In the quest of new absorbent for hydrogen storage, we investigate the capacities of slit pores formed by two BC 3 sheets decorated with Li atoms. Their hydrogen storage capacities are determined using density-functional theory in conjunction with a quantum-thermodynamic model that allows to simulate real operating conditions, i.e., finite temperatures and different loading and depletion pressures applied to the adsorbent in the charge-delivery cycles. We show that the capacities of the adsorbed hydrogen phase of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores are larger than those reported recently for graphene and Li-decorated borophene slit pores. On the other hand, the usable volumetric and gravimetric capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores can meet the targets stipulated by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for onboard hydrogen storage at moderate temperatures and loading pressures well below those used in the tanks employed in current technology. In particular, the usable volumetric capacity for pore widths of about 10 Å meets the DOE target at a loading pressure of 6.6 MPa when depleting at ambient pressure. Our results highlight the important role played by the rotational degree of freedom of the H 2 molecule in determining the confining potential within the slip pores and their hydrogen storage capacities. One of the most important challenges in the XXI century is the energy. The enormous consumption of fossil fuels such as petroleum, natural gas and coal derived from the needs of modern society, and the ecological problems related to the pollution and greenhouse gases, have led to the need to find new lowcost, environmentally-friendly energy sources that can support the sustainability and the global energy demands. In this context, hydrogen has emerged as a promising alternative to replace fossil fuels in the future. Some companies and governmental and non-governmental institutions across the globe are developing strategies and making massive investments toward the "hydrogen economy" Hydrogen is really an ideal fuel because it is lightweight (it has the highest energy density of all common fuels by weight, but the lowest energy density by volume), highly abundant, and the by-product of its combustion is simply water vapour (i.e., no CO 2 and other harmful gases are produced). The overwhelming majority of hydrogen on earth is chemically bound as H 2 O. Thus, whether hydrogen can be considered a clean form of energy or not depends on the primary energy that is used to split water. A way to obtain "green hydrogen" is to use wind or sunlight in combination with photovoltaic cells to produce water-splitting electrolysis High-pressure storage of hydrogen in the gas form, cryogenic storage in liquid form and hydride-based storage in the solid form have several inconveniences There are specific requirements for a material to be a good candidate for onboard hydrogen storage. The targets stipulated by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for 2025 are a reversible gravimetric hydrogen storage capacity of 5.5 wt.% and a reversible volumetric hydrogen storage capacity of 0.040 kg/L at room temperature and moderate pressure In general, the studies performed so far on carbon nanotubes and graphene-based systems have shown that those materials, in pristine form, do not fulfill the H 2 -binding energy criterion. However, it has been proposed that those nanostructures could be used to construct hydrogen storage media if they are decorated with atoms of carefully selected species, such as early transition, alkali and alkali-earth metals (see, e.g., Refs. Concurrently with the research on carbon-based nanostructures, there has been a growing interest in recent years in two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond graphene, and some of them have been investigated for their possible use as hydrogen storage media, including phosphorene Unlike graphene, in which the π electrons are located over the entire carbon lattice, the carbon rings of the BC 3 sheet have an aromatic character, with six π electrons located over each carbon atom, and they are separated by anti-aromatic hexagons composed by boron and carbon atoms without π electrons. The electron deficiency of each boron atom creates a "hole-carrier" in the valence band of the bulk BC 3 material, thus producing greater electric conductivity than that of graphite The hydrogen storage capacity of the Li-decorated BC 3 sheet has been studied recently by means of standard density-functional theory (DFT) calculations The aim of the work presented here is to provide realistic predictions for the volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of a porous material containing Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores. To incorporate finite temperature and pressure, we combine results obtained from DFT calculations with those inferred from a quantum-thermodynamic model Regarding the way we use to simulate the local environment of a porous material based on BC 3 , it is important to remark that the pioneering experiments by Franklin The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is divided in three subsections, where we give some details of the DFT approach used, of the quantum-thermodynamic model employed, and of the method applied to compute the adsorbed, total and usable hydrogen storage capacities. In Section 3 we describe the structural results and the method used to determine the confining potential of the H 2 molecule in the Li-decorated BC 3 slit pore. In Section 4 we present and discuss our results for the adsorbed and total hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores. Section 5 is devoted to the presentation and discussion of the usable hydrogen storage capacities of these kinds of pores. Finally, in Section 6, we summarize the main conclusions of our work. To optimize the structures, as well as to calculate the three-dimensional interaction potential energy between a H 2 molecule and one layer of the Li-decorated BC 3 slit pore, V(x, y, z), we performed DFT calculations as implemented in the VASP code Before determining the potential confining the H 2 molecule in the Li-decorated BC 3 slit pore, we calculated the stable configuration of the pristine BC 3 sheet using the DFT methodology described above. Subsequently, we investigated the optimal Li decoration of the BC 3 sheet, and, finally, we performed fully relaxed calculations to determine the most stable locations of a H 2 molecule on the Lidecorated BC 3 sheet. The results of all these calculations are presented and discussed in Section 3. The quantum-thermodynamic model used in this work Fig. Since the slit pore creates a confining region of nanometric dimensions for the H 2 molecules, quantum confinement effects arise, i.e., the energy of the H 2 molecule is quantized. The energies Ei of the quantum states of the hydrogen molecule are calculated by solving the corresponding Schrödinger equation. The partition function of the adsorbed hydrogen phase, Z ads , is then obtained as where k B is the Boltzmann constant. The equilibrium constant between the adsorbed and compressed phases is given by where the partition function of the compressed (or free) phase, Z com , is obtained as being m the mass of one hydrogen molecule and d excl an exclusion distance due to the steep repulsive part of the interaction potential near the pore layers. In the thermodynamic equilibrium, the equilibrium constant K eq is related to the pressures of the compressed (or external) and adsorbed phases, P ext and P ads , through the equation ln K eq =1/RT ∫ where R is the gas constant and v mol (P, T ) is the molar volume of the compressed hydrogen, which is given by the Mills-Younglove equation of state of H 2 where f i (P, T ) = g j (P)h k (T ), with j = int((i -1)/ 25), k = il and l = 25 j. There are 30 g j (P) functions and 25 h k (T ) functions, with j running from 0 to 29 and k from 1 to 25. The units are: v mol (P, T ) in cm 3 /mol, P en MPa and T in Kelvin. The coefficients c i and the functions g j (P) and h k (T ) can be found in the Supporting Information of Ref. In the present work, the quantum-thermodynamic model has been applied to calculate the volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores of widths between 4.6 and 40 Å, temperatures between 77 and 350 K, and pressures between 0.5 and 70 MPa. The volumetric capacity, v c , of the adsorbed hydrogen phase at P and T is calculated, in kg of H 2 /L, by means of the equation being mass H adsorbed (P, T ) the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen in kg and V pore the volume of the pore in liters. The mass of the adsorbed hydrogen is obtained, in kg, as where Vadsorbed is the volume, in liters, of the adsorbed phase, M(H2) is the molar mass of H2 in kg/mol, 0.00201588 kg/mol, and v mol (P ads , T ) is the molar volume of the adsorbed phase in L/mol. V adsorbed = S w ads , where w ads is the width of the adsorbed phase, computed as indicated in detail in Ref. The gravimetric capacity, g c , of the adsorbed hydrogen phase at P and T is calculated, in wt.%, as 100 mass H adsorbed (P, T ) g c = g c (P, T ) = H adsorbed (P,T) + mass adsorbentmaterial g c ,total =g c ,total (P , T )= 100 mass H total ( P ,T ) mass H total ( P, T )+ mass adsorbent material The capacities defined above give the amount of total hydrogen that can be stored at a given pressure and temperature. For practical purposes, however, the relevant quantities are the usable capacities, which are those to which the DOE 2025 conditions refer. The usable mass of hydrogen stored at a given pressure P (loaded state) and temperature T is the difference between the total mass of hydrogen stored at these P and T and the total stored mass at the depletion pressure and the same temperature T Before explaining the way we used to determine the confining potential, we discuss the predicted structures of the pristine and the Li-decorated BC 3 sheets. The pristine BC 3 sheet is constituted by boron hexagons with carbon hexagons inside (left-hand panel of Fig. As the boron atom has one less electron than the carbon atom, the BC 3 sheet is electron deficient, so that the Li atoms are strongly bonded to the BC 3 sheet due to an electronic transfer from them to the sheet. We performed a series of tests to confirm the dynamic stability of the Li-decorated BC 3 structure, i.e., the absence of Li clustering effects. This is an important point to be taken into account when analyzing the ability of a metal-decorated material for hydrogen storage. To this end, we first computed several diffusion paths for the movement of a Li atom of the Li/BC 3 system on the BC 3 surface, and the results are shown in Fig. On the other hand, we investigated possible configurations of the Li/BC 3 system with a Li 2 dimer and a Li 4 cluster, with rhombic and tetrahedral geometries, to check their relative stabilities. Fig. where E(H 2 @Li-BC 3 ), E(H 2 ) and E(Li-BC 3 ) are the energy of H 2 at (x, y, z) on the Li-decorated BC 3 sheet, the energy of an isolated H 2 molecule and the energy of the Li-decorated BC 3 sheet, respectively, and z is the distance between the H 2 molecule and the surface of the sheet. For the interest of the readers, we show in Figs. S1 and S2 of the Supporting Information the locations of the H 2 molecule on the Lidecorated BC 3 sheet for the first six local minima of the interaction potential, and the interaction potential curves around those minima, as obtained in our calculations using the GGA(PBE)+D3 functional The global minimum of the potential is at -0.28 eV, and the H 2 molecule is situated almost perpendicularly to the Li-decorated BC 3 sheet on a carbon atom (location 1 in Fig. For comparative purposes, in Fig. We now focus on the determination of the confining potential. In order to see the effect of considering a fixed orientation of the H 2 molecule, we selected the orientation corresponding to the global minimum of the potential and displaced the molecule, with this orientation fixed, on a xy grid, with ∆x = ∆y = 0.20 Å. Hence, for the xy plane, 1081 points were considered in a single point calculation mode. The process was repeated at different values of z, from 1.5 to 6.5 Å, with an interval of ∆z = 0.20 Å. This calculation mode turned out to be problematic as the H atom with the lower z could sit very close to one of the Li decorating atoms. This resulted in strongly anti-bonding energy that could even reach tens of eV. The upper panel of Fig. It is then clear that one has to perform most realistic (and computationally much more demanding) calculations by including the rotational degree of freedom of the adsorbed H 2 molecule. To this end, we performed calculations by fixing only the center of the H 2 molecule according to its position in the xy plane. To be more precise, the height of the center of mass of the H 2 molecule with respect to the BC 3 layer was selected to be z = 2.831 Å, which corresponds to the global minimum of the interaction potential, and the orientation was relaxed for each of the 1081 points of the xy grid, all at z = 2.831 Å. In our protocol, the H-H distance was kept fixed to the distance found for the global minimum, that is, d H-H = 0.78 Å. The optimal spherical polar and azimuthal angles at each point were determined using the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm. The lower panel of Fig. The values of the interaction potential energy obtained in the DFT calculations at the (x, y, z) grid points were fitted to a piece-wise function V(x, y, z). The grid has 1081 (x, y) different points or regions. The interaction potential energies corresponding to the point or region i, (x i , y i ), were fitted to an analytic function of the shape The set of the 1081 local or regional functions of this type form a piece-wise analytic function, which is the interaction potential energy V(x, y, z). This piece-wise function was used in the quantumthermodynamic calculations to obtain the hydrogen storage capacities. In Fig. The DOE 2025 conditions refer to the usable hydrogen storage capacities, but for a clear understanding of these quantities it is necessary to analyze first the behaviour of the adsorbed and total hydrogen storage capacities and their dependence on the main parameters, pore width, pressure and temperature. The adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores are shown in Fig. On the other hand, the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores that are obtained when the confining potential was derived by imposing a fixed orientation of the H 2 molecule are noticeably smaller than those predicted when the molecule is allowed to rotate and accommodate into its most stable orientation. In the latter case, the volumetric capacity has two relative maxima at the two pressures, 5 and 25 MPa, a behaviour not found when the orientation of the H 2 molecule is fixed. As indicated in the previous section, the confining potential when the orientational degree of freedom of the H 2 molecule is included in the calculations is more binding and captures all the local minima, which causes the volumetric capacity to increase; as the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen increases, the gravimetric capacity increases as well. Fig. Maximum values of the hydrogen storage capacities at two positions implies that the range of optimal values of the pore width is larger. This latter result is important, because in real nanoporous materials there is not a single pore width but a pore-width distribution, and the experimentalists can be interested in the center and the standard deviation of the distribution. The highest values of the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of the Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores are summarized in Table The shapes of the capacities vs pressure curves for both pore widths is similar: at low pressures, both capacities increase very fast, even exponentially, and then they increase slowly reaching constant or asymptotic values at high pressures. However, although the shapes of the volumetric capacity vs pressure curves for the two pore widths is similar, there are important differences that will be relevant when studying theusable volumetric capacities. As it can be noticed in Fig. 6.4 10.9 ≈ 0.661 The total capacities versus pore width and temperature are shown in the upper panels of Fig. The total capacities versus pore width and pressure are shown in the middle panels of Fig. Finally, the total capacities versus temperature and pressure for a pore of width 10 Å are shown in the lower panels of Fig. The data reported in the previous section were used to calculate the usable hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores. We compute those capacities as a function of the main variables that could be controlled in the design and operation of these possible nanoporous adsorbents: the pore width, the pressure and the temperature. Our aim is to determine if there are ranges of these variables that satisfy the DOE 2025 requirements. Some results are presented in Fig. The dependence of the usable capacities on the pore width and pressure can be noticed in the middle panels of Fig. In summary, the analysis presented above indicates that the usable hydrogen storage capacities of Lidecorated BC3 slit pores reach the DOE 2025 targets in several regions of the pore width, temperature and pressure. Temperatures close to room temperature and moderate pressures (≤ 35 MPa) define the appropriate operating conditions for practical applications. At those conditions, the usable volumetric capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores reach the DOE 2025 target (0.04 kg/L) for small pore widths (9.0-12.0 Å) and for 30-35 MPa. In those conditions, the usable hydrogen storage gravimetric capacity lies between 2.4 and 3.2 wt. %, which is twice smaller than the DOE 2025 gravimetric target. The usable gravimetric capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pore reach the DOE 2025 target (5.5 wt. %) for larger pore widths (27-40 Å) and 20-35 MPa. But in those conditions the volumetric capacity lies between 0.021 and 0.032 kg/L, lower than the DOE 2025 volumetric target. The ultimate goal is to find an absorbent able to work at rather low loading pressures, for the reasons indicated in the Introduction of this work. The calculations of the usable capacities presented above were carried out for a depletion pressure of 0.5 MPa. The loading-depletion pressure window can be easily modified to scan different sorption-desorption conditions. In Fig. With a more general perspective, we want to emphasize that our methodology allows to determine the usable hydrogen storage capacities in porous materials characterized by a pore size distribution, which is the common scenario. In that case, the hydrogen storage capacities could be easily calculated as the average of the data obtained for the different pore widths. In this work, we have presented an extensive computational study of the hydrogen storage capacities of slit pores constituted by two parallel BC 3 sheets decorated with Li atoms. The methodology employed combines density-functional theory, which is used to obtain the structures and the interaction potential energy of a H 2 molecule within the Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores, and a quantum-thermodynamic model that allows to obtain the adsorbed, total and usable volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities. Our results highlight the important role played by the rotational degree of freedom of the H 2 molecule in determining the confining potential within the slip pores and their hydrogen storage capacities. Earlier DFT studies on the hydrogen storage capacities of the BC 3 sheet and other adsorbents Our results show that the usable volumetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC 3 slit pores of width 9.0-12.0 Å reach the DOE 2025 volumetric target, 0.040 kg/L, at room temperatures, 300-320 K, and moderate pressures, 30-35 MPa, but the usable gravimetric capacities are about two times smaller than the DOE 2025 target, 5.5 wt.%, for those pore widths, temperatures and pressures. Hence, a hydrogen vehicle using an onboard deposit with this porous material inside would have the same autonomy than a fossil fuel based vehicle at room temperatures and moderate pressures, but the deposit would be about two times heavier. We have found that the usable volumetric capacity reaches the DOE 2025 target at a loading pressure of 6.6 MPa when the depletion pressure is 0.1 MPa. This is a quite relevant result of the present work. To the best of our knowledge, no other absorbent material with usable volumetric capacity beyond the DOE 2025 target, and working at such a low loading pressure, has been proposed so far. Such a low loading pressure means that a conformable, cheap, and light tank could be employed, that a much less energy cost would be required to pressurize the gas as compared with current tanks working at high pressures, and that the device would improve in security. As it is well known, the identification of adsorbent materials meeting all the targets established by the U.S. DOE is a challenging problem. The results presented in this work can be useful for both theoretical and experimental researchers in the area. Real BC 3 nanoporous materials should consist in a network of slit-shaped BC 3 pores with a pore size distribution in the range of several to hundreds Å. The results of our investigation, in which we have studied pores widths up to 40 Å, strongly suggest that the usable volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of such nanoporous materials, doped with Li atoms, could be probably close to the DOE 2025 targets. 1. Local minima of the interaction potential and comparison of the potentials obtained with the different exchange-correlation functional There is an exact relationship between the adsorbed volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities. According to Eq. 6 of the main text, the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen is given by massH adsorbed (P,T) =vc (P, T)Vpore . In the case of slit-shaped pores, mass adsorbent material = σads 2S , here σ ads is the mass surface density of a sheet of the slit pore and S is the surface of one sheet. The origin of the factor 2 is that the slitpore is formed by two sheets. Hence, Eq. 8 of the main text can be written exactly as We now note that the adsorbed volumetric capacity as a function of the pore width w has some maximum and then decreases slowly towards a constant value (see Fig. The ranges of values of the adsorbed volumetric capacity, the pore width and the product of these two quantities are shown in Table The data in Tables According to Eq. S2, the adsorbed gravimetric capacity is approximately proportional to the product vcw. Therefore, the maximum value of gc is not located at the maximum value of vc , but at the maximum value of vcw. Let's call wmaxgc the value of the pore width for which the maximum of gc is found. The derivative of gc with respect to w must be zero at that point. This implies that ( dv c dw ) w=wmaxgc w maxgc + v c ( w maxgc )=0 (S4) This equation turns into Now, we focus in the region in which w > wmaxvc , where wmaxvc is the location of the maximum of the volumetric capacity. The derivative of v c with respect to w is negative in that region (see Fig. The absolute value of the derivative or slope of the adsorbed v c in that region when the orientation of the H 2 molecule is not fixed is smaller than for the fixed orientation. Besides, in the mentioned region, v c is larger for the non-fixed orientation than for the fixed orientation. Therefore, according to Eq. S6, the pore width corresponding to the maximum of the adsorbed gravimetric capacity (wmaxgc ) for the non-fixed orientation is larger than for the fixed orientation, i.e., the highest adsorbed gravimetric capacities for the non-fixed orientation are located at larger pore widths, as it can be observed in the results shown in Fig. 