In the quest of new exotic phases of matter due to the interplay of various interactions, iridates hosting a spin-orbit entangled j eff = 1/2 ground state have been in the spotlight in recent years. Also in view of parallels with the low-energy physics of high-temperature superconducting cuprates, the validity of a singleor few-band picture in terms of the j eff states is key. However, in particular for its structurally simple member Ba2IrO4, such a systematic construction and subsequent analysis of minimal low-energy models are still missing. Here we show by means of a combination of different ab initio techniques with dynamical mean-field theory that a three-band model in terms of Ir-j eff states fully retains the low-energy physics of the system as compared to a full Ir-5d model. Providing a detailed study of the three-band model in terms of spin-orbit coupling, Hund's coupling and Coulomb interactions, we map out a rich phase diagram and identify a region of effective one-band metal-insulator transition relevant to Ba2IrO4. Compared to available angle-resolved photoemission spectra, we find good agreement of salient aspects of the calculated spectral function and identify features which require the inclusion of non-local fluctuations. In a broader context, we envisage the three-and five-band models developed in this study to be relevant for the study of doped Ba2IrO4 and to clarify further the similarities and differences with cuprates. Over the last decade, iridates have attracted a lot of interest, mainly due to their spin-orbit entangled j eff ground state A particular focus has been set on Sr 2 IrO 4 , whose halffilled j eff = 1/2 band suggests a description in terms of a twisted one-band Hubbard model Ir O Ir 5d In this paper, we hence first study the electronic structure of Ba 2 IrO 4 in detail and derive different ab initio models to describe its low-energy properties. Following a top-down approach, we motivate the use of a three-band j eff model by comparing its properties to the one of a complete five-band description in terms of total angular momentum J states. Then focusing on the former and restricting ourselves to paramagnetic phases, we investigate the metal-insulator transition as a function of interaction strength, spin-orbit coupling and temperature to establish a region of validity for a further reduction to a single-band j eff = 1/2 model. Using DMFT, we map out a phase diagram of our model to study the proximity of Ba 2 IrO 4 to topological and Mott transitions. By comparing the resulting spectral functions to available angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy data The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In section II we construct two effective low-energy models of Ba 2 IrO 4 from first principles, which we study by means of DMFT in section III. The interplay of spin-orbit coupling and Coulomb interaction and their impact on the Mott transition is analyzed in section IV before comparing ARPES data from literature to calculations done for a parametrization of our model relevant to Ba 2 IrO 4 in section V. Finally, section VI summarizes the main conclusions of the paper and discusses the parallels to the low-energy physics in cuprate. In this Section we derive from first principles two lowenergy models for Ba 2 IrO 4 : a highly accurate five-band Ir-5d model and an effective three-band Ir-t 2g one, which will then be solved by means of DMFT. The models are defined by the following generic Hamiltonian: where the one-body terms Ĥ0 is defined by: The indices R, R ′ run over the Ir sites and σ denotes the electron spin. The labels i, j refer to the five 5d orbitals on each site or only to the three t 2g states, depending on the considered model. ĉ( †) σjR ′ are electron (creation) annihilation operators and t iR,jR ′ are the tight-binding (TB) parameters. Local on-site energies are included in the kinetic term (Equation The SOC term ĤSOC is purely local and defined using an isotropic spin-orbit coupling constant λ between the spin-orbitals (i, σ) and (j, σ ′ ) : The Coulomb interaction Ĥint is also local and defined in the extended Hubbard-Kanamori form where, for the sake of readability, we omitted the sum over R. The first two terms are the density-density terms, representing the Coulomb repulsion between electrons with antiparallel and same spin respectively. The last one includes the spin-flip and pair hopping terms. All parameters have been calculated from first principles. In particular, starting from a standard DFT reference calculation, we construct maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) The DFT calculations, using the PBE functional The Kohn-Sham band structure is shown in Figure Figure We now detail the parametrization of the two models built to describe the low-energy part of the electronic band structure of Ba 2 IrO 4 using MLWFs. We stress that the Wannierization and subsequent cRPA calculations are different for the two models. This is in particular visible in the spread of the d xy Wannier function, which is smaller in the five-band model than in the threeband model (4.21 Å2 vs. 4.41 Å2 ), whereas the spread of the other two t 2g Wannier functions remains very similar Despite the different Wannierizations, the TB models for both cases are very similar. In particular, the TB parameters within the t 2g manifold differ at most by 10 -2 eV since the lattice symmetry leads to a nearly absent t 2g -e g hybridization without SOC. The hopping intensities decrease quickly as the distance increases. The main hopping intensities are the nearest and next-nearest neighbor interactions. For the five-band model, the local spin-resolved Hamiltonian H loc d splits into a block-diagonal form consisting of two 5×5 blocks and can be parametrized in terms of only four parameters. In their respective basis {d xz ±, d yz ±, d xy ∓, d z 2 ∓, d x 2 -y 2 ∓}, where we denoted up (down) spins with + (-), the blocks read as: The three terms ∆, δ and δ ′ are the so-called ligand field terms. ∆ accounts for the t 2g -e g splitting, δ (δ ′ ) encodes the splitting of the states within the t 2g (e g ) submanifold, see Figure In the three-band model, the local Hamiltonian in Equation 5 is restricted to the topmost 3 × 3 block H loc t2g . Thus, ∆ and δ ′ are not present in the local Hamiltonian, and the computed value of δ = 0.25 eV is slightly enhanced compared the full 5d one. We note that the sign of the ligand field component δ would correspond to the crystal field of a compressed octahedron, in contrast to the elongated IrO 6 octahedron found in Ba 2 IrO 4 . This difference between crystal field and ligand field is due to the different environments of the apical and the in-plane oxygen atoms Within the T-P approximation, the consequences of the tetragonal crystal field on the eigenspectrum are also shown in Figure where we still denote (up) down spins with (+) -and the angle θ is determined from δ and λ . In particular, the Comparing the Coulomb parameters obtained within the five-band model and the three-band model, we observe that the t 2g subspace of the five-band model has ∼ 0.08 eV smaller values. The Hund's coupling J within the t 2g manifold is identical in the two models. On the other hand, the t 2g -e g part of the Coulomb matrix can be substantial. In particular the d xy -d x 2 -y 2 and the d xz/yz -d z 2 interactions are greater than 2 eV. We note that the Coulomb matrices reflect that different Wannier functions are used in the two models: If the Wannier functions were the same, the larger screening via the e g bands would lead to much smaller values for the interactions within the three-band model, which is not the case. We finally stress that in both cases the ab initio calculated Coulomb tensor deviates from a spherical Hubbard-Kanamori representation In this section, we present results of paramagnetic DMFT calculations for the five-band model of Ba 2 IrO 4 and compare them to results obtained for the three-band model at the inverse temperature of β = 80 eV -1 (T = 145 K). For the calculations, we use the continuoustime quantum Monte Carlo solver (CT-QMC) in the hybridization expansion matrix formulation (CT-HYB) Figure is Z = 0.14 (Z = 0.18) respectively. The filled j eff = 3/2 bands also exhibit a remarkable agreement below the Fermi level, see Figure The k-resolved spectral functions plotted in Figure To further quantify the agreement of the two models, we report in Table III the band fillings obtained from DMFT. The fillings of the j eff bands are nearly the same for both models. The two j eff = 3/2 bands are slightly less filled in presence of ẽg orbitals. In the d basis, this translates to a slightly less filled d xy orbital which transfers some of its electrons to the e g orbitals. This charge transfer is made possible due to the small coupling between the t 2g and e g subspaces when adding SOC. We note, however, that these fillings disagree with a previous RIXS and XAS study The metallic solutions using the ab initio computed parameters are in contrast to experiment and might at first glance seem surprising. However, it indicates primarily an underestimation of the Coulomb tensor. This is a well-known problem within cRPA, which tends to over-screen the Coulomb interaction In the next Section, we are going to study the effect of progressively increasing the interaction strength above the cRPA values on the resulting phase diagram, and we will evaluate it as a function of ∆U , λ, J and T to study whether the effective model can be further reduced to a single-band j eff = 1/2 model. In this Section, we study the ab initio three-band model as a function of interaction strength U , spin-orbit coupling λ, and Hund's exchange J within DMFT. Computational details are given in Appendix A. We will discuss the full phase diagram in order to carve out the nature of the Mott transition in Ba 2 IrO 4 . In order to calculate the phase diagram, we first increase the density-density part of the Coulomb tensor by an isotropic amount ∆U at a fixed temperature of T = 193.5 K (β = 60 eV -1 ). In terms of the traditional representation through Slater integrals By inspection of the orbital-resolved spectral functions, four distinct regions can be defined: a three-band metal (3BM), a single-band metal (1BM), a two-band insulator (2BI), and a single-band insulator (1BI). For λ ̸ = 0 this characterization is done in the j eff basis. We furthermore indicate in green a SOC-induced Lifshitz transition The remainder of this section is divided in four Subsections. First, we discuss the MIT line and the topological Lifshitz transition (Secs. IV A and IV B). Afterwards, Sec. IV C is dedicated to the impact of Hund's coupling on the MIT. Finally, fixing the SOC constant to its ab initio value of λ = 0.31 eV, we will derive a U -T phase diagram for Ba 2 IrO 4 (Sec. IV D). Analyzing the behavior of ∆U c (λ) with respect to the spin-orbit coupling strength, we can distinguish three regions: weak, intermediate and strong SOC. The weak SOC region is defined for λ ≲ 0.1 eV. There, small variations of the coupling constant massively decrease the value of ∆U c . Moreover, the MIT is very sharp. We gain further insights from looking at the diagonal elements of the density matrix of the insulating state for U ∼ U c , see Figure The sharpness of the metal-insulator transition can be explained as follows. Since the SOC is small, a representation in terms of t 2g orbitals should still be a good description. The phase transition occurs when the interaction strength is large enough to move one band below the Fermi level via the relative Hartree shift. Being the one with lower local energy, this turns out to be the band of dominant d xy character. At the non-interacting Kohn-Sham level, the difference in local energies δ is compensated by larger inter-site hoppings in the xy plane that yield nearly isotropic filling. In DMFT, the band anisotropy determines different Hartree shifts ∆ xy < ∆ xz = ∆ yz , thus effectively enhancing the difference in the local energies, until the band d xy becomes completely filled. Once this occurs, the system can be effectively described by a two-band model with an average filling of ⟨n⟩ ≈ 3/4 in the t 2g representation. In that frame, the amount of correlation is already sufficient to realize a Mott insulating state for the d xz and the d yz bands. In the opposite limit of large SOC, λ ≳ 0.6 eV, we observe a different situation. There, the critical line U c (λ) is flat, nearly independent of λ. We can reveal the reason for this behavior by looking at the model in the non-interacting limit. For λ ≳ 0.6 eV the j eff = 1/2 band is half-filled, thereby being the only one crossing the Fermi energy. Due to strong SOC, the j eff = 3/2 states are already completely filled by construction, even without interaction. Still, we will refer to this situation as an effective single-band problem, since there is a non negligible mixing in the non-local part of the TB Hamiltonian between the |3/2; 1/2⟩ and |1/2; 1/2⟩ states. Thus, we are in an effective single-band j eff = 1/2 problem at half-filling, whose Mott transition is entirely driven by interactions. We finally note that the critical value of λ c to realize this effective single-band problem is in quantitative agreement with previous studies for similar model systems In the intermediate range, for 0.1 ≲ λ ≲ 0.6 eV, the insulating state still involves a single half-filled band, but a finite interaction strength is needed to push the j eff = 3/2 band below the Fermi level via a Hartree shift. The consequences of this are particularly evident in the range 0.1 ≲ λ ≲ 0.2 where ∆U c (λ) develops a slope similar to the one in the weak SOC regime and, on the metallic side, the transition goes directly from a 3BM to a 1BM by increasing ∆U . Given this analysis we can draw some partial conclusions. (i) As a consequence of the orbital polarization induced by the ligand field δ, the transition is always orbital selective. (ii) Due to the orbital polarization, the transition occurs over the entire phase diagram for values of U which are moderate, considering the electronic filling and the number of orbitals involved. (iii) In the strong SOC regime, we have an effective single-band problem, which justifies the construction of j eff = 1/2 models. For intermediate SOC, however, such an effective single-band model is only valid close to the metal-insulator transition. Finally, Figure Besides the MIT, we investigate now the nature of the metallic phase, distinguishing the two topologically different regions 3BM and 1BM. The dotted green line in Figure In this perspective, the three regions identified by the dispersion of ∆U c (λ) can be characterized in terms of a more general argument: The large SOC regime is where the single band problem is realized without any correlation by SOC. The intermediate SOC region is where this mapping onto the single band problem in correspondence to the transition line occurs thanks to cooperation of spin-orbit coupling and interactions. Ba 2 IrO 4 and most of the iridium compounds of the Ruddlesden-Popper series are actually placed in this intermediate coupling region Before investigating the impact of Hund's coupling on the picture derived so far, we note that despite J having been formally introduced as a tensor on the correlated manifold, the cRPA calculations yield the isotropic value of 0.22 eV on the full t 2g subset. Thereby, we can refer to it as a scalar with no ambiguity. We derived three U -λ phase diagrams depending on the J value, the first being the one with respect to the ab initio value (J = 0.22 eV) explained in detail in the previous sections. In addition, we considered a vanishing Hund's coupling and finally, we doubled the ab initio value. The resulting phase diagrams are shown in Figure Overall, increasing the Hund's exchange term delays both the MIT and the Lifshitz transition, and can be interpreted as a footprint of its competition with both U and λ. Considering J = 0.43 eV, our calculations reveal a larger intermediate 1BM metallic state between the 3BM and the 1BI for ∆U = 0.3 eV and λ = 0.16 eV. Thus, the transition line directly separating 3BM from 1BI shortens for larger J. For λ = 0.31 eV, as in Ba 2 IrO 4 , the MIT occurs at ∆U = 0.1 eV (0.3 eV) for J = 0.0 eV (0.43 eV) respectively. The sensitivity of the phase diagrams with respect to J shows that a multi-orbital treatment is required to describe the physics properly. In particular in the intermediate SOC regime, the coupling of different orbitals through the exchange term can be substantial. This fact and the presence of non-negligible mixing terms between the different pseudospin states renders Ba 2 IrO 4 a multi-orbital compound in its essence. After having discussed the effects of spin-orbit coupling and exchange, we now focus on values relevant to Ba 2 IrO 4 , i.e. λ = 0.31 eV and J = 0.22 eV. Figure In analogy with section IV A, the transition is generally broad, with a crossover region between the insulating and metallic phases. We mark the middle of the crossover region, U m , as well as the iso-value line of the spectral weight at the Fermi level, ∆U iso = ∆U c (λ). The latter can serve as a guide to identify the insulating phase and thereby an end of the crossover region, similar to ∆U c in the previous section. On the other hand, ∆U m defines the inflection point of the spectral function with respect to ∆U , ∂ 2 ∆U A 0 (∆U, T )| ∆Um =0. Within the crossover region, the spectral weight at the Fermi level is suppressed with respect to the metallic phase, but it is still nonvanishing due to thermal excitations. The size of the crossover region, and the reference values ∆U m , ∆U iso , depend on the temperature. At high temperature, 290 ≲ T ≲ 190 K, the smooth and continuous metal-insulator crossover extends over several hundreds of meV. For lower temperatures, the crossover region gets narrower and turns into a sharp transition line at T ≲ 150 K. This is consistent with the picture of a second order end point of the first-order metal-insulator transition line known from the Mott transition The moderate value of U iso is actually very close to the cRPA value, U cRPA , and well inside the estimated error margin due to the known overestimation of screening processes within cRPA In this Section we compare the electronic properties of Ba 2 IrO 4 evaluated within DMFT with existing literature, focusing in particular on the spectral function. Based on the conclusions of the previous sections, the calculations here are performed on the three-band model at the inverse temperature β = 80 eV -1 (T = 145 K) with a SOC constant λ = 0.31 eV, and the Coulomb parameters U defined in Table The DOS of the DFT and DMFT calculations are shown in Figure The situation is different for the j eff = 1/2 band. In the experimental spectrum, the j eff = 1/2 band has a peak at X with a binding energy in between 0.21 eV Selected k-resolved spectra at the X and M points are shown in Figure To compare our calculations in more detail with experiment, we show some constant energy (CE) maps in Figure In Ref. 26 a backfolding of the bands is reported with less intensity in the antiferromagnetic BZ. To compare with the spectra in the antiferromagnetic phase, we have to define two different BZs depending on the magnetic state, see Figure Even though our DMFT calculations are paramagnetic, we now mimick the effect of antiferromagnetism via backfolding of the bands into the small BZ. In order to reproduce an emerging antiferromagnetic ordering, we show in panels (b) and (c) spectra with 25% spectral weight of backfolded and 75% original bands. With respect to ARPES spectra in Ref. 26, our calculation still misses the peak at X (M * ) for low-energy states, but increasing the binding-energy of the energy cuts leads to a better agreement. In the total spectral function, however, the features stemming from the j eff = 1/2 band are heavily suppressed. This is due to the large incoherence of the j eff = 1/2 LHB, causing a large difference in intensity with respect to contributions from the j eff = 3/2 bands. We therefore show in panel (d) the projection on the j eff = 1 2 band separately. Substantiating the previous discussion, spectral weight is visible in a square around X for the CE map at E = -0.7 eV. In this work, we simulated the electronic structure of Ba 2 IrO 4 by performing realistic dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) calculations based on models derived from ab initio density functional theory (DFT) and constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) simulations. In particular, we presented two models of Ba 2 IrO 4 including Ir-t 2g and Ir-5d Wannier functions respectively. We solved both models within the DFT+DMFT scheme, using a full Coulomb tensor U evaluated from cRPA. To the best of our knowledge, the five-band Ir-5d calculation is the first presented in literature for compounds with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Within this framework, we found a good agreement between the two DMFT solutions, validating the use of the simpler t 2g model that fully retains the low-energy physics of the system. Limitations of the Ir-t 2g model must be searched in the empty part of the spectrum, populated by the upper j eff = 1/2 Hubbard band only. According to our five-band model, the Ir-dx 2 -y 2 band is situated close in energy, which limits the predictive power of the Ir-t 2g model when it comes to the description of spectroscopies that probe the hole sector of the spectrum. This might be the case for optical conductivity measurements at energies in the ∼ eV range Using the Ir-t 2g model, we studied the interplay between SOC, Coulomb interaction and Hund's exchange, showing how SOC influences the physics of compounds with a 5d 5 configuration and the ligand-field of Ba 2 IrO 4 . To that aim, we varied the monopole term of the ab initio Coulomb tensor U , the SOC strength λ and the Hund's exchange J. The resulting phase diagram is remarkably rich. Three different regions were identified: In the weak SOC regime, for 0 ≤ λ < 0.1 eV, the t 2g physics dominates and small variations of λ imply large changes of the critical interaction strength of the metal-insulator transition, U c . In contrast, in the large SOC regime, i.e. for λ > 0.6 eV, an effective single-band j eff = 1/2 model is realized even with no interactions, and the critical interaction strength U c (λ) for the Mott transition stays nearly constant. The Mott transition is thereby U -driven. At intermediate SOC, i.e. 0.1 eV ≤ λ ≤ 0.6 eV, a finite value of U with the resulting Hartree shifts is needed to yield an effective single-band j eff = 1/2 picture. Furthermore, λ plays an important topological role: We identified two distinct regions in the metallic regime, characterized by a SOC-induced topological (Lifshitz) transition. Overall, the transition towards the insulating phase can therefore be referred to as spin-orbit Mott transition. Ba 2 IrO 4 is located in the intermediate SOC region with λ = 0.31 eV. This proximity to both the metalinsulator transition and phases with different band topology is intriguing and could guide material design in the future. Even though in practice, changing the spinorbit coupling constant λ via chemical substitution goes in hand with modifications of the electronic structure and Coulomb interaction as well, we note that reducing λ would drive the system to such an interesting point of phase competition. This could be in principle realised by substituting Ir by 4d transition metal atoms like Ru (λ Ru ≈ 0.1 eV At low temperature, we find an insulating state matching with experiment for U = U cRPA + 0.2 eV. Investigating the Mott transition of Ba 2 IrO 4 at higher temperature, we obtain a crossover resembling the one above the second-order end-point of the Mott transition in the single-band Hubbard model. We expect the corresponding first order Mott transition to appear for T ≲ 150 K. Nevertheless, a treatment within a three-orbital framework is essential to properly describe the spectroscopic properties of the system. This is rooted in the non-negligible orbital mixing within the tight-binding model and the proximity of j eff = 3/2 bands to the Fermi level, consistent with the strong inter-twining of the j eff = 1/2 and j eff = 3/2 manifolds observed in optical conductivity measurements Comparing the spectral function with existing ARPES experiments, our DMFT solution shows good agreement within the j eff = 3/2 bands. On the other hand, our results do not match perfectly the experimental characterization of the j eff = 1/2 band. Especially at the X point of the BZ the calculated binding energy is overestimated by ∼ 0.5 eV. We interpret this difference as a consequence of the absence of non-local correlations and antiferromagnetic fluctuations, which could be included, for instance, via cluster extensions of DMFT. We also envision the effective three-and five-band models developed in this study to be important for investigating the change of the Ba 2 IrO 4 spectral function upon doping. TABLE II. Coulomb and exchange parameters obtained for the five-band model of Ba2IrO4