We have investigated by molecular dynamics method the influence of a finite number of particles used in computer simulations on fluctuations of thermodynamic properties. As a case study, we used the two-dimensional Lennard-Jones system. 2D Lennard-Jones system, besides being an archetypal one, is a subject of long debate, as to whether it has continuous (infinite-order) or discontinuous (first-order) melting transition. We have found that anomalies on the equation of state (the vander-Waals or Myer-Wood loops) previously considered a hallmark of the first order phase transition, are at best at the level of noise, since they have the same magnitude as the amplitude of pressure fluctuations. So, they could be regarded as statistically unsignificant effect. Also, we estimated inherent statistical noise, present in computer simulations, and came to conclusion, that it is larger, than predicted by statistical physics, and the difference between them (called algorithmic fluctuations) is possibly due to the computer-related issues. It was demonstrated that these fluctuations in principle could be observed in real-life physical experiments which would lead to practical resolution of The Matrix hypothesis. Fluctuations are an inevitable feature of finite size systems' thermal behavior, which manifested itself in the Brownian motion of small particles. In thermodynamic limit (infinite size of the system), fluctuations decrease, so we can safely deal with average thermodynamic parameters. However, molecular dynamics and, in general, any computer simulations, use quite small finite size systems. Inevitable question arises with this, how close we are to the thermodynamic limit . To answer this question we have to estimate the system's fluctuations. The problem was previously acknowledged in Hickman and Mishin paper If we limit ourselves to description of NVE ensemble (with constant number of particles N, volume V and energy E ), the pressure and temperature of the system are expected to fluctuate around some average values. Classical statistical mechanics predicts 2 that fluctuations of pressure P and temperature T of large enough system are distributed according to the Gauss law with standard deviations: Here, k B -the Boltzmann constant, c V -specific heat at constant volume per particle, B S -adiabatic bulk modulus, index S means constant entropy. The second formula in the case of ideal gas gives: where γ is an adiabatic exponent. This suggests the general law that relative fluctuations of thermodynamic parameters approximately scale to the square root of the system size. This conclusion is corroborated by computer simulations of pressure fluctuations in non-ideal plasma To test these assumptions we have chosen the two dimensional Lennard-Jones (2DLJ) system Fluctuations of pressure and temperature of system with N = 10 4 particles at T=0.9 are shown in Fig. For comparison we provide distributions densities obtained for the same number of particles in the same conditions but calculated in the NVT ensemble (Fig. To demonstrate this idea we provide the results for the larger NVE ensemble with N = 10 5 particles at the same temperature T = 0.9 in the nearest vicinity of the transition (see Fig. To compare our findings with previous results There is qualitative difference between the two curves in Fig. There is another argument in favor of the first-order phase transition, namely phase coexistence observed in computer experiments between hexatic and liquid phase in the region of "van-der-Waals loop" 21 . We did not investigate this problem closely, but previous report obtained by Patashinskii et al. Later we demonstrate that the noise observed in the 2DLJ system at large extent corresponds to the predictions of statistical physics. Previously we have demonstrated the finite precision of molecular dynamic simulations. In this section we answer the second part of the question posed in the title -what we can learn from finite precision of molecular dynamics experiments. As it follows from Eqs. 1-2 from fluctuations of temperature and pressure we could esti- mate isochoric heat capacity and adiabatic bulk modulus. According to Eq. 1, we can obtain c V from standard deviation of relative fluctuation of temperature . This plot vs. density ρ for temperatures in the range T = 0.6 -1.1 is depicted in Fig. It is hard to estimate the scaling of algorithmical fluctuations with the system size, but the difference between the amplitudes of fluctuations observed in N = 10 5 ensemble and for N = 10 4 one (see Fig. Eq. 1 is not new in molecular dynamics simulations but it is known in different flavor as fluctuations of internal energy U (per particle): which is a consequence of Eq. 1 and thermodynamic identity ∆U = c v ∆T . For example, this formula Eq. 3 was used for calculation of specific heat in the system of the Hertzian disks in Ref. Because of the presence of algorithmical fluctuations c V values obtained from the temperature and internal energy fluctuations (Eq. 1 and Eq. 3 respectively) will be different. Obviously Eq. 1 will underestimate real c V and Eq. 3 will overestimate it. Similarly Eq. 2 should overestimate the real adiabatic bulk modulus. Considering relative input from physical and algorithmical fluctuations to the overall noise, we should arrive to quite paradoxical conclusion, that estimates of thermodynamic parameters from fluctuations in computer simulations will be more precise, if obtained from smaller systems, where larger physical fluctuations dominate over algorithmical ones. The results of estimation of specific heat and adiabatic bulk modulus from fluctuations according to Eqs. 1-3 for N = 10 4 system are depicted in Fig. As it follows from Fig. The case of B S is slightly more complicated. As expected B S is larger than B T in liquid and hexatic phases, but deep inside the crystal phase there are points where estimated adiabatic bulk modulus is smaller than isothermal one (although we expected that B S should be overestimated). The only reasonable explanation for this anomaly is that there are slow physical fluctuations in the solid phase, which require longer time for their registration than our time frame. Taking into account the presence of slow pressure relaxations in solid state (see Fig. The main purpose of this small section is brief demonstration of validity of methods used for investigation of 2D Lennard-Jones system in comparison to 3D case. There is no doubt that 3D melting is the first-order transition. So, how would true first-order transition look like in computer simulations? In 3D case we used the same parameters as for calculations of 2DLJ system except we had 3 dimensions. We restrict ourselves to NVE ensemble with N = 10 4 particles. It allows us to check the convergence of finite time calculations to the final state of transition. As in the 2D case, we start from random initial configuration that is, simulating crystallization rather than melting. It would be demonstrated that possible crystallization into polycrystalline state does not influence much the character of transition. Also by this calculation we would dispel a popular belief, that fluctuations in 3D case are significantly smaller than in 2D case. In both cases fluctuations are governed by the same Equations 1-3 although with different parameters c V and B S . Equation of state at T = 0.9 and pressure relaxation curves at different densities ρ are depicted in Fig. Calculations of B S , C V from fluctuations and B T from equation of state are depicted in Fig. To conclude we demonstrate that the van-der-Waals loops observed on equation of state of 2DLJ system which were believed before to be an indication of first order phase transition between crystal and liquid in two dimensions are at the level of noise and can not be reliably used for determination of transition's character. At least this statistically insignificant effect is surely not enough to overthrow existing Nobel prize winning theories of 2D melting. The increase of the particles number used in molecular dynamics simulation can result in attenuation of standard deviation of fluctuations, but in the same time (as it was demonstrated before 8 ) it results in flattening of van-der-Waals loops on equation of state curves. Estimation of inherent statistical noise present in computer simulations lead us to conclusion that it is larger than predicted by the statistical physics and the difference between them (named algorithmical fluctuations) are possibly caused by the computer related issues. It was demonstrated that these fluctuations in principle could be observed in real-life physical experiments which would lead to resolution of The Matrix hypothesis Data is available on reasonable request from corresponding author.