Orbitronics is an emerging and fascinating field that explores the utilization of the orbital degree of freedom of electrons for information processing. An increasing number of orbital phenomena are being currently discovered, with spin-orbit coupling mediating the interplay between orbital and spin effects, thus providing a wealth of control mechanisms and device applications. In this context, the orbital analog of spin Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), i.e. orbital DMI, deserves to be explored in depth, since it is believed to be capable of inducing chiral orbital structures. Here, we unveil the main features and microscopic mechanisms of the orbital DMI in a two-dimensional square lattice using a tight-binding model of t2g orbitals in combination with the Berry phase theory. This approach allows us to investigate and transparently disentangle the role of inversion symmetry breaking, strength of orbital exchange interaction and spin-orbit coupling in shaping the properties of the orbital DMI. By scrutinizing the band-resolved contributions we are able to understand the microscopic mechanisms and guiding principles behind the orbital DMI and its anisotropy in two dimensional magnetic materials, and uncover a fundamental relation between the orbital DMI and its spin counterpart, which is currently explored very intensively. The insights gained from our work contribute to advancing our knowledge of orbitalrelated effects and their potential applications in spintronics, providing a path for future research in the field of chiral orbitronics. In condensed matter physics, a new and promising area of research known as orbitronics has emerged in recent years. Orbitronics focuses on utilizing the orbital degree of freedom as a means of transmitting and manipulating information in solid-state devices In the realm of chiral spin magnetism, so-called the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) has attracted significant attention due to its pivotal role in the formation and stabilization of topological magnetic textures, including chiral domain walls and magnetic skyrmions Importantly, Yamamoto et al. theoretically investigated the intricate connection between the DMI and orbital moments in heavy metal/ferromagnetic metal structures, revealing a close correlation between the sign of the DMI and the induced orbital moments of heavy metal elements At the same time, while it is clear that the various aspects of orbital nature and orbital contributions to the spin DMI governing the energetics of spin canting deserve further efforts, the physics and properties of the orbital DMI, which reflects the energy changes due to chiral canting of orbital moments, have been practically unexplored so far. Katsnelson et al. has applied the method of infinitesimal rotations to compute the values of orbital part of the DMI in magnetic La 2 CuO 4 from LDA+U +SOC calculations, finding that the orbital part, while being generally small, is by far larger than the spin contribution The orbital DMI and the resulting orbital chiral structures present a novel avenue for creating and manipulating chiral topological textures or angular momentum by controlling orbital properties, marking the orbital DMI as an object deserving further in-depth investigation. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of orbital DMI is imperative. However, a clear and simple physical picture of the orbital DMI, reaching into the realm of electronic structure models not necessarily rooted in strong correlations, is still elusive, which necessitates further clarification of the influence of various orbital parameters on the orbital DMI. Here, we evaluate and analyze in depth the orbital DMI behavior in a two-dimensional square lattice based on a simple tight-binding model of t 2g orbitals. This model satisfies the requirement that the crystal field splitting in combination with ISB promote rich unquenched orbital magnetism, making it an optimal choice to extract the orbital-related effects Before proceeding further with a detailed description of our approach, it is necessary to elucidate the motivation behind our treatment of OAM contribution to the DMI. Our starting point is the non-relativistic non-magnetic Hamiltonian of an orbitally complex system, represented by a t 2g orbital model on a square lattice with broken inversion symmetry. Starting with this model, our next step is to break the time-reversal symmetry by allowing unquenched local orbital moments, which serve as the primary objects whose canting energetics we are to study. The conventional way to achieve this would be to allow for spin exchange interaction which, when combined with an effect of SOC, results in orbital magnetism. However, here, we choose a different path and explicitly include the effect of the orbital exchange field into consideration, which couples directly to the OAM, see Eq. (3) below, and gives rise to unquenched orbital magnetism without resorting to spin magnetism and SOC. In turn, one can perceive the effect of the orbital exchange field as a combined effect of the two latter phenomena, projected onto the orbital subspace only, which allows for a transparent way to perturb the directions of orbital moments by tracking the energetics of the orbital sub-system. When thinking of a physical situation in which the effect of the orbital exchange field can be most easily singled out, we can imagine a weakly coupled bilayer type of system, where a nonmagnetic layer develops orbital magnetism via the SOC and the nonlocal exchange coupling with the second layer that is strongly magnetic, e.g. 3d overlayer separated by a spacer from a 5d substrate Secondly, we can consider a situation in which the shell of orbitals which drive spin magnetism is separated in energy from a nominally spin-degenerate but orbitally active shell of states residing around the Fermi level, such as the case e.g. for materials incorporating 4f -ions Finally, we can turn to a situation of a non-magnetic thin film exposed to a spatially varying external magnetic field which drives a direct interaction with orbital moments in the substrate of the Zeeman typei.e. orbital Zeeman effectas given by Eq. ( In the following, we provide the details of the t 2g orbital model and the derivations of the expression of orbital DMI. where H kin (k) is the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian arising from hoppings and on-site energies, and H L exc describes orbital exchange interaction. H kin (k) is independent of the spin and its nonzero matrix elements are Here, E ∥ and E ⊥ are on-site energies for the in-plane (d xy ) and out-of-plane (d yz and d zx ) orbitals, respectively, and t π and t δ are the nearest neighbor hopping amplitudes between t 2g orbitals via the π and δ bondings, respectively. The inversion symmetry breaking at the surface is equivalent to the potential gradient along the surface-normal direction (z), which promotes hybridization between d xy and d yz , as well as d xy and d zx states, with hopping integral γ characterizing the strength of the symmetry breaking. The orbital exchange interaction is written as where L is the atomic OAM operator, ML denotes the direction of the orbital exchange field, and J L denotes the coupling strength of the orbital exchange interaction. For t 2g orbitals, L = (L x , L y , L z ) becomes in the matrix representation using the basis states φ dxyk , φ dyzk , and φ dzxk . A spinfull model Hamiltonian is constructed by adding SOC H soc , and spin exchange interaction H S exc . The SOC is given by where S is the spin angular momentum operator and λ soc is the SOC strength. The spin exchange interaction is written as where MS denotes the direction of the spin exchange field, and J S denotes the spin exchange interaction strength. The spin angular momentum operator is represented by the vector of the Pauli matrices σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) within each orbital where σ, σ ′ are spin indices (up or down). The values of the model parameters used in the calculation are E ∥ = 1.6, E ⊥ = 1.0, t π = 0.5, t σ = 0.1, γ = 0.02, λ soc = 0.04, J L = 1.0, J S = 1.0, all in unit of eV. The lattice constant is set a = 1 Å. All parameters are set as above unless specified otherwise. We define the orbital DMI as the energy contribution to the free energy functional by the spiralization of the orbital exchange field ML , where ri is the unit vector in the i direction, and ∂ rj is the partial derivative in the j direction (i, j = x, y, z). We derive a microscopic expression for the orbital DMI coefficient D L ij by means of the Berry phase theory, which has been applied in the past to calculate the spin DMI Given the orbital exchange interaction in the spinless Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Following the detailed derivation in Ref. where ] is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function for the unperturbed band energy ε kn , μ is the electrochemical potential, and β = 1/k B T for the Boltzmann constant k B and the temperature T . The quantities A n ij (k) and B n ij (k) are given by the correlation between the orbital torque operator and the velocity operator, where u nk denotes the lattice-periodic part of the unperturbed Bloch wave function of band n at k and v j = ∂ kj H kin /h is the j-th component of the velocity operator. At zero temperature Eq. ( (13) By utilizing T L = ML × ∂ ML H tot , Eq. ( Note the similarity of this expression to the mixed Berry curvature Up to date, the properties of orbital mixed Berry curvature in solid state systems have been not explored. According to Eq. ( In considering the spin, as mentioned above, the Hamiltonian for spinfull systems necessitates the inclusion of both spin-orbit coupling and spin exchange interaction. In this case, the spin torque operator can be represented as T S = (J S /h) MS × S. From this, we can obtain the spin spiralization D S ij through the above equations by replacing the orbital exchange field ML by the spin exchange field MS . First, let us unravel the emergence of an intrinsic orbital texture of t 2g orbitals without considering the effect of SOC and orbital/spin exchange interaction. In Figs. Next, we consider the effect of the orbital Zeeman effect H L exc due to the orbital exchange field ML (keeping the value of J L at 1.0 eV). In the two-dimensional square lattice with an out-of-plane inversion symmetry breaking, the orbital DMI spiralization is described by an antisymmetric tensor due to the four-fold rotational symmetry around the axis normal to the film, which amounts to D L xx = D L yy = 0 and D L yx = -D L xy . We compute the magnitude of D L yx and present its magnitude in Fig. More insight can be gained from a band-projected analysis of orbital DMI at E F = 2.7 eV, as shown in Fig. Next, we explore the impact of SOC on orbital DMI. Namely, we perform calculations to examine the energy dependence, band dispersion, and k-space distribution of orbital DMI while considering the presence of SOC. Remarkably, we find that the qualitative nature of orbital DMI remains unaffected by SOC, see supplementary sections S2 and S3 We analyze in great detail to reveal the anatomy of the orbital DMI. At this point, by keeping the SOC strength at a constant value of 0.04 eV, we study the behavior of the orbital DMI in response to changing the key parameters of the systemthe strength of orbital exchange coupling J L , the strength of inversion symmetry breaking γ, and the angle θ that the orbital exchange field makes with the z-axispresenting the results in Fig. In order to gain a deeper understanding of the trend of orbital DMI with respect to the orbital exchange coupling strength J L , we conduct band-projected as well as k-resolved calculations of orbital DMI. In Fig. In Fig. At last, we present in Figs. C. Relation between orbital DMI and spin DMI Finally, we consider the case when in addition to the orbital exchange and SOC the spin exchange interaction as given by H S exc is also present in the Hamiltonian. We keep the values of J L and J S at 1 eV, while keeping the out-of-plane directions of the spin and orbital exchange fields, and compute both spin and orbital DMI by following the Berry phase theory outlined above. We focus specifically on the dependence of the spin and orbital DMI on the SOC strength, presenting the results in Fig. To understand the origin of this correlation, we scrutinize the band-resolved contributions to the spin and orbital DMI at the value of λ soc = 0.04 eV and E F = 2.2 eV, shown in Figs. As a result, when at a given energy the DMI contributions are small and spread over several bands with different orbital character filling larger areas of k-space, as it is the case below +1 eV, Figs. In summary, we theoretically demonstrate that the chiral exchange interaction among orbital moments, closely resembling the spin Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, can arise in a two-dimensional square lattice with t 2g orbitals. We find that orbital hybridization, induced by inversion symmetry breaking, is crucial for generating orbital DMI. Furthermore, the position and strength of orbital hybridization have a crucial impact on both the magnitude and distribution of orbital DMI. We also argue that in the vicinity of isolated Fermi surface features the orbital DMI is closely correlated with the behavior of the orbital mixed Berry curvature. Moreover, the strength of orbital exchange interaction exerts a decisive impact on the magnitude of orbital DMI. In situations where the strength of the orbital exchange interaction is comparable to that of the spin exchange interaction, the orbital DMI can exceed the spin DMI by an order of magnitude. Importantly, consistent with other orbital phenomena, the orbital DMI can also emerge in the absence of spin-orbit interaction, subsequently inducing the spin DMI through the effect of SOC. While with our work we provide first basic insights into the physics and properties of orbital DMI, further experimental verification is required to validate the existence and control of orbital DMI. On the other hand, more effort is needed to suggest specific material candidates where the formation of chiral orbital textures could be experimentally observed.