The k • p method is significant in condensed matter physics for the compact and analytical Hamiltonian. In the presence of magnetic field, it is described by the effective Zeeman's coupling Hamiltonian with Landé g-factors. Here, we develop an open-source package VASP2KP (including two parts: vasp2mat and mat2kp) to compute k • p parameters and Landé g-factors directly from the wavefunctions provided by the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). First, we develop a VASP patch vasp2mat to compute matrix representations of the generalized momentum operator π = p + 1 2mc 2 (ŝ × ∇V (r)), spin operator ŝ, time reversal operator T and crystalline symmetry operators R on the DFT wavefunctions. Second, we develop a python code mat2kp to obtain the unitary transformation U that rotates the degenerate DFT basis towards the standard basis, and then automatically compute the k • p parameters and g-factors. The theory and the methodology behind VASP2KP are described in detail. The matrix elements of the operators are derived comprehensively and computed correctly within the projector augmented wave method. We apply this package to some materials, e.g. Bi2Se3, Na3Bi, Te, InAs and 1H-TMD monolayers. The obtained effective model's dispersions are in good agreement with the DFT data around the specific wave vector, and the g-factors are consistent with experimental data. Electronic band structures hold immense importance in the field of condensed matter physics and materials science, providing crucial insights into the behavior of electrons within crystalline materials. They reveals information about distributions of energy levels, energy gaps, and density of states, which are essential for determining material electrical conductivities, optical properties, thermal behavior, and so on. In this background, the density functional theory (DFT) However, DFT bands are quite complex, which contain quite a large number of energy bands that hardly affect the desired physical properties thus making the physical pictures difficult to understand. In order to construct a model that only involves a few bands with a greater impact on the physical properties of materials, the k • p method is proposed, which is used to construct an effective model to describe the quasiparticles near the specific wave vector in the reciprocal space When a magnetic field is applied to a condensed matter system, we can use effective Zeeman's coupling Hamiltonian to describe the effects of the magnetic field. Effective Zeeman's coupling determines the split of Kramers states under magnetic field, leading to outcomes like the Pauli paramagnetism of the metals and the van Vleck paramagnetism of insulators. The important parameters in Zeeman's coupling are Landé g-factors. Landé g-factors of materials have been widely studied in quantum wires First of all, Gao et al. developed the program IRVSP to determine the irreducible representations (irreps) arXiv:2312.08729v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 14 Dec 2023 of bands at any k-point in VASP calculations In this work, we have developed an open-source package VASP2KP, which can generate the effective k • p model and Zeeman's coupling, and obtain the values of the k • p parameters and g-factors. This package contains two parts: a VASP patch vasp2mat and a post-processing python code mat2kp. First, we use vasp2mat to generate matrix representations for generalized momentum π = p + 1 2mc 2 (ŝ × ∇V (r)), spin ŝ, time reversal T , and crystalline symmetry operators R in DFT calculations. The matrix elements of the space group operators are derived in detail and computed correctly in the PAW wavefunctions. Second, mat2kp can obtain the unitary transformation U from the degenerate wavefunctions to the k • p standard basis, and then compute these parameters automatically. The obtained effective masses and g-factors are important and comparable with experimental observations. The paper is organized as the following. In Sec. II, the theoretical foundations behind VASP2KP are introduced. In Sec. III the main algorithm steps are described in detail. The results obtained by VASP2KP are shown and analysed for some typical materials in Sec. IV, and we have some discussions in Sec. V. In this section, we first introduce the k • p method in Sec. II A. The method to obtain Zeeman's coupling is presented in Sec. II B. Then the theory of invariants is reviewed and the invariant k • p Hamiltonian as well as Zeeman's coupling are obtained in Sec. II C. In Sec. II D, we propose a general routine to get the unitary transformation that change degenerate DFT basis to the k • p standard basis. Last, the method to calculate k • p parameters and g-factors is introduced in Sec. II E. When we only care about wave vector K around a specific wave vector k 0 in the Brillouin zone, it can be well described by using the k • p effective model. Suppose that ψ nK (r) is the wavefunction of n-th band which satisfies the Schrödinger equation with spin-orbit coupling (SOC), i.e., ĤB ψ nK (r) = ε n (K)ψ nK (r), where is the Bloch Hamiltonian operator with SOC, and p is the momentum operator, V (r) is the potential in crystal, ŝ is the spin momentum operator, m is the electron mass, and c is the light speed in vacuum. To expand the Hamiltonian at k 0 , introducing a transformation φ nk (r) = ψ nK (r)e -ik•r , where k = Kk 0 is the deviation from k 0 , the Schrödinger equation which where Ĥ′ (k) = ħ m k•π is the first-order term, and π = p+ is the generalized momentum operator with SOC. We can take Ĥkp = ĤB + ħ 2 k 2 2m + Ĥ′ (k) as the equivalent Hamiltonian of ĤB since the eigenvalues of them are all equal. Suppose that we have got the eigenenergies {ε n (k 0 )} and the eigenstates {|n(k 0 )⟩} of ĤB . Then we can obtain the generalized momentum elements by π mn = ⟨m(k 0 )| π|n(k 0 )⟩. Thus the matrix elements of Ĥkp can be obtained by Usually, we aimed at several low-energy bands (the set of which is denoted as A). The set of other bands is denoted as B. Then we can fold down the H kp-all mn (k) Hamiltonian into a subspace A via Löwdin partitioning. After twoorder Löwdin partitioning, the effective k • p Hamiltonian is transformed as (see Appendix A for details) with i, j ∈ {x, y, z}. Hereafter we use α, β ∈ A, l ∈ B and m, n ∈ A ∪ B. Moreover, the k • p Hamiltonian of the third order can be constructed similarly in Appendix A. When a magnetic field is applied to the system, the momenta ħk i should be replaced by (-iħ∂ i + eA i ) according to Peierls substitution, where A is the vector potential and e (positively valued) is the elementary charge. Therefore, ħ 2 k i k j in the summation will be replaced by the sum of the gauge dependent term 1 2 -iħ∂ i + eA i , -iħ∂ j + eA j and gauge independent term 1 2 -iħ∂ i + eA i , -iħ∂ j + eA j = -iħe 2 k ε ijk B k , where B is the magnetic induction intensity. In this case, the total Hamiltonian can be written by the summation of the where Zeeman's coupling term can be expressed by where can be considered as the orbital contribution, s αβ = ⟨α(k 0 )|ŝ|β(k 0 )⟩ are the spin elements, and μ B is the Bohr magneton. The detailed derivation is shown in Appendix B. Suppose that the little group at k 0 is L, and D(R) is a representation (rep) for ∀R ∈ L, whose dimension is N . There are a total of N 2 independent Hermitian matrices for ∀R ∈ L. Also, we can construct polynomial space of order p ∈ N, whose basis can be chosen as g Spatial inversion P and time reversal T may also be the elements of the little group L, which transform the wave vector as k P -→ -k and k T -→ -k, respectively. Decomposing D (X) and D (g) into irreps, we have where D λ represents irreps and a λ or b λ denotes the multiplicities of D λ . Note that the irreps decomposed from the D (X) and D (g) are not exactly the same. It is simple to get the matrix basis X λ,μ and polynomial basis g λ,ν (k) of D λ -irrep. An irrep may correspond to more than one sets of matrix basis or polynomial basis, thus enabling us to add an indicator μ/ν to distinguish them. After obtaining matrix basis and polynomial basis, the k • p Hamiltonian can be written as where c λμν are undetermined k•p parameters, which must be real for ∀R ∈ L By the way, given the matrix representations of the generators of the little group L, the python package kdotp-generator constructs the standard k • p Hamiltonian or Zeeman's coupling with undetermined k • p parameters as Eq. ( In DFT calculations, when the irrep is n-fold (n ≥ 2) and the eigenstates are degenerate, there is U (n) ambiguity in the DFT eigenstates. In this section, we propose a general routine to get the unitary transformation that changes degenerate DFT wavefunctions to the k • p standard basis. We can obtain the eigenenergies {ε n (k 0 )} and eigenstates {|n(k 0 )⟩} in VASP. The matrix representation of R under the VASP basis set would be calculated by mat2kp, which is denoted as D num (R). However, D num (R) is usually not in the standard form; they are related by a unitary transformation, i.e., for ∀R ∈ L, where U is a unitary matrix. To find U , it is obvious that only the generators of the k 0 -little group L should be taken into account. They are space group operators {R t |v t }, consisting of rotational part and translational part. The translational part is usually expressed by a phase factor. The Eq. ( where 0 is a zero matrix. The real part and the imaginary part of each elements of U are independent variables, which are denoted as Eq. ( where Q is a real coefficient matrix defined by Eq. ( The details are shown in Appendix C. Therefore, all vectors in the null space of the matrix Q is the solution to Eq. ( , where V 1 and V 2 are orthogonal matrices and Σ is a diagonal matrix. It can be proved that the column vectors in V 1 correspond to the singular value 0 form the basis of the null space of the matrix Q, which are denoted as {u 1 , u 2 , • • • , u m }. After reshaping these vectors, the basis of the solution space of U of Eq. ( where λ α must be real. Thus, one has to get one set of the parameters {λ α } to satisfy U † U = I, where I is an identity matrix. However, this relation is nonlinear, thus making it hard to solve by treating it as an equation directly. In mat2kp, the unitary U is obtained via the sequential least squares programming to find optimal parameter set {λ α }, which can minimize the error ε = ij (U † U -I) ij . Applying Eqs. where A is a constant matrix, and x is the column vector comprised of all undetermined real parameters. To eliminate the constraint of the real x, suppose that A = A r + iA i and b = b r + ib i , where the subscript r represents the real part and the subscript i represents the imaginary part. Then Eq. ( In this case, all the matrices become real (the real constraint is automatically satisfied). Therefore, the linear least square method can be used to calculate the parameters and to give the error as well. The VASP2KP package contains two parts: the VASP patch vasp2mat and the post-processing python code mat2kp. The workflow is presented in Fig. The matrix elements of π, ŝ, T and R are required in constructing the k •p Hamiltonian and Zeeman's coupling under the DFT wavefunctions as shown in Sec. II A. The computation method of π matrix elements was first introduced in Ref. The relation of all electron wavefunction (|n(k 0 )⟩) and pseudo wavefunction where the linear transformation T can be expressed as The φ a μ ζ is the direct product of the real space all electron partial wavefunction φ a μ (r) at the a-th atom with a spinor wavefunction |ζ⟩ (ζ =↑ or ↓), φ a μ ζ is the direct product of the real space pseudo partial wavefunction φ a μ (r) with a spinor wavefunction |ζ⟩, and p a μ ζ is a projector wavefunction comprised of the direct product of a real space projector wavefunction p a μ (r) and a spinor wavefunction |ζ⟩. Here, φ a μ (r)'s are obtained by all-electron calculation for the reference atom. The pseudo partial wavefunctions φ a μ (r) are identical to φ a μ (r) outside the augmentation sphere of the corresponding atom and are much softer than φ a μ (r) inside the augmentation sphere; φ a μ (r)'s provide a complete basis for the pseudo wavefunction | n(k 0 )⟩ inside the augmentation sphere. The projector wavefunctions are defined in such a way, i.e., ⟨ Usually the projector wavefunctions are chosen to be zero outside the core radius. Therefore, outside the augmentation sphere the third and second terms in T cancel each other exactly, and inside the augmentation sphere the first and third terms cancel each other exactly. T leaves | n(k 0 )⟩ unchanged outside the augmentation sphere and maps it to the all-electron wavefunction inside the augmentation sphere. Both φ a μ (r) and φ a μ (r) are stored as a radial part times an angular part, which can be expressed as where τ a is the site of the a-th atom, Y m l are sphere harmonics, and R a μ are real functions. The hatted vectors represent the unit vector along the corresponding directions. According to Eq. ( where F a μζ,νζ ′ is the projection matrix of the operator F in the a-th atom's augmentation sphere, which is defined as The first term in F a μζ,μ ′ ζ ′ gives the contribution from the all-electron wavefunction in the augmentation sphere, and the second term cancels the contribution from the pseudo wavefunction in the augmentation sphere that is counted in the first term of Eq. In PAW, the plane wave is used to span the pseudo wavefunction ψ nk0 (r, ζ) = ⟨r, ζ| n(k 0 )⟩, which is expressed by where c nk0 ζG are the plane wave coefficients. The projection coefficients p a μ ζ n(k 0 ) in the second term of Eq. ( The matrix of the generalized momentum π can be expressed by substituting π into F in Eq. ( Since the SOC effect is considered only within the augmentation spheres in VASP, where | n(k 0 )⟩ = aμζ φ a μ ζ p a μ ζ n(k 0 ) , we can make the second term and the fifth term in Eq. ( where The first term of π mn in Eq. ( where p = -iħ∇. The integrals in π ′a μζ,νζ ′ can be calculated by separating the radial part and angular part, which are expressed as ) Finally, by substituting Eqs. ( By substituting the local operator ŝ for F in Eq. ( ) where ŝ = ħ 2 σ and the projection matrix can be obtained by ) Finally, by substituting Eqs. The general (magnetic) space group operator (SGO) is expressed by F = {R|v} or F = {T R|v}, which is usually a nonlocal (NL) operator. One should notice that the SGO commutes with T in Eq. where In this subsection, we give a brief introduction of the main algorithm steps of mat2kp. This code needs the inputs of ε n (k 0 ), π mn , s αβ , D num αβ (R) and D std αβ (R), which correspond to the EIGENVAL, MAT Pi.m, MAT sig.m, MAT R.m and mat2kp.in files, respectively. The main steps of mat2kp are as follows: 1. Following Sec. II D, calculate the unitary transformation matrix The general workflow is given in Fig. In this section, we apply this package to some typical materials, i.e., Bi 2 Se 3 , Na 3 Bi, Te, InAs, and 1H-TMD, to construct the effective models and to compute all the parameters. As we know, the topological property of Bi 2 Se 3 is due to the band inversion at Γ. By using IRVSP, the lowest conduction band belongs to GM9 (twofold degenerate), while the highest valence band belongs to GM8 (twofold degenerate), as depicted in Fig. To the second order, the k•p Hamiltonian and Zeeman's coupling are given in Eq. The computed values of parameters {ai, bi, ci, gi} for Bi2Se3 in Eq. ( C. Four-band model at H in Te Element tellurium is a narrow-gap semiconductor. The direct gap is at H. The low-energy bands at H are the H4irrep and H5-irrep valence bands and H6-irrep (doubly degenerate) conduction bands. The four-band effective model is constructed accordingly. The standard matrix representations of the generators of the H-little group are given in TABLE Zeeman's coupling is expressed by The computed parameters {a i , b i , c i , g i } are presented in TABLE IV. The four-band k • p model's dispersions agree well with the VASP bands in Fig. In addition, another effective model for the six valence bands is constructed in Appendix F. Surprisingly, the highest valence bands show a splitting of 19.8 meV under 10T magnetic field in Fig. V. DISCUSSION In this work, we develop an open-source package VASP2KP to construct the k • p Hamiltonian and Zeeman's coupling, and to compute the k • p parameters and Landé g-factors from the VASP calculations directly. By applying this package in many typical materials, we get k • p effective models, whose band dispersions are in good agreement with the VASP data around the specific wave vector in the Brillouin zone. As the orbital contribution between the low-energy bands is usually remarkable (due to the small energy difference), the computed gfactor is not accurate in the multiple-band model. Thus, we recompute the effective g-factor for the two conduction bands only in Bi 2 Se 3 and Te. The recomputed values are mainly consistent with the previous experimental data listed in TABLE VII. We reveal that the conduction bands of Te have the larger g-factor than the valence bands, and the 1st valence band has the larger g-factor than the 2nd valence band in 1H-TMD monolayers. Our results indicate that VASP2KP has the capabilities to handle more materials. The obtained models provide the effective masses and g-factors, which are important physical quantities of the materials. The minor discrepancy from the experimental data is due to the non-precise band gap in the DFT calculations. To improve these parameters, one can use our code in the hybrid functionals or GW calculations. For the new synthesized or predicted materials, for which there is no experimental data available, our code can be used to predict reliable parameters. In conclusion, VASP2KP with small k. Furthermore, H ′ can be separated as the sum of H 1 and H 2 which only have nonzero elements in and between the subspaces A and B, respectively, as shown in Fig. The sum of first two terms of Eq. (A.5) is block diagonal in the same shape as H 1 , which is denoted by and the sum of last two terms of Eq. (A.5) is non-block diagonal in the same shape as H 2 , which is denoted by To make H block diagonal, we have H N = 0. Use the ansatz that S can be expanded as Eq. (A.2) and Eq. (A.3) into Eq. (A.14), we can obtain Therefore, the k • p Hamiltonian of order 2 is the sum of H kp(0) , H kp (1) and H kp (2) , which is equal to Eq. ( Appendix B: Derivation of Zeeman's coupling It is easy to compute the commutator [∂ i , A j ] as or in a simple form In addition, the components of the magnetic field can be expressed by where ε lmn is the Levi-Civita symbol and A is the magnetic vector potential. Therefore, we can establish the relation that Therefore, we can obtain the relation in Sec. II B that -iħ∂ i + eA i , -iħ∂ j + eA j = -ieħ( ∂ i , A j -∂ j , A i ) = -iħe(∂ i A j -∂ j A i ) = -iħe k ε ijk B k (B.5) Furthermore, after replacing k i by -iħ∂ i +eA i (Peierls substitution) in Eq. ( where Appendix E: The standard matrix representations 