A theoretical investigation was conducted on Na-based fluoro-perovskites NaYF 3 (Y = Sc, Ti) to examine their structural, optical, electronic, and mechanical characteristics for the first time. These cubic compounds exhibit structural stability, maintaining perovskite structures with lattice spacing ranging from 4.15 to 4.26 Å. Computation of elastic parameters confirm their stability, ionic bonding, ductility, and anisotropy. Computed band profiles reveal the half-metallic nature with indirect (M-Γ) bandgaps for the spin-down configurations. Furthermore, density-of-states analysis highlights the role of Y (Sc, Ti) atoms in the metallic character and conduction band contribution. The lack of absorbance in the visible region highlights the materials' suitability for optoelectronic devices. This investigation aims to provide comprehensive insights and encourage further experimental research. To fulfill the substantial demands of the developing society, modern technical advancements are necessary. The use of novel, cutting-edge materials with enhanced characteristics are therefore strongly favored Owing to their exceptional qualities, oxide perovskites have extensively investigated for a broad range of industrial applications and have widely been utilized in electrical and microelectronic devices Driven by the flourishing promise of halide-perovskites in modern technology, our pursuit is to unveil the physical prospects of NaYF 3 (Y = Sc and Ti) through a rigorous investigation of its structural, elastic, electrical, and optical properties. The full-potential linear augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) approach The IRelast package built by Jamal Murtaza et al. In this sub-section, we inspect the structural characteristics of the lead-free halide-perovskites NaYF 3 (Y = Sc and Ti). Fig. Where , , and represents the ionic radii of Na, (Y = Sc and Ti), and F respectively. According to existing literature, materials with a tolerance factor (τ) falling in the range of 0.90 to 1 maintain a stable cubic perovskite structure We performed structural optimization on the chosen compounds by systematically varying their volumes around the equilibrium cell volume (V 0 ). This volume optimization allowed us to predict various structural characteristics of the compounds under investigation. The energyversus-volume optimization curves, illustrated in Fig. Table This distinction implies that a considerably higher pressure is needed to compress the unit cell of NaTiF 3 , elucidating the observed difference in bulk modulus. The overall tendency of this approximation is supported by the fact that the bulk modulus increases as the lattice constant drops, implying that the estimated outputs are more precise and realistic. Additionally, it is imperative to highlight that the optimized lattice parameters for NaScF 3 and NaTiF 3 , unveiled for the first time within this study, serve as pivotal benchmarks for future investigations concerning these compounds. The elastic constants (ECs) are essential in describing the mechanical characteristics of the compounds as they explore how these materials respond to external forces. Information regarding toughness and stability of materials can be unveiled by measuring these constants. By computing the components of stress tensor at minute strains and providing the energy in proportion to the lattice strain that preserved volume, the ECs of targeted compounds were determined at zero pressure The cubic lattice symmetry allows the reduction of elastic constants to only three i.e., , , and while other elastic parameters can be extracted from these constants. Table , and The value for NaTiF 3 (134.952 GPa) is quite larger than the value for NaScF 3 For the anisotropic materials, A is lesser or greater than 1, whereas designates the isotropic nature of the materials. The observed values (listed in Table [ ] [ ] ⁄ [ ] In contrast to the bulk modulus, which reflects resistance to the fracture, the shear modulus designates resistance to plastic deformation. The bulk modulus for NaTiF 3 (75.695) is larger than that of NaScF 3 (69.599) representing that NaTiF 3 is more resistant to the applied external forces. NaScF 3 is harder and offers stronger resistance to deformation because its Shear modulus (16.910) is higher than that of NaTiF 3 The Pugh ratio ( ⁄ ) is another metric that may be used to classify whether a material is brittle or ductile. According to the Pugh criteria, a material has a brittle character if ⁄ otherwise ductile In this section, we exploited the TB-mBJ approximation to explore the electronic nature of NaYF 3 (Y = Sc and Ti) by modeling their energy band structures and the density of states (DOS). indicating that these elements are predominantly responsible for the observed metallic nature where a minute contribution to the metallic nature is from the F atom. Meanwhile, an analysis of the DOS curves for both compounds in the spin-down configuration reveals that the valence band is primarily influenced by the presence of Y (Sc, Ti) atoms, with a minor contribution from F atoms. This observation aligns with the ferromagnetic nature of the materials, evident from magnetic moment values of 2.00 μ B for NaTiF 3 and 1.01 μ B for NaScF 3 . In this section, we explore how materials respond to incident light. The optical characteristics are mainly correlated to the dielectric function, refractive index, absorption coefficient, reflectivity, energy loss function, optical conductivity, and extinction coefficient. Herein, we report the optical characteristics of the lead-free fluoro-perovskites NaYF 3 (Y = Sc and Ti) for the energy values ranging from 0 to 41 eV. The materials' properties are substantially impacted by their frequency-dependent dielectric function ( ) The Kramers-Kroning expressions allow us to determine these real and imaginary components of The real portion of the ( ) may be used to predict the dispersive behavior of the material while information regarding light absorption can be retrieved from the imaginary component of the complex dielectric function The variation in the real part of ( ) measured for the energy values ranging from 0 to 41 eV is shown in Fig. In Fig. The material's absorption coefficient entails how these compounds might react to the incident radiations and reveal a material's capacity for absorbing incoming photons of certain energy In a nutshell, we can say that the absorption coefficient specifies how many photons a substance can absorb in a unit length. The incident photons, after getting absorbed into the materials, impart sufficient energy to the materials and thus result in the electrons transfer from the VB to CB. The following expression can be utilized to extract the absorption coefficient values from the real and imaginary parts of ( ). respectively, indicating that NaTiF 3 is a good absorber as compared to NaScF 3 . The refractive index ( ( )) of a compound, which is closely associated with microscopic atomic interactions, determines how much light is refracted by that compound and plays a significant role in designing the optical components such as optical lenses, pigments, and optical thin films The material's suitability for use in optical devices is subject to its refractive index. For example, materials with high refractive indices can be employed in photo-voltaic cells. The computed refractive indices of NaYF 3 (Y = Sc and Ti) are shown in Fig. It is clearly visible that for both compounds the ( ) value declines and drops to a value below 1. The observed decrease is attributed to the loss of transparency and thus the materials begin to absorb high-energy photons which are consistent with the findings shown in Fig. The extinction coefficient ( ( )) signifies the degree of light absorption by a material and can be extracted from the dielectric functions by using the following expression The computed extinction coefficients for NaYF 3 (Y = Sc and Ti) are plotted in Fig. The optical conductivity ( ) refers to the phenomenon in which a light of suitable frequency strikes the material's surface and as a result the electrical conduction begins. The optical conductivity can be obtained by using the following relation 