Coherent optics has profoundly impacted diverse applications ranging from communications, LiDAR to quantum computations. However, building coherent systems in integrated photonics previously came at great expense in hardware integration and energy efficiency: the lack of a power-efficient way to generate highly coherent light necessitates bulky lasers and amplifiers, while frequency and phase recovery schemes require huge digital signal processing resources. In this work, we demonstrate a high-coherence parallelization strategy that facilitates advanced integrated coherent systems at a minimum price. Using a self-injection locked microcomb to injection lock a distributed feedback laser array, we boost the microcomb power by a record high gain of up to 60 dB on chip with no degradation in coherence. This strategy enables tens of highly coherent channels with an intrinsic linewidth down to the 10 Hz level and power of more than 20 dBm. The overall electrical to optical wall-plug efficiency reaches 19%, comparable with that of the state-of-the-art semiconductor lasers. Driven by this parallel source, we demonstrate a silicon photonic communication link with an unprecedented data rate beyond 60 Tbit/s. Importantly, the high coherence we achieve reduces the coherent-related DSP consumption by 99.999% compared with the traditional III-V laser pump scheme. This work paves a way to realizing scalable, high-performance coherent integrated photonic systems, potentially benefiting numerous applications. Integrated photonics has made remarkable progress in providing scalable solutions for communications To meet the ever-growing capacity and precision requirements posed by these applications, one major evolution trend over the last few years is the adoption of coherent technology in photonic integrated circuits (PICs) of more than 30 dB is often necessary, posing a challenge for both the integrated erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) Another challenge for integrated coherent systems is the huge digital signal processing (DSP) consumption In this work, we overcome previous challenges by demonstrating a high-coherence parallelization strategy in integrated photonics. Instead of pushing the efficiency of the coherent light source itself, here we use a high-coherence microcomb as a seed to injection lock (IL) a DFB array (Fig. Power-efficient, high-coherence parallel light source on chip Generating the parallel light source consists of two steps. Firstly, we self-injection lock (SIL) an indium phosphide (InP) DFB diode laser to a 35 GHz free spectral range (FSR) Si 3 N 4 microresonator with a thickness of 100 nm (Fig. The SIL scheme also enables optical frequency comb generation Secondly, the microcomb serves as a coherence seed to IL a DFB array where γ N , γ P , g refer to the slave laser's carrier recombination rate, photon decay rate, and linear gain coefficient, respectively. ∆N denotes the carrier number difference between the injection-locked case and the freerunning case. S denotes the intracavity photon number, which is proportional to the output power P . The equation above describes the relationship between injectionlocked and free-running intracavity photon numbers (S and S f r ). Given the amplification circumstances where ∆N << 1, the intracavity photon number closely approximates to the free-running case, S ∼ S f r . This indicates that the output power of the slave laser P is nearly the same as the DFB free-running power P f r regardless of the original master light power. This significant amplification effect comes from the slave laser's cavity enhancement. IL-based amplification harnesses the media gain more effectively and thus leads to higher WPE compared with single-pass amplifiers such as EDFA and SOA. To verify this, we attenuate the power of a comb line to a significantly low level before injecting it into a DFB laser, whose free-running power can reach around 21 dBm. The experimental results show that even under the injected power of -39.6 dBm, the slave DFB laser can still be effectively locked and emits a power of 21.6 dBm, indicating an exceptional gain exceeding 61 dB (Fig. Another appealing property of the IL process is the maintenance of high coherence from the seed light. The phase noise after IL is described by the following equation where < δφ inj δφ inj > ω and < F φ F φ > ω represent the master light phase fluctuation power spectrum density (PSD) and the slave laser cavity Langevin noise in phase, while ∆ represents the phase and photon/carrier number coupling terms that are relatively insignificant in the IL process. Specifically, the frequency response of laser cavity Langevin noise |H φ,φ (ω)| 2 can be suppressed by more than 40 dB compared with the free-running case, while that of the master light |H φ,φinj | remains near 1 in the frequency range of our interest. In other words, the noise factor of the IL process is ∼ 0 dB. Here we compare the degradation of noise under various amplification strategies. We use a comb line with a power of -15.4 dBm and amplify it by 20 dB gain through EDFA, SOA and injection locked DFB respectively. Figure This power-efficient, high-coherence parallel source can significantly enhance the performance of coherent systems on PICs and enable complex system functionality. Here, we use it to drive SiPh transceivers in a high-speed coherent optical communication system. Figure At the receiver side, the combined data carriers and LOs are separated into different wavelength channels, each of which is directed to the corresponding receiver. To satisfy the power requirements of receivers and further enhance detection accuracy, the LOs are boosted to approximately 20 dBm by injection locking other DFBs. Thanks to the ample power and excellent coherence, our approach can effectively facilitate wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) coherent transmission of high capacity and advanced modulation formats. It's noteworthy that both the transmitter and the receiver utilized in our experimental setup are silicon-on-insulator (SOI) based and manufactured by a commercial CMOS foundry, as depicted in Fig. We employ dual-polarization 32-state quadrature amplitude modulation (DP-32-QAM) at a symbol rate of 30 Gbaud to encode data on each of the 34 amplified comb lines. Consequently, the data rate of each modulated channel is 300 Gbit/s (30 GBaud × 5 bits × 2 polarizations). These 34 channels are aggregated via a MUX, resulting in an overall data rate of 10.2 Tbit/s. Moreover, we utilize a 1-km-long 7-core fiber, with 6 cores allocated for transmitting the modulated light and 1 core dedicated to transmitting the LOs at minimal power levels. After signal recovery at the receiver side, the calculated bit error ratios (BER) of all channels remain below 8.1 × 10 -4 (Fig. Besides the hardware breakthrough, this parallel approach can also bring significant DSP reduction in coherent systems. Conventional coherent communication systems usually use DFBs to generate optical carriers and LOs, whose frequencies and phases vary rapidly and randomly. Consequently, unpredictable frequency offsets and phase fluctuations arise between carriers and LOs, as depicted in Fig. There are two key advantages of our strategy for saving the DSP. Firstly, the source itself exhibits a narrow linewidth. Secondly, our strategy preserves coherence during amplification, allowing for the low-power propagation of the LO signal. The coherent communication link and DSP modules we use are illustrated in Fig. To demonstrate the impact of reducing the usage of coherent DSP, we apply different ratios of FOE and CPE to a 30 GBaud 32-QAM coherent transmission link (Methods). We also compare the data recovery accuracies between our strategy and using two standalone DFB lasers as the carrier and the LO. Both schemes recover the signal successfully when employing full coherent-related DSP which incorporates FOE once and CPE for every symbol. Utilizing two standalone DFB lasers results in a BER of 1.7 × 10 -3 , whereas our strategy achieves a significantly lower BER of 2.2 × 10 -4 . Furthermore, in the case of using standalone DFB lasers without FOE, recovery becomes infeasible due to the significant variation in frequency offset. When we decrease the normalized ratio of CPE while incorporating FOE, a CPE ratio of 1 × 10 -3 results in a BER of 8.1 × 10 -3 . As the CPE ratio continues to decrease, data recovery becomes impossible (Fig. By utilizing microcombs with much more channels and broader spans as we demonstrated before Our recent advancements in heterogeneous fabrication technology potentially can enable the integration of all these components on the same substrate, supporting mass production Our method can be extended to diverse applications beyond communications. For FMCW LiDAR, achieving more than 20-dBm power at multiple channels with high coherence is critical for long-distance ranging in automobiles with a fast scan rate The Si 3 N 4 microresonator is fabricated in a commercial CMOS foundry. The starting material consists of a 200 mm diameter silicon wafer featuring 14.5 μm of thermally-oxidized SiO 2 on its surface. The waveguide is formed by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) of Si 3 N 4 , followed by deep-UV lithography and plasma etching for pattern transfer. The resultant Si 3 N 4 core is then capped by 4 μm of SiO 2 , formed using LPCVD with a tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) precursor and annealing at 1150 • C. The resultant wafer is singulated into chips using a blade dicing saw. We mount a DFB laser chip with an output power of 19 dBm in a butterfly package on a 6-axis stage (Thorlabs MAX602D/M). The Si 3 N 4 chip is placed on a TEC holder, whose temperature is controlled by a temperature controller (Vescent SLICE-QTC) to keep the Si 3 N 4 chip in a stable state. We use a laser diode controller (Thorlabs ITC4001) to adjust the temperature of the DFB and provide the drive current. By using a piezo controller (Thorlabs MDT693B) to control the 6-axis stage, the relative position between the DFB and the Si 3 N 4 chip can be accurately controlled so that the two chips can be closely butt-coupled. By setting the temperature and current of the DFB to the appropriate values, the DFB laser can be self-injection locked, leading to the generation of a microcomb at the through port of the microresonator We use a tunable fiber Bragg grating filter (AOS Tunable FBG) to filter one of the comb lines. After adjusting the polarization of the light through a PC (Thorlabs FPC560), we inject it into a DFB laser through a polarization maintaining circulator (PMC) to achieve injection locking amplification. Given the limited number of DFB chips, we adjust the temperature of each DFB laser to modify the output wavelength, enabling the system to achieve amplification of each comb line. The PM (Thorlabs PM100D) and the OSA are employed to capture the power and spectral variations before and after injection locking, respectively. By observing the change in the output frequency in the OSA while adjusting the temperature of the DFB chip, we can ascertain whether the DFB laser is injection locked. To measure the frequency noise before and after injection locking, the correlated self-heterodyne method is adopted After being filtered in turn, each comb line passes through a PC and is split into two paths using a polarization maintaining power splitter. One path, with 1% of the power, connects to a PM for monitoring the polarization of light to ensure effective injection locking. Another path, carrying 99% of the power, passes through a PMC to IL the DFB. A very small fraction of the output light from the injection locked DFB is split off and monitored by the OSA. The remaining light is modulated with the data generated by an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Keysight M8194A). The modulated signal light and the unmodulated LO are transmitted concurrently through two distinct cores of the 7-core fiber. The LO at the receiver side is amplified to 20 dBm by injection locking another DFB with a similar structure, and it is then sent to the coherent receiver together with the signal light. The receiver is powered by a DC power supply (Keysight E36312A). The electrical signals generated by the receiver through the beating of the signal light with the LO are captured by a high-performance real-time oscilloscope after passing through DC blocks (Gwave GDCB-67G-185) and baluns (HYPERLABS HL9407), respectively. The OSC can provide a conversion rate of 80 GSa/s and a bandwidth of 33 GHz on four simultaneous channels. The data samples we collect at a time last for 6.5 μs and are subsequently processed by a computer for DSP. In the DSP at the receiver side, the sampled signal is first orthogonally normalized using the Gram-Schmidt algorithm to compensate for the effects of non-ideal factors in the link. Continuing with the process, we apply matched filtering to the signal using a root-raised cosine filter with a roll-off coefficient of 0.05, followed