The opto-electronic oscillators (OEOs) hosting self-sustained oscillations by a timedelayed mechanism are of particular interest in long-haul signal transmission and processing. On the other hand, owing to their unique tunability and compatibility, magnons -as elementary excitations of spin waves -are advantageous carriers for coherent signal transduction across different platforms. In this work, we integrated an opto-electronic oscillator with a magnonic oscillator consisting of a microwave waveguide and a yttrium iron garnet sphere. We find that, in the presence of the magnetic sphere, the oscillator power spectrum exhibits sidebands flanking the fundamental OEO modes. The measured waveguide transmission reveals anti-crossing gaps, a hallmark of the coupling between the opto-electronic oscillator modes and the Walker modes of the sphere. Experimental results are well reproduced by a coupled-mode theory that accounts for nonlinear magnetostrictive interactions mediated by the magnetic sphere. Leveraging the advanced fiber-optic technologies in opto-electronics, this work lays out a new, hybrid platform for investigating longdistance coupling and nonlinearity in coherent magnonic phenomena. Hybrid magnonics These two subjects were nurtured by recent experimental discoveries, namely, the 'gaindriven polariton (GDP)' Similar to the GDP photon mode, the OEO photon mode sources energy from the loop's gain, and can travel over long distances to support remote magnon-photon coupling beyond the near fields. In this sense, it is therefore interesting to integrate such OEO photon mode with another magnon mode from a magnonic resonator, e.g., YIG, and study their coherent coupling and hybridization. Such a unique system will also allow to investigate how the self-sustained OEO photon mode couples to a magnonic system in the same loop, and how the energy transforms and dissipates between respective photon and magnon modes upon changing the various external control parameters. In this work, we develop a hybrid architecture consisting of an OEO and a YIG sphere integrated on top of a microwave waveguide, as illustrated in Fig. As illustrated in Fig. The main branch (left) is one that entails the magnon resonator: after the light splitting, the signal passes through a fiber delayline, then converts to microwave via an ultrafast diode (Detector), and an optional bandpass filter, then amplifies by an "Amplifier-Attenuator-Amplifier" combo before reaching the magnon resonator. The "Amplifier-Attenuator-Amplifier" represents a tunable attenuator sandwiched between two fixed-gain amplifiers (+30 dB) and effectively serves as a "tunable amplifier", thus allowing the power level of the signal to be tuned before returning to the EOM (at the rf port). The magnon resonator consists of a YIG sphere with a nominal radius 1.0 mm placed on top of the signal line of a coplanar waveguide (CPW), and the whole structure is placed between a pair of circulators, to introduce an additional, reverse-circulating "probe loop" that measures the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) of the magnon resonator. An external magnetic field, H, is applied to establish the magnon resonances and is set parallel to the CPW's stripline. The probe loop microwave power is kept rather small (< -15 dBm) and causes no disturbance to the main loop which typically flows a microwave power > 10 dBm. Once the signal leaves the magnon resonator, it is directed back to the EOM (rf port). Additional microwave splitters and/or couplers are inserted as needed for sampling and monitor the signal power and spectra at desirable positions along the loop. Upon a certain microwave threshold power, self-sustained oscillation sharply establishes in the loop, which we define as the unity-gain (0 dB), to indicate the onset of the autooscillation. A series of eigen-modes in the form of sharp peaks can be observed in the power spectra. These eigen-modes arise because their frequencies satisfy the oscillation condition, which is collectively determined by the loop gain (unity), loop phase (2πN with N being an integer), and other active components in the loop, particularly the amplifier gain profile and the attenuator loss profile. We first turn our attention to the 1 st fundamental mode under the excitation of the magnon resonator. As an example, we use a fiber of 100 m in length and an additional phase shifter tuned to the optimized phase angle. The main mode resonates at ω 1 = 1698.4 MHz, with two pronounced sidebands at 1679.8 and 1715.7 MHz, shown in Fig. Different from using a conventional rf source, the property of the system to monitor the magnon resonator by the OEO loop power is a unique and potentially useful feature of the present dc-gain-driven system. It is likely caused by the similar timescale of the loop recovery to the YIG's relaxation. The YIG sphere we used has a damping of α = 1 × 10 -4 and absorbs/dissipates energy to the OEO's photon mode in the scale of ns; while the OEO relaxation is determined from its delay time, τ d , can be estimated: τ d = τ p + τ m , where τ p and τ m are the photonic and microwave (including magnonic part) delays, respectively. For long fibers, the time is driven primarily by the photonic delay, i.e., the fiber delay τ p = nL/c, where L is the fiber length and n the refractive index. The Corning SMF-28 fiber used in our system has a core index of refraction as 1.4682 at 1550 nm, so the speed of light can be estimated as v = c/n 2.04×10 8 m/s. Therefore, the delay is on the order of ∼ 500 ns just from the photonic part. A more accurate determination of the total delay can be obtained by analyzing the free-spectral-range (FSR). The spectrum evolution upon sweeping the magnetic field near the FMR regime is shown in Fig. Employing a probe sub-loop, we scanned the dispersion of the magnon resonator near the 1 st OEO main mode which resonates at around H = 670 Oe, as shown in Fig. We can rationalize the emergence of sidebands as a consequence of the nonlinear magnetostrictive interaction between a YIG phonon mode of frequency Ω ≈ 13 MHz and the YIG spin waves, which in turn couple to OEO modes. This interaction, which owes its origin to the deformation of the YIG due to the varying magnetization inside the magnetic sphere Our COMSOL simulations confirm the existence of a phonon S 3,2,2 mode at 13 MHz for the 1-mm-diameter YIG sphere, as shown in Fig. Due to the relatively low frequency of the first OEO eigen-mode that lays beyond the magnon manifold, the higher order magnetostatic (Walker) modes of YIG cannot be effectively excited except for the main FMR in the probe sub-loop. Therefore, we shift our focus to the 2 nd OEO eigen-mode at higher frequency, which resonates at ω 2 = 2ω 1 ≈ 3778.1 MHz. By choosing the proper set of circulators and bandpass filters, we can pick out the 2 nd OEO mode while suppressing all other eigen-modes and sidebands. In the sub-loop, the magnon modes are probed by the transmission of a fixed-frequency rf tone (using the lock-in amplifier) while the bias magnetic field is scanned. Near this 2 nd OEO eigen-mode, all the six magnetostatic modes of YIG can be concurrently observed, which is evidenced from both the magnon spectra using the probe sub-loop, in Fig. In addition, during the process, the strong OEO oscillation signal is also present inside the YIG resonator, acting as a strong pump to the magnon modes. Such a strong pump leads to a peculiar PIM We scan the probe signal (low power) near the OEO pump mode ω 2 ≈ 3778.1 MHz, shown in Fig. In the absence of YIG, the frequency response of the OEO above the threshold displays equally spaced peaks analogous to that of a Fabry-Perot resonator. Therefore, we model the OEO modes as harmonic oscillators with ladder operators a n (a † n ), n ∈ Z >0 , possessing resonance frequencies ω n = nω 1 , where ω 1 characterizes the frequency of the first fundamental OEO mode. The Hamiltonian of the OEO system is given by The Hamiltonian of the YIG sphere, which accounts for spin-spin, dipole-dipole and Zeeman interactions, can be diagonalized as 38,39 where m k (m † k ) is the magnon annihilation (creation) operator and ω k the magnon dispersion, which depends linearly on the applied bias magnetic field H. The magnon and the OEO modes interact coherently through the evanescent fields emanating from the waveguide. Furthermore, magnons can couple to the YIG phonon modes (depicted in Fig. There are several magnon and OEO modes interacting coherently through the evanescent fields. For the sake of brevity, here we focus on the interaction between the second fundamental OEO mode and one of the Walker modes, where the operator a 2 (m k ) is superseded by a (m) with corresponding frequency ω a (ω m ). The approximate Hamiltonian of the interacting system, which can be straightforwardly generalized into other modes of the system, is given by Here b (b † ) denotes the annihilation (creation) operator of a phonon mode of frequency Ω, g ma and g mb are respectively, the magnon-photon and magnon-phonon interaction strengths, whereas ε parameterizes the strength of the field pumping the OEO mode. The dynamics of the system in the frame rotating at frequency ω a is provided by the following mean-field equations: where ∆ α = ω α -ω a (α ∈ {m, b}) while κ and γ α are, respectively the damping rates of the associated modes. In the long-time limit, the general solution to the modes in Eq. ( Equation (5) shows that the nonlinear interactions ∝ g mb lead to the generation of sidebands oscillating at frequencies displaced by an integer multiple of Ω around ω a . The coefficients O j (O ∈ {A, M, B}) can be obtained by substituting Eq. ( . The sidebands get self-sustained through the OEO and the corresponding modes appear in the power spectra as shown in Fig. where a n (a † n ) denotes the annihilation (creation) operator of the n th sideband while m d is the pump-induced mode. The strength of coupling G between the magnon and the pumpinduced mode is a function of the intensity of the incident electromagnetic field. Information regarding the eigenstructure of the system can be extracted from the transmission to a weak probe field of frequency ω p applied on the system. The input-output relation relevant to the probe transmission is given by where a in and a out characterize the input and transmitted fields respectively, while Γ is the strength of coupling between the probe field and the modes of the system. In Fig. In summary, we investigate a new hybrid platform comprising of an optoelectronic oscillator coupled with a YIG sphere integrated on a microwave waveguide. We find that both the OEO loop's power and spectrum are significantly affected by the additional magnon resonator. The presence of strong electromagnetic fields from the OEO excites the magnetostrictive interaction between magnon and phonon modes of the magnetic sphere, leading to the generation of newer frequencies around the fundamental OEO modes displaced by phonon frequency. These newer frequencies become self-sustained through the OEO by the time delay of the system and get manifested as sidebands in both the power spectrum of the OEO and waveguide transmission. Due to the system's complexity, a number of characteristic oscillations are observed: (i) the high order OEO modes featuring dense oscillation pattern with 1.55 MHz FSR in Fig. Our experimental observations are well-reproduced by a coupled mode theory and numerical simulations. Thanks to the excellent tunability of magnon system and the "long-rangecoherent" OEO system, our apparatus renders a novel platform to explore both classical and quantum phenomena involving solid-state systems and may potentially be used for achieving remote magnon-photon coupling beyond the near fields. cavity-magnon system", Phys. Rev. B 94, 224410 (2016). 37 Xufeng Zhang, Chang-Ling Zou, Liang Jiang, and Hong Tang, "Cavity magnomechanics", Sci. Adv. 2, e1501286 (2016). . Schematic illustration of the setup: consisting of the (main loop) optoelectronic, magnonic (YIG sphere), and fiber delay parts. Bandpassing functions are given by the enclosed circulator pair and dedicated bandpass filters while other rf components are rated broadband. The fiber splitter splits half of the optical power to a microwave diode for system power monitoring. In between the two circulators, a ferromagnetic resonance probe (sub-loop) is installed that probes the YIG magnonic characteristics at a much lower rf power compared to the main loop (negligible disturbance). The FMR signal (probed by the sub-loop at low power) and the power diode signal (main loop) versus the external magnetic field. The power diode measures primarily the power of the OEO main mode, which is at least 20dB higher than all other sidebands at off-resonance. (c) Power spectrum snapshots at selective magnetic fields. Around the magnetic resonance, the OEO's main photon mode is attenuated, whose energy then smears out and distributes to the continuum. The dense oscillations correspond to the free-spectral-range (FSR) of high-order OEO modes, which is 1.55 MHz (645 ns delay) with a 100 m fiber. 