Magnetic refrigeration (MR) based on the magnetocaloric effect (MCE) is a promising alternative to conventional vapor compression refrigeration techniques. The cooling efficiency of a magnetic refrigerator depends on its refrigeration capacity and operation frequency. Existing refrigerators possess limited cooling efficiency due to the low operating frequency (around tens of Hz). Theory predicts that reducing geometrical effects can increase the operation frequency by reducing the relaxation time of a magnetic material. As compared to other shapes, magnetocaloric wires transfer heat most effectively to a surrounding environment, due to their enhanced surface area. The wire shape also yields a good mechanical response, reducing the relaxation time and consequently increasing the operation frequency of the cooling device. Experiments have validated the theoretical predictions. By assembling microwires with different magnetocaloric properties and Curie temperatures into a laminate structure, a table-like magnetocaloric bed can be created and The MCE is a phenomenon where a magnetic material exhibits a change in temperature or magnetic entropy when subjected to an external magnetic field. MR technology based on the MCE is energy-saving, highly cooling efficient, and environmentally friendly, which makes it a promising platform to replace gas compression (GC) refrigeration techniques As the material is adiabatically magnetized, the magnetic moments of the ferromagnetic material orient themselves in the direction of the applied field. The alignment of the magnetic moments causes a decrease in the spin entropy and therefore the lattice entropy is increased. This increase in lattice entropy heats the material; the temperature of the material increases from T1 to T2=T1+T. This excess heat (T) is then removed by heat exchange with a cooler body, thus reducing the temperature of the material to T3=T1. The removal of the applied field causes the magnetic moment entropy to increase and the lattice entropy and hence the material temperature to decrease to T4=T1-T. The increase/decrease in lattice entropy due to the decrease/increase in magnetic entropy alters temperature of the material and this can be used to refrigerate. It is worth noting that the heat transfer during the MCE process is dependent upon the entropy change in the magnetic refrigerant element The geometric effect of refrigerants used in magnetic coolers has been overlooked by researchers looking to improve MR technology The change in magnetic entropy (SM(T,μ0H)) of a magnetic material with respect to μ0H and T is often considered for MCE studies. The SM(T,μ0H) is related to the change in magnetization (M) with respect to T through Maxwell relation The SM caused by varying external magnetic field from H = 0 to H = H0 is evaluated as The adiabatic temperature change, Tad, at a given temperature T0 can be approximately calculated by In these above equations, μ0 is the permeability of vacuum and (M/T) is the derivative of the magnetization with respect to temperature in a constant magnetic field. According to Eq. (2), the magnitude of SM depends on both the magnitude of M and (M/T)H. As these values increase, so does the magnitude of SM, which is desired in the design of magnetic cooling devices. To obtain a large SM it is best to use a material with a steep change in M with respect to temperature at the transition temperature because (M/T)H is closely related to the magnetic order transition. From Eq. (3) a large Tad can be obtained by having a large SM around the magnetic ordering temperature and a small C(T,H). However C(T,H) varies widely between materials and as a result the larger SM does not necessarily lead to a larger Tad. Therefore, the parameter that characterizes the practicality of a magnetic refrigerant cannot solely be determined by the magnitude of SM. To properly compare magnetic refrigerants, it is important to consider the temperature response of SM of the refrigerant, namely the refrigerant capacity (RC). The RC of a magnetic refrigerant material is calculated using The RC indicates how much heat can be transferred from the cold end (at Tcold) to the hot end (at Thot) of a refrigerator in an ideal thermodynamic cycle. The relative cooling power (RCP), representing an amount of heat transfer between the hot and cold sides in an ideal refrigeration cycle, can be defined as where δTFWHM = Thot -Tcold is the temperature difference at the full width at half maximum of the magnetic entropy change curve. Both RC and RCP have been used to assess the usefulness of magnetocaloric materials for MR It is generally accepted that while first-order magnetic transition materials (FOMT) possess larger values of ΔSM, they are characteristically limited to narrower temperature ranges Among the reported magnetocaloric materials, Gadolinium (Gd) is considered the benchmark material, which shows the best magnetocaloric characteristics for sub-room temperature magnetic cooling applications the magnetocaloric properties of these microwires and their usefulness for MR applications. A clear understanding of the effects of reduced dimensionality on the magnetocaloric response of a magnetic material is essential to optimizing the performance of a cooling device However, this feature is only observed when the applied magnetic field is small (less than 500 Oe). As compared to the single wire, the M-T curve becomes broader near the TC in the multiwire array, which can arise from the enhanced magnetostatic interaction between wires in the multi-wire system. The Curie temperature values of the samples are determined by the dM/dT vs. T curves, which show a slight reduction in TC in the Gd-based materials with reduced dimensions. Interestingly, the M-H data (Fig. In the following sections, unless specified, we have assessed the magnetocaloric properties of different magnetic multiwire systems. It should be noted herewith that the comparison of SM and RC values between reported multi-wire systems is rather relative, since the total number of wires used in each multiwire array can vary. While previous research focused on exploring the MCE in bulk materials (both single and polycrystalline forms) The first method is to utilize the advantage of controlling the parameters associated with melt-extraction. Nanocrystals can be created directly within an amorphous matrix of the wire during melt-extraction process The shortcoming of this method is to sometime create unwanted minor phases in wires, which depend on alloy elements used. The second method is to create nanocrystals in amorphous wires through conventional (furnace) annealing This method is usually time-consuming since it takes time and effort to perform experiments to find out optimal annealing conditions. The third method is to utilize Joule heating effect by which the passage of a dc current through the wire produces heat that is sufficient to partially convert an amorphous phase (mostly on the surface of the wire) into the nanocrystalline phase Several single phase Gd-alloy microwires have been investigated, such as Gd53Al24Co20Zr3 The RC values of the single-phase magnetocaloric microwires are also reported and compared in Fig. While single phase magnetocaloric microwires have been shown to exhibit superior magnetocaloric properties, there is an opportunity for further improvement in their magnetocaloric figures of merit. This can be achieved by creating magnetic nanocrystals embedded in an amorphous magnetic matrix However, it is not straight forward to find out what phases can be possibly formed during meltextraction. The second method has been employed through thermal annealing of as-prepared amorphous microwires (Fig. These biphase microwires were created by annealing as-quenched ones at 100, 200, and 300°C Although the above-discussed Gd-alloy microwires with excellent magnetic and magnetocaloric properties are promising candidates for MR, their Curie temperatures are limited to temperatures below 80-200 K (Figs. microwires. Interestingly, these large values are achieved at ambient temperature. Table Recently, there has been a growing interest in developing high entropy magnetocaloric materials for MR, due to their excellent mechanical properties For magnetic cooling applications above 20 K, the regenerative Ericsson cycle is theoretically ideal for magnetic cooling systems due to its high working efficiency and broad temperature range Typically, the shapes of ΔSM(T) for alloys or elementary substances are shape peaks or broad triangular peaks In this context, magnetocaloric microwires possess superior advantages as they can be easily assembled into multiwire arrays or laminate structures. To design a multiwire-based magnetic bed that exhibits table-like magnetocaloric characteristics, it is essential to select microwires with similar magnetocaloric properties and close Curie temperatures where ΔSM Design is the magnetic entropy change of designed structures, α, β, γ and ΔSM 1 , ΔSM 2 , ΔSM 3 are the weight fractions and magnetic entropy changes of the different microwires. that of C-Basic when TC interval is ~10 K, while RC values of other samples are higher than those of both components. Remarkably, the RC values of the designed samples increase with increasing the TC interval, which means that the enhanced RC values for the designed systems can be obtained by using the Gd-based wires with large TC intervals in a range of temperature. The designed systems with three components show the same tendency as those with two components, which exhibits a table-like MCE and the values of -ΔSM max decreases when the TC intervals increase (Fig. Refrigerants in form of microwires can yield higher cooling efficiencies compared to their bulk or other shape counterparts. The use of these microwires promises high applicability in active MR due to their outstanding soft magnetic, magnetocaloric and mechanical properties. The microsize of the microwires enhances the surface area for the designed structures, which improves the efficiency of heat transfer significantly in cooling systems. These excellent magnetocaloric and mechanical properties can be harnessed by creating novel biphase nanocrystalline/amorphous structures via thermal annealing or during melt-extraction. These functional magnetocaloric microwires can be assembled as laminate structures, rendering them applicable in active cooling devices for MEMS and NEMS. A variety of magnetocaloric microwires have been designed, fabricated, and investigated (Table The disadvantage of these microwires also lies in the large hysteretic losses associated with the FOMT nature. Refining chemical compositions/nanostructures in these systems may offer an approach for reducing the hysteretic losses and improving the RCs while preserving the large MCEs Moving forward, further research should be undertaken to examine the applicability of the currently available magnetocaloric microwires in cooling devices. It is essential to quantify how high the cooling energy efficiency can be achieved in a cooler using the microwires compared to their other shape counterparts. Several challenges need to be overcome. For instance, it is important to improve the existing melt-extraction techniques to create magnetocaloric microwires with uniform diameters. It is also challenging to control the fabrication parameters associated with the melt-extraction process for achieving pure amorphous phase microwires or biphase microwires with controlled amorphous/nanocrystalline volume fraction ratios. The design of magnetocaloric microwires with controlled large, broadened magnetic entropy changes around room temperature is a very important but challenging task. The RCs of these microwires can be enhanced by coating the microwires with soft ferromagnetic layers such as FeNi, creating core/shell wire structures. Interfacial magnetic coupling and interaction between the core and shell is expected to broaden the magnetic entropy change, giving rise to the RC enhancement. Combing the melt-extraction and electrodeposition methods is considered most appropriate for making these novel core/shell wire systems. In an array of magnetic microwires, magnetostatic interactions can play an important role in determining the magnetocaloric response of the system. In this context, tuning magnetostatic interactions through incorporating short magnetocaloric microwires into a thermally conductive polymer matrix appears to be an interesting prospective approach for creating novel magnetic refrigerants. Combined theoretical and experimental studies are needed to validate these hypotheses. Bringing the fundamental studies to the point of making prototype refrigeration devices will require the concerted effort of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers. Since the Heusler alloy microwires magnetic hyperthermia 