We introduce low-energy effective models for dense configurations of vortices in the Kitaev honeycomb model. Specifically, we consider configurations of vortices in which vortex-free plaquettes form triangular lattices against a vortex-full background. Depending on the vortex density, these "dual" configurations belong to either one of two families classified by translation and inversion symmetry. As a function of a time-reversal symmetry breaking term, one family exhibits gapped phases with even Chern numbers separated by extended gapless phases, while the other exhibits gapped phases with even or odd Chern numbers, separated by critical points. We construct an effective model for each family, determine the parameters of these models by fitting the integrated density of states, and reproduce energy spectra and Chern numbers of the Kitaev honeycomb model. We also derive phase diagrams and determine these models' validity. The characterization of free fermion phases via topological invariants represents a major achievement in the understanding of quantum matter From the tenfold way, this model is a class-D topological superconductor in two dimensions, exhibiting an integer-valued Chern number ν ∈ Z when the energy spectrum is gapped. Notably, Kitaev found that the bulk excitations of the model behave either as Abelian (even ν) or non-Abelian (odd ν) anyons, whose properties depend solely on ν mod 16 In the Kitaev model, the Chern number ν corresponds to the number of chiral Majorana edge modes propagating along the boundaries of the system and is associated with quantized thermal transport Previous studies have analyzed the topological phases arising from triangular vortex configurations introduced on the honeycomb lattice The "duals" to these triangular vortex configurations correspond to dense vortex configurations, with density ρ = (n -1)/n, where the plaquettes that do not contain vortices form a triangular pattern against a background of plaquettes that all contain vortices. These dense vortex configurations have recently been studied numerically in Refs. In this paper, we construct two different effective models describing the dual even and dual odd families. These models describe the hopping of pairs of coupled Majorana fermions on a triangular lattice, where the lattice sites correspond to the absences of vortices within a vortex sea. These effective models allow us to understand the variety of Chern numbers and the nature of gapless phases observed. The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we briefly introduce the Kitaev honeycomb model in the Majorana fermion language and discuss the behaviors of the vortex-free and vortex-full sectors. In Sec. III, we identify three distinct symmetry families for direct and dual vortex configurations based on translation and inversion symmetries. In Sec. IV, we show that when the lowenergy bands of the Kitaev honeycomb model are wellseparated from the high-energy bands, they may be accurately described by an effective tight-binding model for all three of these families. We first review the construction of the low-energy model discussed in Refs. We begin by recalling some essential facts about Kitaev's honeycomb model. The original spin-1/2 model can be reformulated in terms of an effective quadratic fermionic Hamiltonian given by Here c i are Majorana operators defined on the vertices of the honeycomb lattice such that c † i = c i and {c i , c j } = 2δ ij . The summation runs over all sites of the lattice, and A is a real skew-symmetric matrix obeying Band gap ∆ and Chern number ν (when ∆ > 0) of the vortex-free and vortex-full sectors (backgrounds) of Eq. ( the following rules: (2) Here the u jk parameters are Z 2 gauge variables defined such that u jk = -u kj = ±1 for each link of the lattice. We assume here that the coupling J is the same in all three directions, corresponding to the isotropic limit of the original spin model. This Hamiltonian describes noninteracting Majorana fermions coupled to a static Z 2 gauge field. The term J describes the nearest-neighbor hopping, whereas κ denotes the strength of the three-spin term that breaks TRS, corresponding to next-nearestneighbor hopping (see Fig. For each plaquette p of the honeycomb lattice, we define the Z 2 variable w p = (j,k)∈p u jk = e iφp , where φ p is the flux threading the plaquette. Here, for each plaquette, the pair of sites (j, k) is taken such that k always belongs to one sublattice of the honeycomb lattice, and j belongs to the other. A value of w p = -1 (+1) indicates a flux φ p = π (0) in the plaquette p, meaning the presence (absence) of a vortex. Two sets of Z 2 link variables u jk defined on the lattice are said to be equivalent if they correspond to the same configuration of plaquette variables, or "vortex configuration." In analyzing Eq. (1), one can then restrict to a particular vortex sector labeled by the pattern of w p 's. In Fig. Direct vortex configurations [see Fig. We now discuss the physics of the vortex-free sector, for which w p = +1 for all plaquettes (ρ = 0) Vortex-free sector. -The standard gauge that realizes this configuration is represented in Fig. Vortex-full sector. -The simplest gauge choice that achieves this configuration has a unit cell made of two hexagonal plaquettes (with π flux each), which results in four bands. When κ = 0, the energy spectrum has four gapless Dirac cones Throughout the rest of this paper, unless otherwise stated, we shall define our energy units such that J = 1, with the assumption that J is nonzero and positive. As shown in Ref. Whether or not the gauge choice for the u jk variables is invariant under translations of A 1 and A 2 is found to depend on the parity of the vortex number P w inside the GUC choice invariant under translations of A 1 and A 2 and the HUC is the same as the GUC We can also analyze how the u jk gauge variables are affected under application of the inversion symmetry operator P = GI, which is the product of a pure spatial inversion I and of a Z 2 gauge transformation G. As discussed in Refs. In Table Previous works have shown that sufficiently sparse direct vortex configurations can be described by an effective Majorana tight-binding model that accurately reproduces their spectra and Chern numbers In this section, we expand upon the above analysis and derive low-energy effective models for the two families of dual vortex configurations. These cases are distinct from the direct configurations as an isolated w p = +1 plaquette within a vortex-full background does not host an unpaired MZM. Instead, in the dual case, the even Chern number of the vortex-full background implies that an isolated "dual vortex" (i.e., a vortex-free plaquette surrounded by vortex-full plaquettes) will host a pair of coupled Majorana fermions equivalent to a single complex fermion mode with finite energy. The tunneling between these isolated finite-energy modes in the dilute limit then gives rise to a set of low-energy bands separated from the vortex-full background (we will still refer to these bands as "vortex bands"). This can be seen in Figs. These effective models are valid as long as the total bandwidth δ v of the vortex bands is much smaller than the energy gap of the background bands ∆ b , as shown in Fig. We begin with a review of the construction of the lowenergy model introduced by Lahtinen et al. for the direct vortex configurations where γ i are Majorana operators defined on the w p = -1 plaquettes of the honeycomb lattice and (t 1 , t 2 ) ∈ R 2 represent the hopping amplitudes between nearest and nextnearest-neighbor vortices, respectively. As explained in Ref. Here Ψ k = (γ k , γ k ) T , such that γ i and γ i represent the Majorana operators for the solid and striped vortices shown in Fig. ( Here we have defined the nearest-neighbor directions as a 1 /2, a 2 , and a 3 = a 2 -a 1 /2, as well as the next-nearest neighbor directions as b 1 = a 1 -a 2 , b 2 = a 2 + a 3 , and b 3 = a 2 + a 1 /2. The above Majorana Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here, we used these extrema to optimize the fitting parameters t 1 and t 2 by imposing the proper bound of the IDOS (they will also be used in the following section). To give an example of the accuracy of this model, in Fig. In this section we introduce a low-energy model for dual even vortex configurations. The size of the HUC is double that of the GUC, and we set a 1 = 2A 1 , a 2 = A 2 , where the vectors A 1 and A 2 now generate the dual vortex lattice. Each of these isolated w p = +1 plaquettes (i.e., a "dual vortex") hosts two Majorana modes at finite energy ±ε. The splitting 2ε has been calculated numerically and plotted in Fig. Here, α i and β i are Majorana operators defined on what we refer to as the "upper" and "lower" layers, respectively. This is schematically shown in Fig. In this construction, each isolated "dual vortex" in Fig. α j , and one belonging to β j . The on-site coupling between them is given by ε, and at the current level we do not allow any interlayer tunneling between neighboring dual-vortex sites; nearest and next-nearest-neighbor tunneling occurs only between sites of the same layer. Including such terms would violate the P 2 = +1 symmetry of the microscopic model. As before, s (α) jk = ±1 and s (β) jk = ±1 are Z 2 gauge variables that determine the total enclosed flux of triangular circuits of dual vortices. From the P w = -1 symmetry [which can be seen in Fig. jk . Doing so allows us to Fourier transform the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Here, Ψ k = (α k , α k , β k , β k ) T , such that α k and α k refer to the solid and striped white dual vortices, respectively (where solid and striped indicate the two inequivalent sites within the unit cell), β k and β k refer to the solid and striped light blue dual vortices, respectively, τ 0 is the identity matrix in the space of solid and striped dual vortices, and H 1 (k) is defined in Eq. ( . (9) In Fig. In Fig. Next we introduce a low-energy model for the dual odd configurations. According to Table We wish to construct a tight-binding model that features two layers of Majorana modes that tunnel between dual vortices located. However, in anticipation of the P 2 = -1 symmetry constraint, this time we shall allow interlayer tunneling between neighboring dual-vortex sites. The Hamiltonian is then Here, (t 1 , t 2 ) ∈ R 2 represent the hopping amplitudes of modes between nearest and next-nearest-neighbor sites in the same layer, respectively. In contrast, the new terms (t ⊥1 , t ⊥2 ) ∈ R 2 represent the interlayer hopping amplitudes between nearest and next-nearest neighbors, respectively. This Hamiltonian then has the four sets of gauge variables: s The original honeycomb model in Eq. The nearest-neighbor directions are defined as a 1 , a 2 , and a 3 = a 2 -a 1 , while the next-nearest-neighbor di- rections are defined as b 1 = a 1 + a 2 , b 2 = a 2 + a 3 , and b 3 = a 3 -a 1 . The above Majorana Hamiltonian in Eq. ( In Fig. In Appendix B, we show that not only the IDOS but also the dispersion relation is well-reproduced by this effective model. As particularly challenging cases, we consider gapless critical points separating gapped phases with different Chern numbers. In this paper, we extended the results of previous works by introducing low-energy models that can describe both sparse triangular (direct) and dual vortex configurations in Kitaev's honeycomb model. In the direct case, featuring a triangular pattern of vortices against a vortexfree background, the behavior of the Kitaev honeycomb model may be interpreted as arising from a combination of the background and of the tunneling of single MZMs between vortex sites. In the dual case, a triangular pattern of vortex-absences is instead superimposed on top of a vortex-full background. These isolated "dual vortices" each contain a pair of coupled Majorana modes, and we have shown that the properties of the Kitaev honeycomb model may be interpreted as arising from a combination of the vortex-full background and of two "layers" of finiteenergy Majorana modes that tunnel to other dual-vortex sites in either an intralayer or interlayer fashion. In both the direct and dual cases, the phase diagram of the Kitaev honeycomb model is controlled by the TRS breaking term κ that we allow to be arbitrarily strong compared to the nearest-neighbor interaction J. For certain values of κ/J, the low-lying energy bands of the microscopic model are well-separated from the high-energy bands, and in these cases we have demonstrated that the low-energy bands may be accurately modeled with our effective descriptions. In addition, the high-energy bands in the microscopic model resemble the spectra of the vortex-free or vortex-full backgrounds. Furthermore, for both the direct and dual configurations, we have found that the total Chern number of the microscopic model ν is equal to the sum of the background bands' Chern number ν b and the low-energy bands' Chern number ν v , i.e., ν = ν b + ν v . The Chern numbers predicted by our effective models are in very good agreement with what has been observed in Ref. We note that while the parameters of our effective models are found by directly fitting the IDOS against that of the Kitaev honeycomb model, it would be worth-while to develop a deeper connection between the parameters of each model. The dual odd family, for instance, has a large number of degrees of freedom with five parameters and four signs of gauge variables to choose from. Knowing how these parameters depend on the TRS breaking term κ, for instance, may help us in better understanding the symmetries and topological properties of the Kitaev honeycomb model. Among perspectives, one could think of using the above effective models to study, in detail, the anyonic excitations predicted by the sixteenfold way In addition, there are several open questions raised by this work that should be addressed. For example, is it possible to find a phase with Chern number ν = ±7 mod 16 by considering nontriangular vortex configurations In this Appendix, we analyze three particular cases of quantum phase transitions occurring in the dual odd family of vortex configurations. These transitions are identified by the number of contact points present within the first Brillouin zone, exhibiting one, two, or six such points. The aim is here to show that the effective model captures not only the integrated density of states but really the k-resolved dispersion relation (at least qualitatively). This type of transition occurs when the vortex Chern number changes from ν v = -1 to ν v = 0 for the dual odd vortex configurations of density ρ = (n -1)/n such that n is not a multiple of three. That is, for densities such as ρ = 12/13, 18/19, 24/25, and etc. These transitions generally occur when κ c ∼ 0.1 -0.2. Before the transition (κ < κ c ), the system features two gapped Dirac points of opposite chirality and is a Chern insulator with ν v = -1. As κ increases, the Dirac points move and at a critical κ c they meet at a time-reversal invariant momentum (TRIM) where they annihilate and the gap closes. Exactly at the transition, there is a single contact point that does not carry a topological charge. After this merging transition, the gap reopens and the system becomes a trivial insulator with ν v = 0. This merging transition is similar to the one occurring in the Kitaev honeycomb model when evolving from the isotropic point J x = J y = J z to a very anisotropic case The Hamiltonian has the same form as that given in Eq. ( We note that this Hamiltonian results from a different gauge choice for the s jk variables than what is shown in Fig. This type of transition results in a change of Chern number from ν v = -2 to ν v = 0, and occurs when κ c ∼ 0.1 -0.2 for the dual odd vortex configurations which have a multiple of three in the denominator of their vortex density. That is, for ρ = 8/9, 20/21, 26/27, and etc. Before the transition, there are four gapped Dirac cones (two of positive and two of negative chirality) and the system is a Chern insulator with ν v = -2. At the transition, Dirac points of opposite chirality meet pairwise, merge, and the gap closes. Exactly at the transition, there are two contact points that are not protected by a topological charge and which do not occur at a TRIM. This is possible since this transition may be described as two merging transitions occurring simultaneously. After the transition, a merging gap opens and the system becomes a trivial insulator with ν v = 0. The Hamiltonian is similar to that of Eq. ( In Fig. We note that in this system, the energy spectrum is gapped and topologically nontrivial only if the sign of one of the sine terms in g 2 (k) is dissimilar to the sign of the other two. If every sine term were positive, for example, then the 2 × 2 matrix Hamiltonian may be expressed as the linear combination of only two Pauli matrices and would either be gapless before the transition (i.e., a topological semimetal with gapless Dirac points) or gapped after the transition with a trivial Chern number of ν v = 0, due to a merging transition. This last type of transition results in a change of Chern number from ν v = -3 to ν v = 3, and only occurs for the ρ = 6/7 dual odd vortex configuration as κ c ≃ 1.8. In contrast to the two previous scenarios, it is not a merging transition of Dirac points, but six Dirac points that each have a simultaneous change in sign of their mass (or gap). The Hamiltonian is similar in form to the previous two except for the g(k) term: 