Many complex crystals show a flattening or even increasing lattice thermal conductivity at high temperatures, which deviates from the traditional 1/T decay trend given by conventional phonon theory. In this work, we predict the thermal conductivity of Al2O3 that matches with experimental data from room temperature to near melting point (2200 K). The lattice thermal conductivity is found to be composed of contributions of phonon, diffuson, and radiation. Phonon particle thermal conductivity decays approximately as ~T-1.14 after considering four-phonon scattering as well as finite temperature corrections to lattice constant, harmonic, and anharmonic force constants. Diffuson (inter-band tunneling) thermal conductivity increases roughly as ~T0.43 . Radiation thermal conductivity increases as ~T2.51 , being slightly smaller than ~T3 due to the increase of phonon linewidth with temperature, which increases photon extinction coefficient and reduces photon mean free path. At room temperature, phonon, diffuson, and radiation contribute about 99%, 1%, and 0, respectively. At 2200 K, the contributions change to 61%, 20%, and 19%, respectively. Four-phonon scattering is important at ultra-high temperature, decreasing the phonon thermal conductivity by a maximum of 24%. The finite-temperature softening effects of harmonic and anharmonic force constants increase the phonon thermal conductivity by a maximum of 36% at ultra-high temperatures. We also verify that Green-Kubo MD can capture phonons' both particle and wave natures, similar to the Wigner formalism. At ultra-high temperatures, the photon mean free path is found to be in the order of 100 nm, which should be considered for experimental measurement of thin films. This study aims to enhance the understanding of lattice thermal conductivity in complex crystals at ultra-high temperatures, potentially spurring further exploration of materials suitable for such extreme conditions. Thermal conductivity of complex crystals at high temperatures is critical for many applications, such as thermal barrier coatings In this study, we take Al2O3 as an example to investigate the flatting or increasing trend of thermal conductivity at high temperatures for the following reasons. The second improvement could be the incorporation of the diffuson thermal conductivity (κdif or κc) along with κph. In PGM and BTE, the primary heat carriers are propagating phonons (particlelike phonons), which account only for the diagonal terms of the velocity operator. This is a good approximation for simple crystals The temperature effect on both κph and κdif could also be studied using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. In principle, MD should capture all orders of phonon-phonon interaction as well as diffuson, due to its ability to simulate the intricate behavior of individual atoms, thereby capturing all the underlying microscopic mechanisms governing lattice heat transfer. MD, while powerful, is limited by the accuracy of the interatomic potential functions they rely on. Classical potentials, based on empirical models, often involve approximations and force field parameters, leading to inherent inaccuracies in capturing the complex quantum mechanical behaviors of atoms and molecules. Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs), on the other hand, have very high accuracy, comparable to that of density functional theory (DFT) calculations. In this study, we train moment tensor potential The third improvement could be the incorporation of radiation thermal conduction (κrad) to overall thermal conductivity. Similar to phonon, photon also propagates inside and through the crystal and transports the heat, which contributes to apparent thermal conduction. Radiation contribution has been hypothesized as a primary reason for the increase in thermal conductivity at ultra-high temperatures in early literature Figure The ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) is computed and snapshots are recorded, from which moment tensor potential (MTP) The temperature-dependent harmonic and anharmonic force constants are extracted using the temperature-dependent effective potential (TDEP) method Radiative properties are calculated using the Lorentz oscillator model, from which κrad is calculated using the Rooseland model. Finally, the total thermal conductivity (κtot or κ) is calculated by summing up κph, κdif, and κrad as well as κGKMD and κrad separately. The details of each step are explained below. The linear thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) is calculated using quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA) with the following formalism Here, (qq, jj) stands for a phonon mode with wavevector qq and dispersion branch jj . NN qq is the number of phonon q points. VV cc is the volume of a primitive cell of Al2O3 is the mode-dependent Grüneisen parameter. In this study, an 18×18×18 qq-mesh is used in the TEC calculations. Ref. The bulk modulus at the ground state is calculated using VASP by finite difference method using BB = -VV dddd dddd , which gives BB = 249 GPa. It matches well with the experimental data of 248.7 GPa , implemented in Phonopy We employ a moment tensor potential (MTP) Once the MTP with a small error is developed, GKMD is performed by using the MLIP-LAMMPS package where kk BB is the Boltzmann constant, VV is volume of total simulation domain, TT is temperature, JJ ⃑ (tt) is the heat current, and the angular bracket represents an autocorrelation. In LAMMPS, the heat current vector is calculated by the energy and forces of the system, which is obtained from the MTP. In this study, we employ a 7×4×3 supercell of the conventional cell, containing 5042 atoms. The size effect is studied. Periodic boundary conditions are implemented in all three dimensions. The time step of GKMD is set to 1 fs. First, an NVT ensemble is run for 200,000 steps (0.2 ns) to fully stabilize the temperature of the system. Then, an NVE ensemble is run for 200,000 steps (0.2 ns) to fully stabilize the system. Finally, another NVE ensemble is run for 800,000 steps with a correlation time of 200 ps, during which the heat current correlation is recorded. To mitigate the noise and intrinsic statistical error of GKMD, we conduct 16 independent runs with different initial velocities for each temperature. The ratio between the total running time and the correlation time is maintained larger than 300, which has been reported to be sufficient The temperature-dependent harmonic and anharmonic force constants are extracted using the temperature-dependent effective potential (TDEP) method The TDEP method extracts effective force constants at a certain temperature by fitting the potential energy of a series of atomic trajectory images at that temperature to the 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th orders. 1000 randomly displaced configurations are generated at each temperature to sample the potential surface. The forces, stress, and energies of these configurations are obtained from MTP at each temperature. The effect of the temperature is factored in by a thermal expansion, a temperaturedependent MTP trained from AIMD simulations at different temperatures, and a temperaturedependent displacement of atoms in the generated supercells. Using the force constants, the thermal conductivity is calculated by solving the Wigner's formalism . ( Here αα and ββ are cartesian directions. κκ pph αααα is the phonon particle thermal conductivity (or Peierls thermal conductivity), obtained from ShengBTE. κκ dddddd αααα is the diffuson thermal conductivity, calculated using an in-house code. jj and jj ′ are phonon branches, ωω is the angular frequency, vv is the group velocity, and ττ -1 is the phonon scattering rates, including three-phonon, four-phonon, and phonon-isotope scatterings. The convergence of ShengBTE at various q-mesh densities is tested. Specifically, the 3ph calculation converges at a q-mesh density of 18×18×18, and the 3ph + 4ph calculation converges at 6×6×6. The iterative solution to three-phonon and phonon-isotope scattering is included, as implemented in ShengBTE. Four-phonon scattering is taken at the relaxation time approximation (RTA) level. The formalism of 3ph and 4ph scattering rates can be found in Ref. Similar to phonon, photon can also transport in materials. Analogous to phonon creation and annihilation (i.e., phonon scattering events), which limit phonon mean free path, photon absorption and re-emission also limit photon mean free path inside a material. When a material's size is much larger than phonon mean free path, phonon transports diffusively, and the phonon thermal conductivity is approximately proportional to phonon mean free path. Similarly, when a material's size is much larger than its photon mean free path, the material is optically thick, and its radiation contribution to thermal conductivity is proportional to photon mean free path. Based on the Rosseland model, the radiation contribution to thermal conductivity (κrad) of an optically thick material where nn(TT) and ββ(TT) are the temperature-dependent refractive index and extinction coefficient, respectively. ββ(TT) gives the attenuation of the electromagnetic waves inside the material and is the inverse of photon mean free path. nn(TT) and ββ(TT) are given by 1 σσ SSBB is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. The spectral refractive index nn(λλ, TT) and spectral absorption coefficient αα(λλ, TT) can be calculated from the dielectric function εε(λλ, TT) as: εε rrrr is the real part of εε. kk(λλ, TT) is the spectral extinction coefficient given by The dielectric function εε(ωω, TT) can be predicted using the four-parameter Lorentz oscillator model where Γ is the same as phonon scattering rate, i.e., Γ = ττ -1 . ωω is the phonon or photon angular frequency, i.e., ωω = 2ππππ . jj runs through all the infrared active transverse optical (TO) and longitudinal optical (LO) branches. ii is the imaginary unit number. εε(∞) is the dielectric function at the high-frequency limit which is calculated from the density-functional-perturbation-theory (DFPT) Using the MTP, GKMD is conducted to calculate the lattice thermal conductivity (κGKMD) as shown in Fig. However, the experimental data shows much increasing thermal conductivity at ultra-high temperature, which could not be captured by the GKMD. In the following, we track the changes of κ at low temperature (300 K), high temperature (1200 K), and ultra-high temperature (2200 K) when we gradually increase the calculation comprehensivity and include the contributions of phonon (κph), diffuson (κdif), and radiation (κrad). First, we calculate the basic 3ph thermal conductivity using ground-state force constants (GSFC), shown in the blue-dash line in Fig. The diffuson thermal conductivity (κdif) increases with temperature at low and intermediate temperatures and becomes flat at ultrahigh temperatures as shown in Fig. Also, κph + κdif obtained from the Wigner formalism matches with the GKMD results throughout the temperatures. This alignment underscores the capability of both GKMD and the Wigner formalism to effectively capture κph and κdif. Further, the good agreement between these two different approaches supports the Wigner formalism as well as the accuracy and consistency of our calculations. Experimental thermal conductivity data from Refs. The radiation thermal conductivity (κrad) is negligibly small at room temperature, but it increases with the third power of temperature and reaches 0. When the κph, κdif, and κrad are summed up together, κ reaches 28.81, 6.85, and 5.51 W•m -1 •K -1 at 300, 1200, and 2200K respectively. This is shown in solid-magenta line in Fig. The scaling laws of κph, κdif, and κrad with respect to temperature are shown in Fig. This is slightly different from κph~T -1.19 obtained from using ground state force constants. κdif increases roughly as ~T0.43 . κrad increases as ~T2.51 , being slightly smaller than ~T3 due to the increase of phonon linewidth with temperature, which increases photon extinction coefficient and reduces photon mean free path. These scaling laws are of interest when interpreting or predicting thermal conductivity trends of other materials as well. Details of power law fittings can be found in the Supplemental Material Based on the diffuson theory, the phonons are characterized as either normal phonons or diffusonlike phonons based on Ioffe-Regel limit criteria As seen, both 3ph and 4ph rates, even at the higher temperature of 2000K are smaller than P -1 (equivalently τ > P) showing that all the phonon modes are normal phonons. Similarly, the second criterion states that phonon modes with mean free path (MFP) smaller than minimum interatomic distance (LL rr ) become diffusons or diffuson-like phonons. As seen in Fig. To look into the reason behind the radiation heat transfer, we calculate the spectral radiative properties of Al2O3 using the Lorentz oscillator model, which uses the frequency and damping of IR active phonon modes at the Γ point. Based on symmetry analysis The spectral reflectance is shown in Fig. Extinction coefficient measures the attenuation of radiative waves inside the medium and is inversely correlated to photon MFP. It depends on the imaginary part of the dielectric function and is sensitive to the damping factor or phonon linewidth. Thus, temperature-dependent phonon linewidth is used to accurately calculate the extinction coefficient at higher temperatures. Note that the value for the extinction coefficient varies with the size of the material and was reported from 0.02 for bulk material The present calculation is based on the Rosseland model, which assumes the materials to be optically thick, where the photon gets absorbed in the medium and re-emitted and re-absorbed. In this scenario, the medium behaves as a participating medium and leads to the radiation thermal transport, as discussed in the previous papers Wm -1 K -1 at the temperature of 300, 1200, and 2200 K respectively. Whereas κdif changes from 0.48, 0.90, and 1.24 to 0.44, 0.95, and 1.28 Wm -1 K -1 respectively. Overall, the κ is overestimated if the NAC is not considered. This overestimation is due to the higher group velocities without NAC (Fig. In conclusion, this work presents the accurate first-principles prediction of the thermal conductivity of Al2O3 from room temperature to near melting point (2200 K). The lattice thermal conductivity is found to be composed of contributions of phonon, diffuson, and radiation. The nm at 300 K and 2200 K, respectively, indicating that it does not suffer from size effect for most experimental samples. 