The combination of antiferromagnetic (AFM) spintronics and anomalous valley Hall effect (AVHE) is of great significance for potential applications in valleytronics. Here, we propose a design principle for achieving AVHE in A-type hexagonal AFM monolayer. The design principle involves the introduction of layer-dependent electrostatic potential caused by out-of-plane external electric field, which can break the combined symmetry (P T symmetry) of spatial inversion (P ) and time reversal (T ), producing spin splitting. The spin order of spin splitting can be reversed by regulating the direction of electric field. Based on first-principles calculations, the design principle can be verified in AFM Cr2CH2. The layer-locked hidden Berry curvature can give rise to layer-Hall effect, including valley layer-spin Hall effect and layer-locked AVHE. Our works provide an experimentally feasible way to realize AVHE in AFM monolayer. Since the discovery and successful preparation of rich two-dimensional (2D) materials, valley has recently received extensive attention, which lays the foundation for processing information and performing logic operations with low power consumption and high speed, as valleytronics To realize intrinsic valley polarization, the ferrovalley semiconductor (FVS) has been proposed However, both spontaneous valley polarization and AVHE are rarely reported in AFM monolayer. By stacking AFM monolayer MnPSe 3 or Cr 2 CH 2 on ferroelectric monolayer Sc 2 CO 2 , the AVHE has been achieved due to the introduction of nonuniform potentials to break the simultaneous time reversal and spatial inversion The proposal for electric-filed tuned AVHE in AFM monolayer is schematically illustrated in Figure There is zero berry curvature (Ω(k)) everywhere in the momentum space due to P T symmetry. However, layerlocked hidden Berry curvature can appear, because each layer breaks the P T symmetry. Due to layer-spin locking, the Berry curvatures for the spin-up and spin-down Here, an out-of-plane electric field is applied to break the P T symmetry, which can remove spin degeneracy of -K and K valleys. The out-of-plane electric field can produce layer-dependent electrostatic potential ∝ eEd (e and d denote the electron charge and the layer distance.), which induces spin splitting effect. With breaking P T symmetry, the spin splitting at the -K and K valleys can be realized (Figure The H-functionalized MXene Cr 2 C (Cr 2 CH 2 ) 42 can be used as a real material to verify our proposal. The Cr 2 C is a half-metallic ferromagnet, which has been successfully synthesized in experiment Within density functional theory (DFT) Å-1 are set to obtain the accurate results. To account for the localized nature of Cr-3d orbitals, a Hubbard correction U ef f =3.0 eV It has been proved that Cr 2 CH 2 monolayer possesses A-type AFM ordering with dynamical, mechanical, and thermal stabilities where || and ⊥ mean that spins lie in the plane and out-of-plane. The calculated MAE is 27μeV/unit cell, indicating the out-ofplane easy magnetization axis of Cr 2 CH 2 . This confirms the realization of our proposed design principles. The total magnetic moment of Cr 2 CH 2 per unit cell is strictly 0.00 μ B with magnetic moment of bottom/top Cr atom being 3.09 μ B /-3.09 μ B . When the SOC is included, the spin degeneracy is still maintained for both out-of-plane and in-plane magnetization directions. For Cr 2 CH 2 , the distribution of Berry curvatures of total, spin-up and spin-down are plotted in Figure To induce spin splitting in Cr 2 CH 2 , P T symmetry should be broken. Here, an out-of-plane electric field +E (0.00-0. In summary, we present a model to induce AVHE in A-type hexagonal AFM monolayer by applying electric filed. The validity of our proposal is confirmed by an extensive study of Cr 2 CH 2 within the first-principles calculations. The spontaneous valley polarization can occur in Cr 2 CH 2 , but the spin splitting of -K and K valleys is absent. The introduction of an out-of-plane electric field results in spin splitting due to layer-dependent electrostatic potential. The layer-locked hidden Berry curvature produces layer-locked AVHE. Our works enriches the AVHE in AFM monolayers, and provide great potential for developing energy-efficient and ultrafast valleytronic devices.