The physics of optically-induced superconductivity remains poorly understood, with questions that range from the underlying microscopic mechanism to the macroscopic electrical response of the non-equilibrium phase. In this paper, we study optically-induced superconductivity in K3C60 thin films, which display signatures of granularity both in the equilibrium state below Tc and in the nonequilibrium photo-induced phase above Tc. Photo-conductive switches are used to measure the ultrafast voltage drop across a K3C60 film as a function of time after irradiation, both below and above Tc. These measurements reveal fast changes associated with the kinetic inductance of in-grain superconductivity, and a slower response attributed to the Josephson dynamics at the weak links. Fits to the data yield estimates of the in-grain photo-induced superfluid density after the drive and the dynamics of phase slips at the weak links. This work underscores the increasing ability to make electrical measurements at ultrafast speeds in optically-driven quantum materials, and demonstrates a striking new platform for optoelectronic device applications. Optical excitation at mid-infrared and terahertz frequencies has emerged as a powerful technique for controlling non-equilibrium functional phenomena in quantum materials In the case of optically-manipulated superconductivity, a number of experiments have focused on the alkali-doped fulleride K3C60 (Fig. These experiments have recently been complemented by a study in K3C60 thin films Here, we report measurements of the voltage dynamics after photo-excitation in the presence of a quasi-DC current bias, enabling a systematic study of non-equilibrium granular superconductivity. An optoelectronic device incorporating a K3C60 thin film was used to detect ultrafast voltage changes after photo-excitation. These measurements were performed both for base temperatures T < T c , for which the equilibrium superconductor is disrupted or strongly weakened by mid-infrared excitation, and for base temperatures T > T c , for which a photo-induced superconducting-like response is observed. Thin films of K3C60 were grown on sapphire substrates via molecular-beam epitaxy. An atomic force micrograph of the sample surface is shown in Fig. The K3C60 samples were connected to the signal line of a coplanar waveguide, which allowed for voltage transients to propagate at frequencies of up to 1 THz. The first set of measurements was carried out at temperatures below Tc. In this regime, the photon energy of the excitation pulse was larger than the energy gap of the equilibrium superconducting state in K3C60. The measured pump-induced changes in V1 and V2 (henceforth referred to as ΔV1 and ΔV2) are plotted in Fig. The reduction in pump-probe signal with increasing temperature and current are consistent with the onset of resistivity in the equilibrium superconducting state before excitation. This is well-understood quantitatively when comparing these results to a circuit model to simulate the voltage dynamics. Two factors govern the physics of this model. First, disruption of superconductivity involves a transformation of charge carriers from Cooper pairs to resistive quasiparticles 23 . Thus, the carrier dynamics should be wellcaptured by using a two-fluid model consisting of a resistive channel in parallel with a purely inductive channel. Second, the granular constitution of the K3C60 thin film impedes dissipationless superconducting transport at temperatures just below the bulk Tc, as evidenced in equilibrium by the broadened superconducting transition (Fig. The voltage dynamics for the disruption of superconductivity under a DC current bias were simulated by numerically solving the circuit equations for the granular two-fluid model under a changing superfluid density (more details in supplementary material). The effect of temperature was modelled by considering thermal fluctuations in the phases of the order parameters of the superconducting grains, which result in thermally-activated phase slips and the onset of resistivity at temperatures close to Tc. We have assumed that, before time-zero, the superfluid density n s depends on temperature T following the relation 27 At time-zero, the superfluid density was assumed to reduce from n s (T) to zero, as shown in Fig. In a second set of measurements, we examined the photo-induced non-equilibrium state at temperatures above Tc. The experimental setup was identical to the previous measurements below Tc. Before photo-excitation, a voltage drop was present across the metallic K3C60 thin film corresponding to its equilibrium state resistance and the applied bias current. In this case, for the conditions in which non-equilibrium superconductivity is induced, a decrease in voltage drop upon photo-excitation is expected (Fig. The measured ΔV1 and ΔV2 for photo-excitation at 25 K are plotted in Fig. ΔV2 displayed equal and opposite behaviour to ΔV1. the positive voltage change at 100 K was linear in current across the whole measurement range. To interpret the experimental data above Tc, we consider the two-fluid dynamics of the charge carriers upon photo-excitation, in addition to the previously-discussed role of granularity in the photo-induced state. where α is a constant that depends on the material geometry and the effective mass of the charge carriers. A change in the superfluid density will therefore change the kinetic inductance. When this occurs in an applied current I, this generates an additional voltage For an increase in superfluid density, this voltage is negative, which is consistent with the measurement. We speculate that the subsequent slow dynamics result from the stabilisation of thermal phase fluctuations. In the case that the phase is highly disordered upon photo-excitation, the initial resistivity of the photo-excited state at early delays would be left unchanged from that of the metallic state. As the phase thermalizes, the rate of thermally-induced phase slips decreases, and the resistivity drops on a timescale of several picoseconds. Nevertheless, the phase slip rate at longer delays would be significant due to lattice heating, resulting in finite resistivity in the long-lived state after photo-excitation. In order to model the dynamical system, we extend our treatment of the photo-induced state to the previously-discussed granular two-fluid model. The superfluid fraction (Fig. For temperatures of 80 K and above, the experimental data no longer display a reduction in resistivity and are represented with a superfluid fraction of zero in place of a fit. One possible reason for the difference between the temperature scaling reported here and previous reflectivity measurements The nonlinear I-V characteristics in this measurement (Fig. In summary, we report ultrafast voltage measurements on K3C60 thin films upon incurrent photo-excitation, and characterized the response of the system for both the photo-induced disruption of the equilibrium low-temperature superconductor, as well as the regime in which a photo-induced superconducting state is achieved. We report a reduction in voltage drop when exciting into the non-equilibrium state above Tc. A twofluid model based on a granular superconductor was used to interpret these findings. The data are consistent with a change in the kinetic inductance upon photo-excitation, followed by a slow reduction in resistivity which can be attributed to thermalization of phase fluctuations. The new understanding extracted from these data complements that obtained for the case of cuprates A diagram of the experimental setup is displayed in Fig. Transient currents in each detection line were sent into in-house custom-built transimpedance amplifiers with a flat frequency dependence, an optimised -3-dB point at 3 kHz, and an amplification factor of 2x10 9 V/A. The voltage output of the transimpedance amplifiers were then sent into lock-in amplifiers, which were trigged at the chopping frequency of the mid-infrared pulses. Data from the lock-in amplifier was acquired digitally using custom software written in LabVIEW. The wavelength of the mid-infrared pulses was characterised using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. The spectrum is displayed in Fig. An illustration of the device fabrication process is displayed in Fig. after which an identical lift-off process was conducted. The next step was the deposition of C60 into the waveguide. C60 dissolves in the organic chemicals used in the photo-lithography process, so a disc of 150-μm thick sapphire was used for the shadow mask instead (Fig. prior to growth. The device temperature was then reduced to 200°C and monitored using a pyrometer for the C60 deposition. The C60 source temperature was 380°C, providing a growth rate of ~1 nm/min. For the electrical contact between the sample and the waveguide, an additional evaporation step of titanium/gold was carried out using a different sapphire mask (Fig. The C60 thin film was then doped by depositing potassium from an effusion cell source, while monitoring the resistance of the film (Fig. K3C60 is highly sensitive to oxygen. As such, the doped thin film needed to be sealed to prevent oxidation while maintaining optical and electrical access. The sealing structure is illustrated in Fig. The photo-carrier lifetime in the excited photo-conductive switches is a significant factor affecting the time resolution of the experiment. To determine the lifetime, the experimental setup shown in Fig. The experimental data for the correlation of the two opposite switches was compared with the autocorrelation of a model switch response function for different decay times. For the model switch response, an error-function rise with a rise time of 250 fs was used, followed by an exponential decay. The rise time of 250 fs corresponds to the duration of the exciting laser pulse. Model switch response functions for different decay times are plotted in Fig. This approach assumes that the decay times for each switch (1 and 3) are similar, which is reasonable because the shape of the measured signal was independent of the measurement direction (circular vs square data points). The experimental data also did not change significantly with temperature. Another important factor affecting the time resolution of the experiment is the dispersion in the coplanar waveguide. To determine the impact of this, the frequency-dependent transmittance in a 200-μm long waveguide was simulated in CST studio suite. The result is shown in Fig. The simulated frequency-dependent complex impedance is shown in Fig. The real component Re[Z] is approximately 59 , while the imaginary component Im [Z] is  0.2  and is therefore negligible. A line profile from an AFM micrograph of the C60 film edge is displayed in Fig. Reflections were subsequently subtracted from the resulting data. A zoomed-out optical microscope image of the device geometry is displayed in Fig. The arrival time of the reflected pulses can be estimated as follows. We consider the distance d 1 between switch 1 and the K3C60 thin film, the distance d 2 between switch 1 and the leftmost pair of switches, and the effective relative dielectric constant of the coplanar waveguide on the sapphire substrate. We have d 1 = 280 μm and d 2 = 600 μm. The effective relative dielectric constant ε r = (ε Al 2 O 3 + 1)/2 = 5.27, giving a pulse propagation speed v = 0.43c. The arrival times t n for the reflections can be calculated as giving 4.3 ps and 9.2 ps for the distances d 1 and d 2 , respectively. Copies of the measured data, scaled to 5 % and 15 % and offset in time by 4.3 ps and 9.2 ps, respectively, were subtracted. This provided a clear plateau in the data below Tc, and reflections were subtracted from the data above Tc using the same parameters. In order to calibrate the magnitude of the transient voltage changes, a DC voltage bias V b was applied to the photo-conductive switch as depicted in Fig. Therefore, given only the detected voltage, the ratio of V b to V d provided a calibration factor κ S relating the measured voltage at switch S to the voltage present in the waveguide. However, directly using the κ S obtained from this measurement is expected to underestimate the magnitude of the voltage changes for two reasons. First, a travelling voltage pulse in the coplanar waveguide will be partially reflected from the photoconductive switch. This can be accounted for by considering the transmittance of the switch. With the detected reflections discussed in S4.3, we see that the second reflection of 15 % magnitude (blue arrow in Fig. Second, the laser pulses incident on the switch will result in heating and an increase in DC conductivity, leading to a leakage current. This effect will last as long as the thermal dissipation time of several nanoseconds. The leakage current therefore provides an additional contribution to V d in the calibration measurement. This means that the detected voltage with a DC bias is larger than with a several-picosecond voltage bias of the same magnitude. Fig. S5. Voltage dynamics simulation S5.1. Voltage due to kinetic inductance for time-dependent carrier densities Kinetic inductance is an inductive electronic behaviour that arises due to the inertia of the charge carriers. (5.1) Assuming, for now, that the charge carrier density n is constant, the current density J can then be calculated as We now make use of the material geometry to extract a voltage-current relation, under the assumption of a spatially uniform electric field. This gives which displays equivalent behaviour to an inductor, and can be written as V = L K dI dt , (5.4) where the kinetic inductance is therefore defined as In a granular superconductor, the onset of resistivity at temperatures just below Tc is understood to result from thermal fluctuations in the phase of the order parameter, which disrupt Josephson tunnelling across the grain boundaries. First, the absorbed fraction of the mid-infrared pulse energy was estimated to be 30 % of the incident energy using a 3-layer multireflection model, where the optical properties from Ref. 34 were used. The absorbed energy E Abs is therefore given by E Abs = 0.3 × Fluence × πr Pulse , where r Pulse is the radius of the laser focus. To calculate the incident power, a Gaussian laser pulse with a full-width-half-maximum of 300 fs was scaled such that its integral was equal to E Abs , as displayed in Fig. To calculate the increase in carrier and lattice temperature in the K3C60 thin film, a twotemperature model with the following form was used where T e and T p are the electron and phonon temperatures, respectively, c e and c p are the electron and phonon specific heat capacity, τ e-p is approximately the electron-phonon scattering time, and τ es is the "escape time", representing the rate of heat transfer from the thin film to the substrate. For films of tens of nanometres in thickness, the escape time τ es is several nanoseconds in duration and is not important on the timescales of this experiment. 39 A value of 3 ns was used here. Measurements in other metals have found values for the electron-phonon relaxation time τ e-p of ~1 ps. In the simulations reported here, τ e-p = 0.8 ps provided the best fit to the data. The value of the phononic specific heat capacity was obtained from fits to calorimetry data The calculated T e and T p for a 5-mJ/cm 2 excitation fluence are displayed in Fig. Voltage changes across the whole sample could therefore be simulated by simulating the voltage changes across a single grain boundary. The resistance R N of the normal channel was given by R N = R 0 f N ⁄ , where R 0 is the K3C60 thin film resistance, accounting for contact and wire resistance by subtracting the measured resistance far below T c , and f N is the fraction of normal carriers. Likewise, the resistance at the grain boundary R J for the superconducting state was given by R J = R 0 f S ⁄ , where f S is the fraction of supercarriers. Fundamentally, f N + f S = 1. Resistances were scaled down to a single grain as R × (N W × N H /N L ) . The kinetic inductance for each channel was determined in the same way, with the inductance of the normal channel given by L N = L 0 /f N and that of the superconducting channel given by L S = L 0 /f S . The total kinetic inductance L 0 of the sample was estimated using equation (5.5). For the 20 μm × 20 μm × 100 nm thin film of K3C60, with a carrier density n = 1.6 × 10 25 m -3 , as extracted from optical reflectivity measurements 43 , L 0 = 22 pH was obtained. Inductances were scaled down to a single grain as L × (N W × N H /N L ). The capacitance for a single grain boundary C was estimated to be C ≈ 10 -17 F, following Ref. The critical current I c of the Josephson junction was also considered to be proportional to the carrier density, following I c = I c (T) × f S . The temperature dependence of the critical current was given by I c (T) = I c (0 K)[1 -(T T c ⁄ ) Finally, voltages were calculated for a single grain, and scaled up to the full sample as V × N L . The following circuit equations were derived from the granular two-fluid model: The data for photo-excitation below Tc displayed in Fig. The voltage changes upon low-fluence photo-excitation at 8 K are displayed in Fig. K, 35 K, 50 K, and 60 K, with an applied current of 1 mA. All voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements above Tc as the applied current multiplied by the equilibrium sample resistance at the measurement temperature. c, Light-induced 'superfluid fraction' vs temperature as obtained from the fitting procedure described in the text. The blue symbols indicate granular two-fluid model fits to the voltage data on the granular thin films. The purple shaded region indicates temperatures below the equilibrium Tc.