This paper studies wave localisation in chains of finitely many resonators. There is an extensive theory predicting the existence of localised modes induced by defects in infinitely periodic systems. This work extends these principles to finite-sized systems. We consider finite systems of subwavelength resonators arranged in dimers that have a geometric defect in the structure. This is a classical wave analogue of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model. We prove the existence of a spectral gap for defectless finite dimer structures and find a direct relationship between eigenvalues being within the spectral gap and the localisation of their associated eigenmode. Then we show the existence and uniqueness of an eigenvalue in the gap in the defect structure, proving the existence of a unique localised interface mode. To the best of our knowledge, our method, based on Chebyshev polynomials, is the first to characterise quantitatively the localised interface modes in systems of finitely many resonators. Wave localisation at subwavelength scales has many important applications in nanophotonics and nanophononics In this paper, we consider wave localisation at the interface between two systems of finitely many subwavelength resonators. These resonators are arranged in pairs or dimers, such that the model we consider shares many of the features of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model in quantum mechanics The present work considers the far less-explored but more realistic physical setting of interface modes in finite dimer structures. As far as we know, it is the first work to deal with the existence of interface modes in finite structures. It provides a one-to-one correspondence between the position of the eigenfrequency in the spectrum of the corresponding infinite periodic structure (i.e., in the asymptotic spectral bulk, its boundary or in the asymptotic spectral gap; see Definition 4.1) and the behaviour (localised versus delocalised) of the corresponding eigenmode. Our results hold for any finite and large enough system of dimer structure with defect satisfying a mild condition on the size of the resonators. Furthermore, we show that the eigenfrequencies lying in the gap converge exponentially as the size of the structure goes to infinity and provide an explicit and simple formula for the limit. We also show that the Hermitian nature of the system together with the position of the interface eigenfrequency in the gap yields a very strong stability property when the geometry of the system is perturbed. Our approach is based on the capacitance matrix, which in general is a powerful tool for characterising the subwavelength eigenfrequencies of a system of high-contrast resonators The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the capacitance matrix approximation of a finite, dimer system with a geometric defect in order to approximate its eigenfrequencies and associated eigenmodes. In Section 3, we first write the characteristic polynomial of the capacitance matrix associated to a defectless, finite dimer system in terms of Chebyshev polynomials. Then, we characterise the structure of the eigenvectors of the capacitance matrix associated with the perturbed dimer structure. Section 4 is devoted to the derivation of a direct relationship between an eigenvalue being within the spectral gap and the localisation of its corresponding eigenvector. In Section 5, we show the existence and uniqueness of an eigenvalue of the capacitance matrix lying in the asymptotic spectral gap and consequently the existence of a unique localised interface eigenvector. Furthermore, we show that this eigenvalue converges exponentially fast to a value in the gap as the system size increases. In Section 6, we analyse the robustness of the interface localisation with respect to imperfections in the structure design. The paper ends with some concluding remarks in Section 7. In Appendix A, we recall some basic definitions and results on pseudo-spectra of normal matrices. Appendix B is devoted to the discussion of the topological origin of the robustness of the interface eigenmodes. We consider a one-dimensional chain of N disjoint identical high-contrast resonators We fix the coordinates such that x L 1 = 0. We also denote by the length of the each of the resonators, and by s i = x L i+1 -x R i the spacing between the i-th and (i + 1)-th inclusions. The system is illustrated in Figure We use A chain of N resonators, with lengths (l i ) 1⩽i⩽N and spacings (s i ) 1⩽i⩽N -1 (which will be chosen to alternate between two distinct values, as depicted). to denote the set of subwavelength resonators. In this paper, we only consider systems of identically sized resonators, that is This will simplify the formulas in our subsequent analysis and is sufficient to observe the physical phenomena we are interested in. In this work, we consider the one-dimensional wave equation propagating in a heterogeneous medium with space-dependent material parameters: The material parameters κ(x) and ρ(x) are piecewise constant in the interior and exterior of the resonators where the constants ρ b , ρ, κ, κ b ∈ R >0 . The wave speeds inside the set D of resonators and inside the background medium R \D, are denoted respectively by v b and v, the wave numbers respectively by k b and k, and the contrast between the densities of the resonators and the background medium by δ: For these step-wise defined material parameters, the wave problem determined by (2.1) reduces to the following system of coupled one-dimensional Helmholtz equations: where for a one-dimensional function w we denote by w| L (x) := lim s→0 s>0 w(x -s) and w| R (x) := lim s→0 s>0 w(x + s) if the limits exist. We are interested in the high-contrast regime characterised by the contrast parameter δ being small. In this case, there exist resonant modes of the system at subwavelength frequencies, for which the size of the resonators is smaller than the wavelength in the background medium. Definition 2.1. A resonance ω(δ) ∈ C for which there exists a non-trivial solution to (2.3) is called subwavelength in the high-contrast regime if ω(δ) → 0 as δ → 0. One consequence of this asymptotic ansatz is that it lends itself to characterisation using asymptotic analysis In This is a modified version of the conventional capacitance matrix that is often used to characterise many-body low-frequency resonance problems. We summaries the findings of Proposition 2.2. Consider a system of N subwavelength resonators with size l and spacings Assume that the eigenvalues of C are simple. Then, the N subwavelength resonant frequencies ω i of (2.3) satisfy to the first order where (λ i ) 1⩽i⩽N are the eigenvalues of the eigenvalue problem Furthermore, let u i (x) be a subwavelength eigenmode corresponding to ω i and let a i be the corresponding eigenvector of C. Then where a (j) i denotes the j-th entry of the eigenvector a i and V j (x) is piecewise linear, supported in (x R j-1 , x L j+1 ) and V j (x) = 1 for x ∈ (x L j , x R j ). Proposition 2.2 states that eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the capacitance matrix stand in a one-to-one correspondence with subwavelength resonant frequencies and modes of the associated system. Systems of repeated dimers (that is s i = s i-2 for 3 ⩽ i ⩽ N ) are of particular interest as the corresponding infinite structure can be studied with Floquet-Bloch band theory where we typically assume s 1 = s 2m+2 and s 2 = s 2m+1 so that the system is symmetric with respect to the center of the (2m + 1)-th resonator with spacings s 1 and s 2 . A sketch of this system with a defect is shown in Figure where (2.7) It will be useful to have notation for the top left (2m + 1) × (2m + 1)-submatrix C 1 and the bottom right (2m + 1) × (2m + 1)-submatrix C 2 (as highlighted by the shading in (2.6)). Figure In this section we will briefly recall results established in Denote by and the prototypical tridiagonal 2-Toeplitz matrices with perturbations on the corners. We define the polynomials where U k is the Chebyshev polynomial of the second kind, as well as the function The following proposition holds. are respectively We start by defining two families of polynomials p (ξp,ξq) k+1 (x) and q (ξp,ξq) k+1 (x) as solutions to the recursion relations p (ξp,ξq) 0 and q (ξp,ξq) 0 (μ) = ξ q , q (ξp,ξq) 1 where β = β 2 /β 1 . Then we state the following result. Then, using μ := y(λ) where y is as in , then the corresponding eigenvector is given by The last result of this subsection is on the structure of the eigenvectors for the capacitance matrix C defined by (2.6). Proposition 3.3 is an adapted version of Proof. We will show Step 1. In the first step, we consider the first 2m + 1 rows of (C -λI)v: where we put * instead of x (2m) to show that we will not use this entry in what follows as we only need the first 2m rows of (3.12) to determine the 2m + 1 entries of x. We write x as Considering the first row of (3.12), we can choose Then by the second row, we have which gives The third row is and thus, Continuing the process, we can easily verify that ) it is now easy to see that x is of the form (3.9). Step 2. We conclude the proof by considering the last 2m rows. By the fact that C is S = antidiag(1, . . . , 1) ∈ R (4m+1)×(4m+1) symmetric, i.e., SCS = C, and C has only simple eigenvalues In this section we will prove the existence of a spectral gap for a defectless structure of dimers. Furthermore, we will demonstrate that a direct relationship exists between an eigenvalue being within the spectral gap and the localisation of its corresponding eigenvector. We first show the existence of a spectral gap for the capacitance matrix of an unperturbed structure of dimers. By physical considerations we assume β 1 , β 2 < 0 and β 1 < β 2 . It will often be useful to shift C in order to have most diagonal entries zero, to that end we introduce z(x) := x -α. Definition 4.1 (Spectral bulk and gaps). Consider a finite structure of resonators. We define the asymptotic spectral bulk Σ and asymptotic spectral gap Γ of the structure as the spectral bulk and spectral gap (also known as band gap) of the associated infinite periodic system, respectively. The spectral gap and spectral bulk of infinite periodic dimer systems have been computed in [2, where lim denotes the Hausdorff limit. Consequently, the asymptotic spectral gap is Proof. From (3.6) we see that any eigenvalue λ of the capacitance matrix of a structure of dimer without defect -that is, a capacitance matrix of the form C N = A (β2,β2) 2m -satisfy , where for ease of notation we use z for z(λ) and y for y(z(λ)). Using the recurrence relation of the Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind we get that So the eigenvalues are given by for 1 ⩽ k ⩽ m -1. The sought result follows now directly from inserting the definition of α, β 1 , β 2 in terms of s 1 and s 2 as in (2.7). ■ We will refer to spectral bulk and spectral gap of the physical system and of the capacitance matrix interchangeably, using the identification Proposition 2.2. In this subsection, we will prove that an eigenvalue in the gap is associated with an eigenvector that is exponentially localised in the sense that it decays exponentially away from the interface in both directions, within the limits of the finite structure. Definition 4.3 (Localised interface mode). Let v(x) be an eigenmode. Then we say that v is a localised interface mode at the point x 0 , if both |v(x-x 0 )| for x 0 < x ∈ D and |v(x 0 -x)| for x 0 > x ∈ D decay exponentially as a function of x ∈ D. The same terminology applies to the corresponding eigenvector of the capacitance matrix. Proposition 4.4 (Eigenvectors of C). Let C ∈ R 4m+1×4m+1 be the capacitance matrix of a defect structure as illustrated in Figure The same asymptotics (with a slight different formula) hold for A and B; if y(λ) 2 < 1: Proof. It is enough to consider the p (ξp,ξq) k and q (ξp,ξq) k part of the eigenvector in Proposition 3.2 as the rest is a multiplicative factor. We only consider p (ξp,ξq) k as the procedure for q (ξp,ξq) k is exactly the same. Let (λ, v) be an eigenpair and recall from (3.7) the recurrence formula p (ξp,ξq) where μ = y(λ). This is a two term recurrence formula with characteristic equation having none, one or two roots r 1 and r 2 in exactly the cases delineated in the proposition. The formulas for the eigenvectors follow. By Vieta's formula, we know that the two roots of (4.2) satisfy r 1 r 2 = 1 so one of them must satisfy |r i | ⩾ 1. The constants A, B, A, B ∈ R follow from the initial conditions (3.7) with the values expressed in Proposition 3. The eigenvector in the case when y(λ) 2 > 1 is exponentially localized in the interface, as we can rescale the eigenvector to make . We remark that the three cases presented in Proposition 4.4 correspond to λ ∈ Γ, λ ∈ Σ and λ ∈ ∂Σ, respectively. We show this behaviour in Figure In this section we will prove the existence of an unique eigenvalue in the gap for the defect structure and consequently the existence of a unique localised interface eigenvector. Furthermore, we analyse the behaviour as the size of the system grows, specifically the limiting behaviour as N → ∞. We will show that the eigenvalue of C lying in the asymptotic spectral gap converges exponentially fast to a value in the gap. We first show the existence of the eigenvalue in the band gap. We start by remarking that by performing Laplace expansion on the top block of rows 1 ⩽ i ⩽ 2m + 1, we obtain that the determinant of C ∈ R (4m+1)×(4m+1) is given by where a = b = β 2 . We observe that the last term has β 1 and β 2 switched. Consequently, the characteristic polynomial p(x) of C is given by as one swiftly remarks that 2m (α, β 1 , β 2 ) are similar matrices. For the sake of brevity, we rewrite where A, B, E, F do not depend on m. Thus, λ ∈ Γ is an eigenvalue if and only if . (5.4) In the above step we were able to divide by χ A (a,0) 2m (λ) and P * m-2 (λ) as we only consider λ ∈ Γ so the latter term is non-zero because the Chebyshev polynomials only have roots in (-1, 1) and the former term was shown to be non-zero in Γ in Proposition 5.3. Moreover, since (5.5) On the other hand, by the recurrence formula of U m , for λ ∈ Γ where y(z(λ)) < -1, , (5.6) by using again the shorthand z for z(λ) and y for y(z(λ)). Now, an algebraic manipulation shows that conditions (5.5) and (5.6) have exactly one common solution λ 0 ∈ Γ given by (5.7) Proposition 5.1. Consider a perturbed structure of dimers as illustrated in Figure Proof. Denote by and note that f ∞ (λ) = lim m→∞ f m (λ). By (5.7) there exists a λ 0 in the band gap such that f ∞ (λ 0 ) = 0. Furthermore, by the above formula of f ∞ (λ), we have By the sign-preserving property, we have f m (λ 0 -ζ)f m (λ 0 + ζ) < 0 for large enough m, which proves the existence of roots of f m (λ) in the band gap Γ. By Proposition 4.4 the corresponding eigenvector is a localised interface eigenvector. ■ We now show the uniqueness of the eigenvalue in the band gap. We will use the following result about the monotonicity of Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind. , we have A well-known property of Chebyshev polynomials is that where T k (x) are the Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind. Thus, to demonstrate the negativity of (5.8) for |x| > 1, we only need to show that It is also well-known that (5.10) So that (5.9) becomes ) and the proof is complete. ■ Proposition 5.3. There exists at most one eigenvalue of C as defined in (2.6) lying in the asymptotic spectral gap Γ = (2/s 2 , 2/s 1 ). In particular, for m large enough, there exists exactly one eigenvalue in Γ. Proof. Considering the compression of C obtained by removing the central row and column we obtain a block diagonal matrix with blocks given by and P BP, where P = antidiag(1, . . . , 1). Remark that the same assumptions as stated before Definition 4.1 on the coefficients of B hold, except that now b = 0, that is, the matrix B is of the type A (a,0) 2m and its characteristic polynomials is thus given by . Consequently, we see from (3.3) that λ is an eigenvalue of B if and only if by using again the shorthand z for z(λ) and y for y(z(λ)). Remark that L(z) in (5.11) is strictly monotonous increasing with a pole of order one at β 2 . Furthermore, by Lemma 5.2 R(z) is strictly monotonically increasing on (β 1 -β 2 , 0) and strictly monotonically decreasing on (0, We first consider the case 2β 2 < β 1 < β 2 , which equates to the pole of L(z) lying outside of the gap Γ. In this case we have ) by the same argument as the one in the previous case. Thus there can be at most one eigenvalue in the gap. For m large enough, by Proposition 5.1 there exists exactly one eigenvalue in the gap. ■ Remark 5.4. We remark that if one can show the existence of an eigenvector in the band gap Γ for the capacitance matrix C with general size m, then by Proposition 5.3, it is unique. Last, we show the exponential convergence of the resonant frequency in the gap and conclude the section by the following theorem. exponentially as N → ∞. In particular, for N big enough, for some A, B > 0 independent of N . Proof. The limit λ i can be computed from (5.7). The only part left to prove is the convergence rate. Denote by 0 d ∈ R d the zero element of that vector space and by v i,N the l 2 -normalised localised eigenvector associated to λ (N ) i . Then, we remark that for some C 1 > 0. So if v i,N needs to be normalised v i,N decays exponentially. By ■ We remark that, combined with Proposition 4.4, Theorem 5.5 also gives the decaying rate of the interface mode for a structure with sufficiently many resonators. We display the left-hand side of (5.13) for a structure with s 1 = 1 and s 2 = 2. Interface modes of SSH-like structures are well known to be stable, i.e., perturbations of the system affect them only slightly. this section we show that perturbation in the geometry have limited effect on both the resonant frequencies and the associated modes and we quantify this effect. To this end we consider a system of N = 4m + 1 resonators as shown in Figure Furthermore, we denote 2) The following proposition handles stability of the eigenvalues and is a direct application of the well-known Weyl theorem. Proposition 6.1. Let C be the capacitance matrix associated to the structure described in (6.1) and let Then, the eigenvalues λ k (sorted increasingly) satisfy where λ k are the eigenvalues of C. Proof. Weyl's theorem states the same result but with the bound of (6.4) replaced by ∥ C-C∥. However, for a tridiagonal matrix M with 1 in its kernel, ∥M ∥ ⩽ 2 max i |M i(i-1) | + |M i(i+1) | by the Gershgorin circle theorem so we obtain the result. ■ Applying Proposition 6.1 to our system of dimers where the perturbations | ε i | ⩽ η are in the interval (-η, η) for some η > 0, we obtain that the eigenvalue perturbation is bounded by In order to analyse the stability of the eigenvectors, we will use the Davis-Kahan theorem where σ j are the r singular values of E T F . We denote by Θ(E, F) = diag(θ 1 , . . . , θ r ) the canonical angles' matrix. The Davis-Kahan theorem states the following. Theorem 6.2. Let S and S be two d × d symmetric matrices with eigenvalues respectively. Fix 1 ⩽ r ⩽ s ⩽ d and let V and V be the matrices having as columns the eigenvectors corresponding to λ j and λ j for r ⩽ j ⩽ s. Let span(V ) = V and span( V ) = V. Define As a direct consequence of Theorem 6.2, we have the following theorem for the stability of the interface eigenmodes. ) The a priori estimate (6.6) holds for δ 0 > 2ε. Remark that for s 1 = 1 and s 2 = 2 and m large we have δ 0 ≈ 0.219 so that the a priori estimate (6.6) holds for ε < 0.1. This a priori estimate is, however, suboptimal as Figure Proof of Theorem 6.3. The proof immediately follows from Theorem 6.2 with r = s by using the bound ∥v -v∥ 2 ⩽ √ 2 sin Θ(v, v) In Figure In this paper, we have quantitatively characterised interface eigenmodes in finite, dimer systems of subwavelength resonators with a geometric defect and proved the exponential decay of their associated eigenmodes. Our characterisation is based on (broken) translation invariance properties of the associated capacitance matrix together with properties of Chebyshev polynomials. The 3-term recurrence relation satisfied by the Chebyshev polynomials is shown to be useful for analysing spectra of tridiagonal (perturbed) 2-Toeplitz matrices. Following this line of research, it would be very interesting to generalise the results obtained in this paper to extended (known also as multi-band) SSH models, exhibiting exponentially localised interface eigenmodes with corresponding eigenfrequencies inside the multiple subwavelength band gaps of the structure In Figure 