The trigonal α-HgS has a 3-fold helical chain structure, and is in form of a noncentrosymmetric P3121 phase, known as the cinnabar phase. However, under pressure, the helical chains gradually approach and connect with each other, finally reconstructing into a centrosymmetric NaCl structure at 21 GPa. Superconductivity emerges just after this helical-nonhelical structural transition. The maximum critical temperature (Tc) reaches 11 K at 25.4 GPa, Tc decreases with further compression, and is still 3.5 K at 44.8 GPa. Furthermore, the Tc-critical magnetic field (Bc2) relation exhibits multi-band features, with a Bc2 of 5.65 T at 0 K by two-band fitting. Raman spectra analysis demonstrates that phonon softening plays a key role in structural transition and the emergence of superconductivity. It is noted that HgS is the first reported IIB group metal sulfide superconductor and the only NaCltype metal sulfide superconductor with a Tc above 10 K. This work will inspire the exploration of superconductivity in other chiral systems and will extend our understanding of the versatile behavior in such kinds of materials. Binary metal sulfides constitute a vast material family. Numerous metal sulfides are essential natural minerals and crucial in scientific study. For example, MoS2, WS2, and other layered sulfides have attracted people's interest due to their outstanding electrical and optical properties The properties of these sulfides can be manipulated in many ways like atomic intercalation The modulated properties can be expanded exponentially based on the large family of sulfides. Pressure, a fundamental thermodynamic parameter, could modify material properties efficiently without changing the composition or adding impurities by controlling the atom distance and electron overlap in a wide range. In particular, layered TMDCs are sensitive to the external pressure. Pressure can help to realize insulator-metal transition and superconductivity (SC) in various layered binary metal sulfides Different from weak interlayer interactions existing in 1D TMTCs and 2D TMDCs, the 3D MMSs have more compact atomic interactions and seem to show much higher structural stability under pressure. However, previous studies demonstrate that 3D metal mono-sulfides have complex phase transition routes and distinguished properties under pressure. Here, we summarize the structural phase transition evolution sequence and superconductivity information (transition pressure and Tc) of MMSs under pressure in Table In this work, we reported the superconductivity in α-HgS by suppressing the helical chain structure under pressure and provided a clear picture to show the correlation between structure and electronic behavior. Consistent results were obtained from the electrical transport, X-ray diffraction, second harmonic generation (SHG) measurements, Raman spectroscopy, absorption and reflection spectroscopy. As pressure increases, the insulating α-HgS first undergoes a direct-indirect bandgap transition near 8 GPa, followed by a structural phase transition from the helical chain structure to the cubic structure near 21 GPa confirmed by XRD and SHG experiments, accompanied by the emergence of superconductivity. Tc reaches the maximum of 11 K at 25.4 GPa and then decreases with further compression. Clear phonon softening is observed, which is expected to be responsible for the structure instability of the helical phase and superconductivity. It is noted that HgS is the first superconductor among the II group sulfide family, and it exhibits a relatively high Tc, which is also the highest one among the NaCl-type metal sulfide superconductors. This work provides new insights into the mechanics of NaCl-type superconductors and will inspire the exploration of superconductivity in other metal sulfides and chiral systems as well. Fig. As seen in Fig. The X-ray diffraction patterns of HgS under pressure are shown in Fig. The peaks hardly move above 21 GPa, indicating that the cinnabar phase is more compressible than the NaCl phase. This is further confirmed by the equation of states fitting shown in Fig. We investigated the magnetic field effect on the superconductivity of HgS up to 5.0 T. At 27.3 GPa, the zero-field Tc is ~10.3 K, and it decreases with increasing field, as seen in Fig. Electron-phonon coupling influences quantum phenomena such as superconductivity. The repulsive Coulomb interaction competes with the attractive interaction provided by electron-phonon coupling, and the latter leads to a conventional superconductivity. BCS theory As mentioned at the beginning, the resistance of the insulating HgS below 15 GPa is too large to be measured by our instrument, hence it is difficult for us to obtain information about the sample's properties below 15 GPa using electrical transport measurements alone. We can learn more about the evolution of electronic structures below 15 GPa by using UV-VIS-NIR and infrared spectroscopies. The UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra are shown in Fig. For metal sulfides, as previously mentioned, ScS When subjected to pressures > 3 GPa and heated, S can transition into the trigonal chain structure S-II phase, sharing the same structure with trigonal Te and Se. This phase remains stable within a pressure range of 1.5 GPa to 36 GPa at room temperature We investigated the electric transport properties, X-ray diffraction, SHG measurement, Raman spectroscopy, and UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy experiments of HgS under pressures up to 45 GPa, and provided a clear phase diagram to show the close correlation between the structure evolution and electronic behavior. XRD and SHG experiments provided a clear structural transition from the noncentrosymmetric cinnabar phase to the centrosymmetric NaCl phase, and the phase transition is accompanied by the emergency of superconductivity. In the superconducting NaCl phase, Tc can reach a maximum close to 11 K, and the SC transition exhibits multi-band features with a Bc2 of 5.65 T at 27.3 GPa. The phonon softening is very significant and it should be responsible for the structural instability and consequent superconductivity. Notably, HgS is the only NaCl-type metal sulfide superconductor with a Tc exceeding This is a question worth investigating. HgS is a good prototype of II group MMSs. Unlike insulating IIA MMSs, HgS has 5d valance electrons, which may show a sensitive electronic behavior under high pressure. There are two different crystal forms of HgS: one is the α-HgS or cinnabar, and it is an insulator in red color; the other one, β-HgS or metacinnabar, is a gray semimetal with a ZB structure meta-stable phase. More interesting, α-HgS has a unique noncentrosymmetric trigonal lattice, while S and Hg atoms alternately interconnect to form 3-fold helical chains parallel to the c axis. The space group (S.G.) of the cinnabar phase can be expressed as P3121 (S.G.152) or P3221 4