In the pursuit of higher critical temperature of superconductivity, quasi-flat electronic bands and van Hove singularities in two dimensions (2D) have emerged as a potential approach to enhance Cooper pairing on the basis of mean-field expectations. However, these special electronic features suppress the superfluid stiffness and, hence, the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition in 2D superconducting systems, leading to the emergence of a significant pseudogap regime due to superconducting fluctuations. In the strong-coupling regime, one finds that superfluid stiffness is inversely proportional to the superconducting gap, which is the predominant factor contributing to the strong suppression of superfluid stiffness. Here we reveal that the aforementioned limitation is avoided in a 2D superconducting electronic system with a quasi-flat electronic band with a strong pairing strength coupled to a deep band with weak electronic pairing strength. Owing to the multiband effects, we demonstrate a screening-like mechanism that circumvents the suppression of the superfluid stiffness. We report the optimal conditions for achieving a large enhancement of the BKT transition temperature and a substantial shrinking of the pseudogap regime by tuning the intraband couplings and the pair-exchange coupling between the two band-condensates. In 2D superconductors, the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition temperature T BKT 1-unit-cell thick FeSe films exhibit a BKT transition at 23.1 K An additional motivation for this work arises from the effective two-gap/patch model discussed in Refs. 34 and 35 in connection with the phenomenology of cuprate superconductors. The effective two-gap/patch model encompasses two distinct wave-vector regions of the band dispersion characterized by different intraband and pair exchange interactions. One of the bands demonstrates a large Fermi velocity and a weak attraction, resulting in the formation of overlapped Cooper pairs with minimal superconducting fluctuations. Conversely, the other band showcases a small Fermi velocity and a strong attraction, leading to formation of tightly bound pairs with strong fluctuations. Most relevantly for this work, the patches of the Fermi surface around the M points of the Brillouin zone (BZ) of cuprates contain a branch of the electronic dispersion characterized by a saddle point, which in 2D is responsible for the van Hove singularity in the density of states. In the two-gap/patch effective model for cuprates, there is a dynamic interplay that emerges between the anisotropic Fermi surface and the wave vector-dependent pairing interaction induced by the charge-density wave (CDW) fluctuations, leading to very different pairing strengths in different arcs of the Fermi surface. This is the electronic structure and pairing configuration that we intend to investigate in this work. The recent investigations into multigap superconductivity in lithium-intercalated bilayer Mo 2 C, conducted through first-principles calculations, show that such intercalation, accompanied by a 3% tensile strain, results in a notable elevation of the critical temperature (T c ) to To incorporate the essential characteristics of the electronic band structure of a FeSe monolayer into our model, we utilize a two-band tight-binding approach that effectively represents the fundamental aspects of the FeSe monolayer's electronic structure The same mechanism is at work when a real-space Hamiltonian with local interactions is diagonalized in a band representation, with the emergence of pairing amplitudes in all channels, as intraband and interband ones. Interband couplings are therefore commonly present in multicomponent electronic systems, whatever the microscopic origin, orbital or geometrical. Our considered multicomponent system incorporates the above described physics and does not depend on a particular origin of the pairing interaction. The manuscript is organized as follows. Section II details the physical system under study and the mean-field theoretical approach for evaluating the superconducting properties. In Section III we report the results and discussion of our analysis with regard to the superfluid phase stiffness and the BKT transition temperature. The conclusions of our work are given in Section IV. Consider a single-band 2D tight-binding model on the square lattice with energy dispersion, where a is the lattice constant. The nearest neighbour hopping parameter t is set to be 0.1 eV and the wavevectors belong to the first Brillouin zone -π a ≤ k x,y ≤ π a . In this article, we use the units = a = k B = 1. In this work, for simplicity, we don't consider the competition of superconductivity with charge order close to half filling because a small next-nearest neighbour hopping will circumvent the competition and, in general, the charge order due to nesting configurations of the Fermi surface is not commonly observed The energy dispersion of the considered 2D quasi-flat band has a bandwidth of 0.8 eV. The chemical potential is positioned at the center of the band, coinciding with the location of a pronounced van Hove singularity in the density of states (DOS). Here, we intend strong or weak van Hove singularities, referring to the values of the DOS close to the singularities in a comparative manner. The effective pairing interaction is approximated by a separable potential V (k, k ′ ) with an energy cutoff ω 0 and it is given by: V 0 > 0 is the strength of the attractive potential. We solve numerically the self-consistent BCS mean-field gap equation at a finite temperature Eq. ( The factor 2 in Eq. ( is the dispersion of single-particle excitations in the superconducting state. Ω is the area occupied by the 2D system. ξ(k) = ǫ(k) -μ is the dispersion relation for the electronic band with respect to the chemical potential (μ). In the single-band case, the dimensionless coupling constant for a pairing of two electrons is defined as λ = N (E 0 )V 0 where N (E 0 ) is the density of states at the bottom of the band. f (x) = [1 + exp(x/T )] -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. We point out that all the coupling configurations considered in this work led to solutions of the gap equations in Eq. ( where ρ s (T ) is the superfluid stiffness, ∆ and μ are temperature dependent and given by the solutions of gap Eq. ( Superfluid stiffness at BCS mean-field level for a generic band and at a finite temperature T is Where k α = k x,y . Due to the tetragonal symmetry of the system ρ x,x = ρ y,y = ρ s . The two-band 2D systems in which one band is deep and the other is quasi-flat in nature is then considered. The index i = 1,2 labels the bands: i = 1 denotes the upper deep band having the nearest neighbour hopping parameter t 1 = 1.0 eV . i = 2 denotes the lower band which has the characteristic of quasi-flat band with t 2 = 0.1t 1 . The quasi-flat band is shifted below the center of the deep band by the energy E g,2 = -2t 1 and no energy shift for the deep band is considered E g,1 = 0. E g = 1.6t 1 is the energy difference between the bottom of the two bands. The effective multichannel pairing interaction is approximated using a separable potential, which is given by: V 0 i,j is the strength of the potential and i, j label the bands. V 0 ij = V 0 ji . V 0 11 and V 0 22 are the strengths of the intraband pairing interactions. V 0 12 = V 0 21 are the strength of the pair-exchange interactions. We consider the same energy cutoff ω 0 of the interaction for the pairexchange and intraband pairing terms. The considered energy cutoff spans the entire spectrum of the quasiflat band, aiming to encompass all available wave-vector states for pairing. Because of the flatness in energy of the quasi-flat band, with bandwidths of the order of 10-100 meV, the typical energy scale for the boson mediators of the pairing, of phononic or electronic origin, is of the order of the quasi-flat band bandwidth, but it results smaller than the bandwidth of the deep dispersive band. Consequently, there exists coexistence between local (BEC-like) pairs forming from the quasi-flat band and more extended Cooper (BCS-like) pairs emerging from the deep band. The experimental observation of BCS-BEC crossover in iron-based or other 2D superconductors where μ is the chemical potential fixed to be the same for both bands. ξ i (k) = ǫ i (k) -μ is the energy dispersion of the bands with respect to the chemical potential. The dimensionless couplings λ i,j are defined as λ i,j = V 0 i,j N (E 0 ), N (E 0 ) is the density of states at the bottom of the deep band. The total density of the two-band system is fixed, and it is given by the sum of the individual densities of the bands, n tot = n 1 + n 2 . The fermionic density n i in the i th band is given by: The system of equations ( where ρ deep 1 and ρ qf 2 are the superfluid stiffness of the deep band and quasi-flat band condensates, respectively. In the absence of the cross-pairing interaction In the next section, we report the results and discussion of single-band and two-band cases. In the single quasi-flat band tight-binding model in 2D, at zero temperature, the chemical potential is fixed around the strong van Hove singularity of the quasi-flat band. Eq. ( Performing a large gap expansion ∆ qf /t >> 1, where, In general, quasi-flat bands are having the characteristic of higher effective mass m * and superconducting gap ∆ qf , which is inversely related to the superfluid stiffness by Eq. ( In Fig. To address the issue of suppressed superfluid stiffness in the quasi-flat band 2D tight-binding system, we coupled the quasi-flat band with the 2D tight-binding deep dispersive band, which has a weak coupling strength and a broad van Hove singularity in the DOS. The coupling strength for the deep band is fixed to be 0.25 throughout the calculation. In many different multiband superconductors, the resulting superconducting gaps are well separated in energy, with distinct features measured in spectroscopic experiments that can be attributed to different gaps. When considering pairing mediated by phonons or by other bosonic fields, the coupling strength between the bosonic mediator and the electrons forming the Cooper pairs depends strongly on the specific structure of the wave functions and, hence, of the electronic bands. Therefore, having different paring strengths in different bands is a standard situation in multiband systems, while equal pairings can be associ- ated with quasi-degeneracy of the electronic structure. A prototype example would be MgB 2 or several iron-based superconductors. Multiband superconductors with a coherent mixture of condensates in the BCS regime (deep band) and in the BEC regime (quasi-flat band) offer a promising route to higher critical temperatures. In systems with quasi-flat bands, the flatness of the bandwidth can enhance the coupling strength through the large density of states in the flat regions of the band structure in the BZ, leading to the emergence of strongly correlated states and strongly-coupled superconductivity, characterized by the formation of short-sized pairs typical of the BEC regime. Thus, prioritizing stronger coupling in the quasi-flat band over the deep band is more favorable. Same physics can arise in the presence of anti-adiabatic effects beyond Migdal, that can amplify electron-phonon coupling in the case of quasi-flat bands. At zero temperature, it is not possible to perform a large gap expansion of superfluid stiffness for a deep band, as the coupling constant (λ 11 ) of the deep band is fixed in the weak coupling regime. However, for ∆ deep /t 1 < 1, ρ deep 1 can be approximated as where N 0 (μ) is the density of the states at the chemical potential. Since the superfluid stiffness of the deep band (ρ deep ) is directly related to the superconducting gap of a deep band which acts as a reservoir to enhance the total superfluid stiffness (ρ tot s ) of the system given by Eq. ( In the flat band and quasi-flat band systems, the superfluid stiffness and BKT transition temperature are negligible due to band geometry. But recent research has indicated that incorporating quantum geometric effects in multiorbital band models could result in a finite BKT transition temperature In our two-band model, the chemical potential is fixed around the vicinity of the van Hove singularity of the quasi-flat band. This region is characterized by a high suppression of the superfluid stiffness and the opening of a pseudogap, which requires the utmost care in the analysis. The intraband and pair-exchanging coupling strengths and the chemical potential primarily determine the mean-field critical temperature in the twoband case and hence play a crucial role in determining the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition temperature (T BKT ). To enhance the BKT transition temperature, the quasi-flat band is coupled with the deep band, where the latter practically acts as a passive band. We consider the intraband coupling strengths of the deep and quasi-flat bands, denoted by λ 11 and λ 22 respectively. As the deep band acts as a passive band, its intraband coupling is smaller than that of the quasi-flat band, i.e., λ 11 < λ 22 , while the pair-exchange coupling strengths are symmetric, i.e., λ 12 = λ 21 . Throughout the numerical calculation, we fix the deep band in the weak coupling regime λ 11 = 0.25 and vary the λ 22 ranging from 0.25 (weak coupling) to 1.0 (strong coupling). To determine the optimal conditions for achieving a higher BKT transition temperature (T BKT ), we vary the pair-exchange coupling strength, λ 12 , from 0.1 to 1.0. To fix the chemical potential around the vicinity of the van Hove singularity of the quasi-flat band in the coupled system, we tune the total number density, n tot . In Fig. In the two-band model, in the weak coupling regime for the quasi-flat band with λ 22 = 0.25, the T BKT transition temperature is found to be approximately 20% to 22% of T c for the pair-exchange coupling regime, ranging from 0.1 to 0.4. Similarly, in contrast, the single quasi-flat band case, as depicted in Fig. In the single-band case, the ratio between the mean-field pairing temperature T c , that can be measured by ARPES or by the deviation from the normal-state resistivity lowering the temperature, and the T BKT cannot be lower than 10, indicating a strong suppression of T BKT and a very large pseudogap regime in temperature for singleband systems. Remarkably, we demonstrate that in the case of two bands, one deep and the other quasi-flat with a vHs, the T BKT is enhanced by an order of magnitude and the ratio T c /T BKT can lower substantially toward values of the order 2-5. Interestingly, FeSe superconducting monolayers show a BKT transition around 24 K In this work, we have explored the influence of electronic band configurations and their properties, such as van Hove singularities, and of the pairing regimes on the suppression of both superfluid stiffness and T BKT temperature. We have addressed the challenge of superfluid stiffness suppression by utilizing multi-band and multi-condensate effects, thereby enabling the stabilization of high-T c 2D superconductivity. In the single-band case, as the band becomes flatter, the effective mass of electrons increases, leading to an increasingly pronounced effect of superfluid stiffness suppression. This effect is even larger for 2D tight-binding electrons due to the presence of the van Hove singularity in the density of states. Interestingly, while the van Hove singularity is known to increase the mean-field superconducting critical temperature, it also leads to substantial suppression of the superfluid stiffness and hence of T BKT . Additionally, we have observed an inverse relationship between superfluid stiffness and the superconducting gap in the strong-coupling regime. Consequently, the superconducting gap emerges as the primary determinant of superfluid stiffness suppression in the strong-coupling regime, which is generated in the vicinity of a van Hove singularity. Here, we have demonstrated a method for circumventing the suppression of the superfluid stiffness in quasi-flat band systems by providing a reservoir of phase stiffness with a deep band characterized by a weak pairing of its electrons, exploiting multi-band and multi-gap superconductivity. Specifically, we have analyzed a coupled quasi-flat and deep dispersing twoband 2D system by tuning the pair-exchange coupling between the band condensates. Our findings indicate that coupling with the deep band is able to increase the T BKT temperature by 10-100 times when compared to the single-band case and also significantly shrinks the pseudogap region between T c and T BKT arising because of amplitude, phase and vortex-antivortex fluctuations. We conclude that our proposed electronic configuration provides an effective means of screening the suppression of the superfluid stiffness and enhancing by order of magnitudes the T BKT temperature in the multiband coupled 2D systems that possess quasi-flat bands and strong van Hove singularities, coupled with deep bands having weak-pairing strengths.