A microscopic control over the origin and dynamics of localised spin centres in lower dimensional solids turns out to be a key factor for next generation spintronics and quantum technologies. With the help of low temperature electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements, supported by the first-principles calculations within density functional theory (DFT) formulation, we found the origin of different highspin paramagnetic intrinsic charge-centres, Mo 3+ (4d 3 ) and Mo 2+ (4d 4 ) present in the nano-crystalline sulfur deficit hexagonal molybdenum disulfide (2H-MoS 2-x ), against the established notion of spin-1 2 , Mo 5+ centres. A critical strain generated in the nanostructured 2H-MoS 2-x was found to be very crucial for spin-localization in this layered material. Indeed, computationally effective proposition of the PBE+U exchangecorrelations within DFT including D3-dispersion corrections found to be more viable 1 The discovery of the two-dimensional (2D) solids stacked by inter-layer van der Waals forces, such as graphene and its nano-structures, group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDC) as well as the transition metal carbides (MXenes), turn out to be an exciting 2D materials family for their extraordinary electronic, mechanical, optical and spin-properties. There are some reports of spin dephasing measurements on the resident electrons through time-resolved optical measurements of few TMDCs. The defects in MoS 2 are also reported to induce magnetism in the host material, such as defect-induced ferromagnetic ordering. In the paramagnetic state, these defects can be probed through electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. So far, most of these paramagnetic defects in MoS 2 have been considered as spin- Besides growing potential of defect engineering in the field of spintronics and quantum information technological applications, very limited efforts have been employed so far to understand the spin-localisation and spin-states of the defect centres in 2H-MoS 2 , in 2D and in nano-crystalline phase alike. In our previous work, we identified three paramagnetic defects in powdered 2H-MoS 2 nanocrystals synthesised through hydrothermal route, and we assigned them as molybdenum antisites, sulfur vacancies and oxygen vacancies of reduced molybdenum oxide. In this work, we have reported low temperature EPR measurements on a series of hexagonal sulfur-deficit molybdenum disulfide (2H-MoS 2-x ) nanocrystals to study the nature and evolution of various intrinsic paramagnetic defects. Also, we took aid of the first-principle calculations to understand the spin-states and found the favourable condition for spinlocalisation around the defect centres, which has been further supplemented by experiments. Finally, with the help of spin-echo measurements, we have found differences in the spin relaxation behaviour of these defect centres. Furthermore, a particular set-up in the DFT exchange-correlation unveiled the role of nano-structured induced critical in-plane and outof-plane strains on 2H-MoS 2-x , as the possible player behind the evolution in the spin-states of these defect centres. MoS 2-x nanocrystals were synthesised through hydrothermal method. In the synthesis, molybdenum trioxide (MoO 3 ) and thiourea (CH 4 N 2 S) were mixed at the molar ratios of 1:1, 1:2, 1:5, 1:8 and 1:10 to prepare five different batches of as-synthesised MoS 2-x nanocrystals, namely A, B, C, D and E. Sample synthesis procedure has been described in detail in the Experimental section. XRD measurements (Figure The variation in relative weight of the three spin centres has been listed in Table It is seen that the relative weight of V1 centre ranges in between 14-18% for sample A, B, C and D, while it increased almost two times for sample E (43%). At the same time, the relative weight of V2 centre ranges in between 51-60% for sample B, C and D, while it falls down by half for sample A and E. On the other hand, the relative weight of V3 centre decreased almost monotonically from 52% to 23% for sample A to E. The sulfur-deficit growth condition leads to the maximization of V3 centre in relative weight, while extreme sulfur-rich growth condition leads to the maximization of V1 centre. After annealing, V2 centre becomes majority, with a weak presence of V1 centre and disappearance of V3 centre (sample C1 in Table Table With the different local symmetry, the defect centres may posses distinct spin relaxation behaviour. In our previous work, we found a significant difference in spin-spin relaxation time-scale among the spin centres. In the W-band, Larmor frequency increases ∼ 10 times, so as the mutual separation in field position of two signals originating from two spin centres. It is evident from comparison of spectra for the same samples at same temperature at two frequencies as shown in Figure was found to remain almost constant for all the as-synthesised samples (∼ 1 ms). While the T 1 value at peak P1 of sample E becomes 650 μs, which is comparable (actually highest) with the T 1 value of other samples, as opposed to the X-band results where T 1 of peak P1, sample E is lower by an order as compared to other samples. To asses this issue, we looked at the echo detected field sweep spectra of sample E in the X-and W-band frequency as shown in Figure To understand the spin-spin relaxation of the defect centres, we measured inter-pulse time (τ ) dependent field sweep spectra of sample B with a Hahn echo sequence To get further insight of spin-lattice relaxation dynamics of the defect centres, we per- There are three major routes of spin-lattice relaxation by which an unpaired electron spin and lattice equilibrate, namely direct, Raman and Orbach process. To understand the nuclear environment of the spin centres, we employed X-band electron- While looking at the W-band field sweep spectra, it can be seen that the entire EPR lineshape has a spread of ∼ 550 mT, which is much higher than the expected magnetic field span for three spin-1 2 species appearing side-by-side in the spectrum (EPR linewidth for a typical spin-1 2 signal is ∼ 5 mT). It further indicates that the localised spin centres of our synthesised 2H-MoS 2-x may be in high spin states. To determine the possible spin states of the defect centres, we performed Rabi nutation measurements at the position of V1, V2 and V3 centres for sample C, which are then compared with the nutation of standard spin-1 2 (coal sample from Bruker Biospin GmbH) and spin-5 2 (0.8 mM frozen solution of MnCl 2 ) samples as shown in Figure where ω 1 = gμ B B 1 /h and B 1 is magnetic field of the microwave. From equation ( The present experimental observations on the origin and dynamics of the localized charge centres in the nano-structured 2H-MoS 2-x are also modelled through the density functional theory based defect sites engineering to better understand their origin. In the DFT modelling we took into account few prime point defects, i.e. sulfur vacancy (S v ), Mo-interstitial at the tetrahedral (Mo tet ) and octahedral sites (Mo oct ) within the van der Waals spacing, and oxy-sulfide formation at S v -sites (V SO ) with or without external strain (for unstrained cases schematic models are shown in Figure We have used Hubbard onsite-U correction and vdW-dispersion energy (at D3-level correction) in the choice of the exchange-correlation functional (see also Despite the marginal improvement (5-10%) of the band-gap of 2H-MoS 2 which falls within the hybrid DFT calculations error bars of quasi-2D solids, In the present case of S v included nano-structured 2H-MoS 2-x sample, total DOS and pDOS are shown in the left panels, Figure Thus, the S v centre rolls out as 3 spin- Similarly, possible other S-deficit 2H-MoS 2-x models with additional Mo-interstitial is viable in the host 2H-MoS 2 material (See SI Figure Here, the octahedral site intercalation, Mo oct within the van der Waals spacing results as thermodynamically most favourable by 23% lower in energy of formation than other interstitial at tetrahedral sites, Mo tet in the host material 2H-MoS 2 (see Table From a general expectation with formal octahedral and tetrahedral crystal field splitting of the 4d-orbitals of MoS 6 and MoS 4 interstitial motifs, respectively, resulted to be high-spin 2 ) and intermediate spin-states (S = 3 2 ) and validates presence of the so called V1 charge-centres observed from current EPR analysis, thus corroborated with DFT calculated data regarding its origin search. Hence, the combined impact of the Mo oct and Mo tet models might forms the possible spin-centres spin- It is also noted that due to the additional covalencies with the neighbouring S-atoms with Mo oct sites or also in tetrahedral sites, Mo tet the NN sub-layers of the host 2H-MoS 2-x got polarized with extra electrons and looks honeycomb polaronic region and possible source of polaritons in such 2D nano-structures, see also Figure To further recheck the robustness of the present strain imposed defect sites engineering via DFT modelling of the S-vacancy and Mo-interstitials within the 2H-MoS In summary, we have investigated the origin, spin-states and dynamics of the localised spincentres in the hydrothermally synthesised 2H-MoS 2-x nanocrystals. The 2-6% in-plane and 2-4% out-of-plane tensile strains estimated from the first principle calculations were found to play a critical role behind the spin localisation around the Mo 2+ and Mo 3+ charge-centres in our 2H-MoS 2-x nanocrystals, rather than the spin-neutral Mo 4+ centres in standard 2H-MoS 2 . These localised charges appeared as paramagnetic spin centres in the material, namely molybdenum interstitial (V1) and sulfur vacancy (V2) as identified by the EPR measurements and corroborated by DFT calculations. A molybdenum interstitial atom residing in the octahedral (Mo 4+ ) or tetrahedral (Mo 3+ ) van der Waals spacing of 2H-MoS 2-x nanocrystals can be identified as the origin of V1 centre. The net spin magnetic moment of the octahedral and tetrahedral sites has come out as 3.3-3.7μ B , which indicates a possible spin-4 2 to spin- These three Mo 3+ centres couple through direct magnetic-exchange to form a spin-3 2 spincentre, which is the origin of the V2 centre. The possibility of high spin states for V1 and V2 centres is also supported by Rabi nutation and EDNMR measurements. On the other hand, oxygen vacancy of oxysulfide phase can be identified as V3 centre, which resides in the spin- MoS 2-x nano-crystalline samples, with varying S/Mo atomic ratio, were synthesised through a typical hydrothermal method (synthesis temperature: 200 • C, synthesis time: 24 hr). In the synthesis, 20 mL of thiourea solution (dissolved in DI water) was added drop-wise to the 15 mL of 0.1 M aqueous MoO 3 solution. Both the precursors were procured from Sigma-Aldrich, India and were used without further processing. This total solution was stirred vigorously for 1 hr to make a homogeneous mixture and was transferred to a 60 mL teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. After reaction, the precipitate were cleaned several times with water and ethanol followed by heating at 60 • C to obtain 2H-MoS 2-x nanocrystals. The S/Mo atomic ratio of the 2H-MoS 2-x nanocrystals was altered through the reaction of MoO 3 and thiourea with varying molar ratio. We synthesised five number of as-synthesised samples, namely A, B, C, D and E, where the precursors were taken in the ratio of 1:1, 1:2, 1:5, 1:8 and 1:10, respectively. Apart from the as-synthesied form, sample C (1:5 molar ratio) was further annealed in argon environment for 3 hr, and was named as sample C1 in the measurements. XRD measurements were performed in Bruker D2 phases table top spectrometer. XPS measurements were carried out by an ULVAC-PHI 5000 Versa Probe II spectrometer. Raman measurements were executed by a T64000 (JY, France) micro-Raman spectrometer. X-band EPR measurements were performed in a Bruker ELEXYS E-580 spectrometer coupled with helium cooled closed cycle cryo-system. W-band EPR experiments were conducted in a home-built spectrometer developed at Goldfarb lab, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. Defects Modeling Using DFT Two major challenges have been mimicked through the approximated manner in the current DFT analysis of the point-defects at the moderate computational resource requirement and reasonable accuracy. First, the true nano-structure environment of the 2H-MoS 2 , is modelled through the applied external strain on the bulk phase, because of the observed nano-particles size in the current exp. synthesis are comparable with bulk properties in 2D and found to be validated in our earlier work on quantum-confinement in layered dichalcogenides. The calculated data is bench marked with earlier single sulfur vacancy formation energies, S v as reported from the higher level of post-DFT theory and modelling and also the use of the PBE-D3+U method is motivated from similar works on the layered oxides V 2 O 5 and MoO 3 while one looks into the thermochemistry and electronic band gaps at the moderate computational loads. core and valence electrons from the SSSP database as implemented with the DFT software package Quantum Espresso version 6.8. Finally, we notice also the vacancy formation energies of the S v at the given exchangecorrelation with or without U term (see Table 