Developing new material platforms for use in superconductor-semiconductor hybrid structures is desirable due to limitations caused by intrinsic microwave losses present in commonly used III/V material systems. With the recent reports on tantalum superconducting qubits that show improvements over the Nb and Al counterparts, exploring Ta as an alternative superconductor in hybrid material systems is promising. Here, we study the growth of Ta on semiconducting Ge (001) substrates grown via molecular beam epitaxy. We show that at a growth temperature of 400 • C the Ta diffuses into the Ge matrix in a self-limiting nature resulting in smooth and abrupt surfaces and interfaces with roughness on the order of 3-7 Å as measured by atomic force microscopy and x-ray reflectivity. The films are found to be a mixture of Ta 5 Ge 3 and TaGe 2 binary alloys and form a native oxide that seems to form a sharp interface with the underlying film. These films are superconducting with a T C ∼ 1.8 -2K and 1T . These results show this tantalum germanide film to be promising for future superconducting quantum information platforms. Superconductor-semiconductor (S-Sm) hybrid material platforms have been of interest in the last few decades for studying mesoscopic superconductor physics In terms of superconducting materials, implementation of tantalum metal is also extremely interesting for cQED devices due to the fact that it forms a well-behaved native oxide for superconducting microwave applications Here, we report the diffusion-limited growth (diffusiongrowth) of tantalum germanide films via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). This technique is similar to what has been a) corresponding author: jshabani@nyu.edu previously employed to study superconducting contacts in GaAs/AlGaAs systems The tantalum germanide films are grown on 50.8mm Ge(001) substrates in a custom solid-source molecular beam epitaxy system (Mod Gen II) equipped with three electron beam sources and hydrogen cleaning capabilities. The internal manifold around the sources is water-cooled and no LN 2 cryo-paneling is used during this deposition. The substrates are first etched ex-situ in deionized water at 90 • C for 15 minutes and then immediately loaded into vacuum on indium-free blocks. The substrates are initially outgased in the growth reactor at 200 • C for 15 minutes, before slowly increasing temperature to 550 • C to anneal for 10 minutes. We confirm the removal of the surface oxide via in-situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) monitoring. We use the presence of a well-defined and sharp (2x1) surface reconstruction of the Ge (001) facet to indicate the removal of any native oxide the reforms during the substrate mounting process. Ta deposition was done using a water-cooled vertical EBVV ebeam source from MBE Komponenten at an emission current of 180mA in a 6kV acceleration field. The films are grown at 400 • C, immediately following the Ge oxide removal. Due to passive heating from the Ta source, deposition was conducted in three cycles of 10 minutes each, allowing the chamber to cool for 15 minutes between deposition cycles to prevent significant outgassing from the chamber walls. bowing in select measurements. All scans are measured in a double crystal configuration. An out-of-plane θ -2θ scan is presented in Fig. Where ρ is the material density, N a is Avogadro's constant, r e is the classical electron radius ∼ 2.818 × 10 -15 m, M a is the molar mass, and f 1 is the real part of the atomic scattering factor of the compound. We calculate values of 5.54cm -3 and 3.83cm -3 for the tantalum germanide and native oxide layers, respectively. Crystallinity and interface structure of the tantalum germanide film is examined with scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) in a JEOL ARM200F, equipped with a spherical aberration corrector for probe mode, and operated at 200 keV. The samples were prepared with cross-sectional tripod polishing to 20 μm thickness, followed by shallow angle Ar+ ion milling with low beam energies([1]3 keV), and LN2 stage cooling in a PIPS II ion mill. Exemplary transmission electron microscopy images are shown in Figure For an accurate determination of the full film composition, Rutherford Backscattering Spectroscopy measurements were conducted via EAG Eurofins, using a Cornell measurement geometry. The He ++ ion beam energy was set to 2.275 MeV He ++ , and the detector was placed at an angle of 160 • from the ion beam path. A second grazing incidence detector was placed at 100 • to increase measurement accuracy. Fig. For determining the density of the film, we use the value of composition as reported from our RBS measurements. Assuming random distribution of elemental species in the two distinct layers, we then calculate the expected average material density to be 14.39g/cm 3 for the tantalum germanide layers, respectively. Comparing against the density of the crystalline form, approximated to be 13.82g/cm Magnetotransport measurements of this material are done in an Oxford Triton dry dilution refridgerator with a base temperature of 15mK and a single direction magnet with a maximum field of 14T. Samples are cleaved down to roughly 5x5mm chips. Contacts on the chip are made by annealing In-Sn eutectic into the four corners in a Van der Pauw geometry which are then contacted to the sample board via gold wires. The results of these measurements are presented in Figure In conclusion, we presented here the growth, structure, and transport characteristics of diffusion-grown tantalum germanide thin films grown via MBE. The tantalum germanide films are formed by a semi-rate-limited diffusion process in which the e-beam evaporated Ta diffuses into the surface that preserves a 3 : 2 Ta:Ge composition ratio within the film region. These films form a small native oxide layer with sharp interfaces and exhibit a roughly 4% increase in material density. Transport shows a reasonable critical temperature of ∼1.8-2K, but more we find a critical out-of-plane and in-plane critical field of H ⊥ C ∼ 1.88T and H ∥ C ∼ 5.1T , respectively. With such a high critical field, ease of semiconductor integration, and the preservation of sharp S-Sm interfaces, this material shows promise for integration into cQED devices. The supplemental material contains additional details on the EDS and XPS experimental considerations and analysis. The data presented herein shows the depth-resolved elemental profiles for the tantalum germanide film as an image via EDS as well as XPS core level measurements as a function of sputtering depth. of the surface. Core level fitting was done assuming a Voigt lineshape using CasaXPS with a Shirley background subtraction. To extract atomic percentages, core levels are normalized to the integrated intensity of the O 1s core level. Data was recorded every 5s while the thermometer only updates every 2 minutes, resulting in clusters of 23 data points at each temperature. The material undergoes a superconducting transition partway during this time period, as such we are reporting the temperature at which the transition starts.