Two-dimensional porous carbon nanomaterials are proven to be promising hydrogen storage substrates as they possess high surface area, large number of active sites, low molecular mass, and hydrogen molecules can be adsorbed on both sides of these materials. By performing firstprinciples density functional theory-based calculations, we report ultrahigh reversible hydrogen uptake in lithium decorated 2D carbon allotrope PAI-graphene, which is formed of a regular pattern of polymerized as-indacenes (PAI). We found that a single unit cell of PAIgraphene can be decorated by 8 Li atoms, in which each Li atom can reversibly adsorb 4 hydrogen molecules, leading to 15.7 % of H uptake, remarkably higher than the DOE demand of 6.5 %. Li atom donates its valence 2s-electron to PAI-graphene and gets ionized. The adsorption energies of the various H2 attached to Li-atom are found to be suitable for reversible use during practical applications. Hydrogen molecules get attached to the ionized metal atom by electrostatic interactions. An energy barrier of 1.48 eV is present for the diffusion of Li atoms between the two most stable adsorption sites which justifies the absence of the clustering of Li atoms. Alternative energy demands are increasing globally due to the sharp rise in population as well as in living standards. Hydrogen energy can replace the fossil fuel dependence in automotive applications since hydrogen is highly abundant and possesses a large energy density of 120 MJ/Kg Generally, transition metals (TMs) decorated hosts bind more H2 compared to alkali or alkaliearth metal (AMs or AEMs) decorated hosts due to the presence of strong Kubas interactions Recently, a novel 2D metallic carbon allotrope PAI-graphene was theoretically predicted by Chen et al. Here, we have explored the H storage properties of the Li functionalized PAI-graphene structure by employing DFT simulations. Li atom is strongly attached to PAI-graphene structure with a B.E. value of -2 eV. We have plotted the density of states (DOS), projected DOS (PDOS), and spatial charge density difference plots to depict the charge transfer phenomenon between Li atom and PAI-graphene. The H2 molecules are attached to the Lidecorated PAI-graphene structure by electrostatic interactions and van der Waals interactions. We have investigated the clustering of the Li atoms by calculating the energy barrier for the diffusion of metal atoms, which indicates that the clustering of Li atoms should not take place in the Li-decorated PAI-graphene system. We have carried out DFT simulations as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package(VASP) We have taken a single unit cell of PAI-graphene structure for Li-decoration and then hydrogen adsorption purposes. The relaxed unit cell of PAI-graphene is presented in Fig. To investigate the electronic structure and orbital interaction, we present the total DOS of PAIgraphene and Li-decorated PAI-graphene systems in Fig. Next, we put the 1 st H2 on the top of the Li-decorated PAI-graphene and performed the relaxation calculations. The H2 molecule is kept 2 Å distance far from the Li atom of the PAIgraphene + Li system. We have taken the heptagon position of the Li-atom for the Li-decorated PAI-graphene system because at this site, the Li atom is bounded with the maximum B.E. of -2 eV. The relaxed geometry of PAI-graphene + Li + 1 H2 is presented in Fig. Here, E (PAI -gra + Li + n H 2 ), and E (PAI -gra + Li + (n -1)H 2 ) are the total energy of the n and (n-1) H2 molecules attached to the Li-decorated PAI-graphene system, while E(H 2 ) is the energy of the single isolated H2. The adsorption energy of the H2 molecules, desorption temperatures, average C-Li, and H-H distances for all the compositions are provided in Table Therefore, H2 molecules are attached to the PAI-graphene + Li system by electrostatic interactions. Next, we estimated the desorption temperatures for the adsorbed H2 molecules by applying Van't Hoff formula Here, Td is the desorption temperature of the H2 corresponding to the adsorption energy Eb. ΔS is the change in the entropy of H2 while undergoing from gas to liquid state For the hydrogen uptake estimation, we have investigated the metal-metal clustering issue in the Li-decorated PAI-graphene system. As mentioned earlier, the Li atom is bounded to the PAI-graphene structure with almost similar B.E. at penta, hexa, and hepta sites (~ 2 eV). Keeping this in mind, if we put the metal atom at all these sites, then the calculated weight percentage will be very high. But, that configuration might leads to the clustering of Li atoms and is not suitable for practical applications. Therefore, we put the metal atom only at the hepta sites of PAI-graphene and calculated the gravimetric weight percentage of hydrogen. A single unit cell of PAI-graphene can be decorated by 8 Li atoms, as displayed in Fig. The gravimetric weight percentage of the Li-decorated PAI-graphene system is calculated by using the following equation: Where The diffusion energy barrier is calculated by using the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) We have explored the reversible hydrogen storage properties of the Li-decorated carbon allotrope PAI-graphene by employing DFT simulations. Li atom is decorated to the top of the pentagon, hexagon, and heptagon of the PAI-graphene with almost same B.E. (~ 2 eV), indicating that a large number of metal atoms can be decorated on the PAI-graphene. We have investigated the interaction between the valence orbitals of Li and PAI-graphene by plotting DOS, PDOS, and charge density difference plots. It was found that one-unit cell of PAIgraphene can be decorated by 8 Li atoms, while each Li atom can adsorb 4 H2 reversibly, leading to an ultrahigh hydrogen uptake of 15.7 % for the system. The binding energies and desorption temperatures of the H2 molecules are optimum for the reversible use of hydrogen. The H2 molecules are bounded to the Li atom by electrostatic interactions. Since the B.E. of the Li atom decorated on PAI-graphene, is more than the cohesive energy of the bulk Li, and an energy barrier of 1.48 eV is present for the diffusion of the Li atom, the Li-decorated PAIgraphene system will be prevented from metal clustering. Therefore, Li-decorated PAIgraphene is a potential hydrogen storage material with an ultrahigh gravimetric weight percentage (~16 %) of hydrogen.