Realizing direct-bandgap quantum dots working within the deep-ultraviolet frequency is highly desired for electro-optical and biomedical applications while remaining challenging. In this work, we combine the first-principles many-body perturbation theory and effective Hamiltonian approximation to propose the realization of arrays of deep-ultraviolet excitonic quantum dots in twisted bilayer hexagonal boron nitride. The effective quantum confinement of excitons can reach ~400 meV within small twisting angles, which is about four times larger than those observed in twisted semiconducting transitional metal dichalcogenides. Especially because of enhanced electron-hole attraction, those excitons will accumulate via the so-call exciton funnel effect to the direct-bandgap regime, giving the possibility to better luminescence performance and manipulating coherent arrays of deep-ultraviolet quantum dots. Introduction. Quantum dots (QDs), also known as "artificial atoms", have been widely utilized as fundamental building blocks in various applications, including light emitters/detectors In this work, we employed the first-principles simulations to propose twistinduced DUV QD arrays. We show that by twisting bilayer h-BN structures, one can realize QDs with a significant periodic potential confinement of ~400 meV. Importantly, the minimum bandgap within the h-BN superlattice is switched to be direct, giving hope to realizing arrays of DUV QDs with an improved quantum yield for optical responses. Going beyond single-particle descriptions, we further incorporate excitonic effects via the many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) and explore an exciton funnel effect, wherein the large moiré exciton binding drives photo-excited electron-hole pairs towards the potential minimum dominated by direct excitons. This exciton funnel effect helps concentrate excitons for energy harvesting and enables coherent optical responses of periodic DUV QDs in an intrinsic moiré superlattice. . There are two fundamental stacking orders in h-BN. Natural bulk h-BN takes the AA' stacking, where there is a 180° rotation between adjacent layers Lattice reconstruction is considered to be an important issue in the study of twisted vdW materials where the summations are over the nearest neighbors, and d is the bond length. d BN is the intrinsic bond length. As shown in Figures Stacking Dependent Quasiparticle Bandgap: We begin our discussions of the electronic structures of three high-symmetry stackings in twisted AA' bilayer with the density functional theory (DFT) results. The electronic band structures of AA', AB1, and AB2 stacked bilayer h-BN are shown in Figures Since DFT is known to underestimate bandgaps of semiconductors and insulators, we further performed the GW approximation to obtain the quasiparticle energies. As shown by the red-solid lines in Figures Twist Driven Continuous Bandgap Variation: We adopt the effective Hamiltonian to obtain the quasiparticle moiré potential in the twisted bilayer h-BN superlattices. The periodic quasiparticle bandgap variation in moiré superlattices can be approximated by a Fourier expansion over the nearest moiré reciprocal lattice vectors 43 and it is plotted in Figure Nonetheless, the photo-excited carrier dynamics and, particularly, luminescence are not only decided by the bandgap. Within the single-particle picture, photo-excited carriers in the superlattice tend to move towards the band extrema, as elucidated in Figure Exciton Funnel Effect in h-BN Moiré Superlattices: It is widely recognized that the optical responses of 2D semiconductors and insulators are dictated by excitonic effects, which are dramatically increased due to reduced dielectric screening Interestingly, for the indirect-band-gap stackings AA' and AB2, the lowestenergy exciton state is essentially still a direct exciton, X d originated from transitions around the K point with a zero momentum, as marked in Figure where S i (ω) = ∑ vck A vck i ⟨vk|v ̂|ck⟩δ(ω -(E ck -E vk )) is essentially the electronhole coupling coefficient modulated JDOS. This also agrees with the picture of the hydrogenic model, in which a larger effective mass contributes to a larger JDOSS and electron-hole binding energy. As shown in Figures The typical real-space wavefunctions of the excitonic state X d are plotted in the inset of Figure Importantly, because the exciton binding energy ( ~1.5 -1.8 eV ) is much larger than the quasiparticle energy variation (~ 300 meV), the photoexcited carriers tend to form electron-hole pairs because of the larger energy gain, and their motion is dictated by the energy landscape of excitons, instead of that of single particles shown in Figure Experimental realizations of quantum emitter arrays in strain textured monolayer MoS2 55 and WSe2 By exploiting the large bandgap variation in twisted bilayer h-BN, we propose the realization of bright DUV QDs in the moiré superlattice with the help from exciton funnel effect. Through many-body perturbation theory calculations, we show the large quasiparticle bandgap and exciton energy confinement within the moiré structure are significant (~400 meV). Although the CBM and VBM are located in different high symmetry areas of the moiré superlattice, the large electron-hole binding energy drives both holes and electrons towards the AB1 stacking to form bright direct Computational Details: The ground-state properties of bilayer h-BN are calculated by DFT within the general gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional The projected density of states of AB1 bilayer h-BN and the single particle carrier wavefunctions in the moiré superlattices. Deep UV