Low-frequency electronic noise in charge-density-wave van der Waals materials has been an important characteristic, providing information about the material quality, phase transitions, and collective current transport. However, the noise sources and mechanisms have not been completely understood, particularly for the materials with a non-fully gapped Fermi surface where the electrical current includes components from individual electrons and the sliding charge-density wave. We investigated noise in nanowires of quasi-one-dimensional NbSe3, focusing on a temperature range near the Pearls transition TP1 ~145 K. The data analysis allowed us to separate the noise produced by the individual conduction electrons and the quantum condensate of the charge density waves before and after the onset of sliding. The noise as a function of temperature and electric bias reveals several intriguing peaks. We explained the observed features by the depinning threshold field, the creep and sliding of the charge density waves, and the possible existence of the hidden phases. It was found that the charge density wave condensate is particularly noisy at the moment of depinning. The noise of the collective current reduces with the increasing bias voltage in contrast to the noise of the individual electrons. Our results shed light on the behavior of the charge density wave quantum condensate and demonstrate the potential of noise spectroscopy for investigating the properties of low-dimensional quantum materials. Low-dimensional layered materials, which include quasi-one-dimensional (1D) and quasi-twodimensional (2D) van der Waals materials, are attracting growing attention owing to their intriguing physics and unique functionalities for future practical applications Electrical current fluctuations, or noise, have always been an essential component of CDW research. Noise contains information about the material quality, defects, impurities, phase transitions, charge carrier recombination, and charge transport. Using terminology, conventional in the CDW field, one distinguishes the narrow-band noise (NBN) and broad-band noise (BBN) Despite decades of investigations, the noise sources and their mechanisms in CDW materials have not been completely understood, particularly for the materials with a non-fully gapped Fermi surface where the electrical current includes components from individual electrons and the current of the sliding CDWs. The revival of the CDW research field and technological improvements call for the in-depth examination of the noise characteristics of CDW materials to gain a deeper understanding of their origins and mechanisms. This is important for monitoring the evolution of the CDW quantum condensate phases and for the practical realization of proposed applications of CDW materials in future low-power and radiation-hard electronics For this investigation, we selected niobium triselenide (NbSe3) -a quintessential CDW material with a quasi-1D crystal structure. It has been studied extensively in the form of bulk crystals or large-diameter whiskers Prior studies of electronic noise in NbSe3, which used bulk crystal samples rather than nanowires, addressed both BBN and NBN There was also a lack of understanding of the difference between the noise produced before and after the CDW de-pining. For this study, we used exfoliated nanowires of NbSe3 as the channels in the device test structures. The amplitude coherence length in CDW materials is relatively small, on the order of ~10 nm, while the phase coherence length is large and can be up to ~10 m We prepared nanowires of NbSe3 by mechanically exfoliating small pieces of high-quality bulk NbSe3 samples (2D Semiconductors) on top of clean Si/SiO2 substrates ((University Wafer, ptype Si/SiO2, <100>). The quality of the bulk samples was assessed using Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw inVia). The room-temperature Raman measurements were conducted using λ= 488 nm laser excitation with a laser power of less than ~ 1 mW to avoid damage to the sample (see Figure We started by cleaning the small pieces of Si/SiO2 substrates several times using acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and rinsing them with deionized (DI) water. A conventional mechanical exfoliation (Nitto tape) was employed to exfoliate the bulk materials into nanowire structures on top of the clean substrates. Figure nanowire devices with varying channel lengths between 2 m -30 μm were fabricated for electrical testing. The schematic image of a NbSe3 multi-contact nanowire test structure is shown in Figure The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics were measured in a conventional two-terminal configuration inside a cryogenic probe station (Lakeshore TTPX) in the temperature range from 77 K to 300 K. The measurements were conducted using a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Agilent B1500A). The resistance of the NbSe3 channel, measured at low bias voltage, has a specific and wellunderstood dependence on temperature, as shown in Figure The LFN measurements were carried out using a home-built noise measurement system. The Supplemental Figure To analyze the noise behavior near the CDW transition, we plotted the resistance and the normalized noise spectral density, SI/I 2 , as a function of temperature for the fixed values of current and frequency. In Figure When comparing the noise characteristics with the corresponding resistance data, one can conclude that the noise peak in the higher temperature region, i.e., at T~145 K, corresponds to the onset of the resistive anomaly due to CDW phase transition where the material behavior changes due to a partial bandgap opening and removal of a part of the conduction electrons to the pinned quantum condensate The appearance of the Lorentzian at the phase transition points can be generally interpreted as due to the system, fluctuating between two phases at the transition point, before settling to one specific phase. The latter results in the Lorentzian, characteristic for the two-level systems where the material resistance switches between the higher and lower resistive states. The interpretation of two other peaks at lower temperatures is more complicated. Let us consider the noise peak at T~130 K. The noise in the linear I-V regime is due to the individual particle conduction. One can assume that the initial increase in the noise with decreasing temperature is due to the reduction in the number of the conduction electrons since part of the electrons condensed into the pinned CDW. The 1/f noise of individual electrons scales inversely with the number of carriers, i.e., SI/I 2 ~ 1/(N×f), where N is the total number of charge carriers in the conduction channel. However, it is difficult to explain the fast decrease of the noise at lower temperatures and the overall narrow shape of this second peak. One should also keep in mind that the increase of the noise in both peaks in Figure Thus, if the first peak signifies the material transition to the IC-CDW phase, the second peak appears around the temperature where the resistance changes are the strongest. Another intriguing feature in the noise characteristics is the emergence of a third peak at lower temperatures, as observed in Figure We now turn to the electric-field dependence of noise in the NbSe3 nanowire devices. The normalized noise spectra density as a function of the bias voltage in Figure V dependence in Figure Interestingly, the amplitude of the noise peak at the onset of depinning also shows a nonmonotonic behavior, with its value initially increasing as the material temperature increases and dropping again at higher temperatures (see also Supplemental Figures To further correlate the noise spectral features with the CDW carrier depinning and sliding, we analyzed the noise spectral density at different bias voltages. V. We now address the question of how noise in the collective current of the sliding quantum condensate compares to the noise of the current of the individual electrons. In Figure We investigated noise in nanowires of quasi-1D NbSe3, focusing on a temperature range near the Pearls transition TP1 ~145 K. The data analysis allowed us to separate the noise produced by the individual conduction electrons and the sliding CDW quantum condensate. We found that the noise of the collective current reduces with the increasing bias voltage in contrast to the constant noise of the current of the individual electrons. The obtained results shed light on the behavior of pinned and sliding charge density wave quantum condensate and demonstrate the potential of noise spectroscopy for investigating the properties of low-dimensional quantum materials. The reduction of the noise of CDWs with increasing current can be important proposed applications of CDW quantum materials in future low-power and radiation-hard electronics.