In this paper, we extend the resonant modal theory (RMT) developed previously for a metal object to an arbitrary source region consisting of metals, dielectrics, or the combination of both. The influences of dielectrics on the fields are replaced by equivalent volume sources through the use of the compensation theorem in electromagnetic theory. The resonant frequencies can be determined by finding the roots of the determinant of the matrix resulted from the discretization of the real homogeneous volume-surface integral equation derived from the requirement that the difference of stored field energies in the source region vanishes. As applications of the extended RMT, three examples have been investigated. The first example is a dielectric resonator antenna, and is designed by exciting the first resonant mode of the composite structure in which the dielectric cylinder is combined with a conformal metallic strip. The second example is a dual-band dielectric-coated metallic wire antenna. The third example studies the resonant modes of a rectangular patch antenna. Physically, an arbitrary scatterer (or source region) is said to be resonant if the stored electric and magnetic field energies of the scatterer are equal The formulations of SEM, EEM, and TCM are all rely on the relationship between the scattering and incident fields. For the SEM in The natural resonant modes of SEM In this paper, the RMT is extended to an arbitrary source region consisting of conductors, dielectrics, or their combinations. Compared with the RMT developed in Ruqi Xiao, Wen Geyi, Fellow, IEEE, Guo Yang, and Wen Wu, Senior Member, IEEE which are replaced by an equivalent volume source through the compensation theorem. The new process yields a real homogeneous volume-surface integral equation (VSIE) that can be employed to determine the resonant modes of metal, dielectric, or the combination of metal and dielectric object. Distinguished from the other modal theories, the RMT are derived by requiring that DSFE in the source region must vanish, and the resonant modes for arbitrary source region can be determined easily by finding the roots of a determinant in the real frequency domain. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the formulation of the extended RMT and the numerical procedures for determining the resonant modes in an arbitrary source region. Section III shows three different applications of the RMT in antenna designs. A summary is provided in Section IV. The extended RMT consists of three steps: 1) The DSFE of an arbitrary source region is obtained from the Poynting theorem and compensation theorem of electromagnetic fields. 2) By requiring that the DSFE must vanish, a real homogeneous integral equation is obtained and is then discretized into a homogeneous algebraic equation. 3) The resonant modes are determined by the existence of non-trivial solutions for the homogeneous algebraic equation. Fig. (1) where j 1 =-; is the angular frequency; / 2  = S E H is the complex Poynting vector; H and E represent the magnetic and electric fields produced by the source current distribution J; 0 and 0 are the permeability and permittivity in free space; and superscript  designates the complex conjugate operation. Note that the RMT formulations in The current J in 0 V is thus divided into the current S J on the conducting surface and the equivalent volume current V J in the dielectric region. Due to the introduction of the dielectric (variation of medium parameters) into the source region, the DSFE in V thus can be written as In (3), the DSFE is divided into two terms after the second equal sign: the first term is the energy difference when the region V is free space, and the second term represents the energy difference caused by the variation of medium parameters in the source region. Note that the equivalent volume source in (2) and the second term after the second equal sign of (3) vanish if there are no dielectric introduced in the source region. The first term after the second equal sign of (3) can be obtained through (1) as follows ( ) where Im represents the imaginary part of the complex vector. Same as in Introducing the inner product of two vector functions A and . Then the DSFE can be written as the sum of inner products ,, JJ JJ where the constant vector operator C and the integral operator DD are defined by ( ) ( ) The source region 0 V is said to be resonant if (7) vanishes. In order to find the resonant frequency and the corresponding modal current distribution J (i.e., the surface current S J and the equivalent volume current V J ) that makes (7) vanish, a sufficient condition is   0 J J 1 16 1 16 If the source region simply consists of conductors, the coefficient matrix in The above equation determines the resonant frequencies , and the corresponding resonant current modes can be found from Clearly, the results obtained from RMT only contain the resonant current modes that inherently exist in the source region, and no redundant non-resonant modes (such as inductive modes and capacitive modes in TCM) are involved. The patterns of these inherent resonant modes help determine which mode(s) to be excited and where to place the excitation sources. For these reasons, RMT provides a clear physical insight in resonant antenna design. To evaluate the resonant modes in a source region, the numerical procedure is implemented with an in-house MATLAB code and may be summarized into three steps. 1) Search the approximate locations of the resonant frequencies: The determinant ( 2) Determine the precise resonant frequencies: The bisection method 3) Calculate the resonant modes and far-field patterns: Once the resonant frequencies are determined in Step 2), the resonant modes are obtained from ( To verify the extended RMT, three numerical examples, including a cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna (DRA), a dual-band dielectric coated wire antenna, and a rectangular patch antenna, will be investigated. The numerical results will be compared with those obtained from other modal theories, the finite-difference-time-domain-solver in CST [28] and MoM-VSIE-solver in FEKO A dielectric cylinder that has been used as a numerical example in For a dielectric cylinder, the resonant frequencies can be obtained from d . The source region consisting of the metal strip and the dielectric cylinder is discretized as 4182 tetrahedrons and 10 triangles. Due to the introduction of the conformal metal strip, the resonant modes of the source region will be different from the single dielectric cylinder and must therefore be recalculated. From The second example is a dielectric-coated metallic wire shown in Fig. We now investigate the modal behaviors of the rectangular patch antenna. The first four resonant modes are calculated by using the cavity model in 3 38 r = and a height of 1.524 mm. The bottom surface of the substrate is the ground plane, whose width and length are 100 mm and 152 mm, respectively. The source region, consisting of the patch, the substrate and the ground, is discretized as 1728 triangles and 3400 tetrahedrons. From ( The current distributions of the first and third resonant modes presented in Fig. In this paper, the RMT is extended to an arbitrary source region, consisting of conductors, dielectrics, or a combination of both. In contrast to the modal decomposition in TCM, in which the redundant non-resonant modes (inductive modes and capacitive modes) are always naturally included, the RMT only addresses the resonant modes that are most relevant to antenna design. Once the resonant modes are determined by the RMT, the rest is to use various excitations to realize the resonant current modes in the selected source region and frequency band. Distinguished from the other modal theories started from the field relationship between the incident and scattering field, the formulations of RMT are directly derived from the definition of resonance in terms of the DSFE, and all the resonant frequencies of a source region can be obtained by finding the roots of a determinant in real frequency domain. Numerical results demonstrate that the extended RMT not only provides accurate solutions for resonant modes but also offers a clearer physical picture about the working principles of resonant antennas to better understand the intrinsic resonances of complicated antenna structures, which is of vital importance in antenna designs. Although the materials investigated in this work only involve metals and dielectrics, other materials, such as the magnetic materials, can also be included by introducing equivalent magnetic currents in the formulation of RMT through the use of compensation theorem In this Appendix, we provide a proof that ( 