Odd-parity superconductivity is a fundamentally interesting but rare state of matter with a potential for applications in topological quantum computing. Crystals with staggered locally noncentrosymmetric structures have been proposed as platforms where a magnetic field can induce a transition between even-and odd-parity superconducting (SC) states. The strongly correlated superconductor CeRh 2 As 2 , with the critical temperature T c ≈ 0.4 K, is likely the first example material showing such a phase transition, which occurs at the magnetic field μ 0 H * = 4 T applied along the crystallographic c axis. CeRh 2 As 2 also undergoes a phase transition of an unknown origin at T 0 = 0.5 K. By subjecting CeRh 2 As 2 to hydrostatic pressure and mapping the resultant changes to the SC phase diagrams we investigated how the lattice compression and changes to the electronic correlations affect the stability and relative balance of the two SC states. The abnormally high in-plane upper critical field becomes even higher close to a quantum critical point of the T 0 order. Remarkably, the SC phaseswitching field H * is drastically reduced under pressure, dropping to 0.3 T at 2.7 GPa. This result signals an apparent strengthening of the local noncentrosymmetricity and forecasts a possible stabilization of the putative odd-parity state down to zero field, hitherto not considered by theoretical models. Introduction.-Broken inversion symmetry in crystals causes momentum-dependent spin polarization, as exemplified by the Rashba effect The two-phase superconductivity in CeRh 2 As 2 may be the only known practical realization of this phenomenon CeRh 2 As 2 is an unconventional superconductor with the critical temperature T c ≈ 0.3-0.4 K, varying with sample quality At a temperature T 0 ≈ 0.5 K, CeRh 2 As 2 enters a state "Phase I" of currently unknown microscopic origin The alternating Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling due to the local inversion symmetry breaking and strong electronic correlations of a heavy-fermion system are thought to be the key ingredients for realizing the parity transition. The former favors comparable magnitudes of the SC pairing potentials of the two phases. The latter allows the purely orbitally-limited SC2 state to survive at higher fields than the paramagneticallylimited SC1 state. The low orbital limiting field of isostructural weakly-correlated LaRh 2 As 2 can then explain why this compound hosts only one SC phase We used hydrostatic pressure to investigate how tuning both the strength of correlations and the local noncentrosymmetricity affects the unusual superconductivity in CeRh 2 As 2 . While an independent study In this letter, we demonstrate that the in-plane upper critical field is enhanced and the shape of the H ⊥ c2 (T ) curve becomes anomalous close to P 0 , in agreement with the presence of the QCP Results.-In Fig. The in-plane upper critical field curves, H ⊥ c2 (T ), are shown in Fig. The upper critical field curves for the out-of-plane magnetic field, H || c2 (T ), are depicted in Fig. Discussion.-Whereas the anomalously high Pauli limit in CeRh 2 As 2 has been mainly attributed to the enhancement caused by the Rashba interaction By multiplicatively scaling the H ⊥ c2 (T ) data in Fig. Close to T c , the theoretical curve visibly deviates from the data, implying that the initial slope of H ⊥ c2 (T ) and hence the in-plane orbital limiting field estimated from it are significantly steeper than found in the earlier experiments Aside from the influence of the quantum critical fluctuations, the atypical shape of H ⊥ c2 at low temperature could also be caused by a presence of a finite-momentum pairing state As for the effect of pressure on the multi-phase superconductivity, both SC1 and SC2 persist well beyond the Phase I critical pressure of P 0 ∼ 0.5 GPa The H || c2 (T ) curve of the SC2 state retains the orbitally limited character at all pressures. As shown in Fig. By extrapolating the SC2 critical field curve to H = 0, we define a fictive critical temperature T SC2 Theories describing locally non-centrosymmetric superconductors quantify the extent of local inversion asymmetry with a parameter α/t c , where α is the strength of Rashba interaction and t c is the interlayer hopping parameter. According to the parity-switching picture, the observed enhancement of T SC2 c relative to T SC1 c implies an increase of α/t c under pressure, whereas one would naively expect t c to become larger as the c-axis lattice parameter shrinks, and thus α/t c to decrease with pressure. The increase of α/t c could be linked to the prediction of the Fermi sheets relevant for the superconductivity being centered at the edges of the Brillouin zone (BZ), where the non-symmorphic symmetry of the lattice enforces t c = 0 What is more striking, is the unexpectedly steep increase of T SC2 c /T SC1 c above 2 GPa. The trend predicts that above 3 GPa the SC2 phase will become the only stable SC phase, in agreement with the pressure dependence of H * . According to the model, when the staggered Rashba interaction is present, the ratio of the magnitudes of the odd-and even-parity state order parameters is given by ( α /t c )/ ( α /t c ) 2 + 1, implying that T SC2 c is always smaller than T SC1 c . This inference, however, assumes the equal bare pairing potentials of the two states (before the Rashba interaction is considered) Conclusions.-Our study of the superconductivity in CeRh 2 As 2 under pressure demonstrates a strong overall sensitivity of SC properties to the proximity to the quantum critical point. However, the pronounced stabilization of the SC2 state over SC1 under pressure indicates that a different tuning parameter drives the balance between the two SC phases. The proposed relevance of the staggered Rashba interaction fits this picture and implies a major increase of the local noncentrosymmetry with pressure. These results demonstrate a good tunability of the system and motivate further experimental and theoretical investigations into the microscopic processes involved in the superconductivity and other ordered states of CeRh 2 As 2 . from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for the CRC 1143 -Project No. 247310070 (project C10) and for the Wuerzburg-Dresden cluster of excellence EXC 2147 ct.qmat Complexity and Topology in Quantum Matter -Project No. 390858490. Data presented in the current letter were obtained throughout the same set of high-pressure experiments as our previous work on CeRh 2 As 2 The pressure cell was initially closed with three samples of CeRh 2 As 2 , denoted as Sample 1, Sample 2, and Sample 3. These belonged to the same batch of crystals that was used for the early studies of the material in Refs. At the start of the experiment, the pressure cell was sealed with a small force (<2 kN) and the first round of measurements was conducted with the samples at effectively ambient pressure. Afterwards, pressure (in GPa) was applied in the following order: 0. 0.55, and 1.53 GPa, when the cell had to be opened in order to repair contacts of Sample 1 or fix its alignment. After 1.53 GPa, Sample 1 could not be recovered and was replaced with Sample 4, coming from a newer batch of CeRh 2 As 2 , also used in Ref. In order to tackle the thermal lag caused by the significant increase of the heat capacity of the beryllium copper pressure cell at low temperatures We defined the SC critical fields and temperatures as the points of maximum slope in the resistivity drop. The derivatives dρ/dT and dρ/dH were calculated using a Savitzky-Golay filter with a second order polynomial. Defining T c and H c2 as a 50% threshold of resistivity drop changes the values of T c and H c2 at most by 5 mK and 50 mT, respectively, and does not affect the interpretation of our results. A recurring observation across multiple studies of CeRh 2 As 2 In Fig. In this paragraph we show why a sizable increase of α/t c with pressure, deduced from the behavior of T SC2 c /T SC1 c against P, is not expected to significantly enhance the in-plane upper critical field of the SC1 state. Using the even-/oddparity model In this section we investigate whether the clean limit of superconductivity is achieved in our samples of CeRh 2 As 2 by comparing estimated mean free paths and coherence lengths for different crystallographic directions. We estimate the mean free paths in CeRh 2 As 2 by referring to the Wiedemann-Franz law, which appears to be upheld reasonably well at low temperature, based on the earlier measure- orb for different values of the the local non-centrosymmetry parameter α. The calculations were performed according to the previously used model where L = 2.44 × 10 -8 V 2 K -2 is the Lorenz constant. Within the Drude model, electronic thermal conductivity can be expressed as: where C v is the electronic heat capacity per unit volume, v F is the Fermi velocity, and l is the mean free path. Combining this expression with the Wiedemann-Franz law gives: where we introduced the volumetric Sommerfeld coefficient Next, we use the BCS formula relating the coherence length ξ to the Fermi velocity via the magnitude of the SC gap function ∆. We admit that it is not rigorous to use BCS expressions in the case of CeRh 2 As 2 , and the following results should be regarded with caution. The formula states: where h is the reduced Planck constant. We then use the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau coherence length extracted from the orbital limiting field H orb , as a proxy for the microscopic BCS coherence length. Keeping in mind that the orbital motion occurs in the plane perpendicular to the field direction: where Φ 0 is the flux quantum, and μ 0 is the permeability of free space. We use the bulk orbital limit of μ 0 H || orb = 17.7 T obtained in the earlier study from the slope of H ∥ c2 (T ) close to T c The critical field curve for H ⊥ c becomes very steep close to T c , and the random uncertainty in temperature of ≈ 0.5 mK translates to a sizable uncertainty in the slope dH c2 /dT | T c . We illustrate it in Fig. The resultant coherence lengths are: We then apply the BCS weak-coupling approximation ∆ = 1.76k B T c (k B -Boltzmann constant) and using T c = 0.3 K (the bulk value) we obtain the Fermi velocities: We use γ m = 1 J mol -1 K -2 for the molar Sommerfeld coefficient, according to the low-temperature heat capacity Close to T c , the anisotropy of resistivity is ρ c /ρ ab = 2.17 The obtained values of ξ and l for each direction are not drastically different. While this does not justify assuming the clean limit of superconductivity, it is plausible for it to be realized in less disordered parts of our samples, which charge transport probes are most sensitive to, and particularly in the newer generation of samples, for which ρ ab = 37 μΩ cm just above T c . A larger ab-plane orbital limit is also more consistent with the idea of a weak coupling between the sublattices If the quasi-two-dimensional picture of the superconductivity is indeed correct, the orbital limiting field is expected to decrease rapidly for small deviations of H from the ab plane. For a more definitive test, one needs to track the critical temperature using a thermodynamic bulk probe in steps of at least 10 mT, while ensuring a sub-millikelvin temperature resolution and an exceptionally good alignment of the crystallographic axes with respect to the magnetic field. Using the pressure dependence of the c-axis orbital limiting field, shown in Fig. In both cases, we found the Fermi velocity unambiguously increasing at pressures above 1.5 GPa, which is consistent with the previously observed weakening of correlations at high pressure [preceding work]. Given a noticeable discrepancy between the critical field curves for H ⊥ c and the even-parity fit close to T c [Fig. 1). The authors of Ref. 2). Furthermore, in Fig. The authors ascribe the irreversibility of their measured phase diagrams to an intrinsic behavior of the odd-parity state. We propose a much simpler explanation-the magnetocaloric heating and cooling of the BeCu body of the pressure cell. Decreasing the magnetic field cools the cell down via an adiabatic demagnetisation involving the copper nuclear spins, and the sample can become colder than what the thermometer reports. The effect is reversed when the magnetic field is swept up, which is why the observed H c2 values are higher for down-sweeps than for the up-sweeps [see, for example, Fig. 