The mechanical response of rubbers has been ubiquitously assumed to be only a function of the imposed strain. Using innovative X-ray measurements capturing the three-dimensional spatial volumetric strain fields, we demonstrate that rubbers and indeed many common engineering polymers, undergo significant local volume changes. But remarkably the overall specimen volume remains constant regardless of the imposed loading. This strange behaviour which also leads to apparent negative local bulk moduli is due to the presence of a mobile phase within these materials. Combining X-ray tomographic observations with high-speed radiography to track the motion of the mobile phase we have revised classical thermodynamic frameworks of rubber elasticity. The work opens new avenues to understand not only the mechanical behaviour of rubbers but a large class of widely used engineering polymers. Rubber elasticity is the generic term describing the behaviour of polymeric solids made up of flexible chains which are joined together to form a three-dimensional network. These solids have the capacity to sustain very large deformations followed by complete recovery. It is one of the most established branches of the mechanics of solids with detailed molecular theories We have developed a laboratory-based XCT method, dubbed "Flux Enhanced Tomography for Correlation (FETC)", to non-intrusively measure full field 3D strains in nominally homogeneous solids ranging from polymers to metals. FETC (Extended Data Fig. Silicone rubber is considered an exemplar rubber and extensively characterised by combining micro-mechanical models of rubber elasticity with measurements To further investigate whether the specimen level volume constraint is a material property and not restricted to the stress-state generated within the H/D = 1 specimen, we performed tensile tests on specimens with a wide range of aspect ratios (the stress triaxiality reduces and becomes more uniaxial with increasing H/D). These measurements (Fig. The current hyperelastic models cannot capture the observations is likely related to the fact that the volumetric deformations occur when strain/stress gradients are large (recall effect of H/D in Fig. The observation that there are local volume changes accompanied by overall incompressibility of the specimen drives the hypothesis that there exists an incompressible mobile phase within the rubber. The transport of this phase then induces local volume changes but with global volume conservation. The micro-mechanical rationale for a mobile phase is that synthetic rubbers such as Silicone rubber are produced by a polymerisation reaction It is now apparent that the concentration of the mobile phase is a key additional state variable that is required to describe the mechanical behaviour of the Silicone rubber. But an additional anomalous feature of the rubber is that the material can volumetrically expand under compressive hydrostatic stress even though observations (Fig. An immediate implication of our finding of a mobile phase within the rubber is that we expect the rubber to have a rate dependent response that is dictated by the mobility of the mobile phase. Such a behaviour would then, even in terms of macroscopic load versus displacement measurements, be inconsistent with hyperelastic models usually used to describe the deformation of rubbers. However, in line with behaviours of rubbers reported in the literature, our measurements too show little or no rate dependence of the response over more than 3 orders of magnitude in κḣ (Fig. Given this understanding of the kinetics, we extended our model to include the mobility of the mobile phase (Supplementary S4). The fact that there is no observed rate dependence of the response even at κḣ = 0.12 s -1 suggests an estimate for the effective diffusion co-efficient of the mobile phase to be D ≈ l 2 κ/κ ∞ = 1.8 × 10 -6 m 2 s -1 . This is an unrealistically high linear diffusion co-efficient (typical diffusion co-efficient for water in hydrogels are ~10 -8 m 2 s -1 -10 -9 m 2 s -1 We have reported numerous counterintuitive behaviours of a Silicone rubber that are contrary to the current understanding of rubber elasticity. These include: (i) the existence of a mobile phase which results in large local volume changes (±10%) while the specimen volume remains unchanged; (ii) dilation under compressive hydrostatic pressures concurrent with the egress of the mobile phase and (iii) extremely high mobility within the rubber. Taken together it is now clear why this behaviour had to-date eluded researchers: (a) traditional techniques only measured global or specimen level volume changes and (b) the very high mobility implies that material rate dependence does not manifest itself at the usual loading rates used to investigate properties of rubbers. These findings while indeed intriguing raise the question whether they are rather niche and without broader implications. The key requirement for the strange behaviours reported here is the existence of a mobile phase which is the outcome of an incomplete polymerisation reaction. Many synthetic engineering polymers are produced by such reactions, and they include widely used thermoplastics like Nylon and high-density polyethylene (HDPE). Thus, it is conceivable that similar effects are not restricted to rubbers but also present in engineering plastics. To test this, we performed three-point bend experiments (Fig. The FETC method we have developed has broad applications to the emerging field of datadriven mechanics. To-date most studies We employed the Polycraft GP3481-F RTV mould-making Silicone rubber. This is a two-part material comprising the Polycraft GP3481-F RTV base which when mixed with the Polycraft RTC-10F/VF catalyst results in a room temperature condensation curing reaction. The base and catalyst were mixed in ratio 20:1 (by weight) and poured into Perspex moulds to produce specimens of the required geometry. The cast rubber was then cured for 48 hrs at 4°C to slow the curing process. This allowed any trapped air bubbles to escape. The samples were demoulded after a further 4 days of curing at room temperature. We confirmed the absence of porosity in the samples; see high resolution scanning electron micrographs and XCT images in Supplementary Figs. The composite Silicone rubber beams with the ZnI 2 tracers were manufactured using the same protocol except that the beam was cast in two parts. A mixture comprising the base and 5% by wt. ZnI 2 dissolved into the catalyst and was first poured into the mould to cast the bottom half of the beam. Subsequently, we poured a mixture comprising just the base and catalyst to produce a beam with the tracers below the neutral axis (Fig. To facilitate in-situ mechanical loading of specimens in conjunction with the high accuracy Xray tomography of required for FETC, we developed bespoke loading rigs (Fig. X-ray tomography method for FETC X-ray tomographs were obtained using the Nikon XTH 225 ST system. X-rays were generated using a Tungsten source (target), and a 2000 pixel × 2000-pixel CCD detector with a resolution of 150 μm pixel -1 captured the transmitted X-rays. Geometric magnification achieved via the location of the detector and sample stage relative to the X-ray source enhanced the resolution of the scans to 30 μm. Copper filters were introduced at the X-ray source to eliminate lowenergy X-rays in the Bremsstrahlung spectrum, mitigating beam hardening effects at the specimen-air interface. These filters are also crucial for the FETC method to enable an increase in flux without oversaturating the detector (Supplementary S1). We employed an exposure time of 1 s to strike a balance between a reasonable scan time (~50 minutes for 3142 projections) while also maintaining a high signal-to-noise ratio (the photon count through the specimen is at least 1.5 times the background noise of the detector). To optimize the X-ray source, we initially adjusted the anode voltage to achieve a transmissivity of ~30% through the specimen, with the digital gain kept at a minimum. Subsequently, the current was increased until it reached a point of oversaturation on the detector. Various thicknesses of copper filters (ranging from 0.1 mm to 1 mm) were then employed to further increase the flux by progressively increasing the anode current until the spot size of the X-ray source at 30 W attained the desired scan resolution of 30 μm (Supplementary Table The 50 mins required for each tomographic scan implied that we could not observe via tomography the anticipated rapid motion of the ZnI 2 tracers attached to the mobile phase. We therefore developed a protocol to acquire 2D radiographs at an interframe time of 500 ms during 4-point bend tests. In radiographs we need to minimise any parallax error associated with the X-ray cone being emitted. For this we made two modifications: (i) we switched from the Tungsten (W) target used for tomography to a Molybdenum (Mo) target which reduces the cone angle of the emitted X-rays from ~40 o to ~20 o and (ii) employed a collimation rectangular slit (Fig. The uncompressed ".raw" volume files were loaded into the commercial software VGStudioMax 2022.4 and organised sequentially in order of the loading stages. For example, for the tension results shown in Fig. A two-dimensional (2D) phantom comprising 3 phases arranged in a checkboard (Extended Data Fig. Detector sensitivity is thus the limiting factor to observe the speckle that is inherent in the low phase contrast 2D phantom that we have designed to illustrate the FETC principle. An obvious solution to this problem is to increase the transmitted flux by enhancing the photon flux i 0 incident on the phantom (this can be achieved by increasing the flux of electrons impacting the X-ray target). Then while the normalized transmitted flux î remains unchanged, the normalized critical detection flux i cr /i 0 reduces by the factor that i 0 is increased by since i ref is a detector property that is unaffected by i 0 . Increasing i 0 by a factor of 2 is expected to bring the all the phases in the phantom within the detection limits (Extended Data Fig. While the copper target generates a near monochromatic X-ray beam, the energies are low (soft X-rays) and insufficient to penetrate most realistic specimens. Common laboratory-based Xray sources therefore use Tungsten (W) which generates a polychromatic X-ray beam including high energy X-rays. The wide spectrum of X-ray photon energies for a standard source excitation voltage of 40 kVp and a W target is shown in Extended Data Fig. ( Here {•} denotes the Macaulay bracket which ensures that a transmitted current below the detection threshold is not included (note we are neglecting the negligible attenuation due to air). A radiograph with a 40 kVp source and a current of 150 μA is shown in Extended Data Fig. We illustrate FETC using a cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen (Methods) of diameter 28 mm and height 56 mm using a W target, source voltage 150 kVp, 0.25 mm Cu filter and currents ranging from 100 μA to 200 μA. The computed grayscale tomograph of a 600 μm cube within the cylindrical specimen is shown in Fig. The problem in DVC to compute strain distributions in a large deformation process is that the correlation algorithm fails to converge much like in digital image correlation (DIC). Both DIC and DVC rely on finding the maximum correlation array between pixel intensity array subsets on two or more corresponding images. This gives the translational and rotational shift between the images. However, extreme deformations means that pixel intensity array subsets (known as the correlation boxes) themselves distort so that images of two consecutive deformation states can no longer be accurately correlated: in DIC the probability of correlation drops to less than 10% for deformations more than 30% As a first step we computed the displacement between consecutive loading increments using the global correlation algorithm We now illustrate the multi-step DVC approach using a Lagrangian/Eulerian finite element setting as a basis to explain the basic idea. Prior to deformation the material is discretised into fixed material points akin to a Lagrangian finite element mesh with the nodes of the mesh following material points. Similarly, space is also discretised into a grid that is fixed in space (i.e., a Eulerian grid) on which the DVC analysis between two consecutive steps outputs the displacement field. The nodes of the Lagrangian mesh are then located within the Eulerian DVC mesh and the displacement of the nodes of the Lagrangian mesh incremented by the incremental DVC displacement. This then provides not only the total displacement of the material points associated with nodes of the Lagrangian mesh but also the spatial position of the Lagrangian nodes to locate within the Eulerian grid for the next increment of the DVC analysis. To visualise this procedure, we show in Fig. where [N] is the matrix of shape function of the Eulerian grid element with nodes 1-8, ζ (E) the parametric co-ordinates of the material point E within this grid element and {d} (n-1) the vector of incremental DVC obtained displacements of the Eulerian nodes 1-8 between steps (n -1) and n. The total displacement of node E is then and the location {X (E) } (n) of node E for the analysis between steps n and (n + 1) is given by where {X (E) } (0) is the location of node E in the undeformed state. This allows for the process to be repeated for the incremental displacements between steps n and (n + 1) with node E now again located within the Eulerian grid for step n (it is now seen to lie in the Eulerian grid surrounded by grid nodes 11-18) as shown in Fig. We constructed a bespoke loading rig to conduct a range of in-situ mechanical tests. The driver behind this was to ensure minimal interference of the loading frame with the X-rays while acquiring the scans for the tomographic reconstruction: FETC requires especially accurate reconstructions to ensure accurate inference of the displacement field. A sketch of the loading fixture along with important dimensions and materials used is shown in Fig. Sketches of the three main setups used in this study are shown in Fig. Full field measurements of displacements (and thereby strains) can be used to determine material parameters and/or constitutive models. This has been done extensively using surface displacement data obtained via digital image correlation (DIC) The experiments we consider in this section are the tension experiments on the H/D = 1 and H/D = 2 Silicone rubber cylinders glued to platens (Fig. where u i (k,j),exp and u i (k,j),sim are the measured and simulated displacement components in the i direction at the k = 1, ... N material points and at loading stage j. The total displacement residue then follows as Similarly, the force residual is where P (j),exp and P (j),sim are the measured and simulated loads, respectively at loading stage j. The total cost function is then (2.4) We considered 3 hyperelastic models widely used in the literature to describe the deformation of rubber. These models are defined in terms of the invariants of the deformation given by 1 If √ ∑ (u i (k,j),exp ) where F ij is the deformation gradient F ij . We used the hyperelastic models and the associated parameters as implemented in commercial finite element (FE) package ABAQUS (i) A compressible Neo-Hookean model which has no I ̅ 2 dependence and two material parameters C 10 and D 1 such that The Mooney-Rivlin model (iii) The Arruda-Boyce model where α 1 = 1/2, α 2 = 1/20, α 3 = 11/1050 and α 4 = 19/7000. The FEMU method was implemented by coupling the package ABAQUS which performed the FE calculations to a Python script where a gradient-free Nelder-Mead The calculations were performed as follows. An initial guess of the material parameters for the chosen hyperelastic model was made and the displacements and corresponding loads computed via FE calculations performed in ABAQUS. These displacements and loads were exported to a Python script running the Nelder-Mead algorithm to minimise the function (2.4). At every step the Nelder-Mead algorithm then provides new guesses of the hyperelastic model parameters, and the steps are repeated until a converged minimum is obtained. The values of the hyperelastic model parameters at this minimum are taken as the parameters that best fit the measured data. This procedure was used to infer the optimal model parameters from the measured data for tensile loading of the H/D = 1 and H/D = 2 specimens. These optimal parameters along with corresponding values of the cost function are listed in Tables The best fit predictions of the nominal stress σ ∞ versus nominal strain ε ∞ for the H/D = 1 and H/D = 2 specimens using the best fit parameters for the 3 hyperelastic models are shown in Figs. Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of F 33 and F 23 on a diametrical plane through the H/D = 1 specimen are shown in Figs. The fact that the predictions of σ ∞ versus ε ∞ agree with measurements (Fig. To confirm the isotropy of the as-cast Silicone rubber we cut 10 mm cubes from the H/D = 2 (D = 28 mm) cylindrical specimens from three locations within the cylinder (Fig. The rather strange behaviour we report in terms of large local volumetric strains, but overall incompressibility of the Silicone rubber specimen been shown to be associated with gradients in the strain field. Dependence of material response on not only the strains but also the gradient of strain is well-established especially in the context of metal plasticity Consider two geometrically self-similar H/D = 2 specimens: (i) D = 28 mm which is the standard size specimen in Fig. The FETC is a novel technique to measure strains in 3D volumes of nominally homogeneous materials without using tracer particles. Given that this is a new technique we performed independent measurements to provide confidence on the fidelity of the FETC measurements. These measurements conducted outside the X-ray setup also provide evidence that there is negligible X-ray damage to the Silicone rubber. Two types of independent measurements were performed: (i) Measurement, using laser extensometers, of the volume change of a central disc of height h 0 during tension/compression loading of the H/D = 2 (D = 28 mm) cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen. These laser extensometer measurements were compared with the corresponding FETC measurements (Extended Data Fig. Comparison between 3D digital image correlation (3D DIC) and FETC measurements of the surface strains for 3-point bending of the Silicone rubber specimen (Extended Data Fig. First consider the cylindrical specimen that we tested in both compression and tension but now outside the X-ray tomography setup. Symmetry of the loading implies that on the central horizontal plane through the cylinder (parallel to the X 1 -X 2 plane), the shear strains vanish. This implies that a central cylindrical disc of height h 0 ≪ H (Extended Data Fig. where h is the current height of the central cylindrical disc at the imposed displacement U. The volumetric strain then follows as ΔV/V 0 where V 0 = πD 2 h 0 /4. These measurements of volumetric strain of this disc are plotted in Extended Fig. While the volume change of the central disc over the loading history varies from approximately -10% to ~10%, the specimen volume changes by less than ±1%. Clearly, this implies that when the central disc loses volume other parts of the specimen gain volume and vice versa in line with the full-field FETC measurements. To confirm the accuracy of the FETC results we include in Extended Data Fig. An important assumption made in the laser measurements of the volume change of the central disc is that it remains cylindrical under the imposed deformations. To confirm this assumption, we revert to the FETC measurements and include in Extended Data Fig. The vanishing shear deformation gradients in Extended Data Fig. We now consider the 3-point bending of the Silicone rubber beam, again outside the X-ray setup but using the loading fixture for the data reported in Fig. The 3D DIC measurements of E 11 and E 13 are included in Extended Data Fig. The fast radiography measurements are discussed in the main text with the technique described in the Methods section. Here we describe (i) the protocol for generating the colour-toned radiographs as presented in Fig. The radiographs generate grayscale images (Fig. To determine the tracer front location, we analyse the grayscale radiographs without the tonal colour scheme (Fig. Most synthetic rubbers are synthesised by a polymerisation and/or crosslinking reaction which transforms the highly viscous polymer into an insoluble rubber-like solid. Typically, the crosslinking or curing reaction is initiated by addition of a curing agent or a catalyst. Peroxide, condensation and addition curing are the three mechanisms by which Silicone can be crosslinked The first key surprising finding made in this study is that there exists a mobile species within the Silicone rubber. It seems reasonable to assume that this mobile species comprises the uncrosslinked molecules within the rubber. However, there are multiple observations associated with this mobility which require interpretation. These include: (i) The volumetric strain is negative at material points where the mobile species fluxing into (compare Figs. From the 4-point bend experiment we deduce that the hydrostatic stress is positive at locations where the volumetric strain is negative and vice versa. Thus, the hydrostatic mechanical work is negative in this case. (iii) The transport rate of the mobile species is surprisingly high with direct observations showing it moves a distance l ≈ 2.7 mm in time t = 4 s (the κḣ = 0.12 with κ ∞ h = 0.48 case in Fig. Before proceeding to develop a continuum model to show that these observations fit within a thermodynamically consistent framework, we hypothesise on possible molecular mechanisms associated with these surprising findings. We emphasize here that the molecular mechanisms are hypotheses: a detailed understanding of the molecular origins of these mechanisms is beyond the scope of the current study. The microstructure of the rubber is envisaged to be an open-celled porous deformable elastic network comprising the crosslinked polymer with the un-crosslinked molecules partially filling the pores as sketched in Fig. The first surprising finding is that the rubber volumetrically contracts when the concentration of the mobile species increases. This is opposite to expectations where we typically anticipate an increasing concentration of a mobile species results in volumetric expansion, e.g. diffusion of hydrogen in Fe Next consider the observation that the volumetric contraction occurs in the presence of hydrostatic tension (and vice versa) resulting in negative hydrostatic work. Such negative hydrostatic work is not forbidden by thermodynamic constraints so long as the total work remains positive. In fact, volumetric expansion under hydrostatic compression is often observed in granular media Finally consider the high transport rate of the un-crosslinked phase. The inferred linear diffusion co-efficient is D = 1.8 mm 2 s -1 . This is at-least 2 orders of magnitude higher than the diffusion rate of water in hydrogels where ∂p/∂X i is the pressure gradient. The permeability k is usually assumed to depend on the square of the pore size Here we present a thermodynamically consistent model for the deformation response of Silicone rubber. The aim is not to capture the measurements to a very high degree of accuracy but rather to demonstrate that the rather counter-intuitive observations fit within a framework that does not violate basic thermodynamic considerations. For simplicity and clarity, we present the model in a small strain framework, but it can be readily extended to a finite strain setting. In addition to temperature T, we write the Helmholtz free-energy in terms of two state variables: (i) the total strain ε ij and (ii) the molar concentration c (per unit undeformed volume of the rubber) of the un-crosslinked phase. Let c R denote the molar concentration of the sites for the un-crosslinked molecules in the undeformed (reference) state and we define an occupancy θ ≡ c/c R (with θ = θ 0 in the reference state) of the sites for the un-crosslinked molecules. This mobile un-crosslinked phase is assumed to induce a "swelling" strain. Our measurements show that that the hydrostatic strain can be tensile in locations where the hydrostatic stress is compressive (Fig. and the shift l takes values l = (0,1,2). The swelling strain ε ij s then follows as ε kj s n j [p] = e [p+l (mod 3) ] n k [p] . The total strain is additively decomposed into an elastic component ε ij el and the swelling component such that ε ij = ε ij el + ε ij s and the shift l chosen to minimise ε ij el ε ij el . This choice sets the alignment of the principal directions of the swelling strains with the total strains. The Helmholtz energy of the rubber is written as a sum of two components: (i) elastic energy due to the deformation of the crosslinked network and (ii) an entropy of mixing of the un-crosslinked molecules with the sites for these molecules such that where R is the universal gas constant and T the absolute temperature. In (4.3) λ and G are the first and second Lame parameters, respectively such that the first term represents the elastic energy while the second term is the contribution from the entropy of mixing. In the elastic energy there is a term associated with the strain triaxiality where the deviatoric strain ε ij d ≡ ε ij -δ ij ε kk /3 with δ ij the Kronecker delta. This term was introduced for the following reason. Recall from Supplementary S3 that the rubber is an isotropic material and thus in the absence of imposed deviatoric strains we require the rubber to have a purely hydrostatic response. To ensure that this remains the case independent of the choice of e [p] we introduce the strain triaxiality term in (4.3) such that the contribution to the elastic energy due to the shear modulus vanishes for vanishing total deviatoric strains. In (4.3), η 0 sets the triaxiality range over which we apply these additional considerations to ensure isotropy come into play and a choice η 0 ≪ 1 implies that this additional term only serves as a regularising parameter. Given the Helmholtz free-energy F, the material stress and the chemical potential of the un-crosslinked species follow as and respectively. Now consider a rubber specimen occupying a domain Ω subjected to surface tractions T i = T i 0 on a portion S T and displacements u i = u i 0 on a portion S U of the boundary S of the domain Ω. The potential energy of this system then and at equilibrium we then require that the total variation dΠ = 0. Then using (4.5) and (4.6) it follows that under isothermal conditions where the strains are related to displacement via ε ij ≡ 0.5(u i,j + u j,i ). Since the variation in displacement and concentration are arbitrary it follows that and The total amount of the un-crosslinked phase in the specimen is a constant (i.e., the uncrosslinked phase does not leave or enter the specimen). Therefore, ∫ δcdΩ = 0 Ω . It then follows from (4.10) that at equilibrium the chemical potential of the un-crosslinked phase throughout the specimen is a constant such that μ = μ 0 with μ 0 set by the conservation law ∫ cdΩ = c R θ 0 Ω Ω . Similarly, applying the divergence theorem to (4.9) we recover the usual stress equilibrium relation σ ij,j = 0 with boundary conditions T i 0 = σ ij m j on S T where m j is the outward normal to S T . To complete the formulation, we now need to specify a constitutive relation between e [p] and the concentration c of the un-crosslinked phase. Physical considerations impose important restrictions on the relation between e [p] and c as follows. Recall that the measurements suggest that the overall volume of the specimen is conserved such that ∫ ε kk dΩ = 0 Ω irrespective of the nature of the loading. Given that the elastic strains are strongly dependent on the nature of the loading it is therefore reasonable to assume that ε kk el contributes negligibly to ε kk (i.e., the rubber is elastically nearly incompressible implying that G/λ → 0) with the volumetric strains predominantly set by the swelling strains e [p] . Then the constraint ∫ ε kk dΩ = 0 where δc is an arbitrary variation. But the conservation of un-crosslinked phase implies that ∫ δc dΩ = 0 Ω and thus (4.12) can only hold for arbitrary δc if ∂f/∂c is a constant, i.e. ε jj s is a linear function of c. We thus choose the form f(c) = ε jj s = k(θ 0 -θ), where k is a material constant so that (4.11) is always satisfied. Given the above constraint on the form of the volumetric swelling strain we propose that the principal swelling strains written in terms of θ ̅ ≡ θ/θ 0 take the form e [1] = kθ 0 α 1 (1 -θ ̅ ); e [2] = kθ 0 α 2 (1 -θ ̅ ); e [3] = kθ 0 (1 -α 1 -α 2 )(1 -θ ̅ ), We now wish to determine the kinetic laws for the case where loading is sufficiently fast that the specimen may not be under equilibrium conditions at every stage of the loading. Recall that the rate of change of potential energy Π ̇ of the system satisfies the inequality Π ̇≤ 0 so that (4.17) Then using stress equilibrium condition (4.9) this reduces to where we have used the divergence theorem along with the conservation law ċ= -j i,i and the boundary condition that there is no flux of the material in/out of the specimen such that j i m i = 0 on the boundary S (with outward normal m i ) of the domain Ω. For the choice N = 1 with M the linear mobility of the mobile species. Given Φ D we can then re-obtain the flux relation (4.16) by following Onsager such that the kinetic path that the system follows satisfies δΨ = 0. Then taking variations with respect to the kinetic variables (u̇i, j i ) and noting that the variations δu̇i and δj i are independent it follows that and the flux is given by (4.16) with boundary condition j i m i = 0 on the boundary S and the flux related to the concentration via the conservation law ċ= -j i,i . In a 4-point bend test (Fig. in terms of the imposed curvature rate κ. The problem specification is completed with the plane stress boundary condition σ 22 = 0 and the traction conditions T i = 0 on x 3 ′ = ±h/2. Under these conditions the principal directions coincide with the global co-ordinate system x i ′ such that the principal stresses are Σ 1 = σ 11 , Σ 2 = σ 22 and Σ 3 = σ 33 . Then the relation between principal stresses Σ i and corresponding principal strains E [i] (defined by ε kl n l [i] = E [i] n k [i] ) is given by Σ i = λ[E [1] + E [2] + E [3] -kθ 0 (1 -θ ∂E [i] [(E [1] -e [1] ) 2 + (E [2] -e [2] ) 2 + (E [3] -e [3] ) 2 ], and chemical potential is μ = λk c R [E [1] + E [2] + E [3] -kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )] -2Gerf ( η η 0 ) [(E [1] -e [1] ) ∂e [1] ∂c + (E [2] -e [2] ) ∂e [2] ∂c + (E [3] -e [3] ) ∂e [3] ∂c ] + RT ln θ 1 -θ . (4.27) Recall that the principal directions of the swelling strains are chosen to coincide with the principal directions of total strains so as to minimise ε ij el ε ij el . Here we choose α 1 = -α 2 = -1 and therefore the choice q k [i] = n k [i] minimises ε ij el ε ij el . This implies e [1] = -kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ ); e [2] = e [3] = kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ ). (4.28) With the swelling strains now known in terms of θ the expressions for the stresses and chemical potential can be further simplified. The equilibrium condition σ ij,j = 0 combined with the traction boundary condition T 3 = 0 on x 3 ′ = ±h/2 implies that Σ 3 = 0. Then from (4.26) it follows that E [2] = E [3] such that (4.26) and (4.27) reduce to ∂E [1] [{κx 3 ′ + kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )} 2 + 2{E [2] -kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )} 2 ] , and -2{E [3] -kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )}] + RTc R ln θ 1 -θ , respectively. The condition that Σ 2 = Σ 3 = 0 can then be used to determine E [3] from the relation λ[κx 3 ′ + 2E [3] -kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )] + 2Gerf ( η η 0 ) [{E [3] ∂E [3] [{κx 3 ′ + kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )} 2 + 2{E [3] -kθ 0 (1 -θ ̅ )} 2 ] = 0. Finally, we need a condition to determine θ. The evolution of θ depends on the kinetics of transport of the un-crosslinked species and we first consider the limiting case of loading with κ̇→ 0. In this limit the chemical potential is given by the equilibrium condition μ = μ 0 : this constant chemical potential is determined by writing θ in terms of μ 0 from (4.30) and then calculating μ 0 from the conservation constraint Now consider the case of a finite κ̇ where the concentration of the un-crosslinked species may not be in equilibrium. In this case, the flux of the un-crosslinked species is given by which combined with the conservation law gives the overall differential equation for concentration of the un-crosslinked species as with initial conditions θ = θ 0 ∀ x 3 ′ at time t = 0 and boundary conditions j 3 = 0 at x 3 ′ = ±h/2. Thus, we need to solve equations (4.31) and (4.34) together with the boundary conditions to obtain solutions for θ(x 3 ′ ) and E [3] (x 3 ′ ). The model requires the specification of the following 5 parameters (in addition to the choice we have made of α 1 = -α 2 = -1) in the equilibrium limit of an infinitesimal loading rate. These are the shear modulus G, the Poisson ratio The tracer radiographs (Fig. Mass conservation of the un-crosslinked species is written as where time t = κ/κ̇ and j3 ≡ j 3 /κ. Here ∂c/∂κ is known from the equilibrium solution procedure of Section S4.4, i.e. given by (4.25) -(4.32). The normalised flux is therefore since ĵ3(x 3 ′ = -h/2) = 0. We shall now use this flux to determine the motion of the tracers. The tracer particles were assumed to be attached to a fraction χ 0 of the un-crosslinked molecules and this concentration is approximately constant over the region -h/2 ≤ x 3 ′ ≤ h T 0 where x 3 ′ = h T 0 is initial position of the tracer front as seen in Fig. where the constant h ε ≪ h is a regularising parameter that smoothens the step function of the initial concentration of the tracers; see Fig. This equation, with ĵ3 given by (4.36) is solved with the initial condition (4.37) along with boundary conditions j T = 0 on x 3 ′ = ±h/2 to determine the motion of the front of the tracer particles. Solution of this transport equation requires the specification of three additional parameters, viz. h ε , h T 0 and χ 0 . The initial position of the tracer front h T 0 follows directly from the radiographs (Fig. Predictions of the spatio-temporal evolution of c T with the measured value of h T 0 = -0.6 mm (and choice χ 0 = 0.05) are shown in Fig. Modular arithmetic is the system of arithmetic for integers where the numbers "wrap around" when reaching a certain value, called modulus. For example, in a 12-hour clock if it is 7:00 now in 8 hours it will be 3:00 since the clocks "wraps around" every 12 hours. Thus, in (4.2) if p = 3 & l = 2; p + l (mod 3) = 2. ν is related to the first Lame parameter via λ ≡ 2Gν/(1 -2ν).