Wurtzite-type Al1-xScxN solid solutions grown by metal organic chemical vapour deposition are for the first time confirmed to be ferroelectric. The film with 230 nm thickness and x = 0.15 exhibits a coercive field of 5.5 MV/cm at a measurement frequency of 1.5 kHz. Single crystal quality and homogeneous chemical composition of the film was confirmed by X-ray diffraction spectroscopic methods such as time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry. Annular bright field scanning transmission electron microscopy served to proof the ferroelectric polarization inversion on unit cell level. The single crystal quality further allowed to image the large-scale domain pattern of a wurtzite-type ferroelectric for the first time, revealing a predominantly conelike domain shape along the c-axis of the material. As in previous work, this again implies the presence of strong polarization discontinuities along this crystallographic axis, which could be suitable for current transport. The domains are separated by narrow domain walls, for which an upper thickness limit of 3 nm was deduced, but which could potentially be atomically sharp. We are confident that these results will advance the commencing integration of wurtzite-type ferroelectrics to GaN as well as generally III-N based heterostructures and devices. Solid solutions with wurtzite-type crystal structure are one of the newest material class to have been confirmed as possessing ferroelectric properties. MOCVD allows the deposition of Al1-xScxN thin films with high rates and single crystalline qualityunlike sputtering and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The ferroelectric nature of the heterostructure is unveiled via current density over electric field (J -E) measurements. Figure However, for this MOCVD-grown film, huge hysteretic currents at positive fields are observed when measuring as-deposited capacitors, while for negative fields the typical ferroelectric displacement current peak is present from the very first cycle (see Supporting Figure Figure As demonstrated in our previous works on sputtered Al1-xScxN thin films, unambiguous evidence of ferroelectric polarization inversion can be reliably provided by the contrast produced by ABF-STEM. A close-coupled showerhead MOCVD reactor equipped with a proprietary setup for the generation of an adequate molar flow of the low-vapor pressure scandium precursor was used for growth. 