The discovery of superconductivity at 80 K under high pressure in La3Ni2O7 presents the groundbreaking confirmation that high-Tc superconductivity is a property of strongly correlated materials beyond cuprates. We use density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the band structure of La3Ni2O7 under pressure to verify that the low-energy bands are composed almost exclusively of Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2p orbitals. We deduce that the Ni 3d z 2 orbitals are essentially decoupled by the geometry of the high-pressure structure and by the effect of the Ni Hund coupling being strongly suppressed, which results from the enhanced interlayer antiferromagnetic interaction between 3d z 2 orbitals and the strong intralayer hybridization of the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals with O 2p. By introducing a tight-binding model for the Fermi surfaces and low-energy dispersions, we arrive at a bilayer tt ⊥ -J model with strong interlayer hopping, which we show is a framework unifying La3Ni2O7 with cuprate materials possessing similar band structures, particularly the compounds La2CaCu2O6, Pb2Sr2YCu3O8, and EuSr2Cu2NbO8. We use a renormalized mean-field theory to show that these systems should have (d+is)-wave superconductivity, with a dominant d-wave component and the high Tc driven by the near-optimally doped β band, while the α band adds an s-wave component that should lead to clear experimental signatures. Ever since the seminal discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in copper oxide materials, scientists have explored the possibility of achieving similar transition temperatures (T c ) in other correlated electronic systems. Particular targets in this search include transitionmetal compounds and especially oxides with crystal structures resembling those of the cuprates. In this context, the recent identification of superconductivity at T c ≈ 80 K in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure At ambient pressure La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is a metal. Following the discovery of high-pressure superconductivity, the band structure and Fermi surface at ambient pressure were characterized by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) Turning to the superconductivity, measurements made at 20.5 GPa showed that, similar to the cuprates, La 3 Ni 2 O 7 exhibits a resistivity that is linear in temperature above T c DFT results representative of the bilayer F mmm structure reveal that three electronic bands, designated as α, β, and γ, cross the Fermi level. The α band forms an electron pocket, while the β and γ bands create two distinct hole pockets in the first Brillouin zone. Considering the two relevant d orbitals of the Ni atom, the α and β bands originate primarily from the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2p x,y orbitals, whereas the γ band arises predominantly from the Ni 3d z 2 orbital. Although DFT methods provide only an approximate treatment of strongly correlated materials, they can be calibrated against ARPES measurements at ambient pressure, which indicates that the leading correlation effects in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 are being captured appropriately. At this pressure, while the α and β pockets exhibit shapes very similar to those in the highpressure system, the γ band lies below the Fermi surface. A key difference between La 3 Ni 2 O 7 and the cuprate superconductors lies in the valence-electron numbers of the Ni 2+ and Cu 2+ ions. Specifically, a Cu ion (3d 9 ) possesses only one unpaired valence electron in the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital, while the Ni ion (conventionally 3d 8 ) has unpaired valence electrons in both the 3d x 2 -y 2 and 3d z 2 orbitals. Multiple models have already been proposed that incorporate different Hubbard-or t-J-type interactions in a bid to capture the properties of this multi-orbital system A key point of contention among these models lies in the interaction terms. The focus of many studies on the interlayer interaction between 3d z 2 orbitals is justified by the fact that the interlayer Ni-O-Ni angle jumps from 168 • to 180 • at the 14 GPa structural transition, while the c-axis lattice constant is shortened. Both changes should contribute to a significant enhancement of the interlayer interaction at pressures P > 14 GPa, leading to a popular interpretation of the high-pressure superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 involving enhanced interactioninduced interlayer pairing between electrons in 3d z 2 orbitals In the broadest terms, these models for the superconducting properties of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure can be classified into two groups. The first assumes that the Ni 3d z 2 band emerging above the Fermi surface is the driver of high-T c superconductivity, through the interlayer Ni 3d z 2 antiferromagnetic interaction. The second assumes that the superconducting pairing is driven by the interplay between Ni d x 2 -y 2 and O 2p x,y orbitals, but differs from the cuprates by a strong interlayer antiferromagnetic interaction between Ni d x 2 -y 2 electrons induced by the strong Hund coupling. Exploration of the pairing symmetry within these different classes of model has also yielded diverse results, including different types of s-wave In this work, we reconsider the fundamental factors governing the superconducting properties of La The model we deduce is then different from both of the model classes summarized above. Although we conclude that the superconducting pairing is driven by the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2p x,y orbitals, unlike the second class of models we find that superconductivity is driven not by the interlayer antiferromagnetic interaction induced by the Hund coupling, but by intralayer antiferromagnetic interactions as in the cuprates. For us the Ni 3d z 2 bands are neither driving nor driven by the superconductivity, and act only as an electron pool that modulates the hole doping of the superconducting 3d x 2 -y 2 band. To show all the details that lead to these conclusions, the subsequent sections of this paper are organized as follows. In Sec. II, we analyze the low-energy electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , which leads us to put forward a bilayer t-t ⊥ -J model. In Sec. III, we use a renormalized mean-field theory to calculate the superconducting phase diagram of this model, focusing on the symmetry of the pairing gap and the effect of doping. Section IV provides a summary of our results and of their physical implications for nickelate superconductivity. To identify the key interactions driving the high-T c superconducting pairing in bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure, it is essential to understand two primary physical effects. The first involves an accurate treatment of the interlayer coupling and the second centers on the role of the Hund coupling, J H . A noteworthy characteristic of the Fermi surfaces in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is the degeneracy of the α and β bands along the two diagonal directions in the Brillouin zone. As we discuss in Sec. II A, this degeneracy is the hallmark of a special form of interlayer tunneling within the bilayer, which forms a critical piece of the puzzle when constructing a minimal low-energy model. Hund coupling is inherent to the Ni ion but, as we detail in Sec. II B, its effects are suppressed quite considerably at high pressures, where the Ni 3d z 2 orbitals on adjacent layers experience an enhanced interaction. At the same time, the hybridization of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals with the O p orbitals, where the holes reside, acts to create both strong intralayer AF interactions and Zhang-Rice singlets, which further reduce the relevance of the Hund term. Drawing from these analyses, we deduce that the minimal model for the low-energy physics of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is the single-band bilayer t-t ⊥ -J model with strong interlayer hopping, t ⊥ , and hence that the high-T c pairing has the same origin as in cuprate superconductors. We have performed our own DFT calculations of the electronic band structures of La We begin by noting that a distinctive feature of the α-and β-bands, which recurs in all these DFT calculations, is their degeneracy along the two diagonal directions, which is shown at the Fermi surface in Figs. As noted above, in our calculations we also find that the α and β bands at k x = ±k y are formed almost exclusively from the electronic contributions of the Ni 3d Here we comment that, although the 3d z 2 orbitals make a negligible contribution to the α and β bands around the Fermi level, they do have a finite involvement arising from hybridization with the in-plane O 2p orbitals. This contribution has a notable effect on the high-energy states in both bands, breaking the degeneracy between the α and β bands along the two zonediagonal directions, as shown in Fig. The above discussion implies that the electronic states around the Fermi level in the α and β bands can be described effectively by a bilayer model of Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 electrons coupled through an interlayer tunneling matrix element t ⊥k . This model is expressed by the Hamiltonian where c n,k is the annihilation operator of a 3d x 2 -y 2 electron in layer n = 1, 2 and is the dispersion relation of electrons in each layer, with respective hopping integrals t, t ′ , and t ′′ between two nearest-, next-, and next-next-neighbor sites; μ is the chemical potential. In Eq. ( whose form arises from the hopping of an orbital possessing 3d x 2 -y 2 symmetry and hence contains only (cos k xcos k y ) and its higher harmonics. Complementing the (cos k x -cos k y ) term used conventionally to describe the c-axis hopping, we introduce the η term to enhance the accuracy of the fit to the DFT bands. To obtain a tight-binding fit to the α and β bands obtained from DFT, shown for high-pressure La 3 Ni 2 O 7 in Fig. Turning from the t term to the J term, a notable complication in constructing a minimal model for the interactions in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is the Hund coupling between the Ni 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. However, as we summarized at the beginning of this section, two effects conspire to quench the effect of the Hund coupling in the superconducting phase of the bilayer nickelate. The first effect is the pressure-induced structural transition occurring at 14 GPa in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , which changes the c-axis Ni-O-Ni bond angle from 168 • to precisely 180 • while also shortening the bond lengths, and thus enhancing significantly the superexchange interaction between the two Ni 3d z 2 orbitals in adjacent layers of a bilayer. As detailed in Ref. In a similar vein, the second effect is the strong hybridization of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals with the in-plane O p orbitals. In the absence of doped holes on the O ions, this gives rise to a robust intralayer AF coupling of Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 spins, and in the presence of a doped hole it causes the formation of a Zhang-Rice singlet, which quenches the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 spin. Both situations constitute the dominant correlations of the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, contributing again to making their Hund coupling to the 3d z 2 orbitals ineffective. Although this hybridization is further enhanced in the high-pressure F mmm phase, where the NiO 2 planes become significantly flatter, it is generically strong in the σ-bonding geometry. Given the nontrivial valence state of a Ni atom in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , which diverges from the straightforward +2 configuration, we make the case that the two e g orbital types are effectively decoupled into separate subsystems, visible in the quite different energies of their respective bands [Fig. where S ni denotes the spin operator of the electron in the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital at site i in layer n of the bilayer. This Hamiltonian is defined within the subspace obeying the constraint of no double occupancy at each lattice site. Thus we arrive at a standard one-orbital bilayer t-t ⊥ -J model, albeit with a sufficiently strong interlayer hopping, t ⊥ , that the α band is converted from hole-like to electron-like. The model we have deduced differs from all of the previous proposals made for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 in two aspects. First, the pairing interaction is not a consequence of the AF interlayer interaction between 3d z 2 spins but instead is governed by the AF intralayer interaction between 3d x 2 -y 2 spins. Second, the interlayer hopping term for the 3d x 2 -y 2 holes is strong and anisotropic in k, and drives the emergence of the characteristically different α and β bands. This significant bilayer-splitting effect has been overlooked in most studies to date. An analytical treatment of the t-J model is made extremely difficult by the hard local constraint of no double site occupancy. In Ref. (and similarly for the other hopping integrals). These expressions contain a strong reduction of the effective bandwidth of the mobile holes, arising from the difficulty of propagating in an AF background, and a strong enhancement of the spin correlations arising from the increased weight of the contributing configuration in the constrained manifold. To gain insight into the physics of the bilayer t-J model for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure and its analogous cuprates, we apply this renormalized mean-field theory by replacing the coupling constants in Eq. ( To apply the renormalized mean-field theory, we decouple the interaction term of Eq. ( where ∆nij = c n,i,↑ c n,j,↓ -c n,i,↓ c n,j,↑ and ∆ nij is the pairing order parameter in real space. In momentum space, the mean-field Hamiltonian becomes where ∆ n,k is the gap function in layer n and may have different components with different pairing symmetries; anticipating that this cuprate-type problem will yield singlet superconductivity, the most general d+is-pairing state would have where The order parameters ∆ nd and ∆ ns are then determined from the gap equations where N is the number of sites in the finite lattice on which we solve the mean-field tight-binding problem. We comment here that we did not enforce ∆ 1,k = ∆ 2,k in order to leave open the possibility of a solution with (d+is) symmetry in one layer and (d-is) in the other, which would be a state preserving time-reversal symmetry, or indeed a solution with s +-symmetry (s-symmetric with opposite signs in the two layers). However, in all of the results we present below, the ground state was found to obey ∆ 1,k = ∆ 2,k . Solving the gap equations self-consistently at a given δ yields the pairing symmetry of the superconducting ground state. In Fig. In this broad parameter range, we find that the superconducting ground state may exhibit either d-or (d+is)wave pairing symmetry (Fig. All of these observations are consistent with the scenario that the near-optimally doped β band strongly favors d-wave pairing symmetry, as in the highest-T c cuprates, while the effect of the α band in favoring an additional s-wave component becomes increasingly important as the net doping is increased. This (d+is)-wave pairing state, if substantiated by calculations more rigorous than our present ones, then stands as a key feature distinguishing nickelate superconductivity from the dwave cuprate superconductivity realized in the highest-T c materials. The pairing symmetry realized in the cuprates La 2 CaCu 2 O 6 , Pb 2 Sr 2 YCu 3 O 8 , and EuSr 2 Cu 2 NbO 8 may also deviate from pure d-wave because both the α and β band-fillings deviate quite significantly from optimal. The (d+is)-wave state has two characteristic properties that can be measured in experiment Considering the doping in more detail, the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2p x,y character of the α and β bands means that δ is to a good approximation the number of 3d x 2 -y 2 holes (Zhang-Rice singlets) in a single NiO 2 plane. The γ band consists predominantly of Ni 3d z 2 and apical O 2p z orbitals, and thus has no role in this calculation when it does not cut the Fermi surface. However, the fact that the γ band emerges above the Fermi level under pressure, forming a hole pocket around the M point, is important because it extracts holes from the α and β bands, allowing the value of δ to be altered by the applied pressure. The Fermi-surface volume of the β band of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient pressure yields an approximate hole doping δ β = 0.26, which corresponds to the heavily overdoped regime in cuprates, where superconductivity is almost completely suppressed. The emergence of the γ band above the Fermi level at the pressure represented in Fig. This straightforward reasoning also accounts for the absence of superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 6 , which has α and β Fermi surfaces comparable to those of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient pressure We have deduced a bilayer t-t ⊥ -J framework to explain the high-temperature superconductivity found in bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at high pressure. Our model is based on two key observations. The first is that the α and β bands that dominate the Fermi-surface topology are composed predominantly of Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and in-plane O 2p x and 2p y orbitals at low energies. The second is that the exact 180 • structure of the bilayer leads to an effective quenching of the Hund coupling between the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and 3d z 2 orbitals, which arises from the strong interactions within their spatially orthogonal subsystems (respectively the planar NiO 2 3d x 2 -y 2 -2p x,y network and the c-axis 3d z 2 -2p z -3d z 2 units), and hence to a nearcomplete decoupling. An essential consequence of the 3d x 2 -y 2 symmetry of the single active low-energy orbital is the k-dependence of the interlayer tunneling, and the resulting degeneracy of the α and β bands along the nodal directions in the Brillouin zone is an important fingerprint of this physics. Other orbitals (such as Ni 4s) and processes in the system mean that the prefactor of the interlayer hopping term is nevertheless substantial, which is the origin of the qualitative change in Fermi-surface topology from the best-known bilayer cuprates. However, we observe that the Fermi surfaces of the α and β bands in the high-pressure phase of La By solving the superconducting gap equations of the bilayer t-t ⊥ -J model within the renormalized mean-field approximation over a wide range of electron fillings and interaction ratios, we find that the pairing order parameter may have either d-or (d+is)-wave symmetry. We assume that the interaction ratio, J/t, is similar to that in cuprates, and find an increase of the gap amplitude with stronger J. By decomposing the hole doping into the contributions from the α and β bands, we deduce that the high-T c superconductivity and d-wave pairing are driven by the near-optimal doping of the β band. An essential contribution to optimizing this doping is made by the γ band, which removes holes into the Ni 3d z 2 orbitals and provides the mechanism by which the pressure controls the doping level. The pressure (doping) then induces a transition from d-wave to (d+is)-wave symmetry, which at the mean-field level of our calculations appears to be favored as the pairing symmetry in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . This (d+is)-wave state then stands as the leading difference between nickelate superconductivity and the purely d-wave superconductivity realized in the highest-T c cuprates (YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ , Ba 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 , HgBa 2 CaCu 2 O 6 , and Tl 2 Ba 2 CaCu 2 O 8 ). The (d+is)wave state is nodeless and breaks time-reversal symmetry, allowing its verification by a number of experimental methods that can be applied under pressure. Concluding with the broader experimental context, bilayer nickelate superconductivity remains a challenging field of research due to the high pressures required to drive the structural transition to the F mmm phase. Early results showed a very low superconducting volume fraction, which appears to have been a consequence of sample inhomogeneity, and recent experiments suggest that ensuring a robust component of the bilayer (2222) phase with good O stoichiometry does solve the problem of superconducting fragility encountered in firstgeneration experiments. We reiterate that our minimal t-t ⊥ -J model is formulated for the bilayer phase, which we believe to be the only one allowing 80 K superconductivity; this occurs for the same reason as in cuprates, and the strong bilayer coupling plays a vital role in finding the same physics in a nickelate. The new generation of samples with high structural quality, the increasing development of high-pressure experimental techniques, and further efforts to mimic high physical pressure by the use of substrates or chemical pressure offer a promising near-term future for nickelate superconductivity. Ni in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 (similar to the value of 3.5 eV used in Ref. Our calculations yielded the electronic band structures of the type shown in Fig. 