Identifying a nanostructure suitable for hydrogen storage presents a promising avenue for the secure and cost-effective utilization of hydrogen as a green energy source. This study introduces a systematic approach for selecting optimal doping on porous materials, emphasizing the intricate interplay between doping with the material's structure and the interaction between doping and hydrogen. Our proposed approach serves as a framework for evaluating and predicting the performance of doped materials. To validate the efficacy of our strategy, we conduct a comprehensive investigation in carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Applying our criteria, we systematically screen several dopants in CNTs. The results highlight Cu-doped CNTs as promising candidates for hydrogen storage applications. Focusing on Cu-doped CNTs, we analyze binding energy, charge transfer, partial density of states (PDOS), and desorption temperature to assess the performance of modified CNTs. Additionally, we explore the feasibility of doped CNTs featuring various sizes of copper clusters and the effect on the release temperature, i.e., complete regeneration. The findings indicate that incorporating 5 to 6% copper impurity onto CNT surfaces renders these nanostructures highly applicable for reversible hydrogen storage near ambient conditions. The importance of energy in modern life is undeniable, as it underprints all kinds of activities, including transportation, manufacturing, space heating or cooling, cooking, lighting, among others Energy production based on burning hydrogen gas is the most promising solution to solve the problem of energy demand. As the most abundant element on earth, hydrogen has the highest energy density per mass compared to all other energy sources (energy density about 120 MJ/kg) Despite its potential, the practical utilization of hydrogen as a fuel source hinges on effective hydrogen storage. Storage enables energy to be available when needed, ensuring a consistent supply that complements other renewable sources to mitigate fluctuations in energy production due to varying weather conditions and seasons Hydrogen is a light and flammable gas with low density in ambient conditions Therefore, the storage process should be carried out at high pressures and low temperatures to ensure a practical energy supply. Common hydrogen storage methods: i) compressed gas; which occurs at high pressures (minimum pressure started at 700 atm; 10000 psi), ii) cryogenic liquid (20K; -253 oC); which occurs at very low temperatures, and iii) solid-state material; which can happen at different pressures and temperatures depending on the material In general, hydrogen storage in nanomaterials can be driven by physisorption, chemisorption, and capillary condensation mechanisms Capillary condensation is a phenomenon that causes gases in porous materials to liquefy at low pressures. This mechanism can lead to high volumetric capacity in storing molecular hydrogen, but the network of the nanomaterial must be carefully controlled. Physisorption, based on weak van der Waals interactions between hydrogen and the material surface, can provide a reversible hydrogen storage with safety and low cost The critical challenge in using solid hydrogen storage lies in identifying a suitable material capable of reversibly storing hydrogen. According to the Department of Energy of the US (DOE) standards, efficient materials for hydrogen storage applications should exhibit gravimetric capacity with a lower limit of about 5.5 wt% by 2025 and an ultimate goal 6.5 wt% Among all the discovered nanomaterials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been widely used for different applications ranging from energy storage, sensors, gas storage, biomedical, and optoelectronics among the numerous potential dopants, which can provide reversible hydrogen adsorption with high gravimetric capacity in CNTs? To address this question, simulations offer a powerful and cost-effective approach to test the performance of a wide range of materials and providing informed-decision guidelines for experiments. In this context, density functional theory (DFT) has been used as a valuable method to extract crucial insights. In the present study, we propose a transferable approach to select the dopant of a material for hydrogen storage by using binding energies as critical criteria. To test the strategy, 29 impurities, spanning all groups of the periodic table, have been tested for potential surface addition on the external surface of CNTs. Among all these impurities, intriguing The hydrogen storage performance of Cudoped CNTs has been performed using Density Functional Theory (DFT) implemented in the SIESTA package (1). E b (Cu) = E tot(CNT) + E tot(Cu) -E tot(Cu-doped CNT) , Eq. ( where E tot(CNT) represents the total energy of the CNT per unit cell, E tot(Cu) indicates the total energy of isolated copper atom, and E tot(Cu-doped CNT) shows the total energy of Cu-doped CNT per unit cell. The average binding energy between hydrogen molecules and the surface of Cudoped CNT has been computed using Eq. ( E b (H 2 ) = E tot(Cu-doped CNT) + E tot(iH 2 ) -E tot((Cu-doped CNT)+iH 2 ) , Eq. ( Where E tot(Cu-doped CNT) indicates the total energy of Cu-doped CNT per unit cell, E tot(iH 2 ) denotes the total energy of i isolated hydrogen molecules, E tot((Cu-doped CNT)+iH 2 ) represents the total energy of Cu-doped CNT with i adsorbed hydrogen molecules, and i shows the number of adsorbed hydrogen molecules. For further explanation of the adsorption mechanism of hydrogen molecules on the surface of CNTs, the charge transfer has been calculated by Eq. (3) through the Mulliken charge transfer analysis. Q t = Q (ads-H 2 ) -Q (iso-H 2 ) , Eq. ( and Q (iso-H 2 ) represent the total charge of adsorbed and isolated hydrogen molecules, respectively. The desorption temperature of hydrogen molecules from the surface of Cu-doped CNT has been computed using The Van't Hoff 's equation (Eq. ( E ads k B ( ΔS R -ln p ) -1 , Eq. ( The average adsorption energy, Boltzmann constant, change in hydrogen entropy from gas to liquid phase, gas constant, and atmospheric pressure are represented by E ads , k B , ΔS, R, and p in Eq. ( Moreover, the gravimetric capacity is calculated using Eq. ( × 100 , Eq. ( where i represents the number of adsorbed hydrogen molecules, W H 2 and W (Cu-doped CNT) are the molecular weight of the hydrogen molecule and Cu-doped CNT structure, respectivly. More information on nomenclature and parameters can be found in the Glossary, Table As mentioned earlier, pure CNT do not meet the hydrogen storage expectations set by the DOE. In response, the modification of these structures has been explored as an effective strategy to improve their performance for hydrogen storage applications. In accordance with the delineation in Figure Among the impurities under study, the most remarkable results were achieved with the Desorption temperatures were computed to assess the release of 1 to 9 hydrogen molecules per impurity from the surfaces of Cu-doped CNT(13,0), CNT(19,0), and DWCNT using Eq. ( The formation of metal clusters on the surface of CNTs is a common phenomenon during the doping addition process. Therefore, it is valuable to assess the performance of CNTs after the formation of copper clusters. Figure These clusters were initially relaxed and subsequently added to the CNT surfaces. Hydrogen molecules were then introduced to evaluate the performance of these new structures for hydrogen adsorption. CNT(13,0), CNT In the case of Cu3-CNT(13,0), ten out of fourteen hydrogen molecules were adsorbed with an average binding energy of about 0.19 eV. A similar number of hydrogen molecules, with a comparable binding energy, were adsorbed onto the surface of CNT In the case of Cu9-CNT, sixteen hydrogen molecules were adsorbed to the surface of CNT(13,0), with an average binding energy of about 0.57 eV. The binding energy between Cu9 cluster and the surface of CNT(13,0) reached 1.64 eV. In CNT In the final step of the analysis, the gravimetric capacity was computed using Eq. ( While these desorption temperatures might be desirable, such working conditions would compromise the stability of the CNTs, as reported in previous studies around 1000 K in the air These results emphasize that the initial performance assessment was a necessary step to ensure reaching the DOE target. Au and Cu atoms emerged as candidates from the approach, with their gravimetric capacities serving a clear indication of their performance, with Au-doped CNT slightly below the target under the chosen conditions, even when the ratio of adsorbed molecules per impurity is higher. This further justifies the preselected dopants with lower molecular weight in the initial step of the approach. Therefore, the proposed strategy can offer reliable information when deciding on the dopants for porous materials, whether for computational or experimental design, providing exploratory tools for making informed decisions based on preliminary performance for hydrogen storage. This study introduces a systematic approach for the rational selection of optimal doping on porous materials, emphasizing the interplay between doping, material structure, and hydrogen interaction. The proposed approach involves a step-by-step process: (i) preselection The evaluation of our proposed strategy demonstrates that this approach serves as a robust framework for assessing and predicting the performance of doped materials, offering valuable insights for both computational and experimental design. As the next steps, testing and assessing the method when doping is placed on the internal surface of the pores is recommended, offering valuable insights for the design of advanced hydrogen storage materials. 