Thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN) enables extremely high-efficiency second-order nonlinear optical effects due to large nonlinear coefficient d33 and strong optical field localization. Here, we first designed and fabricated a pulley-waveguide-coupled microring resonator with an intrinsic quality factor above 9.4 ×10 5 on the reverse-polarized double-layer X-cut TFLN. In such a TFLN resonator without fine domain structures, second harmonic generation with an absolute (normalized) conversion efficiency of 30% (440,000% W -1 ), comparable to that in periodically poled lithium niobate (PPLN) microring resonators, was realized with a submicrowatt continuous pump. This work reduces the dependence of high-efficiency nonlinear frequency conversion on PPLN microcavities that are difficult to prepare. Ultra-efficient second harmonic (SH) generation based on second-order nonlinearity has essential applications in classical light sources Here, we designed and prepared pulley-waveguide-coupled racetrack microresonators on an RP double-layer X-cut TFLN. In these TFLN resonators without periodic domain structures, an ultra-high normalized conversion efficiency of 440,000% W -1 was achieved under nearly critical pump coupling and dual FH and SH resonance. The normalized SH conversion efficiency exceeds that of all photonic microcavities based on MPM, only an order of magnitude lower than PPLN microcavities with complex preparation processes. The racetrack resonators were fabricated on an RP double-layer TFLN on a 2 m thick silicon dioxide film and 500 m thick silicon substrate. The total thickness of the TFLN is 600 nm, and the upper layer has a thickness of 310 nm. The preparation method of TFLN microring resonators is similar to that in Reference. The length of the straight arm of the racetrack resonator is 300 m. To reduce mode coupling between the TE10, SH mode and other high-order modes ensuring the adiabatic mode evolution in the bend section, the bending radius of the racetrack cavity was set to be 150 m. We used a single pulley waveguide to couple and extract the pump and the signal. The width of the pulley waveguide is 450 nm, the coupling gap is 300 nm, and the coupling length is 52 m. The zoomed SEM images of the coupling part and the cross-section are shown in Figure The phase matching condition requires that the neff of the two modes be equal. The setup shown in The most efficient SH conversion was observed in a TFLN resonator with a 1.27 m top width. Experimentally, pump transmission and SH signals were collected simultaneously while scanning the pump laser. Typical results are shown in Figure Type ηnorm [% W -1 ] ηmax GaAs LN [This work] 4.410 5 30% @600 W a) Estimated from Figure In a higher pump power, we even observed cascaded optical parametric oscillation (OPO) generation using optical spectrum analyzer. The principle of the cascaded OPO is shown in Figure The transmission spectrum scanning from short wave to long wave of the FH and SH at different pump power are shown in Figure In summary, we have generated efficient SH conversion from TE00, FH to TE10, SH in an RP dual-layer TFLN microcavity. At an optimized temperature, the normalized SH conversion efficiency reaches 4.4×10 5 % W -1 , and the absolute conversion efficiency is up to 30% when the pump power is 600 W. At 1.21 mW pump power, cascaded optical parametric processes were also observed due to efficient SH generation. The simple preparation process and ultrahigh conversion efficiency of the RP dual-layer TFLN microresonators will facilitate various applications, such as the frequency up conversion of weak infrared signal and the generation of squeezed light and entangled photon pairs. 