Infinite-layer nickelates show high-temperature superconductivity, and the experimental phase diagram agrees well with the one simulated within the dynamical vertex approximation (DΓA). Here, we compare the spin-fluctuation spectrum behind these calculations to resonant inelastic Xray scattering experiments. The overall agreement is good. This independent cross-validation of the strength of spin fluctuations strongly supports the scenario, advanced by DΓA, that spin-fluctuations are the mediator of the superconductivity observed in nickelates. Contrasting cuprates Turning to the differences, a major one is that for cuprates the oxygen 2p bands, that strongly hybridize with the Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 band, are below but close to the Fermi energy. This makes the parent compound a chargetransfer insulator However, one of the pockets, the Γ pocket, shifts up and even above the Fermi energy either when (i) doping into the superconducting regime or (ii) when replacing Nd by La in DFT+dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) calculations Specifically, signatures of AFM fluctuations have been measured in resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) In the present paper, we calculate and analytically continue the magnetic susceptibility behind the DΓA calculation of Fig. The outline of the paper is as follows: In Sec. II A, we describe the theory behind the modelling of spin fluctuations and superconductivity by a one-band Hub-bard model, the ab-initio calculated parameters used, and the DΓA calculations performed (cf. Appendix A). Similarly, in Sec. II B the experimental methods are discussed, specifically the film growth and RIXS measurements. Sec. II C discusses possible shortcomings and sources of errors when extracting the paramagnon dispersion in theory and experiment. In Sec. III, we compare the theoretical and experimental magnetic spectrum. An analysis of the results in terms of a spin-wave model is presented in Sec. IV A. Its interaction dependence is elucidated in Sec. IV B, and two possible effects of disorder are discussed in in Sec. IV C. Finally, Sec. V summarizes our results. Previous work, based on DFT+DMFT Here, t ij denotes the hopping amplitude from site j to site i; ĉi † ( ĉj ) are fermionic creation (annihilation) operators and σ marks the spin; niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ are occupation number operators. The Coulomb interaction is, because of screening, restricted to the on-site interaction U . The electrons taken away by the A-pocket are accounted for by properly relating the Sr doping to the d x 2 -y 2 doping. This translation is displayed in the difference between lower and upper x-axis of Fig. This Hubbard model has been used sucessfully as an effective low-energy model to calculate the superconducting dome in NdNiO 2 As in Ref. 25 the one-site Coulomb repulsion U is taken from constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) calculations. A natural first choice would be to simply use U = U cRPA (ω = 0), which is about 2.6 eV for the single-band approximation of LaNiO 2 We compute the magnetic susceptibility χ m in DΓA for the Hubbard model Eq. (1) using the parameters motivated in the last section. DΓA uses a DMFT solution as a starting point and introduces non-local correlations via the Parquet or, in the simplified version used here, the Bethe-Salpeter equation On a technical note, we solve the Hubbard model with DMFT using continuous-time quantum Monte-Carlo simulations in the hybridization expansion as implemented in the w2dynamics package In the DΓA calculation, all quantities are defined in terms of imaginary time, or correspondingly, imaginary frequency (Matsubara frequency), see Appendix A. When comparing to experiments, however, results on the real axis are required. To obtain them we use the opensource package ana_cont The precursor films of Pr 1-x Sr x NiO 3 (x = 0, 0.2) with 8 nm thickness were grown on (001)-oriented SrTiO 3 and (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 TaAlO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) substrates using pulsed laser deposition (PLD). Soft-chemistry reduction using CaH 2 powder was then performed to remove the apical oxygens of the precursor films. After reduction (300 • C, 100 min), the perovskite phase was transformed into an infinite-layer phase. The infinite layer Pr 1-x Sr x NiO 2 (x = 0, 0.2) films were transferred to the PLD chamber to be deposited on their surfaces with 14-nm thick SrTiO 3 protective top layers. The Pr 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 films grown on SrTiO 3 substrates are superconducting ones with the onset temperatures of superconducting transition ∼12 K. Ni L 3 -edge RIXS measurements were carried out at the I21 beamline at the Diamond Light Source. The energy resolution was set to 39 meV (full-width-at-halfmaximum) at the Ni L 3 resonance (850.6 eV). Incident xrays with π polarisation were used to enhance the paramagnon excitations. The scattering angle was fixed at 154 • to maximize the in-plane momentum transfer. All RIXS spectra are collected at 16 K and normalized to the weight of the dd excitations. The DΓA calculation of the magnetic susceptibility is, as a matter of course, approximate. The DFT (GGA) starting point puts, e.g., the oxygen orbitals to close to the Fermi level. This is a bit less relevant for nickelates than for cuprates, and, in particular, when not including the oxygen orbitals in subsequent DMFT calculations (as done here). The next step, DMFT, is restricted to local correlations. Here, DMFT is used for translating the Sr-doping to the doping of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital and for calculating a local vertex of the effective one-band Hubbard model. From this, we then calculate non-local spin fluctuations in DΓA through the Bethe-Salpeter ladder, and from these, in turn, the superconducting pairing glue is obtained. This procedure neglects how the superconducting fluctuations in the particle-particle channel feed back to the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations in the particle-hole channel, and it also presumes that a local frequency-dependent vertex is a reasonably good starting point. Generally, this vertex is much more local than other properties such as the self-energy, even in the superconducting doping regime Let us, here, mostly focus on two aspects that we believe are important to keep in mind when comparing the theoretical spectrum of the magnetic susceptibility to RIXS experiments: (i) The maxent approach is state-ofthe-art to solve a per se ill-conditioned problem: analytically continuing imaginary time data to real frequencies. Its error grows with frequency, since larger real frequencies only enter exponentially suppressed into the imaginary time (or frequency) data. Further, maxent tends to broaden spectra (ii) On the experimental side, RIXS measurements do not probe magnetic excitations exclusively, but rather elementary excitations in general With the good agreement of the theoretical Looking more into the details, we see that the overall paramagnon bandwidth is systematically a bit larger in DΓA. For example, the peak of χ m (q = X, ω) is at ω peak ∼ 260 meV in DΓA, while the measured one is close to ∼ 190 meV. While the tendency of the maximum entropy method to broaden spectra might also slightly affect the position of the maximum and the spectrum around the X point is more blurred in theory and experiment, overall the difference is beyond the maxent error. In agreement with the overall width, the slope of the linear dispersion around Γ deviates somewhat and hence we conclude: the overall width of the paramagnon dispersion in theory is noticeable larger than in experiment. This difference corresponds to a larger effective spin coupling J in DΓA, as we discuss in more detail in Sec. IV A. Furthermore, the "dip" observed in the dispersion around the M /2 momentum, which corresponds to a next-next nearest neighbor exchange J ′′ in a spin-wave picture, is more pronounced in theory than in experiment. In Sec. IV B, we show that using a larger U = 9 t (instead of U = 8 t) results in a better agreement of the spin wave dispersion and also of the phase diagram of Sr x Nd 1-x NiO 2 on STO, which has considerably lower T c 's than Sr x Nd 1-x NiO 2 on LSAT. Please note that the origin for this experimental difference is not the minute change in lattice constant, but that growing Sr x Nd 1-x NiO 2 on LSAT results in cleaner films without stacking faults Let us now turn toward the doped compounds. DΓA results for Sr 0.2 Nd 0.8 NiO 2 with x = 0.125 (effective filling n = 0.875) and x = 0.225 (n = 0.80) are displayed in Fig. Similar to the parent compound (Fig. In the limit of a large Hubbard interaction U , the Hubbard model (Eq. 1) reduces to an effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian. We refer the reader to Ref. 68 and references therein for an extensive discussion for the oneorbital Hubbard model. While this mapping provides a direct relation between t, U and the effective spin couplings J, the temperature does not enter, nor does the doping. Indeed, strictly speaking, the mapping onto the spin model is possible only for an insulator (at halffilling). Yet, the parent compound Nd(Pr,La)NiO 2 is -in contrast to cuprates-neither half-filled nor Mottinsulating because of the finite pockets. Furthermore, the mapping onto a spin model becomes rather tedious in the presence of hoppings t ′ and t ′′ beyond nearestneighbors For these reasons, we employ here the same approach as in experiment also for the DΓA data: that is, we fit the spin-wave dispersion of the Heisenberg model to our DΓA results in order to extract information about effective spin-couplings J and J ′ . Including only the nearest neighbor (J) and next-nearest neighbor spin-exchange J ′ , the effective classical spin-wave dispersion for a spin-1/2 system is given by where Z C is the spin-wave renormalization factor that accounts for the effects of quantum fluctuations and To better compare with the values obtained in experiment, we fix Z C = 1.18 as in Ref. 39. Fig. To a first approximation (if J ′ ≪ J), the width of the spin wave dispersion is 2J in Eq. ( The DΓA skewness is well described by the spin-wave fit, but there is a pronounced minimum at the M /2-point (for the parent compound) which is not well captured by the (J-J ′ ) spin-wave fit. We presume higher-order couplings, which are difficult to fit to the numerical DΓA data, are needed to account for such a minimum. Specifically, a next-next neighbor exchange J ′′ adds a term in Eq. ( be the maximal U still consistent with the cRPA, while U = 8 t is the best estimate. Fig. The overall width of the dispersion is reduced for larger U , as expected from the spin-wave picture discussed in the previous subsection. Subsequently, the agreement with experimental measurements is improved compared to the results of U = 8 t in Fig. On the theoretical side, we observe a similar difference in transition temperature between calculations us-ing U = 8 t and U = 9 t, respectively. However, the respective Wannier tight-binding parameters for LaNiO 2 78 with in-plane lattice constants fixed to those of STO and LSAT are quite similar, see Sec. II A 2. That is, we find that the nearest-neighbor hopping t increases by about ∼ 4% from STO to LSAT, while the ratios of t ′ /t and t ′′ /t remain essentially the same. An increase of t is not surprising as the smaller in-plane lattice constant of LSAT increases the orbital overlap. On the other hand, the Hubbard interaction (U cRPA = 2.6 eV) essentially does not change when performing constrained random phase approximation calculations for LaNiO 2 with the ab lattice parameters fixed to either that corresponding to LSAT or that of STO, respectively. Considering these changes of the effective single-band Hamiltonian, we expect samples grown on LSAT to have an intrinsically larger T c , since t sets the energy scale and a smaller U/t is also beneficial Following this argument, the appropriate Hubbard interaction for the effective single-band description of infinite-layer nickelates should be close to our best estimate U = 8 t with an intrinsic T max c ≃ 30 K, comparable to that measured on LSAT To fully address the influence of impurities and lattice defects on the paramagnon dispersion, large-scale calculations for supercells that include these defects would be required. Such calculations are not feasible at the moment, at least not for DΓA calculations or similar manybody methods that include non-local fluctuations. For this reason, we will restrict ourselves here instead to qualitative considerations. One possibility is that defects reduce the effective antiferromagnetic coupling strength J and, with reduced antiferromagnetic fluctuations, also T c . While estimating the absolute influence of such local defects in RIXS is very difficult, if not impossible, samples that show a different T c can be compared. Such a study would include measurements of several samples of the same "species", ). The increase of Tc in DΓA when using LSAT instead of STO in-plane lattice parameters is much weaker; the difference between the two substrates hence most likely reflects the improvement thanks to cleaner, defect-free films for the LSAT substrate. e.g., Sr 0.2 Nd 0.8 NiO 2 on STO, which show a sample-tosample variation in T c . Along the same lines, comparing the paramagnon dispersions for samples grown on different substrates (e.g., STO and LSAT) would yield valuable information about the connection between the paramagnon dispersion and T c . A study similar to the latter has already been performed for the related PrNiO 2 compound Let us also point out another way how lattice defects might influence T c : decreasing the magnetic correlation length ξ. Particularly, if stacking faults and similar defects introduce artificial "grain boundaries" 84 , ξ might be restricted to stay below the typical grain-boundary distance, without directly changing the effective antiferromagnetic coupling strength J. Though conceptually somewhat different, the λ-correction in DΓA Such an effective paramagnon-mass enhancement or reduced ξ is difficult to extract from RIXS, which cannot access the M point in nickelates. Yet, it is precisely the strength of the susceptibility around the M momentum, which, from a spin-fluctuation or DΓA perspective, is most important for T c . The M point and a prospective difference in correlation length ξ for different substrates might be accessible in neutron scattering. If measurements of the magnetic correlation length ξ for superconducting samples grown on different substrates show a suppressed ξ at the M point for samples grown on STO compared to those grown on LSAT, this would support this second disorder scenario. To investigate the influence of a suppressed correlation length onto the paramagnon dispersion, we compare χ m between DMFT and DΓA in Fig. We draw the location of the peak in χ m at each momentum in Fig. Let us further note that we observe incommensurate antiferromagnetic fluctuations, evidenced by the shift of the maximum amplitude slightly away from M in Fig. The pairing symmetry obtained in DΓA for nickelates is d-wave, reminiscent of that in cuprates Further, in the case of nickelates, even the minimal model is hotly debated. Among others, the relevance of multi-orbital physics Given the good agreement of the superconducting phase diagram and antiferromagnetic fluctuations at its origin, a critical check whether or not spin fluctuations with similar characteristics are observed in experiment is imperative. To achieve this validation, we compared the paramagnon dispersion calculated in DΓA with the one extracted from RIXS, both from our measurements and those from Ref. 39. We find the spin spectrum is overall similar, especially when considering biases expected both from theory and experiment. This means that the experimental spin fluctuations are consistent with the observed T c in nickelates within the spin-fluctuation scenario of superconductivity. Then, the weaker spin fluctuations (or J) in nickelates, compared to cuprates, might also explain their lower T c . The agreement is however not perfect. The total width of the paramagnon dispersion (or J) is somewhat smaller in experiment than in theory. Using an enhanced Coulomb interaction U = 9 t in DΓA much better matches the RIXS spectrum and also the superconducting phase diagram of Sr x Pr 1-x NiO 2 and Sr x Nd 1-x NiO 2 on STO. However, this might be by chance. The larger T c 's are observed for Sr x Nd 1-x NiO 2 on a LSAT substrate. The difference of LSAT and STO in-plane lattice constants and thus also the DΓA hopping parameters are way too small to explain the by a factor-of-two higher T c . Having much less defects (Ruddlesden-Popper stacking faults In all, we believe that our joint theoretical and experimental investigation strengthens the case for spinfluctuation mediated superconductivity in nickelates. The two-particle Green's function in Eq. (A1) can be expressed in terms of disconnected (free) and connected (vertex) parts: where F is the so-called vertex function which encodes all scattering events on the two-particle level and G(ν 1 , ν 2 ) = -β 0 β 0 dτ 1 dτ 2 ⟨T c 1 (τ 1 )c † (τ 2 )⟩e ν1τ1 e -ν2τ2 is the one-particle Green's function. All diagrams contained in the vertex function F can be classified unam-biguously by the parquet decomposition ph,σσ ′ . (A4) based on their two-particle reducibility, i.e., whether or not a diagram decomposes if one "cuts" two one-particle Green's function lines. For a diagrammatic depiction and the definition of Λ and Φ r see Fig. We now also define the irreducible vertices Γ r = F -Φ r , where r = {ph, ph, pp} is either one of the three scattering channels. Furthermore, we assume SU(2) symmetry, i.e., restrict ourselves to the paramagnetic phase. This spin symmetry leads to only two independent spin combinations F m = F ↑↑ -F ↑↓ (magnetic) and Here, we have written the BSE only for Γ ph , and we use the inverse of Eq. (A5) to extract the local Γ ph . To obtain a q-dependent susceptibility we use a BSE-like equation for the generalized, now momentum-k dependent susceptibility: Here k = (k, ν) and q = (q, ω) are fermionic and bosonic four-point vectors in generalization of local, kk ′ χ qkk ′ d/m . However, a susceptibility constructed this way contains divergences stemming from the mean-field phase transitions in DMFT, which largely overestimates critical temperatures and χ q,λ d/m = χ q d/m -1 is the λ-corrected susceptibility. same