Magnetoelastic composites are integral elements of sensors and actuators utilizing magnetostriction for their functionality. Their sensitivity typically scales with the saturation magnetostriction and inversely with magnetic anisotropy. However, this makes the devices prone to minuscule residual anisotropic stress from the fabrication process, impairing their performance and reproducibility, hence limiting their suitability for arrays. This study presents a shadow mask deposition technology combined with a free-free magnetoelectric microresonator design intended to minimize residual stress and inhomogeneity in the magnetoelastic layer. Resonators are experimentally and theoretically analyzed regarding local stress anisotropy, magnetic anisotropy, and the ΔE effect in several resonance modes. Further, the sensitivity is analyzed in the example of ΔE-effect sensors. The results demonstrate a device-to-device variation of the resonance frequency < 0.2 % with sensitivities comparable with macroscopic ΔE-effect sensors. The reproducibility is drastically improved over previous magnetoelastic device arrays. This development marks a step forward in the reproducibility and homogeneity of magnetoelastic resonators and contributes to the feasibility of large-scale, integrated sensor arrays. In today's technologically advanced world, magnetic field sensors and actuators These sensors exhibit a huge device-to-device performance variation of more than a factor of two difference in the frequency response between sensors with exact dimensions caused by minimal stress that couples into the magnetic properties via the large magnetostriction. In this work, we present a shadow-mask deposition technology and demonstrate the extremely high reproducibility of magnetoelectric thin-film resonators. Further, we develop a double-wing micro-resonator design with various advantages compared to classical cantilevers. The results represent a significant step toward reliable fabrication of magnetoelastic resonators, cheap, large-scale fabrication, and device arrays. First, we demonstrate the micro-resonator design and fabrication technique. Then, we show the induced spatial stress distribution in a representative resonator upon the magnetic layer deposition, combining optical measurements and a magneto-mechanical model. Further, we employ magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy to study the magnetic properties of the sensor. We utilize finite element method (FEM) simulations to identify different resonance modes and validate the corresponding resonance frequencies and mode shapes with vibrometer measurements. We conduct admittance measurements to determine the resonance frequency shift and relative magnetic and electrical sensitivities for the identified resonance modes. Finally, we explore arrays comprising many parallel-connected magnetoelastic sensor elements with identical geometries to investigate the reproducibility and compare their performances with single sensors. The individual resonators (Figure A second component contributing to the reproducibility and performance is the resonator design. Notable technological advantages result from using double-wing micro-resonators (Figure As we will show in Section 2.4, an antisymmetric resonance mode can be excited with the proposed resonator design, which reduces the detrimental influence of magnetic inhomogeneities at the anchor region and the tips. Additionally, the anchor design reduces clamping loss compared to a cantilever design For this work, we fabricated magnetoelastic resonators with various lengths of 400-850 μm and widths of 60-125 μm. The microfabrication and deposition processes are detailed in the Experimental Section. All results presented in the following section are for a representative resonator ID1 with in-plane dimensions of 640 μm × 105 μm. The data for all other produced samples is available in Supporting Information. To demonstrate the stress control of our deposition technology, we analyze the residual stress induced during the deposition of the magnetic layer and its influence on the effective magnetic anisotropy. For that, the out-of-plane displacement u z of the representative resonator with inplane dimensions of 640 μm × 105 μm was measured with a laser profilometer before and after the FeCoSiB deposition. A mechanical finite-element-method (FEM) model is fitted to the measured data to identify intrinsic stress in the substrate and the magnetic layer. Figure To validate the estimation of the stress anisotropies, we employed magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy. We extracted local magnetization curves from additional MOKE measurements to estimate the distribution of the local differential magnetic susceptibility χ at zero field along the long axis (x-axis) of the sample. The results are shown in Figure Local magnetization curves were recorded on the beam and on the anchors to distinguish their local magnetic behavior (Figure To analyze the performance of the exemplary resonator as a ΔE-effect sensor, we selected the first four resonance modes (RM1-4) using FEM simulations and vibrometer measurements. The measured and simulated mode shapes (at B = 0 mT ) are shown in Figure One of the main characteristics of a magnetic field sensor is its sensitivity to magnetic fields. As a measure for the sensitivity of the resonator as a ΔE-effect sensor, we use the amplitude sensitivity S am ∶= S m,r • S el,r , as defined previously. The dependency of the normalized resonance frequency f r (B) f r,max ⁄ , on the applied magnetic flux density B is shown in Figure The normalized frequency detuning ∆f r,norm ≔ (f r,max -f r,min ) f r,max ⁄ , i.e., the difference between the maximum resonance frequency f r,max and the minimum resonance frequency f r,min differs significantly between the four resonance modes. It is largest in RM1 with ∆f r,norm of 0.31 %, followed by RM3 with 0.26 % and RM4 with 0.2 %. The smallest change of 0.11% is measured in RM2. This leads to correspondingly different relative magnetic sensitivities S H,r , as shown in Figure The resonance modes also differ in their saturation behavior. RM1, RM2, and RM4 show a minuscule increase in the resonance frequency at |B| > 5 mT before they reach their maximum values, while the resonance frequency in RM3 slightly drops to a local minimum at ≈ 7 mT before increasing again at larger flux densities. All these differences in the resonance frequency curves can be well explained by the spatially varying effective magnetic anisotropy. The effective magnetic anisotropy is locally weighted by the alternating stress field of the respective resonance mode, and thereby, leads to resonancemode dependent resonance frequency curves. Consistently, the best performance is obtained in RM1 and RM3, where the contributions of the anchors to the resonance frequency is minor. In RM3, the resonance frequency detuning is slightly smaller than in RM1. This is likely caused by a small contribution of the C 66 stiffness tensor component via the shear stress component σ 12 at the anchors (see Supporting Information), which are twisted during the oscillation in RM3. As demonstrated previously, the superposition of the ∆E effect in the shear component (C 66 ) and the longitudinal component (C 11 ) of the stiffness tensor compensate slightly and can result in an overall reduced frequency detuning compared to a pure bending mode. As a result, the largest amplitude sensitivity is reached in RM3 with S am = 121 μS mT -1 . This sensitivity is similar to those previously reported for mm-sized ΔE-effect sensors. To demonstrate the high reproducibility of the resonators achieved with the presented production method, we examined two arrays of 10 (array ID1) and 14 parallel-connected sensor elements (array ID2). The sensors have in-plane dimensions of 640 μm × 90 μm (array ID1) and 430 μm × 100 μm (array ID2). The resonance frequencies of each sensor in the arrays were measured with a vibrometer. The standard deviation of the resonance frequency variation for the first three resonance modes RM1-3 of 24 sensors is approximately 0.13 %, which is 40-50 times smaller than previously investigated magnetoelectric sensors where the magnetic layer was deposited before releasing the resonator. It comprises all resonance frequency data from RM1-3 of both arrays. A histogram of the bandwidth normalized resonance frequency deviation ∆f r,BW (∆f r,BW = ∆f r f BW ⁄ ≈ ∆f r f r ⁄ • Q) We presented a shadow mask deposition technology combined with a free-free magnetoelectric microresonator design for miniaturized ΔE-effect sensors. The deposition of the magnetic layer through the shadow-mask avoids residual anisotropic stress from the nonmagnetic layers during microfabrication. The influence of the magnetic layer deposition on the anisotropic stress and magnetoelastic anisotropy was determined by combining a magneto-mechanical model and (magneto-)optical measurements. A small and homogeneous magnetoelastic anisotropy was achieved (< 500 Jm -3 ). On the anchors, the demagnetizing field locally increases the effective anisotropy energy density and its inhomogeneity. The first four resonance modes (RM) were analyzed with FEM simulations and vibrometer measurements. Frequency detuning via the ΔE effect, quality factors, electric sensitivities, and magnetic sensitivities are overall comparable with mm-sized ΔE-effect sensors, The asymmetric bending mode RM3 was identified as a particularly suitable resonance mode for device operation. It avoids the unfavorable magnetic layer properties on the resonator anchors, can be well excited electrically, and its large resonance frequency results in a higher resonator bandwidth than RM1. In RM3, a maximum amplitude sensitivity of S am = 121 μS was measured with a bandwidth of 842 Hz, a relative electric sensitivity of S el,r = 19.5 mS, and a relative magnetic sensitivity of S m,r = 6.2 T -1 . Arrays of parallel-connected magnetoelectric resonators demonstrated exceptional reproducibility with standard deviations < 0.2 % of resonance frequencies. This is 40-50 times smaller than previously investigated magnetoelectric sensors. The results demonstrate promising progress in the fabrication technology for highly reproducible magnetoelastic structures and devices. Combined with the resonance modes identified, the microresonator design offers multiple benefits compared to traditional cantilevers and marks a notable step toward miniaturized ΔE-effect sensor arrays. Device fabrication: The magnetoelectric MEMS resonators were designed at Kiel University and fabricated at MEMSCAP Inc. by using a 5-mask level silicon-on-insulator (SOI) patterning and etching process. The magnetostrictive layers were deposited in a final step at Kiel University. The fabrication of the resonators starts from 150-mm-wide double-side polished (100)-oriented SOI wafer. The SOI wafer consists of 400-μm-thick substrate, 10-μm-thick polysilicon, and 1-μm-thick oxide layer. The poly-silicon layer is doped to serve as the bottom electrode. It is patterned and etched down to the oxide layer. An 0.2-μm-thick thermal oxide layer is grown and patterned to electrical isolate the doped poly-silicon layer from the following layers. An 0.5-μm-thick piezoelectric AlN layer is deposited by reactive sputtering and is then patterned and wet etched. After the deposition of the AlN layer, a stack of 20-nm-thick Cr and 1-μm-thick Al is deposited and patterned through a liftoff process. Polysilicon is patterned and etched by deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) down to the oxide layer. A polyimide coat is applied to the top surface of the patterned poly-silicon layer to keep the wafer together during the trench etching. After the reversal of the wafer, the bottom side of the substrate is patterned and etched to the bottom side oxide layer by reactive ion etching (RIE). The substrate layer is etched to the oxide layer by DRIE. The oxide layer in the area of the defined trench is removed by wet etching, and finally, the protective polyimide is removed by dry etching. Further details about the microfabrication process can be found elsewhere. Magnetic characterization: Magnetic properties of the sensors were analyzed using magnetooptical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy. Definition of the sensitivities: As a measure for the sensitivity, we use the amplitude sensitivity, as defined previously with the electric sensor admittance relative magnetic sensitivity S m,r and the electric sensitivity S el,r , with the resonance frequency f r , the magnetic bias flux density B = B 0 for an operating frequency f = f r . Resonance frequency detuning: To determine the resonance frequency as a function of the magnetic bias flux density B shown in Figure The in-plane dimensions and anchor geometry are provided in Table The resonance modes (Section 2.3) were calculated with an eigenfrequency study using isotropic damping obtained from the measured quality factors. For the residual stress analysis (Section 2.2), the equilibrium stress σ = σ 0 + C: (ε -ε 0 ) and the equilibrium strain ε were calculated by solving the mechanical equation of motion for static equilibrium conditions. For the simulations, we used σ 0 as a fitting parameter and set the initial strain ε 0 to zero. First, a model geometry without a magnetic layer was used to fit the out-ofplane displacement u z to the measurements of the released resonator without magnetic layer. Here, the initial stress was applied to the Si substrate. Then, in a second model, the magnetic layer was added to the model geometry, and initial stress σ 0 is applied to FeCoSiB layer. The resulting u z of the sample is obtained by summing up the displacement fields from both simulations, which is justified by the linearity of the underlying equations. The local demagnetizing field H D was calculated by solving the magnetostatic equations considering the magnetization of the whole sample aligned along the x-axis. The magnitude of the magnetization is equal to the saturation magnetization M s . For all simulations, we consider M s = 1.5 T. In this study, we investigated twelve single sensors with varying geometries, i.e., in-plane dimensions and anchor width, and two sensor arrays with identical ten and fourteen parallelconnected sensors from the same chip while focusing on one sensor (Sensor ID1) in detail. Below, magnetic domain images in a demagnetized state (Figure Resonance frequencies, sensitivities, and quality factors for RM1-4 of the single sensors, except for RM1 of Sensor ID3 and ID11 (due to noise) and RM1,2 of ID4 (due to a broken sensor), are determined. The geometries and the resonance frequencies f r of the investigated single sensors are given in Table Table entries that could not be determined due to noise (RM1 of ID3 and ID11) and a broken resonator (RM1 and 2 of ID4) marked with "X". 