To optimize electron energy toward in-situ imaging large bio-samples up to 10-μm thickness with nanoscale resolution, we implemented an analytical model based on elastic and inelastic characteristic angles 1 . This model can be used to predict the transverse beam size broadening as a function of electron energy while the probe beam traverses through the sample. As result, the optimal choice of the electron beam energy can be realized. While the sample thickness is less than 10 μm, there exists an optimal electron beam energy below 10 MeV regarding a specific sample thickness. However, for samples thicker than 10 μm, the optimal beam energy is 10 MeV, and the ultimate resolution could become worse with the increase of the sample thickness. Driven by life-science applications, high energy mega-electron-volt Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (MeV-STEM) could potentially break the fundamental limitation set by low-energy Electron Tomography (cryo-ET): the uncertainty and slow speed of Cryo-Focused Ion Beam slicing of large biological samples. This technique can produce just a few 300-nm-thick lamellae per day, and it often takes a few days to obtain an intact 3D biological cell image. Elastic and inelastic scattering of high energy (≥ 10 MeV) electrons with the unique combination of small characteristic angle and high penetration could turn the amplitude-contrast MeV-STEM into an appropriate microscope for sample thickness up to 10 μm with many applications in chemistry, biology, and life-science To achieve a resolution better than 10 nm for in-situ imaging of large bio-samples with the thickness up to 10 μm, we have implemented an analytical model based on the elastic and inelastic characteristic angles. This model can be used to predict the transverse beam size broadening as a function of electron energy. To keep the beam size below 10 nm along its path in the sample, the electron energy is required to be 10 MeV or more. Determining the ultimate resolution, especially for thick bio-samples, is a complex problem, which is beyond the scope of this manuscript. Also, further increasing the electron beam energy couldn't improve the overall resolution; instead, it just increases the cost and technical complicity of the instrument. Hence, the optimal selection of the electron beam energy for in-situ imagining of large thick bio-samples with a thickness up to 10 μm is 10 MeV. xiyang@bnl.gov The angular distribution of scattering from a target atom can be described by differential scattering cross-section. In the Wentzel approximation, the differential cross-section for elastic scattering in the firstorder Born approximation becomes 2 : where el is the total elastic scattering cross-section,  is the solid angle, Z is the atomic number, E is the electron energy, E0 is the rest energy of the electron, aH is the Bohr radius (0.0529 nm),  is the scattering angle, el is the characteristic angle below which 50% of the electrons are elastically scattered into,  is the electron wavelength. Integrating equation ( The angular dependence and the cross-section of inelastic scattering can be approximated with a Bethe-model where inel is the inelastic scattering cross-section, E is the angle determining the decay of the inelastic scattering, E is the mean energy loss from a single inelastic scattering event (e.g., 39.3 eV for amorphous ice The analytical model is derived based on the characteristic angles: elastic el and inelastic inel. These angles depend on the electron energy, and they can be obtained by numerically integrating the differential cross sections (Eq. 1 and Eq. 3) azimuthally The ratio of the total inelastic scattering cross-section and the total elastic scattering cross-section can be approximately expressed by Eq. 4 Here, γ is a parameter close to 20 and hardly dependent on the atomic number or electron energy. This relationship holds for thin samples where multiple scattering is negligible and essentially all the high angle elastic scattering is collected 2 . As an example, the ratio can be approximated to ~3 for amorphous ice (Z ≈ 8). One can convert the elastic and inelastic scattering cross sections to the corresponding weights in the ultimate scattering angular distribution; thus, the effective critical angle can be estimated by Eq. 5. xiyang@bnl.gov Based on the critical angle of elastic (black) and inelastic (red) scattering shown in Fig. The transverse beam size varies according to the sample thickness. The maximum beam size could limit the ultimate resolution; thus, we treat the beam size as the resolution in the graphs shown in Fig. We explore the relationship between the electron beam energy and the optimal sample thickness. So far, we assumed that the tolerance of the maximum projected beam size in the sample thickness dimension is 10 nm. If the sample is thicker than 10 μm and the beam energy is higher than 10 MeV, the GB and EC could ultimately make the resolution worse than 10 nm. However, for the sample thickness up to 10 μm, the electron beam energy can be optimized, as shown in Fig. The detector signal is defined as the fraction of incident electrons traversing through the entire sample (e.g., the amorphous ice) and being collected by the detector within a certain angle range (e.g., 0 to 1 mrad), see the schematic layout in Fig. xiyang@bnl.gov We derived the analytical model based on the characteristic angles of elastic and inelastic scattering. The model is applied to explore the relationship between imaging resolution, sample thickness and beam energy. As the result, while the sample thickness ≤10 μm, there exists an optimal electron beam energy below 10 MeV regarding each specific sample thickness. However, when the sample is thicker than 10 μm, the optimal beam energy should be 10 MeV and the ultimate resolution will become worse with the increase of the sample thickness due to the geometrical broadening effect. Based on the scattering probability being proportional to the mass density, the above results can be adopted to different materials with a specific multiplier, which is the ratio of mass density between the targeting material and the amorphous ice used in the model.