In this work, we have systematically investigated the structural, electronic, vibrational and optical properties of the edge-functionalized hg-C 3 N 4 quantum dots with the aim of exploring their possible applications in solar cells and other optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes. The functional groups considered in this work are methyl (-CH 3 ), fluorine (-F ), and oxygenated groups such as aldehyde (-CHO), carboxyl (-COOH), ketone (-COCH 3 ), and hydroxyl (-OH) groups. The edge-functionalization resulted in significant tuning of the electronic, vibrational, and optical properties. Thus, their structural fingerprints are present in both their vibrational and optical properties, thereby allowing their detection both in the Raman as well as optical spectroscopies. It is observed that edge functionalization broadens the energy range of optical absorption, leading to coverage of most of the ultraviolet and visible regions. This implies that the edge-functionalization of hg-C 3 N 4 quantum dots can be used in a variety of optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and light emitting diodes. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted a lot of attention from the research community since the successful exfoliation of graphene Furthermore, it possesses the smallest band gap as compared to its other allotropes Nowadays, research in the field of quantum dots (QDs) has received extra attention as confinement in all dimensions (0D materials) leads to effective tuning of electronic, optical, physical, and chemical properties [39] compared the geometric structure and electronic properties of heptazine-based g-C 3 N 4 (hg-C 3 N 4 ) QDs and 2D g-C 3 N 4 . Olademehin et al. The motivation for this study comes from the work of Yunhai and collaborators on the edgefunctionalized GQDs The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In the next section, we address our computational methodology in brief, followed by a detailed discussion of our results in section III. Finally, we conclude our work in section IV by summarizing the key findings. All the calculations presented in this work were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) The geometry optimization iterations of all the considered structures were carried out until the gradient forces on each constituent atoms reached a minimum value of 4.5 × 10 -4 Hartree/Bohr. In addition, the RMS force, maximum displacement, and RMS displacement conditions were set at 3.0 × 10 -4 Hartree/Bohr, 1.8 × 10 -3 Bohr, and 1.2 × 10 -3 Bohr, respectively. The vibrational frequencies were also calculated to ensure the stability of the optimized structures and for none of the considered structures any imaginary frequencies were found. GaussView6 software The IEFPCM model The optimized geometries of all the considered pristine hg-C 3 N 4 QDs are shown in Fig. The different functionalized single heptazine units appear to remain planar (Fig. The detailed analysis of the optimized structures suggests that all the carbon and nitrogen atoms present in all the pristine structures are largely sp 2 hybridized, in spite of buckling. In the functionalized cases, the carbon atom of oxygenated groups that contains a carbonoxygen double bond (-CHO, -COCH 3 , -COOH) and is attached to the nitrogen atom of the pristine QD moieties becomes sp 2 hybridized. Whereas, the carbon, oxygen, and fluorine atoms of-CH 3 , -OH, and -F groups, respectively, become sp 3 hybridized while forming a bond with a nitrogen atom of the pristine structures. Table In order to confirm the stability of the optimized structures, vibrational frequency calculations are performed. Total 3n -6 vibrational modes are obtained for each structure, where n represents the total number of atoms present in that structure. The lack of imaginary frequencies confirms that the structural minima are likely to have been obtained. For all the structures considered, the minimum vibrational frequencies are reported in Table Table Structure L (nm) Freq (cm -1 ) Structure L(nm) Freq (cm After confirming the stability of the edge-functionalized hg-C 3 N 4 QDs, next, we investigate their electronic properties using B3LYP functional. In Table We have performed the Mulliken charge analysis and then calculated the amount of charge transfer from the hg-C 3 N 4 QD moiety to the attached functional group or vice-versa. The calculated charge transfers for all the pristine and functionalized structures are presented in Table Also, the amount of electron transfer to the -OH group is less than that to the -F group because comparatively speaking -F group is more electronegative than the -OH group. Further, the positive value of charge transfer in the case of -CH 3 group is in accordance with its electron donating nature, reported for the -CH 3 functionalized GQDs also The amount of charge transfer reveals the extent to which E g increases. Considering the case of 6 -CHO and 6 -COCH 3 , charge transfer is more in case of -CHO group, which leads to a large E g . As stated earlier, the effects of structural distortions are minimal in this work; the increment or decrement of E g is induced by the FOI and charge transfer. The resultant E g for 1 -CH 3 QD gets increased as compared to its pristine counterpart, while it gets lowered in the case of other 1 -X structures. The opposite trend is noticed in 5 -X QDs, as E g is reduced only for 5 -CH 3 QD. In cases of 3 -X and 4 -X QDs, E g is reduced compared to their pristine counterparts, except for -OH functionalized cases. Also, for 3 -CH 3 QD, no change is noticed, which implies that the effective contribution of charge transfer and FOI after functionalization is equal, and thus the cancellation of their effects takes place. In case of 6 -X QDs, edge-functionalization resulted in increased E g for all the considered functional groups. The reason for larger E g than their pristine counterpart in some of the cases implies that the influence of the charge transfer is greater than the effect of FOI. However, reduced E g in other cases reveals that the effective contribution of FOI and charge transfer is such that the FOI dominates. To further investigate the electronic properties, both the total density of states (TDOS) and partial density of states (PDOS) are calculated for each of the edge-functionalized hg -C 3 N 4 QDs using the B3LYP functional, and the results are plotted in Fig. In this section we present and discuss the optical absorption spectra of the edge-functionalized hg -C 3 N 4 QDs computed using the TD-DFT approach with water as the solvent (B3LYP+water), as these QDs are found to be soluble in water The calculated spectra of all the pristine and functionalized structures using B3LYP+water are plotted in Fig. First we note that our spectra of the pristine QDs are in good agreement with the previously reported calculations of Zhai et al. From the UV-vis absorption spectra of the edge-functionalized hg -C 3 N 4 QDs along with their pristine counterparts (see Fig. The TD-DFT wave function of the first excited state of each QD (pristine or functionalized) is dominated by the configuration corresponding to the excitation of an electron from HOMO to LUMO, denoted as H → L. However, f corresponding to the first excited state for all the pristine QDs is negligible, and even after functionalization exhibits no significant increase, as shown in Table Next we consider the optical excitations of the 4-X QDs, presented in Table where i, j and a, b are the indices denoting to the occupied (hole) and virtual (electron) MOs, respectively. The numbers w a i are obtained from the TD-DFT calculations, and represent the coefficients of the singly-excited configurations in which an electron is promoted from the occupied MO φ i (⃗ r) to the virtual MO φ a (⃗ r). We calculated the densities ρ hole (⃗ r)/ρ electron (⃗ r) using the Multiwfn software After the study of optical properties using the B3LYP functional, the UV-vis optical absorption spectra were also computed using a range separated hybrid functional HSE06. These calculations were performed to explore the influence of: (a) a modern range-separated hybrid functional, and (b) crystalline environment. The crystalline form is considered because the g -C 3 N 4 QDs also exist in the crystalline structures It is observed that the qualitative behavior of these spectra is similar to those simulated using B3LYP+water (Fig. In brief, the triangular shaped hg -C 3 N 4 QD structures are designed using a bottomup approach. Starting from a single heptazine unit, we combined more such units at the edges (by replacing one of the edge hydrogen atoms) in a way to form larger triangular structures. Our calculations of the optical properties of the considered triangular shaped hg-C 3 N 4 QDs suggest them to be size dependent. The UV-vis absorption spectra get red shifted with the increase in the size of the QDs due to the decrease in the optical gap. Chemical functionalization of the hg-C3N4 QDs resulted in the shifts of the most intense peaks in the absorption spectra compared to their pristine counterpart. Some of the functionalized structures undergo a red shift, while some others experience a blue shift. In addition, the functionalization of all the considered hg-C 3 N 4 QDs extended the absorption range covered by their corresponding pristine structures. Therefore, edge-functionalization is an effective approach to enhance the photophysical properties of hg-C 3 N 4 QDs by tuning their absorption ranges to make them more suitable for utilization of the solar energy. The significant reduction in band gap with the increasing size and a better optical response also make them potential candidate for photocatalytic applications. To summarize, in this work we have presented an exhaustive first-principles DFT-based study of the electronic, vibrational, and optical properties of pristine and functionalized quantum dots of a novel 2D material g-C 3 N 4 . Triangular structures of increasing sizes derived from heptazine were considered, and their geometries were optimized, followed by a check of their dynamic stability by performing a detailed vibrational frequency analysis. Additionally, the Raman spectrum of each considered structure was computed and analyzed. Electronic properties, such as the HOMO-LUMO energy gap, and the charge transfer were also studied, and it was observed that the edge-functionalization is an effective way of tuning the electronic properties of the hg -C 3 N 4 QDs. Further, the influence of functionalization was also studied by comparing both the partial and total density of states of the functionalized and pristine structures. Using the TD-DFT methodology, the UV-vis absorption spectra of all the structures were computed and analyzed in detail using two different hybrid functionals with different conditions. We found that most of the ultraviolet region gets covered in the pristine structures itself, which gets shifted to the visible region in the case of 6 -P ris QD due to the increase in size. Edge functionalization further extended the absorption range covered by the corresponding pristine structures suggesting that the edge-functionalized hg -C 3 N 4 QDs will operate in a wide energy range and will be effective in enhancing the efficiency of solar cells. Moreover, their excellent optical properties make them a potential candidate for other optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes operating both in the visible and ultraviolet range. Our results for the UV-vis spectra obtained in the case of carboxylic and hydroxyl groups are consistent with those obtained experimentally. Consequently, we hope that this theoretical study of the absorption spectra of edge functionalized hg -C 3 N 4 QDs using other functional groups will guide future experimental endeavors. Also our idea of using two different functionals and three different environmental parameters (vacuum, water, and crystalline environment) to explore their optical properties will be helpful for various experimental studies. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. and Table III we present highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy E HOM O , the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy E LU M O , the HOMO-LUMO energy gap (E g ), and the charge transfer.