We have studied the topological properties of free standing Sn doped cadmium chalcogenide (CdSnX, X = S, Se and Te) nanoribbons of varying widths and different edge structures. The CdSnX nanoribbons are derived from free-standing hexagonal buckled monolayers, with three types of edges viz., distorted armchair, normal armchair and normal zigzag edges. The unsatisfied bonds of X and Sn atoms at the edges cause non-zero values of the magnetic moment. This introduces an exchange field leading to inverted band structure. The electronic band structures of distorted armchair edge nanoribbons also exhibit different types of spin splitting property for different X atoms due to the different local orbital angular momentum at specific X atomic site with the inclusion of spin orbit coupling (SOC). The gap opening at the band crossings near the Fermi level after inclusion of SOC are mainly due to SOC of Sn atom and are responsible for the electron and hole pockets making the system topologically exotic. All the distorted edge nanoribbons show metallic behaviour with non-zero magnetic moments. Amongst CdX (X = S, Se and Te) nanoribbons, systems containing S atoms exhibit Weyl-like semi-metallic behavior and not much change with width, that of Se atoms exhibit Zeeman-type spin splitting and significant change with varying width, whereas systems containing Te atoms show signature of Rashba spin splitting along with Zeemantype spin splitting and moderate change with varying width. The armchair edge nanoribbons show wide gap semiconducting behaviour. Zeeman-type spin splitting is seen in the valence band region for systems containing S atoms and Rashba spin splitting is visible in the conduction band region for systems containing Se and Te atoms. For zigzag edge nanoribbons, no such signature of spin splitting is observed although all the nanoribbons acquire very high magnetic moments. Metal chalcogenides form a class of novel semiconductors being studied extensively in last few years. Among the metal chalcogenides, cadmium chalcogenides is the most common and useful family. Cadmium chalcogenides CdX (X = S, Se and Te) are known to crystallize in both cubic zinc blende (ZB) and hexagonal wurzite (WZ) structures. In the bulk form, they have wide and direct band gap leading to their unique semiconducting, electrical, physical and optical properties. Due to the advances in nanoscale technology, the study of lower dimensional structures of cadmium chalcogenides has gained importance CdSe monolayer having WZ phase was first prepared on Au (111) surface by electrochemical atomic layer epitaxy There is lot of interest in low-dimensional structures of CdX from the point of view of nontrivial topological properties. SOC can also initiate topological character in a 2D structure through band inversion without application of an magnetic field Besides thin atomic films exhibiting topological phases, the 2D structures when confined laterally, resulting in quasi one-dimensional (1D) structures with specific edge structures are equally attractive. Changing the edge style and width offers versatility to tune various properties including topological properties of a material In the present paper, we have studied detailed electronic structure of a new class of nanoribbons derived from Sn doped CdX (X = S, Se and Te) monolayers and have brought out the crucial role of SOC due to Sn in band inversion and of SOC in the spin splitting as X changes from S to Se to Te. The formula unit for the Sn doped CdX nanoribbons is CdSnX 2 , however, we will refer to the nanoribbons as CdSnX nanoribbons. We have considered nanoribbons with 3 different types of edges viz., (i) distorted armchair (henceforth referred to as distorted edge or d-CdSnX nanoribbons), (ii) normal armchair (henceforth referred to as armchair edge or a-CdSnX nanoribbons) and (iii) normal zigzag (henceforth referred to as zigzag edge or z-CdSnX nanoribbons). Due to inversion symmetry breaking environment, different types of spin splitting are observed in zero magnetic field The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II discusses the computational methodology used for calculating the electronic structure and topological properties and Results of detailed electronic structure and topological properties are presented in Sec. III. Section IV presents the summary and conclusions of the work. We have performed calculations based on spinpolarized density functional theory (DFT), using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Sumo and PYPROCAR, python based codes, are used for band structure plots The relaxed structures of pristine monolayers are al-most planar however upon Sn doping, the monolayer structure exhibits buckling ∼ 1.25 Å along the zdirection. CdSnX nanoribbons are constructed from the optimized Sn doped CdX monolayers such that the nanoribbons are infinite (periodic) either along one of the lattice vectors (as shown in Figs. If the Cartesian x-axis and lattice vector ⃗ a are aligned for the nanoribbon, then y-axis is at 30 • from the lattice vector ⃗ b making these nanoribbons tilted. Such kind of tilted nanoribbon structures have attracted much interest due to the edge magnetic moment and thermal stability All the distorted edge, armchair edge and zigzag edge nanoribbons show different atomic configuration for the two terminating edges as explained earlier. Hence, all the nanoribbons have broken space symmetry. The details of the bond lengths and bong angles are analogous to their values in respective monolayers and are listed in the Supporting information (SI) for completeness. The geometrical structure of distorted edge nanoribbons with lengths along lattice vectors ⃗ a and ⃗ b are equivalent. Therefore, results of electronic structure calculations for the two are expected to be same. We have explicitly calculated the band structures, density of states (DOS), partial DOS (PDOS) and spin density and have confirmed this to be indeed the case. Therefore, in this section, we discuss the electronic structure in the vicinity of the Fermi level (E F ) for nanoribbons shown in Fig. Tilted nanoribbon structures seem to show unusual and interesting properties. We present a comparison of the electronic structures to bring out the effect of inclu- sion of SOC and the effect of increasing width W , particularly on the specific bands in the vicinity of the Fermi energy. We discuss further that the electronic properties of these nanoribbons are significantly determined by the edge structures of the nanoribbons and the type of the atoms on the edges The electronic band structures of CdSnS distorted edge nanoribbons of width 2m and 5m are shown in Figs. The majority spin bands near the Fermi energy mostly arise due to p-p hybridization between Sn and S states, whereas the minority spin bands are mostly due to s-p hybridization. These bands contribute to band crossing just below the Fermi energy. The p states of Sn and S atoms split in p x , p y and p z due to the presence of the crystal field. Figure Band inversion can lead to enhanced Van Vleck spin susceptibility in these structures For all widths of d-CdSnS nanoribbons, with inclusion of SOC in the calculations, one prominent band crossing is observed approximately at 0.05 eV below Fermi energy between bands 2 and 3, as shown in Figs. With the change in the atoms in the nanoribbons from S to Se, the general features of the band structure around the Fermi energy, as regards the nature of the bands, remain similar. We have numbered the three bands near the Fermi region and will discuss the changes in these bands only, for all the widths from 2m to 5m. All the nanoribbons shows Weyl semi-metallic character without the application of SOC as the two bands 1 and 2 cross the Fermi level at two time-irreversible points. These two bands are mainly from the p states of Sn and Se atoms from the opposite edges of the nanoribbons. Such tunnelling effect is observed earlier in Bi 2 Se 3 thick slab The electronic band structures for d-CdSnTe nanoribbons are shown in Figs. 7(a) to 7(d) for nanoribbons of widths 2m and 5m without and with inclusion of SOC. The band inversion occurs in these nanoribbons even without inclusion of SOC. This is clearly visible in the The Rashba splitting is characterized by the Rashba energy E R in eV and the corresponding momentum offset ∆k away from the crossing point as elaborated in Fig. To summarise the properties of distorted armchair Cd-SnX (X = S, Se and Te) nanoribbons, we observe that the systems exhibit nonzero magnetic moments localized on Sn and X atoms due to their edge terminating positions that reduces the co-ordination of respective atoms. The spin density giving rise to localized magnetic moments changes with the width of the nanoribbon and the chalcogenide atoms present in the nanoribbons as a result of variations in the interaction and bonding among the atoms. Our calculated values of the magnetic moments of the unit cells for the distorted edge nanoribbons (The Table The opening of band gap at two time irreversible ⃗ k-points on or near Fermi level for S, Se and Te case mainly occurs due to the inclusion of SOC on Sn atoms while the Zeeman-type or Rashaba spin splitting at the Γ point is mainly due to inclusion of SOC in the calculations for chalcogen atoms Se and Te. Figure As shown in Fig. We have systematically increased the width of the nanoribbons from 2m to 5m for all the X atoms of the chalcogen in a-CdSnX (X = S, Se and Te) nanoribbons. All the nanoribbons show semiconducting property for all widths. The band gaps for all a-CdSnX (X = S, Se and Te) systems are listed in Table As the width is varied from 2m to 5m for a-CdSnS nanoribbons (Figs. As X is changed from S to Se in the a-CdSnX nanoribbons, we observe that the band inversion takes place in the valence and conduction bands as shown in Figs. For completeness, we have performed the electronic structure calculations for z-CdSnX (X = S, Se and Te) nanoribbons shown in Fig. The electronic band structures of z-CdSnS nanorib- All the zigzag edge nanoribbons have cell magnetic moment more than the corresponding distorted edge nanoribbons. The magnetic moment in zigzag nanoribbons arises due to the edge Sn and X atoms. The electronic structure study of nanoribbons prepared from Sn doped CdX (X = S, Se, Te ) monolayers is carried out in this piece of work. We considered mainly three types of nanoribbons viz.,(a) distorted armchair edges, (b) normal armchair edges and (c) normal zigzag edges. Lack of inversion and mirror symmetry in these systems, along with the presence of strong exchange field, induces spin splitting in absence of external magnetic field. The valence and conduction bands cross the Fermi energy at two conjugate time reversible points for all the d-CdSnX nanoribbons. Inclusion of SOC opens a band gap (not at Fermi energy) upto few meV at the band crossings with the formation of electron and hole pockets keeping the metallic characters intact for all the nanoribbons. The semiconducting monolayers thus turn into metallic and magnetic nanoribbons, due to the size confinement and nature of the edge atoms. Such types of changes in the band structures are also seen previously in MoS 2 nanostructures and InSe nanoribbons For the d-CdSnS nanoribbons, we observe Weyl semimetal type band structure irrespective of the width of the nanoribbons. The band gap opens up in the Weyl cone due to splitting in addition to tilting of the bands after inclusion of SOC. The d-CdSnSe nanoribbons are more interesting as they show spin splitting due to the exchange field for smaller width nanoribbons and Zeemantype spin splitting for widths 4m and 5m. The d-CdSnTe nanoribbons show Rashba spin splitting around Γ point with band tilting due to high Z value for Te. The different types of spin splittings are consistent with the presence of bulk inversion asymmetry and structure inversion asymmetry One very striking feature of all the d-CdSnX nanoribbons, is that the bands crossing the Fermi level open up revealing a SOC gap at time irreversible ⃗ k-points near the Fermi energy. This opening of the gap is purely contributed by SOC of Sn atom while the band splittings around the Γ point is due to the SOC of the chalcogen atoms. As the SOC of Se and Te is more than S, those systems show Zeeman-type and Rashba spin splitting around the Γ point. For distorted armchair edge nanoribbons the spin splitting due to SOC is observed more in unoccupied states in valence band region while for normal armchair case the same is observed more in conduction band region. Distorted armchair nanoribbons have non-zero cell magnetic moments while normal armchair nanoribbons have zero magnetic moment. Spike-like discontinuous states in the DOS, referred to as van Hove singularities (vHs), are visible for all the distorted and armchair edge nanoribbons revealing confinement of electrons and phonons along one dimension All the armchair CdSnX nanoribbons remain semiconducting with mainly Zeeman-type spin splitting and Rashba spin splitting for X = Se and Te systems respectively. In each case, the unit cell acquires no magnetic moment. A recent study has shown that without external magnetic field Zeeman-type term (H Z ) (called as exchange term) can induce spin splitting This work has established that CdSnX nanoribbons do possess interesting and exotic electronic structure. Confirmation of the topological significance has to be established in terms of presence of edge states with their chirality, finite Chern numbers, anomolous hall current, spin texture etc. We plan to extend the present work for such studies. d-CdSnSe Nanoribbons