Ambient magnetic skyrmions stabilized in multilayer nanostructures are of immense interest due to their relevance to magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) devices for memory and unconventional computing applications. However, existing skyrmionic nanostructures built using conventional metallic or oxide multilayer nanodots are unable to concurrently fulfill the requirements of nanoscale skyrmion stability and feasibility of all-electrical readout and manipulation. Here, we develop a few-repeat hybrid multilayer platform consisting of metallic [Pt/CoB/Ir]3 and oxide [Pt/CoB/MgO] components that are coupled to evolve together as a single, composite stack. Zero-field (ZF) skyrmions with sizes as small as 50 nm are stabilized in the hybrid multilayer nanodots, which are smoothly modulated by up to 2.5× by varying CoB thickness and dot sizes. Meanwhile, skyrmion multiplets are also stabilized by small bias fields. Crucially, we observe higher order "target" skyrmions with varying magnetization rotations in moderately-sized, low-anisotropy nanodots. These results provide a viable route to realize long-sought skyrmionic MTJ devices and new possibilities for multi-state skyrmionic device concepts. 1. Magnetic skyrmions are nanoscale spin textures with fixed handedness, or chirality These device attributes are promising for applications in nextgeneration memory In this work, we develop few-repeat hybrid chiral multilayer nanodots by combining metallic (Pt/CoB/Ir) and oxide (Pt/CoB/MgO) stacks, and engineering them to evolve together. Using magnetometry, magnetic force microscopy (MFM), and micromagnetic simulations, we show that such nanodots behave as one composite stack, with chiral spin textures stabilized over a wide range of FM thicknesses and dot sizes, including at ZF. The spin textures exhibit a variety of configurations, including single, multiple and higher-order skyrmions, and exhibit marked variation with magnetic parameters, geometry, and external field. This provides a strategic platform to integrate the benefits of metallic and oxide multilayer stacks, with immediate relevance to functional spintronic devices. Hybrid Multilayer Structure 4. Double wedged multilayers with active stack composition [Pt(1)/CoB(1.6-2.2) /Ir(1)] 3 /[Pt(1)/CoB(1.0-1.4)/MgO(2.6)] (thickness in nm in parentheses) were sputter-deposited onto 8" Si/SiO 2 wafers using the Singulus Timaris TM ultra-high vacuum magnetron sputtering tool (see SI §S1). The films were patterned into dots with diameters, W of 300-1000 nm using electron beam lithography (Elionix EX10 TM ) and ion beam etching (Oxford CAIBE TM ) (see SI §S2). Magnetization hysteresis loops were measured using the MicroMag Model 2900 TM alternating gradient magnetometer (see SI §S1). The chirality, manifested as the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (iDMI), was measured using Brillouin light scat- tering (BLS) spectroscopy, performed on a wave vector resolved set-up with a six-pass tandem Fabry-Perot interferometer (see SI §S1). Spin textures were imaged by MFM performed using the Bruker Dimension ICON TM microscope with Nanosensors SSS-MFMR TM tips (diameter < 30 nm, ultra-low magnetization ∼80 emu/cm 3 ), including with in situ OP magnetic fields (0-60 mT) (see SI §S3). Finally, to interpret the experiments, grain-free micromagnetic simulations using the effective medium approximation Our multilayer films (schematic: Fig. 6. The stack components were carefully engineered to ensure their evolution as one chiral multilayer. First, magnetometry measurements were performed to determine the out-of-plane (OP) saturation fields, H s , of the individual CoB M and CoB O , in each case, over a range of CoB thicknesses (CoB M : 1.6-2.2 nm; CoB O : 1.0-1.4 nm). These measurements were used to calibrate and match pairs of CoB M and CoB O stacks with similar H s values (see SI §S1). For example, in Fig. The stability and characteristics of chiral spin textures in multilayers are determined by the interplay of symmetric exchange, A, iDMI, and effective anisotropy, K eff Meanwhile, target skyrmions are higher-order skyrmions that appear as annular or concentric domains, discussed in detail subsequently 10. Next, we turn to our striking observation of target skyrmions, which present as concentric domains, stabilized by confined geometries 13. Next, we examine the evolution of skyrmion stability with in situ magnetic field (μ 0 H). Fig. shows the MFM-imaged magnetic states for representative CoB M (2.0)/CoB O (1.3) nanodots as a function of W and μ 0 H. Expectedly, the W ≃ 300 nm dots remain uniform throughout, and W ≃ 400 nm dots consistently form a single skyrmion over the field range. Meanwhile, for the larger 500 and 600 nm dots, a small OP field is sufficient to destabilize LS and TSK states, giving way to skyrmion multiplets over moderate fields (20-50 mT), which diminish to single skyrmions at higher fields en route to saturation. Finally, the size of skyrmions, d S , is also visibly influenced by the applied field, stack properties, and geometry, as detailed below. 14. Fig. Meanwhile, the linear increase in ZF sizes of isolated skyrmions with decreasing K eff (increasing CoB thickness) is not reported in any other system to the best of our knowledge. In this regard, our prior work on high-repeat multilayer nanodots, which reported a direct correlation between d S and D/A for skyrmion multiplets, also included an implicit direct correlation with K eff , and therefore involved a complex interplay of multiple parameters and skyrmion interactions. In contrast, the large (2.5×) tunability of ZF d S achieved here with a single-magnetic knob (K eff ) offers greater utility towards functional devices. 15. Finally, we examine the field-dependence of d S for the case of moderate K eff (CoB M (2.0)/CoB O (1.3)) by imaging 9 nominally identical nanodots for each field and W (Fig. 16. In summary, we report on chiral nanostructures harnessing a bespoke few-repeat hybrid multilayer, comprising metallic ([Pt/CoB(x)/Ir] 3 ) and oxide (Pt/CoB(y)/MgO) stack components, both designed with matched switching fields, and strongly coupled by IEC. The ZF magnetic states of the nanodots are determined by the interplay of dot-sizeinduced confinement effects and CoB-thickness-driven stack anisotropy. Smaller dots (W ≲ 600 nm) stabilize ZF skyrmions over a substantial range of K eff and dot sizes. The skyrmion size, as small as 50 nm at ZF, can be tuned by up to 2.5× by engineering the stack anisotropy and geometric parameters. Finally, large-W , low-K eff dots host higher-order target skyrmions at ZF with chiral rotation up to 3π, whose stability relative to skyrmionic multiplets can be tailored by small bias fields realizable using stack engineering. 17. The presented stability of ZF skyrmions in our few-repeat hybrid multilayer nanodots has practical consequences for several efforts on chiral spin textures. On one hand, the inherent realization of higher-order skyrmions and their interplay with conventional skyrmions in highly-scalable multilayer nanodots is expected to enable their much-sought functionalization via device concepts harnessing topological transitions 