Recently, Grockowiak et al. reported "hot superconductivity" in ternary or multinary compounds based on lanthanum hydride [A. D. Grockowiak et al., Front. Electron. Mater. 2, 837651 (2022)]. In this paper, we explored thermodynamically stable phases and superconducting phases in the lanthanum-nitrogen-hydrogen system (La x N y H 1 -x -y , 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 1) at pressure of 20 GP. We rapidly and accurately constructed the formation-enthalpy convex hull using an evolutionary construction scheme based on density functional theory calculations, extracting the candidates for stable and moderately metastable compounds by the universal neural network potential calculations. The convex hull diagram shows that more than fifty compounds emerge as stable and moderately metastable phases in the region of ∆H ≤ 4.4 mRy/atom. In particular, the compounds are concentrated on the line of x = 0.5 connecting between LaH and LaN. We found that the superconductivity is gradually enhanced due to N doping for LaH and the superconducting critical temperature Tc reaches 8.77 K in La2NH with y = 0.25. In addition, we predicted that metastable La2NH2 shows the highest Tc value, 14.41 K, of all the ternary compounds predicted in this study. These results suggest that it is difficult to obtain the hot superconductivity in the La-H compounds with N at 20 GPa. Metallic hydrides have attracted much attention as potential candidates for room-temperature superconductor As the next stage for the exploration, recently, ternary hydrides are gathering attention as the candidate for higher T c superconductivity. In 2019, Sun et al. predicted from first-principles calculations that Li 2 MgH 16 shows T c of 475 K at 250 GPa In the experiments shown in Ref. 26, ammonia borane, NH 3 BH 3 , was used as a hydrogen source material for the synthesis of La-H. Assuming that La-H is reacted with N included in the sample chamber of DAC, we theoretically searched for thermodynamically stable and metastable phases and superconducting phases in the La-N-H ternary system. In high pressure region above 100 GPa, thermodynamically stable phases and superconducting phases in the La-N-H system have been explored using first-principles calculations and structure search algorithms Since the search for thermodynamically stable phases in ternary systems is computationally expensive, we combined an evolutionary construction scheme (ECS) of a formation-enthalpy convex hull In our search, we used the Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) code The superconducting T c was calculated using the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan formula The parameters, λ and ω log , are electron-phonon coupling constant and logarithmic-averaged phonon frequency, respectively, which represent a set of characters for the phonon-mediated superconductivity. f 1 and f 2 are correlation factors for the systems showing large λ. These parameters are defined as following, using Eliashberg function α 2 F (ω): where To obtain these parameters, we performed the phonon calculations implemented in the QE code. The effective screened Coulomb repulsion constant μ * was assumed to be 0.10, which has been considered to be a reasonable value for hydrides. The k-and q-point grids for the calculations are listed in Table Figure Next, we investigated the superconductivity of the La-N-H system following the convex hull diagram (Fig. to the electronic states at the Fermi level. La 2 NH takes a monoclinic C2/m structure, which is assigned using FYNDSYM Apart from the compounds on the line of x = 0.5, we explored other compounds showing higher T c than La 2 NH. We found that La 2 NH 2 shows λ = 0.9337 and T c = 14.41 K. La 2 NH 2 takes a trigonal P 3m1 structure. In this structure, the triangular lattice is formed in the plane parallel to the ab plane and is stacked along the c axis with the order of A(La)-B(N)-C(La)-A(H)-B(H), as shown in the right of Fig. Although La 4 NH 13 with x = 0.2222 and y = 0.0556 has the largest hydrogen concentration of all the stable and moderately metastable ternary compounds predicted by our search, this compound is the insulator with the band gap of 0.45 eV. In addition, ternary compounds with x ≤ 0.3 and y ≤ 0.4 are all insulating phases (see Fig. To predict novel hydride superconductors, we explored thermodynamically stable and metastable phases at 20 GPa in the La-N-H ternary system (La x N y H 1 -x -y , 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 1) integrating the evolutionary construction scheme of a formation-enthalpy convex hull, the universal neural network potential (PFP) calculations implemented in Matlantis, and the DFT calculations implemented in QE. Thanks to the screening by the PFP calculations, we quickly and accurately obtained stable and moderately metastable phases. The convex hull diagram shows that more than fifty compounds emerge as TABLE II: Superconductivity data of ternary compounds in the La-N-H system, predicted by the evolutionary construction scheme of a formation-enthalpy convex hull. ∆H, λ, ω log , and Tc are the enthalpy difference to the convex hull in the unit of mRy/atom, the electron-phonon coupling constant, the logarithmic-averaged phonon frequency in the unit of K, and the superconducting critical temperature in the unit of K, respectively. stable and moderately metastable phases in the region of ∆H ≤ 4.4 mRy/atom, which can be obtained experimentally by high-pressure and high-temperature synthesis techniques. In particular, they are concentrated on the line connecting between LaH and LaN, i.e. the line of x = 0.5. Following the convex hull diagram, we investigated the superconductivity in the La-N-H system at 20 GPa. For the compounds on the line of x = 0.5, we found that the superconductivity is gradually enhanced due to N doping for LaH and the T c value reaches 8.77 K in La 2 NH with y = 0.25. In addition, we predicted that metastable La 2 NH 2 shows the highest T c value, 14.41 K, of all the ternary compounds predicted in this study. Ternary compounds with x ≤ 0.3 and y ≤ 0.4 are all insulating phases. These results suggest that it is difficult to obtain high-T c superconductivity in the La-N-H system at 20 GPa. In addition, further investigations, e.g. changing the third element from N or changing pressure condition, are required to prove the hot superconductivity previously observed in the La-H based system by the electric resistivity measurements. * Electronic address: