The biphenylene network (BPN) has a unique two-dimensional atomic structure, where hexagonal unit cells are arranged on a square lattice. Inspired by such a BPN structure, we design a counterpart in the fashion of photonic crystals (PhCs), which we refer to as the BPN PhC. We study the photonic band structure using the finite element method and characterize the topological properties of the BPN PhC through the use of the Wilson loop. Our findings reveal the emergence of topological edge states in the BPN PhC, specifically in the zigzag edge and the chiral edge, as a consequence of the nontrivial Zak phase in the corresponding directions. In addition, we find the localization of electromagnetic waves at the corners formed by the chiral edges, which can be considered as second-order topological states, i.e., topological corner states. Topology originates from mathematics, which helps distinguish the geometric structure by invariant quantities during continuous deformation. For example, a closed surface is classified by the number of hole in it. This number remains unchanged without cutting the surface. When topology is applied to physics By applying topology to photonic crystalline systems, the photonic analogy of the quantum Hall effect was theoretically proposed by Raghu and Haldane Designing a topologically nontrivial PhC usually requires the breaking of discrete particle symmetry, such as the time-reversal symmetry, which is not easy to achieve. Another routine is to mimic the existing structures in electronic materials such as graphene Especially, BPN has a fascinating lattice structure, where the hexagonal unit cells are organized on a square lattice, resulting in a two-dimensional tiling pattern that includes four-, six-, and eight-membered rings where E (r) is the electric field and (r) is dielectric function. r = ( , ) is the position vector in 2D space. is the speed of light in vacuum. is the eigenfrequency. Figure The modified photonic band structure is shown in Fig. In this section, we elaborate the numerical calculation method used to evaluate the Zak phase. Then, we discuss the localization of EM waves at the edges for several ribbon structures. The Zak phase is commonly calculated for one-dimensional (1D) periodic systems. It is mathematically defined as the 1D integration of the Berry connection over the 1st BZ In general, we assume that the translational vector of BPN edges can be defined as T = a 1 + a 2 , where a 1 and a 2 are two primitive lattice vectors, and are coprime integers. If they are not coprime, the two vectors defined below do not form the basis set in reciprocal space. Normally, the 2D momentum area that is used to calculate the Zak phase is the 1st BZ. In more a general case, that 2D momentum area is chosen as a rectangular area formed by two orthogonal vectors and ⊥ . These two vectors are defined as follows ( is parallel to the edge orientation (parallel to T). Thus, the 1st BZ for BPN edges can be defined as -|T| ≤ ≤ |T| . The 2nd vector ⊥ is perpendicular to and relates to by the following formula where b 1 and b 2 are two primitive vectors in reciprocal space and defined by a • b = 2 ( , = 1, 2). Equation ⊥ is equal to the area of the original 1st BZ. All the translational and reciprocal vectors for zigzag, armchair and chiral edges are summarized in Table In Fig. For the edge in any direction characterized by vector T, the Zak phase of the -th band is computed by integrating the Berry connection over ⊥ as where and ⊥ are -points in and ⊥ directions, respectively. For numerical calculation, we make an approximation for Eq. ( where is discrete -point of and is discrete -point of ⊥ , ( , = 1, ..., 0 ). The Eq. ( where the index of u k indicates band index. Take the summation product over the period along the , we obtain the Wilson-loop-like matrix as The Zak phase for -th band can be then solved by the -th eigenvalues of the Wilson loop matrix ˆ ( ). The Zak phase for -th subband is given by As can be seen in photonic band structure in Fig. Here we shall evaluate the Zak phase of BPN ribbon with zigzag edges and observe the emergence of topological edge states in photonic band structure, which are associated with the nonzero Zak phase. Figure As shown in Fig. Next we shall discuss the case for BPN ribbon with armchair edges. Figure Finally, we shall consider the case for BPN ribbon with chiral edges shown in Fig. To confirm the existence of topological zigzag edge states at all points, we create another structure containing BPN PhC and a trivial PhC. The trivial PhC has a band gap at the same frequency range as the band gap of BPN PhC. Figure We have examined three different types of ribbon structures of BPN PhC. At the complete band gap between bands 3 and 4, the armchair ribbon is topologically trivial, the zigzag and chiral ribbons are topologically nontrivial resulting in the emergence of topological edge states. All the topological edge states are doubly degenerate because each supercell has two equivalent boundaries. PhC unit cells in -direction. This structure is periodic in both -and -directions and contains the interface between BPN ribbon with zigzag edges and the trivial PhC. (b) The corresponding photonic band structure for the structure of (a). The red lines denote topological edge states, where EM wave is highly localized at the interface between the zigzag edge and the trivial PhC. The topological corner states, as a manifestation of higher-order topology, are examined. These states involve the confinement of EM waves at the corner owing to the non-zero product of the Zak phase in two edge directions forming the corner structure In Fig. Similarly, we can construct another corner structure from two chiral edges, which we refer to as "type II" as shown in Fig. Finally, we examine another corner structure which is formed by the zigzag and the chiral edges as shown in Fig. When we refer to existing research on 2D crystal structures where topological corner states emerge Other corner structures involving the armchair edge, such as corners between the zigzag and armchair edges or corners between the armchair and the chiral edges, can also be constructed. However, topological corner states do not exist in these structures due to the trivial properties within the complete band gap of the armchair edge. In this paper, we have numerically studied EM waves in BPN PhC structure by using finite difference and finite element methods. The original photonic analog of the BPN has no band gap. Linear dispersion of frequency can be observed in this PhC. When the structure is modified by increasing the distance from each rod to the center of the unit cell, a complete band gap opens in between the 3rd and the 4th photonic bands. We examine the topological properties of BPN PhC in this photonic band gap by numerically calculating the Zak phase for several different edge structures. The topological edge states are observed in the photonic band gap due to the nontrivial Zak phase, which are localized at the zigzag and the chiral edges. The higher-order topology as the corner states are found at the corner formed by two chiral edges because of non-zero product of the Zak phase in two directions. We also point out that the topological corner states emerge only when the topological edge states of two edge structures which form the corner are completely overlapped to each other. Compared with graphene-like PhCs, the topological edge states in BPN-like structures can be found without breaking the symmetry of the crystals. Our results suggest a possible way to design in-gap topological waveguide and topological confinement of EM waves.