A digital twin of a direct current brushless (BLDC) electric motor and propeller is developed for predicting the generated thrust when there is no motion of the system (static conditions). The model accounts for the back electromotive force, the propeller drag force, and the finite response time arising from the electromagnet winding inductance and DC resistance. The model is compared to a textbook model of BLCD dynamics and to experimental measurements on a KDE Direct KDE2315XF-885/885 Kv motor with a 945 propeller and a Holybro electronic speed controller (ESC) driving an AIR 2216/880 Kv motor with a 1045 propeller. These systems are typically found on Group 1 uncrewed quadcopters (drones). Both the steady-state and transient dynamics depart substantially from linearized models found in the literature. This study is a starting point for disentangling the dynamics of the motor and the change in propeller dynamics due to complex airflow conditions. A digital twin provides an accurate computer model of a system that can be used to predict its behavior over a range of conditions The purpose of this study is to develop a digital twin of the motor/propeller system without the complication of the changing propeller efficiency with incident airflow. Previous studies combine both effects (see, for example, Ref. In the next section, we discuss the basic operation of a DC brushless electric motor (BLDC) and a motor-propeller model described in a popular aircraft control and simulation textbook A BLDC-propeller combination is found in a wide variety of electrified aircraft technologies because of their high thrust-to-weight ratio, the recent availability of high energy density batteries, and the development of solid-state electronics used for fast switching of the voltage applied to the motor electromagnet windings Torque is generated from BLDC's by keeping the magnetic fields of the rotating part of the motor (rotor) and the stationary part (stator) misaligned. Rotors on BLDC's typically include 2N high-energy-density permanent magnets around an outer ring, which is connected to the shaft in the center of the motor. The stator is in between the outer ring of magnets and the shaft and contains 2M electromagnets. The misalignment between the electromagnet and permanent magnet fields generates a torque that attempts to align the fields; as they approach alignment, the neighboring electromagnet is energized and the near-aligned one is de-energized, thus maintaining misalignment of the fields and the magnets The ESC uses solid-state switches to energize/de-energize the electromagnet windings based on two approaches: sensored ESCs use real-time direct measurement of the shaft angle, typically Hall probes; or sensorless ESCs that estimate the angle by measuring the so-called back electromotive force (EMF) The ESC is often controlled using a PWM signal: a square-wave voltage signal with a frequency in the 10's of kHz range with the duty cycle of the waveform controlled by the user, typically in the range between 50% (0% throttle) and 100% (100% throttle). This signal should not be confused with the modulated signal applied to electromagnet windings whose frequency is locked to the propeller rotation rate but whose duty cycle is related to the duty cycle of the user-input signal to the ESC. The force (thrust) generated by a BLDC-propeller system in the direction along the motor shaft is typically modeled as where k t is the thrust coefficient in N s 2 /rad 2 and ω is the angular velocity of the motor-propeller in rad/s. The thrust coefficient is a nonlinear function of ω and the linear velocity of the center of the propeller in the air, which we take as having a component parallel υ ∥ and perpendicular υ ⊥ to the motor shaft. The velocity includes the free-stream and wind velocities Most studies of the variation of k t with velocity are for fixed-wing aircraft where υ ⊥ ∼ 0; the effects of the perpendicular velocity are usually treated as a separate force. Following this approach, k t is a function of the advance ratio J = 2πυ ∥ /ωD, where D is the propeller diameter. For multi-copter hover conditions with no wind or ground effect, J ∼ 0 and k t is equal to its static value k t0 . For inexpensive plastic propellers with diameters <12", k t decreases approximately linearly with J up to values of J ∼ 0.4, beyond which the drop off is more rapid until attaining the zero-thrust condition The motor model used in the open-source PX4 flight stack for a multi-copter has no time dependence and is described in the Thrust Curve section of the controller guide where F max is the maximum force produced by the system at the maximum rotation rate, and THR_MDL_FAC is a dimensionless parameter in the range 0-1. When THR_MDL_FAC = 0 (the default value), the thrust is linearly proportional to the throttle command. When THR_MDL_FAC = 1, the thrust depends on the square of the throttle command, which is appropriate for an ESC that controls the angular velocity of the motor with the speed proportional to the throttle command. For ESCs that do not control the angular velocity, the guide suggests taking THR_MDL_FAC in the range of 0.3 to 1. As we show in Secs. III.A and IV.A below, this model does not agree with the steady-state predictions of the physics-based model of the motor-propeller system and our experimental observations using a force stand. It also ignores the finite response time of the motor, although an effective exponential time constant can be included using a low-pass filter in the flight stack control loop. Stevens et al. where τ ESC is the response time of the ESC control loop. Our model follows that presented in Ref. applied to the electromagnet windings, where V batt is the battery voltage. This relation breaks down at low voltages (small T) because the back EMF is too small to measure at low ω. The presence of multiple electromagnet windings makes the BLCD electrical circuit somewhat complicated, but it is known The coupled electro-mechanical model is found by applying Kirchhoff's Laws to the circuit and Newton's Laws of rotational motion to the propeller-motor combination where J m is the propeller-motor moment of inertia, k m = k e is the motor torque constant, b m is the viscous friction constant, and k q is the propeller drag constant. In most studies, the propeller drag moment exceeds the viscous drag moment and hence it is typical to take b m =0, which we do so here. However, it is straightforward to generalize our results to include the viscous drag moment. Table The steady-state behavior of the BLDC is found by setting the derivatives in Eqs. 5 and 6 to zero and solving for the steady-state (mnemonic ss) current and angular velocity using Eq. 4 for the thrust. We find that The parameters α and β are not independent because ω ss = ω max for T = 1, where ω max is the maximum BLDC angular velocity. Using this fact, we find that Thus, This observation is important because it implies that there is only a single parameter (α) that specifies the steady-state motor dynamics once ω max is known. Once α is obtained from a fit to Eq. 12 combined with Eq. 1 to predict thrust as a function of T, we can obtain β using Eq. 11. Then, other model parameters can be obtained by considering the steady-state solutions with T = 1. We find the counter EMF constant and torque constant through the relation From the steady-state solution to the current equation, we find the motor resistance and from the angular velocity equation we obtain the propeller drag coefficient 1. Limiting behaviors For low enough angular velocities, we have that βT/α 2 ≪ 1 so that a Taylor series expansion of the square root in Eq. 7 is possible. In this limit, we find that and hence the thrust scales quadratically with the throttle for low throttle. For larger values of T, ω ss depends on the the size of α relative to ω max . For α/ω max ≪ 1, demonstrating that the BLDC thrust is linear with the throttle. For α ∼ ω max , which we hypothesize is the case for a typical BLDC-propeller system, the dependence of F on T is more complex and smoothly connects these two limiting behaviors. As seen in Fig. The steady-state quantities identified in the previous section can be used to put the differential equations of the model (Eqs. 5 and 6) in dimensionless form, which will allow us to identify the remaining unknown parameters of the model. To this end, we define dimensionless quantities ĩ = i/i max , ω = ω/ω max , t = t/τ, α = α/ω max , and β = β/ω 2 max , substitute these definitions into the differential equations, and use the parameters defined in the previous section to find with b m = 0. We see that the two remaining unknown model parameters, L and J m , do not appear independently but as the ratio L/J m . Thus, to fit dynamic data as we do in Sec. IV.B below, only a single ratio needs to be adjusted. The coupled electro-mechanics dynamical model given by Eqs. 5 and 6 can be cast as a Riccati equation and then transformed to a linear second-order differential equation. However, the form of the solution is algebraically complicated and we do not obtain substantial insight from this approach. On the other hand, we observe that the BLDC current has a first-order decay with time constant τ = L/R. But, due to coupling to ω, the time course of the coupled system is non-exponential due to the propeller drag moment, which depends quadratically on ω. 3, where we have adjusted τ ESC = 35 ms so that the predictions agree at the half-height location. The parameters used to generate Fig. Many commercial BLDC vendors provide datasheets of the steady-state ESC-BLDC-propeller characteristics for different voltages and static flight conditions. We use data provided by KDE Direct for the KDE2315XF-885 (885 Kv) motor with a 9' × 4.5" pitch propeller at 16 V (slightly higher than a 4S). They do not specify the protocol used by the ESC, but the data shown below clearly demonstrates that the angular velocity is not controlled and hence we assume that a sensorless ESC of the type considered here was used in the measurements. Less data is available on the dynamical response of ESC-BLDC-propeller systems from the manufacturer. We used a force cell to measure the thrust of a Holybro ESC driving a AIR 2216/880 KV motor with a 1045 (10" diameter, 4.5" pitch) propeller. The parameters of this system are similar to the KDE Direct system considered for the static measurement. The thrust measurements allow us to quantify the non-linear thrust and time response to commanded inputs. The test stand used, a Tyto series 1585, contains a load cell, measurement electronics, and sensorless ESC outputs. Their software allows for automatic generation of the thrust as a function of the angular velocity and precise control over commands for the ESC to collect time response curves. We collect several thrust curves and commanded angular velocity changes from stopped to full speed with the motor and propeller mounted horizontally. The first step in fitting the physics model parameters to experimental observations is to study the thrust as a function of angular velocity, shown in Fig. For the Holybro system, we observe the dynamics shown in Fig. We follow a similar procedure described above to find the model parameters for the Holybro system and adjust for the different battery voltage (the Holybro-provided data used V batt = 16 V, whereas we use V batt = 14.8 V in the experiment). We then adjust L/J m to fit the temporal evolution of the observed and predicted behaviors, where we see the agreement is good. The following procedure describes how to find the parameters for our model for a new BLDC-propeller system: 1) From the manufacturer datasheet of the motor/propeller system, which usually gives steady-state behaviors, identify V batt , ω max , F max , and i max . 2) Plot thrust as a function of angular velocity as done in Fig. 3) Plot the steady-state thrust as a function of the throttle command (Fig. We present a physics-based model of an ESC-BLDC-propeller model consisting of coupled differential equations for the motor current and propeller angular velocity. The coupling gives rise to a nonlinear thrust as a function of the throttle, which has the opposite scaling of the motor model currently used in the PX4 flight-control system. Also, the dynamics are described by a double-lag solution as opposed to a single-lag solution often found in the literature. The controller used in the flight stack can likely be improved using our model for systems that use an ESC that senses the back-EMF. These results will give new insights for tuning flight control systems and will inform the design of artificial neural network -based controllers. In the future, we will generalize the model to account for the system moving in air, which will be important for understanding how to design flight controllers for windy situations or aggressive flight maneuvers.