We present a comprehensive spectral analysis of cylindrical quantum heterostructures by considering effective electronic carriers with position-dependent mass for five different kinetic-operator orderings. We obtain the bound energy eigenstates of particles in a threedimensional cylindrical nanowire under a confining hyperbolic potential with both open and closed boundary conditions in the radial and the axial directions. In the present model we consider carriers with continuous mass distributions within the dot with abrupt mass discontinuities at the barriers, moving in a quantum dot that connects different substances. Continuity of mass and potential at the interfaces with the external layers result as a particular case. Our approach is mostly analytical and allows a precise comparison among von Roos ordering classes. The idea of considering quantum systems with position-dependent effective mass (PDM) carriers initially arose with the development of solid state physics Among the broad spectrum of applications Quantum dots posses convenient optical features to modulate and control the output intensity of a component device. For instance, one can manipulate the electronic energy of such structures and adjust the absorption threshold frequency by regulating its growth. Singleelectron transistors can be used to study electron tunneling through a system of two tunnel junctions in series. An example of this is the observation of Coulomb-blockade oscillations of the conductance in a quantum heterostructure as the voltage on a nearby gate electrode is varied. In The absorption coefficients and relative changes in the refractive index for the inter sub-band transitions between the lower-lying allowed energy levels in cylindrical quantum dots have been investigated for different hyperbolic-type axial potentials. Diverse studies of cylindrical quantum dots have been performed considering hyperbolic Poschl-Teller type potentials The general Hermitian Hamiltonian for a quantum carrier with non-uniform mass M ≡ M(r) can be written as (see von Roos In this work we will analyse a system representing a generic quantum wire, a nanometric double heterostructure with cylindrical symmetry. We will solve it with a general approach where the best established kinetic orderings are considered, making thus possible an assessment of the so called ambiguity problem of the PDM Hamiltonian. The bound-state energy spectrum of a particle with PDM subject to an external potential varying significantly in the axial direction will be analytically obtained. In the calculations of the eigenvalue equation we consider both the Dirichlet zero flux boundary conditions and the open non-zero flux boundary conditions which guarantees the validity of the results for quasi-steady states with extremely high lifetimes. The paper is organized as follows. In the next Section, we start by writing the Schrödinger equation with the von Roos Hamiltonian as a general dimensionless expression. In Section 3 we present the model of a double heterostructure which we will treat. In Subsection 3.1 we separate variables by taking into account the PDM, and thus we get the resulting potential. Then, we proceed to solve the angular and radial sectors and set up the boundary conditions for the axial solution in 3.2. Section 4 is dedicated to the axial differential equation and is divided into five subsections. In 4.1 we perform a canonical point transformation in order to recast the initial differential equation as an ordinary Schrödinger equation. In 4.2 we obtain the analytical solutions whose energy spectrum is analysed in 4.3 and plotted in 4.4. Finally in Subsection 4.5 we discuss the continuous PDM special case. In Section 5 we discuss the complete three dimensional eigenstates and Section 6 is where we draw our conclusions. In three-dimensional space, the position-dependent mass kinetic sector can be rewritten as . By means of the following transformations: r → εr, Ψ(r) → ε -D∕2 ψ(r) and M(r) → m 0 m(r), we can obtain a dimensionless rescaled version of the equation above. The coordinate r is now dimensionless, D is the number of spatial dimensions, ε and m 0 are dimensional positive constants, and ψ(r) and m(r) are respectively the wave function and the mass, both dimensionless and rescaled. With this, the GSE above becomes where Note that Ẽ, Ṽ(r) and Ũa,b (r) are dimensionless, as ψ(r) and m(r). The (dimensional) energy spectrum, E, is proportional to Ẽ through the dimensional factor . The interest in doing so is that in this way the parameters m 0 and ε, controlling the electronic mass and the size of the quantum dot, can be ignored until the end of the whole calculation. We will further comment on this later. For continuous mass functions, the wave-function and its derivative have to be continuous along the whole heterostructure. When there are abrupt heterojunctions and finite discontinuities in the mass profile The theoretical treatment of cylindrical quantum dots is usually considered with an infinite confinement potential, either in the axial direction or in the radial direction. This facilitates the analytical decoupling of the eigenvalue differential equation. The infinite potential approach is applicable when the physical system corresponds, for example, to a quantum wire made of a semiconductor surrounded by a vacuum or by a different material with significantly higher energy gap. Separation of variables with finite confinement potentials is also viable provided the electron wave-function is mostly confined to the quantum dot domain. However, if the dimension of the nanocrystal is similar to the effective Bohr radius of the material the approximation is not applicable. Assuming a quantum semiconductor surrounded by a material inducing a finite potential barrier, it is usual to resort to numerical methods where the differential operators are discretized in space. This is particularly common when effects such as spatial variation of the effective mass associated with different semiconductor materials are included. Here, in a quite comprehensive approach, we will consider a model of a solid such as a quantum nanowire, where a particle is constrained to a cylindrical region of radius εδ r , δ r > 0, around the x axis of a Cartesian coordinate system. Inside, the mass of the particle and the external potential are functions of the x coordinate, M = M(x) ⇔ m = m(x) and V(r) = V(x) ⇔ Ṽ(r) = Ṽ(x). We will pursuit the case of a double heterostructure where the mass and the external potential are given by The subindex in signals the value in the Intermediate Region (IR). Within the quantum dot, in the interval |x| < εδ x , δ x > 0, we assume a mass and a confining potential varying along the cylinder axis and radially uniform. This is a common assumption for quantum dots with azimuthal symmetry and is consistent with the standard dot growth technique. An infinite barrier at the external radius of the cylindrical configuration is also fitting for a quantum nanostructure surrounded by a vacuum in the radial direction. Additionally, it guarantees a clean separation between the axial and radial variables in the nontrivial differential eq. ( It is then appropriate to adopt a solitonic mass profile along the cylinder axis, and for the external potential taking a confining hyperbolic well Ṽin (x) = Ṽ0 (1 - both shapes relevant in several branches of physics. This kind of potential wells can be easily generated and controlled experimentally. A growth process of the alloy GaAs∕Al χ Ga 1-χ As can be set up by adjusting the concentration of aluminum to obtain the potential profile. The local droplet epitaxy technique allows the development of such heterostructures with the desired symmetry and space distribution, see e.g. We solve eq. ( where is the general ordering kinetic potential shown in Sec.2 (prime in this expression denotes derivative with respect to x) which is added to another mass dependent potential term This is the p-depending axial effective potential (the inverse-mass term arose from the dynamics in the perpendicular space and adds up along the whole line). Later we will see that p is a real positive number, p > 0, which ensures that Ṽp (x) ∈ R. Since p 2 -Ṽ0 sinh 2 δ x > 0, then a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of bound , which is always obeyed when m 1 ≤ 1 (otherwise, one has the constraint ). In Figs. 1-2 we represent this system for some choice of the parameters. Periodicity conditions on Φ(φ) are known to imply where the parameter k corresponds to the quantum magnetic number, see eq. (4a). Note that for each value of k the solutions of eq. (4b) must be finite at the origin and zero at r = δ r = 1. The quantum number p depends implicitly on k and l such that p ≡ p k,l , where The zeros of first kind Bessel functions are compactly related by p k,l < p k+1,l < p k,l+1 (see [53, eq. 9.5.2] and Let us write the corresponding bound-state wavefunctions as X(x) = CX(x), where C ∈ C results from normalization and X(x) is a piecewise function x ≤ -δ x c (1) X with Boundary conditions for X(x) are determined by continuity of m a X(x) and m -(1+a) X ′ (x), which lead us to the following expression for the allowed energy levels: Considering the Wronskian of X and assuming that W 1 ≠ 0, we can write the coefficients of eq. ( Now, we proceed to calculate X(x) to complete the total three-dimensional wave-function. In order to solve eq. (4c) in the IR we define a variable ξ and a function Ξ(ξ) such that With this, eq. (4c) transforms into where is an effective potential in ξ space For |x| < δ x , by combining eqs. ( Ignoring for a moment the mass parameters as indices of the eigenfunctions, we define a new variable w = sin 2 ξ and a function W(w) such that The energy spectrum is determined by eq. (8a). This is a transcendental equation depending on the ordering-label a and the quantum numbers k, l and n, where n ∈ Z + . The (n + 1)-th solution corresponds to Ẽa;k,l,n . In order to make it clear, from now on we will include explicitly these indices To carry out the energy calculations and plots, we need to choose the system parameters. For the values m 1 = 2, m 2 = 0.5, δ x = 0.5 and Ṽ0 = -50 well behaved axial effective potentials Ṽp are guaranteed for the following list of quantum numbers, p 1,1 , p 2,1 , p 0,2 , p 3,1 , p 1,2 , p 4,1 , p 2,2 , p 0,3 , p 5,1 , p 3,2 , p 6,1 . In Table Once the solutions in the IR, X + a,a (x) ≡ X + a;k,l,n (x) and X - a,a (x) ≡ X - a;k,l,n (x), as well as the energy levels, Ẽa;k,l,n , are obtained, eq. ( When we assume PDM without discontinuities, then we can include GW and LK Hamiltonians and consider all the five kinetic-orderings together in the analysis. The eqs. ( Let us make m 1 = m 2 = sech 2 δ x in eq. ( Given that the mass parameter is m 1 = sech 2 δ x < 1, the axial effective potentials always have a potential-well shape and k and l can take infinitely many values. Let us focus our computation on the first three Bessel zeros, p 0,1 , p 1,1 and p 2,1 for the sake of concision. In Table Table ( Note that, for each pair (k, l) among the three here analyzed, there are two bound states. Again, the eigenstates are non-degenerated and the energy growth as (0, 1, 0) → (1, 1, 0) → (2, 1, 0) → (0, 1, 1) → (1, 1, 1) → (2, 1, 1). The plots for the axial eigenfunctions with the energies of Table The set of eqs. ( In this work we have obtained the exact bound solutions of the generalized three-dimensional position-dependent mass Schrodinger equation for a cylindrical quantum dot. The energy spectrum depends on three quantum numbers (k, l and n) and two ordering-labels (a, b) which characterize the Hamiltonian adopted. We have presented a comprehensive model of a generic nano-heterostructure. Within such quantum cylinder, the particle mass and the potential are of hyperbolic type in the region between two uniform different layers. Boundary conditions have been taken both open and closed in radial and axial directions. Our spectral values have been calculated for a significant set of states in an expressive number of cases. We have found that the energy spectrum grows smoothly, but strictly, as a function of the kinetic-Hamiltonian adopted to design the structure: For discontinuous PDM models it grows according to the choices ZK → MM → BDD. For continuous PDM models the growing sequence is GW → ZK → LK → MM → BDD. This awareness may allow the appropriate choice of model to better fit experimental data. Another feature that we have noticed is the absence of bound-states below specific values of δ x , see Fig. ≤ a ≤ 0) meaning little difference among these orderings; iii) there is a maximum value of a > 0 for which bound states exist; iv) new states emerge in some intervals outside the ZK, MM and BDD orderings-e.g. (k, l, n) = (2, 1, 1) (upper green line), (0, 2, 1) (upper golden line), (2, 2, 0) (coral line), (0, 3, 0) (cyan line), (5, 1, 0) (yellow line) and (3, 2, 0) (olive color line) (for (k, l) = (6, 1) there is no bound state for any value of a). Our model results can be useful in the general understanding and design of semiconductor devices and quantum dots provided that the parameters are properly adjusted. In semiconducting nanowires and similar applications , see e.g. Being in possession of the exact eigenfunctions, Ψ a;k,l,n (r) = ε -3∕2 ψ a;k,l,n (r∕ε), and eigenvalues, E a;k,l,n = ( 0.038100 m 0 ∕m e eV) Ẽa;k,l,n , of the carriers in the cylindrical nanotube we are able to compute its quantum properties. For example, there are several papers (see e.g. For Al χ Ga 1-χ As typical values are m 0 m 1 = M GaAs = 0.067m e , ε r = n 2 r = 13.0 (the GaAs static dielectric constant), σ v = 3.0 × 10 22 m -3 and Γ ij = 6.6 meV. After the evaluation of the dipole matrix element with the eigenfunctions in eq. ( We will adopt Z, R, C and I to denote the sets of the integers, real, complex and purely imaginary numbers, respectively. * superscript indicates that zero is excluded. + andsubscript indicates respectively only the positive and negative numbers. For a comprehensive study on alternative position-dependent mass in one dimensional Hamiltonians, see The derivatives in eq. (10b) are taken with respect to x and then expressed in terms of ξ. The parameter b is removed for we are considering kinetic-orderings b = a in this subsection. In sect.4.5, b will be considered back