In the calculations of lattice thermal conductivity (κL), vital contributions stemming from fourphonon scattering is often neglected. The significance of four-phonon scattering in the thermal transport properties of monolayer (ML) MoS2 has been unraveled using first-principles calculations combined with the Boltzmann transport equation. If only three-phonon scattering processes are considered then the κL is found to be significantly overestimated (∼ 115.8 Wm -1 K -1 at 300 K). With the incorporation of the four-phonon scattering processes, the κL reduces to 24.6 Wm -1 K -1 , which is found to be closer to the experimentally measured κL of 34.5 Wm -1 K -1 . Four-phonon scattering significantly impacts on the carrier lifetime (τ ) of the low-energy out-of-plane acoustic mode (ZA) phonons and thereby, suppresses its contribution in κL from 64% (for three-phonon scattering) to 16% (for both three-and four-phonon scatterings). The unusually high four-phonon scattering rate (τ -1 4 ) of the ZA phonons is found to result from the simultaneous effect of the acoustic-optical frequency gap, strong anharmonicity and the reflection symmetry imposed selection rule. The strong coupling between the quadratic dispersion of the ZA mode and the τ -1 4 is discovered by the application of mechanical strain. The strain induced increase in the linearity of the ZA mode dispersion dramatically reduces the significance of the four-phonon scattering in the strained ML-MoS2, both qualitatively and quantitatively. These conclusions will provide significant insights to the thermal transport phenomena in ML-MoS2, as well as any other 2D material. Monolayer transition metal di-chalcogenides (TMDCs), in the last decade, has attracted immense interest for various practical applications due to its unique physical, chemical and thermal properties Among the various monolayer (ML) TMDCs, the thermal transport properties of MoS 2 has been explored extensively over the years Over the years, thermal conductivity (κ L ) calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) have garnered significant popularity due to two reasons: less computational expense and incredible agreement with experimental κ L for variety of systems. To mitigate the computational burden, these calculations consider only the lowest-order perturbative intrinsic scattering involving three phonons. Despite neglecting all the higher-order perturbative terms of the crystal Hamiltonian, the first-principle calculations have proved to be reasonably accurate in predicting the κ L of different materials In earlier studies, certain geometrical and phonon characteristics are identified as the governing conditions behind the significantly high four-phonon scattering strength. For example, acoustic-optical (a-o) frequency gap in BAs The thermal transport properties of ML-MoS 2 has been avidly explored both theoretically and experimentally in the past. However, a wide range of values of the thermal conductivity (κ L ) prevail in literature. Apart from making the understanding of the thermal transport mechanism ambiguous, this leads to delusive conclusions regarding the performance of ML-MoS 2 in various applications, such as thermoelectrics. In the present work, we have exemplified the importance of 4-phonon scattering in the thermal transport mechanism of ML-MoS 2 . The accuracy of our calculations are demonstrated by the agreement of the obtained thermal conductivity values with experiments and MD simulations. Besides, we have illustrated the interplay among the conditions that govern the 4-phonon scattering, with particular emphasis on the quadratic dispersion of the ZA phonon mode. Our work, therefore, not only clears the ambiguity regarding the magnitude of lattice thermal conductivity of ML-MoS 2 , but also identify the strong coupling between the phonon dispersion and the 4-phonon scattering processes. Thereby, significantly improves the predicting ability of the first-principles based thermal transport calculations as well as the understanding of the heat transport mechanism of ML-MoS 2 and any 2D material in general. First-principles calculations have been performed using ab-initio density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) The phonon dispersion curves are calculated based on the supercell approach using the finite displacement method with an amplitude of 0.015 Å as implemented in the phonopy code Combining the first-principle calculations with the semi-classical Boltzmann transport equation (BTE), the lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ) of a material can be calculated as: where λ is a particular phonon mode with wave vector q and frequency ω λ , V is the volume of the Brillouin zone (BZ), N q corresponds to the total number of q-points sampled in the first BZ, n 0 λ is the Bose-Einstein distribution function associated with the phonon mode λ at a particular temperature T, ν λ,x is the x component of the phonon group velocity, τ λ is the carrier lifetime of the λ mode phonons. The term ħω λ ∂n 0 λ ∂T corresponds to the phonon specific heat of the λ mode. The intrinsic phonon scattering rates (τ -1 λ ) and thereby, the carrier lifetime (τ λ ) are computed according to the Fermi's golden rule and the detailed derivation of the formulas can be found elsewhere where 1 τ 3,λ and 1 τ 4,λ denote the 3-phonon and 4-phonon scattering rates, respectively. The total scattering rate is, therefore, computed by summing the contribution from all the possible phonon modes. The phonon BTE in the steady-state, describing the balance of the phonon population for a particular mode λ between the phonon diffusion and scattering, is given as, where ν λ is the phonon group velocity and n λ is the Bose-Einstein occupation distribution of the phonon mode λ. Within the framework of relaxation time approximation (RTA), including the 3-phonon and 4-phonon scattering processes, the scattering term on the right-hand side can be expressed as: , where n 0 λ is the equilibrium phonon distribution. Due to the fact that Normal processes (N) contribute indirectly to the thermal resistance by influencing the phonon distribution and thereby, the Umklapp process (U), a direct summation of the N and U scattering rates within the RTA leads to an inaccurate description of the overall thermal transport. Therefore, when N processes are significant as compared to the U processes, an exact solution of the phonon BTE beyond the RTA is required. Within the iterative scheme (ITR) the phonon BTE is solved by considering all the phonon scattering events simultaneously, as opposed to the RTA where scattering events are treated independent to each other. In the ITR, each phonon's final state is coupled with the final states of all other phonons and thus, the current scattering events can be influenced by the results of all the former scattering events. Therefore, the ITR can separate the thermal resistance contribution from each phonon mode. A. Pristine Monolayer MoS2 The single-layer counterpart of 2H-MoS 2 consists of a Mo atomic plane sandwiched between two S atomic planes. The unit cell of monolayer MoS 2 in the undistorted 2H phase is composed of a triangular lattice of Mo atoms arranged in a trigonal prismatic structure with the two triangular lattices of S atoms, as can be seen in Fig. The intrinsic phonon scattering directly impacts the lattice thermal transport properties and therefore, the lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ) can be taken as a measure of the intensity of phonon scattering. Large phonon scattering rate results in a small carrier lifetime (τ ) and thereby, leads to a small κ L . Our calculated κ L of ML-MoS 2 considering only 3-phonon scattering within the relaxation time approximation (RTA) as a function of temperature (T) is presented in Fig. TABLE I. Room temperature (300 K) lattice thermal conductivity (κL) of ML-MoS2 obtained in this work and from literatures using different levels of approximations. Reference Method κL (Wm -1 K -1 ) This work DFT: 3-phonon (RTA) 115.8 Ref. The low 3-phonon scattering rate of the ZA phonons can be understood due to the simultaneous effect of a-o frequency gap and the selection rule imposed by the reflection symmetry (RSSR). Owing to the horizontal mirror reflection symmetry of ML-MoS 2 , of which the mirror plane is in the Mo atomic plane, the RSSR is relevant to all orders of phonon scattering processes. This unique phenomenon in 2D materials is found to forbid nearly 60-90% 3-phonon scattering processes of the ZA mode in graphene and thereby, results in a large overestimation of the κ L associated with it FIG. To get further insight of the scattering processes, we calculate the scattering rates corresponding to every possible ways of scattering allowed in the 3-and 4-phonon processes. There are two possibilities in a scattering process involving three phonons, such as, a single phonon may split into two phonons (splitting, -), or two phonons may combine to create a new phonon (combination, +). Similarly, four phonons may engage in three possible ways, such as, a single phonon may split into three phonons (splitting, -), or three phonons may combine to form a new phonon (combination, ++), or two phonons may combine to create two new phonons (redistribution, +-). The variation in the scattering rates corresponding to all the possible channels of 3-and 4-phonon processes at temperatures 300 K and 900 K are presented in Fig. 3 is proportional to the phonon population, whereas the τ -1 4 depends on the square of the population, and the phonon population scales linearly with temperature. Such scaling laws of the scattering rates have been seen in earlier reports 3 ) and 4-phonon (τ -1 4 ) scattering rates corresponding to the three acoustic modes (ZA, TA and LA) plotted as a function of the reduced wave vector along the high symmetry k-path of Γ-M at a temperature of (a) 300 K and (b) 900 K. The x-coordinate of 0.0 corresponds to the Γ-point and 0.5 corresponds to the M point of the BZ. The phonon dispersion of ML-MoS2 from Γ to M is shown in inset. variation in κ L(3) and κ L(3+4) of ML-MoS 2 as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. Additionally, we observed that our result of κ L(3+4) (24.6 Wm -1 K -1 ) using the relaxation time approximation (RTA) is less than the experimentally measured value. This is something abnormal, since in experiments a phonon, apart from the scattering with another phonon, may scatter from various other sources, such as defects, grain boundary etc. depending on the material parameters. The under-prediction in the values of κ L(3+4) is found to originate from the fact that, in RTA calculations both the Normal (N) and Umklapp (U) processes are considered to be a source of direct thermal resistance. However, only the U processes can introduce thermal resistance directly, whereas the N processes are generally considered as non-resistive. Therefore, the RTA can produce accurate prediction of κ L only for those materials where N processes are negligible. It can be seen from Fig. In summary, using first principle calculations we have demonstrated that the 4-phonon scattering rate is surprisingly high in ML-MoS 2 . Owing to the quadratic dependency of τ -1 averaged for all the modes increases ≈ 2 times in the strained condition (BI 8 ) compared to that of the unstrained one (BI 0 ) at nearly all temperatures. However, the mode averaged τ -1 remain insensitive to the application of strain