Crystallization of alkane mixtures has been studied extensively for decades. However, majority of the available data consider the behaviour of alkanes with chain length of 21 C-atoms or more. Furthermore, important information about the changes of the unit cell structure with temperature is practically absent. In this work, the phase behaviour of several pure alkanes CnH2n+2, with n ranging between 13 and 21, and their binary, ternary or multi-component equimolar mixtures are investigated by X-ray scattering techniques. Both bulk alkanes and oil-in-water emulsions of the same alkanes were studied. The obtained results show formation of mixed rotator phases for all systems with chain length difference between the neighbouring alkanes of Δn ≤ 3. Partial demixing is observed when Δn = 4, yet the main fraction of the alkane molecules arranges in a mixed rotator phase in these samples. This demixing is suppressed if an alkane with intermediate chain length is added to the mixture. Interestingly, a steep temperature dependence of the interlamellar spacing in mixed rotator phases was observed upon cooling at temperatures down to 10°C below the melting temperature of the mixture. The volumetric coefficient of thermal expansion of the rotator phases of mixed alkanes (αV ≈ 2 × 10 -3 °C-1 ) is around 10 times bigger compared to that of the rotator phases of pure alkanes. The experiments performed with emulsion drops containing the same alkane mixture while stabilized by different surfactants, showed that the surfactant template also affects the final lattice spacing which is observed at low temperatures. In contrast, no such dependence was observed for drops stabilized by the same surfactant while having different initial diametersin this case only the initial temperature of the crystallization onset was affected. The simplest organic molecules, linear n-alkanes (denoted hereafter as Cn), are known to have complex phase behavior. When cooled from melt, they undergo one or more phase transitions to phases with an intermediate structure, called rotator phases (R), before forming the most stable crystalline phase (C) at low temperature The structure and properties of the rotator phases have been studied extensively in the last century after the pioneer work of Müller The stability of the rotator phases depends not only on the length of the alkane chain but also on the length scale of the entities studied In contrast, no such phases were detected for bulk C16 in our experiments, whereas earlier studies indicated the formation of transient rotator phase in bulk hexadecane in approx. 10 % of the cooling experiments Alkane mixing is also known to enhance the stability of rotator phases. This effect is usually explained with a reduction in the interlayer coupling interaction, combined with an increase in the lamellar surface roughness and void volume where n n nn  =  is the molar average chain length, n  is the molar fraction of chain length n, Tm ≡ TRL is the melting temperature of the mixture, and TRC is the temperature at which the rotator-tocrystal phase transition is observed. For example, ΔTR ≈ 11°C for C17, whereas it becomes around 25°C for a binary equimolar mixture of two consecutive chain length alkanes and increases further to 33°C for a binary mixture with Δn = 2 The mixing behavior depends primarily on the alkane chain length difference in the mixture, denoted as Δn = n2 -n1. Using a simple thermodynamic analysis and Bragg-Williams approximation for the solid-solution lattice where nmax and nmin represent the number of C-atoms in the longer and shorter alkanes present within the mixture, respectively Alkane mixtures have been studied extensively because such mixtures are widely used in several industrial and technological applications. For example, this topic is of great importance for the petroleum industry, where most of the problems in the production, transportation and refining of crude oil arise primarily from the precipitation of paraffin waxes (mixtures of long n-alkanes) from liquid oil The phase behavior of longer alkanes has been studied also, due to their wide range of applications. Numerous phase diagrams have been developed for binary mixtures of alkanes with chain lengths from 21 to 41 C-atoms, see Figure Co-crystallizing binary alkane mixtures with n ≤ 20 usually form rotator phase RI, characterized by a face-centered orthorhombic lattice (space group Fmmm), see Ref. Usually, this formula tends to underestimate the actual interlamellar spacing as determined by experimental measurements. The excess distance observed is attributed to the inherent disorder among the layers of stacked molecules within the mixture This lamellae should remain sufficiently flat to facilitate the nucleation of subsequent lamellae. It was proposed that mixtures with low variation in chain length (Δn ≤ 2) arrange using interchain mixing, whereas at bigger chain length differences, the end-chains of longer molecules are twisted and/or folded Furthermore, n-alkanes are known to exhibit the phenomenon of surface freezing, i.e. they form ordered monolayer of molecules atop molten alkanes. This monolayer can exist at temperatures up to 3°C higher than the bulk melting temperature In the present study the rotator phases formed in several binary, ternary or multi-component equimolar n-alkane mixtures are investigated by SAXS/WAXS techniques employing both synchrotron and laboratory radiation sources. We provide also results obtained with pure alkanes for comparison. Experiments with bulk and emulsified alkane mixtures were performed to obtain both qualitative and quantitative (temperature resolved) structural information for the molecular arrangement in the studied samples. The effects of several different surfactants and of the drops size were studied for the emulsified alkanes. Nine n-alkanes and their mixtures were studied. The alkane chain lengths were varied between 13 (tridecane) and 21 (heneicosane) C-atoms. All alkanes were with purity > 99% and were purchased from TCI (C13, C15, C19 and C21) or from Sigma-Aldrich (C14, C16, C17, C18 and C20). The alkanes were used as received. The investigated equimolar alkane mixtures were prepared by weighting the necessary amounts of alkanes, followed by melting the mixture and its homogenization. Five binary mixtures (C15 + C17, C16 + C17, C16 + C18, C15 + C19 and C17 + C19), two tertiary mixtures (C15 + C17 + C19 and C14 + C16 + C18) and a seven-component mixture comprising all alkanes with chain lengths between 14 and 20 C-atoms, denoted as C14-to-C20, were examined. The chosen mixtures had molar average chain length n between 16 and 17, except for C17 + C19, where n = 18. Two chain length differences were defined for mixtures having three or more mixed components: maximal chain length difference, Δnmax = nmaxnmin, and minimal chain length difference, Δnmin, defined as the smallest difference between homologous with similar chains, see Table Four different nonionic surfactants were used for stabilization of the studied alkane emulsions. Three of them were polyoxyethylene alkyl ethers, CnEOm: C18EO20 (trade name Brij S20, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich), C22EO30 (Nonidac 22-30, purchased from Sasol) and C16EO8 (NIKKOL BC-8SY, Nikko Chemicals). Emulsions stabilized by polyoxyethylene sorbitan monostearate C16SorbEO20 (Tween 40, Sigma-Aldrich) were also investigated. We note that Brij S20, Nonidac 22-30 and Tween 40 are commercial grade surfactants containing a broad range of ethoxy groups, with the one indicated in the chemical formula being the most abundant The C16EO8 surfactant is a specially synthesized compound, composed exclusively of this specific molecular type (purity 100% as stated by the producer). The surfactants were used as received for preparation of 1 wt. % aqueous solutions. Deionized water purified using Elix 3 module (Millipore, USA) was used, with a resistivity > 18 MΩ.cm. The selected surfactant concentration is considerably higher than the critical micellization concentration for these substances The investigated emulsions contained monodisperse droplets, prepared by membrane emulsification technique ==  , are used in the text. They were determined by optical microscopy observations with an AxioImager.M2m microscope (Zeiss, Germany) and Image Analysis Module of Axio Vision Software. More details about the procedure are available in Refs. The X-ray scattering measurements with emulsified samples were conducted in Elettra Sincotrone, Trieste, Italy, at the Austrian SAXS beamline. The experiments were performed at a fixed cooling and heating rate of 0.75°C/min. The experimental setup was similar to the one used in our previous study SWAXS experiments were conducted also using Xeuss 3.0 equipment (Xenocs, France) on bulk samples and selected emulsion samples. Capillaries with 1 mm outer diameter were used. X-rays with wavelength λ ≈ 1.54 Å (Cu-Kα radiation) were utilized, and the scattered signal was captured by an EIGER2 4M detector positioned at a sample-to-detector distance of 286 mm. Silver behenate and lanthanum hexaboride were used for detector calibration. Temperature control was achieved using the HFSX350 high-temperature stage (Linkam Scientific Instruments Ltd., UK) equipped with a T96 temperature controller and a LNP96 liquid nitrogen pump capable of achieving temperatures well below 0°C. The spectra presented in this article have been shifted along the y-axis for clarity. The scattering of the sample holder has been subtracted to obtain correct intensities for all emulsion samples. The same procedure was applied to the bulk samples when necessary. However, due to the comparatively lower intensity of the X-ray source in the Xeuss apparatus compared to the synchrotron radiation source, the original curves for the bulk samples are presented in the text. The only difference between the subtracted and original curves is the presence of the Kapton peak in the latter, with a maximum at a scattering vector of q ≈ 3.26 nm -1 . The background subtraction notably enhanced the signal-to-noise ratio in the baseline, particularly evident when the data are presented in logarithmic scale, where the secondary and ternary reflection SAXS peaks are visualized much better, without changing in any way the essential information analyzed in the paper, see Supporting Information Figure To obtain the precise peak positions we analyzed the acquired signal with a Gaussian function, or performed peak deconvolution analysis involving two or more Gaussian functions in the cases of double or more complex peaks. All d-spacings (respectively, c lattice parameter values, c = 2d) are obtained by averaging data from the first (002), second (004), and third (006) order reflections (when available). Experimental data obtained in at least two independent experiments are used for this averaging procedure. The a and b unit cell parameters were determined from the WAXS spectra using the relation known to be applicable for an orthorhombic unit cell where h, k and l are the Miller indices and d is the interplanar spacing, determined from the peak position using the relation: d = 2π/q. Note that RI phase has face-centered lattice, therefore reflections are present only when h, k and l have the same parity, i.e. they are all even or all odd numbers. The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were performed on Discovery DSA 250 equipment (TA Instruments, USA). The studied sample was places in TZero aluminium hermetic pan and sealed with TZero lid using the TZero press before the measurement. The samples were cooled and heated at a fixed rate of 0.75°C/min. Before the first cooling, the samples were heated to a temperature at least 10°C higher than the melting temperature of the studied sample and maintained at this temperature for 5-10 minutes to ensure that the crystal memory of the samples had been completely erased. In preliminary experiments, we tested also longer storage periods in a molten state, but we did not observe any significant difference in the cooling/heating curves obtained after 5 min or 60 min storage in molten state. At least 3 individual cooling/heating runs were performed with each studied alkane mixture to check for the results reproducibility. Experiments were performed with some of the pure alkanes studied as well (data not shown). The observed phase transition temperatures were identical to those reported in the literature for the respective alkanes. This section presents the main features of the rotator and crystalline phases observed in bulk odd-numbered alkanes with chain lengths between 13 and 21 C-atoms. The even-numbered alkanes were not included in this analysis because, as explained in the introduction, the R phase observed in them is very short living and difficult to observe. Figure phase is easily detected from the WAXS spectra due to the significant change in the area per molecule, reflected in changes of the a and b parameters in the unit cell, and associated peak shifts. Note that the position of the SAXS peaks remain relatively unchanged during this transition, as the lattice spacing remains similar. Under the applied experimental conditions, i.e. cooling with 0.75°C/min rate, the transition from rotator to crystalline phase is not instantaneous. Instead, the Therefore, the significantly higher (absolute) values of temperature derivatives for C21 are explained with the gradual conformation changes to all-trans conformers as the temperature decreases. The initial area per molecule, which can be reliably determined for R phase, once it is formed upon cooling from L, also increases when the alkane chain length increases, it is ca. 19.4 Å 2 for C13 and 19.8 Å 2 for C21, see Supporting Information Table n , where T is the temperature expressed in degrees Celsius, n is the alkane chain length, and f denotes the function of interest (a, b, c or A). To do this, we plotted the slopes and intercepts of the linear temperature dependences determined from the experimental data as a function of the alkane chain length, see Figure The constants g, m, p and r in equation 4 were determined for each data set, see Table We note that the derived equations are linear with respect to T and n. The linearity in the c(n) dependence can be easily explained considering the fact that the long lattice parameter c depends mainly on the alkane chain length, as discussed in the Introduction section, see also eq. 2 above The newly obtained data allowed us to calculate also the thermal expansion coefficients αf see Supporting Information Table where f is either of the unit cell parameters (a, b or c) or the unit cell volume V. Here f0 is the reference value of the studied parameter. The volumetric expansion coefficient for the rotator phases of pure odd-numbered alkanes with n = 13-19 was αV,R ≈ 1.5 × 10 -4 °C-1 , whereas for the orthorhombic crystalline phases it was more than twice smaller, αV,C ≈ 6.3 × 10 -5 °C-1 . We note that the derived values are in a good agreement with those published in the literature, for example αV,C ≈ 4.2 × 10 -4 °C-1 for the triclinic lattice of C16 and C18, see Ref. The results obtained for odd-numbered pure alkanes serve as a reference for discussing the results obtained with alkane mixtures, which are presented in the following section. In this section, we present the experimental results obtained from equimolar binary, ternary, and more complex alkane mixtures. Experiments with both bulk and emulsified mixtures were performed, aiming to understand whether any significant difference exists between the temperature dependent rotator phases in these two types of systems. The experiments with oil-inwater emulsions allowed us to assess how the surfactant chain length and confinement size (viz. the drop size) affect the phase structures. The results are organized as follows: Section 3.2.1 shows a series of illustrative temperature resolved SWAXS spectra, elucidating the main types of phase behavior characterized in the present study; Section 3.2.2 illustrates the impact of surfactant properties and initial drop size on the rotator phase structure; Section 3.2.3 summarizes the temperature and chain length dependencies of unit cell parameters, as determined from the experimental results. these samples illustrates all main features observed with the various medium chain length alkane mixtures which is schematically illustrated in Figure The C16 + C17 sample is an example of binary mixture in which a complete miscibility is expected, because Δn = n1 -n2 = 1 < 4, as previously shown The results for the phase behavior of the simplest binary mixture with Δn = 1, C16 + C17, are presented in Figure During heating, the sequence of phase transitions occurred in the reverse order: the crystalline phase transformed into a rotator phase initially, which persisted until the sample reached its final melting point. This observation shows that the RI phase is thermodynamically stable. The complete melting of the sample ended at T ≈ 19°C. Notably, this temperature is slightly lower than the bulk melting temperature of pure C17, Tm(C17) ≈ 22°C Additionally, the inherent defects within the R phase structure, arising from the chain length mismatch, contribute to a decrease in the overall enthalpy measured upon phase transition in the mixture. The total enthalpy for the mixture is a sum of the enthalpies for L-to-R and R-to-C transitions, ΔHtot (C16+C17) = ΔHLR + ΔHRC ≈ 214.5 ± 2.5 J/g. In contrast, the phase transition enthalpies for pure C16 and C17 alkanes are ≈ 215 J/g and 230 J/g, respectively, viz. the enthalpy of the 1:1 molar mixture could be as high as 222 J/g. The enthalpy of the L-to-R transition in the mixture, ΔHLR, constitutes about 87% of the total enthalpy. A comparison of the interlamellar spacing observed in the rotator phases of pure hexadecane and heptadecane, and their equimolar mixture is presented in Figure This corresponds to ΔA ≈ 0.5-0.6 Å 2 in the mixed system compared to ΔA ≈ 0.3-0.4 Å 2 in the pure alkane systems. We note that no significant differences were observed between the experimental results obtained with bulk and emulsified alkane mixtures, see Figure The experimental results obtained with the most complex 7-component mixture studied, containing all alkanes with chain lengths between 14 and 20 C-atoms, mixed in equimolar ratio, are presented in Figure The C14-to-C20 mixture comprises alkane homologous with bulk melting temperatures spanning from 5°C (for C14) to 37°C (for C20). Consequently, the temperature ranges in which distinct phase transitions are observed deviate notably from those observed in the binary C16 + C17 mixture, see Figure The L-to-R transition within the C14-to-C20 mixture, observed upon 0.75°C/min cooling from the melt, begins with a significant subcooling, occurring at a temperature slightly below 20°C. This transition spans a broad temperature interval. The temperature range in which about 78% of the total crystallization enthalpy is released by the alkane mixture is about 16°C (viz. between 19°C and 3°C) for C14-to-C20 sample, see Figure This result suggests that the individual molecular species remain mixed together during the L-to-R phase transition without phase separation into distinct domains with predominant content of longer or shorter alkanes (which would crystallize independently, resulting in the emergence of two or more distinctive interplanar spacings). A plausible molecular arrangement leading to this outcome is depicted schematically in Figure Interestingly, the alterations in the interlamellar spacing in response to temperature changes are completely reversible. Upon heating the samples, an opposite shift in the peak maximum towards lower scattering vectors is observed, see Figure The rotator-to-crystal phase transition occurs over a wide temperature range, starting at around -10°C and extending to T ≈ -30°C, see Figure However, considering that the C19 and C20 molecules collectively represent about 28.6% of all alkane molecules in the sample, it becomes evident that the crystal phase characterized by a longer d-spacing encompasses molecules with n < 19 as well. The domain size analysis using Sherrer equation The obtained results from the C14-to-C20 mixture reveal that the inclusion of alkanes with intermediate chain lengths between the shortest and the longest components in the mixture suppresses the anticipated phase separation in R phase. However, this effect does not prevent the phase separation when the crystalline phase emerges. Accordingly, no phase separation was observed within the rotator phases of the investigated emulsified ternary mixtures, C14 + C16 + C18 and C15 + C17 + C19, see Table C15 + C19 mixture (Δn = 4) Next, as an example of a system in which phase separation is observed upon liquid-torotator phase transition, we present and discuss the behavior of C15 + C19 binary equimolar alkane mixture. Upon cooling from the melt, the formation of C19 domains was observed, Figure The peak corresponding to pure C19 comprised ≈ 3-4% of the total peak area in emulsified samples, and increased to about ≈ 20-25% when investigating bulk C15 + C19 mixture, Figure The remaining C19 molecules formed a mixed rotator phase with the shorter pentadecane molecules. Furthermore, formation of pure C15 domains was observed when the bulk samples were studied. The area of this peak represented to a mere 1% of the total peak area, Figure The rotator-to-crystal phase transition in the bulk sample started at T ≈ -9°C and finished at T ≈ -20°C, see the WAXS curves in Figure C15 + C17 + C19 mixture (Δnmin = 2, Δnmax = 4) Finally, we present results for the phase behavior of the ternary C15 + C17 + C19 mixture, see Figure The SAXS spectra obtained with emulsified mixture, Figure This value decreased to d ≈ 24.0 Å at T ≈ 2°C. Once again, two main regions were observed in the d(T) plota steep decrease observed at T > Tm(C15), followed by a region in which the interlamellar spacing decreased at rate similar to that observed with pure alkanes, see Supporting Information Figure In contrast, the bulk mixture of C15 + C17 + C19 showed a different phase behavior, see Figure Similar results were obtained also for C15 + C17 and C17 + C19 binary alkane mixtures for which Δn = 2, see Figure Information Figure The effect of the molecular characteristics of the surfactant used for emulsion stabilization (hydrophobic chain length and hydrophilic headgroup size), along with the initial drop size, was systematically explored concerning the structure of the rotator phases formed within the mixed C15 + C17 emulsified alkane system. This binary mixture has chain length difference Δn = 2 and, therefore, it forms a single mixed rotator phase. The d(T) dependence is expected to be similar to that observed in C14-to-C20 or C15 + C19 mixtures, see Figures The newly obtained results show that the surfactant structure affects to some extend the dspacing observed at low temperatures. Surfactants with longer tails prompt the formation of phases with shorter interlamellar spacing, whereas slightly longer repeat distance of the layers is observed at equivalent temperatures when the same drops are dispersed in surfactant with shorter hydrophobic tail, Figure The results highlighting the effect of the initial drop size are presented in Figure for the interlamellar spacings plotted as a function of temperature, Figure Further analysis of the obtained results, showed that the observed effect is governed by the initial temperature at which the rotator phase begins to form. The nucleation process occurs with an approximately 2°C difference between the two samples. This variation is attributed to the decreased probability for nucleation in smaller droplets, a phenomenon described by the wellknown subcooling effect. In general, smaller drops require higher degrees of subcooling to trigger the nucleation process, due to their reduced material content Table Notably, the predominant fraction of the molecules in C15 + C19 mixture arrange in a mixed R phase. About 25% of the molecules (mainly C19) were observed to phase separate in the bulk sample, whereas this percentage was significantly lower (ca. 3-4%) in the emulsified samples. The addition of hydrocarbons with intermediate chain length suppresses the phase separation within the rotator phase. These findings are schematically illustrated in Figure The interlamellar spacings for the RI phases determined in the current study are in general agreement with the spacings that can be calculated using the equation derived by Dirand and coauthors, see eq. 2 above Using this equation, we calculated successfully the observed interlamellar spacings in the mixed R phases at T ≈ 2°C (R 2 = 0.995) for all studied mixtures, except for C14 + C16 + C18. This particular mixture comprised even-numbered alkanes, which are known to exhibit very short living transient R phases within their bulk samples and metastable R phases within emulsion drops when taken as individual components Similarly to the rotator phases formed by pure alkanes, the unit cell parameter a in the mixed R phases decreased as the temperature decreased, see Supporting Information Table Conversely, the shorter length of the orthorhombic unit cell, parameter b, increased as the temperature decreased. The a(T) and b(T) dependencies showed linear behavior at temperatures slightly below the onset of rotator phase formation. The slopes of these trends depended on the complexity of the mixture -mixtures with larger Δnmax exhibited greater slopes (in absolute values). Nonetheless, the temperature resolved structural analysis of the mixtures showed a consistent decrease in the area per molecule at a rate of (2.7 ± 0.3) ⨉ 10 -2 Å 2 /°C across all investigated mixtures with molar average chain lengths n between 16 and 17. Notably, this value is identical to the one obtained for pure heptadecane, see Figure As elucidated in the previous two sections, the c(T) dependencies for mixed samples with The thermal expansion coefficients (see eq. 5) for rotator phases of mixed alkanes are summarized in Supporting Information Table Table (1) Temperature derivatives for a(T) and b(T) are determined for 10°C ≤ T ≤ 20°C. (2) All temperature derivatives are calculated for the mixed R phases. (3) All temperature derivatives are calculated from data obtained at T < 12°C. The present study investigates the temperature dependent characteristics of rotator phases formed in both pure and mixed linear alkanes with chain length varied between 13 and 21 C-atoms. Empirical equations have been defined to describe the unit cell parameters for the rotator and crystalline phases of odd-numbered alkanes, as a function of alkane chain length and temperature. The results obtained from experiments conducted with both bulk and emulsified mixed alkane samples revealed that confinement at the micrometer scale does not influence the structure of the rotator phases. Single mixed R phase was formed in all emulsified samples when the smallest chain length difference between the homologous in the mixture was Δnmin ≤ 2. A partial phase separation was observed for the sample with Δnmin = 4. However, even in this sample, the main fraction of the molecules assembled into mixed solid solution. This partial phase separation can be suppressed by introducing an additional component with an intermediate chain length into the sample, thereby reducing Δnmin. Phase separation was not observed in the emulsified samples prepared using such ternary mixtures of alkanes, whereas several diverse domain types with similar interlamellar spacings were detected in the corresponding bulk mixtures. The interlamellar spacing within mixed rotator phases is primarily determined by the molar averaged chain length in the mixture, as previously demonstrated Interestingly, a significant shift in the SAXS peak position toward higher q-values, corresponding to smaller d-spacings, was consistently observed across all mixed samples investigated where Δn ≥ 1 at temperatures close to the temperature at which the liquid-to-rotator phase transition began. The DSC data, along with the scattering peak area analysis, showed that this L-to-R phase transition is not instantaneous, rather it occurs over a relatively broad temperature range. Typically, this range extends until the bulk melting temperature of the shortest alkane in the mixture is nearly approached. The observed temperature shift of the peaks at lower temperatures was comparable to that exhibited by the rotator phases of pure alkanes. The experiments involving emulsions with various drop sizes and diverse surfactants showed that the confinement size primarily impacts the initial temperature at which the formation of the R phase starts. Smaller emulsion drops exhibited a more pronounced subcooling, attributed to the reduced probability of rotator phase nucleus formation. The surfactant adsorption layer was found to exert a minor impact on the interlamellar spacing of the R phasesslightly shorter dspacings were observed for drops stabilized by surfactants with longer saturated hydrocarbon tails. These results contribute to a deeper understanding of the intricate structure of intermediate rotator phases. These phases are important in wide array of applications, ranging from engineering, food science, cosmetics, and even essential processes within living organisms. Supporting Table 3.76 × 10 -3 -2.32 × 10 -3 13.7 × 10 -3 / 1.12 × 10 -3 1.77 × 10 -3 C14-to-C20 4.55 × 10 -3 -3.01 × 10 -3 5.37 × 10 -3 / 0.54 × 10 -3 2.89 × 10 -3 (1) The two values given for αc are calculated using the two different slopes from Table 