The reliability with Machine Learning (ML) techniques in novel materials discovery often depend on the quality of the dataset, in addition to the relevant features used in describing the material. In this regard, the current study presents and validates a newly processed materials dataset that can be utilized for benchmark ML analysis, as it relates to the prediction and classification of deterministic target properties. Originally, the dataset was extracted from the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD) and contains a robust 16,323 samples of ABX3 inorganic perovskite structures. The dataset is tabular in form and is preprocessed to include sixty-one generalized input features that broadly describes the physicochemical, stability/geometrical, and Density Functional Theory (DFT) target properties associated with the elemental ionic sites in a three-dimensional ABX3 polyhedral. For validation, four different ML models are employed to predict three distinctive target properties, namely: formation energy, energy band gap, and crystal system. On experimentation, the best accuracy measurements are reported at 0.013 eV/atom MAE, 0.216 eV MAE, and 85% F1, corresponding to the formation energy prediction, band gap prediction and crystal system multiclassification, respectively. Moreover, the realized results are compared with previous literature and as such, affirms the resourcefulness of the current dataset for future benchmark materials analysis via ML techniques. The preprocessed dataset and source codes are openly available to download from github.com/chenebuah/ML_abx3_dataset. It is unsurprising that inorganic perovskite structures are at the forefront of novel energy materials discovery thanks to their vast compositional and configurational setup, which makes them attractive in diverse engineering applications. Among the several types of perovskite structures is the ABX3 stoichiometry consisting predominantly of three chemical elements that span across the entire periodic table. Ideally, the B-site metallic cation occupies the center of a corner sharing octahedron and is coordinated by six anionic X-site elements, whereas the A-site metallic cation is situated within a twelve-fold cavity of a three-dimensional polyhedral geometry The multifunctionality afforded with perovskites is often tied to the desirable properties inherent to their crystal structure (i.e. structure → property relationship). For instance, perovskite solar conversion cells are widely harnessed in the photovoltaic industry, which is because of their tunable band gaps for optimally matching specific wavelengths emitted from solar radiation Inasmuch as there could be several other mechanical and electronic properties of compelling interest to researchers, the formation energy, band gap, and crystal system are highlighted as critical in characterizing the usability of general crystalline energy materials. By definition, the band gap is the energy difference between the lowest unoccupied conduction band and highest occupied valence band at the fermi level, and assists in classifying the electronic state of the material as either conductive, semi-conductive, or insulative Conventionally, the aforementioned properties are proven to be determined via first-principles deterministic methods and/or experimental synthesization. Despite the immense contribution of conventional approaches in the past and present, they are known to be unpractical for extremely wide materials design search space. For instance, first-principles techniques such as Density Functional Theory (DFT) are computationally expensive due to their derived solutions from solving an approximation of the Schrödinger equation whereas synthesization are suggested to Edisonian-based (i.e. trial-and-error) and resource demanding. On this frontier, Machine Learning (ML) techniques are widely revered to be quicker, efficient and inexpensive unlike traditional DFT and Edisonian experiments. However, the reliability with ML critically hinges on the validity, clarity and acceptability of data as such qualities are beneficial for accurate model training. This, therefore, explains why several well-established databases in solid-state materials are devoted towards the continuous improvement of their data platforms in integrating new material entries with computed target properties that are of close approximation to actual experiments. Some proven materials data platforms include the Materials Project (MP as driven by pymatgen) Prior to imminent ML investigation, a user is required to preprocess the data afforded by these platforms and further feature engineer them using specially customized materials descriptors. As an example, Table Machine. The modeling performances of all considered model are evaluated and compared with previous literature for benchmarking the reliability of the present dataset. All original data samples utilized in the study were generated and extracted from the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD). The OQMD platform is a high-throughput materials database with more than one million density functional theory (DFT) entries in total energy calculations, consisting of both Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) experimental structures and hypothetical structures showing all A-and B-sites chemical cations. As can be observed, the cationic sites consist of a wide mix of possible chemical elements spanning over Groups I-XV of the periodic table, including lanthanides and actinides. Furthermore, Fig. Statistically, the newly processed dataset comprise about 79% of compounds that have infinite band gaps (i.e. Eg = 0) and 21% that have finite band gaps (i.e. Eg > 0). In addition, about 97% of all compounds have negative formation energies (i.e. considered generally to be stable) and 3% have Octahedral Factor Of -- Unit Cell Volume vol cubic-Angstrom The input features utilized in the present study are referred to as generalized compositional features, and are in fact similar to those used in a previous study on target property prediction of ABX3 and A2BB′X6 perovskite structures Because this study deals with the multi-classification of crystal systems, all respective space-group notations are therefore matched to their corresponding crystal structures, appertaining to their notational origin from solid-state symmetrical operations This study applies four ML tabular-dataset models for both regression and classification analysis. They include Support Vector Machine (SVM) Similarly, for crystal system multi-classification, average F1-scores (i.e. accuracy), Precision scores, and Recall scores are used to calibrate the modeling performance for each ML model. The tabulated ABX3 feature dataset is therefore formulated into a M × N matrix, represented as = [x MN ] , where x is a continuous value/variable that corresponds to the M th perovskite sample of the N th perovskite input feature. In the present study, the results are divided into three subsections. The first subsection presents the formation energy (Ef) predictive errors and graphically illustrates the regressive performance fittings for all considered models according to their respective R 2 values. Likewise, the second subsection reports the energy band gap (Eg) modeling performance and graphs the predictive results for comparative inspection. In the third subsection, the multi-classification modeling experiment of crystal systems (Cs) are reported based on downsampling and oversampling (data augmentation) techniques. For each subsection moreover, the dataset is reorganized in terms of the experimented sample size and number of input features used for simulation. For predicting the formation energy target, 58 input features were effectively used for training and testing all considered ML models. The features include all physicochemical and stability properties (as outlined using the Table LGB display similar performances in relation to SVM. The reported MAE scores, as outputted by the other models (i.e. ensemble tree algorithms), are estimated at 0.067 eV/atom RFR, 0.058 eV/atom XGB, and 0.044 eV/atom LGB. Moreover, Fig. For instance, the predictive performance in the present evaluation on Ef is demonstrated to improve the modeling accuracy by 76% when compared to a previous study on tabular-dataset modeling using SVM and a similar set of input features For predicting the energy band gap, the dataset is reorganized into a M × N = 16,323 (perovskites) × 59 (features) matrix, and is split into 70% and 30% for training and testing, respectively. The input features used for simulation comprise of all features as applicable to the prediction of the formation energy (Ef) while also including Ef as an additional input variable. As demonstrated in past studies, including Ef among the set of input features is known to be effective in improving the modeling accuracy of band gap prediction LGB model is demonstrated to outperform its peers in the prediction of Eg based on all evaluation metrics. The reported results are comparatively graphed in the Fig. Eg > 0) among the set of data examples. The lower precision in outputted band gap scores therefore suggests the need for further investigation using improvised features that holistically capture bandgap quantum mechanical behavior. This is an area of future study. On final investigation, multi-classification experiments are implemented on the current dataset for the assignments of crystal systems to their respective classes. As illustrated in Fig. Table In general, SMOTE creates synthetic data points by interpolating between existing minority data points along the lines of k-nearest neighbors in hyperdimensional feature space. As a result, minority classes in trigonal, orthorhombic and tetragonal crystal systems are each oversampled using SMOTE to reproduce new data examples that are of equal size to their cubic training data counterpart (i.e. until a maximum of 3,881 samples are reached). Moreover, the task with oversampling is conducted only on the training data, ensuring that the original samples subjected to testing are uncompromised (i.e. original and not synthesized). Emerging from the SMOTE investigation is the Fig. This suggests that the SMOTE process detrimentally interprets tetragonal systems to be cubic during the synthetic generation process. For further highlighting on the difficulty in distinguishing between cubic and tetragonal, Fig. In this study, a robust tabular-dataset of 16,323 ABX3 perovskite structures is extracted and preprocessed for benchmark machine learning investigation. The dataset is developed using sixtyone generalized input features, which are broadly divided into three categories, namely: physicochemical, stability/geometrical, target electronic properties. The target properties subjected to benchmark evaluation includes formation energy prediction, energy band gap prediction and crystal system multi-classification. Four ML models are used in the experiment and were chosen based on their previously reported accuracy on tabular datasets for general inorganic solid-state ML analysis. They include Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RFR), eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGB), and Light Gradient Boosting (LGB) algorithms. The best accuracy realized in study are reported at 0.013 eV/atom MAE, 0.216 eV MAE, and 85% F1, corresponding to formation energy prediction, band gap prediction and crystal system multi-classification, respectively, which represents considerable improvement when compared to previous benchmark evaluation. The good accuracy in modeling behavior thereby authenticates and validates the current dataset for benchmark ML usage. The preprocessed dataset is made openly available as resource for enhancing target predictive capability via ML in the field of materials informatics. Future studies will focus on further advancing the modeling accuracy of target electronic properties by using deep generative ML models.