We performed time-resolved pump-probe measurements using rare-earth iron garnet Gd 3/2 Yb 1/2 BiFe 5 O 12 as a two-sublattice ferrimagnet. We measured the initial phases of the magnetic resonance modes below and above the magnetization compensation temperature to clarify the sublattice selectivity of the inverse Faraday effect in ferrimagnets. A comparison of the time evolution of magnetization estimated using the equations of motion revealed that the inverse Faraday effect occurring in ferrimagnetic materials has sublattice selectivity. This is in striking contrast to antiferromagnets, in which the inverse Faraday effect acts on each sublattice identically. The initial phase analysis can be applied to other ferrimagnets with compensation temperatures. The ultrafast control of magnetic materials using light pulses has attracted considerable interest over the years. In magnetic insulators, the inverse Faraday effect (IFE) and Faraday effect (FE) have been applied to excite and detect magnetization dynamics, respectively. The bismuth-doped RE iron garnet Gd 3/2 Yb 1/2 BiFe 5 O 12 (GdYb-BIG) is a ferrimagnet with a Curie temperature of 573 K and T M = 96 K, which was obtained from the temperature dependence of magnetization and the sign change of Faraday rotation. Figures To understand the initial phases, two cases can be considered for the sublattice selectivity of the IFE. The directions of H Fe IFE acting on M Fe and H RE IFE acting on M RE are opposite (Case 1 in Fig. We conclude that the IFE in GdYb-BIG operates in opposite directions for each sublattice (Case 1). In special cases, H IFE is generated only in M Fe or M RE . This is consistent with the sublattice selectivity of the FE, in which the signs of the contributions of Fe and RE ions to the FE are opposite and the Fe ion's contribution is dominant in the near-infrared range. + sin ωLFt + sin ωLFt -sin ωLFt -sin ωLFt + sin ωHFt + sin ωHFt -sin ωHFt -sin ωHFt ∓ sin ωLFt ∓ sin ωLFt ± sin ωLFt ± sin ωLFt -sin ωHFt -sin ωHFt + sin ωHFt + sin ωHFt