Two-dimensional (2D) materials have garnered significant attention in recent years due to their atomically thin structure and unique electronic and optoelectronic properties. To harness their full potential for applications in next-generation electronics and photonics, precise control over the dielectric environment surrounding the 2D material is critical. The lack of nucleation sites on 2D surfaces to form thin, uniform dielectric layers often leads to interfacial defects that degrade the device performance, posing a major roadblock in the realization of 2D-based devices. Here, we demonstrate a wafer-scale, low-temperature process (< 250 °C) using atomic layer deposition (ALD) for the synthesis of uniform, conformal amorphous boron nitride (aBN) thin films. ALD deposition temperatures between 125 and 250 °C result in stoichiometric films with high oxidative stability, yielding a dielectric strength of 8.2 MV/cm. Utilizing a seed-free ALD approach, we form uniform aBN dielectric layers on 2D surfaces and fabricate multiple quantum well structures of aBN/MoS2 and aBN-encapsulated double-gated monolayer (ML) MoS2 fieldeffect transistors to evaluate the impact of aBN dielectric environment on MoS2 optoelectronic and electronic properties. Our work in scalable aBN dielectric integration paves a way towards realizing the theoretical performance of 2D materials for next-generation electronics. Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are considered as promising, alternative materials for augmenting conventional Si-based technology due to their atomically thin structure and tunable electronic and optical properties. Strategies for dielectric integration include atomic layer deposition (ALD) of 3D amorphous oxides, or transfer of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) grown via chemical vapor deposition (CVD). ALD of high-κ dielectrics such as Al2O3 and HfO2 on TMDs can be carried out on a wafer-scale, at temperature < 300 °C, and with layer-by-layer control. However, water-based precursors are commonly used to synthesize ALD oxides, resulting in the continued possibility of in situ oxidation and degradation of the TMDs. Here, we present the ALD of ultrathin (2-20 nm) aBN as a scalable, non-water-based, lowtemperature process for dielectric integration with 2D semiconductors. We evaluate the impact of ALD processing parameters on the resulting morphology, chemical composition, and structural properties of aBN and demonstrate uniform integration of ultrathin aBN on MoS2 to enable demonstration of aBN/MoS2 quantum wells. Finally, we fabricate and characterize ALD aBN-encapsulated double-gated monolayer (ML) MoS2 transistors with various channel lengths and gate dielectric stacks to study key performance metrics across a large number of devices. ALD Synthesis of aBN. We demonstrate the wafer-scale, uniform, and conformal deposition of BN on planar Si, high-aspect ratio structures, and 2D material surfaces using ALD. BN thin films are deposited using ALD with sequential flows of BCl3 and NH3, which react under the following overall (net) ligand exchange reaction Deposition temperature-dependent properties of aBN. The growth rate of aBN exhibits dependence on the ALD deposition temperature. In ALD processes, the deposition temperature plays an important role in surface chemistry and reaction kinetics, which in turn dictate the film properties. The ALD deposition temperature plays an essential role in oxygen content in aBN films on Si. This is evident using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), where high-resolution spectra in the B 1s region are fit with two components: B-N at 190.5 eV and B-O at 192.4 eV (Figure The dielectric response of aBN films varies with ALD deposition temperature for aBN deposited via 300 cycles of ALD on p ++ -Si at 65, 150, and 250 °C. The capacitance measurements of Pt/aBN/p ++ -Si metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) stacks from 10 3 -10 6 Hz demonstrate the extracted relative dielectric constant, κ, decreases by ~10% for aBN deposited at 250 and 150 °C, but exhibits a 2× increase at 65 °C (Figure The calculated dielectric strength is 4.4 MV/cm at 65 °C, and 8.2 MV/cm for 150 °C and 250 °C. The relative dielectric constant κ at 100 kHz and dielectric strength at different aBN deposition temperatures are summarized in Figure On the right: back-gated ML MoS2 FET with an aBN/HfO2 stack as gate dielectric; ii) an aBN layer deposited on top of the back-gated ML MoS2 FET with an aBN/HfO2 stack as gate dielectric; and iii) a double-gated ML MoS2 FET formed by depositing HfO2 then top gate metal onto the stack shown in ii). Because of the relatively small bandgap of aBN and potential for gate leakage, a stack of aBN/HfO2 (3.6 nm/5.5 nm) is used to enable high carrier densities in the MoS2 channel. The transfer curves of FETs with different channel lengths are shown in Figure By fabricating double-gated transistors, we also proved that aBN can be used as a top intermediate layer for subsequent HfO2 deposition. Previous studies using a metal oxide seeding layer on MoS2 showed significant off-state degradation due to trapped charges at the MoS2 interfaces induced by oxygen defects in the metal oxide seeding layer. In conclusion, we have developed a wafer-scale, low-temperature ALD process for atomically smooth and conformal aBN dielectric for integration with 2D material-based electronics. We established the deposition temperature as a critical factor in controlling the aBN chemical composition, which in turn dictates the dielectric response of aBN. Quantum confinement of MoS2 with aBN leads to enhanced Raman and PL intensities that increase linearly with the stacking number in scalable MoS2/aBN quantum well structures. Additionally, we have demonstrated that ALD aBN serves as an interfacial layer for monolayer MoS2 transistors, delivering excellent off-state performance, including a close-to-ideal subthreshold slope and minimal threshold voltage variations. We successfully demonstrated a double-gated monolayer MoS2 transistor encapsulated by ALD aBN, exhibiting excellent performance specs. Overall, our work paves a route towards scalable integration of dielectrics for the realization of advanced 2D-based electronics. pulse, (2) 2 s soak, (3) 10 s purge, (4) 2 s NH3 pulse, (5) 2 s soak, (6) 60 s purge. The Ar carrier gas flows for pulse and purge steps are 15 and 25 sccm, respectively. Monolayer MoS2 material for aBN/MoS2 quantum well structures is grown via MOCVD. A custom-built MOCVD system is utilized to grow monolayer MoS2 films on 1 cm 2 c-plane sapphire substrates (Cryscore Optoelectronic Ltd, 99.996%). Mo(CO)6 (99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich) serves as the Mo precursor and H2S (99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich) provides sulfur during synthesis. Details of the growth process for achieving uniform monolayer MoS2 films have been previously described in our publication. After ensuring proper adhesion to the target substrate, the TRT is removed by heating it above its release temperature on a hot plate at 130 °C. The PMMA layer is removed by dissolving in acetone for 8 h. The sample is then rinsed in IPA and dried on a hot plate at 80 °C. The entire transfer process is repeated N times to realize (N + 1) aBN/MoS2 quantum well structures. Film thickness and refractive index are evaluated using spectroscopic ellipsometry (J. A. Woollam M-2000) carried out from 192 to 1000 nm. The Cauchy model is used to extract the thickness and refractive index of the BN layer. Chemical composition is measured by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (Physical Electronics VersaProbe II) with Al Kα monochromatic excitation source and a spherical sector analyzer. All spectra are charge corrected to C 1s spectrum at 284.8 eV. Raman and PL spectra are obtained using the Horiba Scientific LabRam HR Evolution VIS-NIR instrument with a laser wavelength of 532 nm at 3.4 mW for 10 s and 0.34 mW for 5 s, respectively. The microstructures of the cross-sectional samples are observed by FEI Titan3 G2 double aberrationcorrected microscope at 300 kV. All scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) images are collected by using a high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector which has a collection angle of 52-253 mrad. EDS elemental maps of the sample are collected by using a SuperX EDS system under STEM mode. The electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) is performed under STEM mode by using a GIF Quantum 963 system. Thin cross-sectional TEM specimens are prepared by using focused ion beam (FIB, FEI Helios 660) lift-out technique. A thick protective amorphous carbon layer is deposited over the region of interest then Ga+ ions (30 kV then stepped down to 1 kV to avoid ion beam damage to the sample surface) are used in the FIB to make the samples electron transparent. The plane-view TEM (high resolution TEM (HRTEM) imaging, and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns) is performed on a FEI Talos F200x TEM at 200 kV. is annealed at a pressure of ~5×10 -8 Torr at 200 °C for 2 h. Optical microscopy is used to identify flakes located on local bottom gates and the sample is spin coated with photoresist PMMA and baked at 180 oC for 5 mins. Next, source/drain contacts are patterned by a JEOL JBX-8100FS E-Beam Writer system and developed in an IPA/DI solution followed by e-beam evaporation of 70 nm Ni as contact metal. Next, the sample undergoes a lift-off process. To fabricate a top gate hybrid stack of aBN/HfO2, 3.6 nm aBN and 5.5 nm HfO2 are deposited by ALD. The top aBN deposition consists of 40 cycles of 65 °C aBN ALD followed by 90 cycles of 200 °C aBN ALD. Finally, the top gate metal is defined by e-beam lithography (EBL), and e-beam evaporation of 50 nm Ni, followed by another lift-off process in acetone. Details of the FET fabrication process flow have been described previously. 