Electrons in materials containing heavy elements are fundamentally relativistic and should in principle be described using the Dirac equation. However, the current standard for treatment of electrons in such materials involves density functional theory methods originally formulated from the Schrödinger equation. While some extensions of the Schrödinger-based formulation have been explored, such as the scalar relativistic approximation with or without spin-orbit coupling, these solutions do not provide a way to fully account for all relativistic effects of electrons, and the language used to describe such solutions are still based in the language of the Schrödinger equation. In this article, we provide a different method for translating between the Dirac and Schrödinger viewpoints in the context of a Coulomb potential. By retaining the Dirac four-vector notation and terminology in taking the non-relativistic limit, we see a much deeper connection between the Dirac and Schrödinger equation solutions that allow us to more directly compare the effects of relativity in the angular and radial functions. Through this viewpoint, we introduce the concepts of densitals and Dirac spherical harmonics that allow us to translate more easily between the Dirac and Schrödinger solutions. These concepts allow us to establish a useful language for discussing relativistic effects in materials containing elements throughout the full periodic table and thereby enable a more fundamental understanding of the effects of relativity on electronic structure. Solid state materials containing heavy elements are currently studied using computational methods based on the Schrödinger equation (SE). Among the most popular approaches is density functional theory (DFT), The primary focus of this article is to establish a new language for translating between the Dirac and SE solutions. We do this by focusing on the hydrogen-like atom, deriving analytic solutions to the problem with the Dirac equation, and then taking the non-relativistic limit in a particular way that allows the SE solutions to be understood in the context of the four-vector solutions to the Dirac equation. In doing so, we define two concepts that establish a language for translating: densitals and Dirac spherical harmonics. We then use these concepts to analyze states in the SE and Dirac solutions. These concepts also allow us to translate from the traditional SE terminology (e.g., s, p, d, f states) to the more general Dirac terminology we define below. The benefit of this approach is that it enables a much more direct and informative comparison of the effects of relativity on any arXiv:2312.04448v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 7 Dec 2023 orbital we wish to consider. Furthermore, it allows us to visualize the effect of relativity on contraction of orbitals or radial functions in a direct way, and also sheds light on why, in some cases, DFT+U methods may not be adequate to account for all types of orbital contraction, which is known to be important in the study of lanthanides and actinides. A further benefit of developing this language and methodology is that it will enable us to discuss magnetic properties of systems in a more natural way. The RDFT formulation tells us that the ground state energy of a system should depend not only on the static electron density n through the effective scalar potential v eff , but also the current density J J J, through the effective vector potential A eff . This lends itself to a more general way to discuss magnetism in the context of solids than when using the SR and SR+SO methodologies, in which the spin and orbital contributions to the total current are decoupled and the orbital contribution is usually only included when adding the so-called orbital polarization (OP) term. We point out that most of the material presented in this article has been published and discussed before, in fact, much of it is textbook material. The key to this work is to put the pieces together in a way that can enhance our understanding and facilitate discussions. We do not pretend that our way is the only clarifying way the pieces can be put together, but it is a way that has worked well for us. We also expect the language to evolve as others adopt it. Fundamentally, the purpose of the present work is to provide a framework for discussing relativistic states in materials, one that at the same time provides a way to translate from the commonly-used SE concepts to the more general Dirac concepts. To do this, we proceed as follows: in Sec. II we define the Dirac equation in full four-vector notation. In Sec. III we solve the Dirac equation for the hydrogen-like atom and take the nonrelativistic limit in a manner that is different from most textbook treatments. In Sec. IV we introduce the concept of densitals and show comparisons of SE and Dirac solutions using this concept. We follow with a discussion of how this compares to the SR approximation in Sec. V and conclude with ideas for future work that use this framework VI. The Dirac equation in 4 × 4 matrix form is where the canonical momentum is p = -iħ∇, the wave function is a 4-component spinor where ψ A,i (ψ B,i ) are the two upper (lower) components, and the matrices are where σ k are the Pauli matrices. The electrons in a hydrogen-like atom with nuclear charge Z move in a Coulomb potential defined by where e c is the electron charge. The solution to the Dirac equation in the presence of a Coulomb potential is described in the text book Advanced Quantum Mechanics by Sakurai The key concept we use from Ref. The energy eigenvalues for the Dirac equation with the potential as in Eqn. 4 are where N ≥ 0 is an integer, κ ̸ = 0 is an integer, and with α ≈ 1/137 the fine-structure constant. The corresponding eigenfunctions are when κ < 0 and j = -κ -1 2 , and when κ > 0 and j = κ -1 2 . Here j 3 is the projection of j so that -j ≤ j 3 ≤ j in integer steps, and Y m l (θ, φ) are (complex) Laplace spherical harmonics. The upper and lower radial functions are where ρ D is dimensionless, as is p 2 = κ 2 -γ 2 . The coefficients in the sums are obtained by the recursion relations and The normalization constant is given by where Γ is the gamma function and A. The non-relativistic limit The Schrödinger equation is the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation, meaning |V | ≪ mc 2 . For the potential in Eqn. 4 this limit becomes taking into account Eqn. 11. In the Dirac equation the eigenenergies of a system includes the rest mass (mc 2 ) but for a non-relativistic system the energy is instead relative to the dominant energy contribution of the rest mass. This means that e N R = e N κ -1 and that 0 < -e N R ≪ 1. Note that this is consistent with the non-relativistic limit in Eqn. and we can identify N +|κ| with the non-relativistic principal quantum number n, n = 1, 2, 3, . . .. We will soon also connect the other two Dirac quantum numbers j (or equivalently κ) and j 3 to the non-relativistic quantum numbers l and m. It is straightforward to derive that This gives that the non-relativistic criteria in Eqn. 18 becomes with the dimensionless radial coordinate in Eqn. 11 becoming The recursion relations for the coefficients b N R m and a N R m , and the value of p N R are determined from carefully eliminating terms that are γ 2 /ρ smaller than other terms in the same equations that the corresponding Dirac quantities are determined from. The resulting equations are indeed the same equations we would get if we put the ansatz directly into the Schrödinger equation. The results are and where we have used that N + p N R = n, determined from identification with the non-relativistic energy as above. Equation Identifying p N R -1 = l, with l the non-relativistic angular momentum quantum number, we arrive at which, with some good bookkeeping, can be reduced to the more recognizable form a is the generalized Laguerre polynomial. To connect the Dirac solutions even more to the nonrelativistic limit, we replace m = j 3 -1/2 in both the negative and positive κ wave functions and arrive at using that l = j -1 2 ; -κ = l + 1; m = j 3 -1 2 for κ < 0, and using that l = j + 1 2 ; κ = l; m = j 3 -1 2 for κ > 0. If we now set f nl (r) = 0, as we derived above for the SE, we can add and subtract the two wave functions with suitable coefficients to arrive at the fact that both the upper spin up, ψ 1,i , and spin down, ψ 2,i , components can be described by The spin and angular momentum are indeed decoupled in the non-relativistic limit, and both spin and angular momentum are now good quantum numbers. SE solutions are often plotted using only the angular part of the wavefunctions, not the radial part. Most often this is done using the real, as opposed to complex (or Laplace), spherical harmonics, and these are typically referred to as orbitals. However, the Dirac solution in Eqns. 7 and 8 cannot be illustrated in this manner due to the fact that we have a mixture of different angular momenta functions in each component, as well as different radial functions in the upper and lower components. Because of this, we will introduce the the concept of densitals While the wavefunctions or orbitals of a system are not observables, the electron density formed by these orbitals with f i an occupancy factor. The density is also the primary quantity in the different computational methods based on density functional theory In Fig. However, as mentioned above we cannot use the real spherical harmonics for the Dirac solution in Eqns. 7 and 8. We therefore define Dirac spherical harmonics where j = l + 1 2 for high and j = l -1 2 for low and j 3 = m ± 1 2 so that -j, -j + 1, . . . ≤ j 3 ≤ . . . , j -1, j. From Eqns. 29 and 30 we have that the upper components are described by these Dirac spherical harmonics. The lower components come from the same formulas but the κ < 0 solution uses the low formula with l replaced by l+1 and the κ > 0 solution uses the high formula with l replaced by l -1. This shift in l values for the lower components means that the upper and lower components will have the same values for j and j 3 . We see that the upper and lower components separately use a linear combination of Y m l with l fixed and different m. We also note that we already in the separate upper and lower components are mixing spin and the projection of the angular momentum. The angular momentum itself gets mixed when upper and lower components are taken into account together, as when forming the density or densitals. We should note that the Dirac spherical harmonics are eigenfunctions of the spin-orbit coupling operator. In Fig. A comparison of Figs. V. DISCUSSION The two solutions can be written as a single solution if we allow the use of spherical harmonics Y mκ κ with negative κ. We have, however, chosen to use the definition Y mκ κ = Y mκ -κ-1 for negative κ, to more easily relate to standard SE language with l being a positive integer. We thus have two types of Dirac solutions, high and low or κ < 0 and κ > 0. We have chosen the names high and low for several reasons. We will discuss this when considering the translations from l to κ, j. Since l and κ have different relations in the high and low solutions, Dirac solutions with the same l can have different energies because of the different values of κ 2 , see Eqn. 5, and they will have different radial functions, see Eqn. The main confusion that can still arise is when comparing states where l is not the same. Of course, this is because the fact that we are not used to translating between the relativistic κ, j and the non-relativistic l. For example, nD l p and nD h s will be degenerate in en- There are many more or less fundamental ways of understanding that the main effect of relativity is to contract the electron density closer to the nuclei. In the planetary view of electrons and nuclei, we know that a planet that moves faster around its sun also needs to contract its orbit since the area swept per unit time needs to be constant. In the positron/electron picture we understand that the mingling of positrons and electrons in the deeper parts of the potential close to the nucleus can allow for more electrons to occupy low energy states in this region. We will here show two more indications to support this fact. In Fig. In Fig. The observations made in this section could explain the fact that the PBE κ=-3, j=5/2 FIG. is often to introduce some localizing effect, such as a +U treatment on the f -or d-orbitals. In view of the insights here, it might be that we should instead contract the s and p orbitals, which are the most contracted ones in the Dirac equation compared to the SE, and use a functional with correct binding properties on this contracted density. The key insight from this scenario would be that the regions in space that accounting for binding even in relativistic materials have non-relativistic character, and all effects are secondary and due to the contraction of the density towards the nuclei. As is usually the case, the truth is probably that we both have to create new functionals able to describe both localized and delocalized electrons on the same footing, and use the full Dirac equation in order to obtain accurate and indisputable results for relativistic materials. The scalar relativistic method by Koelling and Harmon We should note that the Dirac spherical harmonics are eigenfunctions of the spin-orbit coupling operator. This means that the spin-orbit coupling itself is included in any solution written in terms of Dirac spherical harmonics. In the non-relativistic limit, the coupling vanishes because the lower-component radial function becomes very small and we can rotate to a frame where spin and angular momentum are decoupled and each good quantum numbers. In the scalar relativistic method, however, part of the spin-orbit coupling effect on the radial function is explicitly omitted with catastrophic consequences for the D l p state. Just as the SE solution to hydrogen-like atom is the basis for the s-, p-, d-, and f -electron language of non-relativistic electronic structure, we expect the Dirac solution of the same system presented here to form the basis for the language of relativistic electronic structure. We have provided a simple system for translating from the l, m, and s non-relativistic quantum numbers to the j, j 3 , and κ relativistic quantum numbers via the n D(irac) h(igh),l(ow) l j3 notation, with n the nonrelativistic principal quantum number and with j = l + 1/2 for D h (κ < 0) and j = l -1/2 for D l (κ > 0). We have introduced Dirac spherical harmonics and densitals, which can be used for visualizing SE and Dirac solutions on the same footing. We have noted that the main effect of relativity in the case of a hydrogen-like atom is a contraction of the electron density towards the core and that this radial contraction is larger for lower angular momentum l, such as s and p states, while the larger angular momenta d and f orbitals is closer to the non-relativistic limit. We intend to investigate the power of the herepresented alternative viewpoint in several lines of work. For one, it is often elucidating to examine the density of states (DOS) of a system. The integrated DOS is closely related to the partial charges in Eqn. 32 that we based our definition of densitals on. To gain even more detailed information, an lm-decomposed DOS is often studied, in particular for actinide materials. Commonly the lmdecomposition is made by projecting on real spherical harmonics, but we want to explore what more information we can gain by instead projecting on Dirac spherical harmonics. Another line of work is to reexamine the scalar relativistic method from this alternative view point and see if we can modify it to resolve some of the most severe deficiencies. Basing all-electron methods and pseudo-potentials on the Dirac spherical harmonics is another obvious task. We expect this alternative viewpoint to help in developing existing and new computational methods to give better results for actinide materials.