We present numerical simulation of the X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) of the L2,3 and M2,3 edges of Ru in antiferromagnetic RuO2 using a combination of density functional + dynamical mean-field theory and configuration interaction treatment of Anderson impurity model. We study the dependence of the dichroic spectra on the orientation of the Néel vector and discuss it in the context of altermagnetism. Approximate equivalence between the XMCD spectra for geometries with X-rays propagating parallel and perpendicular to the Néel vector is found and shown to be exact in absence of valence spin-orbit coupling and core-valence multipolar interaction. A metallic compensated magnet RuO 2 has attracted a considerable attention recently. The combination of its rutile structure with an antiparallel ordering of spin moments gives rise to a number of phenomena such as the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) Altermagnetism is a non-relativistic concept, i.e., it relies on the spin rotation SU (2) symmetry in the absence of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC). However, the above transport and charge-excitation effects are possible only if altermagnetic order and SOC are present simultaneously. The SOC thus plays a dual role. On one hand, it allows the altermagnetic order to be detectable through some of the technologically interesting transport effects. On the other hand, it gives rise to magneto-crystalline anisotropy and possibly a weak ferromagnetism with a small net magnetization m. To prove the altermagnetic origin of transport phenomena, e.g., AHE, one must not only measure a finite signal, but also distinguish the altermagnetic contribution associated with L from the contribution due to weak ferromagnetism or possibly the external magnetic field associated with m, which requires a careful quantitative analysis The X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) provides an alternative. The XMCD is an odd magnetooptical effect, which arises from the same anti-symmetric part of the conductivity tensor σ a = 1 2 (σσ T ) as the valence band phenomena, such as AHE or magnetooptical effects in the visible range and therefore follows the same symmetry rules. However, the XMCD, especially in lighter elements, arises due to the SOC in the core state and is only weakly affected by the valence SOC reflecting the typically small orbital moments The theoretical altermagnetic contribution to XMCD can be obtained as the XMCD with the valence SOC switched off. In other words, in the X-ray spectral range it is the core SOC which allows the altermagnetic order to be expressed in the magneto-optical spectra, while the valence SOC, which causes the spurious weak ferromagnetism, has only a marginal contribution In this article we compute XMCD at L 2,3 and M 2,3 edges of Ru for various orientations of the Néel vector L. Recently, Sasabe et al. Starting with a density functional theory (DFT) calculation for the experimental structure of RuO 2 The XMCD spectra are calculated for i) Ru 4+ atomic model and ii) DMFT + Anderson impurity model (AIM) using the method of Refs. 45-47 based on a configuration interaction impurity solver. The two models implement the same atomic Hamiltonian, which is coupled to an electronic bath via the hybridization function ∆(ω) in (ii). The ordered Ru moments are generated by the (selfconsistently determined) spin-polarized bath in (ii). In (i) we impose a Zeeman field chosen to generate the same moment as obtained in (ii). Detailed comparison of the two models in SM [38] reveals similar spectra. The com-putationally cheap atomic model is therefore used for the symmetry analysis of the results. The SOC is not included in the DMFT self-consistent calculations. However, SOC within the Ru 4d shell is included in the AIM when computing the XMCD intensities. The spin-polarized hybridization densities ∆(ω) are transformed to capture the desired Néel vector orientations in these simulatons. The XMCD is the difference of the absorption spectra for the right-hand and left-hand circularly polarized light propagating along the direction k. It is convenient to view the antisymmetric part of the conductivity tensor σ as an axial (Hall) vector h(ω) = (σ a zy (ω), σ a xz (ω), σ a yx (ω)). For simplicity we will not show the ω-dependence from now on, but indicate the dependence on k as well as the orintation of the Néel vector L The Hall vector h(L) contains information about XMCD for any direction k, but depends on the crystallographic orientation of L. In Fig. ig.4_correct /home/takahashi/project/RuO2/fig_for_paper/gnuplot_fig4_ver10_factor1.0 Thanks to the local nature of core-level excitations the observed signal is given by a sum of contributions from the two Ru sites In the following we will make use of mirror symmetries to discuss the dependence of the XMCD signal, i.e. h(L) as a function of L. The mirror (glide) planes are marked in Fig. For L ∥ [110] the two Ru sites are inequivalent. There is no symmetry relationship between the XMCD contributions from the two Ru sites and therefore no cancellation between the site contributions h (i=1,2) as shown in Fig. y = 0 on each site as shown in Fig. z and h x , see Fig. (1) y , see Fig. Fig. Our results show that a non-zero XMCD exists for L ∥ [110] and any k not perpendicular to L as well as L ∥ [ 100] and k not perpendicular to [010]. On the other hand, the XMCD signal vanishes for the experimental easy axis L ∥ [00 1]. It was shown that L can be tilted in the [110] using external magnetic field Comparing the XMCD spectra in Fig. We have calculated the XMCD spectra on the Ru L 2,3 and M 2,3 edges of antiferromagnetic RuO 2 using the LDA+DMFT approach. The present XMCD spectra differ from the recent calculations using the atomic model Here we prove analytically the numerical results of Fig. Here |i L ⟩ and |f L ⟩ are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, E f i;L is the excitation energy, and T ± k are the dipole operators for the right-and left-hand polarization with respect to propagation vector k. Thanks to the immobility of the core hole the x-ray absorption spectrum is an sum over site contributions. We will use the geometry of Fig. ometries for Fig. (A2) Here we use the angles φ and α in ∆F (φ, α) to represent k and L in the geometry of Fig. we express the dipole operators T ± x for the circularly polarizated light propagating along the x-axis, helicity basis for k ∥ x, using dipole operators in the helicity basis for k ∥ z The expression (A1) for XMCD then takes the form Here, the polarization of the dipole operators is taken with respect to the z-axis. We will use the shorthand notation for the matrix elements of the dipole operators shown on the third line from now on. In absence of the valence SOC and core-valence multipole interaction, the excitation energy does not depend on the orientation of L, i.e., the angle α and the eigenstates for arbitrary angles φ and α can be obtained from those for φ = 0 and α = 0 by a joint z-axis rotation C(φ, α) of core spin, core we arrive at their transformation properties Substituting these into (A3) we get the formula for the XMCD spectra for general angles φ and α The ↑↑ and ↓↓ terms do not change sign under the magnetic moment reversal α → α + π and thus must vanish the expression for XMCD. Now we can evaluate the XMCD spectra for the orientations in (A2) Note that this is not enough to guarantee ∆F (a) = ∆F (b) . We use the fact that in the rutile structure there are two-fold rotation axes parallel to [110] and [1 10], i.e., φ = 0 and φ = π 2 . In Ref. Adding the two lines we get and substituting (A7) into the third line of (A6) concludes the proof XAS spectral function is described by the Fermi's golden rule Here, |g⟩ is the ground with energy E g , and ω in is the energy of the incident photon. T is the electric dipole transition operator for circularly-polarized X-rays Figure 