We provide a systematic method for constructing effective dispersive Lindblad master equations to describe weakly anharmonic superconducting circuits coupled by a generic dissipationless nonreciprocal linear system, with effective coupling parameters and decay rates written in terms of the immittance parameters characterizing the coupler. This article extends the foundational work of Solgun et al. [1] for linear reciprocal couplers described by an impedance response. Notably, we expand the existing toolbox to incorporate nonreciprocal elements, account for direct stray coupling between immittance ports, circumvent potential singularities, and include collective dissipative effects that arise from interactions with external common environments. We illustrate the use of our results with a circuit of weakly anharmonic Josephson junctions coupled to a multiport nonreciprocal environment and a dissipative port. The results obtained here can be used for the design of complex superconducting quantum processors with nontrivial routing of quantum information, as well as analog quantum simulators of condensed matter systems. Superconducting circuits In typical cQED setups, transmons are used as qubits due their simplicity and reduced sensitivity to charge noise, a feature that is linked to their low anharmonicity Although general, these methods are not tailored to describing nonreciprocal elements that are characterized by nonsymmetric immittance response In this article, we provide a systematic tool to engineer nonreciprocal Lindbladian in cQED platforms based on Schrieffer-Wolff (SW) transformations, i.e., in the dispersive regime, of general nondissipative linear couplers described by an immittance matrix. This work thus constitutes a generalization of the analysis conducted by Solgun et al. This article is structured as follows. In Sec. II, we present our main results, which includes an overview of the derivation of the qubits's Hamiltonian and decay rates, while deferring the technical details to the Appendices. This allows us to for-mulate the master equation for the qubits in its Lindblad form in terms of the circuit's immittance parameters. It is worth emphasizing that our results subsume and extend those derived in Ref. In this section we present our main results and provide sketches for their derivations, with full details found in the appendices. Fig. In general, any lossless causal immittance has a canonical lumped representation known as its Cauer circuit that synthesizes its response In this expression, H S is the Hamiltonian of the junctions and inner modes of the circuit (i.e. resonators and gyrators coupled to the qubit modes), H I is the interaction Hamiltonian of the coupling between qubit and inner modes with the dissipative ports, and H B is the bath Hamiltonian corresponding to the dissipative ports. Finally, H D (t) accounts for classical external voltage sources at the drive ports. Having obtained a general classical representation of the circuit, we now assume the circuit's inner modes to be dispersively coupled to the qubit modes; see Fig. The next step is to add back the qubit's nonlinearity. This approach can be applied to different types of lowanharmonicity qubits operating within a single deep potential well. For such qubits, the charge dispersion is further suppressed when coupled to a linear (non)reciprocal electromagnetic environment In this expression, Ĥq is the qubit Hamiltonian where bi is the annihilation operator for the dressed qubit mode i. The first two terms of Ĥq correspond to the free dressed qubit Hamiltonian, and the last term to qubit-qubit coupling mediated by the circuit. As in Solgun et al. To simplify the presentation, the expressions for the parameters entering Ĥq are provided below for the special case where there is no direct coupling (capacitive, inductive or nonreciprocal) between the qubit ports (see Appendix C for details of the derivation, including the case with direct coupling). First, to second-order in perturbation theory, the qubit frequencies in Eq. ( where the last term accounts for the Lamb shift introduced by the inner modes, with L Ji = 1/C Ji ω 2 i the dressed junction inductance. For I = Y, Z the ac part of the response is defined as I ac = I -I dc , while the dc part I dc is the sum of poles at zero and infinity, i.e., Y dc = iωC Y + L -1 Y /iω + E ∞ , where C Y (L Y ) is the capacitive (inductive) matrix extracted from the admittance, and E ∞ = [Y dc -(Y dc ) T ]/2 = Y dc,NR is the nonreciprocal part of Y dc corresponding to direct nonreciprocal coupling between the ports. We emphasize that the dc part of the impedance contains only the capacitive response, Z dc = C -1 Z /iω, as we consider ports shunted by capacitors, see Appendix A for details. In the expression for ω i , the frequencies ω i take the form where ω Ji = 1/( L Ji C Ji ) 1/2 is the plasma frequency of junction i, with L Ji = φ 2 0 /E Ji the bare junction inductance, and C Ji its total shunt capacitance. The frequency ω i has two types of correction over the bare qubit frequency. First, the presence of the charging energy (bare anharmonicity) E Ci = e 2 /2C Ji . Second, and in contrast with the similar expression from Ref. Moving on to the second term of Eq. ( In these expressions, the admittance and impedance account for both the reciprocal (symmetric) and nonreciprocal (antisymmetric) response, Crucially, the J ij coupling has a nontrivial phase resulting from the interplay of the reciprocal and nonreciprocal responses. Indeed, writing J ij = |J ij |e iθij , the phase is determined by the expression with an identical expression for the impedance response obtained by substituting Y(ω) → Z(ω). In general, effective quantum models breaking time-reversal symmetry require a nontrivial phase in the hopping between sites The second term of the Hamiltonian appearing in Eq. ( where âμ is the annihilation operator for the dressed inner circuit mode μ. To second-order in perturbation theory and sixth-order in the nonlinear terms of the junctions potential, the cross-Kerr coefficients are (see Appendix E) for the admittance and the impedance, respectively. In these equations, ω μ is the frequency of mode μ obtained from the ac poles of the response. The coefficients g qQ iμ (g φΠ iμ ) and g qΠ iμ (g φQ iμ ) are the bare charge-charge (flux-flux) and chargeflux (flux-charge) couplings between qubit mode i and circuit mode μ and are proportional to the residue of the admittance (impedance) at frequency ω μ . Detailed expressions for these couplings can be found in Eqs. (E28) and (E29) of Appendix E. Notably, the presence of nonreciprocity in the circuit, captured by these charge-flux interactions, modifies the dispersive shifts. Hamiltonian Ĥv (t) describes coupling of the qubits to external drive ports and it is given by where n and n D are respectively the number of qubit and drive ports. Focusing on the situation where there is no direct coupling between drive ports and assuming a single tone voltage drive V d (t) = v d sin(ω d t) at each drive port d, the drive amplitudes take the form when expressed using the admittance case, and expressed using the impedance. In these expressions, φ = arctan[Z 0 Im Y dc dd (ω d )] and φ ′ =arctan[Z 0 / Im Z dc dd (ω d )] are the phase shift introduced by the external transmission line Z 0 at drive port d. Moreover, the reciprocal and nonreciprocal components of the dc response take into account possible direct couplings between qubit and drive ports. Additionally, Y drive and Z drive denote, respectively, the external admittance and impedance filtered by the capacitances and inductances at drive ports. They are obtained by adding the lower n D × n D block of the dc immittance response Y dc D (Z dc D ) to the characteristic value of the admittance (impedance) of the external transmission lines located at each drive ports, For the sake of simplicity and without loss of generality, we will consider all the external transmission lines to have the same characteristic impedance Z 0 , that is Z 0 = Z 0 1 n D . More general expressions accounting for arbitrary voltage pulse shapes as well as direct capacitive and inductive couplings between drive ports can be found in Appendix C. The external ports also open decay channels for the qubit, something which we model as baths of harmonic oscillators following the Caldeira-Leggett approach and where ω ij = (ω i + ω j )/2 is the average frequency. Notably, the Purcell decay rates of qubit i due to its coupling to the drive ports can be determined from the diagonal elements of the matrix γ ij . In the absence of direct stray coupling between drive ports, these rates are given by where Here, we have omitted the coherent contribution from the baths which in the dispersive and weak direct coupling regime only leads to a small renormalization of the qubits' Hamiltonian Ĥq . Notably, as shown in Ref. In this expression, D( bi , bj )ρ = bj ρb † i -1 2 { b † i bj , ρ} and the sum is on qubits i and j such that |ω iω j | ≲ min(γ iκ , γ jκ ). In summary, we have shown how the master equation of a nonreciprocal circuit in the dispersive regime is determined by the total linear response exhibited by the microwave structure connecting the qubits and the drive ports. That is ρ = Lρ where the Lindblad superoperator is a function of the circuit's admittance or impedance. For completeness, the cases with direct capacitive, inductive, and nonreciprocal coupling between the qubit ports can be found in Appendix C for both admittance and impedance responses. We now illustrate how the results of the previous section can be used with a simple circuit example that consists on three Josephson junctions coupled via filters to a nonreciprocal scattering element, see Fig. with r(φ) = 1 + 2 cos(φ), t(φ) = 1cos(φ) and c(φ) = √ 3 sin(φ). Geometrically, this scattering matrix is a rotation Focusing first on the case where the filter is a simple πcapacitive filter, see Fig. where ω = ωJ + δ (see Eq. ( the anharmonicity and E C the charging energy which we take to be equal for all three junctions. Moreover, is the ac pole of the admittance response, with R the characteristic impedance of the nonreciprocal scattering element. As noted in Ref. valid for all values of φ ̸ = 0, π. Therefore, we conclude that for the circuit of Fig. As an illustration of this chiral dynamics, starting with one excitation in the first qubit and all other modes in the vacuum, we plot in Fig. Other filters can be used instead of the capacitive filter of Fig. As an additional example of application, we now consider the circuit of Fig. By imposing iJ 21 + γ 12 /2 = 0, the qubit at port 1 can be isolated from qubit at port 2 when expressed in terms of the admittance response, with an analogous expression for the impedance response. Isolation is possible π-capacitive filter, this leads to the following constraints The first condition results from the filter's high-pass behavior, while the second represents an impedance matching condition for the dissipative port of impedance Z 0 , and admits a solution only when C c /C D ≥ 2 √ 3ω/ω y (φ). This inequality is satisfied when C c ≫ C D , C g . In that case, the matched load should be chosen such that Z 0 ≃ √ 3R/ tan φ/2. For φ = 2π/3, we recover the usual impedance matching condition Z 0 = R of an ideal circulator. Importantly, isolation can also be obtained for φ ̸ = 2π/3 provided a suitable adjustment of the impedance matching condition is made. Fig. The three-port network that we have considered here represents a small nontrivial example of the general results of the previous section. Naturally, extending the application of the above results to an N -port network is straightforward. The underlying principles remain unchanged We have shown that knowledge of the classical immittance response together with qubit design parameters (e.g., Josephson's energies) is sufficient to fully characterize the dispersive master equation for transmon qubits even in the presence of nonreciprocal elements. While we have focused on transmon qubits, our results can be readily extended to any weakly anharmonic qubit operating in a single well potential, e.g., building upon the results of Ref. Expanding beyond weakly anharmonic qubits, the formalism presented here could potentially be adapted to inductively shunted qubits, such as the fluxonium qubit, following Ref. More generally, we expect that our work will facilitate the exploration of nonreciprocal models in circuit and cavity QED platforms More broadly, our work bridges the gap between electrical engineering via immittance design and quantum simulation of nonreciprocal and topological models. This connection relies on the mapping between the phase of the tunneling rate and immittance parameters provided by Eq. ( All the codes to reproduce the main results are available online In this appendix, we first provide a review of canonical immittance matrix decompositions for lossless circuits. We then discuss the electromagnetic duality between impedance and admittance responses, and analyze singular cases in both approaches. For more details on linear response synthesis, the reader is referred to Ref. (A1) In this representation, U, V, R, and N correspond respectively to the multiport Belevitch transformer that connects the capacitive, inductive, reciprocal, and nonreciprocal stages to the rest of the circuit where A α and D α with α ∈ {0, ∞, β} are N × N real symmetric matrices with N the number of ports. Similarly, B ζ and E ζ with ζ ∈ {∞, β} are N × N real antisymmetric matrices. These matrices are defined from the residues of the impedance (admittance). Explicitly, we have where the residue is given by Res[Z(ω 0 )] = lim s→iω0 (siω 0 )Z(s), and Z(ω) ≡ lim s→iω Z(s). The same expressions hold for D α and E ζ exchanging Z with Y. The synthesis of these responses can be done using their canonical Cauer circuit, see Fig. with v i (s) the voltage at port i, i j (s) the current at port j, and v c i = i c i /sC i the voltage of the capacitor shunting port i, it follows directly that lim s→∞ Z ij (s) = 0. As such, the impedance responses we will be considering have no poles at infinity and A ∞ = B ∞ = 0. Moreover, we define the reciprocal (nonreciprocal) poles with frequencies ω rγ (ω gμ ) where 1 ≤ γ ≤ m (1 ≤ μ ≤ l), as those with zero (nonzero) imaginary part in their residue, see Eq. (A2). Doing so, the expansions of Z and Y read The Cauer decomposition of these responses rests on two key facts. First, with an appropriate choice of reactive elements, the circuit poles will be at the same frequencies as the response poles. Importantly, the minimal number of reactive elements necessary is directly given by the rank of the response residues. Second, the residue matrices A α and B ζ (D α and E ζ ) encode the topology of the circuit. This topology is realized in the circuit with the use of ideal transformer matrices (U, V, R, N in Fig. where R is the gyration resistance of the gyrator. In the nondegenerate case, the rank of each residue at frequencies ω rγ and ω gμ is one. We elucidate the process of obtaining explicit expressions for the transformer matrices, gyration ratios, and reactive element parameters in the subsequent paragraphs. We focus first on the impedance response synthesis, see Fig. , where the transformer ratios n L,R μ are (N × 1) column vectors coupling the external ports with the left and right branches of the gyrators, with gyration ratio R μ capacitively shunted at each branch with C gμ , synthetizing the nonreciprocal resonators of frequency ω gμ = 1/R μ C gμ . These transformer ratios are obtained from both As before, following standard convention we set C gμ = 1 and R μ = 1/ω gμ . One can show that in the nondegenerate case, the transformer ratios can be given by n μ are the normalized eigenvectors with nonzero eigenvalue of A μ . In summary, we have For the admittance [see right panel of Fig. summary (A6) Here, we have used the convention L rγ = L gμ = 1, C rγ = 1/ω 2 rγ and R μ = ω gμ . The capacitive stage is synthetized analogously as in the impedance case. The inductive stage is synthesized with the orthogonal transformer matrix U, and the inductors given by the inverse of the eigenvalues of D 0 (i.e., the diagonal entries of L). Similarly, the transformer ratios are given by r , where λ γ (λ L,R μ ) are the normalized eigenvectors with nonzero eigenvalue of D γ (D μ ), and have dimension [L] -1/2 . The nonreciprocal stage E ∞ can be formally synthetized with a transformer matrix N ∞ and a set of ideal gyrators represented by the block matrix Y G ∞ . However, as we do not need this synthesis for any of our results, we do not give explicit expressions for it here. We stress that the transformer (gyration) ratios and reactive elements for a given admittance and impedance synthesis when one is the inverse of the other are different. We have chosen the same notation for both to make the duality apparent. However, in general the inverse of the impedance (admittance) is not its dual. We now make this statement more precise. In the context of circuit theory, electromagnetic duality refers to the invariance of the equations of motion for voltages (v) and currents (i) under the transformation v → z 0 i and i → v/z 0 , where z 0 depends on the units chosen for voltage and currents. In particular, two immittance responses Z(s) and Y d (s) are dual if the equations of motion for voltages (v) and currents (i) at the ports are invariant under the transformation , where the Cauer representation of Y d (s) is obtained from the Cauer representation of Z(s), by changing capacitors to inductors (and viceversa), transposing the transformer matrices, and using the LC-oscillators (gyrators) admittance instead of impedance representations. For Josephson junction-based circuits, the shunting capacitances accompanying these JJs introduce an asymmetry in the poles between the impedance and admittance approaches, see Eq. (A3), breaking therefore electromagnetic duality between the two approaches. This leads to the possibility of encountering distinct singular cases for the admittance and impedance representations when constructing their respective Lagrangian. We proceed to show that this is indeed the case. Let us focus first on the singular cases of circuits in which the external ports are shunted by dipoles described by their flux degree of freedom. In this context, the kinetic matrix of the Lagrangian derived from the Cauer representation of the impedance (admittance) will be singular if A 0 (D ∞ ) is singular. Specifically, circuits featuring direct inductive coupling (as depicted in Fig. for all j. In other words A 0 = lim s→0 sZ(s) has two linearly dependent rows and is singular. Notice that this statement is true even in the presence of a parallel (shunting) capacitor to the L c . By the same token, if there is a shunting inductance on port i, then lim s→0 v i = 0 implying that (A 0 ) ij = 0 for all j and A 0 is singular. However, this last case can be remedied by extracting the shunting inductance out of the response and dressing the bare inductance of the dipole with it. In contrast, within the admittance framework, D ∞ will always be full rank due to the shunting capacitances at the ports, hence the derived Lagrangian is not singular and derivation of the corresponding Hamiltonian and subsequent quantization, can always be done. Finally, we note that thanks to electromagnetic duality, our results extend to weakly anharmonic qubits described by their (loop) charge degree of freedom such as phase-slip flux qubit tonian H defined by the quadratic form H as where X is the vector of generalized phase-space coordinates. Without loss of generality we divide it into two sectors A and B such that , where position and momenta obey the standard Poisson bracket {x a , p b } = δ a,b . With this division, the quadratic form H in block form reads Consequently its symplectic form J is also in block form, i.e., with where n (m) corresponds to the number of conjugate pair variables in A (B). The equations of motion of the system read Ẋ = JHX with X = SX the transformed coordinates, such that the Hamiltonian now reads This symplectic transformation must satisfy SJS T = J and, for any symmetric matrix A, it must hold that S = exp(AJ) is a symplectic transformation Because (S T ) -1 HS -1 = exp(JA)H exp(-AJ), we cannot use the well-known Baker-Cambpbell-Hausdorff expansion of exp(B)H exp(-B) to directly evaluate the transformation. Instead, we use the general expansion Substituting with JA = D and -AJ = B we have Furthermore, we define the transpose anticommutator of two matrices {D, B} T ≡ DB + B T D T . With this notation, we can show that {D, . . . {D, which can be easily proved by induction. As (JA) T = -AJ, it follows that T . (B10) Now, we write the off-diagonal block of H coupling the two sectors as H AB ≡ λH AB with λ the customary perturbation parameter. Additionally, we express the block diagonal quadratic forms as A where H A and λH ′ A correspond to its diagonal and nondiagonal entries within that sector, respectively. With similar expressions for sector B, we have As is customary, we also expand A as a power series in λ: Substituting Eqs. (B11) and (B12) into Eq. (B10) while also imposing condition Eq. (B5), we obtain the set of equations for generator A order by order: {JA (1) , {JA (2) , H (0) } T = -{JA (1) , and so on. These expressions are analogous to those obtained for the standard quantum Schrieffer-Wolff transformation Thus, up to second-order in λ only the first-order generator is needed. From Eq. (B13b), we have , and therefore taking into account only the first-order generator the expansion of H will be accurate up to fourth (third) order in λ. To solve Eq. (B13a) and find A (1) note that its diagonal (even) sector will be zero and only its nondiagonal (odd) block sector will be nonzero, and therefore we let A (1) We also write where we have chosen the dimension of all the entries to be of frequency for reasons that will become apparent below. Substituting Eqs. (B4), (B15) and (B16a) into Eq. (B13a) and setting the perturbation parameter λ = 1 we find after some al-gebraic manipulations that where β with w α (ω β ) the oscillation frequency associated with the conjugate pair x α , p α (x β , p β ) when only H (0) is considered. As usual, we call these frequencies the 'bare' frequencies of the problem. The above expressions for the first order generator of the transformations gives us the perturbative criteria where k is the largest entry of matrix H -H (0) and ∆ ab is the smallest frequency gap |w a αw b β | between the bare oscillators in subsectors A, B. Continuing with the general derivation, we substitute Eq. (B17) into Eq. (B11) and, after some algebra, we obtain the corrections up to O(k 3 /∆ 2 ab ) of the quadratic forms of both subsectors A, B: To obtain the corrections to H B , we simply exchange α with β, m with n and use K T in the above formulas. For H A xp , the diagonal entry corrections α = α ′ are equal to zero. As a simple example, take three LC oscillators. Two of the oscillators are nonreciprocally coupled to the third oscillator via gyrators. Moreover, all three oscillators are capacitively coupled. Writing the Lagrangian using the flux variable on the inductances of the oscillators one readily obtains the Hamiltonian where i ∈ {1, 2}. The phase space variables respect the Poisson brackets {φ a i , q b j } = δ ij δ ab , and thus we identify φ → x, q → p. The forms of parameters C i , L i , C k , k g can be easily obtained following the standard approach Organizing the phase-space coordinate vector as T , and rescaling them such that and symplectic forms read with Here, we have defined where For these expressions to be accurate, the perturbative criteria must be satisfied. For the sake of completeness, let us briefly comment on the connection of this approach to the standard quantum SW method used in with Ω A (Ω B ) the normal mode frequencies of sector A (B). With the rescaling It follows that S will be both symplectic and orthogonal, and Eq. (B19) reduces to which is the same as Eq. (B.15) of Ref. Appendix C: Derivation of the main results including direct capacitive, inductive, and nonreciprocal couplings In this appendix, we obtain the effective Lindbladians and Hamiltonians for the general case with direct electrostatic and inductive coupling between the ports. In the closed system, we introduce two different approaches to include the direct capacitive (electrostatic) and inductive (magnetostatic) couplings. First, for the admittance (impedance) representation, in Appendix C 1 (Appendix C 3), we apply a numerical diagonalization of both the kinetic and inductive matrices of the junction sector and then decouple qubit modes from inner modes using SW perturbation theory. Second, in Appendix C 2 (Appendix C 4) we obtain analogous coupling formulas by treating the direct couplings as a perturbation. The main advantage of the first method is that strong direct electrostatic and/or magnetostatic coupling can be accounted for exactly, but at the cost of dressing the modes, something which can potentially obscure the nonreciprocal coupling between the external ports. Subsequently, our focus shifts towards the derivation of the perturbative dissipative contribution of the drive ports by deriving closed admittance and impedance formulas for the correlated decay rates in Appendix C 5 and Appendix C 6, respectively. Finally, we compute the drive amplitudes and classical crosstalks for the admittance (impedance) representation in Appendix C 7 (Appendix C 8). To help the reader navigate this appendix, Table Summary of definitions and notation. We start by deriving the effective Hamiltonian from the admittance response. Here, and up to Appendix C 5, we will not consider the drive ports. Using the Cauer circuit representation of the admittance, explained in details in Appendix A, we obtain the system of equations where v x , i x with x = j, r, c, l correspond to the voltage and current vectors of the junctions, reciprocal resonators, capacitors and inductors respectively. The vectors v G , i G ,v G∞ , i G∞ , correspond to the currents and voltages for the leftright branches of each gyrator are the transformer matrices defined in terms of the admittance response of the junctions sector, see Eq. (A6). Here, we changed the notation of Appendix A U → O L and V → O C for two reasons. First, to make more apparent their orthogonality, and second, to stress the difference with the full orthogonal decomposition of D ∞ = VCV T (D 0 = UL -1 U T ) when the dissipative ports are included. This will be important in Apps. C 5 to C 8. With an appropriate choice of flux and charge coordinates, we obtain a Lagrangian describing the dynamics of the circuit In these expressions, C J , L -1 J , and C r are diagonal matrices with entries C Ji , L Ji , C rγ respectively. Moreover, Y G ∞ is the admittance matrix of the ideal gyrators, and Z g the impedance matrix of those forming the nonreciprocal resonators where as above we have used L gμ = 1 implying ω gμ = 1/R μ , and σ α corresponds to the pauli matrix α = x, y, z. Substituting Eq. (A6) in Eq. (C2) and rearranging we obtain the set of equations These Euler-Lagrange equations can be obtained from the Lagrangian Assuming that C J is not singular, we immediately obtain the classical Hamiltonian where q J , Π are the conjugate momenta of Φ J , Q respectively with Poisson brackets {Φ J , q T J } = 1 n , {Q, Π T } = 1 m+2l , where n, m (l) are the number of qubit ports, and reciprocal (nonreciprocal) resonator modes respectively, see Eq. (A3). Linearizing the junction potential, we write the linear part of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (C7) as H = X T HX/2, with X T = (Φ T J , q T J , Q T , Π T ) and the quadratic form where In these expressions, L J is the diagonal matrix with entries L Ji = φ 2 0 /E Ji obtained from the linear part of U (Φ J ), with φ 0 = ħ/2e the reduced flux quanta. We assume ||T J || ∼ ||Y G J || and ignore the second-order terms in the coupling O(T 2 J ), as they give rise to third and higher order corrections. Furthermore, from now on, we also ignore the second-order terms in the inner modes sector as these would give fourth and higher order corrections in the effective junction sector Hamiltonian after the symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff block diagonalization, see Appendix B for details. For clarity, we separate the nonreciprocal sector from the reciprocal sector of the inner modes H = X T HX/2 with and the coupling matrix to first order then becomes Since every gyrator imposes a constraint in phase-space, there is only one dynamical pair of conjugate variables (instead of two) per capacitor-gyrator-capacitor circuit. In other words, we have redundant nondynamical variables in the above Hamiltonian, see Ref. Continuing our derivation, we now proceed with the approximate elimination of the nondynamical modes with the following symplectic transformation For convenience, we have rescaled the inner modes such that every entry in the transformed quadratic form has dimensions of frequency. By mixing charge and fluxes of the nonreciprocal resonators, S g diagonalizes the nonreciprocal sector and decouples dynamical from nondynamical modes. Indeed, we have that ) The flux-flux and charge-charge subsectors of H J are diagonalized with the additional symplectic transformation where O Ω is the orthogonal matrix that diagonalizes , such that the dressed frequencies of the junction sector due to the direct coupling between junction ports excluding the coupling from Y G J are After this transformation, the quadratic form in the junction sector (S T J ) -1 H j S -1 J ≡ H j reads with we get the quadratic form where and To get the effective junction sector Hamiltonian up to secondorder in the couplings we can now directly apply our formulas Eq. (B19) derived in Appendix B. Doing so, we obtain the effective quadratic form of the junction sector H J with entries where ω i are the diagonal entries of Ω J , and , ω g β is the βth diagonal entry of Ω g , which for odd β is the nonreciprocal oscillator frequency ω g β = ω gμ with μ = (β + 1)/2 while ω g β = 0 for even β. From Eqs. C17 we have where r γ , n μ are the row vectors of R, N, and μ = (β + 1)/2 (μ = β/2) for odd (even) β. Substituting Eq. (C18) in Eq. (C19) and rearranging the term we obtain Once again rearranging, and substituting in Eq. (C20) with Eq. (A6) (remembering our choice of L gμ = L rγ = 1) we get with Hence, the classical effective Hamiltonian for the junctions sector will be Where U nl ( φ, q) stands for the nonlinear part of the junctions potential, now a function of both flux and charges in this new frame. These final frame coordinates are connected to the original ones through the transformation How to obtain S sw to any desired order is explained in Appendix B. Promoting the classical variables to quantum operators (ħ = 1) rearranging, and applying the rotating wave approximation (RWA) we finally obtain the effective quantum Hamiltonian with where When including the nonlinearities, the correction to the frequencies done in the main text (Eq. ( ) we obtain Eq. ( We now proceed to derive the effective Hamiltonian for the qubit sector, treating the direct coupling between qubit ports as a perturbation. We let L -1 Jχ ) respectively be the diagonal and off-diagonal entries of L -1 J (C -1 J ). We treat these off-diagonal terms as first order perturbations. The derivation follows the same steps as above up to Eq. (C12) and, as a result, the quadratic form of the junction sector reads where Hence, following Appendix B we simply add the direct couplings at the end of our perturbative treatment to obtain the effective Hamiltonian for the junction sector. Now, instead of transforming the junction sector with Eq. (C13) we simply rescale it with where G J = (C J δ /L J ) 1/2 . Thus, for the rescaled junction sector, we have with , and where . The symplectic transformation S of Eq. (C16) here takes the same form except for the replacement S J → S J , and Eqs. C17 are also the same under the mappings Ignoring the second-order coupling terms proportional to Jχ N, Y G J C Jχ which give rise to third-order corrections and higher, it follows that Eq. (C18c) and Eq. (C21) here take the form Therefore, the effective quantum Hamiltonian for the junction sector after applying the rotating-wave approximation is with and Y Σ (s) = Y ac,R (s) + Y NR (s), i.e., the rescaled admittance response excluding the reciprocal dc part of the admittance (D 0 , D ∞ ). The frequencies in the second line are given in Eq. (C32), where Ω Cχ (Ω Lχ ) captures the correction from direct capacitive (inductive) coupling, and Ω Y G J is a secondorder correction from the direct nonreciprocal coupling between the ports. In Appendix E, we shift the frequencies entering Eq. (C32), Eq. (C35) and Eq. (C36) to include the nonlinearities up to first order in perturbation theory. We now derive the effective Hamiltonian from the Cauer representation (see Fig. We assume that C J is of full rank, and thus O C is orthogonal. Assigning flux variables for each junction and capacitive branch we have that the equations of motion of the circuit are derivable from the Lagrangian , where Φ J (Φ I ) correspond to the fluxes in the external ports (inner mode resonators and gyrators). The kinetic, inductive and nonreciprocal matrices read where Note that in Ref. T is the transformer matrix, see Eq. (A5) and, Y is the admittance matrix of the gyrators Linearizing the nonlinear potential, the Lagrangian reads with where L J is the matrix of junction inductances L jα = φ 2 0 /E jα obtained from the linear part of U (Φ J ), and Ω R is the diagonal matrix with the inner modes reciprocal resonators frequencies. We focus here on the linear sector, and treat the nonlinearities in Appendix E. As discussed in the introduction of this appendix, we now consider the numerical diagonalization approach to include direct capacitive coupling. First, we dress the external modes with the transformation Φ co = P co Φ, where after which the Lagrangian reads with the transformed matrices with which is in general not diagonal, and J . Following Ref. In this new frame, the capacitive matrix is transformed into the identity C co → 1 n+m+2l , the gyration matrix remains invariant G co → G, and the inductive matrix encodes the coupling between inner and weakly-dressed qubit modes To obtain the normal modes of the qubit ports sector, we apply the transformation Φ = P Ω P ∆ P co Φ, with where the orthogonal matrix O Ω diagonalizes the matrix O Ω can be easily found numerically. The frequencies Ω J correspond to the normal modes of the capacitively coupled external (qubits) ports. In this frame, G = G, C = 1, and the inductive matrix reads with It is useful to express this as H = 1 2 X T HX with X T = (Φ j , q j , Φ I , q I ) and As in the case of the admittance, we now approximately eliminate the nondynamical modes ignoring the second-order terms in the inner mode sector, as these will not change the final effective Hamiltonian of the junctions up to O((k/∆) 4 ). We note that the exact elimination of the nondynamical modes provides equivalent perturbative results, see Appendix D. To proceed, we now perform the symplectic transformations S = S J 0 0 S I , where the submatrices are The resulting quadratic form is with and Here, H j , H r , H g are with Ω g the same as in Eq. (C12b). On these expressions we perform the symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff transformation using the formulas Eq. (B19), and in analogous way as was done above for the admittance, we find the entries of the effective classical quadratic form where Quantizing and rearranging as was done with the admittancebased expressions, we obtain the effective quantum Hamiltonian for the junction sector with In the case without direct capacitive or inductive coupling ) we obtain Eq. ( Moreover, when the response is purely reciprocal, we recover the effective coupling given in Eq. ( We now consider the cased where there is direct capacitive coupling between qubit ports, which we treat as a first order perturbation. Our starting point is the Lagragian of Eq. (C41). We first perform a triangular point-transformation where the new coordinates are Φ ∆ = P ∆ Φ, the kinetic and inductive matrices are Hence, we can immediately obtain the Hamiltonian Jχ respectively be the diagonal and offdiagonal entries of C -1 J . We rescale the junction sector with where G J = (C J δ / L j ) 1/2 such that the Hamiltonian in that sector is with and Ω J = (C J δ L J ) -1/2 . We now use the symplectic transformations of Eq. (C53) for the inner modes. Doing so, it is clear that the final effective classical quadratic form entries are with ωi the frequencies Ω J , and Z ac,R (s), Z N R (s) given as in Eq. (C58) with J . With this choice, the final effective quantum Hamiltonian reads exactly the same as in Eq. (C59). The above formulas hold up to third-order in perturbation theory when the direct capacitive coupling between all external ports is a first order perturbation. In this section, we address dissipation resulting from the coupling of qubit ports to external drive ports via a nonreciprocal environment characterized by its admittance response, see Fig. Setting aside the voltage sources for the moment, the multiport synthesis of the admittance response illustrated in Fig. where Φ J and Q are respectively junction fluxes and inner modes loop charges. U (Φ J ) corresponds to the junctions' cosine potential. As already mentioned in Appendix C 1, the loop charge variable is the natural parametrization of the inner modes within the admittance representation. The matrices L J , Y G J , T J , C I and Z e are defined in Appendix C 1 and * stands for time convolution, f * g is defined by the Fourier transform of its submatrices as for which we assumed that there is no direct gyration between drive ports (Y G D = 0). The non-zero block matrices M ΦΦ D , M ΦQ D and M Q,Φ D arise in the presence of direct coupling between qubit and drive ports characterized by C JD , L -1 JD , Y G JD ̸ = 0. This generalizes prior studies such as Refs. At this point, it is important to note some general properties of the dissipation matrix. First, M D (t) is real because M D (-ω) = M D (ω) ⋆ . Additionally, the poles of M D (ω) live in the upper half of the complex plane defined by Im(z) > 0, ensuring the causality of M D (t) (i.e., M D (t) = 0 for t , which reflects the presence of direct nonreciprocal interaction (Y G JD ̸ = 0) between qubit and drive ports. To construct a classical Lagrangian L that captures dissipation and reproduces classical equations of motion, we use an extended Caldeira-Leggett model where L S , L B , L SB are respectively system (junctions+inner modes), baths and interaction Lagrangians given by where x α = (x α1 , . . . , x αB ), m α = diag(m α1 , . . . , m αB ) and w α = diag(ω α1 , . . . , ω αB ) are respectively baths flux coordinates, capacitances and eigenfrequencies with B = sup ω rank[Im{M D (ω)}] ≤ n D is the number of baths needed to model dissipation, where n D is the number of drive ports However, it is important to note that this matrix is not causal, since its poles are situated along the real line. Typically, to address this issue, the poles are shifted to the upper half of the complex plane following Ref. To obtain the Hamiltonian, we perform a Legendre transform up to second-order in system-bath couplings, which leads to the usual form where Here, the Hamiltonian coupling matrices {c α } are expressed in terms of Lagrangian coupling matrices as which leads to the following constraints c Q,x α = -Ze 2 c Π,x α and c Q,p α = -T T J c q,p α . Inverting the previous equations, the dissipation matrix can be expressed in terms of {c α } matrices Using the phase-space coordinates , the system-baths interaction Hamiltonian can be written compactly as The coupling coefficients are regrouped as To analyze how the coupling coefficients transform when diagonalizing the junctions and inner modes Hamiltonian H S , we employ the symplectic transformations computed in Appendix C 1. This process involves two sequential steps. First, we perform the symplectic transformation S = S J 0 0 S I defined in Eq. (C16), allowing us to obtain normal modes for both junctions and inner modes sectors separately. Under this transformation, the coupling coefficients become Expanding this transformation explicitly, . (C78) The next step consists in eliminating the inner modes, parameterized by the classical phase-space coordinates , through Schrieffer-Wolff transformation (see Eq. (B17) in Appendix B), leading to effective couplings defined by cα = (S T sw ) -1 c ′ α . They are related to the original coupling matrices {c α } as follows where the Schrieffer-Wolff matrices {Λ x , Λ p } involved in the previous equations are defined as In Eq. (C79), the effective junctions-baths coupling matrices cα incorporate two contributions. The first one arises from the dressing with inner modes as a result of SW transformations (terms proportional to Λ x,p ) while the second contribution comprises direct couplings between qubit and drive ports (terms proportional to the dressed frequency Ω J ). The system-baths interaction Hamiltonian can be expressed in this final frame as which captures the most general linear system-bath couplings. Using standard quantization method where The squared terms in Eq. (C82) can be written as where δ(Ω jw α ) ≡ diag{δ(Ω jω α1 ), . . . , δ(Ω jω αB )}. Expressing {c α } using Eq. (C79), and within the dispersive regime Ω The next step is to identify the terms present in the last equation that also appear in the dissipation matrix M D (ω). To achieve this, we use the causality requirement lim ε→0 + M D (ω-iε) together with the Sokhotski-Plemelj formula where P(.) corresponds to Cauchy principal value, and we obtain the following identification On the other hand, the classical equations of motion Eqs. (C67a) to (C67d) enable us to evaluate this set of equations as a function of the circuit's admittance parameters, Substituting these terms in Eq. (C85) and using definitions of SW matrices {Λ x , Λ p } yields Here, the Kernel J(ω) is given by n D × n D positive semidefinite matrix, where n D is the number of drive ports. As defined previously in the non-dissipative case, the dressed admittance Ȳ is related to the bare Y via the following similitude transformation, where Regrouping the square and cross terms together to finally obtain correlated dissipation rates, with Ȳ = ȲR + ȲNR the total dressed admittance. Furthermore, the kernel J(ω) can be written as where We interpret Y drive as the external admittance seen by the inner modes, filtered by the shunting capacitances C D and inductances L D located at drive ports. Therefore, the correlated decay rates are fully determined by the admittance that connects qubits and drive ports Y as well as the value of the characteristic impedance Z 0 of the external transmission lines according to (C101) The Purcell decays are given by diagonal elements of the dissipative rates, that is 6. Impedance dissipative rates and Purcell decays In this section, we derive analytical expressions for correlated decay rates and Purcell decays, akin to was done in the previous section, but here as a function of the impedance response. Applying Kirchoff's equations to Cauer circuit of the impedance representation (see Apps. A and C 3) we obtain the dissipative equation of motion where Φ = (Φ T J , Φ T I ) T regrouped the junctions and inner modes fluxes, C, M 0 , G, are defined in Appendix C 3 and U = U (Φ J ) is the junctions' cosine potential. Similarly to the admittance case, the dissipation matrix is defined by its Fourier transform Here, J and I stand for junction and inner modes sectors respectively. Unlike the admittance case, the dissipation matrix is here symmetric, i.e., M T D = M D . This symmetry is a consequence of two factors: First, the absence of direct gyration in the impedance response (B ∞ = 0) results in the symmetry of the diagonal blocks. Second, the use of the same description (flux-flux, in this case) to parameterize both the junctions and inner modes in the impedance representation implies that the off-diagonal blocks of the dissipation matrix only differ by transposition. The equations of motions can be obtained from the Caldeira-Leggett Lagrangian where the minimal coupling L SB describes the direct capacitive coupling between qubits and drive ports. The couplings matrices {λ α } are chosen to reproduce the classical dissipative equation of motion where Up to correction O(λ 2 α ), the classical Hamiltonian can be expressed as where the Hamiltonian coupling matrices are now given by Moreover, the dissipation matrix can be written in terms of {c q,p α } as In contrast to Refs Similar to the non-dissipative case, we apply successively the transformations to obtain the normal modes of the junctions sectors. Hence, the couplings and the system-bath coupling is written compactly as T the corresponding phase-space coordinate. The second step consists in diagonalizing the gyrator-inner modes (and thus eliminating the zero modes as well) via the symplectic transformations given by Eq. (C53). Consequently, the new effective couplings denoted c ′ α are given by Finally, we eliminate dispersively the inner modes via the symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff transfromation S sw = exp(AJ), see Appendix B. Using Eq. (B13a) and Eq. (C55), the non-vanishing matrix elements of the generator A are given by Jα Ω Jα Ω Jα Ω Jα Ω Jα Ω Jα Ω Jα Ω To first order, this leads to the following couplings, Projecting on the junctions' subspace, one obtain the final couplings as a function of the original ones where the Schrieffer-Wolff (SW) matrices are defined as Jα Ω 2 Similar to the admittance analysis of Eq. (C127), the effective junctions-baths coupling matrices cα contains two contributions, one coming from the dressing with inner modes resulting from SW transformations (terms proportional to Λ p ) and direct couplings between qubit and drive ports (terms proportional to the dressed frequency Ω J ). Besides, this coupling matrices allow us to compute the quantum dissipative rates (see Appendix F for the derivation of the master equation) Using the definitions of cα , the squared terms in the last equa-tion can be written in terms of the dissipation matrix as where Using the definitions of SW matrices {Λ p } to evaluate the last set of equation which leads to The cross terms are obtained similarly Regrouping the squared and cross terms together, we finally obtain the correlated decay rates C136) and the Purcell decays are given by the diagonal elements, with Z drive given by Similarly to Eq. (C100), we interpret Z drive as the external impedance seen by the inner modes, filtered by the capacitances C D connected in series with drive ports. We now compute the qubit-drives Hamiltonian Ĥv that result from (time-dependent) classical voltage sources T present in the n D drives ports, see Fig. which differs from the equation of motion Eq. (C66) by simply adding a voltage source term M V * V(t). Here, the The existence of non-zero M Φ V arises from the direct coupling between the qubit and drive ports (C JD , L -1 JD , Y G JD ̸ = 0). The Lagrangian is given by L = L V=0 + L V where L V=0 = L S + L B + L SB is the time independent Lagrangian (i.e., without drives) given in Eq. (C69). The drives-Lagrangian is given by C141) where L V depends only on the generalized coordinates {Φ J , Q}. We note that one could choose to drive the system via { ΦJ , Q}, both frames being related via a canonical transformation the phase space coordinate and M V given by the 2(n + m + 2l) × n D matrix Here, we remind the reader that n, m, l are the number of junction ports, LC-oscillators (reciprocal poles of the response) and gyrators (nonreciprocal poles of the response) respectively. The voltage-source matrix transforms under a symplectic transformation S as By linearity of the Fourier transform, it translates in frequency domain as Applying successively given by Eq. (C52) and Eq. (C53) to diagonalize both junctions and inner modes sectors separately, and the symplectic SW S sw = exp(AJ) to eliminate dispersively the inner modes (reciprocal and nonreciprocal poles) as detailed in Appendix B, the transformed voltage-source matrix M V (ω) projected on the junctions subspace is given by where the generators {A xx , A xp , A px , A pp } are computed as in Eq. (B13a) in Appendix B. This leads to where Y drive is given by: Similarly, the off-diagonal dc part of the admittance Y dc JD is Therefore, the quantum Hamiltonian due to the external drives takes the form where the driving amplitude contribution of junction port j from drive port d is with the ac part of the admittance given by Y ac = Y ac,R + Y NR . For a single tone drive V d (t) = v d sin(ω d t), we obtain explicitly (C152) For realistic pulse drives with finite rise and fall times, one can either use the integral formula Eq. (C150) or decompose the pulse into its Fourier series V d (t) = ω d v d sin(ω d t) to account for the effect of other harmonics {ω d }, and the total drive amplitudes is simply the sum of single-tone drives amplitudes, i.e., with ε jd (t) being the single-tone drives amplitude associated to frequency ω d given by Eq. (C151). The analytical formula obtained in Eq. (C150) allows us to characterize the classical crosstalk X ij experienced by qubit i while driving from the port d(j) associated to the control line of qubit j, taking into account not only the possible coupling between junction port i and drive port d(j) but also the possible stray coupling between drives' ports d(i) and d(j) which occurs whenever Y drive is not diagonal. Thus, we extend the definition of classical crosstalks X ij , as given in Ref. The matrix element α jd is obtained from an n × n D matrix α, , where ω d is the drive frequency and using the notation [Y(Ω J )] jd = Y jd (Ω j ). In summary, the matrix α enables the computation of drive amplitudes ε jd (t) (see Eq. (C151)) and classical crosstalks between qubit ports during drive operations from different control lines (see Eq. (C154)). We now obtain analytical expressions for the qubitdrives Hamiltonian in terms of the impedance response. Taking into account classical voltage sources T , the Kirchhoff's equations are given by where is defined by its Fourier transform As in the admittance case, the Lagrangian can be divided in two parts, namely a time-independent Lagrangian L V=0 given by Eq. (C109) and a time-dependent part where Also as in the admittance case, we make a gauge choice in which we drive the system via the generalized coordinates (Φ J , Φ R , Φ G ). This choice is to be contrasted to Ref. In this frame, the Legendre transform is simple to perform and we obtain a compact expression for the total Hamiltonian where H V=0 is given in Eq. (C51). The drive Hamiltonian H V (t) is: After diagonalizing the junctions modes, the voltage-matrix is transformed as Repeating the same steps of diagonalizing the inner modes and rescaling by dressed frequencies leads to Finally, eliminating dispersively the inner modes via a SW transformation yields the following voltage-matrices cou-plings where A is the generator of the SW transformation given in Eq. (C125). Consequently, the previous equations can be written in terms of the impedance response After quantizing the junction modes where the drive amplitudes between junction port j and drive port d are where the ac part of the impedance is given by Z ac = Z ac,R + Z NR . For a single tone drive V d (t) = v d sin(ω d t), we obtain explicitly (ω d ). Analogously to the admittance analysis, we can compute the classical crosstalk X ij experienced by a qubit i while driving from the control line d(j) associated to the qubit j to find Here, ω d is the drive frequency, and we use the notation [Z(Ω J )] jd = Z jd (Ω j ). Because in the perturbative regime the approximate and exact elimination yield the same effective models, in Appendix C we have approximately eliminated the nondynamical modes. Here, we perform an exact elimination of these nondynamical modes, extending the validity beyond the dispersive regime, partially in line with the approach outlined in Ref. For the admittance, our starting point is Eq. (C7). From there, we perform the symplectic triangular transformation S ∆y : Following, to eliminate the nondynamical modes we apply the symplectic transformation done in the main derivation Eq. (C11). After these transformations, the quadratic form of the Hamiltonian (exluding the linear terms from the junction potentials) is with and As we have not linearized the junction potential in this elimination, the full Hamiltonian is H = X T HX/2 + U (φ J ) with the junctions potential U (φ J ) =n E Jn cos(φ Jn /φ 0 ), The superscript D stands for dynamical, as all the modes in the gyrator sector now correspond to dynamical modes, and its dimension has been reduced by half, from 2l → l. For the impedance, we start directly from the Lagrangian Eq. (C38). Instead of doing a triangular transformation, we directly obtain the inverse of C using known formulas for the inversion of 2 × 2 block matrices [62] Then, the Hamiltonian is simply (D7) We eliminate the nondynamical modes applying the same symplectic transformations as in the main derivation Eq. (C53). The quadratic form of the Hamiltonian (once again exluding the linear terms from the junction potentials) finally read as Eq. (D2) now with and The full Hamiltonian is H = X T HX/2 + U (φ J ) with X = Φ J , q J , Π r , Q R , Π D g , Q D G , and U (φ J ) the junctions potential. We stress that for a proper quantization of the whole response beyond the perturbative regime, Hamiltonians where the nondynamical modes have been exactly eliminated must be used with Z 1/2 J the necessary diagonal rescaling to obtain dimensions of flux, n the number of junctions and t = (n + m + l) the total number of dynamical modes. We have separated the flux from charge sectors in the final frame to simplify the following calculations. The nonlinear terms in the original frame are such that in the final frame we have substituting and rearranging we get with We expand the series using the general formula where t, j, s are nonnegative integers, C N j,s = (N !/j!s!t!2 j ), 0 ≤ j ≤ N , 0 ≤ s ≤ N -2j, and t = N -2js. We obtained the above expression with a rearrangement of the formulas presented in Ref. The bar over the subindexes refer to conjugation, for example The inclusion of these conjugate coefficients is crucial because, in contrast to the expansion for the nonlinearities given in Ref. between qubit and inner modes and all other ν rs ≃ 0 + O(k 2 /δ 2 ). This implies that we can write the coefficients in matrix form where ζ i ≡ ( L Ji /L Ji ), such that ν rs ≃ ( ν) rs . Therefore, we obtain to first order where . . . similar to Eq. (138) of Ref. we can account for the linear corrections coming from the nonlinearities to first order if we satisfy the condition with ω Ji = 1/ C Ji L Ji and ζ i = L Ji /L Ji . Solving this expression for small anharmonicities E (i) c /ħω Ji ≪ 1 we obtain which for ζ i → 0 (the case with no inductive poles) reduces to recovering as a special case Eq. (144) of Ref. As for the self kerrs and dispersive shifts to first order in the expansion of Eq. (E7) they are To explicitly obtain their values, we have to obtain the entries of α. For convenience of notation we divide α in submatrices From the derivation done in Appendix C, for the admittance we have where P φ J is the projector onto the junctions flux subspace, , and Z J = (L J /C J ) 1/2 . In the full perturbative approach and taking S -1 sw to first order we obtain with Θ i,γ = ω 2 iω 2 rγ . Whereas for the impedance with By simply substituting and rearranging we explicitly obtain with the residue given by Res(Z NR (ω gμ )) = lim s→iωg μ (siω gμ )Z NR (s) = -iB μ /2ω gμ , the nonreciprocal part of the impedance residue at frequency ω gμ . Thus, we recover as a subset Eqs. (120-122) of Ref. (E27) After rearranging, the dispersive shifts in the admittance approach are with where the last three correspond to the bare couplings between qubit and inner modes given in Eq. (C17c) with O Ω = 1 n . Whereas for the impedance, the dispersive shifts are with where the last three correspond to the bare couplings given in Eq. (C55b) with O C = O Ω = 1 n . For the reciprocal resonators, we recover the dispersive shift given in Eq. ( Additionally, we note that the dispersive shifts for the impedance and admittance approaches are different. This is to be expected due to the different frames used for quantization in one approach or another, however and as we have highlighted several times throughout this work, this difference is negligible in the dispersive regime. Going further, analytical formulas for qubits cross-kerrs can in principle be obtained considering higher order terms of S -1 sw , as was done in In this appendix, we derive a completely positive trace preserving (CPTP) master equation for the qubits, taking into account any possible quasi-degeneracies. In the standard approach to open quantum systems, the master equation is derived from a microscopic model (system, bath, and interaction Hamiltonians) using the Born-Markov and secular approximations The starting point of our derivation is the Caldeira-Leggett Hamiltonian Ĥ = Ĥq + ĤB + ĤqB with interaction term of the form of Eq. (C81) The main idea of the partial secular approximation consists on separating the set of qubits (energy transitions) based on their frequency difference. With that objective, we define an equivalence relation F between qubit ports j, j ′ such that (j, j ′ ) ∈ F if and only if their energy difference is smaller or of the order of the natural linewidth, that is Ω j -Ω j ′ ≲ Γ. This separation of energy-scales allow us to perform the rotating wave-approximation whenever (j, j ′ ) / ∈ F. However, if (j, j ′ ) ∈ F, the qubits are considered to be degenerate in first order of perturbation theory in the system-bath coupling where we have omitted the Lamb-shift Hamiltonian which introduces, in the dispersive and weak direct coupling regime, just a small renormalization on the system Hamiltonian Ĥq . Notably, as shown in Ref. where Π(E) is the projector over the eigenspace of Ĥq with energy E. The spectral densities γ εε ′ jj ′ are defined as the Fourier transform of the bath's correlations functions Using Eq. (C81), the bath's eigen-operators are defined as Writing the normalized flux and charge operators in terms of the bosonic modes φj , the master equation can be expressed in a compact way with At cryogenic temperatures β -1 = k B T ≪ Ω j such that the number of thermal photons is negligible n = 1/e βħΩj -1 ≪ 1 and the bath can be approximated to be in its ground state. In this case, one can easily compute the bath correlation functions and γ ε,ε ′ jj ′ , which leads to where By symmetrizing the delta function, i.e., δ(Ω jω αb ) = δ((Ω j + Ω i )/2ω αb ) + O(Γ), one can readily verify that the matrix γ jj ′ is positive semi-definite within the Born approximation. This ensures that the master equation represents a completely positive trace-preserving (CPTP) map. In this appendix, we provide further examples of circuits demonstrating the application of our results. This appendix is divided in four parts. First, we start with a comparison of the admittance and impedance approaches, revealing their equivalence in the dispersive regime. We then focus on a specific singular circuit relying solely on the admittance response in a situation where the impedance approach cannot be applied. In the third part of this appendix, we show how to use our results to estimate Purcell decay rates, and we compare these rates to master equation simulations and previous one-port analyses. Finally, we give a detailed analysis of the nonreciprocal circuit presented in the main text. We provide here both admittance and impedance responses of this three-port device, and give a simple explanation for the conditions which achieve chiral dynamics with complete population transfer. The circuit we consider is the two-port circuit of Fig. , where r cr = (C c /C r ) and r cj = (C c /C J ). On the other hand, the admittance response is To compare the two approaches, we show in Fig. In Fig. 2. Direct inductive coupling and JJs' nonlinearities FIG. 9. 2-port example circuit with direct inductive coupling between qubit ports. For circuits with direct inductive coupling between inductive qubit ports (i.e. described in configuration space by their flux) A∞ = 0, A0 will be singular and unconstrained Hamiltonian dynamics cannot be systematically obtained from the impedance response. We now turn to the circuit of Fig. Figure To benchmark the effective nonlinearities presented in the main text and derived in Appendix E, we compare the effective ZZ-interaction obtained from numerical diagonalization of the effective Hamiltonian, with the one obtained from numerical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian after full exact circuit quantization. In the qubit subspace, the diagonalized Hamiltonian takes the form The effective and exact ZZ-interactions (ω ZZ ) are shown in Fig. We use the circuit in Fig. (G11) To facilitate comparison with prior studies, we rephrase the Purcell decay rate in terms of the qubit-readout resonator coupling strength g, the readout resonator-Purcell filter coupling J, and κ f , the bare decay rate of the Purcell mode. Using our formulas Eqs. ( where κ q = (ω 2 C 2 k Z 0 )/C p (1 + ω 2 Z 2 0 (C d + C k ) 2 ) = κ(ω), ∆ rq = ω rω, ∆ f q = ω fω and ζ μ = ∆ μq /Σ μq with Σ μq = ω μ + ω and μ = r, f . From this equation, we obtain corrections to the usual Purcell protection formula given by gJ ∆rq∆ f q 2 κ f of Refs. In Fig. with , ω z (φ) ≃ ω y (φ)(1r cg r cj ), and β ≃ r 2 cj /3C g . As clear from above, the frequencies of the poles are slightly different in both immittance presentations. This clearly leads to Hamiltonians with different frequencies for the inner modes after the exact circuit quantization. This difference however, is insubstantial, as the quantization is done with different frames for each response. When accounting for the exact frames within which each response is defined, all observables are predicted to be identical regardless of the chosen approach. Furthermore, the one third ratio needed to achieve full chiral population transfer dynamics can be readily understood by examining the exact Hamiltonian of the circuit. By introducing the quasi-momenta mode operators Bk = j e i2πkj/3b † j / √ 3 for the qubit modes, the linearized Hamiltonian in terms of φ reads as follows where J(φ) = ω J ω y (φ) r cj r cg /6 . By considering separately the beam-splitter-like (two-mode squeezing) interaction between the k = -1 (k = 1) mode and the inner resonator mode, the elementary shifts λ ±1 in the frequencies of the modes B±1 are λ -1 ≃ -2J(φ) 2 /∆ and λ +1 ≃ -2J(φ) 2 /(2ω y (φ) -∆). Complete chiral population transfer is obtained when the quasi-momentum modes energies are equally spaced Here, we provide details of the simulation performed to obtain the qubit population transfer dynamics shown in Fig. The full Hamiltonian was constructed using the impedance representation following Appendix D. The admittance approach is equally valid, but the former is preferred due to the lack of poles at infinity, a feature that simplifies the construction. The effective Hamiltonian Eq. ( Figure Remarkably, the desired circulator response can be obtained for arbitrary small values of φ, i.e., low nonreciprocity in the central element. This example shows how our meth- ods can be useful not only in designing effective quantum Hamiltonian models but also in engineering desired scattering responses. All the codes to reproduce the main results are available at 