The zero field splitting (ZFS) quantifies the energy difference for the ground electron spintriplet of a nitrogen-vacancy center in the absence of external fields. The values of the ZFS play a key role in determining the Larmor precession of the Bloch sphere and the Rabi oscillation of a spin system. The ZFS is generally detected using coherent spin manipulation by sweeping microwaves (MWs) at frequencies close to resonance with the ZFS. In this letter, we report our experimental observations of the red-shift effect on the ZFS as a function of the MW power for two different thermal environments of a sample. We find an asymptotic property of the red shifts of the ZFS. Given the identical initial thermal equilibrium states of the sample, the differences in the raw values of the ZFS between the two cases randomly vary from 47 kHz to 1505 kHz over the entire experimental range. According to the asymptotic approximation, the differences are reduced to 29-166 kHz with a standard deviation of 49 kHz, suggesting a significant elimination of the red-shift effect. To the best of our knowledge, no other study has addressed the quantification and elimination of the red shift-effect of the MW field dependence using the asymptotic approximation. A nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color center is a unique point defect in diamond that consists of a substitutional nitrogen atom adjacent to a vacancy within a rigid lattice. The symmetry axis of each NV center is along one of the four (111) crystalline directions. The geometric structure of a NV color center is shown in Fig. The ZFS is the critical parameter that determines the Larmor precession of a Bloch sphere, and the basis of the ODMR scheme Thus, a detailed understanding of the red-shift effect of MW fields on the ZFS is of fundamental importance for the theoretical modeling of the ZFS and metrology using NV - centers as nanothermometers, magnetometers, etc. Our motivation of this study is to examine the quantification and elimination of the red-shift effect of MW fields on the ZFS. In this letter, we report our experimental study on ensemble NV -centers driven by the continuous-wave ODMR (cw-ODMR) scheme. The scheme has the advantages of the experimental simplicity and the tolerance of MW inhomogeneities; thus, is widely employed in metrology using NV - centers. The measurements using this scheme have the desired sensitivities when large ensemble of NV -centers are interrogated with the same optical excitation power The schematic of the experimental setup for the cw-ODMR protocol is shown in Fig. As stated previously, we design two cases for the thermal environment of the sample. In Case I, we apply a constant current into the film heater to achieve a desired stationary temperature of the diamond sample. The total length obtaining an entire ODMR line is in 160 s. During the period, the temperature fluctuations are maintained within  0.05 K. In Case II, we regulate the power of the film heater using the PID controller to achieve a desired temperature. The temperature fluctuations are controlled within  0.02 K. We conduct the study in the nominal sample temperatures ranging from 298.15 K to 323.15 K at an interval of 5 K. The MW powers used to manipulate the spin system are -25 dBm, -20 dBm, -15 dBm, -11 dBm, -10 dBm, -5 dBm, 0 dBm, 5 dBm, and 6 dBm. The laser radiation for optical excitation is maintained at a constant power of 3.96 mW. In Case II, there is a threshold MW power for the sample temperature. Below the threshold, the sample temperature rapidly rises after the MW irradiation is applied and then quickly converges in decaying oscillations to the original sample temperature. The sample temperature oscillates around the original temperature with amplitudes of  0.05 K. When the MW power exceeds the threshold of 0 dBm for the current study, the PID controller fails to control the sample temperature, which increases with time. However, the magnitude of the increase is less than that for Case I. for the MW fields, to manipulate the ground electronic spin triplet. The diamond sample is strain free. We argue that the MW heating effect occurs in the diamond sample even though the MW power is below the threshold. The wire antenna produces an inhomogeneous field in the sample. We can infer that the sample central is slightly hotter than the sample edge. The thermopile attached to the edge of the diamond sample does not detect the rise in temperature at the center of the sample. The PID controller acts according to the edge temperature measured by the thermopile. Thus, the temperature measured by the thermopile is lower than that in the central region of the sample. We reported an intensified MW field in the central region observed using an infrared camera Acosta et al. ascribed the thermal expansion to the temperature dependence of the ZFS Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) show that a lower MW power results in a smaller red-shift effect in the expense of larger error bars for the values of the ZFS and more inferior contrasts of the ODMR lines. In Case I, the random errors for the measured ZFS values, which are obtained using standard deviations, are 87-413 kHz at a MW power of -25 dBm. In contrast, the measurements performed using a MW power of -5 dBm result in standard deviations of 10-61 kHz for the ZFS values and the red shifts of 294-574 kHz. This implies that a high MW power results in small standard deviations of the ZFS values in the expense of substantial red shifts in the ZFS. A similar phenomenon occurs in Case II. Fig. We observe that Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) show a similar asymptotic behavior of the MW-power dependence. This phenomenon indicates that the red shifts asymptotically disappear as the MW power decreases. Thus, zero MW irradiation should not affect the ZFS of the NV -centers in diamond. On this basis, we create an exponential asymptotic fit of the ZFS values related to the MW power. We denote the MW power by Q (dBm), and the ZFS by D (MHz). We consider the MW power as the free variable and obtain the following exponential asymptotic fit: D = a × 10 Q/20 + b. We pictured the fits in Fig. Assuming x=Q1 1/2 , the exponential fit is converted into a linear fit below D = ax + b. ( We pictured the linear fits for Case I and II in Fig. As no red shift occurs in the absence of MW irradiation, we infer that the intercept of a single linear fit approximates the ZFS value for zero red shift. Thus, we argue that the intercepts for the two cases should be equal for identical initial thermal equilibrium states of the sample. The practical difference denotes the measurement uncertainty when using the ensemble of NV - centers presented in our experiment. Accordingly, we compare the intercepts of the fits of the two cases in Fig. 