Despite the intense activity at the electronic and atomistic resolutions, coarse grained (CG) modeling of MOFs remains largely unexplored. One of the main reasons for this is the lack of adequate CG force fields. In this work, we present Iterative Boltzmann Inversion (IBI) and Force Matching (FM) force fields for modeling ZIF-8 in three different coarse grained resolutions. Their ability of reproducing structure, elastic tensor and thermal expansion is evaluated and compared with that of MARTINI force-fields considered in previous work.[C. M. S. Alvares et al, J. Chem. Phys., 158, 194107 (2023).] Moreover, MARTINI and FM are evaluated in their ability of depicting the swing effect, a subtle phase transition ZIF-8 undergoes when loaded with guest molecules. Overall, we found that all our force fields reproduce structure reasonably well. Elastic constants and volume expansion results are analyzed and the technical and conceptual challenges in reproducing them are explained. Force matching exhibits promising results for capturing the swing effect. This is the first time these CG methods, widely applied in polymer and biomolecules communities, are deployed to model porous solids. We highlight the challenges of fitting CG force fields for these materials. This work opens the door to a whole new line of developments in the field of modeling MOFs and other porous crystalline solids. Simulations in the atomistic (AA) scale are essential for understanding structure, dynamics and physical properties at the microscopic level, as they provide information that cannot be experimentally resolved. In this contribution, we develop and critically compare CG force fields for metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). MOFs are extended, generally crystalline, porous materials that result from the polymerization of metallic cations or oxoclusters with organic ligands. Their attractivity lies in the myriad possibilities for encapsulation, transport, selective separation and nano-reactor capacities offered by their connected porosity. Some of these materials contain mesopores, while others are microporous, and both can exhibit meso-or macro-porosities when in contact with other materials within mixed-matrix membranes. They can present large scale defects or show collective-long range motions that affect their porosity (i.e., the "breathing effect"). To model these phenomena, large simulation cells are required and CG models become a must. In this context, a systematic study of CG force field fitting strategies applied to MOFs is a much needed first step to drive future research directions. Are the most widely used strategies for fitting CG models appropriate for MOFs? What are their merits and setbacks? To answer these questions, we evaluate FM and IBI CG potential fitting strategies and compare them to previously derived MARTINI force fields to model ZIF-8 In principle, the notion of rightful reference forces that should be experienced in the CG resolution is not defined and thus different ways to calculate the reference forces F I from the atomistic forces are possible within the FM algorithm. Lastly, iterative Boltzmann inversion (IBI) is a potential fitting strategy to derive CG force-fields that best reproduce the structure of the atomistic benchmark system. Both consistent-FM and IBI correspond to coarse grained potentials that are potentials of mean force (PMF). Yet, it is interesting to note that the two PMFs are different in nature. The PMF that appears when bridging the statistical mechanics of a system in its AA and CG resolutions is related to the fact that the Hamiltonian in the CG level is tied to a constrained region of the all-atom phase space. In the current work, ZIF-8 is modeled in the CG resolution according to three different mappings: A, B and C, shown in figure For each mapping, two different models were created: one where the potentials were all derived via FM and the other, via IBI. MARTINI models for each of the mappings were taken from previous work All the all-atom and CG simulations were performed using LAMMPS. Classical MD simulations in the all-atom resolution are used to gather reference data to derive all the CG force fields. IBI requires reference structural information of the system in the due coarsened resolution, namely reference radial distribution functions (RDFs) and probability density functions for bonds and angles. These functions are used for the iterative procedure and for determining the initial guess of each potential. For FM, on the other hand, a representative amount of configurations each containing the corresponding force experienced by each atom, f i , is needed. To carry out the MD simulations in the all-atom resolution, the interactions in ZIF-8 were modeled by the ZIF-FF force field, To get structural data at T = 300K and P = 1 atm, MD simulations in the NPT ensemble were performed at the all-atom resolution and configurations of the equilibrated system were collected. A total of 1000 configurations, spaced by 500 fs, were considered for deriving structural data. Reference RDFs and probability density functions for angles and bonds were built using VOTCA. All IBI models yielded pressures that were off, as previously observed for other systems. A.2) Force-matching All FM potentials used to model the interactions are non analytical table potentials expressed as cubic splines. Bond potentials depend on pair distance, angle potentials on angle values formed by the three sequentially bonded beads and non-bonded interactions are modeled in pairwise fashion. Deriving force fields via FM can be challenging for crystalline solids such as ZIF-8 depending on how the algorithm is implemented. Using non analytical table potentials requires a set of configurations in which superatoms interacting via each defined potential sample a continuous range of values of the variables they respectively depend on. This is required in order to duly find the optimal values of the forces the potential should yield across this continuous range. While some scientists advocate for constraining the value of the forces coming from a given potential to be zero at non-sampled regions, Several strategies allow to counter this problem for condensed phase systems. The atomistic dynamics was considered in the NVT ensemble. Once the system equilibrated, a total of 4000 configurations containing information on forces experienced by the atoms were collected for the equilibrated system and used to derive force fields via FM. The configurations were sequentially spaced by 500 fs. Note that, within this approach, the FM model will be assumed to be transferable to (V = V ambient, T = 300K) to study ZIF-8. Previous work has indicated that temperature transferability of FM force fields is easier to achieve than density transferability. The structure was evaluated in terms of RDFs, bonded probability density functions and lattice constant. The two former were determined for each model using data collected during MD simulations in the NVT ensemble at a thermodynamic state corresponding to (T = 300 K, V = V ambient ), where V ambient is the equilibrium volume predicted by the atomistic simulation at T = 300 K and P = 1 atm. During the simulation, 1000 microstates were saved and the structural data was obtained from it using VOTCA and LAMMPS. Simulations for computing structural data were also performed for the selected MARTINI models since the RDF data from previous work contained 1-2 and 1-3 neighbors and the lattice constant results in the previous work were derived at a lower pressure. The volume expansion coefficient was determined by numerical approximation as shown in equation (3). The equilibrium volume at (300 K, 1 atm) and (272.5 K, 1 atm) were determined by averaging instantaneous values attained during the dynamics carried out in the NPT ensemble at those thermodynamic states, respectively. were taken into account and the final value of the elastic constant reported was calculated by averaging the two individual ones. Notably, the stress tensor that can be calculated and output by LAMMPS is valid exclusively for Hamiltonians that do not carry volume dependency. Thus, for the FM models, which have a volume dependent Hamiltonian, it was necessary to manually add a term to the values of P ij that were output. The form of the term that needs to be added can be found elsewhere. The capability of depicting the swing effect was evaluated for FM and MARTINI models. The swing effect is a structural change that some MOFs, including ZIF-8, have been observed to undergo when loaded with gas above a given threshold of adsorbed molecules. The loaded state at which ZIF-8 adopts the HP structure varies depending on the guest as well as on temperature. Within both strategies, the MOF and the N 2 interactions were modeled using ZIF-FF and TraPPe respectively, A total of 1000 and 4000 configurations containing the forces experienced by atoms were saved for strategies FM-s1 and FM-s2, respectively, once the system has equilibrated. For FM-s1, all forces coming from interactions between ZIF-8 superatoms were discounted from the values of forces experienced by the ZIF-8 superatoms in all the 1000 configurations, leaving only the contributions coming from interactions with the guest. The configurations were then used as input for deriving the four non-bonded FM potentials for the N 2 interactions for each of the two strategies separately. Subsequently, CG-MD simulations were carried out for the empty and loaded frameworks. For the simulations where ZIF-8 was loaded, both FM-s1 and FM-s2 were investigated and two distinct MD simulation setups were carried out for each of them, yielding a total of four simulations. In the first setup, ZIF-8 was initialized in the AP structure and the dynamics of the system in the CG resolution was carried out in the NVT ensemble with the volume fixed at the one corresponding to a lattice constant of 16.96 Å. In the second setup, the simulation box initially containing ZIF-8 in the AP structure was deformed at a steady rate of 0.0333 Å/fs in all directions up to the corresponding volume of the reported HP framework, corresponding to a lattice constant of 17.071 Å. The structure of ZIF-8 was well reproduced for all CG models and mappings, with IBI outperforming MARTINI and FM as expected. Figure The lattice constant is well reproduced for both FM and IBI, as expected from the fact that they were pressure corrected. It is possible that the value predicted by the FM model for mapping B could be further improved by switching to an n=3 volume dependent term as was done for mapping C. In terms of reproducing the spatial arrangement, figures 2 and SM3-SM5 show that the IBI model almost perfectly matches the reference distributions within all mappings. The distributions obtained when modeling the system with FM models are quite good, as commonly observed in the literature. Given that ideal FM models should have consistent probability density functions, they should also, as a natural consequence, be able to reproduce the structure. Therefore, any failure in doing so should come either from residual errors in the FM algorithm and/or from the fact that the FM force fields were derived at higher temperature. MARTINI, which does not encapsulate the concept of pressure correction, also performs reasonably well. The distribution functions are also similar to the reference ones, which should be attributed to the fact that the harmonic bonded potentials are parametrized to keep the relative spacing between superatoms as in the crystal structure. As discussed in previous work, It is interesting to note that IBI was successful in converging to force fields that accurately reproduce the overall structure even though ZIF-8 is a crystalline solid. The IBI method was developed in a context where the degrees of freedom, a word here used to denote the independent variables the potentials depend on, are roughly uncorrelated. This is afterall the reason why some systems allow for potentials to be iteratively optimized individually within IBI's algorithm without significant harm to the overall structural description. The significant correlation between degrees of freedom expected for ZIF-8 motivated the potentials to be optimized in alternating fashion. And even so, despite the set up, the alternating nature of the optimization does not ensure convergence to potentials capable of reproducing the structure, since in principle, updating one potential could continuously cause undesired changes in the overall spatial organization that would not be fixed as the algorithm goes on. In that sense, the success in converging to IBI models that reproduce the structure in the three mappings studied proves that it is possible to use IBI models in systems where degrees of freedom are not separable if the goal is to get a good structural description. Notably, it was also possible to carry out the standard pressure correction without compromising the structure. The elastic constants characterize the response of a system to a stress within the elastic regime. When using IBI force fields to model interactions in a system, it is often found that the elastic constants are underestimated, leading to the common statement that IBI force fields are softer than they should be . The negative value of C 12 predicted for mapping A is more disconcerting. Elastic constants for ZIF-8 should be positive. Specifically in the case of applied tensile stresses and the corresponding strains, having positive values of elastic constants means that the force field responds favoring the shrinking in all directions. This response is expected, because as the tensile strain causes the distances between pairs to be larger than the equilibrium distances, shortening this distance in any direction would counter the perturbation. On the other hand, a negative value of C 12 suggests that the material favors expansion in the y and z directions in a ε xx deformed state. In the search for an explanation for the negative value observed, it is useful to remember that the algorithm of IBI is designed to work best in a scenario where degrees of freedom are essentially independent. In this scenario, IBI potentials exhibit a well whenever there is a peak in the corresponding distribution function. However, in the case of ZIF-8, bond lengths and angle values cannot be changed without significantly affecting the distribution of pairs interacting solely via the non-bonded potential. The results show that the first iteration yields sharper distributions than prescribed by the reference for all mappings. In the ideal case of complete separability of degrees of freedom, this would mean that each of the potentials should be correspondingly smoothened as the IBI algorithm goes on. Yet, as the update in a potential affects the distribution associated to another due to the correlation of degrees of freedom, smoothening and sharpening can occur alternatingly in a non-predictable fashion as the algorithm progresses. For mapping A, convergence to a set of force field contributions that best describes the structure was achieved for a non-bonded 1-1 potential that counters the overly ordered arrangement imposed in the network by the bonded potentials, which force peaks in the 1-1 RDF to be sharper than they should. The non-bonded potential acquires as a consequence peaks within the range where there are peaks in the 1-1 RDF to alleviate the ordering, as opposed to the expected wells it should exhibit. The initial (step 1) potentials of mapping A and the corresponding target distributions for IBI's algorithm are shown in figure The profile of the 1-1 non-bonded potential leads the system to behave in the opposite direction to the one indicated by the reference distribution. If the superatom pairs are at larger distances than the equilibrium one, the potential yields forces that take them even farther apart. This unusual potential profile explains the exotic mechanical response to strains revealed by the negative C 12 value. For mappings B and C however, non-bonded potentials meet the expected profile IBI potentials should have in some ranges while not in others. The balance is such that positive elastic constants are obtained and the values predicted for mapping B and C are quite close to the reference ones. We can therefore conclude that while it is possible to converge to a pressure-corrected IBI force field that well reproduces the structure for a system with correlated degrees of freedom, caution should be taken if the goal is to reproduce the mechanical behavior. We thus advise checking the IBI potential profiles before blindly using them for this purpose. Similarly, despite the reasonably good results obtained for mapping B and to some extent for mapping A, FM models also seem to have difficulties in reproducing the elastic behavior. In the present work, the values of the elastic constants obtained with by FM models pressure corrected with a U v (V) term were found to be very sensitive to the value of the Ψ i constantsmuch more than the equilibrium value of the lattice constant at ambient conditions. For example for mapping C, one of the U v (V) functions obtained at a given iteration of the self consistent pressure matching algorithm revealed a value of 14.40 GPa for C 11 and a non-linear relationship for P xx = f(ε xx ), which had a R 2 of 0.39 for the linear fit. Furthermore, the negative C 44 value obtained for mapping C even breaks the condition for mechanical stability of cubic crystals. The values of volume expansion coefficient, α V , predicted by each model are also presented in table Histograms for the swing angle value for the empty and N 2 -loaded ZIF-8 for MARTINI and FM models for mapping C are presented in figure 5. Negligible differences were observed in the CG-MD simulations of the loaded system at the AP structure volume versus the HP structure volume. Thus, only the structural results coming from the CG-MD simulation at the AP structure volume are presented in figure It is possible to see that already for the empty framework the MARTINI model significantly overestimates the due equilibrium value of the swing angle for the AP structure, whose reference value is of 9°. Upon loading, the swing angle value increases for both N 2 bead ≈ flavors investigated within MARTINI. The mode lies at a higher value when considering N 2 to be of flavor C1 ( 33°vs 29°) and the peak is slightly broader, revealing the effect the ≈ ≈ non-bonded parametrization has in this context. For FM, the model for the empty framework yields a swing angle value close to the one prescribed by the reference ( 9°). For the loaded framework, a shift of the peak of roughly ≈ 8°to the right is observed when using FM-s2 compared to FM-s1, with modes lying at 18°≈ vs 10°, respectively. This finding is very interesting taking into account the origins of the ≈ potentials used to model the N 2 interactions in the two cases. Using atomistic simulations where the framework is kept rigid at the HP structure and the gas is allowed to do its dynamics allows reaching FM potentials that lead to a ZIF-8 structure closer to the HP one in the CG resolution. This is very promising since the dynamics of the all-atom simulation used to derive the N 2 FM potentials has been carried out at a temperature higher than 77 K and the FM potentials modeling interactions between ZIF-8 superatoms were derived considering the AP structure only. It is also worth remembering that, ZIF-FF together with TraPPe were unable to predict the HP structure as the stable one when considering the framework to be flexible at the atomistic level, as mentioned in section B4. Given the improved structural results obtained when using FM-s2 compared to FM-s1 shown in figure In this work, MARTINI, FM and IBI models were studied in their ability to reproduce the structure and thermodynamic properties (elastic tensor and volume expansion coefficient) of ZIF-8. The capability of depicting the swing effect, a structural transition ZIF-8 undergoes upon guest adsorption, was also evaluated for MARTINI and FM models. We found that all CG strategies explored reproduce structural properties with a very reasonable accuracy. IBI models performed best in this task despite the fact that they are not developed to function in a context of high correlation between degrees of freedom, as is the case in a crystalline material. In regards to thermodynamic properties, the results are varied. Elastic tensor is quite well reproduced by MARTINI 2.0 models. IBI was found to sometimes overestimate elastic constants, contrary to the underestimation tendency observed in the literature. The coarsest mapping exhibits a negative value for C 12 , which has been tied to the fact that degrees of freedom in ZIF-8 are highly correlated. Despite the susceptibility of leading to models with anomalous mechanical behavior in some cases, IBI can also allow reaching models that properly depict it, as revealed for mappings B and C, for which the elastic constants were reasonably reproduced. FM models yield reasonable results for mappings A and B, but also presented challenges for reproducing elastic constants. Amongst the biggest deviations lies the negative C 44 predicted for mapping C. The results obtained are very sensitive to the U v (V) term used in the context of self-consistent pressure matching. Exploring the Virial constraint, using a different expression for the volume dependent term or developing more suitable ways of pressure correcting FM potentials are possible pathways for improving the description of the mechanical behavior of MOFs. Ultimately, we conclude that IBI and FM potentials should be used with caution when applied to depicting mechanical behavior of MOFs. Concerning volume expansion, all strategies give overall reasonable results for the intermediate and less coarse mappings, while mapping A seems to be pathological in all cases. It is shown how the volume expansion prediction can be improved within IBI models by tailoring the onset of potentials accordingly. This is not recommended as a good practice by itself, but rather as an inspiration for ideas to enable the description of the proper physics underlying the volume expansion phenomenon. Finally, we explored the possibility of reproducing the swing effect. While MARTINI force fields were not able to do so, we found that FM reproduces the effect to a large extent as the average values of swing angle for the empty and loaded framework are closer to the reference values. This is quite remarkable taking into account that reproducing the swing effect is already quite rare when relying on atomistic force fields and it is not achieved by the underlying atomistic benchmark model. The fact that the FM potentials between superatoms of the MOF were derived for the AP structure and for a higher temperature than the one for which the loaded state should yield an HP structure just adds up to the promising performance of FM in capturing simple phase transitions. To the best of our knowledge, this article constitutes the first systematic study of coarse graining potential fitting strategies applied to MOFs, and it is also the first study to address the challenges of fitting CG potentials for porous solid materials. In this sense, these findings are not only valuable for the MOF simulation community, but also for researchers that focus on CG methods development. We hope our study motivates the wider use of CG models for MOFs and other materials. Finally, after the update, a set of points (x,y) on the onset of the updated potential for which the value of ΔU was defined, was used as a basis for a linear fit used for deriving new values in the non-updated range. These would be the ranges qualitatively indicated in green in figure The force-matching algorithm was used to derive potentials at a thermodynamic state at ambient conditions density but at a temperature of 1500K. Upon comparing the structure at 300 K versus 1500 K in the different mappings investigated, it was possible to see that all peaks broaden to the point where continuous sampled regions were formed in all distributions except for angles 111 in mapping A. To counter the lack of sampling problem, a different potential was considered for angles belonging to each of the two peaks. For all mappings, bond and non-bonded potentials were set to have a bin size of 0.005 nm and angle potentials, of 0.001 radians. It has been reported that dividing the overall overdetermined system of equations in smaller systems, solving them individually and averaging the solution yields force fields that more accurately describe the given system. The force-matching data output by VOTCA for each potential was smoothened and extrapolated in order to derive data that lies outside of the range of the continuously sampled one. Linear functions were used for the extrapolations and they were made so that all bond, angle and non-bonded potentials have values throughout the intervals of [0 nm, 1.2 nm], [0°, 180°] and [0.1 nm, 1.5 nm] respectively. Only points near the onset region for which original FM data exists were used as basis for fitting the linear function used for the extrapolation. After extrapolation, a smoothening was made in the interval where data coming from the extrapolation meets original data coming from the FM algorithm. In the case of non-bonded potentials, the range of sampling went up to the desired upper limit value (1.5 nm), also used as r cutoff for the non-bonded interactions in all cases, so only an extrapolation in the left-hand side of the curve was required. The non-bonded potentials were all shifted to have a value of 0 at r cutoff . r = It is interesting to note that the FM relies on a numerical optimization that does not necessarily yield physical potentials, which means that force values in the onset region may point to unphysical behavior if used as it originally is for the linear extrapolation. More specifically, the forces may lead to indefinite attraction as or or to indefinite r → 0 θ → 0 repulsion as or . Care is always taken to not endorse such behavior r → + ∞ θ → 180°w henever the original data causes it to occur. To achieve this, the sign of the slope of the optimal linear function obtained fitting the original data is inverted so that the potential accuses the proper expected physical behavior. An example is shown in figure Figure Similarly to IBI, the resulting FM potentials are also table potentials, used within LAMMPS refining the bin size so that 10000 points exist for each of them (see pair_style table for more information). In both strategies, the non-bonded potentials were built considering a bin size of 0.005 nm and the cutoff used for the non-bonded interactions were the same as the ones used for the interaction between ZIF-8 superatoms (15 Å). Each set of 100 configurations was used to build a different system of equations within the FM algorithm for each of the two strategies. The RDFs and bond and angle probability density functions (BPDFs and APDFs) predicted by all models for all three mappings can be found in figures SM3 to SM5 together with the respective reference. The 1-2 and 1-3 bonded pairs are not shown in the RDFs. It is possible to see that the IBI models excel compared to FM and MARTINI models for all mappings investigated. FM models overall predict the due equilibrium positioning correctly but tend to overly restrain the movement, as indicated by the sharper and higher peaks. The success in reproducing structure supports temperature-transferability of the FM potentials, which had been derived at 1500 K. For mappings A and B, MARTINI models capture well the spatial arrangement of bonded superatoms, which is tied to the parametrization strategy for the bonded potentials. Small differences in peak height and width should come from the fact that these potentials have been parameterized in the previous work using angle and bond distribution functions built with a less refined bin size than in the current work. The difficulty in maintaining the description of bonded distributions within mapping C is linked to the non-bonded potentials prescribed within MARTINI 2.0 being overly repulsive, as discussed in previous work. Figure 