The study of the magnetic order has recently been invigorated by the discovery of exotic collinear antiferromagnets with time-reversal symmetry breaking. Examples include altermagnetism and compensated ferrimagnets, which show spin splittings of the electronic band structures even at zero net magnetization, leading to several unique transport phenomena, notably spin-current generation. Altermagnets demonstrate anisotropic spin splitting, such as d-wave, in momentum space, whereas compensated ferrimagnets exhibit isotropic spin splitting. However, methods to realize compensated ferrimagnets are limited. Here, we demonstrate a method to realize a fully compensated ferrimagnet with isotropic spin splitting utilizing the dimer structures inherent in organic compounds. Moreover, based on ab initio calculations, we find that this ferrimagnet can be realized in the recently discovered organic compound (EDO-TTF-I)2ClO4. Our findings provide an unprecedented strategy for using the dimer degrees of freedom in organic compounds to realize fully compensated ferrimagnets with colossal spin splitting. Introduction.-Collinear antiferromagnets have traditionally been viewed as conventional magnetic orderings that lack unique phenomena such as spin current generation. However, recent theoretical advances have identified exotic collinear antiferromagnets with time-reversal breaking, notably altermagnets Several materials have been proposed as candidates for altermagnetism For example, κ-ETtype organic compounds ferrimagnets, a simple method to realize them is necessary. In this Letter, we present a path towards fully compensated ferrimagnets with colossal spin splitting using typical dimer structures in organic compounds. Using a simple one-dimensional model, we demonstrate that a collinear antiferromagnetic order with inequivalent dimers can induce fully compensated ferrimagnets. Furthermore, we find that the recently discovered organic compound (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 [EDO-TTF-I=4,5ethylenedioxy-4 ′ -iodotetrathiafulvalene] Simple model.-First, to show the key idea for realizing the compensated ferrimagnets, we consider a onedimensional model whose unit cell contains two inequivalent dimers. A schematic of the model is illustrated in Fig. To determine the mechanism of spin splitting in this model, we consider the following tight-binding Hamiltonian for the DAF state: where ) and ∆ denotes the gap induced by the DAF order. The spin index σ takes +1 and -1 for the up-and down-spins, respectively. The eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian are given by where t ± = (t 1 ±t 2 )/2 and C(k) = (1+cos k). Thus, spin splitting of the bands is induced by t -= (t 1 -t 2 )/2 and δ, i.e., inequivalence of the dimers. From these expressions, it is evident that the differences in intra-dimer hoppings have the similar gap-opening effect as the differences in the chemical potentials. Because t -and δ are independent of the wave number, spin splitting is isotropic. Figure Crystal and electronic structures of (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 .-First, we summarize the crystal structure of (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 . (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 consists of EDO-TTF-I molecule with +1/2 charge (3/4 filling) and anion ClO 4 layers. Above 190 K, the unit cell contains two EDO-TTF-I molecules and space inversion symmetry is macroscopically protected because of the random orientation of ClO 4 . By lowering the temperature, the structural phase transition with anion ordering occurs at approximately T = 190 K, which induces unit-cell doubling, as evidenced by the X-ray analysis. As shown in Fig. Next, we summarize the low-temperature electronic structure of (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 . Although the resistivity exhibits semimetallic behavior immediately after the structural phase transition, a metal-insulator phase transition occurs at approximately T = 95 K Ab initio effective Hamiltonian for (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 .-To investigate the electronic structures of the low-temperature phase in (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 , we derive the ab initio low-energy effective Hamiltonian, based on band structures obtained by the density functional theory (DFT). We use Quantum ESPRESSO After constructing MLWFs, we derive low-energy effective Hamiltonian, which is given by where c † iασ (c iασ ) is a creation (annihilation) operator for an electron in the i-th unit cell with orbitals α= A, A ′ , B, B ′ and spin σ. The number operators are defined as n iασ = c † iασ c iασ and N iα = n iα↑ + n iα↓ . The transfer integrals t iαjβ are evaluated using the MLWFs. We also evaluate the screened Coulomb interactions U iα and V iαjβ using the constrained random phase approximation many-variable variational Monte Carlo (mVMC) analysis.-The effective Hamiltonian is solved using the mVMC method where P G , P J , and L S are the Gutzwiller factor As detailed in the Supplementary Materials, the Hartree-Fock approximation shows that the DAF state (Fig. To examine the existence of long-range antiferromagnetic order, we calculate the spin-correlation functions of the ground state, defined as where the original lattice structure is mapped to the equivalent L a × 4L b square lattice for simplicity. Figure Using the Hartree-Fock approximation, we calculate the DOS defined as D σ (ω)=(πL a L b ) -1 k,n Im(ω -iη -E k,n,σ + μ) -1 , where μ and η are the chemical potential and the smearing factor, respectively. E k,n,σ denotes the n-th eigenvalue of the mean-field Hamiltonian at momentum k. We set η = 0.002 eV. As shown in Fig. Here, we analyze the origin of spin splitting in (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 . As in the case of the simple model, t -= (t 1 -t 2 )/2 and δ can induce spin splitting. From the ab initio calculations, we find that t -= 0.036 eV is comparable to δ = 0.047 eV. Thus, spin splitting in (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 is induced by both t -and δ. One might think that finite δ would make the total magnetization finite; however, a charge gap guarantees that the total magnetization is robust against perturbations. In this case, the total magnetization is zero at δ = 0 and remains zero even if δ is added, provided that δ is significantly smaller than the charge gap. Summary and discussion.-In this Letter, we present a simple method to realize fully compensated ferrimagnetism using the dimer degrees of freedom, which are typical of organic compounds. Using a simple model, we demonstrate that the inequivalence of the two dimers and DAF order can induce fully compensated ferrimagnets at commensurate filling. Furthermore, ab initio calculations suggest that the ground state of (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 is a DAF insulator with inequivalent dimers. As a result, the DAF order induces isotropic spin splitting in the electronic band structure. Our study shows that the key to realizing compensated ferrimagnetism lies in inequivalent dimer structures induced by anion ordering. This finding offers an unanticipated direction in materials design, where exotic magnetism can be achieved by selecting and modifying anions to exhibit anion ordering. The discovery of compensated ferrimagnetism in inequivalent dimer structures, as well as the potential for materials design using anion ordering, demonstrates that organic compounds offer a versatile platform for realizing exotic magnetism. An intriguing future issue would be to examine the doping effects in the DAF insulating state. Because the lowest unoccupied band is fully polarized and its DOS is large (Fig. The authors thank Y. Nakano, M. Ishikawa, H. Yamochi, and A. Otsuka for the fruitful discussions. This work was financially supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (KAKENHI) (Grant Nos. 23H03818, 23KJ1065, 15K05166, 22K18683 21H01793), Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research for Transformative Research Areas (A) "Condensed Conjugation" (No. JP20H05869) from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), and JST SPRING (Grant No. JPMJSP2125). The computations were performed using the facilities at the Supercomputer Center, Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo. Supplemental Material for "Compensated Ferrimagnets with Colossal Spin Splitting in Organic Compounds" We calculate the electronic band structures by the density functional theory (DFT) using Quantum ESPRESSO To see the inequivalence of the dimers, we calculate the partial densities of states (PDOS) using the one-body part of the low-energy effective Hamiltonians for (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 in the momentum space, which is given by Here, t ∆r,αβ is the transfer integrals obtained by RESPACK and ∆r represents the translational vector. The Hamiltonian H 0 σ (k) satisfies the following eigenvalue equation: |k, n, σ⟩ where E n,σ (k) and |k, n, σ⟩ are the eigenvalue and eigenvectors of H 0 . The band and spin indices are represented by n and σ, respectively. Using E n,σ (k) and d α,n,σ (k), the PDOS D α (ω) can be calculated as where η takes the positive infinitesimal value and μ is the chemical potential determined to set the electron number to 6. We set η = 0.002 eV in the numerical calculation. Figure To examine the ground state candidates of (EDO-TTF-I) 2 ClO 4 , we perform the Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation to the ab initio low-energy effective Hamiltonians defined in Eq. ( Figures Based on the results obtained by the HF calculations, we investigate the ground states using the mVMC method, which can treat correlation effects more accurately. Following previous studies The ordering wave vectors q = (0, π/2), (0, 3π/2) in S(q) (Fig. To see the spin splitting of the DAF states, we calculate band dispersions and DOS using the one-body Green functions obtained by the HF approximation. Here, we set λ = 0.7, which reproduces the charge gap estimated by the mVMC method. By performing the Fourier transformation for the mean-field Hamiltonian in the real space, we obtain the mean-field Hamiltonian in the momentum space, which is given by Here, ∆r denotes the translational vector and σ = -σ. Off-diagonal one-body Green functions in the real space are represented by ⟨c † r0+∆r,β,σ c r0,α,σ ⟩. We take r 0 = 0 as the representative coordinate of r 0 because r 0 is an arbitrary coordinate due to translational symmetry. Using the mean-field Hamiltonians in the momentum space, we calculate the band dispersions and the DOS. All values of the one-body Green functions are uploaded to the ISSP data repository 