Efficiently designing lightweight alloys with combined high corrosion resistance and mechanical properties remains an enduring topic in materials engineering. To this end, machine learning (ML) coupled ab-initio calculations is proposed within this study. Due to the inadequate accuracy of conventional stress-strain ML models caused by corrosion factors, a novel reinforcement self-learning ML algorithm (accuracy R 2 >0.92) is developed. Then, a strategy that integrates ML models, calculated energetics and mechanical moduli is implemented to optimize the Al alloys. Next, this Computation Designed Corrosion-Resistant Al alloy is fabricated that verified the simulation. The performance (elongation reaches ~30%) is attributed to the H-captured Al-Sc-Cu phases (-1.44 eV H -1 ) and Cu-modified η/η' precipitation inside the grain boundaries (GBs). The developed Al-Mg-Zn-Cu interatomic potential (energy accuracy 6.50 meV atom -1 ) proves the cracking resistance of the GB region enhanced by Cu-modification. Conceptually, our strategy is of practical importance for designing new alloys exhibiting corrosion resistance and mechanical properties. For engineering structural component, enhanced mechanical properties facilitate the reduction of material consumption, and excellent corrosion resistance prolongs their service time. Simultaneously improving the mechanical properties and corrosion resistance of materials is a matter of great concern. We present an efficient designing strategy to fabricate light-weight alloys with stronger mechanical properties and corrosion resistance in this paper. We demonstrate our machine learning model combined with high-throughput DFT calculations which discover new structures exhibit superb and comprehensive performance. Al alloys, known for their lightweight properties, are widely used in aerospace When AA7xxx are utilized as structural components, they are subjected to environmental H diffusion and accumulation, resulting in stress corrosion cracking (SCC) To enhance the SCC resistance of Al alloys, one approach is to modify the η/η' phases or retard their consecutive precipitation at the GBs. For instance, switching the η phases to the T phase (Al2Mg3Zn3) by heat treatment resulted in a 60% reduction in the cracking areal fractions High-throughput density function theory (DFT) computations provide wider chemical space for alloy design, the diffusion and stability of 86 kinds of elements in/on the Al matrix/surfaces are confirmed Machine learning (ML) and big data may be the optimal solutions to this dilemma since they have facilitated research in the field of materials science Another option is to augment the dataset based on published work or change the predictive descriptor to more accessible features, such as hardness instead of strength For the practical infinite chemical space for alloy design, artificial intelligence combined with physical laws brings us new opportunities In this study, we illustrate the challenges for ML based on corrosion-mechanics data and propose new ML models combined with DFT calculations to design Al alloys having attractive corrosion resistance as well as mechanical properties. The accuracy of the new reinforcement selflearning model for corrosive elongation prediction archives 0.92 (goodness of fit, R 2 ). Besides, the formation energy, mechanical modulus, and the work function of the various potential phases are compared via DFT calculations. Subsequently, the optimized composition and preferred microstructure for attractive corrosion resistance and mechanical properties are recommended based on fused ML and DFT calculations approach. Finally, we successfully manufactured the Computation Designed Corrosion-Resistant Al (CDCR-Al) alloy and verified the reliability of the proposed design strategy. According to the slow strain rate testing (SSRT, in 0.1 M NaCl), the elongation of the CDCR-Al alloy is ~30%. In addition, its corrosion potential is also higher than -0.7 VSCE. Multi-computations reveal that the design structures are favorable for trapping H atoms, and new GB exhibits higher cracking resistance than the raw η precipitated. More than 1,000 data points (including ~300 corrosive tensile data, Fig. All model accuracy is calculated based on the validation set (independent data, accounting for 20% of the total data). For the validation of the model generalization ability, the experimental UTS and SCC strength values of AA7005, commonly utilized in high-speed trains, are 311 MPa and 284 MPa ( ) ( ) where f(x) indicates the predicted UTS via BP-NN, x represents the element content and its perturbation, k denotes the element type, y and L is the practical and the maximum strength in the Al alloy dataset, respectively. It must be clarified that the AEPC masks the effects of elements in different strength intervals, not all attractive elements (area index >10 -4 ) are inclined to design high-strength Al alloy. Hence the unintegrated results are shown in Fig. Considering the excellent corrosion resistance of AA5xxx (Mg alloyed), the inferior corrosion resistance of AA7xxx is presumed to be related to Zn content. The effect of Zn content on Al alloy strength is summarized in Fig. In addition, Cu, Li, Fe, and Sc also exhibit influence on the high-strength regions. The enrichment of Cu and Er at the GBs can improve the GB cohesive energy, which can reduce the occurrence of IGCs. Moreover, Zr in Fig. According to elemental stability DFT calculations, Sc and Zn are overlapped in the diagram To avoid/modify the precipitation of η-MgZn2 at the GBs, the diffusion barrier of elements which lower than Zn are shown in Fig. Based on the above calculation, Sc (like Zn) and Er (improving the GB cohesive energy) are added to AA7005 to analyze their effects on mechanical and SCC properties (Fig. Unlike the strength, the influence of the corrosive environment on the elongation is more prominent. Quantitatively, the highest elongation prediction accuracy of the conventional BP-NN algorithm is only 0.573±0.09. This impuissance is more obvious when predicting the elongation of high-strength Al alloys, this may be attributed to the fact that corrosion promotes premature cracking and merging of cracks resulting in elongation reduction. The high accuracy of hybrid strength-elongation ML models for strength masks its disadvantage in elongation predictions, especially in corrosive environments. Hence, we propose to use DFT calculations to accurately describe the elemental physical state in the Al, and develop a reinforcement learning algorithm with them (RL-NN, Fig. When the outermost atomic orbital is not yet half-filled, the adsorbed energy of the atom decreases with the increase in the number of electrons in the outermost atomic orbital. The energy then increases after the atomic orbital is half filled. To predict the content of uncommon elements (sparse samples), all compositions are converted into chemical/physical innate characters which synthesize experimental and computational data (Fig. Except for the specialized dataset, the RL-NN model set eight activation functions and eight loss functions with the same initial accuracy probability. Then, several activation functions and one loss function are selected according to the probability, such that the optimal conventional neural network can be generated (the functions are randomly sorted). Each model is evaluated based on the equations in Fig. Statistically, the function probability fluctuation reveals which functions are more suitable for elongation predictions with corrosion tensile data. As shown in Fig. However, the activation functions, such as the linear, selu, tanh, and leakyRelu, have accuracy probabilities exceeding 10. Combining the best activation and loss functions, the model with an accuracy of 0.926±0.022 is developed (Fig. Comparing the contribution of the traditional chemical and calculated features to the accuracy, ). Therefore, the elemental GB cohesive energies have profound impacts on the elongation prediction of Al alloys. Comprehensively, the average AEPC of the summarized calculated features (165) is greatly higher than that of the chemical features (155). After analyzing the calculated features, it also can be referred to that the calculated features related to the matrix have higher effects than the surface calculations. More specifically, the average AEPC importance of conventional calculated features is relatively low, such as that of adsorbed energy on the (100) and ( While the added elements (ML determined) bring opportunities for the formation of new phases, they may also pose the risk of material degradation (mechanical properties and corrosion). Therefore, the formation energies and mechanical moduli of phases are analyzed within this study (Fig. cathode anode atom -1 , but their mechanical indices are the weakest among the main alloying elements. The Zn group (green) forms more easily than the Mg group, and their moduli indices are also greater than Mg. Pure Si will not precipitate from the matrix (≈0.09 eV atom -1 ), whereas its derivatives, having lower formation energy than Zn/Mg/Cu groups, such as β Insight into Zr-induced grains refinement (GBs proliferate and favor the distribution of η/η' phases) and Fe/Si coarsening phases, their positions are set as the left boundary of the ideal zone (gray box in Fig. The corrosion behavior of the phases is another aspect to be optimized. Fig. Partial Cu is expected to combine with Sc/Er to prohibit the pitting corrosion and the other Cu is desired to diffuse into the GBs. Based on the identified element, the trained BP/RL-NN models and genetic algorithm are used to determine element compositions. The optimization goal is synergetic UTS and elongation in corrosive environments. Considering the high dimensionality and extremely wide composition range for the genetic algorithm (full-space search), we perform optimization for AA7005 (Table Besides, the aging process is consistent with that of Al-Zn-Mg alloys, with a temperature of 120°C for 4 h. Short aging time is also beneficial to avoid excessive formation of the η/η' phases and more stable Al-Sc phase (Cu free). Subsequently, the CDCR-Al alloy is successfully manufactured via electromagnetic stirring and die casting, producing a billet with a size φ80×100 mm (Fig. Employing a high solid solution temperature (505°C for 8 h), the diffusion of Cu with relatively high diffusion barrier is more active, such that the partial Al3Sc phases are doped with Cu. To verify the CDCR-Al alloy resistance to SCC, SSRTs (10 -6 s -1 ) were carried out in corrosive Once the AA7005 is in the anodic region, its icorr surges to 1.24 mA cm -2 . Combined with Fig. From Fig. Furthermore, the Gibbs free energy change ΔG of H in the Al matrix and phases are computed and summarized in Fig. reduced to -1.44 eV H -1 . Therefore, this modification reduces the lattice parameters of phases and simultaneously enhances their H-trapping ability. The segmented and modified GB η/η' phases (Fig. It must be reiterated, however, that not all GBs are completely transformed into new structures, such as the partial GBs in Fig. Under the same corrosive environment, the corrosion current of CDCR-Al is close to that of AA5xxx, with a surface oxide film that is intact without micro-pitting. The average work function of potential ternary phases are shown in Fig. Moreover, we utilize the SKPFM observing the height (Fig. As for the complete protective film, this is attributed to the addition of Sc and Er. These two elements have stronger binding abilities to O than Al, their calculated formation energies are -3.58 eV (Sc2O3) and -3.71 eV (Er2O3), respectively. Besides, band structure calculations show that their band gaps (Eg) decrease with the enhancement of formation ability (Fig. When one GB with a crack tip (molecular static, MS) is considered, the strength of Cumodified model at 0 K is like the η phases model, but its failure elongation (63%) is still better than that of η phases (49%). Computing the von Mises stress (Fig. is also approximately 29.57% greater than that of η phases models. Different from the normal cracking simulation, not the crack tip, the high stress at the GB trigger the dislocation emission. Whereas the initial dislocation density of Cu model is higher than the η phases models, although it owns less stacking fault atoms. During the cracking, the increase rate of dislocation density of Cu model is greatly larger than that of η phases models, it indicates that the Cu-modification hinders the slippage of dislocations. This difference also affects the critical fracture toughness KIc ( ) where T is the Kelvin temperature (K), and t indicates the holding time (10 h). The genetic algorithm initially generates random 50,000 alloys within the composition limitation. These alloys are multiplied and mutated to form 15,000 new alloys. Each alloy (75,000 in total) is given a survival probability by the BP/RL-NN models (predicated strength and elongation), then 15,000 alloys are eliminated according to their probabilities. Due to the inferior corrosive elongation prediction of the conventional model, the elements combined with their contents are converted into chemical features, i.e., mass, atomic radius, electronegativity, 1 st ionization energy, and valence electrons. Besides, the physical features calculated by the ab-initio method, such as GB cohesive energy, diffusion, dissolution energy in the Al matrix, and adsorption energy on the Al(100) and Al(111), are utilized to enrich the dataset. The data features and their correlation analysis are shown in Fig. All ab-initio calculations (9,704 in total) are performed using Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP 5.4) where E is the ab-initio calculation total energy, W is the cohesive energy density, and V expresses the model volume. cij and εij are the elastic constant and strain components, respectively. The band structures of Al2O3, Sc2O3, and Er2O3 are obtained using Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE06) Cracking MD/MS simulations are using Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator 59 . The MD system contains ~440,000 atoms, while the MS system is about 35,600 atoms. All models are three dimensions. The basic ML interatomic potential method (Moment tensor potential, MTP) is developed by Shapeev groups (1), force-weight (0.01), and stress-weight (0.001). All configurations are randomly divided into training set (0.8) and validating set (0.2). Given sufficient raw configurations, active learning is performed only 2 times (deforming at 800 K). The isothermal-isobaric ensembles (MD models) are initialized with the temperature and pressure by velocity scaling method to 300 K and 0 MPa respectively. During deformation, the systems are maintained at 300 K, and a strain of 0.1% is applied to the systems along the z-axis every 1,000 steps. As for MS models, the crack boundary is non-periodic and shrink-wrapped. Every step the y-direction (perpendicular to the cracking direction) is stretched 1%, and then the cg and fire methods are used to minimize. The critical fracture toughness KIc and von Mises stress σv are calculated according to Eqs. 8 and 9. Ic Ka  = (8) where σ is the uniaxial stress and a is the crack length. 