We reveal the gate-tunable Berry curvature dipole polarizability in Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 nanoplates through measurements of the third-order nonlinear Hall effect. Under an applied electric field, the Berry curvature exhibits an asymmetric distribution, forming a field-induced Berry curvature dipole, resulting in a measurable third-order Hall voltage with a cubic relationship to the longitudinal electric field. Notably, the magnitude and polarity of this third-order nonlinear Hall effect can be effectively modulated by gate voltages. Furthermore, our scaling relation analysis demonstrates that the sign of the Berry curvature dipole polarizability changes when tuning the Fermi level across the Dirac point, in agreement with theoretical calculations. The results highlight the gate control of nonlinear quantum transport in Dirac semimetals, paving the way for promising advancements in topological electronics. The concepts of Berry connection and Berry curvature play essential roles in the development of modern topological physics The Dirac semimetal provides an ideal platform to investigate the Berry connection and Berry curvature related effects. Dirac semimetals are featured with inverted band structures and massless Dirac fermions The third-order nonlinear Hall effect in nonmagnetic materials is closely associated with BCP tensor G ↔ , which is gauge invariant and represents an intrinsic band geometric property where α, β denote the spatial direction, e is the electron charge, ðA α Þ mn 1⁄4 hu m ji∂ k α ju n i represents the interband Berry connection, and ε n is the band energy. Under the presence of an electric field E and BCP, the Berry connection is generated as and thereby the field-induced BCD (D E ). The D E together with the applied field E would lead to the nonlinear Hall effect as the third-order Hall response, in which the third-harmonic Hall voltage depends on the cube of longitudinal electric field. Although the third-order nonlinear Hall effect associated with BCD polarization has been experimentally observed We start our theoretical analysis of Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 from the typical four-band effective model , where f 0 is the equilibrium distribution function and the integration is taken over the Brillouin zone We carry out low temperature electric transport measurements to reveal the BCD polarization of Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 . The Cd 3 As 2 nanoplates were grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method with (112) surface plane and 1⁄21 10 edge direction To measure the nonlinear Hall effect, we applied an ac driving current along the nanoplate edge direction [as indicated by the white arrow in Fig. ⊥ and V 3ω ⊥ , versus the applied bias current. The value of V 3ω ⊥ is almost 3 times larger than that of V 2ω ⊥ under I k 1⁄4 10 μA. For an ideal Dirac semimetal, the inversion symmetry is conserved in the bulk, which should result in the disappearance of second-order Hall response. However, in practical experiments, lattice symmetry-breaking may arise from factors such as strain introduced during device fabrication, differences in thermal expansion coefficient between the sample and substrate during the measurement cooling process, and surface atomic reconstruction. This lattice symmetry breaking can lead to a nonzero value of the V 2ω ⊥ signal. The third-order Hall response takes the leading role in the nonlinear charge response. The thirdorder Hall signals are also independent of frequencies (Fig. S1 We then investigate the gate voltage dependence of third-order nonlinear Hall responses. The transfer curve [Fig. ⊥ versus V 3 k as a function of V g is summarized in Fig. The underlying mechanism of the nonlinear Hall effect is further investigated by studying its temperature dependence and scaling law behavior. Figure ⊥ exhibits a linear relation with the V 3 k for all temperatures. The slope of V 3ω ⊥ vs V 3 k is gradually attenuated upon increasing the temperature as shown in Fig. , and t are the channel length, channel width, and nanoplate thickness, respectively. σ 0 refers to the conductivity at the base temperature 2 K. According to previous literature Each of the scaling parameters A 0 , A 1 , and A 2 comes from the mixture of intrinsic and extrinsic contributions (Supplemental Material Note 4 To assess the relative contribution of different mechanisms, we carefully analyze the scaling parameters extracted from the parabolic fitting, as shown in Fig. The parameter C int denotes the intrinsic contribution following C int 1⁄4 ðm Ã e=2ħ 2 nÞγ, where ħ is the reduced Plank constant, e is the electron charge, m Ã 1⁄4 0.04m e is the effective mass for Cd 3 As 2 , n is the carrier density, γ is the BCD polarizability defined as γ 1⁄4 D=E. The parameter C sk;1 00 and C sk;1 11 represent impurity-and phonon-related Gaussian skew scatterings, respectively. Then we can obtain that ðE 3ω The three terms on the right indicate the intrinsic contribution, impurity skew scattering contribution, phonon skew scattering contribution to the observed ðE 3ω ⊥ =E 3 k Þ. Figure To gain a deeper understanding of the connection between BCD polarizability and the energy band structure's topology, we conduct a numerical analysis on a conventional insulator model for comparison (see Supplemental Material Note 6 In conclusion, we have systematically studied the third-order nonlinear Hall effect in the Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 nanoplate. The scaling relationship reveals that the third-order Hall effect is mainly contributed by the intrinsic contribution, i.e., electric field-induced BCD, and the extrinsic contribution, i.e., impurity skew scatterings. The BCD polarizability is found gate tunable, and changes its sign when the Fermi level crosses the Dirac point, in agreement with theoretical calculations. Our work reveals the BCD polarization effect in Dirac semimetals, enriching the understanding of nonlinear transport in topological semimetals. † Corresponding author: liaozm@pku.edu.cn The 3D Berry curvature dipole tensor D ⃡ is defined as where f 0 is the distribution function that resembles a step function in zero temperature limit. With this field-induced Berry curvature dipole, one can find an analogy between the third-order transport here and the second-order response in inversion-symmetrybroken materials with an intrinsic nonzero dipole D . In such manner, we have the relation j α NL = χ αβλ E β E λ in the linear response regime, where To be exact, the components of nonlinear current can be explicitly written as noting that E z = 0 helps simplify the equations. The amplitude of Hall response, i.e., j ⊥ NL,3D , can be obtained by projecting the current to the in-plane transverse direction (along [111 ̅ ] direction), also in accordance with experimental setup. To better characterize the relation between field-induced Berry curvature dipole and third-order Hall effect in the Cd3As2 nanoplate, we introduce the concept of "effective Berry curvature dipole". For 2D materials, the Berry curvature dipole tensor can be viewed as an in-plane pseudovector. The nonlinear Hall response is determined by the projection of Berry curvature dipole onto the electric field direction. We define the projection as the effective Berry curvature dipole, which is a scalar and can be calculated as D = j ⊥ NL,2D /( e 3 τ 2 |E| 2 ). We extend the concept from the 2D to the 3D case. For the 3D Dirac semimetal Cd3As2, the Berry curvature dipole is a rank-2 tensor, and its projection onto the electric field direction is hard to define. To solve this problem, we here assume the Cd3As2 nanoplate as a quasi-2D system. This assumption is reasonable because the nanoplate's thickness is much smaller than its width and length, and it is also comparable to the electron mean free path. γ, where ħ is the reduced Plank constant, e is the electron charge, m * = 0.04m e is the effective mass for Cd3As2, n is the carrier density, γ the Berry curvature dipole polarizability defined as γ = D/E. By fitting the experimental data with the parabolic scaling law, we can obtain the gate voltage dependence of three scaling parameters A 0 , A 1 and A 2 , as shown in Fig. In the following, we elucidate the dominant mechanisms of the scaling parameters. The side-jump C i sj cannot play a dominant role in the scaling parameters. Otherwise, since the A 2 doesn't involve side-jump contribution, the A 2 would be much smaller than A 0 and A 1 , contrary with the observed similar amplitude of the three parameters Moreover, the high carrier mobility of Cd3As2 nanoplate indicates the relatively weak side jumps, which are usually pronounced in dirty metals 