The concept of nonlinear kinetic inductance sensor (NKIS) of electromagnetic radiation is proposed. The idea is based on divergency of kinetic inductance L k ∼ dq/dI ( q is a momentum of superconducting electrons, I is a supercurrent) of hybrid superconductor/normal metal (SN) bridge at current I * < I dep (I dep is a depairing current of the hybrid) and temperature T * much smaller than critical temperature Tc. It makes possible to have large change of phase difference δφ along SN bridge in current biased regime at I ≃ I * even for small electron temperature increase. Appearance of δφ is accompanied by the change of the current and magnetic flux through the coupled superconducting ring which could be measured with help of superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). In some respect proposed sensor may be considered as a superconducting counterpart of transition edge sensor (TES) those work is based on large derivative dR/dT (R is a resistance) near Tc. Because at I ≃ I * SN bridge is in gapless regime there is no low boundary for frequency of detected e.m. radiation. Our calculations show that such a sensor can operate in single photon regime and detect single photons with frequency ν 10 GHz. We argue that the nontrivial dependence I(q) of SN bridge could be also used in detectors of continuous e.m. radiation, current and magnetic field sensors. Superconductors are widely used in our days as a basic element of detector/sensor of electromagnetic radiation. Absorbed photons create quasiparticles and/or increase their energy in superconductors and it changes its superconducting/transport properties. For example in kinetic inductance detector (KID) In case of TES its high sensitivity is based on narrow resistive transition of superconductor R(T ) near critical temperature T c and usage of superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) to measure response of the detector -the larger derivative dR/dT the larger resistance and current change via voltage-biased superconductor. One of the advantages of TES is that it operates in resistive state near T c and, hence, superconducting gap practically vanishes, which means that there is no low boundary typical for KID or SSPD where energy of the photon hν should exceed twice the superconducting energy gap ǫ g . Besides it can work in single photon regime (for infra-red and photons with larger energy) and resolve energy of the absorbed photon contrary to SSPD. Here we offer another type of energy resolved sensor * Electronic address: vodolazov@impras.ru which as a TES is based on large variations of transport properties due to small temperature increase of the whole superconducting detecting element. Contrary to TES it operates in superconducting state at T ≪ T c but despite that it has zero superconducting gap. The proposed nonlinear kinetic inductance sensor (NKIS) consists of current biased hybrid superconductor-normal metal (SN) bridge coupled to superconducting ring (see Fig. In comparison with TES where the large derivative dR/dT provides large change of the current, in NKIS the large derivative dq SN /dI SN provides the large change of I ring . In contrast to TES proposed NKIS operates in superconducting, dissipation less state, and dq SN /dI SN → ∞ at I SN = I * and T = T * which potentially may lead to larger sensitivity than TES has. Like a TES it also does not have low boundary for photon detection because at current I SN I * the superconducting gap is equal to zero in SN bridge. Below we show that NKIS can potentially detect even single photons with ν > 10-30 GHz when it is biased at temperature 15 -150mK. In this section we present results of our calculations which demonstrate detection ability of NKIS in single photon regime. In Fig. ), ratio of diffusion coefficients D N /D S = 20, q = (∇φ + 2πA/Φ 0 ) is the momentum of Cooper pairs (φ is the phase of superconducting order parameter, A is a vector potential, Φ 0 is a magnetic flux quantum), T c0 is the critical temperature and I dep,S is a depairing current at T = 0 of single S layer. To find it we use one-dimensional Usadel model (equations and method of calculation are present in At temperature near T * on dependence I SN (q SN ) there is a 'plateau' at current I = I * . It occurs due to temperature driven transition from I SN (q SN ) having one maximum at high T to dependence having two maxima at low T. Maximum at low q SN appears due to increased contribution of N layer to total supercurrent (proximity induced superconductiviy in N layer becomes 'stronger'), which also leads to increase of the slope I SN (q SN ) at small q SN and smaller kinetic inductance. Because N layer has larger diffusion coefficient the depairing effect of supervelocity (in Usadel equation it is described by term with D S,N q 2 SN ) is larger in N layer than in S layer (q SN = const across the thickness of SN bridge). It leads to suppression of superconductivity in N layer at smaller q SN than in S layer and need to increase momentum to keep the same supercurrent which results in appearance of the 'plateau'. Fig. When SN bridge is connected with a superconducting ring the total current I consists of I SN and I ring (see Fig. where we use linear dependence I ring ∼ q ring ξ c (because q ring ξ c ≪ 1) and weak temperature dependence of depairing current of S layer at T ≪ T c0 . With known dependence I SN (q SN ) and expression for magnetic flux through the ring Φ = L G I ring (L G = μ 0 R(ln(8R/r) -2) is geometric inductance of the ring, R is its radius, r ∼ w ring and μ 0 is a magnetic constant) we find dependence Φ(I, T ). We show it in Fig. In the following we consider ability of NKIS detect single photons (analysis can be also made when there is continuous flux of e.m. radiation, as it was done in where C e = 2π 2 k 2 B N (0)T 0 /3 is a heat capacity of electrons, T 0 is bath temperature and V ef f = l SN w SN d ef f is a volume of SN bridge where density of electron states is close to its normal state value. We also neglect heating of phonons due to their much smaller heat capacity and use in calculations N (0) = 13eV /nm 3 which corresponds to Cu. The important characteristic of photon sensor is the signal to noise ratio S/N . Noise may be estimated as N = δΦ n √ ω where δΦ n is the flux sensitivity of the dc SQUID and √ ω is its bandwidth In Fig. The same sensor could be used to detect single THz and subTHz photons. Because of their much larger energy we do not need mK temperatures and T c0 = 1K. Note that V ef f ∼ ξ c ∼ 1/ √ T c0 and I dep,S ∼ T c0 for superconductor those thickness scales with ξ c . Therefore our results could be easily rescaled -one needs to multiply δΦ/Φ 0 in Fig. In this section we discuss gapless regime in SN bridge. In ordinary 'dirty' superconductor energy gap is finite even at I = I dep where it is about of 0.57k B T c0 ∼ ∆ 0 /3 In ordinary superconductor condition Dq 2 /2 ∼ ∆ 0 is fulfilled on unstable branch of dependence I(q) and superconducting order parameter ∆ rapidly decreases with increase of q. In SN bilayer gapless state is stable due to presence of S layer having much smaller diffusion coefficient and, hence, much larger q g . We find that the 'plateau' exists in wide range of parameters of SN bridge. With increase of d S (keeping d N and ratio D N /D S the same) temperature T * , width of 'plateau' and ratio I * /I dep decrease (see panel (a) in Fig. The 'plateau' on I(q) may also exist in bilayer composed of two superconductors having different critical temperatures -see Fig. Peak on dependence L k (I) has been observed recently for MoN(40nm)/Cu(40nm) strip (d S = d N ≃ 6ξ c , T c0 ≃ 7.8K) Single microwave photon detectors based on heating of small volume superconductor have been proposed earlier. The similar design as in Fig. In comparison with Refs. In reality peak in dependence L k (I) will be smeared due to temperature/current fluctuations, local variations of thickness/width and/or material parameters (local T c , resistivity, etc.) of the sample which are also responsible for broadening of resistive transition in TES. However in contrast to resistive transition where always dR/dT > 0 and R(T ) is reversible on dependence I(q) at T < T * there is a region with dq/dI < 0 near I * (see Fig. Although we mainly concentrate on ability to detect single microwave photon the NKIS can also work in continuous regime like TES (hot electron bolometer). In this case to find δT one has to solve balance equation which includes heating of SN bridge due to absorbed e.m. radiation and its cooling due to electron-phonon interaction. Note, that for this type of application is not necessary to use SQUID readout and small size SN bridge. As in KID one may use coplanar waveguide with capacitively coupled superconducting circuit which contains current biased SN bridge. Biased at I = I * and T = T * SN bridge drastically changes its kinetic inductance when temperature increases (see evolution of L k (I) with temperature in Fig. 