Acoustic trapping uses forces exerted by sound waves to transport small objects along specified trajectories in three dimensions. The structure of the acoustic force landscape is governed by the amplitude and phase profiles of the sound's pressure wave. These profiles can be controlled through deliberate spatial modulation of monochromatic waves, by analogy to holographic optical trapping. Alternatively, spatial and temporal control can be achieved by interfering a small number of sound waves at multiple frequencies to create acoustic holograms based on spectral content. We demonstrate spectral holographic trapping by projecting acoustic conveyor beams that move millimeter-scale objects along prescribed paths, and control the complexity of particle trajectories by tuning the strength of weak reflections. Illustrative spectral superpositions of static and dynamic force landscapes enable us to realize two variations on the theme of a wave-driven oscillator, a deceptively simple dynamical system with surprisingly complex phenomenology. Forces exerted by sound waves can levitate and transport small objects without physical contact, which is a boon for processing sensitive Here, we draw attention to an alternative approach to dynamic acoustic trapping whose ability to move matter along prescribed paths is encoded in the spectral content of a small number of acoustic sources. We illustrate the potential utility of such spectral traps by demonstrating dynamic acoustic manipulation along a single axis using just two acoustic pixels emitting stationary sound fields. A steady sound wave at frequency ω propagating through an incompressible medium can be characterized by the real-valued amplitude profile, u(r), and phase profile, φ(r), of its pressure field: p(r, t) = u(r) exp (iφ(r)) exp(-iωt). ( This structured wave can be decomposed into plane waves whose wave number satisfies the standard dispersion relation, k = ω/c m , where c m is the speed of sound * current affiliation: Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA in the medium. A small particle at position r in this field experiences a time-averaged acoustic force to leading order in the particle's dimensionless size scale, ka p < 1, where is the classic Gor'kov potential For the specific case of a spherical particle of radius a p , the coefficients A and B depend on the particle's density, ρ p , and sound speed, c p , relative to those of the medium as where the monopole coupling coefficient, gauges the mismatch in isentropic compressibility between the particle, κ p = (ρ p c 2 p ) -1 , and the medium, , and the dipole coupling coefficient, accounts for the mismatch in density. A superposition of sound waves can be expressed in the form of Eq. ( Alternatively, time-varying acoustic force landscapes can be created by superposing steady sound waves at different frequencies; the resulting beats manifest as slow time variations of the Gor'kov potential. Equation (2) captures this behavior by implicitly averaging the acoustic force over one period, T = 2π/ω, of the carrier frequency, ω. The spectral content of a polyphonic superposition can replace the spatiotemporal variations in a standard acoustic hologram to create dynamic acoustic traps. We refer to this frequency-based approach to wavefront shaping as "spectral holography". To illustrate the opportunities created by spectral holography, we demonstrate programmable transport along one spatial dimension using force landscapes created with just two acoustic pixels. Our experimental system, illustrated in Fig. If both sources operate at the same frequency, ω, their interference creates a standing wave with axial nodes separated by half a wavelength. Each node acts as a potential energy well for small incompressible particles, such as the expanded polystyrene bead shown in Fig. Detuning the two sources by ∆ω ≪ ω creates beats in the axial pressure field, that manifest themselves as motion of the time-averaged axial force field, after substitution into Eq. ( is positive for dense incompressible particles, which therefore tend to be trapped at the nodes of the pressure field. The entire force landscape moves along ẑ at a steady speed, that is proportional to the detuning, ∆ω. Setting aside complications due to inertia and drag where z n (t) = z n (0) + v c t is the position of the n-th pressure node at time t. This type of traveling force landscape is known as a "conveyor" More sophisticated modes of transport can be achieved with more sophisticated superpositions of tones. Such a generalized conveyor, which we call a "scanner", can be implemented as the superposition of waves from two sources, as depicted in Fig. Such a superposition creates a time-averaged force landscape, whose traps travel along ẑ as The resulting motion is slow in the sense that relevant variations in the relative phase satisfy | φ| ≪ ω, where the dot refers to a derivative with respect to time. Any faster variations are suppressed in theory by the implicit time average in Eq. ( Active control of the relative phase, φ(t), has been used in the context of holographic optical trapping to project optical conveyors Acoustic pixels are actively driven transducers. As a consequence, they not only project sound waves, but also act as absorbing boundary conditions for incident waves In practice, acoustic pixels reflect a small proportion, ε 0 , of incident sound waves. Reflections contribute to the force landscape by forming standing waves within the cavity whose amplitude can be controlled through the choice of ω. The associated force landscape therefore has both time-varying and stationary components, where the standing-wave contribution is approximately The factor of 2 in Eq. (13b) accounts for the independent contributions from each of the pixels. The depth of the stationary landscape's modulation, is proportional to the acoustic pixels' reflection coefficient, ε 0 , and can be tuned by adjusting the carrier frequency. For the cavity depicted in Fig. particle trajectories are consistent with ε 0 = 0.38 ± 0.02. The overall scale of the stationary force landscape is set by F 0 (ω), which is given by Eq. ( If the reflection coefficient is large enough, ε 0 > 0.5, the central frequency can be tuned so that 2ε(ω) > 1. In that case, the standing wave exerts enough force to trap the particle, and the dynamic landscape acts as a timedependent perturbation. Representative trajectories for this mode of motion are plotted in Fig. In the opposite limit of weak reflections, ε(ω) < 0.5, the particle is transported by the moving conveyor across the stationary landscape. The nodes then trace out tra-jectories, that reduce to Eq. ( The particles' trajectories increasingly deviate from the traps' trajectories as ε(ω) approaches 1/2 and the trajectories become increasingly sinuous. We quantify these deviations with the kinematic variance, which is plotted as a function of the carrier frequency, ω, in Fig. A trapped particle hews to the trajectory of its acoustic trap if the motion is slow enough to neglect the inertia of the fluid medium reflects contributions from the active force landscape, the stationary force landscape and viscous drag, respectively. A sphere of radius a p moving through a fluid of viscosity η m and mass density ρ m experiences a drag force that is described by the Basset-Boussinesq-Oseen equation which accounts for the inertia of the displaced fluid on time scales set by the viscous relaxation time, The history-dependent contribution to the drag complicates an analytic formulation of the transport properties for a general spectral hologram. To illustrate the challenge, we consider the comparatively simple case of a particle moving under the influence of an acoustic conveyor. Competition between the active and stationary force landscapes causes the particle to oscillate at the beat frequency, ∆ω, about the moving trap's position. We therefore define the dimensionless displacement in the co-moving frame, Applying Eq. ( where primes denote derivatives with respect to the dimensionless time, s = ω 0 t. Equation ( can be varied over the range ε(ω) ∈ [0, 1] by adjusting the carrier frequency relative to the cavity resonance. Similarly, the natural frequency, and the drag coefficient, both depend on cavity tuning when ε(ω) > 0.5. Equations ( under the simplifying assumption the particle oscillates harmonically at the driving frequency, ∆ω. The sphere's effective mass is increased in this approximation by the mass of the fluid in a Prandtl-Schlichting boundary layer of thickness This correction has been demonstrated to quantitatively model the damped oscillations of a particle levitated in a static acoustic trap using the Blackman-Harris window function, W (s). The wave-driven oscillator responds most strongly at the driving frequency, Ω = ∆ω. Increasingly much power is directed into harmonics of that driving frequency as the depth of modulation increases. Agreement between the measured and computed power spectra illustrates the utility of the Basset-Boussinesq-Oseen equation for interpreting the behavior of wave-driven oscillators created with sound. At the same time, the presence of strong harmonics suggests even better agreement could be attained by seeking self-consistent solutions to the equation of motion, including the BBO correction described in Eq. ( More generally, the wave-driven oscillator has been shown Spectral holographic trapping uses interference among waves at multiple frequencies to create time-averaged force landscapes that evolve dynamically on the inertial time scales of trapped objects. Spatiotemporal control afforded by the frequency content of the projected waves reduces the complexity of acoustic manipulation systems by replacing the many spatial degrees of freedom required for conventional monotonic holographic projection. Spectral holography therefore allows complex force landscapes to be generated with small numbers of acoustic pixels. We have demonstrated two archetypal examples, a unidirectional conveyor created with two frequencies and a bidirectional scanner created with nine. We also have shown that tuning the carrier frequency to cavity resonances can usefully implement a superposition of dynamic and static force fields with no additional complexity. In the case of an acoustic conveyor, this superposition implements a wave-driven oscillator whose exceedingly rich dynamical properties emerge from an interplay between the acoustic force field, the particle's inertia and viscous drag in the supporting medium. This study also highlights the importance of accounting for the fluid's inertia when planning and interpreting the motions of particles in acoustic force landscapes. The combination of rich spectral control and analytic dynamical modeling expands the prospects for dexterous acoustic manipulation of macroscopic materials. The present study has focused on the dynamics of individual particles in spectral holograms created within cavities. Additional opportunities can be imagined for freespace manipulation with traveling waves and for selforganization guided by wave-mediated interactions in many-body systems immersed in spectral holograms.