Superconductors (SCs) with nontrivial topological band structures in the normal state have been discovered recently in bulk materials. When such SCs are made into thin films, quantum tunneling and Cooper pairing take place between the topological surface states (TSSs) on the opposing surfaces. Here, we find that chiral topological superconductivity with spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking emerges on the surface of such thin film SCs. There is a mirror symmetry that protects a novel nonunitary orbital and spin triplet pairing of the TSS. In the mirror diagonal space, the chiral topological SC manifests as two independent chiral p-wave spin-triplet pairing states, in which each is a two-dimensional superconducting analog of the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel state in superfluid 3 He with in-plane exchange fields. A rich topological phase diagram governed by the nontrivial Z ⊕ Z topological invariant is obtained with gapless chiral Majorana edge modes and anyonic Majorana vortices. We further construct a three dimensional lattice model with a topological band structure and SC pairings, which is motivated by Fe-based SCs such as Fe(Te,Se). We demonstrate the realization of the proposed intrinsic chiral topological superconductor in the quasi-two-dimensional thin film limit. Our findings enable thin film SCs with nontrivial Z 2 band structures as a single-material platform for intrinsic chiral topological superconductivity with both vortex and boundary Majorana excitations for topological quantum device making. Over the past few decades, there has been an intensive search for two-dimensional (2D) chiral triplet superfluids and superconductors (SCs). These are novel quantum states of matter with topological off-diagonal long-range order that support localized non-Abelian Majorana excitations. The latter are the building blocks for topological quantum computation Electronic structures of crystalline materials can carry a nontrivial topological Z 2 invariant, such as in 3D strong topological insulators, and support topological surface states (TSSs) Here, we report the discovery of intrinsic chiral topological superconductivity with spontaneous TRS breaking in thin films of bulk SCs with Z 2 nontrivial band structures where the normal state is time-reversal symmetric. When the top and bottom surfaces of the thin film are brought close and coupled by quantum tunneling and Cooper pairing, the opposite helicities of the Dirac fermion TSS introduce a mirror symmetry with respect to the xy-mirror plane, as illustrated in Fig. tices. We demonstrate that thin films of unconventional SCs with nontrivial Z 2 invariant band structures and TSSs offer a high-temperature, single-material platform for studying gapless chiral Majorana edge excitations and exploring their applications for topological quantum computing, which may be relevant to Fe-based SCs. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin with the effective low-energy theory of the superconducting TSS on the thin-film surfaces in Sec. II. The mirror-symmetry protected spin-orbital triplet pairings are discussed and shown to produce the nonunitary χTSC with spontaneous TRS breaking characterized by the topological Z ⊕ Z invariant. The model Hamiltonian simultaneously diagonalized in the mirror eigenspace is shown to be equivalent to two independent chiral spin-triplet p-wave pairing states, each of which is a 2D analog of the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel state in superfluid 3 He under in-plane exchange fields. In Sec. III, we study the phase structure of the Z ⊕ Z χTSC and present the topological phase diagrams of the effective Hamiltonian. The topological phase diagram is extended in Sec. IV to include the effects of Zeeman coupling due to an external magnetic field or an incipient magnetic order. The difference and the robustness of the χTSC thin films as a platform for χMEMs are discussed in comparison to the QAHI-SC hybrid structures. The stability of the thin-film χ-TSC against the substrate potential and pairing interactions that break the mirror symmetry is studied in Sec. V. In Sec. VI, we construct a 3D lattice model for the Z 2 nontrivial electronic structure, which is motivated by Fe-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se), and demonstrate the emergence of the intrinsic χ-TSC in the quasi-two-dimensional thin-film limit. We also compare and contrast our findings to the recent proposal of time-reversal invariant topological superconductivity with helical MEMs in thin films of Fe-based SCs. We begin with the low-energy effective theory describing the superconducting TSS on the surface of the thin-film SC illustrated in Fig. , where 1 and 2 are the orbital indices labeling the top and bottom surfaces and ↑ and ↓ the spin states, and q = (q x , q y ) is the 2D momentum. In the Nambu basis Ψ N = (Ψ q , Ψ † -q ) T , we have H = 1 2 q Ψ † N H(q)Ψ N with the 8 × 8 Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, The diagonal elements are the normal state Hamiltonian of coupled TSS on the top and bottom surfaces, where v F ≡ 1 is the Fermi velocity, μ the chemical potential, and t the inter-surface tunneling (Fig. It is crucial to note that due to the opposite helicities of the Dirac fermion TSSs, the normal state Hamiltonian h(q) in Eq. ( ( This mirror symmetry can be used to study the pairing interactions. For isotropic pairing in momentum space, the Cooper pairs must be either a spin singlet and orbital triplet, or a spin triplet and orbital singlet. The superconducting pairing order parameter ∆ for the TSS therefore has the general form where d and d ′ are two unit triplet d vectors in the spin and orbital sectors. Under the mirror symmetry, M∆M -1 = ∆, the only possible d vectors are given by d = ẑ and d ′ = x, leading to which corresponds to spin-singlet, intraorbital triplet pairing ∆ on the same surface and spin-triplet, interorbital singlet pairing across the two surfaces ∆ t as illustrated in Fig. 1 where M is precisely the mirror operator in Eq. ( The thin film SC in Eq. ( where (τ , τ 0 ) denote the Pauli and unit matrix acting in the particle-hole sector. H(q) has the usual particle-hole symmetry CH(q)C -1 = -H(-q), where C = σ 0 χ 0 τ x K and K is the complex conjugation. However, the TRS of the normal state, i.e., T h(q)T -1 = h(-q) with T = iσ y χ 0 τ 0 K and T 2 = -1, is broken in the superconducting state in Eq. ( The mirror symmetry implies that the BdG Hamiltonian (7) has a generalized mirror symmetry Thus, H(q) can be block diagonalized in the basis that diagonalizes M where the topological classification and the nature of the boundary excitations become transparent. Specifically, the unitary transformation where are the Hamiltonians in the subspace with mirror eigenvalues ∓i. Here, σ μ continues to act on the spin, whereas τ μ acts in the space which is a mixing of particle-hole and orbital sectors under U. Since { M, C} = 0, each block describes a SC with particle-hole symmetry A closer examination of the mirror diagonal H ± D in Eq. ( FIG. The quasiparticle spectrum of the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( x + q 2 y , they are given by E + ± = ±ε + ± and E - ± = ±ε - ± at μ = 0. We plot in Fig. Turning on ∆ t 0, the band degeneracy is lifted due to TRS breaking. Increasing t or ∆ t reduces the superconducting gap and leads to a gap closing at the Γ point in Fig. To determine the topological phase structure, we numerically calculate the Berry phase of each band. The total Chern number is given by the sum of the Berry phases for the band inversion at the Γ point in H ± D in Eq. ( Increasing t or reducing the magnitude of the spin-triplet pairing ∆ t between the top and bottom surfaces causes the two circles to move toward each other and overlap, as shown in Fig. Before ending this section, we would like to comment on the coexistence of ∆ and ∆ t . In general, for a 3D superconductor with inversion symmetry and periodic boundary condition, the bulk superconductivity is either purely spin-singlet pairing or purely triplet pairing, distinguished by their parities. The existence of surface breaks inversion symmetry, and the mixture of these two kinds of pairings is allowed A similar situation appears for the 2D effective theory, where the inversion symmetry is partially broken with a remaining mirror-symmetry operation interchanging the top and bottom surfaces. The square lattice model that we study has a D 4h symmetry and, in the thin-film limit, ∆ and ∆ t are all parity odd; therefore, it is possible for them to mix and coexist. In Appendix C, we present a Ginzburg-Landau free-energy analysis. Minimizing the Ginzburg-Landau free energy, we find that there are two distinct stable states where ∆ and ∆ t coexist with different relative phases between the two oddparity pairing order parameters. The state with the phase structure (∆, ∆ t ) ∝ (±1, ±i) has a π/2 relative phase between ∆ and ∆ t , leading to a time-reversal invariant unitary state by Eq. ( Thus far, our χTSC thin film spontaneously breaks the TRS by nonunitary pairing. We now generalize the topological phase diagram to include the effects of Zeeman coupling λ due to either an applied magnetic field normal to the surfaces or an incipient ferromagnetic order. The Zeeman coupling enters the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Extending the phase diagrams into the regions where the TRS is also explicitly broken by λ 0, we find that most of the phases are χTSCs, including additional higher Chern number (N = ±2) phases. Note that since λ preserves the mirror symmetry, a mirror index C emerges in the rectangular region surrounding the origin in Fig. There may be magnetic-ion-induced vortices trapping MZMs In realistic materials realizations of the thin film, substrates and the bulk superconductivity can induce substrate potentials and pairing interactions between the top and bottom TSSs that break the mirror symmetry. In this section, we study these effects and demonstrate the stability of the thin-film χTSC against mirror-symmetry breaking due to the protection of the topological gap. The mirror-symmetry protection of χTSC is similar to that of topological insulator (TI), namely, TI is protected by TRS, and is stable against small magnetic perturbations as long as the topological gap remains open. To study the effects of mirror-symmetry breaking pairing, we can rotate the spin-singlet, orbital-triplet pairing d ′ vector in Eq. ( Since the mirror symmetry M in Eq. ( Substrates are usually present in thin-film experiments. The substrate potential effectively makes the chemical potential different on the top and bottom surfaces and breaks the inversion symmetry I = σ 0 χ x . The structural inversion asymmetry (SIA) can thus be incorporated in the normal state Hamiltonian ( As a result, the substrate potential also breaks the mirror symmetry M in Eq. ( We now move beyond the effective theory of coupled superconducting TSS for the thin-film χTSC to discuss its materials realization in SCs with Z 2 nontrivial topological band structures. To this end, we construct a 3D cubic lattice model capable of describing the superconducting TSS, which is motivated by Fe-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se). We demonstrate that as the number of layers along the c axis is reduced to approach the quasi-2D thin-film limit, the nonunitary χTSC with spontaneous TRS breaking can be induced by the coupling of the TSS in the top and bottom surfaces. We note that a similar procedure has been used in the recently proposed time-reversal invariant TSC in thin-film Fe-based superconductors vγ α sin q α + M(q)γ 5 ( where γ α = σ α ρ x and γ 5 = σ 0 ρ z with the Pauli matrices σ α acting on the spin and ρ α on the two bulk atomic orbitals, v is the Fermi velocity, and m 0,1,2 are the band parameters. This model is known to be capable of producing a band inversion at the Z = (0, 0, π) point in the bulk Brillouin zone for m 0,1 < 0, m 2 > 0, and 2m 1m 2 < m 0 < min(-m 2 , -2m 1 + m 2 ), leading to a single helical Dirac cone around the Γ point on the (001) surface To account for the substrate effect, we include the SIA potential H V = Vσ 0 ρ z in the top and bottom layers of the lattice model and apply open boundary conditions along the z direction. Using the parameters (v, m 0,1,2 ) = (1.0, -8.5, -3.0, 3.0) and a moderate V = 0.5, we obtain the band structure for a thick film shown in Fig. Next, we consider the pairing interaction in the bulk. The pairing gap functions in Fe-based SCs have been observed to be ubiquitously three dimensional where nonzero values of ∆ l s and ∆ l t are limited to the top and bottom two layers. Note that H ∆ closely resembles the pairing Hamiltonian given in Eq. ( Diagonalizing the full 3D lattice Hamiltonian H 0 +H V +H ∆ , we obtain the spectra of the BdG quasiparticles shown in Fig. where D α = -i(∂ a + iA α ) is the covariant derivative, A α the vector potential, M 1 = t -(∆ + ∆ t ) 2 + μ 2 , and u and v the wave functions of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle. ∇ × A = B gives the weak magnetic field applied perpendicular to the thin-film SC. The Andreev reflection is assumed to be suppressed, so the only conducting channel is along the edge. Near the edge of the antidot, M 1 ≡ μ(x, y) is negative on the antidot side, with amplitudes much smaller than the positive bulk values of M 1 on the χTSC side. This ensures that the strength of the magnetic field B does not exceed the lower critical field of the thin-film SC. For simplicity, we take μ to be a constant and assume the magnetic field B to be uniform on the order of the penetration length. In the numerical calculations, we use B = 0.5| μ| and | μ| ∼ 10 -3 ∆. Diagonalizing Eq. ( Choosing V, giving rise to the half-quantized conductance e 2 2h . The mirror symmetry of the coupled TSSs is a key ingredient in our theory for the spontaneous TRS breaking and chiral topological superconductivity in thin-film SCs with a Z 2 nontrivial topological band structure. Under the mirror symmetry, the superconducting state is described by two noncollinear and spatially isotropic d vectors for spin-triplet and orbitaltriplet pairing, i.e., a nonunitary 2D χTSC with spontaneous TRS breaking and a nonzero spin-orbit polarization. As a result, the thin-film χTSC hosts a single χMEM at the boundary and a MZM in the vortex core. This is in contrast to the time-reversal invariant TSC with momentum-dependent pairing and rotational symmetry breaking proposed for a Cu intercalated bulk topological insulator Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 The χTSC thin films can be potentially materialized using the Fe-based SCs. The Fe-chalcogenides and pnictides are p-d charge transfer metals in the normal state In addition to realizing a different and profound topolog-ical quantum state of matter, the chiral topological SC thinfilms provide an unparalleled single-material platform for not only non-Abelian vortex MZMs, but also robust χMEMs for designing topological logic gates. The detection of the halfquantized conductance and the non-Abelian braiding of the χMEMs using the χTSC thin-film-based devices can be more feasible than the previously proposed QAHI-SC proximity effect hybrid structures. Supported by the scalability of the χMEMs in arrays of patterned antidots as well as superlattice stacking, the χTSC thin-films hold promise for the exploration of fault-tolerant quantum computing. Time-reversal invariance is restored when one of the three parameters t, ∆, and ∆ t vanishes. Specifically, consider the case where ∆ t = 0. Then (iσ y τ 0 K)H + D (q)(iσ y τ 0 K) -1 = H - D (-q). The time-reversal operator for H + D ⊕ H - D is therefore given by T ∆ t =0 = iσ y τ 0 Θ x K, where Θ i are Pauli matrices acting on the mirror index. In the original Nambu basis Ψ N , one finds U -1 T ∆ t =0 U = iσ y χ 0 τ 0 K, which is the usual time reversal operator T . Thus, when ∆ t = 0, the Hamiltonian (7) describes a time-reversal invariant TSC 