Theoretical prediction of the 2 nd -order magnetic transition temperature (TM) used to be arduous. Here, we develop a first principle-based, fully automatic structure-to-TM method for two-dimensional (2D) magnets whose effective Hamiltonians follow the Heisenberg model. The Heisenberg exchanges, which can be calculated to an arbitrary shell, are transferred into the Monte Carlo calculation. Using Cr-based magnets as the showcases, we show that our method is a powerful tool to study the 2D magnets in two aspects. First, considering long-range exchanges enables us to identify the spin frustration in the suspended CrTe2 monolayer, whereas the heterostructure calculations reveal that the ferromagnetism can be recovered if the monolayer CrTe2 is grown onto various 2D substrates. Second, we realize a high-throughput screening of novel magnets discovered by random structure searches. Six 2D Cr chalcogenides are selected to have high TM. Our work provides a new insight for the study of 2D magnets and helps accelerate the pace of magnetic materials data-mining. Magnetic materials have wide applications in data storage and spintronic devices, presenting a promising platform for future low-energy consumption technology Among the earliest discoveries of intrinsic magnetism in 2D van der Waals materials, many of them are Ising-type or Heisenberg-type Cr and Mn-based magnets, which are either semiconductive or metallic, such as CrI3 To date, many works of predicting TM are done involving self-explore analysis of certain materials, considering only a few nearest neighbor HEs, which are short-range Previously, high-throughput Curie temperature (TC) calculation for 2D ferromagnets has been reported We develop an end-to-end code called Automated Structure to Temperature-Dependent Magnetism (ASTDM), which realizes high-throughput prediction of TM for any kind of spin-lattice. We adopt the energy mapping method to obtain the HEs. There are many kinds of energy mapping methods. For example, the four-state method treats the i, j sites like defects and requires manually freezing the spin directions We first test the code with various experimental known magnets. Then we focus on the 1T chromium ditelluride (CrTe2), one of the experimental known ferromagnets to have TC approaching room temperature. Down to the monolayer limit, spin frustration exists due to large long-range HEs and small short-range HEs. The Ferromagnetic (FM) order of the ML CrTe2 can be recovered by van der Waals contact with various 2D substrates. Finally, we perform a random structure search of Cr binary compounds to screen 2D magnets with high transition temperatures. We identified six magnets. The 1T' CrS2, 1T1T Cr2S3, 1T2H Cr2Te3 bulk and the 1T2H of Cr3Te4 are FM. The 1T2H Cr2X3 (X=S, Se, Te (ML)) are AFM. Their TM are calculated to be above room temperature. The Heisenberg Hamiltonian can be written as where E 0 is the non-magnetic energy, J ij is the Heisenberg exchange, s ⃑ i /s ⃑ j is the spin vector on the i/j spin site. The second term is the single ion magnetic anisotropy energy, which originates from the structure anisotropy and the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effect, u ⃑⃑ is the unit vector pointing to the anisotropic axis. To predict the transition temperature, both the HEs and the MAE should be calculated. The first step is to analyze the structure and determine the number of HEs that need to be calculated. CrI3 is a two-dimensional semiconductor with a hexagonal lattice and FM ground state. The r c is set to be 15Å, so that HEs are considered to the 7 th shell. ASTDM will generate seven meta-stable AFM configurations plus the FM configuration. We sort the HEs (J Apart from the HEs, the onsite MAE is also calculated by where E axis and E plane are the total energy per Cr of the FM configurations with all spins parallel and perpendicular to u ⃑⃑ , respectively. For CrI3, we find an easy axis along the z-direction, revealing perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). The MAE is -0.025meV/Cr. Finally, the code moves on to the Monte Carlo calculation to calculate the temperature-dependent thermal properties such as the average magnetic moment M, the heat capacity CV, the magnetic susceptibility χ, and the normalized entropy S (see SM II and . The MC calculation is proceeded to finite size test (Fig. We test the transition temperatures of several experimental known 2D magnets (both the monolayer and the bulk forms shown in Table Semiconductive magnets are well described by the Heisenberg model, as they possess localized moments. The 2D magnets we inspect here have been tested that the bilinear Heisenberg exchanges are the major coefficients determining TM by confirming that the spin energy vs. spin rotation angle roughly follows E(θ) ∝ cosθ The Heisenberg model is not primarily designed for itinerant magnets. However, if the unpaired electrons are localized and the interactions between the localized spins are via conduction electrons, the itinerant system can be interpreted by the extended Heisenberg model with the trend of HEs following Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) dispersion where FM state cannot be obtained. We also calculate the spin-resolved partial density of states (PDOS) the HEs are more distance-dependent rather than insulators whose HEs also depend on spin-lattice. The J(r) roughly follows the RKKY curve, whose 2D form is and 3D form is k F is the Fermi vector. We study CrTe2, the HEs, and MC results are shown in Fig. ASTDM is also capable of extracting the HEs in monolayer magnets contacting with substrates. The interfacial engineering is an interesting subject which aims to alter the electronic structure near the interface. It is particularly popular for 2D heterostructures. Down to ultra-thin layers, the interfacial effect is not negligible and often overcomes the bulk effect. Therefore, we investigate the interfacial effect on the HEs. Recently, we also demonstrated how the substrate can dramatically change the HEs to revise the Curie temperature Note that the categorizing of HEs is done by identifying the spin pairs and the distance. Therefore, it is important to make sure the substrate does not deform the magnet, which is true in our cases as the 2D magnets are physisorbed onto substrates. The substrate also breaks the symmetry in the z direction, but we only consider one layer of the magnet and one layer of the substrate. We consider the SOC effect for the substrates with heavy transition metal. We study the heterostructure consisting of metallic ML CrTe2. We select several 2D substrates to construct the van der Waals heterostructures, in which the lattice mismatches are less than 3%. Table Finally, we use ASTDM to predict the TM of materials that have not been experimentally realized. To find 2D magnets with potential high TM, one would require the metalloid with weak electronegativity. Apart from the metalloid, spin-lattice with denser sites is preferred to have more HEs. Therefore, one would seek materials where the magnetic ion ratio is high. However, materials satisfying these might not exist, or the formation energies are too low to be fabricated experimentally. In light of this, we combine random structure searches and ASTDM to seek energetically favored structures with high TM. Selected structures with TM approaching or higher than room temperature. We focus on Cr-based binary magnets. The metalloid is chosen to be S, Se, Te. We implement the ab initio random structure search (AIRSS) code . We find all of them are metallic. We further investigate the selected magnets, shown in Fig. Then we study ML CrS2. The 1T structure is AFM. Under the Peierls distortion, a new structure called 1T' is obtained with a bit higher formation energy, shown in Fig. Lastly, we find the 1T2H Cr3Te4, which has also been proposed previously We identify nine intralayer HEs and two interlayer HEs below 0.8nm. J 1 > 0, corresponding to the on-top inter-sublayer EI of the 1T2H structure. J 3 < 0, helping to stabilize the inter-sublayer FM. J 2a and J 2b are negative, stabilizing the intra-sublayer FM. J 2a < J 2b , J 5a < J 5b , indicating direct exchange is higher in a-Cr, as electrons are more localized. For bulk, the negative large J z0 ensure the interlayer FM order. TC is calculated to be 590K for the ML and 535K for the bulk. The high Curie temperatures stem from a large number of HEs inside the ML. For the same kind of spin-lattice, increasing the ratio of magnetic ions indeed helps enhance TC, which is also reported in iron-based compounds FexGeTe2 There are many interesting works to do with ASTDM in the future. First, a DFT+U test of various magnets can be done. The Hubbard U method is a widely used way to compensate for the underestimation of the Coulomb repulsion induced by electron correlation. For metals like CrSe2 and CrTe2, adding U reduces the overlap of the wavefunction and thereby reduce the overall exchanges, shown in Fig. For other exchanges than HEs, noncollinear magnetic configurations are usually needed for energy mapping method. How these configurations are automatically generated is an interesting topic in the future. If the spins are more than 1/2, higher order exchanges such as biquadratic exchanges should be taken into consideration. For example, biquadratic exchanges help stabilize the FM order in NiCl2 monolayer The advantage of ASTDM is to straightforwardly investigate the Heisenberg exchange with complex spin-lattice and multiple Fermi surfaces. The energy mapping method has the advantage of efficient, one-off render of HEs for magnets with metastable states. The fine structure of HEs can be fundamental, especially considering the long-range HEs which enables us to observe the spin frustration in monolayer CrSe2 and CrTe2. Therefore, our work can be important for future magnetic structure investigations. ASTDM can also be interfaced with other high-throughput code to realize a quick check of large numbers of magnets, which can accelerate the pace of the magnet's data-mining and applications in the next-generation spintronic devices. The cutoff energy is set to 570eV. The energy tolerance is 10 -6 eV/ion. k c varies from 60 to 130 (see the definition of k c in SI III). For itinerant magnets, k c is higher. There is no k-point sampling along the vacuum direction. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) form of Perdew-Burke-Ernzenhof (PBE) ASTDM can integrate with the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) The Monte Carlo sampling can be done either classically or semi-classically, under the framework of the Heisenberg model. First, a random site i is selected to generate its trial direction. For classical sampling, we adopt sphere point picking to generate a random direction. The location of a point on a unit sphere can be written as the spherical coordinate (θ, φ), where θ ∈ [0, π], φ ∈ [0,2π). The area element is The random point picking on the sphere surface should be in the manner that each area element is picked with equal probability. Therefore, the spherical surface can be mapped into a unit square UV so that the random sphere surface point choice is equivalent to the random point choice on the square. Then u ∈ [0,1), v ∈ [0,1] can be randomly selected. For semiclassical sampling, we adopt local quantization of the chosen spin on site i. The Heisenberg Hamiltonian for site i is equivalent to a single-spin quantum Hamiltonian, where the rest spins interacting with the i th spin can be treated as an effective magnetic field B ⃑⃑ eff = -∑ J ij s ⃑⃑ j j , so that s ⃑ i is quantized along B ⃑⃑ eff . Very rarely if B ⃑⃑ eff = 0, the new s ⃑ i is oriented randomly. Otherwise, the quantum number m depicting the projected spin is randomly selected from -s, -s + 1, ... , s -1, s, then the local spherical coordinate can be generated by where u ∈ [0,1) is randomly selected. Then the new spherical coordinate (θ, φ) of s ⃑ i can be deducted from where (θ b , φ b ) is the direction of B ⃑⃑ eff . The initial spin setting for each Monte Carlo calculation is randomly oriented (paramagnetic) to avoid spin freeze at low temperatures in the case of the semiclassical treatment for the spin frustrated system. Though the semiclassical Monte Carlo (SMC) neglects the low-temperature entanglement and is unable to conduct cluster quantum flipping, it largely improved from classical Monte Carlo (CMC) as it sample spin continuously, which should only be in the case of S → ∞. When using SMC, a scaling is applied to the exchange interactions to be consistent with CMC: Observing the heat capacity or the magnetic susceptibility is a good way to determine the transition temperatures, especially for antiferromagnets without explicit magnetic moments. The heat capacity is defined as where E is the magnetic energy. The heat capacity can also be calculated using the fluctuation-dissipation theorem where k B is the Boltzmann constant. These two methods must give equivalent results in the thermodynamic limit if the size of the lattice and the loop number are close to infinity. However, the fluctuation-dissipation theorem is more accurate for a finite-size lattice and a limited number of loops. Therefore, we also calculate the zero-field magnetic susceptibility as where M is the magnetic moment. To obtain the normalized entropy, we collect the direction of each spin in the lattice for each Monte Carlo loop. The direction can then be mapped into a point in the UV. We divided the unit square UV into a G × G grid, so du = dv = 1 G . For a lattice with N spin sites, the probability function of the i th site p i (u, v) is where N l is the number of loop. Finally, we normalized the entropy, defined as: S = -k B ∑ ∑ p i (u, v)lnp i (u, v) u,v i ln(G 2 ) × N S = 1 corresponds to the disordered paramagnetic state, S = 0 corresponds to the ordered magnetic state. We can visualize the most probable direction of any site by the output of (u, v) which has the max p i (u, v). Fig. We use the ML CrI3 as the showcase. The magnetic moment and the heat capacity are calculated with different sizes of the lattice. The total loop is 50000 while we discard the first 10000 loops to ensure the system reaches the equilibrium. The insufficient size of the lattice causes an inaccurate interpretation of the paramagnetic state as well as an overestimation of the transition temperature. The magnetization test in Fig. We still use the ML CrI3 as the showcase. The magnetic moment, magnetic susceptibility, and heat capacity are calculated with different loop numbers. The lattice size is 30 × 30. We find that a loop range of We use the ML CrGeTe3 as the showcase. Though the experiment reveals it has out-of-plane anisotropy, the DFT without U correction shows in-plane anisotropy. The lattice size is 30 × 30. Loop range is 10 5 ~5 × 10 5 . Without the external magnetic field, there is no long-range order. Due to the finite-size effect, we can have the wrong magnetization. Adding the field can solve the problem. We choose 0.1T and 1T fields, both out-of-plane and in-plane. The magnetic field energy of 1T field is ~0.058meV per magnetic moment, which can sustain an easy axis anisotropy. The effect of the field on the transition temperature is small compared to exchange interactions, the magnetization curve drops at a bit higher temperature with the field. We set the size of the lattice to vary with the type of spin-lattice. Usually, the total number of spin sites is ~1800. For example, we set 30 × 30 × 1 for 2D CrI3 and 12 × 12 × 12 for 3D CrI3, 40 × 40 × 1 for 2D CrTe2 and 15 × 15 × 8 for 3D CrTe2. The loop range is from 10 5 to 5 × 10 5 to remove the errors from the initial setting and capture the thermal equilibrium state. For 2D spin-lattice with in-plane anisotropy, we add an in-plane field of 1T as an effective easy axis anisotropy to ensure the long-range order exists. The input structure file is written in a text file containing the information on the lattice vectors and the ion coordinate. Below is the relaxed structure of the CrI3 monolayer as an example: #Lattice_Constant# The first block is the lattice constant, where three lattice vectors should be keyed in successively. The second block contains ion information. The first row is the ion species. Then the second, third, and fourth rows are the fractional coordinates. The last row is the size of the magnetic moment, in the unit of μ B . The parameter file contains all the necessary coefficients to set up the calculation for the current version. Below are the keywords: input: the name of the input structure file. method: DFT code to calculate total energy, 0 for CASTEP, 1 for VASP. non_mag_spin_max: the maximum spin moment of an ion to be treated as a non-magnetic ion ∆s, the unit is μ B . Ex_In_max_r: the cutoff spatial distance r c of the exchange interactions, in the unit of Å. Only J ij satisfying r ij = |r ⃑ i -r ⃑ j | < d c are taken into counted. same_spin_tor: the tolerance of the spin moments δs to be treated as the same, in the unit of μ B . same_r_tor: the tolerance of the distances δr to be treated as the same, in the unit of Å. search_scale: number of times the primitive lattice needs to expand in the three directions to encapsulate all exchange interactions counted. For a given spin site, high-order neighbors can be located far away so expanding the cell is required. The choice of it should correspond to d c . vdW: whether van der Waals corrections are adopted. XC: the exchange-correlation functional used, can be either generalized gradient approximation (GGA) or Local Density Approximation (LDA). SOC: whether the spin-orbit coupling effect is considered. vacuum: the direction of the vacuum, if there is any. It can be x, y, z for two-dimensional materials, xy, xz, yz for one-dimensional materials (chain), and xyz for zero-dimensional materials (quantum dots). mae: whether magnetic anisotropic energy is considered. mae_axis: the direction of the easy axis. . Comparison of CrTe2 ML contacting with different substrates, Lattice match, mismatch, Curie temperature, and MAE.