We observe a considerable hysteresis effect of low-field microwave absorption (LFMA) in coppersubstituted lead apatite. By continuously rotating samples under external magnetic field, this effect is diminished which can not be renewed by a strong magnetic field but will be spontaneously recovered after two days, indicating its glassy features and excluding possibility of any ferromagnetism. The intensity of LFMA is found to sharply decrease at around 250K, suggesting a phase transition takes place. A lattice gauge model is then employed to assign these effects to the transition between superconducting Meissner phase and vortex glass, and the slow dynamics wherein is calculated as well. Researches on applicable superconductors have attracted interests over 100 years The critical temperature (T c ) of superconducting transition always serves as the essential parameter for the practical application as the highest superconducting temperature under ambient pressure is still below 150K As suggested by Lee et al., the structure of CSLA possesses two circles: The outer circle serves as a shield to protect the inner one which forms a quasi-one-dimensional (1D) conducting channel We follow the procedure of Low temperature environment is realized by an Oxford Instruments CF935 continuousflow cryostat using liquid nitrogen. The temperature is controlled by an Oxford ITC4 temperature controller with accuracy of ±0.1 K. As reported previously Most superconductors have got the low-field microwave absorption (LFMA) due to the presence of superconducting gap and the relevant superconducting vortices as excited states The sign of LFMA can be always corrected by the signal of radicals in our measurements. In our cases, the signals below 500 Gauss are all positive, implying the presence of superconductivity. We then sweep the magnetic field forward and backward and observe a prominent hysteresis effect below 450 Gauss, which is independent of the sweep rate. Above this field, the hysteresis is completely absent, excluding the possibility that the positive LFMA and the negative high-field signal together constitute a ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) signal. We guess the negative one refers to a magnetoresistance effect in the normal state. The first turning point and the bifurcation point can be realized as the lower and upper critical field H c1 and H c2 , which in this case are 30 and 450 Gauss, respectively. In order to display an entire hysteresis curve, one has to reverse the orientation of magnetic field, but due to the instrument limitation, we are solely able to rotate the samples to 180 • and then reverse the signs of both signals and magnetic fields, as shown in Fig. pretty hysteresis curve is found, by which one can see as reversing the orientation the signal is almost continued. The values are not explicitly smoothed partly because the baselines are not deducted. If we understand the absorption of microwave is enabled by the generation of vortices, they have not got enough time to relax giving rise to this hysteresis. It is worth noting that, the EPR signal is nothing but the derivative of the imaginary part of ac magnetic susceptibility, namely dχ ′′ dH , and this hysteresis actually points out the feature of relevant excited states with regard to the dc magnetization curves. We thus integrate the signal and plot the imaginary ac susceptibility χ ′′ , from which a closely linear relationship with dc magnetic field is observed The hysteresis effect suggests us to further examine other orientations of magnetic field. We then rotate the sample under zero field from an initial angle, defined as 0 • for convenience, and at every 10 • the magnetic field is swept from 0 to 5000 Gauss. As displayed in Fig. The temperature dependence of derivative LFMA is displayed in Fig. Above experimental results together indicate the primary features of CSLA: positive LFMA, hysteresis effect during magnetic field sweep, saturated absorption while rotation with strangely long memory effect, weak temperature dependence with a phase transition. We therefore appoint the most possible mechanism to the superconducting vortices. The low-field absorption of microwave power with the assistance of dc magnetic field points to the small superconducting gap, and the relevant metastable excited states emerge to be vortices. The vortex creep and relaxation have got glassy slow dynamics to yield the memory effect in both field sweep and rotation. Since the samples are in powder phase, the random orientation of vortices in a quasi-1D lattice makes them solely respond to the magnetic field with proper orientation. Magnetic vortex can not be killed by the magnetic field, so the long-standing vortex state can only be thought of stemming from superconductivity. In order to determine whether the two phases Meissner and vortex glass can be tuned by magnetic field, we consider a quasi-1D flux ladder model in an artificial gauge field Due to the powder phase, the realistic orientations of the 1D ladder are regarded as random. The Hamiltonian is written as which is on a ladder lattice with L rungs as sketched in Fig. We define the filling factor as f = N/(2L), where N is the total number of Cooper pairs, and consider the limit of hard-core bosons with half filling (f = 0.5). The flux per ladder plaquette φ is the essential parameter that is proportional to the magnetic field H, namely φ = 2πHa 2 e/h, where the lattice constant a is related to the coherent length of the Cooper pair, e is the electron charge, and h is the Planck constant. For the experimental considerations, a flux of φ = 1.0π corresponds to a magnetic field of H ∼ 500 Gauss when a ∼ 200 nm. In the calculations, we set J = J ⊥ = 1 as the unit of energy. For the sake of discussing the slow dynamics of vortex creep We focus on the transition from the Meissner-Mott insulator state (Meissner) to the gapless vortex-Mott insulator state (vortex glass) by tuning the magnetic field. This phase transition in the flux ladder model has been comprehensively discussed in Ref. with E m n being energy of the m-th state in the sector of n particles and the excitation gap ∆E ex = E 1 N -E 0 N as a function of magnetic flux Ha 2 e/h to depict the phase transition. The terms Meissner and vortex state account for the characteristic current patterns as also sketched To study the vortex creep, the single rung in the middle is excited to generate vortex current at time t = 0 by applying a rung current operator without phase factor to the ground states, i.e., i a † 1,L/2 a 2,L/2 -a † 2,L/2 a 1,L/2 |ψ 0 In summary, we have found significant hysteresis and memory effect of LFMA in samples of CSLA. The effect is sufficiently robust in magnetic field sweep and rotation and will lose memory in a long duration. The temperature dependence of LFMA intensity exhibits a phase transition at 250 K. The phase diagram of superconducting Meissner and vortex glass is then calculated in the framework of lattice gauge model. In the near future, we will continue to improve the quality of samples to realize full levitation and magnetic flux pinning by increasing active components. The application of a microwave power repository will be considered as well.