The 0/1 matrix factorization defines matrix products using logical AND and OR as product-sum operators, revealing the factors influencing various decision processes. Instances and their characteristics are arranged in rows and columns. Formulating matrix factorization as an energy minimization problem and exploring it with Simulated Annealing (SA) theoretically enables finding a minimum solution in sufficient time. However, searching for the optimal solution in practical time becomes problematic when the energy landscape has many plateaus with flat slopes. In this work, we propose a method to facilitate the solution process by applying a gradient to the energy landscape, using a rectified linear type cost function readily available in modern annealing machines. We also propose a method to quickly obtain a solution by updating the cost function's gradient during the search process. Numerical experiments were conducted, confirming the method's effectiveness with both noise-free artificial and real data. 0/1 matrix factorization aims to find W ∈ {0, 1} MK and H ∈ {0, 1} KN such that V ≈ W ∘ H using a matrix V ∈ {0, 1} In collaborative filtering, which recommends movies to users with similar viewing preferences, the Hamming distance between rows in matrix W is utilized. For movies that users have not yet watched, their ratings can be estimated to predict how they might rate them. This approach is valuable for estimating movie preferences. Similarly, customer purchase behavior can be represented as a matrix that recommends products they have not purchased. Several previous studies on matrix factorization using logical operations. Miettinen et al. They initially determined the presence or absence of correlations between instances as the values of elements in matrix W. Then, they optimized matrix H to maximize the similarity between V and W ∘ H. Zhang et al. In such research, despite user preferences being initially determined by nonlinear decision processes such as logical operations, the computation of real values may introduce errors not originally present. An alternative approach involves using an annealing machine for matrix factorization, constraining the elements of W to non-negative real numbers and those of H to 0 or 1 3)4) . However, these methods require optimizing W outside the annealing machine and then optimizing H within the machine. This can lead to complex back-and-forth processing when using hardware or software modules for annealing, which are separated from other processes. Nevertheless, when considering the use of a machine based on classical, i.e., non-quantum, digital circuits through a quantum-inspired annealing approach 5)6)7)8) , the energy function was predominately confined to binary-quadratic forms. The reason for this is that by dealing with the binary-quadratic form, the energy difference can be easily calculated as a linear combination of variables, and efficient parallel processing dedicated to its minimization is possible. On the other hand, schemes that extend the interaction between variables to encompass many bodies, like the extended Ising machine for Digital Annealers In this study, we propose a new annealing method for 0/1 matrix factorization, leveraging the ability to handle nonlinear or higher-order energy functions, including inequality constraints. However, a direct formulation leads to energy landscapes with many plateaus, rendering the search process arduous. We suggest formulating the problem using rectified linear type functions as cost functions to address this issue and propose an efficient solution method. Numerical experiments are conducted to verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach. In Section 2 of this paper, we explain the formulation and challenges associated with solving matrix factorization using SA, the underlying principle of annealing machines. In Sect. 3, we describe the rectified linear type cost function, an anticipated feature of annealing machines, and propose a method to simplify matrix factorization using this function. In Sect. 4, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method through simple numerical experiments. In Sect. 5, we verify the effectiveness of the proposed method using real-world data. We conclude in Sect. 6 with a brief summary and mention of future work. When solving the 0/1 matrix factorization problem using SA, the objective is to minimize the energy function E given by Equation (1). Here, logical(A) is 1 if A is non-zero and 0 if A is zero, and ‖A‖ represents the absolute value of A. If we denote the elements of W and H as A and B, respectively, the relationship between logical and integer calculations is expressed as A ∧ B = AB and A ∨ B = A + B -AB. In the summation calculation within the aforementioned logical function, since ∨ appears K times, converting it to arithmetic operations introduces a term of order K . Furthermore, expressing it in squared absolute values introduces a term of order 2K. When addressing this issue with an annealing machine, situations where machines cannot handle higher-order terms are resolved by converting it into a quadratic form In addition to the aforementioned reasons, additional difficulties arise in solving the 0/1 matrix factorization problem using an annealing machine. One such difficulty is illustrated in Fig. Even if the integer values are large, the logical values are constrained to 0 or 1. This graph's shape infers that the energy landscape becomes a plateau regardless of the number of elements in W and H that are equal to 1, making the search difficult. We have discussed the difficulties in searching for solutions in 0/1 matrix factorization. In addition to these difficulties, solving problems involving higher-order terms is generally considered difficult due to the energy landscape exhibiting many plateaus. To address this issue, Sutton et al. proposed a method that introduces gradients to flat energy regions using Walsh transformation in MAX-k-SAT problems with higher-order terms, making it easier to obtain the global optimal solution In 0/1 matrix factorization, as mentioned in Sect. 1, we consider using the rectified linear type function, which is a nonlinear function added to the annealing machine, to introduce gradients to the flat regions shown in Fig. The reason for using the RL-type cost function lies in its similarities with the rectified linear unit (ReLU) function, which is widely used in neural networks. This function is easy to implement and computationally efficient, benefiting from the accumulated knowledge and optimization techniques in the field. In Fig. In Equation ( An effective method to escape from such local minimum is to control the penalty coefficients for each constraint. By increasing the penalty coefficient for unsatisfied constraints, at some point, the energy decrease in resolving that penalty violation surpasses the energy increase in other constraints becoming unsatisfied, and the state becomes a non-local minimum. Therefore, an algorithm was also considered where the penalty coefficients for all constraints start from the same value in the initial state, and the coefficient λ is increased at a constant rate for unsatisfied constraints while keeping it constant for satisfied constraints. Hereafter, the method of performing SA with Equation (1) will be referred to as BC (Binary Cost), the method of performing SA with Equation ( We investigated the number of Monte Carlo steps (MCS0) required to obtain a solution for BC, RL-F, and RL-U. In this work, we define a Monte Carlo step (MCS) as the number of attempts made for all spins, i.e., the elements of W and H, once. The temperature control is performed as follows: the initial value of the inverse temperature is β 0 , and the update coefficient is β f . The temperature is updated as β ← β(1 + β f ). The temperature is updated every 1000 acceptance counts in accordance with the Metropolis criterion, and if the rejection count reaches 1000 MCS, the process is stopped as no solution is obtained. For RL-F, λ is the same for all i and j. For RL-U, only the λ values of the elements of V that do not match W°H are increased every 1 MCS, starting from an initial value λ 0 , as λ ← λ(1 + λ p ). The pseudocode for this algorithm is shown in Table For the instances, W and H are generated using a uniform random number R ∈ {0,1} such that V matches ρ ± 0.01, where ρ is a predetermined value. Here, ρ represents the ratio of the number of elements in V that are equal to 1. The instance parameters cover (M, N) = (30, 30) and (40, 40), and ρ = 0.1, 0.5, and 0.8. For each parameter, we investigated 10 instances with 100 patterns, each with 10 initial random numbers. In particular, for (M, N) = (40, 40) and ρ = 0.1 in BC, there were combinations of initial values and instances for which the solution could not be obtained for a long time. Therefore, 80% of the MCS0 values from the smallest ones were used, and for the remaining, 90% of the MCS0 values from the smallest ones were used. For the statistical analysis, we used the median and interquartile range as the error. We covered β 0 = {10.0, 2.0, 1.0} and β f = {0.01, 0.1} to determine the values of β 0 and β f that result in smaller MCS0. The experimental results are shown in Fig. However, for smaller MCS0 values in BC, such as (M, N) = (30, 30), K = 12, ρ = 0.5 and 0.8, there is no significant difference between RL-U and other methods. Moreover, when λ is fixed, increasing it beyond 2 does not significantly change the trends. Additionally, regardless of the experimental results, the error range of MCS0 decreases when λ is increased from λ 0 . Fig. Next, as a case closer to real-world problems, we conducted missing value estimation using previous artificial data. With a missing ratio of miss = 0.1, we randomly selected elements to be excluded from the calculation in (2). We performed a search for local solutions over 5,000,000 MCS and considered the solution with the minimum energy obtained as the estimated solution. Table We conducted a numerical experiment using real data by performing 0/1 matrix factorization on the movie rating data from MovieLens (http://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/, MovieLens 25M Dataset, released in December 2019). This dataset consists of ratings given by 162,000 users to 62,000 movies, ranging from 0.5 to 5 with increments of 0.5. The dataset is pre-tagged with genre information for each movie, such as 'Action' or 'Comedy' etc., indicating the genre of the movie. Here, we aim to identify users with similar rating patterns and determine whether to recommend movies from the unseen movies or missing data. We created V from the dataset, where users are represented as rows, movies as columns, and ratings as element values. For the element values of V, we set ratings of 1.0 or higher as 1, and the remaining as 0. A value of 1 corresponds to having some interest or giving a non-low rating, while 0 corresponds to having no interest or giving a low rating. The 0/1 matrix factorization using AND/OR is useful for analyses such as recommendation indicating interest, because if there is at least one item of interest, the score value will remain logical 1, regardless of how many other items of interest that are logical 1 are stacked. The rows of W obtained from the factorization represent features related to users' movie preferences, while H represents the coefficients corresponding to those features. Users with similar Hamming distances between the row vectors of W can be considered to have similar preferences. By focusing on the rows of V or V ̂ for those users and summing them in the column direction, it is possible to avoid recommending movies with small values or movies with distinctive tags, and instead recommend movies with large values or other relevant movies. In numerical experiments, processing becomes difficult with large matrix sizes. Therefore, we created a matrix using users with IDs ranging from 1 to 300 and movies with IDs ranging from 1 to 400. To exclude users and movies with fewer than 20 elements with a value of 1, we removed rows and columns with fewer than 20 elements. As a result, we obtained a final data We present the results of matrix factorization without missing values in Fig. Next, we show an example of recommendation using the RL-U results. First, the Hamming distance between user features is computed using W and shown as a heat map in Fig. We proposed a formulation using RL-type cost functions to facilitate the solution of problems that result in energy landscapes that are difficult to solve using SA, such as 0/1 matrix factorization. In numerical experiments, we observed that using the proposed method resulted in a reduced number of MCS required to find the solution. RL-type cost functions are expected to be widely adopted in the future for solving real-world problems in Ising machines, and there are high expectations for their widespread adoption and utilization in various devices in the future. Note that it is also possible to consider modifying the function applied to the approach of altering the energy landscape to make it easier to solve without changing the minimum energy. This presents a potential avenue for future research. *E-mail: makiko@fujitsu.com