In the first part of this article, I briefly review early research activities concerning strongly correlated electron systems, beginning with the discovery of superconductivity and the first observation of a resistance minimum in nominally pure Cu-metal, which was explained many years later by Kondo. I will also address the antagonistic behavior of conventional (BCS) superconductivity and magnetism. The main focus of this paper is on the discovery of non-BCS-type superconductivity in the Kondo-lattice system CeCu 2 Si 2 , a prototypical heavyfermion metal. Here, the superconducting state is created by a periodic lattice of 100% of magnetic Ce 3+ ions. Meanwhile, more than fifty lanthanide-, actinide-, and transition-metal-based intermetallic compounds are known to belong to the class of heavy-fermion superconductors. Finally, I will give my personal view of the current knowledge of this kind of unconventional superconductivity. Research on strongly correlated electron systems (SCES) is of central importance in contemporary condensed-matter physics The first indication of an increase of the electrical resistivity upon cooling to below T ≈ 2 K in nominally pure Cu was communicated in 1930 Shortly after this breakthrough, Kondo's results could be verified by resistivity experiments on dilute Mo-Nb and Mo-Re alloys doped with Fe At the end of the 1960s, sufficiently pure rare earths had become commercially available, in particular thanks to K. A. Gschneidner, Jr., at Ames Laboratory A notable provisional end in the exploration of the single-ion Kondo effect was reached in 1975, when Wilson treated the Kondo effect by the renormalizationgroup approach As noticed by Matthias et al. As discussed throughout this article, the discovery of the superfluid phases of liquid 3 He by Osheroff, Richardson and Lee in 1972 In 1975, a strongly renormalized low-temperature Fermi-liquid phase was reported by Andres et al. for the paramagnetic hexagonal intermetallic compound CeAl 3 After learning about this discovery by Andres et al. A relevant question raised by the report of a strongly renormalized Fermi-liquid phase in CeAl 3 unconventional superconductivity, similar to the superfluidity in charge-neutral liquid 3 He (with p-wave and spin-triplet Cooper pairs) which, in its normal state above T c ≈ 1 mK, also exhibits a strongly renormalized Fermi liquid phase This came back to mind in 1977/78 when we, in a collaboration with D. K. Wohlleben's group, detected quite accidently superconductivity in the tetragonal compound CeCu 2 Si 2 . On studying the transport properties of this material It was fortunate that a few months after publication of this paper I met H. Schäfer, the director of the Eduard Zintl Institute for Inorganic Chemistry at the Technical University (TH) of Darmstadt, where I started a professorship in the fall of 1978. He was an expert in intermetallic compounds with the tetragonal ThCr 2 Si 2 crystal structure, and I told him about our problems with CeCu 2 Si 2 specimens lacking phase purity. I asked him to prepare samples of improved quality for us, which were provided pretty soon and subsequently studied via transport and thermodynamic measurements in our Cologne laboratory. My collaborators working there were Jan Aarts, a student of P. F. de Châtel's at the University of Amsterdam, who did part of his dissertation work in our lab, the doctoral students Claus-Dieter Bredl, Wolfgang Franz and Winfried Lieke as well as Dieter Meschede, who was about to finish his Diploma thesis. By February 1979, sufficient data on these new samples had been obtained, which convincingly showed that CeCu 2 Si 2 indeed exhibits bulk superconductivity at T c ≈ 0.5 K As seen in Fig. Due to the lattice Kondo effect [78], in both CeCu 2 Si 2 and CeAl 3 In contrast to a BCS superconductor for which superconductivity is destroyed by a tiny amount of magnetic impurities, in CeCu 2 Si 2 a periodic lattice of 100 at% of magnetic Ce 3+ ions appear to be necessary to generate superconductivity; for, the non-magnetic reference compound LaCu 2 Si 2 lacking 4f-electrons is not a superconductor At the time, our report of bulk heavy-fermion superconductivity in CeCu 2 Si 2 The reservations in the community against our discovery of bulk heavy-fermion superconductivity in CeCu 2 Si 2 were finally overcome after a couple of years when excellent single crystals grown by W. Assmus' group In 1983, H. R. Ott and H. Rudigier from ETH Zürich in collaboration with Z. Fisk and J. L. Smith from Los Alamos National Laboratory revisited UBe 13 The discovery of superconductivity in CeCu 2 Si 2 and the advent of heavy-fermion physics in the early 1980s generated broad interest in unconventional superconductivity and strongly correlated electron systems. By 1992, the year of the first International SCES Conference, organized by T. Kasuya in Sendai, this research field had already substantially broadened For the first time, the heavy quasiparticles had been directly observed via magnetic quantum oscillation measurements The physics of heavy-fermion metals is well described in terms of a competition between the Kondo effect, which tends to quench the local moments, and the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction, an indirect exchange interaction between the local magnetic moments mediated by the conduction electrons, by which the magnetic moments become stabilized Various types of antiferromagnetic instabilities have been studied intensively over the past decades, itinerant spin-density-wave (SDW) In the vicinity of a heavy-fermion SDW QCP, at which the composite quasiparticles stay intact, a novel crossover scale E* = k B T* is anticipated to exist For a few of the heavy-fermion superconductors, i.e., UPd 2 Al 3 Magnetically-driven heavy-fermion superconductivity was proposed by the theorists very early. While Anderson In UPd 2 Al 3 with a 5f 3 configuration, two more localized 5f-electrons appear to be responsible for the magnetic properties, implying a nearly atomic staggered moment of 0.85μ B Heavy-fermion superconductors show an even greater variety of phase diagrams and gap structures than suggested by the afore-mentioned early theoretical works. Thus, for instance, two different superconducting phases in the presence of shortrange antiferromagnetic order have been established for UPt 3 Two Yb-based heavy-fermion superconductors (with very low T c ) are known: ß-YbAlB 4 (T c ≈ 80 mK) shows intermediate-valence behavior While the majority of heavy-fermion superconductors are believed to show anisotropic even-parity Cooper pairing, a few of them are prime candidates for odd-parity pairing, i.e., UPt 3 The s ++ -scenario is highly unlikely by several reasons, in particular because of a pronounced peak in the inelastic neutron-scattering spectra of superconducting CeCu 2 Si 2 (Fig. Moreover, the antiferromagnetic ordering wave vector QAF is identical with the nesting wave vector τ inside the dominating heavy-electron band as obtained by renormalized band calculations (Fig. ted by recent ARPES results (Fig. A band-mixing (d+d) pairing state The afore-mentioned multi-orbital resp. multi-band character of the electronic correlations arguably allows for a larger variety of pair states compared to singleband superconductors To conclude this survey, I illustrate in Fig. Electronically-driven Cooper pairings appear to operate not only in heavyfermion superconductors research activities for many more years to come. This will be in parallel with an increasing interest in hydrogen-rich materials for which near-room-temperature superconductivity of the conventional variant, as indicated by a zero resistivity, was observed upon the application of extremely high pressure 