The realization of magnetic skyrmions in two-dimensional (2D) magnets holds great promise for both fundamental research and device applications. Despite recent progress, two-dimensional skyrmions hosts are still limited, due to the fact that most 2D magnets are centrosymmetric and thus lack Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI). We show here, using a general analysis based on symmetry, that Bloch-type skyrmions can, in fact, be stabilized in 2D magnets, due to the interplay between in-plane component (dx) of second nearest-neighbor DMI and magnetic anisotropy. Its validity is demonstrated in Cr2Ge2Te6 monolayer, which is also verified by recent experiments. Our work gives a clear direction for experimental studies of 2D magnetic materials to stabilize skyrmions and should greatly enrich the research on magnetic skyrmions in 2D lattices. Magnetic skyrmions are a special class of vortex-or antivortex-like noncollinear spin textures In the past few years, magnetism in low dimensions has received renewed interest, marked by the observation of long-range magnetic order in 2D van der Waals materials, including but not limited to CrI3, CrGeTe3, and Fe3GeTe2 In the present work, we unveil that skyrmions can be spontaneously stabilized in centrosymmetric 2D magnets with a honeycomb lattice. Based the symmetry analysis, we demonstrate that centrosymmetric 2D magnets with a honeycomb lattice exhibit finite second NN DMI due to the broken local inversion symmetry, which is primarily responsible for the formation of skyrmions. By using first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, we reproduce the spin spiral and skyrmions phases experimentally observed in Cr2Ge2Te6. This unusual skyrmionics physics is revealed by introducing the dimensionless parameter κ, which can serve as a measurement whether the ground state is a non-collinear magnetic structure or not. Furthermore, we present the anisotropy-field phase diagram. Furthermore, we present the anisotropyfield phase diagram, demonstrating that not only out-of-plane anisotropy but also inplane anisotropy favors the formation of skyrmionic states. Let us first consider the crystal structure of monolayer Cr2Ge2Te6, as illustrated in Figure , that can help us identify magnetic ground state The material parameter A is related to the parameters of the atomistic model by: Here 0 j J is the NN and second NN Heisenberg exchange interactions, 0 x j R is the x component of Cr pair vector, respectively. V is the volume of the magnetic part of the unit cell, e.g. the Cr2Ge2Te6 monolayer. And a is the distance between two second NN Cr atoms. As indicated by our symmetry analysis, the orientation of dz for adjacent second NNs is opposite for centrosymmetric 2D magnetic materials with a honeycomb lattice, thus only the dx is left to contribute to the material parameter D. Hence, D can be expressed as follow: Finally, we can rewrite κ with the parameters of atomistic model as: We now examine the SIA-dx phase diagram at 0 K without external magnetic field. To this end, we adopt the following spin Hamiltonian in parallel tempering Monte Carlo (PTMC) simulations: here Si is the unit vector of spin at site i. The isotropic Heisenberg exchange coupling, denoted by Jij, spans over all first and second nearest-neighbor (NN) magnetic ions. anisotropy, and FM-z for easy-axis anisotropy) is set as the zero reference. One can clearly see in Figure After we obtained all the magnetic parameters, we now investigate the spin textures of monolayer Cr2Ge2Te6 under different magnetic fields at 0 K. The spin Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Cr2Si2Te6 is an FM insulator. Our calculated magnetic parameters lead to a κ value of 3.4, also suggesting FM ground state. Likewise, using the magnetic parameters available for monolayer CrI3 To summarize, we propose a mechanism that stabilize the skyrmions in centrosymmetric 2D magnets. Based the symmetry analysis, we ascertain that centrosymmetric 2D magnets with a honeycomb lattice do possess finite second NN DMI due to the broken local inversion symmetry. Our DFT and MC results well reproduce the spin spiral and skyrmions phases experimentally observed in Cr2Ge2Te6, indicating the importance of the synergetic effect between the in-plane component (dx) of the second NN DMI and the magnetic anisotropy. This unusual skyrmionics physics is revealed by introducing the dimensionless parameter κ, serving as determinants for non-collinear magnetic ground states. Furthermore, we present the anisotropy-field phase diagram, demonstrating that an in-plane anisotropy favors the formation of skyrmion states. Our results should serve as a guide for material parameters of 2D centrosymmetric magnets such that a large skyrmion region can be probed experimentally.