We report a comprehensive study of magnetotransport properties, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), and density functional theory (DFT) calculations on self-flux grown LaAuSb2 single crystals. Resistivity and Hall measurements reveal a charge density wave (CDW) transition at 77 K. MR and de Haas-Van Alphen (dHvA) measurements indicate that the transport properties of LaAuSb2 are dominated by Dirac fermions that arise from Sb square nets. ARPES measurements and DFT calculations reveal an electronic structure with a common feature of the square-net-based topological semimetals, which is in good agreement with the magnetotransport properties. Our results indicate the coexistence of CDW and Dirac fermion in LaAuSb2, both of which are linked to the bands arising from the Sb-square net, suggesting that the square net could serve as a structural motif to explore various electronic orders. Ternary square-net-based compounds LaT Sb 2 (T = Cu, Ag, Au) have recently attracted renewed interest due to the observation of anisotropic Dirac fermion, charge density wave (CDW), and superconductivity, suggesting that LaT Sb 2 can serve as a new candidate for scrutinizing the intertwined orders These investigations indicate that the Sb square net is the key structural motif responsible for the Dirac dispersion, CDW, and superconductivity LaT Sb 2 crystallizes in a tetragonal HfCuSi 2 -type structure (P4/nmm, No.129) featured by alternatively stacking layers of the Sb-square net, T Sb, and La along the c axis. Interestingly, it has been theoretically and experimentally demonstrated that the electronic structure associated with the Sb square net is tunable by its chemical environment, that is, the structural configuration or magnetism of adjacent layers In this paper, we study the electronic structure and physical properties of LaAuSb 2 single crystals via density functional theory (DFT) calculations, magnetotransport, and ARPES measurements. The in-plane resistivity reveals a CDW transition at T CDW = 77 K. A remarkable magnetoresistance (MR) develops below T CDW and reaches the maximum value of 16% at 2 K and 9 T. However, no anomaly corresponding to the CDW transition was found in the specific heat data, suggesting that the Fermi surface gap and structural distortion induced by the CDW transition are weak. Kohler's rule is violated in LaAuSb 2 , which can be attributed to the multiband effects, especially in the CDW state with the reconstructed Fermi surfaces. Hall measurements indicate that the transport properties are dominated by the hole-type carriers, and the carrier concentration is significantly suppressed by the formation of the CDW order. Quantum oscillation was probed by two methods, i.e., magnetization measurements up to 9 T and torque measurements up to 35 T, which are consistent with each other. From the fast Fourier transform (FFT) spectra for the de Haas-Van Alphen (dHvA) oscillation data, F = 10.9, 54.7, 1021.4, and 1702.3 T can be obtained. Further analysis of dHvA oscillation data reveals that the Fermi pocket corresponding to F = 54.7 T has a quasi-twodimensional (2D) character with a small effective mass and nontrivial Berry phase, indicating the existence of Dirac fermion. Further, we directly probe the band structure using ARPES measurements. Both the quantum oscillation and ARPES data can be well interpreted by the electronic structure calculated by the density functional theory, where the Dirac bands can be identified along the Γ -M line and X point in the Brillouin zone. Hence, our study indicates that the Dirac states are indeed present in the CDW compound LaAuSb 2 . Single crystals of LaAuSb 2 were grown by the self-flux method with excess Au and Sb as flux Powder XRD data were collected using a PANalytical powder diffractometer (Cu K α radiation). The element analysis was performed using energy-dispersive xray spectroscopy (EDX) in a Thermo Fisher Quattro S Environmental scanning electron microscope (SEM). The instrumental error for La, Au, and Sb is 8%, 12%, and 6%, respectively. Specific heat and magnetotransport measurements up to 9 T were conducted on polished crystals to remove Sb flux droplets on the surface in a Quantum Design DynaCool Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS-9T). Magnetization was measured using the Quantum Design VSM option in PPMS-9T. The magnetic torque was measured using a piezoresistive cantilever in a 35 T resistive magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in Tallahassee. Electrical resistivity ρ xx was measured using a standard four-probe method. Hall resistivity ρ yx was measured using a four-terminal technique by switching the polarity of the magnetic field to eliminate contributions from ρ xx . The ARPES experiments were performed at the Electron Spectro-Microscopy (ESM) 21-ID-1 beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source II. The beamline is equipped with a Scienta DA30 electron analyzer, with base pressure ∼ 2 × 10 -11 mbar. The total energy and the angular resolution was ∼ 15 meV and ∼ 0.1 • , respectively. Magnetization, specific heat, and magnetotransport measurements (including in-plane resistivity, Hall resistivity, and magnetoresistance) were performed on a barshaped single crystal with a dimension of 2 × 1 × 0.2 mm 3 and a weight of 1.1 mg. The out-of-plane resistivity, magnetic torque, and ARPES measurements were performed on different crystals from the same batch. The out-of-plane resistivity sample is prepared by cutting the crystals into a rod with a dimension of 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.8 mm 3 , where the long side of the rod is along the crystallographic c axis. A small crystal with a dimension of 0.6 × 0.5 × 0.2 mm 3 is used for magnetic torque measurements. The dimension of the crystal used for ARPES measurements is about 2 × 2 × 0.5 mm 3 .We would like to point out that the physical properties inferred from various measurements are consistent with each other, and no signature of inhomogeneity was found. The first-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) emphasize the effects of spin-orbital coupling (SOC), the electronic properties of LaAuSb 2 , including band structure, density of states (DOS), and Fermi surface were obtained with SOC taken into account. The analysis and visualization of the Fermi surfaces were implemented via IFermi software A. XRD, resistivity, and specific heat 49.2 with a standard deviation of 2%, suggesting that our crystals are homogeneous. Further, the core level spectra of LaAuSb 2 containing all the characteristic peaks of the constituent elements [Fig. The temperature dependence of the in-plane resistivity ρ xx (T ) measured at B = 0 and 9 T with electrical current flowing in an in-plane direction (j ⊥ c) is shown in Fig. Specific heat measurements were performed to gain further insight into the CDW transition, and the result is displayed in Fig. where γ is the Sommerfeld coefficient, and θ D and θ E are the Debye and Einstein temperatures, respectively. The coefficients α and 1 -α denote the contribution of the Debye and Einstein terms to the phonon heat capacity, respectively. The fitting yelds α = 0.84, γ = 5.2 mJ mol -1 K -2 , θ D = 207 K, and θ E = 63 K. θ D is close to that previously reported in LaAuSb 2 (θ D = 196 K) Since the behavior of MR could provide valuable information about the underlying electronic structure, MR as a function of the magnetic field was measured at various temperatures and the results are displayed in Fig. Although linear MR is not smoking gun proof, we point out that it can still be taken as a signature of the Dirac fermion, whereas the more rigorous confirmation would require further evidence from the band structure. Since the presence of Dirac fermion is indeed indicated by DFT calculations, ARPES, and quantum oscillation measurements (see Sections C-F), the linear MR in LaAuSb 2 can be attributed to the quantum transport associated with the Dirac fermion. To further explore the underlying electronic structure associated with MR(B), we analyze the MR by Kohler's rule, which dictates that the MR in a conventional metal obeys a scaling behavior of MR = f (B/ρ 0 ) Hall resistivity ρ yx (B) curves are shown in Fig. where n h (n e ) and μ h (μ e ) correspond to the absolute value of the hole (electron) concentration and the hole (electron) mobility, respectively. The fitting results are plotted in Fig. Quantum oscillation measurements could provide direct information on the electronic structure, and serve as one of the most powerful tools during the study of topological semimetals. dHvA oscillation signals in this paper were probed by two strategies, i.e., the magnetization measurements up to 9 T [Fig. To probe the possible high-frequency oscillation, magnetic torque measurements up to 35 T were performed on a LaAuSb 2 single crystal. The obtained magnetic torque τ and corresponding oscillatory components ∆τ data are plotted in Figs. , where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. Then, A F for the Fermi pockets associated with F α , F β , F γ , and F δ are estimated to be A F,α = 0.10 nm -2 , A F,β = 0.51 nm -2 , A F,γ = 9.49 nm -2 , and A F,δ = 15.82 nm -2 . These A F s correspond to 0.05%, 0.25%, 4.7%, and 7.9% of the total area of the Brillouin zone in the ab plane, suggesting that dHvA oscillations arise from small Fermi pockets. According to the Lifshitz-Kosevich formula where α = 2π 2 k B m e /eħ = 14.69 T/K, 1/B is the average inverse field when performing FFT analysis. As shown in Fig. In addition to the small Fermi pocket and light effective mass, the Berry phase is another piece of evidence for the Dirac dispersion that could be given by quantum oscillation measurements. A nontrivial π Berry phase is expected for the relativistic Dirac fermions with linear dispersion. According to the Lifshitz-Onsager quantization rule, Landau level (LL) index n is related to 1/B by A F (ħ/eB) = 2π(n + γ -δ), from which the Landau level index fan diagram can be constructed. γ -δ is the phase factor for oscillation, where γ = 1 2 -φB 2π and φ B is the Berry phase, δ is a phase offset related to the dimensionality of the Fermi surface and takes values of 0 and ±1/8, respectively, for 2D and 3D cases. Berry phase φ B is zero for conventional metals while ±π for Dirac fermions. During the analysis of the Berry phase, the minimum of the DOS(E F ) should be assigned with integer LL indices n, that is, the minimum of the Gibbs thermodynamic potential Ω corresponds to the minimum of DOS(E F ). The magnetization M is equal to the derivative of the Gibbs thermodynamic potential at constant temperature and chemical potential, i.e., M = ∂Ω ∂B . Therefore, there should be a π 4 phase difference between M and DOS(E F ) To probe the Fermiology and understand the origin of the observed oscillation frequencies, we performed a series of magnetic torque measurements at various magnetic field orientations θ. θ is the angle between the applied magnetic field and the c axis as illustrated by the measurement setup in the inset of Fig. ARPES measurements were performed to directly probe the electronic structure of LaAuSb 2 , as shown in Fig. We note that the sides of the smaller and the larger diamond-like Fermi contours are parallel to each other, providing good nesting conditions. If this is the relevant mechanism, the CDW period would have to be around 20 Å, if the modulation is in the crystalographic a direction, or ∼ 30 Å, in the more favorable diagonal direction. If, on the other hand, the relevant nesting is within the slightly split sides of the larger diamond, as suggested by Shi et al. In order to better understand the magnetotransport and ARPES data, we performed comprehensive calculations of the electronic structure on LaAuSb 2 . To emphasize the effects of SOC and k z dependency, the calculated band structures are plotted into four panels as shown in Figs. From Figs. As shown in Figs. The linear bands crossing E F at the midpoint of the Γ -M line originate from the 5p x /5p y orbitals of Sb1 located in the square net, intersect at a Dirac point at ∼ 0.35 eV below E F . Note that there is a small gap (55 meV) at the Dirac point, which increases slightly to 71 meV when SOC is taken into account. These linear bands form a large diamond-shaped electron Fermi pocket FS3 as shown in Fig. The linear bands crossing E F at the X point also arise from the Sb-square net, intersecting at two Dirac points: one at E = -0.6 eV with a small gap of 70 meV and another at E = -0.4 eV with a large gap of 350 meV. These gaps at Driac points are also slightly increased by SOC effects. Notice that these linear bands strongly depend on k z , indicating a three-dimensional (3D) character. According to their k z dependency, the inner linear bands should account for the ellipsoidal shape electron Fermi pocket FS4 centered at the X point [Fig. We first compare the calculated electronic structures with the ARPES data. As shown in Fig. Although our magnetotransport, ARPES, and DFT studies provide strong evidence for LaAuSb 2 to be a Dirac semimetal, its transport properties deviate from prototypical Dirac semimetals, such as Cd 3 As 2 , which exhibits a low carrier concentration, ultrahigh mobility, and giant linear MR Recently, the Kagome lattice has attracted great attention due to the observation of CDW, superconductivity, and Dirac fermion. Prime examples include CDW, electronic nematicity, and superconductivity in CsV 3 Sb 5 In conclusion, we have studied the physical properties and underlying electronic structure of LaAuSb 2 single crystals using magnetotransport and ARPES measurements and DFT calculations. Resistivity and Hall measurements reveal the occurrence of the CDW transition at 77 K. The quantum oscillations and ARPES data reveal quasi-2D Fermi surfaces with nearly massless Dirac fermions, in good agreement with the DFT calculations. Our results indicate that LaAuSb 2 hosts CDW and Dirac fermions at the same time, suggesting that the Sb square net could be a building block for designing topological materials with various electronic orders.