Magnetic anisotropy is essential for stabilizing two-dimensional (2D) magnetism, which has significant applications in spintronics and the advancement of fundamental physics. In this work, we examine the electronic structure and magnetic properties of triangular prismatic MSi 2 N 4 (M = V, Cr) monolayers, using crystal field theory, spinorbital state analyses, and density functional calculations. Our results reveal that the pristine VSi 2 N 4 monolayer exhibits magnetism with a V 4+ 3d 1 S = 1/2 charge-spin state within the triangular prismatic crystal field. However, the strong d orbital hybridization between adjacent V 4+ ions disrupts the d orbital splitting in this crystal field, resulting in a relatively small in-plane magnetic anisotropy of approximately 2 μeV per V atom. In contrast, the pristine CrSi 2 N 4 monolayer is nonmagnetic, characterized by the Cr 4+ 3d 2 S = 0 state. Upon substituting nonmagnetic Cr 4+ with Si 4+ , Cr 1 3 Si 8 3 N 4 transforms into an antiferromagnetic insulator with Cr 4+ 3d 2 S = 1 state, featuring a large orbital moment of -1.06 μ B oriented along the z-axis and huge perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of 18.63 meV per Cr atom. These findings highlight the potential for further exploration of 2D Ising magnetic materials within a unique triangular prismatic crystal field. Since the discovery of two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetism (FM) in atomically thin layers CrI 3 1 and Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 , 2 two-dimensional magnetic materials have been the subject of extensive research due to their unique electronic structure and rich tunable properties. family monolayers with a septuple-atomic-layer structure, The density functional theory (DFT) calculations are carried out using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). monolayer is illustrated in Fig. Thus, the utilization of the triangular prismatic crystal field emerges as a promising avenue for the achieving of 2D Ising magnetization with huge MA. To better describe the on-site Coulomb interactions of V (Cr) 3d electrons, the typical value of the Hubbard U eff = 4.0 eV is used in the GGA+U calculations. We first perform the spin-polarized GGA calculations to study the electronic and magnetic structure of the VSi 2 N 4 monolayer. In the FM state, the calculated V local spin moment of 0.86 μ B refers to the nominal V 4+ 3d 1 S = 1/2 state. The reduction of V 4+ spin moment is due to the strong covalency with the nitrogen ligands. The total spin moment of 0.92 μ B per V atom agrees well with the V 4+ , Si 4+ and N 3-charge states in the VSi 2 N 4 monolayer. We plot in Fig. A clear 0.2 eV semiconductor energy gap is observed, as seen in Fig. Comparing the total energies of the different magnetizations (out-of-plane and in-plane), we find the VSi 2 N 4 has the easy in-plane MA, and the out-of-plane has a higher energy by only 2 μeV per V atom, which is insufficient to stabilize a 2D Ising magnetization effectively. To realize a large orbital moment and giant MA, the single electron in the V 4+ 3d 1 configuration should occupy the x 2 -y 2 /xy doublet, which makes the SOC active and may eventually determine the 2D Ising magnetization. To address this, we perform the GGA+SOC+U calculations and initialize the system in two distinct electronic configurations: one with the single electron occupying the 3z 2 -r 2 state and the other in the L -2 state. Our results show that the L -2 state is unfavorable in the VSi 2 N 4 monolayer and ultimately transitions to the 3z 2 -r 2 and x 2 -y 2 /xy hybridized orbital state, as visualized in Fig. As we mentioned above, the potential for a large orbital moment and huge MA arises from its unique triangular prismatic crystal field. However, this potential is significantly limited due to the strong hybridization between the lower-energy 3z 2 -r 2 orbital and the higher xy/x 2 -y 2 orbitals. In the VSi 2 N 4 , each vanadium (V) atom possesses five d orbitals that are initially orthogonal within the triangular prismatic crystal field. Yet, the hybridization occurs due to the influence of adjacent V ions, which themselves have a high coordination number of 6 in the triangular lattice. This results in VSi 2 N 4 exhibiting only a minimal MA. In order to explore the feasibility of achieving the L -2 state characterized by a large orbital moment and huge MA, we employ calculations within an isolated triangular prismatic crystal field. For this purpose, a 3×3×1 VSi 2 N 4 supercell comprising 9 V ions is utilized. To prevent magnetic interactions, 8 of the V ions are substituted with Si ions named V1 N 4 , which share the same +4 valence state but are nonmagnetic, as seen in Fig. The calculated magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE), at 59 μeV per V atom with easy inplane magnetization, indicates that the 3z 2 -r 2 state is not ideal for sustaining stable 2D magnetism. Conversely, as shown in Fig. To enhance magnetic coupling, the coordination number of the V atom is increased in our calculations. We examine two configurations: V1 After careful analysis of the spin-orbital states and Si-substituted levels in the triangular prismatic crystal field of VSi 2 N 4 , we find that maximum MAE, large orbital moment, and optimal exchange coupling are attainable in the V 1 3 Si 8 3 N 4 configuration. However, this configuration exists in a 3z 2 -r 2 ground state, which is contrary to our expectations. To address this, introducing Cr ions with an extra electron could stabilize the desired L -2 ground state, which is critical for Ising magnetism. We first calculated the pristine CrSi 2 N 4 monolayer. Our results show that it is a nonmagnetic material, which has been studied in valley physics. Comparing with the V 4+ 3d 1 S = 1/2 state, the extra electron of the Cr 4+ occupies the hybridization orbitals of the lowest 3z 2 -r 2 singlet and middle x 2 -y 2 /xy doublet, resulting in a nonmagnetic Cr 4+ with S=0 state, as seen in Fig. Then, we calculated the Cr As seen in Fig. The ground state of Cr1 where the first term describes the Heisenberg isotropic exchange (AF when J>0), the second term is the SIA with the easy magnetization z-axis (when D>0), and the last term J ′ refers to the anisotropic exchange. To determine the magnetic parameters J, D, and J ′ in Cr we use a 3×3×1 supercell of MSi 2 N 4 containing three Cr ions, as seen in Fig. Based on our total energy calculations, we estimate the magnetic parameters as follows: show that the (3z 2 -r 2 ) 1 (L -2 ) 1 ground state remains robust against the strains on the optimized lattice. The SIA strength rises in the feasible strain, as seen in Fig. In summary, we propose Cr L=-2, ∥ 754.344 (12.246) 0.86 0.85 -1.31 in hexagonal MoS 2 .