The local electric field gradients and magnetic dynamics of TaSb2 have been studied using 121 Sb, 123 Sb, and 181 Ta nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) with density functional theory (DFT) calculations using XRD-determined crystal structures. By measuring all structurally expected thirteen NQR lines, the nuclear quadrupole coupling constant (νQ) and asymmetric parameter (η) for Ta, Sb(1), and Sb(2) sites were obtained. These values are all in good agreement with the presented DFT calculations. Principal axes of the electric field gradients was determined for a single-crystal sample by measuring the angular dependencies of NMR frequency under a weak magnetic field. The unusual temperature dependence of η(T) of Sb(2) hints at the suppressed thermal expansion along the a-axis. Spin-lattice relaxation rate (1/T1T ) measurements reveal an activated-type behavior and an upturn below 30 K. Neither the low temperature upturn nor the high temperature activation type behaviors are reproduced by the calculated 1/T1T based on the calculated density of states (DOS). On the other hand, the agreement between the calculated DOS and specific heat measurements indicates that the band renormalization is small. This fact indicates that TaSb2 deviates from the simple semimetal scenario, and magnetic excitations are not captured by Fermi liquid theory. Topological insulators and semimetals are receiving tremendous attention in the solid state research community Using 181 Ta nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) on TaP, we have succeeded for the first time in detecting the excitations of the Weyl fermions near the Fermi level The aim of this paper is to explore the local electric field gradient and the magnetic excitations in TaSb 2 using mainly the NQR method. Special attention was given to the quality of both the polycrystalline and the single crystal samples used. Especially in semimetals, it has been known that stoichiometry plays a crucial role. For this reason, detailed investigations by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) and structural investigation by x-ray scattering were carried out. We conducted a comprehensive NQR study on the two Sb sites and the Ta site. The temperature dependence of the electric field gradient (EFG) and 1/T 1 at the two Sb sites and the Ta site have been studied in great detail. Here, we have also conducted single crystal NMR measurements under a weak field (WFNMR) to check the site assignment of the observed NQR lines and to obtain the EFG tensor experimentally as well. The experimental NQR parameters thus obtained in our detailed study are in rather good agreement with the results of the theoretical calculation based on density functional theory (DFT). TaSb 2 crystallizes in the centrosymmetric space group C2/m (NbSb 2 -type) and contains two inequivalent Sb(1) and Sb(2) sites, and one Ta site. As shown in Fig. Single crystals were grown by a chemical vapor transport reaction using iodine as a transport agent. TaSb 2 has first been synthesized by a direct reaction of the tantalum (powder 99,98 % Alfa Aesar) and antimony (powder 99,999 % Alfa Aesar) at 800 • C in a evacuated silica tube during 10 days. Starting from this microcrystalline powder, TaSb 2 crystallized by the chemical transport reaction in a temperature gradient from 1000 • C (source) to 950 • C (sink), and a transport additive concentration of 10 mg/cm 3 iodine (99,998% Alfa Aesar). The crystallization experiment was carried out in a horizontally arranged two-zone furnace which was tilted by approximately 10 • . The typical size of crystal obtained is 3 × 3 × 1 mm. The quality of the sample was checked by x-ray diffraction measurement. The local stoichiometry was investigated by energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis (see Appendix A). Both data revealed that the synthesized sample is phase pure and of high homogeneity. The TaSb 2 phase was identified half a century ago Our target nuclei in TaSb 2 are 121/123 Sb and 181 Ta and those nuclear parameters are tabulated in the Table First-principles calculations were performed using the full-potential code FPLO version 21, employing a localorbital basis set For microscopic insights into the electronic structure of TaSb 2 , we resort to the nonmagnetic DOS depicted in Fig. It has been suggested that a magnetic field may stabilize a Weyl point in TaSb 2 closing a gap of 0.1 eV would require an unrealistically large magnetic field. Searching for the NQR signal in TaSb 2 , we consider the splitting of nuclear energy levels due to the quadrupole interaction, which is expressed by the following Hamiltonian, where the asymmetric parameter, V xx , V yy and V zz are the EFG at nuclear sites along the x-, y-, and z-axis, respectively. Here, we note that the z-axis is the maximum principal axis of the EFG tensor, V zz , and nuclear spins are quantized along V zz at zero field. The quadrupole-split nuclear energy levels E m and the resulting transition frequencies can easily be calculated numerically by diagonalizing Eq. ( . Then the NQR frequency can be written as ν N QR = ν Q (2|m|+1)/2, because the NQR occurs for the transition between two levels |m| and |m + 1|. Therefore, for η = 0, two and three NQR lines with equal spacings are expected for I = 5/2 and I = 7/2, respectively. For η̸ =0, those NQR lines will be shifted with un-equal spacing The following procedures have been taken for the site assignment, namely how we can associate each line to the particular sites and nuclear isotopes. First, we consider the nuclear quadrupole moment (Q) for each nucleus to assign which site the spectrum originated from. The Q of 181 Ta ( 181 Q = 3.170×10 -28 m 2 ) is approximately five times larger than that of 121/123 Sb ( 121 Q = 0.543×10 -28 and 123 Q = 0.692×10 -28 m 2 ). Moreover, the 121 / 123 Sb NQR lines at the same site are expected to be observed in a close frequency range since the ratio of 121 ν Q to 123 ν Q at the same site is 1.47 from Eq. ( Next, we estimate the ν Q from the combinations of all spectra within each group. The estimated ν Q for 121 Sb and 123 Sb at each site should correspond to each other when the site-assignment is correct. Here, we also consider the asymmetry parameter η because the peak frequencies are unequally spaced for any combinations of spectra. In order to estimate the values of ν Q and η from the observed peak frequencies at 5 K, a least-squares analysis was performed using theoretical quadrupole interaction obtained from the exact diagonalization. The values of ν Q and η have been estimated from all combinations of NQR lines within each group. We found the combinations of NQR lines in which the ν Q and η for 121 Sb correspond to that for 123 Sb, as shown in Table The quadrupolar frequency ν Q and the asymmetry parameter η can be obtained from the EFG tensors at nuclear sites defined as the second partial derivative of the electrostatic potential v(r) at the position of the nucleus: where δ ij and ∇ 2 are the Kronecker delta and the Laplace operator, respectively. In the DFT calculation, we choose Ta (4f /5s5p6s5d6p5f ) and Sb (4s4p4d/5s5d5p4f ) semicore/valence states as a basis set. The inclusion of higher lying states into the basis is crucial for an accurate estimation of the EFG tensor To experimentally determine the principal axes of the EFG tensor, a weak magnetic field (H) was applied to the single crystal. Here, we can treat the Zeeman term H z = -γ N H(I x sin θ cos φ + I z cos θ) as the perturbation of H Q , where θ and φ are the angle between a magnetic field and the principal axis of V zz in the x -z plane and x -y plane, respectively, and γ N is the bare nuclear gyromagnetic ratio. Then one NQR line splits into two lines (f WFNMR -m and f WFNMR +m ). In the case of transitions between ±1/2 and ±3/2, transitions between m and m±2 also occur, so that exceptionally one NQR line splits into four lines Similar measurements were made at 121 Sb(2) and 181 Ta, then we have found that the principal axis of V zz pointing θ ′ = 107 • and 125 • , φ ′ = 0 and 0, η = 0.74 and 0.32, respectively. The obtained η values are consistent with the experimental values obtained from the satellite structure shown in Table The site-differentiation might be due to the anisotropy of the thermal expansion of lattice parameters. Here we extract V xx and V yy (see detail in Appendix D) to discuss η(T) in more detail at each site. Fig. Putting the experimentally obtained temperature de-pendence of Q n and K n due to those of η(T ) (see Fig. Quite generally, 1/T 1 T can be expressed by using the wave vector (q) and frequency (ω), dependent magnetic susceptibility, χ(q, ω), characterizing the magnetic excitations in a system as where χ ′′ ⊥ (q, ω) is the transverse component of imaginary part of χ(q, ω), A q is the q-dependent hyperfine coupling constant and ω N is the frequency for the NQR. Since at the moment we do not have a plausible microscopic theory to calculate the χ(q, ω) in multiband systems like TaSb 2 , we have adopted the theoretical 1/T 1 T for non-interacting itinerant electrons based on the band structure calculation with random phase approximation (RPA). For such a system 1/T 1 T is expressed using the density of state near the Fermi level as where f (E) is a Fermi distribution function, D(E) is the energy dependent density of state and μ c (T ) is the temperature dependent chemical potential. Were there no change of A hf with temperature, the calculation of 1/T 1 T is straightforward from calculated D(E) (see Fig. where k B is the Boltzmann constant (in J/K), N A is the Avogadro number (in mol -1 ), Z = 2 is the number of formula units per cell, and V uc is the unit cell volume (in m 3 ). In the full relativistic calculations, the resulting γ DFT values amount to 1.00±0.05 mJ•mol -1 •K -2 . We also simulated the very small possible deviation of the sample stoichiometry from the ideal 1:2 ratio (see Appendix A) applying the virtual crystal approximation and found no significant changes in the DOS near the Fermi level. The agreement between the calculated and the experimental values also not only supports our DFT analysis, but also indicates that band renormalization in TaSb 2 is small. The discrepancy between the experimental 1/T 1 T (T ) and those from the band structure calculation demonstrate that TaSb 2 is not a simple semi-metal, and the magnetic excitation has to be treated beyond the simple Fermi liquid scenario. Following a number of previous NMR studies like SmB 6 The power law coefficient β in the first term is associated with the strength of exchange coupling between lower occupied state where β=1 and β=0 correspond to purely localized state and delocalized state, respectively. The fit value of β∼0.5, averaged for all sits in TaSb 2 , as well as for TaAs The presented study is a combination of experimental nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) and theoretical calculations using crystal structure obtained from our x-ray single crystal diffraction. We have reported characteristic static and dynamical properties of observed thirteen NQR lines associated with 121 Sb, 123 Sb and 181 Ta in TaSb 2 . All 121/123 Sb and 181 Ta NQR lines are successfully assigned to all inequivalent sites and isotopes by combined analysis of the DFT calculation and the WFNMR measurement. The following characteristic features are to be noted. (I) From the data fitting of the temperature dependence of NQR lines the zero-temperature quadrupole coupling constant ν Q and asymmetry parameter η are extracted, and those values are in agreement with the DFT calculations within ±16%. The temperature dependence of ν Q (T ) and η(T ) has been measured up to 250 K, and unusual η(T ) was observed for the Sb(2) site. The angular dependence of WFNMR frequencies for all sites enabled to determine the direction of the EFG principal axes, V xx and V yy and V zz with respect to the monoclinic crystal axes. The temperature dependencies of the V xx (T ) and V yy (T ) and V zz (T ) have shown a unique characteristic where we found the V yy (T ) of Sb(2) site has almost temperature independent. Since the V yy of Sb( (II) The nuclear relaxation process measured in the NQR at all the sites is proved experimentally by the magnetic excitations, not the quadrupolar. The temperature dependence of relaxation rate, 1/T 1 T (T ), has quite characteristic behavior similar to the many semimetal materials. That is the high temperature activation type process crosses over to the low temperature excess relaxation process, making an upturn in 1/T 1 T (T ) around 30-70 K. However, neither high nor low temperature behaviors could be explained by the simple Fermi liquid using the DFT density of states at Fermi level, even the temperature dependence of the chemical potential is included. Followed by the traditional procedure, the activation type behavior of 1/T 1 T (T ) was analyzed by assuming simple in gap state could reproduce high temperature 1/T 1 T (T ). This energy scale of the activation is similar to other topological materials. We did not observe any power-law behavior in 1/T 1 T (T ) characteristic to Weyl or Dirac fermion excitations. Our DFT-supported NQR/NMR study with the local probes Ta and Sb provide with a valuable contribution to understanding of the temperature dependent local charge distribution, band structure and magnetic excitations in the topological semimetal TaSb 2 . where c 0 is the degree of inversion, and Q n (n = 1,2,3) and K n (n = 1,2,3) are the parameters depending on the nuclear spin I and η. All parameters are calculated in Ref. 