Bulk composites using powder blends of Mn and Bi with equal atomic ratios are consolidated and severely deformed by high-pressure torsion (HPT). Subsequent annealing treatments lead to the formation of the ferromagnetic and rare-earth free hard magnetic α-MnBi phase. The initial phase formation is studied by in-situ high-energy XRD annealing experiments showing a beneficial influence of HPT-deformation on the amount of α-MnBi. The nucleation sites are strongly increased, thus the volumetric α-MnBi phase content exceeds 50 vol.%. A lower HPTpressure of 2 GPa is found to be preferred over 5 GPa to obtain high α-MnBi contents. Annealing is done with or without applying an external magnetic field. Additionally, influences of the HPT-induced shear deformation are discussed and correlated with preferred diffusion path ways fostering the formation of anisotropic α-MnBi phase. For several decades, the MnBi system has attracted attention of researches. Already since the 1950's, the magnetic properties of this material system have been studied, fostering the possible application as permanent magnet material The current roadmap of fabricating MnBi based permanent magnets starts with the formation of a high purity α-MnBi phase in the form of an alloy or powder, which than has to be reprocessed to form bulk materials usually referred to a top-down approach. A very effective way is to utilize rapid cooling processes and subsequent annealing procedures. Several studies show the presence of α-MnBi phase in materials after arc-melting For this, a bottom-up technique is implemented, where the starting materials can be powders and one directly obtains a bulk material. To generate the desired α-MnBi phase, HPT, a severe plastic deformation method is introduced herein. HPT-deformation allows to obtain large sample sizes with dimension of several millimeters up to centimeters, whereas the microstructure simultaneously features particle and grain sizes in the range between micrometers to tens of nanometers where r is the radial distance of the analyzed part of the sample to the HPT rotation axis, t the thickness of the cylindrical specimen in axial direction and n the number of applied revolutions. Very large amounts of deformation can easily be applied, as the shear strain is directly proportional to the number of revolutions. HPT usually leads to a shear texture and a pronounced grain refinement, yet in principle, a broad variety of microstructural morphologies can be obtained In this study, we first discuss the influence of HPT-processing parameters (e.g., applied pressure, amount of applied strain) on the formation of the α-MnBi phase during subsequent annealing. The α-MnBi phase formation is monitored by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) as well as by high energy X-ray diffraction (HEXRD) in-situ annealing experiments using synchrotron-radiation. In the second part, the annealing procedure is further improved applying a vacuum and magnetic field environment while annealing. The influence of the direction of applied magnetic field with respect to the HPT-induced microstructural texture, is extensively studied by SQUID magnetometry. The thorough investigation of the large parameter space provides a sound knowledge on influences of processing steps on the α-MnBi phase formation which further allows to set the magnetic properties by tuning the process accordingly. Binary powder blends with an equal atomic ratio are mixed using conventional high purity powders (Mn: Alfa Aesar 99.95% -325 mesh; Bi: Alfa Aesar 99.999% -200 mesh). Ball milling of the powder blends is done by using an air-cooled planetary ball mill (Retsch PM400), with a 1:20 powder-to-ball ratio at 300 rpm and a total milling time up to 4 h. To prevent heat development inside the jar, the milling process is interrupted every 60 minutes for at least 30 minutes. To prevent oxidation, the powder handling, ball-milling as well as the consolidation process is carried out in an Ar-atmosphere. The powder blends are hydrostatically consolidated in the HPT device; these samples will herein be denoted as HPT-compacted. Further samples are subsequently HPT-deformed at a nominal pressure of 2 or 5 GPa for 30 revolutions and at room temperature (RT) using a rotation speed of ∼0.6 rpm supported by a high-pressure air cooling to avoid a temperature increase through inner friction. In the second part of this study, the development of an even simpler process is intended, utilizing powder blends without previous ball-milling. The powders are HPT-compacted and deformed by applying 10 revolutions at a nominal pressure of 2 GPa at RT by 0.6 rpm and high-pressure air cooling. To study the α-MnBi phase formation with respect to the HPT-induced textured microstructure of Bi, an additional Bi sample is processed from Bi-granules (HMW Hauner 99.99% < 5 mm) and deformed by 25 revolutions at a nominal pressure of 2 GPa. Quarters or eighths of HPT-deformed samples are conventionally annealed (CA) under ambient conditions at 230°C with dwell times between 4 h and 120 h. The specimens are wrapped in a protective foil before the isothermal treatment. After the annealing process, they are quenched in ethanol. Figure The applied shear strain during HPT-deformation is known to induce a crystallographic alignment (texture), which accordingly influences the magnetic properties As depicted in the schematics (Figure The microstructure is investigated using a SEM (LEO 1525, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH), where images are recorded in backscattered electron (BSE) mode in tangential HPT-disc orientation. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) examination is performed with a Bruker e - -Flash FS detector and for chemical analysis, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX; XFlash 6|60 device, Bruker) is applied. X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD; Bruker Phaser D2, Co-Kα-radiation) are applied to the plane surface with the diffraction vector in the axial direction of the HPT-disc. References for expected peak positions are taken from the Crystallography Open Database (Mn: COD 9011108, Bi: COD 9008576, α-MnBi: COD 9008899) A highly uniform Mn and Bi phase distribution is required to focus on the characteristics of the α-MnBi phase formation, which is realized by ball milling of the powder blends. To monitor the ball milling process, the milling process is interrupted every 60 minutes and measured by XRD. The XRD pattern are shown in Figure However, larger, but less "cigar-regions" are found for the 2 GPa sample compared to the 5 GPa sample. EDX mapping of a part of one of these "cigar-regions" (shown in the last row of Figure Quantitative analysis gives an indication for the presence of the α-MnBi phase, but small Mn particles being present within the analyzed volume impede accurate quantification. The uniform distribution of Mn and Bi does not prevail outside these "cigar-regions", where a strict distinction between the two phases is present. In addition, indentation hardness also revealed differences between the new forming phase (66 ± 3 HV) and the surrounding matrix (40 ± 2 HV). Unexpectedly, the α-MnBi phase starts to vanish after annealing for 48 h. This behavior is stronger pronounced for the 2 GPa sample and in addition, the morphology of the sample surface changes, as an oxide layer is formed. Confirmed by EDX measurements (see Figure The {220} Mn peak is found in all recorded spectra and the α-MnBi phase forms in each performed experiment. For all samples, the {101} α-MnBi peak is visible at the end of the annealing treatment but arises after different times. After about 200 s, the {101} α-MnBi peak is visible for both HPT-deformed samples. For the compacted samples, the same peak requires more time to emerge and arises after roughly 2000 s and 5000 s for 2 GPa and 5 GPa, respectively. This is more difficult to identify for the 5 GPa compacted sample, as an additional peak appears at a slightly lower q-value, which is most likely dedicated to the formation of an oxide which forms faster than the {101} α-MnBi peak. An additional {002} α-MnBi peak is only visible for the 5 GPa compacted sample. Furthermore, crystallographic texture is present in the as-processed samples (in particular after HPT-deformation has been applied) as can be seen by the non-homogeneous intensity distribution along the Debye-Scherrer rings. Processing of the α-MnBi phase is further improved by MVA, and simplified by using powder blends without ball-milling and a maximum HPT-pressure of 2 GPa. 2 GPa was chosen, as α-MnBi phase formation is faster in this case according to the in-situ HEXRD annealing results. Figure For the compacted and MVA-treated sample (triangle, brown curve), a Ms of 9.89 emu/g is found. The deformed sample shows a Ms of 33.92 emu/g at 300 K measurement temperature (cube, green curve) and a Ms of 36.12 emu/g at 10 K (empty cube, blue curve). The coercivity Hc slightly increases from 1.38 kOe to 1.58 kOe for HPT-compacted and HPT-deformed samples, respectively. The Hc of the latter one significantly decreases by one order of magnitude to 0.16 kOe, if measured at 10 K. Larger Mn particles and a lower α-MnBi phase fraction is recognized for the HPT-compacted sample. The Bi phase (high Z, bright regions) of the deformed sample still exhibits grain sizes below 1 μm (see Figure After measuring one hysteresis loop, the sample is demagnetized thus, the remanence Mr is minimized before the applied measurement field direction is rotated for the next measurement. All principal directions with respect to the HPT-disc (axial, radial, tangential) were aligned with the magnetic field and they are denoted as Max, Mrad and Mtan. This is schematically indicated in Figure Similarities between HPT-deformation and ball milling are known. In particular, if applied to a single-phase metallic material, the microstructure is generally refined. Although it is possible to induce very high amounts of strain by extensive milling times or by HPT-deformation, the refinement and resulting grain sizes are limited as a steady state regime is reached The milling process is often performed with a surfactant meant to further decrease the particle size. However, in a recent study milling of arc melted ingots within an Ar-gas atmosphere was found to be beneficial for the α-MnBi phase An influence of the applied pressure during HPT-compaction is found for the α-MnBi phase formation. A faster phase formation is found for the 2 GPa sample, as already after 4 h annealing contrast changes in cigar-shaped regions are found, see Figure annealing time, for both samples the α-MnBi phase evolved. This is confirmed by EDX measurements (see Figure The HEXRD results (Figure It appears, that the integrated intensities and thus supposed amount of α-MnBi phase strongly depends on the phase formation characteristics. When we compare the 2D-detector recordings of the 3 h state with the as-processed state in Figure Besides the conclusions on the differences in nucleation behavior, the different appearance of α-MnBi in the diffraction patterns of HPT-compacted and HPT-deformed samples also has consequences on the interpretability of the peak intensities. Since the integrated intensities for the HPT-compacted samples originate from few high-intensity spots of large α-MnBi crystallites and the presence or absence of a single crystallite with measurable orientation has a huge effect, these intensities are not used for conclusions about phase fractions due to the enormous statistical error. This is also illustrated by the fact that the {002} α-MnBi peak for the 5 GPa compacted sample is higher than in any other measurement, but is based on a single crystallite with accidentally beneficial orientation. The statistics of these experiments is given by the diffraction volume and the size of the crystallites. The samples are measured in, with a minimum thickness of about 500 μm for HPTdeformed samples and about 800 μm for compacted samples, at a spot size of 200x200 μm 2 . Comparing to the 4h and 24 h images in Figure Consequently, the most important findings from these measurements are as follwed: -A combination of ball milling, HPT and annealing leads to α-MnBi phase formation. -HPT-deformation prior annealing treatments drastically enhances the number of α-MnBi phase nucleation sites. -Diffusion processes as most decisive phase formation parameter is to the defect density -Long time annealing at ambient conditions adversely affects the α-MnBi phase formation. -α-MnBi grain growth is preferred over nucleation, at least for HPT-compacted samples. -HPT-processing at 2 GPa yields a higher α-MnBi phase fraction than at 5 GPa. In the second part of this study, the α-MnBi phase formation is further studied. In this part, the high defect density is solely applied by HPT without ball milling and the heat treatment is combined with an additional magnetic field. As stated in the introduction, a commercial use of MnBi based permanent magnets is mainly barred by the inability to manufacture large quantities of bulk α-MnBi phase. In addition, porosity often is a limiting factor for magnetic properties when starting with powders. However, HPT-processing of metallic powders lead to completely dense materials. The measured density for the HPT-compacted (8.778 ± 0.223 g/cm 3 ) is lower compared to the HPT-deformed (9.421 ± 0.221 g/cm 3 ) sample. The density value of the compacted powder sample is in good agreement with the calculated value of 8.625 g/cm 3 using theoretical values and a medium composition. The higher density for the HPT-deformed sample could indicate a preferred Mn particle transport towards the HPT-disc edge during deformation, thus leading to a higher Bi content. However, a significant porosity of HPT treated samples is excluded. To increase the α-MnBi volume fraction, it is necessary to rise the number of nucleation sites and additionally accelerate phase growth. A beneficial influence of magnetic field annealing on α-MnBi phase formation, was already mentioned in 1958 The volume fraction of α-MnBi can be calculated with the measured saturation magnetization Ms as it is proportional to the α-MnBi fraction, considering the theoretical Ms of 79 emu/g . γ is the specific grain boundary energy and p is the driving force, whereby p is directly proportional to ρ The Hc of the hysteresis loops (Figure ) n Based on the above introduced expression for Hc, two different samples (HPT-compacted and HPT-deformed) only exhibit a similar Hc if the crystallite size is similar. Combining this information with the higher amount of α-MnBi phase fraction present for the HPT-deformed sample, this further supports our results obtained from HEXRD, where HPT-deformation increases the number of α-MnBi nucleation sites. Accordingly, it is noted that magnetic properties are mainly influenced during the initial annealing process (regarding magnetic field annealing procedures) and changes stagnate for increased annealing times Concluding, primarily effects of α-MnBi phase formation are due to the enhanced nucleation behavior after HPT-deformation and higher amounts of defects. Additionally, the reduced grain size of the Mn-Bi composite after HPT, thus enlarged grain boundary volume and defect density favors grain boundary diffusion and facilitates phase formation HPT-deformation often induces texture in metallic materials However, the XRD measurements on the Bax and Btan,rad annealed samples (Figure Based on SQUID measurements, a detailed investigation of magnetic properties is presented in Figure Thus, the α-MnBi phase content varies between 41.8 % and 44.6 %. Therefore, the amount of forming α-MnBi phase is not affected by different MVA directions though, magnetic properties, e.g., Hc and Mr are influenced. Further commenting on the differences of the α-MnBi phase content, which can occur, if α-MnBi phase particles of sizes in the range of a quasisingle domain regime, exhibiting a high Hc, are not completely demagnetized between the presented Max, Mtan and Mrad measurements. Therefore, the sample exhibits residual magnetic fields, when it is rotated. This could be circumvented, if magnetic measurement fields would be applied at higher magnetic fields, which is not possible using the current device. For the Bax sample (Figure This observation is assumed to originate in the shear deformed microstructure, entailing a preferred orientation for the forming α-MnBi phase. For thin films, the α-MnBi grains are reported to preferably align their c-axis parallel to Bi c-axis [66] where a rapid and incredibly extensive diffusion of molten Bi in polycrystalline Mn is found (see Figure The highest magnetic anisotropy is found for Btan. If grain boundaries are aligned parallel to the MVA field (compare to Figure Therefore, so called short-circuit or pipe diffusion In this work, we successfully produced the ferromagnetic α-MnBi phase for the first time by applying severe plastic deformation using HPT and a subsequent thermal processing step. The influence of applied pressure by HPT changes the rate of the α-MnBi phase formation, as well as its decomposition if annealed at atmosphere. The initial phase nucleation and formation is studied by means of in-situ HEXRD annealing and it is found that the α-MnBi phase forms shortly after beginning of the heat treatment for HPT-deformed samples. This process depends on the applied pressure and is slower for HPT-compacted samples without severe deformation, thus lower microstructural defects. Most importantly, a correlation between higher α-MnBi phase nucleation sites and applied HPT-deformation is found, further revealing that upon annealing α-MnBi phase growth is preferred over nucleation at least for the HPTcompacted samples. By applying magnetic field assisted vacuum annealing (MVA) to HPTprocessed samples, the α-MnBi phase formation is enhanced. HPT-compacted and HPTdeformed samples show similar coercivities, thus similar α-MnBi grain sizes, but a differing saturation magnetization as the α-MnBi phase reaches a higher volume fraction (> 50 vol%) for the HPT-deformed one. Our results point towards the importance of diffusion processes for the α-MnBi phase formation. The diffusion is enhanced for samples with higher defect densities (HPT-deformed compared to HPT-compacted) and influenced by the shear deformation induced, refined grain boundary structure. This further provides the possibility to form anisotropic hard magnets. Summarized, the α-MnBi phase formation is best for HPTdeformed and MVA samples, where the applied annealing field is parallel to the HPT shear direction. 