This paper reports a cathodoluminescence (CL) spectroscopic study of nanogranular AlNOEr x samples with erbium content, x, in the range 0.5-3.6 atomic %. A wide range of erbium concentration was studied with the aim of understanding the concentration quenching of CL. The composition of thin films, deposited by radiofrequency reactive magnetron sputtering, was accurately determined by Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS). CL emission was investigated in the extended visible spectral range from 350 nm to 850 nm. The critical concentration of luminescent activator Er 3+ above which CL quenching occurs is 1 %; the corresponding critical distance between Er 3+ ions in AlNOEr x is about 1.0 nm. The quenching mechanism is discussed. We discount an exchange-mediated interaction in favour of a multipole-multipole phononassisted interaction. The study of the luminescent properties of rare-earth (RE) doped materials is strongly motivated by their possible technological applications in opto-electronics, colour displays and planar waveguides (information transmission domain) The technological applications of solid-state light sources require the highest possible optical emission intensities. It is therefore important to optimize the molar fraction of the RE incorporated in the host. Due to its very attractive physical properties (chemical inertia, high melting temperature, a thermal conductivity close to that of copper), aluminium nitride presents itself as the most suitable solid host. AlNOEr films may be prepared using a sputtering deposition technique well established in industry. The optimization of the dopant fraction is then to be done. In this context, an understanding of the physical reasons governing the optical efficiency, and more specifically its strong decrease when the concentration of the RE increasescalled concentration quenching-is a key issue in making doped nitrides attractive for technological applications. We will first describe the experimental details, and then present the cathodoluminescence (CL) spectra recorded from AlNOEr samples with 0.5 to 3.6 atomic % of erbium; CL spectra will be exploited in order to discuss the luminescence concentration quenching characteristics and mechanisms. The AlNOEr samples are 500 nm thick films deposited on silicon substrates by R.F. reactive magnetron sputtering. Complete information on the synthesis process and the growth modes of the samples can be found in The chemical composition of the samples was assessed primarily by EDS. The analysis was performed on thin sections by means of a Princeton Gamma-Tech (PGT) spectrometer mounted on a Philips CM20 transmission electron microscope equipped with an ultra-thin window X-ray detector. The analyses were carried out in nanoprobe mode with a probe diameter of 10 nm. Such analysis is known to give results with a 10 % precision of the measured value. All films were found to be spatially homogeneous. The compositions of the five samples used in the study are compiled in Table The discrepancy of the analysis is 5 % of the measured values and was performed to improve the precision on the dosing of Er (the spectroscopy is not so precise on light elements). Room temperature CL spectra were acquired in a modified Cameca SX100 electron microprobe analyser Room temperature CL spectra of columnar AlNOEr are presented in Fig. The dominant transitions of our spectra are located at 410 nm, 480 nm and 530-570 nm. Previous CL work recorded at 300 K on AlN:Er nanoparticles deposited on a Si wafer The erbium concentration dependence of the integrated line intensities is plotted in Fig. Preliminary results on quenched samples obtained by combining CTEM investigations and X-ray diffraction (XRD) showed no evidence of erbium-rich clusters; in fact, the samples appear to form a solid solution In the mid-20 th century, the concentration quenching of diluted systems was extensively studied and modelled The mechanism responsible for the transfer can be of quantum mechanical type The estimation of average distance r between two Er atoms as a function of RE concentration x has been carried out on the current data. The calculation was based on the hypothesis of AlNO:Er as a solid solution, with a total dilution of Er. It can be performed in two ways. The value of the specific gravity of AlN (taken at 3.28) can be expressed versus the molar mass of AlNOEr x that can be computed from the concentration measured for each sample and a spherical volume 4/3π (r/2) 3 occupied by one atom. It could either be computed by using crystallo-chemical considerations taking the number of atoms in a wurtzite lattice and its theoretical volume, by using the cell parameters obtained by XRD in this work . As can be seen in Fig. The CL concentration quenching of AlNOEr starts at a greater distance: the exchange interaction mechanism can therefore be discarded over the 0.5 -1.0 nm range. An electrostatic multipole-multipole interaction (1) K and are constants at the same excitation condition for a given material. Depending on the multipole interaction, the mode of ernergy transfer s is equal to 6, 8, or 10. Some simplification of this expression can be carried out by considering the fact that nonradiative interactions are statistically more probable than radiative ones. After simplifying, and noting that =lnK-ln, the log of this gives Logarithmic plots of the visible cathodoluminescence of AlNOEr x as a function of ln(x) are given in Fig. or 10 (with a satisfying coefficient R above 80%) leading to a dipole-dipole interaction for the 4 F 9/2 -4 I 15/2 transition (650 nm -700 nm sector), to a dipole-quadrupole interaction for the 2 H 11/2 -4 I 15/2 and 4 S 3/2 -4 I 15/2 and 4 I 9/2 -2 P 3/2 transitions (530 nm -590 nm sector) or to a quadrupole-quadrupole interaction for the 4 I 13/2 -2 P 3/2 (400 nm -434 nm sector). The obtained coefficient of 14 for the 470 nm -490 nm corresponding to 4 I 11/2 -2 P 3/2 transitions could correspond to interactions between dipoles of more complex symmetries (sextupole/octopole), but the result is open for discussion. The CL emission of Er 3+ in polycrystalline nanocolumnar AlNOEr films was studied in the visible domain with particular attention to the concentration quenching behaviour. Quenching of cathodoluminescence emission occurs for Er 3+ content above 1 % in AlNOEr x . The critical energy transfer distance is found to be 1.0 nm. Based on the experimental results and theoretical calculation, the electrostatic multipole interaction is identified as the major mechanism in concentration quenching, validating the application of Förster's theory. receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-forprofit sectors. 