This study presents an effective optical equalization technique for generating ultrahigh baud rate signals. The equalization technique was demonstrated using a dual-drive Mach-Zehnder modulator (DDMZM) with two-phase shifters having different bandwidths, which can be achieved by adjusting the structural design of the modulator or by incorporating varying bias voltages. When the two phase shifters are driven by appropriately sized driving signals, their partially offsetting response significantly reduces the rise and fall times of the output signal. The experiments were conducted using silicon DDMZMs without digital signal processing (DSP). In an experiment utilizing a low-speed silicon modulator, the on-off keying (OOK) modulating speed was improved from 30 to 90 Gbaud. In an experiment utilizing a high-speed silicon modulator, the OOK modulating speed was improved from 100 to 128 Gbaud, which approached the limit of our testing system. This remains the highest baud rate achieved by an all-silicon modulator without DSP. This technique breaks the baud rate ceiling of the modulator and has the potential to enable silicon modulators to operate at 200 Gbaud and beyond. The versatility of this method extends to a wide range of optoelectronic platforms, encompassing thin-film lithium niobate and indium phosphide modulators. Motivated by the exponential growth in data traffic, optical communications and interconnections have been extensively researched over the years owing to their high speed and economic feasibility. Several methods have been proposed for addressing this issue. One method involves increasing the modulator bandwidth. For example, slow-wave electrodes have been used to achieve velocity matching between optical and electrical waves. Another method is to use optical equalization techniques, which aim to compensate for the distortion introduced by the modulator and improve signal quality. For instance, optical-domain feed-forward equalization (FFE) using a segmented electrode Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) extends the MZM bandwidth without using equalized drivers. In this study, we propose an optical equalization technique to effectively overcome the inherent performance limitations of modulators, enabling the generation of ultrahigh baud rate signals. This innovation eliminated the need for resonant structures, thereby preserving a wide optical bandwidth. This technique uses a dualdrive Mach-Zehnder modulator (DDMZM) with two phase shifters of different bandwidths, which can be achieved through adjustments in the structural design or the incorporation of diverse bias voltages. A phase shifter with a high bandwidth is referred to as a high-speed phase shifter, and one with a low bandwidth is referred to as a low-speed phase shifter. The high-speed phase shifter was driven by a large amplitude signal, whereas the low-speed phase shifter was driven by a small amplitude signal. Their partially offsetting response reduced the rising and falling times of the DDMZM, showing the potential to significantly improve the quality of optical eye diagrams. Low-speed and high-speed modulator speed-up experiments were conducted using silicon DDMZMs, respectively, to investigate the characteristics and capabilities of this technique, as well as to demonstrate the generation of ultrahigh baud rate signals. In the low-speed modulator speed-up experiment, on-off keying (OOK) modulating speed was increased from 30 to 90 Gbaud. In the high-speed modulator speed-up experiment, owing to the limited bandwidth of the experimental system, the OOK modulating speed increased from 100 to 128 Gbaud. However, this still represents the highest baud rate attained using an all-silicon modulator without digital signal processing (DSP). Considering the notable progress made through experiments, it is feasible to allow a relatively low baud rate to increase to 200 Gbaud, or potentially even higher. The proposed optical equalization technique demonstrated the potential to achieve even higher baud rates for modulators, creating new possibilities for the development of ultrahigh speed optical communications. Figure Bandwidth differentiation can be accomplished through various methods, such as altering the length or doping concentration of the phase shifters and applying different junction bias voltages. An electrical signal with a higher amplitude was fed into the high-speed phase shifter, whereas an electrical signal with a lower amplitude was fed into the low-speed phase shifter. These electrical signals are loaded onto two optical carriers through phase shifters. The phase of the two optical carriers changes at different rates because the bandwidths of the phase shifters are different. Additionally, the depth of the phase shift varies owing to the different amplitudes of the electrical signals. In this context, the phase variation rate refers to the speed at which the phase of the optical carrier signal changes, whereas the phase shift depth represents the amount of phase shift applied to the optical carriers. Increasing the phase variation rate and decreasing the phase shift depth resulted in shorter rise and fall times. Assuming that the DDMZM operates at the quadrature point, the two optical signals interfere with each other on the multimode interference coupler, resulting in the subtraction of the phase shifts and their conversion into changes in the optical intensity. The phase-shift depth was suppressed during the subtraction process. The phase variation rate closely aligns with that of the high-speed phase shifter owing to the minor impact of the low-speed phase shifter. Consequently, there is a notable improvement in the rise and fall times compared with the high-speed phase shifter, resulting in the production of an equalized optical signal at the output. as 60 GHz and 20 GHz, respectively. Their frequency response followed the silicon traveling wave MZM at velocity and impedance matching. In this section, we demonstrate an optical equalization technique using silicon DDMZMs. The two identical phase shifters in the silicon DDMZM can easily be set up as high-and low-speed phase shifters because the bandwidth of the silicon electrooptic phase shifter is related to the bias voltage of the PN junction. This section presents two experiments: a low-speed modulator speed-up experiment to comprehensively investigate the characteristics and capabilities of the optical equalization technique, and a high-speed modulator speed-up experiment to explore the generation of ultrahigh baud-rate signals that could reach the bandwidth limit of the experimental system. The low-speed modulator speed-up experiment employs a low-speed silicon modulator with long phase shifters, whereas the high-speed modulator speed-up experiment uses a high-speed modulator with short phase shifters. A low-speed silicon DDMZM was fabricated using the complementary metal- Figure Figure This study proposes an optical equalization technique to overcome the performance limitations of modulators and generate signals with an ultrahigh baud rate. Optical equalization is achieved by making the two arms of the DDMZM have different bandwidths and then applying drive signals with appropriate amplitudes. The subtraction of the responses of the two arms considerably reduces the rise and fall times of the output signal, thereby significantly improving the signal quality. Both low-speed and high-speed modulator speed-up experiments were conducted using low-speed and high-speed silicon DDMZM, respectively. A low-speed modulator speed-up experiment demonstrated a substantial improvement ratio, increasing the baud rate of the generated signal from 30 to 90 Gbaud. However, in the high-speed modulator speed-up experiment, owing to the limited bandwidth of the experimental system, the baud rate of the generated signal only increased from 100 to 128 Gbaud. Nonetheless, this is the highest baud rate achieved using an all-silicon modulator without DSP. Referring to the improvements observed in the experiments, there is the potential to enhance the baud rate of silicon modulators to exceed 200 Gbaud. It should be noted that the optical equalization technique is not limited to silicon platforms, being highly versatile and adaptable to other integrated platforms and discrete devices. The breakthrough in the modulator baud rate paves the way for the applicability of silicon modulators in future ultrahigh speed communications and fosters advancements across various optoelectronic platforms. This represents a significant advancement in the development of future-oriented communication. The low-speed silicon DDMZM was manufactured by Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation. The silicon modulator is comprised of two identical carrierdepletion phase shifters, each with a length of 3 mm and a fill factor of 91%. The intrinsic region was periodically inserted to prevent current from flowing through the optical waveguide. The traveling wave electrode has a signal line width of 10 μm and a 5 μm gap between the signal and ground lines. The lateral PN junction in the optical waveguide is offset by 50 nm from the center to the N-doped region. Heavily doped regions were used to form an ohmic contact with the metal electrode, spaced 750 nm from the edge of the optical waveguide, to obtain a tradeoff between optical absorption loss and modulating speed. The insertion loss of the low-speed silicon DDMZM was 4 dB. The high-speed silicon DDMZM was manufactured by Advanced Micro Foundry, with each phase shifter having a length of 1 mm. The high-speed silicon DDMZM has a traveling wave electrode size equivalent to that of the low-speed version, with two on-chip terminators of 50 Ω placed in parallel at the end of the traveling wave electrode, resulting in a terminal impedance of 25 Ω. The optical waveguide had a width of 500 nm and slab thickness of 70 nm. Lateral PN junctions were formed at the center of the optical waveguide, whereas heavily doped regions were located 700 nm from the edge of the waveguide. The insertion loss of the high-speed silicon DDMZM was 3.1 dB.