An universal line revealing an independence of spin fluctuation contributions to the heat capacity on impurity content and its nature is discovered in the helical phase of Mn(Co,Fe)Si. This situation declares an invariance of the heat capacity of spin subsystem under doping, which probably arises as a result of relative stiffness of the helical spin structure in respect to the impurity spins. On the other hand the situation drastically changes at the helical fluctuation region when no long range spin order exists. In the course of recent study cal properties of the Fe doped sample (Mn 0.83 Fe 0.17 )Si generally agree with a corresponding concentration dependence of properties of Co doped samples (see for instance Fig. a geometry factor (atomic radius of dopant) plays a major role in variation of physical properties of MnSi, which therefore are results of volume changes at doping. The latter justifies our analysis of properties of Co and Fe doped samples as a single set of data thus expanding an available concentration range. Having tried to inderstand the scaling data the classical Monte Carlo (MC) calculations were made to describe the behavior of heat capacity of a spin system S 1-x I x , where S-regular spin, I-impurity spin. We use an approach involving localized spins coupled by the exchange and Dzyloshinski-Moriya (DM) spin-spin interactions of unit length similar to the regular one. The impurity spins are coupled with neighboring regular spins by some modified exchange and DM coupling constants. If two impurity spins happen to occur in neighboring sites the corresponding coupling constants is forced to be zero. The MC simulation was carried out on a cubic lattice with periodic boundary conditions using a standard single-site Metropolis algorithm. We made 10 6 MC steps per spin (MCS) to equilibrate the system and next 10 6 MCS (and up to 10 7 MCS in separate runs) to gain statistics. The Monte Carlo heat capacity and spin structure calculations were also carried out in the transition region of the spin system with isomorphic impurities, i.e. impurity spins replacing regular ones (see Figs. The mysterious universal line revealing an independence of spin fluctuation contributions to the heat capacity of Mn(Fe,Co)Si on impurity contents and its nature is discovered in the helical phase of Mn(Co,Fe). This situation declares an invariance of the heat capacity of spin subsystem under doping, which probably arises as a result of relative stiffness of the helical spin structure in respect to the impurity spins. Indeed, thermal exci-tation in a spin system with a long range order should be collective ones, so impurity spins cannot alter much its energy spectrum. On the other hand the situation drastically changes at the helical fluctuation region when no long range spin order exists. Than thermal excitation certainly became localized and sensible to various kind of perturbations including impurity spins. However a complete explanation of this phenomena cannot be given at present time and it will be of a subject of a thorough study at immediate future.