The crystallographic texture of metallic materials is a key microstructural feature that is responsible for the anisotropic behavior, e.g., important in forming operations. In materials science, crystallographic texture is commonly described by the orientation distribution function, which is defined as the probability density function of the orientations of the monocrystal grains conforming a polycrystalline material. For representing the orientation distribution function, there are several approaches such as using generalized spherical harmonics, orientation histograms, and pole figure images . Measuring distances between crystallographic textures is essential for any task that requires assessing texture similarities, e.g. to guide forming processes. Therefore, we introduce novel distance measures based on (i) the Earth Movers Distance that takes into account local distance information encoded in histogram-based texture representations and (ii) a distance measure based on pole figure images. For this purpose, we evaluate and compare existing distance measures for selected use-cases. The present study gives insights into advantages and drawbacks of using certain texture representations and distance measures with emphasis on applications in materials design and optimal process control. 1 Introduction The crystallographic texture is a microstructural feature that describes the non-uniform distribution of grain orientations in polycrystalline materials. In metallic materials, the texture is initiated via solidification and can be modified by thermal, mechanical, and termo-mechanical processes like heat treatment, cold forming or hot forming.The existence of preferred grain orientations, however, leads to the typically anisotropic behavior of processed metallic products and is therefore an important aspect for the metal industry. Consequently, texture optimization along the processing-structureproperties chain In general, the distribution of microstructural features, such as the orientation distribution, can be described by sets of n-point correlation functions The commonly used distance measures take only into account the shape difference of the density functions, but do not consider the underlying orientation distances and correlations. This missing information is represented in the proposed new distance measures, which also represent orientation distances or even neighborhood correlations between orientations. The effect of incorporating or neglecting this information by using the various distance measures is discussed and demonstrated in this paper. We have chosen process path optimization and machine learning of microstructureproperties-relation as demonstration use cases. Crucial for measuring texture distances is the way how the crystallographic texture, i.e. the ODF, is represented. Having grain orientation data, the ODF can be approximated basically by using different methods, representing the ODF under different aspects: (i) on the basis of a series expansion using generalized spherical harmonics (GSH) as described in Bunge As the ODF is a probability density function, the similarity between two ODFs can be expressed by many density-related distance and divergence measures from probability theory textbooks, such as the four most important measures Kullback-Leibler Divergence The distance measure between two ODFs f (1) (g) and f (2) (g) commonly used in material science is defined as with g being an orientation in the orientation space SO(3). This distance measure represents the integral squared difference between the amplitudes of the density functions only. Neither the distance nor the neighborhood relations between the corresponding orientations are reflected by this measure. Within this distance measure, the ODFs can be expressed by their approximations, as mentioned above. In A different distance measure is introduced in Alternatively, in The idea of using orientation histograms to measure similarities of textures is used by A histogram based measure also taking into account the distances between the representatives of the bins is the Earth Mover's Distance (EMD) The main contribution of the present paper is the development of novel distance measures for crystallographic textures. These are (i) the Earth Movers distance taking into account local distance information encoded in histogram-based texture representations and (ii) a distance measure based on pole figure images. The GSH distance is used for comparison, for which we provide a complete derivation of this distance measure. We compare the distance measures to existing measures and outline their applicability. Furthermore, we show the effect of selected texture representations on the developed distance measures. Our second use-case demonstrates the suitability of the selected texture representations for carrying property information. In the field of machine learning in materials science, it is essential to develop predictive models that can be used to design and optimize materials with specific properties. For this purpose, we develop neural networks for learning texture-property relations for the investigated texture representations and investigate the results among each others. The methods applied in this paper are summarized in the following Section 2. This includes a general introduction to the orientation distribution function in Section 2.1, descriptions of the applied texture distance measures and corresponding texture representations in Section 2.2, the machine learning models applied for approximating texture-properties-relations that are used for an additional application study in Section 2.3, and the underlying data used to compare and evaluate the above mentioned methods in Section 2.4. Then, in Section 3, first, we outline advantages and disadvantages of the proposed texture distance measures and investigate the effect of the corresponding texture representations on the distance measures. Second, as an additional study, the effect of texture representations on learning textureproperties-relations are analyzed. The findings of this work are discussed in Section 4. We summarize our work and draw conclusions in Section 5. Important symbols for representing crystallographic texture and measuring texture distances that are used throughout this study are summarized in Table Grain orientations can be parameterized in different ways, see To describe the crystallographic texture of materials, typically, the orientation distribution function defined by with g being an orientation in SO(3) and V (g) describing the volume in SO(3), is used. Although our study is not limited by certain symmetry conditions, in this work, we assume f (g) underlying cubic symmetry conditions as we focus particularly on steel materials. As a consequence of such symmetry conditions, certain subspaces of SO(3) are equivalent and, thus, SO(3) can be reduced to the so-called fundamental zone, see For expressing an orientation g, several representations exist (cf. b (g)) Chi-Squared distance between two orientation histograms. D sh (f Sinkhorn distance between two orientation histograms. Distance between two pole figures. gsh (g), f gsh (g)) Distance between two orientation densities expressed as GSH. The ODF f (g) can be approximated by a series expansion on the basis of generalized spherical harmonics with the orthonormal basis functions in which g is expressed as Euler angles and P mn l denotes generalizations of the associated Legendre functions. The coefficients of the series expansion C mn l are often used as descriptors for crystallographic texture, as they encode the shape of the orientation distribution function, see for example ( When the densities f (1) (g) and f (2) (g) are expanded in two series of GSH base functions and the distance measure of Eq. ( gsh (g), f (2) gsh (g) reduces to For the sake of completeness, we included the full derivation of Eq. ( Orientation histograms have been introduced in To construct an orientation histogram, a set O of j nearly uniformly distributed orientations o j in SO(3) (or the fundamental zone, if symmetry conditions hold) is needed. The set O forms the bin centers of the orientation histograms and is derived using the algorithm introduced in For a set of orientations G that describes the crystallographic texture of a material, assignment vectors w g are calculated for each element g ∈ G by g denoting the jth component of w g . Furthermore, N l is a set of l nearest neighbor orientations of g in terms of the orientation distance Eq. ( On the basis of the orientation histograms, texture distances can be defined using any histogram-based distance measure. The Chi-Squared distance and the EMD, as well as a faster implementation of the EMD, called the Sinkhorn distance Chi-Squared distance: In b (g) and f (2) b (g) is defined as follows However, for comparing sparsely populated histograms, the applicability of the Chi-Squared distance measure is limited. In such cases, the Chi-Squared distance measure is very likely to show very high values (close to the maximum) and is therefore not sensitive for changes in the histograms. This is why we propose to use the EMD The EMD The computation of the EMD can be formalized as a linear programming problem with constraint conditions as described in b 2 (g)), ..., (q bn (g))} where q (1) i , q (2) j are the histogram bin centers represented as unit quaternions and f b j (g) are the entries (weights) of the corresponding histogram. Respecting the crystal symmetry, the ground distance matrix D = [d ij ] is calculated, where d ij is the distance between the quaternion representations q (1) i and q (2) j . The quaternion distance where • denotes the product of the vector elements (not the quaternion multiplication, which results in another quaternion). The aim of solving the transportation problem is to find a flow matrix b i (g) and f (2) b j (g), that minimizes the overall work Once the transportation problem is solved, and thus the optimal flow F is found, the EMD is defined as the normalized distance between the sets t (1) and t (2) : Sinkhorn distance: The solution of the transport problem as discussed above suffers from the increase in complexity with increasing number of histogram bins, which is also the dimensionality δ of the histogram representation space. If two histograms of dimension δ are compared, the costs for the calculation of the optimal transport distances scale at least in O(δ 3 log(δ)) This results in the requirement that s(F ) should be as large as possible, The resulting (dual) Sinkhorn distance is which is again a convex function. By forming the Lagrangian and searching for its minimum with respect to f i,j , a strictly convex problem is obtained yielding a unique optimal solution. It is shown that the resulting optimum is also a distance. Since the Sinkhorn algorithm relies on matrix-vector products, the distance can be computed through Sinkhorn's matrix scaling algorithm, whereby it is several orders of magnitude faster than transport solvers. In our approach, we calculate the histogram distances using the highly efficient Sinkhorn algorithm ( A pole figure is a graphical representation used in materials science and crystallography to display the orientation of polycrystals. It is based on a stereographic projection that maps three-dimensional information on a twodimensional plane (2) pf (g) pixel-wise by means of the absolute or l 1 loss: where N denotes the number of pixels and M denotes the number of pole figures. When texture-property relations are learned, the textures are transformed into a latent space, which arranges the texture representations according to their properties. Looking at machine learning in materials design, we want to retrieve texture, which correspond to given properties. For this purpose it is very important that the latent space representation also reflects the distance in the original texture space. This can be enforced by using e.g. siamese neural networks In order to investigate the ability of the discussed texture representations being suitable for carrying property information, we develop neural network-based models for learning the relation between textures and their corresponding properties, based on the texture-property data set described in 2.4.2. This forward mapping from textures to properties is modeled as a regression problem. The regression loss is given by the mean squared error between the predicted properties p and the true properties p: where θ are the trainable parameters and R(θ) is a regularization term that is used to prevent overfitting with the hyperparameter λ defining the strength of the regularization (also known as weight decay, see • as orientation histograms having the resolution J = 512 and l ∈ {1, 3}. • as pole figures for the Miller's indices (001), (110), (111), where the polar coordinates are transformed into Cartesian coordinates with a resolution of 64 × 64 pixels. The resulting pole figure representation for one exemplary ODF is depicted in Fig. • as GSH textures for degree L=16 and L=10. For the mapping, we use only a subset of the GSH coefficients, as the first coefficient equals one and half of the remaining coefficients are complex conjugates of the other half Orientations histograms: The topology for the neural network on the basis of orientation histogram (see Tab. 6 (a) and Fig. The topology for GSH with L=10 (see Tab. 6 (b) and Fig. Pole figures: The layout of the CNN topology can be seen in Tab. 6 (d) and Fig. Implementation details: In the context of hyperparameter optimization the random search method The basis for the investigations in the present paper is a simulated metal forming process, which is described in Basically, the simulation framework allows for applying sequences of tension and compression operations on a point within a workpiece of the material under consideration (which we call material point in the following). The operations are defined by the deformation gradient expressed as a matrix with orthogonal basis vectors e i in which F 11 is defined by the applied tensile load increment and both, F 22 and F 33 , are determined such that the stress boundary conditions are fulfilled, cf. with the rotation matrix R. We use the framework to simulate texture evolution and generate different crystallographic textures for our analysis. It is well known that Taylor-type mean-field models typically overestimate texture evolution In addition, the simulation framework is used to calculate material properties. The properties we focus on are the orientation dependent Young's moduli and anisotropy similar to R-values, as in In total, two data sets are generated: a first one, which serves to compare the different measures of texture distances and a second (larger) one to serve the demonstration use case of learning texture-property relations. The generation of both data sets is described in the following. Distance measurement evaluation set: For this purpose we are seeking datasets where the texture distance between subsequent elements is continuously increasing. To generate such an ODF dataset, we simulate an uniaxial tension test (20 load steps with 4% applied strain). When repeatedly applying tension operations on a material with initial texture as in the example process, the distance from the initial texture is expected to be smoothly and monotonically increasing. We generate three such datasets by starting the simulated tension test with different initial texture as follows: • Initial Texture 1: A grey initial texture is used that consists of 512 nearly uniformly distributed orientations (n oris = 512) in the cubictriclinic fundamental zone. The orientations are generated using the algorithm described in • Initial Texture 2: 100 orientations (n oris = 100) are randomly sampled from the 512 orientations of Initial Texture 1. • Initial Texture 3: The third initial texture consists of only one orientation (n oris = 1). Texture-property data set: For learning of a generalized texture-property mapping, a total of 76980 simulations were conducted, each by applying seven tension steps of 10% strain based on Equation In the following, we show the effect of using different texture representations in the two investigated use cases. The effect of the various discussed ODF representations on the corresponding ODF distance measures are shown in the following. For this purpose, we use the distance measurement evaluation set {f (0) (g), f (1) (g), . . . , f (19) (g)} described in 2.4.2, resulting from the forming process, which consists of 20 tension steps. We determine the distances from the initial texture f (0) (g) to each subsequent texture f (i) (g), i = 1, . . . , 19: D(f (0) (g), f (1) (g)), . . . , D(f (0) (g), f (19) (g)), where D represents the distance function. Such sequences of distance measure values are then compared using different texture representations. In the following, we compare the distances, which result from using 1. the Chi-Squared distance D χ 2 (Eq. ( These measures are calculated for the textures resulting from the forming process starting at the three different initial textures. For each texture set, the orientation histograms and pole figures (depicted in Fig. (1) sc (g), which have the maximum distance in their orientations: The sequences of these normalized distances are calculated for our three different texture sets and plotted as distance curves over process step number (depicted in Fig. Initial Texture 2 (n oris = 100): The results of the investigated distances for the orientation histograms and pole figures are depicted in Fig. Initial Texture 3 (n oris = 1): The results of the investigated distances for textures with only one orientation are shown in Fig. The quaternion distance curve is strictly monotonic and almost linear. The Chi-Squared distance measure can not cope with this case because it changes its value only if the single crystal orientation moves into a different bin and then immediately takes on the maximum possible value (saturation). Higher-order soft-assignments smoothen this step function behavior and let the curves saturate slower. The discontinuity problem of the Chi-Squared curves is less prominent for Sinkhorn distance curves because the quaternion distances between bin centers are also taken into account. This also forces the Sinkhorn distance curves to be closer to distance curve and also prevents saturation. The pole figure distance curve is monotonic and smooth, but deviates from the linear ground truth curve by forming a half sigmoid function which saturates smoothly with increasing step number. After having learned that the Sinkhorn distance delivers the best results related to histogram distance measures at textures composed of 512 orien-tations, we now compare these results to the results from using the distance measure D gsh (Eq. ( The value ranges of the different analyzed distances differ due to different representations. To compensate this effect the distances are normalized to the value of the distance at step 19 (maximum distance value): The results for the GSH distance are shown over process step numbers in Fig. The results of the texture-property relations are summarized in Tab. 3. The coefficient of determination R 2 is used for comparison, as well as the regression errors MAE E and MAE R, which denote the mean absolute error (MAE) between the true and predicted Young's moduli and R-values. An MAE of Young's moduli ≤ 1000 and of R of ≤ 0.1 is sufficient in most applications. Additionally, the numbers of input features of the used texture representations are noted. It is shown that texture-property relations with a sufficient prediction quality can be achieved for all texture representations. By considering the orientation histograms, better results are obtained with the soft-assignment l = 3. Comparing all texture representations, the estimator quality for GSH for L = 16 is best considering R 2 while pole figures achieves the best result considering MAE. The distribution of the property values of the learning data set is shown in Tab. 4. The findings of this work will be discussed under three aspects: (1) ODFbased texture representations, (2) texture distances measured with representations as discussed in (1), and (3) effects of texture representations on learning of texture-property relations. ODF-based texture representations: Pole figures are the richest representation of the investigated textures in this study, as they are represented as image data. In this representation, the neighborhood relations of the orientations are represented by the neighboring pixels in the image. Moreover, the visualization of the ODF by pole figures is interpretable by domain experts, which in turn allows them to interpret texture-property relations represented by neural regression networks.In contrast, neighborhood relations are not reflected by orientation histograms, since the order of bins does not reflect the order of orientations, cf. Section 2.2.2. Orientation relationships are only represented by orientation histograms when the orientations of the bin centers are included. The representations of ODFs by GSH coefficients does not contain any information about orientation relationships. When using GSHs, neighborhood relations between orientations are implicitly represented by the base functions, which belong to the GSH coefficients. When expanding an ODF using GSH with only low order coefficients, sharp textures can not be represented very well. Besides pole figure images, plots showing sections through the Euler space are also often used to visualize the orientation distribution. However, due to the distortion of the Euler space, this representations is disadvantageous for representing and processing crystallographic texture data. Texture distance measures: Distances between textures using the distance measurement evaluation set described in Section 2.4.2 are evaluated by means of a stepwise process, which pushes the texture further apart from the initial texture at each step. When constantly applying tensile load increments on a material with initial texture f (0) (g) as it is done in the example process (cf. Section 2.4.1), the distance between texture f (0) (g) and f (k) (g) is expected to be smoothly and monotonically increasing with step number k. The GSH-based distance measure as well as the distance measures based on pole figures show this behavior. The monotonic requirement of the distance measure is also preserved by the Sinkhorn distance of the histogram representation, while it is violated by the Chi-Squared distance measure at soft-assignment l = 1 of the histogram representation. The Chi-Squared distance measure is often not smooth (see Fig. Another disadvantage of the Chi-Squared distance is its high sensitivity with respect to a shift of orientations from one bin to another one. This is less pronounced for dense histograms (i.e. where there is a non-zero number in each bin) than for sparse histograms. This is best seen by looking at extreme cases of three sparse histograms: Histogram f b (g)) = 2 and thus maximal (following Eq. ( In general, it can be seen that the soft-assignment parameter has a strong effect on the Chi-Squared distance measure, as it incorporates local orientation distances by distributing histogram weights to several bins. This is artificially countering the disadvantage of sensibility against the shift of orientations. The Sinkhorn distance, in contrast, is not affected much by the soft-assignment parameter as it incorporates also the distances between the orientations of the bin representatives (cf. Eq In addition, the number of histogram bins of the orientation histogram has a significant effect on the Chi-Squared distance measure, which can be seen in Fig. Regarding the single crystal texture study (Initial Texture 3 (n oris =1)), the orientation histogram-based distance measures do not show a smooth behavior, because the crystal rotation after loading cannot be tracked adequately by the orientation histograms. Therefore, the Chi-Squared and the Sinkhorn distance jumps at certain load steps, independently of the number of histogram bins and soft-assignment parameter. However, because of the bin-wise comparison, the Chi-Squared distance reaches quickly it's maximum value. In contrast, the Sinkhorn distance does not reach the maximum value at all and converges almost to the same value for different number of histogram bins and soft-assignments. Moreover, the Sinkhorn distance is closer to the quaternion distance, which can be considered to be the ground truth in this case. In contrast to the orientation histogram-based distance measures, the pole figure distance shows a rather smooth behavior over the loading steps, as the rotation of the single crystal is tracked by the pole figure. This is due to the generation of pole figures by using a Gaussian kernel which spreads the orientations over several pixels. The distance curves resulting from pole figures are monotonic and smooth. Also the GSH distance shows a smooth behavior in all cases, as it is based on a smooth function approximation (cf. Eq. ( Estimation of texture-property relations: Besides evaluating different texture representations for texture distance measurement their suitability for modeling texture-property relations was investigated in Section 2.3. The results show that sufficient prediction quality can be achieved for all texture representations (see Table The pole figure representation allows the neural network models to exploit the pixel-represented neighborhood relationships within the textures through convolutional operations, which explains the superior prediction quality. However, the pole figure image data must be transformed by a backbone to a vectorized latent space by means of convolutional and pooling layers, before the neural network head can perform the regression to the property values. The additional backbone layers make processing of pole fig-ures more complex than using histograms as input, which results in higher model training efforts. In contrast, the orientation histograms can be directly used as input for the neural regression network, reducing the overall network complexity. Investigations were performed for the number of histogram bins J = 512 and soft-assignment l = 1 and l = 3, where the better result is achieved with l = 3. The improvement with l = 3 can be explained by the approximate consideration of neighborhood relationships by higher order smoothing via soft assignment. The number of bins of J = 512 was chosen as compromise between computational cost and representation quality. The GSH representations can be directly used as input as well. The investigation was performed using GSH representations of the degrees L = 16 and L = 10, which comprise of 280 and 80 features respectively. A better prediction quality is achieved with L = 16, but with L = 10 sufficient results are already achieved with its lower number of features, requiring a less complex neural network model. Better prediction results than with orientation histograms can be achieved by GSH-based models with lower number of features due to the implicit representation of orientation neighborhood relations in the base functions of the GSHs. The measurement of texture distances is essential for any task, where knowledge about the assessment of texture similarities is required. Examples are the design of processes, which are supposed to reach a given a target texture, and modeling of texture-property relations for materials design aiming to optimize textures for given properties. In the literature on material science and engineering, only a few studies can be found related to distance measures between textures. Therefore this has been investigated in more detail in this paper for crystallographic textures, which are commonly described by the orientation distribution function (ODF). Methods of distance measurement based on representations of the orientation distribution function such as generalized spherical harmonics, orientation histograms and pole figures have been developed and investigated: (1) explicit distance measure between two ODFs expanded in GSH, (2) Sinkhorn distance measure and (3) Chi-Squared distance measure for ODFs represented by orientation histograms and (4) distance measure for ODFs represented as pole figures. By evaluating the texture distances resulting from an example process, we were able to figure out the advantages and drawbacks using the discussed texture representations and distance measures. The process generates textures with increasing distance from the initial texture at each process step. This produces a monotonically increasing distance-over-process-step-number curve. By investigating the corresponding distance curves calculated from different texture representations and measures, it turns out that using histogram-based texture representations with the Sinkhorn distance are the best compromise regarding precision and computational complexity. It has been shown that the Sinkhorn distance curves are close to the ground truth quaternion distance curve for single crystals. Comparing the Sinkhorn distance and the GSH distance, the Sinkhorn distance has higher sensitivity with small distances (at the beginning of the process curve) and lower sensitivity with large distances (at the end of the process curve), while the behavior of the GSH distance is opposite (cf. Section 3.1.2 and Fig. Considering the suitability of the investigated texture representations for learning texture-property relations, using GSHs achieves similar quality than using pole figures, but with a lower computing complexity. Both are superior to using orientation histograms which make only limited use of orientation neighborhoods. In the present work, we applied our methods on data from mean-field simulations. The next step is to apply distance measurements as well as learning the structure-property relationship on spatially resolved data from full-field simulations. For the latter, the problem arises that the computational efforts of simulation and of machine learning are much higher and therefore fewer data can be generated (via full-field simulations) and processed. Due to the findings of this work, the Chi-Sqaured distance will be replaced by the Sinkhorn distance in the loss function of the SMTL model The distance between two ODFs f (1) (g) and f (2) (g) can be expressed according to Eq. (1) as D odf (f (1) (g), f (2) ( When the densities f (1) (g) and f (2) (g) are expanded in two series of GSH base functions f The distance measure of Eq. ( gsh (g), f The mixed terms therefore all vanish due to orthogonality and only the squared terms remain D gsh (f The integrads (e imφ 2 ) 2 and (e inφ 1 ) 2 are always equal to 1. Therefore The integral over the Legendre polynomials is (2) gsh (g), when expressed as series expansion of generalized spherical harmonics is then finally D gsh (f The basic form of the Taylor-type material model used in this study originates from the description in For n crystals, the volume averaged stress is defined by with T (i) being the Cauchy stress tensor of a single crystal i with volume V (i) . The Cauchy stress tensor T is derived from the stress tensor in the intermediate configuration using a multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient in its elastic and plastic part (F = F e • F p ): Here, I denotes the second order identity tensor and C denotes the forth order elastic stiffness tensor. When applying to cubic crystal symmetry, C is composed of three independent parameters, which are C 11 , C 12 , and C 44 . To transform T into T * , the following relation is used: The plastic velocity gradient L p , which is used to described the evolution of the plastic deformation, is defined as the sum of the shear rates γ(η) on with the elastic part of the right Cauchy-Green tensor U e . The orientation of a crystal is therefore expected to change smoothly for an applied load. For tensile load increments, we furthermore expect the distances between the initial texture and the evolving texture to increase monotonically. 