Traditional design cycles for new materials and assemblies have two fundamental drawbacks. The underlying physical relationships are often too complex to be precisely calculated and described. Aside from that, many unknown uncertainties, such as exact manufacturing parameters or materials composition, dominate the real assembly behavior. Machine learning (ML) methods overcome these fundamental limitations through data-driven learning. In addition, modern approaches can specifically increase system knowledge. Representation Learning allows the physical, and if necessary, even symbolic interpretation of the learned solution. In this way, the most complex physical relationships can be considered and quickly described. Furthermore, generative ML approaches can synthesize possible morphologies of the materials based on defined conditions to visualize the effects of uncertainties. This modern approach accelerates the design process for new materials and enables the prediction and interpretation of realistic materials behavior. The traditional design of new materials and their production are based on exploratory research and heuristic methodology Data-driven methods close the gap between empirical observation and physical modelling. Neural networks have become the dominant approach for data-based modeling in many complex areas Unfortunately, the black-box nature of neural networks means that the learned function is usually uninterpretable by a human. This makes it difficult to use the trained model to gain deeper insights into the physical principles that lead to the observed properties of the materials, or even to assess the reliability of the model prediction. As a response to the aforementioned shortcomings of standard neural networks, several alternative approaches have been developed that improve these models by learning physical concepts of varying degrees of interpretability. RH 1: The solution is based on a formalization of materials designs that capture the relevant materials properties and serve as input to a surrogate model. Such a model must be developed based on requirements and uncertainties from manufacturing processes. RH 2: The network typologies (Bayesian Generative Autoencoders) and the corresponding algorithms (active learning, RepL) must be developed for this domain. Neural networks for time series -which would be suitable -are an on-going research field in ML RH 3: To extract an explicit, formula-based material model from the neural network, several research directions exist: From symbol-regression based-approaches RH 4: Materials morphologies need to be encoded into a set of feature vectors that are automatically extracted from CT data. Some of these features are straight-forward (e.g., density), while others will require novel image-processing strategies. In related applications, convolutional neural networks have proven to be particularly suitable for this. RH 5: CT data can be used to quantify the effects of manufacturing processes. This knowledge enables high-resolution conditional generative neural networks (generative adversarial networks (GANs) The author group traditionally works on the edge between computer science and automation technology. Focus are ML and artificial intelligence methods for cyber-physical systems including RepL For several years now we have been abstracting these skills into the sub-area of computational materials design or -from an algorithmic perspective -spatial neural networks. Often neural networks are used to analyze materials, e.g. to identify characteristics This also includes the use of surrogate models to replace slow solver-based simulations when designing new materials The ideal physical behavior of materials can often be approximated using well-known partial differential equations (PDEs). However, the numerical solution of these equations is computationally intensive for high temporal and spatial resolutions. In addition, classic deep learning approaches fail due to a lack of labeled data. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) solve this contradiction These models learn the unknown parameters in an otherwise known (partial) differential equation. To do this, the neural network is trained to interpolate between the known data points in a way that corresponds to the known form of the equation. The unknown parameters of the equation are treated as neural network parameters and optimized by gradient descent alongside the actual neural network parameters An alternative to PINNs for settings where the governing equations are not already partially known is offered by an uncertainty-based active learning strategy. They have established themselves as an extremely valuable approach in areas where labeling data requires significant effort An alternative for the spatial system description, taking complex (boundary) conditions into account, are generative AI approaches such as GANs or DDPMs. CTs help here as training data to create realistic morphologies. For example, GANs are used to generate a large number of CT images that have similar properties to the training images However, to create morphologies with defined and changing properties, conditions-based approaches must be considered. Although there are already some approaches from the field of medical technology Feature engineering methods help with subsequent automated CT segmentation or classification, as well as design evaluation q a a 0 o q W d o q + m z H j 6 z d / 9 R H z r b n 1 r e c u v z p t d s r + B 6 T W I e C 1 j i q 3 5 B G z + x w T p C n O A M 5 / j n R M 5 v 5 9 T 5 c 0 1 1 x u q c W d x Z z t / / t 6 m b R w = = < / l a t e x i t > = { , p(r)} < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " l 6 e m g J q 2 u f / o r 1 F g N p U d e y M Q 8 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " o t n 5 c O 5 U 2 F 9 6 G P e e d n u 7 2 7 s r w T j g j F e 0 g i 4 c r E a n T L u 6 Z Y r T h n W T l 0 C P I T 9 x 7 h f X + z T B W z E m F I 0 g b j D n F e A E 8 p j t 4 z I r 0 U 8 9 J L b M j k 6 5 i 6 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " b f e h F + 4 s f 0 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " p 1 q u c n l y j L B + i J 9 r c e P q l W I c 9 Z p G / L e v w A q I 2 V I w = = < / l a t e x i t > Figure The aim of these intermediate steps is a closed ML framework that covers the entire materials design process RepL is the process of automatically discovering and extracting meaningful patterns and features from raw data, enabling more effective and efficient machine learning models. Autoencoders and variational autoencoders Champion et al. ML, CT, and experiments are combined here, to automatically construct transferable and interpretable constitutive materials laws, which are currently missing for the design of many complex material composites. As a result, a new method is developed to learn surrogate models for materials and assemblies. A bottleneck in traditional materials design is the time consuming design-test-cycle: Each new material has to be designed, produced and then experimentally tested. Direct simulation is only a partial solution, as both modeling and simulation tasks are time-consuming, require a high level of expertise and significant computational resources to solve even small domains. A solution for the problem is a machine learning surrogate model which is a simplified and computationally less expensive model that serves as a substitute for time-consuming simulations or expensive computations. Based on bulk materials data, a model generation function can be learned that maps new materials designs onto materials models. Such predictions can be used to try other, new materials designs. Maybe better: Even if this neural network-based approach yields less quantitative precision for a single material. Unbiased learning of a predictive model can still be expected to be qualitatively more predictive than traditional ad hoc heuristics. Such an approach is sketched in Figure Because these materials models come in form of a neural network, explainability and traceability become challenges. For this reason, explicit, formula-based models are extracted from the neural network. Such models resemble closely current manual materials models but can qualitatively differ as a function of provided feature vectors. However, to prevent neural networks from remaining black boxes, changes to the network topology and learning process are required. For this (see also Figure Due to a symbolic description, the physical materials behavior can be theoretically interpreted. However, the generated equations are often difficult to interpret in practice due to their complexity. Another way to better understand system relationships is to synthesize materials structures in the form of tomography. This approach is visualized in Figure The generative part uses CTs as training data. These are labeled with manufacturing configurations such as material compositions and process parameters. Under these highdimensional conditions, a GAN or DDPM is trained to synthesize high-resolution 3D tomography data. In the operation phase, the respective influence on the morphological structure is analyzed by varying the conditions. Analogous to the unsupervised approach mentioned above, a surrogate model is then used to learn and represent the materials behavior. Finally, the design draft is evaluated. A comprehensive approach that integrates ML, CTs and experiments is presented. This solves the lack of transferable and interpretable materials laws for complex composite materials and assemblies. The surrogate design model provides an efficient way to overcome the traditional bottleneck in the design-test cycle. The algorithmic representation ensures the interpretability of the neural network-based models. The extraction of explicit, formula-based models enhances understanding and facilitates meaningful contributions to materials design. In addition, the morphological representation provides a visual understanding of the materials system through synthesis of 3D tomography data. This enables the analysis of manufacturing influences on morphological structures and provides valuable insights into the material design process. The proposed framework not only streamlines the materials design process but also empowers researchers with a powerful tool to explore and predict the behavior of complex material composites. By combining CTs synthesis and explainable AI, this modern approach opens opportunities for the rapid and informed design of materials with tailored properties.