The differences on the thermal behavior (DTA-TG) of mica samples measured before and after sonication have been studied. Sonication treatment produces important modifications in the thermal behavior of muscovite and biotite samples. For muscovite , it produces a broadening and decrease in temperature of the dehydroxylation and crystallization effects, reaching a steady stage after 40 h treatment time. For biotite, the original single peak profile for the dehydroxylation of the untreated sample is co nverted into a two peaks profile after sonication, the intensity of the low temperature peak increases with sonication time, while the intensity of the high temperature peak decreases. The modification of the thermal behavior for sonicated samples has been correlated to the particle size distribution effect produced by the sonication treatment. It has been also observed that the cup tip of the sonication e quipment contaminates the samples releasing titanium of its composition. Micas are minerals of significant commercial importance due to their physical properties. These minerals remain stable at high temperature and have interesting electrical properties. Therefore, they are used in applications where it is required high-temperature stability and electrical properties. Mechanical treatment are of great importance in the preparation and processing of raw materials. Clay minerals subjected to grinding experience particle size reduction together with other important transformations, such as amorphyzation, aggregation of small particles into larger units and contamination. The influence of grinding on the thermal behavior of minerals has been extensively studied. A muscovite from Fuente Obejuna (Co ́ rdoba, Spain) and a biotite from Santa Olalla (Huelva, Spain) were used as starting materials. A high-intensity ultrasonic horn (Misonix inc.), that consists of a solid titanium rod connected to a piezoelectric ceramic, and a 20 KHz, 750 W power supply were used. The horn tip was introduced into a thermostated (20 • C) double-jacket reactor. Three grams of < 2 mm flakes were mixed with 100 cm 3 of freshly deionized water and subjected to ultrasounds for periods ranging between 10 and 100 h. Diffraction patterns were obtained using a diffractometer (Kristalloflex D-500 Siemens) at 36 kV and 26 mA with Ni-filtered CuKa radiation and a graphite monochromator. High-resolution solid-state Thermogravimetric analysis (TG), differential thermogravimetric analysis (DTG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were carried out simultaneously in static air or argon flow (500 cm 3 min -1 ) with an automatic thermal analyzer system (Seiko, TG/DTA 6300). Mica (muscovite and biotite) samples of about 50 mg were loosely packed into a platinum holder and were thermally treated at a heating rate of 10 • C min -1 . The samples were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Jeol JSM-5400 model. The samples were covered with a thin gold film and analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a Link-ISIS Si/Li detector. The mean size (length, L) of the plate-like particles was evaluated by measuring the length in the longest direction of around 100 particles for each sample. The mass fraction versus particle diameter plots have been obtained by a deposition-centrifugation separation procedure described in the literature Chemical quantification of Ti in bulk samples was carried out using a sequential X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (Siemens, SRS 3000). The The gradual size reduction on sonication of muscovite and biotite was revealed by SEM (Fig. The mass fraction as a function of the particle diameter plots for the muscovite and biotite samples sonicated for 40 h are presented in Fig. DTG diagrams carried out in argon flow of untreated and sonicated muscovite samples in the range from 300 to 1000 • C, where dehydroxylation of muscovite takes place, are shown in Fig. Since X-ray diffraction and NMR studies have shown that sonication does not produce significant changes in the mica crystalline structure or Al and Si coordination, the effect of sonication on the thermal behavior of the muscovite could be attributed to changes in the particle size distribution. The importance of particle size in the thermal reactivity of solids have been recognized in literature. For the muscovite sample, there is a correlation between the effect of sonication on particle size reduction and the changes in the thermal behavior. Thus, the thermal behavior changes while the particle size is reduced, that is up to 40 h treatment time, remaining unchanged for longer treatments times. The particle size reduction produced by sonication facilitates the dehydroxylation of the muscovite as observed by the shifting of the main weight loss toward lower temperature. In addition, the new borders created by the particle size reduction should be responsible of the low temperature (300-450 • C) due to weakly bonded OH groups placed on these borders. In order to study the influence of the particle size distribution on the thermal behavior of the sonicated muscovite, DTG plots of the different fractions with different particle sizes separated by the deposition-centrifugation procedure were recorded for the sample sonicated for 40 h under argon atmosphere. Fig. The DTA curve of the original muscovite carried out in argon flow (Fig. For biotite, sonication has also a significant effect on its thermal behavior. the DTG curves recorded in argon flow in the range 900-1225 • C of biotite samples before and after sonication are shown in Fig. The DTA and TG performed in air for the sonicated biotite samples (figures not shown) also indicated contamination of Ti that oxidizes during heating. This Ti contamination was also detected by X-ray diffraction, chemical analysis and SEM in a similar way as in the muscovite samples. Sonication does not produce significant structural transformation in the mica samples. Additionally, for the muscovite sample, it has been observed by NMR that the coordination of Al and Si does not suffer modification due to the treatment. Nevertheless, the particle size of the samples is drastically reduced. This particle size reduction produces important changes in the thermal behavior of these micas. For the muscovite sample, the weight losses on the DTG curve due to dehydroxylation and the corresponding DTA endothermic effect are broadened and shifted to lower temperature, until a sonication time limit is reached at 40 h, treatments longer than 40 h do not produce any impor-tant change in the TG or DTA traces. This behavior could be correlated with the decrease of particle size up to 40 h sonication time followed by a leveling off. The broadening of the main weight loss is related to the effect of the particle size distribution. The weight loss in the range from 300 to 450 • C could be attributed to loosely OH in the borders of the particles generated by the sonication treatment. For the biotite, the particle size decreases in the entire sonication time range studied here, and this continuous change has an important effect on the biotite thermal behavior. Thus, the only weight loss in the range from 900 to 1200 • C due to dehydroxylation observed for the untreated biotite is converted into two different weight losses for the sonicated samples. The DTG trace shows that one of the peak increases its intensity while the other decreases with the sonication time. The study of the influence of particle size distribution on the thermal behavior has shown that the low temperature peak is due to particles smaller than 2 mm while the one at higher temperatures is due to particles larger than 2 mm. The contamination of sonicated samples has been reported, up to our knowledge, for the first time in this paper. Thus, it has been observed that Ti is released from the sonication probe and appears as individual particles mixed with the sonicated particles.