Despite the weak, van-der-Waals interlayer coupling, photoinduced charge transfer vertically across atomically thin interfaces can occur within surprisingly fast, sub-50fs timescales. Early theoretical understanding of the charge transfer is based on a noninteracting picture, neglecting excitonic effects that dominate the optical properties of such materials. Here, we employ an ab initio many-body perturbation theory approach which explicitly accounts for the excitons and phonons in the heterostructure. Our large-scale first-principles calculations directly probe the role of exciton-phonon coupling in the charge dynamics of the WS 2 /MoS 2 heterobilayer. We find that the exciton-phonon interaction induced relaxation time of photo-excited excitons at the K valley of MoS 2 and WS 2 is 67 fs and 15 fs at 300 K, respectively, which sets a lower bound to the intralayerto-interlayer exciton transfer time and is consistent with experiment reports. We further show that electron-hole correlations facilitate novel transfer pathways which are otherwise inaccessible to non-interacting electrons and holes. The freedom to stack quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials, with little restrictions imposed by lattice matching, introduces a vast parameter space for designing and engineering device properties, as well as exploring new physics by tuning electron correlations and order parameters through proximity effects Recent pump-probe experiments have suggested that for the WS 2 /MoS 2 heterobilayer, such inter-layer charge transfer can take place on a time scale of less than 50 fs Earlier theoretical work on WS 2 /MoS 2 heterostructure based on time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) suggested that charge transfer is initiated by coherent charge oscillations and completed by electron-phonon interactions However, while promising, the computational demand of most aforementioned methods is quite steep, and one typically sacrifices the description of electronic correlations to obtain the coupled description of electrons and phonons. For instance, despite earlier pioneering efforts, NAMD calculations are often still restricted to small supercells, which makes the spectrum of excitonic states artificially sparse In this letter, we study exciton transfer (i.e., the rate of scattering from one exciton state to other exciton states via phonons) in a WS 2 /MoS 2 TMD bilayer heterostructure including both electron-hole and exciton-phonon We focus on the energetically favorable H M h stacking WS 2 /MoS 2 heterostructure, with a twist angle of 60 • . Fig. Exciton-phonon coupling matrix elements can be written as a contraction of electronphonon coupling matrix elements with the exciton envelope function given in previous works where E S ′ Q+q is the exciton energy of a state with quantum number S ′ and a COM momentum Q + q; ω νq is the phonon frequency; N νq is the Bose-Einstein occupation factor associated with the phonon, N q is the number of the wavevectors sampled in the Brillouin zone (BZ); and finally, G S ′ Sν (Q, q) is the exciton-phonon coupling matrix element encoding the probability amplitude for an exciton initially in state (S, Q) to scatter to state (S ′ , Q+q) through the emission or absorption of a phonon (ν, q). In Fig. Exciton scattering rates (inverse of the relaxation time) are evaluated from the the imaginary part of on-shell exciton self-energy in Eq. 1. We emphasize this quantity gives the rate of an exciton being scattered from one state to all other states via the exciton-phonon coupling, and it is not between two specific states. In Fig. We further analyze the scattering rate contributions resolved in the full BZ, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, scattering events associated with phonon wavevectors q in the inner ring around K, are mostly associated with excitons wherein the electrons and holes are distributed at the K and K ′ valleys, respectively (See We find that the one-step scattering-event channel associated with the inner ring gives a bleaching time of the WS 2 exciton of about 250 fs. On the other hand, we also study a previously discussed two-step scattering mechanism, by which MoS 2 A excitons are first scattered to excitons wherein the holes are distributed around to the VBM at Γ (the outer ring process), which subsequently scatters to interlayer excitons. We find that such a twostep process gives a bleaching time of the WS 2 exciton of about 200 fs. Similar scattering time was reported in Ref. Next, we focus on the dynamics of the WS 2 A exciton. Fig. After showing that exciton-phonon scattering can be fast enough to explain ultrafast charge transfer observed in a WS 2 /MoS 2 heterostructure, an important follow-up question is to microscopically understand how excitons relax after being excited by an optical field and what is the role of electron-hole correlation in that relaxation. Since a full pump-probe simulation including phonons and the exciton relaxation dynamics remains challenging from ab initio many-body perturbation theory, we compute the population redistribution rate of each independent-particle orbital of the many-electron system as an indication of how the carrier population changes as the excitons relax. We define the band-and k-resolved quasiparticle redistribution rate of a quasi-electron state ck with an initially occupied A exciton as where the expectation values are taken over an evolved state |φ⟩ starting from either the MoS 2 or WS 2 A exciton. A Sq is the exciton envelope function of a state (S,q). Here, the scattered exciton COM momentum coincides with phonon momentum q since initial A excitons have zero COM momentum. A similar expression of the redistribution rate for valence electrons, along with its derivation, is given in the supporting information which can be understood as the exciton-phonon scattering rate weighted by the electron or hole components of the exciton envelope functions. In contrast to the independent-particle picture of electron-phonon scattering, we can see from the above expression that different scattering pathways become possible due to the nonlocal distribution of electron or hole amplitude in reciprocal space for excitonic states. To see the effects of electron-hole interactions in the electron relaxation dynamics, we compare the computed quasi-particle redistribution rate with and without electron-hole interactions in Fig. We also perform the corresponding calculations without excitonic effects (i.e., considering only electron-phonon interactions). If we start from the lowest-energy vertical transition (intralayer interband transitions) on MoS scattering rate is much more limited in this case owing to the stricter energy-momentum conservation conditions in the non-interacting case. In contrast, excitons with energy close to the MoS 2 A exciton can have wide variety of energy and momentum distributions given their different possible internal structure, which allows for the coupling of a variety of states in the BZ. In particular, while holes transfer directly to the VBM at Γ and the K ′ valley, it takes a secondary scattering event for this interlayer charge transfer if electron-hole interactions are not taken into account. For the initially excited WS 2 A exciton (Fig. The exciton-phonon coupling strength can be deduced experimentally by measuring the temperature-dependent exciton linewidth. In Fig. In conclusion, our first-principles calculations reveal the rich and ultrafast, phononmediated exciton scattering channels in a prototypical TMDC bilayer structure of WS 2 /MoS 2 . We show that the MoS 2 A exciton has a relaxation time of about 67 fs and WS 2 has a re-laxation time of about 15 fs at 300 K. Moreover, we show that the ultrafast interlayer charge transfer takes place through a multiplicity of channels, and that two-step scattering processes play a significant role: for an initially excited A exciton in MoS 2 , we predict such channels to cause a photobleaching of the absorption signal at the A exciton resonance in WS 2 in about 200 fs. Our band BZ-resolved analysis further reveals that, upon excitation of the MoS 2 A exciton, the relaxation primarily involves exciton scatterings which transfer the hole from the K point to the Γ region of the BZ while, for the WS 2 A excition, it involves the scattering of the electron primarily to a valley around the Λ valley. We expect these findings to inform novel ways of stacking, electronic hybridization, and many-body effects and be synergistically employed to tune charge and energy dynamics in TMDC heterostructures, and that the formalism described here may be used in future studies involving exciton transport in real-time. Supporting Information. Computational details of GW-BSE, electron-phonon, and exciton-phonon couplings, supplementary figures of phonon dispersion, absorption spectrum, exciton envelope functions, estimation of bleaching time, electron-phonon coupling matrix elements, and derivation of the exciton population change rate.