Nanocrystalline FeCuNbSiB thin films were fabricated through magnetron sputtering followed by heat treatment, resulting in samples characterized by low coercivity and high effective magnetization. Comprehensive microstructural analysis, employing X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy techniques such as selected area electron diffraction, high-resolution imaging, and Fourier transform, was conducted. Magnetic properties were investigated using an alternating gradient field magnetometer and broadband ferromagnetic resonance. The structural analysis revealed a well-defined microstructure of nanograins within an amorphous matrix in all of our films. However, the coercivity of the 80 nm films did not exhibit as low values as observed for the 160 nm films Nanocrystalline magnetic materials have received great attention due to their soft magnetic properties To integrate these materials into micro and nanofabrication techniques, it becomes imperative to replicate the same magnetic properties at a smaller scale, specifically, in the form of nanometric thin films where other sources of magnetic anysotropy are likely to appear. To control the overall soft magnetic properties in thin films of these materials becomes then a challenge that makes difficult to obtain sub-Oersted coercive fields. The possibility miniaturization of devices using nanocrystalline magnetic films of high permeability and high saturation values drives continuously the efforts to tailor the soft magnetic properties of these materials an nanometric thickness. In this study we produced FeCuNbSiB nanocrystalline thin films (80 nm and 160 nm) through a heat treatment process (490 oC, 500 oC and 520 oC), resulting in samples with sub-Oe coercivity and high effective magnetization. The structural and magnetic properties of these films were analyzed by means of X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, alternating gradient field magnetometry and broadband ferromagnetic resonance. Thin films of 80 nm and 160 nm thicknesses were prepared by magnetron sputtering from a target with nominal composition of Fe 73.5 Si 13.5 B 9 Nb 3 Cu 1 , produced by ACI Alloys INC, and deposited onto a Si(100)/SiO 2 substrate with a 300 nm oxide layer. The depositions were carried out at room temperature at a rate of 1.29 Å/s, using a DC source with 50 W of power, working pressure of 5 mTorr and Ar gas flow of 50 sccm after a base pressure of 1 × 10 -8 Torr was reached in the sputtering chamber. The crystallization induction occurred through vacuum annealing (1 × 10 -5 Torr) for 1 hour at temperatures of 490 °C, 500 °C and 520 °C, employing heating and cooling rates of 5 °C/min. The structural properties of the films were investigated via grazing incidence X-ray diffractometry (GIXRD) with a Panalytical X'PERT PRO MRD diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (λ=1.54056 Å). The diffraction peaks were indexed to identify the crystallographic phases. A pseudo-Voigt profile function was employed to estimate the line broadening parameter β at half the maximum intensity (FWHM) for the Fe 3 Si (220) peak around the Brag angle 2θ ≈ 45°. Subsequently, the Scherrer equation (Eq. 1) was used to determine the crystallite size D. A microstructural investigation using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was conducted, involving the preparation of lamellas using focused ion beam (FIB) with a gallium ion source from the FIB LYRA-3 double beam microscope (TESCAN). To protect the film, a platinum layer was deposited in situ using a gas injection system, followed by sequential cuts by sputtering layer-by-layer with the Ga ion source. The lamellas obtained were then fixed on a copper TEM grid. A thinning process was initiated by applying a probe current of 1 nA and completed with a current of 50 pA. FIB-prepared lamellas were analyzed by a JEOL 2100F transmission electron microscope operating at 200 kV and coupled with a CMOS (ONE VIEW) to acquire TEM and high resolution TEM (HRTEM) images, as well as selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns. Magnetic properties were examined through in-plane (M vs H) magnetization curves obtained with an alternating gradient field magnetometer (AGFM) and through broadband ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) using a vector network analyzer based setup. For both measurements an in-plane magnetic field with a maximum amplitude of ± 600 Oe was applied parallel to the sample plane. Effective magnetization M eff and in-plane anisotropy H k parameters were derived from broadband-FMR spectra by fitting the measured dispersion relation. This fitting process involved employing the Kittel equations, aligning resonance frequency f r with applied field H curves. For the easy axis 0°Eq. 2 was used, while for hard axis 90°Eq. 3 was employed. The effective magnetization M eff is related to the saturation magnetization M s and the out-of-plane anisotropy field H ⊥ present in the sample (4πM eff = 4πM s -H ⊥ ). Obtaing M eff form the broadband FMR is a straightforward process as it does not depend on the total volume of the measured sample. In contrast, estimating M s form traditional magnetometry requires a accurate measurement of sample thickness and area, along with magnetometer calibration for the small magnetic moments of thin film samples. Figure In both films, the crystallization of the Fe 3 Si phase is predominant. This was evidenced by the XRD patterns displaying diffraction peaks corresponding to (220), (400), and (422) planes, considering an ordered DO 3 structure, for all annealing temperatures. The DO 3 structure was confirmed by TEM SAED measurements, which also showed sets of equivalent lattice planes {220}. Nevertheless, small peaks of the non-ferromagnetic FeSi 2 phase, with an orthorhombic structure, were observed at different annealing temperatures. The mean Fe 3 Si lattice parameter (a m ) estimated by XRD, as well as the particle size (D), are presented in Table The crystallite size D, estimated by XRD and corroborated by TEM (Table These sizes remained nearly constant at different annealing temperatures for both 80 nm and 160 nm films. Only for the 80 nm film at 490 °C, a slightly larger grain size was observed. TEM results are summarized in Fig. The SAED patterns for the as-deposited films evidence a short-range ordering, characteristic of the amorphous alloys The observed SAED patterns are coherent with the XRD measurements, indicating the predominance of the Fe 3 Si phase. The particle size distribution (PSD) were obtained by analyzing various TEM images for each sample. This distribution is highly asymmetric. The mean grain D size value was obtained by fitting the PSD to a lognormal distribution. These values are presented in Table TEM analysis revealed the absence of Cu clusters, and the literature suggests that in the optimized microstructure, Cu clusters are typically enveloped by FeSi nanocrystals Figure The internal region exhibited a clear crystalline pattern, and fast Fourier transform indexing analysis revealed Fe 3 Si phase (Fig. As expected, heat treatment at these temperatures resulted in a substantial reduction in the coercive field for all treated samples compared to the asdeposited ones. The 160 nm sample, treated at 490 °C, exhibited the lowest observed coercive field (0.51 Oe). Furthermore, all 160 nm treated samples showed sub-Oe coercivities. On the other hand, for 80 nm samples the lowest coercive field was 1.13 Oe for 500 °C heat treatment. Heat treatment also resulted in the elimination of uniaxial anisotropy and an increase in effective magnetization. This later effect is expected due the effect of the nanocrystallization process and the corresponding quenching of magnetocrystalline anisotropy. The obtained coercivity values are still far form the ultra-low coercivities (0.007 Oe) obtained in bulk ribbons, but seem to be good progress when compared to typical values reported in the literature, particularly for 160nm thick films Selected magnetization curves are presented in Fig. The magnetic parameters of as-deposited films exhibit a notable disparity The curves where measured in-plane at two perpendicular angles (0o and 90o). between 80 nm and 160 nm samples, primarily attributable to variations in film thickness. In particular, the lower effective magnetization for 80 nm can be correlated to the higher out-of-plane anisotropy seen in the magnetization curves. This aligns with expectations, as out-of-plane anisotropy is commonly tied to surface interactions and surface roughness effects, showing dependence on film thickness. The effective magnetization obtained by broadband FMR in the studied samples is larger than the saturation magnetization reported in the literature. Yoshizawa In summary, in this work, we were able to produce nanocrystallized Fe-CuNbSiB films with a very good microstructure of nanograins in an amorphous matrix containing nanocrystallites of Fe 3 Si with sizes between 11 nm and 15 nm, as observed by TEM and XRD. No Cu clusters were observed by TEM. Also, there was a variation in the lattice parameter of the Fe 3 Si phase, possibly due to small fluctuations in the atomic percentage of dissolved silicon in the unit cell. Interestingly, sub-Oe coercivity was observed for the thicker films, 160 nm, but not for 80 nm. These results may indicate a relationship between magnetostriction and film thickness or effects of surface interactions and surface roughness. A residual FeSi 2 phase observed in XRD and TEM analyses did not influence the magnetic properties of the samples, given its residual content. From the results obtained in this study with thin films of FeCuNbSiB, it is clear that the crystallization of the Fe 3 Si phase led to an increase in effective magnetization after the thermal treatments at the temperatures employed, indicating a significant microstructural change. The effective magnetization measured by broadband FMR resulted in values larger than the ones reported in the literature. This may be an indication that our sputtering target have more iron than expected, or some kind of strange anysotropy was developed in our sample with the synthesis and annealing processes. EDS studies performed on the sputtering targets and produced films have not indicated any extra iron content. This is a point to be further addressed in our work.