The rise of soft materials and additive manufacturing has provided the feasibility of developing elastomer lattices for various engineering applications. Although earlier attempts have been made to manufacture and test the elastomer lattices, a comprehensive understanding of their fracture behaviour has remained elusive. Inspired by the soft foams in mussel plaque core, the present study introduces the concept of soft, ductile, and tough elastomer lattices. Uniaxial and planar tension tests were conducted, and numerical models were developed to facilitate data interpretation. The applicability of planar tension for measuring the fracture energy of elastomer lattices was confirmed through tensile tests using samples with various crack lengths and doublepeeling tests. The proposed elastomer lattices achieved Young's module of 0.04 ∼ 0.17 MPa, failure strain of 135.5 ∼ 213.9%, and fracture energy of 582 ∼ 941 J/m 2 by manipulating the volume fraction (20 ∼ 50%), positioning them as softer, more ductile, and tougher than the majority of engineering foams in the Ashby diagram. In addition, the fracture energy of the elastomer lattices was sensitive to volume fraction but insensitive to initial crack length, thickness, and height (≥ 20 mm). Notably, two distinct failure modes, truss failure and joint failure, were correlated with volume fraction. The specimens that failed at the transition between these two failure modes achieve a higher fracture energy. This study provides new insights to the materials science community and provides a foundation for the development of lightweight, damage-tolerant, and high-performance metamaterials. Nature is the main source of inspiration for the design of architected metamaterials. Extensive studies have been conducted to develop high-performance metamaterials by mimicking hierarchical microstructures in a biological system. For example, deep-sea hexactinellid sponges inspired diagonal-braced lattice structure was developed to reinforce buckling resistance To date, a few seminal attempts have been made to manufacture stretchable three-dimensional (3D) lattices using hyperplastic materials. These endeavors fall into two distinct categories. The first group focusses on the creation of stretchable lattices using the direct 3D printing method. For example, Ge et al. Inspired by the soft foams in the marine mussel plaque, the present study developed soft, ductile, and tough lattices using ultraviolet-curable elastomers, as shown in Fig. The elastomer lattices were manufactured by a liquid crystal display (LCD) printer (Phrozen Sonic Mighty 8K) using a clear photo-polymer resin (Liqcreate Elastomer-X). The lattice models were designed using a MATLAB-based package (FLatt Pack Program 4 × 4 × 4 mm body-centred cubic (BCC) unit cells with various volume fractions (20 ∼ 50%) were employed to manufacture elastomer lattices, as shown in Figs. Uniaxial tests were conducted on Instron 5900R84 (10 kN load cell) to determine the mechanical properties of bulk material and elastomer lattices. Quasi-static tension and compression were performed using displacement control at a strain rate of 0.001/s. A charge-coupled device (CCD) camera was configured at a special resolution of 100 pixels/mm and frame rate of 0.1 fps to capture the specimen deformation in response to tensile loads. The uniaxial properties of the bulk material were determined using standard tension and compression samples according to ASTM D412 where ρ l and ρ s denote the densities of the elastomer lattice and the bulk materials, respectively. Fracture energy of the elastomer lattices was determined under planar tensions using the Instron 5900R84 where, U(H c ) is the work done by the applied force of un-notched specimen, and H c denotes the critical distance between the clamps of notched specimen, as shown in Fig. In this paper, tensile strain and stress for notched and un-notched specimens using following convention where, ∆H o is the elongation of the samples, and F defined as the reaction force recorded by the load cell. The crack length of the notched specimen was normalised by 3. Numerical simulation To simulate the mechanical behaviour of the bulk elastomer, the experimental results measured from uniaxial tension and compression were fitted into the three-order Ogden's model where λk are distortional principal stretches which can be calculated from principal stretches (λ k ) by λk = J -1/3 λ k , N is the order of the strain energy potential (N = 3), k is the index of summation (k = 1, 2, 3), J is the elastic volume strain, J = λ 1 λ 2 λ 3 , and μ k and α k are the material constants. Principal strains governed failure was employed to capture the fracture behavior of the elastomer where ε eq is the equivalent strain. ε 1 and ε 2 are the principal strains. ε yy and ε xx are the engineering strain in loading and transverse directions, respectively. γ xy denotes the shear strain in the xy plane. Uniaxial tensile tests for bulk elastomer were repeated five times, as shown in Fig. In addition to Eq.3, two other methods proposed by Rivlin and Thomas The force and displacement curves of notched specimens were obtained by loading the specimens to ultimate failure. The total energy U stored in the notched samples at different levels of elongation (∆H o ) was calculated by the area under the force and displacement curve. The total energy U of notched specimens was plotted with various crack lengths to determine the slope of the curve ∂U ∂a , namely strain energy release rate per unit crack length, as shown Fig. Second, double peeling tests were also implemented numerically to further verify the accuracy of the fracture energy. Figures In the present study, the fracture energy determined by Eq. 3 was verified by above two methods, namely notched samples with various initial crack sizes using Eq. 10 and double peeling tests using Eq. 11. For the former method, notched samples with various initial crack lengths can be used to either planar tension or double peeling test. Full-scale and three-dimensional (3D) finite element models were developed to study the tensile and fracture mechanics of elastomer lattices using the commercial FE solver ABAQUS/Explicit. The elastomer lattices were modelled with 8-node 3D linear brick elements with a reduced integration scheme (C3D8R elements). The properties of the materials were modeled using the incompressible Ogden model, as mentioned in Section 3.1. Since the elastomer lattices are highly stretchable, truss structure may contact each other under large deformations. Therefore, general contact using frictionless tangential behaviour and 'hard' contact normal behaviour were defined to model the contact between the trusses. Both uniaxial and pure shear tests used the same boundary conditions, fixing a clapping end and applying a monotonically increased displacement at the free end. Mesh convergence tests were conducted to ensure that the results of the numerical simulations were independent of the mesh density. Various mesh sizes, ranging from a global mesh size of 0.1 to 0.8 mm, were tested, and the global mesh size of 0.2 mm was selected for numerical simulations. To ensure that the simulations capture the quasi-static responses of the system, the loading rate was controlled to ensure that the kinetic energy of the system was within 5% of the internal energy. Figure The mechanical properties of elastomer lattices were compared with available materials in Ashby diagram. Figure The effects of initial crack length on fracture energy were investigated using notched specimens with various normalised crack lengths (ā = 0.13 ∼ 0.80). Figure Notably, failure strain remains consistent, independent of crack length, with all notched specimens failing at strains between 1.12 and 1.36. Figure Although the fracture energies measured from experiments fluctuate with increasing crack length, they agreed well with the FE simulations. The discrepancies between the FE simulations and the experiments are less than 20%, which is within the acceptable level (±30%) recommended by Rivlin and Thomas Consequently, the normalized crack length within the range of 0.27 to 0.67 ensures consistent measurements in fracture energy. shows that the fracture energy remained nearly constant (around 720 J/m 2 ) as the thickness increased. Figure In addition, the notched specimens were modeled using various initial heights Figure Notched and unnotched elastomer lattices were studied numerically and experimentally to investigate the effects of volume fraction on fracture energy. Figures Although the fracture energy is marginally lower than that of solid soft tissue and elastomers, the proposed elastomer lattices approach the lower boundary of these benchmarks while maintaining a significantly lower density. Marine mussel plaque-inspired soft, ductile, and tough lattices have been successfully developed, manufactured, and tested. The main conclusions drawn from the present work are summarised as follows. • Quasi-static uniaxial tensile tests were performed on elastomer lattices with volume fractions from 0.2 to 0.5. Both the FE and experimental results indicate that Young's modulus and tensile strength exhibit an upward trend, while failure strain experiences a downward trend with an increase in volume fraction. • The applicability of the Rivlin and Thomas • The effects of sample dimensions and volume fractions on the fracture energy of the proposed elastomer lattices were investigated. It was found that the fracture energy is insensitive to initial crack length, thickness, and height (H o ≥ 20 mm). Two distinct failure modes, truss failure and joint failure, were correlated with volume fraction. The elastomer lattice with a 40% volume fraction was found to fail at the transition of these two failure modes and achieve the highest fracture energy. • Inspired by marine mussel plaque, lattice structures manufactured by elastomers provide remarkable softness, ductility, and toughness. Through the manipulation of volume fraction, the proposed elastomer lattices achieved Young's module of 0.04 ∼ 0.17 MPa, failure strain of 135.5% ∼ 213.9%, and fracture energy of 582 ∼ 941 J/m 2 . These properties positioned the elastomer lattices as highly softer, more ductile, and tougher than most engineering foams in the Ashby diagram.