We develop a theory of the propagation and focusing of the THz Gaussian laser beam through the layered superconductor slab of finite thickness in the presence of an external DC magnetic field in a nonlinear regime. We show that, in this case, focusing of radiation, which results from the specific nonlinearity of the medium, can be flexibly tuned by the external magnetic field providing a new way to control THz waves. We analytically study the main characteristics of the Gaussian beam, its waist, and the focusing distance as the functions of wave frequency, amplitude, and the external magnetic field. The results of analytic calculations are supported by the numerical simulation of the electromagnetic field distribution in the slab. THz radiation has been intensively studied during the last decades having a lot of applications in communication technologies, imaging, and medicine Layered superconductors are periodic structures, in which superconducting layers are separated by the insulating ones. The examples include natural layered superconductors, such as Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ , and artificial structures, for example, Nb/Al -AlO x /Nb Recently layered superconducting slabs were proposed to focus the THz Gaussian laser beams The paper is organized as follows. In the second section, we describe our theoretical model and setup. In the third section, we study the effect of the external DC field on the main optical characteristics of laser beam focusing: the beam waist (its minimal radius) and the focal length. The subsection A of this section is devoted to the analytical approach, and in subsection B we present numerical simulation results which we compare with those obtained analytically. In the fourth section, we summarize the obtained results. In this paper, we study the transmission of a laser beam through a layered superconducting slab of thickness 2d in the external DC magnetic field ⃗ H dc = H dc ⃗ e y arXiv:2401.17506v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 30 Jan 2024 in geometry presented in the Fig. The distribution of the electric field for a Gaussian beam of frequency ω propagating along the x axis in vacuum is as follows with the phase Φ v depending on coordinates and time, where r 2 = z 2 + y 2 . The wave number k v obeys the dispersion relation for vacuum, k v = ω/c. The amplitude E 0 , the radius r c , the Gouy phase φ, and the wavefront curvature α slowly change along the beam path, i.e. these characteristics of the beam are functions of x. Formally, Eqs. ( at the focal distance F , see Fig. B. Gaussian Beam in Layered Superconductor in the Presence of a Weak DC Magnetic Field To describe the beam propagation inside the sample (-d < x < d) we employ the well-known coupled sine-Gordon equation for the phase difference of the order parameter φ between neighboring layers in the continuum approximation, which can be presented as follows where ω J is the Josephson plasma frequency; λ ab and λ c = c/(ω J √ ε) are the London penetration depths along and across the layers, respectively; ε is the dielectric constant of the interlayer gaps; c is the speed of light. The electric and magnetic fields inside the sample can be expressed in terms of φ Here H c = Φ 0 /(πsλ c ) is the critical field in layered superconductor, Φ 0 = πcħ/e is the magnetic flux quantum, and s is the period of the layered structure. As one can see, Eq. ( We consider static input in Eq. ( The main term in Eq. ( which has a well-known solution describing the Josephson vortex. For relatively weak DC magnetic fields, H dc < H c , and not too thin slabs, exp(-d/λ c ) ≪ 1, we can expressed the stationary solution φ s as two "tails" of Josephson vortices, The terms containing φ w in Eq. ( nonlinear term φ 3 w becomes crucial. In Refs. which is solved in the following section. Note that in the latter equation, we neglect the second derivatives over y and z. They turn out to be small in comparison to the other terms in Eq. ( The beam propagating in the superconducting slab reflects on each of the two interfaces, which, strictly speaking, leads to the multiple reflections and the possible loss of the Gaussian profile of the resulting beam. However, as was shown in Ref. Under this assumption, we can represent the electric field in the sample as a superposition of two Gaussian beams, propagating forwards (index "+") and backwards (index "-"), with phases In the following section, we derive expressions for amplitudes E ± , curvatures α ± , and phases φ ± , as well as for the wave numbers k ± (r). Here we derive the analytic expression for the curvature α t of the transmitted beam as well as the relations between the amplitudes of the beam inside and outside the slab of layered superconductor. In the first step, we describe the beam deeply inside the slab where the DC magnetic field is negligible and we can exploit the approach developed in Ref. As stated in the previous section, the DC magnetic field fades exponentially with distance from the surfaces of the slab, penetrating in the form of the "tails" of Josephson vortices, see Eq. that is fulfilled at a distance of several λ c from the surfaces. Inside this region, the parameters of the laser beam described by Eqs. ( 8κ where k s obeys the dispersion law for linear waves in a superconductor: Note that Eqs. ( Near the boundaries of the sample, where the DC magnetic field penetrates as "tails" of the Josephson vortex, the factor (1 -cos φ s ) in Eq. ( To solve that equation we expand it with respect to r 2 ≪ r 2 0 and keep only up to quadratic terms. The higher terms give contributions to the deviations from the Gaussian profile of the laser beam which are small in the nonlinear regime defined by Eq. where E ± , φ ± , and α ± are constant far from the sample interfaces, where the DC magnetic field is small. Note that Eqs. where the dash denotes the derivative with respect to the variable x. Although the phase itself depends on x, the phase deviations φ ± (d) -φ ± (-d) over the entire sample is of order of small parameter β and can be neglected: (21) Similarly, the same can be shown for the curvatures α ± (x). So, we can consider the phases φ ± and curvatures α ± to be constant along the x coordinate as stated in Eq. For the magnetic component of the beam field (directed along the y axis), we derive from Eq. ( where Note that the first and second summands in the square brackets are calculated using Eqs. ( Now we relate laser beams in vacuum regions, incident and reflected ones for x = -d, and a transmitted one for x = d, with the beams inside the superconducting plate. For this purpose, we match the tangential components of the electric and magnetic fields at the two interfaces between the vacuum and the superconductor. The quantities sought in the problem are amplitudes E r/t/± , phases φ r/t/± , and curvatures α r/t/± of the beams propagating in forward and backward directions both in vacuum and superconductor regions, 12 quantities in total. The parameters of the incident beam are assumed to be known, E i , φ i = 0, and α i = 0. To obtain a set of 12 equations for the required quantities, we expand the expressions for the fields into series in radius r and keep the terms up to the second order, because we neglect the non-Gaussian deviations produced by the higher order terms. Moreover, since k ± λ c ∼ β and √ ε ∼ 1, the amplitudes of the magnetic field are much smaller than those of the electric field, Therefore, we neglect the terms of order of r 2 in magnetic field and keep only the main order. As a result, we get the required set of 12 equations. Eliminating the phases φ r/t/± , curvatures α r/± , and am-plitudes E r/t , we derive two equations relating amplitudes E ± with the incident amplitude E i , and expression for the curvature α t of the transmitted beam, where γ = (γ and factor χ depends only on the DC field magnitude: The parameters κ ± , magnetic H ± and electric E ± field amplitudes are related by a set of nonlinear algebraic equations ( Thus, the developed theoretical approach allows to obtain the focal distance F and the beam waist radius r min for the transmitted beam from Eqs. ( This estimation for the parameters used in Fig. Consider now the beam waist radius r min as the function of frequency and DC magnetic field magnitude. Figure Finally, as was discussed, the focusing ability of the layered superconductor relies on non-linear equations for the wave field. This obviously implies that the focusing parameters depend on the amplitude of the incident beam. We demonstrate this in Fig. To verify the presented analytic results, we conducted a numerical simulation of the beam field in the layered superconductor slab. The motivation behind was to check the assumptions that (i) the beam preserves a Gaussian profile in both the y and z directions; (ii) the higher-order terms in sine-Gordon equation and higher harmonics are negligible. So the comparison of the results obtained from simulation and analytic theory determines whether these effects potentially influence the entire beam propagation. The simulation consisted in solving the sine-Gordon equation ( Before simulating the beam propagation, we established the stationary phase φ s inside the slab according to Eq. Green dotted line in Fig. We have developed theory of the propagation of a Gaussian laser beam through the layered superconductor plate placed in an external DC magnetic field. Due to the specific non-linearity of equations describing electromagnetic field in the slab, it can focus Gaussian beam. The DC magnetic field penetrates the plate non-uniformly and creates a non-linear background for the propagation of the THz beam in the plate that allows tuning the focusing parameters of the plate by varying the external DC field. We show that depending on the parameters of the problem, a non-zero magnetic field can lead to both strong focusing and defocusing of the laser beam. The use of the DC magnetic field can be a more convenient way of tuning the focusing of the laser beam than by changing its frequency. Presented analytic calculations are confirmed by numerical simulation.