Polar nematic liquid crystals are new classes of condensed-matter states where the inversion symmetry common to the traditional apolar nematics is broken. Establishing theoretical descriptions for the novel phase states is an urgent task. Here, we develop a Landau-type meanfield theory for both the achiral and chiral ferroelectric nematics. In the polar nematic states, the inversion symmetry breaking adds two new contributions: an additional odd elastic term (corresponding to the flexoelectricity in symmetry) to the standard Oseen-Frank free energy and an additional Landau term relating to the gradient of local polarisation. As a general necessity, the coupling between the scalar order parameter and polarisation order is further considered. In the chiral and polar nematic state, we reveal that the competition between the twist elasticity and polarity dictates effective compressive energy arising from the quasi-layer structure. The polarisation gradient is an essential term for describing the ferroelectric nature of the systems. The approaches provide theoretical foundations for testing and predicting polar structures in emerging polar liquid crystals. After the first discovery of ferroelectric liquid crystal (LC) states in the smectic C* phase several decades ago Especially in the NF, long-pitch HN*, and SmAF states, the macroscopic inversion symmetry breaking occurs, i.e., n ≠ -n Practically, the realization of the polar states is made by introducing strong dipole moments to rodshaped molecules As extensions of the traditional NLC theory In the previous studies, how the spontaneous breaking of the inversion symmetry leads to a natural modification of the nematic elastic properties is not clear. In addition, how the extended freeenergy functionals would benefit to or connect to experimental measurement is not given. In this article, we derive the elastic and Landau free-energy functionals from the perspective of symmetry for the NF and HN* states and establish the free-energy descriptions for the systems. We compare the properties between the N and NF states and between the apolar chiral nematic (N*) and HN* states. The theoretical foundation makes it possible to explore potential polar states and topologies more accurately and could be extended for polar smectic states. Free-energy functional for NF state -Let us first discuss how the Oseen-Frank elastic free-energy functionals in the typical apolar N state would be revised in the NF state. We consider the director n at the origin aligns along the z-axis. We assume that the director field exhibits a continuous variation, and n deviates from the z-axis at a position slightly away from the origin defined by a displacement vector δr = (δx, δy, δz), The director is expressed as ) . ( a 1 and a 5 describe the splay deformation in the xz and yz planes, respectively. a 2 and -a 4 the twist deformation, and a 3 and a 6 the bend deformation (Figs. ) should be nonzero to make an orientational deformation. Learn from Hooke's Law, that the free-energy density arising from the orientational deformation, f , is represented by a power series of the gradient of the director field, a i . Up to the second power, by Einstein's summation convention. K i and K ij are the nematic elastic constants for the firstorder and second-order power series expansions. When particular coefficients remain under a specific symmetry, the corresponding elastic deformation modes would be allowed. To derive the free-energy density expression for the NF state, it is convenient to argue the energy invariance under coordinate transformation. Let us consider a coordinate transformation: (x, y, z) → (x′, y′, z′) . The orientational deformation a i ( i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ) in the new coordination re-reads a i ′ (i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). Then, the free-energy density can be also re-written as Recall that, in the apolar N state, the D ∞h symmetry permits the director field to cover half of the S 1 /Z2 order parameter space (Figs. Meanwhile, Eqs. (2) and (3) should give the same free-energy value upon arbitrary coordinate transformations in the corresponding point groups. In the following, we show four cases of coordinate transformations to find nonzero K i and K ij coefficients in the NF state: (1) π rotation about z-axis (Fig. (4) π rotation about x-axis (Fig. In case (1), (x, y, z) → (x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) = (-x, -y, z) leads to the corresponding director variation n = (n x , n y , n z ) → n ′ = (n x ′ , n y ′ , n z ′ ) = (-n x , -n y , n z ). According to the definitions of a i (Eq. ( Worth noting that while the K ij matrix is common to the N state, the K i matrix differs from that in the N state, where no odd term exists (K 2 vanishes because of the invariance upon (x, y, z) → (x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) = (-x, -y, -z) ). The nonzero K 1 and K 4 = K 1 means that the odd terms of δn x /δx and δn y /δy regarding 'directional' splay deformation modes survive. This makes a significant distinction to the N state, where the lowest order for the splay deformation is (δn i /δi) 2 , saying that any splay deformation is free-energy costing. In the NF state, the splay deformation could be free-energy favourable in a spontaneous manner when the odd term (say "positive" splay) becomes negative. This scenario, naturally derived from the symmetry argument, is consistent with proceeding theoretical predictions The last term does not contribute to the bulk free energy, corresponding to the saddle-splay deformation. The bulk elastic free energy function can also be turned into the expression: The leading term that couples to the divergence of the director field indicate a preference for a "positive" splay (so K 1 < 0), where the free-energy density becomes negative. In real symmetrybroken systems, the polar symmetry can be given by introducing large dipole or asymmetric shape anisotropy (e.g., pearl-shape) As well as the elastic energy, the stability of a polar state should be determined by the Landau free energy. An important feature of the NF state is that the ferroelectric ordering dislikes any distortion of the polarisation field, which is usually described in the Ising model by setting a negative coefficient for the Hamiltonian H = JP i P j ; (P i and P j are the adjacent polarisation and J < 0 for ferroelectrics) Then, to the lowest orders, we can write the Landau free-energy density as: ∇P term includes the splay, twist and bend polarisation deformations. The first two terms of Eq. (8) are common to the descriptions for many ferroelectrics Finally, we must also include the free-energy density arising from polar interactions. As discussed in the elastic terms, the additional first-order term of the director gradient physically corresponds to the flexoelectricity ( -γn(∇ • n) • P ), which is essential to determine the polarisation alignment and topology in the NF and HN* states near the apolar-polar transition point E d is the depolarisation field, which can be solved by using the Poisson's equation, σ d = -∇ • P is the depolarisation charge density. ε is the dielectric constant of the material. Φ is the depolarisation potential. Though, usually, f dep cannot be solved analytically, the aforementioned polarisation works as a rough for accounting for the penalization of the splay deformation. Therefore, for analytical usage, one can choose to include the electrostatic interaction in the polarisation gradient energy by using with an additional electrostatic coefficient. While it is a rude approximation, it is satisfactory to some extent for reproducing some topological nature in the NF state in the previous report However, this form can only analyse energy landscape under the constant scalar order parameter ( s ) and polarisation ( P 0 ) condition, which would be problematic for conducting theoretical analyses and numerical simulations that allow variations of the scalar order parameter and the magnitude of the polarisation. The main issue here is the need for the coupling between the nematic director and polarisation field, i.e., s and P 0 vary independently. In the simplest case where the dipolar interaction is the dominant factor for giving rise to the (polar) nematic order, it is expected that the scalar order parameter of the nematicity is proportional to the magnitude of the polarisation. It means that the polarisation magnitude should change accordingly once the nematic order parameter changes. Under this condition, a polar nematic phase appears directly from the isotropic phase without going into an apolar nematic phase. To account for this situation, we revise both the expressions of n and P. The modification of n is similar to the Ericksen expressions Free-energy functional for HN* state -Next, we move to discuss the free energy for the chiral ferroelectric state, i.e., the HN* state. As we already obtained the free-energy formulation for the NF state, the extended Oseen-Frank theory can be used to describe the HN* state by simply adding chiral terms. The equilibrium structures of the N* or HN* state are periodic twists around a helical axis (Figs. so that the HN* state with a pure twisted deformation of period 2π/q 0 is at the equilibrium. For helical LCs (e.g., N* and HN*), the twists can also be treated as quasi-layers (Fig. The first term represents the compression energy originating from the quasi-layer nature of the elastic helix, penalizing the layer compression or dilation (or director bend). B is the compression modulus for the quasi-layer and u is the displacement of the quasi-layer. The second term describes the energy payment upon a bending of quasi-layers bending of the quasi-layers. K is the layer bending (or effective director splay) modulus. This expression was already used in our previous report To obtain a simpler polarity-elasticity coupled equation, we consider an effective elastic term and a compression term to comprise the free-energy density as: K ̃ and B ̃ are the effective elastic and compression coefficients, respectively. χ is a unit vector along the helical axis. p and p 0 represent the actual and equilibrium pitch lengths for the N* or HN* systems, respectively. This expression is practical because real measurements probe the effective elasticity and compression modulus, where the contributions from the nematic elasticity and polar interactions are already included. Therefore, the central issue now is to derive the expression of K ̃ and B ̃, which should link to both the polarity and the nematic elasticity for polar states. To make a full comparison with the traditional apolar N* state, we show step-by-step derivations of K ̃ and B ̃ for both the N* and HN* states in the following. As a general approach, we separately derive the expressions for K ̃ and B ̃, corresponding to focusing on either the bending or the dilation of quasi-layers (Fig. Then, we obtain B ̃= s 4 K 22 q 0 2 for the N* state. The effective quasi-layer compression coefficient B ̃ is related to the equilibrium pitch of the helical director fields. In the high-orderparameter limit of s = 1, B ̃= K 22 q 0 2 , consistent with the classic solution θ is the azimuth angle in the plane perpendicular to the r-axis. Since the pitch of the system does not change under the pure bending mode, the condition of θ(r + p 0 ) ≡ θ(r) has to be met. Then, only the elastic term in the Lubensky-de Gennes form survives, i.e., In the Oseen-Frank form, the corresponding free energy term is When the bending deformation is just at the onset with an infinite radius of curvature, the approximation q 0 r ≫ 1 is valid. In the near equilibrium state, the first term in Eq. ( In the HN* state, the polar terms in the extended Oseen- Then, one can easily see that the equilibrium pitch length of the HN* state is elongated by the polarisation gradient interaction (q e < q 0 ), as illustrated in Fig. 