The high-pressure and high-temperature thermodynamic properties of iridium are studied using density functional theory in combination with the quasi-harmonic approximation, where both the contributions to the free energy of phonons and of electronic excitations are considered. The reliability of different exchange and correlational functionals [Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (PBE) (Perdew et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996)), PBE modified for dense solids (PBEsol) (Perdew et al. Phys. Rev. B 100, 136406 (2008)) and local density approximation (LDA) (Perdew et al. Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981))], for studying the equation of state (EOS), the phonon dispersions, the mode-Grüneisen parameter, and different thermodynamic properties like thermal pressure, volume thermal expansivity, isobaric heat capacity, bulk modulus, and the average Grüneisen parameter are tested. Elastic constants are studied at T=0 K as a function of pressure. The predicted results are compared with the available experiments and previous theoretical data. We find generally a good agreement with experiments with at least one functional, but none of the three outperforms the others in all the investigated thermodynamic properties. The electronic excitations contribution is minimal in bulk modulus, but it is significant for other thermodynamic properties. Only next to the hexagonal close-packed osmium (Os), face-centered cubic (fcc) iridium (Ir) is a second-dense material on the periodic table with the third-highest bulk modulus after diamond and Os Recently, Luo et al. The use of density functional theory (DFT) within the quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA) to accurately study the thermodynamic properties complements the molecular dynamics up to 2/3 rd of the melting temperature Moreover, despite having many reports studying some particular property with varying models and approximations, a complete description of the thermodynamic properties of iridium under extreme conditions using the same theoretical method is unavailable. In the present work, we study and compare the anharmonic thermodynamic properties like thermal expansion, isobaric heat capacity, bulk modulus, and thermodynamic average Grüneisen parameter within the QHA using three functionals and consider the role of electronic excitation. Finally, the performance of different functionals under HPHT conditions is discussed. The calculations shown in the present work use Thermo_pw Fig. smearing approach Fig. The experimental data from high-pressure compressive experiments and the theoretical predictions of different techniques are compared with the present work's EOS. We observe that the DAC experiments carried out at room temperature by Yusenko et al. Similarly, while comparing our EOS at 301 K and 2998 K, the experimental data and the fitted 3 rd order Birch-Murnaghan EOS (3 rd -BM-EOS) of Anzellini et al. The theoretical prediction made by Luo et al. However, EOS calculated by Han et al. of Montesuguro et al. We fitted the free energy with the 4 th -order BM equation to calculate the equilibrium lattice constant (a0) from the equilibrium volume (V0), the bulk modulus (B T ), and its pressure derivative (B T ′ ). Table Table The equilibrium bulk modulus at 300 K is compared with the experimental studies of Anzellini et al. 3.877(PAW) 3.891(PAW) 3.887(LAPW) 3.876(US) 3.843(PAW) 3.851(PAW) 3.847(LAPW) 3.819(PAW) 3.829(PAW) 3.828(FLAPW) 3.815(LMTO) 360 342(PAW) 348.8(PAW) 361 (US) 387.9(PAW) 401(PAW) 377(PAW) 406.1(PAW) 402.7(LMTO) Expt (300 K): 5.2(ae) 5.2(ae) 5.1(PAW) 4.8(LMTO) Comparing the three functionals, we notice that for the system near the equilibrium, PBEsol lies in between PBE and LDA, whereas for the compressed system, all three functionals collapse on a single curve. Furthermore, the EEC on the thermal pressure is studied for each functional, and the dependence of Pth with temperature without EEC is shown for PBE in Fig. The variation of volume thermal expansion coefficient () with the temperature at 0 GPa and 300 GPa is presented in Fig. Temperature-dependent volumetric thermal expansion () obtained for LDA, PBEsol, and PBE at 0 GPa and 300 GPa. The electronic excitation contribution (EEC) to the  at 0 GPa, and 300 GPa is shown. The experimental data (symbols) from Arblaster Fig. On comparing with the experimental data from Arblaster Halvorson et al. EEC at 300 GPa P = 0 GPa The LDA result of Grabowski et al. Moreover, in Fig. The rate of decrease in CP (dCP/dP) with an increase in pressure depends on the temperature, as illustrated in Fig. The isoentropic (BS) and the isothermal (BT) bulk moduli for the three functionals at 0 and 300 GPa are reported in Fig. This decrease in Bi depends on the pressure. For all the functionals, at 0 GPa, the decrease in BS and BT (dBi/dT) from 0 K to 2000 K is ~ 0.3 GPa/K and ~ 0.5 GPa/K, respectively, whereas at 300 GPa, the dBi/dT becomes ~ 0.1 GPa/K and ~ 0.2 GPa/K, respectively. It is noted that on neglecting the EEC (not shown in Fig. At 300 K, the experimental bulk modulus studied by Cynn et al. The phonon frequencies shown here are interpolated at 301 K, starting from those calculated on the 15 geometries. The dispersion agrees with Ref. Phonon dispersions curve at 301 K (z,0, In Fig. using DFT with ultrasoft pseudopotentials and LDA, remains reasonably constant. When compared, we found that our values (for LDA) are overestimated by 4.2 % at 300 K and 6 % at 823 K. The overestimation is expected to be due to different technical ingredients. Further, the result of Singh Moreover, the nature of the material, whether brittle or ductile, can be studied by studying the Cauchy pressure We studied the thermodynamic properties of iridium using the DFT within the QHA, where both the phonon and electronic excitation contributions in the free energy are considered. Three popular S1: Comparison of thermodynamic properties of iridium obtained using Δa = 0.1 a.u. (15 geometries) and Δa = 0.2 a.u. (7 geometries) in quasi-harmonic approximation: The main article evaluates the thermodynamic properties like the thermal expansion coefficient by differentiating the free energy (F) considered on 15 geometries (i.e. Δa = 0.1 a.u.). Here, we assessed the free energy starting from the second geometry and doubling the step (Δa = 0.2 a.u.), resulting in 7 geometries. The comparison between the free energy (F), volume thermal expansion (β), isobaric heat capacity (CP), bulk modulus (B), and thermodynamic average Grüneisen parameter (γ) obtained from 15 and 7 geometries for PBEsol are shown in Fig. • Free Energy: S2: Comparison between phonon dispersion obtained using different k-point and q-point mesh: Fig. The phonon dispersion interpolated at T=0 K using 16 × 16 × 16 k-points mesh and 4 × 4 × 4 q-points mesh is presented in Fig. 