Spherosilicate, consisting of a double 4-ring cyclosilicate core (D4R; Si8O20) with every corner functionalized with a dimethylsilyl chloride group (-SiMe2Cl), was used as node to construct an iso-reticular series of porous expanded network materials. Interconnecting the nodes with linear, aliphatic α,ω-alkanediol linker molecules yields PolySilicate Porous Organic Polymers (PSiPOPs), a new type of ordered reticular material related to the well-known metal-organic and covalent organic frameworks (MOFs & COFs). In the synthesis, sacrificial hydrogen-bonded Si8O20 cyclosilicate crystals are first converted into silyl chloride terminated spherosilicate. In a second step, these nodes are linked up by alkanediol units via the intermediate formation of a Si-N bond with catalytic amines such as pyridine and dimethylformamide. Overall, the presented synthesis converts D4R cyclosilicate into an ordered reticular framework with [Si8O20]-[Si(CH3)2-]8 nodes and O-(CH2)n-O linkers. Example materials with ethylene glycol, 1,5-pentanediol, and 1,7heptanediol as linker (n = 2, 5, and 7) were produced and characterized. On a macroscopic level, the synthesis yields porous frameworks exhibiting a thermal stability up to 400°C and a chemical stability between pH 1 and 12. N2 physisorption revealed a secondary mesopore structure, indicating future options to produce hierarchical materials using soft templates. The molecular level structure of these reticular PSiPOP materials was elucidated using an NMR crystallography approach implementing a combination of 1D and 2D 1 H and 29 Si solid-state MAS NMR spectroscopy experiments. Previously reported reticular COF/POP materials implementing D4Rbased nodes, used Si8 octakis (phenyl) D4R POSS as a node, connecting it to the linker via a Si-C bond instead of a Si-O-C linkage. Reticular synthesis, interconnecting rigid metal oxide or lightweight non-metal element nodes with covalently bound, flexible, organic linker molecules, has yielded multiple families of crystalline porous materials (Figure aromatic C=N rings, covalently interlinked by organic molecules. SiCOFs, were synthesized with ionic, single-atom silicon centres (SiO6 2-or SiF6 2-octahedra, and SiO4R -) as nodes. as node in hybrid structures resembling MOFs. Exploiting chelating functionalities on the Rgroups of the SiR4 node, organic linkers were linked to the node through a metal ion coordinating both the SiR4 node and the linker. spherosilicate ([Si8O12][OSi(CH3)2Cl]8; 16 Si atoms) and implemented this unit as a node in the reticular synthesis of POSiSils, 3D amorphous silicate-silicone hybrid polymers (Figure All spherosilicate (dimethyl silyl chloride & dimethylsilyl pyridinium chloride) and PSiPOP syntheses were performed in an inert atmosphere using a standard schlenkline set-up in combination with a coldtrap and external heating bath. experiment was done at 20 kHz MAS using a CP contact of 6.5 ms and The synthesis of dimethylsilyl chloride spherosilicates has previously been reported by Smet et al. (2017). As first documented in 1957 by Allen et al., Evidence for the intermediate formation of a silylated quaternary ammonium transition state (Si-N) with pyridine was obtained by solid-state This combination of 2D NMR spectra readily proves the incorporation of diol linkers in the reticular network. Further evidence of the incorporation was provided by 1 H-1 H DQ-SQ MAS spectroscopy (Figure Instead of pyridine, In essence, this research introduces a promising avenue in the realm of reticular porous materials, expanding the field beyond the well-established metal organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs) and Porous Organic Polymers (POPs). The here presented synthesis of PSiPOPs hints at the possibility for implementing more rigid linker molecules and extending their functionalisation into a more polar chemistry. This could yield crystalline materials and provide options for tailoring their properties for various applications such as high-pressure gas storage, catalysis, and separation processes. The detailed insights gained into the molecular structure and mechanism of formation of the new PSiPOP family of materials paves the way for further advancements in their design and optimization. Si species detected with solid-state The absence of off-diagonal DQ correlations between the chemical shift region of silanol protons and the methyl protons of pentanediol in the 1 H- Per cube, each Si atom in the D-region (D 1 & D 2 ) of the Table SI-2. For each diol linker, their chemically resolved protons, and configuration, the 1 H ratio is calculated according to the deconvolution of the 1D to Detemplation of PSiPOP materials. PSiPOP materials with 1,5-pentanediol and 1,7heptanediol linkers were calcined in a u-tube flow oven under N2 atmosphere at 300°C with a rate of 1°C/min. The calcination temperature was kept for 2h before gradually being cooled to room temperature. Ethylene glycol PSiPOP was detemplated with 2 wash steps, using consecutively water and ethanol. After each step, PSiPOP powder was recovered with centrifugation (15 min at 15 000 rpm) or filtration and dried at ambient conditions after the last step.