Dynamic control of circular dichroism in photonic structures is critically important for compact spectrometers, stereoscopic displays, and information processing exploiting multiple degrees of freedom. Metasurfaces can help miniaturize chiral devices but only produce static and limited chiral responses. While external stimuli are able to tune resonances, their modulations are often weak, and reversing continuously the sign of circular dichroism is extremely challenging. Here, we demonstrate dynamically tunable chiral response of resonant metasurfaces supporting chiral bound states in the continuum combining them with phasechange materials. Phase transition between amorphous and crystalline phases allows to control chiral response and vary chirality rapidly from -0.947 to +0.958 backward and forward via chirality continuum. Our demonstrations underpin the rapid development of chiral photonics and its applications. Chirality refers to the property of an object or system that cannot be mapped to its mirror image by rotations and translations. Being different for molecules, chiroptical effects in nanophotonics arise from the interactions between structured materials and internal electromagnetic fields. Figure The mirror-reflection symmetry can be broken by introducing a vertical tilt with the angle . The slanted Si bar pairs redistribute their fields and induce an offset (d) between two effective dipoles. The coupling parameters of LCP and RCP waves (m) to a metasurface are proportional to sin(kd/2 ∓ θ). The offset makes different the coupling parameters and produces a chiral response (Supplementary Note-2). Figure For a fixed in-plane deformation parameter θ, the opposite signs of offsets of two resonances (Fig. To introduce tunability, we cover Si metasurface with a PCM layer of 30 nm. A change in refractive index of PCM during phase transition Based on the above analysis and numerical simulation, we fabricate the designed Si nano-bars with a combined process of electron-beam evaporation, electron-beam lithography, and reactive ion etching (Supplementary Note-3). The hybrid metasurface is characterized by a home-made microscope system (Supplementary Note-4). Figures Then the phase-changed metasurface is pumped optically by a 450 nm continuous wave (CW) laser with a pumping density of 41.7W/mm 2 . Under such an external stimulus, PCM switches from amorphous phase to crystalline phase and thus its refractive index changes (see Supplementary Note-1). Figures The phase-change metasurface has very good device repeatability. We have fabricated a series of metasurfaces and characterized their optical response. The resonant wavelengths vary a few nanometers due to fabrication deviations. However, the designed CD values are well reproduced and maintained at a high level. Figure For the case of tunable chirality, the reversibility is a critical characteristic. In our experiment, the thickness of Sb2S3 is only 30 nm and thus the intermediate states can be considered as a uniform layer with different refractive indices. The corresponding refractive indices are obtained by fitting the transmission spectra and plotted as dots (#1, 6) in Fig. In summary, we have combined the concepts of chiral quasi-BICs and phase-change materials to demonstrate hybrid resonant metasurfaces with the major functionalities to tune and reverse chiroptic response. By utilizing the inverse dependence of out-of-plane offset on asymmetry, we have achieved two resonances with maximum opposite chirality at the -point of the spectrum. We have demonstrated that optical chirality of the resonant metasurface can be tuned continuously and reversibly between two extreme values via the transition between amorphous and crystalline PCM phases, thus realizing chirality continuum. Our demonstrations suggest a new paradigm for chiral nanophotonics underpinning many practical applications such as dynamically controlled chiral emission, chiral detection, and chiral displays. Performance and potential applications can be boosted further by employing electric tunning at the pixel level. Both metasurface transmittance and its eigenfrequencies are analyzed with the finite-element numerical solver in COMSOL Multiphysics. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in the x and y directions to mimic the in-plane infinite size of metasurface, whereas perfectly matched layers are utilized in the z direction to absorb the outgoing waves. The dielectric constants of all layers are taken from the experimental results measured by ellipsometry. The sample is prepared using standard nanofabrication technology. Amorphous silicon is deposited on a K9 glass substrate with electron beam evaporation (SKE_A_75). Then PMMA A2 electron-beam (E-beam) resist is spin-coated the silicon film with a speed of 4000 rpm. The designed nanostructures are patterned in PMMA film with E-beam lithography (Raith, e-line plus) and then developed in MIBK: IPA=1:3 for 30s and IPA for 10s. After the realization of PMMA nanostructures, 20 nm chromium (Cr) is deposited via E-beam evaporation and the nanostructures are transferred to Cr layer by a standard lift-off process. Taking the Cr nanopattern as a hard mask, a slanted etching process of Si is performed using reactive ion etching (Oxford PlasmaPro 800). The tilt angle of nanostructure is controlled by the tilt stage and a Faraday cage. After removing Cr mask in chromium etchant solution for 5min, the tilted Si nano bars are obtained and then coated with 490 nm polyimide solution (PI-DMF) via a spincoating process under negative pressure. The samples are solidified on a hotplate at 250°C for 1h and further coated with an antimony sulfide film via thermal evaporation. At last, a SiO2 thin film is deposited as a protective layer using E-beam evaporation. The phase transition process is all-optically controlled. For the amorphous to crystalline transition, a continuous wave (CW) laser at 450nm is focused onto the sample through an objective lens (20X, NA = 0.4). The size of focused beam is scanned on the sample to realize the phase transition of entire sample. For the transition from crystalline to amorphous, the CW laser is replaced by a frequency doubled femtosecond laser (100 fs pulse width, 1 kHz repetition rate, 400 nm wavelength). Transmission spectra of metasurfaces are obtained with a standard setup. The circularly polarized incident beam is achieved by passing a supercontinuum laser (NKT) through a linear polarizer and a 1/4 waveplate. The incident light is focused by an objective lens (5X, NA = 0.12) on the sample, which is placed on a rotation translation stage. The transmitted beam is collected and collimated by the second objective lens (5X, NA = 0.12). The polarization components are analyzed by passing a linear polarizer and a 1/4 waveplate again and coupled to an infrared spectrometer (YOKOGAWA, AQ6370D). The angle-dependent transmission stage is achieved by rotating the sample with an angle resolution of 0.1 o . 