Recent developments in radiative cooling technologies have primarily focused on affordable paint coatings that are easy to fabricate and deploy. Using a systematic approach to obtain optimal parameters, a radiative cooling (RC) paint coating using titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is designed. The resulting paint exhibits a high solar reflectivity of 88.2 % (more than 94% in visible and NIR) and an emissivity of 92.4 %. Outdoor testing demonstrates a maximum reduction of 7.9 • C in the internal temperature of an RC paint-coated aluminium (Al) box compared to a bare Al box but in contrast to other studies, no sub-ambient cooling have been observed. In this context, a comprehensive analysis explaining the absence of sub-ambient cooling and underscore the importance of a standardized reporting methodology for RC paints has been discussed. Theoretical calculations suggest that the developed RC paint can achieve sub-ambient cooling (1-4 • C) under specific ambient conditions. As the global climate crisis continues to escalate, there is an urgent need for innovative and sustainable solutions to mitigate the adverse effects of rising temperatures and reduce energy consumption. In this pursuit, radiative cooling coatings have emerged as a promising avenue for enhancing passive cooling strategies in various applications, ranging from buildings and automobiles to electronic devices. These specialized coatings offer a sustainable, clean, and electricity-free cooling solution to counteract the urban heat island effect and reduce the dependence on energy-intensive and polluting air conditioning systems. Apart from effectively reflecting incoming solar radiation, these coatings are engineered to release thermal radiation in the long-wavelength infrared (LWIR) spectrum. This LWIR radiation has the unique ability to pass through the Earth's atmosphere via the transparency window, which spans the 8-13 μm wavelength range, and subsequently disperse into the cold depths of outer space. This phenomenon, known as passive radiative cooling, allows surfaces coated with such coatings to cool down significantly below ambient temperatures, even in the midst of intense sunlight. Theoretically, it can potentially reduce the temperature of a surface, passively, by 60 • C Materials such as TiO 2 In contrast to such materials, we use TiO 2 to develop a paint coating which can demonstrate passive daytime radiative cooling. Due to its high relative refractive index, it provides high reflectivity in visible and NIR with lesser volume fraction and thus provide longevity and durability compared to coatings with high band gap materials but lesser relative refractive index. We study and optimise the pigment particle size, its volume fraction, and the coating thickness to attain high solar reflectivity (R solar ), aided by our novel, highly efficient semi-analytical technique discussed in a previous publication In literature, the cooling performance of coatings for daytime RC is characterized by comparing the temperature of the coating to the ambient temperature during daytime. In fact, in outdoor tests, these designs report cooling by several degrees Celsius below ambient. The sub-ambient cooling is not only dependent on the radiative properties of the coating, and the prevelant environmental conditions, but also on the method adopted to characterise it. In most of the cases, the following practices have been adopted to report sub-ambient cooling: • A radiation shield box, open at the top, has been used increase the coating's sky view factor • Polyethylene (PE) cover has been used to cover the open side of the radiation shield box to eliminate non-radiative losses • Surface temperature of the coating is compared with the ambient temperature • Ambient temperature is measured by keeping the temperature sensor/thermocouple exposed to solar radiation and wind These practices can sometimes artificially elevate the recorded readings. For instance, PE covers used to eliminate non-radiative losses and thus provide a better representation of radiative cooling performance, have been observed to trap heat inside the radiation shield box, leading to air temperatures measuring as high as 60-70 • C In the following sections, we first discuss the design and performance characteristics of our coating, followed by a discussion on the challenges faced by the radiative cooling community in reporting investigation results. We analyze the impact of humidity and review current practices in reporting experimental tests, including the use of radiation shields and polyethylene covers to minimize convective losses, and the measurement of ambient temperature. Two very recent publications 2 Design, material and methods The design of a disordered coating involves optimizing several parameters, including the particle's radius and volume fraction, as well as the coating thickness. To model the radiative properties of the coating, we rely on the Kubelka-Munk (KM) theory and a semi-analytical technique (detailed further in supplementary notes). The design process proceeds in two stages: • The KM theory • With the optimized pigment particle size as a given input, the pigment volume fraction and the coating thickness are fine-tuned using our proprietary semi-analytical technique In the first stage the pigment volume fraction and coating thickness is kept constant at 5% and 1 mm, respectively. This low volume fraction avoids any dependent scattering, and the larger thickness ensures that reflective performance isn't affected by variations in its depth. Since TiO 2 absorbs in the ultraviolet range up to 0.39 μm, all reflectance calculations aimed at optimizing design parameters are carried out over the 0.4-3 μm spectrum. The complex refractive indices of TiO 2 and PDMS used in the simulation are given in supplementary in Figure In the subsequent stage, we employ the semi-analytical methodology detailed in The results are presented in Figure We converted the 15 % volume-based pigment/filler composition to a weight-based formulation. Mixing 70 % PDMS (Part A, SYLGARD TM 184, Dow) with o-Xylene (98 %, Loba Chemie Pvt. Ltd.) in a 1:1 ratio, and stirring at 200 rpm gave a clear solution. We then added the TiO 2 pigment (Titanium (IV) oxide, rutile, Sigma-Aldrich) under slow stirring, and then increased stirring to 500 rpm for 30 minutes. The remaining PDMS and xylene, in the same ratio, was subsequently added and stirred for 90 minutes. After resting the solution overnight, we applied two coats to aluminum substrates, allowing a 24-hour curing period at room temperature. We observe that xylene can be added at any stage to adjust viscosity without affecting optical properties. We employed a field emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss Ultra 55) to image and characterize the pigment powder particles, as shown in Figure The weighted solar reflectivity of the fabricated coating is 88.2 % for the thickness of 280 μm. The maximum reflectivity of the paint is observed to be 89.3 % for the thickness of the 415 μm. It is to be noted that reduction in reflectivity is due to absorbing nature of TiO 2 in UV region. In visible and NIR, the paint's reflectivity is greater than 94 %. The emissivity (calculated using I BB (λ)ε(λ)dλ/ I BB (λ) dλ, where I BB is Planck's blackbody radiation) in the atmospheric transparency window (i.e. 8-13 μm) is seen to be 92.4 %. The total emissivity of the coating for thicknesses 91, 272, 332, and 415 μm is also calculated using an emissometer (Devices & Services, model AE1). The obtained emissivities for 91, 272, 332, and 415 μm thicknesses are 0.8, 0.85, 0.86, and 0.88, respectively. . Many previously reported studies We used a Keysight DAQ970A data logger to record temperature data from T-type thermocouples at regular intervals. Each thermocouple was calibrated with a Julabo calibration bath. Global solar irradiation at the experimental site was measured using a Dynalab Weathertech pyranometer (model 147059). Ambient temperature was recorded by a radiation-and windshielded device from TrackSo, accurate to ±0.5°C (refer to Figure Figure Sub ambient cooling has been shown using TiO 2 -particle based coating with similar reflectivity and emissivity in previous works The performance of RC coatings is typically assessed by comparing the temperature recorded behind the coating with ambient temperature. However, standard practices for measuring ambient temperature often involve using a thermocouple that's exposed to environmental elements like sun and wind The cooling performance of the RC coating is greatly affected by conduction and convection losses. To address this, studies report the use of a radiation shield with a polyethylene (PE) film covering on the top side to counter these parasitic losses The atmospheric conditions of the local environment strongly impact the cooling performance of the RC coating. The increase in humidity and air temperature reduces the atmospheric transparency in 8-13 μm wavelength, which in turn reduces the ability of the coating to radiate heat to outer space via the atmospheric transparency window. As a result, the cooling performance of a RC coating reduces significantly in highly humid areas in contrast to dry areas. The effect of local humidity and air temperature on the cooling performance of RC coating has been studied by researchers for different locations The calculations in this section are carried out for atmospheric parameters (83.77 % average humidity and 29.55 • C average ambient temperature) for 25 th April 2023, obtained from the CPCB database where, the coating temperature, T c , and interior temperature of the Al box, T enc , can be related using Here, h o (=10.43 Wm -2 K -1 ) is the external convective heat transfer coefficient estimated using empirical relations Here, l c and k c represent the thickness and thermal conductivity of the RC paint, while l Al = 4 mm and k Al = 237 Wm -1 K -1 are those of the Al wall, with h i denoting internal heat transfer between still air and the Al wall. TBR, which is the thermal barrier resistance between polymer coating and Al surface Using the atmospheric transmittance from Figure Other parameters, such as ambient temperature and heat transfer coefficient, are left untouched. A marked decrease in the cooling performance is noticed in Figure We have shown conclusively that uncontrollable external factors, including humidity, ambient temperatures, and cloud cover influence the cooling efficacy of the paint. Since the goal of developing such material coatings is to minimize reliance on energy-consuming cooling systems like air conditioners, achieving sub-ambient temperatures should not be the sole criterion for evaluating RC coating efficiency. Instead, temperature reductions recorded in outdoor tests, which consider the prevailing atmospheric conditions, offer a more relevant benchmark. The methodology employed here, utilizing MODTRAN, facilitates the prediction of paint performance across various environmental scenarios. This enables a direct comparison of any newly developed coating's performance in differing climatic conditions. This study introduces a low particle volume fraction TiO 2 /PDMS paint-coating designed for passive daytime radiative cooling. The coating, with 88.2% solar reflectivity, and 92.4% emissivity in the atmospheric transparency window, was tested outdoors in Mumbai, India. Unlike other studies that compare coating surface temperature to ambient, this research measured the enclosure space temperature which will be of of practical utility in real-world applications. Though the coating is observed to significantly reduce the heat load in the enclosure space of a hollow aluminum box compared to an uncoated control, sub-ambient cooling was not achieved, largely due to Mumbai's high humidity which limits the effectiveness of the atmospheric transparency window. The study underscores that PDRC coatings could achieve sub-ambient cooling in low humidity conditions and notes the coating's considerable performance under existing conditions, reducing temperature by about 8°C. The study has also highlighted techniques currently adopted to compare and report cooling performance vis-à-vis the measurement of ambient temperature, and the use of polyethylene sheet as a convective shield and strongly suggests better alternatives for the standardisation and ease of comparison of all future measurements. Weighted reflectivity of TiO 2 /PDMS coating in wavelength range 0.4-3 μm calculated for various TiO 2 particle sizes with f = 5%, and L = 1 mm.