While significant interests have been devoted to the double diffusive phase change heat transfer of binary solutions, the understanding on the melting heat transfer of salty ice in porous media is still imcomplete. This work aims to explore the melting heat transfer characteristics of salty ice in a square cavity filled with homogeneous porous media subjected to lateral heating. In order to facilitate the visualization of melting dynamics in a uniform porous media, a three-dimensional (3D) printed transparent cavity filled with porous matrix was manufactured, featuring an open upper end. Aqueous solutions of sodium chloride at concentration both higher and lower than the eutectic concentration were investigated. Lateral heating experiments with constant heat flux were conducted in a subzero temperature environment. The effect of heating power, initial concentrations and different sizes of porous matrix was investigated. Distinct phenomena were observed based on the concentration of the aqueous solution. Specifically, the concentration lower than the eutectic concentration results in an upward bending melting interface. Whereas the concentration surpassing the eutectic concentration resulted in a downward bending melting interface. In the presence of salt, a melting convex appears at the bottom of the melting interface and manifests during the whole melting process. Notably, smaller matrix enables faster melting rate. Furthermore, three distinct stages were revealed in our experiments, characterized as conduction, mixture of conduction and ultimately convection stage. The correlations for Nu and the average propagation rate of mushy/liquid interface were established by order of magnitude analysis and fit well with the experiments. Double diffusive convective heat transfter occurs in various nature processes and finds considerable applications in engineering contexts. The complication of heat transfer mechnisms during double diffusive convection are governed by a combination of temperature and concentration gradients within fluids. Researches and advancements on double diffusive convective heat transfer have been the interests of scholary communities for decacdes However, the melting heat transfer of binary mixture has received less attention. Beckermann and Multiple double diffusive layers were interspersed at the top of the melt layers. A close relationship between the double diffusive layers and the solid/liquid interface was identified. The interface is divided into several parts by characteristic morphological protrusion features. The melting process of binary eutectics in porous media is also very important. For example, the melting of salty ice occurs widely in thawing of frozen soil, Mars exploration In order to better understand the mechanism of double diffusive convective heat transfer in the melting in low temperature environments, we conducted experiments with 3D printing technology to faciliate visualization. The natural convection and heat transfer characteristics of the melting process in transparent cavity with saturated porous matrix were investigated. The correlations of Nu number and average propogation speed of melting interface were established by the order of magnitude method for the hypoeutetic region. As shown in Fig. The cavity is 40 mm wide, 40 mm high, 2 mm thick, and has a 2 mm base for fixation. A rectangular array of small black cylinders was printed inside the square cavity with the integrated 3D printing technology to simulate the solid matrix in a porous medium. A cylindrical cavity with a diameter of 6 mm, a height of 40 mm, and a wall thickness of 1 mm is attached to the left side of the square cavity for mounting a cylindrical heater. During the experiment, a metal heating rod with a diameter of 6 mm and a height of 40 mm was placed into the cavity, and the inside of the cavity was filled with thermally conductive silicone grease to reduce the contact thermal resistance between the heating rod and the wall. A schematic diagram of the test cell is shown in Figure During the course of the experiments, when a melting liquid appeared, a trace amount of dry methyl blue powder was pushed into the cavity via a hypodermic syringe suspended above the left wall surface in the square cavity to stain the melting zone in order to better distinguish the solid-liquid interface. To perform the visualization experiments, a white LED planar light source was used to illuminate from behind the square cavity. During the visualization experiments, the front and back of the square chamber were covered with a heat shield, while the top and bottom of the chamber were in direct contact with cold air. Photographs were taken at 5 min intervals, and the heat shield was removed when taking the photographs, and then the front and back of the cavity were covered after taking the photographs in order to minimize the heat loss during the photographs. For temperature measurement experiments, the heat shield was kept over the square cavity. Figure The photographs of the melting process of the binary mixture in the cavity is shown in Figure When the eutectic mixture melts into solution, the solute depletion occurs in this region due to the difference in solubility of NaCl in the liquid and solid phase. Solutes precipitate out of the ice into the mushy zone Figure The liquid fraction profiles for various heating powers are shown in Fig. where h is the enthalpy of melting, k is the thermal conductivity, h is the forced convective heat transfer coefficient with the environment, and T is the temperature of the ambient. The order of magnitude of the average distance of the melting interface propogated from the heated wall can be derived as: where θ = Ste Fo, From the eqation, it is known that the distance of the melting interface from the left heating wall shows a relationship with the height of the square cavity, the heating time and the specific heat capacity of the fluid itself, the thermal diffusivity and the enthalpy of melting. The solute affects the thermophysical properties of water to some extent, and therefore indirectly affects the rate of motion of the melting interface at this stage. Under constant heat flow density conditions, T -T is unknown. (q s)/c~(T -T ), where q is the heat flow density. The average Nu number of the heated wall is: Substituting dT~T -T ,dx~s, gives (2) Mixed heat transfer stage As the melting continues, thermal convection was activated and intensitified in the upper section of the cavity as the liquid region increases, accelerating the melting process. As a result, the liquid region in the upper section becomes wider with a height of a, whereas in the lower section with a height of H-a, is still dominated by thermal conduction, including the stagnant region at the bottom. At the mixed heat transfer stage, the heat flux is introduced along the heated wall and is in equilibrium with the fluid heat transfer. The fluid heat transfer can be divided into two sections: the upper section dominated by thermal convection heat transfer and the lower section dominated by heat conduction. Within the convective region, which can be divided into the main flow region and the boundary layer, the changes of temperature and concentration mainly occur in the boundary layer, so s ~δ , H -a~H. In the initial stage, heat conduction is predominant, so according to the conservation of energy: The thickness of thermal boundary layer can be found as According to mass conservation where u is the velocity in x-direction, v is the velocity in y-direction. Applying the order of magnitude analysis yields u δ ~v H In order to verify the results of the theoretical analysis, we analyzed the average Nu number of the heated wall and the average propogation speed of the melting interface under different working conditions. The formulas for data processing are as follows. The average heat transfer coefficient is where T is the average wall temperature, T is the melting temperature, A is the heat transfer area, Q is the net heating power. Then the Nu caculated from the data is where L is the characteristic length and k is the thermal conductivity where q is the heat transfer rate at mushy/re, ρ is the solution density, h is the latent heat of melting, and V is the liquid phase volume. Stefan number can be expressed as where C is the specific heat capacity, q is the input heat flux, L is the characteristic length, and h is the latent heat of phase transition. In order to verify the results of the order-of-magnitude analysis, we carried out experiments with input powers of 3W, 5W, and 7W, measured the temperature data and processed the relevant data according to the above equations. As is shown in Fig. At the first stage Nu decreases rapidly, indicating the predominance of the heat conduction. The propogation of the melting interface to the right increases the heat transfer thermal resistance. The second stage occurs when notable inflection point appears, indicating a transition in the heat transfer mechanism. Convective heat transfer is activated and evolves into a mixed convection mechanism alongside conduction. In the third stage, the Nu number curve approaches to be parallel with the horizontal coordinate axis, exhibiting a nearly constant value independent of time. This implies the dominance of convective heat transfer approaching to a fully developed state, or a quasi-steady state. Stages of transformation were initially determined by comparing interfacial evolution diagrams during the melting process, followed by fitting each stage using the order-ofmagnitude correlations. Notably, the average Nu number under each input power fits well with the experimental results, affirming the validity of the order-of-magnitude analysis. The expressions of the fitted function are detailed in Table An experimental visualization of the melting process of a frozen binary solution within a square cavity subjected to lateral heating is performed. The experiments employ a 3D-printed transparent square cavity filled containing porou matrix, allowing for the observation and order-of-magnitude analysis of the fluid dynamics associated with phase change heat transfer governed by double diffusion. Thermal and solutal gradients both affected the heat transfer and melting process. Thermal convection induced by thermal gradient promoted the melting of the upper section, while salt perticipated enhanced the melting of the lower section. The following conclusions were obtained from the study: (1) During melting in the hypoeutectic side, a protruding melting region at the lower part of the melting interface, attributed to concentration stratification and the concentration-induced reduction in melting point. When melting in the hypereutectic side, the entire melting interface is downward curved due to the fact that salt stratification affects the flow pattern to a greater extent than thermal convection. (2) The melting process is discernibly delineated into three distinct stages, with soil matrix influencing flow patterns, thereby impacting heat transfer and melting rates. By employing dimensionless analysis, a correlation expression for the Nusselt (Nu) number has been derived. The correlation equation reveals that the melting process is predominantly influenced by several key parameters, including the buoyancy ratio, Darcy number, sample height, thermal diffusivity, and Rayleigh number. These factors collectively govern the convective heat transfer characteristics during the melting process and provide valuable insights into the underlying physics of the system. (3) Through order of magnitude analysis, in the first stage of melting, heat conduction is dominant and the Nu number is mainly affected by the temperature difference, the thermal diffusivity of the solution and the height of the square cavity. In the second stage, Nu number are positively related to Ra , incorprating the influence of permeability, buoyancy ratio and heating power. Larger Ra indicates a higher intensity of the thermal natural convection. Also, the relationship between the Nu number and SteFo becomes complex. In the thrid stage, the Nu number is independent of SteFo and depends only on the permeability of the porous medium, the density of heat flow and the buoyancy ratio. Based on the expressions obtained from the order-of-magnitude analysis, it is possible to estimate the time scale required to melt a given amount of salty ice for different input powers and using different heights of heater, as well as for different thermal conductivities, permeabilities, and salinities, which may provide insights for the related applications.