The total emissivity of the absorbing surfaces is a critical parameter in the calculation of the radiative thermal losses in solar thermal collectors. This is because the radiative heat losses have a significant economic impact on the final cost of the electricity produced in a solar thermal plant. This paper demonstrates the need to calculate the total emissivity from spectral emissivity measurements at the working temperature of the solar thermal collector, instead of using extrapolated values from spectral emissivities measured at room temperature. Usual uncertainties produced by the estimation of the total emissivity, in which its temperature dependence is only introduced by the Planck function, are analyzed. 1. Solar thermal collectors (STC) are especially relevant in solar thermal devices for producing heat from the sunlight (T < 150 °C), or producing electricity in concentrated solar power (CSP) plants (250 < T < 800 °C). A critical component of solar thermal collectors is the surface where the conversion of solar radiation into useful heat occurs. These solar absorbing surfaces (SAS) require very high solar absorptivity α(T) in visible and near infrared (NIR) wave-lengths and low total emissivity εT(T) in the NIR-mid infrared (MIR) spectral region where L(λ,T) is the Planck function for the emission of a blackbody. Both methods, the emissometer and reflectivity one, can give εT(T) values that significantly differ from the real sample emissivity at working temperature because the coating spectral emissivity has usually a temperature dependence in the range of wavelengths where radiative transfer occurs. In addition, as it can be observed in other materials A simple calculation shows that small differences between the εT(T) values calculated by using Eqs. ( Fig. In Fig. In Fig. (1) and, however, the one calculated with the εT(T) calculated using Eq. ( Therefore, for the coating studied in this work, the difference between the values of radiative thermal losses calculated with Eqs. ( Obviously, these differences increase if the dependence of the spectral emissivity with temperature increases. Additionally, one must take into account that in the case of the coating studied in this work, the spectral emissivity dependence on temperature shows an emissivity decrease at short wavelengths that produces attenuation on the temperature dependence of the total emissivity. Fig. Similar results, although with minor differences between the total emissivities calculated with Eqs. ( 3. In this paper, the total emissivity values of a selective absorber surface, in the working temperature range (250-600 °C), obtained from spectral emissivity measurements are compared with those obtained from room temperature reflectivity data. Both values will only agree when the spectral emissivity does not depend on temperature within the wavelength range in which the radiative transfer is made. The differences between the two values introduce significant discrepancies in the calculation of radiative thermal losses and therefore influence, significantly, in the calculation of the economic profitability of solar power plants. Therefore, the interest of measuring the temperature dependence of the spectral emissivity is fully justified. In addition, it is essential, for solar selective coatings applications to assess the emissivity changes with heating cycles and heating rate, which can only be proven with spectral measurements at different temperatures. Another important aspect for the applications that can be studied by means of radiometric methods is the detection of possible atypical temperature or wavelength dependences. Finally, it has been shown that a solar coating qualified as efficient using Eq. ( (2) experimental data of the dependence of the spectral emissivity with temperature.