We demonstrate the use of quantum annealing for the selection of multiple martensite variants in a microstructure with long-range coherency stresses and external mechanical load. The general approach is illustrated for martensites with four different variants, based on the minimization of the linear elastic energy. The equilibrium variant distribution is then analysed under application of tensile and shear strains and for different values of the considered shear and tetragonal contributions of the different martensite variants. The interface orientations between different domains of variants can be explained using the perspective of the elastic energy anisotropy for regular stripe patterns. For random grain orientations, the response to an external elastic strain is weaker and variants changes can be interpreted based on the rotated eigenstrain tensor. The formation of microstructures is critical for many applications, as it strongly impacts the properties of materials. In many cases, simulation approaches can nowadays be used to support experimental investigations related to the understanding and prediction of microstructures. Among these approaches the phase field approach plays a central role, as it is able to predict the temporal evolution of non-equilibrium microstructures The prediction of martensite formation and variant selection has been widely discussed in the literature, see e.g. In the present work we focus on the long-ranged elastic effects, which are resulting from mismatches between different martensite variants. They lead to elastic misfits, which induce interactions not only between neighboring phases and grains, but also depend on and influence the entire microstructure. As discussed in A general quantum computer with a sufficient number of qubits is not available yet, but the technology named quantum annealing (QA) In our previous publication The overall concept of the investigations is that we assume that in a microstructure, as depicted e.g. in Fig. To achieve a description in the framework of continuum elasticity, we consider eigenstrain (stress free strain) expressions of the form Here, the function θ n (r) is equal to one inside grain n and vanishes everywhere else. The eigenstrain in each grain with index n can be a superposition using K "spin variables" s ν = s n,k = ±1 with the total number of spins N ν = N • K, which weight eigenstrain tensor components ε (0,n,k) ij . Therefore, we have altogether 2 K martensite variants in each grain by suitable selection of the parameters ε (0,n,k) ij . To determine the thermodynamic equilibrium state (minimum elastic energy), first the elastic problem has to be solved for a given eigenstrain. This can be expressed through the minimization of the elastic energy with respect to the displacement field u i in combination with suitable mechanical boundary conditions. In case of isotropic linear elasticity with phase and variant independent Lamé coefficient and shear modulus, the elastic energy functional reads with the system volume V and the strain tensor In the above expression, the Einstein sum convention is used. Contrary to the optimization of the displacement and strain fields as continuous variables, the variant selection becomes a discrete problem on top of the preceding step. Following the Fourier transformation approach outlined in As the expression for the elastic energy is quadratic in the framework of the linear theory of elasticity, the final expression for the elastic energy can be expressed as with a quadratic, symmetric matrix Jνη . The coefficients E 0 , Hν and Jνη can be expressed directly in terms of the Fourier transformation solution, or alternatively be calculated using any elastic solver, which delivers the total elastic energy E({s ν }) for a given spin configuration {s ν }. We note that the above form of the energy holds for arbitrary values of the spin variables and does not apply only to the special case s ν = ±1. Therefore, we obtain directly where all spins have the value 0, which we also denote as the austenite reference state. Next, we perform calculations where all spins but one vanish, and the selected one has either the value +1 or -1. From that we get Therefore, we can extract the diagonal element for the self-interactions as and consequently Finally, to calculate the interaction coefficients Jij for i ̸ = j we perform elastic calculations with two nonvanishing spins where we can directly calculate Jij using the expressions obtained above For zero stress boundary conditions, we get for the eigenstrain of the type (1) the simplification E 0 = 0 and Hi = 0 for all i. For the use of the quantum annealer, we restrict the allowed spin values to s ν = ±1 and we also have to rewrite the expression (3) in a slightly different way, which excludes in particular self interactions of the type s i s i . The Hamiltonian reads where the offset H 0 only affects the energy value but not the spin configuration minimizing the energy. Comparison with the expression (3) above gives This general formulation has the advantage that it decouples the approach for setting up the Ising coefficients for the annealer from the specific linear elastic energy solver. Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that the formulation (3) relies on the assumption of equal elastic constants in all phases and variants and coherent boundary conditions. However, it is valid also in situation beyond the original work On the quantum annealer level the determined Ising coefficients are used to define an energy landscape, where superconducting loops with clockwise or anticlockwise circulating currents define qubits with different spin states To illustrate the workflow, we consider a case with four variants per grain, i.e. two spins per grain. Similar to the previous work where n numerates the grains. For the first application we assume that the individual tensors of the shear (involving the strain parameter ε 0 ) and tetragonal deformations (associated with ε 1 ) are the same in all grains; later we will also discuss the case of grain rotations, where the tensors differ from grain to grain. Fig. Apart from the self generated internal stresses due to the different variants, also a homogeneous external (average) strain field ⟨ε ij ⟩ can be superimposed, which leads to an additional contribution to the magnetic field vector H n , which couples the external strain ⟨ε ij ⟩ to the k = 0 mode of the Fourier transform of the eigenstrain tensor. This means that a change of the external strain leaves the coupling constants J ij invariant and only modifies a contribution to H n , which can be treated analytically, therefore minimizing the computational cost for repeated calculations with different external boundary conditions. Fig. The patterns formed by several variants can be better understood by analyzing the elastic anisotropy of the transformation. Specifically, the normal to the interface between two variants must be close to a direction that minimizes the elastic kernel of the transformation from one variant to the neighboring one. This can be demonstrated for plate-like domains The elastic kernel can be obtained analytically in Fourier space Both green-red and grey-blue pairs have preferred orientations around ±38 • . Due to constraints of the chosen system sizes and the used periodic boundary conditions, typically deviations from the analytical prediction for infinite system sizes are expected, as discussed in detail in Finally, green-blue and red-grey interfaces show a very pronounced anisotropy with a strong cusp at either 17 • and -62 • (green-blue) or 62 • and -17 • (red-grey). Due to this strong orientation dependence these interfaces either have to appear at these preferred angles or they are strongly supressed. In fact, the corresponding interface lengths in Fig. We note for the subsequent panels of Fig. It is useful to emphasize the periodicity of the patterns by looking at a 2 × 2 supercell of the simulation domain, as shown in Fig. The special case ⟨ε xx ⟩/ε 0 = 0.5 shows a remarkable topological change, as now interfaces between green-blue, green-red, grey-blue and grey-red appear, whereas the previously important red-blue and green-grey interfaces are absent. Moreover, the newly appearing interfaces are at their preferred orientations. For example, the marked 24 • angle inside the red lozenge is the difference between the 62 • minimum energy orientation for the red-grey interface and the 38 • orientation for the red-green pattern. This leads to the geometry sketched in Fig. The same microstructure as in Fig. An interesting case is the three-variant configuration in Fig. For the present four variant setup, the response of the microstructure does not only depend on the ratio ⟨ε ij ⟩/ε 0 , but also on the relative relevance of shear and tetragonal deformations, as expressed through the dimensionless parameter ε 1 /ε 0 . Whereas in the above investigations we have fixed this ratio to ε 1 /ε 0 = 1, Fig. The starting case (center panel in Fig. It is again instructive to look at the angular depen- dence of the elastic energy for infinite stripe patterns (again for zero mean strain boundary conditions), as it depends on the ratio ε 1 /ε 0 , see Fig. The last example concerns a case where the grains are oriented randomly, i.e. rotated around the [001] axis, as depicted in the left panel of Fig. Therefore, for the chosen example, a rotation by π/4 converts the tetragonal deformation to a shear transformation (and vice versa), apart from the eigenstrain contribution in z direction, which only affects the energetic cost but not the strain distribution. Therefore, we expect for a tensile load in [100] direction, that grains with orientation close to 0 or π (the response is π-periodic), to have a tetragonal spin preferentially being in state +1; for a rotation near 90 • , the tetragonal contribution prefers the s = -1 state. For both of these orientations (and nearby values), the shear contributions are indifferent, as they have only a vanishing or small contribution ε (0) ′ xx , which is sensitive to the tensile strain. As explained above, for rotations by approximately π/4 (or 3π/4) the role of shear and tetragonal deformations is exchanged, but the original tetragonal transformation has an energy penalty due to the contribution in z direction for the used plane strain setup. For some selected grains in Fig. From a materials science perspective, quantum quantum is only starting to influence the opportunities and methodologies of modeling approaches. It can be expected, that in future general purpose quantum computing will have the potential to strongly accelerate materials science related simulations and to enable completely new possibilities. As of today, sufficiently large quantum computers are not yet available, and also suitable algorithms have not yet been developed. Nevertheless, quantum annealing, as a specific type of adiabatic quantum computing, is commercially available with large numbers of qubits already today. The type of problems which can be addressed is limited, as it is required to map the materials science related problem of interest to the minimization of an Ising Hamiltonian. In the present work we have demonstrated, that the selection of multiple martensite variants can be mapped to an Ising problem for specific conditions and have demonstrated how the energy minimization can be performed efficiently via quantum annealing. The superiority of QA compared to classical computing has been demonstrated in our previous publication For many applications in science, the formation of microstructures is critical and efficient simulation approaches to support experimental findings are highly desired. Our developed quantum annealing approach presents an efficient new technological opportunity for the determination of equilibrium microstructures with long-range elastic interactions, where multiple martensite variants need to be considered.