Properties of high entropy alloys are currently in the spotlight due to their promising applications. One of the least investigated aspects is the affinity of these alloys to hydrogen, its diffusion and reactions. In this study we apply high-pressure at ambient temperature and investigate stress-induced diffusion of hydrogen into the structure of high entropy alloys (HEA) including the famous Cantor alloy as well as less known, but nevertheless important platinum group (PGM) alloys. By applying X-ray diffraction to samples loaded into diamond anvil cells we perform a comparative investigation of these HEA alloys in Ne and H2 pressure-transmitting media. Surprisingly, even under stresses far exceeding conventional industrial processes both Cantor and PGM alloys show exceptional resistance to hydride formation, on par with widely used industrial grade Cu-Be alloys. Our observations inspire optimism for practical HEA applications in hydrogen-relevant industry and technology (e.g. coatings, etc), particularly those related to transport and storage. High-entropy materials, including high-entropy alloys (HEAs) and high-entropy oxides (HEOs), have gained significant attention as highly efficient applied materials A review of the published literature signifies that only a few ternary alloys and HEAs have been characterized under compression in presence of H2. Their phase transformations are considered to be much more complex in comparison with pure metals and binaries. For example, high local micro strains so typical for HEAs may allow alloy formation with significant H2 uptake in their structure. Considering the perspectives of hydrogen storage, the review of the literature will highlight bcc-HEAs systems based on refractory metals with valence electron concentration (VEC) above 5 and with large lattice distortion At the same time, we also see that behaviour of hcp and fcc alloys has not been characterized so far in great detail, but it is of great importance to understand hydrogen penetration between the closed-packed layers as it can also be significant. Hydrogen migration into octahedral and tetrahedral sites in closed-packed structures may have different energy and pathways resulting in a dramatical contrast of hydrogen uptake and hydrogen diffusivity. As a result, different mechanisms of hydrogen migration might be in play in bcc-, fcc-and hcp-structured alloys and they should be experimentally studied as function of composition and hydrogen pressure. A review of the literature indicates that the topic of hydrogen affinity as well as the topic of resistance to hydrogen with respect to HEA are greatly underexplored. Among the great variety of HEAs, fcc-structured CoCrFeNiMn, also known as Cantor alloy, represents one of the most studied systems. It has been studied extensively at ambient pressure and under high pressure, with the latter studies typically conducted using inert pressure media. From the chemistry point of view, the high-entropy alloy of fcc-structured CoCrFeNiMn as well as high entropy alloys based on platinum group (PGM) elements, e.g. fcc-Ir0.231(2)Os0.090(1)Pt0.273(1)Rh0.302(2)Ru0.104(2) and hcp-Ir0. On one hand, we would like to bring community's attention to the assortment of HEAs and the challenge of finding the most effective materials either for hydrogen related catalysis or hydrogen-resistant bulk material production and coatings (e.g. the quests of transport and storage). On the other hand, within our study we introduce a new quick testing methodology for material hydrogen resistance. Here, the cases of Cantor alloy and PGM HEAs allow us to illustrate different aspects of material behaviour under high pressure in hydrogen and importance of phase transitions for final analysis. Comparison of Cantor alloy and PGM HEAs up to 50 GPa seems appropriate. Indeed, under stress and even being surrounded by inert pressure transmitting medium (PTM), the fcc-phase of Cantor alloy can be reversibly converted to an hcp-structure. The transition occurs above 7 GPa and depends on a great number of factors, including features of the PTM and hydrostaticity of compression Finally, our study would not be full without a comparative study of selected HEAs with industry relevant alloys including Alloy 190 and Toughmet 3 alloys produced by Materion R . Technical development in hydrogen economy is extensive with its multifaceted aspects and applications on various levels (storage tanks, pipes, engines, etc.). We hope our study, apart from demonstrating a new efficient method for testing materials in hydrogen with a focus to hydrogen corrosion resistance in selected HEAs, will contribute to the overall progress and success in the field of renewable energy. Platinum group metals HEAs fcc-Ir0.231(2)Os0.090(1)Pt0.273(1)Rh0.302(2)Ru0.104(2) (fcc-PGM), hcp-Ir0. The CoCrFeMnNi HEA powder was produced at the Korea Institute of Materials Science (KIMS) by using vacuum induction gas atomizer (VIGA, HERMIGA 100/25, PSI, UK), and it is the same as used for additive manufacturing by laser power bed fusion, as described in detail in the publications Cantor alloy and PGM HEAs analytical composition was additionally probed and confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). SEM images were obtained on a XL30 ESEM (Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope) from FEI (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The compositions were characterized by energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX, equipped with Si-(Li) detector) and averaged over 5-6 points. The averaged compositions were close to the nominal composition of single-source precursors and starting solutions. All the alloys reported in our paper are stable at ambient conditions. For our comparative study, small metallic pieces of commercial alloys produced by Materion R , namely, Alloy 190 (fcc-A190) and Toughmet 3, (fcc-TM3) were cut out of bigger strips using a file. The reported composition of the Alloy 190 in weight percent is 1.8-2.0 wt.% Be, min. 0.2 wt.% Ni+Co, max. 0.6 wt.% Ni+Co+Fe with balance of Cu Although the same ruby chips were used for pre-compression of diamond anvil cells loaded with H2, we used Au for pressure determination during the compression for the latter loadings. All results presented in this manuscript were obtained from measurements at ambient temperature. Compressibility curves for fcc-CoCrFeMnNi Cantor alloy with non-reactive solid PTM (multianvil assembly) at moderate pressures below 15 GPa and room temperature were also collected using the large volume multi-anvil press Aster-15 installed at the P61B energy-dispersive beamline The sample was compressed using a 14/7 multi-anvil assembly, which is described in detail elsewhere Before starting the presentation of high entropy alloys data, we show our results on conventional industrial alloys, namely, fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 as compressed in Ne and H2. We will first have a look at data obtained with Ne PTM shown in Figure The picture won't change if Vinet EOS is employed. In latter case the parameters are V0=11.56(2) Å 3 , K0=138(9), K'=4.9(8) for fcc-A190 and V0=11.97(1) Å 3 , K0=147(6), K'=4.9 After we determined EOS describing the behaviour of fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 EOS under quasihydrostatic conditions of Ne, we can compare this data with behaviour of the same alloys in H2 PTM. This comparison lays a foundation for a simple method testing industry-relevant materials for their affinity to hydrogen, and we introduce the procedure here. Quasi-hydrostatic compression of materials sets a reference line, indeed, for a given pressure value the unit cell volume may not be smaller than the equilibrated reference, if we consider cthermodynamic equilibrium. Formation of hydrides often occurs at ambient temperature under sufficient stress and may result either in (A1) penetration of original crystal structure and formation of an isostructural hydride or in (A2) formation of hydrides with the lower pressure structure undergoing a transition under compression. For simple fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 we did not expect any phase transitions below 35 GPa (Figure Our data on compression and decompression cycles of fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 are indeed indicative (Figure Our case study involving a combination of diamond anvil cell with X-ray diffraction with the application to the industry relevant alloys of fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 suggests that the proposed here method of testing materials and comparing their compression in quasihydrostatic PTM and in corrosive PTM, such as H2, has a great potential. It has also several advantages for sample screening: 1) it requires negligible amount of test material; 2) several samples can be tested at the same time; 3) sample chamber is small and the experiment is less dangerous in comparison to large autoclaves; 4) experiment is fast. Indeed, a single slow compression with pressure controlled by a gas driven membrane with several samples per sample chamber may take 3-6 hours for data acquisition for a single PTM with controllable strain rate. Using dynamic piezoelectric actuated diamond anvil cells, screening times can be significantly shortened, resulting in a full data acquisition within minutes if not seconds Using the fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 as an example, we described our observations and typical behaviour of alloys compression in quasi-hydrostatic and H2 PTM in the case (A1) when hydrogen penetrates crystal lattice and induces an isostructural formation of hydrides. Our fcc-PGM and hcp-PGM alloys were behaving the similar way as fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 (Figure We can approach the challenge of hydrogen content estimation in fcc-and hcp-structured PGM HEAs similarly to the approach published by Somenkov et al. The resulting data is shown in Figure Based on our data we can arrange the materials with respect to their affinity to hydrogen in the following way, with the least resistant mentioned first: 1) fcc-TM3; 2) fcc-PGM, and 3) hcp-PGM and fcc-A190. Here, we would like to avoid an impression that these materials can be used for the same applications. Our study only indicates that like in the case of industrial materials, affinity of HEAs to hydrogen is controlled by their crystal chemistry (controlled by doping) and can be efficiently tested using the combination of the diamond anvil cell and X-ray diffraction techniques. It also indicates compression induced formation of previously unknown high entropy hydrides with PGM HEA systems as precursors. Last, but not least we present the data on compression of Cantor alloy in hydrogen PTM. In contrast to the previously mentioned conventional and high-entropy alloys, Cantor alloy belongs to the case (A2) and undergoes a phase transition at relatively low pressures. The transformation sluggish, and it is well described in literature Our results of Cantor alloy compression are in good agreement with literature (Figure Still, although such effects exist, and we should be aware of these details, the most important observations and conclusions remain unchanged. Here, we attract the attention to the following important observation. If we compare data obtained under ambient temperature compression in large volume press PTM, silicone oil, He and H2 pressure media we conclude that there is only minimal absorption of hydrogen by the Cantor alloy in contrast to fcc-TM3 presented above and, moreover, to the 316 Steel also widely used for hydrogen-technology as our results show in Supplementary. Our data shows that the low pressure fcc-phase of Cantor alloy does not absorb hydrogen up to the pressures of hcp-phase transition which according to Tracy et al. should start at 14 GPa. This result indicates that for certain applications Cantor alloy could be even better than fcc-A190 containing Be and, thus, more environmentally friendly in terms of recycling, etc. We deem these results open a new venue to hydrogen economy research and development, particularly within the sub-fields of hydrogen production and storage, transportation, and infrastructure. They are simultaneously surprising and promising and hold potential for various industrial HEA applications. The research and development within the initiative of green energy and sustainability is ongoing and requires intensive exploration along multiple fronts: e.g. physics, chemistry, material science etc. The increasing trend in hydrogen economy investments is evident improving the aspects of hydrogen production as well as the realms of hydrogen transportation and storage. In our work we attract the community attention to the new fast characterization method requiring small amount of sample to test material affinity of reaction with hydrogen. We introduce the method and apply it to the industrial and novel materials, such as high entropy alloys, and give a qualitative report for individual material affinity to hydrogen and discuss importance of composition in correlation with absorbed hydrogen content. Considering the PGM HEAs we indicate an intriguing fact of their low hydrogen affinity despite large atomic radii of constituent atoms. These materials could be important for catalytical applications. Finally, but not least, we investigate the Cantor alloythe HEA alloy with probably the largest number of potential applications and find that it also is very resilient in comparison to 316 Steel as well as to Cu-Be alloy. Our results indicate that Cantor HEA is the same level and likely more efficient in comparison to the many applied materials widespread within the fields of hydrogen economy. Considering that the price of material production decreases and the scope of applications broadens with time and with technological progress, we hope to see the first implementations of Cantor alloy in various fields of hydrogen economy very soon. Cantor alloy represents a single example within the broad space of HEA compositions, the space encompassing a large variety of physical and chemical properties. The number of potential applications for Cantor alloy is very exciting,, but our work fills only one piece of a bigger puzzle. Here, we explore HEA resilience from a new perspective, and, among other results, show formation of new high entropy hydrides in previously unexplored systems, but it is just a drop in the ocean. We hope that our work will attract the community attention to the vast and still unexplored space, as the more complete picture of HEAs will drive the technological process further and farther opening new avenues for innovation. Here and below we show some additional information with respect to the industrial alloys. In addition to the study on fcc-A190 and fcc-TM3 (Figure Figure 