The linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) is a standard method for studying solids and molecules, it is also known as the tight-binding (TB) method. In most of the implementations only the basis set and the coupling constants are provided, without the explicit definition of kinetic and potential energy operators. The tight-binding scheme is, nonetheless, capable of providing an accurate description of properties such as the electronic bands and elastic constants for many materials. However, for some applications, the knowledge of the underlying electronic potential associated with the tight-binding hamiltonian might be important to guarantee that the actual physics is preserved by the semiempirical scheme. In this work the electronic potentials that arise from the use of tight-binding effective hamiltonians it is explored. The formalism is applied to the extended Hückel tight-binding (EHTB) hamiltonian, which is a two-center Slater-Koster approach that makes explicit use of the overlap matrix. The linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO), also known as tight-binding (TB) method, is largely used for describing the transport properties in condensed matter, To best describe the properties of the system a set of TB parameters must be tuned so that the calculations fit some reference data set, which may either be obtained from higher level theory or gathered from experiments. If well parametrized, the method can accurately reproduce ab-initio calculations for a variety of materialsincluding transition and noble metals, However, for some applications, it might be necessary to dis-cern the actual couplings that are implied by the tight-binding parameters, because the effective TB hamiltonian aims at describing only the total energy of the state, disregarding whether it is kinetic or due to a potential. The knowledge of the underlying electronic potential associated with the tight-binding method is important to guarantee that the actual physics is preserved by the semiempirical scheme, since several parameter sets can frequently fit the data. In this work the electronic potentials that result from the use of tight-binding effective hamiltonians is explored. The formalism is applied to the extended Hückel tight-binding (EHTB) hamiltonian, which has been widely used by physicists, chemists and materials scientist to describe the electronic structure and properties of molecules and solids. The EHTB method corresponds to a two-center Slater-Koster approach that makes explicit use of the overlap matrix, which brings to the model information about disorder, molecular shape, molecular arrangement, as well introduce interactions between atomic orbitals in a molecule or solid. The EHTB method is in essence a two-center Slater-Koster formulation of tight-binding with a nonorthogonal basis. According to the extended Hückel prescription, the elements of the hamiltonian matrix are written as a linear function of the overlap (or adjacency) matrix S. Thus, for a given basis set ⟨i|H| j⟩ = ξ i j ⟨i| j⟩ , where {|i⟩} is some generic local basis set χ i (r) = ⟨r|i⟩. ξ i j is commonly written as where K i j is a coupling parameter, which is usually set to 1.75 if i j, or 1 if i = j. The diagonal elements of H, the E i/ j parameters, may be chosen to represent the valence ionization potentials of the atomic species, or the on-site energies associated with the localized basis set. That way a small set of semi-empirical parameters suffice to build up the hamiltonian, which renders the EHTB method a clear physical interpretation, with a reduced number of semiempirical parameters (as compared to the SK method) and good transferability, because it makes explicitly use of the overlap matrix. Thereby, the method accounts approximately for effects produced by geometrical and chemical bond variations. by choosing the parameters The diagonal elements of H are called Coulomb Integrals; they represent the combined kinetic and potential energies of an electron described by the orbital χ i (r), experiencing the electrostatic interactions with all the other electrons and all the positive nuclei. The off-diagonal elements are called Resonance (or Bond) Integrals. In the remainder of the paper it is described, in section 2, the formalism used to obtain the effective electronic potential associated with the Extended Hückel tight-binding (EHTB) hamiltonian is presented and applied in the calculation it for several prototypical molecular systems. In section 3 the method is applied to a model for two-dimensional quantum dot arrays and in section 4 the main conclusions of this study are presented. The tight-binding hamiltonian is not constructed from the kinetic ( T ) or Coulomb potential ( V) operators but it is, otherwise, directly determined by the basis set functions χ i (r), or simply built up from a set of appropriate coupling parameters. As a result, several parameter sets can frequently fit the reference set, with different electronic potentials associated to them. It is, therefore, desirable to know that the underlying physics is preserved by the parametrization scheme. In this section it is presented a procedure to determine the effective electronic potential that results from the use of a tight-binding hamiltonian. For an operator O, written in terms of a nonorthogonal basis set, one has where the sums are carried over all basis states. By defining O = S -1 OS -1 it is avoided the trouble of dealing with the nonorthogonality of the basis, thus The operator O(r, r ′ ) acounts for the interference of wavefunctions χ n (r) and χ * m (r ′ ). The operator O can be formally written in the |n⟩ representation as as well as in the representation of the coordinates. However, if the single particle operator O happens to be a local function of r, i.e., O = f ( r) (like the Coulomb or the harmonic oscillator potentials), then O must be diagonal in the coordinates So far it has been assumed a complete basis set |n⟩, but if this is not the case, it is possible to write where N is the truncation order and as depicted below In Eq. ( Only H is known in the representation of the truncated basis set functions {χ i (r)}. However, it is possible to apply the Kohn-Sham ansatz so it is possible to introduce an effective electric potential V, which is defined as Thus, it becomes possible to map the TB hamiltonian onto a dynamic system, where it is possible to calculate the kinetic energy and the potential V. Thus far, T and V were determined in the representation of basis {|n⟩}, however V(r) is more amenable to interpretation than V i j . Then, rewrite the potential in the representation of the coordinates as Although V(r, r ′ ) should be local for an independent particle, that is not the case due to the approximations undertaken, which are the basis space truncation and the use of the KS ansatz. Though it is not possible to assume that V(r, r ′ ) is diagonal, one can expect that this is a reasonable approximation, since the local density approximation (LDA) This local form will be used in the following to obtain the effective potential of the EHTB method. Having defined the effective electronic potential operator, the EHTB V e f f (r) was calculated for some prototypical molecules. Recalling that the functional form of the electronic potential shall be determined by both the tight-binding parameters as well as the basis set. The basis set functions generally employed to describe chemical species are the Slater-type orbitals (STO), defined as For the STO's, ζ is a semiempirical parameter related to the effective charge of the ion, n is the main quantum number and the Y m l (θ, φ) are spherical harmonics. The radial part of the wavefunctions (Eq. 17 The kinetic energy matrix elements between two STOs centered at R A and R B can be written as a sum of overlap elements (see ref. In the calculations that follow, standard Hoffmann parameters are used for the H, C, N, O and S atoms, Starting by analysing the Extended Hückel electronic potential of the benzene molecule, as presented in Figure To analyze the effect produced by different atoms it was calculated V e f f (r) for four pentagonal molecules of distinct compositions, namely: thiophene (SC 4 H 4 ), pyrrole (NC 4 H 5 ), furan (OC 4 H 4 ) and cyclopentadienyl (C 5 H 5 ). Their EHTB potentials are shown in Figure A more demanding calculation was performed for the 2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole (HBT) molecule, shown in Figure The linear combination of harmonic functions associated to localized parabolic potentials can describe charge and energy transport in quantum dot arrays, Firstly it is analysed a model of two coupled parabolic wells, as shown in Figure To assure that the energy of the bound states are negative, it is shifted the Extended Hückel hamiltonian by the value E shi f t = ħω(N + 1/2), as follows where the integer N designates the number of bound states. The elements S i j of the overlap matrix can be calculated analitically for the orbitals (Eq. Although V e f f (r) is defined as a local potential by Eq. 16, the effective potential is actually nonlocal, as given by Eq. 15. For the nonlocal potential, the energy term U(x) = V(x)φ(x) in the Schrödinger equatoin is replaced by where the kernel V(x, x ′ ) contains the nonlocal dependence. So far the local (diagonal) part of the effective potential has been shown, but in Figure being the argument α = √ mω/ħ, while the energy eigenvalue are written as where the normalization constant is The kinetic energy matrix elements between two eigenstates given by Eq. 23 can be written as a sum of overlap elements as where ω is the characteristic frequency of the QD whose kinetic energy is calculated and S is the overlap matrix between dot states. The EHTB method was used to study the two-dimensional array of quantum dots shown in Figure In this work it was investigated the electronic potentials that are obtained from parametrized tight-binding hamiltonians. From the fundamental viewpoint, it is desirable to guarantee that the underlying physics is preserved for a given choice of tight-binding parameters because several paramter sets can produce similar results, whereas, from the pragmatic viewpoint, it can also be said that the non-uniqueness of parametrization can be used to make numerical procedures as convenient as possible. In this work the formalim was applied to the extended Hückel tight-binding (EHTB) hamiltonian, which consists of a two-center Slater-Koster method that makes explicit use of the overlap matrix. The functional form of the effective electronic potential is determined by both the tight-binding parameters and the basis set states. In the case of molecular systems described by Slater-type orbitals the ensuing potential exhibits minima at the bond regions, as a result of the resonace integral (off-diagonal) matrix elements. The effective electronic potential V e f f (r) tends to be shallower on the atomic sites. The effect is more pronounced as the principal quantum number of the STO basis set increases because only the valence orbitals are taken into account in the EHTB method. The effect is analogous to that produced by the use of pseudo-potentials in first-principle formalisms to avoid the ion potential on the core region. The electronic potential gained from the EHTB method also describes the effects produced by the different electronegativities of the atoms, giving rise to deeper bonding potentials for the more electronegative species. The method is also applied for the 2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole (HBT) molecule, after optimization of the EHTB parameters to fit ab-initio calculations. The 2D potential profile is used to determine the polarity of the molecule. As another application to the extended Hückel theory, that has been applied extensively to atomistic systems both in chemistry and physics, it was demonstrated a procedure to model arrays of quantum dots with the EHTB method in the basis of harmonic oscillator eigenstates. The approach is versatile and describes well the characteristics of the system. 