We have investigated the vortex dynamics in a thin film of an iron-based superconductor FeSe0.5Te0.5 by observing second-harmonic generation (SHG) in the THz frequency range. We visualized the picosecond trajectory of two-dimensional vortex motion in a pinning potential tilted by Meissner shielding current. The SHG perpendicular to the driving field is observed, corresponding to the nonreciprocal nonlinear Hall effect under the current-induced inversion symmetry breaking, whereas the linear Hall effect is negligible. The estimated vortex mass, as light as a bare electron, suggests that the vortex core moves independently from quasiparticles at such a high frequency and large velocity ≈ 300 km/s. Quantum vortex in superconductors has gained continuing interest both from practical and fundamental points of view over decades. Intensive studies have been devoted to characterizing the behavior of the depinning current density Much attention has also been focused on nonreciprocal responses in inversion-broken superconductors exhibiting nonreciprocal electric transport phenomena Recently, nonreciprocal responses originated from the vortex motion were found to appear in quasi-optical, specifically terahertz (THz), frequencies in a dirty limit superconductor NbN under supercurrent injection. Here the supercurrent acts as an inversion and time-reversal symmetry breaking field, giving rise to gigantic second harmonic generation (SHG) In this Letter, we have applied this THz-SHG detection technique to investigate the vortex dynamics in an iron-based superconductor FeSe 1-x Te x (FST) under the diamagnetic shielding current induced through the Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect. Combined with the polarization-and phase-resolved measurements, we have visualized the two-dimensional trajectory of a moving vortex in a thin film of FST. According to previous studies of microwave and DC transport measurements, a vortex in FST has properties of that in clean-limit superconductors where quasiparticles are rarely scattered in a vortex core behaving as a quantum well. Accordingly, the vortex mass becomes very heavy since most of normal conducting electrons accompany the vortex motion, and the long scattering time also leads to a gyroscopic force perpendicular to the vortex motion First, we report the observation of THz-SHG caused by the vortex motion in a thin film of FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 . In general, SHG occurs when the inversion-symmetry is broken. Therefore SHG is usually observed in materials with noncentrosymmetric structures The shielding current is expected to circulate in the film as depicted in Fig. The SHG was measured using the THz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) techniques in a transmission geometry, as schematically illustrated in Fig. these three situations, the SH peak only appears for ZFC where both vortices and shielding current exist as depicted in Fig. The position dependence of the SH signal was measured by moving the sample on the focal plane of the incident 0.48 THz-FH beam whose spot size is ≈ 1 mm. The shape of the sample is 7 mm square secured on a metallic tapered hole with a diameter of 6 mm. Both parallel and perpendicular SHG have clear and similar position dependencies as depicted in Fig. The parallel SHG shows a magnetic hysteresis loop as depicted in Fig. The observed magnetization hysteresis loop is accounted for by Bean's critical state model As parallel SHG is explained by one-dimensional vortex motion where n 0 is the density of vortices, z is the unit vector normal to the film, and Φ 0 ≡ h/(2e) is the magnetic flux quantum. The maximum velocity is ≈ 300 km/s as indicated in Fig. The trajectory first reveals that the vortex motion is nearly perpendicular to the incident THz field E in along x-axis, where the motion amplitude in x-axis at the FH frequency is only 5% of that in y-axis. In other words, the vortex moves parallel to the Lorentz force due to the supercurrent induced by E in . If the quasiparticles in the core dominate the vortex motion, the vortex would move almost perpendicular to the driving force To explain the parabola-like trajectory, we consider a moving vortex under a two-dimensional pinning potential V pin of Gaussian shape. Under an electric current along the y-axis, the effective potential V eff is tilted in x-axis and has a function form of whose contours are depicted in Fig. Here we plot V eff as a function of x for different values of y in Fig. x and E (ind) y in Fig. Here we discuss the vortex mass m v . The mass of a clean vortex core has been considered to be of the order of the total mass of electrons in the core Finally, we briefly address the Majorana bound state (MBS) which has been reported to exist in a vortex core at low temperatures below 3 K in FST In summary, we have demonstrated time-resolved visualization of the trajectory of a fast-moving vortex in a thin film of iron-based superconductor FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 using phase-resolved THz-TDS techniques. The polarizationresolved measurements revealed the THz-SHG with po-larization perpendicular to that of the incident THz pulse, and its origin is attributed to the nonreciprocal nonlinear Hall effect as unveiled from the vortex trajectory, reflecting the supercurrent-induced inversion symmetry breaking. The properties of the fast-moving vortex are estimated from the analysis of THz-SHG, providing a small mass and viscosity of the vortex. This result suggests that most quasiparticles originally bound in the static vortex core do not catch up with the fast movement of the vortex. We have also demonstrated new schemes to visualize shielding supercurrents through the observation of phase-resolved THz-SHG, which may encourage spectroscopic studies with supercurrent injection on various superconductors. This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI (Grants No. 20K14408), by JST PRESTO Grant No. JPMJPR2108, Japan, and by JST CREST Grant No. JPMJCR19T3, Japan.