Electrical manipulation of magnetic order by current-induced spin torques lays the foundation for spintronics. One promising approach is encoding information in the Néel vector of antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials, particularly to collinear antiferromagnets with the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), as the negligible stray fields and terahertz spin dynamics can enable memory devices with higher integration density and ultrafast speed. Here we demonstrate that the Néel order information in a prototypical collinear AFM insulator with PMA, Cr2O3, can be reliably readout via the anomalous Hall effect and efficiently switched by the spin-orbit torque (SOT) effect with a low current density of 5.8×10 6 A/cm 2 . Moreover, using Cr2O3 as a mediator, we electrically switch the magnetization of a Y3Fe5O12 film exchange-coupled to the Cr2O3 layer, unambiguously confirming the Néel order switching of the Cr2O3 layer. This work provides a significant basis for developing AFM memory devices based on collinear AFM materials with PMA. For decades, ferromagnet (FM)-based spintronics have led to the birth of high performance spintronic devices, such as magnetic random-access memory (MRAM). 1- 3 The success of MRAM was based on the development of magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ), whereby the resistance can be reliably read out through the tunneling magnetoresistance effect and whose magnetic configurations can be electrically written with high efficiency via the current-induced spin torques. In particular, spin-orbit torque (SOT) originating from spin-orbit coupling in the heavy metal (HM) layer offers unique advantages in efficiency, speed and flexibility 3 . To further improve the performance of memory devices, antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials have recently attracted significant interest Many AFM materials have multiple easy axes along which their Néel order can be aligned, instead of only two that can directly encode the binary states 0 and 1 as in ferromagnets the 0 and 1 binary data straightforwardly as desired. Such 180 o switching has several advantages over 90 o or other switching strategies for AFM memories Recent work has investigated full electrical switching of the noncollinear AFM metal Mn3Sn films in which tensile strain from substrates is applied to realize PMA Electrical switching of a collinear AFM by 90 o has also been reported, though debated in some cases due to possible entanglement with the electromigration and thermoelastic effects Though collinear AFMs are simpler in their spin structure, it is difficult to unambiguously demonstrate 180 o full switching of a collinear Néel vector. To convincingly demonstrate this switching requires three characteristics: (1) The desired 180 o switching cannot be readout by the planar Hall effect anymore which has been extensively exploited for the case of 90 o rotation. Therefore, a significant anomalous Hall effect is necessary for 180 o switching. (2) The collinear AFM state should preferably have a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, which helps to distinguish any influences from the thermal and Oersted field effects. (3) The Néel order switching of the collinear AFM should also be clearly distinguishable from the case of switching of uncompensated spins at the interface only. Consequently, unambiguous demonstration of the collinear Né el order switching in experiment is challenging. Cr2O3 is a collinear AFM insulator with its easy-axis along the c axis of a hexagonal lattice We grew Cr2O3 films in the thickness range from 5 nm to 20 nm on Y3Sc2Ga3O12 (YSGG) (111) substrates by using the pulsed laser deposition method. A 3 nm Pt layer was then deposited on top by using magnetron sputtering (Methods). M-H loops show typical field-dependent magnetization of an AFM at different temperatures (T) (Supplement I). Also visible is a tiny kink around zero field due to the existence of uncompensated moments at the Cr2O3/Pt interface. Such uncompensated moments at the surface or interface in Cr2O3 systems have been successfully utilized to probe antiferromagnetic domain walls Moreover, the exchange bias effect associated with the exchange coupling between FM and AFM films at their interface constitutes an additional evidence of AFM order The inset figure shows a representative M-Hz hysteresis at 150 K. These data indicate that the AFM order is stabilized below 300 K in all samples, as expected based on the bulk compound. We further characterized the AFM behavior of Cr2O3 by magneto-transport measurements (Fig. Here, in contrast, using polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR), we confirm no parasitic magnetization inside our films (Supplement IV). Furthermore, we also measured the dependence of the longitudinal resistance (ΔRxx) on the direction of the applied field of 1 T at different T. Here, current is applied along the x axis and the spin current induced by the SHE is then polarized in the y axis. Fig. Moreover, the switching direction, clockwise or counterclockwise, is controlled by the sign of Hx, which is a discriminative feature of the z-type SOT switching scheme When we replaced Pt by W, with an opposite spin Hall angle, the switching direction was also reversed (Supplement V). We also replaced Pt by Cu, and no switching loop was observed (Supplement V). Furthermore, we calibrated the real temperature T* of our sample with the current pulse turned on. The real sample temperature T* was still below TN (Supplement V). These features provide clear evidence of (1) 180 o switching of the Néel order in Cr2O3 driven by SOT and (2) the dominant role of the SOT mechanism rather than the Oersted or heating mechanisms. Note that the critical current (Jc), 5.8×10 6 A/cm 2 at 270 K, is lower than those reported in other nonmagnetic metal (NM)/AFM insulator systems (Jc≈3×10 7 A cm -2 ) 20,38 (CoO or Fe2O3) and comparable to those reported in the NM/AFM metallic systems Notably, Jc increases commensurately with Hc as T is decreased, suggesting a strong correlation with anisotropy. To test how robust the magnetic properties of collinear AFM films are against external perturbations, we have investigated the SOT switching behavior under increased Hx at lower temperature (Supplementary Fig. To quantitatively demonstrate the role played by the uniaxial anisotropy (HK) of Cr2O3, we have systematically studied the dependence of Jc on Hx, T and tCr2O3, finding that HK, Hc, and Jc all increase as T is reduced (Fig. To further gain insight into the SOT switching results, we use a theoretical framework that combines a time-dependent nonequilibrium Green's-function (TDNEGF) algorithm with Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation to calculate the dynamics of magnetization switching 39,40 (Supplement VIII a). Through the s-d exchange coupling, the polarized electrons exert a torque on the localized magnetic moments at the Pt/AFM interface, which reverses the AFM Néel vector. The simulations also show that the critical current is positively correlated with the anisotropic energy and insensitively correlated with the applied magnetic field, which is in accordance with experiments. On the other hand, we also studied the significance of uncompensated magnetic moments on the surface during the Néel order reversal process (Supplement VIII b). The above simulations conclusively show that differences in anisotropy, interlayer coupling, and especially magnetization of the interfacial region from that of the bulk Cr2O3 plays a critical role for the presence of the field-induced and SOT-induced Néel order switching. Inspired by the switching of Cr2O3, we expect SOT can drive perpendicular magnetization switching of YIG for YSGG//YIG/Cr2O3/Pt samples, since an interfacial coupling between YIG and Cr2O3 is verified in Fig. However, the magnetization state of YIG cannot be probed by the AHE since Pt is only connected with Cr2O3. Thus, we further conducted the in-situ current-induced switching measurement via the magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) for the trilayer. we changed the Hx direction. As a result, the polarity of the MOKE signal is also reversed (Fig. We note that several AFM-based magnon-transfer torque (MTT) effects have recently been reported to enable FM magnetization switching in FM/AFM insulator (AFI)/HM systems To experimentally rule out the MTT mechanism, we measured the SMR of a YIG/Cr2O3/Pt trilayer. If the MTT were to dominate, the YIG layer would have absorbed magnon current at the YIG/Cr2O3 interface so that the YIG magnetization should have influenced the Pt resistance according to the SMR mechanism. However, no SMR is observed below TN for the trilayer (Supplement X), indicating the spin current produced in Pt has already been fully absorbed by Cr2O3 before reaching the YIG layer. The T-dependence of SMR is consistent with the experimental data in Ref. These observations strongly favor a picture in which transferred spin torque from Pt is directly imposed on the perpendicular Néel vector of Cr2O3, resulting in 180 o switching of its Néel order and indirectly reversing the YIG magnetization through exchange coupling with Cr2O3 (Fig. Thus, our experiment reveals AFM-mediated torque as a new pathway for energyefficient magnetization switching of magnetic insulators. This process is as energy efficient as MTT. Such a picture is also well reproduced by theoretical calculation, which reveal that the Cr2O3 Néel vector and YIG magnetization are simultaneously switched by a polarized spin current (Supplement VIII a). In addition, the AFMmediated torque mechanism which can nonlocally switch magnetization of a magnetic insulator embedded in AFMI/FM heterostructures can be potentially used to electrically control magnetic states of emerging insulating magnon devices, such as magnon junctions From the above observations and analysis, it is clear that this magnetic insulator / AFM insulator / heavy metal trilayer system with perpendicular anisotropy is required to unambiguously demonstrate the 180 o SOT switching of the AFM Néel order. Encouragingly, after proving the SOT-switching feasibility in this collinear and insulating AFM system, we see no physical limitation to prevent the same mechanism from being generalized to other collinear AFM systems such as metallic MnN The performance of electrical manipulation of the antiferromagnetic order is crucial for practical memory devices. More specifically, the spin current generated by subterahertz antiferromagnetic resonance has been reported in Cr2O3, offering attractive dynamic properties for potential applications in ultrafast devices. Accordingly, we also switched the Néel vector of Cr2O3 by 6-ns current pulses, a record-fast value for SOTswitching of an AFM insulator system, which is also a key step toward ultrafast and robust device applications 7 (Supplement XI). Further, the SOT switching endurance performance was tested through the application of 5000 alternating pulse currents. The obtained switching curves did not show noticeable degradation, demonstrating high endurance (Supplement XII). We note that TN of Cr2O3 is 275 K currently, insufficient for room-temperature applications. To mitigate this shortcoming, epitaxial or chemical strain engineering has been recently demonstrated as a viable path to increase TN to 400 K, In summary, our study unambiguously demonstrates efficient control over the Néel order of collinear AFM insulator Cr2O3 with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy by spin-orbit torques. The AFM order is switched with a minimum current density of ~5.8×10 The PNR measurements were performed using the POLREF instrument at the ISIS Neutron and Muon Source. The POLREF beamline is a white beam Time of Flight (ToF) polarized neutron reflectometer with a polarized wavelength band of 0.2 nm -1.4 nm. The samples were mounted horizontally in a helium flow cryostat within an electromagnet with a maximum field of ±700 mT that can be applied in the plane of the sample. A helium exchange gas pressure of 4 kPa was used, providing a temperature stability of ±0.01K. The samples were held in place by gravity alone to avoid the use of epoxy, which may strain the film and substrates upon cooling to lower temperatures. The data were reduced using the Mantid framework in combination with additional inhouse python scripts and analyzed using the Refl1D software package. Uncertainties on fitted parameters were obtained using the DREAM algorithm in the Bumps software package, a Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. The transport characteristics were measured by a standard four-probe method using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). First, we measured the transverse resistance Rxy as a function of the Hz to obtain anomalous Hall resistance. After subtracting a linear background due to the ordinary Hall effect, a clear hysteresis was observed when T was far below 275 K. As for the SMR measurement, we measured longitudinal resistance Rxx with the rotation of devices in the α, β, γ plane. For the switching measurement, we applied a 100 ms pulse write current Iwrite to switch antiferromagnetic domains. Then a d.c. read current of Iread = 0.1 mA was applied along the x direction, where a wait time of 500 ms was inserted after turning off the write current and before measuring RH. The The datas that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.