Nature hosts a wealth of materials showcasing intricate structures intertwining order, disorder, and hierarchy, delivering resilient multifunctionality surpassing perfect crystals or simplistic disordered materials. The engineering of such materials through nanoparticle assembly represents a burgeoning field, poised with potential to yield sustainable material systems rivaling or exceeding biological functionalities. This review delineates the fundamental concept of complexity in the context of nanoscale materials. It examines methodologies for characterizing complexity and functionality, explores pragmatic approaches to create complex nanomaterials, and offers a perspective on their potential applications, guiding the trajectory of future research endeavors. The need for complexity in materials engineering lies in the pursuit of optimized and robust solutions that address the hard challenges posed by environmental, economic, and social boundary conditions for their design. Sustainable materials must exhibit a difficult-to-achieve balance of properties, such as strength, flexibility, and recyclability, to meet the diverse needs of various applications while minimizing their environmental footprint. It is becoming increasingly clear that traditional crystalline materials (characterized by perfect order) and amorphous materials (characterized by simple uncorrelated disorder) cannot address these needs. Learning from biology, incorporating complexity into material design by combining order, disorder, and hierarchical organization enables the development of innovative structures and compositions that mimic the structural designs of the most advanced and adaptable systems in nature -those of living organisms. To increase the complexity of human-made (or synthetic) materials, whether or not the repeating structural patterns found in living creatures are incorporated -is the best pathway to new materials with enhanced performance while reducing resource consumption. The complexity will also foster their resilience and adaptability of these materials, ensuring that they can withstand dynamic environmental conditions and evolving technological requirements. Embracing complexity is, therefore, pivotal for the development of materials that are foundational for a sustainable future. The subject of complexity is significant and timely for nanostructured materials because they: (1) have an intrinsic ability to self-assemble into complex structures; (2) require deliberate design of intricate architectures to best ensure their properties like conductivity, mechanical strength, and catalytic activity; and (3) provide the unique opportunity to observe the emergence of complexity over multiple scales due to high electronic contrast and microscopic observations of nanoparticle (NP) dynamics. As the design of complex self-assembled nanostructures continues to advance to benefit energy, environmental, water, biomedical, information and other technologies, a quantitative approach to complexity engineering of nanostructures becomes the forefront of materials science and technology. The objectives of this perspective are threefold: (1) to define the notion of complexity in the context of materials; (2) to establish and validify methodology(ies) of its quantification; and (3) to provide practical pathways for further scientific studies of complex particles, composites, assemblies, and biomaterials and their technical and biomedical realizations. The subject of complexity has many faces. It represents a ubiquitous yet vague notion that does not have a universal agreed-upon definition based on the physical description of matter. The earliest thought about complexity traces back to Aristotle, who defined complexity as "The whole is more than the sum of its parts" (Metaphysics, Vol. VII). Note that this is a function-based conceptualization of complexity, which can theoretically guide the construction of many complex systems and materials. The first modern attempts to transition from colloquial to formal definitions of complexity are associated with the development of programming and information theory. The works of Kolmogorov, Repeatable patterns found in crystals, dramatically simplify the algorithms (rules) describing their structural organization, and thus AIC. At the same time, randomness of the atomic structures of the materials increases AIC. The relationship between Shannon information, algorithm design, and complexity was further explored in the 1980s in the publications by S. Wolfram in 1984, The change in physical interpretation of complexity enabled these scientists and engineers to explore the relations between complexity and "big" subjects, such as the emergence of life and evolution of the universe. Elegant, instructive, and quantitative insights into the relationship between complexity and thermodynamics were also made. The direct connection between the complex multifractal systems of particles and their entropy and enthalpy were made by The interest in complexity continued between 1990 and 2000 and expanded to the structural complexity found chemical and biological matter. These studies included brain and neuronal networks, Expanding the ideas of Aristotle, Grassberger, Holland, and Gell-Mann about an effective and function-based complexity, let us consider the reasons for complexity as a design metric for materials. The best examples of amazingly complex and universally useful chemical structures excelling in both performance and longevity are biological composites. They can be found in all parts of the biosphere and are typically made from renewable earth-abundant nanoscale components, which makes a particularly good case for complexity in the context of sustainability. High-performance biological composites are exemplified by seashell nacre, The key reason for universality of these structural traits is that the combination of order and disorder enables hierarchical organization, which would be otherwise impossible in a perfectly Note that the intricate multiscale organization have, however, enthalpic and entropic penalties. Noncomplex materials, for instance, perfectly crystalline minerals or perfectly disordered glasses, are more advantageous with respect to the free energy costs and component availability. Nevertheless, the materials with high complexity are the ones that make a difference between existence and non-existence for living organisms. They support life because they excel not in only one task but in multiple ones at the same time. Nacre, enamel, bone, cartilage, etc. require complexity because they must display high strength, high toughness, high ionic selectivity, high flux of nutrients, low weight longevity, and selectivity in cellular adhesion -all at the same time. Monolithic blocks of calcium fluorophosphate, collagen, or their mixture exhibiting complete disorder or perfect order (crystallinity) will not provide the hardness, strength, and longevity of enamel. Besides examples from nature, there are numerous materials, and more generally, materials systems, that are neither periodic nor random, which are essential for their performance, robustness, and manufacturing. They span a vast range of technologies from neuromorphic computers to desalination membranes. Considering the prior studies of complexity in the context of 'big questions', a parallel can be made with other complex systems evolving under multiple boundary conditions modelled by Kauffman 31 and Holland 10 Similarly, complexity in biomaterials emerges because they must perform multiple tasks and conform to multiple functional requirements that would otherwise be impossible to fulfil. In the context of materials complexity can, therefore, be defined as purposeful performance-oriented structural organization of matter, combining order and disorder. This definition is applicable to biological and non-biological materials, static or dynamic matter, and open or closed systems. It also incorporates atomic, nanoscale, mesoscale, microscale, and macroscale structures relevant to understanding the interactive and malleable hierarchy in living and technological systems. The approach to complexity as a parameter relating materials organization and performance can be described as a generic "Goldilocks" curve (Figure of materials structure to satisfy multiple requirements giving rise to multiple properties, the complexity and performance reaches a maximum somewhere between order (i.e., perfect continuous crystallinity) and disorder (i.e., uncorrelated isotropic randomness). Multiple approaches to quantify complexity have been proposed in the past. On the positive side, AIC can be related to entropy and entropy-related measure(s) of complexity were proposed by Grassberger Notably, all these approaches were inspired by biological systems. Cumulatively, they can be described as different methods to divide the actual physical system (Tononi, Ay) or its photographic image (Wolf, Katsnelson, Koonin) into parts followed by testing whether the complete system (object, image, etc.) has more information than a sum of its parts. In this regard, one system is higher in complexity when its generalized functionality is higher than that of another system. This approach and its different interpretations capture the idea of and can theoretically lead to a quantitative Goldilocks curve. Self-assembled nanostructures can serve as a convenient model to further our understanding of how complexity and functionalities are related. Varied degrees of order and disorder are typical for NPs and other nanoscale structures. The latter includes a range of structures from nearly perfect colloidal crystals made from NPs with simple singular functionalities to imperfect but multifunctional assemblies from polydispersed NPs and to random agglomerates with limited functionalities. Additionally, the structures of inorganic nanoscale assemblies can be evaluated by various microscopy methods because of their higher contrast compared to of inorganic materials. Finally, the variety of nanoscale materials in biology and technology is enormous. The creation of a universal approach to their design that incorporates multiple requirements would significantly simplify the job of materials scientists. Prior studies of complexity were not adapted to nanoscale structures in part because a methodology for the structural description of nanoscale systems that combined both order and disorder had not yet been defined. Simplification of graph representation of the nanoscale components is needed to have consider contribution from unifying connectivity patterns between the building blocks. This approach GT models of nanoscale structures and nanoassemblies can be extracted from their TEM and SEM images (Figure Note that graph descriptions of nanoscale structures can be applied to both size-limited nanoscale assemblies from NPs, nanorods and nanoplatelets, such as supraparticles, as well as to (semi)infinite materials, such as composites, gels, etc. The GT approach can be extended to continuous materials, such as nacre, enamel, and bone. Once a representative graph of a nanostructure, or more generally, a material, is created, its complexity can be calculated. However, there is no universally accepted measure of complexity (Section 3.2). Additionally, measures developed in the classical studies of complexity have not yet been applied to materials -nanoscale or otherwise. Several complexity measures could potentially be applicable to nanostructures. Among them are fractal exponents that describe selfsimilarity across the scales calculated from the GT representations. Organizational patterns with multiple structural motifs can sometimes be described by a single fractal exponent, such as perfectly ordered fractals represented by Sierpinski triangles, and random isotropic fractals represented by diffusion-limited agglomeration structures. In a more general case, one can use a spectrum of fractal dimensions treated as scale-and location-dependent variables. These methods to describe repeatable patterns are referred to as multifractals and multifractal spectra. Their repeatable organizational pattern of nacre or nacre-like man-made composites, that is, the stacking of nanoplatelets with organic layers in between, is uniformly described by a graph where K3 segments are interconnected by additional edges (Figure CI can serve as a measure of COD complexity. For complex particles, the rise in CI can be directly associated with their multifunctionality, and potentially construct a Goldilocks curve. The rise in functionality is characterized by the multitude of properties controllable by organization at these scales. The addition of atomic scale that describes the nanoparticles, nanorods, nanosheets, and the heterogeneity over the volume of the supraparticles, will increase the degrees of freedom, the number of nodes in GT representations, and thus, the measure of complexity. Concomitantly, this will also increase the number of properties that can be combined for a particle and the range of parameters that one property can be tuned independently of others. A recent proposal in this workspace was to perform real space renormalization on images and calculate the distances (i.e., dissimilarities) between images across consecutive steps of renormalization, and use the sum of these distances across the scales to define a multiscale structural complexity. How can one create a complex material? Answers to this question hold the key to technologically friendly pathways to scalable complex materials that exhibit a desired set of properties. Although many views on complexity have been proposed and many methods to predictively describe complex systems have been postulated, the actual pathways to real materials from real components that exhibit intended complex behavior and an intended set of properties, have been much less explored. As often is the case with such difficult problems, some lessons can be learned from examining complex materials in nature. Most of them are nanostructured, self-assembled, and chiral. In this section we review several models that connect these characteristics with COD complexity. Chirality: Chirality, or mirror asymmetry, arises from the spatial arrangement and chemical distinction of atoms, molecules, nanoparticles, supraparticles, etc. This geometric characteristic and associated parameters introduce a uniquely practical dimension to the topic of material complexity. In chemistry and biology, it is widely accepted that chiral components self-assemble into intricate and sophisticated structures, which often exhibit properties that are very distinct from their initial components. Chiral molecules and particles can also be synergistically combined with non-chiral counterparts. The arrangement of chiral entities, such as molecules or NPs, can lead to the emergence of materials with complex helical or twisted structures. This dependence can be understood in the context of competitive restrictions on the shortand long-range self-assembly patterns that emerge for systems with different chirality. Electrostatic repulsion between the components engenders the nearly universal restrictions that tn is the temperature of the reaction. impose limits on particle size, which is common for SPs, vesicles, micelles, inkjet droplets, exosomes, intracellular compartments, etc. The complex nanoscale chiral architectures emerge only when restrictions are multiple, anisotropic, and competitive. What is essential is that energy gains and penalties associated with these restrictions on the self-assembly of building blocks must be comparable. When none of the competing interactions and restrictions dominate, NP self-assembly acquires complex architectures to negotiate these conflicting requirements. For chiral NPs, the anisotropic restrictions associated with electrostatic repulsion are intertwined with those from hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic attraction, meta-ion coordination, and elastic deformation. The first order assessment of characteristic energies of these interactions when competitive restrictions result in complex architectures is 50-60 kJ/mol. The practicality of the chirality pathway to complexity can be highlighted by the fact that the polydispersity of NPs does not impede the formation of complex architectures. For Au-Cys NPs with extremely high polydispersity, the complexity of the resulting SPs is considerably higher than those formed from other NPs. Polydispersity may actually increase the complexity of the supraparticles, because the presence of smaller and larger NPs with stronger and weaker twists enables the growing assembly to select site-suitable NPs from the mixture. The strong effect of chirality enables the scalable preparation and controllable preparation of complex particles in a sustainable manner and helps us to understand the origin of the astounding diversity and sophistication of biological nanocomposites (Figures for r > r $ ≈ 3.57 through the onset of chaos, where orbits become irregular and small variations in the initial conditions changes drastically over time (Figure The more generalized concept, spatiotemporal chaos, describes extended systems involving many interacting degrees of freedom, and finite correlation in both time and space controlled by the time elapsed from the onset of chaos. Having "finite correlation in both time and space" is common in systems with stochasticity, such as statistical mechanics, but spatiotemporal chaos refers to how this phenomenon comes from nonlinearity, even when the system is fully deterministic. This concept is directly relevant for physical, chemical, and biological systems where complex spatial patterns arise from simple nonlinear dynamics rules. The connections between spatiotemporal chaos and complex biosystems in nature have been extensively discussed in prior studies. There is a high degree of certainty that spatiotemporal chaos can be a realistic pathway to complex materials. Similar to many cases of complex materials, this research direction remains largely unexplored for nanostructures and other materials. Geometric frustration: A new route to complex structures that has been identified recently is geometric frustration between the building blocks, which can take the form of frustrated attraction and repulsion (Figure Geometric frustration may be caused by chirality (Figure More recently, influenced by the blossoming field of active matter, To summarize, the study of pathways to complexity in the context of nanomaterials is still at its infancy. Predictions of complexity theories outline an exciting future where complex structures lead to functionality and adaptability. Tools to synthesize such systems, fundamentally understand their formation mechanisms, and predict their functionalities, will be of great value. Conclusions. The notion of "complexity" is at the crossroad between the philosophical methodologies of deduction and induction. Deduction has prevailed in the methodology of physics research since the 19 th century, where deterministic laws govern a wide variety of phenomena in nature. In contrast, induction is dominant for studies of "emergence" that has gained popularity since the second half of the 20 th century, with discoveries of critical phenomena and nonlinear dynamics. Emergence encompasses stochastic behaviors due to many degrees of freedom, the interactions of which are difficult to deduce because they are less deterministic, and the system is non-ergodic. The concept of structural complexity is at the center of emergence, where a realm of fascinating phenomena arises even when the system components obey very simple rules. Translating this point to materials design, the interactions between the materials components do not need to be excessively complicated and contain multiple parameters to make complex materials. These interactions do need to be, however, multibody, competitive, and experimentally deducible. Scientists now have the capabilities, therefore, for fundamental and practical studies of complex materials, especially for nanoscale components, that satisfy many requirements and are experimentally convenient. In the next few years, we can aim at better understanding of control and utilization of order, disorder, and hierarchy for specific property sets establishing the links between complexity and functionality. We expect that dynamic nanostructured systems will be created demonstrating gradual emergence of the hierarchical 3D patterns with direct utility in energy technologies, optoelectronics, membrane science, and biomedical applications.