This article presents the use of advanced tools applied to the design of devices that can solve specific acoustic problems, improving the already existing devices based on classic technologies. Specifically, we have used two different configurations of a material called Sonic Crystals, which is formed by arrays of acoustic scatterers, to obtain acoustic screens with high diffusion properties by means of an optimization process. This design procedure has been carried out using a multiobjective evolutionary algorithm along to an acoustic simulation model developed with the numerical method called Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD). The results obtained are discussed in terms of both the acoustic performance and the robustness of the devices achieved. Environmental noise can be defined as an unwanted or harmful outdoor sound created by human activities, and is one of the main environmental problems all over the world Generally speaking, environmental noise can be mitigated (i) at the source, reducing the radiated sound power emitted by vehicles; (ii) during its propagation, reducing the noise level during its propagation from the source to the receiver or (iii) in the receiver, improving the isolation of the dwellings and preventing its transmission through the exterior walls. When the noise control is carried out in its propagation phase, the most used solution is the placement of acoustic barriers (AB) If we focus on the energy of specularly reflected noise, some unwanted problems can arise when placing AB to protect predetermined areas. Thus, sometimes the site where AB is located to acoustically protect a receiver can increase the noise level in other locations that also need protection. This situation is illustrated in Fig. Regarding the solution based on scattering reflected noise, some new proposals have been made in recent years. One of the most widely accepted is the use of new devices based on technologically advanced materials devoted to noise control. Sonic Crystals (SC), generally defined as heterogeneous materials formed by arrangements of acoustic scatterers embedded in air, is one of these materials On the other hand, the use of sound diffusers in room acoustics to increase the sound diffuseness is generally accepted for four decades ago, when Schroeder presented the first proposal of such devices In addition, in recent years it has been possible the increasing of the acoustic performance of some devices based on SC, as SCAS or SCAD, through the use of evolutionary algorithms. Specifically, an elitist Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithm (MOEA), called ev-MOGA Hereafter we will refer to these new devices as SCASAD (Sonic Crystals Acoustics Screens and Diffusers). The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we describe the optimization process, explaining both the optimization tool and the simulation model used. The results obtained in the optimization process are analyzed and discussed in Sec. 3. The last section, Sec. 4, contains the closing remarks, where the main conclusions are summarized. In this section we briefly explain the main characteristics of the MOEA used in this work as well as the optimization procedure carried out. There are certain types of optimization problems in which is necessary to achieve solutions that satisfy several objectives simultaneously. Obviously, the natural tendency is to search the best solution for each one of the considered objectives. However, if the objectives are in conflict, usually an improvement in one of them means a worsening in others, and this means that there is not a single optimal solution. These kinds of problems, where several conflicting objectives have to be simultaneously optimized are known in the literature as multiobjective optimization problems, and they may be solved using MOEA Eq. ( where Ji(θ), i ∈ B:=[1 ... s] are the objectives to be minimized, θ is a solution inside the L-dimensional solution space D⊆R L , and θli and θui are the lower and the upper constraints that defined the solution space D. The general way to solve such problems using MOEA is the localization of a set of infinite optimal solutions in the objective space, which is mapped as the Pareto front. This front shows the best individuals, in some sense, obtained in the optimization process and classified according to the values achieved in the functions to be optimized. The basic concept to obtain the Pareto set is known as Pareto dominance, which is defined as follows: a solution θ 1 dominates another solution θ 2 , denoted by ≤ Ji(θ 2 ) ∧ Ǝk ∈ B: Jk(θ 1 )<Jk(θ 2 ). The Pareto set ΘP is composed by all the non-dominated solutions, and the associated Pareto front is denoted as J(ΘP). Due to the difficulties appeared in real problems to get the exact Pareto front, we have used here an elitist multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on the concept of e-dominance The first cost function we have chosen, related to the acoustic insulation capabilities of different individuals, is related to the Insertion Loss (IL) index, defined as the difference in sound pressure at a point or area with and without the sample. Note that the goal is to achieve a high level of acoustic insulation and therefore, in the optimization process we will work minimizing -IL. Thus, for a solution (individual) θ: where pd is the direct acoustic pressure (without device), and pinter is the acoustic pressure interfered (with device), both calculated at the same point or area. The second cost function concerns the diffusion properties of the individuals. To characterize this acoustic capability we have defined a new index called Specular Reflection Sound (SRS). For an individual θ is defined as: where α is the absorption coefficient and d is the diffusion coefficient for each individual. These two cost functions determine the performance of individuals as both SCAS and as SCAD in the predetermined range of frequencies stablished by us. In this work we have selected a range of frequencies formed by the octaves bands whose central frequencies are 500 Hz, 1000 Hz and 2000 Hz, i.e. a range of frequencies from 355 Hz to 2828 Hz. The reason for this selection is related with the nature of the noise that our devices will deal with, which is given by the normalized spectral traffic noise defined in the norm UNE 1793-3:1998, where critical frequencies are covered by our selected range. Once the cost functions have been defined, the next step of the optimization procedure (step 2) is twofold: (i) the characterization of the shape of the individuals -including the initial population with which the optimization process begin-in such a way that the population will be formed by a variable set of individuals, all of them based on a predetermined SC module, and (ii) their codification. In this work we have selected a module formed by 28 cylindrical rigid scatterers arranged in 4 rows. The reason for this choice is related to the characteristics of the SCAS and SCAD designed and/or optimized up to now: SCAS are usually formed by 3 or 4 rows On the other hand, in order to provide enough genetic variation to the initial population necessary to create new individuals with a high variability in the values of their cost functions, we have used as a tool the variation of the radii of the cylindrical scatterers of the individuals formed from the module previously defined (7x4 cylinders). To characterize each individual of the population it is necessary to establish a gene codification, encoding each one of them by means of a set of genes that represents the set of the 28 (7x4) normalized cylinders radii. Each radius can take any value from 0 to 0.9. If the value is 0, the cylinder does not exist and, if the value is 0.9, the cylinder has almost the maximum possible radius, which is equal to the half lattice constant. In this way, any individual θ can be represented by a genotype given by a vector of length 28 elements, varying each one from 0 to 0.9. Two examples of the genetic coding are shown in Fig. Once the cost functions and the codification of individuals have been defined, the optimization procedure can be initiated. This process works using together ev-MOGA and an acoustic simulation model developed by us, which will be presented in next calculating the values of its cost functions (-IL and SRS) and providing them to ev-MOGA. Finally, the optimization procedure ends when an optimal solution belonging to the Pareto Front obtained is selected according to designer preferences. To acoustically characterize the different individuals obtained in the optimization process, we have developed a simulation model based on the numerical technique called Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD). This model works together with ev-MOGA and performs the necessary calculations to obtain the values, for each individual, of the previously defined cost functions. FDTD is often used in acoustic simulations of different devices. In particular, it has been already used successfully to quantify the acoustic performance of SC in some optimization processes, working together with ev-MOGA The model developed specifically for this paper is shown in Fig. With these boundary conditions, the numerical scheme is excited by a line source placed at the left hand side of the integration area (see Fig 3 On the other hand, to calculate the SRS index we need to estimate both the incident and the reflected sound. For doing so, the total acoustic pressure is recorded every 0.01 m in 1/3 octave bands along the entire vertical blue line shown on the left in Fig. According to the characteristics of the numerical model explained, the optimization process is developed only for the normal incidence of the wave on the SC. To obtain high performance devices that act simultaneously as SCAS and as SCAD we have used in this work the combination of ev-MOGA and FDTD, as we have commented above. One of the main problems of this optimization procedure is that the joint use of both algorithms implies large computational cost. In our case, the FDTD simulation for each device takes about 240 s on an Intel Core i7-3632QM 2.20 GHz (Santa Clara, CA). To calculate the total runtime, it is necessary to take into account that the total number of calculations in the optimization process is estimated as the number of new individuals plus the number of individuals in the initial population. Once the Pareto set is obtained for each generation, it is used as part of the initial population for the next optimization. In the process of optimization developed in this work, the initial population is formed by 2000 individuals, and in each generation 8 new individuals are added. Under these conditions, the total execution time of the entire process is 7 days, considering 1000 generations. The selected configuration is formed by the initial module defined in section 2.1 but arranging the cylindrical scatterers using only one lattice constant. That means that the existing bandgaps in the region of interest are due to only one periodicity. Specifically, and taking into account the normalized spectral traffic noise defined in the norm UNE 1793-3:1998, we have set the value of the considered single lattice constant in p=0.17 As can be seen, the -SRS values are generally higher for the selected individual and lower for the reference, confirming the trend shown in Fig. Another interesting parameter used to help decision maker to choose the most appropriate individual in the optimization process is the robustness of the selected devices. This concept has been previously introduced by some of us, and is defined as the degree to which the values of cost functions are affected by small changes in the values of the parameters that vary in the optimization process In Even with this important restriction, the results obtained are successful, in terms of both acoustic performance and robustness. Although the existence of some problems related to the acoustic behaviour of sonic crystals, in particular the fact that the frequency ranges with maximum attenuation 