Superconducting circuits reveal themselves as promising physical devices with multiple uses. Within those uses, the fundamental concept of the geometric phase accumulated by the state of a system shows up recurrently, as, for example, in the construction of geometric gates. Given this framework, we study the geometric phases acquired by a paradigmatic setup: a transmon coupled to a superconductor resonating cavity. We do so both for the case in which the evolution is unitary and when it is subjected to dissipative effects. These models offer a comprehensive quantum description of an anharmonic system interacting with a single mode of the electromagnetic field within a perfect or dissipative cavity, respectively. In the dissipative model, the non-unitary effects arise from dephasing, relaxation, and decay of the transmon coupled to its environment. Our approach enables a comparison of the geometric phases obtained in these models, leading to a thorough understanding of the corrections introduced by the presence of the environment. Significant advancements in coherent superconducting circuits have enabled the development of a diverse range of qubit designs, encompassing the classic flux Within the landscape of physical systems provided by cQED setups, the objects known as geometric phases (GPs) have lately played an important role, mainly for implementing measurements and other quantum operations and therefore allowing GPs to be harnessed for various applications, such as geometric gates. The idea that the phase acquired by the state of a quantum system can be decomposed into a dynamical and a geometrical component originated with Berry's theoretical work, where it was constrained to the context of adiabatic, cyclic, unitary evolution As evident in the extensive literature, GPs have evolved into not only a fruitful avenue for exploring fundamental aspects of quantum systems but also a topic of technological interest. For instance, due to its resilience to fluctuations in a coupled bath, the GP has been proposed as a significant resource for constructing phase gates When dealing with non-unitary dynamics leading to mixed states, the GP needs further generalization from its pure-state definition. A well defined proposal that applies under these conditions was presented in In a previous study In the present paper, we extend the work on the JC model to encompass the scenario of a nonlinear transmon coupled to a transmission line or resonator. Additionally, both the transmon and resonator are coupled to two semi-infinite waveguides serving as the surrounding environments. We will investigate the dynamics of the composite system, both in the qubit sector and in the two-excitation sector. Restricting to the one-excitation sector will allow for direct comparison of the results previously obtained, which implies the comparison of two different architectures in which atom-cavity dynamics emerge. It is worth highlighting a major difference between both studies even at this early stage, which is the non-monotonic behavior encountered in the GP under certain environmental conditions. Thereafter, to further explore the richer nature of the transmon atom, we also examine the GP and its environmentally induced corrections when the two-excitation levels are involved in the dynamics. In the next section, we will introduce the Hamiltonian describing the non-harmonic transmon-field system under investigation and the coupling of the composite system to the environment. In this section, we will also present some insights about the dynamic evolution of the system and the definition of the geometric phase. In Section III, we will describe the one-excitation subspace dynamics and the correspondence with previous results. The two-excitation space and the role of charging energy and non-harmonicity is discussed in Section IV. Section V summarizes our main conclusions. Due to their substantial dimensions, stemming from the necessity of maintaining low charging energy (via large capacitance), transmon qubits inherently lend themselves to capacitive coupling with microwave resonators. This coupling is reflected in the transmon Hamiltonian Ĥ = 4E c (n-n g ) 2 -E J cos φ by the substitution of the classical voltage source V g with the resonator, a quantized gate voltage n g → -n r , representing the charge bias of the transmon due to the resonator. The Hamiltonian of the combined system is therefore where n = Q/2e is the charge number operator, and φ = (2π/Φ 0 ) Φ (mod 2π) is the phase operator, defined by the charge and phase operators, respectively, of the quantum circuit. The charging energy is E c = e 2 /2C Σ , with C Σ = C J + C S being the sum of the junction's capacitance C J and the shunt capacitance C S . The operator nr can be written as nr = m nm , with nm = (C g /C m ) Qm /2e being the contribution to the charge bias to the mth resonator mode. In this expression, C g is the capacitance of the gate and C m is the corresponding associated resonator mode capacitance. It is usual to consider C g ≪ C Σ , C m . When assuming that the transmon frequency is much closer to one of the resonator modes than all the other modes, it is possible to truncate the sum over m to a single term. In this single-mode approximation for the resonator or cavity, the Hamiltonian reduces to a single oscillator of frequency denoted by ω r coupled to a transmon. Expressed in terms of creation and annihilation operators, in the single-mode approximation, the Hamiltonian for the transmon-resonator cavity reduces to where the term n2 r has been absorbed in the charging energy term of the resonator mode and therefore leads to a renormalization of the resonator frequency, which we omit for simplicity. The frequency of the mode of interest is ω r , and the coupling constant between the artificial atom and the resonator is given by the relation g = ω r Cg /CΣ ( E J /2Ec) 1 /4 ( πZr /R K ) 1 /2 , where Z r is the characteristic impedance of the resonator mode and R K = h/2e 2 is the resistance quantum. The above Hamiltonian can be simplified further in the experimentally relevant situation where the coupling constant is much smaller than the system frequencies, |g| ≪ ω r , ω q . After rotatingwave approximation, the Hamiltonian reads This is the Hamiltonian we shall consider to study the interaction between the artificial atom (in the transmon regime E J /E c ≫ 1) and the electromagnetic field mode of the resonator. In this Hamiltonian, the term proportional to E c is the so-called Kerr-like interaction term, or non-harmonic term. A. Coupling to the Environment Hitherto, our focus has been on quantum systems completely isolated from the surrounding environment. Nevertheless, a comprehensive portrayal of quantum circuits necessitates consideration of the manner in which these systems engage with their environment, encompassing both measurement apparatus and control circuitry. Indeed, the environment assumes a dual function in quantum technology; portraying quantum systems as entirely isolated is not only impossible due to inevitable coupling with undesirable environmental degrees of freedom but also renders a perfectly isolated system impractical for manipulation. Such a system would lack utility since we would be devoid of the means to control or observe it. Given these considerations, in this section, we investigate our quantum system coupled to external semi-infinite transmission lines that represent the measurement and control mechanisms while constituting the primary environment leading to photon loss and spontaneous decay of the transmon as their main environmental effect, respectively. We also consider the existence of a flux line for tunability of the transmon that leads to dephasing due to flux noise. To study the open system comprising the transmonresonator and transmission lines (reservoir), we will employ the conventional formalism provided by Lindblad master equations. In this context, we can model the transmission lines as a set of harmonic oscillators, similar to the approach taken in quantum Brownian motion models, which are paradigmatic examples of open quantum systems. Assuming, therefore, that the transmon and the resonator are coupled to independent baths (this system is illustrated in Figure where ρ is the density matrix of the composite system (transmon-resonator), and ĤK is the Hamiltonian of Equation where {. ; .} , is the anticommutator. We will work on the basis B = {|m n⟩}, where m refers to the mth energy eigenstate of the transmon and n is the nth Fock state of the mode field in the resonator. Transmon capacitively coupled to the resonator and both of them capacitively coupled to transmission lines. The coefficient κ is associated with the coupling between the resonator and the readout transmission line and represents the photon decay rate. In addition, γ is related to the qubit-environment coupling strength introduced by the control mechanism and represents the relaxation rate. Finally, γφ is the pure dephasing rate emerging due to the flux noise taking place in the flux line that allows for tunability of the transmon frequency. To address the dynamics of the transmon-field composite system, we numerically solve the master Equation ( which can be decomposed into blocks as in Equation In this way, when the system is prepared in a oneexcitation state |Ψ(0)⟩ ∈ {|10⟩, |01⟩}, the evolution remains restricted to the subspace form by the 2 × 2 block and ρ 00 . In that case, the dynamics renders independent on the value of the capacitance energy E c generating the anharmonicity. On the other hand, by setting the initial state as a pure state within the 3 × 3 block, all the matrix elements in the block-diagonal subspace are involved in the evolution. As already noted in the introductory Section I, a generalized definition of a GP that is suitable to be computed for a mixed state under non-unitary evolution was proposed in where ψ k (t) are the instantaneous eigenvectors of the density matrix, and ε k (t) are the corresponding eigenvalues. This formula provides a well defined GP that, although defined for non-degenerate but otherwise general mixed states, when computed over pure states under unitary evolution, reduces to the expression defined over the most general unitary evolution of a pure state |Ψ(t)⟩ where |ψ + (t)⟩ is the eigenvector of ρ(t) that coincides, at t = 0, with the initial state. This is the eigenvector such that ε + (0) = 1. Equation ( We will restrict our analysis to pure initial states, so that the usual analysis applied to pure-state GPs can be immediately extrapolated by observing the behavior of the density matrix eigenstate |ψ + (t)⟩. It will be useful to start by exploring some aspects of the better-known subspace accessed when preparing the system in a state with only one excitation. In this case, as stated in Section II B, the state of the system remains constrained to the 2 × 2 block spanned by {|10⟩, |01⟩}, with the only exception of showing population exchange to ρ 00 . On general grounds, the populations ρ 11 and ρ 22 of energy levels with one excitation oscillate while decaying, whereas the population of the vacuum state ρ 00 grows. Depending on the parameters, the asymptotic state can be a pure |00⟩ state or a mixed state with non-vanishing but suppressed ρ 11 and ρ 22 populations. The only nonzero coherences ρ 12/21 (t) increase in absolute value up to a maximum value and then vanish asymptotically. It is useful to notice already at this point that the relation between the parameters defining the unitary evolution and the parameters defining the environmental effects results in a dynamic that exhibits specific characteristics. This is noticeable in Figure The eigenvector |ψ + (t)⟩ of the density matrix that is involved in the expression for the geometrical phase belongs, in this case, to the 2 × 2 block and can thus be observed on the Bloch sphere. In order to inspect the dependence of the dynamics with the detuning ∆, Figure Figure In some cases, as displayed in panels (a) and (b) of Figure As expected, the accumulated GP has a sign while the state is winding the sphere on one hemisphere, and it changes sign as soon as the winding takes place on the other hemisphere. It can be seen from Figure To better explore under which physical circumstances the GP accumulation is non-monotone, we study the dependence in three characteristics of the system and environment. These are: the initial state of the system, which we take to be either |10⟩ or |01⟩; the main source of decoherence and dissipative effects, which we consider to be either the photon loss κ or the atom spontaneous decay γ; and the detuning ∆. The results of this examination are displayed in Figures Figure Likewise, Figure Comparing to previous results in The evolution in Figure Once again, the change in the direction of the GP coincides in time with the moment in which the path traced by |ψ + (t)⟩ crosses from one side to the opposite of a great circle. In order to re-state the description in terms of the behavior of the coherence, we go back to the initially considered case in which the initial state of the system has a single field excitation |Ψ(t)⟩ = |01⟩. The analysis performed indicates there are two main situations in which the GP accumulated by this state will be monotonic: (a) if the relation between the environmental effects is such that the photon loss results are negligible in comparison with the atom decay rate, and (b) if, even though the main source of decoherence were the photon loss, the unitary parameters are strong enough to prevent the hemisphere crossing until the steady state is achieved. Figure It is immediately noticed that, in none of those cases, the absolute value of the coherences goes below its asymptotic value. In panel (a), where the photon loss is negligible in comparison with the atom decay rate, the excited populations ρ 11 and ρ 22 decay oscillating as the ground state gets populated. Different from what was observed in Figure When turning to higher excited initial states, the evolution of the system takes place in the full six-dimensional Hilbert space described in Section II B. As stated there, if the system is prepared in a state with a defined number of excitations, the originally vanishing coherences remain zero at all following times. On general grounds, the excited populations decay as lower-energy states get populated and, in the same way as described in Section III, the system evolves to an asymptotic state that can be either the pure ground state |00⟩ or a mixed state with non-vanishing but suppressed populations on exited states. The non-zero coherences increase in absolute value up to a maximum value, to vanish asymptotically afterwards. In order to make the most simple generalization pos- sible of the one-excitation case, we consider in this section a system that is prepared in a two-excitation state |Ψ(0)⟩ = |11⟩, with excitations of a different nature. Figure In order to reproduce the analysis performed for evolutions constrained to the one and zero-excitation subspace, we turn now to the observation of the GP accumulated by the state of the system in time. With this purpose, Figure In panel (a) of Figure In addition, panel (b) shows the evolution of the same system for the case in which the main environmental effect is the photon loss. Under these circumstances, the non-monotonic behavior of the GP already observed in Section III is recovered. If the detuning is small enough, the environment has the effect of changing the sign in the GP accumulated, which afterwards tends to an asymptotic state as the system reaches a steady state that does not move in the ray space. However, the differences observed when comparing to Figure With the anharmonicity between levels being one of the main differences between these state subspaces, we further inspect the effect of the ratio E c /ω q with focus on this difference in the behaviors observed in Figures In order to examine the effect of the anhamonicity E c on the GP accumulated by the non-unitary system, in panel (a) of Figure With regard to the unitary results, displayed in the figure in dotted lines, the GP accumulated when decreasing the anharmonicity remains qualitatively equal to the previous situation for the smallest ∆ = 0.0017ω q ratio, as depicted by the purple dotted line. However, when increasing the detuning, the unitary GP reaches a regime in which it changes sign periodically, leading to a step-like oscillation around a fixed value. Regarding the GP accumulated in the presence of an environment, the non-monotonic behavior observed in Figure To further inspect this effect, panel (b) of Figure As a whole, the GP accumulated by an initial state with one photon and the transmon in its first excited level shows the non-monotonic behavior only when the main effect of the environment is the photon loss, ob-served when both the anharmonicity splitting the transmon levels and the effect of the environment are big enough, leading to a system that is closer to a two-level system. Reducing the anharmonicity leads to a degeneracy in the artificial atom states that prevents the environmental non-monotonic behavior while introducing qualitative changes in the unitary GP. In this paper we examined the dynamics beyond the two-level approximation of a transmon. Particularly, we studied the open dynamics of a nonlinear transmon coupled to a one-mode resonator and a transmission line. We have shown that the density matrix can be decomposed into blocks that satisfy differential equations that decoupled under particular initial conditions. Therefore, we were able to separately analyze one-excitation and two-excitation subspaces. We further explored the geometric phase accumulated by the state in order to have a better insight into the richer nature of the transmon artificial atom. In the case of a one-excitation state, we retrieved results of the dissipative Jaynes-Cummings model. However, as we contemplated complex Linblad equations (with three different noise channels), we can complete already existing results. For example, we found the existence of a non-monotonic behavior in the accumulated geometric phase due to a combination of both the initial state and the main leading noise ruling the dynamics. In the case of the two-excitation state, we studied the dissipative dynamics of the system in a regime where E c cannot be neglected. The open dynamics are more complex, but we were able to present studies on the numerically accumulated geometric phase on a 3 × 3 subspace and study its behavior as a function of the anharmonicity rates. Again, the GP accumulated by an initial state with one photon and the transmon in its first excited level shows the non-monotonic behavior only when the main effect of the environment is the photon loss. This can be better understood with the help of the complete analysis on the 2 × 2 subspace (where we can interpret results with the help of the Bloch sphere). It is important to remark that in the near-resonance case, the accumulated geometric phase seems to remain robust, as previous results stated. This research was funded by Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica (ANPCyT), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), and Universidad de 728 Buenos Aires (UBA).