We study the local interaction of the gravitational field with a superfluid condensate. To this end, we exploit the Ginzburg-Landau formalism with generalized Maxwell fields. The analysis shows that a slight local alteration of the gravitational field in a thin superconducting film can be achieved by laser pulses with particular characteristics. In the classical theory of gravitation, as well as in general relativity, the local gravitational field cannot be affected by any medium or device of reasonable density and size. The situation changes, as shown theoretically by Modanese In previous works, we have already studied the possibility that supercondensate systems can locally affect the gravitational field As one might expect, the increase in system complexity is reflected in troubles with the mathematical formalism describing the interplay. To study the new setting with a tractable mathematical formulation, we will consider a simple system consisting of a thin superconducting film, with thickness smaller than the superconductive penetration depth. The latter film is then hit, orthogonally to its center, by a laser beam with suitable time-dependent frequence and intensity. This will generate an external vector potential and associated generalized electric field, driving the effective interaction between the supercondensate and the local gravitational field. The chosen setup allows to neglect the spatial dependence of the physical quantities involved, so that the behavior of the system can be described in terms of time-dependent differential equations of the first order. This also provides a simpler framework in which to determine the most favorable situation for a localized interaction with the gravitational field. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly describe the gravito-Maxwell formalism, giving rise to the generalized Maxwell fields. In Section 3 we give an explicit formulation for the physical interaction by means of a generalized time-dependent Ginzburg Landau (TDGL) theory, taking into account the effects of the laser pulses. In Section 4 we analyse the experimental predictions about the local gravitational affection and study how to determine the most favorable situation for a macroscopic effect; this, in turn, requires an optimization of the input parameters in the Ginzburg-Landau equations, in order to maximize the interaction. Finally, in Section 5 we summarize our results and give some insights about possible future developments. Our starting point for a well-defined model, leading to explicit experimental predictions, is the appearance of generalized fields and potentials in superconductors, induced by the presence of a local gravitational field coupled to the superconden-sate Let us consider a weak gravitational background, where the (nearly-flat) spacetime metric g μν is expressed as with η μν = diag(-1, +1, +1, +1) and where h μν is a small perturbation of the flat Minkowski spacetime. with h = h σ σ , it can be shown that the Einstein equations in the harmonic De Donder gauge ∂ μ hμν » 0 can be rewritten, in linear approximation, as having also defined the tensor We then introduce the fields for which we get, restoring physical units, the set of equations having defined, in a comoving reference frame, the mass density ρ g ≡ T 00 and the mass current density j g ≡ -T 0i . Generalized fields and equations. Now we introduce generalized electric/magnetic fields, scalar and vector potentials, featuring both electromagnetic and gravitational contributions ) where m and e identify the mass and electron charge, respectively. The generalized Maxwell equations for the new fields read where ε 0 and μ 0 are the vacuum electric permittivity and magnetic permeability. In the above equations, ρ and j identify the electric charge density and electric current density, respectively, while the mass density and the mass current density vector can be expressed in terms of the latter as while the vacuum gravitational permittivity ε g and permeability μ g read 3 The model Let us consider a superconducting sample on the Earth surface, in the presence of an external magnetic field B 0 . The standard Ginzburg-Landau equations describing the system can be written as where m ⋆ is the mass of a Cooper pair, D the diffusion coefficient, σ the conductivity in the normal phase. We already pointed out that the interaction with the local weak gravitational field leads to the appearance of effective generalized Maxwell fields a 0 , b being positive constants. The contributions related to the normal current and supercurrent densities can be explicitly written as The boundary and initial conditions are where ∂Ω is the boundary of a smooth and simply connected domain in R N . We denote by A 0 and φ 0 the external vector and scalar potentials, coinciding with the internal values when the sample is in the normal state and the material is very weakly diamagnetic. Finally, ψ 0 (x) is the order parameter in the unperturbed superfluid state. Dimensionless Ginzburg-Landau equations. Let us put ourselves in the Coulomb gauge ∇ • A = 0 so that, when B 0 is uniform, In order to write eqs. where λ(T ), ξ(T ) and B c (T ) are the penetration depth, coherence length and thermodynamic critical field, respectively. We also define the dimensionless quantities and the dimensionless potentials, fields and currents can be then expressed as: (18) Finally, we define the dimensionless parameter proportional to the Earth surface gravity acceleration g. Using ( , η e A 0 being the three parameters describing our system. The boundary and initial conditions In the (dimensionless) Coulomb gauge, ∇ • A = 0, the above (20) read We now examine in detail the experimental setting introduced in Sect. 1 and the relevant physical implications. Let us consider an horizontal thin superconducting film of thickness L, see Figure where θ(t) is the Heaviside function. Then, we consider the presence of the constant, external Earth gravitational field along the vertical direction. The latter constitutes the gravitational component E 0g = -g ⋆ ⃗ u x of an external generalized electric field. with a related scalar potential φ 0g = g ⋆ x. Following the discussion of Sect. 2, the external generalized field E 0 is then expressed as Let us now consider equations In the absence of the laser pulse and neglecting the gravitational field we would have that implies, for these conditions, ψ = ψ 0 = 1. We then look for general solutions inside the superconductor of the form where we stopped the expansion at first order in g ⋆ , being g ⋆ ! 1. Here, A(t) denotes the magnitude of the vector potential modified by the presence of the superconductor. The terms ψ 1 (t) and A 1 (t) are connected to the perturbation of the system due to the presence of the laser, while ψ 2 (t) and A 2 (t) are determined by the presence of the gravitational field. In this regard, we are interested in the laser effect on the superconducting condensate, analysing a possible enhance of the local perturbation on the gravitational field. Let us now derive the equations for ψ 1 (t), ψ 2 (t), A 1 (t) and A 2 (t). To this end, we will analyse the contributions in the TDGL equations at different orders in g ⋆ . Inserting at zero-order in g ⋆ , with the initial condition ψ 1 (0) = 0. The variation of the ψ 2 component comes from the expansion at first-order in g ⋆ and reads We assume that, when the laser is turned on at t = 0, the superconductor has already been subjected to the external static gravitational field for a sufficiently long time. This ensures that the effect of any gravitational transient on the supercondensate has already vanished In order to simplify calculations, we study what happens at the center of the superconductor, corresponding to x = 0. This gives for ψ 2 with the initial condition ψ 2 (0) = 0. Using with the initial condition A 1 (0) = -A 0 , see Finally, from the contribution at first-order in g ⋆ , we find for with the initial condition A 2 (0) = -η. The latter condition is found starting from eq. ( so that from (33) we obtain To solve the resulting system of four equations, we initially put in equations ( and then we solve for ψ 1 (t) and ψ 2 (t). Subsequently, we use the latter results to obtain A 1 (t) and A 2 (t) from eqs. ( In the special case under consideration, with a laser impulse of the form ( From a general point of view, when solving the Ginzburg-Landau equations describing our framework, it is necessary to respect the physical prescription since the condition A 0 ≥ k would cause the system under consideration to return to its normal state. Figures where E 0g is given by the constant contribution of the standard Earth gravita-tional field and represents the perturbed generalized field, affected by the presence of the superconductor, whose form is found using the solutions (28) of the Ginzburg-Landau equation. Every variation is calculated at a sample temperature T ⋆ such that the ratio is approximately the same in the two materials. The latter T ⋆ is chosen so that the material is in the superconducting interval of temperatures where the Ginzburg-Landau formulation apply and a mean field approximation can be exploited. The described situation takes place for a range of temperatures close to the critical T c , but sufficiently far from it so as to prevent the appearance of fluctuations. The results show that the local gravitational affection is maximized for values of A 0 that are close to k, and the extent of the response is similar for the two superconductors. Restoring dimensional quantities through so that the dimensional version of condition (37), involving the maximum allowed value for the vector potential magnitude, is given by then depending on penetration depth and thermodynamic critical field. Apparently, there is a great difference in the characteristic times of the phenomenon for the two superconductors. However, restoring again dimensional quantities through eqs. ( We can also see from Figures Now we examine the effects originating from the presence of an oscillating laser pulse. We study the particularly simple case In this case, it is no longer possible to obtain affordable analytical solutions of the system given by the Ginzburg-Landau equations ( In this new physical situation, the input parameters for the system are given by A 0 and ω. The latter affects not only the periodicity of the local effect, but also its intensity. The limitation (37), A 0 < k, still apply. The results of the simulations are shown in Figures From the same figures we can also see that the intensity of the local variation of the gravitational field increases as k and ω increase. On the other hand, higher values of ω result in higher frequency rates of the oscillations: this in turn means that, from an experimental point of view, it would be more difficult to observe the phenomenon due to reduced time scales, since the average effect also tends to zero. In view of the above discussion, the best physical setup for experimental detection involves an amplitude A 0 close to k and a value of ω that is not too large. The latter choice is dictated by the discussed difficulties in time resolution for standard measurement systems. In this work we have seen that suitable laser pulses can be used to maximize and amplify a local affection of the static Earth's gravitational field, in the simultaneous presence of a superconducting condensate. In particular, we have considered the vector potential associated to the laser pulse and its interaction with a superconducting thin film. This local interplay gives rise to a generalized electric-like field, featuring a gravitational component, and its explicit form can be obtained by studying the associated Ginzburg-Landau equations. We have then compared the latter perturbed field with the unperturbed value of the Earth's gravitational field, analysing the magnitude of the interaction and the time scales in which the phenomenon manifests itself. A major challenge definetely consists in simultaneously optimizing the magnitude and duration of the effect, exploiting particular values of the input parameters, such as the intensity of the laser pulse and the physical characteristics of the superconductors. In this regard, most of the detection difficulties reside in reduced time scales for the occurrence of the local interplay. However, recent experimental setups should be able to probe effects taking place in time intervals well below nanoseconds Here we work in the 'mostly plus' convention and natural units c = ħ = 1 . The latter identifications differ by a sign with respect to our previous works, and determine minus signs in From now on, we drop the primes for the sake of notational simplicity. From now on, we denote by a zero subscript the values of the initial external potentials and fields. In dimensional units, E0 g = -m e g ⃗ ux .