The bottleneck in achieving fully integrated silicon photonics lies in silicon-based lightemitting devices that are compatible with standard CMOS technology. Dislocation loops by implanting boron into silicon and annealing represents an enticing strategy to transform highly inefficient silicon into a luminescent material. However, the emission at telecommunication wavelength suffers from the strong thermal quenching effect, resulting in low efficiency at room temperature. Here, we applied a new deep cooling process to address this issue. Interestingly, we find that electrons and holes recombine through defects emitting two photons, one in near infrared (NIR, 1.3~1.6 μm) and the other in mid-infrared band (MIR, around 3.5 μm). The PL intensity at NIR increases by three folds when the temperature increases from 77 K to 300K. Furthermore, the NIR light emission of reverse biased silicon diodes was significantly enhanced compared to forward bias, emitting the maximum output power of 42 nW at 60 mA. The results offer new opportunities for the development of IR light sources in integrated circuits. Electrically pumped Si based light sources are important devices for highly integrated silicon photonic systems. In this work, we employed the deep cooling method to treat our B-doped Si samples (210 19 cm -3 ) and fabricated a silicon p-n junction diode by introducing additional phosphorus (P) dopants. The interstitial dislocation loops induced a localized strain, thereby facilitating the spatial confinement of injected carriers and effectively suppressing their diffusion into non-radiative pathways. Temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) and room-temperature electroluminescence (EL) were recorded. Besides the broad spectrum at NIR, the emission wavelength extended to region of interest in mid-infrared (MIR) ~ 3.5 μm. The intrinsic <100> single crystalline silicon (FZ, resistivity > 1× 10 4 Ω•cm) was implanted by boron ions with a dosage of 5×10 14 cm -2 at 20 keV. The wafers were cut to pieces and then went through the same cleaning procedure in which silicon wafers were first cleaned with acetone, ethanol, deionized water, and then immersed in Piranha solution (98% Sulfuric acid: 30% Hydrogen peroxide = 3:1) to remove the contaminations. Rapid Thermal Annealing (RTA) and Deep Cooling (DC) processes were employed to treat two pieces separately to activate boron ions and repair the damage caused by ion implantation. The two samples were hold at 950 °C for 5 mins. Then, the RTA-treated sample is cooled by nitrogen gas flow and water at the same time, which takes a few minutes to drop from 950 °C to room temperature. In contrast, samples treated by the DC process was flushed with high purity Helium (99.999 %) gas cooled by liquid nitrogen (77K), causing the high-temperature (950 °C) sample to drop to -125 °C in 5 s and then rise to room temperature slowly. The vertical PN junction diode was formed by implanting boron and phosphorus ions with a dosage of 1.5 × 10 14 cm -2 at 20 keV and 1 × 10 15 cm -2 at 200 keV, respectively. Deep cooling process was applied to activate the dopants. The defined region of wafers was etched by 260 nm to expose the n-type contact region. A vertical PN junction diode was formed with a pair of co-axis metal electrodes of 5 nm Cr and 100 nm Au by thermal evaporation. The cross area of emission is 2.8×10 - 4 cm -2 . The PL at NIR was excited by a 405 nm laser spot with a diameter of 2 mm. With a relatively low excitation power of 50 mW, the PL spectra were measured by a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled Ge detector system at room temperature. The EL were recorded using an Edinburgh FLS1000 Spectrometer with a nitrogencooled near-infrared InGaAs photomultiplier tube. The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of the device was measured by a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. The emission power of the DC-treated LED was calculated with a commercial LED (Hamamatsu, L12509-0155G, 1550 nm) with a calibrated External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) as a reference. The PL at MIR was excited by a 532 nm laser with a power of 100 mW. The PL spectra were recorded using a FTIR spectrometer (VERTEX 80v). Higher SNR can be obviously achieved with a lock-in amplifier at 1317 Hz chopper frequency. The sample was mounted on the cold head of Helium closed cycle cryostat, which allows for temperature adjustment ranging from 4 K to 300 K. The B atom distribution profile of the sample treated by RTA has a peak concentration of 2×10 19 cm -3 at 100 nm with a diffusion depth of 400nm according to the secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) data shown in Fig. Interestingly, we found that the DC treated B-doped Si emits light at MIR shown in Fig. Clearly, the DC processed B-Si samples have recombination paths depicted in Fig. The temperature-dependent integrated intensities of D1, D2 (150 mW) and MIR lines were explored, shown in Fig. The diode has a rather weak luminescence under forward bias, comparable to the noise level. Interestingly, the luminescence becomes orders of magnitude stronger under reverse bias. The EL exhibits a broad band at room temperature ranging from 1.1 μm to a wavelength longer than 1.65 μm (limited by the InGaAs detector) as shown in Fig. We fabricated a B-doped Si light emitting diode that emit photons with a broad band from 1.1μm up to mid-infrared spectrum (~3.5 μm). Interestingly, we observed the near infrared and midinfrared emission are coming from electrons and holes recombining through deep level defects, emitting two photons with one in near infrared and the other in mid-infrared band. The emissions from the diode are only detectable when the diode is under reverse bias. A model of impact excitation is proposed to explain this relatively strong emission under reverse bias and the spectral difference between the EL and PL.