Dark excitons in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) have been so far neglected in the context of polariton physics due to their lack of oscillator strength. However, in tungsten-based TMDs, dark excitons are known to be the energetically lowest states and could thus provide important scattering partners for polaritons. In this joint theory-experiment work, we investigate the impact of the full exciton energy landscape on polariton absorption and reflectance. By changing the cavity detuning, we vary the polariton energy relative to the unaffected dark excitons in such a way that we open or close specific phonon-driven scattering channels. We demonstrate both in theory and experiment that this controlled switching of scattering channels manifests in characteristic sharp changes in optical spectra of polaritons. These spectral features can be exploited to extract the position of dark excitons. Our work suggests new possibilities for exploiting polaritons for fingerprinting nanomaterials via their unique exciton landscape. The integration of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) monolayers in optical microcavities opens the door to a variety of applications in optoelectronics While the importance of spin-dark excitons on optical properties of TMD-based exciton-polaritons * beatriz.ferreira@chalmers.se has been recently considered Interestingly, we find that cavity detuning allows us to switch on and off phonon-driven scattering channels between the lower polariton branch and momentum-dark exciton states in tungsten-based TMDs. Depending on the detuning between the polariton and the exciton energy, realized by changing the cavity length Theoretical approach: Using a Wannier-Hopfield method Starting from the Heisenberg equations of motion for the coherent population of polaritons, including the external radiation field, we obtain an Elliot-like formula for the polariton absorption for a symmetric cavity [17] for each polariton branch n and the in-plane momentum k. Here, we have introduced k with E n k as the polariton energy and ħω as the energy of the incoming light. The polariton-phonon scattering rates Γ n k are obtained within the secondorder Born-Markov approximation Polariton Absorption: We start by studying the detuning-resolved polariton absorption spectra at 77K, calculated by numerically evaluating Eq. ( In MoSe 2 , we find only a negligibly small absorption of the lower polariton branch, cf. Fig. The upper polariton spectra are more similar for tungsten and molybdenum monolayers. We find a significant polariton absorption for all detuning values for both materials. The reason is that for the upper polariton branch, the acoustic intravalley scattering is always allowed, contrary to the case of the LP branch Temperature plays a crucial role in polariton absorption as it dictates the efficiency of phonon-driven scattering processes Overall, the absorption in MoSe 2 is weaker than in WSe 2 due to the reduced effects of dark excitons supported by the different band alignment, which forbids the scattering via emission of phonons. At high temperatures, a few weak step-like increases are present due to the thermally-activated absorption of intravalley optical modes (purple) or intervalley phonons toward the dark KK' valley (red). In MoSe 2 , the scattering into KK' is possible only at high detunings because the energy of KK' states is 9 meV above the bright exciton, in contrast to WSe 2 where it lies 46 meV below the bright exciton (cf. Fig. So far, we have investigated the polariton absorption at zero momentum. Figure Finally, we show that not only the absorption magnitude but also the spectral linewidth of the lower polariton [2(2γ +Γ)] is strongly sensitive to the opening of the detuning-driven polariton-phonon scattering channels, cf. Fig. Polariton linewidth: Now, we complement the theoretical predictions with cryogenic reflectance measurements of WSe 2 and MoSe 2 monolayers in a cavity. We generalize Eq. ( Figure Note that the direct comparison between theory and experiment suggests that inhomogeneous broadening plays an important role, as indicated by the overall increase of the polariton linewidth with detuning also in the ∆ ≪ 0 regime (solid lines in Fig. We have presented a microscopic study combining material-specific many-particle theory with cryogenic spectroscopic measurements to investigate polariton absorption and reflectance in hBN-encapsulated WSe 2 and MoSe 2 monolayers integrated into a tunable Fabry-Perot cavity. Interestingly, we find both in theory and experiment the appearance of a series of characteristic step-like increases at specific detuning values both in polariton absorption and polariton linewidth in WSe 2 monolayers. This behaviour is a clear signature of the opening of phonon-driven scattering channels between the lower polariton branch and the dark exciton states in WSe 2 . These results show the potential of polaritons to map the full exciton landscape, including bright and dark states in atomically thin semiconductors. Acknowledgements: We acknowledge funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via SFB 1083 and the regular project 524612380, as well as from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation via the Grant KAW 2019.0140. The computations were enabled by resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC). We also acknowledge financial support within the projects SCHN1376 11.1 and SCHN1376 14.1, and within the program for major equipment (INST 184/220-1 FUGG) funded by the German