Extensive research spanning several years has been devoted to investigating femtosecond laser-induced modifications and damage in transparent materials. These dedicated efforts have been motivated by the numerous promising applications in the realm of photonics. Schematic figure FIG. To understand the mechanism of multi-void formation, we performed three-dimensional high resolution finitedifference-time-domain (FDTD) simulations. To date, such simulations relied on nonlinear pulse propagation with plasma generation and dynamics, using approximations such as slowly varying envelopes or evolving waves, to obtain an evolution equation for the pulse placed the geometric focus much deeper within the simulation domain and found no difference in our results. The linear refractive index of fused silica is 1.45. the band gap energy is 9 eV , the third order nonlinear susceptibility is χ 3 = 1.910 -4 esu, and the saturation density is 10 n cr , where n cr = meω 2 0 4π 2 is the critical plasma density; and ω 0 refers to laser frequency. The saturation density is estimated at n s ≈ 10n cr , where n cr ≈ 1.75 × 10 21 cm -3 is the critical electron density for the free-space laser wavelength 0.8 μm. The saturation density n s is the maximum density that can be reached when every molecule is ionized. The FDTD simulates linear and nonlinear laser propagation in the medium, plasma generation, ionizational and collisional energy losses as well as laser interaction with the created plasma. A. Laser interaction with bulk of Fused silica The mechanism of void array formation, as observed in the experiments is a multi-laser pulse effect. In order to understand what precisely drives multi-void formation, we first performed simulations of laser interaction with bulk of fused silica. The first laser pulse is expected to generate the first void structure in the bulk of silica. In what follows we considered how the input laser energy for fixed laser spot size (and fixed laser pulse duration) affects the interaction with bulk fused silica. Figure To investigate the role of Kerr self-focusing, we conducted simulations with the nonlinear Kerr effect disabled by setting the Kerr susceptibility to zero, while all other parameters stayed the same. The results, shown in fig. We have developed a novel model To verify that the void generation continued with subsequent laser pulses, we implemented pre-recorded voids, both the first and the second voids, as concentric spheres with refractive index of air in the centers, and densified shells with slightly higher linear refractive index than the medium (∆n = 0.1). The pre-recorded voids were placed at the locations where the first (x = 37.3 μm) and the second void (x = 40.6 μm) were observed (fig. To understand the mechanism of void formation, we re-peated the simulations with one pre-recorded void but this time we turned off the Kerr nonlinearity. Figure V. CONCLUSION This study investigated multi-void formation in fused silica using high resolution Finite-Difference-Time-Domain (FDTD) simulations. First we studied laser interaction with bulk of fused silica. The threshold laser intensity for single void structure formation in fused silica with laser pulse duration of 50 f s, wavelength of 800 nm, and laser spot size of 0.69 μm is 5 × 10 13 W/cm 2 , which corresponds to laser energy of 1.53 μJ To understand the mechanism of multi-void formation, we modeled a pre-recorded void in the material as concentric sphere with densified shells and simulated the laser's interaction with the void, this demonstrated that a second void is generated as a result of laser pulse interaction with prerecorded void. To confirm the mechanism, we carried out another simulation with two pre-recorded voids as concentric spheres with densified shells and simulated this further interaction with the voids resulted in the third void formation behind the second pre-recorded void. To understand the mechanism, we repeated the simulations with Kerr nonlinearity terms turned off in the simulations. Comparing the results of simulations with and without Kerr effect revealed that the mechanism of multivoid formation in fused silica is a linear mechanism. This study provides valuable insight into the mechanism behind the formation of void arrays in fused silica. The simulation results agree with the experimental results to further validate the model and gain a better understanding of the physical processes involved in the generation