In this work, we report diffuse reflectivity measurements in InNbO4, ScNbO4, YNbO4, and eight different rare-earth niobates. From a comparison with the established values of the band gap of InNbO4 and ScNbO4, we have found that the broadly used Tauc plot analysis leads to erroneous estimates of the band-gap energy of niobates. In contrast, accurate results are obtained considering excitonic contributions using the Elliot-Toyozawa model. We have found that YNbO4 and the rare-earth niobates are wide band-gap materials. The band-gap energy is 3.25 eV for CeNbO4, 4.35 eV for LaNbO4, 4.5 eV for YNbO4, and 4.73 -4.93 eV for SmNbO4, EuNbO4, GdNbO4, DyNbO4, HoNbO4, and YbNbO4. An explanation for the obtained results will be presented. The fact that the band-gap energy is nearly not affected by the rare-earth substitution from SmNbO4 to YbNbO4 and the circumstance that these are the compounds with the largest band gap are a consequence of the fact that the band structure near the Fermi level originates mainly from Nb 4d and O 2p orbitals. We hypothesize that YNbO4, CeVO4, and LaNbO4 have smaller band gaps because of the contribution from rare-earth atom 4d or 5f states to the states near the Fermi level. TOC IMAGE KEYWORDS: Rare-earth niobate, band gap, reflectance, electronic properties Rare-earth and trivalent metals niobates (MNbO4) have been used for half a century as luminescent materials LEDs have many advantages over the other light sources, including lower power consumption, longer lifetime, improved physical robustness, smaller size, and faster switching Let us start presenting results from InNbO4 and ScNbO4, which have been used to establish the method used to determine Eg. Both materials have a monoclinic wolframite-type structure (related to fergusonite) and their band-gap energies have been accurately determined previously In this expression, the first term within the brackets is the discrete excitonic contribution, and the second term is the continuum contribution. In our fitting we have assumed that only the fundamental exciton state (j = 1) contributes to the peak, being Once the correct method for determining the band-gap energy has been established we will present the results on rare-earth niobates. We will first present SmNbO4, EuNbO4, and GdNbO4. The results of our experiments and the analysis are provided in Fig. The obtained values for the exciton binding energy (see Fig. In Fig. Again, the three compounds have a very large band gap Egap ~ 4.9 eV (see Fig. In Fig. According to the Elliot-Toyozawa model, YNbO4 has a band-gap energy of 4.56 eV (see Fig. It is interesting to stress that the band-gap energy of rare-earth niobates follows a very similar trend as observed for rare-earth vanadates eV. LaVO4 has a band gap of 3.5 eV and CeVO4 a band gap of 3.2 eV. The 3.8 eV band gap is a consequence of the fact that states near the Fermi level are dominated by O 2 p and V 3 d states. In the other compounds, the band gap is reduced due to the contribution of 5d and 4f electrons from La and Ce. A similar picture provides a qualitative explanation to the results reported here. The band structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of most niobates are reported in the literature They are qualitatively similar to the band structure and DOS of vanadates To provide a more quantitative discussion, we will focus on LaNbO4, CeNbO4, EuNbO4, and YbNbO4 However, there is a Γ-Γ direct band gap very close in energy. According to the electronic DOS, in EuNbO4 and YbNbO4 the valence-band maximum is dominated by O 2p states. This behavior is typical of most wide-band-gap oxides. On the other hand, the conduction-band minimum is predominantly dominated by Nb 4d states with a small contribution of O 2p states. This molecular orbital composition is analogous to what happens in vanadates with V 3d and O 2p states Interestingly, this unit is little modified when going from one compound to the other, changing the average Nb-O bond distance less than 1% along the series of rare-earth niobates. Then, it is not surprising that most members of this family have a very similar Egap. It is also not surprising that these compounds have a band-gap energy comparable to that of Nb2O5 (Egap = 5.1 eV) in which states at the bottom of the CB and top the VB are also dominated by the hybridization of O 2p and Nb 4d states, and O 2p states, respectively Summing up, in this letter we reported diffuse reflectance measurements for rare-earth niobates and proposed a method for accurately determining their band-gap energy. We have shown that in most previous studies the band-gap energy has been underestimated. The band-gap energy of the studied compounds is 3.25 eV for CeNbO4, 4.35 eV for LaNbO4, 4.5 eV for YNbO4, and 4.73 -4.93 eV for SmNbO4, EuNbO4, GdNbO4, DyNbO4, HoNbO4, and YbNbO4. We also provide an explanation to the experimental results based on density functional calculations. The reported information is crucial for technological applications of rare-earth niobates. Experimental details: Polycrystalline rare-earth niobates were synthesized by the commonly used solid-state reaction technique. Starting metal oxides, R2O3 and Nb2O5 (purity > 99.9%) were pre-dried to remove any moisture or organic impurities. These dried binary oxides were weighed in stoichiometric (1:1) ratio, followed by hand mixing in pestle and mortar, cold pressing into cylinders of 12.5 mm in diameter and 5 mm in height, and fired at 1200 °C for 24 hrs. in a box type programmable resistive furnace. These pellets were further sintered at 1300 °C for 48 hrs. Single phase formation of the compound was confirmed by angle-dispersive powder x-ray diffraction. We confirmed that all synthesized rare-earth niobates crystallize in the fergusonite structure. For measurements in ScNbO4 and InNbO4, we used the same samples used in previous studies 