This paper extends the recently introduced Front Face Flash Method for extraction of thermal diffusivity of thin films to samples of small optical thickness. The paper discusses the principal question whether diffusivity is uniquely defined in case a heated ceramic, thin film sample is non-or only partly transparent to radiation. The paper applies radiative Monte Carlo and Two-Flux simulations to numerically solve the Equation of Radiative Transfer. Both methods are integrated in a Finite Element scheme, with conduction coupled to radiation, to investigate heat transfer under strongly transient and non-linear conditions. In this paper, the Front Face Flash method is successfully applied to ZrO 2 and SiC samples. It thus provides a promising tool to also investigate the thermal transport properties of thin film superconductors, but applicability still has to be demonstrated. The approach is particularly suitable for analysis of coupled conduction/radiation processes. other coatings has to be measured, during their preparation and during ageing of the films. For these conditions, thermal wave technique and flash-methods are available for remote measurement of the thermal diffusivity. Standard flash methods apply very short energy pulses, with length in the order of few nanoseconds. The methods work successfully under the following conditions: (a) stationary "background" sample temperature, (b) non-transparency (opacity) of sample or substrate material, which means signals like temperature variations, the "answer" of the sample to a short-time disturbance arrive at a detector solely by thermal conduction, (c) laboratory conditions, like in the thermo-reflectance microscope. Traditionally, isotropic transport properties, too, have been considered a prerequisite for successful application of thermal wave or flash methods. But isotropic conduction properties can rigorously be fulfilled only with some single crystals or in non-layered, thin film materials provided there is no significant phonon back-scattering from sample surfaces, or with pure metals, in other words, in some rare cases only. While isotropic thermal conductivity is typical for cubic crystals, we hardly ever achieve single crystals in industrially manufactured thin films. Approaches have been reported recently Condition (a) of the above neither may be fulfilled during sample manufacture nor during use phases. Plasma spraying of a protective coating on a gas turbine blade, for example, is performed by running quickly a beam (droplets of molten metallic or ceramic powder) delivered by a spray gun, line by line, over the substrate. This not only induces strong variations of sample temperature but coating thickness would increase rapidly during in-situ measurement, and crack formation may arise immediately behind the solidification front due to thermal contraction or thermomechanical mismatch between coating and substrate. Contrary to rapid film growth, the time interval, t, to reach a stationary (thermal) state, can extend to the order of seconds (it scales with L 2 /D, with L the momentary thickness of the coating and D its thermal diffusivity). Thus stationary thermal conditions, a prerequisite for application of thermal wave technique, hardly can be achieved. The same applies to item (c) of the above if the sample is integrated in a running industrial process. The thin film may either be partly transparent or non-transparent (opaque) to radiation. Clearly, the first case is not very suitable for application of thermal wave or of flash technique: The aim of a usual experimental setup is to determine the solid thermal diffusivity, and as a consequence, the applied method must respond solely to solid thermal conduction. Accordingly, it is item (b), the extinction coefficient of the material that must be very large, if film thickness is small. Naturally, tempting assumptions like "opaque sample" have often been made in the literature, to simplify modeling heat transfer and interpretation of results. While diffusivity of metals and alloys or non-transparent dielectrics can be measured in a rather straightforward manner, materials and coatings of small optical thickness have mostly been investigated only when an irradiated extra covering layer was deposited that must be ultra-thin and opaque (the investigated material simply was "blackened" to incident radiation). But it is the covering layer that then acts as the secondary radiation source with its emitted, frequently black body, spectrum quite different from the spectrum of an incoming radiation beam. The target under industrial conditions also might not be easily accessible, and there may be strongly scattering atmospheres like in a plasma spraying chamber where a lot of dust (particles that bounce back from the substrate) disturbs extraction of diffusivity from measurement of surface temperature (this is the reason why the present simulations start with definition of surface heat sources instead of modelling interactions between an incident beam and the sample front surface, see later for details). The optical thin case accordingly remains to be solved for determination of thermal diffusivity, under coupled conduction and radiation conditions. For this purpose, the Front Face Flash method, recently introduced by the present authors, in particular applies measurement of surface temperature distributions instead of just the temperature of a single spot. Before the procedure is described in detail, we will first discuss the traditional Parker and Jenkins approach. In their frequently referenced paper, Parker and Jenkins In case a perfect, solely 1D thermal conduction really would be achieved, and if also heat exchange with ambient (convection, radiation) can be neglected, the dimensionless rear surface temperature, Θ(L,t), on a flat sample of thickness, L, and at any lateral position, x, is obtained: Eq. ( This ideal case neglects any radiative transfer in the sample (any heat transfer mechanism other than solid conduction). A well known exception of this case is diffusion-like radiative transfer. It is observed if the radiation extinction coefficient is very large and the mean free path of photons in the sample accordingly very small (this is the diffusion model of radiative transfer). However, in reality, sample thickness may be very small so that optical thickness is significantly limited. This is exactly the problem that shall be investigated in this paper. For solely 1D solid conduction heat transfer, Figure Figure Results are given at central front (x = 0, y = 0) and rear surface positions (x = 0, y = 1 mm). Thermal equilibrium is observed at about 1 s after start of the irradiation (sample stagnation over-temperature under Q 0 is 0.488 K). But if the target radius is very small, for example only 1/100 of sample radius (Figure Nodal over-temperature on all front and rear side x-positions (Zirkonoxide), vs. time Nodal over-temperature of ZrO 2 -sample, calculated as before (Figure Nodal over-temperature of ZrO 2 -sample, calculated as before (Figure Nodal over-temperature on front and rear side x = 0-positions (y = 0 and 1 mm), within or opposite to target (Zirkonoxide), vs. time While the original Parker and Jenkins model has been modified in the literature to account for deviations from 1D conduction or for heat exchange with ambient, the essential problem remains, i. e. when radiation would be coupled to conduction. This is inevitably the case when extinction coefficient, E, or sample thickness, L, are small so that the optical thickness τ = E L would be limited to τ < 15; for an explanation of this numerical limit see The Monte Carlo simulation described below shows that creation of a heat source, not located below but just at exactly the sample surface (the Parker and Jenkins assumption), cannot be realized with existing (standard) materials; a perfect thermal mirror would have to be constructed to realize the condition "zero thickness an absorptive surface layer" for the derivation of Eq. (1); this is not possible. The assumption "opaque" sample in addition has led many authors to believe in an opaque solid there are no radiation contributions to heat flow at all, and that corresponding source terms in the Equation of Radiative Transfer (ERT), compare e. g. Radiation diffusion models have been reported in the literature for this situation (see e. g. The majority of reports available in the literature also neglects that flash experiments lead to radiative non-equilibrium, which means radiation not only would be absorbed but also might be scattered and perhaps escape from the sample; this definitely has impacts on its overall energy balance, on sample temperature and thus on measured diffusivity. If the optical thickness is large (with the above mentioned τ = 15 as the lower limit), a Monte Carlo approach can be applied, while for small optical thickness, a radiative Two Flux-model is given preference, see below. Both models serve for calculation of absorbed and (anisotropically) scattered radiation. Components of the ERT are illustrated schematically in Figure In particular, isotropic scattering is rather an exceptional case. However, the solutions at least allow to demonstrate tendencies how coupled solid conduction/radiation heat transfer would have impacts on temperature distribution in a thin film sample, and how the corresponding variations would alter the extracted thermal diffusivity. Simultaneously to solutions of the ERT, the equation of conservation of energy, both applied to the present problem, has to be solved; in the present paper, this is done by the Finite Element simulation. Figure All details of the Monte Carlo approach applied to determine the radiative contributions to the total, transient heat transport problem in thin films, have been reported in Figure Discrete co-ordinates (i,j) are used to identify plane "area elements" (i ≤ 50, j ≤ 20) for the Monte Carlo simulations in the pellet. The area elements later will each be filled with a large number of proper "finite (FE) elements"; the corresponding FE-mesh is not shown in this figure. Continuous co-ordinates (x,y) serve to solve Fourier's differential equation in the Finite Element procedure. Volume elements (cylindrical shells), with same (i,j) co-ordinates, are generated by rotation of the meshed area elements against the symmetry axis (x = 0), and so are the finite elements.. The front faces (y = 0) of part of the cylindrical pellet elements serve to define the target plane, (i ≤ 10, j = 1). Each of the target elements is heated by a thermal load, Q 0 (Ws). The physical origin of this initial source (the transient disturbance of an initially homogeneous temperature distribution in the pellet) in principle is arbitrary. Examples are absorbed radiation from a single short laser pulse, or an electron beam (like in the paper by Parker and Jenkins), or even a surface heater. Target or shell elements (and, after meshing, their corresponding finite elements) accordingly serve for definition of surface heat sources that initialise the subsequent thermal, solid conduction plus radiation transport processes. In this way, we need not model an initial radiative or electron beam interaction with the target. In cylindrical geometry, radius of the elements (distance from the x = 0 axis) increases, and so does their individual cross section, A. All target elements shall receive the same absolute amount, Q 0 (Ws), of thermal energy, constant within t ≤ 8 ns. The thermal power density, (dQ 0 /dt)/A (W/m 2 ) onto the target surface elements thus decreases with increasing co-ordinate, i. At the central position, it is maximum. The load profile accordingly is not Lambertian but depends on the square of the corresponding i-(or x-) co-ordinates. The disturbance not only emits a thermal wave (conductive heat flow emerging from positions y = 0 within the target area) are but in the Monte Carlo simulation also is the source of a large number of radiation beams (bundles), with randomly distributed foot-points (i ≤ 10, j = 1) and the subsequent absorption/remission or scattering events at random interior positions (i ≤ 50, j ≤ 20) of the sample. The foot-points oscillate over the target area. Once emitted, the beams, parallel to conduction, by absorption create randomly located, internal volume heat sources, Q V (i,j), at all simulated times, t. More beams (in the language of Monte Carlo simulations: more bundles) are remitted from these volume elements (i,j) to create new sources, with their distribution and magnitudes again simulated in the Monte Carlo model. Mean free path, l m , of radiation emitted from the target area and from all internal positions (i ≤ 50, j ≤ 20), scattering angles, Θ, and albedo, Ω, of single scattering determine the positions of the radiative volume sources, Q V (i,j. After each absorption/remission event along the zig-zag path of a bundle, magnitude of Q V (i,j) decreases until the bundle energy is completely exhausted, or when it escapes from the sample. Radiation bundles escaping from the sample are schematically indicated in Figure The scattering phase function is explained in the Appendix (see the corresponding spider diagram; it indicates strong forward scattering). The total number of bundles in the Monte Carlo simulations is at least N = 5 10 4 ; this number proved to be sufficiently large, compare Figures 3 and 4b in Within real materials, occurrence of absorption/remission and, in particular, scattering interactions is inevitable (a variety of crystal and lattice defects, grain boundaries, cracks and pores) are responsible for scattering. Thus heat transfer in any real sample, under a localised heat source like in flash experiments, cannot be onedimensional if the material is not perfectly non-transparent (optical thickness τ →∞), in all spatial directions. If the optical thickness is very large, a thermal detector that, for example, receives transmitted radiation from the corresponding rear sample surface neither responds to an energy flow from just one direction through the sample nor can it distinguish initial diffuse from initial beam radiation sources directed onto the sample front surface; even, in an absorbing material, it cannot distinguish the wavelength of incident radiation from that of the original source (this would be possible only if the material is solely scattering and under elastic collisions. For determination of temperature excursion with time in a conductive solid, Carslaw and Jaeger Provided the optical thickness is large, it then makes sense to treat the whole coupled conduction/radiation problem as a conduction process, using an appropriately defined radiative (diffusion) conductivity. Application of the Monte Carlo simulation described in Step 1a to also samples of small optical thickness, τ = 1, becomes extremely laborious: After initial interactions between bundle and constituents of the pellet (solid particles, cracks, pores) at positions (i,j), more interactions of the same (residual) bundle emitted from these positions either occur with other solid particles or with other obstacles at positions (i', j'). Or the bundle would immediately escape to the ambient. The (i',j') no longer are located very close to the (i,j); this would be the case only if the optical thickness is large. The optical thickness by its definition, τ = L/l m , with l m = 1/E, on a statistical basis, the mean free paths between two interactions, is identical with the number N of interactions in the pellet. In the present case, N = 1 if τ = 1; there is, accordingly, and still on the statistical basis, in the extreme case no secondary absorption/remission or scattering event at positions (i', j') within the sample. Each volume element, under the condition τ = 1 and if it is hit by a beam becomes an absorbing/remitting or scattering obstacle (or, if it is not hit, a thermal emitter simply because it is heated by conductive heat flow). In this way, radiative exchange over extended distances (not a diffusive, radiative conduction process), is initialised, with all distant neighbours. In contrast, in the optical thick limit (τ →∞), the radiative interaction, as a diffusive transport mechanism, again includes all elements but extends over only very small distances (as mentioned, explicit modeling of each of the huge number of these diffusive interactions can be circumvented by introduction of radiative conductivity). For an adequate approximation of the optically thin limit, time integration steps therefore would have to be chosen very small in order to re-calculate temperature of all volume elements before a new distribution of power sources and their emissions can be determined. The overall procedure then requests a close series of Monte Carlo calculations and intermittently performed finite element calculations to determine emissive vs. received radiative power and temperature of each volume element. Although the procedure in principle is straight-forward, this sequence would enormously increase computation time, even if the axial symmetry of the pellet is exploited. Yet the Monte Carlo method, though extremely laborious, also under these conditions finally delivers reliable surface temperature distributions (see below, Figures Because of the increased mean free path, it is to be expected the distribution of power sources (and thus of temperature) within the sample becomes more uniform (like the distribution of bundles leaving the rear surface in Fig. 17 -22; also see the discussion below, Sect. 5.2. An alternative of practical value for the case τ = 1results from application of a radiative Two Flux model: The Two Flux-model yields radiation transmission coefficients, ζ = q + (x,y=L)/q + (x,y=0) from ratios of positively oriented radiative flux, q + (x,y), with L the sample thickness; the corresponding. oppositely oriented flux q -(x,y) would serve for calculation of reflection coefficients from the ratio q -(x,y=0)/q + (x,y=0), but this is of minor importance for the internal transport processes investigated here. During given time steps, energy Q(x,y) = ζ q + (x,y=0) is delivered either to a volume element (i,j) located inside the pellet, or the flux leaves the pellet. Taking into account the albedo Ω of single scattering, like in the Monte Carlo simulations, the energy Q V,abs (i,j) = (1 -Ω) ) is scattered at the position (i,j). Derivation of the transmission coefficient, ζ, in the Two Flux model (a series of exponentials in E, Ω and L) is straight-forward and is described in standard volumes on radiative transfer (like to constant E (independent of wavelength and temperature), again to keep description of the method as simple as possible (and tolerable). taken from an experimental spectrum, and S, the scattering coefficient, from Mietheory of scattering) was estimated in results from experimental spectral YSZ extinction coefficients so that a range 10 4 ≤ E ≤ 5 10 4 1/m applies approximately to the thermal spectrum of this and other polycrystalline ceramic solids, in the present range of temperatures (300 ≤ T ≤ 400 K). Accuracy of the Monte Carlo-approach can be checked e. g. by calculated angular distribution of the directional intensity, I', of absorbed/remitted and scattered radiation; the intensity is in Figure Figure with pellet and target radii of r p = 120, r t = 15 mm). As is to be expected, a uniform temperature distribution on either front or rear sample surface cannot be confirmed. Instead, a strong hot spot shown in Figure Figure The figure is taken from The origin of the hot spot is three-fold: First, it results from the previously explained radial dependence of the volume element cross sections (circular, concentric shells). They all receive the same absolute amount, Q 0 , of energy, but the shells are exposed to strongly different heating power, (dQ 0 /dt)/A, per unit area, A. Since the cross section of element i = 1 (or the volume of this element) is minimum, surface temperature of this element (strictly speaking, temperature at x = 0, y = 0) becomes maximum (Figure The impact of solely the distribution of thermal sources in the target plane on surface temperature can be seen below, solid red circles in Figure Second, if there is coupled conduction/radiation, the hot spot in Figure Third, beams scattered or emitted in directions off normal have to run over extended distances to volume elements (i',y') located anywhere in the sample; this means these beams will loose more energy and thus are quickly extinguished. Elements (i,j) located at directions off normal and at large co-ordinates, j, and because of the low temperature rise receive little radiation originating from the initial disturbance. The traditional approach (data taken in principle at any rear sample surface position, Figure Nodal over-temperature of ZrO 2 -sample on its front surface, calculated from the Two Flux-Model integrated into the FE procedure, for solely solid conduction (solid circles) and for solid conduction coupled to radiation (solid diamonds) with target very small against sample (pellet) area, under adiabatic conditions and for small optical thickness, τ = 1. Pellet and target radii are r p = 120, r t = 1.2 mm. Results are given in dependence of time at central front position (x = 0, y = 0) and for albedo of single scattering Ω = 0.01 (strong absorption) and 0.99 (strong scattering); scattering again is strongly anisotropic (forward directed). Length of total heating period and deposited energy Q = 1 Ws as before, isotropic conductivity and specific heat (independent of temperature). No significant hot spot arising at x = 0, except in case of pure conduction, which reflects solely the distribution of heat sources on the target area. Radiation and its absorption/remission and scattering quickly distributes energy deposited on the target area (y = 0) to interior sample positions (y > 0); this redistribution strongly reduces the calculated front side surface temperature, in relation to the solely conduction case. In Figure Nodal over-temperature of ZrO 2 -sample on its rear surface, calculated as before (Figure Nodal over-temperature of ZrO 2 -sample on its rear surface, calculated as before (Figure Nodal over-temperature vs. x-position on target rear surface (y = 1 mm), under strong forward scattering, at constant time Nodal over-temperature of ZrO 2 -sample on its rear surface, calculated as before (Figure Extraction of thermal diffusivity Considering only a single position, x, on front or rear sample surface according to Face Flash method (compare The method therefore is applicable in case there is energy exchange with environment (convection, radiation) that may introduce local variations of surface temperature. It is of practical value also when only part of the target or rear surface area might be visible. Again, solely for improving clarity, the present analysis is confined to isotropic (constant, independent of temperature) materials properties (conductivity, specific heat, extinction coefficient, albedo), i. e. to idealistic conditions. But the procedures in principle are straightforward (though becoming increasingly laborious) when analysis is performed for anisotropic, temperature or wave length-dependent parameters, or for layered samples. In Step (1) of the method, thermal homogeneity, T 0 (x,t), at any constant depth y, preferentially at y = 0 (see below, step 2) has to be checked. It would be useless to apply the Front Face Flash method (Step 2) to regions where T 0 (t) oscillates. Step (1) identifies the region of Fourier numbers, Fo = D t/L 2 (using 0.16 ≤ Fo ≤ 0.25) to yield the time interval during which the heating regime is regular and where Step (2) may be applied: In Step (2), the diffusivity, D, is extracted from absolute temperatures, T i k , (3) The T i k , with indices i and k, denote temperature measured at time, t k , at position number, i, with r = r i at front sample surface (y = 0); co-ordinate r is parallel to xdirection. Time and radial co-ordinate intervals are defined by t = t k  t k1 = t k+1  t k , and r = r i+1  r i . The r i+1 and r i have to be taken outside the target. Temperatures applied in Eq. ( With the fine mesh and correspondingly improved spatial resolution, divisions by zero in Eq. ( The extracted thermal diffusivity, D, is given in Tables A general expectation is that extracted diffusivity, like those in Table Variation of the diffusivity, against the pure solid conduction value, results from opening a second heat transfer "channel", radiation parallel to conduction. If radiative transport is strong (optical thickness is small), this channel will be responsible for most of total heat transfer, and little contribution is left for solid conduction. If on the other hand optical thickness is large (radiation less important), the overwhelming part of total heat transfer is shifted to the parallel conductive flow channel. To which extent these expectations are realised depends on magnitude of the diffusivity: In the poorly conducting solid ZrO 2 , increase of E leads to an increase of the extracted diffusivity. In the strongly conducting solid SiC, on the other hand, variations of E hardly induce variations of extracted diffusivity since solid conduction in this material is so strong that the competing radiation channel, under (reasonable) variations of E or Ω, plays only a minor role. Diffusivity then remains constant, as is observed in Table If optical thickness is large (Figure If on the other hand the optical thickness is small (Figure Figure An approximately linear decay of T(y,t) (note the logarithmic scale) with increasing co-ordinate y, is observed in Figure For small optical thickness, the temperature distribution is strongly different: The field T(y,t) in Figure Situations (i) and (ii) are different from the procedure reported in the conduction/radiation analysis by Viskanta This occurs if optical thickness of the sample is small, τ ≤ 1. The mean free path, l m , in direction parallel to the surface normal, then is statistically larger than sample thickness, which means a large number of bundles within the pellet might not find absorbing or scattering centres for radiation/solid particle collisions. The centres, at least part of their total number, even might not have solid/solid contacts among themselves, and a temperature field between these centres accordingly is not defined. Local or non-local temperature gradients then cannot exist. Thermal conductivity, in samples of small optical thickness, thus is at best an apparent conductivity but no longer a uniquely defined materials property. The same applies to the thermal diffusivity, D = λ/(ρ c p ). The Front Face Flash-model for extracting thermal diffusivity from surface temperature distributions was derived by the late Oleg Yu. Troitsky, the co-author of this paper, before 1999. The method entirely relies on the imagination of solely thermal conduction, including no radiation at all, which means application of the original model to thin films with small optical thickness would deliver anything else than an apparent conductivity. Strictly speaking, even the name "Diffusivity" would be misleading because it is no longer a diffusive energy transport but rather an exchange of radiation between solid particles (provided they exist in thin film sampls), parallel to solid conduction. Thermal transport in such cases can tentatively be modelled with cell models but it is questionable whether a coupled conduction/radiation problem can be solved accurately. But optical thickness τ << 1 is typical for superconductor, thin film samples: Thickness of thin ceramic, high temperature superconductor films is 1 or 2 micrometers, with E in the order 10 4 to 10 5 1/m. Investigating the applicability of the Front Face Flash method to the corresponding multi-layer "coated conductor" system (Figure Goldsmith A, Waterman Th E, Hirschhorn H J, Handbook of thermophysical properties of solid materials, Vol. III Ceramics, Revised Ed., Pergamon Press,Oxford (1961) 