Frequency-selective or even frequency-tunable Terahertz (THz) photodevices are critical components for many technological applications that require nanoscale manipulation, control and confinement of light. Within this context, gate-tunable phototransistors based on plasmonic resonances are often regarded as the most promising devices for frequency-selective detection of THz fields. The exploitation of constructive interference of plasma waves in such detectors not only promises frequency selectivity, but also a pronounced sensitivity enhancement at the target frequencies. However, clear signatures of plasmon-assisted resonances in THz detectors have been only revealed at cryogenic temperatures so far, and remain unobserved at application-relevant room-temperature conditions. In this work, we demonstrate the sought-after room-temperature resonant detection of THz radiation in short-channel gated photodetectors made from high-quality single-layer graphene. The survival of this intriguing resonant regime at room-temperature ultimately relies on the weak intrinsic electron-phonon scattering in graphene, which avoids the damping of the plasma oscillations. Terahertz (THz) radiation (0.1 -10 THz) has a strong perspective in a wide range of different applications, including metrology and characterization of nanomaterials One of the most prominent ideas to design tunable and selective THz photodetectors, originally introduced by M. Dyakonov and M. Shur more than two decades ago, predicts that twodimensional (2D) gated FETs may exhibit a resonant response to electromagnetic THz radiation at discrete plasma oscillation frequencies of the 2D electrons in the device channel Up to date, several experimental studies have attempted to demonstrate resonant THz detection in different 2D electron gases systems with varying levels of success. Convincing signatures of plasmon resonances, including the appearance of frequency-dependent oscillations in the zero-bias photoresponse of the system w.r.t. the carrier density, have been identified at cryogenic temperatures in FET devices made of some high-quality semiconductors such as III-V materials In this letter, we demonstrate room-temperature THz detection in FET devices made of highquality, single-layer graphene. In particular, we show how the characteristic frequency-dependent oscillations in the photoresponse of monolayer graphene FETs are largely tunable with the density of charge carriers in the device (i.e. with applied top gate voltage), unique fingerprints of the resonant detection which are furthermore visible from cryogenic up to room temperature. The fact that these robust signatures persist up to 300K can be directly ascribed to the weak acoustic phonon scattering in monolayer graphene, which leads to large carrier mobility values in the material even at elevated temperatures In order to observe plasmonic resonant THz detection, we fabricated a short-channel (length Lch = 6 μm) dual-gate, high-mobility, single-layer graphene FET device (Figure The graphene was then side contacted to Cr/Au (3.5/50 nm) metallic electrodes acting as drain and source contacts. In addition, a metal top-gate electrode covering most of the FET channel (LTG = 4.8 μm) was defined on the device, together with a coupled bow tie antenna between top-gate and source electrodes. This antenna ensures an efficient rectification of the incoming THz radiation for a large range of frequencies, via gate-to-source coupling (additional fabrication details are shown in Supporting Information Note 1). Transport and zero-bias photocurrent measurements in our device were performed in a closedcycle cryostat, with the chamber temperature varying from 10K up to 300K. We employed two different THz sources to perform the photocurrent experiments. First, a sub-THz source was used to undertake measurements at a frequency of 0.3 THz and then, a quantum cascade laser was used to undertake measurements at frequencies in a range between 2.5 THz up to 4.7 THz (more information about the photocurrent setup can be found in Refs. First, we measured the transport characteristics of our graphene FET via electrical measurements from 10K up to 300K (see Supporting Information Note 2). We extracted average mobilities, μμ, in the device exceeding 70000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for both electron and hole carriers at low temperatures (10K). Such values remain high, above 60000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , even at room temperature (Supporting Information Note 2 contains the measured electrical data as well as details to calculate the carrier mobility). We further estimated the momentum-relaxing scattering time of charge carriers in the device τ to lie between 0.29 ps and 0.23 ps at 10K and room temperature, respectively. This is calculated with the relation ττ = mmμμ/ee, where e is the elementary charge and m is the effective mass of carriers in single-layer graphene. The latter is given for single layer graphene by mm = ħkk FF /vv FF , where vF is the Fermi velocity, ħ is the reduced Plank constant and kF the Fermi wave vector (kk FF = √ππππ, with n as the carrier density). mechanism Next, we measure the photoresponse of the device at 10K but a higher frequency, 4.7 THz (Figure Intriguingly, the current photoresponse recorded at this higher frequency exhibits not only the characteristic antisymmetric line shape with respect to the applied gate voltage (similar to the broadband case depicted in Figure For completeness, we additionally measured the photoresponse at different frequencies (range 2.5 THz -4.7 THz), all within the resonant regime or weakly damped scenario (QQ ≫ 1). Figure highlights the evolution of the emerged photoresponse oscillations within this frequency range. For simplicity and clarity, we present the normalized current responsivity, RR II NN , with respect to the photocurrent maximum observed close to the CNP. Interestingly, the current photoresponse as a function of the gate voltage exhibits oscillations at all these measured frequencies, but the visible number of oscillations strongly depends on the THz frequency. In particular, the number of peaks decreases when lowering the excitation frequency. Further frequency-dependent measurements can be found in Supporting Information Note 3. The observed oscillations of the current photoresponse when sweeping VTG can be further analyzed in the following way. Excited plasmons in gated two-dimensional systems follow the linear dispersion law, ωω = sskk, where s is the plasma wave velocity and k is the real part of the angular wave number And resonances should emerge when the real part of the wave number is given by: Importantly, the effective mass, m, in single-layer graphene Then, using the plasmon dispersion law with equations ( Following equation ( For instance, at 4.7 THz, the resonant mode NN = 2 is expected to occur for gate potentials larger than 250 V, values which are not reachable in common experimental devices. Resonant modes below 6 are only experimentally accessible in our device when decreasing the excitation frequency down to 2.5 THz (see Figure The observed resonant modes in the THz photoresponse can be further utilized to extract significant information of the propagating graphene plasmons This observation agrees well with equation ( The fact that devices made from high-quality, single-layer graphene exhibit clear and unambiguous evidences of resonant responsivity at room temperature (including the appearance of oscillations of the zero-bias photoresponse with respect to the gate voltage -or equivalently carrier density) is extremely relevant for applications. Up to date, robust signatures of this resonant regime had only been reported to occur at cryogenic temperatures in semiconductors such as bilayer graphene Only some experimental indications have been interpreted as arising from resonant detection in III-V field-effect transistors operating at room temperature In contrast, our study (Figure We argue that the robust observation of the resonant regime in high-quality single-crystal graphene results from the large room-temperature mobility of the charge carriers in this material In summary, we have studied the zero-bias photoresponse of a high-mobility monolayer graphene FET subjected to THz radiation. The operation of the device is perfectly tuned between nonresonant and resonant regime depending on the frequency of the incoming radiation. In particular, the resonant regime is univocally demonstrated by the measured oscillations present in the gate-voltage-dependent photocurrent. These oscillations are dependent on both the carrier density in the channel and the frequency of the THz radiation. We demonstrate that such univocal fingerprints of resonant THz photodetection are not only visible at cryogenic temperatures but also at room temperature. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that resonant THz photodetection has been robustly observed at room temperature without application of a large drain current bias (which is undesirable for a proper detector operation). From an application point of view, these findings pave the way for the design and development of a new generation of (graphene-based) plasmonic resonant photodetectors operating at room temperature. The application space of such systems is significant in the THz and mid-infrared regime where Rc is the parasitic resistance (i.e. the two contact resistances and the resistance of the ungated regions in the graphene channel), LL and WW are the channel length and width respectively, RCNP is the resistance value at the CNP, e is the elementary charge, μ is the carrier mobility and ππ is the carrier concentration approximated by ππ = CC oooo VV TTTT * ee ⁄ where Cox is the gate oxide capacitance per unit area and VV TTTT * is the applied top gate voltage with respect to the CNP. We have obtained values of average carrier mobilities exceeding 70000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at temperatures around 10 K and remain as high as 60000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at room temperature. To underpin the high-mobility values of charge carriers in our samples, we have additionally fabricated a multi-terminal Hall bar device using the same procedure as described in the manuscript and Supplementary Note 1. The longitudinal device resistance was measured via four-terminal configuration at different back-gate voltages (see Figure By using a Lorentzian fit in the current responsivity curves (see Figure Moreover, we have performed simulations analysis of the dependence of the plasmonic cavity length to observe the propagation of plasma waves in time (See supporting movies 1 and 2). When the plasmonic cavity length is much larger than the plasmon propagation length (i.e. LG >> LP), propagating plasmons in graphene decay before reach the end of the cavity (See supplementary movie 2). In this scenario, the rectified photocurrent do not differ for both resonant (Q >> 1) or non-resonant regime (Q << 1, case of our device at the measured frequency 0.3THz), and hence no frequency and gate dependent oscillations appear in the photoresponse. When LG ≈ LP, (case of our device at frequencies > 2.5THz) propagating plasma waves slightly decay and they can reach the end of the channel, be reflected and therefore creating a constructive and destructive interferences in the channel in a quasi-standing wave scenario. In this regime, a notable dependence of the photoresponse on the incoming THz frequency and the applied gate voltage is observed (See supplementary movie 2).