Here we report muon spin rotation (μSR) experiments on the temperature and field dependence of the effective magnetic penetration depth λ(T ) in the η-carbide-type suboxide Ti4Ir2O, a superconductor with an considerably high upper critical field. Temperature dependence of λ(T ), obtained from transverse-field (TF)-μSR measurements, is in perfect agreement with an isotropic fully gaped superconducting state. Furthermore, our ZF μSR results confirm that the time-reversal symmetry is preserved in the superconducting state. We find, however, a remarkably small ratio of Tc/λ -2 0 ∼1.22. This value is close to most unconventional superconductors, showing that a very small superfluid density is present in the superconducting state of Ti4Ir2O. The presented results will pave the way for further theoretical and experimental investigations to obtain a microscopic understanding of the origin of such a high upper critical field in an isotropic single gap superconducting system. The quest for superconducting materials for groundbreaking applications continues to drive the condensed matter research community, leading to the discovery of an array of novel superconductors and improved superconducting properties. η-Carbide family of compounds, encompasses a variety of materials which are important for the investigation of emergent quantum properties In this letter, we report on the low density of copper pairs (dilute superfluid) and unusually high upper critical field larger than the Pauli limit in η-carbide-type suboxide Ti 4 Ir 2 O. We, furthermore, demonstrate the isotropic fully gap pairing and the preserved time-reversal symmetry in the SC state of this system. These results identify Ti high-purity titanium (purity: 99.9%, Alfa Aesar), irid-ium (purity: 99.99%, Strem Chemicals), and titanium dioxide powders (purity: 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) via arcmelting and solid-state reaction. Initially, the reactants were mixed in stoichiometric ratios, formed into a pellet, and melted in an arc furnace under a purified argon atmosphere to ensure homogeneity. The resulting melt was then ground into fine powders, re-pelletized, and annealed in a sealed quartz tube at 1000 °C for 7 days under a partial argon atmosphere. The reaction was completed by cooling the quartz tube to room temperature through water quenching. For magneto-transport measurements, a bar shaped sample was used with four 50 μm dia platinum wire leads spark-welded to the sample surface. The transport measurements were performed in the 35 T resistive magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. The magnet was swept from 11.5 T to 20 T owing to the static 11.5 T background field generated by the outer superconducting coil of the magnet combination. The temperature under 2 Kelvin was ascertained using the vapor pressure of Helium-3, which remains unaffected by magnetic fields. This method contrasts with the use of Cernox and Ruthenium Oxide thermometers, which exhibit significant magnetoresistance. Transport measurements in lower fields were performed using a Physical Properties Measurements System (PPMS) from Quantum Design, equipped with a 9T superconducting magnet. Transverse-field (TF) and zero-field (ZF) μSR experiments were carried out at πE1 beamline on DOLLY spectrometer at the Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland). The field dependent TF-μSR experiments at 1.6 K were were performed at πM3.2 beamline using GPS spectrometer. For μSR experiments, we used powdered sample which was pressed into a 7 mm pellet and then mounted on a Cu holder using GE varnish. This holder assembly was then mounted in the respective spectrometer cryostat. Both spectrometers are equipped with a standard veto setup The upper critical field μ 0 H c2 (0) of Ti 4 Ir 2 O was estimated using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) approximation in the clean limit where t = T /T c and T c (5.30 K) is the transition temperature at zero magnetic field. In Figure Figure Magnetism, if present in the samples, may also enhance the muon depolarization rate and influence the interpretation of the TF-μSR results. Therefore, we have carried out ZF-μSR experiments above and below T c to search for magnetism (static or fluctuating) in Ti 4 Ir 2 O. As seen from Fig. The absence of magnetism in Ti 4 Ir 2 O implies that the increase of the TF relaxation rate below T c is attributed entirely to the flux-line lattice (FLL). Assuming a Gaussian field distribution, we analyzed the observed TF-μSR asymmetry spectra using the following functional form where A 0 refers to the initial asymmetry, γ μ ≃ 851.615 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, and φ is the initial phase of the muon-spin ensemble, B int corresponds to the internal magnetic field at the muon site, respectively and σ is the total relaxation rate. σ is correlated to the superconducting relaxation rate, σ SC , following the relation σ = σ 2 nm + σ 2 SC where σ nm is the nuclear contributions that is assumed to be temperature independent. To estimate σ SC , we considered the value of σ nm obtained above T c where only nuclear magnetic moments contribute to the muon depolarization rate σ. The solid lines in Fig. In Figure where, Φ 0 = 2.068 × 10 -15 Wb is the magnetic flux quantum. It is important to note that Eq. 4 is valid when the separation between the vortices is smaller than λ We have analyzed the temperature dependence of the magnetic penetration depth, λ -2 (T ) to unveil the superconducting gap structure of Ti 4 Ir 2 O. Within the London approximation (λ ≫ ξ), λ(T ) can be described by the following expression, -1 is the Fermi function, φ is the azimuthal angle along the Fermi surface and ∆ 0,i (T ) = ∆ 0,i Γ (T /T c ) g(φ). ∆ 0,i is the maximum gap value at T = 0 K. The temperature dependence of the gap is described by the expression Γ (T /T c ) = tanh 1.82 [1.018 (T c /T -1)] 0.51 As seen from the Figure For the two-gap scenario, we have used the weighted sum of two gaps: Here x is the weight associated with the larger gap and ∆ 0,i (i = 1, 2 are the gap indices) are the gaps. A close look at the goodness of fitting suggests that the single s-wave model gives the lowest value of χ 2 r indicating the best fit to the observed data. We note that while fitting the experimental data keeping two gaps as free parameters, the weight of the higher gap (x) was reaching a value close to 0, implying the single gap scenario is more appropriate. Also d-wave gap symmetry was also tested, but were found to be inconsistent with the data (for example, see the green solid line in Fig We also investigated the field dependence of TFrelaxation rate σ sc (B) measured at 1.6 K (see Fig For these measurements, each point was obtained by field-cooling the sample from 10 K (above T c ) to 1.6 K. σ sc first increases to a maximum with increasing magnetic field followed by a continuous decrease up to the highest field (400 mT) studied as expected for a single gap superconductor with an ideal triangular vortex lattice. Interestingly, the observed σ sc (B) curve at fields above the maximum, can be well modelled using the Brandt formula (for a single s-wave gap superconductor) While the temperature-and field-dependence of the London penetration depth λ -2 ef f and henceforth of the superfluid density can be well understood as a fully gapped s-wave superconductor, the T c /λ -2 ef f ratio for Ti 4 Ir 2 O is comparable to those of high-temperature unconventional superconductors. In the context of the Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC) to BCS crossover In conclusion, we provide the first microscopic investigation of superconductivity in the η-carbide-type suboxide Ti 4 Ir 2 O with a bulk probe. Namely, the zerotemperature magnetic penetration depth λ ef f (0) and the temperature as well as the field dependence of λ -2 ef f were studied by means of μSR experiments. We have demonstrated the isotropic fully gap pairing and the preserved time-reversal symmetry in the SC state of this material. Interestingly, the T c /λ -2 ef f ratio is comparable to those of high-temperature unconventional superconductors, pointing to the unconventional nature of superconductivity in Ti 4 Ir 2 O. This result -together with earlier findings of the high upper critical field larger than the Pauli limit and the thermodynamic signatures for an FFLO state -hints towards an unconventional pairing mechanism in this material. These results identify Ti 4 Ir 2 O as time-reversal-invariant fully gapped unconventional superconductor.