Superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) which is made of two parallel Josephson junctions has applications in magnetometry. A similar spin-based device is proposed here where spin superfluid in ferromagnet (FM) mimics the superconducting state. Two materials CoFeB and Fe3Sn are used for spin superfluid-based SQUID like device where easy plane anisotropy in CoFeB can be engineered and Fe3Sn has inherent easy plane anisotropy. Frequency varies in spin based proposed devices. Frequency increases and again decreases with the increase in both applied magnetic field and applied spin current. The proposed device can be used as nano oscillator and detector. The frequency in the proposed device shows multiple frequency steps which can be used for neuromorphic applications.' Superfluidity is the property of a fluid with zero viscosity and is generally assigned to resistance free charge current in a superconductor. Like Cooper pair-based superconductor, superfluidity is also found in spin-based systems where dissipation is negligible and long-distance transport is possible. Spin superfluidity is found in ferrimagnetic material even at room temperature. Two ferromagnets are antiferromagnetically exchange coupled by non-magnetic (NM) metal junction at two ends. There is no inter layer exchange coupling in the middle part of top and bottom ferromagnet (FM). White region is nonmagnetic (NM) insulator. Easy plane anisotropy is in X-Y plane. Magnetic fields are applied along Z-axis. Basic structure having two parallel Josephson junctions is shown in Fig. Fig. Two types of easy plane ferromagnet CoFeB and Fe3Sn are used where easy plane anisotropy can be engineered in CoFeB whereas Fe3Sn has inherent easy plane anisotropy in X-Y plane. CoFeB is one of the most popular materials for making spintronics based devices. CoFeB The spin dynamics of these structures can be described by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation, MUMAX3, a well-known versatile software is used for simulating the spin dynamics in the structures which incorporate Slonczewski torque due to the flow of current with the Landau-Lifshitz formalism. Magnetization along different directions with oscillations along X-direction and Y-direction for different current density are shown in Fig. The directions of the magnetic moments in top and bottom FM of synthetic antiferromagnet are denoted by two-unit vectors m1 and m2. The precession of m1 and m2 are driven by the exchange interaction, the anisotropy, and a magnetic field which is applied along the z direction. These three parts are represented by ωE, ωA, and ωH = γH0, respectively. The equations of motion are The resonance frequencies are then ω = ωH ± ωR = ωH ±√(ωA(ωA + 2ωE)), Over the past few decades, research has focused on a wide range of materials and tools that facilitate the production of tiny chips used in a variety of applications 