The interactions between different layers in van der Waals heterostructures have a significant impact on the electronic and optical characteristics. By utilizing the intrinsic dipole moment of Janus transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), it is possible to tune these interlayer interactions. We systematically investigate structural and electronic properties of Janus MoSSe monolayer/graphene-like Aluminum Nitrides (MoSSe/g-AlN) heterostructures with point defects by employing density functional theory calculations with the inclusion of the nonlocal van der Waals correction. The findings indicate that the examined heterostructures are energetically and thermodynamically stable, and their electronic structures can be readily modified by creating a heterostructure with the defects in g-AlN monolayer. This heterostructure exhibits an indirect semiconductor with the band gap of 1.627 eV which is in the visible infrared region. It can be of interest for photovoltaic applications. When a single N atom or Al atom is removed from a monolayer of g-AlN in the heterostructure, creating vacancy defects, the material exhibits similar electronic band structures with localized states within the band gap which can be used for deliberately tailoring the electronic properties of the MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructure. These tunable results can offer exciting opportunities for designing nanoelectronics devices based on MoSSe/g-AlN heterojunctions. The rapid growth of technology leads to a rise in scientific studies on the micro-miniaturization and functioning of electronic devices. There are two key crucial aspects for the material to be utilized or discovered for this reason: first, it needs to have the necessary band gap or be able to modify its band gap; and second, it must be in nanocrystal form with carrier mobility. Because of its extraordinary physical and chemical characteristics, the discovery of single-layer graphene from graphite via the mechanical exfoliation method in 2004 MoSSe/AlN heterostructures have emerged as promising materials for various practical applications, because they were found to be energetically, dynamically, and thermally stable. Extensive theoretical studies were conducted on defect-free MoSSe/AlN heterostructures, revealing their indirect band gaps ranging from 1.00 eV to 1.68 eV Fascinated by these intriguing discoveries in 2D heterostructured materials, we used first-principles studies to investigate the effects of intrinsic atomic defects on the structural and electrical characteristics of a MoSSe/g-AlN van der Waals heterostructure. These defects are produced by removing a single Al and/or N atom close to the interfaces. We first assess the stacking types and possibilities for producing MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructures by taking into account both the MoS and MoSe sides interacting with the monolayer g-AlN. We want to uncover the influence of intrinsic atomic defects on the electronic characteristics of MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructures after determining the most stable stacking type of MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructures. Then, based on the type of vacancy, more emphasis is laid on localized band gap states. The results show that the MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructure has many novel properties, such as a moderate band gap, appropriate band edge positions, and electronic-hole separation, which provide additional insights into the structural and electronic properties of MoSSe/g-AlN heterojunctions for use in nano/optoelectronic and spintronic applications. In this work, all density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using Quantum Espresso package We first started investigating the structural and electronic properties of MoSSe and AlN monolayer. The atomic configurations of MoSSe and g-AlN monolayers are shown in figure Comparing the lattice constant of monolayer g-AlN with monolayer, there is a small ratio of lattice mismatch at about 2.43%. It makes possible candidates to form vertical van der Waals (vdW) heterostructure without rather high strain which indicates the capability to synthesize MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructure in actual production. Due to the different faces of monolayer MoSSe, we considered 12 different configu- rations to find the most stable structure. For SMoSe/g-AlN heterostructure, we considered the following configurations as shown in figure where the E MoSSe/AlN , E MoSSe , and E g-AlN are the total energies of the MoSSe/g-AlN heterostructure, MoSSe and g-AlN monolayers, respectively. From our results, we found that SMoSe/g-AlN stacking (Mo-N configuration) has the lowest E f , of 99.282 meV/atom, suggesting this arrangement to be energetically competitive and potentially accessible by experiments. The calculated interlayer distance, h i is 3.013 Å for this configuration. Both the interlayer distance (3.336 Å The van der Waals interface can be perceived as a two-dimensional defect and the overall material properties are strictly related to those of each component In conclusion, we examined the structural and electrical characteristics of SMoSe/g-AlN heterostructures with and without vacancies. The SMoSe/g-AlN structure maintains a flat configuration for its both sublayers in the absence of defects. The introduction of Al and N vacancies, on the other hand, causes localized distortions. The results demonstrate that SMoSe/g-AlN (Mo-N configuration) is more stable than other forms of stacking, with a binding energy of 99.282 meV/atom, independent of possible atomic locations. The stable SMoSe/g-AlN heterostructure has an indirect band gap of 1.627 eV based on the results of the projected band structure, which is in the visible infrared range. The heterostructure exhibits comparable electrical band topologies with localized states inside the band gap by creating vacancies in the substrate g-AlN. Furthermore, due to the asymmetry of the MoSSe monolayer, this heterostructure has an inherent dipole moment perpendicular to the two-dimensional plane, which may be exploited to tune the interfacial interactions. The research findings obtained might give useful insights for utilization in nano/optoelectronic devices. 