The swelling kinetics of charged polymer gels reflect the complex competition among elastic, mixing, and ionic contributions. Here, we used dynamic light scattering to investigate the collective diffusion coefficient of model gels, whose polymer network structure was controlled so that the three contributions were comparable. We demonstrate that the collective diffusion coefficient stems from the sum of elastic, mixing, and ionic contributions, without evident cross-correlations. The significant ionic contribution conforms to the Donnan equilibrium, which explains equilibrium electrical potential gradients in biological systems. Charged gels, characterized by ionic species immobilized in the polymer network, exhibit enhanced swelling compared to electrically neutral gels because of the excess osmotic pressure caused by the Donnan effect Swelling kinetics are crucial for practical applications of these gels. Tanaka and co-workers where K is the osmotic bulk modulus, G is the shear modulus, and f is the friction coefficient (per unit volume) between polymer networks and solvents. However, quantifying D based on Eq. (1) remains challenging Recently, we have developed a strategy to synthesize tunable model polymer networks To validate Eq. ( Theoretical derivation of collective diffusion coefficient in charged gels.-We derive the contribution of D ion to D, using a similar procedure as that for D mix and D el in neutral gels and The D ion originates from Π ion produced by immobilized charge in polymer networks. Notably, Eqs. (3) have been validated for neutral gels at as-prepared states (5) Substituting Eq. ( According to Eq. ( To fabricate charged gels, we mixed two solutions at stoichiometrically imbalanced ratios of s = 0.325, 0.350, 0.375, and 0.400 (Table We immersed each charged gel into the outer salt (HCl + NaCl) solutions of pH = 4.0 and c out = 0.1-30 mM (Table We measured the diameter d of each gel at equilibrium in the outer salt solutions, using an optical microscope (M165 C; Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) to calculate the volume swelling ratio Q = (d/d 0 ) 3 (initial diameter d 0 = 1.04 mm), determining c = c 0 /Q and c im = c 0 im (c/c 0 ). To ensure accurate c 0 and c 0 im values at each s, we assessed the sol fraction eluted out from the polymer network during the swelling process using the Bethe approximation [37-39] (Further details are described in Supplemental Material, Sec. S2 We measured D of charged gels via DLS (ALV/CGS-3 compact goniometer, Langen, Germany) in the same way as Refs. We measured the (equilibrium) shear modulus of gels at the equilibrium swollen state G for each c out using a rheometer (MCR302; Anton Paar, Graz, Austria) with a 25-mm parallel plate geometry. The gels, shaped into discs with a height 1 mm and a diameter 35 mm, were equilibrated in outer salt solutions with varying c out (Table I). We measured the storage modulus G ′ and loss modulus G ′′ at T = 298 K with angular frequency ω = 0.63-63 rad/s and shear strain γ = 1.0%, as well as ω = 6.3 rad/s and γ = 0.1% -10%. For all samples, G ′ was independent of γ and ω, and was much larger than G ′′ (Supplemental Material, Sec. Estimating D mix and D el in neutral gels.-Before considering charged gels, we briefly revisit the decomposition of mixing (D mix ) and elastic (D el ) contributions to D in a model neutral gels, based on our previous studies Through the decomposition of D mix and D el , we obtain the empirical formulas D mix = 2.2 × 10 -12 c 0.8 and f = 8.0×10 11 c 1.5 for neutral gels (the detailed results are provided in Supplemental Material, Sec. S7), corroborating the scaling predictions f ∼ c 1.5 Estimating D ion in charged gels.-We expand our analysis to electrically charged gels and examine Eq. ( For neutral gels [Fig. Concluding remarks.-We developed model charged gels [Fig. Our findings demonstrate the successful prediction of the dynamic behaviors from the static properties of charged gels equilibrated in a good solvent. This aspect is particularly relevant considering the dynamics in gel-like biological systems such as extracellular matrices, which are predominantly negatively charged Figure Figure We demonstrate the decrease of shear modulus G = G 0 (c/c 0 ) 1/3 during the swelling process for charged gels. This nonlinear relationship is consistent with models proposed by Flory We investigate the effect of c out on D in a neutral gel. Figure 