We introduce the concept of "quantum geometric nesting" (QGN) to characterize the idealized ordering tendencies of certain flat-band systems implicit in the geometric structure of the flat-band subspace. Perfect QGN implies the existence of an infinite class of local interactions that can be explicitly constructed and give rise to solvable ground states with various forms of possible fermion bi-linear order, including flavor ferromagnetism, density waves, and superconductivity. For the ideal Hamiltonians constructed in this way, we show that certain aspects of the low-energy spectrum can also be exactly computed including, in the superconducting case, the phase stiffness. Examples of perfect QGN include flat bands with certain symmetries (e.g. chiral or time-reversal), and nonsymmetry-related cases exemplified with an engineered model for pair-density-wave. Extending this approach, we obtain exact superconducting ground states with nontrivial pairing symmetry. The properties of a correlated electronic system are largely determined by its electronic structure. One such familiar manifestation is the role of Fermi surface nesting conditions In this paper, we propose such a concept, which we call "Quantum Geometric Nesting" (QGN), that focuses on the geometric aspects of the electronic structure in flat-band systems. In contrast to Fermi surface nesting, here we start from a strong-coupling perspective in which the band dispersion is assumed negligible in comparison with the interaction strength, and then ask: for a given quantum geometry of the flat bands, are there any natural forms of order? If so, what sort of interactions favor them? We will show that these questions can be addressed by examining whether a set of QGN conditions is satisfied. Intuitively, these conditions refer to certain forms of 'overlap' of the wavefunctions in the flat band subspace at wavevectors related by a shift (p-h case) or inversion (p-p case) in momentum space, akin to the familiar case of Fermi surface nesting. For "perfectly nested quantum geometry," we construct ideal Hamiltonians containing arbitrary combinations of an infinite class of engineered short-range two-body interactions that have solvable ground states with fermion bilinear order of a character determined by the quantum geometry. For these ideal Hamiltonians, the few-body excitations are solvable as well, including single-particle (quasi-particle), particle-hole (exciton), and two-particle (Cooper pair) excitations. For the p-p case, we further show that these ideal Hamiltonians host a (fine-tuned) pseudospin SU (2) symmetry, whose stiffness can be inferred from the excitation spectra. We prove that certain symmetries (e.g. chiral or time-reversal) can ensure particular forms of QGN in flat bands. Non-symmetryrelated cases also exist, such as an engineered model for pair-density-wave order that we construct. Extending the construction scheme, we further obtain an SSH-type model with solvable p-wave pairing groundstates. Indeed, except for symmetry-enforced cases, it is unlikely for a physical system to have exact QGN -in common with the case of Fermi surface nesting. However, the use of QGN can be much more versatile: for systems with almost perfect QGN (quantification of the closeness to the ideal nesting will be defined below as 'nestability'), one may engineer an idealized electronic structure with perfect QGN and then construct ideal interacting Hamiltonians that are close to the physical one. The solvability of these ideal models thus makes them excellent starting points for including perturbative corrections to reach the physical Hamiltonian. This type of intrinsically strong coupling viewpoint (in the sense that the dominant part of the interactions has been accounted for in the solvable models) has proven fruitful in recent studies of twisted bilayer graphene and other flat-band materials We will present the conclusions in the main text and defer the detailed proofs and technical discussions to the corresponding sections in the Supplemental Materials (SM). In Fig. We consider an electronic structure encoded in a tightbinding model where R indicates the unit cell position, Greek letters in lowercase μ, ν, . . . denote a "flavor" index which, for simplicity, includes both orbital and spin indices unless otherwise specified. The annihilation operators for Bloch states with a given flavor index are expressed as ĉk,μ ≡ R e ik•R ĉR,μ / √ V in the periodic embedding. [98] In momentum space, the single particle Hamiltonian is diagonalized with a band basis where U † nμ (k) are unitary matrices and we use Latin letters in lowercase (n, m, . . . ) to label the bands. We assume there are N flavors and thus N bands in total. We will quantify the degree of QGN for flat-band systems by utilizing the geometric information in U μn (k). To do so, we consider an idealized setup (illustrated in Fig. (3) FIG. Without loss of generality, we can relabel all the bands to make the n = 1 . . . N flat bands the flat bands. We then define the k-dependent projection matrix for the flat bands and, for later convenience, the projection matrix onto the remaining bands, Q μν (k) ≡ δ μν -P μν (k). For the ideal scenario we are assuming, we define the "flat-band subspace", H flat , as the tensor product of the Fock space of the flat bands and a "vacuum" state of the other modes γ k,n=N flat +1...N (i.e. all the modes with energy higher or lower than the flat bands are respectively empty or occupied). We formally define the projector onto H flat as P . To leading order of the perturbation series treating both V /∆ and W/V as small parameters, we can set Ĥ0 = 0 and project the interactions, Ĥint , onto H flat . Formally, this means studying the effective Hamiltonian P Ĥint P , but operationally this can be more conveniently done by retaining terms that only involve γk,n≤N flat , or equivalently, by replacing all ĉkμ → P μν (k)ĉ kν in the interacting Hamiltonian In terms of the gauge-invariant projection matrices P and Q, the key information of QGN at a given wavevector Q for p-p or p-h channel is encoded in the linear operator where ⋆ means complex conjugation. When viewed as a matrix (with μν a grouped index and μ ′ ν ′ the other), Π is hermitian and positive semi-definite and can be diagonalized with non-negative eigenvalues. By definition, an electronic structure has "perfect QGN" at a wavevector Q in the p-p or p-h channel when the corresponding Π has eigenvalue(s) equal to 0. In other words, a perfect QGN is satisfied if there exists a N × N matrix N Q μν , which we call the "nesting matrix", satisfying (for any We will show that the favored OP operator within the flat-band subspace can be expressed in terms of N Q as: where F (k) is the form factor in the band basis corresponding to N Q being the unprojected form factor in the original orbital basis, One important property (which can actually serve as an equivalent definition) of QGN is that for arbitrary k, the form factor F nm (k) defined by a nesting matrix is a block-diagonal matrix that disconnects flat band indices from the others, i.e. F nm (k) = 0 as long as n, m are not simultaneously ≤ N flat or > N flat . In other words, QGN implies that the wavefunctions of the flat bands at two momenta related by a shift (p-h case) or inversion (pp case) are fully compatible, in the sense N Q maps the single-particle flat band null spaces to each other. As a direct result, the static susceptibility of the OP defined in Eqs. 8&9 can be shown (see Sec. I C of SM) to strictly saturate an upper bound when the corresponding QGN is satisfied, suggesting the harmony between the quantum geometry and the OP in the ideal circumstances. We will further show in Sec. II that an infinite class of interacting solvable models can be constructed, which host ground states with the corresponding order. For QGN to be non-trivial in the p-p channel, it is additionally required that N Q cannot be symmetric since Ôp-p,Q vanishes in this case. (It is proven by explicit construction that valid, anti-symmetric solutions can indeed exist for Π.) On the other hand, the identity matrix is always an allowed solution for Eq. 7 in the p-h case for Q = 0, but this is a trivial one in the sense that the resulting Ôp-h,Q=0 is simply the total density operator not associated with any broken symmetry. Excluding all the unwanted solutions, for a generic flat-band system, the value of the minimal eigenvalue of Π Q , π Q 0 , is a natural dimensionless measure of "nestability" that quantifies the 'distance' of a system to perfect QGN in the corresponding channel at Q [100]. Later in Sec. V we will give several examples of electronic structures with perfect QGN, i.e. π Q 0 = 0. Depending on the channel, momentum Q, and nesting matrix N Q , Eq. 8 or 9 represent fermion bilinear orders with different natures. In the p-p channel, if Q = 0, the order is a uniform SC order; while for Q ̸ = 0 it is pair-density-wave (PDW, not to be confused with the other DWs in the p-h channel) order of the single-Q, Fulde-Ferrell type [101]. In the p-h channel, if Q = 0, non-trivial QGN (N p-h,0 ̸ = 1) leads to flavor-symmetry-breaking orders, including flavor ferromagnetism and inter-flavor coherent states; the Q ̸ = 0 cases include various forms of DWs (e.g., spin, charge, or current/flux DWs). A system can satisfy multiple QGN conditions in different channels and/or at different Qs. It is also possible that there can be more than one linearly independent nesting matrix for each channel and Q, which typically signals a further internal symmetry breaking, e.g. triplet SC in spin invariant systems. We mention that each satisfied QGN condition allows for constructing a generalized quantum geometry in the sense that it defines a notion of distance in momentum space and thus a generalized metric tensor, which can be related to the second spatial moment of the OP density bare correlation functions originating from the flat bands. The familiar definition of quantum distance d(k, k ′ ) ≡ N flattr[P (k)P (k ′ )] We now present a general strategy to construct a solvable "ideal" interacting Hamiltonian, Ĥint , for a flat-band system with perfect QGN. It is an engineered model in the sense that it targets the OP Ô defined as in Eq. 8 or 9; specifically, it is constructed to have ground states that exhibit a pattern of spontaneous symmetry breaking associated with an anomalous expectation value of Ô. For reasons that will be made clear in the next section, we write Ĥint in the form: where V IJ (R -R ′ ) is any function whose Fourier transform is positive semi-definite for all q. Thus, by construction, the eigen-energies of Ĥint are non-negative. { Ŝ(I) R } is an infinite set of linearly independent Hermitian operators centered in any unit cell R, which, after projection onto H flat , commute with Ô (in Eq. 8/9): These hermitian operators, Ŝ(I) R , are labeled with Latin letters in uppercase, and ⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ are the corresponding ground-state expectation values. It should be noted that these operators are defined in the entire Hilbert space, whereas the above commutation relation only holds after projection. For generic flat-band systems, no set of local hermitian operators that satisfy Eq. 14 exists. However, when the OP derives from a band geometry with perfect QGN, there is (at least) an infinite class of solutions that take a special flavor-space separable form where ] ⋆ is a spatial coefficient and B (I) is a hermitian matrix acting on orbital indices. In order for Eq. 14 to hold, the constraints on the coefficient A (I) and matrix B (I) are not overly restrictive, in that they only need to obey for the p-p case, and for the p-h case. We derive in Sec. II B&C of SM a systematic way of constructing all possible B (I) and prove that there are at least 3N flat of them in the p-p case, and N flat of them in the p-h case when 2Q = 0. (Some explicit worked examples are presented in Sec. V.) In particular, the identity matrix is always a solution for B in the p-h case, which makes ŜR a local density operator for the unit cell at R. Clearly, even given all the constraints, we are still left with an infinite class of possible interaction terms with considerable leeway, at least in choosing Although the above construction scheme could encompass many realistic forms of interactions, it is admittedly unlikely that the electronic structure and interactions of any physical system are perfectly ideal. Therefore, the merit of QGN should be viewed in a more practical way: it can help identify solvable limits of physical flat band systems of interest. Specifically, we are proposing the following recipe for the use of QGN in the study of a physical Hamiltonian Ĥphys : First, one computes its electronic structure and examine whether there is a channel and a wavevector on which QGN is nearly satisfied (i.e. the corresponding π 0 is small compared to 1). If there is indeed such a nearly nested possibility, one can consider its perfect nesting limit by slightly modifying the electronic structure either numerically or analytically (through recognizing certain approximate symmetries, e.g. those discussed below in Sec. V). Then, one can further search in the space of all possible ideal solvable interacting Hamiltonians validated by the QGN, to find one that is closest to the physical Hamiltonian, Ĥideal . This can be systematically achieved by minimizing the norm of the difference between them, ||δ Ĥ|| = || Ĥideal -Ĥphys ||. A small value of this operator distance justifies perturbative analyses starting from the ideal solvable limit. The flexibility of our construction allows the dominant part of many interactions to be captured. Furthermore, we remark that these nearby solvable limits can also facilitate numerical studies of Ĥphys , in that one can benchmark the validity of the methods being used at these limits, and confirm the phase being observed by checking whether there is an intervening phase transition as interpolating between Ĥphys and Ĥideal . One caveat on the terminology should be noted: After projecting onto H flat , there are terms quadratic in fermion operators, besides the quartic ones that are conventionally called "interactions". For the special case of Hubbard interactions, a property called the "uniform pairing condition" We remark that the building blocks of the ideal Hamiltonians, { ŜI R }, do not necessarily mutually commute. As we will see in the next section, the solvability of these interactions results from the fact that they all commute with the order parameter and share certain eigenstates. The ideal interacting Hamiltonians are in this sense 'frustration-free'. In this section, we present a general recipe for obtaining the many-body ground states for an ideal Hamiltonian Ĥint constructed in the previous section. We first define a "pseudo-Hamiltonian" within H flat with θ a free U (1) phase which can be viewed as a trial Hamiltonian of the original system. Since Ê commutes with the ideal { Ŝ(I) R } and thus the ideal Ĥint within H flat , any non-degenerate eigenstate of Ê, |Ψ⟩, must also be an eigenstate of { Ŝ(I) R } and Ĥint projected onto H flat . Taking ⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ ≡ ⟨Ψ| Ŝ(I) R |Ψ⟩ in Eq. 12 implies |Ψ⟩ is a zero-energy eigenstate of Ĥint within H flat and thus a ground state. Therefore, the task is to find the unique eigenstates of Ê and show that they are ordered. Since Ê is quadratic in fermion operators, its spectrum and eigenmodes can be easily solved. In general, the bands of Ê are flat, and the values of the "pseudo-energies" are determined by N Q . If the QGN is in the p-p channel, the spectrum of Ê is given by N flat Bogoliubov-de-Gennes quasiparticle pseudo-bands with perfect particle-hole symmetry (since no γ † γ term is present). Fully occupying all the negative pseudo-energy bands gives rise to a state |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ with eigenvalue Φ 0 , which is a sum of all the pseudoenergies of the occupied bands and thus is non-zero and extensive. Φ 0 is a non-degenerate eigenvalue of Ê, since any change of the occupation configuration of the BdG quasi-particles will also change the eigenvalue Note that by doing a global gauge transformation γ → γe -iθ/2 , we are able to transform Ê(θ) → Ê(θ = 0) and thus |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ → |Ψ SC (θ = 0)⟩, while keeping Ŝ(I) R unchanged. Thus, all |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ with different θ are simultaneous eigenstate of Ŝ(I) R with the same eigenvalue. The corresponding ground state of Ĥint with an arbitrary fixed (even) particle number N e can be constructed as In the p-h case, the ground state of Ĥint can be similarly obtained by occupying any integer number of pseudo-bands of Ê that are separated from other bands by finite gaps, since this gives rise to a non-degenerate [99] and generically non-zero eigenvalue Φ 0 within the corresponding particle number sector. This implies that the system is solvable only at certain rational filling fractions of the flat bands with specific values determined by the OP. In contrast to the p-p case, here θ only cycles the pseudo-energies, permuting the equivalent translationsymmetry-breaking groundstates. It should be noted that when Q ̸ = 0, Ê has a folded BZ since it breaks the translation symmetry of the original electronic structure (corresponding to DW). Diagonalizing this pseudo-Hamiltonian then gives us MN flat pseudo-bands, where M is the smallest positive integer that makes MQ = 0 modulo the reciprocal lattice. It is, in principle, possible to have π Q 0 ≈ 0 in a continuous range of Q, such that an incommensurate DW order is suggested. In such a case, the properties of each incommensurate Q should be approached to a good approximation from a nearby commensurate value. While the four-fermion term in H int is translationally invariant, the single particle term is only translationally invariant when all ⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ are. For any order with Q = 0, the translational invariance of ⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ is obvious. Even for Q ̸ = 0, ⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ can still be translationally invariant. For example, because the p-p orders we have constructed are of the FF type, translation by R is equivalent to a phase change of the OP by θ → θ + Q • δR; since Ŝ(I) R , by assumption, are gauge invariant, their expectation values remain constant under translation. Similar situations can arise in the p-h cases, for example, when the order involved is a generalized "spiral order" and the used Ŝ(I) R only overlap with the magnitude of the OP. In general, however, certain choices of Ĥint may explicitly break translational symmetry, but still preserve other symmetries that are broken spontaneously by |Ψ⟩. It should be noted that despite the spiritual similarity to the mean field theories, the Slater determinant states solved by the above approach are the exact many-body ground states of the ideal systems instead of just proxy states capturing the qualitative properties. The perturbations away from those ideal limits can be accounted for systematically since not only the ground states but also many aspects of the excitation spectrum can be solved, as we discuss below. In the ideal models constructed in Sec. II, aspects of the excitation spectrum can also be determined in a systematic fashion, which we discuss in this section. The strategy to solve the excitations with simple compositions is to construct operators ξ(c) P within each charge-c, momentum-P sector that satisfy: This is easier said than done for typical interacting Hamiltonians, where the commutator of a one-particle operator, γ † a , with the Hamiltonian produces higher order terms such as γ † b γ † c γ d , and the commutator of many-particle operators produces still higher order terms in a hierarchy that never closes. However, because |Ψ⟩ is a zero-mode of all Ŝ(I) R -⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ within H flat , sectors with e.g. γ † a and γ † b γ † c γ d excitations cannot mix where k ± ≡ P /2 ± k. The commutation relations for single-particle/hole, two-hole, and particle-hole (exciton) excitations can be similarly derived (see Sec. IV A-C of SM for computationally feasible expressions in terms of parameters in the Hamiltonian). By diagonalizing the scattering matrix Γ, one can compute the corresponding eigenstates and spectrum of an excitation creates a charge c ± 2, momentum P ± Q, energy E (c±2) (P ± Q) = E (c) (P ) excitation when acting on a ground state. Therefore, for the p-p case, the particle and hole excitations share the same spectrum, and certain particle-particle, particle-hole, and hole-hole pair excitations share the same spectra. Furthermore, lowest branch of E (0,±2) (P ) must hit zero at P = 0, ±Q since Ôp-p,Q, † creates a zero-energy p-p excitation with momentum Q. This is due to a pseudospin SU (2) symmetry in the p-p case, which is generated by: Ĵx,y ≡ ( Ôp-p, † ± Ôp-p )/2, Ĵz ≡ [ Ôp-p, † , Ôp-p ]/4 where M -1 ij is the Cooper pair inverse mass tensor, extracted by a Taylor expansion of the lowest branch of the charge-2 spectrum E (2) 2 δQ i M -1 ij δQ j , and φ 0 is the ODLRO density defined in Eq. 21. Given the quadratic dispersion of the Nambu-Goldstone mode, the Mermin-Wagner-Coleman theorem implies that spontaneous breaking of the SU (2) symmetry cannot occur at finite temperature when the space dimension is d ≤ 2. (At zero temperature, in contrast, ferromagnetism is allowed in low dimensions.) However, we note that the susceptibility χ(T ) ∼ T 3 /|κ| 4 exp(4π|κ|/T ) is large at low temperature T → 0 which quickly becomes comparable to |κ| for non-zero symmetry-lowering energy scale δ. We note that multiple factors can lead to a deviation from the idealized setup we constructed, and thus a weak explicit lowering of the pseudospin SU (2) symmetry, including (but not limited to) the finite band gap, imperfect QGN and flatness of the bands, and the deviation of the interactions from the ideal form. Depending on the nature of those perturbations, the superconducting state may remain phase-coherent up to a temperature comparable to |κ| for all dimensions d ≥ 2. Our approach provides a direct estimate of the superfluid stiffness of nearly ideal systems, providing complementary estimates to generic upper bounds V. EXAMPLES OF ELECTRONIC STRUCTURES WITH PERFECT QGN Here, we present several examples of QGN. More detailed discussions, as well as another constructed model for a current density wave, can be found in Sec. V of the SM. We first note that QGN can be guaranteed by symmetries. The simplest example of this is the combination of spin S z conservation and time-reversal symmetry. In such a system, we recognize the Wannier degeneracy (separating out the spin index s from the orbital index μ): Then one can verify N p-p,Q=0 μν , where σ i are spin Pauli matrices and B(I) are arbitrary symmetric (for i = x, y, z) or antisymmetric (for i = 0) hermitian matrices for the orbital indices. This includes a huge class of possible interactions, e.g. the attractive Hubbard interactions on each site and orbital, whose solvability was pointed out in Refs. A less obvious example is associated with chiral symmetry. Specifically, when the lattice is bipartite and there are degenerate flat bands, one can verify that N p-h,Q=0 μs,νs ′ = δ μν (-1) μ Ñss ′ is a nesting matrix for the p-h channel at Q = 0, where the parity of the orbital index μ represents the sublattice group, and Ñ is an arbitrary hermitian matrix associated with the conserved flavor index s (e.g. spin and/or valley). The condensation of the corresponding OP then leads to symmetry breaking of the conserved flavor symmetry with a pattern specified by Ñ (e.g. spin/valley polarization, inter-valley coherence, ...). This is exactly the case extensively discussed in the studies on magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene in its chiral-flat limit It is of particular interest to identify and predict what interactions could lead to certain specific symmetrybreaking patterns in flat band materials. In this regard, the construction of solvable models for different OPs can provide important information by suggesting interactions that only favor certain types of symmetry-breaking patterns. We leave material-specific investigations to future studies. C. Non-symmetry-related cases: An engineered model for pair-density-wave It is probably even more interesting to study cases in which perfect QGN is not associated with symmetry. To show such a possibility, we construct a simple model of a dimerized bilayer on a square lattice in which τ 0,x,y,z are Pauli matrices acting on orbital/layer indices, and s is the spin index, See Fig. , we find that QGN is also satisfied in both p-p and p-h channels at this momentum. This can be shown by computing the lowest two eigenvalues of Π Q in both p-p and p-h channels (Eqs. 5&6), to leading order in t/M , so that one branch reaches zero at Q = (0, 0) and the other at Q = (π, π). Solving the corresponding nesting matrices at Q = (π, π), we find N μs,νs ′ = τ x μν σ y ss ′ in the p-p channel, and ss ′ in the ph case, where σ (i=0,x,y,z) are Pauli matrices acting on spin indices. QGN thus suggests that, besides the uniform pairing order, the system is simultaneously prone to a singlet PDW, a charge DW, and a spin DW, all at Q = (π, π). [In Sec. V D of the SM, we generalize this construction to show that any single-particle Hamiltonian obeying N h(k)N † = h(k + Q) with a unitary nesting matrix N has perfect QGN in the p-h channel at Q. (Analogous statements hold in the p-p channel.) For this class of systems satisfying QGN, we further show that the Fubini-Study quantum metric is also 'nested', g(k) = g(k + Q), a property that may guide the search of electronic structures with corresponding to inter-orbital singlet pairing. We pick a judicious choice of interaction, that uniquely selects the PDW state as the ground state (see Sec. V C of the SM). ŜR,μ = 1 2 s ĉ † R,μ,s σ σ σ ss ′ ĉR,μ,s ′ is the spin operator on layer-μ and site-R. The exact ground states are generated by the p-p order parameter (Cooper pair creation operator) with ĉ † k+Q,ν = ν ĉ † k+Q,μ P μν (k) the projection of the orbital operators onto the flat bands (see Eq. ( Adopting the methods in Sec. IV, we can exactly solve the few-body excitations in an artificial setup by setting the W → 0 and ∆ → ∞ with the quantum geometry U μn (k) remaining fixed. First, we consider the charge ±1 fermionic quasi-particles above the ground states. We find that these excitations are spin-degenerate, gapped, and flat, with energy E (±1) (p) = 3V . Next, we consider a Cooper pair excitation. This spectrum is also analytically solvable since the two-particle scattering matrix can be diagonalized by generalizing the approach of Ref. ) to leading order in t/M , where the coefficient g is the integrated Fubini-Study metric In the second equality of Eq. 33, we expanded in δP = P -(π, π) to find the inverse Cooper pair mass ≈ 6V t 2 M 2 . We thus find the quantum geometric origin of PDW in this model is similar to the known case of uniform pairing One may be worried about the effects of the actual small but non-zero bandwidth W ∼ t 2 /M in our model. To address this issue, we first note that the quasi-particle excitations are relatively unaffected due to their large gap ∼ V ≫ W . For the two-particle excitations, we check the robustness of the key results by numerically calculating the excitation spectrum (shown in Fig. After verifying the robustness of the two-particle excitation results in Eq. 33, we finally turn to the estimate of the superfluid stiffness and thus the BKT transition temperature T c of the system in the presence of symmetry lowering terms (see Sec. IV B). Since for generic fillings, the ODLRO density of the system, φ 0 , is O(1), T c is expected to scale as which applies as long as ∆ ∼ M ≫ V ≫ W ∼ t 2 /M . In the further limit V ≫ t, we see that T c ≫ W 2 /V , the conventional strong coupling scaling for single-band systems. This observation further corroborates that the phase stiffness originates from the quantum geometry of the band instead of the (single-particle) kinetic energies. This example (along with similar efforts in Refs. We note that the form of solvable models presented in Sec. II is not the only possibility for systems with perfect QGN. For instance, consider the one-dimensional SSH chain which realizes an obstructed atomic limit by choosing the interaction taking the form where ŜR again satisfies [ P ŜR P , Ôp-p, † ] = 0 but is non-hermitian. Explicitly, we choose ŜR to take the form where s z ↑/↓ = ±1 and τ (0) = τ 2 /4, τ (±1) = ∓iτ 0 /4, τ (±2) = (-τ 2 ±iτ 3 )/8. This generalizes the form assumed in Eq. 12 (see Sec. VI of SM for the explicit construction which guarantees trivial one-body terms). Remarkably, zero-energy ground states can still be exactly constructed according to ( Ôp-p, † ) n |0⟩ and proven to be unique using a corollary of Lieb's well-known theorem Moreover, it remains to be investigated whether QGN is the necessary condition for a set of flat bands to admit solvable strongly coupled interacting Hamiltonians. It is interesting to explore whether new notions in quantum geometry literature. [98] QGN can be defined for any embedding of the intraunit-cell positions {rμ}, but the periodic embedding {rμ = 0} is a special one since if a certain QGN condition is satisfied for any embedding, it is also satisfied in the periodic embedding. It thus suffices to always work with periodic embedding. In the sense that the embedding can be fixed, QGN is an embedding-independent concept, which is necessary for QGN to be a physical concept since embedding is purely a redundancy in the definition of Bloch basis [99] We note that this scheme in general will result in some additional quadratic terms when compared to P Ĥint P , which can be operationally viewed as part of Ĥ0. See Sec. II below and Sec. II D of SM for detailed discussions. [100] We note that these concepts are spiritually similar to the "ideal band condition" where R indicate the unit cell center position, Greek letters α, β, . . . denote the orbital index in each unit cell. For simplicity, we combine the orbital and spin indices unless otherwise specified. In momentum space, we define basis ĉk,α ≡ R e ik•(R+rα) ĉR,α / √ V and Fourier transform t αβ (k) ≡ R e ik•(R+rα-r β ) t αβ,R (V is the number of unit cells in the system, r α is the intra-unit-cell position of orbital α) to rewrite Finally, we can diagonalize the Hamiltonian into the form where we use Latin letters (n, m, . . . ) to label the bands. We assume there are N orbitals, and thus N bands in total. The dispersion ε n (k) and the unitary transformation matrix (the wavefunctions) U αn (k) together define the electronic structure of the system. Conventional Fermi surface nesting conditions only use the information of the dispersion, and lose meaning when the bands are flat in comparison to the interaction strength. In this work, we aim to propose complementary concepts for flat band systems, utilizing the information stored in U αn (k). To do so, we consider an ideal setup where there are N flat nearly degenerate and flat bands isolated from all the other bands by a large gap ∆, and the relevant interaction strength V is small compared to ∆ but large compared to the flat bands' bare bandwidth W . Without loss of generality, we can relabel all the bands and assume the n = 1 . . . N flat bands are the degenerate flat bands, and n = N flat + 1 . . . N bands are the others. For the single particle basis, we can thus define a projector matrix: For later convenience, we also define a projector matrix onto the remaining bands, For the ideal scenario we are assuming, we define the "flat band subspace", H flat , as the Fock space of the electron modes γ k,n=1...N flat tensoring with the "vacuum" state of the other modes γ k,n=N flat +1...N (i.e. all the modes with energy higher/lower than the flat bands are empty/occupied). We formally define the projector onto H flat as P . To the leading order of a perturbation series treating both V /∆ and W/∆ as small parameters, we can set ε n=1...N flat (k) = 0 and project the interacting Hamiltonian onto H flat . Formally, this should be achieved by P Ĥint P , but operationally this could be more conveniently done by retaining terms that only involve γk,n≤N flat , or equivalently, by replacing all ĉkα → P αβ (k)ĉ kβ in the interacting Hamiltonian. We note that this scheme in general will result in additional quadratic terms when compared to P Ĥint P . We will discuss the subtlety led by this in Sec. II D. We emphasize that the main results of this paper do not rely on symmetries other than translation symmetry and charge conservation, and they apply to flat-band systems in arbitrary dimensions. Now we define QGN, which are based on U αn (k) instead of the dispersion ε n (k). Similar to conventional nesting conditions, to define a condition of QGN of an electronic system, one needs to specify the wavevector Q and whether it is in the particle-particle (p-p) channel or in the particle-hole (p-h) channel. In order to define the concept of QGN, we need to first define a linear operator for each case: In Sec. I C we prove that the hyper-operator is hermitian and positive semi-definite. Therefore, it can be diagonalized, and all the eigenvalues are real and non-negative. Then, we call an electronic structure satisfying QGN at a wavevector Q in the particle-particle (p-p) channel or the particle-hole (p-h) channel, if the smallest eigenvalue of the corresponding Π Q is 0. In other words, QGN is defined by the existence of a N × N matrix N μν , which we call the "nesting matrix", satisfying (for any Naturally, the value of the smallest eigenvalue of Π Q , π 0 , defines a "geometric nestability" that measures the closeness of a system to perfect geometric nesting in the corresponding channel and Q; the smaller π 0 is, the more "nestable" the system is. This nesting matrix of perfect QGN further suggests an order parameter operator within the flat band subspace: Ôp-h which is specified by the form factor or For QGN to be non-trivial in p-p channel (i.e. the order parameter is non-zero), it is additionally required that ⋆ which restricts N to be hermitian. In Sec. I C, we will prove that in the p-p or p-h cases, the eigenmatrix of Π Q , in general, satisfies the corresponding condition. In principle, a system can satisfy multiple QGN conditions in different channels and/or at different Qs. It is also possible that there can be more than one linearly independent nesting matrix N for each channel and Q, which signals a further internal symmetry breaking, e.g. triplet SC in spin invariant systems. The main conclusion of our paper is that, whenever QGN is satisfied, there exists an infinite class of interaction terms, Ĥint , that feature solvable ground states with a non-zero corresponding order parameter. The form of such interaction terms will be given in Sec. II, and the reason that they give rise to solvable ground states will be analyzed in Sec. III. For any such solvable models, we further show in Sec. IV that the one-or two-particle excitations as well as certain neutral excitations are also exactly solvable, which can be used to estimate the superfluid stiffness of the superconducting states. In Sec. V we derive several scenarios where QGN are satisfied, which include many known systems. Lastly, in Sec. VI we will present a generalization of the construction scheme, where ground states with non-trivial pairing symmetry are solvable, at the price of losing the ability to exactly solve the excitations. Before we proceed, we analyze some important properties of the linear operator Π Q and QGN, which will be used for the following sections. From here on, the superscript Q and the channel label will be omitted when not ambiguous, for simplicity. 1. Π is hermitian in the sense that: which could be proven straightforwardly using the hermicity of P and Q matrices. 2. Π is positive semi-definite: Using the the definitions of Π in Eqs. 7&6, F in Eqs. 11&12 and P , Q in and below Eq. 5, it follows that, for any matrix N : 3. Equivalent definition of QGN. Since the equal sign in Eq. 14 can only be taken when the QGN is satisfied, and it can be taken if and only if every term in the summation equals zero, we can give an equivalent definition of QGN: There exists a matrix N , such that for arbitrary k, the form factor F nm (k) defined by N (as in Eq. 11/12 depending on the channel) is a block diagonal matrix that disconnects flat band indices from the others, i.e. F nm (k) = 0 as long as n, m are not simultaneously ≤ N flat or > N flat . 4. QGN is gauge invariant. Consider a unitary transformation, V nñ (k), which rotates the degenerate bands, F → V † F V will be transformed accordingly, but the block-diagonality will be preserved since we assume the flat bands are disconnected from other bands. An equivalent way of seeing this is to verify that all the ingredients in defining Π, the projection matrices, are gauge invariant. If N is a nesting matrix, (N N † ) n N for n = 1, 2, • • • are all nesting matrices. This is most conveniently seen with the equivalent definition of QGN: If N is a nesting matrix, then the F matrix defined by N is block diagonal, and thus F ′ ≡ (F F † ) n F is also block-diagonal for any positive integer n; this F ′ is nothing but the form factor defined by (N N † ) n N . 6. Any nesting matrix N can be decomposed as where N sv is the number of distinct non-zero singular values of N , a i are the non-zero singular values, each N (i) is a nesting matrix with all non-zero singular values equal to 1, and different N (i) are orthogonal in the sense that To see this, we first recognize that, any nesting matrix can be singular-value-decomposed as where V 1 , V 2 are unitary and is diagonal and is a linear combination of identity matrices on singular value blocks (d i is the degeneracy of i-th singular value). Then, (N (according to the property 5 above). Linearly recombining those nesting matrices yields, on can obtain , which are still nesting matrices. Then, apparently, For any Q in p-p case, all the eigen-matrices of Π are either symmetric or anti-symmetric. To see this, we note that: In the second equality, we changed the dummy variable k → -k. In the third equality, we used the hermicity of P and Q. M and M T are both eigenmatices of Π with the same eigenvalue, then (M ± M T )/2 construct the symmetric or anti-symmetric eigenmatrix with eigenvalue λ. For 2Q = 0 (mod reciprocal lattice vectors) case in p-h channel, all the eigen-matrices of Π are hermitian (up to an overall prefactor). To see this, we note that: In the second equality, we used the hermicity of P and Q. In the third equality, we shifted the dummy variable k → k + Q. In the fourth equality, we took into account the fact that 2Q = 0. M and M † are both eigenmatices of Π with the same eigenvalue. Then (M + M † )/2 and (M -M † )/(2i) construct the hermitian eigenmatrices with eigenvalue λ. 9. The susceptibility of the order parameters suggested by QGN originating from the flat bands saturate a theoretical upper bound. To see this bound, we consider an arbitrary order parameter defined in the orbital basis the static susceptibility originating from a set of flat bands at temperature T (the contributions involving the remote bands are neglected) can be derived as (taking the p-h case for example): The trace in the above expression is a geometric factor that depends on the structure of the flat band subspace, and it can be rigorously upper-bounded by tr where the first inequality is Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and the second inequality is the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means. Then, suppose the flat bands satisfy QGN at Q with the nesting matrix N , then the suggested order parameter is defined by O(k) = N , and by definition, With simple algebraic manipulations, this immediately implies that the upper bound in Eq. 33 is saturated for every k. In this sense, QGN of a flat-band system suggests a 'best' order parameter with the largest possible susceptibility at low temperatures. A similar derivation can be done for p-p case, where the susceptibility can be evaluated and bounded as follows (ν ≡ tanh μ 2T ∈ (-1, 1) is the filling fraction of the flat bands and μ is the chemical potential, both measured from charge neutrality): This bound is similarly saturated when the corresponding QGN is satisfied. 10. (The issue of embedding) For the suggested OP to be physical, it is necessary that F (k + G) = F (k) for any reciprocal lattice vector G; this amounts to the restriction N μν e iG•(rμ-rν ) = N μν in both p-p or p-h cases. This implies that if N is a nesting matrix at some embedding, it is also a nesting matrix at the periodic embedding r μ = 0. Therefore, it suffices to consider only the periodic embedding throughout the discussion. Nonetheless, in the supplemental material, we will explicitly keep the embedding dependence in many places. The reduction to the periodic embedding is straightforward. The quantum geometry In this section, we show that each satisfied QGN (at momentum Q with nesting matrix N Q in either channel) defines a generalized quantum distance in the momentum space, D(k, k ′ ): which satisfies all the rules for a distance (2-4 hold for at least for close enough generic momenta pairs): 1. The distance between a point and itself is always zero D(k, k) = 0. This is directly implied by the definition of QGN: since each term in the k-sum is non-negative (Property 2 of QGN), all the terms must be zero. It also reduces to the usual distance d(k, k ′ ) when one consider the 'trivial QGN' with Q = 0 and N = 1 in the p-h channel. To see rules 2-4 above are generically approximately satisfied at least for small separations of k, we note that D 2 (k, k ′ ) can be expanded for k ′ ≈ k: which defines a generalized Fubini-study metric: Generically, G should be a positive tensor since D 2 is always non-negative. After proper rescaling and rotation, it reduces to an identity tensor that gives the ordinary definition of distance and thus make rules 2-4 satisfied. We will see below that this notion of generalized metric will determine the superfluid stiffness in a toy model for a superconducting state with non-zero ordering Q (Sec. V C), similar to the familiar case where the usual quantum metric determines the superfluid stiffness in attractive Hubbard model (Sec. V A). Lastly, we prove that the generalized Fubini-Study metric closely relates to the second moment of the bare correlation functions of the order parameters from in the flat-band subspace, specifically: where ÔR ≡ μν e iQ•R ĉRμ N μν ĉRν (for p-p case) or ÔR ≡ μν e iQ•R ĉ † Rμ N μν ĉRν (for p-h case) is the unprojected order parameter density in real space. The expectation value is taken in an empty state in the flat-band subspace. To see this, consider p-h case for example: = =2 =2 where in the first equality we used Wick's theorem, in the second equality we defined P μν (r) ≡ 1 V k e -ik•r P μν (k) and similarly defined Q(r), in the third equality we rearranged the terms and relabeled R and R ′ in some of them, and in the second last equality we used the general formula r i P (r) = k [i∂ ki P (k)] e ik•r . This relation reduces to the usual case for the conventional quantum metric and electronic density correlations when one considers the 'trivial QGN' with Q = 0 and N = 1 in the p-h channel. We note that, with a cumulant expansion method, higher-order geometric objects of this geometry (e.g. the Cristoffel symbol and the Riemann curvature) may be further related to the higher-order correlation functions To construct the interactions that can give rise to the ground states with the promised orders ⟨ Ô⟩ ̸ = 0, we first try to construct a set of local, hermitian, fermion bilinear operators { Ŝ(I) R } centered at each unit cell and labeled by Latin letters in uppercase (I, J, . . . ). The operators of interests are those that commute with the order parameter within the H flat It should be noted that these operators are defined in the entire Hilbert space, whereas the above commutation relation only holds after projection. Then, any interaction terms that are built from those operators commute with the order parameter as well. In general, those interactions take the form where ⟨ Ŝ(I) R ⟩ is simply a number for each R and I. [It should be noted that those "interactions" contain quadratic terms, and are not normal-ordered four-fermion operators. We will discuss the nomenclature subtlety led by these in Sec. II D.] Note that Ŝ(I) R are not necessarily mutually commuting, although it could be possible to construct a set of { Ŝ(I) R } that is mutually commuting. For later convenience, we further rewrite the interaction as (δ Ŝ ≡ Ŝ -⟨ Ŝ⟩) where For the hermicity of the Hamiltonian, we need Since the kinetic energy is zero within the subspace, the order parameter further commutes with the whole Hamiltonian Ĥ = Ĥ0 + Ĥint [ Ô, Ĥ0 + Ĥint ] = 0 within H flat Below we will construct the specific form of the desired hermitian operators. In general, such an operator can be parameterized as: which can be equivalently written with momentum bases as where When projected onto H flat , one can simply restrict n, m ≤ N flat in Eq. 58. The hermicity of Ŝ(I) R ensures that S (I) nm (p, q) = S (I) mn (q, p) The locality further implies that S (I) R to make them commute with the order parameter suggested by the QGN. For p-p and p-h cases, we need to discuss them separately. Within H flat , we compute In the third equality, we used that F p-p nm (k) = -F p-p mn (-k). In the fourth equality, we shift q → Q 2 + q and we use the equivalent definition of QGN (property 3 in Sec. I C) and recognize that the summation of the dummy variable m can be over all possible bands, since the block diagonal structure of F will ensure that the summation for m > N F won't generate any results; this is the most crucial role played by QGN in our derivation. In the fifth equality, we recognize that k, q and n, l are dummy variables that are exchangeable, and we are free two exchange them for half of the terms. In the last equality, we substitute in the definitions of F and S (I) and recognize that N is anti-symmetric for p-p case. Therefore, the commutator vanishes if and only if for any k, q and μ, ν. Then we choose S (I) μν (p, q) to take a separable form: where B is a hermitian matrix, and A (I) (p, q) = A (I) (q, p) ⋆ in order for Ŝ to be hermitian. In real space, this separation of orbital and momentum amounts to where ) is a spatial coefficient, and it satisfies A (I) (r 1 , r 2 ) = A (I) (r 2 , r 1 ) ⋆ . The calculation for p-h case is similar. Within H flat , we compute In the second last equality we redefined q → q -Q 2 in the first summation, and p → k + Q 2 , k → q in the second summation. Property 3 of QGN (see Sec. I C) is also used to allow the intermediate dummy index to sum over all bands. In the last equality, we substitute in the definitions of F and S (I) . Therefore, in order for the commutator to vanish, the matrix inside the square parenthesis in the last line must vanish for any k, q. We again choose Ŝ(I) R to take the separable form in Eq. 71, and we find the following conditions for the coefficients A (I) (p, q) and the hermitian matrix B becomes: Now we derive implication of the first condition, Eq. 88, on the form of A (I) (r 1 , r 2 ) (See Eq. 72 for definition): which further suggests that A (I) (r 1 , r 2 ) = 0 if e iQ•(R1-R2) ̸ = 1. We note that we are still left us with infinite choices. Especially, all the on-site density operators are always allowed. To satisfy the second condition in Eq. 89, there are at least N flat choices of such hermitian matrices B if N is hermitian, which is true when 2Q = 0 (property 8, Sec. I C). Those B matrices can be found by first diagonalizing N with a unitary transformation where V is unitary and D is diagonal. Then B can be constructed by V D ′ V † with D ′ any diagonal matrix; clearly, there are N flat linearly independent choices. When there is degeneracy in the spectrum of N , one can even construct more B matrices, since now any matrix defined on that block will commute with D. For the general case where N is not hermitian, one can repeat the above procedure in its diagonalizable subspace. At least, one can construct two B's for Eq. 89, which is simply the identity matrix and N . In summary, we have proven that, as long as Ŝ(I) takes the separable form in Eq. 71, and the loose conditions Eqs. 88&89 are satisfied, [ Ôp-h Q , Ŝ(I) R ] = 0 within H flat . We further showed that Eqs. 88&89 are satisfiable for an infinite class of constructions. There were two subtle issues concerning the projection scheme and the definition of interactions we adopted, which we discuss in this section. Recall that we have effectively enforced the projection by simply replacing ĉkα → P αβ ĉkβ , i.e. retaining the terms that only involves γ kn≤N flat . This is in general not equal to the projection with P for four fermion terms. To see this, we compose any ĉ operator as ĉ ≡ c + c where c is the part that involves γ kn≤N flat and c is the remaining part. Then, for any four fermion operator ĉ † 1 ĉ2 ĉ † 3 ĉ4 , the projection with our scheme is: However, for the more rigorously defined projection, this will result in where ⟨⟩ is evaluated on the "vacuum" state of the other modes γ k,n=N flat +1...N (i.e. all the modes with energy higher/lower than the flat bands are empty/occupied). Therefore, we see that these two schemes differ by some Hartree-Fock (HF) terms contributed by the electrons (or holes) in the remote bands. Specifically, for the form of interactions we constructed in Eq. 51, the difference is: The bandwidth of the Hartree-Fock terms is generically O(V ), and hence can not be neglected in the ideal limit where the bare kinetic energy H 0 has nearly flat bands (i.e. bandwidth smaller than V ). However, we note that the Hartree-Fock terms are of strength ∼ V ≪ ∆ by assumption, so they do not alter the energy sequences between the flat bands and the remote bands, nor do they change the definition of the projector matrix P (to the leading order of V /∆). Therefore, if one only regards the geometric nesting conditions as suggesting potential fermion bilinear orders in a strongly correlated system, one does not need to worry about these issues since there is no ambiguity in defining QGN with the projector matrix P . When the construction of solvable models is concerned, a more careful discussion about the definitions of the definition of Ĥ0 and Ĥint is needed. A simple resolution to the subtlety is to regard ĤHF as a part of the "noninteracting Hamiltonian" instead of part of the "interaction". Specifically, we can redefine in all the discussions in this paper. On the other hand, if ĤHF is just a chemical potential term for the flat bands, we can also avoid all the subtleties. Below we evaluate this possibility by explicitly deriving the condition for such a case. Without loss of generality, we consider an electronic structure with a flat band at the bottom of the spectrum, so that the vacuum state these HF terms are evaluated on is the empty state. In this case, there is only one nontrivial term given by the contraction ⟨c 2 c † 3 ⟩. We will calculate this term explicitly to derive conditions on when it can be rigorously neglected, and the groundstates constructed in the Main text are asymptotically exact. In this case, the interactions we consider can be written and the quadratic term arising from projection onto the flat band Hilbert space is where (1 -1 flat ) is a projector onto the dispersive bands, e.g. acts as a trivial chemical potential in the flat band Hilbert space, meaning the quantity in parentheses is independent of k. We give two explicit examples. First, we consider the attractive Hubbard case with V IJ (q) = U 2 δ IJ and S (I) αs,βs ′ (k + q, k) = δ αI δ βI σ z ss ′ writing out μ = α, s for orbital and spin respectively. Then the one-body term is where Ref. The second example concerns the toy model in Sec. V C of the Main Text where we choose V IJ (q) = δ IJ V I to be diagonal and on-site with for i = x, y, z. This interaction results in the one-body term and thus is a trivial chemical potential on the flat band Hilbert space. Here we used [Q(q), σ i ] = 0 from SU (2) spin, which reduces q Q(q) + τ z Q(q)τ z to a diagonal matrix, and all its entries must be equal due to τ x Q(q)τ x = Q(q -(π, π)), and hence must be 1 since TrQ(k) = 2. This is an example of how "uniform pairing" can be generalized to the more complicated interactions considered here. We have proven that once QGN is satisfied, there are several local hermitian operators { Ŝ(I) R } within the flat band subspace that commutes with the order parameter This motivates us to define a "pseudo-Hamiltonian" where θ is a free U (1) phase. It is easy to see that Ê also commutes with Ŝ(I) R . In this section, we will show that Ê can be viewed as a certain 'trial' Hamiltonian of the system, which provides exact solutions to ordered ground states of the interacting system. Specifically, since Ŝ(I) R and Ê commute, we can deduce that any non-degenerate eigenstate of Ê must also be an eigenstate of Ŝ(I) R . According to the analysis in Sec. II, we know that once such an eigenstate is found, we can easily make it a ground state of Ĥ by adjusting constants. Therefore, the task is to find the unique eigenstates of Ê and show that they are ordered, ground states of Ĥint . Ê is Hermitian and quadratic in fermion operators within the flat band subspace, so its spectrum and eigenmodes can be exactly solved. Before proceeding to more detailed discussions, we note that the spectrum of Ê always consists of flat pseudo-bands, i.e. the eigenmodes of Ê on each k have identical pseudo-energies. To prove this, we define an operator which has k-independent spectrum. Therefore, we conclude that Ê also only have flat pseudo-bands. Now we discuss the specific cases. If the QGN is in the p-p channel (such that N is antisymmetric), Ê can be written as where is the Nambu spinor on k and is the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) pseudo-Hamiltonian on k. Diagonlizing h BdG (k) will result in 2N flat quasiparticle modes for each pair of ±k, and the eigenvalues come in pairs ±λ i , where λ 2 i is the i-th eigenvalue of F † (k)F (k). Further denoting the i-th (ortho-normal) eigenvector of F † (k)F (k) as φ (i) k , the (±i)-th eigenvectors of h BdG (k) take the form e iθ F (k)φ Therefore, the spectrum of Ê consists of N flat BdG quasiparticle bands, appearing in pairs. Fully occupying all the upper (or lower) bands gives rise to a state |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ with a real eigenvalue Ē ≡ εV, where ε = i λ i is a sum of all the pseudo-energies of the occupied bands and thus non-zero. It is clear that Ē is a non-degenerate eigenvalue of Ê and |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ is its unique eigenstate since any change of the occupation configuration of the BdG quasi-particles will also change the eigenvalue. Thus we see that |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ is an eigenstate of Ŝ(I) R and thus Ĥ. By explicitly writing out the expression of the many-body wavefunction: we readily verify that it hosts an off-diagonal-long-range-order (ODLRO) with a superconducting phase θ in the sense that We note that by doing a global gauge transformation γ → γe -iθ/2 , we are able to transform Ê(θ) → Ê(θ = 0) and thus |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ → |Ψ SC (θ = 0)⟩,while keeping Ŝ(I) R unchanged (since it conserves charge). Thus, all |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ with different θ are simultaneous eigenstate of Ŝ(I) R with the same eigenvalue. Therefore, if one prefers to work with fixed particle numbers, we note that θ is arbitrary and defines a superconducting state with a fixed electron number N e . In the above analysis, we have implicitly assumed that Ê is full-rank, i.e. there are no zero modes. If this is not true, the uniqueness of Ψ SC (θ) needs to be discussed with more care. In this case, we may consider a subspace of H flat , H ′ flat , in which the electron modes relevant to the BdG zero modes are all empty. Then, repeating the analysis above proves the uniqueness of Ψ SC (θ) in this subspace. Since Ŝ(I) R preserves H ′ flat , this still proves that Ψ SC (θ) is an eigenstate of Ŝ(I) R . On the other hand, if the QGN is in p-h channel, Ê breaks the original translation symmetry of the problem for Q ̸ = 0, and the BZ of Ê will be folded. The folding number, M, is the smallest positive integer that makes MQ = 0 modulo the reciprocal lattice. Then, diagonalizing the pseudo-Hamiltonian gives us MN flat electron bands within the folded BZ. Again, occupying any integer number of bands that are separated from other bands by finite "pseudo-gaps" gives rise to a density-wave state |Ψ DW (θ)⟩ with a real, non-degenerate and non-zero eigenvalue Ē within the fixed particle number sector. In contrast to the p-p case, here θ only cycles the pseudo-energies of different pseudo-bands which corresponds to different translation symmetry-breaking patterns, but they do not have direct physical meaning. In this section, we solve certain excitations for a system satisfying perfect QGN with an ideal Hamiltonian of the kind we constructed in Sec. II. The strategy is to find operator ξ that satisfies: for any ground state |Ψ⟩. Since we have assumed momentum and charge conservation, we are able to seek such excitations within each charge and momentum sector. This method was proposed in Ref. We first compute the following commutators within H flat [ Now, for any ground state |Ψ⟩, since δ Ŝ(I) (q)|Ψ⟩ = 0 (recall where Γ h,P is the transition matrix defined by lm (P , q + P )S (I) mn (q + P , P ) Therefore, the eigenstates and eigenvalues of Γ h,P on each P describe the charge -1, single-hole excitations of the system. Similarly, we obtain, where Γ p,P is the transition matrix defined by Γ p,P ln ≡ 1 V IJ,m≤N flat ,q V IJ (-q)S (I) nm (P , q + P )S (J) ml (q + P , P ) Then, the eigenstates and eigenvalues of Γ p,P on each P describe the charge +1, single-electron excitations of the system. We note that Γ p/h , in general, do not share the same spectrum since there is no obvious particle-hole symmetry in the system. However, for the p-p case, there is an emergent "particle-hole" symmetry that allows us to relate the spectrum Γ p at P with that of Γ h at P -Q (Q is the wavevector of the QGN). See Sec. IV D 1 for details. Defining k ± ≡ k ± P /2, using Eqs. 118&121, we compute within Then we find that starting from any ground state |Ψ⟩ (recall δ Ŝ ≡ Ŝ -⟨ Ŝ⟩), since δ Ŝ(I) (q)|Ψ⟩ = 0, we have where Γ p-h,P is the scattering matrix for a particle and a hole with total momentum P Solving the spectrum of Γ p-h,P on P will give the charge-neutral particle-hole pair (exciton) excitations with total momentum P . Defining k ± ≡ P /2 ± k (do not confuse with k ± defined for the previous section), we compute within H flat Then we find that from any ground state |Ψ⟩, since δ Ŝ(I) (q)|Ψ⟩ = 0 (recall δ Ŝ ≡ Ŝ -⟨ Ŝ⟩), we have where Γ p-p,P is the scattering matrix for two particles with total momentum P , and Γ h-h,-P is the scattering matrix for two holes with total momentum -P , Solving the spectrum and eigenstates of the scattering matrices will give rise to the particle-particle pair or hole-hole pair excitations with charge ±2 and momentum ±P . Note that the first and last lines of Eq. ( It is important to note that the basis on which Γ acts is γ † k+,m γ † k-,n which anti-symmetrizes the matrix due to the anti-commutation relations of the electron operators. Thus if ψ kmn (p) is an eigenvector of Γ, it only corresponds to a physical excitation of the model if is nonzero. For models with S z symmetry, we can decompose Γ into spin 0 and spin ±1 sectors which are antisymmetric/symmetric in spin, respectively. In the Hubbard case for instance, one can show the nontrivial scattering term vanishes on the spin ±1 states To be explicit, we will write up the spin-single branch of the Cooper pair scattering matrix assuming SU (2) symmetry and time-reversal. We find (134) where we took m → m, s to label the mth band in the spin s sector. In general, the excitations derived in previous sections do not have any relation. However, in the p-p case, we find that certain excitations with the same fermion (and thus charge) parity could be related. To see this, suppose ξ(c) P creates a charge c excitation with total momentum P and energy E (c) (P ), then ξ(c+2) define a charge c ± 2 excitation with momentum P ± Q and energy and similarly for ξ P +Q . Applying this to the previous cases, we know that the particle and hole excitations share the same spectrum, and the particle-particle, particle-hole, and hole-hole pair excitations share the same spectrum. In this section, we will show that there are N sv pseudo-spin SU (2) symmetries in the solvable Hamiltonian we constructed for the p-p case, where N sv is the number of different non-zero singular values of N . First, we recall that each nesting matrix can be decomposed as (property 6 in Sec. I C) where a i are the singular values of N , and each N (i) is a nesting matrix with singular values equal to 0, 1. Different N (i) are orthogonal. Then we recognize that there are N sv linearly independent order parameters that commute with the Hamiltonian. They are given by where F (i) is given by N (i) according to Eq. 11. To prove this, we repeat Eq. 70 here (but recast into a more concise form), which is the sufficient and necessary condition for a ŜR to commute with Ô (constructed by N ): Utilizing this we know that where in the third and the fifth equality we used the hermicity of S: S(k, q) = S † (q, k). Therefore, we know that the Hamiltonian we constructed also commutes with the order parameter Ô constructed by N N † N and all even those corresponding to (N N † ) n=1,2,... N . Since linearly combining (N N † ) n=1,2,... N can yield {N (i) } (see property 6 in Sec. I C), linearly combining the corresponding order parameters can also yield { Ô(i) }. We thus conclude that all those order parameters { Ô(i) } commute with the Hamiltonian we constructed. Finally, we recognize that, for each Ô(i) , we can construct three operators: all of which commute with the Hamiltonian, and form an su(2) algebra ("η-pairing") in the sense that: To check these commutation relations, we compute (defining Then for Ĵ(i) where the second equality used the fact that all the singular values of N (i) are either 0 or 1. Similarly, we can obtain Combining these two equality we thus verify that Ĵ(i) x,y,z form an su(2) algebra. Since they all commute with the Hamiltonian, the system has an SU (2) symmetry generated by them. It is straightforward to check that the symmetry generators commute for different (i). Therefore, we conclude that there are N sv pseudo-spin SU (2) symmetries in the solvable Hamiltonian we constructed for the p-p case. Intriguingly, for each of them, the conservation of Ĵ(i) z implies charge conservation in a part of the flat bands. We first review some general results for systems with SU (2) symmetry. It is well known that its symmetry-broken phase is described by a non-linear sigma model (NLSM) where π a=x,y,z are the Nambu-Goldstone (NG) fields of the pseudospin symmetry, ρ ab = c 2ε abc ⟨ Ĵc ⟩/V is related to the pseudospin density evaluated in the symmetry broken phase, and D ij , g are undetermined effective parameters. We note that D ij is the pseudospin stiffness tensor. From this NLSM, it can be derived that, when the pseudospin ⃗ J is ferromagnetically ordered, i.e. J = |⟨ ⃗ J⟩|/V ̸ = 0 in the thermodynamic limit, the NG fields in the orthogonal directions are mutual conjugate variables, and the dispersion relation of the NG mode at small wavevector δQ will be given by Given the quadratic dispersion of the NG mode, the Mermin-Wagner-Coleman theorem further states that spontaneous symmetry breaking of the pseudospin SU (2) symmetry generically cannot occur at finite temperature when the space dimension is d ≤ 2 (at zero temperature, in contrast, it can happen at all positive dimensions). However, when d = 2, the susceptibility χ(T ) ∼ T 3 /|D| 4 exp(4π|D|/T ) (where |D| = √ det D) is large at low temperature T which quickly become comparable to |D| as D ′ becomes non-zero. With these general understandings in mind, we now come back to our constructed, solvable systems. For simplicity, we will restrict to the case of N sv = 1, but the generalization to other N sv is straightforward. From Eq. 113 it can be directly inferred that the ground states |Ψ SC (θ)⟩ have pseudospin order in its xy-plane with amplitude J = |⟨ ⃗ J⟩|/2 = |⟨cos θ Ĵx + sin θ Ĵy ⟩|/2 = εV/2. On top of these ground states, the lowest branch of the Cooper pair or neutral spectrum, E (0,±2) (P ), must hit zero at P = Q. This is because Ô is a pair excitation operator with zero energy and momentum Q. Then, the dispersion E (0,±2) (P ) near Q can be Taylor expanded: where M -1 ij is the inverse of the mass tensor of the cooper pairs. These modes are nothing but the NG mode corresponding to the spontaneous pseudospin symmetry breaking. Thus, comparing the dispersions in Eq. 152 and Eq. 150, one can conclude that We also note that there are multiple factors that can lead to a deviation from the idealized setup we assumed and thus a weak explicit breaking of the pseudospin SU (2) symmetry, including (but not limited to) the finite band gap, the imperfect flatness of the bands or electronic structure, and the deviation of interaction from the obtained form. Depending on the nature of those perturbations, the superconducting state may remain phase-coherent up to a temperature comparable to |D| in d ≥ 2. In this section, we give several examples of electronic structures satisfying certain QGN. A. Time reversal symmetric and S z conserving systems To give the simplest example of QGN, we consider any system with spin S z conservation and time-reversal symmetry. Then we separate out spin index from the band and orbital indices and recognize the implications of the symmetries: Then N μs1,νs2 ≡ σ y s1s2 1 μν satisfies QGN at Q = 0 in the p-p channel, since is block diagonal (equivalent definition of QGN in property 3 of Sec. I C). The consequence is that, for this QGN, solvable Hamiltonians can be constructed with B (I) μσ1,νσ2 = σ i=0,x,y,z σ1σ2 B(I) μν where B(I) are arbitrary symmetric (for i = x, y, z) or antisymmetric (for i = 0) hermitian matrices for the orbital indices. This includes a huge class of possibilities, e.g. the attractive Hubbard interactions on each site, which were pointed out in Ref. We note that, given those symmetries, the conventional Fermi surface nesting is also satisfied for the dispersive cases. In fact, both cases are the manifestation of the Wannier degeneracy. When the electronic system is on a bipartite lattice, the single-particle Hamiltonian on each k can be written as where T is a N A × N B matrix characterizing the hopping between the two sublattices A and B consisting of N A and N B orbitals, respectively. Without loss of generality, we assume N A ≤ N B . Then T (k) can be singular value decomposed into where D(k) is a N B × N B diagonal matrix with non-negative entries and rank R ≤ N A , i.e. (assuming 0 and V A (k) and V B (k) are unitary matrices of sizes and eigenbasis defined by where ṼA is a N B × N A matrix expanded from V A by adding N B -N A empty rows to the top, and ṼB is a N A × N B matrix trimmed from V B by deleting the first N B -N A rows. N μs;νs ′ ≡ 1 μν σ y ss ′ (165) Then we note that, is a nesting matrix for the p-h channel at Q = 0 in the sense that the form factor matrix defined by keep all the zero modes disconnected from other finite energy modes (which is easier to see if one re-indexes the bands and makes n = 1 . . . N flat the flat bands). Therefore, according to the alternative defintion of QGN (property 3 in Sec. I C), when there are flat bands at zero energy in chiral systems, the system satisfies QGN in the p-h channel. This QGN is particularly useful when there are additional internal symmetries, e.g. spin and/or valley. In this case, the nesting matrix can be a tensor product of Eq. 166 defined on purely the orbital basis and an arbitrary matrix on the internal symmetry basis. The condensation of the corresponding order parameter then leads to the symmetry breaking of the internal symmetry. This is exactly the case extensively discussed in the studies on magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene in its flat and chiral-flat limits It is of particular interest to identify or even predict what form of perturbations and interactions could lead to certain specific symmetry-breaking patterns in flat band materials, e.g. picking inter-valley coherence, valley polarization, etc, out of the symmetry-related manifold. We expect QGN to provide important information in this aspect since it may suggest interactions that are only favorable for one type of symmetry-breaking pattern but not the others. We leave the investigations to specific materials for further studies. C. An engineered model for PDW To show that QGN can be applicable to other systems, here we explicitly construct a toy, minimal system where QGN is satisfied in multiple channels. Specifically, we consider a two-band, spinful model on the square lattice, whose band structure is given by Ĥ0 where we have restored the spin index σ, and τ i=x,y,z are the Pauli matrices acting on the orbital indices. In real space, this model can be viewed as a bilayer model with an interlayer hopping M and an intralayer nearest neighbor hopping t with an opposite sign but the same magnitude on two layers. It is easy to tune the system to a flat band limit, where the band gap is much greater than the bandwidths, by taking M ≫ |t|. This system is time-reversal invariant and spin rotation invariant so that the QGN for uniform pairing discussed in the previous subsection is automatically satisfied. However, there are actually more QGN satisfied in this system. To recognize these channels, we note that in this band structure, U αs,ns (k) = δ ss ′ U αn (k) and for Q = (π, π), This suggests QGN in p-p channel with nesting matrix N p-p,Q αs,βs ′ = τ x αβ σ y ss ′ (and thus form factors F p-p,Q ns,ms ′ (k) = δ nm σ y ss ′ ), and a series of QGNs in p-h channel with nesting matrices N p-h,Q αs,βs ′ = τ x αβ σ i=0,x,y,z ss ′ (and thus form factors ). These channels of perfect QGN suggest that, besides the uniform pairing order, the system is simultaneously prone to a singlet pair density wave, a charge density wave, and a spin density wave, all at Q = (π, π). Applying the construction scheme in Sec. II, we find that different possible μσ,νσ ′ matrices (factorized by τ i=0,x,y,z μν σ j=0,x,y,z ss ′ ) can serve as building blocks of ideal interactions for different orders, as listed in Aiming to construct a simple ideal model for PDW in this quantum geometry, we consider the following local interaction made of four of the six possible B (I) matrices in Table . showing a combination of anti-ferromagnetism and inter-orbital attraction. This form of interaction is particularly simple and is spin invariant. We now compute the charge ±1 (quasi-particle) and charge 2 excitation (Cooper pair) excitations for this model. Note that the one-body terms generated by projection are all trivial, and thus the groundstate and excitations are exact in the strong coupling limit V ≫ t 2 /M . The charge ±1 excitations are also fully gapped and flat. The calculation is very similar to Eq. ( where m, n ∈ {↑, ↓} since there is 1 flat band per spin in the projected Hilbert space. The flatness of the charge 1 bands leads to the solvability of the Cooper pair spectrum. We will focus on the spin 0 sector (see Eq. ( using the fact that the charge 1 excitation energies are flat and equal to 3V . To diagonalize the Hamiltonian, it is sufficient to diagonalize the scattering matrix, which we are able to solve in some generality. We need the following identities where we dropped the spin index of the eigenvector using SU (2) symmetry, and took U (k) = U (-k) by spin-less time-reversal. We now write the scattering matrix in the outer product notation where Γ p. is the flat charge 1 excitation energy, and we have defined the V × N 2 orb matrix (recall and the N 2 orb × N 2 orb interaction matrix Here N orb is the number of orbitals per spin. Since the rank of U(p) and B can be no greater than N 2 orb , the scattering matrix, although thermodynamically large, has finite rank at most N 2 orb . Its kernel contains all eigenvectors annihilated by U † (p), which hence have total energy 6V (twice the charge +1 energy) and form the flat particle-particle continuum. To derive the nontrivial eigenvalues, we will assume that B is positive semi-definite. Then we can write B = AA † via a singular-value decomposition, leading to showing that the non-zero eigenvalues are those of whose eigenvalues are the binding energies of the Cooper pair branches below the particle-particle continuum. Written out in components, we find generalizing the form previously found in Ref. Using the fact that 2Γ p. = 6V is twice the charge +1 excitation spectrum, Eq. ( neglecting the additional two modes with zero binding energy. The condensing PDW mode is the focus of this work, which behaves like for p = (π, π) + δp. Thus we determine the inverse mass of the Cooper pair to be 6V t 2 M 2 , which is proportional to the interaction strength and the integrated Fubini-Study metric In particular, the ratio of the inverse mass (in units where the lattice constant is 1) to the quasi-particle gap is M 2 /3V = 2g is identical to the attractive Hubbard model case with s-wave pairing Like how a single-band model has perfect Fermi-surface nesting if E(k + Q) = E(k), we can engineer bands with perfect QGN obeying N U (k) = U (k+Q) where N is an N×N unitary matrix. Our method is to realize a single-particle Hamiltonian obeying where in this section we require a periodic embedding h μν (k) = h μν (k + G) for all reciprocal lattice vectors G. Eq. ( where t(R), the Fourier transform of h(k), is the hopping matrix between unit cells R apart. Given Eq. (185), it is clear that U (k + Q) and N U (k) are eigenvectors of h(k + Q), and thus the projector onto the set of (quasi-)flat bands obeys This condition is gauge-invariant, although it is restricted to the periodic embedding. We now show that N yields a nesting matrix as defined by the criteria in the Main Text, Π μ ′ ν ′ ,μν N μν = 0 for the p.-p. and p.-h. cases. To show this, we shift k in the sum to yield (considering the p.-h. case) first since P (k)Q(k) = 0. We now make the observation that the solution to the QGN criterion exhibited here manifests as a conventional "nesting instability" of the Fubini-Study metric. This is because Eq. (187) implies If we consider g(k) as an effective dispersion E(k) on the BZ, then QGN can be visualized as a nesting of g(k). In general, perfect QGN such that ΠN = 0 implies g(k + Q) = g(k) if N is unitary (up to an overall normalization, i.e. N † N ∝ 1). To see this, note that every term in the k sum defining Π is positive semi-definite, so ΠN = 0 implies that so that N † P (k + Q)N is a Hermitian matrix in the null space of Q(k). If N is unitary, then N † P (k + Q)N is a Hermitian projector with rank TrN † P (k + Q)N = P (k + Q) = TrP (k). This proves N † P (k + Q)N = P (k) since the maximal-rank projector onto the nullspace of Q(k) is unique. If N is not unitary, N † P (k + Q)N is not guaranteed to be a projector, and this argument does not hold. For the p.-p. channel, we will assume there is also time-reversal symmetry h * (k) = h(-k), in which case and thus we find that N * is a nesting matrix obeying which completes the proof. Note that a weaker requirement for the p.-p. case is P (k+Q) = (N P (-k)N † ) * . Following the same arguments as the p.-h. case, it follows that g(k + Q) = g(-k). E. An engineered model for current density wave At first glance, the order parameter considered in our work seems orthogonal to any current operator when expressed on an orbital basis, thus excluding the possibility of a current (flux) density wave. However, in a multiband system with non-trivial quantum geometry, the projected order parameter may acquire overlap with the current operator and lead to the current density wave order. To see this, we construct a simple example below. Consider a one-dimensional, two-leg (labeled by α = 1, 2), spinless electronic system with electronic structure specified by: Ĥ0 where τ i are Pauli matrices acting on the leg index, and we take a special choice with δ an arbitrary real number. This electronic structure has two perfectly flat bands (labeled by n = ±): Then, when Q = π, Therefore, according to the alternative definition of QGN, any one of the two bands satisfies QGN in p-h channel with Q = π with nesting matrix: Then, the ground states at 1/4 or 3/4 filling for any constructed ideal interacting models will have a certain density wave order with momentum π, the nature of which is to be determined. To be concrete, we focus on the 1/4 filling where one of the ground states can be obtained by occupying the modes (γ k,n=-+ γ k+π,n=-)/ √ 2 on all k. With this many-body wavefunction, we can compute the expectation value of the current (going from leg α to β) density operator at momentum π: Meanwhile, the number density operators (on leg α) have vanishing expectation values on this momentum: ρα (q) ≡ k ĉ † k+q/2,α ĉk-q/2,α (206) Therefore, the ground state is purely a current density wave. The corresponding ideal interaction can be constructed with the general scheme in Sec. II. In this case, the viable B matrices are τ y or τ 0 = 1. Therefore, the ideal interaction can be as simple as a density repulsion VI. A GENERALIZATION OF THE CONSTRUCTION SCHEME OF SOLVABLE MODELS The construction scheme for solvable models so far encompasses the known solvable cases of flat bands. However, it is not exhaustive for systems satisfying perfect QGN. We now show that relaxing the Hermiticity constraint of the spin operators in Eq. ( Below we will show a minimal example of this extension in the superconducting case by constructing a 1D p-wave eta pairing groundstate. In this section, we construct a family of models with solvable eta-pairing ground states with nonzero angular momentum (p-wave, d-wave, and f -wave pairings). Our construction generalizes the s-wave groundstates obtained in Ref. We will consider a system S z spin U(1) symmetry, spin-ful time-reversal symmetry T , and a single-particle Hamiltonian H 0 with a set of exactly flat bands. For convenience, we will assume all electron orbitals on which the flat band is supported are located at the origin of the unit cell, r α = 0, as can be easily implemented in the construction of Ref. We now define a generalized spin/hopping operator where s z σ = ± for spin ↑ / ↓ and τ σ βα (R ′ -R) is a finite range hopping whose form is determined by a solvability criterion we will derive momentarily. (We use the notation τ instead of S to avoid confusion with the s z σ spin.) From S R we obtain the positive semi-definite interaction although it is possible to generalize our results to longer-ranged positive-semi definite interactions. For S R to be time-reversal symmetric, i.e. T S R,α T -1 = -S R,α and T H int T -1 , we take τ σ βα (R ′ -R) = τ -σ βα (R ′ -R) * . It will be useful to rewrite this Hamiltonian in momentum space as We now go to the band basis via the following Fourier transformations V q e -iq•(R ′ -R) τ σ βα (q) (212) and γ † k,n,σ = α c † k,α,σ U σ α,n (k) in terms of the single-particle eigenvectors U σ (k) of H 0 . We obtain leading to the momentum space expression We define a projected interaction H int,f lat = U q S † q Sq (215) are (unnormalized) pairing groundstates at fixed particle number. This follows from [ Sq , η † ] = 0 because ⟨n|H int,f lat |n⟩ = q Sq η †n |0⟩ 2 = 0 (224) and thus |n⟩ must be zero energy eigenstates because of the positive semi-definite form of H int,f lat . Hence they are groundstates. This approach agrees with the particle-number polarized groundstates of the psuedo-Hamiltonian in III. We now will show that p-wave, d-wave, and f -wave Cooper pairing groundstates can be constructed from this more general ansatz, and then we will give a minimal example. Using Eq. ( so that τ (k) is the order parameter/Cooper pair wavefunction. To have η † transform nontrivially, we check its symmetry transformation properties: We see that only ±1 eigenvalues of g = C n are allowed, which is expected given that we have enforced spin-ful timereversal symmetry and the groundstate it unique. The + sign is conventional s-wave. For g = C 2 , C 4 , C 6 , thesign corresponds to p-, d-, and f -wave symmetry respectively (i.e. Cooper pairs with angular momentum l = 1, 2, 3 mod 2, 4, 6) and spin zero. To illustrate that it is possible to achieve these higher angular momentum pairing symmetries in a strictly local model, we first give a minimal 1D example with p-wave symmetry. We consider a 1D SSH-type chain with s and p orbitals at the origin. We pick the single-particle Hamiltonian to be A key feature of τ (k) is that is is supported on strictly finite harmonics e ink , n = 0, ±1, ±2, and as such is a compact obstructed atomic limit arising from a model with completely flat bands Although such bands have zero Berry curvature, they exhibit nontrivial many-body phases Finally, we discuss the excitations above the groundstate. It is important to note that, unlike in the s-wave case, Sq ̸ = S † -q as is apparent from the non-hermiticity of S R in Eq. ( where we used Eq. ( V n s z σ γ † k+q,n,σ τ σ nm (k, q), [τ σ (k, q)] mn = [U σ † (k + q)τ σ (k + q)U σ (k)] mn . (233) We now use the matrix inequality ⟨n|γ k,m ′′ ,σ γ † k,m ′ ,σ |n⟩ ⪯ [⟨n|n⟩ 1] mm ′ to observe that ⟨n|γ k,m,σ H int,f lat γ † k,m,σ |n⟩ ⟨n|n⟩ ≤ U V q [τ σ † (k, q)τ σ (k, q)] mm = [ U V q τ σ † (k, q)τ σ (k, q)] mm ≡ [R σ (k)] mm . Using Eq. (231), we compute which has zeros at k = 0, π corresponding to the nodes of the Cooper pair η † . Since the excitation energies must also be positive semi-definite, the existence of nodes in the upper bound R σ (k) proves nodes in the full many-body spectrum. The inequality in Eq. ( 