Organic electrochemical transistors formed by in operando electropolymerization of the semiconducting channel are increasingly becoming recognized as a simple and effective implementation of synapses in neuromorphic hardware. However, very few studies have reported the requirements that must be met to ensure that the polymer spreads along the substrate to form a functional conducting channel. The nature of the interface between the substrate and various monomer precursors of conducting polymers through molecular dynamics simulations is investigated, showing that monomer adsorption to the substrate produces an increase in the effective monomer concentration at the surface. By evaluating combinatorial couples of monomers baring various sidechains with differently functionalized substrates, it is shown that the interactions between the substrate and the monomer precursor control the lateral growth of a polymer film along an inert substrate. This effect has implications for fabricating synaptic systems on inexpensive, flexible substrates. Organic electrochemical transistors (OECT) have emerged as one of the most widely investigated devices for diverse bioelectronics applications such as neural interfaces, sensors, printed logic circuits, and, more recently, neuromorphic computing devices. Considering how thoroughly electropolymerization of conducting polymers has been examined, Here, we deliberately control the surface properties of the SiO 2 substrate by introducing hydrophobic trimethoxy(octadecyl)silane (OTS), partially positive (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES), and partially negative (oxygen plasma treated) functional groups. We postulated that the charged sulfonate sidechain plays a role in determining the interactions with the substrate and sought to test this theory by complimenting the ETE-S, which is predominantly negatively charged at pH 7, with a zwitterionic phosphocholine ETE derivative (ETE-PC) and a positively charged trimethyl ammoniumcontaining derivative (ETE-TMA). This systematic approach enables us to construct a set of general principles that can be used to rationally adapt EOECTs to novel substrates. Maintained aqueous solubility at the concentrations used for the experiments was a prerequisite for any changes made to the monomer. Phosphoryl choline, structurally inspired by the The monomer is oxidatively electropolymerized by applying a voltage above the polymerization threshold value for a period of time. As the polymer crosses the gap between the source and drain and makes contact with the opposing electrode, there is an increase in the channel conductance, which is evidenced as an increase in the drain current. zwitterionic hydrophilic head of phospholipids, was chosen as a substituent to obtain a neutral monomer with high hydrophilicity. A quaternary ammonium substituent was selected to obtain a positively charged monomer. A hexyl linker was chosen to distance the positive charge from the thiophene core of the timer. The hexyl trimethyl-ammonium substituent was previously used to obtain positively charged polythiophenes The oxidative polymerization of the ETE-X monomers and the electrochemical characteristics of the resulting films were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) on a fluorine-doped tin oxide electrode (Figure cyclic voltammogram in a solution of ETE-X monomer, corresponding to nucleation of the conducting polymer on the FTO electrode, is observed at 0.30 V for ETE-S, 0.47 V for ETE-PC, and 0.54 V for ETE-TMA (Figure As noted previously, we suspect that the interactions between the monomer and the inert substrate supporting the source and drain electrodes is a determinant of whether lateral spreading away from the active electrode will be observed during polymerization. We thus study the interaction of the monomer precursors with three distinctly functionalized surfaces using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. As representative systems, we evaluate a partially negative hydrophilic SiO 2 surface, as would be obtained by plasma cleaning, alongside a partially positive silanized surface modified with amine-terminated APTES and a silanized hydrophobic surface modified with OTS. A simulation box of ≈115 Å × 115 Å × 100 Å was packed with 200 monomer molecules, the associated counter-ions, and 80% water molecules using the Packmol software package. To experimentally study the influence of device substrate chemistry on EOECT channel growth, we modify the silicon oxide substrate prior to depositing the source and drain contacts through either oxygen plasma treatment to obtain a partially negative hydrophilic surface or silanization to obtain a partially positive hydrophilic or hydrophobic surface. The formation of the EOECT channel was evaluated on each of the three modified substrates in combination with each of the three ETE-X derivatives (Figure The ETE-X monomers were electrochemically polymerized at a constant offset potential from the oxidation current peak to generate EOECT channels. This was done to maintain some consistency in the rate of electropolymerization across the monomers. Voltages were selected to be 0.5 V for ETE-S, 0.6 V for ETE-PC, and 0.7 V for ETE-TMA. Channels were grown asymmetrically by applying a constant electropolymerization voltage to one of the source/drain contacts for 60 seconds and measuring the current passing through the channel between the source and the drain (Figure We find that, as suggested by previous results and supported by MD simulation, tailoring the surface properties of a device substrate to the conducting polymer material is essential for the promotion of lateral polymer growth and the formation of the channel between the EOECT's source and drain electrodes. We observe a significant influence of substrate modification on channel formation and device-to-device variability. For ETE-S, facile and reproducible channel formation was observed for both APTES-and OTS-modified substrates, which is evidenced by a steady increase in the current measured between the two gold electrodes. However, for the O 2 plasma-treated substrate, neither an increase in the current nor any significant lateral polymer growth is observed within the 60 s timeframe of the experiment. For ETE-PC, a zwitterionic monomer, channel formation was observed on every substrate that was evaluated. For positively charged ETE-TMA, robust channel formation was observed only on negatively charged plasma cleaned substrates, but a small increase in I D was also observed on APTES-modified substrates. Results from the MD simulation on cationic and anionic substrates are in perfect agreement with the electrical characterization of channel formation and the microscopic characterization of polymer spreading behavior. Accumulation of ETE-X at the substrate surface leads to the formation of a dense layer with a higher effective monomer concentration in the substrate plane and facilitates the mass transfer and film growth in the lateral direction. The results from the hydrophobic OTS-modified substrates are somewhat more difficult to interpret in the context of the MD simulations. Whereas the channel formation on hydrophilic surfaces is favorable when a high-density monomer layer is present near the surface, this correlation breaks down on OTS-modified substrates. For example, the monomer distribution profile of ETE-TMA has a well-defined peak near the OTS surface, but ETE-TMA does not form a conductive channel while ETE-PC does form a highly conductive channel but does not exhibit any apparent surface accumulation. One explanation for this behavior is that the ETE-TMA monomers are entrapped in the OTS in quantities that are insufficient to form a continuous layer while the diffusion coefficient of the entrapped monomer is constrained to a value that prevents the ETE-TMA material from forming fibers. The lack of continuity/interaction between the ETE-TMA entrapped in the film and the ETE-TMA in the solution also precludes film formation. Unlike the distribution of ETE-TMA, the distribution of ETE-S and ETE-PC is continuous rather than discrete between the OTS-entrapped species to the solubilized species, indicating that there is potential for interaction between the two. When the final current is plotted as a function of change in area, it is clear that channel conductance correlates with polymer spreading away from the gold electrode (Figure The side-chain modification of the PETE-X also affects the transfer characteristics of the resulting devices. Due to poor film adhesion for some monomer-substrate combinations and inconsistency in rinsing protocols, the absolute values of the device characteristics are too variable to make any meaningful comparison (Figure Electronics are currently trending toward non-traditional substrates to accommodate conformable, wearable, and bio-integratable devices. Of the three available monomers, only ETE-PC forms a connection within a minute of electropolymerization time (Figure In order for any technology to advance, a thorough understanding of the principles underlying its behavior must be established. Here, we describe a key engineering principle to ensure the success of evolvable OECTs, which have applications in a number of fields, most recently as synaptic devices in neuromorphic computing. We demonstrate, both experimentally and through MD modeling, that the electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions between the substrate and the monomer play a significant role for the lateral growth of polymer film across a substrate. EOECTs based on three differently charged ETE derivatives, negatively charged ETE-S, positively charged ETE-TMA, and zwitterionic ETE-PC were investigated in combination with substrates modified to display different types of surface charge-partially negative oxygen plasma cleaned silicon, partially positive APTES, and hydrophobic OTS. By modifying the surface charge of the substrate and/or the charge on the monomer sidechain, we can rationally tune the spreading of an electropolymerized film as well as the electrical properties of the transistor. This broad understanding of film spreading is important when transferring EOECTs to new substrates, as we demonstrate by growing EOECTs on a flexible PET substrate. More broadly, this understanding will also be essential in applying electropolymerization as a useful tool to modify future micro-and nanobioelectronic interfaces. Materials Synthesis and Characterization: ETE-S monomer was synthesized by following previously reported protocols. Electrochemical Characterization: Cyclic voltammograms of the ETE-X monomers were obtained in an aqueous solution containing 2 mM monomer dissolved in 10 mM NaCl. A flat FTO-coated glass substrate serves as a working electrode, a Pt mesh electrode as a counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl pellet electrode as a reference electrode. The CVs of the formed polymer films were obtained in a nitrogen atmosphere. Device Fabrication and Surface Modification: For EOECT device fabrication, silicon substrate with a 1 μm thermally grown oxide layer was cleaned by sequential sonication in 2% Hellmanex, DI water, acetone, and isopropanol and then dried under a stream of nitrogen gas. Clean substrates were then activated by oxygen plasma treatment for 2 min using an input power of 200 Watts. APTES and OTS were purchased from Sigma Aldrich/Merck and stored in nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. To modify the SiO 2 surface with APTES and OTS by vaporphase deposition, substrates were placed in a stainless steel petri dish and 80 μL of the appropriate silane was dropped at the bottom of the petri dish in such a way that it does not make contact with the substrate. The petri dish was placed on a hot-plate set to 80 °C for 2 h. Excess silane was removed by sonicating the substrates in acetone followed by isopropanol for 5 min each. After substrate preparation, a set of source and drain electrodes (2 nm Cr, 18 nm Au) with channel dimensions (width × length) of 1000 × 30 μm were thermally evaporated on the APTES-modified Si/SiO 2 substrate using an evaporation mask (Source-Drain Deposition Mask for Low-Density OFETs, Osilla Ltd, UK). Electropolymerization of conducting monomers was done using a SP-300 Bio-Logic potentiostat/ galvanostat (Bio-Logic Science Instruments, France). Substrates that were not subjected to any treatment besides plasma cleaning were cleaned in a UV-Ozone cleaner for 10 min immediately prior to use. During deposition, a working electrode was connected to the source terminal while the drain was grounded together with an Ag/AgCl pellet electrode (Warner Instruments, USA), which serves both as the gate and a counter-reaction for the electropolymerization. Solutions containing 2 mM of the ETE-X monomer were prepared in DI water containing 10 mM NaCl electrolyte. The voltage used to electropolymerize each monomer is selected to be 0.2 V above the monomer oxidation peak (0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 V for ETE-S, -PC, and -TMA, respectively) and is applied for 60 s. A voltage of -0.2 V is applied before and after the electropolymerization voltage. Device characteristics like output and transfer curve were obtained on a Keithley Model 4200 Semiconductor Characterization System (Keithley Instruments, USA). An in-plane electrode modified with silver paste was used as the gate. Printed EOECTs: The PET substrate Polifoil Bias is purchased from Policrom Screen. Carbon ink 7102 printing paste from DuPont is used for the electrode contacts. Insulating ink (5018, DuPont) was used for electrode isolation. Devices comprising a set of carbon source and drain electrodes protected by an insulating layer were screen printed on a PET substrate using methods described previously. Molecular Dynamics Simulations: The interaction of the three monomers, ETE-S, ETE-PC, and ETE-TMA with the three different substrates were studied using MD simulations. All the MD simulations were run in LAMMPS simulation package. Adv. Funct.Mater. 2022Mater. , 32, 2202292 16163028, 2022, 32, 32, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202202292 by Test, Wiley Online Library on [18/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License (4 of 9)© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Functional Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH (5 of 9) © 2022 The Authors. Advanced Functional Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH (6 of 9)© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Functional Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH