Cooper quartets represent exotic fermion aggregates describing correlated matter at the basis of charge-4e superconductivity and offer a platform for studying four-body interactions, of interest for topologically protected quantum computing, nuclear matter simulations, and more general strongly correlated matter. Focusing on solid-state systems, we show how to quantum design Cooper quartets in a double-dot system coupled to ordinary superconducting leads through the introduction of an attractive interdot interaction. A fundamentally novel, maximally correlated double-dot ground state, in the form of a superposition of vacuum |0⟩ and four-electron state |4e⟩, emerges as a narrow resonance in a many-body quartet correlator that is accompanied by negligible pair correlations and features a rich phenomenology. The system represents an instance of correlated Andreev matter and the results open the way to the exploration of interaction effects in hybrid superconducting devices, and the study of novel correlated states of matter with ingredients available in a quantum solid-state lab. The Cooper instability predicts a state of matter in which electrons pair up and form a condensate showing unique properties such as zero resistivity and perfect diamagnetism. Making a conceptual jump we can ask ourselves if more complex electron aggregates such as Cooper quartets could form and condense, yielding charge-4e superconductivity. Such a highly correlated fermion state belongs to a family of complex fermion states, that are typically the subject of intensive quantum simulations through quantum computing platforms In this work, we change the perspective and tailor the conditions for the onset of a Cooper quartet ground state. We consider a minimal model of a double quantum dot, that allows us to accommodate a four-electron superposition state through an additional orbital binary quantum number beyond spin. We exploit Cooper pairing through proximity coupling the double-dot system to a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductor. We then add a crucial ingredient, that consists in an strong attractive interaction between the quantum dots and that allows us to stabilize the quartet superconducting phase. An attractive interdot interactions has be experimentally realized through a second double quantum dot in which the vacuum state |0⟩ and the four-electron state |4e⟩ appear in superposition of equal weights and that describes the formation of a coherent, albeit minimal, condensate, whose properties are dictated by the charge 4e. We show that many-body interactions yield a finite quartet correlator, with d iσ fermionic dot annihilation operators, showing that pure quartet superconductivity violates the Wick theorem and has a genuine interacting origin. It is important to stress indeed that quartet correlations may be present in a BCS superconductor, but are subdominant with respect to pair correlations. The correlator Q resonantly peaks to its extreme values ±1/2 when the states |φ ± Q ⟩ are realized, whereas the pair correlator is zero on these states. We study the Josephson currents by attaching extra BCS leads and single out the conditions for a two-Cooper pair current. More generally, the system realizes a correlated Andreev matter beyond the family of arXiv:2401.04202v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 5 Oct 2024 multi-terminal Josephson junctions These findings open the way to the exploration of interaction-based superconductors and non-local phase coherence of multiterminal setups can be used to better investigate those systems We consider the double quantum dot system schematized in Fig. with and d iσ dot fermionic annihilation operators. We include tunnel coupling to the superconducting lead S as a proximity effect, for which the quantum dots develop a finite pairing amplitude to form Cooper pairs, either locally on each dot or in a delocalized way, between the two dots, so that the pairing Hamiltonian reads This model has been thoroughly studied in the infinite superconducting gap limit (∆ → ∞), where scattering off the superconducting lead becomes elastic and integration away of the leads produces effective pairing amplitude, γ S = 2πν F t 2 DS and γ ′ S = γ S e -δr/ξ sin(k F δr)/(k F δr). These coincide with the rates of local and crossed Andreev reflection, in which a Cooper pair can either tunnel to one of the two dots or split between the two dots, respectively, with ν F the density of states at the Fermi energy, t DS the dot-superconductor tunneling amplitude, assumed equal for the two dots, δr the interdot distance, k F the Fermi momentum, and ξ the coherence length of the superconductor. The full Hamiltonian is and we focus the analysis on the even parity sector, where the four electron operator Quartet correlations emerge specifically around the resonance condition 4ε + 2U + 4W = 0, To select the doublet |0⟩ and |4e⟩ as a host for a quartet ground state, we require all other states to have higher energy. By realistically assuming a repulsive onsite interaction U > 0, a relevant condition is met when the quantum dots experience an attractive density-density interaction that is stronger than the onsite repulsion, -W > U > 0. Close to resonance, ε = -U/2 -W + δε, with δε a weak detuning from resonance, and for -2W > 0, -U -W > 0, and γ S , γ ′ S ≪ |U + W |, U, |W |, the vacuum and the fourelectron states couple at first order with the higher energy states |φ + 2e ⟩and |φ - 2e ⟩, as schematized in Fig. We then project the Hamiltonian on the low energy states, where it assumes a simple form The phase diagram of the system is shown in Fig. It becomes natural at this point to search for a direct consequence of having a quartet ground state and a smoking gun observable that can witness its presence. The most intuitive property that a quartet ground state is expected to show is a quartet dissipationless current. However, since the leads are BCS superconductors, the fundamental carriers are Cooper-pairs and a Josephson current will in general flow through higher energy twoelectron states, at second order in the rates γ S , γ ′ S , resulting in a standard 2π-periodic current-phase relation, despite the fact that the double-dot system is in a quartet ground state. In particular, in a specular two-terminal configuration with an additional superconducting lead on the right side, coupled with same γ S , γ ′ S , the rates all acquire a factor 2 cos(φ/2) and the resulting current is 2π periodic, reflecting the fact that the system can load and discharge individual Cooper pairs via higher energy states through multiple processes involving local and non-local Andreev reflection. Nevertheless, the system features a strongly correlated ground state and we expect that under proper conditions it can mediate a non-trivial two-Cooper pair current, that appears as a π-periodic Josephson current. For this to occur, a peculiar interplay between local and non-local Andreev processes needs to be arranged. More generally, the delocalized nature of the quartet ground state suggests that the system can manifest a correlated behavior in a multi-terminal configuration and a more general class of correlated multi-terminal Andreev matter can emerge. To generalize the description we focus on a threeterminal structure constituted by a common lead at the left, relabeled lead 0, and two additional leads 1 and 2 each coupled to the corresponding quantum dot, as schematized in Fig. The low energy states are modified by the complex rates and now read and the Hamiltonian projected on the low-energy manifold reads with 1 1 a 2 × 2 identity in the low energy manifold and Γ a generalized complex matrix element between vacuum and four-electron states, that at δε = 0 reads (13) Its argument Θ(φ 1 , φ 2 ) = arg [Γ] represents the phase of the superposition between vacuum and four-electron state in the ground state, ), and can be tuned through the phases φ 1 and φ 2 . The ground state energy as a function of the two phase differences φ 1 , φ 2 is shown in Fig. The Hamiltonian Eq. ( We now analyze the dissipationless transport properties of the system. The ground-state current through dot i features two contributions: an ordinary Josephson term describing current between leads i and 0, and a second term that depends on both φ 1 and φ 2 , We first look for a two-Cooper pair current in a twoterminal configuration by joining contact 1 and 2 in a unique drain by setting φ 1 = φ 2 = φ and study the total current I = I 1 + I 2 . An ideal two-Cooper pair current flows in the case γ S,l = 0. This is easily understood as follows. Starting in the quartet ground state a Cooper pair coming from the left lead can only split between the two dots, by virtue of the condition γ S,l = 0. Such a state is current-blocked by the superconducting gap in the leads 1 and 2, that have no single-particle states in the spectrum (especially in the ∆ → ∞ limit). A second Cooper pair coming from the left lead can again only split and result in a four-electron state in the doubledot. The latter is now unblocked and gives rise to an ideal two-Cooper pair current, as shown in Fig. with , that is manifestly π-periodic. In addition, for τ > 0 the minima of the ground state energy Eq. ( For the realistic case of γ S,l = γ S,r = γ S , the different terms compete and a π-periodic current can only arise approximately, in that the contribution coming from |Γ| must cancel the ordinary 2π-periodic pair contribution of the first term Eq. ( Crucial is the opposite sign between the terms that originates from the singlet expression of the non-local Cooper pair tunneling and yields a destructive interference effect. By setting W = -U -δW , δW ≪ U , γ ′ S = γ S , and expanding the current at lowest orders in δW/U we obtain The resulting current is shown in Fig. The interacting nature of the quartet correlator suggests us that another possible clear signature of the quartet ground state can appear in the non-local response of the system. A non-local response appears by noticing that a given phase difference established between two given terminals, say 0 and 2, affects the current through the third terminal in a non-trivial way. If we close lead 2 on lead 0 and enclose a flux Φ x (as schematized in Fig. This behavior constitutes a clear signature of the quartet Andreev process for this simple setup, that becomes active only at resonance, and it is understood as follows: away from the resonance the ground state has a weak quartet component and an ordinary dissipationless current flows from terminal 2 to terminal 0, following the phase bias. As resonance is approached, the system develops a ground state with a strong quartet component, that necessarily yields currents in both terminal 1 and 2, that goes in the opposite direction to the phase bias, as dictated by the interference between the phase dependent and the phase independent term that constitute Γ. It is worth to remind that the emergence of a πjunction behavior typically requires engineering complex structures, that involve ferromagnetic systems Here, we provide a possible experimental implementation of a system that could host the attractive double quantum dot and several other possibility have been explored in literature with a denoting he bosonic annihilation operator of the flexural mode. The Hamiltonian is quadratic in the bosonic modes, so that it can be rewritten as , where the new displaced bosonic mode reads A = a+(g 0 /ω 0 )(n 1 +n 2 ). The ground state will be given by the vacuum of A, so that the correction of the energy results in the effective interaction for the two dots with U = U 0 - , with U 0 > 0 and W 0 > 0 the bare onsite repulsion and interdot densitydensity interaction strengths. The crucial point is that the bare frequency of the flexural phonon can be very low compared to the coupling to the electronic density We have demonstrated how appropriate tuning of electron-electron interaction in a double quantum dot system opens the possibility to engineer a quartet superconductor. The system presented shows a great host of counter-intuitive properties and opens unexplored paths in the simulation of correlated states of matter and the study of interactions effects superconductors. As a further development in the context of transport in hybrid normal-quantum-dot-superconducting devices we foresee the possibility of a quartet Andreev reflection, something that may make the quartet ground state nature evident and that will be addressed in future works. The possibility to experimentally achieve the isolation of a quartet ground state relies on the ability to engineer an attractive density-density interaction. The latter has been mediated by a second double quantum dot capacitively coupled to the system The quartet resonance is fragile to detuning δε, as shown in Fig. In the finalization of the work, we became aware of recent studies concerning quartet superconductivity in a two-orbital Hubbard model with similar results 