We comparatively analyzed imbibition of polystyrene (PS) into two complementary pore models having pore diameters of ~380 nm and hydroxyl-terminated inorganicoxidic pore walls, controlled porous glass (CPG) and self-ordered porous alumina (AAO), by X-ray computed tomography and EDX spectroscopy. CPG contains continuous spongy-tortuous pore systems. AAO containing arrays of isolated straight cylindrical pores is a reference pore model with a tortuosity close to 1. Comparative evaluation of the spatiotemporal imbibition front evolution yields important information on the pore morphology of a probed tortuous matrix like CPG and on the imbibition mechanism. To this end, pixel brightness dispersions in tomographic 3D reconstructions and 2D EDX maps of infiltrated AAO and CPG samples were condensed into 1D brightness dispersion profiles normal to the membrane surfaces. Their statistical analysis yielded positions and widths of the imbibition fronts without segmentation or determination of pore positions. The retardation of the imbibition front movement with respect to AAO reference samples may be used as a descriptor for the tortuosity of a tested porous matrix. The velocity of the imbibition front movements in CPG equaled two-thirds of the velocity of the imbibition front movements in AAO. Moreover, the dynamics of the imbibition front broadening discloses whether porous matrices are dominated by cylindrical neck-like pore segments or by nodes. Independent single-meniscus movements in cylindrical AAO pores result in faster imbibition front broadening than in CPG, in which a morphology dominated by nodes results in slower cooperative imbibition front movements involving several menisci. The results presented here may be relevant to applications including printing and adhesive bonding as well as to the optimization of production and properties of engineering, construction and hybrid materials. Imbibition of nanoporous media by invading fluids 1 is of significant relevance to a diverse variety of application fields ranging from geophysics (Equation The classical Lucas-Washburn model A pore diameter histogram of the CPG membranes derived from mercury intrusion data is shown in Figure Monodisperse sec-butyl-and H-terminated PS (mass-average molecular weight Mw = 239 kg/mol; number-average molecular weight Mn = 233 kg/mol; PDI = 1.03) was supplied by Polymer Standards Service (Mainz, Germany). Toluene (anhydrous; 99.8 %) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Silicon wafers were purchased from Siegert Wafer GmbH. Self-ordered AAO was prepared following the procedures reported elsewhere. The infiltration of AAO membranes attached to underlying 900 μm thick alumina substrates with PS was reported elsewhere. To detect the PS imbibition front, Zernike phase-contrast X-ray computed tomography imaging was performed using a Carl Zeiss Xradia Ultra 810 device operating at 5.4 keV (Cr X-ray source). The sample preparation for X-ray computed tomography was carried out as described elsewhere. Before imaging, the aluminum substrates of the PS-infiltrated AAO membranes were selectively etched with a solution containing 3.4 g CuCl22H2O and 100 mL HCl per 100 mL H2O at 0°C. The freestanding PS-infiltrated AAO and CPG membranes were then cleaved perpendicularly to the membrane surface. The samples were sputtercoated with a platinum-iridium layer three times at 20 mA for 15 seconds in a K575X Emitech sputter coater. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a Zeiss Auriga microscope applying an acceleration voltage of 3 kV for AAO samples and 3.5 kV for CPG samples. Secondary electron secondary ion (SESI) and InLens detectors were used for image acquisition. Window integral EDX maps of the carbon Kα peak at 0.277 keV were obtained at a working distance of 5 mm using an EDX system Aztec (Oxford) equipped with an 80 mm 2 -SDD-detector attached to the Zeiss Auriga SEM. Accelerating voltages of 3.0 kV and 3.5 kV were applied for the mappings of cross-sectional AAO and CPG samples. The 2D EDX maps extending 2048 pixels by 1532 pixels were imaged until at least 1 million counts were collected. The original EDX maps had an image depth of 32 bit. Pixel intensity dispersion profiles Rq,EDX(D) along horizontal pixel rows in x direction of the external reference coordinate system parallel to the membrane surfaces, where D is the distance to the membrane surface along the z-direction of the reference coordinate system, were then extracted with the software Gwyddion. Because PS has a high glass transition temperature of ~100°C, transient imbibition stages can be frozen after selected imbibition times ti by thermal quenching. At room temperature, the glassy PS is vitrified and has solid-like properties so that the frozen transient imbibition stages can be conveniently characterized ex situ. We could thus obtain 3D reconstructions of AAO and CPG membranes infiltrated with PS for different imbibition times ti by X-ray computed tomography (method Batch-CT-rms). The 3D reconstructions consisting of 16-bit xy slices, which were approximately parallel to the membrane surfaces and the xy plane of the reference coordinate system (Figure Rq,s was calculated in the form of a root mean square roughness according to Equation Fourthly, color map Rq,c(D) profiles (black curves in Figures 3, S4 and S5) were calculated for each pixel row in a color map parallel to the y-direction, that is, for each D value along the z-axis: In Equation For comparison, we recorded 2D EDX maps of cross-sectional AAO (Figures ,123 = ∑ -(Equation N is the width of the evaluated 2D EDX maps in pixels, i.e., the number of pixels per row in the x direction parallel to the surfaces of the AAO and CPG membranes. The pixel intensity is denoted , where j is the index of summation (1 ≤ j ≤ N), and denotes the mean pixel intensity of all pixels in the considered row. Thus, for each pixel row at a certain distance D to the surfaces of the AAO and CPG membranes a Rq,EDX (D) value was obtained (Figure Rq,dB(D) is the value of the double-Boltzmann fit function at a specific D value (smooth green curves in Figure To consider "dead layers" of adsorbed PS molecules on the pore walls, Thus, the prefactor  of the Lucas-Washburn law for cylindrical pores as in AAO, which corresponds to the slopes dLa/dti 1/2 of the linear fits to the experimentally determined sets of La(ti 1/2 ) data points, can be expressed as: 23 As discussed elswhere, Apart from b0, the quantities in the second square root L are known from the literature. The mean pore radius b0 of CPG was obtained from mercury intrusion data (Figure Figure Equation ( The overall number of considered bg values and, therefore, of fp,g(bg) data points is z so that 1 ≤ g ≤ z. It should be noted that in equation ( (Equation The comparison of the sets of La(ti We also used equation ( and determined for each b0 value the slope CPG(b0) of linear fits to the corresponding sets of La(ti) data points corresponding to the Lucas-Washburn prefactors. To estimate the tortuosities 2.280/(b0) apparent from imbibition dynamics, we divided the slope AAO = 2.280 μm/min 1/2 experimentally obtained for AAO by method Batch-CT-rms (Table As discussed by Vazquez Luna et al. We evaluated which exponent n of ti yields the best linear fit to sets of WD(ti n ) data points (Figure We have comparatively studied the imbibition of polystyrene into AAO containing isolated straight cylindrical pores and CPG containing spongy-continuous pore systems. Both pore models have hydroxyl-terminated oxidic pore walls and pore diameters of ~380 nm, which exceed the dimensions of the infiltrated macromolecules by one order of magnitude. To statistically analyze 3D reconstructions of imbibed membranes obtained by Zernike phase-contrast X-ray computed tomography and, for comparison, 2D EDX maps, the pixel intensity dispersion parallel to the membrane surfaces was evaluated. It appears that the pixel brightness dispersion is a more powerful and more universal descriptor of the image properties than the mean pixel intensity when it comes to the identification of the positions of imbibition fronts and membrane surfaces. The 3D reconstructions and the 2D EDX maps were condensed into 1D profiles normal to the membrane surfaces representing the pixel intensity dispersion as a function of the distance to the membrane surface. To process the 3D reconstructions in this way, a two-step algorithm was developed comprising the successive calculation of pixel intensity dispersion profiles along two orthogonal directions parallel to the membrane surface. The approach reported here does neither involve segmentation procedures nor require the determination of pore coordinates. The statistical analysis of the 1D brightness dispersion profiles yielded consistent results regarding the imbibition front positions. The prefactor of the Lucas-Washburn law relating the imbibition front position to the imbibition time found for the AAO samples is 1.5 times larger than that found for the CPG samples. This outcome is in good agreement with the tortuosity of CPG reported earlier. Thus, imbibition retardation with respect to AAO reference samples having a tortuosity close to 1 may quantify the tortuosity of a probed pore system on condition that surface interactions are comparable. Using the prefactor experimentally determined from X-ray computed tomography data and CPG pore diameter frequency densities obtained by mercury intrusion, the average imbibition front positions in CPG could be reproduced by the Lucas-Washburn law. Analysis of the 1D brightness dispersion profiles also yields statistical descriptors of the imbibition front widths, the dependence of which on the imbibition times reveals to what extent individual or cooperative meniscus movements govern imbibition. X-ray computed tomography data indicate that in contrast to Vycor glass with sub-10-nm pores, meniscus movements in the CPGs used here are governed by cooperative effects. This outcome in turn indicates that necklike cylindrical pore segments do not significantly impact the spatiotemporal imbibition front evolution in the CPGs tested here. The results presented here may help achieve predictive understanding of imbibition into real-life materials with spongy-continuous pore systems relevant to applications including printing, adhesive bonding, and the fabrication of hybrid materials. ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. Large-field cross-sectional SEM image of self-ordered AAO, raw slices of 3D reconstructions obtained by X-ray computed tomography of infiltrated AAO and CPG membranes, evaluation of X-ray computed microscopy raw data and EDX maps using the mean pixel intensity as descriptor, yz color maps of infiltrated AAO and CPG membranes, 2D EDX maps of infiltrated AAO and CPG membranes. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org."