Metasurfaces play a key role in functionalizing light at the nanoscale. Existing dielectric metasurfaces, however, are often limited to geometric primitives and their usage in emergent hybrid metasurfaces is hampered as confinement of light occurs only in their interior. Taking inspiration from biophotonic systems in nature, we introduce a new class of hybrid metasurfaces, which combine ordered and disordered elements. While the ordered phase relies on non-reciprocal meta-atoms -whose breaking of the out-of-plane symmetry enables the confinement of visible light in air, the disordered phase exploits global plasmonic network modes and their ability to localize energy at nanometric scales. By generating configurable structural colors with extra-ordinary resolution, we demonstrate that coupling of these elements provides a new dimension in the design space. We showcase that control of the local light-matter interaction enables the creation of intricate, customizable optical patterns, which open new avenues for information encoding and high-security features. "Color is crucial" -Pop artist Roy Lichtenstein's famous quote highlights the importance of color in art and culture, but the significance of color goes far beyond. In nature color is a means of communication, natural selection, 1 camouflage 2 and self-defense. Intriguingly, many systems optimized by natural evolution rely on disorder as a design principle to attain specific functions. While nature readily utilizes complex photonic structures comprising ordered and disordered elements, nanophotonic systems are often limited to ordered systems. Although initial ef- forts have been made to embrace disorder as a design principle, In this work, we present amorphous silicon (a-Si) nanocups as a versatile and scalable platform to design hybrid metasurfaces (ordered dielectric element + disordered metallic element). In these hybrid system, the out-of-plane asymetry of the dielectric nanocups enables efficient coupling to the disordered metallic photonic element. Silicon nanostructures are key building blocks of modern photonics and their ability to strongly enhance and shape light fields at the nanoscale leads to a plethora of applications from non-linear on-chip photonics, 19 microcavities 20 and sensing 21 to structural colors. Nanocup metasurfaces were fabricated using a five-step process (Figure In Figure Moreover, 3D simulations of the scattering behavior of the a-Si nanocups reveal predominantly forward scattering (see Supplementary Information) enhancing the interaction between nanocups and the substrate. This is especially advantageous for efficient coupling to a second resonating system. With increasing cup diameter 2r the absorbance resonance undergoes a red shift resulting in the formation of a full gamut of structural colors (Figure The calculated colors based on the 2D simulations are shown in Figure We continue with the fabrication of a-Si nanocup metasurfaces with increasing cup diameter, shown in Figure DNMs are able to trap and localize surface plasmon (SP) waves in nanometric volumes, so-called "hot spots". Thus, in contrast to simple nanoparticles, the optical response of such a network takes on a global character and can be conceptualized as a network of randomly coupled dipoles. Using basic wet-chemistry, the plasmonic disordered network can be assembled in-place, i.e. To analyze the impact of the order-disorder transition on the local optical properties, we compare the local reflectance of the ordered system (a-Si nanocups + backreflector) with the disordered system (a-Si nanocups + DNM). Qualitatively, the change is visible in Figure In conclusion, we have developed new class of hybrid metasurfaces based on ordered and disordered photonic elements. The ordered dielectric nanocup metasurfaces are fabricated by directed growth, where we take advantage of the non-uniform growth conditions of PVD to create the out-of-plane asymmetrical nanostructures. This simple fabrication scheme is not restricted to a-Si and thus can readily be employed to other semiconductors such as germanium or titanium dioxid. We showcase efficient and robust light absorption in the nonreciprocal nanocup metasurfaces through the generation of a full gamut of structural colors. Beyond the generation of structural colors these open resonators offer unique possibilities for applied photonics including lasing and colloidal quantum dot electronics as the cups in principle, can be filled with a gain medium. Furthermore, the hybrid metasurface introduced here can serve as a testbed to study the light-matter interaction and mode coupling of ordered and disordered components in complex photonic systems. Especially, interesting would be study the mode hybridisation of such systems in three dimensions by energy electron loss spectroscopy (EELS) tomography. Thin-Film Deposition: The aluminum brass backreflector, was deposited by direct DC magnetron sputtering onto Si/SiO 2 substrates. A detailed description on the selection of the ideal aluminum brass for this purpose is given in the supplementary material. Nanocup fabrication: The a-Si nanocups were fabricated by electron-beam exposure, carried out using a RaithOne system operating at 30 keV acceleration voltage. The inverse nano-pattern was generated within a double-layer PMMA electron beam resist and developed in IPA/MIBK 3:1. Following the development, Si was deposited by magnetron sputtering at a rate of 0.3 Å/s with a constant rotation speed of 10 rpm and under a gracing angle of 23.5 degrees. Finally, a lift off step was performed by immersing the sample in acetone. Three sets of simulations were performed. Firstly, simulations of the periodic arrays of a-Si nanocups were performed using the frequency-domain solver of the commercial finite-element package COMSOL Multiphysics 6.1 in 2D. The a-Si nanocups were modelled by assembling rectangles into a cup shape, were the edges were rounded using the fillet function. Periodic boundary conditions were used for the x-direction to introduce lateral periodicity, while in the upper and lower air boundary of the simulation domain perfectly matched layers (PML) were introduced to absorb the outgoing waves. The refractive indices of the aluminum brass backreflector and the a-Si were extracted from ellipsometry measurements. To simulate the scattering spectra of single nanocups again the commercial finite-element package COMSOL Multiphysic 6.1 was used. The cup shape was generated as the difference between two different cylinders. Perfectly matched layers were introduced in spherical shells surrounding the nanocups. The excitation was implemented by a background plane wave. Lastly, the introduction of disorder was modeled by introducing a FIB cross-section of the disordered network below the a-Si nanocups in the 2D simulations. The image to curve plugin in Comsol Multiphysics was used to convert the FIB cross-section into a curve. Color palettes: The color palettes as well as the chromaticities were obtained from simulated reflectance spectra using the commercial Software Wolfram Mathematica 12.2. ( they stretch fully throughout the graph (reflectance minimum is persistent for angles of incidence between 45 • and 80 • ), the absorption and thus generated color is independent of the angle of incident. The graph for p-polarized light (Figure refractive index, can be engineered. Directed growth of the a-Si nanocup metasurface Firstly the influence of an increasing cup diameter is shown in Figure In Figure In Figure In Figure In Figure (7) Qin, M.; Sun, M.; Hua, M.; He, X. Bioinspired structural color sensors based on responsive soft materials. Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 2019, 23, 13-27, Active and adaptive soft matter. (8) Li, N.; Xiang, F.; Elizarov, M.; Makarenko, M.; Lopez, A.; Getman, F.; Bonifazi, M.; Mazzone, V.; Fratalocchi, A. Large-Scale and Wide-Gamut Coloration at the Diffraction Limit in Flexible, Self-Assembled Hierarchical Nanomaterials. Advanced Materials 2022, 34, 2108013. (9) Middleton, R.; Sinnott-Armstrong, M.; Ogawa, Y.; Jacucci, G.; Moyroud, E.; Rudall, P. J.; Prychid, C.; Conejero, M.; Glover, B. J.; Donoghue, M. J.; Vignolini, S. Diffuse White Structural Coloration from Multilayer Reflectors in a Squid. Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 2014, 26 . van Appl. Opt. 1991, 30, 3492-3500. (33) Cao, X.; Du, Y.; Guo, Y.; Hu, G.; Zhang, M.; Wang, L.; Zhou, J.; Gao, Q.; Fischer, P.; Wang, J.; Stavrakis, S.; deMello, A. Replicating the Cynandra opis Butterfly's Structural Color for Bioinspired Bigrating Color Filters. Advanced Materials 2022, 34, 2109161. (34) Chen, W.-J.; Hou, B.; Zhang, Z.-Q.; Pendry, J. B.; Chan, C. T. Metamaterials with index ellipsoids at arbitrary k-points. Nature Communications 2018, 9, 2086.