Intriguingly conducting perovskite interfaces between ordinary band insulators are widely explored, whereas similar interfaces with Mott insulators are still not quite understood. Here we address the (001), (110), and (111) interfaces between the LaTiO 3 Mott-and large band gap KTaO 3 insulators. Based on first-principles calculations, we reveal a mechanism of interfacial conductivity, which is distinct from a formerly studied one applicable to interfaces between polar wide band insulators. Here the key factor causing conductivity is the matching of oxygen octahedra tilting in KTaO 3 and LaTiO 3 which, due to a small gap in the LaTiO 3 results in its sensitivity to the crystal structure, yields metalization of its overlayer and following charge transfer from Ti to Ta. Our findings, also applicable to other Mott insulators interfaces, shed light on the emergence of conductivity observed in LaTiO 3 /KTaO 3 (110) where the "polar" arguments are not applicable and on the emergence of superconductivity in these structures. The formation of a conducting layer at the interface between two insulators is one of the most intriguing problems in the physics of low dimensional electron systems. A remarkable example is the interface between two perovskite band insulators LaAlO 3 (LAO) and SrTiO 3 (STO) For oxide electronics, the most prominent mechanism of the conductivity is the so called "polar catastrophe", broadly applicable to the (001)-oriented structures Recently, the isostructural perovskite KTaO 3 (KTO) attracted a lot of attention due to its ability to produce the surface superconducting state, strongly dependent on the crystal orientation Here we use first-principles calculations to study the formation of interfacial conducting layers for (001), (110), and (111) -oriented LTiO/KTO heterojunctions. We demonstrate that the crystal structure effect, that is the matching in the orientation of the oxygen octahedra surrounding Ti and Ta ions, at the interface and the following charge transfer across the interface are decisive for the formation of conducting layer. This mechanism resulting from a small gap in the LTiO, making it highly sensitive to the crystal structure variations, is distinct from the conventional explanation for polar band insulators and can be extended to other interfaces with Mott insulators. To have reference points, we present the first-principles calculations of the bulk materials obtained with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Calculation of the bulk Mott insulator LTiO within the density functional theory (DFT) needs the DFT+U parametrization Considering epitaxial interfaces of materials with different lattices, one expects a local modification increasing their similarity, within several atomic layers near the interface. Various structural alterations in similar structures were discussed in experimental and theoretical studies To quantitatively understand the critical impact of the tilting on the electronic structure and 2DEG formation, we calculate the bulk electronic and magnetic properties of KTO and LTiO at discrete tilting angles without the following relaxation. Figure In our main task we study the LTiO/KTO interfaces with first principle calculations. The key feature of the obtained optimized atomic positions and the crystalline structure at the interfaces is the strong layer-dependence of the tilting angles θ on both LTiO and KTO sides for all considered orientations. Figure interface plane charge sequence in-plane magnetic order (001) -1/+1/-1/+1//+1/-1/+1/-1 AFM chessboard (110) -4/+4/-4/+4//-4/+4/-4/+4 AFM chains (111) -5/+5/-5/+5//-3/+3/-3/+3 FM related tilting up to 10 • in its interfacial unit cells. Thus, the weak tilting of the oxygen octahedra in LTiO interfacial layers, insufficient to form the Mott insulator, leads to its metalization and formation of the 2DEG at all these interfaces. Now we consider this interface-based 2DEG in detail. For all considered orientations of interfaces, we found that it is formed mainly by the B-type cations, Ta and Ti, placed in the two interfacial unit cells of KTO and LTiO with the spinpolarized DOS calculated for Ta and Ti in the interfacial layers I and I+1 presented in Fig. The lower density of states can be attributed to larger interlayer distances in LTiO/KTO (001) heterostructure. This reduces hybridization via the interface, which is reflected in the DOS: the ferromagnetic highly spin-polarized peak at ≈ 0.6 eV below the Fermi level (see Fig. The very similar shapes of their site-projected DOS and similar numerical values, show that the metalization involves Ti and Ta atoms contributions on the same scale, with 5d of Ta states getting a considerable population and becoming conducting together with the contribution of Ti electrons. Thus, the origin of the 2DEG in these systems is different from the case of the LAO/STO (001) interface, in which the 2DEG is formed with the interface polarity accompanied by corresponding band bending. In Fig. To provide an outlook and further development of this research, we stress that the proposed picture of formation of two-dimensional conducting systems of interacting electrons can be applied to various interfaces between wide gap-and small gap-perovskite Mott insulators. To make this picture applicable, the interface structure should favor tilting of the oxygen octahedra different from that in the bulk Mott insulator with its band structure being strongly sensitive to the tilting, as possibly can occur for thin films of LaVO 3 grown on SrTiO 3 substrates. interface q(Ta(I)) q(Ti(I+1)) n F (Ta(I)) n F (Ti(