We establish new results on the spectra and pseudo-spectra of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators and matrices. In particular, we prove the connection between the winding number of the eigenvalues of the symbol function and the exponential decay of the associated eigenvectors (or pseudo-eigenvectors). Our results elucidate the topological origin of the non-Hermitian skin effect in general one-dimensional polymer systems of subwavelength resonators with imaginary gauge potentials, proving the observation and conjecture in Motivated by the study of the non-Hermitian skin effect in polymer systems of subwavelength resonators and its topological origin, in this paper we extend the theory on the spectra and pseudo-spectra of Toeplitz operators and matrices to tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators and matrices. Our main goal is to establish a connection between, on one hand, the winding number of the eigenvalues of the symbol function of a tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operator and, on the other hand, the exponential decay of the associated eigenvectors or pseudo-eigenvectors. By doing so, we elucidate the topological origin of the eigenmode condensation at one edge of a polymer system of subwavelength resonators where an imaginary gauge potential is added inside the resonators to break Hermiticity. We show that, due to a nonzero total winding of the eigenvalues of the symbol of the k-Toeplitz operator corresponding to the polymer system, the eigenmodes exhibit exponential decay and condensate at one of the edges of the structure. In addition to advancing our understanding of the non-Hermitian skin effect, which can be seen as the classical analogue of the non-Hermitian Anderson model Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first provide an optimal characterization of the spectra of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz and Laurent operators. Then we prove the existence of an exponentially decaying eigenvector for Topelitz operators. In Section 3, we establish a connection between the eigenvectors of a tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operator and the associated tridiagonal k-Toeplitz matrix. In Section 4 we discuss the topological origin of the non-Hermitian skin effect in polymer systems of subwavelength resonators and numerically verify our findings on the spectra of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators. In Section 5, we make some concluding remarks and give some possible extensions of our present work. In this section, we characterize the spectrum of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators and prove that their associated eigenvectors exhibit exponential decay. This type of operators and their associated truncated operators, i.e. matrices, are crucial in the study of the one-dimensional polymer systems of subwavelength resonators where a i , b i , c i ∈ C for i ∈ N and A ij = 0 if |i -j| > 1 for i, j ∈ N. Its finite, truncated, counterpart will be called a tridiagonal k-Toeplitz matrix. To characterize the spectrum of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators, we introduce the notions of Fredholm operator and Fredholm index. Let X be a Banach space and B(X) the set of bounded linear operators on X. We say that an operator where CokerA := X/ImA. The index of the Fredholm operator A is defined as (2.2) Observe that the tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operator A presented in (2.1) can be reformulated as a tridiagonal block Toeplitz operator, where the blocks repeat in a 1-periodic way: with The symbol of the tridiagonal block Toeplitz operator (2.3) (and thus also of the tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operator (2.1)) is defined by or explicitly We will write A = T (f ). In the following sections, we will characterize the spectrum of the operator T (f ) based on its symbol f (z). To get a better understanding of the connection between the symbol f and the operator T (f ) itself, it is necessary to introduce the so-called Hardy Spaces. Let T be the unit circle in C. , where f n denotes the Fourier coefficients of f . The spaces H 2 and H 2 -are closed, orthogonal subspaces of L 2 := L 2 (T). Hence, one may write form an orthonormal basis of H 2 . One important property of functions in H 2 is given by the following theorem Theorem 2.2 (F. and M. Riesz). If f is a nonzero function in H 2 , then the set {e it ∈ T : f (e it ) = 0} has measure zero. It is well-known in the above orthonormal basis. A similar notion holds for block Toeplitz operators. We denote by (H 2 ) k the k-dimensional vector space whose entries are elements of H 2 . If P is the orthogonal projection of (L 2 ) k onto (H 2 ) k and f ∈ (L ∞ ) k×k , then T (f ) is the matrix representation of the operator where f g is the usual matrix-vector multiplication. Note that the (H 2 ) k equivalent of Theorem 2.2 holds verbatim with H 2 replaced by (H 2 ) k . With this in mind, we are now able to prove a generalization of Coburn's lemma (for the Toeplitz case, see (i) T (f ) has a trivial kernel; (ii) T (f ) has a dense range; (iii) The leading (k -1) × (k -1) principal minor of A 0 has a nonzero kernel. In particular, there exists some z 0 ∈ C ∪{∞} such that ker(z Proof. It is not hard to see that the adjoint of T (f ) is T (f ⊤ ), where the superscript ⊤ denotes the transpose. Assume that T (f ) has a nontrivial kernel and a nondense range, i.e., conditions (i) and (ii) do not hold. This implies that T (f ⊤ ) has a nontrivial kernel as well. Hence there exist nonzero functions g + , h + ∈ (H 2 ) k such that where for z = e iθ , where we have absorbed the factor 1 √ 2π into v n and w n . This allows us to write where we have used that g -∈ (H 2 -) k in the last equality. Similarly, using that h -∈ (H 2 -) k , we obtain the following expression for h -: (2.9) By Theorem 2.2, it follows that g + , h + ̸ = 0 almost everywhere on T. We define It holds that φ ∈ L 1 . Moreover, φ n = (h ⊤ -g + ) n = 0 for n ≤ 0 and φ n = (h ⊤ + g -) n = 0 for n ≥ 0 since by (2.7), (2.8), and (2.9), Hence φ = 0. This implies , then by (2.9) which contradicts the fact that det(f ⊤ ) = det(f ) does not vanish identically on T. Therefore, v n ⊥ e k for n ∈ N ≥1 . By the above arguments, we conclude that if T (f ) has non-dense range and nontrivial kernel, then v n ⊥ e k for n ∈ N ≥1 and for any v n defined by (2.7). Now we prove that if T (f ) has a non-dense range and a nontrivial kernel, then the condition (iii) must hold. Since cannot have full rank. On the other hand, one can compute that where v n is the j-th element of v n . Considering the case when n = 1, by (2.8), we know that v (1) 0, which contradicts det f does not vanish identically on T. Similarly, we can also show that b k ̸ = 0. Thus by (2.10) and b k ̸ = 0 there exists some z 0 ∈ C ∪{∞} such that v 1 lies in the kernel of z -1 0 A -1 + A 0 . Therefore it holds that ker(z -1 0 A -1 + A 0 ) ∩ ker(A 1 ) ̸ = 0, which concludes the proof. ■ In this section, we will provide a full characterization of the spectrum of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators. We begin by first recalling (and generalizing) a few theorems on Toeplitz operators. The first important theorem is a consequence of (2.11) We first have the following theorem characterizing the essential spectrum of T (f ). Theorem 2.4. The operator T (f ) in Proof. The first part has been proven in We now recall the following Theorem due to Gohberg [15, Chapter 23, Theorem 5.1]. Ind T (f ) = -wind(det(f (T)), 0), with wind(det(f (T)), 0) being the winding number about the origin of the determinant of f (z) with z ∈ T. Utilizing this theorem together with Theorem 2.3, we are now able to establish one of the main results of our paper, an optimal characterization of the spectra of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators. Before stating the theorem, we first define (2.12) with g(λ) being given by (A.2), which yields where λ j (z), 1 ≤ j ≤ k, are the eigenvalues of the matrix f (z), we obtain (2.14) Note that the representations (2.12), (2.13) and (2.14) have their own pro and contra. For relating our results to the conjecture in where σ det (f ), σ wind (f ) are given by Proof. The first inclusion is an immediate consequence of Theorems 2.4 and 2.5. For the second inclusion, note that if then it must hold that T (f ) -λI is Fredholm and Ind(T (f Moreover, since λ ∈ σ(T (f )), T (f ) -λI has a non-trivial kernel and non-dense image. By Theorem 2.3, this implies that λ must be an eigenvalue of B 0 . ■ This characterization is optimal. It cannot be made more precise, as it cannot be guaranteed that an eigenvalue λ of B 0 with wind(det(f -λ), 0) = 0 is also an eigenvalue of T (f ). To illustrate this, consider The determinant of this symbol is given by det ). We have wind(det(f (T)), 0) = 0 and det f (z) ̸ = 0, ∀z ∈ T. In this case, B 0 = 0 is just the top left entry of f (z). Furthermore, by (2.2), if 0 ∈ σ(T (f )), then the kernel space of T (f ) must be non-trivial. Since , one can check that, after scaling, the only possible eigenvector of T (f ) corresponding to the eigenvalue 0 is u = (1, 0, -2, 0, 4, . . . ) ⊤ . However, u does not lie in l 2 , which means that 0 ̸ ∈ σ(T (f )). On the other hand, consider 1 . The determinant is det( f ) = -(1+2z)(1+2z -1 ), hence 0 / ∈ σ det (f ) and wind(det( f (T)), 0) = 0. Therefore, by Theorem 2.3, the operator T ( f ) is either invertible or has a nontrivial kernel. By explicitly writing down T ( f ) Remark 2.7. Note that (2.13) and (2.14) also provide ways to compute σ wind (f ) explicitly. We will utilize (2.14) in Section 4 for numerical illustrations of the topological origin of the skin effect. For the sake of completeness, we will devote the last part in this section to tridiagonal k-Laurent operators that are defined as with σ det (f ) being defined by Now that we have characterized the spectra of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operators, we will venture onwards to explore their eigenvectors. The following theorem is the second main result of this paper. Theorem 2.9. Suppose Π k j=1 c j ̸ = 0 and Π k j=1 b j ̸ = 0. Let f (z) ∈ C k×k be the symbol (2.5) and let λ ∈ C \σ ess (T (f )). If k j=1 wind(λ j (T), λ) < 0 for λ j being the eigenvalues of f (z), then there exists an eigenvector x ∈ l 2 of T (f ) associated to λ and some ρ < 1 such that where C > 0 is a constant depending only on λ, a p , b p , c p for 1 ≤ p ≤ k. Proof. Let λ ∈ C be such that , with poles at 0 and ∞. Then the argument principle implies that det(f (z) -λ) = 0 for two values z 1 , z 2 with 1 < 1 ρ ≤ |z j | , j = 1, 2, counted with multiplicity. Moreover, since det(f (z i ) -λ) = 0, we find that λ is an eigenvalue to f (z i ) and hence there exists an associated eigenvector v i . Assume for now that z 1 ̸ = z 2 . Consider the vectors defined by The vector u i satisfies the eigenvalue equation T (f )u i = λu i in all but the first row. Since u 1 , u 2 are linearly independent, there exists a linear combination of them that is indeed an eigenvector of T (f ). Next, we consider the case where z 1 = z 2 and first suppose that dim Eig(f (z 1 ), λ) > 1, where Eig(f (z 1 ), λ) denotes the eigenspace of f (z 1 ) associated to the eigenvalue λ. Then there exist linearly independent eigenvectors v 1 , v 2 of f (z 1 ) associated to λ and we can use to construct an exponentially decaying eigenvector of T (f ). Finally, it remains to treat the case when z 1 = z 2 and dim Eig(f (z 1 ), λ) = 1. Denote v 1 the eigenvector of f (z 1 ) associated to λ. We will construct a vector v 2 such that satisfies the eigenvalue problem in all but the first row. Similarly to the previous arguments, this is enough to construct the eigenvector of T (f ). By explicitly writing down (T (f )λ)u 2 = 0 (except for the first row), we find that v 2 must satisfy the condition which is also a sufficient condition. From Lemma A.1, it is not hard to see that for all λ in a small neighborhood of λ, the equation det(f (z) -λ) has two distinct roots. Let (ε j ) j be a sequence converging to zero. We define λ(ε j ) = λ + ε j . Then by the previous observation, we may assume that to each λ(ε j ) there exist two distinct roots z 1 (ε j ), z 2 (ε j ) of the equation det(f (z) -λ(ε j )) = 0. Let w 1 (ε j ), w 2 (ε j ) be the corresponding unit eigenvectors. We may assume that (2.23) The limit of w i (ε j ) (or a subsequence thereof) exists by a standard compactness argument and it must be an eigenvector of f (z 1 ) associated to λ. In particular, for each j it holds that (2.24) Consider now the sequence w1(εj )-w2(εj ) ∆z(εj ) . If a bounded subsequence exists, we may define v 2 as the limit of this subsequence. In this case, it is not hard to see that v 2 satisfies the condition (2.22). Otherwise, there exists a subsequence of w1(εj )-w2(εj ) ∆z(εj ) whose norm tends to infinity. Define ∆w(ε j ) = ∥w 1 (ε j ) -w 2 (ε j )∥. Then (upon passing to said subsequence) it holds that ∆z(ε j ) ∆w(ε j ) → 0. (2.25) Multiplying (2.24) with this yields In the limit, the right-hand side tends to 0. Thus v 2 = lim εj →0 w1(εj )-w2(εj ) ∆w(εj ) satisfies This indicates that v 2 is an eigenvector. But from the construction of v 2 , it becomes apparent that v 2 must be orthogonal to v 1 , which contradicts the assumption that the eigenspace of f (z 1 ) associated with λ is one-dimensional. Therefore, the sequence is uniformly bounded and arguments for the first case already demonstrate the existence of such v 2 satisfying (2.22). The exponential bound in (2.18) is clear by the construction of the vectors u 1 and u 2 . ■ Remark 2.10. Note that the constructive approach used in the proof of Remark 2.11. For the case when k j=1 wind(λ j (T), λ) > 0, λ ∈ σ(T (f )) is because T (f ) has a non-dense image. In particular, one can construct the eigenvector x of T (f ) ⊤ -λ in the same spirit of Theorem 2.9, which implies T (f ) -λ has a non-dense image. In this section, we will apply the results of the previous section to matrices. As already described by Trefethen in The set of all ε-pseudoeigenvalues of A, the ε-pseudospectrum, is denoted by σ ε (A). If some nonzero u satisfies ∥(λ -A)u∥ < ε, then we say that u is an ε-pseudoeigenvector of A. By the equivalence of norms in finite dimensions, any norm can be used. For a general treatment of pseudospectra, see We consider the family of tridiagonal k-Toeplitz matrices {A N } of various dimensions obtained as N ×N finite sections of the infinite operator T (f ). Results on the pseudospectra of the family of Toeplitz matrices can be found in Let us also introduce the sets where T r = {z ∈ C : |z| = r} and let σ ε (A N ) be the set of ε-pseudoeigenvalues of A N . The connection between the eigenvectors of a tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operator and those of the associated tridiagonal k-Toeplitz matrix can be made with an argument similar to Then, for any r < 1 and ρ > r, we have where ∆ ε is a closed unit disk of radius ε and C 1 , C 2 are constants depending on r, ρ, and a j , b j , c j for 1 ≤ j ≤ k but independent of N . In particular, for the corresponding λ ∈ Ω r ∪ Ω 1/r , there exist nonzero pseudoeigenvectors v (N ) satisfying where C 3 , C 4 , C 5 are constants independent of N . Proof. Firstly, we note that the inclusion σ(T (f )) + ∆ ε ⊆ σ ε (A N ) is triviality valid for any matrix or operator. Secondly, by symmetry, Ω r must satisfy an estimate of the type (3.3) if Ω 1/r does. Thus all that we have to prove is Ω 1/r ⊆ σ ε (A N ). Given any r < 1, let λ ∈ Ω 1/r be arbitrary. Since wind(det(f (T 1 r )-λ), 0) < 0, similarly to the arguments in the proof of Theorem 2.9, we can show that det(f (z)-λ) = 0 for two values z 1 , z 2 with 1 < 1 ρ ≤ |z j | , j = 1, 2, counted with multiplicity. Also, since det(f (z i ) -λ) = 0, we find that λ is an eigenvalue to f (z i ) and hence there exists an associated eigenvector v i . Assume for now that z 1 ̸ = z 2 . Consider the vectors defined by where without loss of generality we assume that N is divisible by k. This vector satisfies the eigenvalue equation A N u i = λu i in all but the first and last rows. Since u 1 , u 2 are linearly independent, there exists a normalized linear combination v (N ) = a 1 u 1 + a 2 u 2 so that (A N -λ)v (N ) = 0 in all but the last row. It is not hard to see that where C 3 depends on a j , b j , c j , λ but not on N . Then since 1 which proves the claim (3.4) if z 1 ̸ = z 2 . If the roots z 1 , z 2 are distinct for all λ ∈ Ω 1/r , then the function sup is a continuous function of λ on the compact set Ω 1/r ; its maximum provides the constant C 1 in (3.3) that independent of λ, N , and we can take ρ = r. In the case where z 1 = z 2 , one can resort to a similar argument as the one in Theorem 2.9 to utilize (3.9) to construct the pseudoeigenvector. This yields a similar bound except with C 3 ρ ⌈N/k⌉-1 in (3.4) replaced by an algebraically growing factor at worst ⌈N/k⌉C 4 ρ ⌈N/k⌉-1 . Then since the function sup is a continuous function of λ on the compact set Ω 1/r , its maximum provides the constant C 2 in (3.3). Finally, (3.5) is deduced from construction (3.6) and (3.9). ■ The non-Hermitian skin effect is the phenomenon whereby in the subwavelength regime a large proportion of the bulk eigenmodes of a non-Hermitian open system of subwavelength resonators are localised at one edge of the structure Recently, the non-Hermitian skin effect has been demonstrated in one-dimensional systems of subwavelength resonators using first-principle mathematical analysis. In particular, By the results obtained in the previous sections, we provide the topological origin of the skin effect in the one-dimensional polymer system, i.e., in systems with periodically repeated cells of k resonators. This also elucidates the numerical findings in Let us first introduce the model setting. We consider a chain of N disjoint one-dimensional resonators The lengths of the i-th resonators will be denoted by i and the spacings between the i-th and the (i + 1)-th resonators will be denoted by s i = x L i+1 -x R i . Furthermore, we assume that k resonators are periodically repeated, that is, s i+k = s i . The resulting system is illustrated in Figure where 0 < δ ≪ 1, the wave speeds inside the resonator and in the background are respectively v b and v and are of order one, and γu ′ for γ ∈ R * denotes the imaginary gauge potential. Here, for a function w we denote by w| L (x) := lim if the limits exist. We are interested in nontrivial frequencies ω such that (4.2) is satisfied and ω → 0 as δ → 0. Such ω are called subwavelength resonances. In the high-contrast, low-frequency setting described above, gauge capacitance matrices provide a discrete approximation of the subwavelength eigenfrequencies induced in the structure. Definition 4.1. For γ ∈ R * , we define the gauge capacitance matrix and all the other entries are zero. In [1, Corollary 2.6], one can find a formal argumentation that the gauge capacitance matrix gives indeed a valid approximation of the eigenmodes in a subwavelength regime as δ → 0. For the remainder of this paper, we assume that γ = l i = 1. Without loss of generality, we consider a system of nk resonators and obtain a gauge capacitance matrix of the tridiagonal k-Toeplitz form (perturbed): For the semi-infinite systems we obtain a perturbed tridiagonal k-Toeplitz operator with f being the symbol (2.5). It has been observed and conjectured where wind(λ j (T), λ) > 0, then the above results hold for the left eigenvectors. Proof. Although with a perturbation a on the first element, the proof of Theorem 2.9 can still be applied. ■ Theorem 4.2 elucidates the topological origin of the skin effect in the polymer system of subwavelength resonators. In particular, the skin effect holds for all λ in the region This is a generalization for the topological origin of the skin effect in the Toeplitz operator case given in -:= H 2 -(T) are defined by