Nanoscience at times can seem out of reach to the developing world and the general public, with much of the equipment expensive and knowledge seemingly esoteric to nonexperts. Using only cheap, everyday household items, accessible research with real applications can be shown. Here, graphene suspensions were produced using pencil lead, tap water, kitchen appliances, soaps and coffee filters, with a children's glue-based graphene nanocomposite for highly sensitive pulse measurements demonstrated. Research into using liquid exfoliation (LE) methods have led to the wide-spread production of two-dimensional (2D) materials on a large scale. In Figures (2) can be derived from the Raman spectra. Where (ID/IG)Graphene and (ID/IG)Graphite, are the ratios between the D and G mode intensities for graphene and the starting graphite source respectively. Furthermore, (I2D/IG)Graphene is the ratio between the 2D and G mode intensities. Using Equations 1 and 2, for our home-made graphene, <L> ~ 314 ± 63 nm and <N> ~ 7.37 ± 1.84 respectively. In comparison to standard lab processed graphene, similar aspect ratio values were reported. Through scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the topography between the pristine (Figure Upon the application of compressive strain (-ε), the electrical properties of p-putty were observed to change. In Figure The electromechanical sensitivity (G) can be extrapolated by fitting Equation 3 to the low strain regimes of ΔR/R0 versus -ε curves (Figure In this communication, we introduce hometronics as not only a valid way in which nanoscience can be accessible to all researchers and the public alike, but a simple methodology with real applications from our everyday surroundings. Nanoscience research need not be complex and by taking pencil lead processed using home appliances, we demonstrate graphene suspensions from household detergents. Using home-based graphene, nanocomposites from children's glue can be produced to easily measure a wearer's pulse. The accessibility of the work also leads to the use of the methodologies being applied in schools with students from a range of economic backgrounds to inspire and diversify the next generation of scientists. A Graphite Pure 2900 9B pencil was initially crushed in a mortar and pestle, then ground in a SQ Professional Blitz Coffee Grinder -Spice Grinding Mill -One-Touch for ~60 s. A mass of 2.5 g of Fairy Max Power Washing Up Liquid was then mixed with 1 L of tap water. 300 mL of the soap mixture was then added to a Tefal BL420840 Blendforce II Blender (Plastic Jug, 600 W, 1.5 L) with 1 mL of Ecover Fabric Softener also added to the blender. 16 g of powdered pencil lead was then placed in the blender and stirred into the soap/softener/water mixture by hand. The blender was then turned on to the first (#1) setting for 1-minute on, 1 minute off intervals to reduce motor heating effects, until the total blending time reached 15 minutes. The solution was then transferred to a beaker and left to sit for 24 hrs. After which, the solution was passed through a Rombouts Italian No. 2 Coffee Filter. Diluted graphene suspension (~ 0.01 mg/mL) was drop cast onto a heated silicon wafer (70 °C). The wafer was then washed with deionized water to remove residual household soaps. A Dimension Icon Bruker in an insulated box over an anti-vibrant stage to minimize environmental noise and building vibrations was used for measurement. A ScanAsyst Air tip with a spring constant of 0.4 N m -1 and a tip-sample contact force of 5.0 nN was used. Graphene suspension (6 mg/mL) was drop cast onto a heated silicon wafer (70 °C). The wafer was then washed with deionized water to remove residual household soaps. For the graphite sample, pencil lead was crushed using the mortar and pestle and patted down onto a silicon wafer. Renishaw inVia confocal Raman microscope with 0.8 cm-1 spectral resolution and a 532 nm laser (type: solid state, model: RL53250) was used for measurements. A 2400 mm -1 grating at 100× magnification and 5 mW laser power was applied. Each sample curve is an average of ten spectra. For the graphene sample preparation, 2 mL of Elmer's White PVA Glue, 1 mL of Elmer's Glue Slime Magical Liquid Solution, and 0.5 mL of graphene suspension were mixed by hand for approximately 5 to 7 minutes. To vary the graphene loading, different concentration suspensions, ranging from 1 mg/mL to 10 mg/mL, were used. For the pristine putty sample, in place of the graphene suspension, 0.5 mL of tap water was used. For all p-putty samples, they were left at room temperature for 40 minutes before testing. The fracture surfaces of the nanocomposites were observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Inspect-F, The Netherlands) with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. The nanocomposites were cryo-fractured after immersion in liquid N2 and carbon coated with a ≈5 nm layer. A Stable Micro Systems TA-TXplus texture analyser with two insulating plates was used. Electrically conductive copper tape was attached to the inside of their faces. The copper tape contacts were then attached to a Keithley 2614B source meter using silver wire to supply a current across the samples. P-putty samples cyclical in shape (diameter = 5.5 mm and length 6 mm) were placed onto the bottom stationary plate's copper tape contact, with the test arm lowering the second plate's copper tape contact into contact with the top of the sample. Through this setup, mechanical (texture analyser) and electrical (source meter) data could be simultaneously recorded. Samples were deformed at a rate of 6 mm/min. For measurements, an Anton Paar MCR 302e rheometer was used. Samples was flattened prior to lowering the plates (25mm diameter). Gap size was 1.1mm, with normal force quickly settling to zero after reaching gap height. Samples were subsequently allowed to relax for 30 minutes while oscillating the plate at low amplitude (0.1% strain amplitude at 1 Hz). An electronic patch made out of Ecoflex 00-30 using a previously described method was used to encapsulate the putty sample for testing. Aljarid on his own person by holding the electronic patch to the carotid artery in the neck. 