In the recent past, MnTe has proven to be a crucial component of the intrinsic magnetic topological insulator (IMTI) family [MnTe]m[Bi2Te3]n, which hosts a wide range of magneto-topological properties depending on the choice of m and n. However, bulk crystal growth allows only a few combinations of m and n for these IMTIs due to the strict limitations of the thermodynamic growth conditions. One way to overcome this challenge is to utilize atomic layer-by-layer molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) technique, which allows arbitrary sequences of [MnTe]m and [Bi2Te3]n to be formed beyond the thermodynamic limit. For such MBE growth, finding optimal growth templates and conditions for the parent building block, MnTe, is a key requirement. Here, we report that two different hexagonal phases of MnTe -nickeline (NC) and zinc-blende/wurtzite (ZB-WZ) structures, with distinct in-plane lattice constants of 4.20 ± 0.04 Å and 4.39 ± 0.04 Å, respectivelycan be selectively grown on c-plane Al2O3 substrates using different buffer layers and growth temperatures. Moreover, we provide the first comparative studies of different MnTe phases using atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy and show that ZB and WZ-like stacking sequences can easily alternate between the two. Surprisingly, In2Se3 buffer layer, despite its lattice constant (4.02 Å) being closer to that of the NC phase, fosters the ZB-WZ instead, whereas Bi2Te3, sharing the same lattice constant (4.39 Å) with the ZB-WZ phase, fosters the NC phase. These discoveries suggest that lattice matching is not always the most critical factor determining the preferred phase during epitaxial growth. Overall, this will deepen our understanding of epitaxial growth modes for chalcogenide materials and accelerate progress toward new IMTI phases as well as other magneto-topological applications. MnTe has been studied extensively in the past few decades due to its innate property of being an antiferromagnetic semiconductor, making it valuable for memory devices Interest in the ZB MnTe phase stemmed from its role in some diluted magnetic semiconductors and it was found that it has a lower Neel temperature (~65 K) However, co-existing ZB and WZ MnTe phases have never been reported, despite their structural similarities. One of the active research areas where MnTe plays a critical role is the newly discovered intrinsic magnetic topological insulator (IMTI) family, [MnTe]m[Bi2Te3]n [MnTe]m[Bi2Te3]n have been performed on bulk crystals and thin flakes exfoliated from them. Inherently, bulk crystal growth relies on macroscopic diffusion of constituent elements along all the three directions until they reach thermodynamically the most stable configuration. In such a growth mode, it becomes extremely difficult to form highly layered structures with large unit cell sizes, as in the case of [MnTe]m[Bi2Te3]n compounds with large m and n values. Additionally, among the compounds that are thermodynamically stable i.e., m = 1, n ≥ 1, the ones with higher n exist within a very narrow range of temperatures. As a consequence, so far only m = 1, n ≤ 7 phases have successfully been grown On Al2O3(0001) substrates, our initial goal was to find optimal growth conditions for NC MnTe phase because it is the phase found in the bulk crystals, and the atomic-sequence of Te atoms surrounding the Mn layer in bulk crystals of [MnTe][Bi2Te3]n is equivalent to that of the NC structure The lattice constant of NC MnTe, aNC = 4.14 Å, is not a good match with that of the sapphire substrate, aAl2O3 = 4.76 Å. A common solution for such a lattice mismatch problem is to introduce a structurally compatible buffer layer between the film and the substrate. In this case, the buffer layer chosen was insulating In2Se3, with a lattice constant of aIn2Se3 = 4.02 Å, which is closer to that of NC MnTe. We have previously grown high-quality, single-phase In2Se3 on Al2O3, involving a multi-step recipe Accordingly, first, a seed layer of 3 QL Bi2Se3 is grown at 135 °C and an additional 7 QL is deposited at 300 °C. This serves as a good template to grow In2Se3 (5 nm), also at 300 °C. When this layered structure is annealed to 600 °C, the Bi2Se3 layer diffuses through the In2Se3 and evaporates away, leaving behind In2Se3 directly on Al2O3. Once the buffer layer is ready, the substrate is cooled down to 450 °C and the MnTe film is grown on top [Fig. Since we were unable to obtain NC MnTe on In2Se3, we tried using a different buffer layer: Bi2Te3. As can be inferred from the existence of [MnTe]m[Bi2Te3]n, Bi2Te3 and NC MnTe are compatible with each other. However, Bi2Te3 is conducting; hence, we would need a very thin layer of it, so that it does not interfere with the transport properties of MnTe. Based on our previous reports, Bi2Te3 has poor adhesion to inert Al2O3 substrate at its optimal growth temperature, and inserting a less inert layer like Cr2O3 between them can help it stick better To probe further, x-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on the two films, using a Panalytical X'Pert Pro and a monochromated Cu Kα1 source. Fig. High-angle annular dark-field scanning tunneling electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) was carried out to gain insight into the atomic structure of these films. The cross-sectional STEM sample was prepared using a FEI Helios G5 UX focused ion beam system with final Ga+ milling performed at 2 keV. Then, the HAADF-STEM was performed with a JEOL ARM 200CF equipped with a cold field emission gun and spherical aberration correctors, which was operated at 200 kV. The detection angles for HAADF imaging were ranging from 68 to 280 mrad. Figures Our study provides a detailed structural analysis of NC and ZB-WZ phases of MnTe, grown selectively on Al2O3(0001) substrates with two different buffer layers. Surprisingly, In2Se3 buffer layer, despite its lattice constant (4.02 Å) being closer to that of the NC phase, fosters the ZB/WZ phase, whereas Bi2Te3, sharing the same lattice constant (4.39 Å) with the ZB/WZ phase, fosters the NC phase. This suggests that lattice matching is not always the most critical factor determining the preferred phase during epitaxial growth. Furthermore, we have provided the first atomic-resolution STEM studies of ZB-WZ MnTe phase, showing that stacking of ZB(111) and WZ(0001) MnTe can easily alternate from each other, which suggests that the formation energies of ZB(111) and WZ(0001) MnTe are extremely close to each other. The absence of literature for the coexistence of these two phases, despite their similar formation energies, could be due to two possibilities. First, the few reports of ZB(111) MnTe growth in the literature may have some portions of WZ-like stacking, and vice versa, but could not be confirmed due to lack of detailed STEM studies. Second, the In2Se3 buffer layer may play a role in stabilizing both of these meta-stable phases. Although it is an open question whether it is possible to achieve pure ZB or WZ sequences on the In2Se3 buffer layer, having MnTe thin films with ZB-WZ mixed sequences on the In2Se3 buffer is an unexpected yet significant finding, considering the proximity of its in-plane lattice constant (4.39 ± 0.04 Å) to that (4.39 Å) of Bi2Te3 and [MnTe]m[Bi2Te3]n. Due to this perfect lattice match, it can be used as an optimal foundation to grow these IMTIs with minimal interfacial defects. As demonstrated recently by some of us, this also opens the possibility of combining superconducting Fe(Te,Se) with IMTIs toward novel topological superconductivity, via hybrid symmetry epitaxy 