One unique feature of nonlinear dynamical systems is the existence of superharmonic and subharmonic resonances in addition to primary resonances. In this study, an effective vibration testing methodology is introduced for the experimental identification of these secondary resonances. The proposed method relies on phase-locked loop control combined with adaptive filters for online Fourier decomposition. To this end, the concept of a resonant phase lag is exploited to define the target phase lag to be followed during the experimental continuation process. The method is demonstrated using two systems featuring cubic nonlinearities, namely a numerical Duffing oscillator and a physical experiment comprising a clamped-clamped thin beam. The obtained results highlight that the control scheme can accurately characterize secondary resonances as well as track their backbone curves. A particularly salient feature of the developed algorithm is that, starting from the rest position, it facilitates an automatic and smooth dynamic state transfer toward one point of a subharmonic isolated branch, hence, inducing branch switching. Experimental modal analysis is the most common approach for identifying the dynamical characteristics of a mechanical system. Specifically, the objective is to determine the modal parameters, namely the vibration modes, resonance frequencies and damping ratios, from the analysis of free or forced vibrations. At the root of experimental modal analysis is the assumption of linear dynamical behavior. However, nonlinear phenomena are more and more frequently encountered during vibration testing of modern engineering structures Nonlinear systems are known for exhibiting rich and sophisticated dynamical phenomena which include the dependence of resonance frequency on motion amplitude and the resulting hardening and softening phenomena, co-existence of multiple stable vibration states and jumps between different states due to external perturbations, existence of unstable branches in the nonlinear frequency response curves (NFRCs) that are interconnected with stable portions at bifurcation points, activation of multiharmonic responses by a mono-harmonic excitation, appearance of secondary resonances, namely superharmonic and subharmonic resonances, in addition to the primary resonance, emergence of isolated resonance curves detached from the main branch, occurrence of internal resonances and exchange of energy between different modes, etc In this context, nonlinear normal modes (NNMs), defined either as periodic motions of an undamped and unforced mechanical system One of the first attempts to identify NNMs experimentally exploited a nonlinear extension of the phase lag quadrature criterion The vast majority of the studies in the technical literature dealing with experimental modal analysis of nonlinear structures focuses on the characterization of primary resonances. However, a fundamental harmonic excitation can activate fractional and higher-order harmonic responses, which, in turn, can trigger the excitation of secondary resonances. Even if the superharmonic and subharmonic resonances of nonlinear systems have been widely studied analytically and numerically, see, e.g., The objective of this study is to develop a vibration testing scheme based on PLL feedback control and the concept of a resonant phase lag The paper is organized as follows. The basic principle of the proposed method is introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, the control scheme is tested on a Duffing oscillator in a virtual experiment. The performance of PLLT for the characterization of folded superharmonic responses and subharmonic isolas is investigated. In Section 4, a slender beam exhibiting geometrical nonlinearity is employed as the test system in a physical experiment. Conclusions are drawn in the final section. The basic principle of PLLT is to make use of the unique phase variation property of a nonlinear resonance to unfold the NFRCs. This is exemplified for the nonlinear primary resonance of a hardening Duffing oscillator excited by a sine forcing function in Figure The PLL scheme utilized in this work requires no prior knowledge of the tested system and can be easily implemented in a physical experiment. Another benefit is that it can stabilize unstable branches through the action of the controller The instantaneous frequency is determined by the difference between the assigned reference phase Φ ref and the phase lag of the κ-th harmonic Φ κ,υ obtained by the phase detector and the settled PI controller Here, ω o is the open-loop forcing frequency, often set to be close to the target resonance. K P and K I are the proportional and integral gains of the controller, respectively. They are employed to achieve fast convergence to the target phase angle and eliminate the steady-state errors in the feedback loop. Alternatively, Eq. ( The measured periodic response is written in terms of the truncated Fourier expansion where κ is the number of harmonics and υ is a positive integer introduced to account for subharmonics. The fundamental harmonic excitation can activate multiharmonic responses which where Q(t) is a row vector collecting the time-dependent trigonometric terms and z is a vector containing the associated Fourier coefficients In this work, the amplitude and phase lag of the κ-th harmonic component are determined as where and To develop a control-based scheme that can effectively characterize secondary resonances, the phase of the non-fundamental harmonic of interest, i.e., κ = υ, must be accurately estimated. This is why we resort to adaptive digital filters for performing online Fourier decomposition The row vector Q(t) containing the sine and cosine functions now becomes the basis in adaptive filtering, and the weight coefficients ẑ are combined in the vector These weights can be interpreted as an approximation of the Fourier coefficients with ẑ ≈ z. They are updated online at discrete time steps using the least mean squares (LMS) algorithm, which is more cost-effective as compared to other alternative algorithms where μ is the step size factor specifying the convergence and ǫ is the synthesis error estimated using The phase of the κ-th harmonic of the displacement can then be extracted according to The phase of the fundamental forcing component at κ = υ denoted Φf υ,υ can be decomposed in a similar manner, so that the phase lag of the κ-th harmonic of the displacement with respect to the forcing can be estimated using the relation When it comes to practical implementation, the phase angles of the trigonometric terms of the basis in Eventually, the concept of a resonant phase lag introduced in A Duffing oscillator under sine forcing governed by the equation of motion is considered in this section. m, c, k and k nl are the mass, damping, linear and nonlinear stiffness coefficients, respectively. They are chosen to be equal to m = 1 kg, c = 0.001 kg/s, k = 1 N/m and k nl = 1 N/m 3 . The natural frequency of the underlying linear system is ω l = k/m. The dynamical model integrating PLL control and the Duffing oscillator was implemented in the Matlab/Simulink environment. The fixed-step ordinary differential equation solver was employed for carrying out the time-domain simulations. The parameters of the PLL controller and of the adaptive filter are tabulated in Table The NFRC and backbone of the primary resonance were identified using PLLT at three different forcing amplitudes F , namely 0.00005, 0.0001 and 0.00015 N. A reference solution was also computed using the harmonic balance method (HBM) As shown in The identification of the 3:1 and 2:1 superharmonic resonances was achieved using PLLT by letting the phase lags Φ 3,1 and Φ 2,1 vary between 0 and -π or between -π/2 and -π, respectively. The corresponding phase resonances occur at -π/2 and -3π/4, respectively. Figures The calculation of the 3:1 resonance is facilitated by the fact that it appears in the direct continuation of the main branch of the NFRC. This is not the case for the 2:1 resonance which bifurcates out of the main branch. As a result, HBM necessitates either a branch switching strategy or an initial guess to calculate the 2:1 branch. Interestingly, this is not necessary for the proposed PLLT scheme, because the 2:1 branch can be reached from the rest position, i.e., starting with trivial initial conditions x 0 = ẋ0 = 0. As illustrated in Figure Unlike superharmonic resonances, subharmonic resonances take the form of isolated branches of periodic solutions detached from the main branch As discussed in As for the 2:1 resonance, a very interesting feature of PLLT is that subharmonic resonances can be reached without any guess or user interaction. This is illustrated for the 1:3 subharmonic resonance in Figure i An initial overshooting, a typical phenomenon when using a PID controller, results in fast oscillations of the instantaneous frequency around ω = 3. This overshooting depends on the controller parameters K P and K I . For instance, Figure ii A smooth transfer along the subharmonic branch toward the high-amplitude resonant point takes place. The fact that the PLL controller has a general tendency to reach the upper resonance point can be explained by the fact that there is an extremely rapid change in the phase lag around the lower amplitude resonance point (see around ω ≈ 3 in Figure iii When the measured phase lag converges to the reference phase lag, the upper resonance point of the subharmonic resonance is reached. Such an automatic branch switching process could be achieved at other force amplitudes or with reference phase lags different from the resonant phase lag. However, it also happened that the transition to the isola could not be achieved. This is the case for F = 0.1N in Figure The identification of the 1:2 subharmonic resonance in Figure The test sample is a thin straight aluminum beam of dimension 2mm × 20mm × 1m, see Figure During the installation process, low initial tension or compression force along the beam was ensured so as to avoid structural buckling. Such a slender beam is expected to exhibit geometrically nonlinear behavior resulting in an hardening effect due to mid-plane stretching. The first vibration mode is considered in this study. The formulas given for secondary resonances in An electromagnetic shaker (TIRA TV 51075) fed by a power amplifier (TIRA BAA 120) working in current mode was used to drive the beam into vibration. The shaker was connected to the beam through a flexible stinger and an impedance head (DYTRAN 5860B). The shaker was placed close to one clamped boundary in order to minimize shaker-structure interaction. An accelerometer (DYTRAN 3035G) was placed closer to the beam center. The measured signals were amplified by a signal conditioner (PCB PIEZOTRONICS 482C). PLLT was realized using the real-time controller dSPACE MicroLabBox with the control scheme implemented in Matlab/Simulink. The sampling frequency of the fixed-step solver was set to be 10 kHz. An additional controller was used to control the applied excitation toward a settled magnitude F o Despite its apparent simplicity, this set-up posed two important difficulties. First, shakerstructure interaction remained an important issue for PPLT with the consequence that it was not possible to find a single beam length for which all the resonances of interest could be identified robustly. Second, the set-up exhibited important day-to-day variability induced by the key role played by room temperature on the dynamical properties of the beam. The NFRCs obtained from classical sine sweep testing (SST) and from PLLT around the primary resonance as well as the backbone identified by PLLT with Φ ref = π/2 are displayed in Figure The backbone in Figure Finally, the automatic transfer to the 1:2 isola and the subsequent identification were also successfully achieved for beam 2. As shown in Figure In this study, a control-based vibration testing scheme for identifying both primary and secondary resonances of nonlinear systems was proposed. The PLLT scheme integrates digital adaptive filters into the phase detector module of PLL. The experimental continuation of NFRCs exploited the fact that, unlike the forcing frequency, the phase lag has a monotonic evolution around nonlinear resonances. Thus, the NFRC can be obtained by sweeping the phase lag at constant forcing amplitude. The experimental continuation of backbone curves exploited the concept of a resonant phase lag. In this case, the forcing amplitude is swept at constant phase lag. The performance of PLLT was carefully assessed using numerical and physical experiments. The NFRCs (with their stable and unstable portions) and backbones of different superharmonic and subharmonic resonances were successfully identified. A salient feature of PLLT is that both bifurcating and isolated branches were reached from the rest position without any user interaction. Throughout this study, the selection of the gains of the PI controller remained a matter of trial and error. Further research concerning this aspect is necessary.