Ultra-low-noise laser sources are crucial for a variety of applications, including microwave synthesizers, optical gyroscopes, and the manipulation of quantum systems. Silicon photonics has emerged as a promising solution for high-coherence applications due to its ability to reduce system size, weight, power consumption, and cost (SWaP-C). Semiconductor lasers based on self-injection locking (SIL) have reached fiber laser coherence, but typically require a high-Q external cavity to suppress coherence collapse through frequency-selective feedback. Lasers based on external-cavity locking (ECL) are a low-cost and turnkey operation option, but their coherence is generally inferior to SIL lasers. In this work, we demonstrate quantum-dot (QD) lasers grown directly on Si that achieve SIL laser coherence under turnkey ECL. The high-performance QD laser offers a scalable and low-cost heteroepitaxial integration platform. Moreover, the QD laser's chaos-free nature enables a 16 Hz Lorentzian linewidth under ECL using a low-Q external cavity, and improves the frequency noise by an additional order of magnitude compared to conventional quantum-well lasers. Narrow-linewidth and frequency-stable lasers have opened up new opportunities for optical sensing and signal generation applications, including optical frequency and microwave synthesis In this work, we introduce advanced quantum-dot (QD) lasers as a compelling solution for high-coherence turnkey external cavity locking (ECL) technology. Semi-conductor QDs, due to the atom-like density of states, exhibit much lower linewidth enhancement factor (LEF), and thus much lower frequency noise and linewidth The QD-on-Si laser material was grown in a Veeco Gen-II solid source molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber on an anti-phase-domain free GaP/Si on-axis template. After completing the defect-reducing buffer layers and the QD active region Owing to the quantized density-of-state, the carriers are tightly confined in the dots leading to enhanced injection efficiency Laser dynamics under external optical feedback (EOF) have been extensively studied during the past four decades. The stability and instabilities of semiconductor lasers under EOF have opened up various applications. The coherent feedback allows for an increase in the intracavity photon density, which is beneficial to significantly reduce the laser linewidth. Nevertheless, a strong EOF would possibly lead to a severe coherence collapse. To take advantage of the narrow linewidth under EOF, it is crucial to suppress the coherence collapse of the laser. Compared to the conventional QW laser, the chaos-free QD laser opens up new opportunities for laser linewidth locking. Figure The 35 dB improved feedback insensitivity in the wavelength-detuned QD laser is mainly attributed to the large damping factor The severe coherence collapse in the conventional QW laser can be suppressed through the use of a high-Q external cavity that offers frequency-selective feedback (Fig. It used to be a challenge to reduce the QW laser linewidth to hertz level with a low-Q external cavity, due to the weak coherent feedback that it offers. In general, the coherence of QW external-cavity lasers is more than one order of magnitude inferior to the high-Q SIL lasers The remarkable ECL performance of the QD laser is twofold: First, the QD laser allows for generating a narrower free-running linewidth than the QW laser owing to its lower LEF. The free-running linewidth of the wavelength-detuned QD laser is 84 kHz, which is four times narrower than its QW counterpart. Second, the Offset Frequency (Hz) Offset Frequency (Hz) Offset Frequency (Hz) Offset Frequency (Hz) chaos-free QD laser does not require a frequency filter to suppress the coherence collapse, thus it can take advan- tage of the strong coherent feedback offered by a low-Q external cavity. As a result, both the linewidth and the linewidth reduction ratio are improved by utilizing the QD laser. Theoretical analyses of the frequency noise reduction are available in the Supplementary Information. The calculated frequency noise of the QD and the QW laser are shown in Figs. This work demonstrates a high-performance QD laser on Si that achieves a Lorentzian linewidth of 16 Hz under external cavity locking. The quantized QD laser opens up more opportunities for large-scale PICs owing to its compatibility with the mature CMOS foundry. Compared to the QD lasers grown on the native substrate, directly growing the QD lasers on Si improves not only the scalability using the commercial 300 mm Si wafers but also the laser performance. For instance, the epitaxial QD laser on Si enabled a record LEF as low as 0.13 * G, gain medium; EC, external cavity. † ECL, external-cavity locking. ‡ SIL, self-injection locking.