We report a characterization of the high-pressure behavior of zinc-iodate, Zn(IO3)2. By the combination of x-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and first-principles calculations we have found evidence of two subtle isosymmetric structural phase transitions. We present arguments relating these transitions to a non-linear behavior of phonons and changes induced by pressure on the coordination sphere of the iodine atoms. This fact is explained as a consequence of the formation of metavalent bonding at high-pressure which is favored by the lone-electron pairs of iodine. In addition, the pressure dependence of unit-cell parameters, volume, and bond is reported. An equation of state to describe the pressure dependence of the volume is presented, indicating that Zn(IO3)2 is the most compressible iodate among those studied up to now. Finally, phonon frequencies are reported together with their symmetry assignment and pressure dependence. Metal iodates form a group of materials that have been intensively studied as promising nonlinear optics (NLO) materials Of special interest are the studies of the crystal structure and vibration behavior of metal iodates at high pressure (HP). Recently, we have reported a comprehensive crystal structure and vibration study of Fe(IO3)3 under compression employing X-ray diffraction, IR spectroscopy, Raman scattering (RS) measurements, and first-principles DFT calculations Here we extend the HP-study on another metal iodate, Zn(IO3)2. At ambient conditions, Zn(IO3)2 crystallizes in a monoclinic structure (space group: P21, Z=4) where ZnO6 octahedral units are bridged by IO3 triangular pyramids (see Fig. For the study of Zn(IO3)2, micron-sized needle-like crystals were synthesized from an aqueous solution (2 mmol, 99.5% purity) and zinc chloride ZnCl2 (1 mmol, 98% purity) in de-ionized water: 2KIO3 + ZnCl2 → Zn(IO3)2 + 2KCl. The reagents were purchased from Fluka (KIO3) and Riedel-deHeän (ZnCl2). The reaction mixtures were slowly evaporated and maintained at 60° C for four days, leading to the formation of white precipitations. We filtrate and washing the crystals with de-ionized water. To confirm the purity and crystal structure of Zn(IO3)2, we performed powder XRD measurements at room conditions (see Fig. Angle-dispersive powder HP-XRD experiments were performed at room temperature (RT) up to 27.8 GPa employing a membrane diamond-anvil cell (DAC), with diamond culets of 400 μm. For these experiments the Zn(IO3)2 sample was grinded to obtain a fine powder which was loaded in a 180-μm diameter hole drilled on a stainless-steel gasket pre-indented to a thickness of 40 μm. Pressure was measured using the equation of state of gold HP-RS measurements up to 12 GPa were performed in Zn(IO3)2 also with a DAC, where sample and ruby chips were loaded in the 150-μm diameter hole of a preindented steel gasket. A 4:1 methanol-ethanol mixture was used as pressuretransmitting medium Calculations of the total energy as a function of pressure for Zn(IO3)2 were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulations package (VASP) After optimizing the crystal structure at different pressures a study of the phonons was performed at the zone center (Γ point) of the BZ using the direct method A. Structural study Fig. The changes induced by pressure in XRD patterns are reversible as can be seen in Fig. Under compression, most diffraction peaks shift to higher angles, as expected Fig. The bulk modulus is 21.6 (0.7) and 18.4 (1.5) GPa according to experiments and calculations and the corresponding pressure derivate is 7.0 (0.3) and 6.7 (0.7), respectively. Experiment and calculations describe a similar high compressibility behavior of Zn(IO3)2 at low pressures and the minor difference between them is within a reasonable error A, EOS of the theoretical results in the 0-3 GPa range provides a bulk modulus of 18 In our previous study In order to further characterize volume changes, we have used a 3 rd order BM EOS to describe the pressure dependence of the ZnO6, I1O6, and I2O6 octahedral volumes (here we assume a 3+3 coordination of I). In this scenario, we obtain zero-pressure bulk moduli of 66(2), 26(2) and 15(1.3) GPa, with corresponding pressure derivatives of 9.2 (0.5), 5.3 (0.5) and 5.3 (0.5), respectively. Since we already know that the bulk modulus of bulk Zn(IO3)2 is 21.6 GPa in the experiment and 18.4 GPa in the calculations, it is clear that the bulk modulus of the crystal is mainly determined by the compression of IO6 units, rather than the compression of the ZnO6 unit. This result is similar to what has been found in Fe(IO3)3 From Rietveld refinement of HP-XRD patterns, we have studied the evolution of unit-cell parameters of Zn(IO3)2 under pressure and compared them with the results of DFT calculations (see Fig. In the low-pressure range, the linear compressibilities of a-and b-axis are similar and very small. In the medium-pressure range, they are even negative. Finally, in the highpressure range, both unit-cell parameters show a similar slow decrease with pressure. In contrast, the behavior of the c-axis is very different, being much more compressible than the other two axes, at least in the two first pressure ranges, and showing a strong decrease of the compressibility in the third pressure range. The much higher compressibility of the c-axis at low pressures is a consequence of the quasi-layered structure formed by IO3 tetrahedron and connected by ZnO6 octahedron along this direction (see Fig. To highlight the different behavior of the axes in Zn(IO3)2, we plot in Fig. GPa that agree with those observed in the lattice parameters and the monoclinic gamma angle, as commented below. We will comment now on the pressure dependence of the monoclinic γ angle (inset of Fig. Based upon the good agreement between calculations and experiments regarding the pressure dependence of structural parameters and the difficulty to obtain reliable atomic positions from our HP-XRD measurements due to the influence of preferred orientations, we have performed a more detailed analysis of the theoretical data to investigate the behavior of the monoclinic structure near 3.4 and 8.9 GPa. In particular, we have used those data to calculate the pressure dependence of the theoretical distortion index of both polyhedra as calculated by using VESTA pressure. An almost linear decrease of the distortion index of IO6 units is observed. Additionally, an S-like nonlinear decrease of the distortion index of ZnO6 units with changes in slopes near 3.8 and 8.9 GPa are observed. The sum of the pressure effect on both polyhedra cause the nonlinear change of γ under pressure. Moreover, the changes observed in both polyhedra lead to: i) a symmetrization of the ZnO6 octahedron, and ii) the gradual formation of IO6 octahedra; i.e. an increase of I coordination due to the rapid decrease of the second-nearest neighbor I-O distances (represented in dashed lines in Fig. We think the structural changes observed at 3.4 and 8.9 GPa are caused by two subtle isostructural phase transitions (IPTs) More evidence for the two IPTs can be found in the theoretical pressure dependence of the Zn-O and I-O distances and, more importantly, in the experimental and calculated Raman-mode evolution under pressure to be discussed in the next section. Regarding the pressure dependence of the Zn-O distances (see Fig. As regards the pressure dependence of the I-O distances, we must recall that there are two different atomic positions for iodine, I1, and I2. I1 is the iodine in the bottom and top of the unit cell when viewed from a-axis (see Fig. Here we will focus on the change of I1-O bond distances with pressure (Fig. O bonds (Fig. The strong distortion of the IO6 polyhedra at low pressures is due to the large stereoactivity of the iodine LEP. This stereoactivity decreases in strength with pressure and ultimately disappears in order to stablish the three new bonds above around 8 GPa, thus leading to a more regular IO6 polyhedron as already commented. The pressureinduced reduction of the cation LEP stereoactivity can be found in some other materials, like Fe(IO3)3 Finally, we must note that there is an increase of the three shortest I-O distances that is in contrast to the decrease in the three largest I-O distances. The increase of the three shortest I-O distances will lead to the soft behavior of some Raman-active modes at HP that we will show in the next section. In this context, it must be stressed that an increase of the three shorter Zn-O bond distances with increasing pressure have also been observed between 3.8 and 8.9 GPa. The S-like behavior of the Zn-O bond distances with pressure is not normal. In particular, the increment of the cation-anion bond distance and the equalization of the different bond distances has been recently observed for As-S bonds in orpiment (As2S3) under compression First, we will start discussing the Raman spectra of Zn(IO3)2 at ambient pressure (see Fig. According to group theory, Zn(IO3)2 should have fifty-four vibrational modes with three acoustic modes (A+ 2B) and fifty-one Raman-active and IR modes (26A + 25B). We have observed twenty-two Raman-active modes out of fifty-one. In previous studies, twenty-one and sixteen modes have been reported The strongest Raman modes in Zn(IO3)2 and Fe(IO3)3 are at 782 and 790 cm -1 , respectively The pressure evolution of the Raman mode frequencies and the closing phonon gap can be better seen in Fig. In the high-frequency region (Fig. Now we focus on the high-frequency region of the Raman spectrum (see Fig. . First, we would like to mention that the experimental mode of highest frequency is a second-order Raman mode that is likely a combination of modes observed near 400-450 cm -1 (all of them showing positive pressure coefficient). Second, we would like to comment on the observed phonon softening upon compression of many highfrequency modes. This is a common feature of all the calculated phonons and most experimental phonons of Zn(IO3)2. Based on our DFT calculation, we are capable of seeing the related atomic movements of all phonons by using J-ICE To verify the hypothesis of the softening of the high-frequency phonons due to the increase of the short I-O bonds, we have assumed under a harmonic approximation that the force constant, k, of the I-O bond is a function of negative cubic of the average I-O bond distance, (dI-O) -3 . Since the frequency of the stretching mode, ω, can be written as ω = (k/μ) 1/2 , where μ is the mass, if the assumption is right and the mode softening is caused by the increase of the bond distance, then we can found a linear relationship between ω -2/3 and the bond distance. By using the calculated data, we plotted the theoretical frequencies of the soft modes with the average I-O bond distance in IO3 units (see Fig. To explore this hypothesis in Zn(IO3)2 new studies are needed. 