Addressing the uncertainty and variability in the quality of 3D printed metals can further the wide spread use of this technology. Process mapping for new alloys is crucial for determining optimal process parameters that consistently produce acceptable printing quality. Process mapping is typically performed by conventional methods and is used for the design of experiments and ex situ characterization of printed parts. On the other hand, in situ approaches are limited because their observable features are limited and they require complex high-cost setups to obtain temperature measurements to boost accuracy. Our method relaxes these limitations by incorporating the temporal features of molten metal dynamics during lasermetal interactions using video vision transformers and high-speed imaging. Our approach can be used in existing commercial machines and can provide in situ process maps for efficient defect and variability quantification. The generalizability of the approach is demonstrated by performing cross-dataset evaluations on alloys with different compositions and intrinsic thermofluid properties. Additive manufacturing (AM) can be considered one of the pillars of the fourth industrial revolution. The industry has the potential to play a major role in innovation processes and in the US and global economy The technology uses a high-power laser as an energy source to melt and fuse powders in specific locations to form certain shapes, a recoater then spreads a new layer of powder, and the process repeats until 3D objects are formed. The variability problem is the main obstacle that hinders the reliability of the quality of printed parts and thus the potential for full production. The mechanical properties and dimensional accuracy of printed parts vary depending on the powder and machine used, the scanning strategy, and the printing conditions High-speed imaging by a laser at a fine spatiotemporal scale has been used to monitor molten pools. Although this monitoring technique has been used in previous work, adopting it for in situ process mapping is limited due to the poorly observable features In this work, we develop an in situ approach for designing an accelerated and efficient process for 3D printing of new metal alloys to achieve melt-pool stability and address the variability problem. Based on the advancement of knowledge in defect formation dynamics We developed an off-axial imaging setup at the L-PBF facility of the CMU Next Manufacturing Center, which consists of a high-speed camera and magnification lenses with optical filters attached to it. The optical train is devised to block the wavelength that is associated with most of the emissions of the plasma plume, i.e., ionized vapor, condensed particles, and plumes formed during printing. The plume temperature alone can be higher than 3500 K The melt pool becomes smaller but elongates as the scan speed increases. However, melt pools captured in the lack-of-fusion regime are very small with a low length-to-width ratio, as the energy density is very low and the laser beam does not penetrate deeply into the material. Although the captured melt pools are clearly distinct from the plasma and plume, they are still observable with high oscillations in the keyholing regime. In the keyholing regime, owing to the high energy density, the vapor plasma has a significantly high energy density and cannot be easily filtered out. Examples of videos for the four regimes are presented in Supplementary Movies S1-S4. In the balling regime, in agreement with the modeling study To further investigate the dynamic changes in melt-pool shapes that can be captured by the imaging setup, we analyzed the changes in the maximum intensity of the captured melt-pool emissions and the crosscorrelation of subsequent frames. As shown in Fig. The keyhole fluctuation is typically characterized by fluctuations in the width and depth of the keyhole However, the intensity fluctuation is found to have a higher frequency of approximately 8-17 kHz. Notably, the intensity fluctuation does not directly represent the fluctuation in the keyhole depth temperature because the emissions of the plasma plume can block the view of the keyhole depth. The temporal changes in the melt-pool shapes are qualitatively analyzed by calculating the correlation coefficient between subsequent frames. Box plots of the correlation coefficients calculated for melted beads at different regimes are illustrated in Fig. Transformers are state-of-the-art self-attention deep learning architectures for natural language processing. Vaswani et al. Due to the small field of view of the high-speed camera and the high scan speed of the laser, a limited number of frames are stored in each recorded video. Thus, we implement regularization schemes to efficiently deal with small amounts of data. Biases and layer weight regularization are applied to the MLP of the multiheaded transformers and the MLP head. Although data augmentation is powerful in boosting the performance of transformers (39), we rely instead on regularization to preserve dynamic changes in the molten pool that are reflected in the image intensity and changes in the geometrical attributes. The videos are classified into four categories: desirable regimes and printing regimes with three different types of defects: keyholing, balling, and lack-of-fusion. Keyholing is deep drilling into the material through vaporization, and it results in a deep vapor cavity We conducted single-bead experiments with different P-V combinations, covering the four printing regimes, on stainless steel SS316L, titanium alloy Ti-6AL-4V, and Inconel alloy IN718. To explore the generalizability of the method, we performed a cross-dataset evaluation, where the model is trained on the recorded videos of one alloy and tested on the videos others while the hyperparameters are kept unchanged. The classification results of the training experiment on SS316L alloy are listed in Tables The classification accuracy for the Ti-6Al-4V data is expected to be lower than that of the IN718 alloy data. The Ti-6Al-4V alloy is observed to emit a denser vapor plume in comparison to the other alloys. The alloy elements of Ti-6Al-4V experience significant vaporization in comparison to those of SS316L and IN718 After classification, the classes of the P-V combinations are averaged across the samples in the testing datasets and plotted to generate process maps. The process maps Note, however, that there is no clear separation between these classes To validate the performance of the method, experiments are performed to compare the video vision transformer with other state-of-the-art models. Two pretrained video vision transformer models, ViViT-B (51) and TimeSformer To provide more insights into the method performance, we visualize the t-SNE projection (56), i.e., a technique used for the visualization of high data dimensions, of the ViViT-B model features in Fig. The results of three model variants of ViViT-B (51) are shown in Supplementary Table The influence of regularization is examined by running experiments with the factorized encoder model of ViViT-B with and without data augmentation steps of random horizontal flipping, random cropping and stochastic layer dropout Variability in melt-pool morphologies can lead to dimensional inconsistency of printed features and a coarse surface finish. Moreover, it can indicate heat accumulation and fusion defects, such as a discontinuities in melt tracks and spatter generation and powder spreading defects. Therefore, selecting process parameters that lead to a less variable melt pool can enhance the consistency of the printing outcome. Following the creation of process maps for printability and defect formation, we construct process maps for morphological variability. Although the depth of the melt pool cannot be seen from the top view of the machine bed, the width and area attributes are markers of printing consistency Powder single tracks are printed in Ti-6Al-4V alloy with a layer thickness of 30 μm, a 100-μm laser spot diameter, and different processing parameter combinations: laser powers of 200, 300, and 400 Watts and scanning speeds of 800, 1200, and 1600 mm/s. The experiments are conducted four times to account for variability in powder spreading and to sufficiently analyze melt-pool changes. After printing the beads and collecting the data, ex situ analysis with a ZEISS Axio Imager microscope was performed to measure the track width every 200 μm. The liquidus-solidus threshold in the captured videos is estimated by correlating the actual bead's mean width with the melt pool captured by the camera. The variability in melt-pool morphology represented by the standard deviation of the melt-pool width and area is illustrated in Fig. As demonstrated above, molten pool dynamics and shape changes can be captured with a simple off-axial imaging setup. Vision transformers with temporal embedding can enable in situ detection of melt-pool defects and efficient process mapping for alloys that are different in chemical composition and intrinsic thermofluid properties from the material used in training. The process maps generated by our method, along with the variability maps of molten pool attributes, can potentially accelerate the qualification of printability and process development for newly developed 3D printed alloys. We show that incorporating the temporal features leads to accurate prediction of process maps, as the dynamics of the process are a major contributor to defect formation and the printing regime Consistent with former observations Results obtained from training on the Ti-6Al-4V data tend to be inferior to those obtained from training on the other alloy datasets, as the thermophysical properties of this metal alloy are significantly different from those of the other alloys The classification accuracies of the model are found to be high enough to reconstruct the process maps of the testing alloys. However, the "keyholing" defect class is confused with the "desirable" class in some instances. The desirable class consists of data points of printed beads in conduction and keyholing regimes, as keyholing without severe evaporation may not cause defects. The findings of this study can be the basis for developing deep learning models with multilabel classification. Although the generalizability of the method is validated, its expansion to real-time monitoring for process control has some challenges and limitations, and further studies are needed to address these limitations. First, the data transfer rate must be high enough to match the recording rate needed to capture the high frequency oscillations in melt-pool changes. Second, most commercial high-speed cameras are designed to record short videos for limited periods. The high-speed imaging setup was built at the Mill 19 facility of the CMU Next Manufacturing Center (Pittsburgh, PA). A Photron FASTCAM Mini AX200 high-speed monochrome camera (Tokyo, Japan) was used to capture the melt pool in real time at 54,000 frames per second. The exposure time of the camera was manually adjusted depending on the brightness level of the scene to avoid saturation and blooming, i.e., exceeding the electric signal limit that the camera sensor can handle The recorded videos were processed using scaling and image registration. The frames were converted into grayscale arrays, and the molten pools were registered to be in the same location along each clip. The image intensity was normalized. For each video, the pixel intensities were linearly scaled from zero to one, where one represented the maximum pixel intensity in the video. The size of each data point was 80x160x15, which represents a temporal resolution of 18.5 μs and a spatial resolution of 6.3 μm. Active contouring followed by thresholding was used to measure the melt-pool attributes for the attribute variability analysis. Ground truth labeling was performed based on four classes: (1) keyholing defects: when the keyhole penetrates deep enough into the material with a probability to generate pores (the width to depth ratio is Tables Results of defect and processing regime prediction by training on SS316L and testing on Ti-6AL-4V Fig. 