The field of integrated photonics has significantly impacted numerous fields including communication, sensing, and quantum physics owing to the efficiency, speed, and compactness of its devices. However, the reliance on off-chip bulk lasers compromises the compact nature of these systems. While silicon photonics and III-V platforms have established integrated laser technologies, emerging demands for ultra-low optical loss, wider bandgaps, and optical nonlinearities necessitate other platforms. Developing integrated lasers on less mature platforms is arduous and costly due to limited throughput or unconventional process requirements. In response, we propose a novel platform-agnostic laser integration technique utilizing a singular design and process flow, applicable without modification to a diverse range of platforms. Leveraging a two-step micro-transfer printing method, we achieve nearly identical laser performance across platforms with refractive indices between 1.7 and 2.5. Experimental validation demonstrates strikingly similar laser characteristics between devices processed on lithium niobate and silicon nitride platforms. Furthermore, we showcase the integration of a laser with a resonant electro-optic comb generator on the thin-film lithium niobate platform, producing over 80 comb lines spanning 12 nm. This versatile technique transcends platform-specific limitations, facilitating applications like microwave photonics, handheld spectrometers, and cost-effective Lidar systems, across multiple platforms. Integrated photonics has sparked a revolution in various fields, including optical communication Although silicon photonics or III-V platforms like InP have well-developed integrated lasers We note that both hybrid (chip-to-chip) and heterogeneous (on-chip) integration techniques Our goal is to develop a laser integration technique that is platform agnostic; a single design and process flow are used without modification for fabricating scalable integrated lasers across a large variety of platforms (see Fig. We first show our technique's compatibility with a wide range of platforms, with refractive indices ranging from 1.7 to 2.5. We then experimentally validate our findings by showing near-identical laser characteristics for identically processed lasers integrated on TFLN and SiN platforms. Additionally, we demonstrate a laser-integrated resonant electro-optic (EO) comb by integrating our laser along with a frequency comb generator on the TFLN platform, resulting in a spectrum spanning 12 nm in the telecommunication region. The latter illustrates our platform-agnostic approach's ability to rapidly develop fully integrated devices on new platforms. To guarantee that the laser behaves uniformly across platforms, its manufacturing process should not rely on the specific photonic platform being utilized and a single laser design and geometry should be universally applicable across platforms. Here, we first argue that micro-transfer printing is particularly suited for platform-agnostic fabrication since it enables processing the laser components separately and only then transferring them to the target platform. We then describe a platform agnostic design realized with a two-step transfer printing process: printing first the laser's cavity followed by its gain section. Finally, we describe how to use this process to fabricate platform-agnostic lasers over a large wavelength range, by combining different gain sections with variations of our optimized cavity. Micro-transfer printing Previously, however, laser integration with micro-transfer printing required platform-specific considerations. It usually involves printing a III-V amplifier coupon onto a low-loss cavity on the target chip to facilitate lasing. The cavity can be an on-chip filter like an add-drop Vernier combined with a Sagnac reflector Furthermore, good coupling between the gain material and low index platforms is challenging since even narrow tapers in the usually "thick" (∼ 4 μm), high index (n ≈ 3.5) III-V stack are not sufficient to ensure high-efficiency coupling to low index materials such as LN (n = 2.2). This can be addressed with a thin intermediate layer of a higher index material such as Si (n= 3.4) with narrow tapers fabricated using mature processing In our approach, we instead print a prefabricated silicon coupon on the platform material which combines the intermediate coupling section with a laser cavity, by including both a linear taper and a QWSDFB grating on the coupon (details in the next section). To finalize the laser we then print a III-V gain coupon on top of the silicon grating creating a Si/III-V DFB laser cavity (see Fig. This allows us to separately pre-process the III-V coupon containing the gain section and the silicon coupon containing both the cavity and the coupling section. It also opens up the possibility of combining a III-V gain section with different silicon cavities with distinct resonance wavelengths, generating a family of platform-agnostic lasers across the whole gain bandwidth. Importantly these Figure silicon coupons with different cavities can be processed on the same source wafer. Furthermore, the wavelength range can be further extended by utilizing multiple III-V coupons, prefabricating them on different chips with distinct material stacks. To show the potential of this approach we plot the calculated relative lasing powers and lasing wavelengths for different combinations of coupons in Fig. To optimize the platform-agnostic operation of the laser we have to address its three sections: the combined III-V/Si DFB laser cavity, the coupling section from the cavity to the silicon waveguide, and the coupling section from the silicon waveguide to the platform. We will show that the relatively high indices of the Si and III-V enable a platform-agnostic cavity and coupling section to the silicon waveguide by having strong optical confinement in the printed layers instead of the platform material. The silicon taper design will however be crucial to ensure efficient coupling between different platforms and the silicon waveguide. We will also show that the wavelength independence is a serendipitous byproduct of the platform-agnostic optimization. We optimize the different laser sections using Lumerical Mode and Eigenmode Expansion (EME) simulations with a model material stack for the considered photonic platforms consisting of a 600-nm thick platform material (n = n platform ) with partially etched waveguides 300 nm deep on top of 2-μm of buried oxide (n = 1.55) with a Si (n = 3.4) substrate. We note however that the results obtained in this section are not dependent on the specific stack but are representative for any common material stack as will be shown in the experiments and Supplementary section 3. First, we consider the laser cavity, a QWSDFB grating in the silicon with the III-V gain material on top, where the resonant wavelength λ DF B and reflectivity R are determined by: There are three critical parameters for the cavity design, the length of the grating (L), the pitch Λ and the effective refractive indices of the etched (n etched ) and unetched (n unetched ) grating sections. These effective refractive indices n unetched ≈ 3.20 and n etched ≈ 3.23 can be retrieved from mode simulations on different cross sections (Fig. Then we consider the coupling section consisting of two parts, first the light coming out of the laser cavity is coupled from the III-V/Si waveguide into the silicon waveguide after which this light gets coupled to the platform waveguide (see Fig. The second coupler, however, interfaces directly with the target photonics platform. To ensure coupling between a variety of nano-photonic platforms and the silicon coupon, the coupler's dimensions must cover the required effective index matching points for a wide range of platform indices. As we want to keep the printing site geometry of the platform fixed (3μm waveguide at the coupler) this index matching point will correspond to different widths of the silicon coupler for different platforms. To cover a large range of widths while keeping the coupling adiabatic, we adopt a linear taper geometry for the platform-silicon couplers. The taper is optimized by using Lumerical Eigenmode Expansion to calculate the transmission and varying both the taper dimensions and the platform index n platform and keeping the wavelength fixed. By comparing these transmissions we can choose an optimal design within the fabrication constraints covering a wide range of indices. The optimized silicon taper has a narrow tip of 120 nm which tapers out to 340 nm width over 200 μm (see Supplementary section 5) and has a simulated transmission at 1570 nm of > 93% for n platform =1.7-2.5 , with a peak transmission of 99.5% for n platform = 2 (see Fig. The width of the silicon taper is constrained there because it must be significantly smaller than the width of the printing site underneath (3 μm) to avoid a dramatic drop in the coupling efficiency in case of lateral misalignment. For the optimized taper and n platform =1.7-2.5, λ=1570 this drop is less than 5% for a lateral offset of 500 nm of the silicon coupon, which is 3 times the standard deviation((3σ = ± 500 nm) of state of the art transfer printing tools (see Supplementary section 6 for the wavelength dependence). For higher index platforms, one could use a wider printing site but this would come at the cost of exciting higher order modes in the waveguide for lower index platforms. Also a lateral offset of 500 nm for III-V coupon results in less than 2 % drop in transmission across our index range at 1570 nm (see Supplementary section 6 for the wavelength dependence). We additionally note that the transmission of the full coupling section consisting of the silicon and III-V tapers is not significantly affected by the operation wavelength, with T (λ, n platform ) > 80% for n platform =1.7-2.5 and λ laser =1460-1580 nm spanning most of the gain bandwidth of the three amplifiers considered (see Supplementary section 3). This wavelength insensitivity was not specifically optimized for but is a byproduct of the platform agnostic design. While we use a single taper design here, the operating range could further be extended by using multiple designs for different wavelength and index ranges. To experimentally demonstrate the platform-agnostic laser integration technique we fabricate lasers using the same coupons on SiN and LN. We first describe the fabrication of the Si and III-V coupon chips, and then we elaborate on the preparation of the SiN and TFLN platform chips, followed by the printing process. Finally, we discuss the laser measurements on both platforms and show that the laser performance is nearly identical. For the Si coupons we start from a silicon-on-insulator sample with a 400 nm silicon layer on top of a 2 μm BOX layer. We partially etch (180 nm deep) the silicon waveguides and the QWSDFB grating (Λ = 247 nm) and define the coupons by fully etching a rectangular trench around the waveguides with grating, while retaining some tethers connecting the coupon to the surrounding silicon (see Methods). The coupons are then underetched, resulting in suspended coupons with partially-etched waveguides and a QWSDFB grating (details in Methods). The processing of the III-V amplifier coupons is described in The SiN target chip is fabricated on a 300 nm thick SiN on 3.3 μm of oxide on a silicon substrate with fully-etched waveguides while the TFLN target chip is fabricated on 600 nm of x-cut TFLN with partially etched (300 nm etch depth) waveguides on 2 μm oxide on a silicon substrate The printing site for both SiN and TFLN is defined as a single-mode waveguide tapering to a 3 μm wide section which is 130 μm long after which it tapers to > 60 μm wide section. The 3 μm waveguide part will be where the Si taper couples the light to the platform, while the > 60μm wide section is where the cavity will be printed (see Fig. After the circuits on the LN and SiN target chips are defined, the fabrication steps are identical. We first spin coat 50-70 nm of Benzocyclobutene (BCB) to provide extra adhesion for the transfer printing process and deposit an Al 2 O 3 etch stop layer (35 nm). We then transfer-print identical silicon coupons containing the QWSDFB (Λ = 247 nm) and an access waveguide on top of the printing site on each platform. Subsequently, the silicon tapers are patterned and fully etched with the Al 2 O 3 etch stop layer protecting the underlying platform. This step requires a degree of process compatibility as the patterning of the taper can be subtly influenced by the underlying platform. As part of future improvements, it will be incorporated into the coupon preprocessing, mitigating any platform-specific fabrication considerations. This is followed by another round of BCB spin coating and printing the same amplifier (amplifier 3) coupons with included tapers on both chips. We then cover everything with 3 μm of BCB, open the vias, pattern the electrodes, and deposit the Ti-Au for the final contacts (details in Methods). The amplifier coupons printed have gain centered around 1550 nm and the QWSDFB grating (Λ = 247 nm) in the silicon coupons will select the target wavelength within the gain bandwidth (see Fig. We use a current source to pump the lasers and measure a threshold current of ∼ 75 mA for both devices (see Supplementary section 7). At 130 mA the lasers reach their maximum lasing power as higher drive current will result in lower power due to self-heating effects. At this drive current, the emission spectra of the laser on SiN and LN are near-identical (see Fig. It is important to note that the Si and III-V coupons printed are identical not only in design but that they come from the same prefabricated chip. This means any systematic errors introduced during fabrication will affect both coupons ensuring identical operation and allowing for pretesting on a test platform e.g. SiN before printing them on a harder-to-fabricate platform like low-loss LN. Aside from systematic fabrication errors, random local imperfections are minimal for both silicon and III-V due to their process maturity. Moreover, the lasing wavelength can be finely tuned by changing the pump current (see Supplementary section 7 ), further reducing the impact of random local fabrication errors. Finally we remark that the compared lasers are printed on platforms with different platform indices as well as different material stacks: 300 nm SiN on 3300 nm SiO 2 on Si and 600 nm LN on 2000 nm SiO 2 on Si,while retaining near-identical laser performance, demonstrating that the process is truly platform agnostic (see also Supplementary section 3). To demonstrate the utility of platform-agnostic laser integration we use the laser on LN to realize a fully integrated electro-optic comb. We first discuss why this is a relevant example, then we detail the co-integration of the laser with the EO comb generator and discuss the characteristics of the resulting comb. While numerous examples of on-chip photonic advancements can benefit from laser co-integration, we specifically focus on using our technique to integrate a laser with an electro-optic frequency comb generator. Compared to other frequency comb sources, EO combs have several advantages such as fundamental coherence, smaller comb spacing, flexibility in the center operating wavelength, and reconfigurability of the comb spacing We realize this device by first fabricating a TFLN circuit consisting of a transfer printing site connected through single-mode waveguides to a high Q racetrack cavity with electrodes along the straight arms (Fig. An EO comb can then be generated by coupling the laser into the racetrack resonance by tuning its frequency to a resonance frequency f 0 . The electro-optic effect of LN is then used to modulate the refractive index of the two arms of the racetrack resonator, resulting in pure phase modulation of the circulating light. By matching the modulation frequency to the ring's free spectral range (FSR) frequency f RF = f FSR , two sidebands are generated at f 0 -f FSR and f 0 + f FSR which in turn will be resonant, build up in power, and generate further sidebands, building up a comb with a spacing of f FSR . The efficiency of generating sidebands is proportional to e -a QV Here we tune the lasing wavelength into the racetrack resonance at 1574 nm using current tuning (1.5 nm tuning range: see Supplementary section 7) by driving it with 108 mA (2V). At this operation point the integrated laser has -14 dBm of output power and a linewidth of 40 MHz. We then apply EO-modulation at the FSR frequency of 18.9 GHz using an RF source followed by a power amplifier, amplifying the signal to P RF = 30 dBm, although most of this power is reflected as the device is not impedance matched. The generated spectrum consists of 80 comb lines with a bandwidth of more than 12 nm and a slope of -3.5 dB nm . (see Fig. The fully integrated comb shown here is a critical step towards the realization of compact frequencyagile spectrometers In summary, we have introduced a platform-agnostic technique for rapidly integrating single-mode lasers with center wavelengths between 1460 and 1580 nm onto photonics platforms with refractive indices ranging from 1.7 to 2.5. This technique consists of a two-step transfer printing process, printing first a silicon coupon containing the cavity and the coupling section and then printing a III-V coupon containing the gain section. The design of the coupling section and the strong confinement of the light in the printed layers avoid the need for any platform-specific design or fabrication. This enables off-chip fabrication and pretesting and optimization of the laser on a test platform ensuring predictable and high-yield lasing operation for future platforms. Importantly the silicon and III-V coupons can be prefabricated and remain stable for years, allowing for off-the-shelf processing. Moreover, different cavity and gain coupons can be readily combined allowing for flexibility in lasing wavelength and other laser characteristics. This approach is particularly valuable for prototyping and rapidly integrating lasers on evolving platforms We have validated our approach by successfully implementing lasers on both SiN and TFLN platforms, achieving nearly identical performance in terms of lasing wavelength and power. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the utility and ease of integration of our technique by showcasing a fullyintegrated resonant electro-optic frequency comb on the TFLN platform, generating more than 80 comb lines over 12 nm from the on-chip laser. Looking ahead, our focus will be on transferring the remaining on-chip post-processing to preprocessing by etching the tapers of the silicon coupon before printing instead of after. This would simplify on-chip processing to just the two transfer printing steps and depositing electrodes, avoiding post-processing of the final device. Aside from optimizing the technique we aim to integrate lasers on various platforms to realize fully integrated devices with different applications. The implementation of our miniaturized, powerefficient integrated lasers with various comb sources would pave the way for compact, high-performance transceivers and microwave photonic systems. In Fig Here T (λ, n platform ) is the power transmission from the laser to the platform material, largely determined by the taper in the silicon coupons , α i is the internal cavity loss, hν is the photon energy and q is the electron charge. α m is the distributed mirror loss, defined as α m = 1 L ln 1 R with R(λ, n platform ) the simulated QWSDFB grating reflection dependent on both the wavelength and platform index and L the cavity length. I is the drive current and I th is the threshold current which can be derived for the different amplifiers from the measured wavelength dependent small signal gain g(I, λ) and the QWS-DFB reflection R(λ, n platform ). This formula can be interpreted as the amount of surplus electrons converted to photons above threshold hν q αm αm+αi (I -I th ) multiplied by the fraction that is coupled out of the cavity αm αm+αi and the coupling from the laser to the platform T (λ, n platform ) . The powers shown are calculated assuming I = 120mA and using: the simulated silicon grating reflection, assuming the correct pitch at each wavelength, the extrapolated (for amplifiers 1, and 2) and measured (for amplifier 3) gain spectra, and the simulated taper transmission (More details in supplementary section 2). For the Si coupons we start from a silicion-on-insulator sample with a 400 nm silicon layer on top of a 2 μm BOX and a Si substrate. We then partially etch trenches defined by e-beam lithography with an etch depth of 180 nm to define the silicon waveguides and the QWSDFB grating (Λ=247 nm) using a reactive ion etch (RIE) with CF 4 , H 2 and SF 6 . To define the coupons we use the same RIE recipe to fully etch a rectangular trench around the waveguides with grating, while retaining some tethers connecting the rectangular coupon to the surrounding silicon. Then we underetch this silicon coupon by etching away the silicon oxide underneath using a vapor HF etch. At this point we have suspended coupons with on top partially etched waveguides with a QWSDFB grating and this source chip is ready to be used. After the coupons are printed tapers are fully ethed using the same RIE recipe. The processing of the III-V amplifier coupons is described in The SiN target chip is fabricated on a 300 nm thick LPCVD grown SiN material on 3.3 μm of thermally grown oxide. The fully-etched SiN waveguides are defined using e-beam lithography (positive tone AR-P 6200.13 ) followed by an RIE with CF 4 , and H 2 chemistry. The TFLN target chip is fabricated on 600 nm of x-cut TFLN on 2 μm of thermally grown oxide on a silicon substrate. The waveguides are patterned using E-beam lithography with a negative tone resist (HSQ) and partially etched (300 nm etch depth) with RIE (Ar+ ) and are later cladded with 800 nm of Inductively Coupled Plasma Chemical Vapour Deposition (ICPCVD) SiO2, followed by an annealing step to recover damages caused by ion implantation In all experiments the lasers are driven using a Keithley 2400 as the current source. The laser output is measured from one of the grating couplers as light is emitted to both sides, the listed powers are all single-side output. The comb and laser spectra are acquired using an Anritsu MS9740A Optical spectrum analyser. The RF voltage applied to the racetrack resonator in the comb experiment is generated by the Rohde & Schwarz SMR40 Signal Generator. All measurements are done with a temperature controller set to 25 • C. The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. The stacks considered all have a waveguide layer on top of 2 μm of BOX. The waveguide layers are a 600 nm rib waveguide with a 300 nm slab, a 600 nm fully etched strip waveguide and a 300 nm fully etched strip waveguide. The 300 nm stack shows an extended and shifted operation range of n platf orm =1.8-2.8 gain spectrum of the amplifier and a change in the refractive index of the silicon grating which finally causes the lasing wavelength to shift. The amplifier gain shift is investigated by printing and measuring amplifiers on an LN on BOX on sapphire platform and comparing it to the LN on BOX on silicon platform considered in the main text. Fig. In practice these shifts can thus be anticipated as they result from a different substrate and can easily be ameliorated by having a large enough range of ready-made gratings and amplifier coupons. We note that once the amplifiers and lasers are tested on a specific substrate, lasers can be printed on any platform with that substrate. The result of the test can be used to accurately predict the lasing wavelength regardless of the specific stack because of the platform agnostic design of the laser. As described in the main text, the mode inside the laser cavity is strongly confined in the silicon and III-V layers and barely interacts with the platform material. Fig. In the main text we discuss the standardized process flow for platform agnostic laser integration. Here we describe in detail the geometry of the coupons and the transfer printing site on the target chip. The printing site on the target platform is defined by tapering the standard waveguide to a 3 μm waveguide section, this section extends over 130 um, after which the waveguide tapers up to a width of 8 μm over 30 μm, then it tapers out to a width of 18 μm over 8 μm which then abruptly transitions to a > 60 μm wide slab (for positive resist lithography no trenches are etched in this section leaving a full slab ). The wide slab will then continue for the length of the laser which is in this case ∼ 1300 μm and transition to the mirrored coupling section on the other side. The 3 μm wide section will be used to transfer the light to the silicon waveguide on top, the rest of the tapering is used to adiabatically transition to a slab and stay far enough from the silicon waveguide edges which are also tapering. The slab section is where the light will be completely confined in the silicon and III-V coupons on top. Figure After defining the transfer printing site on the target platform and depositing the BCB adhesion and A 2 lO 3 etch stop layer, the silicon coupon can be printed. The silicon coupon is fabricated on a 400 nm Si layer and consists of a 1750 μm× 46 μm rectangular coupon with a shallow etched (180 nm etch depth) 3μm wide waveguide across the coupon length and with a 450 μm long shallow etched QWSDFB grating (Λ = 247 nm) in the center. After printing, a fully etched taper is etched at both ends of the waveguide. Each silicon taper has a narrow tip of 120 nm which tapers out to 340 nm width over 120 μm after which it tapers out to the 3 μm waveguide over a 30 μm length. The tapers will be printed on the 3 μm wide section of the transfer printing site on the target platform and transfer the light from the silicon waveguide to the platform. The III-V coupon is fabricated with the stack described in supplementary section 1 , and has tapers with a nonlinear profile at each end to efficiently couple from light the cavity section to the 3 μm wide silicon waveguide. The III-V coupon can then be printed on top of the silicon coupon where the cavity is defined by the silicon QWSDFB but the optical mode is confined in both the silicon and the III-V gain section above. The details of the III-V coupon geometry is described in To check the robustness of our laser integration technique to lateral transfer printing offsets we consider an offset of 500 nm. This is three times the standard deviation of state of the art transfer printing tools and one time the standard deviation for our transfer printing tool 3σ SOA = σ = 500 nm , this means that respectively 99.7% and 68% of the printed coupons will have less or equal offset for the different tools. We consider the offsets of the silicon and amplifier coupons separately and plot the simulated total transmission from the platform to the cavity in Fig. The lasers described in the main text are designed for a specific wavelength, but due to fabrication variations such as a different etch depth this wavelength can shift a bit. This is partly addressed by integrating the laser on a test platform and measuring the shift. The platform agnostic design then ensures that the shift will be near-identical on different platforms as systematic fabrication variations on the hundreds of coupons from the same chip will be the same. For some applications however e.g resonance based devices, the laser needs to emit at an exact wavelength. This is possible in our device by using current tuning to mitigate the shift from the design wavelength. Fig. In the main text platform agnostic lasers integrated on a SiN and LN platform are compared at 130 mA drive current. Here we compare them in both wavelength and power for their whole operating range. Fig. 