Demagnetization in ferromagnetic transition metals driven by a femtosecond laser pulse is a fundamental problem in solid state physics, and its understanding is essential to the development of spintronics devices. Ab initio calculation of time-dependent magnetic moment in the velocity gauge so far has not been successful in reproducing the large amount of demagnetization observed in experiments. In this work, we propose a method to incorporate intraband transitions within the velocity gauge through a convective derivative in the crystal momentum space. Our results for transition-element bulk crystals (bcc Fe, hcp Co and fcc Ni) based on the time-dependent quantum Liouville equation show a dramatic enhancement in the amount of demagnetization after the inclusion of an intraband term, in agreement with experiments. We also find that the effect of intraband transitions to each ferromagnetic material is distinctly different because of their band structure and spin property differences. Our finding has a far-reaching impact on understanding of ultrafast demagnetization. Ever since the pioneering experiment by In the last several years, ab initio calculations of the ultrafast demagnetization of ferromagnetic materials were made, based on the time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) Although intra-and interband transition dipole moments are readily distinguishable in the length gauge, calculation of position vector r for intraband transitions in particular involves -i∇ k δ(kk ′ ), which is highly singular, as well as Berry connections A = -i∇ k which are not uniquely determined in general In 2009, our velocity-gauge calculation based on the time-dependent quantum Liouville equation (QLE) in Ref. In this paper, we study the ultrafast demagnetization of ferromagnetic solids of transition elements (bcc Fe, hcp Co and fcc Ni) by solving the time-dependent QLE. The velocity gauge is used, but an effect of intraband transition is added using the convective derivative The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present our method and the rationale behind the implementation of intraband transitions in the velocity gauge. Results and discussions are presented in Sec. III, followed by our conclusion in Sec. IV. Atomic units (m = e = = 1) are used throughout, unless otherwise noted. Let |ν, k be the Bloch state of energy E ν,k , where ν and k are the band index and the crystal momentum, respectively. It is the solution of the stationary Kohn-Sham equation where H 0 includes the single-electron kinetic energy operator and Kohn-Sham potential where ψ ν,k (r) = r|ν, k is the coordinate representation of the Bloch states, and the Fermi in which N is the number of electrons in a unit cell of volume Ω. The step function Θ(E F -E ν,k ) in Eq. ( We solve a set of Kohn-Sham equations (1) iteratively by using the full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave (FLAPW) method implemented in the WIEN2K software The time-dependent Kohn-Sham orbital for the ith electron in the basis of Bloch states as with the normalization condition: ψ i (t)|ψ i (t) = 1, which in light of the orthonormality The expansion coefficients c i ν,k (t) = ν, k|ψ i (t) are then called the crystal momentum representation of a state vector The density operator of Kohn-Sham orbitals is defined by whose matrix elements in the Bloch basis are The initial state of the density matrix is given by which is consistent with the ground-state electron density given by Eq. ( We evolve the density operator (8) by solving the time-dependent quantum Liouville equation (QLE) in the velocity gauge; that is, In the limit of dipole approximation, the interaction Hamiltonian in the velocity gauge is where A(t) is the vector potential of a circularly-polarized driving laser field of a Gaussian envelope on the xy-plane, given by where τ is the laser pulse duration. A linearly polarized driving laser pulse can similarly be implemented as well. Accordingly, Eq. ( where k is time-independent. p k νν ′ = ν, k| -i∇ r |ν ′ , k is the momentum matrix element between energy bands ν and ν ′ is calculated within a module of the WIEN2K code using the LAPW basis where S k = S k x x + S k y ŷ + S k z ẑ is the spin matrix vector in the LAPW basis where R m are the translational lattice vectors (m = 1, 2, • • • ), and of the fact that the momentum operator p = -i∇ r is invariant of space translation. As a result, the transition moment in the velocity gauge couples two Bloch states as in which the integral is taken over a unit cell with R m = 0. On the other hand, the position operator r in the length gauge does not conserve the crystal momentum k, and the transition dipole matrix elements involve the off-diagonal Berry connections It is insightful to note that the QLE in the crystal momentum representation (12) becomes the semiconductor Bloch equations , where a † ν,k and a ν,k are creation and annihilation operators for the Bloch states, diagonal terms (ν = ν ′ ) describing the population and off-diagonal terms (ν = ν ′ ) the coherence The QLE (Eq. 12) in the velocity gauge using the time-independent k in the previous section has a deficiency. Consider the system only has a single band, such as the nearly free-electron model. Equation ( This demonstrates that if we ignore the time dependence in k, the density in the velocity gauge remains unchanged, so is any observable, which is clearly invalid. Physically, even a static field F moves one electron from k 1 to k 2 . To see this, suppose that our one-dimensional system is along the x axis. The crystal momentum k x (t) at time t is connected with the initial k x (0) through In the velocity gauge, the spatial change is now translated to the crystal momentum k change in time as The situation resembles the classical Boltzmann equation, which, besides the timedependence, depends on both the position and velocity where f is the distribution function and the right hand side is due to collisions. Since the diagonal element of a density matrix is just the distribution used in the Boltzmann equation, one can see the direct connection between the quantum and classical mechanics and the result must agree with each other a single band limit. Now we can understand how Eq. 16 fails. Although its time-derivative is zero, ρ is changed through ρ k(t) . A simple solution might be to change every k to k(t) in Eq. 12, but it would introduce two difficulties. First, Eq. 12 becomes a time-dependent functional differential equation, unsolvable in general. Second, the pure intraband transition has no memory effect. Once the laser field is gone, ρ returns to its original value, so the intraband transition alone cannot describe demagnetization and we must include interband transitions. A compromise is to rewrite dρ k(t) /dt = ∂ρ k(0) /dt + ∂ρ/∂k • ∂k/∂t, where ρ k(0) is the density for the time-independent k. Therefore, the partial time-derivative on the left hand side of Eq. ( where v k ≡ ∂k/∂t. Because k(t) = k(0) -A(t), we write The derivative with respect to the crystal momentum in the convective derivative is numerically challenging, and it is often obtained through Wannier functions where p k νν = ∂E ν,k /∂k are the group velocity of an electron in the νth band Therefore, the equation ( Therefore, the energy derivative of diagonal elements (which account for the intraband transition) in the last term of Eq. ( where the step function assures that the summation over μ is zero unless the energy difference between E μ,k and E ν,k is within a bracket energy E b . The bracket energy is a parameter used in our calculation to control the amount of intraband transitions. We should note that expressing the k-gradient operator as a product of the group velocity and the energy derivative as in Eq. ( Under the steady state (∂n/∂t = 0) and the closed circuit (∇n = 0) conditions, the above assumption leads to n [1] (k where τ is so-called the transport relaxation time, and n Our present calculation does not include the effect of electron-phonon scattering, which could be incorporated by adding a phenomenological dephasing term in Eq. ( In general, the electron-phonon scattering leads to remagnetization after approximately 1 ps, due to the equilibration of electron temperature with phonons prior study Our prior study based on TDDFT demonstrated that the electron correlation and the memory kernel frequency dependence in a density functional could bring a strong demagnetization In this section, we study the demagnetization of three ferromagnetic materials, bcc Fe, hcp Co and fcc Ni, driven by a circularly-polarized, ω = 1.6 eV (775 nm) laser pulse of duration τ = 60 fs. In Fig. Different E b is necessary since three ferromagnets have different band structures. Fig. In our bulk materials, without interfaces or surfaces, the spin moment is reduced due to the transition from the 3d bands with a larger spin moment to the 4sp bands with a smaller spin moment. Because the 3d bands have a stronger exchange interaction, the spin majority and minority bands split, but in the excited states the 4dp bands are weakly spin-polarized. The presence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) mixes the minority and majority spin states, and allows the spin flipping transitions, which reduces the total spin moment. In the absence of SOC, the spin moment cannot be reduced in this picture. There are other mechanisms for demagnetization without SOC. One is to allow the spin to transport from one part of the sample to another. The part losing the majority electron sees the decrease in the spin moment. The receiving end sees the increase in spin moment. Another one is the spin wave excitation For bcc Fe, the amount of demagnetization in Fig. Notice that the change in the final magnetization of hcp Co and fcc Ni beyond the cutoff energy in Figs The fact that the cutoff bracket energies in Fig. That is, maximum demagnetization in each ferromagnet is achieved when an electron gains enough energy to move up to the top of a 3d band via intraband transitions. Notice in Fig. The above analysis indicates that we should be cautious about setting an arbitrary large bracket energy in Eq. In order to further study the effect of intraband transitions to demagnetization, we plot in Fig. Finally in Fig. We have shown that intraband transitions have a significant effect on demagnetization in all three transition-element ferromagnets. The contribution of intraband transitions to demagnetization in each element is different because of the band structure difference. The amount of spin moment reduction, under the same experiment laser fluence, is now comparable to the experimental data. Our method is based on the time-dependent Liouville equation using the velocity gauge, which is advantageous over the length gauge where differ-ent crystal momenta are coupled to each other. In this work, we only address the maximum demagnetization and in the future we plan to investigate the time profile of demagnetization, so we can compare with experiments to the full extent 