Drop-on-demand inkjet printing is a promising and commercially relevant technology for producing organic electronic devices of arbitrary shape on a wide variety of different substrates. In this work we transfer the inkjet printing process of organic photovoltaic devices from 2D to 3D substrates, using a 5-axis robot system equipped with a multi-nozzle inkjet printing unit. We present a ready-to-use 3D printing system for industrial application, using a 5-axis motion system controlled by commercial 3D motion software, combined with a commonly used multi-nozzle inkjet print head controlled by the corresponding printing software. The very first time inkjet-printed solar cells on glass/ITO with power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of up to 7% are realized on a 3D object with surfaces tilted by angles of up to 60° against the horizontal direction. Undesired ink flow during deposition of the inkjet-printed layers was avoided by proper ink formulation. In order to be able to print organic (opto-)electronic devices also on substrates without sputtered indium tin oxide bottom electrode, the bottom electrode was inkjet-printed from silver nanoparticle (AgNP) ink, resulting in the first all inkjet-printed (i.e., including bottom electrode) solar cell on a 3D object ever with a record PCE of 2.5%. This work paves the way for functionalizing even complex objects, such as cars, mobile phones, or "Internet of Things" (IoT) applications with inkjetprinted (opto-)electronic devices. Direct functionalization of objects with arbitrary shape is necessary in order to access cheap and versatile production of smart functional devices Organic solar cells (OSCs) already attracted attention in research and industry because they are lightweight, semitransparent, mechanically flexible, and compatible with highthroughput production methods like slot-die coating, gravure printing, spray coating, and inkjet printing, which enables an economical, fast, and versatile production Inkjet printing is a technology that is widely used in industry and research because it is a contactless and highresolution digital printing method that allows efficient use of material, high throughputs, and low-cost manufacturing. Therefore, it is also the printing technology of choice for printing organic photovoltaics (OPV) of arbitrary shapes. Inkjet printing of a complete OSC stack (i.e., all functional layers including both electrodes) has already been successfully demonstrated The alcohol-based silver nanowire (AgNW) formulation ClearOhm was obtained from Cambrios. The hole-transport layer (HTL) material, poly Inkjet printing was performed on four different substrates. 2D solar cells were printed on glass/ITO and pure glass substrates. 3D solar cells were deposited on glass and glass/ITO substrates attached to a 3D structure at four different angles with respect to the print head, namely 0°, 30°, 45°, and 60° (see Figure For inkjet printing of AgNP bottom electrodes on glass substrates, wetting was improved by coating a thin layer of PEDOT:PSS (AI4083 diluted 1:5 with IPA and filtered using a 0.45 μm PTFE filter) beforehand. The formulation of inkjet printing inks was done according to the following recipes. AgNP paste was dissolved in 2-butoxyethanol at a concentration of 29 wt% and afterwards filtered three times using 1 μm, 0.45 μm, and 0.45 μm filters consecutively. ZnO ink was produced using commercially available N10 and replacing the solvent (2-propanol) with 1-pentanol at same concentration by means of rotary evaporation. The reformulated ink was filtered using a 0.22 μm PVDF filter. PV2000:PC61BM (1:1.5) solution was prepared using a total concentration of 37.5 mg/ml in oxylene:tetralin (1:1). The solution was stirred over night at 120 °C in nitrogen atmosphere and cooled down to room temperature before printing. The PEDOT:PSS ink was produced by filtering a 1:1 mixture of Clevios FHC Solar by Heraeus and purified water using a 0.45 μm PVDF filter. Afterwards, the fluorosurfactant Capstone FS-31 was added to the ink with a concentration of 5 μl/ml. The mixed ink was placed in the ink reservoir three hours prior to the printing process to avoid bubbles. The AgNW ink was obtained by replacing the original solvent (2-propanol) with 1-pentanol at one third of the original concentration. Before printing, the reformulated ink was filtered using a 30 μm filter. The printing parameters are summarized in Table Pulse For inkjet printing on 3D substrates a special inkjet printer was built and its control unit and software developed or adapted (see Figure For analysing the topology and surface properties of the layers, an optical microscope from Olympus and a confocal microscope from NanoFocus were used. The solar cell efficiency was measured using an AAA solar simulator from LOT Quantum Design providing 1000 W/m2 (AM1.5G). For investigating inkjet-printed solar cells on 2D and 3D objects, the functional layers of the organic photovoltaic (OPV) layer stack were inkjet-printed either onto glass/ITO substrates or onto pure glass substrates. In the latter case, the bottom electrode was provided by inkjet-printing a silver nanoparticle (AgNP) layer (see Figure For the development of a printing process for 3D-printed solar cells, a special 3D object with differently tilted surfaces at angles of 0°, 30°, 45° and 60° with respect to the horizontal (see Figure Since printing solar cells onto pre-coated ITO substrates limits the choice of substrates and therefore also possible applications, an injekt printing process for silver nanoparticle (AgNP) bottom electrodes is developed, which enables the fabrication of fully printed organic electronic devices (OEDs) onto any object. Inkjet printing of AgNP electrodes Besides a high conductivity, the most important requirement for bottom electrodes of OEDs is a low roughness, as too rough surfaces may pierce through the overlying layers and, by this, short-circuit the whole device. Figure In order to obtain smooth AgNP layers, we optimize the printing process by investigating the influence of printing resolution and wet film drying temperature on the homogeneity of the layer. To this end, different AgNP layers are printed with 400-700 dots per inch (dpi) and subsequently dried at room temperature, 40 °C, 65 °C, or 90 °C. Afterwards, all layers are thermally annealed for 5 min at 180 °C. The results of this optimization are shown in Figure The respective sheet resistances of all samples are plotted in Figure To conclude, the best parameters for the inkjet printing of AgNP bottom electrodes are 700 dpi resolution, 65 °C predrying, and 5 min post-annealing at 160 °C. These parameters will be used in the following for the fabrication of all inkjetprinted solar cells. All inkjet-printed solar cells Using the optimized process for printing AgNP bottom electrodes, fully inkjet-printed OSCs are processed onto glass substrates, first at 0° angle, in order to optimize the layer stack and to further investigate the influence of the distance between print head and substrate, since this parameter will always vary to a certain extent in a multi-nozzle inkjet printing process on 3D objects. The electron transport layer (ETL) is deposited at three different thicknesses by printing either one, two, or three 60 nm thick layers of zinc oxide consecutively. This is alongside a systematic variation in the distance from printhead to substrate between 0.5 mm (standard) and 3.5 mm. Like this, the effect of bottom electrode roughness on the device performance can be investigated, since thicker ETL layers are able to cover a rough surface better and can thus prevent shunting of the device to a certain extent. The resulting solar cell performances are displayed in Figure While there is no difference in performance observed between the standard printing distance of 0.5 mm and 1.5 mm, the PCE already slightly decreases at a distance of 2.5 mm and becomes significantly worse at 3.5 mm, suggesting that at higher printing distances the roughness of the bottom electrode increases. This is confirmed by the microscope images of AgNP dots that are inkjet-printed with different distances between print head and substrate (Figure In this work we developed a 3D inkjet printing process for organic electronic devices by systematically investigating the influence of printing distance and angle on the functional layers. A commercially available 5-axis robot system equipped with a multi-nozzle inkjet print head was used to produce the first 3D-printed organic solar cells. Printing of organic solar cells onto a 3D object with glass/ITO surfaces has been shown to result in high power conversion efficiencies up to 6.5%, even for high inclination angles of 60° between print head and substrate. Complete inkjet printing of the whole solar cell stack including a AgNP bottom electrode onto a 3D object was also achieved and yielded PCE values up to ~3%. In this case, material flow of the AgNP ink on tilted surfaces and the resulting bottom electrode roughness was found to limit device performance. Once this open challenge is overcome, e.g. by further improving the ink formulation, inkjet printing of highly efficient solar cells directly onto 3D objects will be possible. Apart from organic solar cells, also other optoelectronic devices such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) can be printed using the setup and the processes presented in this work, as shown in Figure 