We show here that numerous examples abound where changing topology does not necessarily close the bulk insulating charge gap as demanded in the standard non-interacting picture. From extensive determinantal and dynamical cluster quantum Monte Carlo simulations of the half-filled and quarter-filled Kane-Mele-Hubbard model, we show that for sufficiently strong interactions at either half-or quarter-filling, a transition between topological and trivial insulators occurs without the closing of a charge gap. To shed light on this behavior, we illustrate that an exactly solvable model reveals that while the single-particle gap remains, the many-body gap does in fact close. These two gaps are the same in the non-interacting system but depart from each other as the interaction turns on. We purport that for interacting systems, the proper probe of topological phase transitions is the closing of the many-body rather than the single-particle gap. The discovery of topological insulators This conventional understanding of a TPT has now been challenged by recent experiments on strongly correlated topological systems. Specifically, experiments on AB stacked MoTe 2 /WSe 2 moiré heterobilayers The issue of a TPT in the absence of the closure of the single-particle gap (which we denote as a "gap-not-closing TPT") was initially discussed in Ref. In this paper, we address the conditions under which a TPT arXiv:2401.01402v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 10 Jan 2024 driven by strong correlations requires the closing of a singleparticle charge gap. We first study the generalized KMH model at half-and quarter-filling using the unbiased determinantal quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) and the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA). We find that in the presence of strong interactions, a TPT can occur even though the singleparticle (charge) gap remains open between a topological insulator and a trivial Mott insulator at both 1/2 and 1/4 filling. This observation challenges our conventional understanding of a TPT. To analyze this situation in more details, we then study the exactly soluble KM model with extended orbital Hatsugai-Kohmoto (HK) We consider the generalized KMH model in an external magnetic field, where we include the nearest-neighbor hopping t = 1 between sites on the two different sublattices on the honeycomb lattice as the energy scale. The next-nearest-neighbor hopping t ′ e ±iψσ plays the role of spin-orbit coupling with the Haldane phase ψ We simulate this model using DQMC method with jackknife resampling to estimate the error bars. We focus on a lattice with 6 × 6 unit cells; finite size effects are suppressed considerably with a small magnetic flux which is measured directly in experiments Consider first the non-interacting KM model studied in (Fig. More relevant to the TMD materials In short, the TPT between topological and trivial insulators in the presence of sufficiently strong interactions at either halffilling (Fig. To decipher this enigma, it is useful to work with a solvable model that exhibits such a TPT. To this end, we adopt the HK We keep t ′ = 0.2 and ψ = 0.5 for illustration. As we will show below, with V ′ > 0, there is a transition to a trivial Mott insulator without closing the single-particle gap given a sufficiently large U ′ . This model is exactly solvable since the k's are independent. The model is further simplified if U ′ = V ′ . In this case, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where γ = ± represents the band index of the upper and lower bands from diagonalizing the non-interacting KM model. In the following, we will explore the physics at half-filling for general U ′ and V ′ with special attention to U ′ = V ′ . We first solve the KM-HK Hamiltonian to obtain the manybody and single-particle spectra with the chemical potential shifted to μ = U ′ /2 + V ′ /2. The many-body spectrum ε mb η,k at ⟨n k ⟩ = 2 is plotted in Fig. Degeneracy level crossing for TPT occurs and the spin-triplet state becomes the ground state. Hence, the level crossing in the manybody spectrum could be an indicator of the TPT. However, the many-body spectrum for the Hubbard model can only be obtained using exact diagonalization which is limited to only small clusters and is significantly influenced by finite size effects. Experimentally, however, it is the single-particle spectrum that is more accessible. What we show now is that the singleparticle spectrum is likely to be a poor indicator of the transition. We obtain the single-particle spectrum defined as the ground state energy difference of adding a particle ) by computing the corresponding many-body spectrum to acquire the needed energy differences. The results are shown in Fig. and where ∆ mb represents the lowest energy cost for multiparticle excitations, such as particle-hole pairs creation, while ∆ sp represents the lowest energy cost for a single-particle excitation. As mentioned above, ∆ mb vanishes definitely when a TPT obtains. In the non-interacting case, ∆ mb (⟨n⟩) = ∆ sp (⟨n⟩). Thus in topological band theory, we learn that a TPT is always accompanied by closing and reopening the single-particle gap. In interacting systems, however, the single-particle gap could depart from the many-body gap. Fig. ) and Γ (U ′ V ′ = 36) points respectively. We observe three different phases. The system is a QSH insulator with weak interactions and becomes a trivial Mott insulator for adequately strong U ′ and V ′ . The intermediate state is an insulator with a finite single-particle gap (except at a single point U ′ = 0, V ′ = 6 √ 3t ′ ). We call this a mixed insulator because it is composed of the QSH state and the trivial triplet state in different parts of the Brillouin zone, which we further elaborate in Fig. From the phase diagram in Fig. We also calculate the spin Chern number Although the trivial insulating states differ in the Hubbard (antiferromagnet) and HK (ferromagnet) models, both interactions containing Mottness show a TPT between a topological and trivial insulator without closing the single-particle gap for the half-filled interacting KM model. This indicates the generality of this emergent phenomenon as a direct cause of topological Mottness. Sufficiently strong interactions (U > ∆ 0 and U > W ) are needed to observe this in experiments. The transition between QSH and trivial band insulator in AB stacked MoTe 2 /WSe 2 moiré heterobilayers at ν = 2 We also emphasize that the gap-not-closing TPTs in our models occur in the absence of any external symmetrybreaking fields. For all values of the interaction strength and tuning parameters, the symmetries of the Hamiltonian do not change. Nevertheless, the TPTs with no single-particle gap closing in our models are accompanied by the onset of spontaneous symmetry breaking in the ground state. The gapless Goldstone modes associated with the spontaneous symmetry breaking emerge via the closure of the many-body energy gap, and ensure that the TPT occurs when the many body gap closes. Our work thus gives a completely microscopic picture of correlation-driven TPTs in electronic systems beyond mean-field theory, without the need to introduce explicit symmetry-breaking fields. Our findings are also relevant to the recent advancement in the field of interacting topological quantum chemistry DIFFERENT TOPOLOGICAL PHASES AT QUARTER-FILLING OF THE GENERALIZED KANE-MELE-HUBBARD MODEL In this section, we show different topological phases at quarter-filling of the generalized Kane-Mele-Hubbard (KMH) model. Given a relatively flat lower band, a gap emerges at quarter-filling in the presence of sufficiently strong interaction. To determine the topological nature of the gap, we look into the compressibility as a function of magnetic flux and particle density, shown in Fig. Let's rewrite the Hamiltonian in momentum space: At half-filling, namely the N = 2 sector, there are six states. We work with the following ordered basis (ignoring k index): The three states { 11⟩, 1 1⟩, 10⟩} have total spin S = 1, while the other three states { a⟩, b⟩, c⟩} are spin singlet states with total spin S = 0. Now we write the Hamiltonian in this basis, denote as H 2 : where d x = R(g 0 ), d y = -I(g 0 ), d z = -2I(g 1 ) (all are functions of k) The term -2μ can be dropped for the calculation of band touching as it shifts all bands equally. From Eq. ( There are two eigenvalues U and V by observation. Band overlap starts to happen when the lowest energy of the above matrix becomes zero, the same as the first two spin-triplet states. Plugging that into the eigenvalue equation (Ux)(Vx) -36 = 0, we obtain the condition U V = 36. Similarly, a two-fold degenerate state with energy U is obtained. Band overlap starts to happen when the lowest energy of the above matrix becomes zero, the same as the first two spin-triplet states. Plugging that into the eigenvalue equation ( Therefore the band-crossing condition is the same, as expected from the inversion symmetry of the model. When The eigenvalue equation for the lower 3 × 3 matrix is (Ux) 2 (Vx) -4(Ux) = 0. To obtain a solution x = 0, we need the condition U V = 4. In summary, we obtain all three phase boundaries for the phase diagram through analytical calculation. The Hamiltonian is where α = 1 for A sublattice and -1 for B sublattice and In the case U = V , it becomes particularly simple as where γ = ± is the band index and we add a small Zeeman field which would be sent to 0 at the end. With Eq. ( For each k, we have where the number in subscript tells how many states are occupied at a given k. First of all, Z 0k = 1 and Z 4k = exp(-β(4U -4μ)). The others are Note that ε +k = -ε -k . For half-filling, μ = U , then Z 0k = Z 4k = 1 and Z 1k = Z 3k = γσ exp(-β(ε γk -U -hσ 2 )). Therefore, )) + 2 exp(βU ) + Due to the factor of σ, ⟨m k ⟩ → 0 if h → 0. The magnetic susceptibility is For a certain k, There are three situations: U < ε +k , ε +k < U < 2ε +k and U > 2ε +k . For U < ε +k , To summarize, approaching zero temperature, if U < 2ε +k , χ s,k → 0 and if U > 2ε +k , χ s,k → β. Since 1 < ε +k < 3 (2 < 2ε +k < 6) over the Brillouin zone, as shown in the Fig. The susceptibility calculated above is for magnetization along z direction, namely χ sz,k . We also calculate the susceptibility for magnetization along x direction: Taking the zero temperature limit β → ∞, exp(2βU ) ≫ exp(βU ). Then χ sx,k → χ sz,k /2 U' = V' = 0 U' =7, V' = 0 Many-body spectrum Single-particle spectrum (a) (b) Γ K M K' Γ -5 0 5 Γ K M K' Γ -5 0 5 Peizhi Mai 1 , Jinchao Zhao 1 , Thomas A. Maier 2 , Barry Bradlyn 1 and Philip W. Phillips 1, † 1 Department of Physics and Institute of Condensed Matter Theory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA and 2 Computational Sciences and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA (Dated: October 2022)