We present a loop-opening model that accounts for the molecular details of the intrinsic fracture energy for fracturing polymer networks. This model includes not only the energy released from the scission of bridging chains but also the subsequent energy released from the network continuum. Scission of a bridging chain releases the crosslinks and opens the corresponding topological loop. The released crosslinks will be caught by the opened loop to reach a new force-balanced state. The amount of energy released from the network continuum is limited by the stretchability of the opened loop. Based on this loop-opening process, we suggest that the intrinsics fracture energy per broken chain approximately scales with the product of the fracture force and the contour length of the opened loop. This model predicts an intrinsic fracture energy that aligns well with various experimental data on the fracture of polymer networks. Introduction. Polymer networks are found in everyday items as diverse as automobile tires and hydrogels, but fracture events limit the lifespan of their service. The original Lake-Thomas model Extensive efforts have been made to explain why the Lake-Thomas model significantly underestimates the intrinsic fracture energy of polymer networks. Here we propose a loop-opening model for the intrinsic fracture energy of polymer networks that accounts for both nonlocal energy dissipation in the network continuum and the polymer network topology (Figure where ff and Lf are the critical force and displacement at the chain fracture. The loop-opening model (Equation In the remainder of this paper, we will introduce the force-extension behavior of a single polymer chain and the corresponding network continuum and discuss the concepts and limitations of existing fracture models of polymer networks. We will then integrate the single-chain behavior with the network continuum to demonstrate our proposed loop-opening model and its new scaling law. At the end, we will validate our model by comparing it with experimental data. Single chain and network continuum. We begin with the force-extension behavior of single polymer chains. where R is the end-to-end distance, f is the tension along the chain, L is the force-free contour length of the polymer, and L(xx) = coth(xx) -1/xx is the Langevin function. The characteristic entropic tension fs = kT/b characterizes the initial linear entropic elasticity at low force regime, where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and b is the Kuhn length. The characteristic enthalpic tension fe characterizes the linear enthalpic elasticity, which is typically three orders of magnitude larger than fs. It describes the linear extension of the polymer backbone beyond force-free contour length L. Note that the polymer chain always breaks at ff < fe. The energy stored in a bridging chain at breakage Uchain is the area under the force-displacement curve up to the fracture point (Figure When the crack propagates in a polymer network, a bridging chain is not directly connected to rigid boundaries. Instead, it is connected to an elastic network continuum that consists of other polymer chains (Figure As an example, we can approximate the network continua as two Caley trees connected to each end of the bridging chain, comprising identical polymer chains and crosslinks (structures shown in Figure where Rtree is the displacement of the boundary that the trees' roots are connected with, f is the tension on the bridging chain in g = 0 (or the combined tension in a generation). A typical forcedisplacement curve obtained by Equation 4 is shown in Figure The loop-opening model. Real polymer networks consist of finite topological loops. Throughout this process, the restoring force along the bridging chain can be represented by the m-FJC model (gray curve in Figure Approximating the elastic network continua as the tree-like structures without the loss of generality (red chains in Figure The former is much larger than the latter at state 2 (ftree » floop), but they counterbalance at state 3 (ftree = floop). In this assumed quasi-static unloading process, the energy released from state 2 to state 3 is Urelease (red shaded area in Figure The energy released from state 2 to state 3 is eventually dissipated in the polymer network (e.g., viscous dissipation), which contributes to the measured intrinsic fracture energy of the polymer network. Therefore, the loop-opening model predicts Γ0/M ≈ Uchain + Urelease ≈ Urelease, as Urelease » Uchain. This energy Urelease depends on the retraction behavior of the elastic network continua (red curve) and the stretchability of the opened loop (blue curve). Although we use the tree-like structures to approximate the network continua, it should be noted that the loop-opening model does not depend on the tree-like structures for the elastic network continua. Instead, any constitutive models that can characterize the generic features of the elastic network continua (Figure Urelease, we propose a semi-quantitative argument that Urelease scales with ff • (nloop -2) Lf (Figure Lf as the displacement of two crosslinks from state 2 to state 3 and ff as the typical force scale during this process. Based on the loop-opening model, we can thus formulate a new model for the intrinsic fracture energy of polymer networks, where parameter α is a parameter that scales with nloop -2. ] Uchain = 2Uchain based on the tree-like model Discussion. Several points regarding the loop-opening model are noteworthy. First, various models for the intrinsic fracture energy of polymer networks (Figure Second, for the same type of polymer networks, the loop-opening model (Equations 2&5) leads to since the fracture force ff remains constant while Lf ~ N, where N is the number of Kuhn segments of the network chains between crosslinks. This mirrors the scaling law of the Lake-Thomas model (Equation Third, for polymer networks prepared under highly overlapped conditions, Fourth, the loop-opening model for polymer networks shares some similarity with the lattice trapping model in crystal fracture. Both models focus on the local stress and load at the crack tip, extending beyond the thermodynamic limit of the Griffith theory The loop-opening model introduced in this study captures the intrinsic fracture energy of polymer networks by focusing on the energy released from network continuum. The energy released per broken chain, Γ0/M, is governed by the stretchability of polymer chains within the opened loop. Without further assumption for the constitutive law of the network continuum, this leads to a new relationship, Γ0/M = α ff Lf, for polymer network fracture, which aligns well with experimental data from end-linked PEG gels. The model suggests that the intrinsic fracture energy of a polymer network stems from contributions at both the single-chain level and the networkcontinuum level. Moreover, the loop-opening model suggests that by either shielding the bridging chain from the fracture force or increasing its crosslinks' maximum displacement before breaking the next chain (e.g., through larger topological loops) could enhance the fracture energy, resulting in tougher and more resilient polymeric materials. Coupled with continuous advancements in polymer characterization technology and precise chemical control of the force-coupled reactivities, The authors thank W.A. Curtin for helpful discussion. the mechanophores embedded and the potential weak bonds along the polymer backbone, which were estimated to be 1.3, 2.6, 3.8 nN, respectively. The average contour length of elastically active strands within each PEG network are estimated (L = Nb = N × 1.1 nm), where N can be calculated from the shear moduli (Equation S1). Combining L for different gels with the fracture force ff and parameters fs and fe from before, Uchain and ff Lf can be estimated using Equation S3 and S4. Table (kDa) In generations directly connected to the bridging chain (g = ±1), at least one strand will be part of the topological loop (Figure Analysis of the experimental data in Table1and Figure4; Dependence of force-displacement on the retraction of tree-like structures.