Nucleation of domain walls by current-driving a single domain wall, confined to the junction area of two symmetrical strips, is investigated using systematic micromagnetic simulations. Secondary domain walls (equivalently, bits encoded in domains) are simultaneously nucleated and driven by alternatively applying current pulses between two terminals in the structure. Simulations show that nanosecond-duration current pulses nucleate and drive series of robust up/down domains even under realistic conditions. These results demonstrate a technique for sequentially nucleating and shifting domain walls without using attached external 'bit lines', fields or modifying the ferromagnetic strip. external in-plane magnetic fields. Simpler mechanisms for nucleation of packed chiral DWs, without manipulating the magnetic anisotropy nor using magnetic fields, remains elusive Here we explore an approach based on a single current-driven DW, confined to the junction area of two symmetrical strips, that works as a DW nucleator. The subsequent domain series is coherent with the input pulsed current without the need of external magnetic fields or attachments. In what follows, we firstly describe the micromagnetic model used for our simulations. After that, we present and discuss the results from ideal and realistic scenarios, typically found in experiments. Finally, the main conclusions are summarised. Fig. anisotropy constant K U = 0.8 × 10 6 Jm -3 and DMI parameter D = -1.2 × 10 -3 Jm -2 Starting from the initial state shown in Fig. where ⃗ τ SOT accounts for the SOT due to the Spin Hall Effect (SHE), unit vector direction along the spin current ⃗ J S and ⃗ u J is that of the applied current ⃗ J. H 0 SL = hθ SH J 2|e|μ 0 M S t F M defines the Slonczewski-Like-SOT magnitude, which is proportional to J. Micromagnetic simulations were performed using Mumax3 Sequential nucleation of domains in the R (register) strip can be characterised as phase diagrams for each combination of J and pulse duration d. Micromagnetic results reveal that two different 'states' can be obtained. These states will determine the success of nucleating domains in sequence. This purely geometrical method can generate any domain sequence, as the same process shown in Fig. The nucleation of such first DW is performed only once by standard ways, for example by injecting a current along a bit line (see the additional simulations and related discussion in the supplementary material). Driven by J (J 2 in Fig. Nucleated DWs in the R strip will be driven independently of activating either J 1 or J 2 . Thus, by alternatively applying current pulses between the TL or BL strip and the R strip, up or down domains can be simultaneously nucleated and driven. Then, regarding practical purposes, one question arises: how could we optimise information (domain) density in the R strip? To get further insight, Fig. (circles) and θ = 85o (triangles) and w = 32 nm. Similar results were also obtained for other θ < 90o. Also, for w = 96 nm or w = 10 nm. Fig. Using wider strips would further allow to reduce J C , but at the expense of increasing d. For all the above, an optimal density of domains is expected when both J C and d are minimised, and by increasing θ and/or reducing w. So far, we explored the performance of the proposed method under ideal conditions, i.e. no thermal fluctuations (T = 0 K), no grain structure nor rounded geometrical features. To get a better insight, we explore the performance of a more realistic strip accounting for thermal fluctuations at room temperature (T = 300 K), grains and rounded kinks, with θ = 85o. Following from previous studies Two bit input sequences '1-0-1-0-1-0-1' and '1-0-0-1-0-1-1', encoded into m z by the pulse (shown in the top graphs in Fig. Therefore, nucleation of domain sequences coherent with the input pulses is demonstrated as proof-of-concept. Additional simulations were also performed taking into account the influence of a Field-Like (FL-SOT) torque comparable in magnitude to the SL-SOT. The results, presented in the supplementary material, indicate that the working principle of our proposed method remains valid in the presence of FL-SOT. Moreover, the role of the non-uniform Joule heating has been also analyzed as described in the supplementary material. Such results point out that the proposed nucleation and shifting method still remains valid. To conclude, we have devised a method to nucleate DWs with just three terminals, purely by current methods without requiring multilayer attachments, external magnetic fields or actively modifying the magnetic properties of the strip. A symmetric three-strip structure with a confined chiral Neel DW in the center is used as an optimal DW nucleator as a function of J and d. Our design is simpler than those found in literature that are based on similar principles Therefore, the proposed method significantly reduces the technological constraints for an iterative DW nucleation and the writing and transmitting of bits encoded in up or down domains. The provided supplementary material includes: (i) micromagnetic simulations of a conventional nucleation method for the initial DW, (ii) a detailed discussion on the reasons that may contribute to the reduction of J C when the aperture angle (θ) increases, (iii) additional results for narrower strips (w = 10 nm), (iv) the analysis of the Field-Like (FL) torque, and (v) an investigation of the Joule heating effect on the proposed nucleation method.