The main target of this article is to propose for the first time a physics-based continuous and symmetric compact model that accurately captures IV experimental dependencies induced by geometrical scaling effects for graphene transistor (GFET) technologies. Such a scalable model is an indispensable ingredient for the boost of large-scale GFET applications, as it has been already proved in solid industry-based CMOS technologies. Dependencies of the physical model parameters on channel dimensions, are thoroughly investigated, and semiempirical expressions are derived, which precisely characterize such behaviors for an industry-based GFET technology, as well as for others developed in research labs. This work aims at the establishment of the first industry standard GFET compact model that can be integrated in circuit simulation tools and hence, can contribute to the update of GFET technology from the research level to massive industry production. OWADAYS, classical (constant-field) metal-oxidesemiconductor field-effect transistors' (MOSFETs) scaling As a rule, compact modeling engineers derive firstly the basic parameters for the wide-long channel devices within a process, where a one-dimensional (1D) analysis is applied as, according to the gradual channel approximation, vertical field is much stronger than longitudinal and lateral fields along a microscopic slice of the channel in such large FETs [1, §5.1], [2, §4.1], In this work, such critical scaling effects are investigated, for an industry-based GFET technology (Graphenea PF1) Six back-gated GFETs from Graphenea PF1 technology (W/L=50/60, 50/70, 50/100, 10/50, 40/50, 100/50 μm/μm) have been measured with both trap-affected (forwardbackward sweeps) and trap-reduced (opposing pulses) IV setups The drain current ID model in [5, §2.1], is here updated as: so as to enable distinct μp(n) where usat is the saturation velocity and b a VS smoothing parameter [5, §2.1]. In the following part, geometrical effects of the main GFET parameters will be thoroughly characterized and properly modeled, after highlighting their relation with the corresponding scaling effects in MOSFETs. It has been experimentally shown in CMOS technologies that the shrinkage of device L and W, leads to a variation of VTH from its wide-long channel value [1, §5.3], As in CMOS, the variation of measured VDirac in shortchannel GFETs can be associated with an increased contribution of source and drain potentials to the channel potential where wide-long channel (VGS0), W (VGS0W, VGS0W2), L (VGS0L, VGS0L2) and WL (VGS0WL) scaling parameters are defined, respectively, as in CMOS models where Rds0 is the constant term and the ~1/W trend of Rsh is described by Rcoeff coefficient while Rexp exponent is also employed for optimum model calibration. Regarding μ, CMOS experimental data have revealed a proportional to W, L dependence, which is precisely described by semi-empirical models [1, eq. 6.156], In GFETs, peak gm has been recorded to degrade due to a μ reduction at short channels where wide-long channel (μ0p(n)) and L scaling parameters (μL, μL2) are extracted. The latter projects a μ reduction for short L (nm range). nres has been shown to scale inversely with μ in terms of L [26, Fig. The basic parameters (VG0, Rds, μ, θint, Δ) are extracted from experimental data of each GFET under test according to Initially, the consistency of the updated scalable model vs. experiments for the Graphenea GFETs, is presented in the transfer characteristics of Fig. The model is also validated with measurements from GFET technologies obtained from literature for various short- To better validate the model at stronger horizontal electric fields, VDS-dependent experiments from short-channel GFETs are essential. Fig. The L-dependence of VG0, μp(n), Δ parameters is presented in Fig. The model interprets notably the measurements from strong pto strong n-type region, including VDirac, and from low to high VDS with a negligible relative RMS error below 5% for most GFETs examined while it does not exceed 10% in any case (cf. Fig. A reliable benchmark for CMOS compact models to evaluate the symmetry and continuity around VDS=0 V, is the GST (cf. [2, Fig. A scalable symmetric compact GFET model, that accurately describes geometrical effects, is proposed in the present study. It targets towards the design of the first GFET Process Design Kit, and eventually, to the transition of GFET technologies from research labs to the breakthrough of largescale industry-based IC production. Polynomial and exponential equations are formulated through investigating geometry-induced dependencies of basic model parameters. The scalability features of the model presented here, precisely characterize experiments from different fabricated GFET technologies with different W and from short (nm) to long (μm) gate devices. Furthermore, the unavoidable trap effects observed in this emerging technology are also captured by the model. The latter aids to select scenarios to enhance the reproducibility of the device characteristics. where Qt, Qp(n) are the transport sheet, p(n)-type charges, respectively; Vc is the chemical potential, h the reduced Planck constant, uf the Fermi velocity, e the electron charge and k a coefficient This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TED.2023.3330713 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.