Despite attractive cost-effectiveness, scalability, and superior stability, carbon-based printable perovskite solar cells (CPSCs) still face moisture-induced degradation that limits their lifespan and commercial potential. Here, we investigate the moisture-preventing mechanisms of thin nanostructured super-repellent coating (advancing contact angle > 167 ̊ and contact angle hysteresis 7 ̊) integrated into CPSCs for different moisture forms (falling water droplets vs water vapor vs condensed water droplets). We show that unencapsulated super-repellent CPSCs have superior performance under continuous droplet impact for 12h (rain simulation experiments) compared to unencapsulated pristine (uncoated) CPSCs that degrade within seconds. Contrary to falling water droplets, where super-repellent coating serves as a shield, we found water vapor to physisorb through porous super-repellent coating (room temperature and relative humidity, RH 65% and 85%) that increased the CPSCs performance for 21% during ~43 days similarly to pristine CPSCs. We further showed that, water condensation forms within or below the super-repellent coating (40 ̊C and RH 85%), followed by chemisorption and degradation of CPSCs. Because different forms of water have distinct effect on CPSC, we suggest that future standard tests for repellent CPSCs should include rain simulation and condensation tests. Our findings will thus inspire the development of super-repellent coatings for moisture prevention. Solution-processed perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are advancing rapidly, with a remarkable increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8 % However, complex packaging makes the process time-consuming, highly costly, and challenging for sealing large areas. Current studies employ rather hydrophobic than superhydrophobic materials recent developments in PSCs, it remains unclear how the hydrophobic/superhydrophobic coatings improve the performance of PSCs. Discussion on the moisture-preventing mechanisms of those coatings is scarce, and the chosen aging tests easily fall out of ISOS recommendations. Carbon-based printable perovskite solar cells (CPSCs) used in this work have Glass/FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/mp-ZrO2/carbon/infiltrated perovskite structure. (mp-ZrO2), and carbon are fabricated via screen-printing. A perovskite precursor solution of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and 5-ammonium valeric acid iodide (5-AVAI) is infiltrated throughout the electrode stack using a programmable multi-channel pipetting robot (Solaronix). The samples are annealed at 55 ̊C for 90 minutes and then cooled to room temperature to form perovskite crystals in the porous electrode structure (Figure We further studied droplet mobility with an oscillating droplet tribometer (ODT) To investigate how super-repellent coating is integrated into CPSC, we examined unencapsulated CPSCs (34 Batch I and 16 Batch II) by measuring their PV parameters (Figure and measured their PV parameters after applying the coating. The measured power conversion efficiency (PCE) for pristine CPSCs (before coating) and super-repellent CPSCs (after coating) (17 of each from Batch I) is shown in Figure The results from Batch II confirmed that the coating did not impact initial PV performance and showed excellent reproducibility of the application process (Figure To study the vapor-induced degradation in a humid environment, we performed the dark storage aging test at room temperature (RT) and relative humidity (RH) 65% and 85%. One set of 12 unencapsulated CPSCs (Batch I, 6 pristine CPSCs, and 6 super-repellent CPSCs), was placed in an automated environmental chamber (VCL 4006, Vötsch Industrietechnik, Germany) at the RT (23 ̊C) and the RH of 65 % and 85 % for specific durations (Figure Interestingly, with increasing RH to 85% in segment 2 (Figure Table To study the stability of super-repellent CPSCs in supersaturating vapor, we performed an aging test at elevated temperature on the same CPSCs from the previous aging test in the environmental chamber. The CPSCs were placed in the chamber with RH of 85 % and RT, and the temperature was increased from 23 °C to 40 °C (keeping constant RH). At the beginning of the experiment, we noticed water condensation on the carbon electrode due to reached supersaturation (supersaturated air with RH >100%). The supersaturation happened due to the temperature difference between the CPSCs and the environmental chamber. pristine CPSCs, and 6 super-repellent CPSCs) using a thermal chamber (Memmert, Germany). After 981 h of testing, the PCE of encapsulated pristine and super-repellent CPSCs reduced 35.3 % ± 2.2 % and 33.8 % ± 2.9 % of the initial values, respectively, with no statistically significant differences in the average change percentage between the two types of cells (Figure In summary, we focused understanding the moisture-preventing mechanisms of thin nanostructures super-repellent coating from different moisture forms (falling water droplets vs water vapor vs condensed water droplets). To tackle this, we successfully integrated superrepellent coating (commercially available Glaco) into carbon-based printable perovskite solar cells (CPSCs) and tested its performance in conditions that resemble the outdoor environment: coatings as a moisture-preventing barrier is becoming an emerging research direction. We anticipate our findings inspire the development of repellent coatings that prevent the unwanted water condensation and chemisorption. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrate (Product code: TCO22-7/LI), Ti-Nanoxide T165/SP, Zr-Nanoxide ZT/SP, and Elcocarb B/SP and perovskite precursor solution containing methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and 5-ammonium valeric acid iodide (5-AVAI) was purchased from Solaronix, Switzerland. Titanium diisopropoxide bis (acetylacetonate, 75 % in isopropanol) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The super-repellent coating is Glaco Mirror Coat Zero (SOFT99)).. Unencapsulated devices. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrate (10 cm x 10 cm, 7 Ω Sq -1 ) was etched with an automated fiber laser to fabricate individual cell electrodes followed with ultrasonic cleaning in 1% Hellmanex aqueous solution, acetone, and isopropanol solvents (15 minutes each). A thin (30-50 nm) compact TiO2 layer (c-TiO2) was then deposited on an active area (through a glass mask) by aerosol spray pyrolysis at 450 °C using titanium diisopropoxide bis (acetylacetonate, 75 % in isopropanol) dissolved in absolute ethanol (1:80 v/v) as precursor and oxygen as carrier gas. After cooling to room temperature (RT), mesoporous TiO2 (400-600 nm), the insulating mesoporous ZrO2 (1-2 μm), and the conductive porous carbon (10-12 μm) layers were deposited via sequentially screen-printing Ti-Nanoxide T165/SP, Zr-Nanoxide ZT/SP, and Elcocarb B/SP pastes layer by layer. After each screenprinting step, the printed layers were dried at 150 °C for 5 minutes before sintering. Sintering temperatures for mp-TiO2 and mp-ZrO2 layers were 500 °C for 30 minutes, while the porous carbon layer was 400 °C for 30 minutes to form the mesoporous triple-layer-based scaffold. After final sintering, the printed layers were cooled to RT. The perovskite precursor solution (Solaronix) was prepared by mixing lead iodide (1.2 M), methylammonium iodide (1.2 M), 5ammonium valeric acid iodide (5% mol) and dissolving in gamma-butyrolactone and ethanol mixture (85:15 v/v). The solution was stirred on a preheated (70 °C) hot plate for 30 minutes. The warm, clear yellow solution was filtered through a 0.2 μm PTFE filter and cooled to room temperature. The solution was then deposited using a programmable multi-channel pipetting robot (Solaronix) on an as-fabricated substrate masked with polyimide cut-out shapes (Impregnation Masks, Solaronix). The wet substrates were allowed to dwell for several minutes to let the liquid sip into the porous structure. The perovskite crystals in the porous electrode structure were achieved with final annealing in an oven at 55 °C for 90 mins. For encapsulation procedure, see Supporting Information. The 50 PSCs were prepared as described above, of which 34 CPSCs are from Batch I, and 16 CPSCs are from Batch II. The superhydrophobic coating was prepared using Glaco Mirror Coat Zero, a commercial product of a colloidal suspension of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles in isopropanol. To achieve set of 5 images was acquired after at least 30 min for stabilization. Image processing and root mean square (RMS) roughness measurements were performed with Gwyddion software. Contact Angle Goniometry (CAG). Contact angles were measured using a conventional optical tensiometer (Attension Theta, Biolin Scientific) following the established protocol Advancing contact angles were measured by placing a 0.22 μl droplet on the surface and increasing its volume to 20 μL, with 0.025 μL/s. Then, an additional 20 μL was added, and receding contact angles were measured by decreasing droplet volume with 0.025 μL/s. The data were analyzed using Young-Laplce fitting with OneAttension software, and reported advancing and receding contact angles were those when the droplet baseline increased and decreased, respectively. Oscillating Droplet Tribometery (ODT). Friction forces for moving droplets on super-repellent CPSCs were measured using ODT [39,40,41] as follows. A 5 μL water-like ferrofluid droplet (0.2 vol.% nanoparticles) was placed on the CPSCs by pipette and brought into oscillations by moving the magnets in a sinusoidal fashion. The motion was captured with a Phantom V1610 high-speed camera at 1000 fps. The droplet position was tracked and fitted to the analytical solution for harmonic oscillations to obtain the friction force. For more details, see Supporting Information.