Besides ongoing studies of phase structural transitions, pairing mechanism, and physical properties of recently discovered highly compressed high-temperature superconductor La3Ni2O7-, here we explored a possibility for the electron-phonon pairing mechanism as an origin of the superconducting state and determined the microcrystalline strain, , in highpressure Fmmm-phase, and low-pressure Amam-phase of this nickelate. To do this, we analysed temperature dependent resistance and extracted pressure dependent Debye temperature, D(P), in La3Ni2O7- with an approximate value of D(25 GPa) = 550 K. From this we established that the La3Ni2O7- is strong-coupled superconductor with the electron-phonon coupling constant e-ph(P=22.4 GPa) = 1.75. This value is close to e-ph = 1.70 of ambient pressure superconductors Nb3R (R = Sn, Al). To address ongoing discussion that the lattice strain can be the origin for the emergence of high-temperature superconductivity in the La3Ni2O7-, we determined the microcrystalline strain, 0.011 ≤ (P), in the high-pressure Fmmm-phase, and (P) < 0.011 of low-pressure Amam-phase. Our analysis showed that (P) has three-dome shape in the pressure range of 1.6 GPa ≤ P ≤ 41.2 GPa. One of these two ε P deeps at P 15 GPa coincides with the pressure at which the Amam into the Fmmm phase transition occurs. Based on our analysis, we proposed probable condition to observe the zero-resistance state in La3Ni2O7-. Experimental discovery of superconductivity with a transition temperature above 200 K in highly compressed sulphur hydride by Drozdov et al High-temperature superconductivity in nickelates was predicted by Anisimov et al We need to mention that that there are some current experimental and theoretical challenges to explain the superconductivity in the nickelates. For instance, doped RNiO2 (R = La, Pr, Nd) exhibits superconductivity with T , 1.9 K, but only in thin films of several nanometers thick. Bulk samples do not exhibit any sign of superconductivity down to T , 1.9 K Another example is the superconductivity in atomically thin quintuple-layer square-planar nickelate superlattice Simple examination of this experimental data shows that the Nd6Ni5O12 exhibits the lowest measured resistance: ρ T 53 mK 6.3 μΩ cm (1) which is higher than the resistivity of practically all pure metals at room temperature ρ T 300 K 6.3 μΩ cm (2) In addition, Pan et al. Two recent studies Here, we contributed to the exploration and focused on a detailed analysis of available experimental data measured in highly compressed La3Ni2O7- single crystals. While the majority of theoretical groups (but not all To do this, we extracted: (1) pressure dependent Debye temperature, Θ P ; and based on that, we determined: (2) the electron-phonon coupling constant, λ , for one sample exhibited the zeroresistance state. In addition, we estimated: (3) the crystal lattice strain, ε P , in the La3Ni2O7- at nanoscale level. Primary idea to determine the lattice strain, ε, was initiated by recent FPC result by Sanna et al The clearest expressions that the FPC studies should change its primary research object from the ideal defect-free crystal lattices to lattices with defects and strain has been reported by Cucciari et al While there are no experimental techniques which can be used for direct observation of the vacancies or other defects for samples in DAC, here we utilized the Williamson-Hall (WH) analysis It should be mentioned that Ren et al All of above facts are confirmations that the evolution of the ε P is important parameter which needs to be determine in any high-pressure superconductor. Experimental data sources In this study, we analysed experimental datasets reported by Sun et al Standard technique to determine the Debye temperature, Θ , is the fit of the specific heat measurements to Debye model. However, this technique cannot be used in studies of highly compressed conductors because of negligible sample thermal mass in comparison with the DAC mass. However, the fit of R T data using the saturated resistance model R T where R , R , Θ and A are free-fitting parameters. In Fig. In Fig. One can see that in the pressure range where the high-pressure Fmmm phase exists, the Debye temperature is more or less constant with the approximate value of Θ 550 K. Considering that Sun et al where μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential. In this work we assumed that μ * 0.13, which is a typical value for highly compressed electron-phonon mediated superconductors where θ x is the Heaviside step function, I0(x) is the zero-order modified Bessel function of the first kind, R T , T , F, R , R , Θ , and A are free-fitting parameters. We defined the transition temperature by the criterion: , , . The fit is shown in Fig. Derived T , . 58.0 0.1 K and λ 1.75. Deduced λ shows, that if the high-temperature superconducting state in La3Ni2O7- originates from the electron-phonon interaction, this requires the interaction strength at its upper limit, similar to the interaction strength exhibited in highly compressed hydrides 1.75 value is close to λ 1.70 of Nb3Al and Nb3Sn XRD peaks , is the peak position, β is peak integral breadth, and I , 2θ , , and β are-free fitting parameters. I level was chosen manually in all fits. Details can be found elsewhere Derived peaks breadth, β θ , and peaks diffraction angle, θ, were fitted to classical Williamson-Hall (WH) model where λ 61.99 pm is the wavelength of used radiation in Ref. Performed fits showed that for all pressures, 1.6 GPa P 41.2 GPa, the size of coherent scattering regions, D P , is large and the uncertainty of the value exceeds the value itself by far. Thus, we fit data to the reduced equation: We show some fits in Fig. We detected two deeps in the ε P at P 15.1 GPa and 29.5 GPa (Figs. The first deep at P 15.1 GPa coincides with the transition pressure from the Amam into the Fmmm phase, and perhaps it is direct structural evidence of the lattice relaxation at the structural transition. However, the ε P dependence does not exactly match the lattice constants dependences (see, 1 a P ⁄ , 1 b P ⁄ , and 1 c P ⁄ in Fig. However, we can explain the latter because of reducing the lattice volume by reducing the volume of each vacancy. This reduction can occur without significant changes in the lattice strain, because the vacancies density remains the same. Perhaps, high vacancies density can be the origin for the observation/absence of the zeroresistance state in the La3Ni2O7- We also need to stress that all XRD datasets (which we analysed) were collected at room temperature Another important revealed issue is that the level of the microcrystalline strain, ε P , in the Amam-phase of the La3Ni2O7- samples is higher than the one measured in perfect undoped YBa2Cu3O7- films Based on all above, we should note that there is a need for low-temperature high-pressure XRD studies of La3Ni2O7-, which can be used for detailed analysis of the phase transition(s) and related structural/phase parameters. Highly compressed La3Ni2O7- is under intensive experimental and theoretical studies at the moment [11-14,20,35,36,39,61,62]. In this work, we analyzed experimental data and determined: (1) pressure dependent Debye temperature, Θ P ; (2) three-dome shape of the ε P in the studied pressure range, where one deep of the ε P coincides with the pressure at which the Amam into the Fmmm phase transition occurs; and (3) electron-phonon coupling constant, λ P 22.4 GPa 1.75; in single crystal La3Ni2O7-. In Supplementary Materials we showed analysis for temperature dependent resistance data, and XRD data. 