2D Ferroelectricity with switchable electric polarization has drawn widespread attention in condensed matter physics due to its crucial applications in non-volatile memory and ferroelectric spin devices. Despite recent progress in 2D ferroelectric, achieving the mono-elemental ferroelectricity still remains a great challenge because most nonmetallic mono-elemental materials are stabilized in nonpolar crystal structures. In this work, we theoretically designed mono-elemental ferroelectricity with tunable and significant spin textures in bilayer tellurium (BL-Te). Comprehensive quantitative polarization calculations demonstrate that asymmetric stacking in BL-Te can generate out-of-plane (OOP) polarization with a magnitude of 0.78 pC/m. This polarization stems from distinguishing interlayer and intra-layer contributions. Moreover, these stacked BL-Te, characterized by significant spin-orbit coupling, serve as an ideal platform for investigating both conventional spin polarization and layer-dependent/hidden spin polarization through ferroelectric reversion. Our work not only broaden the category of 2D mono-elemental ferroelectric but also offer a new platform for multifunctional nanodevices. Recently, two-dimensional (2D) ferroelectric materials have garnered significant attention due to their immunity to size-related effects and their ability to exhibit electric polarization at the monolayer level On the other hand, 2D mono-elemental materials (termed as Xenes), have consistently garnered significant attention due to their simple composition and diverse range of physical properties. However, achieving ferroelectricity in mono-elemental materials is inherently challenging because most nonmetallic mono-elemental materials are stabilized in nonpolar crystal structures of high symmetry. Nevertheless, two mechanisms have emerged to modifying the equivalence or symmetry of the same elements, which can be further employed to realize monoelemental ferroelectricity: Motivated by these background, we theoretically predict the emergence of sliding ferroelectricity in newly a synthesized 2D tellurene and demonstrate the tunable spin textures by flexibly switching the electric polarization. Beginning with six distinct bilayer stacking configurations (AC/AC ′ , AB/AB ′ , AA/AA ′ ), structural evolution between them is clearly illustrated through interlayer sliding and rotation. Subsequently, we confirm that the ground state (AC/AC ′ phases) hosts a polar point group that enables the occurrence of ferroelectricity. Employing Berry phase approach and modern ferroelectric theory Recently, a new category of monolayer tellurene (ML-Te) was successfully synthesized on pyrolytic graphite substrates In the case of BL-Te, within its hexagonal lattice, we explored all high-symmetry stacking possibilities, resulting in the creation of six distinct bilayer configurations, as illustrated in Fig. Commencing from the AA ′ stacking structure characterized by M z symmetry forbidding out-of-plane (OOP) ferroelectricity, we initiate a sliding transformation of the upper layer along the a and b axes using the sliding vector ν=(l a a, l b b), where a and b represent the basis vectors of the crystal. The resulting energy contour is depicted in Fig. The above FE transformation process are also clearly demonstrated through the analysis of the phonon spectra as illustrated in Fig. The electric polarization intensity P s in the periodic system was evaluated by using the Berry phase method Based on above analysis, the overall polarization in BL-Te, P s can be decomposed into interlayer polarization (P inter ) and intralayer polarization contributions (P bot /P top ). Based on the definition of polarization for a finite system the total polarization strength (P s ) and its different components can be quantitatively calculated. In the plotted electron distribution function ρ(z) along the z-direction, it is evident that the electron distribution between the bottom and top layers is asymmetric. Using the integral in the equation ( The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) links the spin degree of freedom to the orbital motion of electrons in a solid and plays an important role in the emergence of new physical phenomena The Fig. In order to have a better understanding of the spin splitting nature and the relation between ferroelectric and spin polarization, the spin textures for VB1 and VB2 for AC/AC ′ phase are plotted in Figs. Moving on to the AA ′ stacking phase with M z symmetry, it also behaves as a semiconductor with an indirect band gap of 0.18 eV with SOC effect. In Fig. It is observed that a clockwise spin texture is hosted by the top layer, while an anti-clockwise spin texture is hosted by the bottom layer for VB1. The presence of such layer-locked hidden spin polarization is likely to be probed in experiments using Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) In summary, we present first-principles evidence of mono-elemental ferroelectricity in BL-Te with large SOC effect. The most stable stacking stacking patterns is obtained which can break the central symmetry, and thus induce OOP ferroelectric polarization with a magnitude of of 0.78 pC/m and small transition potential barrier of 29.2 meV. Due to large SOC strength and broken centrosymmetry, Rashha-like spin texture emerges with switchable spin polarization direction control by changing the electric polarization direction. In addition, the layer-dependent hidden spin polarization is also revealed in mirror-symmetric paraelectric phase. 