Electromagnetic wave coupling between photonic systems relies on the evanescent field typically confined within a single wavelength. Extending evanescent coupling distance requires low refractive index contrast and perfect momentum matching for achieving a large coupling ratio. Here, we report the discovery of photonic supercoupling in a topological valley Hall pair of waveguides, showing a substantial improvement in coupling efficiency across multiple wavelengths. Experimentally, we realize ultra-high coupling ratios between waveguides through valley-conserved vortex flow of electromagnetic energy, attaining 95% coupling efficiency for separations of up to three wavelengths. This demonstration of photonic supercoupling in topological systems significantly extends the coupling distance between on-chip waveguides and components, paving the path for the development of supercoupled photonic integrated devices, optical sensing, and telecommunications. Direct coupling between photonic modes typically relies on evanescent wave, which decays exponentially with distance from the mode edge to the bulk space. By strategically constructing and tailoring the alignment, efficient and tunable evanescent coupling can be achieved. This compact coupling technique plays a crucial role in numerous photonic systems such as fiber couplers A long evanescent tail can be achieved for a confined mode when there is a narrow difference in refractive index of the bulk space, potentially facilitating long-distant coupling. For a waveguide mode as an example, the evanescent field can extend over tens of wavelengths when the refractive index contrast between the core and cladding areas is on the order of 10 -2 or even lower. However, achieving such precise control of the indices presents significant challenges across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, particularly in the context of material properties for waveguiding networks and integrated circuit designs, although can be realized in specific scenarios such as the femtosecond laser directly written waveguide arrays Manipulating electromagnetic wave at wavelength-or sub-wavelength-scales offers the potentials to extend the evanescent coupling regions when maintaining coupling efficiency. The construction of spatial inhomogeneities enables precise modulations of the mode profile and momentum, that can be accomplished through the utilization of periodic structures like photonic crystals Here, we propose and demonstrate a photonic supercoupling method in topological valley Hall system In conventional index waveguide system, as illustrated in the left panel of Fig. In contrast, the valley-conserved VPC system provides the potential for ultra-long-distance mode coupling. The VPC waveguide is the interface of two VPC bulks characterized by reversed valley Chern numbers C v ± , achieved through breaking the spatial inversion symmetry. The topological waveguide mode (kink state where ψ 0 is the maximum mode profile amplitude at the interface (y = 0), K ⃗ ⃗ x is the projected valley momentum along +x-direction, and α(δ) is the decay rate along ±y-direction as a function of the symmetry perturbation strength δ. The waveguide mode tail can be extended over several wavelengths (D = mλ) with a minimal δ (Fig. The waveguide supercoupling in VPC is schemed in Fig. The momentum matching between WG1 and WG2, with respective x-projected valley momenta K ⃗ ⃗ x1 and K ⃗ ⃗ x2 , is achieved via valley-conserved coupling area where the effective momentum is ΣK ⃗ ⃗ i , i indicates each unit cell site. The efficient intra-K-valley momentum transition gives rise to the rotation-invariant wave flows forming vortex array over the coupling region. The projection angle θ i between K ⃗ ⃗ i and ex (Fig. The symmetry breaking is achieved by altering the on-site equilateral triangular hole sizes from l 1 = l 2 to l 1 ≠ l 2 , where l 1 and l 2 represent the side lengths of the triangles, and a is the lattice constant. The symmetry perturbation strength is defined as δ = l 1 -l 2 . The transverse-electric valley vortex is showcased for type A (δ > 0) and type B (δ < 0) unit cells by the simulated topological phase singularities (∠ψ in colormap, ψ indicates magnetic field) and Poynting vector vortex (S in arrows). The simulated photonic band diagrams of the VPC unit cells are presented in Fig. The valley-conserved vortex array in the coupling region is exhibited in Fig. To assess the coupling distance limit, we constructed a rectangular coupling region (red dashed box) as depicted in Fig. . For a coupling distance of d = 2.7λ, there is a drastic increase in energy coupled from WG1 to WG2 accounting for the growing number of valley-conserved supercoupling loops, as w varies from 2.7λ (star) to 13λ (triangle), and to 23λ (square). The coupled |S 31 | 2 values are 33%, 68%, and remarkably 87% respectively. The respective coupling strength κ sc w are 0.65, 1.17 and 1.68, obtained using equation |S 31 | 2 = tanh 2 (κ sc w) Experimentally, the topological waveguide supercoupling configuration is fabricated on a 200μm-thick high-resistivity silicon chip in the terahertz domain, as imaged in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the supercoupling phenomenon through a terahertz waveguide coupling experiment in a topological valley Hall system. Leveraging the expansive mode extension and the valley-conserved vortex array, we significantly enhance waveguide coupling distances with an ultra-high coupling ratio. Our experiments validate an efficient coupling distance of 2.7 wavelengths with a coupling ratio of 95%, and even over 5 wavelengths with a reduced coupling ratio of 31%. Photonic supercoupling expands the efficiency boundaries of conventional evanescent coupling, unlocking possibilities for advanced supercoupled photonic systems such as topology-protected interferometers, integrated lasers, and topological-chip-based polaritonics. Supercoupling also opens doors to emerging fields including on-chip supercoupled sensors, couplers, and spectrometers.