Vanadium dioxide (V O 2 ) exhibits strong infrared optical switching due to its insulatormetal phase-transition property. However, in the visible wavelengths, it's intrinsic optical switching is quite low. Current research explores solutions like multilayering, intricate structural patterning, high thermal budget processes and costly metals for improved color switching. Nonetheless, the color gamut coverage with these methodologies remains notably limited. This work overcomes these limitations and demonstrates dynamic multi-colour switching covering a large color gamut using a simple, unpatterned, ultrathin (∼ λ 14 , where wavelength λ is taken as 575 nm at the center of visible spectrum) asymmetric Fabry-Pérot structure of V O 2 on Aluminium (Al). We use the transfer matrix method to design the V O 2 /Aluminium (Al)/Sapphire structure for maximum visible reflectance switching. V O 2 films are synthesized using a simple, low thermal budget atmospheric oxidation of Vanadium (V). With varying oxidation durations, different colors of the oxidized samples are observed. Consistent and reversible 1 Dynamic/active color switching has received extensive research attention for its applications in smart glasses, 1,2 optical filters, 3,4 and display technology. Most of the existing studies use multilayer structures, nano-scale features, or costly metals like Ag and Au in various forms to achieve better visible color switching with V O 2 . However, opting for these approaches significantly adds to the process cost and complexity. In some cases, precise control of process parameters and high thermal budget annealings are involved, adding further limitations to these approaches. In this work, we design and fabricate a uniform V O 2 /Al/sapphire structure for active color switching. Deposited Vanadium (V) thin film is oxidized in atmospheric conditions to synthesize V O 2 thin films. Various colors are noticed during the oxidation process, and depending on the sample's oxidation duration, different extent of color switching is obtained. Raman and reflectance measurements are used for the sample characterization. Samples containing V O 2 are found to exhibit strong and reversible color switching as a function of temperature. Table Standalone V O 2 suffers from low optical switching in the visible region. To overcome this, we propose having Al as a back reflector, eliminating the transmission loss. The reflected signals from the Al top surface would lead to constructive and destructive interference effects. To find the optimum thickness of Al, the transfer matrix method (TMM) simulations are performed. Python TMM library is used for the simulations. On comparing the results, it can be observed that V O 2 /Al/S shows enhanced optical switching for smaller thickness (≤ 200 nm) than V O 2 /S; the results also show two hotspots of ∆R near ∼ 95 nm and 40 nm of V O 2 . This is due to Fabry-Pérot resonances or interference effects similar to those observed in conventional ultrathin dielectric-metal structures. The process flow followed to fabricate the samples is shown in Fig. To oxidize the samples, atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation (APTO) After fabrication, the effect of temperature on the color of the fabricated samples is analyzed. Camera images are taken while each sample is kept on the heating stage, initially maintained at RT (∼ 30 • C) and subsequently at HT (∼ 100 • C). Figure The samples with t oxd of 30 s to 5 minutes (S 6 -S 9 ) show no color change with temperature. The reversible color-switching videos of the 6 s and 27 s samples (between RT and HT) are included as supplementary material. To understand the observed color-changing behavior, the samples are characterized using Raman and reflectance measurements. Fig. Next, the reflectance measurement is performed on the OV Al/S samples for the two temperatures RT and HT. Fig. The ∆R for different wavelengths with varying t oxd is calculated from measured reflectance of Fig. The samples are mapped on the CIE 1931-xy chromaticity diagram, as shown in Fig. As illustrated in Table 