Polar-active nanocomposites and colloids, containing ferroelectric nanoparticles of various shapes and sizes, are unique model objects for fundamental research of surface, dimensional, and crosstalk effects in the nanoparticle ensembles In this work, we investigated the impact of nanoparticle sizes on the effective dielectric properties of suspensions and the polymer-ferroelectric composite films prepared using the particles. From the rheological data, an effective viscosity, flow behavior index, normalized thixotropy/rheopexy degree and hydrocluster size was calculated (table Next, we prepared the tape-casted dense ferroelectric composites consisting of 28 vol.% BaTiO3 nanoparticles (average size 24 nm) in the polyvinyl butyral polymer and 35 vol.% BaTiO3 microparticles (0.5-0.7 μm) dispersed in the ethyl-cellulose, as well as the ceramics made from the nanoparticles using the annealing at 1250 o C. The composite films were covered with Ag electrodes and the measurements of the temperature dependences of their capacitance and dielectric losses were performed in the frequency range 100 Hz -100 kHz. The analysis of rheological studies allowed us to draw conclusions about the mechanism of structure formation in the investigated polymer-ferroelectric nanocomposites. The TCS-27 suspension with BaTiO3 nanoparticles, which average size is 24 nm and the size distribution function is very narrow in the range from 17 to 30 nm, exhibits characteristics of a low-viscosity liquid with a slight shear thickening (n > 1) and mild rheopexy behavior. This flow profile is typical for suspensions of nanoparticles dispersed in a polymer solution with low molecular mass TCS-34 comprises sub-micron BaTiO3 particles dispersed in a polymer solution of long-chain ethyl-cellulose molecules. The use of long-chain polymer leads to increased viscosity and a shear-thinning flow characteristic in the liquid. The elevated viscosity, coupled with the shear-thinning behavior (n < 1), indicates the formation of large hydroclusters capable of deformation and stretching in the shear direction To verify this conclusion, we measured the dielectric characteristics of polymer-ferroelectric composites. Also, we studied a pellet made of pure BaTiO3 powder ceramics, annealed at 1250 o C. These results we compared with the ones which were obtained for the composites, as well as with the results obtained in other works, for this compound. The composite was in a form of a thin film, plated on top of a metalized textolite plate. Using an LCR-meter, we measured the capacitance (and derived the effective dielectric permittivity from it), as well as the tangent of the dielectric losses, in several samples with different film thickness. These measurements were done for several frequencies, ranging from 100 Hz to 100 kHz, as well as a temperature, from the room point, and up to approximately 180 o C. In order to determine the influence of particle sizes on the properties of studied composites, and considering that the temperature of phase transitions of BaTiO3 nanoparticles can be significantly shifted due to the influence of mechanical stresses and the depolarization field, we probed their phase composition by the 137 Ba NMR. The NMR spectra of the studied samples were recorded on a Bruker Avance II 400-MHz commercial NMR spectrometer in a magnetic field of 9.40 T, corresponding to the Larmor frequency of 44.466 MHz. The 137 Ba NMR spectra were obtained with the conventional 90x-τ-90y-τ spin echo pulse sequence using a four-phase "exorcycle" phase sequence (xx, xy, x-x, x-y) to form echoes with minimal distortions due to antiechoes, illrefocused signals, and piezoresonances. The p/2-pulse length was typically tπ/2 = 4μs, the spin-echo delay time τ was 20 μs and the repetition delay between scans was 0.15 s. At least 100,000 scans were collected for each temperature to obtain the spectrum of the powdered sample. The spectra were measured at 200, 300, 350 and 400 K. The 137 Ba spectra were referenced against BaF2, which gives a narrow 137 Ba resonance, taken here as the zero for the chemical shift. Let us now discuss the dielectric response of the polymerferroelectric composites, and then compare them with the response of the ceramics sintered from the same BaTiO3 nanoparticles. As one can see from Fig. For TCS-34, the results are shown in Fig. For an estimate of the effective permittivity, ε eff , of the composite, we can use the Lichtenecker's logarithmic mixture law Using Eq. ( (2) = - (I(I + 1) - ) f η (θ, φ), where ν Q = - BaTiO3 ceramics at different temperatures passes through four phases: cubic non-polar phase Pm3 ̅ m for temperatures above 393 K, tetragonal P4mm in the temperature range 278-393 K, orthorhombic C2mm between 193-278 K, and rhombohedral R3m below 193 K The shape of the obtained spectra does not explicitly contain features characteristic of NMR spectra corresponding to different EFG symmetries, but is rather characteristic for the BaTiO3 compound, where the dispersion of the EFG values is present. The line shape analysis of experimentally obtained spectra was carried out under the assumption that the nanoparticles under study have a core-shell structure with a disordered "shell" and "core" with a clearly defined symmetry of the crystal lattice. To model the disordered part of the BaTiO3, the normal distribution of the EFG parameters was used As can be seen from Fig. We measured the temperature dependences of the capacity and dielectric losses of the tape-casted dense ferroelectric composites consisting of 28 vol.% BaTiO3 nanoparticles (average size 24 nm) in the polyvinyl butyral polymer and 35 vol.% BaTiO3 microparticles (0.5-0.7 μm) dispersed in the ethyl-cellulose, as well as the ceramics made from the nanoparticles using the annealing at 1250 o C. The composite films were covered with Ag electrodes and the measurements were performed in a wide frequency range. Measuring the dielectric losses, as well as the permittivity of these materials, at different frequencies, we were able to determine the following. Two composite samples, with a PVB or an ethyl-cellulose matrixes, were very different in the temperature dependence of the losses and the permittivity. The first one, with a PVB matrix, has a diffuse maximum on the permittivity, corresponding to a minimum on the losses. But the second one had a sharp peak, with a maximum on the losses at the same temperature, as well. The ceramic pellet shows results, consistent with those, shown in various works or textbooks. We tried to compare our experimental results for the real part of the dielectric permittivity with an evaluation obtained from the Lichtenecker's mixture law. But, in these results, the peak is still very sharp, and at temperatures slightly higher, then those we saw on the data for TCS-34, for example. Moreover, the measured effective dielectric response of the ferroelectric-polymer composites is significantly different than the predicted by the effective media model. This counterintuitive conclusion indicates on the strong crosstalk effects in the dense ferroelectric nanocomposites, which can be very promising for their applications in nanoelectronics and energy storage.