This paper uses Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) to design Frequency Selective Surface (FSS). PINN integrates physical information into the loss function, so training PINN does not require a dataset, which will be faster than traditional neural networks for inverse design. The specific implementation process of this paper is to construct a PINN using field solutions of mode matching method, and given the design goal, the PINN can train the shape of the diaphragm. The single frequency FSS that meets the design goal was designed using the inverse design method proposed in this paper without a dataset, verifying the rationality of using PINN to design metasurfaces. Using PINN for inverse design is not limited to single frequency FSS, but can also be used for more complex metasurface. In 2019, Raissi et al. Based on the advantages of PINN, it can be applied in inverse design. In this paper, PINN is used for inverse design of single frequency FSS. In Section II, a method for inverse designing FSS using PINN is proposed. In Section III, the training results are presented and simulated. In Section IV, analysis and outlook are conducted on this method. The designed FSS consists of FSS unit cells arranged tightly to form an infinite rectangular array, and the unit cell is shown in Figure On the domain x ∈ (0, a) , y ∈ (0, a), the shape function of the two-layer diaphragms is: The incident wave is TE 00 . The mode matching method is used on both sides of the metal diaphragms to establish the interaction relationship between the metal diaphragm and the electromagnetic fields. Equation where, applies to modes. C i represent the mode coefficients of the (i-th) region, E t and H t represent the tangential electromagnetic fields in Floquet mode. represents the interaction relationship between the diaphragms and the electromagnetic fields: when g = 0, Equation (2) satisfies that the tangential electric field is 0; when g = 1, Equation (2) satisfies the boundary condition that the tangential electromagnetic fields are continuous at the interface of the dielectric and vacuum. Usually, the inverse design goal of FSS can be represented by S parameters, which can be represented by certain mode coefficients. The control equation, boundary conditions, and design goal of the inverse design problem are already included in Equation ( (3) arXiv:2401.03686v1 [physics.app-ph] 8 Jan 2024 Only g i (x, y) in L has not been solved. Using a fully connected neural network (FCNN) to generate the structure of the metal diaphragms g i (x, y), obtaining res(Eq.( Using the PINN model in Section II, an FSS is trained to meet the design goal. The design goal is to not transmit electromagnetic waves at a frequency of 15GHz, set Simulate the structure using the frequency domain solver of full wave simulation software, and the S 21 at Port 2 was obtained as shown in Figure Define the error as Equation ( From Figure Using PINN, this paper successfully designed the FSS that meets the set inverse design goal. Due to the fact that PINN does not require a dataset, it is more efficient than using traditional neural networks for inverse design. This paper introduces PINN into the design of FSS for the first time, and numerical experiment have proven the correctness of this method. Although this paper takes FSS as an example, this method is not limited to FSS. In fact, many electromagnetic devices can be designed using this method, which will promote the development of inverse design of electromagnetic devices.