The electronic and transport properties of aluminum-graphene composite materials were investigated using ab initio plane wave density functional theory. The interfacial structure is reported for several configurations. In some cases, the face-centered aluminum (111) surface relaxes in a nearly ideal registry with graphene, resulting in a remarkably continuous interface structure. The Kubo-Greenwood formula and space-projected conductivity were employed to study electronic conduction in aluminum single-and double-layer graphene-aluminum composite models. The electronic density of states at the Fermi level is enhanced by the graphene for certain aluminum-graphene interfaces, thus, improving electronic conductivity. In double-layer graphene composites, conductivity varies non-monotonically with temperature, showing an increase between 300-400 K at short aluminum-graphene distances, unlike the consistent decrease in single-layer composites. Recent experimental research has shown that composites formed by the inclusion of single layer or multiple layers of graphene into aluminum (Al) and copper (Cu) improve the electronic conduction properties of bulk metal. The interfacial structure of the metal-graphene composites is generally believed to form a high-energy configuration under suitable compression for specific experimental designs, such as hotextrusion 1,2 or friction-extrusion 3 methods. This discovery holds promise for long-distance power transmission, and other applications Several works have provided insight into the mechanisms of enhanced conduction in Al-graphene (Al-G) and Cu-graphene (Cu-G) composites In a previous Letter in this journal To create the Al-G composite models, we started with an orthorhombic cell of face-centered Al (111) that includes a stacking fault, as shown in Figure Visual inspection of the composite models before any compression and structural optimization, as shown in Figure We computed the atom-projected electronic density of states (PDoS) for varying interfacial distance models. The PDoS for the SL and DL composite models are shown in Figure The Fermi level shifts towards higher energies with decreasing Al-G distance, allowing more electronic states to participate in conduction (see details in Table Next, we computed the conduction path in real space and its Al-G distance dependence. To achieve this, we employed the space-projected conductivity (SPC) method to project the electronic conductivity onto real-space grids Next, we investigated the temperature dependence of conductivity in the composite models. This was done by estimating the average electrical conductivity from KGF for models held at different temperatures. The procedure to calculate the temperature-dependent conductivity is discussed in Section S3 of the supplementary material. Figure We show that graphene and graphene stacks enhance the electronic conductivity of Al and while a key addition to the area, it is not the full story. The graphene structures are dispersed in an unknown way throughout the metal microstructures in the experimentally synthesized bulk composites and conspire to create a globally enhanced conductivity and globally modified temperature dependence. These effects could be due to (1) reduced scattering at grain boundaries from the graphene or (2) forming a network of isolated or weakly interacting Al-G structures. Our work complements both of these imaginings. The registry between the sp 2 carbon network (see Figure In conclusion, this study provides a comprehensive atomiclevel understanding of the role of graphene as an additive in aluminum grains, focusing on single-and double-graphene stack(s) in the aluminum matrix. We have demonstrated that the increased electrical conductivity observed in Al-graphene composites arises from the enhanced electronic dynamics at the Fermi level. The interaction between carbon and interfacial aluminum atoms highlights the active role of graphene in facilitating electronic conduction. Furthermore, our study depicts the experimentally observed enhanced electrical conductivity within the temperature range of 300 K to 400 K. A. Nittala, J. Smith, B. Gwalani, J. Silverstein, F. Kraft, and K. Kappagantula, "Simultaneously improved electrical and mechanical performance of hot-extruded bulk scale aluminum-graphene wires," Materials Science and Engineering: B 293, 116452 (2023).