We present magnetostriction and thermal expansion measurements on multiferroic (Ni0.93Co0.07)3V2O8. The high field phase diagrams up to 33 T along the a, b and c directions are built. For H//a, as the magnetic field increasing, two intermediate phases appear between the incommensurate phase and the paramagnetic phase at about 7 K, and then a magnetically induced phase appears above the paramagnetic phase. For H//b, a thermal expansion measurement indicates a mutation in the spin lattice coupling of the high field phases. The interlaced phase boundary suggests a mixed state in the optical high field phase. For H//c, an intermediate phase between the commensurate phase and the incommensurate phase is detected. A nonlinear boundary between the intermediate phase and the low temperature incommensurate phase, and a clear boundary between the commensurate phase and the paramagnetic phase are found. These results indicate that doping Co 2+ breaks the weak ferromagnetic moment of the commensurate phase, which exists in the parent compound Ni3V2O8 and (Ni0.9Co0.1)3V2O8. This nonlinear influence reflects complicated spin modulation in Ni3V2O8 by doping Co 2+ . Magnetoelectric multiferroic materials raise attention due to the coexistence of magnetic and electric order, in which the type-II multiferroic materials could couple the ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity ′ phase at T P H (9.1 K), T HL (6.3 K), T LC (4 K) and T CC ′ (2.3 K), respectively. In the LTI phase, the spontaneous electric polarization induced by a particular magnetic order in the spine and cross-tie sites has been found The anisotropy K modulates the range of the HTI phase. The Dzyaloshinskii Moriya(DM) The single crystal was grown by Barilo and Shiryaev The thermal expansion curves of NVCO in zero magnetic field (ZF) along three crystallographic directions are shown in Fig. ′ phase at T CC ′ The magnetostrictive curves of NVCO along the a direction are shown in Fig. In Fig. ′ , C and LTI phases becomes blurry(Fig. In the diagram for H//a [Fig. In Fig. ′ , C and LTI phases is still unclear. An unknown phase between the LTI and high field phase (HF1) is found, which seem to be the α phase in Ref. ′′ phase boundary changes in an exponential law by intensive measurements. Moreover, the distinct C-P transition arises in the thermal expansion measurement along the b direction. The C-P boundary indicates a distinct field induced effect, close to that of NVO and (Ni 0.9 Co 0.1 ) 3 V 2 O 8 In NVO, considering the DM interaction, the spine staggered moment N s,a generates a weak ferromagnetic (FM) moment M s,c in the spine site along the c direction: ( where the D b is the b component of DM vector, χ s,c (0) is the c component of spine susceptibility with zero wave vector. Analogously, on the cross-tie sites a FM moment will generate from the so-called off-diagonal exchange spine cross-tie interaction: where the χ c,c is the c component of the cross-tie susceptibility, j ac and d b are the symmetric (PD) and antisymmetric (DM) elements, respectively. M s,c and M c,c form the M c , the weak FM moment along the c direction, which leads to the linear boundary in the HTI-C and LTI-C transitions while H//c. The bilinear coupling between M c and the spine staggered moment N s,a gives rise to a blurry boundary between the P and C phases. If this coupling does not exist, a tricritical point with two second-order lines (P-HTI and P-C) and a first-order line (HTI-C) will appear, which is the result of a competition between the HTI and C phase. We find that two second order transitions(P-HTI and P-C) and a first order transition(HTI-C) as well as a tricritical point appear We now discuss these behaviors of the phase boundary by a symmetry analysis. In the NVO, the P phase has double rotation and inversion symmetry with the representation Γ 7 for H//c and Γ 5 for H//a. But the C phase has representation Γ 7 both for H//a and H//c In summary, we have provided detail investigations for the magnetic phase diagrams of NVCO by magnetostriction and thermal expansion measurements. The behavior of NVCO in high magnetic fields and the effect of doping Co 2+ on the NVO system are discussed. For H//a, the multicritical point of the C ′ , C and LTI phase moves to ZF and the boundary between them becomes blurry, indicating that the commensurate phase is suppressed by Co 2+ . The field dependence stability of the LTI phase is improved distinctly. As the magnetic field increases, the system goes into the high field states (F3 and F6). The F3 phase exhibits a field induced behavior. In addition, there are two intermediate phases (F4 and F5) with distinct anisotropy between the HTI and P phases. For H//b, a mixed state of the OHF phase consisting of two anisotropic phases is proposed. At about 20 T and 3 K, the system undergoes a transition from strong to weak spin lattice coupling. The high field states share a similar evolution with the low field states. In addition, the diagram reveals an unknown phase that is similar with the α phase. It is separated by two first order transitions. For H//c, an intermediate phase (C ′′ ) between the LTI and C phase is detected, which may be isomorphic with the C phase. The nonlinear LTI-C ′′ and HTI-C phase boundaries indicate the breaking of weak FM on C phase. The clear C-P phase boundary indicates the decoupling between magnetization M c and the spine staggered moment N s,a . Compared with the NVO and (Ni 0.9 Co 0.1 ) 3 V 2 O 8 , we find that doping Co 2+ produces a nonlinear effect on the NVO system. With the increase of Co 2+ doping, the weak FM moment first disappears and then reappears. These results manifest that a small amount of Co 2+ doping can effectively adjust the spin interaction between the competing magnetic orders in NVO system. 2+