Nickel titanium (NiTi) is a protypical shape-memory alloy used in a range of biomedical and engineering devices, but direct molecular dynamics simulations of the martensitic B19 ′ → B2 phase transition driving its shape-memory behavior are rare and have relied on classical force fields with limited accuracy. Here, we train four machine-learned force fields for equiatomic NiTi based on the LDA, PBE, PBEsol, and SCAN DFT functionals. The models are trained on the fly during NPT molecular dynamics, with DFT calculations and model updates performed automatically whenever the uncertainty of a local energy prediction exceeds a chosen threshold. The models achieve accuracies of 1-2 meV/atom during training and are shown to closely track DFT predictions of B2 and B19 ′ elastic constants and phonon frequencies. Surprisingly, in large-scale molecular dynamics simulations, only the SCAN model predicts a reversible B19 ′ ↔ B2 phase transition, with the LDA, PBE, and PBEsol models predicting a reversible transition to a previously uncharacterized low-volume phase, which we hypothesize to be a new stable high-pressure phase. We examine the structure of the new phase and estimate its stability on the temperaturepressure phase diagram. This work establishes an automated active learning protocol for studying displacive transformations, reveals important differences between DFT functionals that can only be detected in large-scale simulations, provides an accurate force field for NiTi, and identifies a new phase. The bimetallic alloy nickel titanium (NiTi) exhibits a range of fascinating behaviors, including superelasticity and the shape-memory effect. Because of its unique properties, NiTi is used in a range of biomedical, aerospace, and robotics applications A more computationally feasible approach to simulating the martensitic phase transition is to use an empirical interatomic potential or force field to drive the simulation, as the cost of energy and force prediction with a classical force field scales only linearly with the size of the system. However, parameterizing an accurate classical force field that captures the rich and subtle potential energy surface of NiTi is a formidable challenge. A number of classical force fields for NiTi have been developed over the years In the last decade, machine learning (ML) based approaches have dramatically increased the flexibility of classical force fields, opening up the possibility of linear-scaling models that achieve very high accuracy relative to their ab initio reference data Here, we train four highly accurate ML force fields for equiatomic NiTi based on the LDA, PBE, PBEsol, and SCAN DFT functionals. We use our recently developed active learning methodology In both the cooling and heating simulations, temperature shocks are introduced every 5 ps during the first half of the simulation (vertical lines, and the formation of a monoclinic distortion in the unit cell (Fig. Structural phase transitions are also observed with the PBE, LDA, and PBEsol models during cooling, but to lower-volume structures that are inconsistent with the expected B19 ′ martensite phase. Visualizations of the structures obtained in each of the four cooling simulations are presented in Fig. The relaxed SCAN structure has space group P 2 1 /m and exhibits a monoclinic distortion and elongated ⃗ c lattice vector, consistent with B19 ′ martensite (Fig. [ perature. We validate our models by computing a range of challenging properties and comparing against DFT and a recent 2NN-MEAM NiTi force field The MEAM model is in better agreement with experiment than DFT for the C 11 and C 12 constants, but overestimates C 44 by more than 130%. Predicting the thirteen independent elastic constants of the monoclinic B19 ′ phase represents an even more stringent test of the machine-learned force fields, and to our knowledge these constants have not been reported with any NiTi force field in the literature. The predictions of our PBE-trained model are plotted in Fig. Finally, we perform large-scale molecular dynamics simulations with the ML models to probe the structural phase transition in equiatomic NiTi supercells of 12, 168 atoms (see Fig. ). We first check the stability of B19 ′ martensite by performing heating simulations of pristine B19 ′ NiTi from 100 to 1500 K with a heating rate of 1 K/ps (light colors, Figs. Next, we perform cooling/heating simulations with each model to examine whether the B19 ′ → B2 phase transition is reversible (dark colors, Fig. Consistent with the training simulations, the LDA, SCAN, and PBEsol models predict a transition to the M 2 phase, indicated by sharp drops in the atomic volume. Only the SCAN model predicts a reversible transition to B19 ′ martensite, with the B2 → B19 ′ transition observed at 400 K and the B19 ′ → B2 transition observed at 680 K. We investigate the possibility that M 2 is stabilized at elevated pressures by performing cooling/heating and compression/decompression simulations at a range of pressures and temperatures with the SCAN-trained force field. The results of these simulations are summarized in the phase diagram shown in Fig. Furthermore, symmetry analysis of frames extracted from molecular dynamics simulations of the M 2 phase failed to reveal a space group larger than P 1 or P -1 , suggesting M 2 is a low-symmetry, possibly incommensurate, phase with properties that are highly sensitive to the DFT functional. We have developed four force fields for equiatomic NiTi based on the LDA, PBE, PBEsol, and SCAN DFT functionals. The models were trained autonomously during molecular dynamics, without any constraints applied to the unit cell as the 144-atom model systems were heated and cooled. During these training simulations, the models are in remarkable agreement with the DFT reference to within about 1 meV/atom on potential energy predictions, allowing us to generate MD trajectories at ab initio accuracy at a fraction of the cost of ab initio molecular dynamics. Nearly all previous computational studies of equiatomic NiTi have relied on a single DFT functional, most often PBE, and explored either the zero-Kelvin potential energy surface or the finite-temperature free energies of specific phases. Our training simulations eliminate these restrictions, allowing us to directly observe which phases form as the system is cooled or heated past the phase-transition temperature. Surprisingly, on cooling of the B2 austenite phase, our LDA, PBE, and PBEsol models predict a transition to a lower-volume phase that does not match any known phases of equiatomic NiTi. We have labelled this phase M 2. Only our SCAN model predicts the 19 expected from experiments. Similar behavior is observed in much larger cooling and heating 12, 168-atom simulations of the phase transition, with the LDA, PBE, and PBEsol models predicting a sharp decrease in atomic volume on cooling, consistent with the zero-Kelvin volume of the M 2 phase. We have validated the models on a range of challenging properties, and shown excellent agreement with DFT in predictions of the elastic constants and phonon frequencies of B2 and B19 ′ NiTi, showing dramatic improvement over a previous MEAM force field. The accuracy of our models suggests that the departure from experiment observed at low temperature is not due to inaccuracies of the force field models in reproducing the DFT reference, but rather due to inaccuracies in DFT itself, at least with the LDA, PBE, and PBEsol functionals. This has the surprising implication that the most common DFT functionals used in the past to study NiTi, most often PBE, are in qualitative disagreement with experiment at zero pressure, predicting the more densely packed M 2 phase rather than B19 ′ martensite. This, however, eluded detection because large-scale DFT-accurate simulations were not possible before the possibility to develop machine learning force fields. It is possible that the M 2 phase predicted by our LDA, PBE, and PBEsol models is stabilized at higher pressure. The phase diagram of equiatomic NiTi has not been extensively explored in experiments. A recent DFT study has proposed candidate phases of NiTi at high pressures The models discussed in this work are sparse Gaussian processes trained with the FLARE++ code, as discussed in greater detail in Ref. where k is a kernel function quantifying the similarity of two inputs, d i and d s are descriptors of the local environments ρ i and ρ s , and α is a vector of training coefficients. Atomic forces and virial stresses are computed from gradients of local energy predictions with respect to the atomic positions and cell vectors. In this work, we use a normalized dot product kernel with integer power ξ = 2, The signal variance σ 2 is a continuous hyperparameter that is optimized together with the energy, force and stress noise parameters σ E , σ F and σ S by maximizing the log marginal likelihood of the SGP. For the descriptor vectors d i , we use the B 2 term of the many-body Atomic Cluster Expansion Uncertainties in the local energy ε(ρ i ) are computed as the square root of a normalized predictive variance V ε , defined as where k εS is the vector of kernels between ρ i and the environments ρ s in the sparse set, and K SS is the matrix of kernels between pairs of sparse environments. Final models for each DFT functional are constructed by pooling together the structures collected during the heating and cooling training simulations and training a single SGP on all structures. The optimized hyperparameters σ, σ E , σ F , and σ S from the heating simulations are used in the final trained models. The final models are trained on cohesive energies rather than potential energies by correcting raw potential energy labels with isolated-atom energies of Ni and Ti. To accelerate predictions, the final models are mapped onto equivalent parametric models that are quadratic in the descriptor d i and that have a prediction cost that is independent of the size of the sparse set During the training simulations, hyperparameter optimization of σ, σ E , σ F , and σ S is performed with the L-BFGS-B algorithm implemented in SciPy DFT calculations are performed with plane-wave basis sets and the projector augmentedwave (PAW) method implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) We use a plane-wave kinetic energy cutoff of 336.9 eV and a k-point mesh of ∼ 4000 k points per reciprocal atom. The Methfessel-Paxton smearing method is used with a broadening value of 0.2 eV. The 3d 9 4s 1 and 3d 3 4s 1 electrons are included in the valence for Ni and Ti, respectively. For elastic constant and phonon frequency calculations, an electronic energy convergence criteria of 10 -7 eV is used. Phonon frequencies are calculated using the frozen phonon method as implemented in Phonopy Large-scale MD simulations are performed with LAMMPS using a custom pair style available in the FLARE++ repository. Simulations are performed in the NPT ensemble at zero pressure. We use a timestep of 2 fs, a temperature damping parameter of 0.2 ps, and a stress damping parameter of 2 ps in all simulations. Atomic volumes reported in Fig. 