We present an easily reproducible inexpensive microwave antenna that can generate a strong and homogeneous magnetic field of arbitrary polarization, which enables fast and coherent control of electron spins over a large volume. Unlike preceding works, we present a resonant antenna that maintains its resonant behaviour regardless of the proximity of other experimental hardware components. This robustness is crucial as it enables, amongst others, using microscope objectives with short working distances to perform wide field imaging/sensing with bulk diamonds. The antenna generates a magnetic field strength of 22.3 A/m for 1 W total driving power, which doubles the power efficiency compared with previously reported patch antenna designs. The magnetic field homogeneity in a volume of 0.3mm 3 , 0.5mm 3 and 1mm 3 is within 6%, 8% and 13%, respectively. The antenna has a full width at half maximum bandwidth of ∼160 MHz and its resonant frequency can be tuned over a 400 MHz range via four capacitors or varactors. The antenna has been tested and found to remain within safe handling temperatures during continuouswave operation at 8 W. The files required to reproduce this antenna, which can be built on a standard and affordable dou-ble sided PCB, are provided open-source. This work facilitates a robust and versatile piece of instrumentation, being particularly appealing for applications such as high sensitivity magnetometry and wide field imaging/sensing with Nitrogen Vacancy centers. Nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond have emerged as a promising platform for quantum sensing due to their exceptional properties, such as long coherence times even at room temperature, high sensitivity, and nanoscale spatial resolution. They have been used to detect various physical quantities, including magnetic and electric fields, temperature, and strain NV centers are atomic-scale defects consisting of a nitrogen atom adjacent to a vacant lattice site, or vacancy, in the crystal structure of diamond. These defects can exist in three electronic states: neutral (NV 0 ), positively charged (NV + ), and negatively charged (NV -). The latter is the most explored due to its remarkable optical and spin properties The initialization, control and readout of NV centers in diamond using laser and microwave (MW) techniques are fundamental processes in harnessing their quantum properties. A widespread NV center spin controlling approach is to use a green laser pulse to initialize the electron spin to its m s = 0 state through a preferred decay pathway from the excited state, as visualized in Figure By considering only the effects of the external magnetic field, the electron spin Hamiltonian can be simplified to where D = 2.87 GHz is the zero-field splitting parameter, Ŝ is the vector of spin operators and γ e = 2.8 MHz/G is the gyro-magnetic ratio of the electron Working near the degeneracy conditions of the m s = ±1 states, e.g., without an externally provided bias magnetic field In this context, the design and the characteristics of the microwave antenna used for NV center experiments play a crucial role in achieving efficient and precise manipulation of the NV center's spin states. Factors such as the antenna geometry, polarization, and power distribution should be optimized to maximize the coupling efficiency between the antenna and the NV center, ensuring effective spin manipulation. Large ensembles of NV centers can be advantageous for several applications, i.e. vector magnetometry determining both direction and magnitude of magnetic fields simultaneously When employing single NV centers it is a common practice to use a simple straight wire or a loop as source for the MW fields, which can enable very fast spin control due to the high magnetic fields they generate when placed in very close proximity to the NV centers. However, these antennas are not suitable to control NV ensembles as they generate very different MW conditions for distinct NVs because the MW fields they generate possess large spatial variations. Furthermore, it is more difficult to achieve orthogonality between the MW magnetic field and that of the external static one at the location of the NV center A diversity of microwave antennas have been proposed to address these homogeneity limitations. Many of the existing works limit to generating linearly polarized fields Several approaches have been proposed capable of generating circularly polarized MW magnetic fields but with reduced field homogeneity. A pair of wires aligned either orthogonally or perpendicularly has been used to generate circularly polarized magnetic fields. Such designs based on thin straight wires are placed few a μm away from the NV centers to the achieve high magnetic field ratios, and suffer very high spatial inhomogeneity Resonant antennas can offer a solution to covering a large volume with a strong and homogeneous field Here we present an efficient quadrature microwave antenna that maintains its calibrated resonant behaviour regardless the configuration of its neighbouring setup components. This largely reduces setup constraints otherwise introduced by antennas whose behaviour is dependent on nearby elements 2 Design materials and methods The antenna was designed to generate strong and homogeneous circularly polarized fields while providing ample optical and mechanical access and fabrication simplicity. The planar geometry of the circular patch antenna together with the through hole to host the diamond facilitates easy access space on both sides of the PCB so other setup components, like microscope objectives with short working distances or samples to be analyzed, can be brought in close proximity to the diamond. This design also offers more flexibility when designing optical path configurations because optical pumping and fluorescence collection can be performed from both faces of the diamond. The resonant frequency of the prototype was designed to be 2.86 GHz. However, to enable efficient control of the m s = 0 ⇐⇒ -1 transition, the resonant frequency can be tuned to lower frequencies by adding capacitors to the antenna. As mentioned earlier, two important design constraints are achieving a high field strength and high homogeneity over a large volume in the diamond. Importantly, to harvest the highest signal to noise ratio, the location and shape of this volume should be such that it can be optically addressed in a manner that the NVs contained in the optimally controllable volume are all interrogate at once, while minimizing the fluorescence from NVs not contained in this volume. An electromagnetic field simulation software (CST Studio Suite 2023, Dassault Systèmes, Vélizy-Villacoublay, France) is used to optimize antenna design parameters. An initial geometry is estimated from analytical expressions for circular patch antennas derived in where c is the speed of light, a is the radius of the antenna and ε r is the permittivity in the dielectric material, also called the dielectric constant. The TM 110 mode presents the highest magnetic field at the centre of the antenna. Therefore, the positioning for the diamond has to be chosen accordingly. Other higher frequency modes could be excited but they will result in a lower and less homogeneous magnetic field. The antenna is designed with a square hole, so that it can host a diamond as large as 3 x 3 x 0.5 mm 3 , which covers most commercially available single crystal samples. The simulations also include the diamond material with the aforementioned size, a dielectric constant ε r of 5.7, and placed in the center of the hole. Due to its common availability, we have chosen FR-4 as PCB substrate, which has an ε r of 4.4. According to Equation Reducing substrate thickness also increases the magnetic field, but considerably penalizes the homogeneity along the Z direction. Coaxial SMA connectors are used for signal launch to the PCB, providing a reproducible performance and a robust connection. These connectors also facilitate maintaining a 50 Ω impedance of the transmission chain, thereby minimizing power reflections. A quarter wavelength transmission line is used to match the impedance of the circular patch antenna to the 50 Ω of the transmission chain. This enables efficient power transfer and high signal integrity. The feeding ports are connected to the outer edges of the circular patch, allowing surface currents to run through the patch without disturbance. This configuration ensures that the strongest magnetic field would be created in the middle of the patch. The antenna is visualized in Figure In Figure For smaller volumes of 0.5 mm 3 and 0.3 mm 3 , the inhomogeneity is within 8% and 6% respectively. In linear polarization modes ( Figure An antenna designed to host a 3 x 3 x 0.5 mm 3 diamond size is built on a double sided standard FR-4 PCB (Figure To drive the antenna in a linearly polarized mode, a MW drive signal is fed through one of the ports. To generate the circularly polarized modes, the MW drive power signal is split into two 90 • phase shifted signals with a 90 • phase shifting power splitter (ZX10Q-2-34-S+, Minicircuits, NY, USA), outputs of which are connected to the two ports of the antenna. Right or left circularly polarized fields are generated by swapping the order of the cables at the power splitter. A vector network analyser (Fieldfox N9912A, Keysight, USA) is used to measure the reflection (S11 & S22) and transmission (S21 & S12) coefficients of the antenna, and to calibrate the power delivered to the antenna. The results of these measurements can be observed in Figure One important feature of this antenna is that it is very stable under changes of external conditions. For example, in Figure An optical setup is built to evaluate the manufactured MW antenna prototype. The setup allows to sweep through the volume of the diamond initializing and reading out the electron spin of the NV centers. The simplified schematic of the setup can be found in Figure An external static magnetic field highly stable and of low spatial inhomogeneity is generated via a ring with permanent magnets placed at a radial distance of 80 mm. This ring can host up to 32 square magnets of 12 mm length. NdFeB magnets of grade N48 are employed. This external magnetic field points along the z direction, i.e., orthogonal to the PCB of the MW antenna. The applied external magnetic field is fine-tuned for the Larmor frequency of the m s = 0 ⇐⇒ -1 transition corresponding to f ∼ = 2.81 GHz follow-ing Equation An Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) experiment is performed where the change in the fluorescence due to microwave coupling to the electron spin states is measured. A typical example can be seen in Figure The strength and polarity of the MW field generated by the antenna are measured experimentally with a Rabi experiment. The sequence consists of MW pulses with different time durations. Subsequently, the oscillation frequency of the obtained photoluminescence is analyzed. The Rabi A simple power splitter was used to feed both ports from a single power amplifier and no further efforts were made to tune the feeding powers and dephase. This far from ideal feed introduced a considerable ellipticity, which can be inferred from the presence of the second smaller peaks. The contrast of the m s = 0 ⇐⇒ +1 transition at 2.935 GHz is lower than the m s = 0 ⇐⇒ -1 counterpart at 2.805 GHz. This difference is due to the MW antenna being tuned to be resonant at 2.81 GHz and, as consequence, it is more efficient driving the m s = 0 ⇐⇒ +1 transition. frequency is estimated by fitting the signal to an exponentially decaying oscillation according to where Ω is the Rabi frequency, A is the amplitude of the signal, τ is the MW pulse duration, θ is a phase offset factor, T 2 is the decay ratio, B is a linear drift and C a DC offset. The Rabi frequency is proportional to the MW magnetic field generated by the antenna where an additional √ 2 is multiplied in the case of circular polarization. Also, H rms ∝ √ P ant , the square root of the input power to the antenna. Figure The distribution of Rabi frequencies across different planes (xy, xz, and yz) is analyzed using both circular and linear polarization. This spatial distribution is characterized stepping the position of the antenna and the diamond with the micropositioner, sweeping the spot being interrogated in the diamond. For circular polarization, each port of the antenna was fed with a power of 2.8 W, while for linear polarization, 3.8 W was applied to a single port. In the former, the power splitter fed to each port 1.3 W and 1.5 W. The resulting Rabi frequency maps are illustrated in Figure Increasing the power delivered in the center by feeding more power could cause damage to the antenna due to heating. To test this, the heat distribution is measured with an infrared thermometer. Figure Besides, it was observed that the temperature increase generated a shift in the resonant behaviour of the antenna. Figure Our experience shows that, while the new geometry is effective, the built antennas tend to have a lower resonant frequency than predicted by simulations. We distinguish three possible factors: the dielectric constant might differ, fabrication inaccuracies might be present or spurious electrical capacitances that were not considered might exist. The shift is about 55 MHz in the manu- factured prototypes, but note that this may vary from producer to producer. Given this tendency to shift, and the limitation that capacitor based tuning can only lower the resonance frequency, the authors recommend scaling down the outer diameter of the copper patch aiming for a higher resonant frequency than the desired one. The results presented herein question the need to add 2 additional dummy ports (a total of 4 ports) to the PCB to achieve high homogeneity volumes by geometric symmetry, as found earlier The central hole in the antenna offers flexibility for adjustment of the diamond along the axis of the hole. For example, the diamond can be located at the height of the ground plane for applications benefiting from microscope objectives with short (>0.6 mm) working distances. However, the highest field strength versus homogeneity is achieved when the diamond is centered along the hole axis. In this configuration, the field inhomogeneity is below 7% within a volume of 1mm 3 . This makes our configuration particularly suited to both harvest the averaging power of large pools of NV centers as well as those at moderate Rabi frequencies (>5 MHz), such as in dynamic nuclear hyperpolarization (DNP) and microfluidic NMR applications. Importantly, the high homogeneity volume in this antenna is cylindrical and covers a 0.5 mm height, which is a standard size of commercially available diamonds. Furthermore, this cylindrical geometry enables matching seamlessly the volume geometry addressed with the green pump beam to that of the low inhomogeneity MW field region. Our configuration largely improves the coherence in the response of the large pool of NVs, which is paramount for bulk sensing in applications such as magnetometry with bulk diamonds. The ∼2 ns ringing time of the antenna does not impose a hazardous limitation as it is very short compared to those required for popular π and π/2 pulses, which are more than an order of magnitude longer for the Rabi frequencies generated by this antenna. For example, achieving a π/2 pulse in 50 ns would require <20 W input power in the circularly polarized mode, which is enabled by the good linearity (Figure The direction of the circular polarization could be dynamically switched or adjusted, for example, by driving independently each port with a two channel arbitrary waveform generator or, for lower budget setups, by swapping the order of the transmission paths with fast switches. It is important to note the ellipticity of the field maps for linear polarization feeds. This ellipticity introduces a linear polarization component that limits the degree of isolation achievable when trying to address the -1 and +1 spin states independently. Our results show that our antenna design offers a good compromise with respect to other antennas used in NV centers measurements. Our design doubles the power efficiency, offers an improved optical access and, most importantly, is robust against the variability of external hardware components, in contradiction to the previous patch antenna 