A Fe-17Mn-6Si-19Cr-4Ni-1(V,C) shape memory steel (SMS) was characterised electrochemically in its unstrained and pre-strained conditions. The work focused on analysing the passive films generated in alkaline conditions, and on the behaviour of those passive samples in various Cl -/OH -ratios. The passive films were developed by cyclic voltammetry and their characterisation was performed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS); these tests were also carried out in 304 L stainless steel specimens for comparison purposes. The results indicated that the film characteristics (thickness and composition) were similar in all the samples, although higher corrosion resistance was observed in the 304 L due to the higher Cr content. In addition, the behaviour of the passive samples in aggressive conditions was assessed by potentiodynamic measurements. The results stated that the shape memory steels were more sensitive than the stainless steel to the aggressive conditions, especially when the alloy was pre-strained. It was also observed that the SMS exhibited a characteristic corrosion morphology localized at the grain boundaries. Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are a variety of smart materials characterized by having Shape Memory Effect (SME), which consists of the capability to recover its original shape through temperature variation once the material has been deformed beyond its elastic limit In recent years, the application of SMS in civil engineering has gained attraction, mainly for constrained recovery applications such as pipe joints, rail couplings or pre-stressing reinforcement elements; this latter represents a most promising field of application. In this, the SMS component is pre-strained before being embedded in concrete. Once the concrete has been hardened, the SMS is heated to activate the reverse transformation; however, its deformation is constrained in the concrete, and tensile stress is generated in the SMS (recovery stress). Consequently, compressive stress is developed in the concrete. The advantage of this procedure is that no pre-stressing tools, such as mechanical jacks and anchor heads, are needed since the pre-stressing is achieved by the SME of the alloy Moreover, it was found that the precipitation of fine particles of NbC The present work deals with the electrochemical survey of a Fe-17Mn-6Si-19Cr-4Ni-1(V,C) shape memory alloy in alkaline conditions, close to those inside the concrete pores, considering not only unstrained but also pre-stained states since this is the condition in which the SMS will be embedded in the concrete. The characterization of the passive film generated in alkaline conditions was performed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In addition, the response of the previously passivated samples in aggressive conditions, such as the presence of chlorides or the alkalinity decrease due to the carbonation process was also studied. The SMS specimens were rebars with a diameter of 11 mm, provided by the "RE-FER" company (https://www.re-fer.eu/) in two states: unstrained and 5% pre-strained. For comparative purposes, the electrochemical experiments were also performed in AISI 304 L stainless steel rebars with a diameter of 14 mm. The chemical composition of both types of samples is given in Table The specimens were mechanically grounded with successive grades of SiC papers up to 1200 grit. They were then polished with diamond paste of 1 μm grain size to obtain mirror-like appearance. Finally, samples were ultrasonically cleaned before immersion in the different solutions test. The surface morphology of the SMS samples was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The equipment employed was an Electroscan JSM-54® model from OXFORD® instruments using an acceleration voltage of 20 kV. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique was used to identify the phases present in both states. The equipment employed was a Siemens® D5000 powder diffractometer with a monochromatic CuK α radiation, λ α = 1.5 Å; the step size and time were 0.02 • and 4 s, respectively. The analytical characterisation of the passive films generated in the alkaline medium was assessed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha ESCA® instrument equipped with Al K α monochromatic radiation (1486.6 eV). The measurement was done in a Constant Analyser Energy mode (CAE) with a 100 eV pass energy for survey spectra and 20 eV pass energy for high-resolution spectra. The passive films were generated by cyclic voltammetry (CV), submitting the samples to six cycles to obtain a film thick enough to be analysed. The electrolyte was a NaOH 0.1M + KOH 0.1 M solution (pH=13) close to the concrete pores' solution. The potential was scanned from hydrogen to oxygen evolution reactions at dE/dt = 5 mV⋅s -1 . The characterisation of the semiconducting properties of the films generated was performed from the Mott-Schottky approach. The relation between the space charge capacitance (C SC ) and the potential is given by where the positive sign is for n-type semiconductors and the negative for p-type semiconductors. N is the dopant concentration (cm -3 ), e is the electron charge (1.6 × 10 -19 C), ε o is the vacuum permittivity (8.85×10 -14 F⋅cm -1 ), ε r is the relative dielectric constant of the passive film (taken as 15.6 in the present study Where the symbols have the same meaning as in Eq. ( The measured capacitance, C, was obtained from Eq. ( where Z'' is the imaginary component of the impedance and ω= 2πf is the angular frequency. The M-S approach assumes that the space charge capacitance is much smaller than the Helmholtz double-layer capacitance. Since both are in a series arrangement, the measured capacitance will equal C SC . The impedance measurements were conducted after 24 h of the passive layer generation by sweeping the potential anodically in the passivity region, from -0.4 to 0.2 V vsHg/HgO with a step of 25 mV, at 1 kHz frequency and using an AC signal with 10 mV rms amplitude. After the Mott-Schottky tests, impedance measurements in a broader frequency range were carried out to investigate the processes at the metal/passive film/solution interfaces. The measurements were also done in the passivity region, every 50 mV in the anodic direction, the frequency range was from 10 kHz to 1 mHz using 7 points per decade and an AC signal with 10 mV rms amplitude. The corrosion behaviour of the specimens in aggressive environments was assessed using the CV technique. The previous step was the passive film generation employing the procedure mentioned above. Once the film had been generated, the samples remained in the alkaline solution for 24 h, after which this electrolyte was removed, and the cell was filled with the new one. Different solutions were tested, in which a 0.1 M NaCl concentration was kept constant, and the pH was lowered at 0.5 pH unit steps by diluting the original NaOH 0.1M + KOH 0.1 M solution. This experimental procedure aimed to simulate the loss of alkalinity that occurs in the reinforced concrete due to the carbonation process. The voltammetry was performed after one hour of stabilization time. The potential was scanned from -50 mV cathodic respect to the OCP up to oxygen evolution reaction or when high current densities were recorded (in the order of mA⋅cm -2 ) at 1 mV⋅s -1 scan rate. A conventional three-electrode arrangement was used to perform all the electrochemical experiments. The metallic specimens were the working electrode defining an area of 0.33 cm 2 , and a large platinum mesh was used as the counter electrode. Two reference electrodes were employed depending on the electrolyte. A Hg/HgO 0.1 M KOH electrode was used with NaOH 0.1M + KOH 0.1 M solution during the generation and characterization of the passive film to avoid contamination with chloride ions. The saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was employed in chloride-containing electrolytes experiments. An Autolab 30 Potentiostat with an FRA module, from EcoChemie®, was employed to perform all the electrochemical measurements. Fig. The XRD technique was employed for assessing the identification of the phases present. Fig. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a common technique for characterizing the passive layers generated on metallic substrates; it provides a good understanding of the oxidation and reduction processes occurring on passive metals. The CVs performed in the SMS samples (both states) immersed in 0.1 M NaOH+ 0.1 M KOH solution are shown in Fig. Analytical information on the generated passive films has been extracted from the XPS measurements. The acquired survey spectra are depicted in Fig. The semiconductive nature of the generated passive films was characterised based on the Mott-Schottky (M-S) analysis. The C -2 SC vs applied potential profiles (M-S plots) are shown in Fig. Three different regions are distinguished. At low potentials, the oxide films behave as an n-type semiconductor due to oxygen vacancies and/or Fe or Mn cation interstitials., A plateau region is observed at higher potentials, which may be interpreted as dielectric behaviour The donor (N D ) and acceptor (N A ) dopant concentrations can be assessed from the slope of the M-S plots. Table The evolution of the space charge thickness (L SC ) with the applied potential is illustrated in Fig. The EIS was also employed to assess the electrochemical response of the oxide films generated in alkaline conditions. As stated in the experimental section, the EIS measurements were performed in the passivity region every 50 mV by sweeping the potential anodically. Fig. The obtained spectra are modelled using the electrical equivalent circuit shown in Fig. The C dl evolution shows an initial period characterized by nearly constant values, consistent with the low current density recorded in the CVs (see Fig. Donor (N D ) and acceptor (N A ) densities extracted from the M-S plots of the generated oxide films. which agrees with the capacitance increasing. The low-frequency time constant provides information about the redox activity in the oxide films. The capacitance values are small, confirming this region's low oxidation rate. Despite that, the redox activity is higher for SMS samples and tends to increase at more anodic potentials, reflecting the Mn activity previously mentioned. The resistance evolution follows the reciprocal of the voltammograms profile. The initial increase indicates a slowdown in the redox activity, probably because as the thickness of the film increases, it adopts a more stable structure. At higher applied potentials, a continuous decrease is observed, which supports the activation of the Mn activity observed in the capacitance evolution. There are slight differences depending on the state. Thus, the resistance reduction is more substantial for pre-strained SMS samples. In the case of AISI 304 L, the resistance decreasing is not correlated to the capacitance evolution. Although it is not fully understood, it could result from increased film conductivity. The stability of the passive films generated in alkaline conditions can be compromised by aggressive ions, such as chlorides, or by the loss of alkalinity due to the carbonation phenomenon. Therefore, it is worth knowing the behaviour of the passivated SMSs in these aggressive environments. Fig. A more detailed analysis of the reverse curves reveals some changes if they are compared with those without chlorides. Fig. The same tendency is observed at pH = 12.5 and pH = 12 (not included here). The passive films remain intact in all the studied cases. At lower pH values, distinct behaviour is recorded depending on the type of samples, as Fig. The cyclic voltammograms recorded at pH = 11.5 (Fig. Fig. The higher resistance to pitting corrosion of AISI 304 L is expected, and was already observed by other researchers On the other hand, although the corrosion resistance of the SMS is similar in both states, the pre-strained SMS exhibits slightly lower resistance to chloride depassivation, in agreement with the results obtained by other researchers after deformation, which promotes more active zones to metal dissolution The present work approached the characterization of a Fe-17Mn-6Si- 10Cr-4Ni-1(V,C) shape memory alloy in unstrained and 5% pre-strained conditions. The study was performed in alkaline conditions close to the concrete pores' solution. The main results can be summarized in the following conclusions: • The morphological characterisation revealed the presence of γ-austenite and ε-stress-induced martensite, in both states. In addition, a new δ-ferrite phase was also observed, located at grain boundaries. • By cyclic voltammetry, a passive film was generated in alkaline conditions, not only on SMS samples but also on AISI 304 L, for comparative purposes. The CVs of SMS presented some differences compared with the AISI 304 L that should be associated with the presence of Mn. The most significant difference was related to the lower current density recorded at the magnetite formation peak in the case of the SMS, which may be associated with the presence of manganese oxides that partially blocked the iron activity. • The XPS results indicated that the thickness of the films was around 20 nm and corroborated the presence of oxides/hydroxides of Fe, Cr, Mn and Ni in the oxide film. • The electronic characteristics of these films revealed a dual response, n-type semiconducting behaviour at lower potentials and p-type at more anodic ones. • The impedance measurements performed towards the anodic direction initially reflected a gradual thickening of the oxide films. However, at higher potentials, there was some dissolution. In addition, differences were observed in the impedance values depending on the state of the SMS; the lower values registered for the prestrained SMS samples indicated the generation of less stable oxide film, probably due to the stressing procedure. • These previous conclusions were corroborated when the samples were immersed in aggressive conditions, involving the presence of chlorides and the loss of alkalinity. The SMS was more sensitive to the decreasing pH and chloride ions presence than the AISI 304 L, mainly in the pre-strained stage. This result may limit the use of this SMS in pre-stressing reinforcement components. • The corroded surface morphology observed in SMS samples revealed the intergranular corrosion due to the δ-ferrite phase. Therefore, in this line, the optimization of the production procedure of this alloy to avoid the δ-ferrite formation should increase its corrosion resistance. The corresponding authors on behalf of all authors declare any financial or any potential competing or non-financial interests of the manuscript. Data will be made available on request. 