Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a specific class of hybrid, crystalline, nano-porous materials made of metal-ion-based 'nodes' and organic linkers. Most of the studies on MOFs largely focused on porosity, chemical and structural diversity, gas sorption, sensing, drug delivery, catalysis, and separation applications. In contrast, much less reports paid attention to understanding and tuning the electrical properties of MOFs. Poor electrical conductivity of MOFs (~10 -7 -10 -10 Scm -1 ), reported in earlier studies, impeded their applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and renewable energy storage. To overcome this drawback, the MOF community has adopted several intriguing strategies for electronic applications. The present review focuses on creatively designed bulk MOFs and surface-anchored MOFs (SURMOFs) with different metal nodes (from transition metals to lanthanides), ligand functionalities, and doping entities, allowing tuning and enhancement of electrical conductivity. Diverse platforms for MOFs-based electronic device fabrications, conductivity measurements, and underlying charge transport mechanisms are also addressed. Overall, the review highlights the pros and cons of MOFs-based electronics (MOFtronics), followed by an analysis of the future directions of research, including optimization of the MOF compositions, heterostructures, electrical contacts, device stacking, and further relevant options which can be of interest for MOF researchers and result in improved devices performance. The field of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) has experienced a tremendous evolution over recent decades, both in terms of fundamental studies and potential applications. MOFs are generally composed of metal ions or metal-ions-based clusters called 'nodes' and multitopic ligands called 'arms' or 'linkers', coupled to the 'nodes'. Bulk MOFs are commonly synthesized via a solvothermal procedure performed at high temperatures followed by slow cooling (2-5 o C/h). During this process, 'nodes' and 'arms' coordinate with each other via a self-assembly process, leading to the formation of highly ordered, crystalline, cage-like MOFs. The journey of MOFs began in 1995 by Yaghi and team after the discovery of the first microporous framework featuring 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate (BTC) multidentate group as 'arms' and Co 2+ as 'nodes', held together by a coordination bond. Large pore size and design diversity make these systems promising candidates for storing small molecules, gas absorption media, sensing platforms, catalytic materials, photo-responsive systems, and biomedical applications. Except for these major issues, we shortly discuss such general points as the current models of electrical conductivity in MOFs, experimental approaches to the fabrication of thin film MOFs, and standard experimental techniques to measure the electrical conductance. More detailed information on these points and some other relevant questions in the general context of electrically conductive MOFs can be found in the dedicated reviews and perspectives published recently in various journals. Freund et al. describing the current state of designing and tuning MOF and COF (coordination polymer framework) properties and the respective electronic applications, A schematic overview of a roadmap in context of conductive MOFs and the relevant fabrication techniques for thin MOF films are presented in Fig. Despite successful use of MOFs in various electronic applications and devices, it remains a challenging task to understand an underlying charge conduction mechanism. The majority of MOFs feature a wide band gap, and the orbitals of the metal ion clusters, and redox-inert linkers do not overlap sufficiently to allow for effective charge transport in the framework. As a result, most of the MOFs are electrical insulators. The first electrically conductive MOF, Cu I [Cu III (pdt)2] (pdt = pyrazine-2,3-dithiolate], was reported in 2009 by Takaishi and co-workers. It is generally assumed that the charge transport in conductive MOFs occurs in either "through-bond" or 'through-space' fashion, relying on either band or hopping transport mode (Fig. Charge transport properties of MOFs are best represented by their electrical conductivity, , a parameter that reflects the ease with which charges can propagate through MOFs or other materials, can be calculated according to the equation, where I, V, L and A denote current, applied bias, the distance between the two electrodes (thickness of a MOF film), and the cross-sectional area of the junction, respectively. Conductivity of MOFs can be measured for both single crystals and polycrystalline materials in the form of either thin films or pellets. In polycrystalline samples, grain boundary resistance and distribution of different crystallographic orientations contribute to the conductivity in addition to their inherent conductivity which is the property of fundamental interest. Nevertheless, most of the charge transport measurements so far were performed on polycrystalline thin film MOFs or pellets, which are the most frequently used MOF samples. At the same time, measurements on single-crystal MOFs have their own importance since they provide the most characteristic material values, serving as references for polycrystalline samples and as a benchmark for applications. The charge transport measurements are usually performed by either two-probe or four-probe methods. In-plane conductivity typically refers to the coordination bonds within the same plane of the MOF structure. In contrast, out-of-plane conductivity entails charge carriers moving perpendicular to the primary planes, often involving charge transport via hopping, or tunneling mechanism. The major challenges to acquire these parameters are to prepare single-crystal MOF samples with appropriate orientations and to contact them properly relying on the suitable crystal face. Another critical issue for the electrical conductivity measurements on single-crystal MOFs is the reproducibility of the results, affected both by the distribution of the parameters of the crystals (size, shape, purity, and morphology) and by the quality of the contacts. Hence, smart tactics are required to meet the above challenges. Toward this endeavor, Sun et al. probed the electrical conductivity of a single crystal of Cd2(TTFTB) MOF with a hexagonal shape for both in-plane (σ∥c) and out-of-plane (σ⊥c) directions, relying on the specific faces of this crystal. A particularly high value of in-plain conductivity in the single-crystal MOFs, 10.96 S cm -1 , was measured for the single crystals of the Cu-based frameworks, {[Cu2(6-Hmna)(6-mn)]•NH4}n (6-Hmna = 6-mercaptonicotinic acid, 6-mn = 6-mercaptonicotinate) featuring 2D copper-sulfur planes. Ref. (2-probe) N2-atmosphere (Glove box) 10 -4 ab-axis Sun et al. (2-probe) N2-atmosphere (Glove box) 10 -7 c-axis Sun et al. (2-probe) N2-atmosphere (Glove box) 10 -6 Random Sun et al. c-axis Ha et al. Single crystal (vdP) Vacuum ~ 1 ab-axis Dou et al. (2-probe) Vacuum 0.1 Random Day et al. Vacuum 150 c-axis Day et al. External stimuli, such as electric or magnetic fields, light, temperature, and pressure, can significantly influence the charge transport properties of MOFs. For example, McGrail and co-workers prepared conductive MOFs composed of the TCNQ (7,7,8,8-tetracyanoqunidodimethane) linkers and Cu 2+ nodes which could reversibly change the structural configuration in response to applied potential. Light represents a versatile and non-destructive stimulus to modulate the electronic properties of photoresponsive MOFs, relying in particular on photosensitive linkers, facilitating charge transport. Scm -1 , increased to 2.9 (± 0.67) × 10 -6 Scm -1 upon UV irradiation. Another useful building block in the context of optoelectronic applications is porphyrin which is an excellent electron donor with a delocalized π-system and absorption in the visible region. A promising approach to rational design of functional photoswitchable MOFs was demonstrated recently by M. Mostaghimi et al. Doping entities can effectively tune and significantly improve the electrical properties of MOFs. For instance, Farha and co-workers reported doping of the NU-1000 MOF, formed by pyrene-based linkers and hexa-zirconium nodes, with nickel (IV) bis(dicarbollide) (NiCB). Similarly, conducting polymer fibres embedded in MOFs lead to a significant increase in electrical conductivity, Alternative to doping with conducting polymer fibres, in situ polymerization within the frameworks can be performed. To this end, Ballav and co-workers reported the inclusion of monomer pyrrole (Py) into the nanochannels of [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)] MOFs (NDC = 2,6-napthalenedicarboxylic acid and PCA = 4pyridinecarboxylic acid]. MOFs. Energy dispersive X-ray spectra suggest the presence of nonstoichiometric and insignificant amounts of I2, corroborating its role as an initiator for oxidative polymerization of pyrrole. The band gap tuning is another tool to boost the electrical conductivity of MOF. Thus, the EIS studies provide a deep insight into the charge transport phenomena, revealing the contributions of specific charge carriers. Another popular approach to enhance the electrical conductance of MOFs, pioneered by Allendorf and co-authors, Subsequently, these films were loaded with ferrocene (Fc) for conductivity tuning. The pristine and Fcdoped SURMOFs were placed into two-terminal junctions with the gold substrate serving as the bottom electrode and hexadecanethiol (HDT) passivated mercury drop serving as the top electrode (Fig. The respective I-V curves show a higher current density for the doped SURMOFs compared to the pristine ones as well as an exponential decrease of the current density (and, consequently, an increase in resistance) with the film thickness, corresponding to a very low decay constant (β ≈ 0.006 Å -1 ) (Fig. The above experimental results were confirmed and even improved by Jung et al. by using a solution shearing method to synthesize a thin film of HKUST-1 MOF with a large area and high crystallinity. MOFs by infiltration with bromine vapor with varying stoichiometry ratios with respect to Cu ion. The electrical conductivity of MOFs can also be modulated by doping with alkali metal ions, as in particular was demonstrated by Zhu and co-workers. Using the Arrhenius equation, σ = σ0 exp(-Ea/kBT), with σ0 as prefactor, the activation energy for the charge transport (Ea) was determined at 0.128, 0.39 and 0.34 eV for MnHHB, MnRbTHBQ, and MnCsTHBQ, respectively (Fig. A specific kind of doping are polar solvent molecules that can modulate many properties of materials including electrical conductivity. The metal-catecholates (M-CAT) based MOFs exhibit strong charge delocalization due to the significant overlap of electronic states between the metal nodes and organic linkers. The combination of in-plane conductivity and layered structure makes them an excellent platform for creating ultrathin MOF films, suitable both for model studies of electrical conductivity and device fabrication. However, the conductivity of these films turned out to be much lower (by up to three orders of magnitude) than that of the respective single-crystal MOFs, making it crucial to increase their crystallinity and orientational order. In this context, Medina and co-workers prepared well-oriented M-CAT-1 thin films with thicknesses of 180-200 nm by using vapor-assisted conversion technique. These films, comprised of 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene (HHTP) linkers and Ni 2+ , Co 2+ , and Cu 2+ nodes, were subjected to electrical measurements and integrated into model solar cells between ITO and Al electrodes. An alternative approach to the synthesis of highly oriented, ultrathin (10 nm) Cu-CAT-1 MOF films (sequential transfer of nanosheets) was reported by Carlos and co-workers, resulting in a relatively high electrical conductance. In contrast, at lower temperatures (T < 240 K), the conduction is governed by a hopping mechanism, which was further confirmed by the observed T -1/4 relationship, typical of hopping in Mott's 3D systems. It was assumed that the Cu-CAT-1 MOFs feature both inter-and intralayer charge transport relying on Reprinted with permission from Ref. Recently, Dincă and coworkers reported tuning of the band gap of metal-alloyed conjugated MOFs (MxM'3-x)(HITP)2 (MM' = CuNi, CoNi, CoCu; HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene) by varying the metal ions ratio, leading to a considerable increase in electrical conductivity. Promising systems are 2D conductive MOFs, such as Ni3(HITP)2, which consist of 2,3,6,7,10,11hexaaminotriphenylene (HITP) linkers and nickel ions and show high bulk electrical conductivity (> 5000 Sm -1 ). These frameworks can be particularly useful in the context of supercapacitor and battery applications and electrocatalysis. To date, the utmost efforts in modulating the electrical conductivity of MOFs have been centred around the tuning of ligand structures. In contrast, the role of metal ions in influencing conductivity has gained comparatively less attention. The electrically conducting MOFs that have been reported consist mainly of only a few metal ions, e.g., Ni, Cu, and Co. Notably, Dincă and co-workers have expanded the library of electrically conducting MOFs through the pioneering synthesis of Ga metal ions-based frameworks. The authors inferred that charge transport within the Ga-based MOFs is predominantly facilitated through π-π stacking interactions, leading to high electrical conductivity, similar to the Ni(II) and Co(II) case. This finding marks a significant breakthrough and opens new avenues for utilizing -block elements in MOF synthesis. Another promising alternative to the "standard" MOF systems exploiting predominantly Ni, Cu, and Co nodes is provided by lanthanide MOFs. To this end, Dincǎ and co-workers studied the conductivity relationship in a series of Ln-HHTP MOFs comprising HHTP ligands and lanthanide cations (Ln = Yb, Ho, Nd, and La), showing that the emergence of high conductivity in layered MOFs does not necessarily require a metal-ligand bond with highly covalent character and that interactions between organic ligands alone can produce efficient charge transport pathways. In view of the dominant role of the stacking distance in the lanthanide MOFs, tetrathiafulvalene tetrabenzoate (TTFTB), known for strong π-π interactions, was considered as a linker. To this end, Dincă and co-workers synthesized three different MOFs composed of La 3+ -TTFTB and denoted as 1, 2, and 3 via the conventional solvothermal method, varying temperature and composition of the solvent (H2O: DMF: EtOH) (Fig. Complementary to the above frameworks, Skorupskii and Dincă recently synthesized intrinsically electrically conductive and structurally isotropic Eu6HOTP2 and Y6HOTP2 MOFs, consisting of 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaoxytriphenylene (HOTP) linkers and Eu and Y metal nodes. Research on MOFs-based electronics has drastically advanced in recent years, targeting photoelectric and memory devices, field-effect transistors (FETs), rectifiers, etc. reported the first example of MOF-based resistive memory devices using γ-cyclodextrin based Rb-CD-MOFs. This review discusses recent advances made with diverse bulk MOFs and MOF thin films in context of controlling and tuning their electric properties, putting particular attention on the relevant fabrication strategies, anisotropy of conductance, most promising types of conductive MOFs, and prototype electronic devices using selective MOFs. However, despite a variety of promising results, integration of MOFs into real electronic devices is still a challenge, along with many other challenges and unresolved questions in the MOFtronics that need further studies and better understanding. A comprehensive list of the respective challenges and questions, most of which are still relevant, can be found in the recent review by Dincă and co-authors. MOFs, isolation and characterization of single layers of 2D MOFs, expanding the library of ligands for MOFs featuring through-space charge transport pathways, more detailed structural investigations of host-guest interactions in MOFs, influence of environment and atmosphere on MOF conductivity values, and a better documentation of the materials preparation and measurement routes. i. Fabrication of heterostructure MOFs: Heterostructure MOFs, comprised of either two different MOFs or differently doped MOFs (such as in Ref. However, such studies are necessary to derive additional knowledge regarding the relevant charge transport mechanism and to optimize the thickness of the MOF films for specific applications. iii. Role of electrodes in device fabrication: It is indisputable that electrodes play an important role in controlling charge transport properties of any electronic device, including MOF-based ones. In particular, different electrodes have most likely different coupling efficiencies with the MOF and different Fermi levels (EF), affecting the heights of the injection barriers at the respective interfaces (EHOMO/LUMO-EF) and, consequently, controlling the charge injection at these interfaces. iv. Metal-free electrodes in device stacking: Metal-free electrodes are highly desirable for real-world applications as metals are costly and usually require a high vacuum deposition system. In this context, conductive carbon or graphene can be an excellent alternative to replace metal electrodes. viii. Charge transport mechanism: It is crucial to understand in-depth the charge transport in MOFbased electronic devices including such relevant parameters like barrier height, electrode-MOF coupling, and intermolecular coupling. For instance, the charge injection barrier height, defined by EHOMO/LUMO-EF, can be minimized by choosing an appropriate electrode (known EF) for the known values of HOMO and LUMO. Also, the standard I-V representation of the charge transport data can be well complemented by LnJ vs V, lnJ vs E, or LnJ vs E 1/2 (J, and E stand for the current density and electric field, respectively) plots, which can help to decide whether the charge transport is electric fileddependent or not. ix. Theoretical models: Simulations and suitable theoretical models can help to understand better the physical and chemical factors governing the electrical conductivity of MOFs. In addition to these fundamental issues, theoretical simulations can also open new ways for the rational design of MOFs, beyond time-and resource-consuming trial-and-error experimental approach, which is frequently applied for optimization of new systems. x. Adapting of design ideas: Novel design ideas can be implemented. One example, is the introduction of built-in electric fields into MOFs, on the basis of dipolar linkers, 