Indium incorporation and surface morphology of InAlN layers grown on (0001) GaN by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy were investigated as a function of the impinging In flux and the substrate temperature in the 450-610oC range. In incorporation was found to decrease with substrate temperature due to thermal decomposition of the growing layer, while for a given temperature it increased with the impinging In flux until stoichiometry was reached at the growth front. The InN losses during growth followed an Arrhenius behaviour characterized by an activation energy of 2.0 eV. A growth diagram highly instrumental to identify optimum growth conditions was established. InAlN alloys have a direct band gap tunable from 0.7 eV to 6.2 eV, and, for a 17% In there is lattice match (in-plane) to GaN. Heterostrutures and devices including InAlN layers, such as resonant cavities, multi-quantum wells for high-speed inter-subband devices, or high electron mobility transistors have been recently reported Growth diagrams, useful to identify optimum conditions, have been established for binaries (AlN, GaN, InN), grown by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PA-MBE), from the surface morphology dependence on growth temperature and impinging fluxes InAlN thin layers (∼80 nm thick) were grown by PA-MBE on (0001) GaN templates (~3.6 μm thick) grown by metal-organic vapour phase epitaxy on sapphire (Lumilog). Growth temperature was measured with an Ircon Modline3 optical pyrometer. Metal fluxes (ΦGa, ΦAl, ΦIn), measured as Beam Equivalent Pressure (Bayard Alpert), were calibrated in atoms/sec•cm 2 using cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) data from N-rich GaN, AlN and InN thick layers grown at temperatures where thermal decomposition and adatoms desorption are negligible To analyse separately the effects of growth temperature and impinging In flux on In incorporation two sets of samples were grown. In a first set (Series-A) all impinging fluxes were kept constant, and the growth temperature varied between 450 and 610oC, a range where Al sticking coefficient is 1, being preferentially incorporated due to a much higher energy of the Al-N bond than that of In-N As in InGaN alloys ) by thermal decomposition are proportional to the Boltzmann factor with an activation energy, Ea, and to [InN] * with a constant factor C: The nominal In incorporation rate, inc As temperature increases, more In excess is available, thus, less impinging ΦIn is required for stoichiometry conditions. Above this solid line, the In excess cannot be neither desorbed (below ~560 oC) nor incorporated to the crystal because of N shortage, thus, it accumulates on the surface as droplets. The stoichiometry condition determined by this solid line is given by: For temperatures above 560 oC, In desorption becomes non-negligible, opening a window in which growth can proceed under intermediate In-rich conditions As in the case of In(Al)GaN alloys the best quality is expected for those samples grown in this regime due to the presence of a surfactant In adlayer with coverages ranging from zero (lower N-rich boundary) to 2.5 monolayers (upper In-droplets boundary) where ) (T des In reaches its maximum value (for a given temperature) at the upper boundary. These maximum values follow an Arrhenius temperature dependence with an activation energy of 2.49 eV The diagram in figure 