A database for the Cr-Ni-V system was constructed by modeling the binary Cr-V and ternary Cr-Ni-V systems using the CALPHAD approach aided by density functional theory (DFT)-based first-principles calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. To validate this new database, a functionally graded material (FGM) using Ni-20Cr and elemental V was fabricated using directed energy deposition additive manufacturing (DED AM) and experimentally characterized. The deposited Ni-20Cr was pure fcc phase, while increasing the amount of V across the gradient resulted in the formation of sigma phase, followed by the bcc phase. The experimentally measured phase data was compared with computational predictions made using a Cr-Ni-V thermodynamic database from the literature as well as the database developed in the present work. The newly developed database was shown to better predict the experimentally observed phases due to its accurate modeling of binary systems within the database and the ternary liquid phase, which is critical for accurate Scheil calculations. Laser-based directed energy deposition (DED) additive manufacturing (AM) is a process in which three-dimensional components are fabricated layer-by-layer. In powder-based DED, powder feedstock is deposited into a melt pool created by a laser, where the powder melts, cools, and solidifies, fusing to the material below. DED can be used to fabricate functionally graded materials (FGMs), in which composition is tailored as a function of position within a build The local compositions and thermal histories dictate the phases formed, which in turn determine the spatially varying properties Joining iron alloys with titanium alloys has been of interest in the aerospace and nuclear industries where multiple materials must be used within components to achieve required functionality. For example, stainless steel and titanium alloys are both used in aircraft engines where joining them allow for the assembly of engine blades into a singular component Similarly, these same materials are used in the nuclear industry to join components for processing and transporting spent nuclear fuel To avoid the formation of intermetallics in FGMs, intermediate elements or alloys may be introduced along the composition pathway between terminal alloys. In a recent study by the present team To achieve reliable predictions for path planning, thermodynamic databases that are validated over the entire composition range of interest are required. However, these are often restricting, as databases used for phase predictions are typically optimized for one principal element in a material system Thermodynamic modeling of the Cr-Ni-V system has been performed by Choi et al. However, due to the lack of ternary experimental thermochemical data available in the literature for the Cr-Ni-V system, they used the binary CALPHAD modeling works of Cr-Ni by Lee et al. The present work focused on remodeling the Cr-Ni-V system using the CALPHAD method through incorporating more recent experimental data and thermodynamic descriptions available in the literature. To incorporate ternary interaction parameters into the present database, DFT-based first-principles calculations were performed to calculate the formation energies of sigma phase using the (Cr, Ni, V)4(Cr, Ni, V)10(Cr, Ni, V)16 sublattice model To validate the model constructed for the present work and compare it with the most recent one for Cr-Ni-V (i.e., that by CALPHAD modeling of the thermodynamic properties of the ternary Cr-Ni-V system involves thermodynamically modeling the three pure elements, three binary systems, and the overall ternary system considered in the system. In the present work, thermodynamic models of pure elements were sourced from the Scientific Group Thermodata Europe (SGTE) database The Cr-Ni binary modeled by Tang et al. There are two classes of phases contained in the Cr-Ni-V system -solution phases with a single sublattice and compounds that contain multiple sublattices. These are typically differentiated by a phase's Wyckoff positions. The liquid phase is typically modeled with onesublattice model unless there is strong short-range ordering. Using the Gibbs energy functions of pure elements (i.e., Cr, Ni, and V) taken from the SGTE database Models for other binary compounds of CrNi2, NiV3, Ni3V and Ni8V that were considered in the present modeling were directly taken from Cr-Ni from Tang et al. The Cr-V system was first remodeled using ΔHf, activity, and phase equilibria data. The accepted Cr-V binary system contains only two phases which are both solution phases: liquid and bcc. ΔHf predictions for compositions in the Cr-V system at 0 K were also incorporated into the present models. Gao et al. Four different experimental measurements were considered to determine phase equilibrium data for the Cr-V system. However, differences were observed in the liquidus-solidus equilibria measured in the literature, and thus, only data with similar reported values were used in the present modeling. Carlson et al. In the present study, the DFT-based quasiharmonic approach is used to calculate ΔHf for sigma, while AIMD calculations were used to obtain the enthalpy of mixing (ΔHmix) for liquid phase. This is due to the lack of experimental data in other ternary sigma and liquid phases in other modeling works. According to the DFT-based quasiharmonic approach, Helmholtz energy of a solid phase can be estimated as a function of temperature, T, and volume, V, which corresponds to the Gibbs energy under zero external pressure Eq. 4 where the Helmholtz energy, F, includes the static energy at 0 K without the zero-point vibrational contribution, E 0 (V), the contribution from lattice vibrations, F vib , and the contribution from thermal electrons, F el . The equilibrium volume at each temperature was determined by finding the minimum of F, i.e., when the pressure, P = -∂F ∂V = 0 Pa. DFT-based calculations were used to predict the energy versus volume (E-V) curve for each phase (or endmember) at 0 K. The resulting data points were then fitted using a fourparameter Birch-Murnaghan (BM4) equation of state (EOS) Eq. 5 with fitting parameters k 1 , k 2 , k 3 , and k 4 . The equilibrium properties at P = 0 GPa from this EOS include the equilibrium energy, E 0 , volume, V0, bulk modulus, B0, and derivative of the bulk modulus with respect to pressure, B'. The contribution of lattice vibrations, F vib , was determined using the phonon density of states (pDOS) Eq. 6 where g(ω) is the pDOS as a function of V and frequency, ω Mermin statistics For the liquid phase, AIMD was used to determine its ΔHmix with composition CrxNiyV1-xy at 2700 K, calculated by the function, where H mixture is the enthalpy of CrxNiyV1-x-y calculated by AIMD, c i the mole fraction of the component i, and H i the enthalpy of pure elements Cr, Ni, and V at 2700 K. In the present work, all DFT-based first-principles and AIMD calculations were conducted using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) To estimate first-principles thermodynamics of the Cr-Ni-V system, the reference states of pure elements bcc Cr, fcc Ni, and bcc V were used, where ferromagnetic spin-polarization are considered for the Cr and Ni atoms. The sigma phase was modeled using three sublattices consisting of 27 endmembers as opposed to the sublattice model from refs. For modeling of the ternary parameters, experimental phase equilibria measurements between bcc, fcc, and sigma phases were taken from Kodentzov et al. Feasibility maps, a tool developed by the team for use in AM These maps assess the feasibility of compositions and gradient pathways fabricated via AM based on the amount(s) of deleterious phase(s) that form as predicted by both Scheil and equilibrium calculations. These equilibrium calculations, shown in Figure Conversely, Scheil calculations, shown in Figure In the Cr-Ni-V, the feasibility of a composition is determined based on if the total amount of sigma, is below (feasible) or above (infeasible) a threshold that is assumed to lead to cracking DED AM was used to fabricate an FGM grading between Ni-20Cr and 59 wt. % V (balance Ni-20Cr) to validate the thermodynamic database developed in the present work. Powders of Ni-20Cr (American elements, California), (herein referred to as NiCr) and V (American Elements, California), both sieved to a -100/+325 mesh size were used. The FGM was fabricated using a DED AM system (RPM, Inc., Model 222, South Dakota) in an Ar environment (<10 ppm O2) equipped with a YAG laser that was operated using the parameters given in Table An as-built sample was prepared for evaluation by sectioning a pillar, mounting in epoxy resin, then polishing using standard metallographic techniques with a final polish of 0.05 μm alumina slurry. EDS was performed in an SEM (Thermo-Scientific, Apreo S Low Vac, Massachusetts) equipped with a silicon drift detector (Oxford Instruments, Ultim Max silicon drift detector, Massachusetts) to measure local compositions within the sample. Local phase identification was performed using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD, Oxford Instruments, Symmetry detector, Massachusetts). Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA, Cameca SX-5, Wisconsin) equipped with a LaB6 electron source was used in selected areas to determine the compositions of the boride particles found within the FGM build. For comparison to the present modeling, predictions for activity values at 1550 K of the Cr-V binary from the present work were plotted in Figure ΔHf were also compared between DFT calculations Figure In contrast, the modeling by Choi et al. These differences in ΔHmix are attributed to the lack of ternary interactions for liquid in the modeling by Choi et al. Figure To demonstrate the importance of a validated and accurate database for predicting phase formation in alloys, additional experimental data were collected in the present work to validate the Cr-Ni-V model using the fabricated NiCr-V FGM. To determine the phases along the linear NiCr to V composition pathway, EDS area scans and EBSD data were collected across the height of the FGM. EDS and EBSD analysis focused on 11 distinct compositions along the FGM that ranged from 3 to 59 wt.% V, as shown in Figure V with the understanding that the balance is NiCr. Faceted particles, which will be discussed later, were present in regions with 16 -59 wt% V and were likely a result of powder contamination with boron. Small round particles were also present throughout the areas and were found to be carbides. To focus on the phases present in just the Cr-Ni-V ternary, the compositions of the areas surrounding these particles, referred to as the matrix, were analyzed and used for comparison to computational phase predictions. EDS area scans of approximately 65 μm x 45 μm in size were sub-sectioned into five 13 μm x 45 μm areas, from which composition data were averaged and used to calculate the standard deviation of the overall scan area. The compositions from this analysis are shown in Figure The EBSD scans were analyzed for fcc, bcc, and intermetallic compounds of CrNi2, sigma, NiV3, and Ni2V7 as they are compounds within the Cr-Ni-V ternary system. Average area fractions and standard deviations of phases for each layer composition were calculated using the same method above on the scans for composition analysis. The amount of zero-solution for each area was added to the positive direction of the error bars to account for the uncertainty in what phases were present in those regions, and the resulting phase fractions as a function of composition in the FGM are compared with computational predictions in Figure Additional composition and phase analyses were performed on the small round particles that appeared between 11 and 34 wt.% V and the faceted particles that appeared between 16 and 59 wt.% V. EDS area scans indicated that the round particles were enriched in V and C, as shown in Figure As B should not have been present in this FGM, it is likely that the powders were contaminated during pre-processing (e.g., sieving or storage) or in-process (e.g., due to residual boron in the feedlines from a previous build). While not the focus of this study, to confirm the formation of borides in this Cr-Ni-V system contaminated with boron, the borides that experimentally appeared in the sample were modeled using the CALPHAD method and were incorporated into the modeling for the present work. The model adopted the B-containing binary phase diagrams from the latest publications on Cr-B from Tojo et al. for MB and (Cr0.25V0.75)0.6(B)0.4 for M3B2, indicating there are two stable ternary borides in the B-Cr-Ni-V system, MB and M3B2. With the updated model for the B-Cr-Ni-V system, Scheil simulations were performed to thermodynamically explain the formation of borides found in the NiCr-V FGM and to understand the effect of B on phase formation in the sample. The overall B content was estimated by using weighted fractions between the particle compositions and the matrix. Particle compositions were calculated using stoichiometry of the MB and M3B2 compounds and EDS data for the fractions of Cr and V contained within the particles then were weighted according to the phase fractions of the phases observed from EBSD analysis. As shown in Table To understand the influence of B on the phase formation in the NiCr-V system, comparisons between experimentally observed phase fractions were made between the matrix area and the entire overall area (including the borides) by calculating the relative ratio of fcc, sigma, and bcc phases in these areas, as given in Table resulting in those compounds solidifying first, and leaving behind a melt pool composition made up of Cr-Ni-V from which solidification would proceed. It is hypothesized that this difference in melting temperatures would lead to the borides solidifying out of the melt prior to solidification of any other phases, such that they would not participate in the rest of the subsequent solidification of phases from the remaining melt. Thermodynamic calculations were performed using the present model and the model developed by Choi et al. A comparison of the phases predicted by the two databases is shown in Figure The differences in the equilibrium predictions between the two thermodynamic models is due to the non-stoichiometric phase descriptions for CrNi2 and Ni3V that were incorporated into the present model, allowing for the CrNi2 and Ni3V phases to form across a wider composition range than that in Choi et al.'s model While the equilibrium phase predictions at 1000 K were used to represent the lowest temperature threshold at which solid state phase transformations were assumed to be kinetically feasible during the FGM fabrication via DED AM, the intermetallic CrNi2 phase that is predicted to form in the present database along the sample did not experimentally appear. Although previous work has suggested that kinetically driven phase transformations are possible from the solidus temperature down to approximately 1000 K for another Ni-Cr alloy As shown in Figure Although both CALPHAD models predicted the same phases to appear in the matrix compositions investigated, they differ in the phase fractions of each phase predicted. For example, the present model consistently predicts more sigma phase to form than in Choi et al.'s model Experimental data were used for validation of the feasibility maps For the linear gradient between NiCr and V, both feasibility maps correctly predict the infeasible build compositions between 34 -59 wt% V using the Scheil simulations, due to having higher than the allowed 0.10 mole fraction detrimental (sigma) phase. These compositions are depicted in Figure However, due to different feasibility predictions between the feasibility maps of the two models, care must be taken in evaluating a CALPHAD model's ability to predict accurate amounts of phases in a material system. Figure Cracking was also experimentally observed in the NiCr-V FGM gradient around 52 wt.% V, as noted on the feasibility maps in Figure Regardless, it is undesirable to grade into regions containing this much sigma phase, and thus, a linear composition gradient between NiCr and V is an undesirable path through which to grade an FGM, in joining, for example, stainless steel and Ti-6Al-4V. The present work used thermodynamic data from DFT-based first-principles and AIMD simulations, and recent experimental data from literature to remodel the Cr-V and Cr-Ni-V systems. The Cr-V system was remodeled using the DFT calculations from Gao et al. • Improvements were made to the Cr-Ni-V thermodynamic modeling through the addition of accurate sublattice models for binary systems and the addition of ternary liquid parameters with the inputs from the present AIMD simulations, making the present thermodynamic model more suitable for predicting phases in an additively manufactured FGM over other Cr-Ni-V models. • Scheil simulations performed using the present CALPHAD model accurately predicted the experimentally observed phases along the NiCr-V FGM. The present CALPHAD modeling and that by Choi et al. • A linear gradient from Ni-20Cr to V resulted in the formation of regions containing 100% sigma phase and is therefore an undesirable gradient pathway through the Cr-Ni-V ternary composition space. 61.9Ni-22.8V