In an effort to expand the existing QUEST database of accurate vertical transition energies [Véril et al. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 2021, 11, e1517], we have modeled more than 100 electronic excited states of different natures (local, charge-transfer, Rydberg, singlet, and triplet) in a dozen of mono-and di-substituted benzenes, including aniline, benzonitrile, chlorobenzene, fluorobenzene, nitrobenzene, among others. To establish theoretical best estimates for these vertical excitation energies, we have employed advanced coupled-cluster methods including iterative triples (CC3 and CCSDT) and, when technically possible, iterative quadruples (CC4). These high-level computational approaches provide a robust foundation for benchmarking a series of popular wave function methods. The evaluated methods all include contributions from double excitations (ADC(2), CC2, CCSD, CIS(D), EOM-MP2, STEOM-CCSD), along with schemes that also incorporate perturbative or iterative triples (ADC(3), CCSDR(3), CCSD(T)(a) ⋆ , and CCSDT-3). This systematic exploration not only broadens the scope of the QUEST database but also facilitates a rigorous assessment of different theoretical approaches in the framework of a homologous chemical series, offering valuable insights into the accuracy and reliability of these methods in such cases. We found that both ADC(2.5) and CCSDT-3 can provide very consistent estimates, whereas among less expensive methods SCS-CC2 is likely the most effective approach. Importantly, we show that some lower order methods may offer reasonable trends in the homologous series while providing quite large average errors, and vice versa. Consequently, benchmarking the accuracy of a model based solely on absolute transition energies may not be meaningful for applications involving a series of similar compounds. The efficient harnessing of photophysical and photochemical phenomena still presents a formidable challenge for chemists. These intricate processes unfold at an ultrafast timescale and often entail the interplay of multiple electronic states, introducing a level of complexity beyond the scope of traditional thermal chemistry. In response to this challenge, the experimental and theoretical communities have actively pursued the development of innovative methodologies, aiming to characterize electronic excited states (EES), which serve as central objects for comprehending and rationalizing interactions between light and matter. a) Electronic mail: Denis.Jacquemin@univ-nantes.fr On the theoretical side, efforts have been dedicated to developing efficient and computationally economical methodologies offering chemically relevant descriptions of EES. Inspired by the seminal works of Thiel's group, This paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the theoretical protocols employed to define the theoretical best estimates (TBEs) associated with these vertical excitation energies and the software used in the benchmarking section. Next, we compare these TBEs with literature data and we discuss their accuracy. Next, we evaluate the performances of lower-order models using these TBEs and consider both absolute and relative accu-racies. Finally, we summarize our main findings. The ground-state geometry of all systems has been optimized, depending on the size of the compound, at the CCSD(T) or CC3 level using the cc-pVTZ atomic basis set and applying the frozen-core (FC) approximation. These optimizations have been achieved with CFOUR, To determine the TBEs associated with the VTEs, we relied on high-level CC calculations, all performed in the FC approximation. We carried out the CC calculations using either the equation-of-motion (EOM) or linear-response (LR) formalisms, but we do not specify this aspect below since both yield the very same transition energies. In most cases, we could achieve CCSDT calculations with one of the double-ζ basis sets, hence our TBEs were obtained as or These equations have been demonstrated to provide excellent estimates of the actual CCSDT/aug-cc-pVTZ values. For some EES of the most compact molecules, we could achieve CC4/6-31+G(d) calculations for the singlet EES, and we therefore computed the TBEs as We underline that CC4 provides results very close to both CCSDTQ and FCI, Note that triplet EES are typically characterized by a very large single excitation character (%T 1 ), We have used the TBEs defined in the previous Section to benchmark a large set of wave function methods. Again, we systematically applied the FC approximation and used the aug-cc-pVTZ atomic basis set. We performed CIS(D), 57,58 CC2, Our TBEs are listed in Tables In the right-most column of Tables I and II, we provide previous theoretical and experimental estimates for comparison. Caution is advised when comparing with previous computational data, given the different ground-state TABLE I. Theoretical best estimates (TBEs) of the VTEs (in eV) for ABN, aniline, benzonitrile, chlorobenzene, DMABN, and DMA. The extrapolation procedure employed to determine the TBE, the percentage of single excitation (%T1) computed at the CC3/aug-cc-pVTZ (in %), and oscillator strength (f ) are given, together with the variation of the size of the electronic cloud during the excitation process (∆r 2 in a.u.) computed at ADC(3)/aug-cc-pVTZ level. Note that the f have been obtained using the LR-CC3 formalism. A selection of literature data is given in the right-most column. The acronyms sCT, wCT, and Ryd stand for significant CT, weak CT, and Rydberg, respectively. geometries and basis sets. This caution extends to measured values, whether given as 0-0 energies or wavelengths of maximal absorption (λ max ), as these do not correspond to vertical transition energies (see discussion in Section I). Nonetheless, one can anticipate qualitative consistency in chemical trends, excited-state ordering, and absolute energies. For the amino-substituted benzoni-triles, that is, ABN, 78,79,114-119 and DMABN, For aniline, comprehensive sets of VTEs have been reported, For the two monohalobenzenes, the previous extensive CASPT2 investigation of Liu and co-workers For dimethylaniline, previous wave function studies using CASPT2 Previous works devoted to the push-pull nitroaniline mostly focused on the CT EES, For 4-nitropyridine-N -oxide, which is often employed as a solvatochromic probe, 111 literature data are limited except for a dedicated theoretical investigation of the main band, 110 and our recent contribution focusing on the CT EES. For pyranone (4H-pyran-4-one), accurate measurements and CCSD simulations of vibronic couplings are available for the lowest singlet and triplet EES, However, Figure For the 14 VTEs where CC4 corrections could be obtained, our confidence in the accuracy of the TBEs is logically higher. A noteworthy case is the previously mentioned 1 B 1 EES of pyranone, characterized by a relatively low %T 1 value of 81.7%. For this state, the difference between CC4 and CCSDT VTEs, calculated with the 6-31+G(d) atomic basis set, remains modest at -0.035 eV. The CC4 transition energy is bracketed by its CC3 and CCSDT counterparts but is logically closer to the latter. A similar, yet somewhat unexpected, CC4 correction is observed for the 1 A 1 EES of the same molecule (-0.037 eV), displaying a %T 1 value of 86.6%. In all other cases, the improvements brought by CC4 are essentially insignificant, strongly hinting at the quality of the CCSDT values. With these TBEs at our disposal, it is natural to benchmark "lower-order" wave function methods, which could potentially be applied to larger or less symmetric com- pounds. In the vast majority of cases, the identification of each EES is straightforward thanks to the symmetry, oscillator strength, and underlying composition of molecular orbital pairs. Table Consistently with previous findings, 12,46,68,148-153 ADC(2) and CC2 exhibit similar behavior, displaying error distributions centered around zero. Their MAE of approximately 0.15 eV and SDE of roughly 0.20 eV are characteristic of these two levels of theory. STEOM-CCSD, compared to CC2, showcases slightly improved accuracy, again agreeing with previous reports. While the spin-scaling parameters of Q-Chem 66 were found more effective than their Turbomole counterparts The trends observed with SCS-CC2 are consistent with those of CCSD, showing a smaller SDE than both CC2 and ADC(2). However, this improvement comes at the cost of a notable blueshift of all transition energies. The overestimation trend associated with CCSD has been previously documented, In Table Table Notably, among all tested methods, only ADC(2.5) and CCSDT-3 deliver MAE smaller than 0.10 eV for all considered subsets. This emphasizes the notable accuracy of these two methods across a diverse range of EES. As discussed in Section I, the emphasis in EES calculations for practical applications often revolves around obtaining accurate chemical trends rather than absolute values. This is particularly pertinent when an experimental reference is available for certain compounds within a series. The selection of data of interest is contingent upon the specific application. For example, optimizing a dyeing application might require a focus on the most intense absorption, while many fluorophores might only necessitate consideration of the lowest EES. In this study, we have examined three specific parameters for which trends have been investigated: i) the VTEs to the first 1 B 2 EES, which corresponds to the lowest π → π ⋆ transition for most compounds in the series; ii) the position of the lowest 3 A 1 EES, which often represents the lowest π → π ⋆ triplet EES; and iii) the singlet-triplet gap (STG) considering the two lowest excited states (S 1 -T 1 gap) for each method, regardless of their chemical nature and symmetry. In each case, we computed auxochromic shifts relative to the corresponding EES in benzene, the reference non-substituted compound. Our TBEs for the relevant singlet and triplet EES in benzene are 5.045 eV and 4.159 eV, respectively. We also recall that, for the CC models including triplesnamely, CCSD(T)(a) ⋆ , CCSDR(3), and CCSDT-3 -no implementation of triplet EES is available. A notable positive observation from Table V is that most methods generally do provide accurate chemical trends, often with large to very large R 2 values, indicating a good correlation between calculated and reference shifts. However, a few exceptions can be identified. For the first property, the change in the VTE of the lowest 1 B 2 EES, CIS(D) stands out with a remarkably small MAE of 0.07 eV and an R 2 close to unity, despite its large SDE in Table For the second property, the transition energy to the lowest 3 A 1 EES, almost any of the evaluated wave function approaches (except perhaps EOM-MP2) produces highly satisfactory results. It appears that the evolution of the relative energy of this EES when adding chemical substituents to benzene, is easily captured by all wave function methods. The most interesting case is probably the STG. We underline that, for some compounds, methods may disagree on the nature of the lowest singlet or triplet states, which introduces an additional aspect in the comparison, since in contrast to the two former properties, the actual ordering of the EES provided by each method matters. As evidenced by the data gathered in Table It is essential to acknowledge that the three simple tests presented above are not representative of all EES chemistry, and the results of Table V should not be directly extrapolated to other chromophoric units. Nevertheless, this comparison clearly illustrates that, except for the computationally expensive CC models that consistently TABLE V. MSEs and MAEs (in eV) as well as linear determination coefficients (R 2 ) obtained when comparing the shifts with respect to benzene for the three properties discussed in the main text. perform well, lower-order methods can excel in predicting important chemical trends despite an overall modest performance (as seen in the case of CIS(D) for the 1 B 2 and 3 A 1 relative energies, despite a large overall MAE and SDE). In summary, we have extended the QUEST database of accurate vertical excitation energies by adding 108 new VTEs obtained on 12 substituted six-membered rings, considering both donor and acceptor groups, as well as several push-pull configurations. Except for one case where a notable difference between CC3 and CCSDT estimates was identified, we maintain confidence in the accuracy of the obtained TBEs. This confidence arises from the incorporation of CC4 corrections, the application of CCSDT-3 for CT states, or the manifestation of minor CC3-CCSDT discrepancies alongside prominent singleexcitation characters. Utilizing these TBEs, we conducted a thorough assessment of several second-order (ADC(2), CC2, CCSD, CIS(D), EOM-MP2, and STEOM-CCSD) and third-order (ADC(3), CCSDR(3), CCSD(T)(a) ⋆ , and CCSDT-3) wave function models. Crucially, our findings highlight the nuanced nature of method performance, revealing that some lower-order methods exhibit reasonable trends for some key EES in the present homologous series, despite large average errors and standard deviations when considering all EES. This underlines the necessity to taylor method selection based on the specific targeted application, as benchmarking solely on absolute transition energies may not offer a comprehensive understanding for applications involving similar compounds. For the current set of compounds, taking into account all evaluated criteria, we suggest the adoption of ADC(2.5) and SCS-CC2 as accurate and reliable O(N 6 ) and O(N 5 ) approaches, respectively. Surpassing the performance of these models necessitates the use of CC approaches that incorporate triple excitations, albeit at the expense of a considerable increase in computational resources. We are currently exploring additional chromophoric units to augment and diversify the content of the QUEST database. a TBE determined via Eq. (