Heterosubstrates have been extensively studied as a method to improve the heat dissipation of Ga 2 O 3 devices. In this simulation work, we propose a novel role for p-type available heterosubstrates, as a component of a reduced surface field (RESURF) structure in Ga 2 O 3 lateral field-effect transistors (FETs). The RESURF structure can eliminate the electric field crowding and contribute to higher breakdown voltage. Using SiC as an example, the designing strategy for doping concentration and dimensions of the p-type region is systematically studied using TCAD modeling. To mimic realistic devices, the impacts of interface charge and binding interlayer at the Ga 2 O 3 /SiC interface are also explored. Additionally, the feasibility of the RESURF structure for high-frequency switching operation is supported by the short time constant (∼0.5 ns) of charging/discharging the p-SiC depletion region. This study demonstrates the great potential of utilizing the electrical properties of heat-dissipating heterosubstrates to achieve a uniform electric field distribution in Ga 2 O 3 FETs. reliability, and scalability of the Ga 2 O 3 power devices As a remedy for this thermal management challenge, heat dissipation of Ga 2 O 3 -based devices can be improved by utilizing heterogeneous semiconductor substrates with higher thermal conductivity, such as sapphire As a result of the effectively promoted heat dissipation, Ga 2 O 3 field-effect transistors (FETs) based on such heterosubstrates deliver improved thermal stability and suppressed selfheating effects In this work, we demonstrate the utilization of p-type doping of SiC heterosubstrate as a component of a reduced surface field (RESURF) structure to suppress electric field (E-field) crowding in lateral Ga 2 O 3 FETs. The E-field crowding is one of the major issues that limit the breakdown voltages (BVs) of lateral high-voltage devices. The RESURF technology is firstly developed to address this issue in silicon devices As shown in Fig. The fabrication of the proposed RESURF Ga 2 O 3 -on-SiC FETs is feasible based on existing techniques. The conventional Ga 2 O 3 -on-SiC FETs have been successfully fabricated In this section, the impacts of the three key parameters, including the acceptor concentration (N A ), the thickness (t p ), and the length (L p ) of the p-SiC region (as illustrated in Fig. Fig. Since line B' (p-SiC) has a lower critical E-field breakdown point can easily transfer from point A to line B' when the p-SiC starts to terminate the E-field. Fig. As shown in the Fig. Based on the analyses shown in Figs. Fig. To mimic the realistic condition of device, the impact of net charges at the Ga 2 O 3 /SiC interface is studied. In Fig. Positive interface charge has monotonic impact on the breakdown voltage. The positive interface charge compensates the negative space charge in the p-SiC region, and thus eliminates the improvement brought by the RESURF structures, causing the E-field to crowd at point A again. Moreover, the excessive positive interface charge can emit E-field to point A, further enhancing the E-field at point A. As a result, the BV decreases monotonically with positive interface charge. In practical applications, the interface charge at the Ga 2 O 3 /SiC interface should be carefully controlled. An additional Al 2 O 3 interlayer at the Ga 2 O 3 /SiC interface (Fig. In summary, with the preset dimensions and doping concentration of the n-Ga 2 O 3 channel epilayers, the optimal BV can be obtained when the point A and the line B' reach their critical E-field simultaneously. In the example shown in Fig. During practical switching process, V DS switches between high and low values. When the V DS switches to high values, holes will leave the p-SiC to establish a depletion region (Fig. conducted. First, V DS is suddenly (within 0.1 ns) increased from 0 to 800 V (charging), or decreased from 800 to 0 V (discharging). Then, the current through the p-SiC is monitored (Fig. In this work, the electrical properties of heat-dissipating Ga 2 O 3 -on-SiC heterosubstrate have been utilized to construct RESURF structures in Ga 2 O 3 FETs. The proposed RESURF structures can evenly distribute the E-field to achieve higher BVs. With careful design of the N A and dimensions of p-SiC, as well as eliminating the interface charges, the BV can be improved from 253 V to 2055 V with the RESURF structures. The Al 2 O 3 interlayer in the existing heterosubstrate devices has minimal influence on the RESURF structures. Additionally, RESURF Ga 2 O 3 -on-SiC FETs shows a fast (dis)charging rate for high-frequency switching applications. This study provides a demonstration of unlocking the full potential of heat-dissipating heterosubstrates by leveraging their electrical properties.