Due to the low dimensionality in the quantization of the electronic states and degree of freedom for device modulation, two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetism plays a critical role in lots of fields. In this study, we perform first-principles calculation to investigate the ising ferromagnetism and half-metallicity of kagome V2O3 monolayer. Based on the calculations using different functional, it is found that GGA-PBE gives a half-metallic band gap while the GGA+U gives a semiconductor narrow band gap (~1.1 meV), which shows quasi-half metallic nature. By studying the magnetic properties with LDA, GGA-PBE, and GGA+U, we get a robust ferromagnetic ground state, where the giant perpendicular magnetic anisotropy energy of ~0.544 meV is achieved by applying the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) with GGA+U. Furthermore, by exploring the orbital contribution to the electronic bands and the magnetic crystalline anisotropy, it is uncovered that the 3d (V) orbitals contribute to the out-of-plane. The electronic band structure shows two flat bands (F1 and F2) and Dirac points (D1 and D2) which further confirm that kagome V2O3 ML can also be used for topological properties. Besides, the Curie temperature of the V2O3 ML is calculated to be 640 K by Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. The successful isolation of single layers of carbon atoms in form of first two dimensional (2D) material called graphene Interestingly, in the recent past, some 2D materials has been extensively studied both experimentally and theoretically, called transition metal tri-iodide (XI3) such as CrI3 and VI3 from the bulk down to few and monolayer Spintronics is a prominent filed in condensed matter physics, which provides the utilization of spin degree of freedom in various practical applications for various innovative technologies The current developments in two-dimensional material intriguer our attention towards the study of the oxides materials. Besides, the versatility of these materials makes them attractive for the spintronics applications. Interestingly, these observations of Dirac points and flat bands in the vicinity of EF may attract the researchers for manipulating the topological properties in magnetic or half-metallic materials Numerical Methods We use the density functional theory (DFT) calculations with projected augmented wave (PAW) under the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) For phonon stability, we use the phonopy code For magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) calculations, we use the non-collinear energy calculations including spin orbit coupling (SOC). The energy criterion is set up to 10 -8 with a denser k-mesh of 21x21x1. Further, we use different functional as given in Table (1) First, we explored the phonon and thermal stability of the kagome V2O3 ML. From the phonon dispersion, we found no imaginary modes, which confirms the dynamically stability of kagome V2O3 ML. Fig. Where Ef is the formation energy per atom of the kagome V2O3 ML. E (V2O3) is the total energy of the V2O3 monolayer (ML), E(V) is the energy of single V atom in the stable bulk (BCC) is -9.32 eV while μO 2 is the chemical potential of the single O gas is -2.60 eV respectively. Interestingly, we found that the formation energy of the V2O3 ML per atom is -3.02 eV/atom, which is not only matching well with the previous reported systems To find the energetically stable magnetic ground state of the kagome V2O3 monolayer, we calculated the total energies for both the ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) configurations of the system. In case of AFM, we consider three different configurations as shown in Figure Where ΔE, EFM and EAFM shows the energies difference between ferromagnetic (EFM) and antiferromagnetic (EAFM) ground state respectively. Using the above relation, we found that AFM2 is energetically more stable configuration as compare to other configurations irrespective of the functional. Further, the magnetic moment remains unchanged irrespective of the functional used for calculation as given in Table . We also calculated the energy differences between the FM and AFM configurations using the different DFT functional and reported in Table Therefore, we consider the magnetic anisotropy. In this regard we consider two magnetic axes along [001] and [100] directions called the out of plane and in plane magnetic anisotropy because the other direction [010] is an analogue of [100]. Interestingly, in case of V2O3 ML, including spin-orbit interactions, after the total energy convergence calculations we found that the magneto-crystalline anisotropy is in the perpendicular direction having a value of 0.544 meV. Now to discuss an intuitive picture of MAEs, as we know that the MAE is basically comes from the spin-orbit interaction. Basically SOC is very sensitive to the orbitals of both the occupied and unoccupied spin states. Therefore, the following equation is a confirmation of the above statement. In this equation, ξ is the strength of spin-orbit coupling and ɛu,α , ɛo,β in the denominator shows the energy levels of unoccupied and occupied states with spin α and β respectively. Further, as for each spin the magnetic moment is related to the electrons of the occupied states, therefore the magnetic moment is insensitive to the orbital character, while the MAE is strongly dependent on the orbital feature, because of the SOC mechanism. Following the second order perturbation theory, we use the SOC which further allows to calculate the matrix elements difference between the easy and hard axis for the angular momentum (l = 1, 2). Thus, we analyzed contribution to the MAE from each SOC channel as shown in Figure We explore the electronic properties of the kagome V2O3 ML for the important applications in the electronic devices. To investigate the electronic properties, we use the GGA-PBE calculated band structure as shown in Figure Similarly, for band structure of kagome V2O3 ML, we also use on-site Hubbard type interaction (GGA+U) with U = 3.68 eV Next, we have to discuss the Curie temperature (Tc) of the V2O3 ML. We use two different approaches for calculating Tc, the Mean Field Theory (MFT) approach and the Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) simulation coded in the VAMPIRE software package. , where kB is Boltzman's constant and m is the number of magnetic ions. For ΔE = 409 meV, the estimated Tc is 1579 K. Further, we also use the same approach of MFT for CrI3 monolayer, and interestingly we found that the Tc of the CrI3 monolayer is about 80 K. Thus, it is confirmed that the MFT overestimates the Tc, therefore, we calculate the Tc using VAMPARE software for both the CrI3 and V2O3 monolayers. Interestingly, the Tc of CrI3 monolayer 46, is in accordance to the experimentally reported value of the Curie temperature. Therefore, our calculated value of Tc for V2O3 ML is also expected to be in accordance with the actual value if experimentally estimated. We performed the temperature dependent magnetization curve using the Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) simulation coded in the VAMPIRE software package Here, we used the classical spin Heisenberg model which can be written H = -∑ J i,j m i . m j (6) Where J is the exchange coupling energy parameter of the first nearest neighbor atom and mi, mj shows the magnetic moment of neighboring atoms related to each exchange interaction. Then, the Ji = ΔE Nm 2 where N and m are the total number of magnetic atoms per unit cell and average magnetic moment per magnetic atom in the V2O3 ML unit cell. For MC simulation, we considered a large enough supercell of 50 x 50x1. Note that the magnetization curve was fitted by using the Curie-Bloch equation in the classical limit as given below We fitted the temperature dependent magnetization curve by using the critical exponent of 0.48. Thus, the Tc of the V2O3 ML is 640 K as shown in Figure In summary, we use the first principles calculations to explore the kagome V2O3 ML. Further, to investigate the ising ferromagnetism and half-metallicity character of the V2O3 ML, we use different functional and found different behavior towards the functional. For example, the PBE results shows halfmetallicity while the on-site Hubbard type interaction for V 3d orbital gives a semiconductor band structure of zero band gap. Both GGA Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE), and GGA+U gives us a strong ferromagnetic ground state with a constant magnetic moment of 2μB per V atom. For calculating the magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE), we apply the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) along [1 0 0], [1 0 1], and [0 0 1] directions and obtained ~0.155 meV perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Further, through the SOC analysis, we found that both the V atoms are equally and prominently contributed to the MAE while the O atoms contribution is almost negligible. We also analyzed the spin orientation dependence on the orbital. Besides, the Curie temperature calculated by both the Mean Field Theory and Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) simulations and the it is further confirmed that the MFT results are overestimated as compared to the Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. This robust and large value of the Curie temperature provide a feasible way to study the V2O3 ML at room in the experimental work.