Conventional superconducting flux qubits require the application of a precisely tuned magnetic field to set the operation point at half a flux quantum through the qubit loop, which complicates the on-chip integration of this type of device. It has been proposed that by inducing a π-phase shift in the superconducting order parameter using a precisely controlled nanoscale-thickness superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor Josephson junction, commonly referred to as π-junction, it is possible to realize a flux qubit operating at zero magnetic flux. Here, we report the realization of a zero-flux-biased flux qubit based on three NbN/AlN/NbN Josephson junctions and a NbN/PdNi/NbN ferromagnetic π-junction. The qubit lifetime is in the microsecond range, which we argue is limited by quasiparticle excitations in the metallic ferromagnet layer. Our results pave the way for developing quantum coherent devices, including qubits and sensors, that utilize the interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity. The essential component in superconducting quantum bits (qubits) is the Josephson junction (JJ) composed of a nanoscale tunnel barrier sandwiched between two superconducting layers. These junctions, typically formed by superconductor/insulator/superconductor structures, introduce circuit nonlinearity while preserving its quantum nature, enabling the circuit to behave as a macroscopic artificial atom. The conventional choice for these JJs, ever since the first demonstration of nanosecond-scale quantum coherent oscillations in a charge qubit in 1999 Alternative approaches have been explored to enhance device coherence. For example, titanium nitride (TiN) was used for capacitors and/or microwave resonators to mitigate microwave dielectric loss caused by uncontrolled defects in oxides present at their surfaces and interfaces Motivated by the objective of improving materials, we have been working on the development of alternative materials not only for the capacitor and resonator components but also for the JJs in the qubits. Recently we successfully demonstrated epitaxially grown nitride superconducting qubits on a silicon (Si) substrate, achieving coherence times at the scale of tens of microseconds A previous study In this article, we present the successful operation of a flux qubit that contains a πjunction (to which we refer as π-junction qubit). The π-junction was realized using a ferromagnetic palladium-nickel (Pd89Ni11) layer between niobium nitride (NbN) superconductors NbN-based flux qubit with/without π-junction. Conventional flux qubits and π-junction qubits were fabricated using NbN-based fabrication techniques, employing a TiN buffer layer on a Si substrate, as depicted in Fig. 1 . Both types of qubits had the same basic design of capacitively shunted flux qubits with NbN/aluminum nitride (AlN)/NbN JJs. Two of the three JJs that comprise the flux qubit were nearly identical, and the third JJ had a smaller area by a factor α (< 0.5). The only difference between the qubits was the inclusion of an additional and relatively large πphase shifter, made of a NbN/PdNi/NbN junction. Further information on the fabrication process and experiment setup can be found in "Methods". In this experiment, we chose an architecture with a C-shunt flux qubit coupled to a 3dimensional (3D) microwave cavity For example, T1 times up to 90 μs were observed in Al-based C-shunt flux qubits on a sapphire substrate in a 3D cavity The qubits were placed inside the cavity as shown in Fig. where the energy gap Δ and the flux-dependent energy shift εε are defined by Here, EE cc = ee 2 /2CC Σ is the effective charging energy determined by the total qubit capacitance CC ΣΣ . Other parameters include the area ratio of the small JJ relative to the two larger JJs αα=0.458, Josephson energy EE JJ /h = 225 GHz (where h is Planck's constant, and the corresponding critical current density of the larger JJ in the qubit is 59 A cm -2 , which is close to the value obtained from junction characterization), and charging energy We note that the minimum in fig. Considering that the period in the fig. 2c is 26.3 mA, we find that the offset flux is 0.002ΦΦ 00 , which indicates the presence of a residual magnetic field. This residual field could be caused by components, such as circulators and isolators, that contain ferromagnetic materials. Another possible origin of the residual field is a spontaneous supercurrent at the 0-π phase boundary which can appear near the π-junction edges if the ferromagnetic layer thickness becomes smaller than the threshold needed for the π-state This situation can occur during the lift-off process and could be avoided by using dry etching. For the π-junction qubit, at the flux-insensitive point (i.e., φφ = 0 ), the qubit has its minimum frequency at 4.055 GHz, detuned by (ωω cc -ωω 01 )/2ππ = 4.189 GHz from the fundamental cavity mode. The two qubits have similar transition frequencies because they have the same qubit design, except for the fact that one of them has a π-junction where the other one has only a shunting via. To explain why the conventional flux qubit and the π-junction qubit have similar frequencies despite their different circuit schemes, we examine the Lagrangian of the circuit in Supplementary Note 1. There, in the process of deriving the Hamiltonian of the π-junction qubit from the Lagrangian, for the π-junction with almost no phase change (i.e. the phase is fixed to π), the kinetic energy of the πjunction can be ignored. Thus, the Hamiltonian and the qubit frequency of the π-junction qubit is almost the same as those of the conventional flux qubits except for the phase shift of π in the potential energy. We believe that the small frequency difference between the two qubits can be attributed to the unavoidable small variation of αα in the two qubits. Despite the similar designs and qubit frequencies, the working flux bias points of the two qubits are entirely different. For the qubit with the π-junction, the optimal operation point, where the relevant transition frequencies are least sensitive to variations in the applied magnetic field, is at zero field, indicating a half-flux-quantum shifted operation compared to the conventional flux qubit. These results demonstrate the successful operation of the superconducting flux qubits operating at zero magnetic field when incorporating a π-junction. Energy relaxation time TT 11 and dephasing time TT 22 . The coherence properties of the qubits were characterized by time-domain measurements, where the energy relaxation time (TT 1 ) and spin-echo coherence time (TT 2 ) were measured at the flux-insensitive point for each qubit using the control-pulse sequences depicted in the insets of Fig. The dephasing time, shown in Fig. Using an exponential fit, we determine TT 2 = 11.3 ± 0.76 μμμμ for the conventional flux qubit and TT 2 = 1.47 ± 0.15 μμμμ μs for the π-junction qubit, at their respective optimal points (i.e., at φφ = 0.5 for the former and φφ = 0 for the latter). Since TT 2 is related to both the pure dephasing time TT φφ and TT 1 as described by , if the pure dephasing rate is negligible, TT 2 becomes larger than TT 1 , approaching the In the π-junction flux qubit, TT 2 ≈ TT 1 . Also, both the TT 1 and TT 2 times of the π-junction qubit are one order of magnitude smaller than the respective times for the conventional flux qubit. From their coherence times (TT 1 = 1.45 μs and TT 2 = 1.47 μs), the TT φφ is estimated to be about 2.98 μs, which is shorter than that of the conventional flux qubit. These results indicate that additional dephasing source, such as inelastic quasiparticle tunneling through the metallic π-junction, causes TT φφ of the π-junction qubit to be shorter than that of the conventional flux qubit. Furthermore, as shown in Figure Interestingly, these fluctuations appear to be larger at longer delays, which is unusual. This suggests that there might be an additional noise source affecting the data variability in π-junction qubit. One possible cause of this fluctuation could be magnetization fluctuations or slow movement of magnetic domains in the π-junction. However, further investigation is required to confirm this hypothesis. We note that the coherence time of our conventional flux qubit was similar to that reported in Ref. 10 (TT 1 ~16 μμμμ), where we used a transmission-line resonator to probe the qubit dispersively. We believe that our T1 value is not limited by the measurement setup but by the dielectric dissipation arising from the material surface of the qubit or weakly coupled TLS defects in the remaining silicon dioxide after buffered hydrogen fluoride (BHF) treatment in our fabrication process. It is worth noting that the coherence times of our π-junction qubit are three orders of magnitude higher than those of the previously demonstrated superconducting phase qubit coupled to a π-junction On the other hand, the coherence times of the π-junction qubit were one order of magnitude lower than those of the conventional flux qubit. These results clearly show the impact of the NbN/PdNi/NbN π-junction on both TT 1 and TT 2 , providing valuable insight into the coherence properties of the superconducting flux qubits. In particular, we expect that the qubit coherence is limited by the π-junction. To understand the main factors contributing to the reduced coherence times of the πjunction qubit, we estimated the theoretical predictions for the decay time caused by damping at the π-junction as discussed in Refs. 19 clearly demonstrates the additional decoherence induced by the π-junction employed in this flux qubit, consistent with our findings. We therefore attribute the difference between the qubits with and without π-junctions to dissipation caused by quasiparticles in the superconductor/ferromagnetic metal/superconductor structure in the π-junction qubit. Even if we want to keep using an overdamped π-junction, it could be possible to increase ττ rrrrrrrrrr by reducing the JJ size, which reduces II c , and/or increasing the π-junction size, which reduces RR NN,π . However, Ref. 30 suggested that using an underdamped π-junction (expected from the junction with insulating tunnel barrier) is a more promising approach to give a significantly longer coherence time. In other words, the coherence properties of our π-junction qubit could be improved by employing a ferromagnetic insulator in the πjunction. We have realized a superconducting flux qubit operating at zero magnetic field by utilizing a ferromagnetic Josephson π-junction. We engineered the NbN/PdNi/NbN πjunction incorporated into NbN/AlN/NbN-based superconducting flux qubits with a nanoscale thickness in the range needed to produce a robust π-state. The microwave spectroscopy and time-domain coherence measurements of the π-junction qubit confirmed the optimal operation at zero magnetic field. The qubit lifetime is in the microsecond range. The lifetime of the π-junction qubit is an order of magnitude shorter than that of a reference conventional flux qubit. We attribute the difference to dissipation caused by quasiparticles in the superconductor/ferromagnetic metal/superconductor (S/FM/S) structure in the π-junction qubit, indicating that the coherence properties could potentially be improved by employing a ferromagnetic insulator in the π-junction. In this work, we prioritized implementing a flux qubit with a well-established S/FM/S structure that reliably achieves a stable π-state Unlike the phase qubit studied in Ref. 19, reporting clear coherence properties such as This qubit can open the pathway towards high density integration of flux qubits. The incorporation of π-junction flux qubits in the 3D architecture can also be utilized for bosonic code quantum computation Fabrication of all-nitride flux qubit with NbN/PdNi/NbN π-junction. In this study, we utilized two distinct types of JJs as the building blocks for superconducting flux qubits. The first type is a fully epitaxial NbN/AlN/NbN JJ grown on a single-crystal Si (100) substrate, with a (200)-oriented TiN buffer layer (see the left inset of Fig. To examine the effect of the ferromagnetic JJ as a π-phase shifter on the qubit, we fabricated flux qubits with and without π-junctions on the same Si substrate, as shown in Importantly, the PdNi interlayer thickness was set to 15 nm to achieve both the π-state and a critical current density (JJ c ) ~ 4.4 kA cm -2 , sufficient to function as a π-phase shifter for the qubit Experiments were performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 10 mK. The qubit chip was mounted in a 3D microwave cavity, as shown in Fig. To characterize the cavity, the microwave transmission S21 was measured using a vector network analyzer. For spectroscopy and coherence measurements of the qubit, an additional microwave drive and a commercial analogue-to-digital converter were used, enabling the qubit state to be read out dispersively via the cavity in a circuit quantum electrodynamics (circuit QED) architecture. To apply the magnetic flux bias to the qubit, a small custom-made solenoid magnet outside the 3D cavity was utilized. A detailed description of the experimental setup can be found in Ref. 13. , 30. Since the superconductor/ferromagnetic metal/superconductor π-junction can be considered a superconductor/normal metal/superconductor (S/N/S) structure, and the latter is known to have dissipation via gapless quasiparticle excitations, a similar theoretical model of dissipation effects in the ferromagnetic metal layer can be utilized. In order to describe the damped dynamics for the π-junction qubit, the resistively shunted junction (RSJ) model for the π-junction, where dissipation occurs in the normal resistance RR NN,ππ of the junction, was used in Ref. 30. Our NbN/PdNi/NbN π-junction is an overdamped junction and has RR NN, π ≈ 344.3 μΩ and a critical current II c,π ≈ 3.5 mA which are estimated from (583 MHz) is associated with the characteristic Josephson frequency of our NbN/PdNi/NbN π-junction. Based on these calculations, we theoretically estimate the relaxation time