The Arrhenius law predicts the transition time between equilibrium states in physical systems due to thermal activation, with broad applications in material science, magnetic hyperthermia and paleomagnetism where it is used to estimate the transition time and thermal stability of assemblies of magnetic nanoparticles. Magnetite is a material of great importance in paleomagnetic studies and magnetic hyperthermia but existing estimates of the attempt frequency f 0 vary by several orders of magnitude in the range 10 7 -10 13 Hz, leading to significant uncertainty in their relaxation rate. Here we present a dynamical method enabling full parameterization of the Arrhenius-Néel law using atomistic spin dynamics. We determine the temperature and volume dependence of the attempt frequency of magnetite nanoparticles with cubic anisotropy and find a value of f 0 = 0.562 ± 0.059 GHz at room temperature. For particles with enhanced anisotropy we find a significant increase in the attempt frequency and a strong temperature dependence suggesting an important role of anisotropy. The method is applicable to a wide range of dynamical systems where different states can be clearly identified and enables robust estimates of domain state stabilities, with particular importance in the rapidly developing field of micromagnetic analysis of paleomagnetic recordings where samples can be numerically reconstructed to provide a better understanding of geomagnetic recording fidelity over geological time scales. The Arrhenius law In contrast to the complexity of scientific problems to which it has been applied, the form of the Arrhenius-Néel law is extremely simple: where τ is the mean time a system stays in an local energy minima magnetic state (with energy E 1 ) before it rotates to a second state (with energy E 2 ) or vice versa. τ 0 is the characteristic switching time of a magnetic nanostructure and its inverse f 0 = 1/τ 0 the attempt frequency of the system. The relaxation time τ depends on the ratio of the energy barrier E B V between the local energy minima states and the thermal energy k B T of the system. k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature of the system. In nanomagnetism, E B is determined by the different types of anisotropies in the system, e.g. magnetocrystalline or shape anisotropy Different methods exist to calculate the energy barrier E B of a magnetic nanostructure such as constrained Monte Carlo In this letter we numerically determine an accurate value for f 0 of magnetite nanoparticles using atomistic spin dynamics which models the time evolution of the magnetization time in the presence of thermal fluctuations. The value of f 0 is calculated for magnetite nanoparticles of varying volumes and anisotropies and at different temperatures and we present an alternative strategy to determine the temperature dependence of the energy barrier E B in magnetic systems. To model the dynamics of magnetite nanoparticles we use a Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian which considers the magnetic moments to be localized at the magnetic atoms Here we study truncated octahedral faceted nanoparticles, one the most common morphologies found in natural samples and laboratory manufactured crystals The dynamics of magnetic nanoparticles are highly dependent on the particle size and temperature. Characteristic dynamics of a D = 16 nm nanoparticle are shown in Fig. To accurately determine the attempt frequency it is first necessary to obtain a definitive value of the mean relaxation time, τ. Here we use an alternative approach using geofencing, where the magnetization is associated with one of the eight local minima and is associated with that minimum until transitioning to a different minimum. Here we use a criterion that the magnetisation m is associated with a new minimum state The magnetisation exhibits telegraph noise where the magnetisation is metastable in the minimum. The associated magnetic minimum is extracted from the time-dependent magnetisation using the geofencing approach. The corresponding time-evolution of each minimum state (labelled 1-8) for each temperature is shown in panels (d-f). This allows an accurate calculation of the relaxation time τ for all particle sizes and temperatures. α when m • e α > 0.91, where e α is the easy direction of the local minimum. This allows for large fluctuations around the minimum state without defining a transition. This approach allows an accurate estimation of the number of transitions N over the simulation, and we express the characteristic relaxation time as τ = t/N where t = 1 μs is the total simulation time. The associated magnetic states extracted from the dynamics in Fig. where the intercept is the attempt frequency and the gradient gives the energy barrier. Additional data for low anisotropy and a wider range of temperatures is available in supplementary Figures Firstly, the linear nature of the data shows that the influence of the particle volume on the attempt frequency value f 0 is negligible and its temperature dependence f 0 (T ) can be determined from the intercept of a linear fit for each tempera- The temperature dependence of the attempt frequency exhibits two different behaviours depending on the anisotropy value. For the low anisotropy case closely reproducing the anisotropy of magnetite at room temperature, the attempt frequency is temperature independent with a value of f 0 (300K) = 0.562 ± 0.059 GHz, i.e. half of the widely accepted value for magnetite f 0 . In contrast, for the high anisotropy case f 0 decreases with increasing T but with an asymptotic like behaviour at high temperatures. The variation in f 0 is however small, less than an order of magnitude in a 250K temperature window. In this case f 0 (300K) ∼ 5 GHz. The temperature dependence of the extracted anisotropy energy shown in Fig. In this work we have simulated the dynamics of singledomain magnetite nanoparticles with cubic anisotropy in a range of sizes and temperatures using atomistic spin dynamics. The temperature range spans below and above room temperature, covering the most relevant cases for paleaomagnetic and magnetic hyperthermia studies. We have studied the cases for low and high anisotropy representing fully passivated Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles and particles with an enhanced anisotropy arising from either surface anisotropy or dopants such as Co. We find that the attempt frequency shows a different characteristic temperature-dependence depending on the magnetic anisotropy energy of the particles, highlighting the importance of the absolute value of the anisotropy in the dynamic behaviour of magnetic nanoparticles, affecting both the attempt frequency and the energy barrier, in disagreement with previous analytical theories 