SrTiO 3 -based conducting interfaces, which exhibit coexistence of gate-tunable 2D superconductivity and strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC), are candidates to host topological superconductive phases. Yet, superconductivity is usually in the dirty limit, which tends to suppress nonconventional pairing and therefore challenges these expectations. Here we report on LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 (LAO/STO) interfaces with remarkably large mobility and mean free paths comparable to the superconducting coherence length, approaching the clean limit for superconductivity. We further show that the carrier density, mobility, and formation of the superconducting condensate are controlled by the fine-tuning of La/Al chemical ratio in the LAO film. Interestingly, we find a region in the superconducting phase diagram where the critical temperature is not suppressed below the Lifshitz transition, at odds with previous experimental investigations. These findings point out the relevance of achieving a clean-limit regime to enhance the observation of unconventional pairing mechanisms in these systems. The coexistence of two-dimensional (2D) superconductivity and spin-orbit-coupling (SOC) is key for the development of novel device concepts for quantum technologies that exploit unconventional electron pairing in topological phases In this work, we report on LAO/STO q-2DEGs with exceptionally large mobilities, which allow for achieving mean free paths (l mf p ) comparable to the superconductive coherence length (ξ), approaching the clean limit even in the depletion regime. In LAO/STO interfaces the electronic conductivity is ensured by t 2g electrons in Ti (d xy , d xz , d yz ) orbitals. The quantum confinement of the q-2DEG splits the energy levels of the 3d orbitals, whose splitting is dictated by the out-of-plane effective mass m * , which depends on the degree of orbital wavefunctions overlapping along the confinement direction On the other hand, the origin of the 2DEG in LAO/STO interfaces has been discussed in terms of either oxygen vacancies Thin LAO films were grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on top of (001) oriented TiO 2 -terminated STO substrates (see supplementary note 1 for growth process details). The epitaxial layer-by-layer growth of the films was confirmed by intensity oscillations of reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED), as shown in Figure Figure The sheet resistance at T = 300 K decreases for smaller La/Al ratios (Figure tivity in our samples can be attributed to the difference in the La/Al ratio. We emphasize that all samples show a metallic behavior in all the analyzed range of temperatures (2K-300K), with little sign of an increase in resistance at low temperatures (see supplementary figure We investigated the effect of the La/Al ratio (r La/Al ) on the evolution of carrier density at low temperature as a function of back gate voltages V G . In the depleted regime, corresponding to negative or low positive V G , we found a linear response of the transverse Hall resistance R H as a function of the applied out-of-plane magnetic field (B ⊥ ) in all samples (see top panels of Figures In our samples the nonlinearity is observed at rather low magnetic fields B ⊥ ≤ 2T, as can be seen in the bottom panels of Figures Figure To investigate superconductivity, we measured the temperature dependence of the sheet resistance R S (T ) between 0.03 and 0.45 K for different V G . Figures Our results provide important insights into the nature of superconductivity in the oxide q-2DEGs. According to the conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) scenario, pairing through d xz/yz rather than d xy bands is more favorable for superconductivity, due to the larger density of states of the former 