Ceramics based piezoelectric generators are known for their high energy density and poor flexibility. In this work, v r -PMN-0.3PT/PDMS 2-2 composite with optimum PMN-0.3PT content (v r ) was designed that demonstrated enhanced output energy density and superior mechanical flexibility under dynamic mechanical excitation. v r -PMN-0.3PT/PDMS 2-2 short-circuit current density of 69 nA/cm 2 and an open-circuit electric field of 189 V/cm, translating to a maximum output power density of ~13 μW/cm 3 higher than that of pristine PMN-0.3 PT based piezoelectric generator. Estimated mechanical flexibility was found to be ~53 % higher than that of pristine PMN-0.3PT. composite with different PMN-PT reinforcement content (v r ) and two different reinforcement configurations were fabricated and characterized for effective electro-elastic properties and energy harvesting response. Parallelly, using the finite element method and analytical models, effective electromechanical properties were calculated. Composites with parallel connectivity of the reinforcement phase demonstrated enhanced piezoelectric charge coefficient (d 33 c ) even with low PMN-0.3PT content whereas the relative permittivity (κ 33 c ) and elastic modulus (E 33 c ) exhibited a linearly increasing trend with reinforcement volume fraction. At a compressive load of 50 N and 5 Hz frequency, a piezoelectric generator (PG) based on a v r = 0.2, v r -PMN-0.3PT/PDMS 2-2 composite with parallel connectivity produced a maximum Advanced wireless technologies and microelectronics have empowered a new generation of wearable technology, MEMS-based devices, sensors, actuators, etc. Traditional piezoceramics, however, are naturally brittle and unreliable during cyclic mechanical loading This leaves ample opportunities to come up with novel composite designs with superior energy density with reasonable mechanical flexibility. In this regard, our earlier work suggested that the oriented configuration of the reinforcement phase in the composite could result in superior electro-elastic properties in piezoelectric-polymer composite Reinforcement orientation in the matrix could be achieved by specific designing strategies, such as with 1-3 and 2-2 configurations of the reinforcement and the matrix, respectively with the increase in the volume fraction of PZT reinforcement. Similar results were reported in 2-2 piezoelectric composites (PZT-5 as the piezoelectric active phase and cement-epoxy polymer as the passive phase) [31] exhibited an output short-circuit current of ~200 nA and ~500 nA, respectively, demonstrating a significant potential for energy harvesting applications. In this regard, PMN-PT, with its class-leading electromechanical performance, could be an interesting proposition for developing high-energy density piezoelectric generators Considering the above research gap, in the present work, we conduct a combined v r = 0.20-based 2-2 parallel connected composite was demonstrated to be even higher than that of pristine PMN-0.3PT under identical loading condition albeit with superior mechanical flexibility. The 2-2 piezoelectric composites can be represented in two different geometrical configurations: series and parallel connections. The process flowchart for the fabrication of the 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composites with both series and parallel connectivities is presented in Fig. Subsequently, the composite was taken out of the mold and then cut into 15 mm × 15 mm pieces. In the case of composite with series connectivity, PVDF was added as a binder to fabricate the PMN-PT layer. The cast film was subjected to drying at a temperature of 60°C for a duration of 4 h. Following this, a PDMS polymer mixture consisting of PDMS and a curing agent, in a ratio of 10:1 was applied onto the dried PMN-0.3PT film. Subsequently, a PMN-0.3PT layer was cast onto the PDMS film, which was then overlaid with an additional layer of PDMS. The volume fraction of PMN-0.3PT-PVDF in the 2-2 configured composites was managed by film thickness. v r -PMN-0.3PT-PVDF/PDMS with v r = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75 were successfully fabricated. For electrical characterization, a layer of conductive silver paint (Sigma-Aldrich) was uniformly coated on both surfaces of the composite film (12 mm × 12 mm). The capacitance of the composite sample was measured at a frequency of 1 kHz and with a 1 V AC signal using the Wayne Kerr 6500B high-precision impedance analyzer. The relative permittivity ((κ 33 c ) was calculated from the capacitance: κ 33 c = Ct/κ 0 A, where A represents the surface area of the electrode, t denotes the thickness of the composite sample, and κ 0 corresponds to the permittivity of the vacuum. Impedance measurements were conducted on poled composite samples (1 kV/mm) over the frequency range of 20 Hz to 1 MHz at room temperature. The thickness coupling coefficient (k t c ) of the piezoelectric composites can be mathematically represented in terms of effective material constants as or, the value of k t c can be determined by measuring the resonance frequency f r (t) and antiresonance frequency (f a (t) ) of a piezoelectric composite using the relation Eq. 1 and 2 were used for calculation of the elastic modulus (E The piezoelectric constitutive relationships that exhibit coupling characteristics between mechanical properties (stress and strain) and electrical properties (electric displacement and electric field) are given in matrix form as, where, σ, ε, E, D, C E , κ ε , and e are the stress tensor, strain tensor, electric field vector, electric displacement vector, elastic stiffness tensor at constant electric field, permittivity tensor at constant or zero strain, and piezoelectric coupling tensor, respectively. The superscript T stands for the transpose of the matrix. The above constitutive equations represent several independent material properties for the PMN-0.3PT and PDMS material, such as elastic modulus, piezoelectric charge coefficient, and relative permittivity. Hence, all these material properties need to be known for the complete characterization of a 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS piezoelectric composite. The 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS piezoelectric composite with parallel connectivity (illustrated in Fig. Table for the 2-2 layered piezoelectric composite. Voigt notation was used in conversion of two indices to a single index wherever applicable. Where [R], [A] and [B] are expressed as: For 2-2 composite with series connectivity, however, the above model needs to be modified as per the current experimental setup where direction 3 is the poling direction Note that, v 1 . u 3 = 1 (v 1 ∥ u 3 ), v 2 . u 2 = 1 (v 2 ∥ u 2 ), and v 3 . u 1 = 1 (v 3 ∥ u 1 ). Therefore, ]. The elastic, dielectric, and piezoelectric tensors are transformed as, The above formulation was used to transform the elastic, dielectric, and piezoelectric tensors into any new coordinate system. In the present work, firstly, the materials properties were transformed based on Kar-Gupta's assumptions (along 1-direction). The transformed electromechanical properties are presented in Table As demonstrated in the following section, the 2-2 composite with parallel connectivity is ideal from energy harvesting perspective. Therefore, finite element analysis with kinematic uniform boundary conditions was employed only for the composites with parallel connectivity as implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics software The output voltage and output current of the 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS piezoelectric composite (15 mm × 15 mm × 1.5 mm) with parallel connectivity were simulated using the COMSOL Multiphysics. The lower surface was fixed-constrained (solid mechanics) and grounded (electrostatics). The boundary load (5 N, 10 N, 20 N, 30 N, and 50 N) at a frequency of 1 Hz and 5 Hz was applied to the upper surface of the piezoelectric composite. Moreover, a floating potential boundary was applied to the upper surface. For meshing three-dimensional models, tetrahedral elements were utilized. A direct solver with a relative tolerance of 0.01 was employed. The simulations were conducted using a time-dependent approach for 2 second with a time step of 0.1 seconds. Measured and computed effective elastic modulus (E 33 c ), relative permittivity (κ 33 c ), and piezoelectric charge coefficient (d 33 c ) of 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS piezoelectric composites are plotted in Fig. (κ 33 c /κ 33 r ) of the 2-2 composite with series and parallel connectivity as a function of PMN-0.3PT content. In addition to the analytical model presented above, the effective relative permittivity (κ 33 c ) of the two-phase composite can also be calculated by using the Wiener model suggest that with an increase in the PMN-0.3PT content, there is a marginal increase in the relative permittivity (κ 33 c ) with the series connectivity while a substantial increase in the κ 33 c could be obtained for parallel connectivity. For the series connectivity, both Wiener and modified Kar-Gupta's normalized relative permittivity matches the experimental results for all the PMN-PT volume fractions. Both the Finite Element Method (FEM) and the Kar-Gupta analytical model for parallel connectivity yield identical predictions of κ 33 c of PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composites across all the volume fractions of PMN-0.3PT. For the parallel connectivity, FEM and Kar-Gupta predicted κ 33 c at v r = 0.20 composite has a good agreement with the experimentally measured κ 33 c as shown in Fig. Fig. Where, d 33 c , d 33 r , and d 33 m are the piezoelectric charge coefficient of PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composite, PMN-0.3PT reinforcement (d 33 r = 237 pC/N), and PDMS matrix (d 33 m = 0 pC/N), respectively. Also, v r and v m are the PMN-0.3PT ceramic and PDMS polymer volume fractions in the composite, respectively. For the series connectivity, both Newnham and modified Kar-Gupta's normalized piezoelectric charge coefficient matches the experimental results for all the PMN-PT volume fractions. For the parallel connectivity, the piezoelectric charge coefficient predicted by Newnham, Finite Element Method (FEM), and Kar-Gupta analytical model are identical for all PMN-0.3PT volume fractions (close to the d 33 r ) . Piezoelectric charge coefficient d 33 c of the series and parallel connectivity 2-2 v r -PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composites was measured using a d 33 piezometer. The Piezoelectric charge coefficient of the v r = 0.10, 0.20, and 0.43 parallel connectivity composite samples are found to be 183 pC/N, 194.5 pC/N, and 200.5 pC/N, respectively, which are approximately 81.5 %, 86.5 %, and 89.1 % of the d 33 r values, respectively. However, for series connectivity, the composites with v r = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75 demonstrate very low piezoelectric charge coefficients of 2.9 pC/N, 3.3 pC/N, and 3.1 pC/N, respectively. These data validate theoretical predictions Clearly, 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composite with parallel connectivity demonstrates large piezoelectric charge coefficient compared to the 2-2 composite with series connectivity as well as 0-3 composite , where σ y and E represent yield stress and elastic modulus, respectively The output voltage (V) and output charge (Q) from a piezoelectric generator (PGs) under dynamic compressive load can be theoretically estimated using: V = only cause marginal increase in the experimental d 33 c value. Therefore, it can be inferred that beyond a specific PMN-PT content, there would be a drop in the output voltage. Fig. However, it is evident that J sc and E OC peak at intermediate composition, v r = 0.20. The composite film with a v r = 0.20 exhibits a maximum J sc = 68.75 nA/cm 2 and an E OC =189 V/cm under 50 N load at 5 Hz. It is worth noting that J sc and E OC generated from the v r = 0.20 2-2 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composites are much higher than the v r = 0.50 0-3 PMN-0.3PT/PDMS composite PMN-0.3PT pellet synthesized successfully by solid-state reaction method, was used to fabricate 2-2 connectivity, v r -PMN-0.3PT/PDMS (v r = 0.10, 0.20, and 0.43) piezoelectric composite. It was observed that an increase in volume fraction leads to a significant increase in the effective relative permittivity (κ 33 c ) and elastic modulus (E 33 c ). However, the effective piezoelectric charge coefficient (d 33 c ) reaches its maximum value at a much lower volume fraction. The 2-2 piezoelectric composite with a v r = 0.20 exhibits the highest power density among all the composites. The maximum current density, 68.75 nA/cm 2 and electric field, 189 V/cm, corresponds to a power density of ~13 μW/cm 3 was obtained from the v r = 0.20 PG when subjected to a compressive load of 50 N at 5 Hz. 