Deep learning (DL) models have now been widely used for high-performance material property prediction for properties such as formation energy and band gap. However, training such DL models usually requires a large amount of labeled data, which is usually not available for most materials properties such as exfoliation energy and elastic properties. Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods have been proposed to address this data scarcity issue by learning inherent representations from unlabeled data in various research fields. Herein, we present DSSL, a physics-guided Dual SSL framework, for graph neural networks (GNNs) based material property prediction. This hybrid framework combines node-masking based predictive SSL with atomic coordinate perturbation based contrastive SSL strategies, allowing it to learn structural embeddings that capture both local and global information of input crystals. Especially, we propose to use predicting the macroproperty (e.g. elasticity) related microproperty such as atomic stiffness as an additional pretext task to achieve physics-guided pretraining process. We pretrain our DSSL model on the Materials Project database with unlabeled data and finetune it with ten extra datasets with different material properties. The experimental results demonstrate that teaching neural networks some physics using the SSL strategy can bring up to 26.89% performance improvement compared to the baseline GNN models. Our source code is now freely available at https://github.com/usccolumbia/DSSL. Material property prediction is an important and challenging topic in the field of material design and discovery The advent of self-supervised learning (SSL) There have been some researches leveraging GNNs with SSL to predict material properties. Magar et al. In this paper, our objective is to tackle the aforementioned problems and challenges associated with the existing supervised or self-supervised methods for material property predictions by harnessing the power of physics-guided self-supervised learning. Our methods are inspired by the fact that it is the ensemble of the microproperties of local atoms that determines the macroproperties of a material. For example, the elastic property (macroproperty) of materials is strongly dependent on the atomic stiffness Microproperties of materials manifest at the lattice level and are typically examined through diffraction or spectroscopic methods. Examples of microproperties include the lattice constants, its temperature variation, and the amplitudes of atomic thermal vibrations. Instead, macroproperties such as elastic properties, hardness, and dielectric properties are investigated through measurements of materials in bulk In this work, we present DSSL, a two-stage physics-guided GNN-based dual SSL framework for material property prediction. During the pretraining stage, the model is trained using a predictive SSL strategy in combination with a contrastive SSL strategy, making effective use of extensive amounts of unlabeled data selected from the Materials Project (MP) database We propose a physics-guided dual SSL GNN-based framework for material property prediction composed of two stages (as shown in Figure The state-of-the-art deep learning methods for predicting material properties are based on GNNs given the graphs from material structures. For a material graph G = {V, E} where V represents the atom set and E represents the connection relationships between atoms, a basic GNN like DeeperGATGNN updates the node information by aggregating messages from the neighborhood of this node. The message-passing update function of basic GNNs can be expressed as follows: where f u and f a represent the update function and the aggregate function (i.e., neural networks) and N (u) represents the neighborhood sets of the node u. At each iteration k, the aggregate function f a takes the set of embeddings of the nodes in node u's neighborhood N (u) as input and generates a message based on this aggregated neighborhood information. The update function f u combines this aggregated information with embedding of node u at iteration k -1 (i.e., h (k-1) ) to generate the updated embedding h k u . In this paper, we use DeeperGATGNN as the backbone to encode the input graphs. Based on the basic GNNs, the DeeperGATGNN introduced a novel global-attention GNN layer with a differentiable group normalization (DGN) and residual skip connections to achieve scalable training of highly deep graph neural network models for materials property prediction Mask-based generative SSL Atom masking is one of the SSL strategies we use to capture the local microproperty information (i.e., node information) in the pretraining stage (as shown in the second row of Figure where z i is the node embedding; y is the target; C is the number of the atom types. Contrastive SSL Contrastive learning is one of self-supervised learning approaches to learning to extract meaningful representations by contrasting a pair of instances. Intuitively, contrastive learning can be considered as learning by comparing Physics-guided predictive SSL It is well known that microproperties, or the properties of the individual atoms and bonds within a material and their combinations significantly influence the corresponding macroproperties of the material. With this prior knowledge, we propose to use specific microproperties prediction as one of the pretext tasks for SSL during the pretraining stage (as shown in the third row of Figure where z i represents the node embedding of the i th node; y is the ground truth (true VE or true AS). By combining mask-based generative SSL, contrastive SSL, and predictive SSL with physics-guided pretext tasks, the overall loss for the framework can be written as: We utilize the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) to evaluate the performance of our work, which measures the error between the predicted properties and the corresponding true targets. -138,614 HOIP where N is the sample size; x n is the n th material; f (.) represents the network used to predict material properties; y n and f (x n ) denote the n th target and prediction, respectively. For a fair comparison with baseline SSL methods, we conduct experiments using ten repetitions of training on the same split training set of HOIP, Lanthanides, Fermi Energy, Formation Energy, and Band Gap datasets and five-fold cross-validation method for JDFT2D, Phonons, Dielectric, GVRH, and KVRH datasets. This allows us to compute the MAE E i for each run i and subsequently determine the mean E and standard deviation σ across these values. where K is the number of runs (five or ten), E i represents the MAE score of the i th run. We initially pretrain our model using the Materials Project (MP) database In this section, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation of our models on different datasets and compared them with existing models. Additionally, we designed a set of ablation studies to assess the effectiveness of various SSL strategies implemented in our model to analyze these individual components and unravel their distinct contributions to the overall performance. In Table We then design the experiments to compare the model performances with and without the help of microproperties based pretext tasks in our DSSL framework as shown in Figure Ablation Study To investigate the complementary relationship among different SSL methods, we conduct a comprehensive ablation study for our DSSL algorithm. As shown in Table While the contrastive SSL model on its own does not yield satisfactory results, when combined with mask-based SSL (i.e., DSSL), they synergize to establish a complementary relationship, resulting in favorable outcomes. DSSL can achieve the best performance with improvements on the original DeeperGATGNN of 11.58%, 3.67%, and 8.70%, respectively. Moreover, DSSL+microproperties on the corresponding datasets enhance the performance of DSSL, resulting in mean MAEs of 0.083 GPa and 0.283 eV on the GVRH and Band Gap datasets, respectively. However, DSSL+VE does not exhibit performance improvement over DSSL due to the previously analyzed reason: valence electrons lack a strong correlation with formation energy, making it challenging to guide the prediction of formation energy. Then for the HOIP dataset, we find that both Mask SSL and contrastive SSL lead to worse performance compared to the Original model with an MAE of 0.237 eV compared to 0.214 eV. The same is true for the Lanthanides dataset. This performance degradation by SSL is, as we analyzed before, due to the fact that the pretraining data from the MP datasets are significantly different from these two downstream task datasets. Here, the pretraining on the MP dataset becomes a hindrance to the finetuning stage, so that the original DeeperGATGNN has the best results. Additionally, we applied the physics-guided SSL strategy over another SOTA network, ALIGNN, with the results shown in Table We introduce a physics-guided GNN-based dual SSL framework, DSSL for structure based materials property prediction. The framework contains two stages. In the pretraining stage, the model is trained on the MP dataset using both maskbased and contrastive learning SSL strategies to capture both local and global information for the input crystal structures. Additionally, we propose using macroproperty related microproperty prediction as additional pretext tasks in the pretraining stage to achieve physics-guided neural network training. From the experiments, we observed that our DSSL can achieve better performance than its backbone model, DeeperGATGNN, and the majority of SOTA graph neural network models in predicting various material properties. However, we find that for downstream tasks with different data distributions from the pertraining dataset, it is hard for DSSL to improve the performance of the baseline model. We further designed the ablation study to examine the impact of different SSL strategies on the performance of the baseline GNN model and found that our DSSL with physics-guided pretext tasks can achieve the best performance as shown by the band gap and elasticity prediction problems. However, similar challenges arise when dealing with datasets with different distributions from the pretraining dataset. Given this problem, it may have to adjust or expand the pertaining dataset according to the specific downstream task of property prediction. Our work may be further improved by exploiting the newly discovered 2.2 million stable structures by the DeepMind team Performance comparison on extra five datasets: Fermi Energy (eV), Formation Energy (eV/atom), Band Gap (eV), HOIP (eV), and Lanthanides (eV/atom).