Matter entanglement is a common chaotic structure in both quantum and classical systems. Turbulence can be pictured as a tangle of vortex filaments in superfluids and viscous vortices in classical fluids. However, it is hard to explain how the statistical properties of turbulence arise from elemental structures. Here we use the quantum vortex tangle as a skeleton to generate an instantaneous classical turbulent field with intertwined vortex tubes. Combining the quantum skeleton and tunable vortex thickness makes the synthetic turbulence satisfy key statistical laws and provides valuable insights for elucidating energy cascade and extreme events. By manipulating the elemental structures, we customize turbulence with desired statistical features. This bottom-up approach of "weaving" turbulence provides a testbed for analyzing and modeling turbulence. Turbulence is recognized as one of the most complex physical systems Vortices are the key components of turbulence An inverse approach to understanding turbulence assembles a turbulent field from the bottom-up -using fine structures as building blocks. By comparing synthetic and real turbulence, we can distinguish the effects of different elemental structures or their combinations on turbulence statistics. Existing synthetic methods of turbulence, such as Fourier modes To shed light on the elemental structure of turbulence, we develop a novel bottom-up method to "weave" an instantaneous turbulent field using intertwined vortices with customizable fine-scale features. This provides a unique way to generate turbulent fields for assessing turbulence theory and developing structure-based models. It eliminates the need for simulating flow evolution and can be employed as tailored flow data for further turbulence simulations and machine learning training. Skeleton of turbulence. Considering the vortices should be chaotic and entangled, we propose that quantum turbulence Subsequently, we generated the axisymmetric Burgers vortex tubes from the skeleton. Here, the radial vorticity distribution is ω s (ρ) = Γ exp -ρ 2 /(2σ 2 ) /(2πσ 2 ) with the radial distance ρ from the centerline and the normalized circulation Γ = 1. This simple exact solution of the Navier-Stokes equations is an attractive candidate for modeling fine-scale turbulence and encapsulates the stretching by the local strain and the dissipation by viscosity. In particular, the vortex tube has a variable core size σ(s) along arc-length s of the centerline, which characterizes the evolution of vortices with multiscale features. We have developed a general method to construct the vorticity for vortex tubes with arbitrary centerline topology, differential twist, and variable thickness (see Supplementary materials, Materials and Methods B, and Supplementary Text, Section II for details). Figure Flow statistics and energy cascade. Turbulence statistics are estimated from the instantaneous woven field based on the celebrated Kolmogorov 1941 theory The various structural features introduced in our bottom-up construction lead to a multi-scale nature of the woven turbulent flow field. The vortex tubes are intertwined in chaotic patterns, with varying entanglement degrees and core sizes (Fig. To explore the energy cascade The cascade picture elucidates why woven turbulence can recover classical turbulence statistics from tangled filaments by introducing viscous vortex tubes. Figure Intermittency and extreme events. The coexistence of ordered and random natures causes classical turbulence to exhibit intermittency and extreme events, which are highly challenging to present in synthetic turbulence. In woven turbulence, distributions of the local enstrophy Ω = |ω| 2 and dissipation (divided by viscosity) Σ = ε/ν = 2S ij S ij , measuring the strength of the velocity gradient tensor S ij = ∂u i /∂x j The flow structure of extreme events can be classified and identified through Q(x) = -(S ij S ji ) /2 and R(x) = -det [S ij ], the second and third invariants of S ij Another notable difference is the symmetrical and asymmetrical R-Q PDFs in woven and real turbulence, respectively. We performed a DNS for decaying turbulence with the initial woven field, as described in Section IV of the Supplementary Text. When the vortex tubes start to interact with each other, well before the onset of fully developed turbulence, a part of the axial strains are rapidly converted into biaxial strains, resulting in an asymmetric R-Q shape (Figs. Customizing turbulence. Besides unveiling insights into turbulent structures, the method of weaving turbulence also enables customizing a turbulent field with desired properties, such as the Reynolds number, turbulent kinetic energy, and helicity The quantum skeletons with more vortex filaments and higher entanglement correspond to larger turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds number. A more valuable question is how the vortex geometry affects turbulence. We manipulated the core size and internal twist The internal twist of vortex lines within vortex tubes is a key topological component of helicity, altering the flow chirality where each index labels a single vortex tube, and the writhe W r and link L k are only related to the knotting and linking of the vortex skeleton. In Fig. Modifying the cross-sectional shape of elemental vortices is effective in customizing turbulence statistics. As an example, we use the vortex sheet, another candidate of the elemental structure, to weave a turbulent field in Fig. Discussion. In summary, our bottom-up approach of "weaving" turbulence, utilizing adjustable fine structures as building blocks, offers a testbed for exploring and understanding elemental structures of turbulence. By utilizing quantum vortex filaments as "skeleton", we have generated classical turbulent fields consisting of intertwined vortex tubes. The combination of the quantum skeleton and tunable tube thickness ensures that the woven turbulence adheres to key statistical laws, including the -5/3 scaling of the energy spectrum, negative third-order structure function, and positive spectral energy flux in the inertial range. By manipulating the elemental structures, we can tailor turbulent flow fields with different Reynolds numbers, helicities, and local flow geometries. The customizable woven turbulence can be used to assess turbulence theory We generate a tangle of vortex filaments in superfluid turbulence without the normal fluid using the vortex filament method (VFM) In the VFM, the vortex filament moves according to the total induced velocity solved by the de-singularized Biot-Savart integral Here, vortex core radius is a 0 = 10 -8 cm for superfluid 4 He, circulation κ q = h/m = 9.97 × 10 -4 cm 2 /sec is fixed by quantum constraint of the Planck constant h and bare mass m of a helium atom, l ± are the lengths of the line segments connected to s after discretization, and s ′ and s ′′ are unit tangent and normal vectors at point s, respectively. The computational box is a cube of size L = 0.1 cm with periodic boundary conditions. A tree algorithm with opening angle θ tree = 0.4 is used to speed up the evaluation of Biot-Savart integrals. The third-order Adams-Bashforth method is used for time advance with the stepping dt = 5 × 10 -5 sec. The spatial resolution is based on the cutoff scale δ which is the length of a filament segment. Through vortex reconnection, the size of the smallest vortex filament is cut off at scale δ We performed two cases to simulate quantum vortex tangle with different degrees of entanglement by adjusting δ = 0.01 cm and 0.005 cm (Movies S1 and S2). Both initial configurations consist of 50 vortices at random positions and with random orientations. After a rapid transition, the tangles become statistically isotropic and homogeneous (Figs. In the construction of woven classical turbulence, first, we used the VFM to simulate the quantum vortex tangle. Then, we reconstructed the control points on the filaments into cubic spline curves defined piecewise by polynomial parametric equations (Supplementary Section II A). Based on these centerlines C, the 3D vorticity field for the vortex tubes was constructed in a periodic box of size L = 2π on N 3 = 1024 3 uniform grid points by mapping from the curved cylindrical coordinates centered on C to Cartesian coordinates (Supplementary Sections II B and II C). Finally, boundary processing was performed so that the vector field satisfies periodic boundary conditions. Two types of boundary problems need to be handled separately. When a centerline crosses the boundary (Type I), we set ghost points for the centerline. When the vorticity for a vortex tube with finite thickness crosses the boundary, while the centerline does not cross the boundary (Type II), we consider the effect of the other 3 3 -1 = 26 periodic boxes surrounding the original domain. The construction process is summarized in Fig. Type II We performed a direct numerical simulation for solving the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations in a periodic box with the open-source pseudo-spectral code HIT3D We compare different synthetic turbulence methods in Table Spectral methods Fractal models include wavelet-based The multiscale Lagrangian map method Low-order statistics Intermittency Coherent vortices Gaussian random field Comparison of different synthetic turbulence methods. Low-order statistics include energy spectra and second-order spatial correlations. Intermittency is reproduced by the scaling law of high-order statistics, such as high-order velocity structure functions. The check or cross mark denotes that the feature is or is not reproduced, respectively. We detail the theoretical and numerical methods for constructing a 3D divergence-free vorticity field from a tangle of quantum vortex filaments. Section II A describes how to transform a vortex filament composed of multiple spatial control points into multiple smooth parameter equations based on cubic spline polynomials. Section II B describes how to generate a 3D vorticity fields using vortex filaments with their centerlines in a curved cylindrical coordinate system. Section II C presents a numerical algorithm for constructing a vorticity field on a Cartesian grid. Section II D describes the boundary processing, and discusses the effect of different boundary processing methods on flow statistics. In the simulation of quantum turbulence with the vortex filament method, a vortex filament is determined by a sequence of discrete control points. To use these vortex filaments as the skeleton of vortices, we need to transform the control points of a spatial curve into an explicit parametric equation. Under the periodic boundary conditions, all vortex filaments are either closed loops or infinitely extended with periodic repetitions. We can trace each filament from any point along itself (crossing the periodic boundary if necessary), and it will always return to the starting point, so each vortex filament can be considered closed. For a single sequence of discrete control points x i = (x i , y i , z i ), i = 1, 2, . . . , N p , we introduce the discrete arc-length parameter and total discrete length L = s Np+1 . Then we obtain the normalized arc-length parameter We use the cubic spline parametric equation to smoothly connect the control points piecewise. In each segment ζ ∈ [ ζ i , ζ i+1 ), we determine four vector coefficients [α i , β i , γ i , δ i ] by solving the linear system where the positions and first-order derivatives of the two endpoints of a segment are calculated from the positions and center differences of the control points, respectively. Substituting Eqs. ( A special treatment is needed for where two consecutive control points are on opposite sides of a boundary. To make sure that the spline curves cross the boundary correctly and meet the periodic boundary conditions, we set ghost points on both sides of the boundary. Finally, we reconstruct all N v vortex filaments composed of discrete points x i into N v smooth cubic splines C (k) : c (k) (ζ), k = 1, 2, . . . , N v , determined by Eq. ( For any given vortex filament, the total arc-length of the spline is no less than the total discrete length of the initial sequence of control points, i.e., where the equality only holds when the filament is a straight line. Therefore, the continuous arc-length parameter of a spline C is inconsistent with the discrete arc-length parameter s i ∈ [0, L) of the control points on C, and the mapping ) is bijective by Eqs. ( We construct the vorticity field ω for multiple tube-like vortices with tunable internal structures. These vortices are generated based on their centerlines described Eq. ( For a single vortex centerline C, we introduce the curved cylindrical coordinate system (s, ρ, θ) within a tubular region where R v denotes the radius of Ω C . The Frenet-Serret formulas on C are where T ≡ dc/ds denotes the unit tangent, N ≡ (dT /ds)/|dT /ds| the unit normal, B ≡ T × N the unit binormal, κ the curvature, and τ the torsion of C. Based on coordinates (s, ρ, θ), we specify the vorticity field Figure We construct ω based on the geometric relation between vortex lines and surfaces. The vortex surface field (VSF) φ v is defined to satisfy the constraint For vortex tubes with the variable core size σ(s) and local twist rate η t (s, φ v ) with the circulation Γ, Gaussian kernel function as in the Burgers vortex model, and the normalized VSF Here, the three terms on the right-hand side of Eq. ( with σ 2 ≫ σ 1 . We truncate the elliptical distribution at ρ = R v , so that the vorticity on a cross section is concentrated within a sheet-like region, which is centered on C, and has thickness 2σ 1 and width 2R v (see Fig. with a compensation coefficient to make the circulation equal to Γ. Finally, we obtain the vorticity for a turbulent field consisting of N v intertwined vortex tubes by adding up the vorticities separately constructed from the skeleton C (k) , k = 1, 2, . . . , N v . It is straightforward to extend the numerical algorithm in Ref. with ζ i = (i -1)∆ζ and ∆ζ = 2π/N C . Note that ζ is not necessary to be an arc-length parameter s because of the one-to-one mapping between ζ and s. Then the space in the proximity of curve C can be divided into N C subdomains with where subscripts N C + 1 and 1 are equivalent. For a given x, we first use Eq. ( For each j ∈ I ζ (x), the parameter of C is approximated by At c j = c ζ j , we use the second-order finite difference scheme to calculate the Frenet-Serret frame as well as in Eq. ( and azimuth-related functions are calculated by We approximate Eq. ( for vortex tubes or vortex sheets with computed and given variables. Finally, we construct N v intertwined vortex tubes by adding N v vorticity fields calculated by Eq. ( We present two types of boundary problems at the bottom of Fig. To examine the influence of boundary processing on flow statistics, we compare the results from the two processing methods in Fig. We compare important statistics between woven turbulence and real classical turbulence. First, we use the secondorder structure function to estimate the mean dissipation rate in Section III A. Then, we apply the statistical theory for homogeneous isotropic turbulence (HIT) to obtain other flow statistics and relevant length scales in Sections III A and III B. We also compute the kinetic energy spectra and nth-order longitudinal velocity structure functions and compare them in woven and classical turbulence in Section III C. Finally, we evaluate and compare the kinetic energy flux and transfer function in Section III D. The velocity in woven turbulence nearly satisfies the Gaussian distribution, as shown by the probability distribution functions (PDFs) in Fig. measures the covariance of the velocity difference between two points, x + e 1 r and x, along the same direction e 1 . The celebrated Kolmogorov 1941 (K41) theory in the inertial range, where ⟨ε⟩ is the mean dissipation rate and C 2 is the Kolmogorov constant. The scaling exponent of D LL for HIT reaches 2/3 in the inertial range but drops below 2/3 in the energy-containing and dissipation ranges. Therefore, we can estimate the mean dissipation rate from the inertial range by where we adopt C 2 = 2.2 as a widely accepted value Finally, we calculate the Taylor microscale and Taylor Reynolds number where u ′ = ⟨u i u i ⟩ /3 is the turbulent root-mean-square (RMS) velocity and k t = 3u ′ 2 /2 is the turbulent kinetic energy. Table We calculate the length scales in turbulent flow fields. The Kolmogorov length scale is the characteristic length scale of the smallest turbulent motion in viscous flow. The integral length scale characterizes the large eddies in viscous flow. The core size σ(s) = 0.015(1 + 0.5 sin s) characterizes the length scale of a viscous vortex tube. For quantum turbulence, the average distance between quantum vortices is estimated by where L q is the quantum vortex line density (i.e., the vortex length per unit volume). Since the quantum skeleton is scaled dimensionlessly into a periodic box of size L = 2π, the average distance between vortices in woven turbulence is where the box size of quantum turbulence is L q = 0.1 cm. Table We calculate the kinetic energy spectra and nth-order longitudinal velocity structure functions of woven turbulence and compare them with direct numerical simulation (DNS) and model results of HIT with identical flow parameters. The 3D kinetic energy spectrum represents the contribution to turbulent kinetic energy by wavenumbers from k to k + dk, where û(k) denotes the Fourier modes of velocity field u at wavenumber k, the superscript "*" denotes the complex conjugate, and dA(k) is the area of a surface element on a sphere with radius k = |k| in the Fourier space. We plot the rescaled 3D energy spectrum of woven turbulence in Fig. measures the statistical correlation of velocity differences along the direction of a unit vector e 1 . The K41 theory and To account for the intermittency effects into higher-order structure functions, we adopt the She and Leveque 1994 (SL94) model with We plot the rescaled longitudinal 2nd-to 5th-order velocity structure functions of woven turbulence in Figs. Considering the intermittency corrections, the 4th-and 5th-order structure functions are rescaled with the SL94 scaling in Eq. ( To compare statistics in woven and real classical turbulence, we performed a DNS of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation (see Materials and Methods Section C for more details). Moreover, we used a simple model with the intermittency exponent μ = 0.25. The corresponding E(k) can be calculated from Eq. ( where is the one-dimensional energy spectrum. Figure Figures The spectral kinetic energy flux and transfer support the classical Richardson cascade in woven turbulence in Fig. This represents the net transfer of energy from all eddies with wavenumber smaller than k to those with wavenumber larger than k. Then, we obtain where T (k) is the spectral kinetic energy transfer function, which encodes the energy gain or loss at k. In the inertial subrange, we expect since ⟨ε⟩ is the rate of loss of energy from large eddies. Thus we can also estimate the mean dissipation rate using ⟨ε⟩ = max(Π K ) = 2.67. Note that ⟨ε⟩ ≈ 73%⟨ε⟩ is lower than ⟨ε⟩ which is estimated by the second-order structure function in Eq. ( In the classical turbulence theory, the kinetic energy cascade removes energy from large scales, transfers it to small scales through the inertial range, and dissipates it by viscosity at the smallest scales. In Fig. The total helicity is the volume integral of the helicity density h = u • ω. For multiple closed vortex tubes, the helicity can be topologically decomposed into where Γ i is the circulation of vortex tube i, L k,ij is the Gauss linking number between vortex tubes i and j, and W r,i and T w,i are the writhing and twisting numbers of vortex tube i, respectively where x and x * are two points on C. The twisting number is defined by the local twist rate of vortex lines C * along the centerline C, where N s is a radial unit vector from C to C * in plane S C , N ′ s = dN s /ds, and T is the unit tangent vector of C where x i and x j are points on C i and C j , respectively. The helical wave decomposition where h ± are the eigenvectors of the curl operator that satisfy ik × h ± = ±|k|h ± , and u ± are the corresponding Fourier coefficients. In physical space, the velocity field can be written as a sum of complex helical waves and the gradient of a harmonic potential φ, with u R (x) = û+ (k)dk and u L (x) = û-(k)dk. Here, u R is the projection of u onto the vector space spanned by all eigenfunctions with positive eigenvalues (+1|k|) of the curl operator, and is the right-handed component of u; u L is a linear combination of eigenfunctions with negative eigenvalues (-1|k|), and is the left-handed component of u. For a flow that is at rest at infinity, ∇φ is a constant vector field and can be eliminated by choosing an appropriate inertial frame. The vorticity field can be decomposed similarly as with ω R = ∇ × u R and ω L = ∇ × u L . Then, the helicity can be decomposed as The cross-terms ω L • u R and ω R • u L vanish due to the orthogonality of the eigenfunctions of the curl operator, and H R and H L are positive and negative definite, respectively. We study the evolution of an initial woven turbulent field to examine the dynamics of woven turbulence. We find that woven turbulence gradually evolves into the regular HIT in a decaying process. This evolution is quantified by the turbulent kinetic energy, mean dissipation rate, and joint PDF of the second and third invariants (Q and R) of the velocity-gradient tensor. When the vortex tubes contact, the R-Q PDF starts to migrate along the right branch of the Vieillefosse line. Around t * = 0.8, the joint PDF recovers the classic teardrop shape. As illustrated in Figs. We describe how to customize a turbulent field by weaving different elemental vortices, which serves as a testbed for various turbulence studies. The turbulence statistics can be manipulated by changing the core size (Section V A), internal structure (Section V B), and cross-sectional shape (Section V C) of vortex tubes, with the same quantum vortex skeleton. The core size of the vortex tube affects the Reynolds number and the width of the inertial range (Fig. The internal structure of vortices influences small-scale statistics of classical turbulence. The vortex lines inside the vortex tube may not be parallel to the vortex centerline and may coil within the tube With the same quantum skeleton, the cross-section of the elemental vortex can be set in various shapes. We generate the turbulent field woven by sheet-like vortices using Eqs. ( 