The pseudoelastic and pseudoplastic properties of NiTi alloys result from the closeness of the structures between the B2 cubic austenite and the B19' monoclinic martensite, and the facility to transform one into each other. Until now, the paths followed by the atoms during the B2  B19' transformation were imagined as independent shears and shuffles. Here, we propose a simplified hardsphere atomistic model of phase transformation decomposed into three distinct types of atomic movements: a contraction along the [100]B2 axis resulting from the formation of Ti-Ti bonds, an angular distortion between the [001]B2 and [11 ̅ 0]B2 directions, and an rotation of the Ti atoms around the Ni atoms that also establishes new Ti-Ti bonds. The model's inputs are the Ti and Ni atomic or ionic diameters and the monoclinic angle . The outputs are the lattice parameters of the B19' phase and the atomic positions. The results are remarkably close to those reported in the literature from X-ray diffraction experiments or DTF simulations. The hard-sphere model permits a better understanding of the B19' structure and the way it is inherited from its parent B2. It explains the change of enthalpy by the formation of short Ti-Ti bonds in B19'. It is also shown that the value of the monoclinic angle  close to 97.9° corresponds to the highest molar volume among all the possible hard-sphere monoclinic B19' structures; which suggests that it could be a consequence of a maximization of the vibrational entropy. The hard-sphere model was applied in the special case of absence of monoclinicity to predict the B19 structure. The calculations do not agree well with the B19 structure reported in NiTi alloys, probably because of the phase only forms when the alloys contain a high content of copper. They are however in excellent agreement with the B19 structures reported in other binary alloys, such as in AuTi, PdTi, and AuCd. It is concluded that the B19' phase in NiTi alloys and the B19 phase in AuTi, PdTi, and AuCd alloys can be considered as "simple" hard-sphere structures. NiTi are the most studied and used shape memory alloys since their discovery more than sixty years ago The mechanism and atomic trajectories during the B2 to B19' transformation are unclear. According to Otsuka and Ren (h, l, h). In the present paper, we use the -convention recommended in the International Table plane. The second step is the monoclinic distortion that transforms the 90° angle of B19 into the monoclinic angle β B19 ′ ≈ 98°. This step is described as a lattice shear on the (001) B2 plane along the [11 ̅ 0] B2 direction. Since the atomic positions after this shear do not however correspond to those deduced from X-ray diffraction, additional shuffles are required. In this description, the shears and shuffles are independent, but it should not be so because the atomic displacements and the lattice distortion are highly interconnected in most of the displacive phase transformations The aim of the manuscript is to propose a simple hard-sphere model of B2 B19' transformation. We have already elaborated such hard-sphere models for transformation in steels between face centred cubic (fcc) austenite and bcc martensite 2 Hard-sphere model We make the simple assumption that the Ti and Ni atoms are spheres that do not interpenetrates and that come into contact when attractive bonds link them together. This way of considering crystal structures and transformations between them is quite "old-fashion" in comparison with the incredible capabilities of DFT simulations, but, when it is applicable, it has the enormous advantage to capture the most important features of the phase transformation and give a global understanding of the mechanism. In this hard-sphere model, two values are required: the diameters of the Ti and Ni atoms, which are respectively the large and small atoms in the structure. We start by fixing the size of Ti, the largest atom. From the room temperature lattice parameters of metallic Ti in hcp state the diameter should be d Ti = a Ti = 2.95 Å. However, since in all the B19' structures proposed in the literature the vector a B19 ′ that points between two Ti atoms has a length slightly lower, close to 2.9 Å, we fixed the diameter of the Ti atoms at d Ti = a B19 ′ = 2.9 Å . The diameter of the Ni atoms cannot be determined as directly as for Ti atoms. If it is deduced from the metallic Ni in fcc state with a Ni = 3.52 Å, the diameter would be d Ni = √2 2 a Ni = 2.49 Å. If it is calculated from the Ti-Ni bond in the B2 phase, the diameter would be d Ni = √3a B2 -d Ti = 2.31 Å, which is significantly lower, and actually corresponds to Ni atoms involved in covalent bonds. Diameters of covalent Ni atoms are indeed reported between d Ni = 2.20 Å and d Ni = 2.30 Å depending on the source of information The model is built as follows. From the B2 unit cell shown in Fig. It is the matrix we already used on the correspondence theory to calculate the twins between the B19' variants The calculations in an orthonormal reference basis with k = d Ni (d Ni + 2d Ti ). The coordinates of the Ni atom in E' written in B ⊞ are They can be written in the conventional crystallographic basis B B19 ′ = (a B19 ′ , b B19 ′ , c B19 ′ ) by using the coordinate transformation matrix, also called structure tensor: The value of b B19 ′ is not yet known now, but it has no influence on the atoms of the first layer. The The calculation gives c B19 ′ = 4.638 Å and E ′ = (0.6024, 0 , 0.4658). Note that these values are close to those given by Kudoh et al. Hard-sphere packing in the second layer of (110) B2 For the atoms of the second layer of the (110) B2 plane, two kinds of hard sphere stacking can be imagined: (i) one in which the Ni atom initially in position B comes into contact with the Ti atoms in O and A' and with the Ni atom in E', or (ii) one in which the Ti atoms, initially in F and G in B2, keep contact and maintain their β B19 ′ angle established during the movements 1 and 2, and in addition come into contact with the Ni atom in E', as shown in Fig. The atomic displacements resulting for the three movements are represented in 3D in Fig. In B ⊞ , the coordinates of the Ni atom in E' are given by equation ( Once the coordinates of the Ti atoms in F' and G' are determined, those of the Ni atom in B' are deduced by G′B′ ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = E′A ′ ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ , or equivalently The equations ( Now that the parameters (a B19 ′ , b B19 ′ , c B19 ′ , β B19 ′ ) are known, [B ⊞ → B B19 ′ ], the structure tensor of B19', can be calculated. In addition, The orientation relationship matrix between B2 and B19' then comes directly as The distortion matrix from B2 to B19' is Its determinant gives the molar volume change of the transformation, This means that a volume change of +1.3% is expected. The coordinates of the Ti atoms in F' and G' that were calculated in the basis B ⊞ can be written in the conventional crystallographic basis B B19 ′ thanks to the structure tensor (4), similarly as what was made for the coordinates of the Ni atom in E' in equation The two first columns report some structures deduced from X-ray diffraction, the third one the structure predicted by DFT, and the last one the structure resulting from the hard-sphere model with inputs d Ti = 2.9 Å, d Ni = 2.27 Å, and β = 97.9°. The output lattice parameters a B19 ′ , b B19 ′ , c B19 ′ deduced from the hard-sphere are close to those reported by Kudoh et al. The extreme simplicity of the hard-sphere model permits to capture easily the three main components of the lattice distortion, as illustrated in Fig. The structure of the B19' has been built by assuming that the monoclinic angle is β B19 ′ = 97.9°. However, the hard-sphere model can be used to explore the hypothetical B19' structures with other monoclinic angles. The equations introduced in section 2 with different final β B19 ′ values have been solved with the same Mathematica program as that used in section 2. The β B19 ′ values were chosen from 90° to 112° with a step of 2°. The volume change calculated for each final β B19 ′ value follows a concave-down curve shown in Fig. , where ∆S V 1 V 2 is the increase of entropy when a mole of the gas expands from the volume V1 to the volume V2. At the opposite, the molar enthalpy is probably less dependent of β B19 ′ than the molar entropy. Indeed, according to the hard-sphere model, the number of short first neighbourhood Ti-Ti and Ti-Ni bonds between the atoms in B19' do not depend on β B19 ′ as long as β B19 ′ ≠ 90° ; thus the molar enthalpy is a function of β B19 ′ only by the contribution of the second neighbour bonds. The hypothesis that the value of β B19 ′ is imposed by a maximum molar volume is quite speculative at the moment and would require a study of the phonon dispersions in the structure. However, if it is correct, it would imply that the value of β B19 ′ would not result from the accommodation stress field between the parent B2 and B19' as proposed by Ishii In section 3.2, the starting structure used in the continuous model of B2 to B19' transformation is B2 (β = 90°) except that the Ni atoms were chosen already slightly smaller than in the real B2 phase. None of the three movements of atoms were not yet activated at the beginning of the transformation process. Let us now consider a different problem in which β = 90°, but the movements 1 and 3 are complete. This structure would be a type of B19' structure without monoclinic distortion; such a structure is expected to be B19. Can the hard-sphere model used for B19' could also be applied to predict the lattice parameters and atomic positions of the B19 phase? Before comparing with the literature, some important crystallographic conventions have to be reminded. Contrarily to B19' which exists only in NiTi alloys, the B19 phase has been reported in various binary alloys, such as AgCd, AuCd, AuTi, CdMg, IrW, MoPt, NbPt, NbRh, PtTi, PtV In other words, the vectors (a, b, c) of B19' described in the previous sections should become the vectors (b, a, -c) of B19. For the atomic positions, we also have to apply the operation (x, y, z)B19' ⇒ (y, x, -z)B19. If we assume that the B19 structure is a special type of B19' without monoclinicity, and keep the same size of the Ti and Ni atoms as those used for the monoclinic B19' structure, i.e. d Ti = 2.90 Å and d Ni = 2.27 Å, the lattice parameters of B19 would be a = 4.26 Å, b = 2.9 Å, c = 4.28 Å. The c value does not agree well with that measured by X-ray diffraction in the B19 phase reported in NiTiCu alloys (a = 4.28 Å, b = 2.88 Å, c = 4.51 Å) Table Atom diameter hard-sphere e : dTi = 2.9 Å f : dNi= 2.45 Å X ray A hard-sphere model of the B2  B19' transformation and of the B19' structure in NiTi alloys is proposed. The model's inputs are the Ti and Ni diameters and the monoclinic angle β B19 ′ . The transformation is decomposed into three distinct but concomitant atomic movements: 1. A contraction along the [100]B2 axis resulting from the formation of short Ti-Ti bonds. 2. An angular distortion between the [001]B2 and [11 ̅ 0]B2 directions increasing their angle from 90° to β B19 ′ . 3. An rotational displacement of the Ti atoms around the Ni atoms resulting from the formation of short Ti-Ti bonds. The outputs of the model are the lattice parameters and the final atomic positions in the B19' phase. They agree well with the structural data deduced from X-ray diffraction or DFT simulations reported in the literature. The differences on the lattice parameters are less than 1% and the differences on the atomic positions better than 4%. The atomic trajectories during the B2  B19' are not anymore viewed as "straight" shears and shuffles, but more as angular/rotational collective displacements driven by the formation of short Ti-Ti bonds. An important result is that the actual monoclinic angle β B19 ′ ≈ 97.9° has the highest molar volume among all the possible hypothetical hard-sphere monoclinic structures. If it is not a coincidence, the movement 2 (monoclinicity) could result from a maximization of the vibrational entropy. More research is required to explore this hypothesis. The hard-sphere model was applied to the B19 structure by fixing β ≈ 90°, and applying only the atomic movements 1 and 3. The calculations do not agree well with the literature for NiTi(Cu) alloys, probably because of the high amount of copper in these alloys. The model's outputs are however in excellent agreement with the B19 structures reported in other binary alloys such as AuTi, PdTi, and AuCd. From this study, it is concluded that the B19' phase in NiTi alloys and the B19 phase in AuTi, PdTi, and AuCd alloys can be considered as simple hard-sphere structures.