The need for ever-faster information processing requires extremely small devices operating at frequencies approaching the terahertz and petahertz regimes. For the diagnostics of such devices, researchers need a spatiotemporal tool that surpasses the device under test in speed and spatial resolution and therefore, such a tool cannot be provided by electronics itself. with femtosecond, micrometre and millivolt resolution under normal operation conditions. We analyse the dynamical response of a coplanar waveguide circuit and reveal the impulse response, signal reflections, attenuation and waveguide dispersion directly in the time domain. The demonstrated measurement bandwidth reaches 10 THz and the sensitivity to electric fields is tens of millivolts or -20 dBm. Femtosecond time resolution and the potential to directly integrate our technique into existing electron-beam inspection devices in semiconductor industry makes our femtosecond electron beam probe a promising tool for research and development of next-generation electronics at unprecedented speed and size. The demand for ultimate speed in modern information processing and data transfer has prompted extensive research on high-speed electronics at maximum frequencies and shortest switching times Modern research offers some creative diagnostic solutions to deal with the small size of devices or their high speed, but not at the same time. For example, sub-nanometre resolution can be provided by scanning tips Here, we show how an ultrafast electron microscope A variation of the delay between the DUT trigger and the femtosecond electron pulses by means of moveable mirrors and scanning the electron beam across the DUT then provide a stroboscopic movie of the local electro-magnetic field vectors in space and time. Figure For our proof-of-principle experiments, we investigate one of the key components for terahertz electronics, that is, a transmission line in form of coplanar waveguide on insulating substrate, one of the most common ways for signal transport. Femtosecond electron pulses at a beam energy of 70 keV are produced by femtosecond laser photoemission Undoped GaAs is used both as the insulating substrate of the coplanar waveguide and the active gap material in the photoconductive switch. The terahertz circuit is manufactured with ultraviolet lithography and wet etching, following established designs The width of the photoconductive gap is 10 μm. Figure The electric fields of the generated pulses are mostly pointing along the y direction (blue and magenta arrows) and therefore deflect the electron beam while the magnetic fields mostly point in electron beam direction and therefore provide no substantial effect. At two locations, marked with blue and magenta ellipses in Fig. There is a delay of 3.6 ps with respect to the trigger of the photoconductive switch at 0 ps. After this impulsive rise, the voltage pulse decreases to 50% of its maximum value within ~45 ps (t2). Two weak additional voltage peaks are observed at 80 ps and 87 ps (t3), and a stronger peak emerges at 130 ps (t4). In the second probe region (blue), the initial response (t5) is also a strong but this time negative impulsive voltage change from 0 V to -6 V. The fall time is 2 ps (10% to 90%). There is also a delay with respect to the trigger of the photoelectric switch, this time 0.9 ps (t5). During the subsequent rise of the voltage back to ground, there are again several additional voltage peaks, for example at 25 ps (t6), 65 ps (t7) and 120 ps (t8). When the photoconductive switch is triggered by the laser pulses, the optical carrier-hole pairs make the gap conductive within femtosecond times and the bias voltage is shortened to ground. Consequently, there emerges an electric field in form of approximately a Heaviside function that subsequently propagates as a positive or negative electric field into the left and the right side of our coplanar waveguide. This dynamics and the time that is needed to reach the points of measurement (blue, magenta) explains the strong and ultrafast voltage changes in our two measurements at opposite polarity and different delay (t1 and t5). In the 1-4 picoseconds that are needed to propagate from the source to the measurement, the laser-generated voltage pulse already attenuates and disperses to picosecond duration The additional voltage peaks in both recovery signals (t3, t4, t6, t7, t8) are time-domain signal reflections from geometry changes in our transmission line with partial impedance mismatch The wirebond connections to the 50- resistor are too thin to be relevant for our picosecond dynamics. On the left side of the coplanar waveguide (blue data), the voltage pulse in the negative voltage region at t6 = 30 ps originates from impedance mismatch when the waveguide opens in a triangular way to the DC bias pad. The voltage pulse at t7 = 65 ps is a reflection from the end of the bias pad. The latest measured voltage pulse in our scan range at t8 = 125 ps is a double reflection within the DC bias pad (see Fig. Figures In a second experiment, we demonstrate the additional diagnostic capability that is gained by compressing the electron pulses from 800 fs to 100 fs with laser-generated terahertz fields Figure Extended data Fig. where H is the Heaviside function and ⨂ is a convolution in time. The fit parameters are the signal amplitude A, the time zero t 0 , the time constant τ RC of the photoconductive gap and the pulse broadening τ disp due to propagation. The instrumental function of our electron beam probe τ inst is fixed to 100 fs (Fig. The best global fit for both bias cases (black lines) is obtained with an RC-limited rise time of RC = 0.72 ps and a dispersive broadening of disp = 0.42 ps. Fitting attempts with simpler models do not yield good results; see extended data Fig. Given that electron pulses in electron microscopes can be made as short as attoseconds Static electron beam testing is ubiquitous in semiconductor industry and inevitable for research and development, quality control or failure analysis. The special electron microscopes in such eBeam testing facilities work typically with high-brightness field-emission sources similar to those in transmission electron microscopy. The only changes to convert such devices into an ultrashort fs-eBeam diagnostics are a laser-triggered electron source and a DUT-triggering by a photoconductive switch. Alternatively, a terahertz function generator can be synchronized to a femtosecond laser at 10-fs precision These results and considerations show that electron beam probe with ultrashort electron pulses (fs-eBeam) can resolve the electromagnetic response of working electronic devices in space and time. Conventional scanning electron beam probe Detecting the most basic quantity of electronics, electric and magnetic fields in space and time, at nanometre, femtosecond and millivolt resolutions should therefore help researchers to discover hidden mechanisms and design novel ultrafast electronics beyond the state-of-the-art. The terahertz circuit is produced on a 625-m thick, undoped, double-side polished GaAs wafer (University Wafers) by ultraviolet lithography (Smartprint, Smartforce technologies) with a 1-m thick photoresist layer (AZ MIR 701, Merck). The design of the structure is based on a 50 impedance line and the dimensions are chosen to minimise losses Femtosecond electron pulses are produced by two-photon photoemission from a back-illuminated gold cathode at 70 keV The electron pulses are compressed to ~100-fs duration by velocity-matched transmission through a metal membrane 