Surfaces (interfaces) dictate many physical and chemical properties of solid materials and adsorbates considerably affect these properties. Nitrogen molecules, which are the most abundant constituent in ambient air, are considered to be inert. Our study combining atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), and thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) revealed that nitrogen and water molecules can self-assemble into two-dimensional domains, forming ordered stripe structures on graphitic surfaces in both water and ambient air. The stripe structures of this study were composed of approximately 90% and 10% water and nitrogen molecules, respectively, and survived in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions at temperatures up to approximately 350 K. Because pure water molecules completely desorb from graphitic surfaces in a UHV at temperatures lower than 200 K, our results indicate that the incorporation of nitrogen molecules substantially enhanced the stability of the crystalline water hydrogen bonding network. Additional studies on interfacial gas hydrates can provide deeper insight into the mechanisms underlying formation of gas hydrates. Clathrate hydrates, or gas hydrates, are crystalline solids in which water molecules form cages containing small non-polar gas molecules. Typically, gas hydrates are unstable under ambient conditions; they form under pressures substantially higher than ambient pressure and at temperatures considerably below room temperature (RT). Many experimental studies have demonstrated that hydrophobic solid particles play a role in promoting gas hydrate formation 1-5 . Some studies have indicated that hydrophobic solid surfaces shift the equilibrium condition for gas hydrate formation to lower pressures and higher temperatures 4 . In addition, nucleation and growth of methane hydrates in the confined nanospace of activated carbons occur under milder conditions and with faster kinetics than those observed in nature 6 . To date, the understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics involved in the formation of gas hydrates, particularly at the interfaces between water and hydrophobic solids, remains inadequate. Enhanced understanding of these processes can considerably improve the ability to control gas hydrate formation. In the current study, we identified a specific type of nitrogen gas hydrate layer that forms on graphitic surfaces, which are mildly hydrophobic substrates, in water under ambient conditions and in ambient air with a certain level of humidity. This nitrogen gas hydrate layer was initially observed through atomic force microscopy (AFM) and appeared as two-dimensional (2D) domains of ordered rowlike (or stripe) structures with a height of approximately 0.5 nm and row separations of 4 to 6 nm on graphitic surfaces. In 2012, our group reported the formation of stripe structures on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) in deionized water 7-10 ; these stripe structures, aligning along the zig-zag direction (Fig. because a nitrogen gas environment possibly promoted nucleation and growth of the stripe structures Through AFM, these self-assembled stripe structures were identified as responsible for the anisotropic friction domains present on graphene Although stripe structures may form on aged HOPG We also performed measurements on freshly cleaved HOPG (HOPGfresh), with the findings for the HOPGfresh compared with those of the aforementioned types of samples. We employed AFM, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), and thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS). Unless otherwise specified, all experiments were conducted at RT (22-24 °C). We used AFM to obtain surface topography of the stripe structures at nanometer resolution. XPS and TDS have excellent chemical sensitivity of solid surfaces; however, XPS and TDS measurements should be conducted under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions. Using AFM, we determined that the stripe structures that formed on HOPGwater and those that formed on HOPGnanoGOs survived in vacuum conditions. XPS revealed a strong signal for oxygen K-edge and a smaller signal for nitrogen K-edge on the HOPGwater and the HOPGnanoGOs samples. TDS, which is based on mass spectroscopy, detected a significant peak in desorbed water (mass 18) and a smaller peak in N2 (mass 28) at temperatures within the range of 70 °C and 100 °C for both types of samples. Neither methanol nor O2 (mass 32) was detected. These findings indicate that the stripe structures that formed on the HOPGwater and HOPGnanoGOs samples are nitrogen gas hydrate overlayer. Fig. We performed XPS measurements on HOPGwater, HOPGnanoGOs, and HOPGfresh samples over 4 years, with the experiments being repeated more than 10 times. The results remained consistent across all measurements. Fig. The N1s spectra of HOPGwater and HOPGnanoGOs were similar and exhibited peaks at the BE of approximately 400 eV (Fig. We used three quadrupole mass spectrometers for our TDS measurements and obtained similar and consistent results on HOPGfresh, HOPGwater. and HOPGnanoGOs. Fig. The signal at m/z = 32 remained considerably low during the heating process (Figs. The stripe structures resulting from the self-assembly of hydrocarbon contaminants on vdW materials disappeared after undergoing annealing at 200 °C for 1h Zheng et al. proposed that the stripe structures on HOPGnanoGOs are RT ice overlayers. Similarly, Zhao et al. The reported ice chains on graphene Our observation that the stripe structures on HOPGwater survive after water is removed (Fig. The study proposed that molecules in the water monolayer form a fully coordinated surface with no dangling OH bonds or lone pair electrons. The water molecules in stripe structures on HOPGwater might form hydrogen bonding networks with few or no dangling OH bonds or lone pair electrons on the surface, resulting in weak interactions of the structures with the overlying liquid water. Thus, studies should determine the details of the atomic structures and hydrogen bonding that occur in interfacial gas hydrate layers. Because current AFM imaging of stripe structures still do not have sufficient resolution to determine the atomic structures, researchers may be able to obtain more details of these stripe structures by using UHV-AFM at cryogenic temperatures; structural fluctuations 10 can be considerably minimized at low temperatures. Low-energy electron diffraction and other diffraction methods can be employed to examine stripe structures on HOPG. Additional experimental and theoretical investigations can be conducted to obtain details regarding atomic and molecular stripe structures and to identify reasons for the high stability of nitrogen gas hydrate layers on graphitic surfaces. Whether the formation of nitrogen gas hydrate layers occurs on many other solid surfaces that come into contact with liquid water or are exposed to ambient air with humidity levels higher than a certain level remains unclear. Many studies have suggested such a possibility. Immobile surface nanobubbles have been observed on many different hydrophobic solid surfaces in water, and these surface nanobubbles might also be pinned by nitrogen gas hydrate layer formed at the three-phase nanobubble-water-surface contact line. A few studies reported the formation of a protruded circular rim at the perimeter of each surface nanobubble on polystyrene and a gradual increase in the rim height over several hours Further exploration of this topic by using a combination of AFM, XPS, and TDS on other systems can confirm this speculation. Gas hydrate overlayers forming on different solid surfaces would constitute an interfacial phenomenon that potentially affects the interfacial properties (e.g., wetting, adsorption, tribology, and chemical and electrochemical reactions) of solid surfaces under ambient conditions. Additionally, interfacial gas hydrate layers might serve as easily accessible systems that can be used to analyze the kinetics and formation mechanisms of gas hydrates. Materials and Sample Preparation. The HOPG samples (lateral sizes of 12 mm × 12 mm, Grade: ZYB) were provided by Momentive Technologies. The HOPGfresh sample was prepared by peeling off the top layer of a HOPG substrate with Scotch tape prior to each experiment. Water was purified using a Milli-Q system (Millipore, Boston) with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ•cm. D2O (99.9 atom % D) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. To prepare HOPGwater, an HOPGfresh substrate was placed in a liquid cell of AFM. Subsequently, deionized water was injected into the liquid cell. AFM imaging was conducted to monitor the growth of the stripe domains. For the XPS and TDS measurements, stripe structures were grown until they covered more than 50% of the surface. Subsequently, water was removed from the stripe structures, and they were placed in a desiccator pumped to approximately 0.1 atm. The desiccator was opened immediately before the measurements. The preparation method for nanoGOs has been detailed in a previous study Measurements were performed at BL24A beamline of Taiwan Light Source (TLS) in National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC). The TLS is a 1.5-GeV ring operated in a top-up injection mode with a constant ring current of 360 mA. XPS measurements were probed using the incident X-ray energy of 750.0 eV and collected using the photoelectron analyzer (PHOIBOS150, SPECS). The photon energy was calibrated with the major peak of the fresh graphite sheets occurring at a BE of 284.4 eV. The averaged energy resolution was better than 0.1 eV. A mass spectrometer was employed to measure the m/z ratios of the atoms or molecules desorbed from a surface when the temperature of the sample was increased. TDS experiments were conducted in a UHV chamber (Omicron VT-STM) with a base pressure of 4 × 10 -10 mbar. The sample holder, modified from a standard sample holder for Omicron VT-STM, was transferred from the UHV chamber to ambient air by using a load-lock system. Each sample was immediately mounted on the holder within a 5min window before being moved back into the load-lock system, which was then pumped with a turbomolecular pump overnight. Subsequently, the samples were transferred into the UHV chamber. The heating process during the TDS measurements involved indirect heating by running a current through a tungsten wire, which was insulated with a ceramic tube and placed under the sample holder. The heating current was gradually increased over time during the TDS measurement. The sample temperature was measured after several TDS measurements had been conducted. The same heating procedure was used for the temperature measurement, with the temperature being measured by attaching a Chromel/Alumel thermocouple to the top side a HOPG sample (approximately the same size as that used for the TDS measurements). The accuracy of the temperature measurements was estimated to be ±5 °C. TDS was performed using one of the three quadrupole mass spectrometers (Pfeiffer PrismaPro® QMG250, Prisma QMS 200, and Stanford Research System RGA300). spectra for HOPGwater was assumed to comprise two components: one at a BE of 532.4 eV (red line in Fig. The measured N1s spectra for HOPGwater (Fig. Previous XPS studies examining the adsorption of N2 on TiO2 fiber Previous studies on the N-H bond in ammonia and amino groups have revealed a peak within the range of 400 to 403 eV in N1s spectra To determine the molecular ratio of H2O (XX HH 2 OO ) and N2 (XX NN 2 ) in stripe structures on HOPGwater and HOPGnanoGOs, we used CasaXPS software to calculate the XPS peak area with a BE of 533.2 eV for H2O (II HH 2 OO , blue lines in Fig. After computing data from 13 independent XPS measurements of HOPGwater and 14 independent XPS measurements of HOPGnanoGOs, we determined that the stripe structures (nitrogen gas hydrate overlayer) on HOPGwater were composed of 90±4% H2O and 10±4% N2, and that those on HOPGnanoGOs were composed of 93±3% H2O and 7±3% N2. 