Epitaxial Fe film has been grown on ion beam sputtered MgO(001) substrate by electron beam evaporation. Reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and transport measurements (TM) were performed simultaneously during the growth of the film. While TM provided information about film morphology, RHEED provided information about the structure of the film. The film grows via the Volmer-Weber mechanism, where epitaxial islands grow larger to impinge with other islands and eventually coalesce into a continuous film at around 1.8 nm thickness. Unlike what has been reported in the literature, there is no sign of the iron oxide layer forming at the Fe/MgO interface, not even at 300 C. A high-quality epitaxial Fe3O4 layer is found to develop on the Fe surface when the sample is annealed under a moderate oxygen partial pressure. Over a decade Fe/MgO system has been the subject of extensive investigations due to numerous interesting phenomena such as tunnel magnetoresistance Fe film of ~3.0 nm thickness is grown on MgO(001) substrate using e-beam evaporation and characterized in-situ using RHEED and TM during growth. Au contact pad has been deposited (~ 30 nm) on the substrate for TM. Before Fe deposition, the substrate was cleaned by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min followed by Ar+ ion etching at 1 KeV for 20 min. Insitu RHEED measurements were also performed after annealing Fe film up to 300 °C. All the RHEED images were collected along [100] direction of Fe. For magnetic properties, magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) measurements were performed before and after annealing at 300 °C (with and without oxygen partial pressure). Fig. After ~1.8 nm thickness (region C), it decreases slowly due to the formation of a continuous layer. RHEED images 1(c-e) correspond to 0.53 nm, 0.92 nm, and 3.0 nm thick Fe films. The spotty and streaky pattern in all images indicates the epitaxial growth of Fe (001) on the MgO(001) substrate To further study the effect of annealing, Fe film is heated at 300 °C temperature for 20 min. RHEED and longitudinal MOKE measurements Drastic reduction in the Kerr signal after the formation of the Fe3O4 layer on the Fe surface can be understood by the expression of Kerr intensity in the longitudinal geometry of MOKE, where the Kerr signal is linearly related to the thickness (dFe) of magnetic film in the ultrathin regime and given by the relation Q is the magneto-optical constant and  is the angle (~45°) of incidence measured from surface normal. As the oxide formation took place at the cost of the Fe layer on the surface, therefore the reduction in the Kerr signal could be attributed to the decrease in dFe. On the other hand, an increase in the Hc may be due to the increase in domain wall pinning at the Fe3O4/Fe interface. Fe film is grown epitaxially on MgO(001) substrate to study morphological evolution and surface/interface Fe-oxide formation. Systematic studies of epitaxial Fe film were done in-situ during different stages of the Fe growth using RHEED, MOKE, and TM. Fe film is found to grow via Volmer-Weber mechanism, where epitaxial islands grow larger to impinge with other islands and eventually coalesce into a continuous film at around 1.8 nm thickness. Unlike the literature 