There is growing interest in strongly correlated insulator thin films because the intricate interplay of their intrinsic and extrinsic state variables causes memristive behavior that might be used for bio-mimetic devices in the emerging field of neuromorphic computing. In this study we find that laser irradiation tends to drive V2O3 from supercooled/superheated metastable states towards thermodynamic equilibrium, most likely in a non-thermal way. We study thin films of the prototypical Mott-insulator V2O3, which show spontaneous phase separation into metal-insulator herringbone domains during the Mott transition. Here, we use low-temperature microscopy to investigate how these metal-insulator domains can be modified by scanning a focused laser beam across the thin film surface. We find that the response depends on the thermal history: When the thin film is heated from below the Mott transition temperature, the laser beam predominantly induces metallic domains. On the contrary, when the thin film is cooled from a temperature above the transition, the laser beam predominantly induces insulating domains. Very likely, the V2O3 thin film is in a superheated or supercooled state, respectively, during the first-order phase transition, and the perturbation by a laser beam drives these metastable states into stable ones. This way, the thermal history is locally erased. Our findings are supported by a phenomenological model with a laser-induced lowering of the energy barrier between the metastable and equilibrium states. Strongly correlated insulator thin films are the subject of intensive research in the emerging field of neuromorphic computing If these materials are cooled to a temperature below the transition temperature, the charge carrier mobility is considerably reduced due to electron-electron correlation effects like the Mott-Hubbard interaction (e.g., V 2 O 3 We have investigated the effect of laser scanning irradiation on a V 2 O 3 thin film during the IMT/MIT by acquiring photomicrographs. Here we report on laserinduced phase transitions. While at the IMT, the metal phase is induced, the insulating phase is predominantly induced at the MIT. The latter is surprising, because one might expect the main effect of the laser irradiation to be heating, which is expected to drive the system towards a more metallic state. The sample under investigation is a continuous 300nm-thick rf-sputtered V 2 O 3 film on an r-cut sapphire substrate with gold electrodes evaporated on top (see Ref. We used the same optical microscopy setup as in Lange et al. [32] (Sec. I). For this study, the photomicrographs are acquired in the widefield mode with an monochromatic (532 nm) LED illumination, and the laser scanning mode is used for exposing the sample under investigation to laser light of 405 nm wavelength. The theoretical laser spot diameter on the thin-film surface is 322 nm. We have measured the incident laser power on the sample surface by replacing the sample with a photodiode. The maximum laser power is 919 μW. However, different laser powers were chosen, throughout this study. For exposure, the selected area is scanned line by line (line separation 100 nm) with the laser in the continuous wave mode as depicted in Fig. The procedure to investigate the effect of laser scanning irradiation is the following: 1. A photomicrograph (32×32 μm 2 ) of the thin film is acquired. 2. A selected area (14×14 μm 2 ) is exposed to laser light. 3. A second photomicrograph is acquired. 4. For the differential image, the first photomicrograph is subtracted from the second. With this procedure, the laser-induced changes from the metallic to the insulating and from the insulating to the metallic phases are mapped. We have exposed a V 2 O 3 thin film by laser light at different temperatures during the IMT/MIT (Fig. We also modified the laser irradiation procedure to determine the power thresholds for laser-induced phase changes during heating and cooling (see Sec. III in Ref. [32] for details). It was found that laser irradiation already at relatively low power levels induces a phase change during heating (i.e., IMT), while during cooling (i.e., MIT), the required laser power is considerably larger. Moreover, the temperature range, in which a laser-induced phase change was observable, is larger during IMT, compared to MIT. Hence, the heating branch of the transition seems to be more sensitive to laser irradiation than the cooling branch. For a quantitative analysis of the laser-induced phase changes, we investigated the filling factors, i.e., the ratio between the surface area of a particular phase and the total surface area of interest at a laser power of 460 μW. This laser power was chosen because it is far from the minimum and maximum threshold values for both cooling and heating (see Sec. III in Ref. Figure Figure The most intriguing result of this study is that laser irradiation predominantly induces insulating domains in large amounts during cooling. Considering the laser spot as a local heat source, it is not surprising that laser irradiation induces metallic domains since the metallic phase is the high-temperature phase of the Mott transition. Indeed, we observe this behavior during heating of the sample through the IMT. However, the predominant laserinduced creation of insulating domains during cooling is puzzling. In other words, why does the effect of laser irradiation depend on the thermal history? To answer this question, the thermodynamic nature of the MIT/IMT of the V 2 O 3 thin film must be considered. The thermodynamic description of V 2 O 3 thin films is the subject of ongoing research With respect to the MIT we measured electrical transport properties during minor thermal cycles to investigate how heating affects a V 2 O 3 thin film in the critical state. This procedure emulates a heat source that changes the temperature gradually on a large length scale. A detailed description and discussion of these additional experiments can be found in Ref. [32] (Sec. IV). Although we found that a minor heating cycle can indeed increase the resistance, the effect is not strong enough to account for what we observed in the laser irradiation experiment. To elaborate on the matter of metastability, we discuss a phenomenological numerical model. In a twodimensional (2D) resistor network, each site can either be metallic or insulating, depending on the local temperature, which is updated at every simulation step. Solving Kirchhoff's laws, currents and voltages on each site are determined. A first-order Landau-type free energy functional provides stable and metastable states separated by a barrier. The laser irradiation is implemented in the model by decreasing the barrier height to drive transitions between insulating and metallic states. For each site, the escape from a metastable state was determined by comparing random numbers to Boltzmann factors with a constant number of iterations. If the escape criterion is fulfilled, the transition probability is given by a Boltzmann distribution; see Sec. V in Ref. Our model reproduces the hysteresis in the R(T ) curves, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we can state that a V 2 O 3 thin film in the metastable state at the IMT/MIT is highly susceptible to a local perturbation by a focused laser beam at the sub-micrometer scale. Whether the laser perturbation predominantly creates a metallic or insulating phase depends on whether the film is in the heating or cooling branch. Our observations tell that the laser beam brings the system from a supercooled/superheated state to the equilibrium one, provided that the laser power is sufficient to overcome corresponding energy barriers. This implies, that laser scanning irradiation can be used to effectively erase thermal history and provides a novel method to reset memristive devices locally. Our experiments may also be considered as a clear indication that external stimuli on a strongly correlated thin film in a critical state can result in unexpected and presumably non-thermal effects. Non-thermal effects have been in- vestigated in ultra-fast pump-probe experiments on VO 2 and V 2 O 3 The sample under investigation (Fig. The experimental setup is a cryogenic combined widefield and laser scanning microscope, which is described in detail in The illumination for the widefield microscope is realized by a LED with 532 nm wavelength and follows a Köhler illumination scheme. The depicted field lens is used to define the illuminated sample area. After passing a beam splitter, the light is reflected by a removable mirror and is focused onto the sample by the microscope objective lens. The microscope objective has a high numerical aperture (NA = 0.8), which allows for a working distance of 1 mm. After reflection from the sample, the light travels the same way back, is deflected by the beam splitter and then focused onto the sensor of a low noise sCMOS camera. This widefield microscope has a field of view (FOV) of 500×500 μm 2 and a spatial resolution of 0.48 μm. The entire optical path of the widefield microscope is polarization sensitive, which however is not relevant for this study. The illumination for the laser scanning microscope is provided by a 405-nm-laser diode coupled into a single mode fiber. The laser light is collimated and thereafter reflected by a fast steering mirror, that serves as scanning mirror. In order to use this operation mode, the removable mirror is not inserted in the beam path. The laser beam is focused onto the sample by the microscope objective lens. Assuming a Gaussian beam profile, the theoretical laser spot diameter is 322 nm (1/e 2 diameter). The FOV of the laser scanning microscope is identical with the FOV of the widefield microscope. The polarization sensitive components and the detector unit of the laser light are not included here, because in this study, we use the laser scanning microscope exclusively for irradiation. In order to confirm the hypothesis, that laser scanning indeed induces phase transitions, we investigated its effect on the electrical properties of a V 2 O 3 microbridge device in an additional experiment. The sample under investigation is a planar microbridge device patterned in a 300-nm-thick film V 2 O 3 thin-film (same deposition procedure as in Sec. I) using Ar ion milling, followed by Au deposition and lift-off to define Au contacts (see Fig. For the two-terminal layout we assume a well-defined homogeneous current distribution in the microbridge. To bring the sample in a defined state in the heating branch, we used a thermal cycling procedure. This implies cooling the sample to a temperature, where the hysteresis is closed (in this case T = 80 K) followed by heating to the target temperature. The same device was used for each laser-irradiation scan, so thermal cycling is required to bring the sample in a defined pristine state for imaging at every single set temperature. At every set temperature -after acquiring a widefield micrograph (see left columns of Fig. Analogous to the results shown in the main manuscript, metallic and insulating phases are induced by laser irradiation, which show up as black and white patches, respectively, in the differential images. Clearly, the data obtained on this microbride show, that in the heating branch predominantly the metallic phase is induced, and that comes with a reduction of the device resistance. In the cooling branch, mostly the insulating phase is induced, which leads to a significant increase of the device resistance. We modified the laser irradiation procedure to determine the power thresholds for laser-induced phase changes during heating and cooling. Instead of scanning the whole 22 × 22 μm 2 area with the same intensity, four 11 × 11 μm 2 quadrants are exposed with different laser powers of 230 μW, 460 μW, 689 μW, and 919 μW. The two consecutive quadrants, for which the first shows no and the next some laser-induced phase change, are chosen by examining the corresponding photomicrographs. Following a nested interval procedure, an additional pristine area is exposed to a quadrant pattern, with the minimum and maximum laser power corresponding to the power levels of the two consecutive quadrants chosen before. Using the photomicrographs of this pattern, the lower and upper limits of the laser power threshold are estimated, and these limits are averaged to calculate the threshold value. The results are shown in Fig. Since the laser irradiation effect discussed in the main manuscript involves focusing the beam onto a very small region, it is important to check whether the observed phenomenology could simply arise from heating. To address this issue, we performed R vs T measurements on a continuous 100-nm-thick rf-sputtered V 2 O 3 film on r-cut sapphire Here we focus on measurements conducted on the cooling curve where the experiments on laser irradiation described in the main manuscript showed a surprising increase in the insulating phase fraction in considerably large amounts. To check whether a simple heating-cooling thermal cycle may induce a similar effect, we performed the following experiments: first, we warmed the sample up to 210 K to ensure that it is in the fully metallic phase and then slowly cooled it to T reverse =154 K which is in the middle of the resistive transition. This reversal temperature exhibits the maximum slope of log(R) vs T , where the largest effects are expected in resistance change due to the proximity to the percolation threshold. After reaching T reverse we performed a minor heating loop, i.e., the sample was heated up by a certain temperature ∆T and then cooled down to 100 K. Several runs were conducted with various values of ∆T . An example of the resistance recorded during such a procedure is shown in Fig. However, quantitatively, it is found that the effect of temperature cycling on the phase fraction is significantly smaller than that of the laser. Considering Fig. The conclusion that the effect of minor thermal cycles is considerably smaller than that of the laser is further corroborated by the observation that the phase fractions after laser irradiation from both the heating and cooling curves (Fig. and with a critical temperature T c , where the free energy is symmetric, and T A , h 0 , p 1 , c are constant parameters, specified in Table As illustrated for three selected temperatures around T c in Fig. Each resistor in the network is in a metallic state with energy E met or in an insulating state with energy E ins . In each simulation cycle, we assign an escape criterion to each site, dependent on whether the initial state is metallic or insulating. 