interface and reveal the magnetic order induced by layered structure. The spins in individual nanoparticles become more aligned with increasing number of layers, resulting in a larger net magnetization. Our experimental results show a magnetic short-range order in the monolayer due to the proliferation of thermally induced magnetic vortices and a magnetic long-range order in the bilayer and trilayer, stemming from the strengthened dipolar interactions that effectively suppress thermal fluctuations. We also observe a screening effect of magnetic vortices and the attractive interaction between the magnetic vortices with opposite topological charges. Our work demonstrates the crucial role of layered structure in shaping the magnetization of nanoparticle assemblies, providing new opportunities to modulate these properties through strategic layer engineering. Ferromagnetic liquid droplets, generated by the mechanical jamming of superparamagnetic nanoparticles at liquid-liquid interfaces, introduce a novel paradigm in magnetic materials due to their combined mechanical and magnetic adaptability The recent development of soft x-ray vector-ptychographic tomography holds promise as a solution to this challenge Our experiment used superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles with magnetic cores about 22 nm The tomographic imaging was performed at the COSMIC imaging beam line at the Advanced Light Source, where circularly polarized x-rays with an energy tuned to the Fe L3 edge (713 eV) were focused onto the sample by a Fresnel zone plate (Fig. x-rays (Table Quantitative analysis of the magnetic order in the superparamagnetic nanoparticle assembly was performed in terms of the net magnetization inside each nanoparticle, referred to as a macrospin from the 3D vector reconstruction (Fig. was quantified in terms of the vortex density The total vortex number within an area Ω is given by: where S || = (S x , S y ) is the planar projection of the vector field S, φ is its polar angle relative to the x axis, and ∂Ω denotes the boundary of the area parameterized by dl. This reveals the bulk-edge correspondence of magnetic vortices: the total vortex charge inside a region is entirely determined by the magnetic states on its boundary. For our purpose, we discretize Eq. ( where z ̂ represents the normal vector of the triangular plane, S is the normalized macrospin sitting on the vertices, and the sum runs over the three edges (l is the vertex adjacent to l ′ in the counterclockwise direction). Given that the triangle serves as the foundational building block for arbitrary 2D lattices including disordered structures, Eq. ( The magnetic order in different regions was further examined by the spin-spin correlation function, defined as C spin (|R|) = ⟨S(r)S(r + R)⟩ r with |R| as the pair distance, which measures the degree of collinearity of the spins. The blue curve in Figure This behavior indicates the presence of the magnetic long-range order and implies a higher degree of spin collinearity within the bilayer and trilayer structures. This distinction is attributed to the different coupling strength of the magnetic dipole forces in the nanoparticle assembly, which was predicted to stabilize the 2D magnetic order We further confirmed these results by evaluating the vortex correlation function defined as, C vortex (|R|) = ⟨ρ(r)ρ(r + R)⟩ r , where the vortex charge ρ is defined in Eq. ( The reconstructed magnetization vector field and magnetic correlations were compared with magnetic simulations to validate the correctness of reconstruction in a physical context and establish the link between structural short-range order and magnetic ordering. We modeled the superparamagnetic nanoparticle assembly using the experimentally determined 3D coordinates as direct input at 300 K by means of micromagnetic Monte Carlo simulations with Boris Spintronics (Supplemental Material [32]) In conclusion, soft x-ray vector-ptychographic tomography revealed the roomtemperature 3D magnetization vector field and magnetic order in self-assembled superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Our results confirm on the nanometer scale that the thermal stability of the magnetization within each nanoparticle and the magnetization configuration depend on layered structure and the corresponding strength of the dipolar interaction. With increasing of number of layers, the net magnetization of each superparamagnetic nanoparticle increases due to suppressed spin fluctuation. Quantitative analysis of the spin-spin and vortex-vortex correlation functions revealed a long-range macrospin order in the bilayer and trilayer and the formation of magnetic vortices and anti-vortices in the monolayer and at the boundary between different layers. We measured the distance between magnetic vortex and antivortex pairs was measured to be 22.3±1.4 nm, while the magnetic vortex-vortex and antivortex-antivortex pairs are stabilized at comparatively larger distances of 43.9±3.9 nm and 58.2±4.9 nm, respectively. These experimental results were further validated by micromagnetic Monte Carlo simulations based on the experimental 3D coordinates of the superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Our work elucidates the previously reported stable remanent magnetization in ferromagnetic liquid droplets The real-space images were reconstructed from the diffraction patterns using the extended ptychographic iterative engine (ePIE) where f c and f m are the charge and magnetic scattering factor, respectively, z ̂ is the normal vector along the z-axis, S(r) is the magnetization field at r = (x, y, z), and '±' represents left-and rightcircularly polarization. The complex-valued ptychography reconstruction is proportional to the scattering factor f; thus, the magnetic signal of the material can be retrieved from the difference of the oppositely-polarized optical density. Based on Eq. (S1), 35 projections for 3D scalar and vector reconstructions were computed from the sum and difference of the paired optical density projections, respectively. The common-line and center-of-mass methods were used to align the projections The REal Space Iterative REconstruction (RESIRE) algorithm was used for the 3D scalar reconstruction The magnetic nanoparticles were modeled as a macrospin ensemble by providing the experimental 3D coordinates to a micromagnetic Monte Carlo method (MMC) 