The symmetry-breaking first-order phase transition between superfluid phases 3 He-A and 3 He-B can be triggered extrinsically by ionising radiation or heterogeneous nucleation arising from the details of the sample cell construction. However, the role of potential homogeneous intrinsic nucleation mechanisms remains elusive. Discovering and resolving the intrinsic processes may have cosmological consequences, since an analogous first-order phase transition, and the production of gravitational waves, has been predicted for the very early stages of the expanding Universe in many extensions of the Standard Model of particle physics. Here we introduce a new approach for probing the phase transition in superfluid 3 He. The setup consists of a novel stepped-height nanofluidic sample container with close to atomically smooth walls. The 3 He is confined in five tiny nanofabricated volumes and assayed non-invasively by NMR. Tuning of the state of 3 He by confinement is used to isolate each of these five volumes so that the phase transitions in them can occur independently and free from any obvious sources of heterogeneous nucleation. The small volumes also ensure that the transitions triggered by ionising radiation are strongly suppressed. Here we present the preliminary measurements using this setup, showing both strong supercooling of 3 He-A and superheating of 3 He-B, with stochastic processes dominating the phase transitions between the two. The objective is to study the nucleation as a function of temperature and pressure over the full phase diagram, to both better test the proposed extrinsic mechanisms and seek potential parallel intrinsic mechanisms. The mechanism behind the first-order phase transition between the superfluid A and B phases of 3 He has evaded explanation despite decades of both experimental and theoretical work. Moreover, cosmological analogues Experimentally the phase transition between the A and B phases, usually from supercooled 3 He-A into 3 He-B, is routinely observed. This has led to proposals and studies of various heterogeneous nucleation mechanisms. Textural surface singularities (boojums) by themselves have been calculated to be unlikely to encourage the nucleation enough It has been proposed that in the case of secondary nucleations, tiny surface pockets can hold the stable phase by surface tension, and thus retain a memory of it, eventually expanding and filling the sample volume (the "lobster-pot" scenario) The third category is a phase transition triggered by ionising radiation working alone or in combination with the above-mentioned surface and textural effects. This radiation can stem either from cosmic rays or from radioactive materials near the experiment. Two models have been proposed to explain such phase transitions: baked Alaska mechanism The radiation-triggered phase transition is a stochastic process. This is firstly due to the random nature of particle interactions and the distribution of deposited energy within the sample Such experiments, performed near melting pressure at 34.2 bar, have studied the lifetime of the supercooled metastable A phase as a function of incoming particle flux, temperature, and magnetic field strength The nanofluidic sample container for SQUID-based NMR studies (Fig. The fill line entry hole and the confining cavity are connected by a 2.25 mm long, 20 μm wide, and 110 μm deep trench providing good thermal connection and minimising the possibility of a cavity collapse due to differential thermal contraction between the silicon cell and the silver fill line (Fig. In the confinement volume, there are 150 μm wide support pillars arranged in a hexagonal pattern 500 μm apart from each other (Figs. The experimental platform, based on the SQUID-NMR spectrometer Nuclear spin precession is excited by a saddle-shaped transmitter coil on a Kel-F former around the cell holder. We use small NMR pulses (spin-tipping angle β < 1 • ) to virtually remove the dependence of the superfluid precession frequency on the pulse size. The pulses are applied once every three seconds, providing a good signal quality after 60 averages. The NMR receiver coil is part of a series tuned circuit having a resonance frequency f 0 = 965 kHz and a quality factor Q = 30 . The tiny signal is amplified with a two-stage SQUID device Since the gyromagnetic ratio of 3 He is ∕(2 ) = 32.43 MHz/T, our NMR scheme requires a static magnetic field strength B 0 ≈ 30 mT. The field is oriented perpen- dicular to the cavity surfaces, B 0 = B 0 ẑ . The field strength is fine-tuned to locate the 3 He Larmor frequency away from any prominent noise features in our system: f L = B 0 ∕(2 ) = 986 kHz. Additionally, a small magnetic field gradient is applied in the xy-plane to separate the precession frequencies of the five lakes from each other to allow independent monitoring of each of them (Fig. The temperature of the heat exchanger on the silver plate, T sp , is measured with a Pt-NMR thermometer calibrated against a 3 He melting-curve thermometer. This temperature can be precisely controlled with the heater shown in Fig. The NMR precession frequency f L of normal liquid 3 He is defined by the mag- netic field alone. In the superfluid phases the precession frequency f shifts by Δf = ff L , which can be either positive or negative, depending on the curvature of the dipole energy as a function of rotations in the spin space The nanofabrication techniques have been modified compared to those used in the earlier work The step-by-step nanofabrication process flow is illustrated in Fig. The series of such images confirms the dimensions of the fabricated features, most importantly the etched depths of the lakes and the shore, and their spatial uniformity. The height variation within a single cell was measured to be less than 10 nm. (g) The wafers are thoroughly cleaned in solvent followed by a two-step RCA cleaning process (SC1 → HF → SC2). Immediately after cleaning, as a last step before bonding, a dry 50 nm thick thermal SiO 2 is grown on all the surfaces inside a CMOS clean furnace. The purpose of the silicon dioxide layer is chemical passivation To test the performance of our experimental setup, we study the superfluid phase transitions at pressure P = 22.0bar, above the polycritical point, to allow a finite tem- perature range of stable 3 He-A just below T c . At this pressure and B 0 ≈ 30mT, the bulk phase-transition temperature between 3 He-A and 3 He-B is T AB ≈ 0.96T c [50], which corresponds to 2.20 mK on the Greywall temperature scale Two such examples at slow cooldown rates are shown in Fig. We determine the helium temperatures T He inside the individual lakes, when in the A phase, from their NMR precession frequency shifts Δf , using the known tem- perature dependence of the bulk A-phase frequency shift Δf A determined inside a different nanofluidic cell with thin cavity, D = 80nm The A-to-B phase transition is associated with latent heat release To study the lifetime of the supercooled A phase at constant temperature, we first stabilise T sp , after which a suitably chosen NMR heating pulse is applied to reset the Fig. After the heating, we wait until the helium cools down and all the lakes have transitioned from the A phase to the B phase. Two such examples at P = 22.0bar and T sp ≈ 1.045 mK are shown in Fig. Over the course of these experiments, we also confirmed that the B-phase nucleation is not triggered by mechanically vibrating the cryostat; neither the gentle Fig. A first-order phase transition can manifest superheating as well as supercooling, and both have previously been studied in superfluid 3 He The shallow shore region would also act as a nucleation source if it was filled with the A phase. Here this possibility is eliminated by choosing the shore depth D = 75nm, pressure P = 22bar, and strongly pair-breaking solid 3 He surfaces. This completely suppresses the superfluidity in the shore down to approximately 1.70 mK On a slow warm up from below T AB , shown in Fig. We must consider secondary nucleations, since the A phase existed in the lakes while cooling the sample down from above T c prior to starting the warm-up experi- ment. However, the smooth surfaces, regular container geometry, and normal 3 He in the shore make the survival of the A-phase seeds after the A-to-B transition in each lake highly unlikely. Thus, we argue that primary nucleations not only of the B phase but also of the A phase are likely to be observed in our experiments. This opens up the possibility for studying the mechanism of the phase transition between these two phases in both directions. We can tune the stability of the A phase in the shore with pressure and/or 4 He preplating Our preliminary results show that nanofluidic samples with stepped confinement are a promising tool to investigate the first-order phase transition between 3 He-A and 3 He-B. The approach relies on the creation of isolated tiny "lakes" of superfluid, which can be cooled through a surrounding very thin "shore" region of either 3 He-A or normal fluid. We determine the superfluid phase in each lake by sensitive SQUID NMR combined with simple imaging techniques. With nearly atomically smooth surfaces and vertical walls, the phase-transition volumes allow both very strong supercooling of 3 He-A and superheating of 3 He-B, so far confirmed at a single pressure, P = 22.0bar. This work will be extended over a wide pressure and temperature range, including below polycritical point. Of particular interest is the low-pressure regime where very little supercooling has been observed under stronger confinement, potentially linked to resonant tunnelling The geometry and the surface quality of the nanofluidic sample container are designed to eliminate seeds triggering heterogeneous nucleation; confirmation of a lack of history dependence is a future task. It remains likely that the detected stochasticity has a contribution from external triggers, such as cosmic rays and radioactivity in the laboratory environment. The effect of both of these can be minimised by additional shielding or careful choice of materials. We will characterise the radioactivity of the specific materials present in significant amount close to the sample, including Macor, silicon, and Kel-F. Combining this information with the recent assay result of other commonly used materials in the cryostat Eventually the understanding of the extrinsic effects, coupled to a study of nucleation across the entire P -T plane of the superfluid phase diagram, should uncover potential underlying intrinsic mechanisms and their cosmological analogues. Besides the lifetime of the metastable phase, the kinetics of the phase transition-in particular the speed of the propagating phase boundary-are crucial when comparing the A-B phase transition to the cosmological phase transitions and the predicted spectrum of generated gravitational waves Furthermore, the successful design, fabrication, and use of a nanofabricated stepped-height sample container is the latest step into the microkelvin studies of topological mesoscopic superfluidity. The method enables the creation of hybrid nanofluidic devices by sculpture of the order parameter 