This work reports the design, fabrication, and characterization of coupling-enhanced magnetostatic forward volume wave resonators with significant spur suppression. The fabrication is based on surface micro-machining of yttrium iron garnet (YIG) film on a gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) substrate with thick gold transducers. A distributed resonator is used to excite forward volume waves in YIG to realize a frequency dependent coupling boost. Fabricated devices at 18 GHz and 7 GHz show coupling coefficients as high as 13% and quality factors above 1000. Higher-order magnetostatic mode suppression is experimentally demonstrated through a combination of transducer and YIG geometry design. An edgecoupling filter topology is proposed and simulated which utilizes this novel distributed magnetostatic resonator. N EXT generation RF front-end modules require low- loss and highly-selective bandpass filters to cover the multitude of densely allocated frequency bands for commercial communication systems scaling beyond 6 GHz. Highly compact bandpass filters are also desired for wideband active electronically steered antenna arrays (AESA), which are susceptible to interference and jamming when beamforming electronics are integrated at the element level. Including either tunable or arrays of selective filters between the antenna and receiver electronics mitigates this risk while maintaining the advantages of fully-digital wideband AESAs Filters based on magnetic materials such as yttrium iron garnet (YIG) have been an attractive technology for many years due to the material's magnetically tunable dispersion relation and low Gilbert damping. The geometry of a magnetostatic wave (MSW) cavity can be designed independently from its bias-dependent resonant frequency allowing significant miniaturization over electromagnetic resonators. However, this technology has faced a number of integration and scaling challenges. Until recently MSW filters were constructed out of flip-chip assemblies on a PCB In previous work, a MSW is excited in YIG using an inductive element with a frequency response modeled using the lumped circuit shown in Fig. where ω m = μ 0 γ m M s , ω 0 = μ 0 γ m H ef f DC , t is the film thickness, γ m is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the permeability of free space, k mn is the wave vector, M s is the saturation magnetization, and H ef f DC is the effective DC magnetic bias. The MSW is confined within the YIG mesa forming a number standing waves with discrete wave vectors For the shorted transducers (Fig. Fig. The fabrication process for the MSFVW resonators is outlined in Fig. IV. RESONATOR MEASUREMENT 1-port s-parameters are measured using an Agilent PNA E8364B with non-magnetic GSG probes at an input power of -15 dBm. The out-of-plane magnetic field is generated using a constant current source and a single-pole electromagnet with a 10 mm pole face diameter. A single-axis Gauss meter attached to a probe manipulator is positioned closely above the sample near the device under test (DUT) to estimate the magnitude of the applied field. To ensure a uniform bias field across the entire length of the YIG mesa, the DUT is aligned to the center of the pole face using an optical microscope and secured in place using an adhesive. Fig. Fig. Based on the results of We report a novel MSW resonator coupled to a distributed electromagnetic resonator using state-of-the-art micromachining fabrication techniques. The magnetostatic coupling boost can be precisely controlled through the design of a radial stub termination and we demonstrate both 7 GHz and 18 GHz resonators for C-band and Ku-Band operation respectively. The resonator figure of merit (k 2 ef f • Q) peaks at 50 for the 7 GHz and at 121 for the 18 GHz surpassing state-of-the-art piezoelectric resonators at similar frequencies 