Impregnation treatments are one of the alternatives to protect concrete-based building and monuments from weathering degradation. However, it is important to consider the chemical compatibility of the reaction products with the building material. The impregnation product studied here consists of a silica oligomer able to polymerize, by a simple sol-gel process, inside the pore structure of concrete. In this work, we investigate the ability of this impregnation treatment to produce C-S-H gel in contact with cement paste. A complete characterization of the reaction products demonstrated that the silanol groups from silica oligomers react with the portlandite present in the cement paste generating a material with the chemical, structural and morphological features of C-S-H gel. Simultaneously, the 29 Si NMR results indicate that the SieO units are incorporated into the existing C-S-H, increasing its chain length. These results open the way for a simple concrete structures repairing procedure. The technological advances brought by the procedure to obtain Portland cement and the use of reinforced concrete shaped late 19th and 20th century architecture, giving rise to the architectural styles of the modern era (modernism, rationalism, brutalism...). As a defining characteristic of said styles, these new reinforced structures were often left in fair-faced condition Nowadays, the application of surface treatments, which prevent the water ingress and fill the cracks produced by degradation, is the preferred choice for preserving historic concrete Silica oligomer/monomer-based sols (e.g. ̧tetraethoxysilane, TEOS) are widely used in the stone conservation market In previous developments The application of silica oligomer/monomer-based products as an impregnation treatment on concrete has been hardly investigated, despite recent studies indicating their higher effectiveness in comparison to other impregnation products (such as sodium silicate and nanosilica) The effectiveness demonstrated by silica-based sols to repair degraded concrete structures can be clearly associated to their reactivity in contact with cementitious substrates. It is well known that calciumsilicate-hydrate (C-S-H) gel is a significant component in the cement paste, giving rise to its engineering properties, and durability Starting from this premise, the objective of this work is to investigate the ability of the silica oligomer-based impregnation, product previously developed and patented by our group The product employed for this study (henceforth called UCA-T) was synthetized according to a previously developed surfactant-assisted sol-gel method developed and patented by our group Xerogel samples were obtained, in order to study the product properties, in absence of cement paste, by casting 15 ml the sol in an open Ø85 mm Petri dish and keeping them under laboratory conditions (20 °C, 40% RH) for gelification. Once the samples reached constant weight, the xerogel was ground for characterization. A first approach to verify the ability of the product to form C-S-H gel, was to study its reaction with portlandite paste (PP). The samples for this study were prepared as follows: (1) A PP was obtained by mixing, under mechanical stirring, Ca(OH) 2 (90%, Scharlau) and de-carbonated H 2 O in a water/solid ratio of 0.5 (2) 2 g of the UCA-T sol were mixed with 15 g of the PP (3) The pastes were placed in desiccator under a N 2 atmosphere with saturated humidity and left to cure (4) At different time intervals (7 and 21 days), the reaction was stopped by replacing the water via solvent exchange with isopropanol The second series of experiments focused on studying the interaction of the impregnation product with the hydration products present in concrete. To avoid the interferences due to the aggregates, the experiments were carried out using hydrated cement paste (CP), prepared by mixing a Cem I 42.5 R cement with de-carbonated H 2 O in a 0.5 w/c ratio. The paste was cured in a N 2 atmosphere saturated with water for 28 days, and afterwards vacuum-dried at 35 °C during three days. Prior to mixing with UCA-T, the cement paste was finely ground to a size of < 30 μm. 15 g of the powdered cement paste was mixed with 3 g of the UCA-T sol and stored in a N 2 atmosphere saturated with ambient water. After curing for 7 and 21 days, the hydration reactions were stopped by replacing the water via solvent exchange with isopropanol and, afterwards, dried in a vacuum oven at 35 °C during three days. For comparison purposes, a sample of CP was also subjected to the same experimental conditions. Structural, chemical and morphological characterization of the xerogels and the reaction products of the sol with portlandite and cement paste was carried out by the techniques described below. Prior to their analysis, all the solids under study were finely ground (< 30 μm). Mineralogical and chemical analysis of the samples was performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) techniques. The XRD patterns of the materials were obtained with a Bruker D8 advance diffractometer equipped with a secondary monochromator, Cu tube X-ray, using Cu Kα radiation. Quantitative analysis of the phases was carried out by the Rietveld method. Compositional analysis was carried out by micro-XRF (μ-XRF) analysis, using a Bruker S4-PIONEER equipment. The sample compositions were obtained averaging the XRF elemental maps of the powdered samples spread on a plate. TGA was carried out in a SDT Q600 TA-Instruments thermobalance. The samples were heated up to 800 °C at 5 °C/min, in a flow of O 2 (5%)/He (60 cm 3 /min). Such TGA experiments were complemented by analyzing the released gases using a quadrupole mass spectrometer (Pfeiffer, QME-200-D-35614 model) to track MS signals and identify the desorption and decomposition products. Structural characterization of the materials was performed by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and 29 Si nuclear magnetic resonance ( 29 Si NMR). The samples for the FTIR measurements were prepared in KBr pellets (1% proportion) and measured in transmittance mode in the 4000-450 cm -1 range by using a IRAffinity-1S spectrophotometer from Shimadzu. In order to perform semi-quantitative analysis of the portlandite and carbonates, K 3 Fe(CN) 6 was added (K 3 Fe(CN) 6 /sample ratio 1:1) as an internal standard. Single-pulse (SP) MAS- 29 Si NMR experiments were carried out on a Bruker ADVANCE WB400 spectrometer equipped with a multinuclear probe. Samples of powdered materials were packed in 4 mm zirconia rotors and spun at 8 kHz. Pulse length was 5 μs, with a recycle delay of 30 s and the number of transients was 8000. The chemical shift values are expressed in ppm of tetramethylsilane. Morphological features of the materials were studied by electron microscopy. Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM) micrographs were registered in secondary electrons mode with a NanoSEM 450 model from the FEI Company, working at an acceleration voltage of 2.5 kV. The samples were prepared by directly depositing a small amount of the powder over carbon tape placed in an aluminum sample holder. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy Bright Field (STEM-BF) images, were obtained with a FEI TITAN3 Themis 60-300 microscope, operating at an acceleration voltage of 60 kV and equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy EDXS detector for selected area EDXS analysis. The samples were prepared by finely grounding the powders and direct deposition over a lacey carbon-coated copper grid. Characterization of the UCA-T sol and the sol-gel transition are reported elsewhere After the sol-gel transition, UCA-T forms a monolithic xerogel due to the effect of the surfactant (n-octylamine), which plays two important roles: (i) it reduces the surface tension and (ii) it promotes the formation of a particulated xerogel with a mesoporous structure. This combination of surface tension reduction and increasing of pore size results in a lowering of capillary pressure that allows monolithic xerogels to be obtained The final weight (after 60 days) of the xerogel was a 65% of the initial (sol) weight, a value remarkably higher than the theoretical weight that would result from a fully realized sol-gel reaction to produce SiO 2 (~40%), indicating the presence of unreacted ethoxy-groups and/or byproducts (H 2 O and EtOH) trapped inside the smaller pores of the structure. The SEM and TEM images reveal the mesoporous structure of the UCA-T xerogel. Specifically, the SEM micrographs (Fig. The amorphous nature of the UCA-T was confirmed by the XRD pattern (Fig. The chemical nature of the UCA-T xerogel was further evaluated by infrared spectroscopy. The FTIR spectra (Fig. Thermogravimetric analysis confirmed that the CeH bands in the FTIR spectra (Fig. The progress of the hydrolysis reaction could be estimated by recalculating the weight losses with respect to the initial sol weight, considering simultaneously the values obtained by TGA and the 35% weight loss that occurred from the initial sol to the xerogel (calculations are detailed in supporting material). The recalculated data indicate a 39% SiO 2 content (practically the same as the theoretical value), a 5.2% loss associated to unreacted ethoxy groups and a combined 54.5% loss in hydrolysis byproducts (H 2 O and EtOH). The degree of hydrolysis, calculated (see eq. 1) as the relation between the experimental weight loss in hydrolysis byproducts and the theoretical weight loss that would result from a fully realized reaction (60%), was estimated at 91%, indicating that the majority of the silica precursor was hydrolyzed during the process. Experimental Loss Theoretical Loss The MAS- 29 Si NMR experiments were employed to study the reticulation degree of the silica structure. The NMR spectra (Fig. Due to the difficulty of studying all the different interactions of the UCA-T product with a system as complex as a cement paste (i.e. presence of multiple phases, heterogeneous pore structure, varying water content in the pores...), a first approach to study the interaction to form C-S-H gel, was to perform a series of experiments with portlandite paste (Ca(OH) 2 + H 2 O). This model system was chosen considering that portlandite is one of the hydration phases of cement, and can act as a Ca 2+ source with basic character, both of them conditions which favor pozzolanic-like reactions with the silica source The X-ray diffractograms of the portlandite paste (PP) (Fig. It is worth mentioning that the data obtained by XRD are insufficient to confirm the nature of the possible reaction products (i.e. SiO 2 and C-S-H gels), since they are predominantly amorphous and, therefore, they will produce weak and broad signals, which are masked by the peaks of the crystalline phases. The elemental composition of the portlandite and portlandite + UCA-T pastes was analyzed by XRF (Table The reactivity of the UCA-T sol with Ca(OH) 2 to form C-S-H-like products was evidenced by the FTIR spectra (Fig. 2-bands at 870 (δ CeO) and 1450 cm -1 (ν as CeO), in line with the calcite content found by XRD measurements (Fig. -groups from the impregnation product are able to incorporate into the C-S-H silicate chain and decrease its Ca/Si ratio, which is consistent with the increase of the area ratio between the silica band and the internal standard (C^N) band from 3.1 to 5.2. Another difference with respect to the UCA-T xerogel spectra was the total absence of the CeH bands in the presence of portlandite, which is a consequence of the strongly basic pH in the reaction mixture promoting a higher hydrolysis rate. The curve fitting analysis of the 760-1200 region (Fig. An analysis of the phases present in the pastes was carried out by The detailed quantification results of the different components, calculated from the stoichiometry of the reactions, can be seen in Table With regard to the evolution of the PP + UCA-T paste over time, variations in the phase proportions were barely observed. Specifically, the residue (silica phases) and the hydration water of C-S-H increased by < 0.2 while Ca(OH) 2 proportion decreased by < 0.1%, indicating a rapid equilibration of the Ca(OH) 2 reaction with the silica source. The small magnitude of the compositional changes seems to suggest that the evolution of the paste from 7 to 21 days is mostly the result of a restructuring of the calcium silicate phases. The 29 Si NMR spectra, measured for the PP + UCA-T paste cured for 21 days (Fig. Another important difference with respect to the UCA-T xerogel lies in the shift of the Q 2 and Q 1 band positions. As discussed for the xerogel (Fig. In addition to the chemical and structural characterization of the formed C-S-H gel, the evolution of the morphological features of the reaction products was studied by SEM. The SEM study (Fig. After 7 days (Fig. The evolution of the reaction products towards more defined structures became clear after 21 days (Fig. After curing for 21 days, the Ca/Si ratio evolved towards values in the 1.0-1.4 range, which fit into the characteristic proportions found in C-S-H. This decrease in the Ca/Si ratio can be explained by the increase in the degree of polymerization of the C-S-H silica chains, in line with the FTIR measurements, which showed a shift of the silicate bands towards higher wavenumbers (Fig. In light of the results obtained from the different techniques, we propose that the reaction of the product with the Ca(OH) 2 takes places Fig. Having demonstrated the ability of the UCA-T product to react with portlandite, the following stage of the study was focused on the evaluation of the interactions with hydrated cement paste (CP). Crystallographic analysis by XRD (Fig. Elemental analysis by XRF of the CP showed a typical composition of cement (see Table The nature of the reaction products was further studied by analysis of the FTIR spectra (Fig. The curve fitting analysis of the 750-1300 cm -1 band group (Fig. After the reaction with UCA-T, the contribution of the 1104 cm -1 decreased overall, indicating the formation of SieO structures and/or the reaction of the UCA-T product with the ettringite. The quantification of the peak areas revealed an increase of the contribution of the Q2 SieO band (~970 cm -1 ) and a slight decrease of the Q1 SieO band (~820 cm -1 ) respect to the CP, which may be indicative of a lengthening of the silica chains in C-S-H. This fact was further evidenced by the shift of the bands towards higher wavelengths, in line with the observations made for the PP + UCA-T pastes (Fig. Regarding the evolution of the reaction from 7 to 21 days, it can be observed that the SieO (Q2) and SieO (Q1) bands slightly increased, indicating the formation of new C-S-H gel during this interval. The position of these bands remained roughly the same, which can be interpreted as an evidence that the silica chains did not undergo further polymerization, unlike in the 0-7 days interval. On the other hand, the fact that the 1040 cm -1 (SieO networks) and 876 cm -1 (CO 3 2-) bands did not increase suggests that the SiO 2 xerogel formation and carbonation processes may be considered insignificant under the experimental conditions. A more detailed characterization of the phases present in the pastes was performed by thermogravimetric analysis. The TGA curves of the CP and CP + UCA-T (Fig. In agreement with the FTIR spectra, the TG analysis evidenced a decrease in the proportion of Ca(OH) 2 from 24.2% in CP to 15.7% and 14.8% after 7 and 21 days mixed with UCA-T, respectively. These values are lower than the nominal proportion (c.a. 17.9%), thus confirming that the portlandite had been consumed during the process. The low magnitude of the increase in %CaCO 3 (< 2%) suggests that the main process consuming the portlandite was its reaction with UCA-T instead of the carbonation process. In a similar vein to the results from the Ca(OH) 2 pastes, the amount of water from hydrated phases increased from 14.1% to 15.9%, and there was an increase in the residual weight from 56.2% to ~61.5%, suggesting the formation of similar reaction products (i.e. C-S-H). The partial carbonation from 7 to 21 days, observed by FTIR, was also confirmed by a 1-2% increase in the CaCO 3 proportion. Fig. In the case of the CP + UCA-T sample, the spectra showed similar bands, with a minor contribution of the Q 3 signals, indicating that the product predominantly polymerized in the form of linear chains, instead of the typical reticulated structure of silica xerogels A more detailed analysis of the structural changes was carried out through curve fitting analysis of the 29 Si NMR signals (Fig. (3) Significant changes were observed in the CP after reaction with UCA-T that indicated the integration of the silica oligomer in the structure. On the one hand, the contribution of the Q 0 signals decreased, indicating a progress of the hydration process. On the other hand, the contribution of the Q 2 and Q 1 signals is inverted (Q 2 > Q 1 ) compared to the paste without UCA-T. The global contribution of the Q 2 (1Al) units decreased, although the Q 2 (1Al)/Q 1 area ratio was roughly the same as in the paste without UCA-T. As a result of the contribution of Q 2 units, the MCL increased from 4.6 to 6.0 units. This observation evidences that the silica tetrahedral units resulting from the UCA-T hydrolysis may be incorporated into the C-S-H gel The morphological features of the reaction products were observed by Scanning Electron microscopy. Micrographs of the plain CP (available in supporting information Fig. We have demonstrated the ability of a silica oligomer based-impregnation treatment, developed in our laboratory, to produce C-S-H gel in contact with Ca +2 ions existing in porlandite, one of the components of cementitious materials. A thorough characterization of the products resulting from the interaction between silica oligomer and cementitious matrix components demonstrated that the polymerization of the silica precursor occurs through a different pathway in their presence yielding reaction products with the structural, chemical and morphological properties of C-SH gel, instead of the reticulated silica xerogel that is produced by auto-polymerization of silica oligomer chains. Specifically, when polymerization occurred in the presence of portlandite and water, the silica precursor reacted with the solubilized enhancement of Q 2 SieO units in bridging positions (as observed by 29 Si NMR). The presence of reticulated chains and structures with xerogel morphology was marginal, indicating that the reaction with the paste is favored respect to the auto-condensation. Further studies should be carried out in order to determine the possible changes in reactivity with cement pastes affected by chemical degradation processes that decrease the portlandite content and alter the C-S-H structure (e.g. carbonation). In light of the obtained results, the similarity of the reaction products with the cementitious matrix indicates a high chemical compatibility with concrete and mortars.