The quantum tunneling effect in the two-dimensional (2D) checkerboard lattice is investigated. By analyzing the pseudospin texture of the states in a 2D checkerboard lattice based on the low-energy effective Hamiltonian, we find that this system has a chiral symmetry with chirality equal to 2. Although compared to regular chiral fermions, its pseudospin orientation does not vary uniformly. This suggests that the perfect reflection chiral tunneling, also known as the anti-Klein tunneling, is expected to appear in checkerboard lattice as well. In order to verify the conjecture, we calculate the transmission probability and find that normally incident electron states can be perfectly reflected by the barrier with hole states inside, and vice versa. Furthermore, we also numerically calculate the tunneling conductance of the checkerboard nanotube using the recursive Green's function method. The results show that a perfect on-off ratio can be achieved by confining the energy of the incident states within a certain range. It also suggests that, by tuning the barrier, the checkerboard nanotube is able to work as a perfect "band filter" or "tunneling field effect transistor", which transmits electrons selectively with respect to the pseudospin of the incident electrons. Quantum tunneling refers to the passage of particles with finite probability through barriers that are forbidden according to the laws of classical physics Traditional transistors were designed relying on the fundamental charge degree of freedom of electrons, and then the intrinsic spin was also confirmed to modulate the electron transport, giving rise to the study of spintronics In the case of systems with odd chirality, such as the monolayer graphene, the normally incident electrons can completely pass through a barrier of arbitrary height (known as the Klein paradox) In this paper, we investigate the quantum tunneling in a 2D checkerboard lattice This conjecture of the perfect reflection in the checkerboard lattice is then confirmed by the calculation of transmission probability, which shows that a perfect reflection effect for normal incidence is found in the case of s s ′ where s and s ′ are the subband indexes inside and outside the barrier, respectively. Inspired by the perfect reflection of normal incidence in the checkerboard lattice, we also suppose that a "band filter" or "tunneling field effect transistor" can be designed based on the quasi-1 dimensional checkerboard nanotube. We numerical calculate the tunneling conductance of the checkerboard nanotube using the recursive Green's function method At last, we propose that τ-type organic conductors We start with the tight-binding model of the checkerboard lattice depicted in Fig. where a † i, j (b † i, j ) and a i, j (b i, j ) are, respectively, the single electron creation and annihilation operators on the site A(B) of the primitive cell (i, j) with i( j) being index along the x(y)direction. t stands for the nearest hopping, while t ′ and t ′′ denote two types of next-nearest hopping. In the calculations below, without loss of generality, we choose the case with t = t ′ = -t ′′ = 1. A general analysis of parameter settings is provided in Appendix B. Following the Bloch theorem, the Hamiltonian in the wavevector space reads (details shown in Appendix A) where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the Pauli matrix of sublattice pseudospin. The conduction and valence bands of this system quadratically touch at the ( kx , ky ) = (π, π). Thus, we expand the above Hamiltonian around the touching point by redefining the wavevector as kx = π + k x and ky = π + k y . The low-energy effective Hamiltonian is given by The corresponding eigenenergy and eigen-state are and is the normalization coefficient, k = |k| and θ k = arctan(k y /k x ) are the length and angle of k, respectively, and s = ±1 denotes different subbands. The pseudospin of this model occurs in the (xz) plane since the Hamiltonian Eq. ( Therefore, the angle of pseudospin θ σ is obtained by solving where |ψ ′ ks ⟩ = e iσ x π 4 |ψ ks ⟩ is the rotated pseudospin state. It is remarkable that the pseudospin angle depends only on the angle of wavevector, not on the amplitude. As shown in Fig. Above, we infer the existence of the anti-Klein tunneling in the checkerboard lattice by analyzing the chiral symmetry and pseudospin texture of the low-energy effective Hamiltonian. In the following, we calculate the tunneling transmission probability to address this conjecture. The barrier potential we considered is uniform along the y-direction and has a rectangular shape along the x-direction, where V s and D denote the height and length of the barrier, respectively. We assume that the incident wave comes from infinite away (x → -∞) with wavevector k = (k x , k y ) and energy E which satisfies the dispersion relation. The wavefunctions of the system with barrier can be obtained by solving the equation (details shown in Appendix C) Here, Ĥk serves as an operator in the coordinate representation. It is got by redefining the wavevector as k = k -(π, π) in Eq. ( where the subscript α = L, M, R denotes the incident, barrier and transmitting regions, respectively. Mathematically, this equation gives two sets of roots, which are denoted by ±k αx and ±k ′ αx , and correspond to modes e ±ik αx x and e ±ik ′ αx x , respectively. Thus, without loss of generality, the solution to Eq. ( is the x-component of quasiparticle velocity. Then we attempt to determine the coefficients. Firstly, b R = 0 since it corresponds to an extra "incident" wave towards the barrier region. Next, attention is turned to the wavenumbers in the incident and transmitting regions. To be specific, it's easy to see that roots k Lx = k Rx = k x definitely are real, and therefore modes e ±ik Lx x and e ±ik Rx x are propagating. But mathematically, roots k ′ Lx and k ′ Rx could be either imaginary or real, which leads to some differences in physics. For the former case, i.e. k ′ Lx and k ′ Rx are imaginary just as in the bilayer graphene Fig. where 2 ), and q ′ x = arcosh(1 . When the s index (electron-like for s = + or hole-like for s = -) of the incident state is the same as the states contained in the barrier, Eq. ( Inspired by the perfect reflection of the normal incidence in the checkerboard lattice, we suppose that a "band filter" or "tunneling field effect transistor" can be designed based on the quasi-1 dimensional checkerboard nanotube. The nanotube is assumed to be infinity in the x-direction, but finite in the y-direction with a periodic boundary condition, so k y is discretized as k y = n 2π M , where M is the width of nanotube along y-direction and n Here, we consider the lattice with even widths, which makes the band structure gapless. Then, we label each subband by (n, s) as shown in Fig. 3(1cos 2π M ). Before calculating the conductance of the checkerboard nanotube with a barrier, we would like to analyze the orthogonality of the wavefunctions of different slices (assemblages of all primitive cells with the same x) in the nanotube since the wave propagates slice by slice. The slice wavefunction can be expressed by Eq. ( where k y is replaced by n. The wavefunctions of the two lowest bands take where ψ 0,+,k x (r) only populates the sublattice A and ψ 0,-,k ′ x (r) only populates the sublattice B, which is similar to the zero-mode solution of the Dirac fermions in a magnetic field Besides, the slice wavefunctions with different band index n are also orthogonal due to Combining the relations Eq. ( Fig. For the incident hole-like state with energy E 1 , as shown in Fig. From the comparison of results from these two methods, it can be seen that the tunneling conductance is insensitive to the bands coupling, especially in the perfect reflection region, which meets the expectation from the slice wavefunction analysis that Ψ 0,±,k x (x) and Ψ n,∓,k ′ x (x) are completely orthogonal. Another remarkable behavior found in tunneling conductance is the presence of many resonance peaks during the change of V s , at which the barrier is transparent to one or more channels. These resonance peaks arise from waves that are reflected multiple times in the barrier and then transmitted in the same phase, which is similar to the taking place in the optical Fabry-Perot resonator or in a microwave capacitively-coupled transmission-line resonator So far we have explored the perfect reflection Klein tunneling in the checkerboard lattice based on the tight-binding model. Then, we suggest some experimental systems where our simulation results can be potentially observed. At first, attention can be paid to the τ-type organic conductors, in each conducting layer of which, donor molecules form a square lattice, and anion molecules are arranged on it with a checkerboard pattern In summary, we have studied the electronic quantum tunneling of a checkerboard lattice through a barrier potential. Due to the chiral nature of the quasiparticles, we find that there exists an anti-Klein tunneling, which leads to the perfect reflection of the normally incident waves. Moreover, we have also shown that a barrier potential can play the role of a "band filter" or "tunneling field effect transistor" in the checkerboard nanotube, which transmits the electronic states according to the selection rule. Finally, we expect that the checkerboard lattice can be realized in materials like τ-type organic conductors and optical checkerboard-like lattices. where a † i, j (b † i, j ) and a i, j (b i, j ) are, respectively, the single electron creation and annihilation operator on the site A(B) of the primitive cell (i, j) with i( j) being index along the x(y)-direction. t stands for the nearest hopping, while t ′ and t ′′ denote two types of next-nearest hopping. To get the Hamiltonian in the wavevector space, apply the Fourier transform ĉi where V is the area of the lattice, and c represents either a or b, r c i, j is the position of the corresponding sublattice of the primitive cell (i, j). In this letter, we take the length of primitive translation vectors as the unit length, which is also the distance of the next-nearest hopping. Then r a i, j = (i, j), where δr = r c ′ i+δi, j+δ j -r c i, j . Thus, Eq. (A1) becomes As shown in Appendix A, The wavevector space form of the Hamiltonian Eq. ( where σ 0 is the identity matrix. The corresponding dispersion relation is The parameters t = t ′ = -t ′′ = 1 set in the main text is a showcase without loss of generality, based on following reasons. Firstly, since the σ 0 term in the Hamiltonian Eq. (B1) does not affect the expression of the eigenstates, the t ′ = -t ′′ we set do not affect the orientation of the pseudospin, which is essential reason of the Klein and anti-Klein tunneling. Secondly, from the dispersion relation Eq. (B2), it is obvious that the location of the touching point k = (π, π) is independent with the values of t, t ′ and t ′′ . Thirdly, we performed the calculation of the pseudospin texture of the model with parameters are obtained by DFT calculation of τ-type organic conductor reported in Ref. Appendix C: Calculation of transmission probability 1. Determining the wave modes Before solving Eq. ( where E ′ = E -V and Ĥk is got by redefining the wavevector as k = k -(π, π) in Eq. ( where auxiliary values Rewrite Eq. (C4) as a quadratic equation with u as the variable: The solution is Besides, Eq. (C4) leads to that the necessary and sufficient condition for ∂E ′2 ∂u > 0 is u > 1+v 2 . As a consequence, mathematically, for a certain v, E ′2 is monotonically decreasing for u ∈ -∞, v+1 2 , and monotonically increasing for u ∈ v+1 2 , +∞ , respectively. Thus, E ′2 achieve minimum value 3(1v) 2 when u = v+1 2 . Besides, E ′2 = 4(1v) 2 for u = 1. These results in, physically, for 12 and a fixed v ∈ [-1, 1]: , there is not any mode. , just shown as the blue line in the Fig. And the transmission probability is easy to be calculated as introduced in Appendix C 3. And the transmission probability is easy to be calculated as introduced in Appendix C 2. So far, for certain E ′ = E -V and k y , Eq. ( In the scenario that two propagating modes and two evanescent modes (mathematically) exist in both sides of the barrier, the wavefunction Eq. (10) becomes where the superscripts L, M, R denote the incident(left), barrier(medial) and transmitting(right) regions, respectively. Note since V(x) has the same value for the incident(L) and transmitting(R) regions, pseudospin states in the transmitting(R) region have been represented by ones in the incident(L) region. For pseudospin states , subscript 1(2) corresponds to the propagating wave with positive (negative) component of velocity in the x-direction v x ≡ 1 ħ ∂E ∂k x , while 3(4) corresponds to the evanescent wave with positive (negative) wavenumber λ x in the x-direction, respectively. Considering the continuity of both the wavefunction Eq. (C10) and its partial derivative ∂ x ψ(x, y) respectively at x = 0, we have ψ (x, y) x→0 -= ψ (x, y) x→0 + and ∂ x ψ (x, y) x→0 -= ∂ x ψ (x, y) x→0 + . Similarly, at x = D, we have ψ (x, y) x→D -= ψ (x, y) x→D + and ∂ x ψ (x, y) x→D -= ∂ x ψ (x, y) x→D + . These four equations can be simplified to be where In the scenario that four propagating modes exist in both sides of the barrier, the scattering happens between modes with different magnitudes of velocities should be considered. To change the algorithm as little as possible, we denote λ L 1 = ik x , λ L 2 = -ik x , λ L 3 = ik ′ x and λ L 4 = -ik ′ x . And the wavefunction Eq. (10) becomes ψ (x, y) = e ik y y × here are propagating modes and subscript 3(4) corresponds to the positive (negative) component of velocity in the x-direction. To simplify the calculation, we rescale the incident wave, resulting Eq. (C14) to be ψ (x, y) = e ik y y × The only difference with Eq.(C10), in mathematical, is that c ′ and d ′ are replaced by γr ′ and γt ′ , respectively. It indicates that following the same approach of solving Eq.(C10), parameters r, r ′ , t, t ′ can easily get. Thus, the reflection (R) and transmission (T ) probabilities can be calculated as R = |r| The normal incidence requires v y ≡ 1 ħ ∂E ∂k y to be 0. A sufficient condition is k y = 0, which corresponds to the 0-th mode of energy bands. Denote s = sign (E -V), then the eigenstate and corresponding wave modes are: