Re-based superconductors provide a rich platform for the study of unconventional superconductivity. We have investigated the superconducting properties of Re8NbTa, a new noncentrosymmetric cubic (α-Mn structure) rhenium-based ternary superconductor using transport, magnetization, specific heat, and muon spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) measurements. Specific heat and transverse field μSR measurements suggest moderately coupled fully gapped superconductivity, well described by BCS theory. However, our zero-field μSR measurements reveal a small internal field onsetting around the superconducting Tc, indicating that the superconducting order parameter breaks the time-reversal symmetry. An important question in the study of unconventional superconductivity is the role of fundamental symmetries such as time reversal and inversion in the pairing interaction and the resulting superconducting state The polycrystalline Re 8 NbTa sample was synthesized by melting high purity metals (3N) Re, Nb and Ta in a stoichiometric ratio under high-purity argon gas in an arc furnace. A PANalytical powder X-ray diffractometer equipped with Cu-K α radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) was used to determine the crystal structure and phase purity. Magnetization was measured with a Quantum Design MPMS 3, while resistivity and specific heat were measured using a Quantum Design PPMS. Muon spin rotation/relaxation experiments were conducted in transverse-field (TF) and zero-field (ZF) configurations to investigate the superconducting gap structure and identify any spontaneous field in the superconducting state, using the M20 beamline at the TRIUMF Center for Molecular and Material Science (CMMS), in Vancouver, Canada. For the μSR measurements, the Re 8 NbTa sample was cut into flat plates and held in the sample holder within the 4 He gas flow cryostat using thin metalized Mylar R ○ tape, which is sufficiently thin to not stop any muons. Muons missing the sample landed in a veto detector, allowing us to collect background-free spectra. In the TF configuration, the initial orientation of the muon spins was prepared to be perpendicular to the magnetic field, which was applied parallel to the incoming muon beam momentum. A combination of a fluxgate magnetometer, muMetal, and three sets of perpendicular electromagnets was used to establish a zero magnetic field at the sample position. Our μSR data was analyzed using the musrfit software package The room-temperature powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of Re 8 NbTa is shown in Fig. Figure dx, (1) where ρ 0 represents the temperature-independent residual resistivity due to scattering from defects in the crystal; the second term is the temperature-dependent generalized BG resistivity in which B is a material-dependent proportionality constant. The red line in Fig. Magnetization measurements were performed in zero field-cooled warming (ZFCW) and field-cooled cooling (FCC) in an applied magnetic field of 1 mT. It confirms the superconducting transition temperature of Re 8 NbTa at 7.7(4) K by exhibiting a strong diamagnetic signal as shown in Fig. The upper critical field H c2 (0) was estimated by measuring the effect of the applied field on the transition temperature using different techniques: magnetization (M (T, H)), specific heat (C (T, H)) and resistivity (ρ (T, H)). Figure where, t = T /T c and the fit using Eq. ( At T = T c , the initial slope -dHc2(T ) dT for Re 8 NbTa was found to be 3.16 , where C = 1.86 T/K Two fundamental length scales of a superconductor, coherence length and penetration depth, can be computed using the values of H c1 (0) and H c2 (0). In GL theory, the coherence length ξ GL (0) ξ GL (0) + 0.12 , respectively, where Φ 0 (= 2.07 × 10 -15 T m 2 ) is the magnetic flux quantum ξ GL (0) = 78.6(2), indicating Re 8 NbTa is a strong type II superconductor. The thermodynamic critical field is estimated as H c (0) = 163.3(6) mT using the relation c ln(k GL ). The Ginzburg-Levanyuk number Gi represents the strength of the thermal fluctuations over the vortex unpinning in the superconducting state, and is given by Eq. ( where the anisotropy factor τ is 1 for cubic Re 8 NbTa. Using T c = 7.7(4) K, ξ(0) = 42.8 where γ n represents the Sommerfeld coefficient providing electronic contributions to the specific heat, β 3 and β 5 represents the phononic and anharmonic contributions to the specific heat, respectively. A fit to the specific heat data using Eq. ( ) is estimated to be 18.9(1) states/eV f.u. for Re 8 NbTa. According to the Debye model, the Debye temperature (θ D ) can be obtained from β 3 using the where N is the number of atoms per formula unit, R is the molar gas constant (8.314 J mol -1 K -1 ), giving θ D = 303(1) K. It exceeds θ D obtained from the BG fit of resistivity data, possibly due to the sensitivity of the low-temperature specific heat to low energy phonons, while the higher temperature resistivity responds to both low-and high-energy phonons From McMillan's model where μ * represents screened Coulomb repulsion, considering μ * = 0.13 as mentioned for all transition metals The normalized electronic specific heat jump ∆C el /γ n T c = 1.64, higher than the standard value of 1.43 for BCS superconductors in the weak coupling limit, suggesting moderate electronphonon coupling in Re 8 NbTa We have also performed field-dependent specific heat measurements to investigate the gap structure via the dependence of the Sommerfeld coefficient on the magnetic field (γ(H)). In a conventional superconductor γ(H) ∝ H for a nodeless gap The inset of Fig. -1 is the Fermi function, E(ξ) = ξ 2 + ∆ 2 (t), E(ξ) is the energy of the normal electrons measured relative to the Fermi energy, y = ξ/∆(0), and ∆(t) = tanh 1.82(1.018((1 /t) -1)) 0.51 is the BCS approximation for temperature-dependent superconducting energy gap. The solid orange line in Fig. Transverse-field μSR: To investigate the superconducting gap symmetry, we performed muon spin rotation and relaxation measurements in the transverse field (TF) configuration. To generate a well-ordered flux line lattice (FLL), the field-cooled method was employed where a magnetic field H c1 < H ≪ H c2 was first applied in the normal state, and then the sample was cooled to low temperature. The asymmetry spectra recorded below and above T c are presented in Fig. where A is the asymmetry, σ is the relaxation rate of the sample, φ is the initial phase, and ω is the precession frequency. The total depolarization of the sample σ includes the contribution of FLL in the superconducting state σ sc and a small contribution from randomly oriented nuclear dipole moments σ nm . Figure Using Eq. ( where γ μ = 2π×135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. For a triangular Abrikosov vortex lattice, the penetration depth can be calculated from the relaxation rate of FLL using Brandt's formula Here, φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. The reduced temperature variation of (λ μ ) -2 is shown in Fig. where ∆(T ) = ∆(0) tanh[1.82(1.018((T c /T )-1)) 0.51 ], the temperature dependence of the energy gap in the BCS approximation, and ∆(0) is the energy gap value at 0 K. Our results for this fitting, illustrated in Fig. where ∆ resembles the relaxation rate due to the denselypacked, randomly-oriented nuclear dipoles. To fit our data we used the following function, which is the product of G KT (t) with an exponential function where A i is the initial asymmetry and Λ is the exponential relaxation rate. Fig. where δ∆ is the increase in the Gaussian relaxation rate (∆) in ZF mode below T c , 0.0094(2) μs -1 , which corresponds to the internal field B int = 0.15(1) G. This value of B int for Re 8 NbTa is comparable to the values found in previously reported NCS rhenium-based TRSB superconductors listed in Table Eq. ( In conclusion, we have synthesized a new ternary noncentrosymmetric bulk superconductor Re 8 NbTa having a T c of 7.7(4) K with an upper critical field surpassing the Pauli limiting field. The superconducting gap ∆(0)/k B T c = 1.89, and the electron-phonon coupling strength λ e-ph = 0.73, point to a robust electron-phonon interaction suggesting moderately coupled superconductivity. Temperature-dependent electronic specific heat and TF-μSR measurements confirm the existence of a nodeless superconducting gap. Additionally, ZF-μSR results unveil the breaking of the time-reversal symmetry in the superconducting state, characterized by an internal magnetic field of 0.15 G. Our result suggests the influence of disorder on the emergence of time-reversal symmetry breaking in the superconducting state of Re 8 NbTa, while the role of the critical Re-percentage appears to be insignificant. Nevertheless, further comprehensive investigations on new Re-based superconductors are necessary to establish a conclusive link between disorder, crystal structure, anti-symmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC), and time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) in Rebased superconducting alloys.