This paper shows a systematic experimental and theoretical study on the temperature dependence of the infrared optical properties of pyrolytic boron nitride (pBN), from 390 to 1050 °C for wavelengths between 4 and 16 μm. The temperature dependence of these properties has never been analyzed before. The measured emissivity spectra were fitted to a dielectric function model and an effective medium ap-proximation. The phonon frequencies and dielectric constants agreed well with room temperature experimental values from the literature, as well as with ab initio and first principles calculations. In ad-dition, the phonon frequencies of the perpendicular mode and the dielectric constants of the parallel mode showed an appreciable parabolic temperature dependence, which justifies the interest of more theoretical efforts in order to explain this behavior. Finally, the results of this work demonstrate that thermal emission spectroscopy allows obtaining the values of the optical and dielectric parameters of impure ceramic materials in a simple manner as a function of temperature. Boron nitride shows four polymorphic variants whose special properties make this compound suitable for a large number of technological applications Hexagonal BN crystallizes in the P6 3 /mmc space group with four atoms in the unit cell and with the following irreducible representation of the phonon modes at the Brillouin zone center: . This h-BN polymorphic modification consists of sp 2 -bonded 2D layers In this paper, we report an experimental study on the emissivity spectra of pyrolytic boron nitride (pBN), as well as its optical constants, Γ phonon frequencies and dielectric properties (highfrequency and static dielectric constants) obtained by thermal emission spectroscopy. The theoretical interpretation of the experimental results is carried out by using a four-parameter dielectric function model as well as a Kramers-Kronig analysis. In addition to the basic interest of these measurements for the analysis of the discrepancies indicated above, this material shows promising properties in the mid-infrared range that make it attractive for many applications. As noted above, pBN may be an appropriate candidate for the main thermal protection system of the Solar Probe Plus (NASA) The pBN sample studied in this paper consisted of a 1 mm thick square plate of hexagonal BN deposited on a graphite substrate by pyrolysis of precursor gases at 1800 °C The emissivity measurements were made with a radiometer which has been described in the literature where FT means Fourier transform; I S , I BB and I RT are the interferograms recorded for the sample, black-body and room temperature background of the apparatus; P S , P BB and P RT are the Planck functions calculated at the temperatures of the sample, black-body and apparatus; and E BB is the emissivity of the blackbody. The temperature of the sample was determined at the Christiansen point (λ Chris ), a wavelength at which ceramic materials behave like a black-body (E1⁄4 1). This point does not depend on temperature and is thus used as a common non-contact method for surface temperature measurement in ceramic materials The X-ray diffractogram of Fig. The emissivity spectrum of pBN was measured in the 390-1050 °C temperature range and for wavelengths between 4 and 16 μm. The wavelength range of study was limited by the onset of transmittance at both extremes, which makes the emissivity of the material to fall abruptly to 0. The maximum temperature was chosen to avoid any possible oxidation, while the minimum temperature chosen was the lowest one that ensured an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio in the selected spectral range. The emissivity spectra for three temperatures are shown in Fig. The spectra show two reststrahlen bands at 6-8 and 12-14 μm, corresponding to the two infrared active phonons of h-BN. These spectra show a great similarity to those observed by reflectance measurements at room temperature A minor peak occurs at 6.4 μm, which becomes progressively weaker with temperature. This peak has been observed in reflectivity measurements on polycrystalline samples at room temperature and was attributed to 2-phonon combination processes The observed Christiansen wavelength in this sample was λ = μ 6.0 m Chris , a value that agrees with that obtained with a hopBN sample ( λ = μ 5.9 m Chris ) In order to analyze the pBN spectra, the data was fitted to a dielectric function model, which is related to the emissivity and reflectance through the Fresnel relations where ε ∞ is the high-frequency electronic contribution to the di- electric function, Ω is the frequency of an optical phonon (transverse or longitudinal), γ is the damping frequency of that phonon, and ⊥ and ∥ are the two possible electric field polarizations for a hexagonal crystal (perpendicular or parallel to the optical c-axis). As the sample is a randomly oriented polycrystal, the global dielectric function should be an average of the two polarizations, in which the perpendicular accounts for 2/3 of the total because of its higher multiplicity: av Finally, the effect of the microstructure and the presence of carbon impurities observed by the XRD and SEM experimental techniques, in agreement with data in the literature for similar samples, should be taken into account. To this end, and given the small size of the voids and defects ( o1 μm), the Maxwell-Garnett effective medium theory was applied where ε ef stands for the effective dielectric function, ε i for one of the impurities, f i for their volume concentration and ε av for the average dielectric function of the polycrystal, given by Eq. ( The parameters obtained with this model (phonon frequencies and dielectric constants) are shown in Table The other parameters of the Kurosawa model have not been thoroughly studied. The errors introduced by the fitting procedure in the values of the damping constants are greater than the slight positive temperature dependence that could be observed. The mean values for the perpendicular modes are γ = ± ⊥ 42 2 TO, cm À 1 and γ = ± ⊥ 99 8 LO, cm À 1 . No conclusions could be extracted from the parallel damping constants, since the fitting algorithm introduced noticeable errors near the end of the spectral range. The values reported above are in good agreement with the data given in the literature for room temperature The temperature dependence of the phonon frequencies and dielectric constants are plotted in Figs. In order to obtain more precise values of the dielectric function of the material, a Kramers-Kronig inversion of the reflectivity of the sample ( = -R E 1 ) was performed. Contrary to the model-fitting approach, this method involves purely mathematical operations on the data without any physical input. The imaginary part of the Fresnel reflection coefficient ( * = θ r re i ) is calculated from the real part ( = r R) by means of the following equation [48]: where P stands for principal value of the integral. The result of the Kramers-Kronig is shown in Fig. It can be seen that the two methods lead to curves which overlap for most of the spectral range considered. However, there is a noticeable difference around the main phonon at 7.5 μm, more clearly seen in the imaginary part of the dielectric function. This may reveal an inadequacy of the semiclassical models when trying to obtain precise values of the optical constants of materials, even Fig. The emissivity spectra of pBN were measured as a function of temperature and fitted to a four-parameter dielectric function model taking into account the random orientation of the crystals and the presence of carbon impurities, which were described by an effective medium approximation. This modelling approach shows a better agreement between the theoretical and experimental spectra than previous attempts. The temperature dependence of the optical and dielectric parameters of this material has been reported for the first time. The values obtained by the fitting procedure agree well with experimental data at room temperature and with first-principles calculations. No systematic differences have been found for different sample types, except for those of thin films. A parabolic temperature dependence was found for the frequencies of the perpendicular components of the phonons and for the parallel components of the dielectric constants. This temperature dependence could not be explained by the current ab initio calculations, which rely almost exclusively on the T 1⁄40 approximation. The quality of the experimental results presented in this work confirms that thermal emission spectroscopy is a good alternative for the study of optical properties of ceramics beyond room temperature. Knowledge of the emissivity spectra at high temperatures is necessary for many interesting applications, such as protective and selective coatings for the aerospace and solar energy industries. Moreover, accurate temperature-dependent values of the dielectric function are also crucial for numerical simulations of complex materials based on h-BN, such as tunable infrared absorbers.