Percolation pathway switching in laser graphitized polyimide conducting tracks M J Whitfield, 1 L Yip, a) S Speakman, b) and D G Hasko Engineering Department, University of Cambridge (*Electronic mail: david.g.hasko@gmail.com) (*Electronic mail: melanie.j.whitfield218@gmail.com) (Dated: 12 July 2023) Laser processing has been used to create weakly conducting tracks in polyimide film. Raman spectroscopy shows that these tracks consist of nanometre sized graphitic regions contained in a carbon-rich matrix. The measured temperature dependent and electric field dependent conduction characteristics show an activated characteristic that is consistent with nearest neighbour hopping. In addition, discrete percolation pathway switching events are seen when the system is subjected to significant disturbance from equilibrium. Disordered electron transport is of interest for a range of device applications, including thermometry Here, control of the laser processing has enabled a thin nonporous carbon-rich layer to be formed, which allows greater control over the interconnections between the 2D regions. This is done by using a short wavelength laser to limit the depth of material in which the light is absorbed (see the absorbance spectra Exposures were carried out using an L3PM tool, manufactured by 3t Technologies Limited The width of this trench depends on the laser exposure conditions, but the depth remains similar across this range.The TABLE I. Optical microsopy images (x50 magnification) for tracks fabricated at 100mms -1 at a range of power and duty ratios change; in this way, providing a method through which the electrical characteristics may be engineered -and weakly conducting conditions achieved. thickness of the deposit varies across the width of the track and is accompanied by significant texture differences, as seen in optical micrographs, see Table Assuming that the remaining material in the carbon-rich deposit is in a glassy form and so is non-conducting, then the electrical conduction mechanism will depend on the strength of coupling between the conducting 2D regions. Conduction will be confined to pathways where the gaps between these 2D regions are smallest, as shown schematically in Fig. The width and thickness of the trench as well as the composition of the carbon-rich deposit can be systematically controlled by changing the exposure conditions, as shown in the optical images in Table .1. Both the presence of temperature thresholds enabling thermolytic degradation, and the duration at which they are sustained, influence the resulting chemical composition and macromolecular structure. This may be observed as considerable colour and texture differences across 1) the width of the laser exposed region and 2) between optical micrographs demonstrating tracks created with different exposure scan rate, power and duty ratio, even at the same fluence. Across the conditions tested, the graphitic cluster size remains the same, but inter-cluster spacing and channel dimensions As the extent of the laser exposure is reduced (by a combination of reducing the continuous laser power and by modulation) the electrical behaviour of the device becomes more non-linear, see Table Here the conductivity, σ (F, T ), may be related to L, the average hopping length, through change with F, the applied electric field, and T, the temperature. The data shown in Figs. 