The primitive-path analysis (PPA) [R. Everaers et al. Science 303, 823, (2004)] is an algorithm that transforms a model polymer melt into its topologically equivalent mesh by removing excess contour length stored in thermal fluctuations. Here we present an inverse PPA algorithm that gradually reintroduces contour length in a PPA mesh to produce an topologically equilvalent polymer melt. This enables the generation of model polymer materials with well controlled topology. As an illustration, we generate knitted model polymer materials with a 2D cubic lattice of entanglement points using a synthetic PPA mesh as a starting point. We also show how to combine PPA and inverse PPA to accelerate stress relaxation approximately by an order of magnitude in simulation time. This reduces the computational cost of computational studies of structure-property relations for polymer materials. The complex interplay between molecular topology and emergent properties of soft-matter is of great interest for physics, biology, and chemistry. The relation between viscoelasticity and topological entanglements in linear polymer melts is well understood Grossberg et al. proposed that biological function relies on DNA being in the form of crumbled unknotted globules, since entanglements and knots would impose strong kinetic barriers on biological processes. Many properties of polymer materials can be studied with computationally efficient coarse-grained polymer models. The result of the iPPA is the conversion of a synthetic mesh into a topologically equivalent KG model material. We illustrate this process by creating periodic plain-knitted KG polymer melts, designed in such a way that entanglements form a regular 2D cubic lattice. We also illustrate how stress relaxation can be accelerated by applying a deformation not to a KG melt, but to its mesh, and then after a fast mesh relaxation (energy minimization), we use iPPA to convert the mesh back to a KG melt state. The resulting melt conformation is computationally much cheaper to brute force equilibrate compared to brute force equilibration of a deformed KG melt. In Sect. 2.1, we introduce the force field switching process that connects the PPA and KG force fields. Our approach to monitoring topology is introduced in Sect. 2.2, and in Sect. 2.3 we introduce the protocol we propose for switching between PPA and iPPA force fields. Validation of topology preservation is presented in Sect. 3.1. In Sect. 3.2, we show how to generate a mesh with a controlled topology and perform iPPA to generate a KG melt with the same topology. We show how iPPA can accelerate stress relaxation in Sect. 3.3. We finish with a conclusion in Sect. For the definition of the Kremer-Grest polymer force field, and the standard PPA analysis method, we refer to the Appendix. In the original PPA algorithm Here i, j denotes a pair of beads on the same chain. We assume beads are numbered sequentially as N min , . . . , N max along this chain. d(i, j) denotes the chemical distance between the beads, that is the number of bonds connecting the two beads. The chemical distance is defined as d(i, j) = |i -j| for linear chains, and d(i, j) = min (|i -j|, N max -max(i, j) -N min + min(i, j) + 1) for cyclic chains. The size of the current window is denoted w(λ), and it depends on a control parameter λ ∈ [0 : 1]. The window defines how interactions between bead pairs depend on the chemical distance between them. Bead pairs within a chemical distance smaller than the window do not interact. Bead pairs separated by a chemical distance matching the current window interact via a force capped WCA interaction. Finally, for beads further apart along the chain than the current window we retain the full WCA interaction. This ensures that distant self-entanglements are preserved. for r ci ≤ r , here r ci denotes an inner cut-off distance below which the WCA potential is replaced by a linear extrapolation. The inner cut-off can be related to the energy at overlap (which we refer to as the force-cap) for β c → 0, thus by gradually decreasing β c , we increase the repulsion between beads. The force cap is related to β c as which can be inverted to provide β c and thus r ci as function of the force cap as Fig. To specify the switching protocol, we also need to define how the window depends on λ. We use w(λ) = ⌊W (λ)⌋ where ⌊x⌋ denotes rounding down to nearest integer (floor), and a continuous window W (λ) function given by . Where W 0 is the maximal size of the window, and α is a parameter that controls the switching process. When λ is very small, w(λ) = W 0 and hence pair interactions are switched off in the maximal window of chemical distances. As λ increases the window shrinks, when λ is almost one, w(λ) = 1 and the pair interaction between bonded beads is being switched. First when λ = 1 is the chemical window w(1) = 0 in which case the WCA pair interaction is applied between all beads. Within each integer increment or decrement of the switching window, we also need to control the force cap in Eq. ( The latter parenthesis is a sawtooth function. When it is zero, the force cap within the current chemical window is at its maximal value defined by β(λ) = β c , while as the parenthesis approaches unity, β(λ) → 1 and the potential is switched off. Hence β c is a parameter that is defined by the maximal force cap U 0 via eq. (3). Fig. Increasing λ in the interval ]0 : 0.2], w(λ) = 5 and while the force cap grows from zero to the maximal value. This has the effect of gradually introducing intramolecular excluded volume interactions between all beads separated by exactly 5 bonds. Thus if any such bead pair is spatially overlapping, the force field transformation will gently push them away from each other until they do not overlap. At exactly λ = 0.2 the force capped potential has reached its maximal repulsion U 0 = 3ε. When λ is increased above 0.2, the force capped potential between beads 5 bonds apart is switched from the maximal force capped potential to the full WCA potential. Since all 5-distant beads have been pushed away from each other, it is numerically safe to switch to the WCA potential. During this process no changes were made to the intramolecular interactions between beads separated by shorter or longer chemical distances. Increasing λ in the interval ]0.2 : 0.4], repeats the process but now with a chemical window w(λ) = 4. Hence we progressively introduce excluded volume interactions between bead pairs 4 bonds apart. Hence this process continues to introduce the full WCA interactions between beads separated by fewer and fewer bonds by increasing the relevant force capped potentials. When λ is slightly above 0.8, we have w(λ) = 1, and we start to introduce excluded volume interactions between bonded beads, while the WCA interaction is used for all beads separated by a larger chemical distance. When λ is just below unity, we have the maximal force capped repulsion between bonded beads. When we reach λ = 1, then w(λ) = 0 and all intramolecular beads interact via the WCA potential. This corresponds to the KG force field. In the mesh, chains have rod-like conformations between entanglements and due to contour length contraction many intramolecular beads will overlap. During the iPPA push-off process, most of the contour length is introduced when excluded volume is introduced between bonded beads. Hence it makes sense to invest most of the computational effort during the w(λ) = 1 stage of the push-off process. Choosing α = log W 0 / log 2 as in Fig. The process can also be run in reverse by reducing λ from one to zero. In this case, we start to remove excluded volume interactions between nearest neighbors allowing them to overlap, and progressively we remove interactions between beads up to the chosen maximal chemical window W 0 . As pair interactions are progressively switched off, the bond interactions reels in the excess contour length, and pulls the chain taut. This is a continuous variation of the standard PPA contraction process where the force field is changed instantaneously. Fig. During the switching processes, we optionally can monitor for topology violations. The classical approach is to monitor bond lengths and stop the PPA algorithm if a bond exceeds a length of 1.2σ. Steps code, we developed a LAMMPS pair style performing the topology check, and a LAMMPS fix for storing necessary data. The two work in tandem, the pair style compares all spatial neighboring bond pairs, the fix keeps a tally of topology violations and also stores the bead coordinates of the last time step. We chose to implement the PPA force field and topology check as two separate pair styles, since the latter is computationally costly, and it might be useful in other circumstances. Having the ability to mark all beads where topology violations occur, we can optionally mark the beads involved in topology violations, and reset their positions to their coordinates in the previous time step. This provides an approximate way to correct for topology violations, however, we have not used this option in the present paper. Instead we have implemented a polynomial expansion of the FENE potential which allows topology violations to be strongly suppressed. This is explained in more detail in the Appendix. Optionally the topology checking code will save a file with the local chemical environment around each topology violation it identifies. Fig. The reversible PPA protocol depends on three parameters W 0 ,α, and U 0 . W 0 is the maximal size of the window of chemical distances used when switching the force field. During primitive-path analysis it should be chosen sufficiently large that the chains can contract to their equilibrium PPA lengths. Here we use a constant value of W 0 = 10 > Λ -1 (κ = 0) = 6.67, since this is sufficient for KG melts with κ ≥ 0. The maximal force capped potential is defined by U 0 . If the repulsion force is too small during the push-off, then the simulation will crash when we switch to the full WCA potential. We have observed that a typical value U 0 = 200ε is sufficient to ensure stability of simulations. The α parameter allows us to control how many MD iterations to spend within each switching window. α = 1 corresponds to spending an equal number of integration steps within each chemical distance step. However, most of the heat is generated during the push-off of the nearest neighbors which occurs as λ → 1, hence values α > 1 allows us to invest more integration steps during this part of the push-off. For instance, if we aim to spend half of the MD steps on the removing/introducing interactions within bonded neighbors, then w(λ) = 1 should occur at W (λ = 0.5) = 2. The solution is to choose α = log(W 0 )/ log Before converting a melt state to a mesh with the force field transformation, we freeze it to T = 0.001ε using a short cooling stage with a high friction. The force field transformation can be done within 10 4 steps, however, the resulting mesh state is not necessarily converged. If necessary, we apply gradient descent minimization or dampened Langevin dynamics with the λ = 0 force field to converge the mesh. To reverse the process, we perform an iPPA push-off again using just 10 4 steps. The entire force field switch occurs at essentially zero temperature, and we use a short heat-up stage with T = 1ε and a high friction to thermalize the system before running a KG simulation. The parameters are summarized in Tab. 1. As in the original PPA algorithm, we use a FENE potential with a spring constant of k = 100εσ -2 during the force field switch. Below we have also used a polynomial expansion of the FENE potential to limit topology violations as described below. As a thermostat, we choose Langevin dynamics. To characterize the iPPA force field, we generate synthetic meshes comprising 400 linear chains of length 5a pp (κ) for chain stiffnesses κ = -2, 0, 2, 4. Here a pp (κ) denotes the Kuhn length of the primitive path mesh of a melt of linear chain, for the corresponding numerical expressions, we refer to Refs. Fig. Fig. Fig. As expected, the average bond distance shows much less scatter, and evolves in the same way during all 100 cycles. We observe similar behavior for the systems with other stiffnesses (not shown). For all systems the maximal bond length is below 0.99σ during all 100 PPA analysis cycles. We observe that the maximal temperature of 1.38ε during the heating stage and 0.20ε during PPA analysis. During the simulations we did not observe a single topology breakage event. Fig. Assuming the wiggles form a tube along the primitive path chain, then we can estimate the tube radius as follows. Assuming a straight PPA segment with N beads, then it will have a length of L pp = Λl b N . Since the density of beads in the cylinder is ρ b = N/(πr 2 L pp ) we obtain the radius r = (πρ b l b Λ) -1/2 = (πΛ) -1/2 ξ = 1.61σ, where ξ = (ρ b l b ) -1/2 = 1.10σ is the mesh size of the KG model. The size of the wiggles is independent of the number of beads in a segment and grows with an increased contour length contraction factor as expected. In a mesh, the tubes containing wiggles will be space filling, and we can estimate the volume of one wiggle as a cylinder of length and radius r: V w = πr 3 = 13σ 3 which corresponds to N w = 11 beads per wiggle. Comparing that to the number of beads between entanglements N eb (κ = 0) = 84, To illustrate how iPPA can generate KG melts with a controlled topology, we choose to generate melts with a 2D knitted topology. Instead of attempting to generate the primitive path of such a structure directly, we start with the parametric curve recently proposed by K. Crane Fig. The utility of this curve becomes apparent, when we choose t ∈ [0, n] for some integer n, and replicate the curve 2n times with offsets o = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 2n -1 along the y axis. Fig. To generate KG model melts, we convert the parametric curves to a beadspring representation. Noting that the length of an entanglement strand (a straight segment in the mesh) is exactly s, the most natural choice is to identify this scale with the Kuhn length of the primitive path a pp (κ), since this corresponds to the length of a tube segment. The Kuhn length depends on the stiffness of the target melt. The bead density of the mesh should be the same as for a KG melts ρ b = 0.85σ -3 . The procedure above produces parametric curves with a density that is an order of magnitude too low. Since each layer is pseudo-2D, the density can be fixed by compressing the mesh along the z direction to reproduce the target density. For a single layer, this procedure will fail, since the resulting system has a z dimension that is less than the size of a bead. This leads to spurious effects. However, this can be resolved by replicating the xy layer a number of times along the z direction to ensure the z dimension of the system is much larger than the bead size. We also decrease the oscillation in the z direction by 10% and apply a random shift in the xy plane to each layer. To obtain the final mesh, we apply a primitive-path analysis to an uncompressed set of layers, followed by a compression of the resulting meshes along the z direction to reproduce the target density. Having an initial mesh designed with the desired melt topology and bead density, we proceed to use the iPPA protocol described in Sect. 1 to introduce excess contour length. We then perform a simulation of 5 × 10 6 steps to thermalize and equilibrate the resulting KG melts. This is long compared to the entanglement times of the systems. We compare stress relaxation using two protocols 1) brute force KG stress relaxation and 2) iPPA accelerated stress relaxation. To estimate the equilibrium shear modulus, we use KG melts with approximately M = 500 chains and Z = 100 entanglements per chain for stiffness κ = 0, 1, 2,3. In the iPPA accelerated protocol, we start by performing PPA on the melts to generate the corresponding meshes. Each mesh is deformed using the same deformation protocol as the melt. To relax the mesh, we ran a short simulation of 8×10 3 steps with the PPA force field during which chain length can redistribute in the mesh and entanglements can move to minimize the longitudinal tension. We then gradually use the iPPA protocol to switch from the PPA to the KG force field during a simulation of 10 4 steps. Afterwards, we apply 2 × 10 3 MD steps to heat up the melt state to T = 1ε. Finally, we proceed with a brute force KG stress relaxation as above. During the force field transformations, we use a modified form of the FENE potential in order to minimize topology violations, which will be discussed below. We estimate the time dependent shear relaxation modulus by where σ αβ (n) denotes the instantaneous microscopic virial stress tensor. The equilibrium modulus is estimated as the average of the brute force relaxed G(n) for n > 2 × 10 6 steps. For the brute force simulation n denotes the number of MD steps of stress relaxation, while for a fair comparison we start counting MD steps at the start of the mesh relaxation simulation. Thus the first 2 × 10 4 steps of the iPPA accelerated protocol are the computational cost of mesh relaxation, force field switching, and the short warmup. During both protocols, chain ends are pinned to avoid stress relaxation due to contour length fluctuations.[1] Fig. For the iPPA accelerated protocol, we do not show data for the modulus during the mesh relaxation and force field transformations, since these are physically meaningless. The initial conformation in the KG relaxation simulation is a deformed melt state, where the longitudinal stresses have been equilibrated, but where the local chain structure is perturbed due to the local wiggles created by the iPPA. We observe that the shear modulus for all the different stiffnesses show the same monotonous increasing behavior. After 10 5 steps the stress values of the iPPA accelerated protocol is within 20% of the equilibrium value for all systems, whereas the stress of the κ = 0 system is a factor two above the equilibrium for the brute force stress relaxation protocol. After roughly 2 × 10 5 steps of the iPPA accelerated protocol, all systems have reached the equilibrium shear moduli. Thus we conclude that performing a PPA, deformation, fast relaxation, and iPPA cycle before stress relaxation significantly reduce the time it takes to reach the equilibrium stress response for κ ≲ 2, whereas for stiffer melts κ ≳ 2 the relaxation time of the two protocols is comparable. During the force field transformation, we continuously check for topology violations. With the standard FENE potential, we observed a number of topology violations for κ ≥ 2. We have tested a number of variations of the deformation and relaxation protocol. The number of topology violations depends strongly on stiffness, but also on the number of steps taken during force field switching. As shown in Fig. To summarize, we have shown that a PPA / deformation / relaxation / iPPA push-off can save us roughly an order of magnitude of stress relaxation simulation time for melts with κ ≲ 2. For the brute force stress relaxation dynamics local Brownian bead motion equilibrates chain statistics on progressively larger and large scales. This requires a very long simulation and typically necessitates access to a super computer. The relaxation dynamics of the PPA mesh is energy minimization, which very rapidly equilibrates the large scale mesh structure. When excess contour length is reintroduced during the inverse PPA back to the KG force field, the result is a strong, but as shown above, local perturbation of the chain statistics due to the wiggles. Thus the relevant relaxation time of the resulting melt is the Rouse time of a single wiggle which is much shorter than the entanglement time. Thus only a relative short simulation is required to establish the equilibrium chain structure on all length scales. Primitive path analysis The effects of the iPPA force field transformation have been characterized, and we have shown that 100 cycles of PPA followed by iPPA preserves the original melt topology. We have also illustrated how an iPPA push-off can be used to convert synthetic PPA meshes into equilibrium KG model melts. This enables detailed control over the topological state of such model melts. As a toy example, we choose pseudo-2D knitted structures, where entanglements form a regular 2D cubic lattice. These toy systems hinted at complex physics and interactions between the entanglements, especially for stiffer chains where we saw indications that entanglements were forming clusters. This is consistent with expectations from theory of confined polymer knots Finally, we illustrated the utility combining PPA and iPPA to accelerate stress relaxation. We deform a mesh rather than a melt, since relaxation of the large scale mesh structure is essentially instantaneous since it is just energy minimization. Then we use iPPA to convert the mesh back to the KG force field, where we observed localized wiggles had been created along the primitive path chains. Thus only a relatively short simulation is required to reequilibrate local chain structure. For melts with κ ≲ 2, we observed that the equilibrium stress was reached roughly order of magnitude faster than brute force stress relaxation. For stiffer systems, we observed topology violations during iPPA, and no significant acceleration of the dynamics was observed compared to brute force stress relaxation. Here we have used melts as model systems, but we expect the iPPA push-off to work equally well for KG model networks, where estimation of equilibrium moduli also requires long simulations and careful extrapolation of stress data. We acknowledge that part of the results of this research have been achieved using the PRACE Research Infrastructure resource Joliot-Curie SKL based in France at GENCI@CEA. Discussions with R. Everaers and I.A. Gula are gratefully acknowledged. although this is an arbitrary number. The temperature is chosen as T = 0.001ε, the friction is Γ = 20mτ -1 and 10 3 MD steps are performed with time step ∆t = 0.006τ . During this process chain length rapidly contracts as randomwalk like thermal fluctuations are converted to straight chain segments between topological entanglements. To converge the process the friction is reduced to Γ = 0.5m b τ -1 and relaxed for additional 10 5 steps. The result of the PPA analysis is the contour length contraction ratio Λ(κ) = l pp (κ)/l b , where l pp denotes the length of bonds after PPA. This ratio characterizes the density of entanglements along the chain, and is usually converted into the number of beads (or Kuhn segments) between entanglements. Fig, For the PPA force field, the transition state where topology preservation is violated corresponds to a planar configuration with two perpendicular bonds and four beads in a square arrangement. for r < 0.5σ,this is a very good approximation to the PPA FENE potential, however for larger values it grows much faster than FENE. The PPA force field switching method described above has been implemented as an extension to LAMMPS 1: pair_style wca/ppa window 10 u0 200 alpha 2.32 lambda 1.0 2: pair_coeff 1*2 1*2 1.0 1.0 3: bond_style fene 4: bond_coeff * 100 1.5 0.0 1.0 5: special_bonds lj 1 1 1 6: variable switch_to_ppa equal "ramp(1.00,0.00)" 7: fix switch all adapt 1 pair wca/ppa lambda 1*2 1*2 v_switch_to_ppa 8: run 10000 The first line defines the protocol of the force field switch. The key words specify parameters that match the notation of the present paper. The last argument "lambda 1.0" sets the initial value of λ, for instance if we wanted to run a simulation with a constant preset value of lambda. The second line sets up the specific interactions assuming a system with two types of beads with WCA parameters ε = 1.0 and σ = 1.0. The third line defines the bond potential as FENE. The fourth line specifies the FENE bond parameters spring constant of k = 100εσ -2 , cutoff distance R = 1.5σ, finally a non-standard value of ε = 0.0 and σ = 1.0 between bonded beads. The fifth line specifies that WCA/PPA pair interactions should be calculated between nearest, next-nearest, and second-next-nearest neighbors. The usual LAMMPS convention is to include the WCA interaction between bonded beads as part of a FENE+WCA bond potential. Then pair interactions should not be calculated again for bonded beads. However, here we need to explicitly use the wca/ppa forcefield for all pair interactions, hence we disabled the WCA contribution to the FENE+WCA bond potential in line four, and specify that we want a full pair interaction to be calculated between bonded beads in line 5. The sixth line defines a variable which changes as a linear ramp from the value of 1.0 at the start of the run to 0.0 at the end of the run. The sevenths line sets up a fix that at every time step changes the "lambda" parameter of the wca/ppa interaction with the instantaneous value. Finally, the eighth line runs a simulation with 10000 integration steps performing the force field transformation. The reverse transformation is simply obtained by changing the ramp and the initial value of lambda in the force field. In case of circular polymer chains, the wca/ppa takes an optional argument "circular", which changes the definition of chemical distance to that of circular chains. Note that additional commands are required to load the mesh, setup integration and thermostats and pin the chain ends. To limit topology violations, the FENE potential can be replaced by a polynomial expansion. That is achieved by replacing line 3-4 above by the following Where the arguments after the star is the point around which we perform the Taylor expansion, and then the 7 coefficients defining a 6th degree polynomial expansion of the potential. The following snippet of LAMMPS code sets up a switching force field with concurrent topology checking. Topology is checked via a dummy pair style associated with the dummy beads that represent the neighbor list of bonds. This does not add forces, but only checks bond pairs for topology violations and stores these in a separate fix "f_topo" that is defined automatically by the pair style. Here we assume the input configuration has two bead types 1 and 2 (e.g. to distinguish free beads from. fixed chain ends). The topology check adds a third bead type which are the type 3 beads placed at the center of bonds. Line 1 and 2 is one command that sets up a hybrid force field using the "wca/ppa" force field defined above as well as the dummy force field for checking for topology violations "topo". "cutoff 2.0" sets up the cutoff distance for checking for topology violations. The check is applied to all bond types "bondtype *". Since intramolecular bond pairs within the current switching window should not be included in the check, we need again to specify how we switch the chemical window. The third line defines the WCA interactions ε = 1.0 and σ = 1.0 between all beads of type 1 and 2. The fourth line defines the cross-interaction between beads and dummy beads as none. Since the latter are a computational trick to keep track of bonds. The fifth line sets the "pair interaction" between pairs of dummy beads (representing bonds) as the topo pair style. The final sixth line sends the current value of the switching variable to the two pair styles, since they both need it to calculate the current window of chemical distances w(λ). When this pair style is used, a fix denoted "f_topo" in LAMMPS is automatically created when the pair style is initialized, and it exports four global scalars f_topo 