Spatial ordering of matter elicits exotic properties sometimes absent from a material's constituents. A few highly mineralized natural materials achieve high toughness through delocalized damage, whereas synthetic particulate composites must trade toughness for mineral content. We test whether ordering the mineral phase in particulate composites through the formation of macroscopic colloidal crystals can trigger the same damage resistance found in natural materials. Our macroscopic silica rod based anisotropic colloidal crystal composites are processed fully at room temperature and pressure, reach volume fraction of mineral higher than 80%, and aided by a ductile interface, unveil plastic strain reaching 10% through the collective movement of rods and damage delocalization over millimeters. These composites demonstrate key design rules to break free from conventionally accepted structural materials properties trade-off. Spatially ordering a material microstructure can make properties absent from its composition emerge, giving rise to the concept of metamaterials. These unusual behaviors stem from a spatial variation of a properties leading to structural color 1 , negative refractive index 2 , or acoustic bandgaps Examples of such intricate control of the microstructure can be seen in natural materials and have fascinated researchers because of their combination of properties absent in man-made materials The only synthetic materials that come close or even exceed the order found in natural materials are colloidal crystals. These crystals made from monodisperse particles of size ranging from a few nanometers to a micron can self-assemble into larger structures The objective of this study is thus two-fold: to fabricate centimeter-sized colloidal crystals with anisotropic particles so they can be mechanically tested, and to study the effect of ordering on the damage delocalization in composites. Fig. We first confirmed the formation and size of the rods from the sol-gel synthesis and their capacity to self-assemble upon sedimenting using SEM (Fig. We can a priori grow cm-scale colloidal crystals from this simple process at close to room temperature, but the local structure and orientational control over macroscopic distance is key to study the mechanical properties. Characterization of the short-and long-range order in the composites We confirmed using small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and electronic microscopy that we can control the orientation of rods over the millimeter scale and thus grow some of the largest textured colloidal polycrystals made with a local packing close to the theoretical limit. SEM images of the top surface of composites grown with and without template show that the rods are indeed self-assembled into a smectic phase in the composite, with layers of rods stacked into columns with their ends almost aligned. While the sample grown with a template shows an alignment of rods over tens to hundreds of microns (Fig. In conclusion, we introduced order into particulate anisotropic composites using a combination of principles from colloidal crystal, traditional crystal growth, liquid crystal, and composite fabrication. Because of that, our anisotropic colloidal crystal composites are manufactured entirely at close to room temperature and pressure, reach macroscopic sizes, and still present up to 80 vol% of mineral reinforcements. The monodispersity of the rods and the entropy-driven templated assembly leads to a smectic microstructure that is present at short range but also at long range as confirmed by a combination of microscopy and diffraction results. The sol-gel derived rod assembly into highly ordered structure triggers toughening mechanisms at local and macroscopic length scale only seen in natural materials so far. The composites present a macroscopic strain at failure of up to 10%, breaking free of the expected trade-off between high reinforcement content and high deformability and toughness in particulate composites. We established that this capacity to delocalize damage over large volumes is directly rooted in the order of the microstructure and the polymeric interface deformability. The materials produced here are intrinsically interesting to unveil further the influence of microstructure periodicity on mechanical properties at the macroscopic scale. But more importantly, the effect we provide here can be applied to any composition and for any application where high toughness and high mineral content is crucial, from solid electrolyte energy storage devices to high performance structural materials for extreme environments, such as nuclear fusion reactors or space shuttle protection systems. 3-(Trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (g-MPS, 98%), ammonia solution (28% in water, >99.99%), 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA, 99%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), methyl methacrylate, (MMA, 99%), 1-pentanol (ACS reagent, > 99%), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, Mw = 40,000 g/mol), sodium citrate dihydrate (> 99%) and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, 98%) were purchased from Aldrich-Merck. Ethanol (> 99.5% Ph. Eur., USP) was purchased from VWR. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, SYLGARDTM 184 silicone elastomer kit) was purchased from Dow. n-butyl methacrylate (n-BMA, 99%) was purchased from Thermal Scientific. The synthesis is a sol-gel process reported by Kuijk et al Once the supernatant in the last centrifuging step was removed, the centrifuge tube was placed in an oven at 60°C for at least 15 min to fully evaporate the ethanol. The dry mass of rods was weighed and redispersed with a weight fraction of 10 wt% in a solution of g-MPS:ethanol 1:2 in volume. The solution was stirred at room temperature for 24 hours, then centrifuged and washed twice in ethanol with runs at 1500 g for 15 min. Finally, the rods were dried at 60°C for 15 mins. The dry rods were weighed and resuspended in an index matching solution. Index matching was obtained by dispersing rods in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, n = 1.479 at 20°C) then adding deionized water (n = 1.333 at 20°C) dropwise until the sol became transparent. The volume fraction of rods in solvent was chosen to be 2 vol% to ensure the rods are in the isotropic phase before sedimenting. A volume ratio of 10:2.1 DMSO:H2O had to be used during sedimentation to match the refractive index of functionalized rods, yielding an effective refractive index of n = 1.45. Once the rods had been dispersed in DMSO and H2O, the system was left to self-assemble and sediment for at least 7 days. During the assembly of rod-like colloids, the competition between sedimentation under gravitational forces and Brownian diffusion can be first estimated by the gravitational Péclet number 64 : Pe = 4π∆ρgR # 3k $ T for spherical particles of radius R, with ∆ρ the difference in density between the solvent and particles, g the acceleration of gravity, k $ the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. By assimilating rods to spheres of radius equal to their radius of gyration After 7 days of sedimentation, a sediment of 2-3 mm height had formed at the bottom of the cylinder. The supernatant was removed and the remaining solvent evaporated by placing the sample in a vacuum oven (OV-11, Jeio Tech). To evaporate the water first, the oven was kept at ambient pressure and heated at 70°C for 4 hrs. Then, vacuum was pulled down to -0.1 MPa while keeping the temperature at 70°C to evaporate the DMSO. Once the sediment was dry, it was removed from the oven and infiltrated with the monomer and photoinitiator mix. Two acrylate monomers were tested, methyl methacrylate (MMA) and n-butyl methacrylate (BMA). The photoinitiator was 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA). For infiltration with BMA and/or MMA, the monomers were mixed with 10 wt% DMPA. The monomer mix was then slowly added dropwise from the top side of the sediment, leaving enough time for capillary forces to draw the liquid towards the bottom of the sediment without trapping air bubbles. The infiltration of a liquid with a refractive index close to the one of silica rods led to a change of translucency of the sediment upon impregnation, allowing for a visual confirmation of uniform infiltration of the resin. The infiltrated composite was then consolidated by curing the acrylate resin in a UV chamber (Asiga Flash, Asiga) at 365 nm for 30 mins. Characterization of crystal growth using optical microscopy under polarized light Polarized light microscopy was used to monitor the sedimentation of silica rods in the DMSO/H2O solvent and observe the nucleation of crystalline domains. Imaging the sample under polarized microscopy allows to observe 2 mechanisms in 1 setup. First, the observation of birefringence, characterized by the apparition of 2 refractive indices in a material depending on the light propagation direction. Birefringence can change the polarization of light, meaning that light can still pass through a crossed polarizer-analyzer. In the case of the silica rod composites, birefringence could occur from the optical anisotropy of aligned rods in the nematic and smectic phases The microstructure of the silica rod composites was first characterized using SEM. Before imaging, the composites were embedded in epoxy (EpoThin 2, Buehler) and polished down to 1 μm using diamond suspensions (DiaPro, Struers). To further flatten the surface and image only the contrast between the silica rods and the acrylate resin, some samples were polished using broad argon ion beam milling (PECS II, Gatan) for 30 mins at 4 keV and 6°. A conductive coating of 10 nm of chromium was sputter coated on the samples prior to imaging (Q150T S, Quorum). Samples were imaged in the SEM at acceleration voltages of 5 kV for the secondary electron detector and 10 kV for the backscattered electron detector (Auriga CrossBeam, Zeiss). Small Angle X-ray Scattering Since sending X-rays on a colloidal crystal of lattice spacing of hundreds of nm results in diffraction at very small angles, the silica rod composites were characterized using small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron facility using the DL-SAXS beamline. Silica rod composites of 5 mm diameter and a few millimeters in height were prepared and cut in slices of 1 mm thickness, with the rods either in-plane or in the cross-sectional view. In addition, a blank sample made of pure acrylate resin was used as a control to ensure that the observed signal was solely due to the interaction of silica rods with the incident beam. Slices were placed in a 6 mm disc solid rack. Scans were taken in ambient conditions, using an Excillium Ga MetalJet source of 9.2 keV and a EIGER2 R 1M detector with a pixel size of 75 μm. Each sample was imaged taking a grid of 3 x 3 measurements per sample, separated by 1.5 mm in each direction. Two sets of measurements were taken with the sampleto-detector distance set to 1 m and 4.5 m. Data processing and visualization was conducted using the DAWN software The strength and toughness of the freshly prepared silica rod composites were determined by in situ 3-point bending using a 300 N microtest stage (MT300, Deben UK Ltd), with a span of 11 mm and a test speed of 0.1 mm/min. The composites were tested on the day of the cross linking, we observed a small time dependency of the PBMA:PMMA mechanical properties and thus kept this timing between cross-linking and testing constant. The tensile surface and the surface to be imaged were polished down to 1 μm using diamond suspensions. Three bars of 14×2×1 mm 3 for each composition (rods infiltrated with PMMA and PMMA:PBMA=20:80) were test for strength and four bars of 14×3×1 mm 3 for toughness. One of the bar for PMMA:PBMA=20:80 was tested with an unloading step after 3% strain to demonstrate that there was plastic strain and is plotted separately in Fig. 