The paper presents a reflectionless stripline filter with reduced dimensions having a single bandwidth over a wide frequency range. The filter consists of coupled strip lines and RLC circuits included in the diagonal ports of the coupled strip lines. Calculations and measurements of the reflectionless stripline filter layout in the frequency range up to 4.8 GHz have been carried out. The obtained results show that the dimensions are reduced by a factor of two compared to previously developed reflectionless stripline filter designs. It is achieved by folding the coupled lines in the form of a meander formed by horizontally and vertically arranged conductors on horizontally and vertically oriented dielectric substrates. The proposed reflectionless stripline filter allows to solve the problem of improving the mass-dimensional parameters of the equipment and to provide signal selection with minimum reflection at out-of-band frequencies. It can be in demand in multichannel systems of wireless communications, radar, and measurements. Nowadays, reflectionless filters based on transmission lines and coupled lines find application in various radio-electronic equipment The paper The research described in The main objective of this study is to develop the conductor topology of a reflectionless stripline filter with reduced dimensions by a factor of 2 while preserving the parameters of previously developed reflectionless stripline filters. The design of the reflectionless stripline filter prototype The equivalent circuit of the investigated reflectionless stripline filter is shown in figure To ensure matching between input and output, it is necessary to use transmission lines of 3 2.8 w  mm width to achieve a wave impedance of 50 Ohm. Designing of the proposed reflectionless stripline filter at the first stage to simplify the calculation of S-parameters was carried out by replacing coupled strip lines in the form of a meander with a rectilinear equivalent line with a length of 45 mm. Subsequently, the calculation of parameters was carried out for a real design with reduced dimensions. To calculate the primary parameters of coupled strip lines, the TALGAT software As a result of the development carried out, a reflectionless stripline filter was manufactured. Figure In the paper, a reflectionless stripline stripline filter has been presented with a reduction by a factor of two compared to previously developed reflectionless stripline filter designs. The filter provides operation at the center frequency of 0.94 GHz with a bandwidth of 6 GHz and a reflection coefficient that does not exceed -10 dB over the entire frequency range up to 4.8 GHz. Such single-link filters can be applied in radio systems where size reduction is required while minimizing reflection at out-ofband frequencies with non-repeating bandwidth. Cascading sufficiently well matched reflectionless stripline filter links will increase the selectivity, and the use of packing in pairs of links on the grounded base side will provide a negligible increase in the occupied volume of a two-link reflectionless stripline filter.