Compared to other body-centered cubic (bcc) transition metals Nb has been the subject of fewer compression studies and there are still aspects of its phase diagram which are unclear. Here, we report a combined theoretical and experimental study of Nb under high pressure and temperature. We present the results of static laser-heated diamond anvil cell experiments up to 120 GPa using synchrotron-based fast x-ray diffraction combined with ab initio quantum molecular dynamics simulations. The melting curve of Nb is determined, and evidence for a solidsolid phase transformation in Nb with increasing temperature is found. The high-temperature phase of Nb is orthorhombic Pnma. The bcc-Pnma transition is clearly seen in the experimental data on the Nb principal Hugoniot. The bcc-Pnma coexistence observed in our experiments is explained. Agreement between the measured and calculated melting curves is very good except at 40-60 GPa where three experimental points lie below the theoretical melting curve by 250 K (or 7%); a possible explanation is given. The d-block transition metals are extremely important technological materials. However, their phase diagrams have remained virtually uknown over decades of research. More recently, advances in theoretical XRD measurements reported here are from seven runs carried out on fresh samples to avoid the influence of possible chemical reactions on the results. They were performed at beamline ID27 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF). See Methods section for both experimental and computational details. Fig. A normalized reference background has been subtracted from them. In order to do so, we used a measurement of the scattering from the DAC probing at a point of the pressure chamber where the sample was not present At 2800 K a typical powder diffraction pattern starts changing into a single-crystal-like one. Above that T , we observe rapid changes in the relative intensities of the Bragg peaks in consecutive diffraction patterns which are due to the recrystallization of the sample. This phenomenon has also been observed in other metals under HP conditions at several hundred degrees below T m At 38 GPa, upon further heating to 3450 K we observe the disappearance of the Bragg peaks of Nb and the appearance of diffuse rings. At 117 GPa the same effect is detected at 4900 K. Such phenomena have previously been attributed to a signature of the onset of melting The diffuse rings at 3450 K are seen in Fig. In the experiment carried out at 117 GPa, the emergence of the diffuse scattering and the disappearance of bcc-Nb Bragg peaks is detected at 4900 K. In this case, the bump centered at 2θ = 10 • is broader than that at 38 GPa and more intense than the second bump. This qualitative difference in the diffuse scattering can be due to the fact that at 38 GPa NaCl may be also partially molten, as described above. Following the literature Another important issue in the experiments is the possible occurrence of chemical reactions between the sample and the pressure medium or the sample with carbon that diffuses out of the diamond anvils. Usually, chemical reactions lead to a runaway heating Solid-solid and solid-liquid transitions can be identified by the presence of a plateau in the sample T when it is measured as a function of the increased laser heating power It is important to note here that at the five different P s in our experiments up to 50 GPa at T below T m but ∼ 200-300 K above the recrystallization T we observe the appearance of extra XRD peaks. After their first appearance, the new peaks are randomly observed as T increases to T m . These new peaks are seen in some XRD patterns; other XRD patterns only exhibit the peaks that are associated with bcc-Nb. For instance, Fig. The unit-cell volume determined for the orthorhombic structure at 38 GPa (15.705 Å3 atom -1 ) is ∼ 1% smaller than that of bcc-Nb at the same P (15.852 Å3 atom -1 ). This small volume change at the bcc-Pnma transition suggests that the corresponding solidsolid phase boundary is rather flat, in view of the Clausius-Clapeyron (CC) formula dT /dP = ∆V /∆S, and should be similar to the flat melting curves in the former DAC experiments The calculated positions of the peaks assigned to Pnma-Nb and bcc-Nb are indicated by the corresponding vertical ticks in Fig. For the calculation of the melting curve of bcc-Nb a 432-atom (6 × 6 × 6) supercell with a single Γ-point is used. Full energy convergence (to < ∼ 1 meV atom -1 ) is checked for each simulation. The six bcc-Nb melting points are listed in Table Fitting the Simon-Glatzel (SG) form the initial slope of which, dT m (P )/dP = 36.5 K/GPa at P = 0, is in excellent agreement with 36 K/GPa from isobaric expansion measurements ) is checked for each simulation. The six melting points of Pnma-Nb are listed in Table The melting curve of Pnma-Nb is described by the SG form (again, T m in K and P in GPa) T m (P ) = 2710 1 + P 21.0 0.34 . ( It crosses the melting curve of bcc-Nb, Eq. ( Supplementary Figures We have also obtained the bcc-Pnma solid-solid phase transition boundary from the calculation of the total free energies of both structures using TDEP at four different P s. In Fig. Hence, its total free energy can be calculated and compared to that of bcc-Nb. Fig. which interpolates between the low-P experimental data and high-P theoretical data better than the quadratic fit. The four theoretical bcc-Pnma transition points and the phase boundary are shown in Fig. In order to get another confirmation of the existence and the location of the bcc-Pnma )/4; B 0 and B ′ 0 are the adiabatic bulk modulus and its first pressure derivative where η = ρ/ρ 0 and (ρ 0 in g cm In each of the two cases, this EOS is expected to be reliable to ∼ 500 GPa. Note that our value of ρ 0 for bcc-Nb is identical to the Nb experimental ambient density. Our set of (B 0 , B ′ 0 ) for bcc-Nb is consistent with similar sets that can be found in the literature: (168.8, 3.73) We also note that the finite-T counterparts of the above two EOSs can be written approximately as P (ρ, T ) = P (ρ) + α T, where α bcc = 3.8 • 10 -3 and α Pnma = 4.3 • 10 -3 . For example, for the two experimental unit cell volumes of Pnma-Nb that correspond to 38 and 50 GPa mentioned above, 15.705 Å3 atom -1 and 15.188 Å3 atom -1 (the corresponding densities are 9.823 and 10.16 g cm -3 ), the Pnma-Nb finite-T EOS with the corresponding set of (B 0 , B ′ 0 , ρ 0 , α) gives P (9.823, 3100) = 39 GPa and P (10.16, 3300) = 49 GPa, in good agreement with 38 and 50, respectively. With the above values of ρ 0 , B 0 and B ′ 0 , the two straight segments shown in Fig. We note that a solid-solid transition on the Nb Hugoniot was also detected in classical molecular dynamics simulations by Germann However, he associated the high-P T phase with hcp rather than Pnma. This was done based on the radial distribution function (RDF) of the simulated structure emerging above the transition P after shocking in the [110] direction. This RDF is noisy and cannot be relied upon to identify the high-P T phase. The mechanism of fast recrystallization observed in our experiments on Nb can be qualitatively characterized using the approach that we developed to describe a fcc-14H solid-solid phase transition experimentally observed in iridium The nonhydrostaticity that is always present in a DAC When the Pnma-bcc total free energy deficit is compensated by an increase in F bcc of ∆F, a bcc-Pnma transition starts. The family of quasi-parallel curves in Fig. Equating this to ∆F yields the bcc-Pnma transition T as a function of P under nonhydrostatic stress, which is very accurately approximated by T = 2450 + 7 P up to ∼ 60 GPa, in excellent agreement with the dashed line of FR in Fig. The above arguments strongly suggest the following mechanism of fast recrystallization. Under nonhydrostatic stress in a DAC, bcc-Nb becomes thermodynamically unstable and converts to Pnma-Nb, which results in the release of nonhydrostatic stress. This happens below TTB at P < ∼ 60 GPa and very close to TTB at higher P ; see Fig. T increases and the bcc-Pnma transition point is approached and eventually reached, bcc-Nb becomes thermodynamically unstable and converts into Pnma-Nb. Then, under nonhydrostatic stress, the total free energy advantage of Pnma over bcc is reversed, by the same mechanism that reverses the total free energy advantage of bcc over Pnma below TTB discussed above, so that Pnma converts to bcc, which reverts back to Pnma, and so on. The difference between the two cases of FR considered above, namely, below and above TTB, is that bcc-Pnma coexistence is only observed in the latter case but not in the former. The lowest-P Pnma data point in Fig. There may be a number of reasons for this to happen. First, although the nonhydrostaticity-based model for FR considered above predicts the P -T location of the FR line below TTB correctly, a texture transition in bcc-Nb may be mainly (or solely) responsible for this FR, so that the corresponding XRD patterns exhibit the bcc phase only. Second, the appearance of Pnma may be suppressed for kinetic reasons, and it may be observed above TTB, as mentioned above, only because the surface of the sample is ∼ 200-300 K hotter than its bulk, so that XRD picks up a combined signal from the two coexisting solid phases belonging to different sections of the sample that have different T s. In any event, the duration of the FR Pnma cycle is expected to be larger for FR above TTB than that for FR below TTB. Indeed, this duration directly depends on the kinetic factor exp{ ∆F bcc-Pnma }, and ∆F bcc-Pnma changes its sign across TTB. For instance, with values of ∆F = 0.1 eV atom -1 and T = 3500 K (so that k B T corresponds to ≈ 0.3 eV atom -1 ) that are typical of Nb, exp{-0.1/0.3} ≈ 0.7 but exp{0.1/0.3} ≈ 1.4, a factor of two. This may be crucial for the observation of Pnma above TTB. There may be other reasons, too, which we do not mention here. It would be interesting to test the idea that a texture transition observed earlier on in Mo The seven experimental T m s can be described by the SG equation T m (P ) = 2750 (1 + P/48) 0.45 , where T m is in K and P in GPa, which is plotted in Fig. For this fit, the initial slope, 25.8 K/GPa, is significantly lower than the value 36 K/GPa obtained from isobaric expansion measurements The difference between their values of T m and those predicted by Eq. ( As we have already mentioned above, the detection of melting by XRD at high P may be problematic, and may cause uncertainty in the experimental melting T. It turns out that a T plateau, too, may be another source of uncertainty in experimental T m . Although a T plateau is considered to be an unambiguous signature of melting, there may be experimental conditions at which the plateau may correspond to T different from the true T m . Stutzmann et al. The theoretical bcc-Pnma solid-solid phase boundary is shown in Fig. The theoretically predicted existence of a HP-HT orthorhombic phase not only provides an explanation for the appearance of the extra Bragg peaks observed in our experiments, but also for the observed FR. Unfortunately, it is so fast that the orthorhombic phase cannot be isolated in our XRD, in which images were collected every two seconds. Therefore, our results call for the development of ultrafast XRD techniques for HP studies. To summarize, we have determined experimentally and theoretically the melting curve of Nb and found very good agreement between experiments and theory. We also found evidence for the existence of Pnma-Nb, the orthorhombic HP-HT phase of Nb. The existence of this phase provides an explanation not only for the appearance of extra Bragg peaks in the XRD patterns at HP-HT conditions, but also for the sample recrystallization observed several hundred K below T m . The polymorphism of Nb makes it an excellent candidate for further studies that will advance our understanding of the P -T phase diagrams of transition metals. We conclude by making the following four points that summarize our combined experimental and theoretical study on Nb at HP-HT. 1. FR observed in HP-HT experiments on transition metals, including the present case of Nb, may correspond to either an isostructural texture change (Mo or a true solid-solid phase transformation (Re 2. The appearance of bcc-Nb above the bcc-Pnma transition point detected by XRD is probably due to some (small) nonhydrostaticity or radial thermal gradients being present in our experiments, as discussed in more detail above. 3. Our findings provide clear evindence for the topological similarity of the phase diagrams of Nb and Ta, its group 5B partner in the periodic table. In both cases an orthorhombic phase transition occurs, and the high-PT physical solid structure is Pnma. However, the location of the bcc-Pnma-liquid triple point in Ta corresponds to P an order of magnitude higher than that in Nb The laser beams were defocused to create hotspots of 15-20 μm in diameter over the surfaces of the sample. The power and focusing of the lasers were adjusted to minimize the difference of T s on both sides of the sample to less than 100 K. Spectral radiometry was used to determine T s on the sample surfaces by collecting the thermal emission signal from circular areas of 2 μm diameter in the center of the hot spots We have carried out an extensive study of the phase diagram of Nb using the Z method implemented with VASP (Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package) in combination with the temperature-dependent effective potential (TDEP) method. The Z method was used to simulate the Nb melting curve. The Z method is described in detail in were calcualted using unit cells with very dense k-point meshes (e.g., 50 × 50 × 50 for bcc-Nb) for high accuracy. In all the non-cubic cases we first relaxed the structure to determine its unit cell parameters at each volume. Fig. below 100 GPa, which is therefore relevant to our experimental work. This structure is Pnma. The melting curves of the other two orthorhombic structures may become relevant at P above 100 GPa, although additional more careful study may be required to clarify this point. As a matter of fact, the melting curve of bcc-Nb is the highest among those of all the solid structures that we considered, including A15. m ), obtained from the Z method implemented with VASP.