Ultrafast laser micromachining can be used to promote diamond graphitisation, enabling the creation of electrically conductive wires embedded in the diamond matrix. In this context, the presence of a potential barrier in the conductivity of transverse graphitic wires fabricated by pulsed Bessel beams without sample translation across 500 μm thick monocrystalline CVD diamond has been studied. In particular, the role of the crystallographic orientation has been analysed. The morphology and the conductivity of the obtained electrodes have been studied using optical microscopy and currentvoltage measurements, while the structural changes have been investigated by means of micro-Raman spectroscopy. By using different laser writing parameters, we have explored the features of different electrodes in a (100) and a (110) oriented diamond crystal respectively. We show that in addition to the use of specific pulse energies and durations (in the fs and ps regimes), the crystallographic orientation of the sample plays an important role in reducing or eliminating the potential barrier height of the IV electrical characterization curves. In a (110) oriented sample, it is possible to eradicate the potential barrier completely even for graphitic wires fabricated at low pulse energy and in the fs pulse duration regime, in contrast to the (100) oriented-crystal case where the barrier is generally observed. The effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples on the resistivity of the fabricated microelectrodes has also been investigated. In (110) oriented diamond, resistivities lower than 0.015  cm have been obtained. Diamond is an excellent material platform thanks to its unique properties such as high thermal conductivity, good biocompatibility, high radiation stability, remarkable hardness and high chemical resistivity Another prominent feature of diamond is that it can be converted to graphite-like carbon thus creating conductive channels within a sample that is insulating in nature Annealing the diamond sample under vacuum around 1700 o C can lead to the formation of a graphitic layer on the surface resulting in the generation of a conductive region independent of surrounding gas pressure Fabrication of microstructures in different transparent materials using ultrafast lasers has emerged as an excellent tool for the precise modification of the same. Thanks to the multiphoton absorption and avalanche ionization, the non-linear absorption of the ultrashort pulses helps in avoiding collateral damages due to thermal effects thus resulting in a modification of the material within a confined volume Recently, finite energy Bessel beams Fabrication of graphitic microwires in diamond bulk using pulsed Bessel beams was initially reported by Canfield et al. The fabrication of conductive micro-electrodes perpendicular to the diamond surface was performed by means of a 20-Hz Ti:Sapphire amplified laser system (Amplitude) which delivers 40-fs transformlimited pulses at 790 nm wavelength in the mJ pulse energy range. Thanks to the laser compressor which can be detuned to change the pulse duration, it is possible to work at both femtosecond and picosecond regimes. This is crucial since pulse duration can influence the barrier height in the conductivity of an electrode as shown later in section 3.2. The results reported in this paper are related to a pulse duration of 200 fs and 10 ps respectively. As described in detail in Note that in the micromachining experiments the pulse energy was varied in a range such that the BB central core is the only portion of the beam which undergoes nonlinear absorption and interacts with the diamond sample, leading to microstructures with transverse size in the micrometer range. For a precise adjustment of the energy, a motorized attenuator consisting of a polarizer and rotating halfwave plate (Watt Pilot, Altechna Rnd, Vilnius, Lithuania) was placed just after an optical shutter used to select the number of laser pulses. As described in The diamond sample was placed on the motorized stage and aligned in both x and y axis (thanks to micrometer screws of the support) to make sure it is flat (within an error limit of 2 μm), in order to fabricate orthogonal wires with respect to the sample top and bottom surfaces. The Bessel beam micromachining was performed in multiple shot regime and, as already mentioned and shown in Fig. Here, we have explored the role of different laser writing parameters and of the crystallographic orientation on the potential barrier and thus on the conductivity of the graphitic wires fabricated. For this purpose, two samples were considered -a monocrystalline type IIa CVD diamond with (100) orientation and another sample of the same type with a (110) orientation, both produced by MB Optics. The dimensions of the samples are 5 mm × 5 mm ×0.5 mm. The electrical characterisation of the fabricated electrodes (featured by voltage-current measurements) was carried out by using conductive layers on the top and bottom surfaces of the diamond samples The thickness of the deposition was 400 nm. The other side of the sample was fixed on a silicon wafer using silver paste thus completing the whole circuit (See The current-voltage characterization was then conducted with a 2-probe configuration (tungstencarbide microprobes controllable with micrometric accuracy) in a custom probe station. The probes were connected to a high-precision KeithleyTM 6487 voltage source, communicating with a computer through a LabVIEW system, which, in turn, measures the I-V curves. A "Leica Essential M50" optical microscope with an achromatic objective with magnification 0.63×, focal length of 148.2 mm and an eyepiece magnification of up to 100× interfaced with the I-V chamber allows for the accurate positioning of the microprobes on the sample. Micro-Raman spectroscopy using a Labram Aramis John Yvon Horiba system with a DPSS laser source at 532 nm, was performed in order to characterize the effective transformation of diamond into amorphous or graphitic-like carbon (featured by the presence of sp 2 hybridized carbon) in the laser-written microstructures. The system was also equipped with a confocal microscope, an 1800 line mm -1 grating, and an air-cooled CCD camera. The Raman signal collected in a backscattering configuration with a 100× objective, can achieve a spatial resolution of about 1 μm. In the study presented here, the role of thermal annealing on the potential barrier change or the resistivity change was also investigated. To this end, the diamond samples were annealed thermally in ultra-high vacuum at 950 o for 1 hour. The home-made annealing chamber consisted of a heating stage (HTR1002) made up of a unique combination of a dielectric ceramic material (Pyrolytic Boron Nitride) and an electrically conductive material (Pyrolytic Graphite). The dimensions are 50 mm × 60 mm with a thickness of around 1.40 mm In this section, we present the results of the Bessel beam micromachining of two samples of monocrystalline synthetic diamond featured by (100) orientation and (110) orientation respectively. In addition to study the effect of different laser writing parameters such as pulse energy and pulse duration, we shall focus on understanding the role of the crystallographic orientation on the morphology, the structural modification, and the IV characteristics (and on the presence or absence of a potential barrier) of the graphitic microwires obtained. We will thus compare the obtained results in the two different types of samples. In both cases, the electrode formation in the bulk follows the same mechanism. Under Bessel beam irradiation in the multiple shot regime, the formation of a graphite globule (sp 2 carbon) gets initiated at the bottom surface within the bulk. This can be explained by considering the reduced damage threshold and a higher local beam intensity at this position thanks to the constructive interference of the beam due to Fresnel reflections occurring on each diamond-air interface The study of the electrodes fabricated in two differently oriented diamond crystals started with an analysis of the morphology of the 500 m long graphitic wires obtained. The Bessel beam laser writing was performed in two different pulse duration regimes (femtosecond and picosecond regimes), and with the purpose of exploring the extremities of this chosen range, we used 200 fs and 10 ps pulses. The energy was varied in the micro Joule range. The structure and morphology of the microstructures obtained were observed under an optical microscope. In Fig. We can notice that the wires fabricated with 200 fs pulse duration (Figs. On the contrary, a large amount of energy is still deposited even after the formation of the first globule in case of higher pulse durations (such as the 10 ps pulses) leading to an enhanced cracking since the local strain overcomes the tensile strength of the diamond due to volume increase. It is worth noting that even when there is a cracking effect, the dimension of the main lobe remains the same irrespective of the pulse duration. In addition, the preferential cracking direction of the electrode towards (111) orientation, when machining a (100) cut diamond crystal, has already been observed and discussed in If we focus on the differences in the morphology of the electrodes fabricated in the two differently oriented crystals, we can observe that the transverse size (≈ 1 m) of the graphitic wires fabricated in the (110) oriented diamond crystal is smaller than that (≈ 2.5 m) of those fabricated in a (100) oriented one, irrespective of the chosen energy or pulse duration. This can be noticed in the images of Fig. The difference in the cracks direction along the wires fabricated in (100) and (110) cut samples has been explained by preferable cracking of the diamond crystal along (111) planes, which are turned at different angles depending on the chosen direction of observation On the other hand, when the diamond sample is irradiated through the (110) crystallographic plane, the cleaved (111) planes are placed either parallel or perpendicular to the beam (see for instance later on the resulting cracks in Fig. A detailed study of the electrical properties of the fabricated in-bulk electrodes has been conducted, before and after thermal annealing of the diamond samples, with a focus on the evolution of the potential barrier height with respect to the different crystallographic orientations and beam parameters. Around twenty graphitic wires were fabricated on two CVD diamond samples with respectively (100) and (110) crystallographic orientation, by varying the pulse energy between 1 to 10 μJ, and with two different pulse durations (200 fs and 10 ps); and their resistance/resistivity was measured with a current-voltage measurement set-up as detailed in the methodology section. For all the tests mentioned in this work, we used a voltage range of -450 to 450 V, a compliance current of 25 mA, a step value of 5 V and a measurement time of 300 ms. The current-voltage (IV) tests for each electrode were conducted multiple times resulting in a standard deviation error of 5 %. In Figure In order to investigate the crystalline structural changes and the extend of the material transformation after the laser-matter interaction, micro-Raman spectroscopy was performed on the wires fabricated in the two diamonds featured by different crystallographic orientation. The laser beam used for the measurement was focused at the top of the electrodes in correspondence with the centre of the transverse section of the wires extremity, where we expect a higher concentration of graphite, as previously discussed The electrical characterization of the graphitic wires fabricated with 10 ps pulse duration was performed for a comparison with the results presented so far. None of the resulting electrodes showed a trace of potential barrier in the resistivity measurements, at any pulse energy regime, and in both crystallographic orientations (in accordance with the results of As it has already been established that the pulse energy used in the micromachining process can influence the conductivity of the electrode obtained A similar trend is observed in the evolution of the resistivity values that can be extracted from the IV measurements. Table Although we know that the femtosecond regime of laser machining in diamond generally leads to graphitic wires with lower conductivity compared to long pulse durations As also stated at the end of section 2, the results just presented refer to the characterization of the fabricated electrodes in the diamond samples, after thermal annealing of the latter. In this section, we present for completeness a comparison of the potential barrier height and the resistivity values obtained before and after the thermal annealing of the samples. The results of the electrical characterization are summarized in Table In this work, the graphitic microelectrodes have been fabricated in monocrystalline 500 m thick CVD diamond samples with orientations (100) and (110) respectively, by using a pulsed Bessel beam in the femtosecond and picosecond regime, impinging orthogonally to the sample surface. The optimization of the morphology and conductivity of the electrodes has been done by using different laser writing parameters. Different characterisation techniques such as optical microscopy, current-voltage tests and micro-Raman measurements have been used to analyse the morphological, electrical, and structural features of the electrodes. We have shown that in addition to the use of specific pulse energies and durations, the crystallographic orientation of the sample can have a prominent influence in reducing or eliminating the potential barrier height of the laser written graphitic electrodes. With this study, the impact of the crystallographic orientation of the diamond samples on the overall quality of an electrode has been clearly demonstrated as the graphitic wires fabricated orthogonally to the (110) plane showed no trace of potential barrier in any energy regime or pulse duration, in contrast to those fabricated orthogonally to the (100) oriented-crystal case where the barrier is generally observed, especially when obtained with low pulse energy and 200 fs pulses. We believe that thanks to the additional heating mechanism that arises from the directionality of cracking during the fabrication of the wire, the possible microgaps that may exist between the graphitic globules that are generated along the beam path, are drastically reduced in (110) cut samples resulting, therefore, in this case, in high quality electrodes with good conductivity and a barrier potential height definitely negligible. A comparison between the micro-Raman spectra recorded for wires fabricated in the fs regime in the two differently oriented samples indicated that there is a better transformation of diamond into graphite when the wires are fabricated orthogonally to the (110 plane). From the morphological point of view, we have shown that in addition of being thinner (1 m size approximately), the electrodes fabricated in the (110) cut sample present a smoother core than those obtained in the (100) cut sample, especially at low energy regime. On the other hand, in the (110) oriented sample, micromachining with higher energies (larger than 6 J with the geometry of our Bessel beam) leads to the breakage of the graphitic microstructures, possibly due to incubation effects and also nonlinear propagation effects of the Bessel beam inside the bulk. This acts as a limit to explore a wide high energy regime for the generation of continuous electrodes throughout the whole sample thickness. The effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples, on the resistivity of the fabricated microelectrodes has also been investigated. We found that while there is indeed a reduction in the resistivity after the annealing process especially for the wires fabricated with low energy pulses in both the samples, the barrier potential height which was present in the IV curves in the (100) oriented sample, remains, on the other hand, the same. In the (110) oriented diamond, resistivities lower than 0.015  cm have been obtained, namely 0.013 Ω cm for a 1 m transverse size electrode, which, to the best of our knowledge, is one of the lowest values compared to the literature results and the lowest using Bessel beams. In addition, it is the lowest value achieved for an in-bulk graphitic micro-electrode written perpendicular to the surface of the sample by laser micromachining. With this study we have found some particular conditions for an improvement of the overall quality of the laser written electrodes in terms of morphology (uniformity of the wires) and conductivity values. This opens the way to the fast fabrication by pulsed Bessel beams without any sample translation, of graphitic electrodes with different geometries and configurations that may find their applications not only for sensing in photonic and microfluidic chips, but also in the case of 3D diamond detectors for highly energetic radiation, to be used for instance in nuclear physics and medical dosimetry.