Optical parametric amplification (OPA) represents a powerful solution to achieve broadband amplification in wavelength ranges beyond the scope of conventional gain media, for generating high-power optical pulses, optical microcombs, entangled photon pairs and a wide range of other applications. Here, we demonstrate optical parametric amplifiers based on silicon nitride (Si3N4) waveguides integrated with two-dimensional (2D) layered graphene oxide (GO) films. We achieve precise control over the thickness, length, and position of the GO films using a transfer-free, layerby-layer coating method combined with accurate window opening in the chip cladding using photolithography. Detailed OPA measurements with a pulsed pump for the fabricated devices with different GO film thicknesses and lengths show a maximum parametric gain of ~24.0 dB, representing a ~12.2 dB improvement relative to the device without GO. We perform a theoretical analysis of the device performance, achieving good agreement with experiment and showing that there is substantial room for further improvement. This work represents the first demonstration of integrating 2D materials on chips to enhance the OPA performance, providing a new way of achieving high performance photonic integrated OPA by incorporating 2D materials. Optical amplifiers are key to many applications Notably, it has underpinned many new technological breakthroughs such as optical microcombs To achieve OPA, materials with a high optical nonlinearity are neededeither second-(χ Recently, two-dimensional (2D) materials with ultrahigh optical nonlinearities and broadband response have been integrated on photonic chips to achieve exceptional nonlinear optical performance Previously In this work, for the first time, on-chip integration of 2D materials to achieve improved OPA performance is demonstrated, which is realized through the integration of 2D layered GO films onto Si3N4 waveguides. We employ a transfer-free, layer-by-layer coating method to achieve precise control over the GO film thickness, and by using photolithography to open windows in the waveguide cladding we are able to accurately control the GO film length and position. The processes for GO synthesis and on-chip integration are discussed in more detail elsewhere We perform a detailed experimental characterization of the OPA performance of the devices with different GO film thicknesses and lengths, achieving a maximum parametric gain of ~24.0 dB, representing a ~12.2 dB improvement over the uncoated device. By fitting experimental results with theory, we analyse the influence of the applied power, wavelength detuning, and GO film thickness and length on the OPA performance, and in the process demonstrate that there is still significant potential for further improving the performance. These results verify the effectiveness of the on-chip integration of 2D GO films to improve the OPA performance of photonic integrated devices. GO properties. Figure Device design and fabrication. Figure To enable the interaction between the GO film and the evanescent field of the waveguide mode, a portion of the silica upper cladding was removed to allow for the GO film to be coated on the top surface of the Si3N4 waveguide. Figure shows the dispersion D of the uncoated waveguide and the hybrid waveguides with 1 and 2 layers of GO, calculated with commercial mode solving software using the materials' refractive indices measured by spectral ellipsometry. The Si3N4 waveguides in all these devices had a cross section of 1.60 μm × 0.72 μm, and the inset in Figure Note that we have discussed the physics and mechanisms for the enhancement in the nonlinear optical performance of GO-coated integrated photonic devices elsewhere as well For the hybrid waveguides with 1 and 2 layers of GO, the GO mode overlaps are ~0.07 % and ~0.15 %, respectively. We selected TE-polarization for our subsequent measurements since it supports in-plane interaction between the waveguide's evanescent field and the GO film, which is much stronger than the out-of-plane interaction due to the significant optical anisotropy in 2D materials Loss measurements. The coating of GO films onto Si3N4 waveguides introduces extra linear and nonlinear loss. Before the OPA measurements, we used the experimental setup in Figure Fiber-to-chip coupling was achieved via lensed fibers butt coupled to inverse-taper couplers at both ends of the Si3N4 waveguides. The coupling loss was ~4.2 dB / facet. We measured three devices, including the uncoated Si3N4 waveguide and hybrid waveguides with 1 and 2 layers of GO. The Si3N4 waveguides in these devices were all ~20 mm in length, while for the hybrid waveguides, windows with a length of ~1.4 mm were opened at a distance of ~0.7 mm from the input port. In our following discussion, the input light power quoted refers to the power coupled into the devices, with the fiber-to-chip coupling loss being excluded. In (a) -(d), the curves for GO-0, GO-1, and GO-2 show the results for the uncoated Si3N4 waveguides, and the hybrid waveguides with 1 and 2 layers of GO, respectively. The linear loss was measured using continuous-wave (CW) light with a power of ~1 mW. shows the insertion loss of the fabricated devices versus wavelength. All devices exhibited nearly a flat spectral response, which suggests the absence of any material absorption or coupling loss that would generate a strong wavelength dependence. By using a cut-back method By comparing the Si3N4 waveguides with and without opened windows in the silica cladding, we deduced a higher propagation loss of ~3.0 dB/cm for the Si3N4 waveguides in the opened window area, which can be attributed to the mitigating effect of the silica cladding on the Si3N4 surface roughness as well as the slight roughness induced on the waveguide top surface by the cladding removal process. Finally, using these values and the measured insertion loss of the hybrid waveguides, we extracted an excess propagation loss induced by the GO films of ~3.1 dB/cm and ~6.3 dB/cm for the 1-and 2-layer devices, respectively. Such a loss induced by the GO films is about 2 orders of magnitude lower than Si3N4 waveguides integrated with graphene films shows the measured insertion loss versus input CW power at a wavelength of ~1550 nm. All devices showed no significant variation in insertion loss when the power was below 30 mW, indicating that the power-dependent loss induced by photo-thermal changes in the GO films was negligible within this range. This observation is consistent with our previous results where photo-thermal changes were only observed for average powers above 40 mW The measurement of nonlinear loss was conducted using a fiber pulsed laser (FPL) capable of generating nearly Fourier-transform limited femtosecond optical pulses centered around 1557 nm. The pulse duration and repetition rate were ~180 fs and ~60 MHz, respectively. Figure To generate the pump light required for the OPA experiments, we employed the same FPL that was used for the loss measurements. On the other hand, the signal light was generated through amplification of the CW light from a tunable laser. The pulsed pump and the CW signal were combined by a broadband 50:50 coupler and sent to the device under test (DUT) for the optical parametric process. The polarization of both signals was adjusted to TE polarized using two polarization controllers (PCs). To adjust the power of the pulsed pump, a broadband variable optical attenuator (VOA) was utilized. The output after propagation through the DUT was directed towards an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) for analysis. Figure As the pump light used for the OPA experiments was pulsed, the optical parametric process occurred at a rate equivalent to the repetition rate of the FPL. As a result, both the generated idler and amplified signal also exhibited a pulsed nature with the same repetition rate as that of the FPL. The optical spectra in Figure We also note that the hybrid devices showed greater spectral broadening of the pulsed pump caused by self-phase modulation (SPM), which is consistent with our previous observations from SPM experiments Figure To evaluate the OPA performance, we conducted experiments where we varied the wavelength detuning, CW signal power, and GO film length. Except for the varied parameters, all other parameters are the same as those in Figure Optical nonlinearity of hybrid waveguides and GO films. We used the theory from Refs. Based on the fit γ for the hybrid waveguides, we further extracted the Kerr coefficient n2 of the GO films (see Methods), as shown in Figure where γ is the waveguide nonlinear parameter and Leff (L) = [1 -exp (-α×L)] /α is the effective interaction length, with α denoting the linear loss attenuation coefficient. Note that the nonlinear figure of merit defined in Eq. ( Figure For the hybrid waveguides that we measured in the OPA experiments, only a specific section of the waveguides was coated with GO films. In Figures Figure We also investigate the performance improvement by optimizing the GO film length LGO. Figure We investigate the performance by optimizing both ∆λ and LGO simultaneously (see Figure dB and maximum ∆PG of ~31.5 dB, while the 2-layer device reaches PG up to ~37.8 dB and ∆PG up to ~27.3 dB. In addition, by further increasing the pump peak power from 180 W to 400 W, even higher performance is achieved, with the 1-layer device reaching a maximum PG of ~43.7 dB and maximum ∆PG of ~40.1 dB, and the 2-layer device a maximum PG of ~43.8 dB and maximum ∆PG of ~37.3 dB (see Figure For this reason, devices coated with more GO layers will have lower maximum ∆PG. We investigate the improvement in PG and ∆PG by optimizing the coating position of the GO films (see Figure While this work is the first report of parametric gain in waveguides integrated with 2D materials, we compare our results for the OPA performance of Si3N4-GO waveguides with theoretical calculated OPA performance of Si3N4-graphene waveguides. By using the graphene material parameters from Refs. Note that we have demonstrated enhanced nonlinear optics in three CMOS-compatible integrated nonlinear optical platformssilicon, Si3N4, and high index doped silica In this work, we demonstrate enhanced OPA performance in GO-Si3N4 hybrid waveguides by using optical pulses with high peak powers. Further optimization of the GO film properties, e.g., reducing the loss and increasing the optical nonlinearity, could potentially enable meaningful applications such as optical microcomb generation, where high parametric gain needs to be achieved for a CW light with a low peak power In summary, we experimentally demonstrate significantly improved OPA performance in Si3N4 waveguides integrated with 2D GO films compared to uncoated waveguides. We fabricate GO-Si3N4 hybrid waveguides with precise control of the thickness, length, and position of the GO films. Detailed OPA measurements are performed for the fabricated devices using a pulsed pump and CW signal. The results show that up to ~24.0 dB parametric gain is achieved for the hybrid devices, representing a ~12.2-dB improvement relative to the device without GO. Based on the experimental results, the influence of the pump / signal power, wavelength detuning, and GO film thickness / length on the OPA performance is theoretically analyzed, showing that further improvement can be achieved by optimizing these parameters. We calculate that a parametric gain of ~37.8 dB and a parametric gain improvement of ~31.5 dB should be possible by optimizing the wavelength detuning and GO film length, and even higher to ~43.8 dB by increasing the pump peak power to 400 W. Our study provides valuable insights into the promising potential of on-chip integration of 2D GO films for enhancing the OPA performance of photonic integrated devices, of benefit to many nonlinear optical applications. Fabrication of Si3N4 waveguides. The Si3N4 waveguides were fabricated via CMOS compatible processes Synthesis and coating of GO films. Before GO film coating, a GO solution with small GO flake size (< 100 nm) was prepared through chemical oxidation of graphite using a modified Hummers method The coating of 2D layered GO films was achieved by using a transfer-free method that allows for layer-by-layer GO film deposition with precise control of the film thickness, as we did previously The electrostatic force enables conformal film coating onto complex structures such as wire waveguides and gratings with a high degree of uniformity. However, achieving conformal GO film coating in narrow slot regions with widths <100 nm and heights >200 nm remains a challenge. This limitation is primarily attributed to the size of the GO nanoflakes employed for self-assembly, which was typically ~50 nm in our prepared GO solution. By modifying the GO synthesis methods and using more vigorous ultrasonication, GO flakes with smaller sizes can be obtained, which can potentially mitigate this issue. The solution-based, layer-by-layer GO film coating method demonstrates excellent scalability and compatibility with different integrated optical platforms such as silicon, silicon nitride, and high index doped silica. Unlike techniques involving film transfer, where the coated areas are constrained by the lateral size of the exfoliated 2D films, the coverage area achievable through our self-assembly method is constrained only by the substrate and the solution container dimensions This makes it particularly proficient at coating large areas. By using plasma oxidation, the removal of GO films that have been coated onto integrated devices can be effortlessly accomplished. This allows for the reclamation of integrated chips and the subsequent reapplication of new GO films. Apart from using opened windows to control the length and positioning of GO films on integrated waveguides, this can also be achieved by using lithography followed by lift-off Extracting parametric gain from the measured optical spectra. We used the same methods as those in Refs. Psignal, peak = ∫∫ P signal, out (λ)dλ where Psignal, out (λ) is the average output power spectrum of the signal as a function of wavelength λ, frep is the repetition rate of the FPL, and T is the pulse width. In our calculation of Psignal, peak, the power residing in the CW signal line was subtracted from the spectrum of Psignal, out (λ). After deriving Psignal, peak, the signal parametric gain PG was calculated as: where Psignal is the CW signal power at the input of the waveguide. According to Eq. (3), the PG in our discussion is the net gain over and above the waveguide loss (including that induced by both the Si3N4 waveguide and the GO film). In contrast, the on/off parametric gain is defined as The parametric gain calculated using Eq. ( OPA Modeling. The third-order optical parametric process in the GO-coated Si3N4 waveguides was modeled based on the theory from Refs. + jγ i A s * (z)A p 2 (z)exp(-j∆βz) (7) where Ap,s,i are the amplitudes of the pump, signal and idler waves along the z axis, which is defined as the light propagation direction, αp,s,i are the loss factor including both the linear loss and the SAinduced nonlinear loss, Δβ = βs + βi -2βp is the linear phase mismatch, with βp,s,i denoting the propagation constants of the pump, signal and idler waves, and γp,s,i are the waveguide nonlinear parameters. In our case, where the wavelength detuning range was small (≤ 10 nm), the linear loss and the nonlinear parameter are assumed to be constant, i.e., αp =αs = αi = α, γp = γs = γi = γ. In Eqs. ( Extracting n2 of GO films. The Kerr coefficient n2 of the layered GO films is extracted from the nonlinear parameter γ of the hybrid waveguides according to: 