We report on a direct mapping of acoustic slender waveguides to the one dimensional trimer Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model, with neither chiral nor mirror symmetry. Importantly, we can choose to perform this mapping for either the acoustic velocity or pressure. We demonstrate that, for finite systems, this choice is necessarily linked to the boundary conditions. It allows for the unveiling of the edge states of the acoustic system through an edge state phase diagram. An experimental realization of our setup in the audible regime corroborates our theoretical predictions. Topology has a high impact on the design of a new class of wave systems in many different areas, such as photonics Among the many extensions of the SSH model that exist both in one and higher-dimensions In this article, we introduce a periodic configuration of different slender acoustic waveguides of the same length, similar to The SSH3 model is a periodic lattice whose unit cell consists of three sites connected by three alternating couplings u, v (intra-cell) and w (inter-cell) as is shown in Fig. where q ∈ [-π/d, π/d) is the Bloch wavenumber and d is the length of the unit cell. The system exhibits a band structure similar to the one shown in Fig. where λ i denotes the band which is probed and r = A, B, C the sublattice. In Eq. ( We proceed now with the theoretical implementation of an acoustic waveguide system that can be mapped to the SSH3 model. First, we demonstrate that a 2D acoustic waveguide composed by segments of equal length L and three different cross sections S A , S B and S C , arranged periodically with period d = 3L, as depicted in Fig. Our starting point is the consideration of an ideal fluid neglecting nonlinearity, viscosity and other dissipative terms. In this regime, the acoustic pressure field p(x, y) inside the waveguide of Fig. with Neumann conditions corresponding to zero normal velocity at the rigid walls ∂ n p = 0. Here k = ω/c 0 with ω the angular frequency and c 0 the speed of sound. Moreover, we are interested in sufficiently low frequencies such that only the fundamental acoustic mode of the waveguide is propagating (monomodal approximation). In this regime, the acoustic wave propagation is simply described by the one-dimensional (1D) Helmholtz equation For the mapping, we follow exactly the same technique as in where φ n,j := S j dpn,j dx is the flux velocity at the change of cross section. By employing where is a "pseudo-energy" and the couplings u, v and w are given as functions of the cross-sections S A , S B and We note that the normalization is performed to recover the exact form of the system of discrete equations of the SSH3 (see Appendix B). Furthermore, by using Bloch's theorem, pn,A = pA e iqnd , pn,B = pB e iqnd , pn,C = pC e iqnd , one can recover the following eigenvalue problem By comparing By using Bloch's theorem once again, φn,A = φA e iqnd , φn,B = φB e iqnd , φn,C = φC e iqnd , we obtain the following eigenvalue problem for the flux velocity, One can observe that the mapping of the flux velocities is equivalent to changing the cross sections of the pressure mapping in the following manner: S 1 → 1/S 1 , S 2 → 1/S 2 , S 3 → 1/S 3 and BBC will change accordingly as we will see in the next section. Furthermore, this formalism can be identified as a continuum version of strain coordinates In Fig. To verify the theoretical predictions of Fig. The length of each waveguide segment is chosen L = 2 cm, while the three cross-sections are S A = 0.75 cm 2 , S B = 0.5 cm 2 , S C = 1.2 cm 2 corresponding to couplings u = 0.4804, v = 0.3430 and w = 0.6591 (10)- The experimental setup is based on an acoustic rectangular waveguide with periodically alternating change of cross-section, as depicted in Fig. As mentioned in the previous section, the leakage due to the open ends of the experimental setup induces additional dissipation, thus we choose to work with closed boundaries (zero velocity boundary conditions). This is realized by skrewing two plexiglass plates at the two ends of the waveguide. We perform experiments with two different waveguide configurations, one corresponding to the region of the phase diagram with 2 edge modes (black grid) and one for the region with 1 edge mode (blue grid) at each gap respectively (see Fig. Depicted with red line in Fig. Fig. In summary, we have established an acoustic analogue of the SSH3 model without chiral and mirror symmetry, for both acoustic pressure and flux velocity fields. In particular, for finite systems, we have shown that the choice of the dependent variable is essential to predict the number of edge states of the system, relying on the boundary conditions. By performing experiments using acoustic waveguides, we explored the different regimes of the edge state phase diagram. Our analysis extends the findings of At first glimpse the resulting Hamiltonian will not be symmetric. However we can normalize pressure following the normalisation proposed in which we substitute in Eqs (B4-B6) and obtain equations ( In contrast to the pressure mapping established in the previous section, we now show that an equivalent mapping may be found for the flux velocity field. Starting from Eq. ( where Z l = ρ 0 c 0 /S l is the waveguide impedance, ρ 0 is the density of air and the subscript l = CA, AB, BC denotes the corresponding waveguide segments. Taking the left and right propagation of flux at each change of cross section and applying the jump conditions (5), we get the following relations for the pressure-flux amplitudes at for the segments AB and BC: Next we multiply (B11) by Z A and (B12) by Z C and add them up. By dividing the resulting equation with 1/(Z C + Z A ), we get: (B13) By repeating the same procedure with the rest of the segments, we arrive at the following system of equations that describe a discrete SSH3 model: where: Since we have limited our analysis in the lossless and low frequency regime, such that only the plane acoustic mode is propagating, one can use the transfer matrix and the Bloch theorem for a periodic unit cell of the trimer waveguide, as the one depicted in Fig. Assuming an infinite periodic waveguide with translation invariance, Eq. ((C1)) must hold for any n. Thus we may solve this equation by using a Bloch like anstaz where A is a column eigenvector. Substituting this expression into equation (C1) we obtain the following eigenvalue equation for the unknown phase factor qd T A = e iqd IA. Hence, e iqd is an eigenvalue of the transfer matrix T . Due to time reversal symmetry, the determinant of the transfer matrix is equal to unity. As a result its eigenvalues where In order to verify the 1D approximation, we compute the dispersion of the periodic waveguide by solving the lossless 2D Helmholtz equation (3) using finite element methods (FEM) and we compare it with expression (C6) derived through the TMM. The results are shown in Fig. 