First of all we shortly illustrate how the symplectic quantization scheme Symplectic quantization has been recently introduced Conversely, the basic idea of symplectic quantization is that the statistical effect of quantum fluctuations can be sampled by a deterministic symplectic dynamics, driven by an intrinsic time τ , different from the coordinate time of quantum relativistic field theories. Accordingly, the main outcome of this approach is the possibility of look-ing at the dynamics of a quantum-relativistic field-theory as a relavant piece of physical information, while the system approaches asymptotically equilibrium. In this respect it is important to point out the basic hypothesis of symplectic quantization: the deterministic evolution equations of any quantum-relativistic field, ruled by the intrinsic time τ is ergodic, i.e. it samples a constantaction hyper-surface according to a uniform probability measure. Such an assumption stems from the consideration that quantum-relativistic fields are infinite dimensional functions and there is no a priori reason to be invoked contrary to ergodicity, once all symmetries of the model under scrutiny have been taken into account. The main ingredients of this approach are summarized in Section II, in order to provide a preliminary framework for the main content of this paper. In fact, the main purpose of this paper is to show how the symplectic quantization procedure applies also to non-relativistic field theories, while recovering also the limit of standard quantum mechanics. In Section IV we illustrate how symplectic quantization can be extended to non-relativistic field theories by performing a suitable non-relativistic limit of the symplectic evolution equations, which transform into symplectic evolution equations for a Schrödinger field, which still keeps a dependence on the intrinsic time τ . We discuss also the connection of this non-relativistic scheme with the standard formulation of non-relativistic QFT: the Feynman path-integral turns out to be the Fouriertransform of the partition volume of the constant-action hypersurface Ω(A). This outcome elucidates also that symplectic quantization is the result of a deterministic dynamical evolution yielding a generalized microcanoni-cal measure, whose entropy is given by S sym = log(Ω(A)). (1) In Section VI we go through the symplectic quantization scheme for a quantum field in interaction with a classical electromagnetic field and we show that, by a coarsegraining procedure over the fast dynamics ruled by τ (a sort of adiabatic elimination procedure) one can recover the standard quantum mechanical limit in terms of the Schrödinger equation, provided self-interaction terms can be neglected with respect to the interaction with external classical fields. In this perspective the symplectic quantization approach to non-relativistic field theories might be interpreted as a sort of formulation of quantum mechanics relying upon a hidden-variable theory. These are the momenta conjugated to fields yielding the dynamics engendered by the intrinsic time τ of quantum fluctuations. Note that this is not contradictory to the foundations of quantum mechanics and, in particular, with Bell's theorem. Actually, this does not rule out non-local theories with hidden variables (see, for instance Let us start from the Lagrangian density of a massive charged scalar field φ(x), where x = x μ = (x 0 , x) with x 0 = c t, c the speed of light in vacuum, t the time, and x ∈ R 3 the vector of spatial coordinates. Including the quartic non-linear self-interaction the Lagrangian density reads Since in what follows we want to consider the nonrelativistic limit of the theory, we have to consider a complex, i.e. charged, field φ. The integral over the spacetime continuum of the Lagrangian density in Eq. ( where The fundamental idea of symplectic quantization is that x 0 = c t is just a standard coordinate and that one has to consider an additional time variable, i.e. the intrinsic time τ parametrizing the sequence of quantum fluctuations where ∂ τ denotes the derivative with respect to τ and c s is a suitable parameter with the dimensions of a velocity. Let us observe that the simple form of the generalized Lagrangian in Eq. ( and thus define the symplectic action, or generalized "Hamiltonian", as follows Making use of all of the previous equations one can finally write The symplectic dynamical equations then read For the field-theory (2) they have the explicit expressions The purpose of the present discussion has been to introduce the formalism of symplectic quantization for relativistic fields in order to both connect with the previous papers on the subject Here we discuss the non-relativistic limit in the framework of the symplectic quantization. The first step amounts to factorize the high-frequency component of the field φ(x; τ ), thus epitomizing its dependence on the parameter c (speed of light): where Ψ(x, t; τ ) is the non-relativistic field, i.e. the Schrödinger field, which still exhibits a dependence on the intrinsic time τ . The adiabatic separation in slow and fast oscillating components of the field φ(x; τ ) is a standard approach to perform 1/c expansions, see for instance By substituting Eq. ( where g = λ 4 /(4m 2 c). Then, for consistency, we also define the slow non-relativistic component Π(x, t; τ ) of the conjugated momentum field π(x; τ ) as follows In this way we obtain the expression of the generalized non-relativistic Hamiltonian where μ = 2mc -2 s / 2 . One can easily recognize in the previous formula a generalized separable Hamiltonian, containing a generalized "kinetic energy" term and a generalized "potential energy" term with The symplectic dynamical equations of the Schrödinger field Ψ(x, t; τ ) read then For the non-relativistic limit of the field-theory, Eq. ( Before proceeding further in illustrating more details about the outcomes of the non-relativistic limit of the symplectic quantization scheme, we want to point out a crucial comment about its physical interpretation. The deterministic dynamics in the intrinsic time τ , engendered by Eqn.s (21),( In this section we want to elaborate about the relation between the non-relativistic symplectic quantization scheme introduced in the previous section and the standard formulation of non-relativistic field theory (QFT), based on the path integral formalism. The key point is the assumption that the dynamics engendered by Eqn.s (19),( where the normalization factor is a generalized microcanonical partition function fixing to A the value of the generalized non-relativistic Hamiltonian H nr (which has the actual physical dimensions of an action) : The ergodic hypothesis amounts then to assume that the dynamical average along the trajectories of the symplectic quantization dynamics do correspond to ensemble averages with respect to the probability measure P A [Π, Ψ] in Eq. ( where Ψ A (x, t; τ ′ ) denotes a solution of symplectic dynamics equations relative to a generic initial condition, such that H nr [Π(x, t; 0), Ψ(x, t; 0)] = A. In Eqn.s (24) and (25) the symbols ] denote functional integration over the fields Π(x, t) and Ψ(x, t), respectively. According to Eq. (25) the dynamical average can be replaced by the (microcanonical) ensemble average: for this reason the fields and their conjugated momenta in the integral on the r.h.s. do not keep any dependence on τ . This is in complete analogy to what is assumed in classical statistical mechanics, where the dynamics is replaced by (functional) integration over equilibrium configurations. In this case the partition function in Eq. ( It is worth stressing that the ergodic hypothesis is the core of the connection between symplectic quantization and ordinary quantum field theory also in the non-relativistic limit discussed here. Then, since in the present framework the action A is the symplectic analog of the microcanonical internal en-ergy, it is natural to introduce the dimensionless symplectic analog of the familiar microcanonical entropy as S sym (A) = ln Ω(A) . (26) In this way, the reduced Planck constant fixes the constraint or, equivalently, which relates the extensive quantity A to the intensive quantity . As previously discussed, in the symplectic quantization plays the role of the intensive thermal energy k B T . At this point our purpose is to draw the precise connection between the microcanonical representation of symplectic quantization and the most familiar functional approach to quantum field theory, i.e. the path-integral representation. As we are going to show this bridge can be established by performing a suitable change of equilibrium statistical ensemble, which, in this case, does not amount to a standard Legendre transform. Actually, in the microcanonical representation of the symplectic quantization scheme the value of the action over the phase-space is fixed and one would like to transform this formalism to a sort of canonical representation fixing on average the action per unit volume. In equilibrium statistical mechanics the analogous procedure yields a canonical representation based on a Gibbs-Boltzmann weight. Since in symplectic quantization scheme (also in the present non-relativistic case) the functional with respect to which we would like to consider the integral transform is an action, i.e. a "non-positive" defined quantity, the only transformation which can be performed is the Fourier one. Accordingly, the Fourier transform of the partition volume in Eq. (24) reads where z is the variable conjugated to A and has therefore physical dimensions of an inverse action, [z] = [A -1 ]. By then fixing z = 1/ and integrating over the quadratic dependence on conjugated momenta one obtains which is the standard Feynman path integral representation of the non-relativistic QFT of the Schrödinger field Ψ(x, t), where N ( ) is a suitable normalization factor. We can conclude that within the symplectic quantization approach the Feynman path-integral is obtained, on the basis of the ergodic hypothesis mentioned in this paragraph, simply as the Fourier transform of a generalized microcanonical partition function based on the conservation of the symplectic action. Only on a formal ground, we can therefore think at Eq. (30) as a sort of partition function and its complex integrand as a sort of probability measure P [Π, Ψ] which, provided the original ergodic hypothesis in Eq. ( More precisely, we can write which makes explicit the relation between symplectic quantization dynamical averages and the expectation values in ordinary quantum field theory. Note that, as for Eq. ( as is it happens, for instance, in non-abelian gauge theories We conclude this section by discussing the physical implications of the quantization constraint in Eq. ( where Accordingly, the angle brackets • are a shorthand notation for a time-average, which, consistently with the ergodic hypothesis, is assumed to be independent of the initial conditions. We can export this procedure in the framework of the symplectic quantization scheme by introducing the following correlation function for generalized momenta where Π * (x, t; s) and Π(y, t ′ ; s) denote solutions of the Hamiltonian equations, Eq. ( where μ is a suitable dimensional constant. By Fouriertransforming this equation one obtains the quantization Note that for a lattice version of the theory, the condition in Eq. (37) should be replaced with where a is the lattice spacing along spatial directions and b is the lattice spacing along time direction. Again, by Fourier-transforming this equation one obtains Eq. ( VI. COARSE-GRAINING: FROM QUANTUM FIELD THEORY TO QUANTUM MECHANICS In this section we illustrate how to obtain a nonrelativistic theory for a quantum wave-function ψ(x, t), by applying a suitable coarse graining procedure to the Schrödinger field Ψ(x, t; τ ). We limit our considerations to local fields and single-particle wavefunctions, disregarding the case of many-body wavefunctions, since they are non-local objects unsuitable for describing in the same framework non-relativistic and relativistic systems, a fortiori in the presence of interactions. We consider the paradigmatic case of a self-interacting quantum scalar field which is also in interaction with a classical electromagnetic field. Starting from the Lagrangian in Eq. ( The classical nature of the electromagnetic field excludes any dependence of A μ (x, t) and Φ(x, t) on the intrinsic time of quantum fluctuations τ . Since we assume that the elecromagnetic field is a static external field, we can also neglect "propagative" terms such as F μν F μν . Thereofere, the total Lagrangian, including the contributions of the external fields, reads In order to consider the non-relativistic limit, we rewrite φ(x, t; τ ) in terms of a high-frequency component e -imc 2 t/ and a slow component Ψ(x, t; τ ) according to the relation in Eq. ( where the non-relativistic Lagrangian L nr [Ψ] is the one define in Eq. ( where we have made explicit the dependence of the quantum fields on τ , as opposed to the classical fields, which are assumed independent of it. We can now introduce the coarse-graining argument which allows us to deduce quantum mechanics from quantum field theory. Let us recall that within the symplectic quantization approach we have to deal with a generalized Hamiltonian, that we have also called symplectic action, because its physical dimensions are those of an action. This generalized Hamiltonian is related to the Lagrangian in Eq. ( Since for physical reasons we have to assume that the generalized Hamiltonian takes a finite value, also the "potential energy" contribution, i.e. the one depending on Ψ(x, t; τ ), and the "kinetic energy" contribution, i.e. the one which depending on Π(x, t; τ ), have to remain finite for any values of τ . Accordingly, the generalized momenta are bounded functions of τ . Therefore, averaging with respect to the intrinsic time τ both terms of Eq. ( For what concerns the quantum field Ψ , we assume that its intrinsic-time average defines the quantum mechanics wave-function By assuming that the external field is such that q 2 ǫ 0 μ 0 Φ 2 /m ≪ qΦ, Eq. ( The important information which must be retained from Eq. ( It is only in peculiar cases, related to quantum phase transitions, that one finds situations where the following replacement is correct Ψ+ where in Eq. ( The main conclusion is that for local fields in the presence of self-interactions, in general the Schrödinger field Ψ(x, t; τ ) is intrinsically fluctuating and cannot be reduced to a wave-function. Only when the effect of the external classical field is dominant with respect to the self interaction, namely where ||•|| denotes an L 2 norm in the appropriate Hilbert space, or when the self interaction is set to zero (g = 0), the coarse-graining with respect to the intrinsic time τ allows one to map the fluctuating quantum field to a wave-function, uniquely determined in each point of space-time as the solution of the Schrödinger equation: In summary, the above derivation is a well-defined protocol for obtaining a wave function ψ(r, t) (with |ψ(x, t)| 2 representing a probability density in space-time) from a fluctuating quantum field Ψ(r, t; τ ) by a sort of adiabatic elimination procedure, combined with suitable assumptions about the role of self-interacting contributions in the original field theory. In this paper we have explained how the symplectic quantization approach to quantum field theory introduced in 