Strengthening by grain refinement via the Hall-Petch mechanism and softening by nanograin formation via the inverse Hall-Petch mechanism have been the subject of argument for decades, particularly for ultrafine-grained materials. In this study, the Hall-Petch relationship is examined for ultrafine-grained magnesium, aluminum, copper, and iron produced by severe plastic deformation in the literature. Magnesium, aluminum, copper, and their alloys follow the Hall-Petch relationship with a low slope, but an up-break appears when the grain sizes are reduced below 500-1000 nm. This extra strengthening, which is mainly due to the enhanced contribution of dislocations, is followed by a down-break for grain sizes smaller than 70-150 nm due to the diminution of the dislocation contribution and an enhancement of thermally-activated phenomena. For pure iron with a lower dislocation mobility, the Hall-Petch breaks are not evident, but the strength at the nanometer grain size range is lower than the expected Hall-Petch trend in the submicrometer range. The strength of nanograined iron can be increased to the expected trend by stabilizing grain boundaries via impurity atoms. Detailed analyses of the data confirm that grain refinement to the nanometer level is not necessarily a solution to achieve extra strengthening, but other strategies such as microstructural stabilization by segregation or precipitation are required. Bulk nanostructured materials have ultrafine grains with sizes smaller than one micrometer with mainly high-angle grain boundaries, and they are receiving significant attention in recent years due to their enhanced mechanical and functional properties The strength of materials can be enhanced by several strategies such as solution hardening, dislocation hardening, grain-boundary hardening, and precipitation hardening where σ 0 is the friction stress, and A is a constant. The dislocation hardening can be quantified through the Bailey-Hirsch equation where M is the Taylor factor of 3.06, α is a constant depending on the dislocation interaction, G is the shear modulus, b is the Burgers vector, and ρ is the dislocation density. Some theoretical studies suggested that the dislocation density is inversely proportional to the grain size, and thus the variation of yield strength with grain size can follow a Hall-Petch-like relationship even in the presence of dislocations Another complication in the application of the Hall-Petch relationship to bulk nanostructured materials arises from the occurrence of the inverse Hall-Petch mechanism The occurrence of segregation due to non-equilibrium microstructural features of severely deformed materials is another parameter that can affect the strength of these materials The grain sizes of severely deformed metals are usually in the range of the submicrometer level, but there are high interests to reduce the grain size further to the nanometer level (< 100 nm) to achieve enhanced mechanical properties through the Hall-Petch mechanism In this study, the Hall-Petch relationship for magnesium, aluminum, copper, and iron after processing with SPD was investigated. It was found that the grain refinement to the nanometer level does not necessarily lead to higher strength and hardness due to the breaks in the Hall-Petch relationship, but other strategies such as stabilization of grains and grain boundaries by precipitates or segregation are required. This study investigates the Hall-Petch relationship for four groups of materials: (i) magnesium and its alloys, which have low melting points and hexagonal close-packed (HCP) structure; (ii) aluminum and its alloys, which have low melting points and face-centered cubic (FCC) structure; (iii) copper and its alloys, which have moderate melting points and an FCC crystal structure; and (iv) iron with a high melting point and a body-centered cubic (BCC) structure. By considering the melting points and crystal structures, the fastest dislocation mobility belongs to magnesium and aluminum, and iron has the slowest dislocation mobility. The experimental data for yield strength, hardness and grain size were gathered from the literature. The grain sizes (the average diameter of the regions separated by high-angle grain boundaries) were measured either with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) or electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD). To plot the Hall-Petch relationship, the hardness values were converted to the yield stress by the Tabor equation The gathered data are either after HPT, ECAP, or ARB processes, but some data for the annealed and coarse-grained materials were included for comparison. For magnesium, since texture can influence the data after ECAP and ARB processing, only the data after HPT processing were gathered. Moreover, since iron alloys can show phase transformations or the presence of other compounds such as carbides, they were not included in this study to avoid complications. The composite materials or materials containing particles were also excluded, but limited age-hardenable aluminum alloys were included for comparison. The gathered data, taken from Refs. , are given in Tables A1, A2, A3, and A4 of the Appendix A for magnesium, aluminum, copper, and iron, respectively. The plot of yield stress versus the inverse square root of grain size for magnesium and its alloys is shown in Figure For aluminum and its alloys, the trend of datum points in the Hall-Petch plot is rather similar to magnesium, although the scattering of the data is less, as shown in Figure The plot between the strength and the inverse square root of the grain size for copper and its alloys is shown in Figure The Hall-Petch plot for iron is shown in Figure The current study shows different behaviors of magnesium, aluminum, copper, and iron when their yield stress is examined in different grain size regions through the Hall-Petch plots. While magnesium, aluminum, and copper show one up-break and one down-break in the Hall-Petch relationship, iron fails to show a clear break. Three questions need to be discussed. (i) What is the reason for the occurrence of such breaks? (ii) What is the reason for the different behaviors of the four selected metallic groups? (iii) Is grain refinement to the nanometer level beneficial to achieve ultrahigh strength in severely deformed materials? Regarding the first question, it should be noted that the strength of materials is influenced by different mechanisms such as solution hardening, dislocation hardening, grain-boundary hardening, and precipitation hardening Regarding the second question, iron apparently follows the Hall-Petch relationship, but the three other metals show breaks in the Hall-Petch relationship. Here, it should be noted that only pure iron was included in this study, because iron alloys are rather complicated in their structure and strengthening mechanisms. For iron, which has the strongest atomic bond energy, the highest melting point, and the slowest dislocation mobility among the four selected metallic systems [161], there should be a reasonable inverse relation between the dislocation density and the grain size, leading to a Hall-Petch-like relationship from the micrometer grain sizes to the nanometer grain sizes Regarding the third question on the significance of grain refinement to the nanometer region on extra strengthening, each material can be discussed separately. For magnesium, the reduction of grain size to the nanometer level does not provide a clear benefit to achieve extra strengthening. This negative behavior can be overcome by adding a large concentration of solute atoms into magnesium to suppress the dislocation mobility, as attempted earlier by using the concept of ultra-SPD The validity of the Hall-Petch relationship for severely deformed magnesium, aluminum, copper, and their alloys, as well as for iron, was examined. Up-breaks due to the enhanced contribution of dislocation hardening and down-breaks due to the reduced contribution of dislocation hardening and the possible contribution of thermally-activated phenomena were observed in magnesium, aluminum, and copper. Iron mainly followed the Hall-Petch relationship from the micrometer to nanometer grain size ranges, although the hardening at the nanometer grain sizes somehow negatively deviated from the relationship. To achieve a high strength, a combination of grain refinement and precipitation/segregation generation appears to be more effective than only nanograin formation. Future studies are required to quantitively analyze the contribution of different hardening mechanisms to the strength of severely deformed nanograined materials to clarify the role of the inverse Hall-Petch relationship in their mechanical behavior. Data taken from the literature for grain size (measured either with TEM or EBSD), yield stress or hardness divided by three, and dislocation density are given in Table Reported experimental data for grain size, yield strength or hardness divided by three, and dislocation density for magnesium and its alloys before and after processing by severe plastic deformation. 