ZnSe and related materials like ZnMgSe and ZnCdSe are promising II-VI host materials for optically mediated quantum information technology such as single photon sources or spin qubits. Integrating these heterostructures into photonic crystal (PC) cavities enables further improvements, for example realizing Purcell-enhanced single photon sources with increased quantum efficiency. Here we report on the successful implementation of two-dimensional (2D) PC cavities in strained ZnSe quantum wells (QW) on top of a novel AlAs supporting layer. This approach overcomes typical obstacles associated with PC membrane fabrication in strained materials, such as cracks and strain relaxation in the corresponding devices. We demonstrate the attainment of the required mechanical stability in our PC devices, complete strain retainment and effective vertical optical confinement. Structural analysis of our PC cavities reveals excellent etching anisotropy. Additionally, elemental mapping in a scanning transmission electron microscope confirms the transformation of AlAs into AlOx by post-growth wet oxidation and reveals partial oxidation of ZnMgSe at the etched sidewalls in the PC. This knowledge is utilized to tailor FDTD simulations and to extract the ZnMgSe dispersion relation with small oxygen content. Optical characterization of the PC cavities with cross-polarized resonance scattering spectroscopy verifies the presence of cavity modes. The excellent agreement between simulation and measured cavity mode energies demonstrates wide tunability of the PC cavity and proves the pertinence of our model. This implementation of 2D PC cavities in the ZnSe material system establishes a solid foundation for future developments of ZnSe quantum devices. Photonic crystals (PC) structures, which are characterized by periodic variations in their refractive indices, possess the ability to modulate light generation and propagation by engineering the photonic band gap. Due to their small mode volume and moderately high Q-factor, PC cavities are particularly intriguing to enable substantial emission rate enhancement via the Purcell effect, Especially, ZnSe-and (Zn,Mg)Se-based heterostructures provide a large direct band gap and high oscillator strength. The minimal lattice mismatch between ZnSe and GaAs allows for nearly defect-free growth of ZnSe on standard GaAs substrates. More complex structures, implementing ZnSe QWs between ternary (Zn,Mg)Se barriers, enable even more intensive emission, smaller linewidths and the opportunity of spectral tuning by QW engineering. In addition to the heterostructure, the design of the PC cavity also plays a crucial role in determining important parameters such as the Q-factor and mechanical stability. Therefore, we used the commercial FDTD solver Lumerical to perform FDTD simulations for three different vertical PC designs shown in the inset of Fig. The simulations were carried out by assuming a design of an unmodified L3 cavity (PC cavity with three holes missing in the center) with a lattice constant of 175 nm and a radii ratio (i.e. radius/lattice constant) of 0.26. For the purpose of comparison, we restrict ourselves to the selection of a single specific mode (Mode-1, see Fig. with F 0 and E 0 representing the effective oscillator strength and band gap of the SEO model, respectively. We only modified the third term in the square root into a Lorentz oscillator to avoid divergence near the ZnMgSe band gap energy E g . At low temperatures, we assumed E g = 2.82 + 1.28x (eV) as reported in Ref., For the dispersion relation of the wet-oxidized former AlAs-buffer layer (and also for the AlO x capping layer), we used values from Tauc-Lorentz model, as this model provides the most accurate fit for the heterostructures according to ellipsometry measurements. The obtained refractive index (see SI section S2) is close to that reported by Ref. 3 , which depicts the Purcell enhancement averaged for the effective cavity volume, independent on where our dipole source is located. Here in the formula, λ is the cavity mode wavelength and n is assumed to be the refractive index of ZnMgSe at λ. The simulation results are shown in Fig. Having established the PC cavity designs, we now turn our attention to the fabrication of the PC cavities. The device fabrication process employs a top-down technique, shortly summarized in the following (see SI section S3 for details). First, 40 nm Cr is deposited on the pristine layer stack as a hard mask. Secondly, the PC cavity design is defined using e-beam lithography. The pattern is then transferred into the Cr layer using reactive ion etching (RIE) with a gas combination of Cl 2 /O 2 . Next, several successive etching steps are performed, starting with wet-chemical etching of the AlO x capping layer using developer AZMIF326. Then RIE dry etching with H 2 /Ar and Cl 2 /Ar/CH 4 chemistry is applied for etching through the ZnSe/ZnMgSe heterostructure and the AlAs layer, respectively. Subsequently, the sample undergoes wet oxidation in a reaction chamber at 350 °C using water vapor carried by nitrogen gas flow. After wet oxidation, the 220 nm thick AlAs buffer is transformed into roughly 190 nm thick AlO x (shrinkage ratio of 86 %, similar to reported values Following the fabrication process, Fig. To investigate the influence of wet oxidation on the sample's strain condition, we measured photoluminescence (PL) spectra from the same sample at untreated and wet-oxidized regions, as indicated by the black and red spots in the inset of Fig. Following our PC cavity design and sample preparation, the subsequent optical characterization of the PC cavities is conducted using a cross-polarized resonance scattering (RS) spectroscopy setup, In order to verify the presence of cavity modes, we first performed line scans in x-and ydirection across a PC cavity (with dimensions L=186 ± 4 nm, R=0.308 ± 0.016). A reflection map of the investigated PC cavity is shown as inset in the left upper corner of Fig. To address the influence of fabrication tolerances and microscopic PC designs on the experimentally observed resonant signals, normalized experimental spectra of six PC cavities are shown in Fig. In order to gain a more comprehensive insight into the PC cavities and especially to quantify the dispersion relation in our heterostructures including the abovementioned formation of ZnMgSeO, we extensively investigated nearly 100 individual PC cavities with varying lattice constants and radii ratios and extracted the experimental cavity mode energies from the measured RS spectra. In Fig. The observation of cavity modes, which spans a broad range of cavity mode energy from 2.456 eV to 2.821 eV, proves the successful implementation of 2D PC cavities in ZnSe QW heterostructures. At the same time, the excellent agreement between our simulation and experimental results demonstrates the pertinence of our simulation model using our quantified dispersion relation of ZnMgSeO. In this work, we demonstrate the successful implementation of 2D photonic crystal cavities within ZnSe QW heterostructures as tailored for the blue/green spectral range. To the best of our knowledge, no prior investigation of 2D PC cavities has been reported in this specific material system. In our innovative approach, the QW heterostructure is grown on top of an AlAs buffer layer, which then is post-growth wet-oxidized into AlO x . This technique is a mandatory requirement to provide excellent mechanical stability as well as sufficient optical confinement in the vertical direction via index guiding. Detailed analysis using scanning electron microscopy revealed excellent structural properties of the fabricated PC cavities, with steep side walls of the etched holes signifying remarkable etching anisotropy. This is particularly noteworthy considering the small characteristic length scale, represented by etched holes with diameters in the range of 70-115 nm. The applied elemental mapping techniques, namely energy dispersive spectroscopy and electron energy loss spectroscopy, not only confirmed the complete wet-oxidation of AlAs into AlO x , but also revealed partial oxidation of the II-VI heterostructure. In particular, oxidation of the ZnMgSe barriers leads to the formation of ZnMgSeO and alters the corresponding dispersion relation. The optical characterization of fabricated PC cavities using cross-polarized resonance scattering spectroscopy verified the existence of cavity modes in the central PC cavity region, of which the energy can be tuned over a broad spectral range of 2.456-2.821 eV, depending on the microscopic PC design. Moreover, we quantified the effective dispersion relation of the partially oxidized QW heterostructure and determined a scaling factor of 93 ± 1 % by fitting the measured cavity mode energies with simulation results performed with a FDTD solver. The obtained results represent a solid experimental and theoretical basis for further investigations of PC cavities in the II-VI semiconductor material system. Those may cover for example interaction between cavity and QW emission, the enhancement of Purcell factors or tailoring of the angular far-field projection of the cavity modes. * Purcell factor is calculated with the formula