Room temperature photoluminescence and optical absorption spectra have been measured in wurtzite InxAlyGa1-x-yN (x ~ 0.06, 0.02 < y < 0.27) layers grown by molecular beam epitaxy. Photoluminescence spectra show both an enhancement of the integrated intensity and an increasing Stokes shift with the Al content. Both effects arise from an Al-enhanced exciton localization revealed by the S-and W-shaped temperature dependences of the photoluminescence emission energy and bandwidth respectively. Present results point to these materials as a promising choice for the active region in efficient light emitters. An In-related bowing parameter of 1.6 eV was derived from optical absorption data. Efficient visible Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Laser Diodes (LDs) based on InGaN alloys are commercially available despite a very high dislocation density due to heteroepitaxial growth. The high efficiency of InGaN-based LEDs and LDs is generally attributed to a strong In-induced exciton localization that prevents carriers to reach nonradiative recombination centers (NRCs). Alloy compositions were determined by Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) using a 2 MeV He + ion beam. The spectra were acquired in random geometry and with the detector located at a scattering angle of 170o. High resolution x-ray diffraction (HRXRD) measurements were done to assess both the crystal quality and the strain state of the QN layers once their composition was known from RBS data considering the validity of Vegard's law for the lattice parameter. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were carried out to study the surface morphology and to assess the TDD. PL was excited with the 325 nm line of a He-Cd laser with 1.5 mW power. Absorbance data were derived from transmittance and reflectance spectra obtained with a Jasco V-650 spectrophotometer. Figure The simulation employs a homogenous In incorporation along the growth direction, which provides a reliable fitting of the experimental data. The alloy compositions for each sample are summarized in Table The values of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of symmetric (0002) ω and (0002) θ-2θ scans are collected in Table where G E and ∆E represent the "effective band gap", and the absorption edge broadening, respectively. The QN band gap empirical dependence with composition and residual strain along the c-axis, zz ∈ , is given by: where The comparison of PL and absorbance spectra for samples A and B shows a Stokes shift of ≈ 40 and ≈ 120 meV respectively. Comparable values were reported on both QNs 6,7 and InGaN 10,14 layers, explained in terms of exciton localization in potential fluctuations due to alloy inhomogenties. Note that for samples C and D it was not possible to estimate the Stokes shift because the absorption band edges correspond to the GaN template. However, for sample C a Stokes shift higher than 150 meV is expected considering that the QN bandgap must be at least as wide as that of GaN. Therefore, these results reveal an increasing Stokes shift for higher AlN mole fractions. Figure 15) to exciton thermalization into shallower potential minima than those responsible of the S-shape. The same temperature dependence was observed in sample B but shifted towards higher temperatures indicating a stronger localization degree. In summary, the optical properties of QN layers with low In content (~ 6%) were studied by PL and optical absorption as a function of the AlN mole fraction (2 to 27%). 