Recent development in two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials have motivated the search for new van der Waals magnetic materials, especially Ising-type magnets with strong magnetic anisotropy. Fe-based MPX3 (M = transition metal, X = chalcogen) compounds such as FePS3 and FePSe3 both exhibit an Ising-type magnetic order, but FePSe3 receives much less attention compared to FePS3. This work focuses on establishing the strategy to engineer magnetic anisotropy and exchange interactions in this less-explored compound. Through chalcogen and metal substitutions, the magnetic anisotropy is found to be immune against S substitution for Se whereas tunable only with heavy Mn substitution for Fe. In particular, Mn substitution leads to a continuous rotation of magnetic moments from the out-of-plane direction towards in-plane. Furthermore, the magnetic ordering temperature displays non-monotonic doping dependence for both chalcogen and metal substitutions but due to different mechanisms. These findings provide deeper insight into the Ising-type magnetism in this important van der Waals material, shedding light on the study of other Ising-type magnetic systems as well as discovering novel 2D magnets for potential applications in spintronics. The study of two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials has greatly advanced our understanding of magnetism in low dimensions and the implementation of materials for technological applications . So far, the studies have been limited to a few material systems. Seeking new magnetic van der Waals (vdW) materials with potential to realize 2D magnetism and engineering their magnetic properties has become one important research direction. With this motivation, vdW-type antiferromagnetic (AFM) MPX3 (M = transition metal, X = chalcogen) materials have attracted growing attentions owing to their well-established magnetic orders in bulk materials and the feasibility of obtaining their atomically thin layers Importantly, magnetism in MPX3 varies with the choice of M and X Therefore, most of 2D magnets such as the atomically thin layers of FePS3 This work focuses on investigating the Ising-type antiferromagnet FePSe3 through chalcogen and metal substitutions. We found that S and Mn substitutions in FePSe3 play distinct roles in manipulating magnetic anisotropies and exchange interactions. Our work provides a better understanding of the Ising-type magnetism in FePSe3 and related compounds, which can be further extended to other Ising-type systems. Furthermore, the realized tunable Ising-type magnetic material offer a novel platform to explore 2D magnetism and device applications. As a member of the MPX3 family, FePSe3 was discovered a few decades ago Metal substitution in MPX3, unlike the chalcogen substitution which leaves the magnetic metal layer intact, introduces inevitable magnetic fluctuations and frustrations. Nevertheless, metal substitution has been demonstrated as a higly effective approach to control magnetism in MPX3 due to the distinct single-ion anisotropy for different M 2+ ions As discussed above, the chalcogen S and metal Mn substitutions provide two distinct routes to control and further understand the magnetism in FePSe3. However, the magnetic properties of S-substituted FePSe3 have not been studied so far, and for metal substitution, only polycrystalline Fe1-xMnxPSe3 have been investigated To investigate the evolution of magnetic anisotropy in FeP(Se1-xSx)3 and Fe1-xMnxPSe3, we have measured the temperature dependence of susceptibility (χ) under out-of-plane (H⊥ab) and in-plane (H//ab) magnetic fields of μ0H = 0.1 T. Because the sample holder may contribute to magnetic anisotropy In FeP(Se1-xSx)3, the Ising-type magnetic structure upon substitution is supported by the unchanged magnetic easy axis. As shown in Figure Given that the magnetic anisotropy in FePSe3 mainly originates from Fe 2+ crystal-field anisotropy, substitution in the Fe sites instead of Se should be a more effective way to tune anisotropy. This has indeed been demonstrated in our Mn-Fe metal substitution study. As shown in Figure Tuning the magnetic anisotropy in MPX3 corresponds to changing the magnetic easy axis Similarly, as shown in Figure It is rather surprising that FePSe3 maintains its magnetic anisotropy even with up to 90% of Mn substitution. Interestingly, a similar retention of anisotropy upon large Mn for Fe substitution (up to 97%) has also been observed in another Fe-based compound K2FeF4 The spin rotation induced by heavy Mn substitution is also evident in the fielddependent magnetization measured under out-of-plane (H⊥ab) (red color) and in-plane (H//ab) (blue color) magnetic fields. As shown in Figure Our results demonstrate that Ising-type AFM ordering in FePSe3 is unaffected by S substitution but can be tuned with havey Mn substitution. The strong anisotropy in FeP(Se1-xSx)3 compounds makes them promising candidates for 2D magnets. In addition, given that both pristine FePSe3 For TN, on the other hand, it is determined by magnetic exchange interactions within and between magnetic sublattices in AFM materials in a more complicated way. Therefore, though exchange parameters for the end compounds FePS3 and MnPS3 have comparable values The overall magnetic interactions in MnPS3 and NiPS3 are governed by the nearestneighbor (J1) and the third nearest-neighbor (J3) exchanges respectively In conclusion, we have studied the magnetic properties of the Ising-type antiferromagnet FePSe3 and identified strategies to engineer its magnetism. The magnetic anisotropy in pristine FePSe3 is robust against S substitutions but more tunable with Mn substitutions. In addition, both S and Mn substitutions result in a non-monotonic evolution of the magnetic ordering temperature, which might be attributed to different mechanisms of Fe-Fe distance-mediated exchange interactions and magnetic frustrations, respectively. Our study provides a deeper understanding of the Ising-type Fe-based MPX3 vdW magnetic system, offering an important platform for discovering novel 2D magnets and engineer magnetic properties. Materials Synthesis: The single crystals of FeP(Se1-xSx)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and Fe1-xMnxPSe3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) used in this work were synthesized via a chemical vapor transport method using I2 as the transport agent. For each composition, elemental powders with desired molar ratios were sealed in a quartz tube and placed in a two-zone furnace with a temperature gradient from 750 to 550 °C for a week. Elemental and structure characterizations: The elemental compositions and crystal structures of the obtained crystals were examined by energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and x-ray diffraction (XRD), respectively. Magnetic property characterizations: Magnetization measurements were performed in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). study). J. S. acknowledges the support from NIH under award P20GM103429 for powder XRD experiment. J.W. acknowledges the support from the U.S. National Science Foundation under grand DMR-2316811 for structure refinement and analysis. 