Thin gadolinium metallic layers were deposited by high-pressure sputtering in pure Ar atmosphere. Subsequently, in situ thermal oxidation was performed at temperatures ranging from 150 to 750 C. At an oxidation temperature of 500 C the films show a transition from monoclinic structure to a mixture of monoclinic and cubic. Regrowth of interfacial SiOx is observed as temperature is increased, up to 1.6 nm for 750 C. This temperature yields the lowest interface trap density, 4 10 10 eV 1 cm 2 , but the effective permittivity of the resulting dielectric is only 7.4. The reason of this low value is found on the oxidation mechanism, which yields a surface with located bumps. These bumps increase the average thickness, thus reducing the capacitance and therefore the calculated permittivity. The continuous advance of the microelectronic industry will require the transition to third generation high permittivity dielectrics in the near future. This generation should present a higher permittivity value than the HfO2 that is currently widely used An interesting candidate is Gd2O3, with a reasonably large-k value (around 18), large bandgap (6 eV) A straightforward method to deposit Gd oxides is reactive sputtering of a Gd target with a mixed Ar/O2 atmosphere Gadolinium metallic thin films were deposited by High Pressure Sputtering (in the following, HPS) from a metallic Gd target (purity 99.9%, diameter 5 cm). The target was sputtered by the application of rf power (between 10 and 30 W) in a high purity Ar atmosphere. The range of deposition pressures studied was 0.25-1.0 mbar, much higher than conventional sputtering systems. The reason of this high pressure is twofold: first, to thermalize the sputtered species within a very short distance reducing damage to the samples, and second, to confine the plasma within a small neighborhood of the target, that enables a very compact design of the system Concerning the processing procedure, before deposition the system was evacuated to a base pressure of 7.5 10 7 mbar using a turbomolecular pump. High purity Ar was introduced into the chamber through a mass flow controller. The optimal combination of power and pressure was selected by glow discharge optical spectroscopy (GDOS). After the Gd thin film was sputtered and without exposing the sample to the atmosphere, all pumping ports were closed, leaving the chamber sealed. Then, the chamber was filled with pure O2 up to a pressure of 1 bar, and the substrate holder temperature was ramped at 50 C/min up to the oxidation temperature (we studied temperatures between 150 and 750 C). This temperature was kept for 60 min (shorter times yielded incomplete oxidation). Then the substrates were cooled down to room temperature and subsequently removed from the chamber. The maximum temperature of 750 C was chosen with the aid of Technology Computer Aided Design, (TCAD), simulations which implement the Massoud oxidation model The substrates used were 2'' n-Si wafers, grown by the floating zone method with (1 0 0) orientation. The substrates were cleaned by the conventional RCA procedure The emission lines of the HPS glow discharge were registered by a Jobin Yvon H-25 monochromator attached to a photon counting system, measuring the plasma emission at wavelengths between 280 and 520 nm with a resolution of 0.1 nm. The sheet resistance of the oxidized GdOx layers was measured by a conventional 4-point probe method. The FTIR spectra were measured between 400 and 4000 cm 1 with a Nicolet Magna-IR 750 series II spectrometer. Glancing incident X-ray diffraction (XRD) was measured with a XPERT MRD Panalytical system for 2h angles between 10-70. To calculate the thicknesses of the layers, the same system in a h-2h configuration was used to measure the X-ray reflection at low angles (XRR), between 0.2 and 4. The thicknesses were obtained by fitting the reflection spectra. Cross-sectional TEM images were obtained with a JEOL-JEM-2000FX microscope operating at 200 keV. To fabricate MIS devices, 70 nm of Al was e-beam evaporated on top of the dielectrics and on the backside of the wafer. Squares were defined by positive lithography and wet etch of Al. After that, the devices were annealed in forming gas (FGA) for 20 min at two typical processing temperatures, 300 and 450 C. The admittance of the resulting MIS devices was measured with an Agilent 4294A impedance meter. To correct for possible lithography offsets, several areas were measured (500 500 lm 2 , 300 300 lm 2 , and 100 100 lm 2 ). The interface trap density (Dit) was estimated by the conductance method. Cgate vs Vgate curves were fitted using the Hauser algorithm The first objective was selecting the optimal sputtering conditions. We measured the GDOS spectrum of the plasma for rf power between 10 W and 30 W while setting the pressure at 0.5 mbar. The results are shown in Fig. In order to determine the optimal working pressure, the plasma spectra were measured at pressures of 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1.0 mbar, and they are shown in Fig. From the figure it is clear that at a pressure of 0.25 mbar the plasma does not present ionized Ar, thus there is no Gd extraction. For higher pressures there is Gd extraction, and the Gd vs Ar intensity ratio is higher on 0.50 mbar, which indicates a more efficient extraction. Thus we chose this pressure, 0.50 mbar, as working pressure. Once the deposition conditions were fixed, as a fast screening procedure we studied the oxidation degree of the metallic films by 4-point sheet resistance measurements, in order to obtain the onset temperature of oxidation. We performed consecutive annealing treatments at increasing temperature, and we found that under 350 C the sheet resistance was finite with an ohmic behavior. On the other hand, for higher temperatures the resistance was too large to be measured. This was a first indication that full oxidation was not achieved for temperatures under 350 C. Thick Gd films (around 200 nm) were deposited and oxidized at temperatures between 150 and 750 C in order to study the crystalline structure of the oxidized Gd films. Thick layers were used in order to obtain intense diffraction peaks. The XRD diffraction patterns of as-deposited metallic Gd and films oxidized at different temperatures are shown in Fig. Metallic Gd films (Fig. These peaks may correspond to the cubic Gd2O3 structure Peaks at 26, 29.5, and 33.9 could also be related to hexagonal GdSi2 These results confirm the resistivity measurements that pointed to a minimum oxidation temperature of 350 C. Also it can be concluded that oxidation at low temperature produces a polycrystalline monoclinic Gd2O3 and gadolinium silicate may be forming in the interface. On the other hand, oxidation at temperatures above 500 C yields a mixture with cubic phase. This behavior is contrary to thermodynamic studies and the results of other groups In order to check if these conclusions can be extended to thin films, 15 nm -thick films were also studied by XRD. This thickness was also the chosen one to fabricate the MIS devices. As expected, the measurements were much noisier and the only observed diffraction was monoclinic (401) Gd2O3 peak, one of the most intense, at 29.4 In order to obtain the thickness of the Gd2O3 layers, XRR measurements were also performed. The results were fitted with a segmented algorithm to a Gd2O3/SiO2/Si bilayer model, using density, thickness and roughness as parameters. As an example, Fig. Since one of the goals of this work is trying to minimize SiO2 or gadolinium silicate regrowth, we relied on transmission FTIR spectroscopy as a fast and more accurate technique to study the SiO2 presence on the samples. The drawback of this technique is that it measures the film and the substrate, thus a reference substrate is needed to correct the spectrum. Our experimental procedure was to measure a Si wafer of the same lot HF etched just before FTIR measurements, in order to minimize native oxide regrowth. This spectrum was used to correct for the sample substrate absorbance. However, this approach has two drawbacks: slight differences in wafer thicknesses yield residual Si peaks in the spectra and some native oxide growth is unavoidable because after HF etching the substrate is transferred to the FTIR system in an uncontrolled atmosphere. This has the effect that for these small thicknesses FTIR can only be used qualitatively for SiOx thickness determination. Concerning Gd2O3, due to the high atomic mass of Gd, the vibration of the Gd-O bond would shift to wavenumbers around 405-455 cm 1 In particular we have not found any clear vibration on 900 cm 1 , so it is not likely that there is a silicate formation. In fact, most peaks in the spectra are identical in shape and intensity, and can be related to the Si substrate correction. The exception is the feature at around 1060 cm 1 , which shows a clear increase in absorption with increasing oxidation temperature. This feature is due to the SiOx that is usually present at the High-k/Si interface. Unstressed thermal SiO2 has its most intense stretching absorption at 1076 cm 1 The electrical results of the MIS devices are shown on Fig. On Fig. The EOT of the devices was obtained from the fit of the Cgate-Vgate FG annealed at 450 C with the CVC algorithm Concerning the gate leakage, it is clear that oxidation at higher temperatures reduces leakage by several orders of magnitude. Also, FGA at 450 C also reduces leakage by an order of magnitude as compared to FGA at 300 C. This reduction can be attributed to an improvement of the quality of the Gd2O3 layer, probably due to grain size growth, and to the densification/relaxation/defect passivation of the SiOx interfacial layer (as we previously showed, with increasing temperature the Si-O stretching peak shifts towards the relaxed SiO2 value). Another improvement that happens with oxidation temperature is also evident when extracting the interface trap density (Dit) from the electrical measurements by the conductance method. The results for 10 kHz are also included on Table The main drawback that we have found is the moderate permittivity value found. The origin of this low permittivity could be extrinsic (a measuring problem, such a miscalculation of the thicknesses obtained from XRR) or intrinsic (silicate formation, low permittivity of the dominant monoclinic phase...). In order to clarify this question, we prepared cross-sectional TEM samples of the samples oxidized at 500 and 750 C. The results for the 750 C sample are shown in Fig. On Fig. However, there are other regions on the surface where the film presents ''bumps'' (Fig. In any case, independently on the origin of the bumps, they are clearly at the origin of the low effective permittivity calculated: even if the permittivity were the same as Gd2O3, since they are 2-3 times thicker and occupy a big portion of the MIS surface, they produce a big decrease on capacitance. This decrease would be even more exacerbated if the dome explanation is correct, since in that case the capacity of the bump is the Gd2O3 capacity in series with the vacuum capacity, which has a relative permittivity of 1. As a consequence of this problem, even after the low Dit values found, we have to conclude that pure thermal oxidation of metallic Gd does not meet the requirements for future high-k dielectrics. Thus, following a similar approach as the works on HfO2 of Y. Hoshino et al. In this paper we have explored the thermal oxidation of metallic Gd in order to obtain high-k Gd2O3 on Si. The results show that the films oxidized above 500 C are a mixture of monoclinic and cubic phases. The leakage and interface trap density decrease with temperature, being minimal after oxidation at 750 C and FGA at 450 C. However, we found a low effective permittivity of the MIS device, due to the formation of domes at the Gd2O3/Si interface. These bumps decrease capacitance by a large amount, so the advantage of the high-k Gd2O3 is lost. Thus, in the future we will explore other processing approaches in order to obtain device quality high-k Gd2O3. 