In railway transportation, the evaluation of track geometry is an indispensable requirement to ensure the safety and comfort of railway vehicles. A promising approach is to directly use vehicle dynamic responses to assess the impact of track geometry defects. However, the computational cost of obtaining the dynamic response of the vehicle body using dynamics simulation methods is large. Thus, it is important to obtain the dynamic response of the vehicle-track coupled system efficiently and accurately. In this work, a branch Fourier neural operator (BFNO) model is proposed to obtain the dynamic response of the vehicle-track coupled system. The model takes into account the nonlinear relationship of the vehicle-track coupled system and realizes the fast and accurate estimation of the system dynamic response. The relative L 2 loss (rLSE) of BFNO model is 2.04%, which is reduced by 64%, compared with the traditional neural network (CNN-GRU). In the frequency domain, BFNO model achieves the effective estimation of the dynamic response of the system within the primary frequency range. Compared with the existing methods, our proposed model can make predictions at unseen time steps, enabling predictions from low to high time resolutions. Meanwhile, our proposed model is superior to commercial software in terms of efficiency. In the evaluation of track geometry, users can use pre-trained BFNO to obtain the dynamic response with almost no computational cost. The evaluation of track geometry is an indispensable requirement to ensure the safety and comfort of railway vehicles. Currently, the amplitude of measured track geometry parameters is used to detect and categorize track geometry defects. Although experience generally confirms the safety of this approach, the correlation between defect amplitude and vehicle response is relatively low. The performance of the bogies has a significant impact on the safety and reliability of high-speed trains With the rise of big data mining techniques and artificial intelligence, some areas related to economy and personal safety, such as stock price forecasts (1) Data-driven finite-dimensional operators for learning Euclidean space mappings from numerical simulation data To address the above limitations, the concept of neural operators has been proposed. Neural operators directly learn infinite-dimensional mappings from any function parameter dependencies to solutions, with a key design choice being the selection of operator layers. Commonly used operator layers include Graph Neural Operator (GNO) In this paper, we extend the FNO-based architecture to vehicle-track spatially coupled dynamics systems, enabling the rapid acquisition of responses from the vehicle system. Considering the different frequency ranges of the car body and bogie frames, we propose the BFNO structure. Compared with CNN This study provides the following contributions: (1) A vehicle-track spatially coupled dynamic model was built that considers the dynamic coupling between the wheel and rail. (2) For the first time, we propose a branch Fourier neural operator (BFNO) architecture that separates the car body from bogie, enabling the independent learning of their respective mapping relationships within the system. (3) Our proposed model is able to achieve good estimation in both time and frequency domains, and model achieves predictions from low to high time resolutions. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the vehicle-track spatially coupled dynamics model. Section 3 presents an overview of the proposed methodology, including FNO theory, the architecture of the BFNO model, equation weight normalization technique, and loss function design. Section 4 presents the generation of data, the selection of hyperparameters in neural networks and shows the comparison of estimation results between different models. Finally, conclusions and discussions are given in Section 5. The vehicle-track spatially coupled dynamics model introduced in this study was proposed by Zhai Vehicle-track spatially coupled dynamics is a typical multibody dynamics (MBD) problem. The vibration equation for the vehicle and track subsystems is expressed as Equation where M, C, and K are the generalized mass, damping, and stiffness matrices, respectively; X, Ẋ, and Ẍ are the vectors of displacement, velocity, and acceleration, respectively; P is the vector of the applied loads of the system; t represents time. Inspired by the Newmark-β implicit method, the Zhai method was used to obtain approximate solutions to the equations, as shown in Equation ( where t is the time step, and ψ, φ are free parameters that control the stability and numerical dissipation of the algorithm. The best calculation accuracy and numerical stability were achieved when the values of both parameters were 1/2. Subscripts n-1, n, and n+1 represent the previous, current, and subsequent integration step, respectively. Equation ( In engineering, the mode superposition method (MSUP) where u is the solution field (displacement); φ i is the i-th order mode shape function; q i is the coordinate value of the i-th mode of u; n is the number of modes used. In this study, the rails were modelled as Euler beams, their vibration equations were fourth-order PDEs. The vertical vibration differential equation (Equation ( where EI Y is the rail bending stiffness to the y-axle; Z r (x, t) is the vertical displacement o f the rail; F V i is the vertical dynamic forces at the i-th rail-supporting point; δ(x)is the Dirac delta function; x wj is the coordinate of the j-th wheel, and N is the number of sleepers under the rail; N V is the highest order of the vertical mode shape of the rail. For the intercepted modal order N V , it is necessary to reach the frequency and then more than twice the effective frequency of the analyzed rail. Substituting Equation (6) into Equation ( integrating over [0, l], and using the orthogonality between the different modes, we obtain Equation ( The PDEs of rail vibration were transformed into ODEs. These ODEs, together with those describing the motion of the vehicle system, form a system of coupled differential equations, described as where p and f denote the physical parameters and system excitation parameters with n p and n f respectively; u represents the solutions for all quantities in M, and D is the bounded time domain. Our goal is to learn a mapping between two infinite-dimensional spaces from a finite set of input parameters and output parameters by constructing a neural network to approximate the solution operator of Equation The FNO proposed by Li et al. where P and Q are pointwise neural networks that lift the input a ∈ A to a higher-dimension channel space and output u ∈ U by projecting it back to the target dimension. The model stack has L layers and the iterative update from layer to layer (v j → v j+1 ) in the model is implemented by σ (W j + K j ) ; W j are pointwise linear operators (matrices); K j are integral kernel operators, and σ are fixed activation functions. Definition 2 (K) Define the Fourier convolution operator where F and F - The FNO consists of a frequency-truncation T K in each layer that only allows the lowest K Fourier modes to propagate the input information, as shown in Figure 3. Connecting the output structures of the car body branch and the bogie branch as the model output u ∈ U. Fundamentally, the BFNO is used to extract the feature relationship between the input and output data in the frequency domain, a fully connected layer is used to combine the features and output approximate solutions. The neural operators only output solutions to Equation The differential equation group M in a vehicle-track coupled system consists of multiple coupled ODEs. Considering the units and numerical differences in the different degrees of freedom, there are significant variations in the magnitude of the data corresponding to each equation. Use of normalization techniques reduces scale differences in the input data, improving the training effectiveness and performance of the neural networks. We propose an equation weight normalization technique that effectively leverages prior physical knowledge Algorithm 1 Compute weight λ ij for j th the ODE in i th the dataset end for where σ(x) represents the standard deviation of x, and σ(a, b) generates a random sequence following a uniform distribution on the interval (-a, a) with the same dimensions as b. Max T |M|computes the extremum of each ODE in in the time domain. r is the sensitivity factor, indicating an acceptable level of signal error. In this study, we set r as 2% as a greater penalty. In general, the model performs optimally when the same loss criterion is used for both training and testing. The choice of the loss function plays a crucial role. In this work, we use the relative L 2 loss (rLSE) to measure the performance in our model. The L 2 loss and its square, the mean squared loss (MSE), are common choices for testing criteria in deep learning. We observe that training the model using relative loss has beneficial effects in terms of normalization and regularization, preventing overfitting. The L 2 loss is applied to both the original output (y(t)), the first derivative of the output (∂y/∂t), and the second derivative of the output (∂ 2 y/∂t 2 ), is written as: where ŷ is the predicted output, ∂ ŷ/∂t is the first derivative of the predicted output, ∂ 2 ŷ/∂t 2 is the second derivative of the predicted output, and w 1 , w 2 , w 3 are the weights of each error. Use of derivative loss was motivated by the engineering community's primary interest in derivatives rather than solutions. For example, sound in nature is typically associated with vibration speed (first derivative), whereas human comfort is linked to acceleration (second derivative). This section compares 4 types of model architectures: CNN, CNN-GRU, FNO and BFNO. All models are trained on the proposed loss function. Detailed parameters for each model are summarized in Appendix B to Appendix E. The input and output parameters for the training, validation, and test data set were generated using the Zhai method, described in Section 2. We set the three types of input parameters in each numerical simulation case to be variable: running speed, physical parameters of system and system excitations. As shown in Figure In this study, only track irregularities were included in the system excitations. The track irregularities present on an actual line are superimposed by random irregularities of different wavelengths, phases, and assignments, and are complex stochastic processes related to line mileage. The power spectral density (PSD) is the most commonly used statistical function for representing random track irregularities. It is usually considered as a stationary stochastic process; the statistical characteristics of random track irregularities can only be obtained from field measurements. In engineering, PSD charts are often used to describe the relationship between spectral densities and corresponding frequencies. We used the classical spectral method Selection of hyperparameters is crucial in neural networks, the main hyperparameter tuning methods include manual tuning, grid search, random search, and Bayesian optimization. Bayesian optimization uses the performance of previously searched parameters to infer the next step, improving the search efficiency As shown in Table where y i and ŷi are the i-th actual and predicted data points, respectively, and ȳ and ŷ are the expectations for the actual and predicted data points, respectively. The range of the PCC is from -1 to 1, a higher numerical value indicates a stronger positive correlation and better performance. The training and the validation loss curves of the BFNO model are shown in Figure In order to considering the average performance across the entire training and testing sets, the estimation results of BFNO and MBS methods are shown in Figure It can be observed from Figure In the evaluation of track geometry, considering the vehicle response to track defects requires fast and reliable vehicletrack coupled dynamic simulations based on a large amount of track data. The use of dynamic simulations is well established, but it is computationally expensive. In this paper, the BFNO model was proposed, which provides a more convenient and economical method for estimating vehicle responses and has the potential to be applied to in-service trains. The findings of this study are as follows. (1) The proposed BFNO model separates the car body from the bogie and extracts the feature relationship between input and output data in frequency domain. The model demonstrates good estimation performance in both the time and frequency domains. Under the optimal hyperparameter combination, the rLSE of BFNO model is 2.04%, which is reduced by 64%, compared with the CNN-GRU model. (2) The proposed BFNO model is superior to commercial software in terms of efficiency. In the evaluation of track geometry, users can use pre-trained BFNO to obtain the dynamic response with almost no computational cost. Besides, the improvement in the computational efficiency can support many railway engineering tasks that require repetitive forward numerical simulations. (3) Compared with the CNN-GRU model, the BFNO model can make predictions at unseen time steps. The BFNO model is trained on data with a time step of 0.003s and tested on data with a time step of 0.001s, achieving good generalization performance. However, our proposed model still faces some challenges, such as the prediction performance of the lateral response is slightly inferior to that of the vertical response, the prediction accuracy cannot be guaranteed for physical parameters outside the range of this paper. In the future, we will explore methods to further improve the prediction accuracy of our proposed model and training strategies for model in the case of sparse data. Furthermore, establishing a vehicle-track coupled model under the combined effects of random and disease irregularity, and extend the application of the proposed model in this paper to the analysis and assessment of dynamic responses under defective conditions. Lift the input a ∈ A to a higher-dimension channel space through a fully connected neural network transformation P .