Introduction of a dielectric material in an NMR probe head modifies the frequency response of the probe circuit, a phenomenon revealed by the detuning of the probe. For NMR spectroscopy, this detuning is corrected for by tuning and matching the probe head prior to the NMR measurement. The magnitude of the probe detuning -'the dielectric shift' -provides direct access to the dielectric properties of the sample, enabling NMR spectrometers to simultaneously perform both dielectric and NMR spectroscopy. By measuring sample permittivity as function of frequency, permittivity spectroscopy can be performed using the new methodology. As a proof concept, this was evaluated on methanol, ethanol, 1-propanol, 1-pentanol and 1-octanol using a commercial CPMAS NMR probe head. The results accurately match literature data collected by standard dielectric spectroscopy techniques. Subsequently, the method was also applied to investigate the solvent-surface interactions of water confined in the micropores of an MFI-type, hydrophilic zeolite with Si/Al ratio of 11.5. In the micropores, water adsorbs to Brønsted acid sites and defect sites, resulting in a drastically decreased dielectric permittivity of the nano-confined water. A theoretical background for the new methodology is provided using an effective electric circuit model of a CPMAS probe head with solenoid coil, describing the detuning resulting from insertion of dielectric samples in the probe head. Many chemical, biochemical and physical processes occur at solid-solvent interfaces. Characterization of interfacial interactions is however extremely tedious, especially in 3D porous materials such as zeolites, mesoporous silicates, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs). Such materials are nevertheless abundantly implemented in chemical applications, While NMR and DRS investigations of confined systems are relatively abundant in the literature, correlation of the information acquired with individual techniques is very often difficult. With the here proposed NMR/dielectric multi-diagnostic approach, the long range and average information given by DRS can be seamlessly correlated to the molecular level picture obtained by NMR, uniquely providing the data required to rationalize these effects of host-guest interactions in nanopores. The method allows to record sample permittivity over the range of NMR frequencies both in static and MAS conditions, thus allowing for simultaneous in situ NMR and permittivity spectroscopy. This effect is seen from the reflectance curve of the probe circuit, also known as wobble curve. Standard MAS NMR probe heads are based on a resonant circuit containing a solenoid coil. For an NMR experiment to work properly, the resonance frequency of the circuit should match the Larmor frequency (ωNMR = γB0) defined by the static magnetic field (B0) and the gyromagnetic ratio (γ) of the targeted nucleus. Also, to achieve maximum detection efficiency, the impedance of the probe head circuit should be matched to 50 Ω. When a sample with dielectric properties different from air is inserted in the NMR coil, the frequency response of the probe circuit is modified, as revealed by the detuning of the probe (Figure Materials. MFI-11.5 (CBV2314, MFI framework type, Si/Al = 11.5) was purchased from Zeolyst International in Ammonium-form. Methanol, ethanol 1-propanol, 1-pentanol and 1-octanol were purchased from Fisher Scientific (United Kingdom) and used without further purification or dehydration. Rotor caps with full shaft and o-ring were bought from Rototec (Germany). Load impedance measurement. The load impedance of a H/BB double resonance 4 mm solidstate magic angle spinning (MAS) 300 MHz Bruker probe head was measured in the reflectance mode using a HP 8712C vector network analyser (VNA) connected to the 1 H channel of the probe via a 50 Ω (Z0) coaxial cable (see also Discussion S1 and Figure Calibration curves for dielectric permittivity measurements. To use an NMR probe for dielectric permittivity measurements, for each frequency, the dielectric shift has to be measured for a set of samples with known dielectric constant. To construct these calibration curves, an empty 4 mm zirconia NMR rotor was inserted in the NMR probe head and the probe was tuned to the frequency of interest and matched to 50 Ω. Ultrapure water has been used as permittivity standard, as it features a constant dielectric permittivity ε H 2 O = 79 up to 1 GHz at 22 °C. To demonstrate the applicability of the presented methodology to investigate dielectric properties of nanoconfined water, the dielectric and the spectroscopic properties of water adsorbed in an MFI-11.5 zeolite with Si/Al ratio of 11.5 was monitored. The ammonium-form of the zeolite was calcined at 550 °C for 8 h to promote conversion to its H-form. The zeolite was packed into a 4 mm zirconia rotor and dried for 16 h at 200 °C under vacuum (75 mTorr). Following dehydration, the zeolite was loaded with water and the rotor was capped with a vespel cap with a solid shaft and o-ring, avoiding leakage or additional adsorption of water from the air. The capped rotor with the hydrated sample was equilibrated overnight at 60 °C prior to the measurement. To determine the effective dielectric permittivity of the water fraction in the sample, the dielectric shift of the dehydrated zeolite was subtracted from the dielectric shift of the hydrated sample. A 4 mm H/X/Y triple resonance CPMAS solid-state MAS Bruker probe ( 1 H Larmor Frequency 500 MHz) head was employed in these measurements and its calibration curve for dielectric shift (Figure NMR spectroscopy. NMR Probe Circuit and Calibration. When an oscillatory electric signal is passed through a solenoidal NMR coil, axial magnetic (B1) and electric fields (E1) are generated inside the coil. The electric field outside the coil gives rise to a stray capacitance C0 acting to increase the effective inductance of the coil. In addition, a resistance term R0(f) and a reactance term X0(f) account for the rest of the probe circuitry, eventually comprising tuning and matching components and circuit elements related to other NMR channels in the probe. The load impedance of the probe can then be written as: where the effective inductance of the coil is The resonance frequency (fres) of the probe can then implicitly be determined from the resonance condition, Im[Z(fres)] = 0. From an experimental point of view, calibration curves can be constructed by inserting in the coil samples of known dielectric permittivity. Figure By taking CS = 6.0 fF, CR, = 5.1 fF and CG = 0.31 pF, as defined by Eq. 2-4, L 0 = 178 nH and X0(f) and R0(f) as defined by Eq. 7, the only free parameter defining the resonance frequency (fres) of the probe head is the stray capacitance C0. By fitting the modelled dielectric shift (calculated using the resonance condition 'Im[Z(fres)] = 0' for the empty and filled rotors) to the experimental data in Figure Dielectric spectroscopy on alcohols. The new methodology was validated by measuring the permittivity spectra of methanol, ethanol, 1-propanol, 1-pentanol and 1-octanol in the frequency range from 75 to 800 MHz (Figure From Figure Spectral decomposition allows quantification of the mobile water fraction revealed by the sharp resonance at 4.7 ppm (blue shaded area) highlighted in the inset of Figure While the magnetic interactions between coil and sample in an NMR probe head allow characterization of atomic level interactions thought the acquisition of NMR spectra, the electric interactions in the system allow to simultaneously probe the dielectric properties of the sample. Via the calibration of the NMR probe head, dielectric permittivity measurements on liquid and solid systems can be performed in the NMR frequency range. Comparison between dielectric permittivity data acquired via this calibration and via other traditional EIS/DRS techniques demonstrates the accuracy of the developed methodology. Multi-diagnostic NMR/dielectric permittivity characterization of water confined in the micropores of an MFI-type hydrophilic zeolite with Si/Al ration of 11.5 revealed the drastic decrease in the dielectric permittivity of water due to confinement and the interaction with the pore wall. Multi-diagnostic in situ NMR and permittivity spectroscopy is expected to benefit physicochemical characterization not only of confined water systems, but also of electrolyte and sensor materials. ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. Nomenclature adopted for the input and load impedances. Electric delay determination. Dielectric permittivity calibration curves. Discussion on the model circuit. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org. *