Recent research in multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs) has increasingly focused on the exploration and exploitation of short-range order (SRO) to enhance material performance 1-6 . However, the understanding of SRO formation and the precise tuning of it within MPEAs remains poorly understood, limiting the comprehension of its impact on material properties and impeding the advancement of SRO engineering. Here, leveraging advanced additive manufacturing techniques that produce samples with a wide range of cooling rates 7 (up to 10 7 K s -1 ) and an improved quantitative electron microscopy method, we characterize SRO in three CoCrNi-based MPEAs to unravel the role of processing route and thermal history on SRO. Surprisingly, irrespective of the processing and thermal treatment applied, all samples exhibit similar levels of SRO, suggesting that prevalent SRO may form during the solidification process. Atomistic simulations of solidification verify that local chemical ordering arises in the liquid-solid interface (solidification front) even under the extreme cooling rate of 10 11 K s -1 . This phenomenon stems from the swift atomic diffusion in the supercooled liquid, which matches or even surpasses the rate of solidification. Therefore, SRO is an inherent characteristic of most MPEAs, insensitive to variations in cooling rates and annealing treatments typically available in experiments. Integrating thermal treatment with other strategies, such as mechanical deformation 8,9 and irradiation Multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs), usually consisting of three or more components with nearly equal elemental ratios, have received extensive attention due to their excellent mechanical performance and damage tolerance under extreme environments To date, the majority of research addressing the second question has been primarily focused on modulating SRO by modifying processing methodologies and/or thermal treatments (Supplementary Fig. Given that SRO is more energetically favorable at lower temperatures, it is conceivable that an increase in the cooling rate during the solidification process of MPEAs could help suppress SRO formation and retain the RSS state. To bolster the formation of SRO, intermediate temperature annealing is widely adopted, which is ultimately governed by the competing balance between thermodynamic driving force (which intensifies at lower temperatures) and kinetics (which accelerates at higher temperatures, expediting diffusion and reducing SRO formation time). Presumably, quenched samples are commonly deemed closely akin to an RSS, while annealed specimens are associated with a higher degree of SRO To assess how cooling rates and thermal treatments influence SRO in MPEAs, we fabricate MPEAs with a cooling rate spanning seven orders of magnitude using traditional casting and several advanced techniques, including laser-directed energy deposition (LDED) and laser powder bed fusion (LPBF), as illustrated in Fig. It is crucial to evaluate the degree of SRO in these MPEAs using a technique that can collect bulk-representative data. Previously, methods to characterize SRO include high-resolution scanning TEM (HR-STEM) Thin lamellas for TEM characterization were prepared from the bulk samples, with their bright-field TEM images and corresponding SAED patterns shown in Fig. Figure The intriguing SRO characterizations motivates a bold hypothesis that a large degree of SRO is formed during solidification (crystallization) temperature, at which the MPEAs are presumably considered to be RSS. To testify this critical hypothesis and fundamentally reveal the kinetics of SRO formation, we create a solidification model consisting of a growing solid front and liquid region, which allows us to reveal the solidification and its resultant chemical distribution (see Fig. To assess the proximity of the SRO state to its maximum achievable SRO degree through long-time annealing, we employed a hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamic (MC/MD) approach to attain the equilibrium state. The results, shown in Fig. To reveal spatial variation of CSRO during solidification, we characterize the values of ∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr along the solidification direction, mapped as a function of distance from the bottom to top (i.e., the z direction shown in Fig. The fast cooling rate and rapid solidification speed pose a question about the kinetic processes that can facilitate such rapid CSRO formation. The decisive question is: "Is the diffusion of atoms in surrounding liquid fast enough to endow the chemical ordering during solidification?" To answer this, we compute crystal growth (solidification front) velocity and compare it with the atomic diffusivities in liquid. The crystal growth velocity is determined by the average growth distance of the solidification front as a function of time (Fig. We propose an atomistic mechanism for the CSRO formation during solidification, as schematically shown in Fig. Recent research has shown that the type of element introduced into the system plays a more critical role than the number of constitutional elements in modulating crystal growth velocity To investigate additional methods that could be effectively integrated with thermal treatment and quench rate selection for enhanced SRO tuning, we have conducted in-situ nanomechanical experiments using the EQ-SAED method. This allows us to elucidate the impact of mechanical deformation and dislocation slip on SRO. CoNiV was selected for this demonstration as it offers a better SNR in its SRO signal (Fig. Moreover, our experiment confirms the ability of the EQ-SAED method to capture SRO information in MPEAs quantitatively, further reinforcing its effectiveness and reliability. Recent studies have proposed that these diffuse signals at the 1⁄2 {3 ̅ 11} location of FCC MPEAs electron diffraction on [112] zone axis (a key aspect of our EQ-SAED approach) have alternative origins such as stacking faults Prior research has provided clues regarding the prevalence of SRO in MPEAs. For example, Li et al. employed resistometry to examine the evolution of SRO during mechanical deformation in single crystal CoCrNi samples In this study, we demonstrate both qualitatively and quantitatively, through comprehensive electron microscopy characterizations, the ubiquitous nature of SRO in CoCrNi-based MPEAs, regardless of the cooling rates (ranging from 1 to 10 7 K s -1 ) and even after prolonged annealing periods. In addition, our atomistic simulations of CoCrNi solidification reveal that a substantial degree of SRO can form even under an extreme quench rate of 10 11 K s -1 at the temperature close to melting. This rate is a minimum of three orders of magnitude higher than the maximum cooling rate achieved in our experimental setup. Our simulations further elucidate that the extent of SRO is primarily determined by the interplay between the crystal growth velocity and the atomic diffusivities within the supercooled liquid. These factors can be intricately fine-tuned by adjusting the cooling rate and solidification temperature. We found that as the cooling rate increases, the degree of SRO decreases correspondingly, due to the increased solidification front velocity and reduced diffusion range. Considering that the cooling rates employed in experiments to fabricate bulk samples typically do not exceed 10 7 K s -1 , our results suggest that a higher degree of SRO, approaching the ideal degree achievable through long time annealing, is already established after solidification. This implies a negligible difference between samples subjected to varying thermal treatments, which aligns perfectly with our experimental observations. Therefore, our experimental results together with modeling outcomes offer convincing evidence of the ubiquitous nature of SRO in MPEAs. The inescapable formation of SRO in FCC CoCrNi-based MPEAs carries significant implications for resolving the conundrum surrounding the impact of SRO on yield strength in these alloys. In the realm of body-centered cubic (BCC) MPEAs, both experimental 5 and theoretical However, acquiring an actual RSS presents a formidable challenge, mainly due to our limited understanding of effective methods for tuning SRO. Our experiments and modeling results in this study suggest that the cooling rates during solidification and the heat treatments, contrary to previous assumptions, do not efficiently modify SRO, at least for the equimolar CoCrNi-based MPEAs with concentrated solid solutions. Furthermore, the absence of an experimentally verified TTT diagram for describing the kinetics of SRO formation makes its modulation via thermal treatment challenging. In fact, the relationship between SRO and material properties can exhibit non-monotonic and complex patterns. For instance, the negligible difference in yield strength between quenched and annealed MPEAs could imply a plateau stage. However, there might be a preceding stage characterized by a rapid increase in yield strength, which remains undiscovered due to the lack of an RSS MPEA sample experimentally. The ability to adjust SRO across a broad spectrum is crucial to fully probe this relationship. If the tuning range of SRO is limited, we might only explore a local or specific behavior of the material properties, potentially missing critical turning points that only exist at specific levels of SRO. Hence, broad tunability of SRO not only allows for a more comprehensive understanding of the SRO-property relationship but also facilitates the identification of optimal SRO levels to achieve desired material properties. Navigating these complexities and addressing the above challenges may necessitate exploring alternative strategies to modulate SRO, such as mechanical deformation, element substitution, irradiation, and interstitial alloying. As illustrated in Fig. Additionally, understanding the impact of SRO on material properties necessitates a precise quantification of SRO due to the potentially non-monotonic nature of this relationship. A non-monotonic relationship suggests that small variations in SRO may significantly alter material properties in complex and potentially unpredictable ways. Therefore, without accurate measurement of SRO, it would be challenging to map this intricate relationship accurately, leading to misconceptions about the role of SRO. The EQ-SAED method we developed in this study is more quantitative than the previous EF-SAED method, and it negates the need for an energy filter, which considerably simplifies its application. However, this method remains semi-quantitative due to the inherent challenges in calibrating the exact degree of SRO. The precise quantification of SRO in MPEAs persists as a key hurdle in understanding the influence of SRO on material properties. It is crucial for future investigations to pioneer a more accurate quantification method, which could greatly expedite the exploration and application of diverse SRO modulation techniques. Such an advancement, though challenging, might be achievable through the integration of theoretical models grounded in a comprehensive understanding of interatomic interactions. In conclusion, the ubiquitous presence of SRO in MPEAs, attributable to its efficient formation during the solidification process across a wide cooling rate range, challenges the efficacy of thermal treatment as a method to modulate SRO. Consequently, future research should invest more in combination of multiple potential factors influencing SRO formation, as well as understanding the nuanced impacts of SRO on specific properties of MPEAs. This continued research is vital to unlocking new pathways to manipulate material properties and expanding our comprehension of these complex alloys. Samples, including CoCrNi, CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeMnNi, were prepared by traditional casting, LDED, and LPBF, respectively. The as-cast samples with the same composition were prepared by arc-melting constituent elements with 99.99% purity under an argon atmosphere. The cast ingot was flipped and remelted multiple times to ensure chemical homogeneity. The annealed CoCrNi sample was sealed in a quartz tube with argon and then heattreated at 900 °C for 7 days. LDED was conducted using an Optomec Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS) 450 system with an IPG fiber laser (400 W) at a wavelength of 1064 nm and a laser spot size of approximately 400 μm at the focal point. During the printing process, the chamber was filled with high-purity argon as an inert gas to keep the oxygen level below 20 ppm. The LDED typically relies on feeding powders into the melt path and molten pool created by a laser beam to deposit material layer-by-layer upon a substrate part or build plate. The LPBF samples were prepared using a commercial M290 (EOS) LPBF machine with a maximum power of 400 W and a focal diameter of 100 μm. All samples were prepared in an argon environment with an oxygen concentration of less than 1,000 ppm. The part is formed by spreading thin layers of these powders and fusing layers upon layer of these powders under computer control. The typical cooling rate for LPBF, LDED, and traditional casting is about 10 5 to 10 7 K s -1 , 10 3 to 10 5 K s -1 , and 1 to 10 2 K s -1 , respectively. The CoCrNi and CoCrFeNi samples labeled as L-DED were laser scanned as-cast samples using a LENS system. The CoNiV and CoCrNi samples labeled as L-PBF were laser scanned as-cast samples using an EOS M290 system. Only the top layers of all samples were used for analysis and the process parameters of LPBF and LDED are summarized in Supplementary Table The samples underwent a TEM sample preparation procedure by lifting them out from the bulk sample and welding them on gold half-grids using the Thermo Fisher Scientific (TFS) Helios Nanofab 660 FIB. It is important to note that, for the LDED and LPBF samples, the lifting out of the sample was performed on the newest printed layer. This choice ensured that the selected region had not undergone any additional annealing processes. After the lift-out, the samples were thinned by Ga FIB working at 30 kV, which was subsequently reduced to 16 kV and then 8 kV. This process reduced the sample thickness to approximately 240 nm. The samples used for Figs. 1-2 were then flash polished The ideal SRO through infinite time annealing could be generated by hybrid MC/MD simulation using VCSGC package The local short-range order was calculated as the nonproportional number of local atomic pairs ∆αi-j, modified from the Warren-Cowley parameter ∆αi-j = Ni-j -Ni-j,0 where Ni-j is the number of i-j pairs in the first nearest neighbor shell of an i-type atom, Ni-j,0 is the number of i-j pairs for the random solid solution. Since there are 12 first nearest neighboring atoms for FCC structure, an equimolar CoCrNi would give rise to Ni-j,0 = 4 (i.e., 12 × 1/3 = 4 ). For species i and j, a positive ∆αi-j suggests the clustering in the first shell and the negative ∆αi-j means opposite. The difference between this definition of SRO parameters and the more commonly used Warren-Cowley parameters are provided in Supplementary Notes B, showing that the definition of SRO parameter will not change the conclusion and reliability of this work. The crystal growth velocity is estimated by tracking the average locations of atoms in the solidification front as a function of time. In our model, it contains three identical structures. RSS substrate and solidified region have perfect FCC structures. Supercooled liquid shows amorphous structures. The solidification front belongs to the free surface of the solid, which is the boundary of FCC structures. It is identified as an irregular structure via OVITO. By searching the first nearest neighbors of atoms in FCC structures on the boundary, irregular structure atoms in the first nearest neighbors of FCC structure atoms belong to the solidification front. Their positions are averaged to track the location of the solidification front after that. The diffusion of elements in the liquid is characterized by diffusion coefficient D via the Einstein-Smoluchowski equation where d is the dimension of diffusion and is equal to 3 in our simulations. t is the time and 〈R 2 〉 is the mean square displacement (MSD) of an ensemble of particles over time that can be written as follows: where N is the number of each element in the liquid, r i (t) is the position of atom i at time t and r i (0) is the initial position of atom i. We performed independent simulations to ensure that the measurement of diffusion at solidification temperatures isn't influenced by solidification. We created a system with a dimension of 20a0 × 20a0 × 20a0 (a0 is lattice constant) that contained 32, 000 atoms. Periodic boundary conditions were applied to three dimensions. The system's temperature was increased to 2, 000 K for 10 ps to melt the crystal completely and then relaxed at target temperature for 10 ps. Afterward, the MSD of each element was calculated by Equation 