We present a density functional theory study of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on a single atom catalyst embedded in graphene, namely, TM-N 4 -C (TM = Fe and Co), using the effective screening medium method combined with the reference interaction site model (ESM-RISM). It was found that Fe-N 4 -C and Co-N 4 -C show comparable ORR activities from the constant electrode potential simulations, in contrast to the results obtained using the constant (neutral) charge simulation, in which the superior performance of Co-N 4 -C has been predicted. The constant potential method allows the variable charge and thus results in a potential dependence of the reaction-free energies different from that with the constant charge method in which the potential dependence is included as an ad hoc manner. We suggest the importance of the variable charge in the simulation of the electrochemical reaction, which is enabled by ESM-RISM. It has been well established that the single-atom catalyst, particularly the transition metal (TM = Fe and Co) embedded in N-doped graphene, has the potential to reduce O 2 to H 2 O with appreciable activity and stability. The computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) model There have been several methodological developments to include the effects of the electrode potential In this study, we investigate the mechanism of ORR on TM-N 4 -C (TM = Fe, Co) catalysts by means of the density functional theory (DFT) calculations combined with the effective screening medium (ESM) method and the reference interaction site model (RISM), We used the projector augmented wave (PAW) method The kinetic energy cutoff for the solvent correlation functions was set to 160 Ry. We used the vacuum/slab/solvent boundary condition to model TM-N 4 -C's and reaction intermediates, while solvated H 2 O and H 3 O + were modeled with the solvent/ion/solvent one. Note that the electrolyte plays an essential role in determining the electrode potential and pH, but the poisoning effect of the anion reported in Refs. We begin by describing the EDL formed at the HCl/graphene solution interface from our ESM-RISM calculations. In Figure We here describe how to derive the free energy of the reaction with ESM-RISM (See the Supporting Information for further details). On Fe-N 4 -C and Co-N 4 -C catalysts (Figure where A tot,X , E ZPE,X , T 0 dT ′ C V,X and S X are the Helmholtz free energy, the zero-point energy, the integral of the constant-volume heat capacity (C V,X ) over temperature (T ), and the entropy of the intermediate adsorbed species X, respectively. The pH effect is automatically included in A tot within the RISM framework. , and S Y are the total energy, the integral is over constant-pressure heat capacity (C p,Y ), and the entropy of the gas-phase species Y . See Table In the constant-μ e method with ESM-RISM, the electrode potential can be defined by referencing to the inner potential (see Ref. where U on the arrow indicates that the reaction takes place at the constant potential U . The free energy of the intermediate species X is calculated as where Ω X (U ) = A tot,X -μ e ∆N e is the electronic grand potential at a constant electron chemical potential μ e with reference to U , A tot,X is the Helmholtz free energy, ∆N e is the deviation of the number of electrons from the neutral one, E ZPE,X is the zero-point energy, , and S X is the entropy. See Table where O 2 (g) and H 2 (g) in the vacuum condition (C p is the constant-pressure heat capacity). We note that the entropies of H 2 O(l) and H 3 O + (aq) species were scaled by a factor of 0.65 as discussed in Refs. Computationally, the thermodynamic limiting-potential (U L ) is referred to as the highest potential at which all of the reaction steps in the free energy diagram are downhill, and the difference between the ORR equilibrium potential (U = 1.23 V vs RHE) and U L is called the overpotential, calculated by η = 1.23 -U L . In the constant-N e method, U L can be simply determined as the minimum free energy change among all of the elementary steps of the ORR. In the constant-μ e method, on the other hand, one has to iterate the calculations with different applied potentials U until all of the elementary steps is exothermic. Note that, in the constant-μ e method, the total charge of the system changes depending on the applied potential, in contrast to the conventional CHE/constant-N e method, where the calculations are performed in the neutral condition, and the effect of potential is taken into account in an ad hoc manner. Figure With the constant-N e method, the predicted η for Co-N 4 -C (0.51 V) is significantly lower than that for Fe-N 4 -C (0.72 V) and competitive to that for Pt(111) (0.48 V), With the constant-μ e method, we found that there is a competition between * O → * OH and * OH → H 2 O for the Fe-N 4 -C, and O 2 → * OOH and * OH → H 2 O for the Co-N 4 -C. In the case of Fe-N 4 -C, the PDS changes to * O → * OH (∆G 3 ) with U L (η) is predicted to be 0.78 V (0.45 V), while in the case of Co-N 4 -C, it changes to O 2 → * OOH (∆G 1 ) with U L (η) of 0.80 V (0.43 V). Given its competing nature, we presume that the actual PDS and associated U L may change depending on the local environment (such as defects near the active site or substrate below the carbon surface), which is a subject for future investigation. Our results indicate that using the constant-μ e method with ESM-RISM, Fe-N 4 -C and Co-N 4 -C show comparable activity, in contrast to those obtained using the constant-N e method. The highest experimental ORR half-wave potential (E 1/2 ) which can be compared with the calculated limiting potential, is reported to be 0.75-0.83 (0.82-0.92) V vs RHE for Fe-N-C 3,64-67 (Co-N-C 66-68 ), and our calculated U L 's are in reasonable agreement, considering the uncertainty of the active sites of the catalysts in the experiments. Note that, the E 1/2 for Co-N-C is reported to be comparable 67 with or slightly lower 66 than that for Fe-N-C, when both the catalysts are synthesized and analyzed within the same experimental procedures. To understand the origin of the difference between the results obtained using the constant-N e and constant-μ e methods, we first compare the free energies of ORR intermediates (∆G's) with and without solvent (Table We also calculated ∆G's for the ORR intermediates (Figure We present a DFT study on the mechanism of ORR on Fe-N 4 -C and Co-N 4 -C in contact with an acidic solution under an applied potential, which has been enabled by ESM-RISM. We found that the solvent effect is essential in modeling the ORR, as PDS changes from The data underlying this study are openly available in Materials Cloud with the identifier: DOI: 10.24435/materialscloud:7j-bt.