We used broadband local dielectric spectroscopy (BLDS), an electric force microscopy technique, to make non-contact measurements of conductivity in the dark and under illumination of PM6:Y6 and Y6 prepared on ITO and PEDOT:PSS/ITO. Over a range of illumination intensities, BLDS spectra were acquired and fit to an impedance model of the tip-sample interaction to obtain a sample resistance and capacitance. By comparing two descriptions of cantilever friction, an impedance model and a microscopic model, we connected the sample resistance inferred from impedance modeling to a microscopic sample conductivity. A charge recombination rate was estimated from plots of the conductivity versus light intensity and found to be sub-Langevin. The dark conductivity was orders of magnitude higher than expected from Fermi-level equilibration of the PM6:Y6 with the substrate, suggesting that dark carriers may be a source of open-circuit voltage loss in PM6:Y6. The power conversion efficiency of donor-acceptor solar cells has been increasing rapidly since the introduction of non-fullerene acceptors The measurement is an electric force microscopy (EFM) technique, broadband local dielectric spectroscopy (BLDS) The BLDS measurement is sketched in Figure with ω c = 2πf c the cantilever frequency; ω m = 2πf m the modulation frequency; k c the cantilever spring constant; V ts = 2 V the tip-sample voltage; tip , two derivatives derived from the tip-sample capacitance; and a complex-valued transfer function function that depends on the tip capacitance and sample impedance Z(ω). The transfer function relates the steady-state tip charge q(ω) to the applied tip-sample voltage, q = C tip H(ω)V ts . It is convenient to define a sample response time and a tip-charge response time as τ s = R s C s and τ tip = R s C tip , respectively, with R s the sample resistance, C s the sample capacitance, and C tip the tip capacitance. The Equation (2) transfer function can be written in terms of these charge response times as follows: According to Equations ( At fixed tip-sample separation, if C s ≪ C tip then the conductivity is simply proportional to the roll-off frequency. This was the case in Reference 30. In contrast, here we find C s ≫ C tip . In this limit we can nevertheless obtain R s by fitting the entire BLDS spectrum. The Figure We wish to compute sample conductivity σ from the resistance R s obtained from BLDS experiments. Conductivity is an intrinsic quantity that depends on sample and contact materials. Conductivity is the product of charge density ρ and charge mobility μ, σ = eρμ, with e the unit of charge. Resistance is inversely proportional to sample conductivity, with the proportionality constant, k R , having units of length. For a slab of area A and length l, k R = A/l. Because it depends on sample dimensions, the resistance is an extrinsic quantity. In our experiment, k R depends on the effective area and thickness of the sample probed by the tip, which in turn depend on tip radius, tip-sample separation, and sample thickness. Computing k R for our experiment requires a microscopic theory of the BLDS signal. Describing the response of free charges and molecular dipoles in the sample to an oscillating tip charge in the BLDS experiment involves coupling a transport equation for free charges with Maxwell equations and the fluctuationdissipation theorem; this work is beyond the scope of the present study. Lekkala, Marohn, and Loring, however, have developed a microscopic theory for friction over a semiconductor Friction was calculated for a cantilever oscillating perpendicular to the surface of a semi-infinite semiconductor using Equations ( Dwyer et al. predict 5) with ω = 2πf c the cantilever frequency, C 0 the tip capacitance, C 1 the first derivative of the tip capacitance, V ts the tip-sample voltage, and H(ω) the transfer function given by Equations ( with the proportionality constant, k C , having units of length. The Equation ( with σ = eρμ the sample conductivity. The numerically calculated friction in Figure Considering the simplicity of the Equation ( In Figure is shown above the residuals as a third x axis. We will see below that most experiments were done in the highconductivity region of Figure TABLE With conductivity σ obtained from Equation ( with m a slope and σ 0 a dark conductivity, Figure From the Figure where n 0 and p 0 are the background electron and hole concentrations, respectively; ∆n and ∆p are the change in electron and hole concentrations due to light; n CT is the charge transfer (CT) state density; k m , k s , and k r are the rates at which carriers meet, split, and recombine, respectively; and G hν is the charge-generation rate, proportional to the irradiation intensity and absorption coefficient. A more detailed explanation of how we arrived at these equations is given in Section S-4 of the SI. At steady state, ṅ = ṗ = ṅCT = 0. Comparing Equations (12a) and (12c), we see that at steady state. Plugging Equation ( where k L = k m is the Langevin rate, the rate at which carriers meet, and γ = k r /(k r + k s ) is the Langevinreduction factor in the Burke picture The conductivity is given by σ = qμ n (n 0 + ∆n) + qμ p ∆p. In this limit with ] the absorption coefficient, E [J] the energy per photon, and ] the electron (hole) mobility. Equation ( We obtained γk L and n 0 from the best-fit m and σ 0 , the measured α, known E, and literature estimates for μ p and μ n (Table which can be compared to the Langevin rate with ε r the relative dielectric constant (3.5, ) When ∆μ is positive, electrons will flow from the contact to the molecule, whereas when ∆μ is negative, electrons flow from the molecule to the contact. Charge densities n h and n e were computed from Equations 22 with μ → ε contact F , using the parameters in Table PM6:Y6 was found to be highly conductive, even in the dark. The conductivity increased linearly with light intensity, on both PEDOT:PSS/ITO and ITO, indicative of PM6:Y6 being a good solar cell material. All Y6 samples had much lower conductivity than the blend, indicating that the blend is a better solar cell material, as expected. Some Y6 samples showed modest photoconductivity, while in most samples the conductivity was dominated by background carriers. The conductivity was highly variable, with one sample showing almost no conductivity; this lack of conductivity might be due to material degradation, since the reagents were older as that sample was prepared about two months after the other samples. These observations are in qualitative agreement with Saglamkaya et al., who showed that charge generation readily occurs in neat Y6 The PM6 BLDS spectra were independent of modulation frequency. The conductivity roll-off must therefore be outside our measurement limits, either below 100 Hz or above 3 MHz. Based on the moderate conduc- tivity observed in the PM6:Y6 blend, it seems unphysical that the PM6 control would have higher conductivity than the blend. We conclude that σ PM6 must be less than the lowest conductivity measured in our experiment, 0.0098 mS m -1 . Values obtained for γ in each PM6:Y6 sample are listed in Table The large random error in our determination of γ arises primarily from the relatively poor fits of the BLDS spectra. In our fits we assumed that the sample dielectric constant was frequency-independent, which is likely a poor approximation for the small molecule and polymeric semiconductors studied here. To determine the proportionality constant connecting the best-fit bulk resistance to a microscopic conductivity, we compared a macroscopic theory to a microscopic theory for friction, and assumed that the same proportionality constant held in a BLDS measurement. Future work should focus on devel-oping a proper microscopic theory for the BLDS measurement that incorporates a frequency-dependent dielectric constant. We observed that C s C tip was independent of light intensity, as seen in Figure We found that if data were collected more than a week after PM6:Y6 or Y6 samples were prepared and stored in a nitrogen box in the dark, they did not display the same high conductivity as was measured immediately after preparation; PM6:Y6 and Y6 samples need to be measured within a day or two after being prepared. Consistent with this observation, Zhu et al. found that nonfullerne acceptors can aggregate in bulkheterojunction films, decreasing device performance, just by storing in the dark in a nitrogen-filled glove box Although every precaution was taken to ensure that sample preparation was consistent, we saw distinct differences in the dependence of conductivity on light intensity, Figure We report new evidence for significant dark conductivity in PM6:Y6 and corroborate recent studies indicating non-Langevin recombination in this material. The underlying concentration of dark carriers is many orders of magnitude larger than expected from Fermi-level equilibration. Sources of the anomalous dark carriers could be chemically oxidized/reduced PM6 or Y6 present due to reactions of these molecules with air or impurities present due to imperfect synthesis, or interface dipoles absent from our model of Fermi-level equilibration. That the observed dark conductivity is comparable to the light-induced conductivity implies that either the electron or hole pseudo-Fermi level is partially pinned by the associated dark carriers in PM6:Y6. Such pseudo-Fermi level pinning due to dark carriers is a potential source of voltage loss and deserves further study. The polymer donor PM6 (Ossila) and the molecular acceptor Y6 (Ossila) were stored in a nitrogen glove box and used as received within 8 months of receipt. A small amount was removed from the glove box to prepare each solution in air. Chloroform (Macron Fine Chemicals) and 1-chloronaphthalene (Sigma-Alrdrich) were used as received. PM6:Y6 samples were prepared on both ITO and PE-DOT:PSS/ITO substrates as follows. The PEDOT:PSS preparation was adapted from Reference 56, with spin coating done statically instead of dynamically. The PM6:Y6 preparation followed Reference 3 as closely as possible. ITO coated glass slides (10 Ω/sq., Nanocs) were cleaned by sonicating in isopropanol and acetone (1:1 volume ratio) for 10 minutes, followed by scrubbing with detergent (Aquet Liquid Laboratory Detergent) in DI water, rinsing with DI water, and drying with N 2 . Slides were then UV-ozone cleaned (UVO-Cleaner Model No. 12, Jelight Company Inc.) for 10 minutes. PEDOT:PSS (Al 4083, Ossila) was filtered through a 0.45 μm PTFE filter and 100 μL was statically spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Films were annealed on a hot plate at 150 °C for 20 min in air and left in a nitrogen flow box to cool before spin coating the active layer. PM6:Y6 (1:1.2 weight ratio, 16 mg mL -1 ) in chloroform:1-chloronaphthalene (CF:CN, 99.5:0.5 volume ratio) was stirred for 3 h using a new PTFE stir bar prior to statically spin coating 100 μL at 3000 rpm for 60 s. Control samples were prepared with PM6, 7.3 mg mL -1 in CF:CN, and Y6, 8.7 mg mL -1 in CF:CN. All solutions were stirred in air in the dark. Three to four replicate samples were made for each formulation. Samples were kept in the dark in a nitrogen box until they were loaded into the microscope under red light. Sample thickness, measured by profilometry (Tencor AlphaStep 500), was 110 nm, 40 nm, and 80 nm for PM6:Y6, Y6, and PM6, respectively. Scanning probe measurements were performed under high vacuum (10 -5 mbar) in a custom-built scanning Kelvin probe microscope. The cantilever used (HQ:NSC18/Pt conductive probe, MikroMasch) had a typical resonance frequency f c = 75 kHz, force constant k c = 2.8 N m -1 , tip radius r tip = 30 nm, and cone angle θ cone = 40 • . Specific cantilever parameters used in each Figure The cantilever was driven into self oscillation via pos-itive feedback to an amplitude of 100 to 200 nm. Tipsample separation was determined by first approaching the sample surface until the amplitude decreased to 80% of its initial value and then backing up to the desired separation, 120 nm, using a Thorlabs piezo controller. Tip-sample separation was checked before and after each BLDS spectrum was collected. If the tip-sample separation drifted more than 3 nm, the minimum DC step in our microscope, the spectrum was discarded. In a BLDS measurement, the tip voltage was sinusoidally on-off modulated at a fixed frequency, 20 Hz, and sinusoidally modulated at frequencies ω m = 2πf m ranging from f m = 100 Hz to 3 MHz at various light intensities. The cantilever frequency was measured using a commercial phase-locked loop (RHK Technology PLL-Pro), and the 20 Hz Fourier component of the cantilever frequency, ∆f BLDS , was obtained from the phase-locked loop output using lock-in detection (Perkin Elmer Instruments 7265 DSP Lock-in Amplifier). The lock-in output ∆f BLDS was divided by V 2 ts , with V ts = 2 V, and the resulting voltage-normalized frequency shift was plotted versus the modulation frequency ω m to give a BLDS spectrum. V ts hν non-contact high dark conductivity conductivity Sub-Langevin recombination rates were measured in PM6:Y6 using a non-contact measurement of conductivity in the dark and under illumination. An impedance model and a microscopic model of cantilever friction were compared to obtain a microscopic sample conductivity. Dark conductivity was orders of magnitude higher than expected, suggesting that dark carriers may be a source of open-circuit voltage loss. If ∆n << n 0 , In computing conductivity, let us neglect n. This assumption gives, In this case, conductivity is directly proportional to light intensity, which is what we see in our data. The error bars for the Langevin reduction factor were estimated as follows, where γ is the Langevin reduction factor; m and c are the slope and intercept for the linear fit of conductivity versus light intensity; σ γ , σ m , and σ c are the error for the Langevin reduction factor, slope, and intercept, respectively; and ρ mc is the correlation coefficient. Dataset: Dataset: Dataset: was the second sample prepared (△), with medium conductivity and "high σ" was the third sample prepared (□), with the highest conductivity of the 3 samples. Atomic force micrographs (AFMs) of polymer films were collected in air on a commercial instrument in tapping mode (Asylum Research MFP-3D-BIO) using a Olympus AC160TS-R3 probe. The AFMs (Figs. S9-S10) of the PEDOT:PSS/ITO samples give some insight into the conductivity. We observe that samples with higher conductivity have a lower rms roughness. This is noteable in the PM6:Y6/PEDOT:PSS/ITO samples, where the sample with lower conductivity (△) has a roughness of 30 nm, and the sample with higher conductivity (□) has a roughness of 6 nm. ) 2.4. Estimating the dark conductivity . Measured dark conductivity σ0, estimated Langevin reduction factor γ, and background charge density ρ0 for each PM6:Y6 sample. Symbols in the dataset column correspond to the symbols in Figure and highest unoccupied molecular orbitals, respectively; and μ is the electron chemical potential in the molecular film. Relevant parameters are listed in Table ε F = (ε -1.48e-01 ± 1.12e-02 5.74e-02 ± 6.46e-03 6.75e-07 ± 3.27e-08 3.70e-07 ± 5.57e-08 TABLE