The structure and growth of the Solid Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) region between an electrolyte and an electrode is one of the most fundamental, yet less-well understood phenomena in solid-state batteries. We present a parameter-free atomistic simulation of the SEI growth for one of the currently promising solid electrolytes (Li 6 PS 5 Cl), based on ab initio trained machine learning (ML) interatomic potentials, for over 30,000 atoms during 10 ns, well-beyond the capabilities of conventional MD. This unveils a two-step growth mechanism: Li-argyrodite chemical reaction leading to the formation of an amorphous phase, followed by a kinetically slower crystallization of the reaction products into a 5Li 2 SLi 3 PLiCl solid solution. The simulation results support the recent, 1 experimentally founded hypothesis of an indirect pathway of electrolyte reduction. These findings shed light on the intricate processes governing SEI evolution, providing a valuable foundation for the design and optimization of next-generation solid-state batteries. Li-metal anode all-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) may replace current Li-ion batteries, since they have higher theoretical energy densities, The paragraphs below describe our use of moment tensor potentials (MTPs) with the MLIP-2 code 30 to simulate SEI formation between a Li-metal anode and an LPSC electrolyte at various temperatures, internal pressures, and initial velocities. We discover a two-step growth process consisting of an initial electrolyte reduction followed by gradual crystallization of the reaction product. The value of the exponent in the crystallization's time dependence appears to be influenced by the MD temperature, suggesting a qualitative change in the driving mechanism of crystallization. Finally, we found that crystallization of the reaction product impedes the movement of Li from the anode, which can slow down the rate of further reduction. We build two Li(110)/LPSC(110) interface models of different sizes following the methodology described in Ref. The curves in Fig. (1) Within the first 5 ps of the simulations, the reaction between Li and the electrolyte leads to the formation of a thin layer of amorphous product. (2) Starting from 5 ps, the first crystalline nuclei appear in the amorphous matrix. The reaction continues with the growth of amorphous and crystalline regions. As discussed below, electrolyte conversion has a logarithmic dependence on time, while SEI crystallinity has a square root (at 300 K) or linear (at 400 K) dependence. Thus the amorphous phase dominates over the crystalline at the initial stages of the reaction. (3) At 165 ps, electrolyte conversion reaches 71%. This point corresponds to the maximal amount of amorphous phase within reduced electrolytes. This is also when the so far separate crystalline domains start to coalesce. Subsequent growth of crystalline nuclei with a limited amount of unreacted electrolyte will lead to a decrease in the percentage of amorphous product, and a drastic slowdown in the amount of Li diffusing into the electrolyte. This slowdown might be related to the decreased Li diffusivity in the crystalline region compared to that in the amorphous one, and also to the fact that as time progresses there remains less of the original LPSC left to react with the diffusing Li. further slight increase in crystallinity is due to changes in the structure of grain boundaries. We cannot expect 100% crystallinity even with longer MD simulations due to the presence of defects and grain boundaries. Fig. future studies should explore larger internal pressures for a comprehensive understanding. An important finding is that the amount of reduced electrolyte in the simulation increases over time t roughly as log(t) (Fig. which for n << n r yields where A = e γnr . Since the amount of reduced electrolyte is proportional to n, we have Therefore dt ∝ dn e -n ⇒ t ∝ e n , which implies n ∝ log(t). The intuitive picture behind this logarithmic law is one where Li atoms roam unimpeded through the electrolyte, and the only limit to their flow comes from the dwindling chemical potential difference between the two reacting materials. The log(t) behavior also suggests that the electrolyte becomes reduced via a continuous lithiation process through which there is no sharp structural phase transition. It is only after being reduced, that the (by then After the initial reduction of the electrolyte, crystallization occurs. The crystallization time dependence is very different from that of the amorphous reduction, and its functional form depends on temperature (Fig. Nevertheless, certain simulations for the smaller system (specifically, the 1 kbar, seed 1 case of Fig. Interestingly, the effect of different seeds on the initial velocities is marked only for the smaller systems, but becomes minor on the largest (31,824 atom) interface models. We believe this is due to the fact that crystallization proceeds akin to a percolation process. Throughout reaction stages 2, 3 and 4 (see Fig. It is known in percolation theory that the experimental or simulated value of a system's percolation threshold becomes more reliable as the system size grows. This explains why the model I systems still present rather different electrolyte reduction and SEI crystallinity curves (Fig. The initial stages of SEI formation just described are a fast process taking place at the timescale of nanoseconds (ns), after which the slower, long-term growth begins, limited by the less ion-conductive 5Li 2 SLi 3 PLiCl solid solution polycrystalline layer. Directly observing the initial reaction stages poses a challenge. Perhaps nano-indentation techniques, in com-bination with in operando transmission electron microscopy, might enable real time imaging of the SEI time evolution at the atomistic level, in a similar way as the reorganization of metal chains during break-junction experiments was imaged some 25 years ago. In conclusion, we have deciphered the evolution of the atomic structure during the early stages of SEI growth at a Li-metal/LPSC interface. Machine learning-enhanced MD has enabled us to simulate systems up to 36 times larger than those previously modeled by AIMD, for trajectories up to 100 times longer. 1) SEI formation is a two step process: Li-LPSC redox reaction leading to the formation of the amorphous phase, followed by the crystallization of the reaction products into a polycrystalline solid solution. This aligns with Schwietert et al.'s hypothesis of an indirect pathway. 3) Over the 10 ns simulation we observe the onset of four distinct reaction stages: formation of the amorphous product, crystal nucleation, crystal coalescence, and reaction stalling. After the onset of the last stage, growth proceeds at orders of magnitude slower rate. The growth curves become fairly consistently reproducible, irrespective of initial velocities, when the system size exceeds 30,000 atoms. By employing predictive atomistic simulations we can surpass inconclusive models of SEI growth based on adjustable parameters. The outcomes and insights from this study, focusing on the LPSC/Li-metal contact, serve as an illustration of the potential of this approach for various other solid electrolyte systems currently under investigation. Further developments in the field of ASSBs can highly benefit from large scale parameter-free atomistic simulations akin to the ones showcased in this work. GC, AVR and NM thank T. Ayadi, F. Bruneval, and M. Nastar for helpful discussions. Project funded by CEA through program FOCUS-batteries.