Spectroscopies utilizing free electron beams as probes offer detailed information on the reciprocal-space excitations of 2D materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers. Yet, despite the attention paid to such quantum materials, less consideration has been given to the electron-beam characterization of 2D periodic nanostructures such as photonic crystals, metasurfaces, and plasmon arrays, which can exhibit the same lattice and excitation symmetries as their atomic analogs albeit at drastically different length, momentum, and energy scales. Due to their lack of covalent bonding and influence of retarded electromagnetic interactions, important physical distinctions arise that complicate interpretation of scattering signals. Here we present 1 Historically, techniques employing low energy electrons, such as low energy electron diffraction (LEED), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), high resolution electron energyloss spectroscopy (HREELS), and photoemission spectroscopy (PES), have played a critical role in understanding a range of material properties, from local atomic structure While optical-based probes have been successful in the characterization of such materials, the use of q-EELS has been limited to the study of photonic density of states in the vicinity of plasmonic thin film architectures Here we present a common theoretical framework for the interpretation of wide field q-EELS signals in the measurement of the broadband reciprocal-space excitations in 2D crystalline materials spanning from atomic to nanophotonic dimension and expose the unexplored ability of q-EELS to probe the 3D polarization-resolved responses of plasmonic arrays. Reflection scattering processes typical of HREELS are also equally treated from the same formalism. While well understood as a probe of responses intrinsic to solid state 2D materials with Ångstrom-scale bond lengths, the ≳ 100 nm periodicity scale of 2D nanophotonic materials such as photonic crystals, metasurfaces, and plasmon arrays present a distinctly new physical regime where electromagnetic retardation effects prevail and companion wide field inelastic electron scattering observables must be interpreted accordingly. Through the lens of expanded selection rules appropriate to fully retarded light-matter interactions, we elucidate the conditions under which q-EELS can be adapted for measuring the broadband excitations of nanophotonic 2D materials with emphasis placed upon the evolution of the 3D selection rules for scattering processes both within and beyond the first Brillouin zone (BZ), the excitation of optically dark transitions on and off of the light cone, and role of electron speed and collection geometry (i.e., transmission versus reflection). Throughout, contrast and comparison between the IR vibrational excitations of graphene and the optical-frequency excitations of a plasmonic honeycomb lattice as encoded in the inelastic electron scattering signal are made to illustrate the utility of q-EELS in probing 2D materials excitations spanning broadly across disparate spatial, momentum, and energy scales. The schemes in Figs. As representative 2D-periodic samples that support reciprocal space excitations in the Figure where L is the box quantization length, E if = ħε if = ħε iħε f is the loss energy, and The transition current density produced as the probing electron transitions between incom- is the dyadic Green's tensor characterizing the electromagnetic responses of the sample. Leveraging the plane wave form of J f i (x), Eq. ( where is the Fourier coefficient of the probe's vacuum transition field The Fourier coefficient is related to the position-and frequency-dependent field, evaluated citations of the sample are encoded within the tensor-valued q-dependent response function Πqκκ ′ (ε if ), while the subset that are excited by the electron probe are characterized by the Despite apparent physical distinctions, the discrete translation symmetry shared by each structure necessitates periodic energy-momentum dispersion of both phonon and LPP quasiparticles excitations. In either class of 2D material, Bloch wave excitations with in-plane momentum ħK can be described by the equations of motion (SI) where the displacement of the coordinate at lattice position Electron beams serve as one example of a probe of reciprocal space lattice excitations where the in plane recoil momentum ħq ∥ is the Bloch momentum ħK. However, propagating free space light can also drive lattice responses at specific K points corresponding to the projection k ∥ of its wavevector k onto the sample plane. In either case, the induced moments are Ks ] represents the specific probe under consideration evaluated at each of the s sublattice sites. Double bars have been introduced to distinguish 3s × 3s matrices from 3 × 3 matrices, which have a single bar, e.g., ΠK (ω) κκ ′ = ΠKκκ ′ (ω), while the absence of a κ subscript indicates that a vector is 3s × 1. Focusing first on atomic crystal phonons where the resonant IR wavelengths together with subnanometer bond lengths justify neglect of the finite speed of light, the generalized dynamical matrix Dκκ ′ (K, ω) reduces to the conventional dynamical matrix Dκκ ′ (K) = Fκκ ′ (K) + Cκκ ′ (K), with G a reciprocal lattice vector. At each q ∥ point, the spectrum is independently normalized to the maximum DDCS value, as in Ref. It is evident from Eq. ( ,qκ when projected onto the sample coordinates. Based upon the dipole limit of the scattering form factor of a single Coulombically bound target electron, showing that the characteristics of the transition field largely dictate how strongly each tensor component of Πq contributes to the DDCS. Although the eigenmode dispersion is periodic in reciprocal space, the momentum dependence of the effective charge Z(q) causes ΠK ′ +G ̸ = ΠK ′ . The dispersions in q ∥ of the electron's field E 0 f i (solid red/blue traces) as well as that of its limiting quasistatic form E 0 f i ∝ q (dotted red/blue traces) are displayed in Figs. This crossover in polarization content of the electron's field elucidates the computed DDCS in Fig. Sharing the same hexagonal lattice structure as graphene but with a lattice constant of a = 460 nm, Fig. , where E 0 kκ = E 0 ε(k)e ik•rκ is the Fourier coefficient of the stimulating optical plane wave field with wave vector k, while the fully retarded q-EELS DDCS (Eq. ( x-polarized out-of-phase and in-phase LPPs at M 0 /M 2 and Γ 2 , respectively, in the third BZ (Fig. In contrast to the near indistinguishability of quasistatic and fully-retarded transition fields under the conditions presented in Figs. and electron beam spectra at Γ 0 and M 0 , where both fully retarded (black traces) and quasistatic (dashed gray traces) descriptions of the electron's vacuum transition field are adopted. While the normalized DDCS spectra are indistinguishable at the Γ 0 point, where the quasistatic and fully-retarded fields in Fig. While of considerable utility in the investigation of 2D atomic materials, spectroscopies derived from the inelastic scattering of free electron beams have found less consideration as probes of 2D periodic nanostructures. Here, we have presented a fully-retarded theoretical approach to describe the low energy inelastic scattering of wide field electron beams from 2D periodic materials spanning from atomic-scale quantum materials to nanophotonic array structures. In both forward and reflection geometries typical of q-EELS and HREELS measurements, we have investigated the reciprocal-space excitations native to a plasmonic honeycomb lattice under both inelastic electron scattering and angle-resolved optical extinction spectroscopies, and compared these observables to the momentum-resolved phonon excitation spectrum of monolayer graphene. We find important differences arise in the selec-tion rules between 2D atomic and nanophotonic materials under optical-and electron-based probes, leading to complementary behavior in their polarization-dependent responses both inside and outside of the BZ. These differences, together with a breakdown of the quasistatic approximation, thus require consideration of fully retarded light-matter interactions to properly interpret inelastic electron scattering signals from periodic nanophotonic materials.