We have combined DFT calculations with the Boltzmann semiclassical transport theory to investigate the effect of selective hydrogenation on the thermoelectric properties of tetra-penta-deca-hexagonal graphene (TPDH-gr), a recently proposed new 2D carbon allotrope. Our results show that the Seebeck coefficient is enhanced after hydrogenation. The conductivity along the x direction is increased almost eight times while being almost suppressed along the y direction. This behavior can be understood in terms of the electronic structure changes due to the appearance of a Dirac-like cone after the selective hydrogenation. Consistent with the literature, the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity displays the same qualitative behavior as the conductivity, as expected from the Wiedemann-Franz law. The increase in thermal conductivity with temperature limits the material's power factor. The significant increase in the Seebeck coefficient and conductivity increases also contribute to the thermal conductivity increase. These results show that hydrogenation is an effective method to improve the TPDH-gr thermoelectric properties, and this carbon allotrope can be an effective material for thermoelectric applications. Anisotropic physical properties generally originate from structural low symmetry Directional-dependent properties are highly desirable in some energy harvesting applications, including thermal energy recycling through Seebeck or Peltier effects Recently, novel carbon 2D allotropes have been experimentally realized, such as graphynes We have recently shown that the hydrogenation of TPDH-gr occurs mainly at the tetragonal rings, producing transversal lines of hydrogen atoms with non-hydrogenated hexagon rings along the x-direction, as highlighted in Figure First-principles calculations were carried out using density functional theory as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO package The electronic transport coefficients were calculated using Boltzmann semiclassical transport equations within the relaxation time approximation. The conductivity (σ), Seebeck coefficient (S), and electrical contribution to thermal conductivity (κ e ) tensors were obtained from analytical expressions as functions of temperature (T ) and chemical potential (μ) using the transport kernel (Ξ ij (ε)): Where e is the electrical charge, Ω is the cell total volume, ε is the electronic band energy, and f μ (T, ε) is the carrier distribution function. The i and j indexes represent the cartesian components. BoltzTraP code 3 Results and Discussion The conversion of waste heat into electricity can be achieved by exploiting the Seebeck or Peltier effects. The Seebeck coefficient (S) represents the maximum potential difference created in the material when a temperature gradient is present Pristine TPDH-gr displays a small S coefficient around the Fermi level for both directions. This is typical for metals due to the symmetry of electrons and holes caused by the absence of an electronic band gap In Figure These results can be explained in terms of the electronic structure (presented in Fig. We can understand these changes by analyzing the electronic structure of the hydrogenated system (Figure The results for the electronic contribution to the thermal conductivity (κ e ) show a temperature dependence for both components. An increase in thermal conductivity is expected due to increased thermal energy. The x direction also shows a lower conductivity when compared to the y direction. When the structure is hydrogenated, κ ex increases while κ ey drops substantially. This indicates that hydrogenation also promotes thermal transport along the x direction while suppressing the transversal heat conduction. These results are the opposite of the hydrogenation of graphene but agree with the results for penta-graphene, in which the enhancement in the thermal conductivity was attributed to weaker phonon scattering due to larger bond anharmonicity The thermoelectric conversion capacity, representing the maximum power available, can be expressed by the power factor (PF) given by the product S 2 σ. The x and y components of the PF are presented in Figure As expected, pristine TPDH-gr presents a poor thermoelectric conversion capacity. It has an almost zero PF along the x direction and a maximum of 5x × 10 10 W/(mk 2 s) along the y direction. For comparison, the PF of 6% compressed n-type doped hydrogenated germanene can reach 57.21 × 10 10 W/(mK 2 s) at T = 800 K In this work, we have combined DFT calculations with the Boltzmann semiclassical transport theory to investigate the effect of hydrogenation on the thermoelectric properties of TPDH-gr. Our results show that TPDH-gr thermoelectric properties are intrinsically anisotropic due to the low symmetry of the lattice system. Furthermore, the Seebeck coefficient is enhanced after hydrogenation due to the changes in the material's electronic structure after selective hydrogenation of the tetragonal rings. Interestingly, the conductivity along the x direction is increased almost eight times while being almost suppressed along the y direction. This behavior can be understood in terms of the electronic structure changes due to the appearance of a Dirac-like cone after the selective hydrogenation. Consistent with the literature, the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity displays the same qualitative behavior as the conductivity, as expected from the Wiedemann-Franz law. The increase of thermal conductivity with temperature limits the material's power factor. The significant increase in the Seebeck coefficient and conductivity increases also contribute to the thermal conductivity increase. These results show that hydrogenation is an effective method to improve the TPDHgr thermoelectric properties, and this carbon allotrope can be an effective material for thermoelectric applications. Considering the recent advances in the synthesis of new 2D carbon allotropes 