Controlling the size distribution in the nucleation of copper particles is crucial for achieving nanocrystals with desired physical and chemical properties. However, their synthesis involves a complex system of solvents, ligands, and copper precursors with intertwining effects on the size of the nanoclusters. We combine molecular dynamics 1 Metal nanoclusters (NCs) exhibit different physical and chemical properties as a function of their crystal morphology and size distribution. We performed MD simulations using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator, LAMMPS (30 Jul 2021) The simulations were conducted with a timestep of 1 f s. Lennard-Jones (LJ) parameters for non-bonding interactions between different atoms or pseudo-atoms were calculated using traditional Lorentz-Berthelot combination rules. To test our hypothesis that chemical bonds between TPOP and Cu are responsible for changing the size distribution of the nanoparticles, we performed MD simulations of nucleation at the relevant experimental temperatures. In our simulations, which used relatively high temperatures, nucleation happens spontaneously, and Metadynamics simulations are not required. The first simulation was performed in the isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble at ambient conditions, including a premixed copper in solution without additive. The P-Cu bond strength was set to 15.3 kcal mol -1 , based on preliminary DFT calculation of the complex (see more details below). A snapshot from the simulations is shown in (Figure Swapping only hydrogen atoms with an NH2 group (Figure Swapping three hydrogen atoms with NH2 groups on different phenyl rings (Figure When replacing one phenyl ring with a methyl group, the bond between the copper and the altered TPOP increases even further to 28.8kcal mol -1 ,and the conformation of the complex changes (Figure To summarize, we investigated the nucleation of ligand-protected copper nanoclusters in order to design ways to control their size distribution. We showed that adding a TPOP additive resulted in smaller NCs relative to a system without it. We used MD simulation to follow the nucleation process and understand the mechanism leading to control over NCs size. The metal-phosphine bond of copper atoms and ligand blocks the coalescence and growth of copper clusters, thus enabling smaller NCs. We showed that decreasing the P-Cu bond strength resulted in larger copper nanoclusters. P-Cu bond strength equal to or below 6kcal mol -1 resulted in a single nanocluster, similar to the nucleation process without the additive. We used DFT calculations to examine the effects of modifying the side group of TPOP on the P-Cu bond strength. Altering the ligand with such groups can allow finetuning of the copper nanocluster size, which is interesting to test experimentally. Our results show the potential of MD simulations in aiding the design of improved ligands for controlling the size distribution of nanoclusters with desired properties. a experimental values obtained from ref a experimental values obtained from ref