This work presents the results of two interlaboratory comparisons of particle filtration efficiency measurements performed by a network of laboratories across Canada and Australia. Testing across multiple layers of a common verification material demonstrates a constant size-resolved quality factor when layering uncharged materials. Size-resolved filtration curves also match expectations, with increasingly size-dependent curves and a predictable increase in the PFE. Candidate reference materials with controlled material properties were also tested across multiple laboratories. Each set of materials sharing a common charge level show specific trends with the material basis weight. Respirators showed more consistency between the laboratories than the other filters. However, across a majority of the tests, dark uncertainties, which are otherwise unexplained variability between laboratories, are significant. This leaves room to improve the test method by developing improved verification procedures and additional reference materials. Face masks, respirators, and other related products are essential personal protective equipment, which protect against a range of respiratory hazards, including infectious pathogens, forest fire smoke, and occupational hazards. Amongst the fundamental quantities characterizing these products is particle filtration efficiency (PFE) that quantifies the ability of a filter to capture particles in the air. The considerable attention given to PFE as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for a better understanding of test results. Quantifying the uncertainty of test results, as well as the precision and bias of the associated test methods, are key to removing doubt as to the transferability or traceability of the test methods used to determine PFE. Given potential challenges with understanding dark uncertainties reference materials supported by robust interlaboratory comparisons, present a more viable pathway to establishing traceability. Interlaboratory comparisons (ILCs) to quantify the reproducibility of measurements of respiratory protection are not widely available and are often very limited in the range of materials and participating laboratories. Li et al. All of the measurements throughout this work were conducted using a challenge aerosol consistent with many standards for particle filtration testing of respirators such as that used in NIOSH TEB-APR-STP-0059 A range of instruments were permitted to measure aerosol concentrations and are separated into three categories. Due to the prevalence of the TSI 8130A, both in terms of its explicit mention in the TEB-APR-STP-0059 test method Within this framework, measurements were conducted across two interlaboratory comparisons, summarized in Table Laboratory identifiers throughout this manuscript are anonymized and are identified on a per-ILC basis (i.e., lab 1 for the first ILC is not the same as lab 1 for the second ILC). For the first ILC, laboratories are numbered according to results from measurements for one layer of Green Line Paper (prescribed calibration media documented in the TEB-APR-STP-0059 test method The first ILC had components driven by differences in the samples being tested, which spanned different materials, construction, and charge states. There are three components relevant here: Component 1. This first component examined the PFE of layered Green Line Paper (TSI 813010), as supplied from a single lot by the National Research Council Canada. Green Line Paper is typically supplied for verification of TSI 8130A instruments Component 2. PFE was measured on a set of candidate reference materials composed of flat melt-blown polypropylene sheets manufactured by Roswell Downhole Technologies and having some control of the underlying material properties. These materials were also used in Sipkens et al. The second ILC had a focus on the test method prescribed in CSA Z94.4.1:21 Results for PFE are all reported in terms of the logarithm of penetration, with the equivalencies in terms of penetration and percent PFE shown in Table ( ) where QF is the quality factor, P is the penetration, Δp is the pressure resistance, and η is the PFE as a percent. This quantity has been shown to be particularly useful in distinguishing between different materials, e.g., Plots in this work typically reverse the penetration axis such that PFE still increases as one moves up the corresponding panels. Uncertainties in log-penetration will result in skewed uncertainties in terms of the original penetration and PFE. Standard deviations stated in terms of log-penetration will correspond to a geometric standard deviation in terms of the penetration itself. From simple error propagation, absolute uncertainties in PFE and penetration will be the same with opposite skew Data is analyzed according to a random effects model. In this framework, effects are perceived as random variables, holding some distribution. Then, the measured value, yjk, is modeled as a combination of effects where μi is the consensus value for the ith test; lij is the random effect for the jth laboratory and represents dark uncertainties; and εij is the remaining error within a given laboratory. The laboratory effect, lij, is assumed to be normally-distributed and unbiased, lij ~ N(0, σl,i 2 ), and is conditioned on the tests, allowing for different degrees of lab-to-lab variation for each test. Here, the variance σl,i 2 is used to represent dark, interlaboratory uncertainties or biases The distribution for the effects and consensus value were determined using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). This approach generates a distribution for the interlaboratory variability, lij, and the consensus value. To minimize the MCMC burnin period, the set of lij were initiated about the average for each quantity and μi about the global mean. To restrict the solution space and improve convergence with this Bayesian approach, we also apply priors (encoding approximate information known before the statistical analysis) to these quantities. The prior on μi was taken as exponential about the global average, maximizing the information entropy when only using the mean. The prior on the standard deviation of lij was taken as half Cauchy distributions with a median of the difference between the global mean and the laboratory mean. The method used here makes use of the Just Another Gibbs Sampler (JAGS) code In running the statistical analysis, outliers are typically not removed, so as to capture the broader variability possible in these measurements. This includes in determining the consensus value and the magnitude of the effects. However, when discussing physical trends, outliers are identified using the generalized extreme Studentized deviate (GESD) test, typically using a threshold factor of 0.6. Exclusion of such measurements would act to underestimate the dark uncertainties. Figure Figure Dark uncertainties (related to reproducibility) contributed significantly to the overall uncertainties across all of the subcomponents (see also Figure There is substantial scatter with respect to the different instrument types, though the mass-based PFE computed from count-based measurements tended to be lower. This observation could be related to a combination of remaining differences between scattering-and mass-based filtration efficiency, where scattering-based filtration tends to be higher Figure penetration are identified with crosses in Figure Layering results in a trend of increasing filtration along a line of similar quality factor. This is consistent with expectations, where mechanical filtration increases according to an exponential with the thickness of the same material Figure The most penetrating particle size (MPPS) is relatively consistent across the different layers, again consistent with previous observations Quality factors measured here are also consistent with results from Li et al. PFE results for the candidate reference materials are shown in Figure Figure Correlation between the pressure drop and penetration measured for a single material by the laboratories is less pronounced than in the Green Line Paper (manifesting as round circles instead of titled ellipses in Figure Both the final component of the first ILC and the entirety of the second ILC made use of respirators that were supplied to participants. Figure For the first ILC, repeatability within a laboratory was a good surrogate for the reproducibility across the laboratories in most cases. In other words, for the reporting laboratories, measurements seem to be reproducible both in terms of the initial and minimum PFE. Further, those laboratories with the least amount of interlaboratory variability also tended to have measurements close to the consensus value. For the second ILC, an identical respirator was used across all three tests and an initial PFE was reported. Little structure was observed between measurements by the laboratories, with a random ordering in terms of PFE across the different panels (i.e., on average, no lab consistently measured below the others). Dark uncertainties were more significant for these respirators, driven in large part by laboratories that had repeatable measurements but are located at the periphery of the data (e.g., laboratory 1 in Figure Conditioned Unconditioned Conditioning these different scenarios. Results were more varied for the exhalation case. This could indicate challenges associated with consistent mounting the respirators to face the other direction, which is a non-conventional setup. Yet, despite this reduction in reproducibility, the consensus PFE was not affected by mounting direction. Figure Figure outliers by a GESD procedure gives an indication of the degree to which these stray measurements drive up dark uncertainties in the present analysis, with the leftover dark uncertainties shown as slightly darker, teal dashed border bars in Figure This work has quantified the interlaboratory variability of particle filtration measurements for respiratory protection, spanning a range of materials for the conditions typical of testing respirators. Dark, interlaboratory variability was the dominant source of uncertainty in a vast majority of measurements. Overall uncertainties in the measurements varied from 10 % -30 % of the nominal value of the log-penetration. Further investigation is required to understand and minimize the effect of both intralaboratory and interlaboratory (dark) differences in the measurements. Particular focus should be placed on the dark uncertainties, including studies of the procedures used to verify instrument function (e.g., used to constrain the challenge aerosol size distribution and number concentration as well as verifying the optical particle counters) and the persistence of outliers in these measurements, which contribute significantly to the dark uncertainties. The uncharged Green Line Paper showed a linear relationship between the number of layers and log-penetration, consistent with simple multiplicative penetration through each layer, without any indication that interfacial effects are significant. Evidence for this approach is relatively clear in the size-resolved particle filtration, with some minor secondary effects when the particle filtration is integrated over a size distribution (for mass-based PFE). Similar results were observed when a controlled level of charge was applied to the candidate reference material. As such, this simple model and the traditional quality measure 