Ferrofluids kept in place by permanent magnet quadrupoles can act as liquid walls to surround a second non-magnetic inside, resulting in a liquid fluidic channel with diameter size ranging from mm down to less than 10 μm. Micro particle tracking velocimetry (μPTV) experiments and modeling show that near ideal plug flow is possible in such liquid-in-liquid channels due to the reduced friction at the walls. The measured fluids velocity profiles agree with the predictions of a hydrodynamic model of cylindrical symmetry with a minimal set of hypotheses. By introducing symmetry breaking elements in the system, we show how unique velocity and flow properties can be obtained. Our liquid-in-liquid confinement opens new possibilities for < 10 μm-sized microfluidics with low pressures and low shear, with flow characteristics not attainable in comparable solid-wall devices. In the realm of fluid mechanics, there is a need of new approaches to diminish friction in fluid flow In the presence of a non-uniform magnetic field H ⃗ ⃗ , a material with uniform magnetization M ⃗⃗ , small enough to neglect its generated demagnetizing field, experiences a Kelvin force: where μ0 is the permeability of free space. The direction of this force depends on the magnetic susceptibility of the material, negative for diamagnetic materials and positive for paramagnetic or ferromagnetic ones, i.e. diamagnets are repulsed from regions of highest magnetic field, while the reverse is true for paramagnets and ferromagnets. All the fluidic circuits presented here are based on the use of a pseudo-quadrupolar magnetic field source generated by commercially available N42-grade NdFeB permanent magnets of magnetization μ 0 M r = 1.2 T. These magnets are arranged to generate a negligible field at the geometric centre of the assembly while radially increasing outward. Fig. where the magnetic stray field H is related to B via B = μ0H, r is the radial distance from the centre, and w the gap between magnets with the same magnetisation (Fig. The resulting liquid-in-liquid tube, or 'antitube' At first let us consider a system without flow in order to test the hypothesis of a cylindrical enclosure for the transport of the liquid of interest, to determine the smallest possible diameter that can be reached. The strong optical absorption of ferrofluids complicates imaging, making the use of X-ray imaging the most appropriate tool, with synchrotron beamline facilities being necessary for micron-range resolution. Fig. In the static case, the balance of Laplace pressure (i.e. surface tension), magnetic pressure, and magnetic normal traction at the magnetic non-magnetic interface result in a minimum/equilibrium antitube diameter, d eq . To begin with, the Bernoulli equation with magnetic pressure is given by: Since the magnetic force is considerably larger than the gravitational force, and we are in static case, we neglect the gravity and velocity terms giving: Eq. 4 is the governing equation valid at all locations, where P ′ is the local pressure and P m = ∫ μ 0 M dH H 0 = μ 0 M ̅ H is the fluid magnetic pressure, M is the magnetization of the ferrofluid, M ̅ is the field averaged magnetisation of the ferrofluid under external magnetic field H. A general boundary condition to solve Eq. 5 is: where P 0 is atmospheric pressure. P n = and Laplace pressure respectively,  is the surface tension, and R the radius of the antitube. P n and P c act at the magnetic-nonmagnetic interface and at the interface with a nonzero interfacial tension respectively. In our work, both act at the boundary between antitube and ferrofluid. Hence, at the centre of the antitube (location 1), P 1 ′ = P 0 and at the magneticnonmagnetic interface (location 2), P 2 ′ = P 0 + P c -P n . Since Eq. 5 is valid at all the locations we can write: as at centre of the antitube, H = 0 (see Eq. 2), hence P m 1 = 0 and Eq. 6 results in: Eq. 7 depicts the balance between surface tension (Laplace pressure), fluid magnetic pressure and the magnetic normal traction, where σ, H I and M I are surface tension, magnetic field and ferrofluid magnetisation at the magnetic-nonmagnetic interface respectively. Rearranging Eq. 7 gives the equilibrium diameter of the antitube (d eq = 2R) given by In summary, the stability of such cylindrical antitube is governed by the relative strengths of the destabilizing Laplace pressure and the stabilizing magnetic pressure. Since, the Laplace pressure is given by the ratio of interfacial tension and diameter of the flow channel, increasing when the size of the fluidic circuit decreases. It therefore sets the limit for smallest achievable diameters when it exceeds the magnetic pressure. The latter depends on the magnitude of the applied local field and the magnetic susceptibility of the ferrofluid material. A suitable design of the magnetic field and the appropriated choice of intrinsic properties of the ferrofluid make possible the stabilization of minimal antitube size (d eq ). In a nutshell, one needs to maximize the magnetic susceptibility of the ferrofluid and minimize its interfacial surface tension with the enclose liquid forming the antitube fluidic circuit. Our experiments show that diameters below 10 μm can be realized, with possible smaller values requiring further miniaturization of the source magnets (for increasing the local magnetic field) and optimization of the ferrofluid intrinsic properties. Fig. In the dynamic case, we detail the hydrodynamics resulting from the motion of the transported liquid. The conceptual difference between the standard flow (Poiseuille flow) and the proposed flow (antitube flow) is illustrated in Fig. 1. a finite velocity at the confining wall 2. a reverse flow path of the ferrofluid. These two distinct features lead to spectacular high drag reduction values, measuring the reduction of friction forces, up to measured values of 99.8% for viscous liquids where, β 0 is the simplified drag reduction factor . The wall velocity depends on the relative coverage of the ferrofluid (t f ⋆ ) and the viscosity ratio (η r ). As expected, increaing the relative amount of ferrofluid improves the lubrication. Inversely, if the viscosity of the ferrofluid increases, the systems is more and more resembling to a solid wall boundary condition, therefore detrimental to lubrication. Velocimetry experiments require no obstruction to the incident light (no ferrofluid in the path of light), hence a planar flow equivalent, slightly deviating from axisymmetric encapsulation of the transported liquid, is required. In this case, the ferrofluid covers the side of the flow channel, keeping the light unobstructed (See Fig. The four white arrows in the cross section show the direction of magnetization of the magnets and the red line along the flow depicts the liquid-liquid interface. As required, the ferrofluid (colour grey) only covers the two walls and hence facilitates the transmission of light, essential for flow visualization. We measure the velocity profile in the antitube directly using μPTV. We use glycerol (η a = 1.1 Pa.s) as antitube transported liquid and ferrofluids APGE32 (η a = 1.7 Pa.s) from Ferrotec . The antitube and the microchannel cavity width are d = 0.5 mm and D = 1.5 mm respectively. The ferrofluid coverage is maintained at, t f = D-d . We begin by mixing glycerol with fluorescence 4 μm size particles (FluoSpheresTM). The excitation and emission maxima for the particles are 580 nm and 605 nm respectively. We use a source of light with a bandpass filter (572/25 for excitation and 629/62 for emission). Fig. We argue that the symmetry of the flow can be broken by implementing deformations all along the chamber walls (i.e., only in contact with the magnetic fluid). One possible implementation is to define a threaded screw profile along the cylindrical circuit length (Fig. stating it is proportional to the radial position r ⋆ = √x 2 + y 2 through the angular velocity ω ⋆ , with all variables non-dimensionalized by their values at the magnetic-nonmagnetic interface (flow wall). Fig. Ferrofluid encapsulation of liquid circuits opens new possibilities for microfluidics and fluidics applications A direct measurement of velocity profile using the μPIV confirms the occurrence of liquidliquid wall velocity as large as 85% of the maximum velocity. This value increases with the increase in viscosity ratio between transported liquid to the lubricant. The experimental observations are supported and predicted by an analytical modelling using the Stokes equation. Such low drag flow channels enable microfluidics applications that require reduced operating pressures, specifically needed in microchannel flow of concentrated solution or variable viscosity solutions. Drug delivery and shear control on delicate cells also falls in the gamut of possible applications. The magnetically confined flow channels open therefore new possibilities in the field of microfluidics for shearless transport, for a wide range of biological and technological applications. Beyond a simple flow profile (Poiseuille like parabolic profile), complex flow profiles can be obtained by tuning the design of the cavity used for the flow. We have shown that a screw pattern on the inner boundary of the cavity results in the swirling motion of flow about the central axis. The flow resembles a forced vortex flow with constant vorticity and deviates as we approach the centre of the flow, away from the screw design. These examples provide insight into the possibility to design and investigate novel flow patterns, otherwise not possible when using the solid walls that constrain the flow of the transported liquid.