Recently, evidence of superconductivity (SC) has been reported in pressurized La4Ni3O10. Here we study the possible pairing mechanism and pairing symmetry in this material. Through fitting the density-functional-theory band structure, we provide a six-orbital tight-binding model. In comparison with the band structure of La3Ni2O7, the additional non-bonding d z 2 band is importance to the pairing mechanism here. When the multi-orbital Hubbard interactions are included, our random-phase-approximation based study yields an s ± -wave pairing. The dominant FS nesting with nesting vector Q1 ≈ (π, π) is between the γ-pocket contributed by the bonding d z 2 band top and the α1-pocket contributed by the non-bonding d z 2 band bottom, leading to the strongest pairing gap amplitude and opposite gap signs within the two regimes. The dominant real-space pairing is the interlayer pairing between the d z 2 orbitals. We have also studied the doping dependence of the pairing symmetry and Tc. The recent discovery of superconductivity (SC) in the nickel-based family The density-functional-theory (DFT) based calculations suggest that the low-energy degrees of freedom in La 4 Ni 3 O 10 are mainly the Ni-3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals In this paper, we study the pairing mechanism and pairing symmetry in pressurized La 4 Ni 3 O 10 through standard random-phase-approximation (RPA) approach. We start from a six-orbital tight-binding (TB) model which well fits our DFT band structure. After adding multi-orbital Hubbard interactions into the model, our RPA result provides an s ± -wave pairing. The dominant FS nesting is between the γ-pocket centering around the M -point contributed by the bonding d z 2 band and the α 1 -pocket centering around the Γ-point contributed by the non-bonding d z 2 band. The pairing gap is mainly distributed on the two pockets, with opposite gap signs on the two pockets. The real-space pairing pattern is dominated by interlayer 3d z 2 pairing. While the pairing symmetry maintains s ± for low doping levels, the T c arrives at its maximum at slight electron doping. Band Structure and TB model: To study the band structure of pressurized La 4 Ni 3 O 10 , we adopt the tetragonal I4/mmm conventional cell with six Niatoms. Our DFT calculations utilized the projectoraugmented wave (PAW) pseudo-potentials with the exchange-correlation of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof and the GGA approach, as implemented in the Vienna abinitio Simulation Package (VASP) The obtained band structure is shown in Fig. To facilitate subsequent studies involving electron in-teractions, we neglect the coupling between the upper three layers and the lower three layers within a unit cell, and by taking each three layers as a unit cell we extract from the Wannier representations the following sixorbital TB model up to the third-nearest neighbor hopping, Here i/j denote site indices, i.e. the combined in-plane coordinate and layer indices. μ/ν label orbital, and σ labels spin. ε iμ represents the on-site energy of orbital μ at the site i. The relevant hopping integrals t ij,μν up to the NNN bonds are illustrated in Fig. Here, U , V , and J H denote the intra-orbital, inter-orbital Hubbard repulsion, and the Hund's rule coupling (and the pair hopping) respectively, which satisfy the relation For the subsequent calculations, we fix J H = U/6. We employ the multi-orbital RPA approach to treat this Hamiltonian We define the following bare susceptibility The spin (s) and charge (c) susceptibilities renormalized in the RPA level are given by[100-107] Usually, repulsive interactions suppress χ (c) but enhance χ (s) . There exist a critical strengths U , exceeding which χ (c/s) diverges, leading to the charge/spin-density wave (CDW/SDW). Usually we have For the present band structure U c ≈ 1.2 eV. We further define the static spin susceptibility matrix χ (s) k (pq, st) ≡ χ (s)pq st (k, iω = 0), where ω is the Matsubara frequency. The largest eigenvalue of this Hermitian matrix for each momentum k is defined as χ (s) (k), which represents the eigen spin susceptibility in the strongest channel. The distribution of χ (s) (k) over the BZ is shown in Fig. Pairing Symmetry and T c : When U < U c , through exchanging spin/charge fluctuations represented by χ (s/c) , an effective interaction V αβ (k, q) [100-107] can be obtained, which can mediate the pairing instability. Then via the mean-field treatment with the obtained effective Hamiltonian, one can acquire a self-consistent pairing gap equation, which after linearized near T c provides the linearized gap equation. Choosing a thin energy shell ±∆E near the Fermi level and integrating the high energy part, the linearized gap equation after discretized on the lattice takes the form of an eigenvalue problem of the effective interaction matrix. The T c is related to the largest eigenvalue λ of this matrix via T c ∝ e -1/λ , while the pairing symmetry is determined by the eigen vector corresponding to this eigenvalue. The U dependences of the largest pairing eigenvalue λ for different pairing symmetries, including the s-wave, d xy -wave, d x 2 -y 2 -wave, and degenerate (p x , p y )-wave, are shown in Fig. The distribution of the relative gap function is shown on the FS in Fig. The distribution of the relative gap function on the FS for δ = 0.1 electron doping is shown in Fig. For δ = -0.1 hole doping, the γ-pocket grows larger than that for the undoped case, while the α 1 pocket vanishes,as shown in Fig. Robust s ± -wave pairing: As the top of the bonding d z 2 band at the M -point and the local bottom of the non-bonding d z 2 band at the Γ-point are very close to the Fermi level, a slight variation of the band structure may lead to appearance or disappearance of the α 1 or the γ pocket. In order to investigate the influence of these pockets on the superconducting pairing in the system, we built a new band structure with the lattice constants and atomic positions of this tetragonal I4/mmm structure under 40 Gpa fully relaxed. The new band structure is shown Fig. Adopting the same multi-orbital Hubbard model as described in Eq. 2, our RPA calculations reveal that, despite vanishing of the γ-pocket, the maximum of the spin susceptibility still locates at the "virtual" nesting vector Q 1 ≈ (π, π) which connects the M -point and the boundary of the α 1 -pocket. This is due to two reasons: Firstly, the local band top at the M -point is very near the Fermi level; secondly, this band top is very flat leading to large DOS. Consequently, similarly with the case for δ = -0.1 shown in Fig. ⊥ / ⊥1 mean interlayer hoppings. Similar with La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , for the d z 2 orbital, the interlayer coupling is strong but the intralayer coupling is weak; while for the d x 2 -y 2 orbital, the interlayer couplings is weak but the intralayer coupling is strong