Results of spectroscopic studies at ambient and high pressures of a LuAlO3:Ce 3+ (LuAP:Ce) single crystalline film (SCF) as well as LuAP:Ce and YAlO3:Ce (YAP:Ce) single crystals are reported. Room temperature absorption measurements of the single crystals in the vacuum UV region allowed establishing the bandgap energies of 7.63 eV for YAP and 7.86 eV for LuAP, with an assumption of the direct band-gaps. Luminescence of Ce 3+ in LuAP and YAP bulk crystals was measured as a function of temperature from 6 K up to 873 K. Temperature quenching of the Ce 3+ luminescence in YAP:Ce was observed above 650 K, which is related to the location of the lowest Ce 3+ 5d level at 1.27 eV below the conduction band minimum. No temperature quenching occurred in LuAP:Ce up to 873 K, mostly due to the lower energy of the 4f levels with respect to the valence band maximum. The barycenter energies and splittings of Ce 3+ 5d states in YAP and LuAP at room temperature were precisely established. Theoretical calculations of the Ce 3+ 5d states energy structure under pressure revealed a discrepancy between the obtained experimental results and the prediction of Dorenbos' theoretical model. The discrepancy can be removed if instead of the 5d state of the free Ce 3+ ion the bandgap of the compound is taken as reference energy for the red-shift of the 5d level. This hypothesis also allows us to take into account the pressure-induced increase of the bandgap energy, expected for the studied compounds. Pressure dependences of LuAP:Ce luminescence spectra suggest that a certain type of phase transition occurs above 15 GPa. Yttrium and lutetium aluminum oxide perovskites (YAlO3 -YAP, and LuAlO3 -LuAP, respectively) are known to be prospective optical materials and have been studied for a relatively long time. Scintillators based on these materials are probably the most prominent application exploiting LuAP properties. Particularly, cerium-doped LuAP has a high light yield, high crystal density, and short decay time, which was already known back in 1998 Therefore, LuAP seems to be more promising than YAlO3:Ce, despite the same crystal structure and similar properties. Both materials could be also used for solid-state laser applications. They are also studied for a better understanding of their fundamental properties LuAP was much less studied than the YAP, mainly due to difficulties in the growth process, related to non-congruent melting under higher temperatures than the YAP. To understand the mechanisms of LuAP:Ce luminescence better, it is important to know the location of the Ce 3+ states in the band gap of the host. Theoretical investigations of the Ce 3+ levels in the YAP band gap were performed in Both YAP and LuAP can be produced by many different growth methods, such as Czochralski, sol-gel, solid state reaction, liquid phase epitaxy, and others. Some materials grown by liquid phase epitaxy (LPE) contain less defects Previous band-gap estimations of YAP and LuAP, among them also with the use of synchrotron radiation, produced slightly larger values of this parameter Concerning doping with Ce 3+ some estimations of parameters of the energetic structure of this dopant in relation to the band structure of YAP and LuAP were done by Dorenbos However, the Dorenbos' estimations, although allowing having quite good qualitative information, sometimes differ by a few tenth parts of eV from those observed experimentally. This difference may be critically important for the evaluation of the thermal stability of luminescence efficiency of Ce 3+ dopant in particular compounds. These materials were not studied under high pressures, which affect their optical properties. This paper is dedicated to obtaining some general observations about the influence of high pressures on the energetic structure of Ce 3+ in various materials. LuAP:Ce bulk crystals studied were grown by Czochralski and micro-pulling-down (-PD) methods. The Ce concentration was equal to 0.2 mol. %, 0.5 mol. % in YAP and 0.15 mol% in LuAP single crystals. Ce 3+ doped LuAP single crystalline films were grown by LPE method on (001) oriented YAP substrates using a melt solution containing Lu2O3 (5N), CeO2 (5N), and Al2O3 (4N) and a PbO-B2O3 (5N) flux. The growth temperature was in the 1020-1035 °C range. The CeO2 content in the melt-solution was 20 mol %. However, microanalysis of the films has shown that the Ce concentration was only equal to 0.055 and 0.05 mol % at 1020 °C and 1035 °C growth temperatures, respectively. Thus, the estimated segregation coefficient of Ce ions in LuAP SCFs lies in the 0.0025-0.005 range. The measurements of single crystalline film surface morphology (see Fig. The single crystallinity and high quality of LuAP:Ce SCFs were confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a modified DRON 4 spectrometer (Cu Kα1 X-ray source). The crystalline phase of the prepared LuAP:Ce/YAP epitaxial structures was characterized in the 2θ range from 20° to 100° with a step of 0.02°. The SEM image of the SCF surface presented in Fig. The XRD -2 scan in Fig. From the difference in the peak positions, the misfit between the lattice constants of the YAP substrate and the LuAP SCF can be determined. The misfit, m = [(ascf -asub)/ascf] × 100%, is equal to -1.255% (see also The optical absorbance spectra were measured using a spectrophotometer JASCO V-660 with a double monochromator (1.5-6.5 eV) and a laboratory setup based on a vacuum monochromator VMR-2 and a hydrogen discharge light source (5.5-11 eV). In the latter case, the constant number of exciting photons was achieved by varying the slit width of the monochromator and using the constant signal from sodium salicylate for normalization. An easyLab diamond anvil cell (DAC) was used for high-pressure (HP) measurements of LuAP:Ce SCF. Before the measurements, the samples were polished from the substrate side to a thickness of about 20-25 μm. Ruby crystals were used as pressure sensors. As pressure transmitting media either a 5:1 methanol-ethanol mixture or argon were applied in luminescence and Raman measurements, respectively. The applied pressure is hydrostatic up to about 10 GPa. Temperature dependences of the luminescence were measured in two different experimental setups. For measurements above room temperature, an FTIR 600 high temperature table provided by Linkam was used, while below room temperature an Oxford Optistat CF104 cryostat was used. The temperature overlapping region of both setups (from 77 K to room temperature) served to adjust the results. During both pressure and temperature-dependent measurements the same excitation source and registration system were used. Luminescence was collected in back-scattering geometry using a Triax 320 monochromator provided by ISA Yobin Yvon-Spex equipped with a Spectrum One liquid nitrogen cooled CCD camera. An Inova 400 argon-ion laser of constant power was used for 275 nm and 300 nm excitations. Room temperature, unpolarized Raman spectra of LuAP:Ce SCF were collected with the use of a MonovistaCRS+ spectrometer equipped with: a 0.75 m Acton-Princeton monochromator; backthinned, deep-depleted PyLoN system, liquid-nitrogen cooled CCD camera (1340×100 -20 μm per pixel array); computer controlled Olympus XYZ IX71 inverted stage equipped with a Moticam (1280×1204) camera. The spectra were excited with the 532 nm laser line. The laser was focused on the sample through long working distance objectives with 50x (numerical aperture NA = 0.9) and 10x (NA = 0.23) magnification for experiments at ambient and high pressures, respectively. The calculations of the structural and electronic properties of the LuAlO3 crystal were performed using the CASTEP Room temperature absorption spectra of Ce doped YAP and LuAP single crystals are shown in Fig. The determined bandgap energy of the LuAP bulk crystal is significantly lower than the previously reported value of 8.44 eV describes the luminescence intensity as a function of temperature, assuming that the electrons which are thermally activated to the second and third excited levels of Ce 3+ contribute to the luminescence, while the electrons which are thermally excited to the conduction band are not recaptured and thus do not contribute to the emission. This assumption is valid given the existence of numerous electron traps responsible for thermoluminescence. Equation (1) takes thus the form: where I0 is the initial low temperature luminescence intensity, ΔE is the energy distance between the lowest 5d level and the bottom of the conduction band (treated as a fitting parameter), E21 is the energy distance between the lowest 5d and second lowest 5d level, and E31 is the energy distance between the lowest 5d and third 5d level. The parameters α1 and α2 are ratios of the radiative recombination probabilities from the second and third d-level to that of the lowest d-level, while α3 is the ratio between the ionization rate and the radiative transition probability. The E21 = 0.22 eV and E31 = 0.470 eV energies were estimated from the absorption spectra in Fig. The obtained data allow estimating the position of the ground 4f state of Ce 3+ in YAP crystal. This subject is very important since it is one of the basic parameters in the Dorenbos model The temperature quenching of the Ce 3+ luminescence is not observed in LuAP up to 873 K. It may be partly related to the larger bandgap of LuAP than YAP, although the relatively small difference between them (only 0.23 eV) indicates that the position of the ground state of Ce 3+ in LuAP must be closer to the top of the valence band than in YAP. A list of the observed Raman lines together with their assignations are given in Table Luminescence of the LuAlO3:Ce 3+ bulk crystal and the LuAlO3:Ce 3+ single crystalline film (SCF) measured as a function of pressure under excitation with the 275 nm laser line is shown in LuAP:Ce SCF layer since the thickness of the sample in the cell cannot exceed 25 microns. As can be seen in Fig. As shown in Fig. In the case of the SCF sample, the pressure dependences of the peak energies are not quite parallel (see Fig. The different pressures at which the change of shift rates is observed, i.e. around 15 GPa in SCF and around 20 GPa in SC samples, suggest that the bulk crystal is more pressure resistant. This can be related to the larger number of defects, which seem to play a structure stabilizing role. The lower defect concentration in the film than in the bulk crystal can be due to the much lower growth temperature. The different pressures at which the change of shift rates is observed, i.e. around 15 GPa in SCF and around 20 GPa in SC samples, suggest that the bulk crystal is more pressure resistant. This can be related to the larger number of defects, which seem to play a structure stabilizing role. The lower defect concentration in the film than in the bulk crystal can be due to the much lower growth temperature. Indeed, LuAP SCFs are prone to stress relaxation, associated with the difference in lattice parameters between the substrate and the overgrown layer, which sometimes even results in breaking. Pressure-dependent Raman spectra of the LuAP:Ce SCF single crystalline film are presented in Fig. 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 (a) An unusual exemption from the typical behavior, i.e. increase of the energy of the Raman modes with applied pressure, exhibits line 4.2, which energy decrease with applied pressure. This behavior can be seen in Fig. Due to such distortions, the force parameters may decrease, which causes the energies of certain lattice vibrations may undergo a decrease with increasing pressure. The vibrations around 400 cm -1 are associated with Al-O stretching and deformation modes in the parent YAlO3 compound These effects do not exclude that an abrupt change of the already mentioned angle of distortion may occur at a certain pressure. The results of theoretical calculations performed for LuAP with the use of two approximations: GGA and LDA, are presented in Fig. The redshift of Ce 3+ luminescence observed in the high-pressure experiments is related to the compression and possible distortion of the crystal lattice. Physical mechanisms leading to the red shift are three-fold: (i) down-shift of the barycenter (centroid) of 5d levels, c, as compared to the free ion, (ii) increase of the crystal field splitting of the 5d states, cfs, (iii) distortion of the oxygen polyhedron surrounding Ce 3+ from cubic symmetry. The first two mechanisms can be evaluated in the following way: the down-shift of the centroid can be described by the following formula, adopted (modified) from papers where Ri is the distance (pm) between Ce 3+ and anion i in the undistorted lattice. Pressure application changes these distances. The summation is over all N (N = 8) anions that coordinate Ce 3+ . 0.6 ΔR is a correction for lattice relaxation around Ce 3+ , ΔR is the difference between the radii of Ce 3+ and Lu 3+ , α sp i (in units 10 -30 m -3 ) is the spectroscopic polarizability of anion i, and A is a constant (1.79 × 10 13 ). The polarizability α sp i can be evaluated from the formula: where av is the weighted average of the electronegativities of the cations in the oxide compounds. The contribution of the splitting of the 5d state by the crystal field can be evaluated from the empirical formula: where Rav is the average distance between the activator and the neighboring anions, poly values are in the ratio 1, 0.89, 0.79, 0.42 for octahedral, cubic, dodecahedral, and tricapped trigonal prismatic coordination, respectively, and octahedral = 1.35 × 10 9 pm 2 /cm Crystal field splitting of the 5d levels is also dependent on the distortion from the cubic geometry of the octahedron, which is more difficult to evaluate. Results of the calculations, based on the Dorenbos theory . In the calculations, we assumed that Y, Lu, and consequently, Ce ions are located in dodecahedral (however strongly distorted) crystallographic positions, thus the values of dod = 0.79 × oct. The experimental positions of the barycenters of 5d states of Ce 3+ ions, estimated from the integral of absorption measurements of all 5d transitions for each compound (see Fig. The 5d barycenter energy of Ce 3+ in LuAP was estimated as equal to 5.22 eV if calculated from integrated absorption to the 5d states. This value is much larger than obtained as the average of the observed peak energies of the five 5d states of Ce 3+ , which is equal to 4.86 eV. The value obtained from the integration of the absorption coefficient is affected by the relatively large background present in the LuAP crystal close to the conduction band. The 5d barycenter in LuAP estimated from the integrating procedure is located between the two highest-lying 5d levels. In contrast, in YAP the 5d barycenter energies of Ce 3+ calculated both as an average of the peak energies and from the integration of the absorption coefficients agree with each other (see Table The better agreement in YAP is a consequence of the much lower background absorption than in LuAP. Therefore, the experimental Ce 3+ 5d barycenter energy in LuAP is better taken as equal to 4.86 eV, from the average position of 5d levels peak energies. The theoretical energies of the 5d level positions much better correlate with the experiment if they are calculated from the bandgap energies instead of the free Ce 3+ ion 5d state energy. The results of such calculations are shown in the last row of Table where R0 and R are Ce 3+oxygen distances at ambient and applied pressures, respectively, B0 and B'0 are values of bulk modulus and its pressure derivative The apparent discrepancy between experimental and theoretical data can be corrected by taking as a reference level the position of the conduction band bottom instead of the free-ion 5d level energy. The best fit to the experimental data is obtained if a linear shift of the conduction band minimum with pressure, equal to 310 cm -1 /GPa, is assumed (see solid blue lines in Fig. Taking the pressure dependence of the bandgap calculated with the use of LDA (red lines in Fig. There is no experimental data on the pressure dependence of the bandgap energy of LuAP due to its high energy, coinciding with the bandgap of diamonds. However, both the linear dependence of the band gap energy and this calculated with GGA are in reasonable agreement with typically observed in similar compounds, for example YGG The obtained results, with linear dependence of the bandgap energy or that calculated with GGA now exhibit good agreement between theory and experimental data, at least up to 15 GPa. They also show the importance of considering the pressure dependence of the band structure. There is no possibility to neglect pressure dependence of the energy of the conduction band minimum vs. the position of the 4f levels, which in this consideration are treated as pressure independent. This is in agreement with the commonly accepted idea that 4f states, being screened by outer electrons, are very weakly dependent on the environment. Contrary to that, the d levels, especially also 5d, strongly interact with surrounding anions and therefore their energy structure is strongly pressure dependent. The use of conduction band energy as the reference level for the calculation of the down-shift energy c may be justified by the close location of the intervalence charge transfer state IVCT, which is formed by ionization of the Ce 3+ ion followed by trapping of the ionized electron. This state can be understood as a (Ce 4+ + e) exciton and its energy level should lie close to the bottom of the conduction band depending on the electron binding energy Although the obtained general agreement between such theoretical considerations and experimental data is quite good, the more close comparison reveals also important deviations, which are detected by our measurements. First, the bending of theoretical curves in Fig. The possibility of a phase transition is confirmed also by high-pressure Raman measurements depicted in Fig. The results of absorption measurements in a near-UV region of YAlO3 and LuAlO3 crystals allowed accurate measurements of the bandgap energies of YAlO3 and LuAlO3 single crystals at room temperature, which are equal to 7.63 eV and 7.86 eV, respectively, assuming direct bandgaps. Thermal quenching of YAP:Ce luminescence observed above 650 K in high temperature measurements, locate the position of the lowest excited 5d level of Ce 3+ at 1.27 eV below the bottom of the conduction band. This value is affected by the temperature change of the band-gap, i.e. at low temperatures, the difference between the energy of the 5d level and the bottom of the conduction band is larger. The estimated position of the 4f level is thus consistent, within the experimental error, with the estimations of Dorenbos theory and DFT calculations. Ce 3+ luminescence quenching is not observed in LuAP crystals up to about 873 K. This is a result of the larger bandgap of LuAP as compared to YAP as well as the lower energy of the ground Ce 3+ 4f states, which are located closer to the top of the valence band in LuAP than in YAP. The down shift of the 5d energy levels of Ce 3+ with respect to the energy of the free Ce 3+ ion calculated according to Dorenbos theory does not agree with experimental data. The difference can be reconciled if the down shift is calculated relative to the bandgap energy of YAP and LuAP. This approach also allows correlating the observed changes of the 5d state energies under pressure in LuAP, related to the pressure-induced changes of the average cation-anion distances, assuming that the main changes of the bandgap are due to the energy increase of the conduction band bottom. The other possibility proposed in We suggest that the observed change of the pressure coefficients of the 5d→4f Ce 3+ luminescence bands is associated with pressure-induced structural transitions, occurring in the liquid-phase epitaxy grown layers at a pressure of about 15 GPa, and at higher pressures crystals grown by the micro-pulling down grown method. We related this difference to the larger number of unintentional impurities and structural defects present in the micro-pulled down crystals than in the single crystalline film. The observed abrupt changes of the pressure coefficients of Raman modes above 10 GPa in LuAP confirm the hypothesis of a phase transition. In the high pressure Raman experiment also one soft mode with an energy equal to 455.4 cm -1 at ambient pressure was identified, the energy of which decreases with pressure. Growth Calculated from formulas (2), (3), and (4), and experimental values of the down-shift of the centroid barycenter, c, the splitting of the 5d state by the crystal field, cfs, and related data at ambient pressure (see description below). https