We report the fabrication and characterization of a plasmonic metasurface comprising electricallycontacted sub-wavelength gold dipole nanoantennas, conformally coated by a thin hafnia film, an indium tin oxide layer and a backside mirror, forming metaloxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitors, for use as an electrically-tunable reflectarray or metasurface. By voltage biasing the nanoantennas through metallic connectors and leveraging the carrier refraction effect in the MOS capacitors, our measurements demonstrate phase control in reflection over a range of about 30 degrees, with a constant magnitude of reflection coefficient of 0.5, and the absence of secondary lobes. Comprehensive electromagnetic and quantum carrier models of the structure are developed and are in excellent agreement with the measurements. The metasurface holds promise for use as an optical phased array. Electrically-tunable metasurfaces hold significant promise for numerous applications, including dynamic beam forming and focusing, beam steering, and, generally, wavefront shaping particularly to implement beam steering devices based on optical phased arrays An ideal beam steering metasurface should possess several key characteristics Optical phased arrays based on plasmonic nanoantennas hold promise for meeting the requirements of optical beamsteering. Resonant plasmonic nanoantennas support strongly enhanced fields which confer a high sensitivity to local perturbations in refractive index. They are also nanoscale structures, enabling pixels to be dimensioned to sub-wavelength scales which precludes the emergence of grating (secondary) lobes. Moreover, metal nanoantennas can also serve as device electrodes, ensuring strong optical overlap with the active region. Integrating plasmonic nanostructures with a semiconductor enables exploitation of the carrier refraction effect through electrical biasing in an appropriate device configuration. Altering the carrier density by applying a gate voltage provides a pathway to dynamically and actively tune the phase, amplitude and polarization of the emerging light Implementing devices that replicate the function of a turning mirror to control a beam generated by a nearby source involves the pixelation and application of a controllable phase gradient across a reflective area. Such a device, termed a tunable reflectarray, allows for steering a monochromatic beam to any desired angle of reflection. To achieve this, it is desirable that the phase of each pixel over the beam cross-section to be continuously variable from 0 to 2π without affecting the incident light's intensity. The versatility of the tunable reflectarray concept makes it a powerful tool. Much of the ongoing research in beam steering devices, particularly those involving optical metasurfaces or plasmonic nanostructures, is focused on the development of reflectarrays constructed with tunable pixels, incorporating ITO as electro-optical active material. Huang et al. More recently, Kim et al. Here we focus on the development of a reflectarray following a nanoscale pixel design based on a gold dipole nanoantenna that enables phase control in reflection, explored theoretically in previous work The gold antennas and contacts are supported by a glass (fused silica) substrate. They were deposited on a 3 nm layer of chromium to ensure adherence, as shown in magenta in Figs. The device is constructed such that ITO fills the gap between the antenna arms, which is where the optical fields are enhanced and the structure is most sensitive. When the MOS structure is driven into strong accumulation, a high electron concentration layer is formed within a confined area approximately 4 nm away from the interface of the ITO and the insulator. We refer to the accumulation layer as the perturbed layer in ITO, indicated in red in Fig. The antenna unit cells (pixels), of dimensions a x by a y , are distributed in a periodic fashion over a designated area measuring 10 × 10 μm 2 , centered within an electrical fan-out structure to contact an array column-wise. The selection of pixel periodicity is crucial, and is chosen small enough to satisfy the condition a x , a y ≤ λ/2, where λ represents the wavelength of operation in the medium through which light is incident on the nanoantennas (glass substrate). By respecting this condition, the arrangement ensures the absence of grating diffraction orders in reflection. The fabrication process employed three distinct lithography techniques. A trilayer contact photolithography process was employed to create relatively large features via lift-off, such as a fan-out structure, contact fingers and pads, and the backside metallization. For specific details of this fabrication process, refer to The complete fabrication flow is depicted in Fig. Witness samples were included during the deposition of hafnia and ITO for the purpose of evaluating the films independently. The hafnia layer had a density of 9.61268 g/cm 3 and a thickness of 7.76 ± 0.258 nm, confirmed using X-ray reflectometry (XRR). The electronic properties of the ITO layer were determined using an Ecopia HMS-3000 Hall effect measurement system in Van der Pauw configuration. The optical properties of the deposited ITO and hafnia layers were extracted from ellipsometry measurements using a spectroscopic ellipsometer (UVISEL Plus, Horiba Scientific). See Section ?? under supplementary material for details. To investigate the reflectarray's electro-optical performance, we used two custom-built confocal microscopes. Fig. The sub-wavelength reflectarray was designed to reflect the incident beam without secondary lobes (which would be apparent in our set-up on images captured by the IR camera). It is desirable for the incident beam spot to be smaller than the area of the reflectarray (10×10 μm 2 ) to minimize diffraction from its edges To ensure this, the beam spot diameter was measured for both of our sources (super-continuum and the tunable laser) using the knife-edge method To apply bias voltages to the device under test (DUT), we used a custom probe card (Accuprobe) to simultaneously contact the 42 pads of a DUT: 2 pads connected in common to the device's ground, and 40 pads connected columnwise to the nanoantenna array to apply the gate voltages. Alignment of the probe card to a DUT was facilitated by a miniaturised microscope camera positioned on the backside of the DUT, as depicted in Fig. We measured the magnitude of the relative reflection coefficient |Γ(V )| at different bias voltages using the setup shown in Fig. The phase shift measurement relied on the intensity change resulting from the interference between the beam reflected by the Device Under Test (DUT) and the reference beam reflected by mirror M (Fig. Initially, the bias voltage was set to zero. To achieve equal intensity for the reflected and reference beams on the camera, OD 1 and OD 2 were carefully adjusted. This involved individually blocking one beam's optical path while adjusting the Optical Density (OD) filter of the other. To align both beams on the camera, the tilt mount of mirror M was adjusted until the position of the reference beam almost perfectly overlapped with the reflected beam. Subsequently, the translation stage of mirror M was fine-tuned to achieve total constructive interference. The intensity I(0) was captured under the conditions that the intensity of individual beams w 1 and w 2 were the same and constructively interfering (A = |Γ(0)|B and cos (φ(0)) = 1). From equation ( Then a non-zero and identical bias voltage was simultaneously applied to all pads of the device, and I(V ) was measured. By assuming that the intensity change in the resulting interference patterns was solely due to the phase shift or that the magnitude of the relative reflection coefficient at a given wavelength is almost constant (|Γ(V )| ≈ |Γ(0)|), we solved cos (φ(V )) in eq. ( ( The solutions of Eq. ( where the second solution is dropped for producing values out of range of the cosine function. Isolating the phase shift φ(V ) from Eq. ( where I(V ) has been measured and A determined as described above. See section S?? under supplementary material for a an example calculation of the phase shift from the raw data. We measured individual capacitance-voltage (C-V) characteristics for every nanoantenna column using an HP 428a LCR meter, at an AC voltage of ±30 mV and a frequency of 10 kHz. The DC bias voltage was increased from -2 V in steps of 0.05 V until the breakdown voltage (BDV) was reached in accumulation. The C-V measurements were performed after the electro-optic measurements because the capacitor structures become compromised when the BDV is reached. From the C-V characteristics, we determined the dielectric constant (DC relative permittivity) of hafnia using: where C max is the maximum capacitance measured in accumulation, t ox is the thickness of the hafnia layer, A p is the capacitor area probed by pad p, and ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The breakdown field (BDF) in MV/cm was calculated using BDF = BDV × 10/t ox,nm , where the breakdown voltage BDV is in V and t ox,nm is the thickness of the hafnia layer in nm. Classical models such conventional drift-diffusion (CDD) Here, we used self-consistent Schrödinger-Poisson (SP) coupling to compute the carrier density profile in ITO under accumulation The Poisson and Schrödinger equations are coupled second-order nonlinear differential equations, and solving this system is nontrivial, requiring an iterative approach. To start the iterations, we computed the potential distribution throughout the 1D MOS capacitor (Fig. The potential distribution obtained from the CDD was then input into the SP model by updating the potential term therein. In the next step, the carrier density profile N (d) is computed using the sum of statistically weighted densities of the eigenfunctions obtained from the updated Schrödinger equation via where W i represents the weight factors, φ i is the i th normalized eigenfunction associated with eigenenergy E i , and d denotes the distance from the oxide surface. Then, the new potential distribution is computed by solving Poisson's equation using the updated charge distribution N (d) (Eq. ( We then used the electron density distribution computed by the SP model N (d) in the Drude equation where ε ∞ is the high-frequency relative permittivity and γ D is the collision frequency, which were taken as 3.92 and 4.4 × 10 13 rad/sec, respectively where N (d) is obtained for an applied bias voltage of interest. ω D,b is the bulk plasma frequency of ITO and was fixed to 1.55 × 10 15 rad/sec To investigate the gate-tunable optical response of the reflectarray, we used the relative permittivity distribution in ITO computed for different applied gate voltages as described in Subsection 3.4 as well as the experimentally-determined dimensions of the nanoantenna array (Fig. where μ r is the relative permeability (set to 1), ε r (x, y, z) is the relative permittivity distribution describing the structure, k is the free-space wavenumber, and E and H are the electric and magnetic field vectors. The structure varies along the z-axis and is periodic along the x and y directions (Fig. In our optical model, the refractive index of hafnia was taken from experimental ellipsometry data (see section S??), the relative permittivity of Au and Cr were taken from Johnson and Christy Completed devices produced by the fabrication process described in Subsection 3.1 are shown in Fig. In Figure Figure Figures The permittivity of ITO experiences perturbation through the carrier refraction effect induced in the material (recall that the ITO is the semiconductor in MOS capacitors). Voltage gating facilitated by metallic connectors induces a carrier density perturbation over a thin ITO region near the nanoantenna under accumulation and depletion. During accumulation, the carrier density increases, leading to a blueshift of the epsilon-near-zero wavelength (λ EN Z ) in the perturbed ITO region. The local changes in carrier density within the thin ITO layer, induced by accumulation or depletion in the MOS capacitor, lead to a local variation in permittivity due to the carrier refraction effect. As this perturbed ITO layer is situated in the enhanced field region near the plasmonic nanostructure, its refractive index variation alters the resonance of the nanoantenna, thereby influencing the reflection properties of the reflectarray, particularly its phase shift. Theoretical and experimental results summarising the electro-optical performance of the sub-wavelength reflectarray are presented in Fig. The experimental resonance wavelength closely matches the simulation results, thus validating the accuracy of the model. However, it is worth noting that the experimental |Γ| are slightly larger than the calculations. The difference between them is 0.15 offresonance and 0.24 on-resonance. This difference is due to background light present during the measurements and imperfect coupling due to slight misalignment of the beam to the reflectarray. Figure Figure The insertion loss (IL) in dB of the reflectarray is defined as IL = -20 log 10 |Γ|. The experimental IL at 1560 nm is 4 dB, and at 1640 nm it is 3.35 dB. In contrast, the theoretical IL values are higher, 8 dB at 1560 nm and 6 dB at 1640 nm. The difference between them is attributed to background light present during the measurements and imperfect coupling due to slight misalignment of the beam to the reflectarray, as mentioned previously. Figure These scattering effects are caused by the incident polarization and boundary conditions acting on the vertical edges of the reflectarray. Scattering from metallic edges occurs differently depending on whether the polarisation is hard or soft -the polarization is said to be hard when the boundary condition that applies is a Neumann condition, and soft for a Dirichlet condition Analysis of the measured C-V data allows the dielectric constant (DC relative permittivity) of the hafnia layer to be extracted using Eq. ( The dielectric strength of the Hafnia layer was determined using Eq. ( The non-uniformity observed in the hafnia layer, along with its low relative permittivity and BDF, suggests the presence of nanopores and a low density relative to bulk hafnia. Referring to the fabrication flow, we note that the metal stack of the nanoantennas, Fig. The deposited ITO layer exhibits an epsilon-nearzero (ENZ) state in the near-infrared (NIR) wavelength range, as confirmed by the analysis on witness samples (refer to Section S?? in the supplementary material for details). The device's performance is significantly influenced by the ENZ wavelength of the ITO layer. This perturbation in ITO permittivity near the nanoantenna, induced by carrier refraction, is facilitated by voltage gating, allowing for carrier density modulation through accumulation and depletion. The increased carrier density leads to a blueshift in λ EN Z during accumulation impacts the reflectarray's reflection properties. The wavelength at which the refractive index of ITO becomes zero, λ ENZ , can be determined using the following equation: where c 0 is the speed of light in vacuum, ε ∞ denotes the dielectric constant of ITO, and ω D,b corresponds to the Drude frequency for the bulk. Eq. ( To estimate λ ENZ of the ITO layer in the reflectarray, we used the parameters obtained in Section ?? of the supplementary information file. Given that the carrier concentrations measured via the Hall effect align well with ω D,b derived from the ellipsometry fittings, we calculated λ ENZ using an average ω ′ D = (ω D,Hall +ω D,Ell )/2, where ω D,Hall is the Drude frequency for the bulk calculated using Eq. (??) based on the carrier concentration measured via the Hall effect, and ω D,Ell represents the Drude frequency for the bulk obtained from the ellipsometry fitting. Using Eq. ( The response speed of the reflectarray is inherently limited by the time required for the MOS capacitors to reach full charge under accumulation, then to discharge when the bias voltage is reduced. The measured specific capacitances given in Fig. We have successfully fabricated, experimentally characterized, and theoretically modelled a novel subwavelength reflectarray capable of varying the phase of the reflected beam without modifying its intensity or introducing scattering effects. The reflectarray pixels consisted of Au dipole nanoantennas inte-grated within a MOS capacitor structure. The pixels were fabricated on a fused Silica substrate, with a conformal coating of thin hafnia followed by layers of ITO and a Au backside mirror. By utilizing this MOS capacitor, we were able to modulate the carrier density of ITO at the interface with hafnia, thereby leading to the observed phase shift in the reflected beam. The reflectarray demonstrates excellent performance near 1550 nm, producing exclusively the desired specular reflected lobe. The reflectarray generated a maximum measured phase shift of about 30 degrees at λ = 1560 nm, limited by the quality of our hafnia insulating film. The magnitude of reflection coefficient was about 0.5 and remained flat over the tuning range of the phase. Electrically tunable plasmonic metasurface as a matrix of nanoantennas: supplemental material February 26, 2024 During the deposition process of the indium tin oxide (ITO) and hafnia layers, witness samples were created with the purpose of evaluate the hafnia and ITO layers. Sample SR83 had a target thickness of 79 nm of ITO deposited on fused Silica. Sample Hf4-227 consisted of a target thickness of 7 nm of hafnia deposited on fused Silica. Additionally, a bilayer sample (Hf3-227) was created, which consisted of a target thickness of 79 nm of ITO on top of 7 nm hafnia, both deposited on a fused Silica substrate. The electronic properties of the ITO layer were analyzed using an Hall effect measurement system (HMS-3000, Ecopia) in the Van der Pauw configuration. The system measured the resistivity, carrier concentration, and mobility The optical characteristics of the deposited ITO and hafnia layers were extracted by taking ellipsometry measurements using a Spectroscopic Ellipsometer (UVISEL Plus, Horiba Scientific). This system uses a double modulation acquisition technology to measure the ellipsometry angles Ψ and ∆ in reflection. The angle of incidence was kept fixed at 70 o . The collected ellipsometry data were fitted to a layered model to determine the optical parameters of the ITO and hafnia layers. The algorithm used for the fitting was the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. The goodness of fit (GOF) was determined by: where (Ψ th , ∆ th ) and (Ψ exp , ∆ exp ) are the theoretical and measured ellipsometry angles, and Γ x is the standard deviation of each data point. The refractive index of hafnia was modelled using the Cauchy dispersion model, n(λ) = A + Bλ -2 + Cλ -4 ; k = 0. ITO was modelled using Drude dispersion model: To analyze the transparent samples, we employed a backside reflection model. We used void as the substrate and added a 500 μm fused Silica layer. The total number of backside reflected beams was kept constant at 2. The percentage of first collected beam was set at 100% and the last collected beam was adjusted during the fitting process in order to minimize the GOF. The fused Silica layer was modeled via a multi-Sellmeier model, utilizing the bulk parameters reported in The ellipsometry fitting process began by extracting the optical parameters of hafnia from the Hf4-227 sample. Next, the Drude parameters for ITO were determined from sample SR83. Subsequently, the hafnia parameters obtained from the Hf4-227 sample were used to model the hafnia layer on sample Hf3-227. For the ITO layer on the Hf3-227 sample, we used the Drude parameters obtained from the SR83 analysis as initial values in the fitting process. To fit the ellipsometry data measured from Hf4-227, we used initial parameters for the Hafnia layer that correspond to bulk hafnia During the fitting for the Drude parameters of the ITO on sample SR83, we used initial parameter values for ITO as the average of values reported in The model for the sample Hf3-227 consisted of a top layer of ITO over hafnia. The thickness of the ITO and the Drude parameters of the ITO layer were used as fitting parameters. The Hafnia layer was fixed at 7.2 nm which resulted from the fitting process on the sample Hf3-227. The initial thickness of the ITO layer was 79 nm and the initial parameters for the ITO were the resulted parametes from the fitting performend on sample SR83. The resulted fitting process using the ellipsometry data from the witness samples were consistently very good. The GOF obtained was low across all cases studied. Specifically, for the model of sample Hf4-227 (hafnia on fused Silica), the value of χ 2 was 0.065, yielding a thickness of hafnia of 7.196 ± 0.862 nm and an A value of 1.872126 ± 0.0379. Similarly, for the model of sample SR83, the value of χ 2 was 0. where |n b,ell | is the carrier concentration in cm -3 , ω D,b is the Drude frequency in rad/sec obtained from the fitting process, ε 0 is the permittivity of vacuum in F/m, m * n = 0.35m e is the effective electron mass in Kg, m e is the electron mass in Kg, and e is the electron charge in Coulombs. The measured carrier concentration and the estimated value obtained through ellipsometry fitting showed a good agreement per sample. For sample SR83, the ellipsometry-derived carrier concentration |n b,ell | is 3.37 ×10 20 , which differs by 1.5% from the carrier concentration measured using the Hall effect system. Similarly, for sample Hf3-227, the ellipsometry-derived carrier concentration |n b,ell | is 4.19 ×10 20 , exhibiting a difference of 5.5% compared to the carrier concentration measured using the Hall effect system. The relative density of the hafnia layer can be estimated using the Lorentz-Lorenz (LL) equation. The relationship between the variation of the film density ρ f and the refractive index of the fitted hafnia layer is described by the equation ρ f /ρ 145 = (n 2 f -1)(n 2 145 + 2)/[(n 2 f + 2)(n 2 145 -1)], where ρ 145 is the density and n 145 is the refractive index of 145 nm thick hafnia reported in Table Test structures were defined on the first metal layer to study the pin and fanout resistance. Fig. The voltage-current characteristics of the pins were measured using a sourcemeter (2400, Keithley), which allows for voltage sourcing during measurements without the need for connection changes. A bias voltage was applied between pins 3 and 30 or between pins 12 and 21, and the resulting current was recorded. Fig. The area of each capacitor was taken as the area of each fan-out finger beneath the ITO patch, as shown in Fig. 