The temperature at which supercooled liquids turn into solid-like glasses (Tg) can change at the free surface, affecting the properties of nanostructured glasses and their applications. However, inadequate experimental resolution to determine the Tg gradient and a longstanding debate over the role of nonequilibrium effects have hindered fundamental understanding of this phenomenon. Using spatially resolved Tg measurements and molecular dynamics simulations, we reveal a crossover from equilibrium behavior to a new regime of nearsurface nonequilibrium glass physics on cooling. This crossover causes the form of the nonequilibrium Tg gradient to change, highlighting the need to include these physics for rational understanding of the properties of realistic nanostructured glass-forming materials. They also potentially recast the interpretation of decades of experimental data on nanoconfined glasses. Since the 1990s Over the past decade, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have revealed a coherent picture of alterations in dynamics near interfaces under equilibrium conditions. This understanding suggests that the relaxation time () of glasses exhibit a double exponential gradient over 10 nm from the surface Experimental studies typically define Tg by observing a gain (or loss) of equilibrium during heating (or cooling). Since these studies necessarily involve the system in a nonequilibrium state before (or after) the glass transition, we refer to this Tg as the nonequilibrium Tg (Tg ne ). In contrast, typical simulations as discussed above To gain a better understanding of our experimental result and the potential influence of nonequilibrium effects on the glassy dynamics of nanoconfined glasses in general, we perform MD simulations on the near-surface dynamics of long-chain polymers, incorporating extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, associated with an initially nonequilibrium chain conformational state, and intrinsic nonequilibrium effects, which refer to the unavoidable loss of equilibrium at Tg ne , to the systems. The results from these simulations not only explain the observed Tg(z) gradient in our experiment, but also shed light on the puzzling "onset behavior" observed in experiments, where the temperature dependence of  of polymer nanofilms qualitatively changes just below Tg ne . Our findings suggest the presence of new nonequilibrium physics that transforms the magnitude and basic form of near-interface alterations in dynamics and Tg relative to the purely equilibrium limit. This provides valuable insights into the dynamics of nanoconfined glasses and highlights the importance of considering nonequilibrium effects in future studies. To measure the Tg ne (z) profiles in cyclic PMMA (c-PMMAm) and linear PMMA (l-PMMAm) with varying degrees of polymerization (m), we have used a method we developed recently In Fig. To determine whether this difference arises from nonequilibrium effects, we conduct simulations of glass formation in freestanding long-chain polymer films and their bulk counterpart upon incorporating both extrinsic and intrinsic nonequilibrium effects. To incorporate extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, we perform melt-quench simulations in which longchain conformational statistics begin and remain modestly out of equilibrium, which qualitatively mimics the effect of trapped nonequilibrium chain configurations commonly produced during fabrication of polymer films. To investigate intrinsic nonequilibrium effects at simulation versus experimental timescales, we devise a simulation protocol to analyze changes in Tg ne (z) as the simulation time scale (tANN,max, the maximum annealing time applied to the system) increases. By comparing these results with Tg eq (z), we evaluate if nonequilibrium effects can explain the experimentally observed linear Tg ne (z). To control the nonequilibrium effects, we employ a two-step protocol in our simulations. First, we subject the system to a high-temperature configurational annealing, where we control the extrinsic nonequilibrium effects. Then we thermally quench it to various measurement temperatures (T) and perform an isothermal (segmental) annealing for a maximum duration of tANN,max to control the intrinsic nonequilibrium effects (see Supplementary Simulation Method). Consequently, the system falls out of equilibrium when bulk-the relaxation time in the middle of the film, which resembles bulk behavior-exceeds tANN,max. Therefore, Tg,bulk ne is approximately the temperature at which bulk = tANN,max. To maintain consistency, we define Tg,bulk eq as the temperature at which bulk equals tANN,max under equilibrium. In our simulation, tANN,max is initially set to 10 6 Lennard-Jones time (τLJ). We measure  at z from the intermediate scattering function of the polymers at z (Supplementary Simulation Method). Fig. Our findings above provide insights into the source of the nonequilibrium effects. First, they cannot arise purely from extrinsic nonequilibrium (chain conformation) effects because nonequilibrium chain conformations exist above Tg,bulk, and yet our Tg eq (z) data continue to report an exponential gradient like that in prior simulations of short chains possessing conformational equilibrium We have observed that the "onset behavior", a long-standing anomaly of nanoconfined glasses, is also found near Tg ne . In this behavior,  begins to exhibit an Arrhenius T-dependence at low temperatures (as opposed to the Vogel-Fucher-Tammann T-dependence commonly exhibited by glasses), which has been previously observed Our observations suggest a unified picture of altered dynamics and glass formation near a free surface. In equilibrium, surfaces induce an exponential Tg eq gradient along with a weak longranged tail, which is consistent with the simulation literature Collectively, our results indicate that nonequilibrium effects play a central role in mediating the thermal and dynamical properties of thin films and nanostructured glasses. Furthermore, those properties can be modulated both by tuning the thermal pathway (and hence Tg ne ) or trapping nonequilibrium molecular conformations at high temperatures. These possibilities allow for new strategies to rationally control the properties of diverse nanostructured materials. In contrast, most current theories of altered dynamics near interfaces focus on purely equilibrium systems. Given the envisaged opportunities, extending these theories to account for nonequilibrium effects should be a priority in future work. Segmental relaxation time τ vs. inverse temperature for various segmental layers at different distances z/σ from the surface ( is the length scale of the bead-spring potential). The dotted lines represent the low-temperature cutoff for inclusion of equilibrium relaxation time data and τ = tANN,max = 10 6 . The curved lines show fits of the data to an established model for equilibrium dynamics T g eq ; t ANN,max = 10 5 T g eq ; t ANN,max = 10 6 T g ne ; t ANN,max = 10 5 T g ne ; t ANN,max = The alkyne functionalized initiator, TMS-C≡C-CH2OOCC(CH3)2Br ( The macroinitiator l-TMS-C≡C-PMMAm-Br (3) and fluoro-tracer-labeled linear PMMA (l-TMS-C≡C-PMMAm-b-FMAn-Br (4)) with different molecular weights were synthesized by ATRP similar to our previous work Silicon (100) wafers covered by a native oxide layer (SiOx, ~2 nm) were cut into 1.3 cm × 1.3 cm slides and employed as a substrate. The slides were cleaned by a freshly prepared piranha solution (H2SO4:H2O2 (v:v) = 3:1) at 363 K for 30 min. The cleaned substrates were coated by gold by sputtering in a sputter Q 150T S (Quorum, U.K.) under an argon atmosphere. The thickness of the gold layer was about 140 nm, as determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Thin films of c-PMMAm-b-FMAn films with different thicknesses were obtained by spin-coating solutions of the polymers in cyclohexanone at various concentrations onto the gold-coated substrates. Afterwards, the films were dried in vacuum at 318 K for 72 h to remove the residual solvent. The film thickness of was determined by an EP 3 SW ellipsometer (Accurion GmbH Co., Germany). Before taking any measurements, the films were annealed for a period of 24 h at each measurement temperature. The molecular weight distributions of the polymers were determined by GPC (Waters-150C, USA). Solutions of the polymers in THF at a concentration of 1 mg/ml were injected into the GPC at 313 K at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) (Q2000, TA Instruments, USA) under a nitrogen environment was used to measure the Tg (Tg,bulk ne (DSC)) of the c-PMMA bulk polymers. During measurement, the sample was first heated to 453 K and held for 5 minutes to eliminate thermal history. Then it was cooled to 323 K at the fastest rate and kept at 323 K for 1 min. Afterwards, the sample was heated at 2 K/min to 453 K during which Tg,bulk ne (DSC) was obtained. The radii of gyration (Rg) of the c-and l-PMMA polymers were calculated by Rg = (Nlb 2 /12) 1/2 and Rg = (Nlb 2 /6) 1/2 , respectively (41) (where lb is the average statistical segment length, which is 0.69 nm for PMMA, and N is the degree of polymerization). Experimental Methods We employed a method that we recently developed Because the fluoro-labels have a lower surface energy than PMMA, they tend to migrate to the free surface. At a given temperature T between the Tg ne at z = 0 and the bulk counterpart Tg,bulk ne , this migration process is halted for z > z*, where z* is the position for which Tg ne (z*) = T. This occurs simply because the local Tg ne (z) deeper in the film than z* are greater than the experimental temperature, and so the segmental dynamics (which are the main dynamics that govern the glass transition in polymers) are frozen in the glassy state. Therefore, the temperature at which the fluoro labels within depth z begins to enrich on heating (because of migration of the fluoro labels from the region immediately below) is taken to be the local Tg ne at z. By exploiting the fact that the different surface techniques have different probe depths, Tg ne (z) could be measured from z = 0.5-9.0 nm. In all our measurements, a 24-h waiting time was allowed upon each stepwise increase of T for the sample to stabilize. The resulting Tg ne determination is akin to a devitrification temperature measurement because it probes the temperature at which degrees of freedom at a given depth z are liberated on heating. Figure To carry out WCA measurements, we used a Krüss DSA-10 CA goniometer (Hamburg, Germany). In each measurement, a 2 μl drop of deionized water was dispensed onto the sample surface. After a waiting time of 3 s, the contact angle of the droplet was measured. Sum frequency generation (SFG) spectra were collected by using a custom designed SFG spectrometer (EKSPLA, Lithuania). During measurement, the incident angles of a tunable infrared (IR) laser beam and a 532 nm visible laser beam were fixed at 50° and 70°, respectively, to generate sum frequency (SF) signal in a second-order nonlinear optical process. The ssp (SF/s, visible/s, and IR/p) mode and IR/p polarization sum-frequency signals were collected at a frequency of 4 cm -1 , where s (p) represents the polarization normal (parallel) to the plane of incidence. Fig. Angle-resolved XPS spectra were conducted by using a PHI5000C ESCA system with an Al Kα X-ray source (1253.6 eV) operated at 250 W and 140 kV. The analytical depth (z) of the XPS analysis was estimated by z = 3 sin Next, we analyze the Tg ne (z) data of the c-PMMAm-b-FMAn films, shown in Fig. where ht,0 and ht is the depth where the linear dependence of Tg ne (z) begins and ends, respectively (Fig. We have also conducted similar measurements on l-PMMA films with various degrees of polymerization. The Tg ne (z) gradients in these films also show a linear increase with z. However, unlike Tg ne (z) of the c-PMMA films, these data do not reach Tg,bulk ne , and therefore, the full profile of Tg ne (z) cannot be determined. Nevertheless, our simulation data in Fig. To determine the mean-film Tg ne for films of varying thicknesses, h, we conducted experiments using an EP 3 SW ellipsometer (Accurion GmbH Co., Germany) to measure the ellipsometric angles, Delta and Psi, while increasing the temperature T at a steady rate. Then we fitted the data using the method reported in Ref. To determine Tg,bulk ne , we conducted mean-film Tg ne measurements on films with a bulk thickness of 106 nm. To ensure consistency with the Tg ne (z) study, we adopt the same thermal scheme, allowing for a 24-hour waiting time between temperature changes. We found that the Tg,bulk ne value determined for the c-PMMA173 films with a bulk thickness of 106 nm (~387.5 K; fig. Molecular dynamics simulations employ an attractive variant of the bead-spring model of Kremer-Grest Within this model, non-bonded beads interact via the 12-6 Lennard-Jones potential, with energy and range parameters of ε = 1 and σ = 1, respectively, and with a cutoff distance of 2.5 σ. Bonded beads, on the other hand, interact via the Finitely Extensible Nonlinear Elastic Potential, with K = 30, R0=1.3, εb = 1.0, and σb = 0.8. These bond parameters are slightly different from the standard values, and yield a shorter bond length that has been shown to better suppress crystallization without significantly altering segmental dynamics Translational relaxation dynamics are quantified via the self-part of the intermediate scattering function, computed at a wavenumber of 7.07, approximately equivalent to the first peak in the segmental structure factor. To extract the relaxation time, , from these functions, the long-time portion of the time dependence is fit to a Kohlsrauch-Williams-Watts (KWW) stretched exponential function, which allows us to smooth and interpolate the data. The relaxation time is then determined as the timescale at which this function relaxes to a value of 0.2. This method yields a value similar to the zeroth moment of the long-time  process, over the set of stretching exponents β encountered in this polymer. These conventions are commonly used in simulation literature We generate initial randomized configurations using the Packmol package and subject them to a high temperature isothermal annealing procedure at a reduced Lennard-Jones temperature T = 1.5 for varying durations of 5 × 10 5 τLJ, 2.5 × 10 6 τLJ, or 5 × 10 6 τLJ. It is worth noting that the initial anneal occurs at a temperature ~4.4 times the experimental Tg of the polymer models in this class, which is around T = 0.34 on the 100-second timescale. This initial annealing period serves to alleviate unfavorable chain configurations associated with the initial state, similar to what is observed in many thermally quenched experimental systems. To track the evolution in chain conformational statistics, we compute the mean end-to-end distance of the chains after these distinct annealing periods. The root-mean-square end-to-end distance is computed as 20.1 σ, 22.5 σ, and 23.5 σ after annealing periods of 5 × 10 5 τLJ, 2.5 × 10 6 τLJ, and 5 × 10 6 τLJ, respectively. These results suggest that chain conformations are modestly removed from equilibrium for the shortest annealing periods and evolve towards it with increasing time. Throughout this paper, we use the term "extrinsic nonequilibrium effects" to describe the presence of out-of-equilibrium chain conformations. In addition to the above protocol, we also present results using 1000-bead polymer chains. In this case, we employ the hybrid molecular dynamics / Monte Carlo chain-rebridging protocol of Sides et al As demonstrated by figs. S2 and S3, the presence of extrinsic nonequilibrium affects the system dynamics only when intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are also present. Furthermore, their degree of influence correlates with the strength of the extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, resulting in a greater deviation of relaxation time from the equilibrium relaxation time ( eq ). Unlike extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are governed by segmental equilibrium. Our prior work Following the initial chain conformational annealing procedure, we subject the systems to thermal quenching from the high temperature using the Predictive Stepwise Quench (PreSQ) algorithm, which we developed earlier In our simulations, we set a maximum limit for the segmental annealing time, denoted by tANN,max. In our primary simulations, this limit is set to 10 6 τLJ, where τLJ is the Lennard-Jones time unit. Above T * -the temperature at which  eq (T) = tANN,max-we subject the system to annealing periods of 10 eq , which would allow the system to attain segmental equilibrium. Below T * , the system is permitted to deviate from segmental equilibrium according to the following protocol. Starting from T * , we quench the system to a lower temperature while saving its configurations at regular temperature intervals. Each configuration is then subjected to a fixed isothermal annealing period of tANN,max. Because τ eq exceeds tANN,max below T * , T * is assigned to be Tg ne . The timescale for the nonequilibrium glass transition to occur is tANN,max as it is the relaxation time value  ne at Tg ne . To compare the equilibrium and nonequilibrium Tg's, we also use tANN,max as the timescale for the equilibrium glass transition to occur. Using this criterion, we can similarly determine the equilibrium bulk Tg (Tg,bulk eq ). To determine the local Tg ne at a given depth z, we assign it as the temperature at which the local segmental relaxation time at z exceeds tANN,max. The effective quench rate for each simulation is controlled by the inverse of the maximum isothermal segmental annealing period (1/tANN,max). Our longest-time simulation employs a maximum segmental annealing time of 10 6 τLJ, resulting in the lowest effective quench rate and the deepest supercooled state achieved. To investigate the influence of the depth of supercooling on the Tg ne gradient, we conduct simulations using the PreSQ protocol to maintain equilibrium only down to the temperature at which the bulk relaxation time is 10 4 or 10 3 τLJ. Correspondingly, we lower tANN,max to 10 5 or 10 4 τLJ, respectively, which is equivalent to increasing the quench rate by a factor of 10 or 100, respectively. These changes lead to a loss of equilibrium at a higher temperature, and an increase in Tg ne . To determine the extrapolated low-T simulation behavior shown in Fig. with parameters A = 0.19 and ξ = 3.2, as determined by simulations in the thick film limit. Although our simulations involve freestanding films, we can predict the behavior of supported films by averaging over a single gradient and truncating it at the second surface. This approach was validated in our recent work, which examined equilibrium dynamical gradients in supported films on dynamically neutral substrates with  eq (z,T) being given by equation S3. Prior studies have shown that the equilibrium gradient's A and ξ values are insensitive to film thickness and temperature (at low simulation temperatures) Using the above protocol, we generated the dotted lines for the equilibrium relaxation times in Fig. where z* is defined as the intersection point of the low-z linear and high-z exponential regimes of ln.(bulk(T) /  eq (z,T)). Here, A and ξ employ the values reported above. Fits to the linear regime of  ne (z) suggests that m ≅ 0.06 is essentially temperature-invariant for this system. The growing penetration depth of the linear regime with increasing tANN,max (or bulk) is driven by a growth of the parameter b with increasing supercooling at Tg ne . However, with only two data points of tANN,max (Fig. To obtain the extrapolated nonequilibrium behavior, we combine equation S5 with the average provided by equation S4, which yields the dashed lines in Fig. The black solid line in Fig. 