We construct a model which exhibits resistivity going as a power law in temperature T , as T α down to the lowest temperature. There is no residual resistivity because we assume the absence of disorder and momentum relaxation is due to umklapp scattering. Our model consists of a quantum spin liquid state with spinon Fermi surface and a hole Fermi surface made out of doped holes. The key ingredient is a set of singular 2kF modes living on a ring in momentum space. Depending on parameters, α may be unity (strange metal) or even smaller. The model may be applicable to a doped organic compound, which has been found to exhibit linear T resistivity. We conclude that it is possible to obtain strange metal behavior starting with a model which is not so strange. The notion of strange metals emerged out of transport measurements from the early days of cuprate superconductivity and has been applied broadly over the years to instances where linear in temperature resistivity is observed, whether it is low temperature, high temperature and with or without a finite residual resistivity due to disorder. In this broad sense, strange metal behavior has been seen in many materials and has attracted a great deal of attention from the community, as summarized nicely in recent reviews We consider a Hubbard model on the triangular lattice with nearest neighbor hopping t and onsite U . We assume U/t is such that we are on the insulator side of the Mott transition, but not deep inside, so the charge gap is finite but relatively small. S = 1/2 local moments are formed on the sites and we assume that they do not order but form a spin liquid state. We further assume that the electrons have fractionalized into fermionic spinons carrying S = 1/2 but no charge, and relativistic bosonic chargons. Both are coupled to emergent U(1) gauge fields. Note that the hole band containing p holes violates Luttinger theorem which states that the Fermi surfaces should enclose a total of 1 -p fermions. This situation has been dubbed FL * by Senthil, Sachdev and Vojta. There is support for this possibility by studies involving more expansion parameters. (2) In these equations, the σ dependent part comes from the vertex function γ and the rest comes from particle-hole excitations including the self-energy correction. Eq.1 gives the limit ω2/3 > |q| and is given in ref. We note that while Eqs.1 and 2 are often derived assuming a circular Fermi surface, it is generally applicable to any Fermi surface shape as long as opposite k points on the Fermi surface have parallel tangents. In this case k F is a function of angle θ and Eqs.1 and 2 remain valid. Now we are ready to compute the resistivity of the hole band due to scattering by the soft 2k F mode of the spinon Fermi surface. We note that after shifting by a reciprocal lattice vector G, the 2k F vectors are equivalent to a set of vectors P centered at the M point that connect the Fermi surfaces on neigboring extended Brillouin zones, as shown in fig 1a. If the hole Fermi surface is large enough, these vector can connect points on the hole Fermi surface and give rise to umklapp scattering which relaxes the momentum and current. The condition on the size of the hole Fermi surface is the following. With nearest neighbor hopping the spinon Fermi surface is nearly a circle with radius k F ≈ 0.375|b 1 | where b 1 is the reciprocal lattice vector along x. Unlike the spinon Fermi surface, the hole Fermi surface is not coupled to the gauge field and does not have the anomalous large self energy and damping rate. The major source of damping at low temperatures come from the umklapp scattering channel under consideration. If this rate is smaller than linear in T or its frequency Ω, the quasi-particle is well defined and a Fermi liquid description is valid in the Landau sense, even if Luttinger theorem is not obeyed. Here I remark that even if the decay rate ends up with a power law smaller than unity and Landau quasi-particles do not exist, it is still possible to treat the transport problem using Boltzmann equation, as long as the self energy has only frequency dependence and no singular momentum dependence, which is the case here. This was shown by Prange and Kadanoff In its simplest form, the solution of the Boltzmann equation is just the computation of the scattering rate 1/τ using Fermi's golden rule. As shown in Fig. The umklapp scattering rate is given by where V 0 is a short range interaction constant between the holes and the spinons. Since the imaginary part of Π 2k F represents the excitation of a particle-hole pair of spinons, this equation captures the scattering of holes by spinons described in Fig. It is easy to see that |∆q| ≈ k F φcos(φ 0 ). Hence the integral over φ is converted to an integral over q/cos(φ 0 ). We have where Λ ≈ 1 is an ultra-violet (UV) cut-off in the q integration. We can divide the q integral into two regions. Region ( We have constructed a model based on doping of a spin liquid with a spinon Fermi surface, forming a hole Fermi surface with an area that corresponds to the doped hole concentration p. As such it violates Luttinger theorem and belongs to the classification F L * . We note that the key ingredient of our model is a critical mode which is soft along a line in momentum space. This gives rise to low energy scattering in finite regions on the Fermi surface which allows us to circumvent the hot spot problem associated with scattering by a mode which is critical at one momentum. We employ a model with a spinon Fermi surface because that represents a critical state which exists over a range in parameter space. Therefore the power law resistivity exists over a range of parameters such as doping or pressure. Furthermore a circular spinon or hole Fermi surface is not needed, because the singularity of Π 2k F is a consequence of a two patch model, which rely on the fact that opposite k points in the spinon Fermi surface have parallel tangents. There has been a lot of discussions concerning the socalled Planckian bound, ħ/τ < k B T . 