Loop gain-based eigen-sensitivity (LGES) is a useful frequency-domain tool for oscillation diagnosis of converter-based system. However, the existing theory is still scant in two aspects: participation factor (PF) is bound up with the frequency-domain modal characteristic that does not necessarily point to the stability as that of the time-domain eigen-sensitivity (i.e., PF of oscillation mode); a systematic LGES analysis framework containing both component-and parameter-level sensitivity is missing. These two factors hinder the application of LGES method on the proper evaluation of stability effects, which are closely related with the time-domain oscillation mode. To address these issues, this paper proposes a multilayer LGES method directed to the oscillation mode, and a full set of indices like PF, component and parameter sensitivity are established. The link from the eigen-sensitivity of frequency domain to that of time domain is revealed, through which it is shown how the proposed LGES method can facilitate the control parameter tuning-guided oscillation suppression. The effectiveness of the proposed LGES method is validated via case studies conducted on a generic AC/DC converter-based system. HE demand of low-carbon energy utilization stimulates the fast development of converters-interfaced renewable power generations (RPGs) like wind power, and converters-based grid interconnectors such as high-voltage dc (HVDC) transmission. This leads to a paradigm shift of traditional power system to a more converter-dominated power system In this context, the impedance-based analysis method for the oscillatory stability analysis is widely applied Given that the impedance/admittance network retains the structural information of the overall system The Nodal Admittance-based Eigen-Sensitivity (NAES): This method originates from the resonance modal analysis This method is inspired by the way of performing the generalized Nyquist criterion (GNC)-based stability test, for which a socalled generalized source-load model To bridge the above gap and aimed for developing a multilayer LGES framework as the counterpart to the NAES method, this paper will contribute to the following aspects: 1) Propose a multilayer LGES method with respect to the time-domain oscillation mode, and indices like PF, component and parameter sensitivity are all established; 2) The link from eigen-sensitivity of frequency domain to that of time domain is revealed, through which it is shown how the proposed LGES method can facilitate the parameter tuning-based oscillation suppression. The rest of paper is arranged as follows: Section II makes a review on the existing LGES method. Section III introduces the proposed multilayer LGES method. Section IV validates the correctness of the proposed LGES method. Section V shows the application of the proposed LGES method on the oscillation suppression. Section VI concludes the paper. This Section will briefly review the loop gain model and the existing calculation method of its eigen-sensitivity, whose parts can be improved are clearly pointed out. Recently, a frequency-domain loop gain model is proposed to characterize small-signal dynamics of multi-converters system in the network form, with the advantage of being immune to those nasty RHP-poles where I node s and V node s are node currents and voltages, respectively. Z net s denotes the node impedance of the source subsystem with only passive elements, where internal nodes (denoted as blue circles) are eliminated via the Kron reduction. Y con s denotes the node admittance of the load subsystem containing only converters. I is the identity matrix. Since Z net s is constituted of pure passive elements, it is free of RHP poles and zeros. Then, the stability of closed-loop system in (1) can be determined by its loop gain L s . The system is stable if and only if there exists no RHP zero in det L s . Supposing an unstable oscillation at s= 0 happens, i.e., an RHP zero appears, it should fulfill: To simplify notation,  0 in brackets will be omitted hereinafter, i.e., L  0 will be denoted as the notation L. The eigen-sensitivity analysis method where  i L is defined as the modal loop gain; R L is the right column eigenvector, T L is the left row eigenvector and it has R L T L =I. The superscript 'L' denotes that variables belong to the loop gain-based eigen-sensitivity (LGES), so as to distinguish from those variables of the node admittance-based eigen-sensitivity (NAES) The eigenvalue matrix  L can be represented as: There will appear an eigenvalue  i L in  L close to 0, which corresponds to that one Nyquist loci will cross the -1,j0 . This eigenvalue is defined as the critical modal loop gain. Supposing  1 L 0 (i.e., critical modal loop gain), it can be expressed as in -Fig. where t 1 L and r 1 L are the corresponding critical eigenvectors. Based on (6), loop gain-based PF (referred as LG-PF hereinafter) is established in where PF L is defined as the LG-PF matrix. It can be seen that the existing LG-PF reflects the sensitivity of system parts L ij to the critical modal loop gain  1 L , which is in frequency domain. However, in terms of stability effects, the sensitivity of L ij to the time-domain oscillation mode  0 is more concerned. This is because the oscillation diagnosis and suppression are realized mainly through the movement of oscillation mode  0 from the unstable RHP to the stable lefthalf-plane (LHP). Also, the specific suppression strategy is conducted from the level of components and parameters, while their sensitivities are still absent. TO THE OSCILLATION MODE To address above issues, this Section will introduce a multilayer LGES analysis method. Three sensitivity indices, including loop PF, component-and parameter-sensitivity, are established and all linked to the oscillation mode. The oscillation mode  0 , i.e., the RHP zero of det L s , is exactly the eigenvalue The critical modal loop gain  1 L is the eigenvalue of the frequency-domain loop gain matrix L as shown in The establishment procedure of the multilayer eigensensitivity is presented in Fig. As stated above, the connection between two kinds of PFs (i.e., ) will be derived first. Based on the derivative chain rule, det L is utilized as a bridge to connect Then, two partial derivatives concerning det L needs to be calculated. Since there exists an RHP zero  0 (i.e., oscillation mode), det L s can be represented in the pole-zero form as: The partial derivative of  0 to det L s can be obtained as: By substituting  0 into g L s , it has: where the notation g L represents the g L  0 . Since the eigen-matrix has been derived in ( Similar to (11)~( where the notation By substituting ( ( ) where  L is a complex-valued modification factor. Based on ( The sensitivity of impedance component (e.g., Z net,ij ) with respect to the oscillation mode can be calculated from that with respect to the critical modal loop gain. By substituting ( I and Y con do not contain any element concerning Z net,ij , meaning that their corresponding partial derivatives equal to zero. Then, ( ) By substituting ( Based on the derivative chain rule, the parameter sensitivity can be further derived from the above component sensitivity. Supposing parameter  z affects some impedance components Z net,ij , its sensitivity can be calculated as in where  represents that all components containing  z should be considered in the form of summation. The subscript ' z ' represents parameters of passive elements in Z net s . The admittance component sensitivity can be calculated in a similar way as (20), where Y con,ij is taken for derivation. At this time, I and Z net will not contain any element concerning Y con,ij , ( ( ) Supposing  y affects some admittance components Y con,ij , its sensitivity can be calculated similarly as in (24). where subscript 'y' denotes converters' parameters in Y con s . So far, the multilayer eigen-sensitivity of the loop gain L s has been established, and main sensitivity indices are summarized in Table This Section will implement some case studies on a typical AC/DC converter-dominated system, based on which the correctness of established multilayer LGES indices is verified. A three-terminal HVDC system shown in Fig. Notations of each non-zero Z net or Y con component and their internal parameters are listed in Table II. For this system, a typical marginal unstable condition is considered, i.e., increasing the PLL bandwidth  PQ S1 of sending converter-2 (SEC-2). Fig. By substituting the obtained oscillation mode (e.g.,  1 0.0794j53.2) into L s , its eigenvalues can be calculated using (4) and results are listed in Table Participation Factor L 0 is the critical modal loop gain, based on which r 2 L and t 2 L are extracted as critical eigenvectors. Then, according to ( With the identified critical eigenvectors and modification factor, PF mod L can be obtained. To make data more readable, the trace of PF mod L is used as the per-unit base, and results of the normalized PF mod L are given in Fig. 2 With the calculation of PF mod L , the component sensitivity concerning Z net and Y con can be obtained according to ( The above theoretical calculation results will be compared with actual tuning results, so as to justify their accuracies. The actual tuning results for the above PF and sensitivity indices will be calculated here. For example, a 5% increment in the real part of L ij is considered, and the predicted change in  0 can be calculated based on (26). ( ) For comparison, the system  0 is re-computed for 5% increment in the real part of L ij and the actual change from the original condition is denoted as  0 ' . The error between the predicted  0 and actual  0 ' are calculated in Fig. 2 The same procedure is repeated for the error analysis of the component and parameter sensitivity. For example, a 5% increment in the real part of Z net,ij and  z is considered, and the predicted change  0 can be calculated based on ( This is also valid for Y con,ij and  y . ( ) Similarly, the system  0 is re-computed for the above increment and the obtained actual  0 ' are compared with predicted  0 . The results of the corresponding error analysis are presented in Fig. So far, the correctness of the proposed multilayer LGES analysis method has been validated, including indices of LG-PF, component-and parameter-level sensitivity. This section will exhibit the potential of the proposed LGES method on the oscillation suppression, mainly the role of the parameter sensitivity played in guiding the controller tuning. As shown in Fig. As a comparison, the parameter sensitivity with respect to the critical modal loop gain (i.e.,  2 L in this case) are also shown in Fig. Time-domain simulations are given in Fig. An interesting phenomenon can be observed by comparing Fig. The comparison on the magnitude of different parameter sensitivities is presented in Fig. This paper proposes a multilayer LGES analysis method to facilitate the oscillation source locating and suppression of the converter-dominated system. Three crucial indices directed to the time-domain oscillation mode are established, including loop gain-based PF, component-and parameter-sensitivity, whose correctness is validated. Main conclusions include: 1) Traditional LGES is in essence a frequency-domain modal characteristic, which does not necessarily point to the stability (or oscillation mode) as that of the timedomain eigen-sensitivity. Thus, the derived parameter sensitivity cannot provide an effective guidance for the suppression on the unstable oscillation mode; 2) A complex-valued constant transformation is proposed to link the traditional LGES with the time-domain oscillation mode. In this way, time-domain sensitivity information originally defined on the state space model can now be acquired using the more modularized frequency-domain model, e.g., loop gain model; 3) The established parameter sensitivity contains the information of both magnitude (absolute values) and phase (direction). Its projection on the real axis is more suitable for determining dominant parameters in terms of the oscillation suppression. On the foundation of the established LGES method, its connection with another widely-applied eigen-sensitivity method, i.e., node admittance-based eigen-sensitivity method (NAES), will be further studied in the future work, including their similarities and differences on the physical meaning, oscillation suppression, etc. con1 Y Y con,11 , Y con,12 , Y con,13 , Y con,21 , Y con,22 , Y con,23 , Y con,31 , Y con,32 , Y con,33