We present a theoretical account of some of the most likely hydrogen-related reactions with impurities in n-type and p-type solar-grade silicon. These include reactions with dopants and carbon, which are relevant in the context of life-time degradation of silicon solar cells, most notably of light and elevated temperature degradation (LeTID) of the cells. Among the problems addressed, we highlight a comparative study of acceptorenhanced dissociation of hydrogen molecules in B-and Ga-doped material, their subsequent reaction steps toward formation of acceptor-hydrogen pairs, the proposal of mechanisms which explain the observed kinetics of photo-/carrier-induced dissociation of PH and CH pairs in n-type Si, analysis of reactions involving direct interactions between molecules with P and C, and the assignment of several electron and hole traps with detailed atomistic-and wavefunction-resolved models. Over the last two decades, a combination of cost reduction with improvement in material quality, changed the list of concerns regarding the various sources of bulk life-time degradation of solar silicon. For instance, while transition metal contamination became avoidable, the boron-oxygen light induced degradation gained relevance A second and more recent reason for exploring alternative dopants other than boron, has been Light-and elevated-Temperature-Induced Degradation (LeTID) of solar Si While degradation in the field takes years to manifest, LeTID can be accelerated by increasing the operating temperature to ∼ 70-100 °C with illumination of ∼ 1 sun (1 kW/m 2 ), or more usually in lab tests by passing a current to inject minority carriers equivalent to the population produced during normal operation. This is sometimes referred to as carrier induced degradation (CID), and produces very similar results to illumination. Many variants of accelerated LeTID/CID appear in the literature ranging from high intensity laser irradiation to dark annealing. It seems nevertheless that degradation and recovery take place simultaneously at different rates with thermal activation energies close to 1 eV Importantly, there is a very substantial literature on LeTID which relates the magnitude of the effect to the fast-firing step in the fabrication process. Although there are wide variations in the results, it now seems certain that hydrogen is implicated (see for instance Refs. Molecular hydrogen is well know to form upon quenching p-type and n-type Si in contact with a hydrogen source at high temperature Several models for LeTID have been hypothesized, but as yet, a detailed mechanism or mechanisms remain unclear. We recently proposed that a possible culprit for the non-radiative recombination activity behind LeTID in boron-doped Si is a complex made of boron and two hydrogen atoms were limited by activation barriers of 1.1 eV and 0.8 eV The calculated value of the energy barrier for the first reaction in sequence 1 accounts well for the activation energy of the degradation stage of 1.08 eV determined for B-doped multi crystalline Si It has been argued in Ref. Presently, passivated emitter and rear cell (PERC) architecture dominates the photovoltaic market It is therefore of uttermost importance to understand the reactions involving hydrogen in n-type Si, including the effect of minority carriers, and ideally using state-of-the-art quantum mechanical calculations. We cannot provide an extensive review of previous work on hydrogen in Si. For that we direct the reader for instance to Refs. Atomic H in Si is an amphoteric element -it is an acceptor and a donor in n-type and p-type Si, respectively Due to its high mobility (the diffusion length of H + is about 1.4 μm at room temperature Hydrogen passivation of group-V donors in Si is a well documented topic The other view follows a transformative model Other omnipresent impurities in solar Si are carbon and oxygen. The available experimental and theoretical results indicate that OH pairs are weakly-bound and not stable at room temperature Carbon, on the other hand, is able to form stable and electrically active centers upon capture of hydrogen atoms. This paper extends our understanding regarding the formation and properties of CH n complexes. We focus on reactions involving substitutional carbon and hydrogen under typical conditions of solar cell fabrication and operation. In this case, already known defects are the CH pair and CH 2 complex. The latter, also referred to as CH * 2 Regarding the CH pair, the picture is not so consensual. According to combined first-principles calculations and Laplace deep level transient spectroscopy (Laplace-DLTS) The above picture for the CH complex, including the structure, location of transition levels, as well as the number of charge states, are also under dispute. Recent capacitance and depth profile measurements led to an alternative view, where several CH complexes could form in wet-etched and plasma-treated material. While there is an agreement regarding the origin of the E c -0.16 eV acceptor transition (the ≡ C-H BC Si ≡ defect), the E v +0.33 eV level was assigned to an acceptor transition of a C-H complex with a different geometry. Additionally, first and second acceptor levels at E c -0.51 eV and E c -0.06 eV were assigned to a H AB -C Si≡ defect, and a complex with more than one H atom was assigned to an electron trap at E c -0.14 eV The paper is organized as follows: Section. II describes a comparative study of hydrogen reactions (atomic and molecular) with boron and gallium acceptors in p-type Si. In Secs. III and IV we investigate analogous reactions with phosphorus (n-type Si), with emphasis on the minority-carrier-enhanced dissociation of PH. In Secs. V and VI we revisit and extend previous calculations of CH n complexes with n ≤ 3. Finally, we lay our conclusions in Sec. VII. H 2 molecules occupy tetrahedral interstitial cages of the Si lattice. Inspection of the band structure of a supercell with the molecule indicates that it has a clean band gap, i.e. cannot trap carriers, irrespectively of its orientation and location within the accessible volume. A fully occupied Kohn-Sham state in the lower half of the gap, which could lead to carrier trapping, appears only after partial dissociation of the molecule into a H + BC -H - AB pair. This state is achieved upon collision of the molecule with a Si-Si bond, after surmounting an energy barrier of 1.6 eV, and that figure was assigned to the dissociation barrier of isolated H 2 More recently, we have argued that boron can act as a catalyst for H 2 dissociation by lowering the above barrier to 1.1 eV Given the controversial results on LeTID in cells based on Ga-doped Si, we have performed a comparative study of H-reactions with B and Ga in Si. Some results already reported include the binding and dissociation energies of BH and GaH pairs. The binding energy was found from the reaction energy , where E is and E fs stand for the energy of initial (reactants) and final (products) states, respectively. The dissociation energy of a defect complex is the overall barrier that the system must surmount, starting from its ground state, and reach the dissociated state (uncorrelated constituents, for instance infinitely separated B -and H + ). This is obtained from the activation energy E d = ∆E A = E ts -E is of the above reaction, where E ts is the energy of the transition state, all along the minimum-energy path between reactants and products evaluated using the NEB method. In principle, the dissociation mechanism involves an infinite sequence of H + jumps away from B -. To make the problem tractable, we calculated the barriers of H + jumps from first and second neighboring sites (with respect to the B -ion), and from sites where H + is infinitely separated from B -. First and second jumps of H away from B and Ga have transitionstate energies that are clearly below that of saddle point of H + migration at a remote location from B - The results are shown in Table The comparison between experimental and calculated activation energies of defect reactions should be done with care. Usually, several defect reactions, including interactions with carriers, take place in parallel during experiments designed to follow the loss or growth of a specific complex. For instance, reliable values of dissociation energies of XH pairs, free of some back-reaction effects, could only be measured in the depletion region of reverse-biased diodes From a comprehensive exploration of the potential energy surface involving the motion of H + next to B -and Ga - we could arrive at the reaction and dissociation energies reported in the topmost three rows of Table 2 ), was calculated as 0.46 eV and 0.36 eV for X = B and Ga, respectively. Hence, formation of XH + 2 via capture of H + by XH in X-doped Si is anticipated to show an activation energy similar to the migration barrier of H + . While the reaction mechanism between H 2 and B -has been addressed already, the analogous process involving H 2 and Ga -is unchartered. In Ref. In step 1 (H 2 + X -→ XH-H -), the molecule strikes the X-Si bond and that has an energy barrier of 1.10 eV and 1.05 eV for X = B and Ga, respectively. The XH-H -landing state is 0.59 and 0.89 eV above the H 2 + X -initial state for X = B and Ga, respectively. Its atomistic geometry is shown in Figure Activation energies for jumps of H -in both BH-H -and GaH-H -into a neighboring interstitial cage was estimated about 0.5 eV. If we add this figure to the energy of the XH-H - state we find 1.1 eV and 1.4 eV for the barrier that has to be surmounted to reach the XH - 2 (A) acceptor state (steps 1 and 2a combined) for X = B and Ga, respectively. The label 'A' emphasizes that the complex is an acceptor and adopts an axial (Si-H BC X-H AB ) geometry, where both Si and X are four-fold coordinated. The XH - 2 (A) state is 0.31 eV more stable and 0.14 eV less stable than H 2 + X -for X = B and Ga, respectively. Figure Inspection of the one-electron structure of XH-H -reveals a deep fully occupied state within the gap, which could be responsible for trapping holes (step 2b), thus converting the H -unit into H 0 or H + . The barrier for such capture processes is deemed small and it is neglected in the following analysis. From NEB calculations we obtained minute barriers (≲ 0.2 eV) for conversion of XH-H 0 into XH 0 2 (D). The latter state is 0.08 eV and ∼ 0 eV above the H 2 + X -+ h + initial state for X = B and Ga, respectively (see Figure Although the dissociation of H 2 molecules assisted by B and Ga show almost identical activation energies (perhaps it is slightly more favorable when Ga is involved), the resulting BH + 2 and GaH + 2 show very different electrical activity. This finding was firstly reported in Ref. 2 is a deep donor, GaH + 2 is very shallow. Indeed, the wavefunction of the donor state of GaH 0 2 is very diffuse and spans the whole supercell. This is a strong indication that it is an effective-mass-like donor. Our conclusion is that while both BH + 2 and GaH + 2 are likely to form upon reaction of H 2 with B and Ga, the latter is unlikely to lead to strong carrier recombination activity. We finally report on the dissociation mechanism of XH + 2 complexes. This was partially addressed (for BH + 2 ) in Ref. We now look at reactions between hydrogen and phosphorus. In n-type silicon, atomic hydrogen is negatively charged and is readily attracted by P + ions to form PH pairs. Among more than 10 different locations for H next to P (up to third neighboring tetrahedral interstitial, bond-center and anti-bonding sites), we arrived at three prominently stable PH configurations. They are depicted in the upper part of Fig- Among the above geometries, only the ground state PH AB displayed a clean band gap. Calculation of electronic transitions from total energies confirmed that PH AB is electrically inert, chemically passivating the P dopant. The PH BC1 defect has a high-lying and fully occupied level, responsible for (0/+) and (+/ ++) transitions at E c -0.27 eV and E c -0.51 eV, mostly localized on the Si-H BC1 -Si unit. The PH BC geometry also has a fully occupied level in the gap, but closer to the valence band top. The origin of the level stems from the overlap of the 1s electron of H with the P lone pair, raising the energy of the latter above the valence band top. From total energies we found a (0/+) transition of PH BC at E v + 0.29 eV (no second donor transition was found). Figure Another pillar of the transformative model is the assignment of the PH 0 BC → PH 0 AB transformation barrier to the ob- served 0.7 eV activation energy of the passivation recovery kinetics of samples in darkness (which were previously illuminated) Another puzzle relates to the calculated binding energy E b = 0.94 eV for P + + H -→ PH, which is larger than that of BH (E b = 0.76 eV), in apparent contradiction with the higher thermal stability of the latter -whereas PH anneals out at about ∼ 100 oC (in the dark) According to Figure To address the above issues we investigated the potential energy surface of the H atom in the neighborhood of P. From the perspective of a charge state transition, the PH + BC geometry is rather distant from PH 0 AB . Hence, we were particularly thorough in searching for a hole trapping mechanism involving structures closer to the PH 0 AB ground state. We found that small wagging oscillations of the Si-H AB unit of PH 0 AB led to the appearance of an occupied gap level above the valence band edge. The oscillations are depicted schematically in Figure Figure The itinerary of the wagging motion is AB → AB * → BC * (and back). The AB * and BC * geometries (≡ P: Si-H * AB and ≡ P-Si-H * BC -Si ≡), are metastable positive charge states, consisting of increasingly bent Si-H and Si-H-Si units next to a three-fold and four-fold coordinated P atoms, respectively. The PH + BC* state is already close, but still separated from PH + BC1 by a small barrier (0.36 eV high). The less distorted PH + AB* metastable structure is very close to that of PH 0 AB , and the localization of the trapped hole is represented in BC* , PH + BC1 or even PH + BC . In the first case, the estimated emission barrier is ∼ 0.1 eV and the defect returns to the neutral ground state. Regarding the H jumps, the barriers were calculated in the range 0.32-0.36 eV. These are rather low barriers, which should be easily surmounted at room temperature, and ultimately lead to PH + → P + + H 0 dissociation. So far, none of the PH + states presented (with BC * , BC1 or BC geometries), are more stable than PH 0 AB + h + , so we still do not have an explanation for the photo-or currentinduced dissociation of the PH pairs. For that, there must be a state, which is more stable than PH 0 AB under illumination, and less stable in the dark. We propose that finite temperature effects could explain the existence of such state. From the all-electron energy calculations, we find that the photo-/injection-induced dissociation PH 0 AB + h + → P + + H 0 BC has a potential energy cost of ∆E R = 0.30 eV. If we account for the configurational entropy raise of that reaction, we find that already near room temperature, -T ∆S conf ≈ -(0.3-0.4) eV, meaning that the free energy of dispersed P + + H 0 becomes lower than that of the pairs, hence providing favorable conditions for the dissociation. On top of that, under persistent illumination, a second hole capture via PH + BC1 + h + → PH ++ or via P + + H 0 + h + → P + + H + (dashed line in Figure Ground state potentials of close pairs (PH 0 ) and uncorrelated P + and H -ions (P + + H - T ) are shown at the bottom and right-hand side of the diagram, respectively. At the top we find an excited state corresponding to the generation of a free electron-hole pair (PH 0 + e -+ h + ) and states that result from thermally assisted capture of a minority carrier (PH + + e -). Relative energies with respect to ground state PH 0 AB are indicated next to the potential minima. Also indicated are several potential energy barriers for processes of interest (next to the arrow heads). These energies are relative to the nearest minimum. Finite temperature effects (not represented), most notably from configurational entropy, stabilize the states on the right hand side of the diagram, namely P + + H 0 BC + e -and P + + H - T . At room temperature and darkness, the ground state is the PH 0 AB passivated pair. Conversion to metastable PH 0 BC involves surmounting a ∼ 1.7 eV barrier, which is even higher than the dissociation barrier (1.41 eV). However, when minority carriers (holes) are present and some heat is provided, a thermally-assisted capture PH 0 AB + h + → PH + AB* may occur with a capture barrier of about 0.4 eV. This provides the opportunity of H 0 to quickly jump away from P + , and find a more stable state with larger entropy. The diagram also shows that from PH + AB* , the defect can be converted to PH + BC by overcoming a barrier of only 0.32 eV (toward the left hand side of the excited state potential). From here, it could capture an electron and become trapped at the relatively deep potential of PH 0 BC . However, this picture cannot explain the increase of fixed charges observed during light-soaked annealing treatments of hydrogenated diodes (reactivation of P + + e -). Our calculations support a dissociative model for the observed light-/current-induced changes of PH pairs in Si. After dissociation of PH, and if darkness is restored, any metastable H 0 BC will relax to H - T after electron capture. This step must be preceded by a reconfiguration of H from the bond center site into a tetrahedral cage of the crystal, surmounting a barrier of about 0.4 eV The thermally-assisted capture mechanism PH 0 AB + h + → PH + AB* leads us to postulate that the thermal stability of the PH pairs, which is considerably lower than that of BH pairs, could be limited by interactions with intrinsic carriers. At 100 oC the intrinsic hole concentration is already 1.5 × 10 12 cm -3 We finally note that a more rigorous account of the above picture would include the calculation of the capture cross section for PH 0 AB + h + → PH + AB* . That involves finding the hole capture rate and the respective electron-phonon matrix elements From several geometries (up to 10 pair combinations of H sites as depicted in Figs. S1 and S2 of Supporting Information) and charge states (q = {-1, 0, +1}) of complexes that result from reaction P + + H 2 + (1 -q)e -→ PH q 2 between P and H 2 , we could only find two stable configurations with ∆E R ≲ +1 eV. Their geometry consists of H pairs at sites 3-5 and 1-3 shown in Fig. Although we did not investigate the dissociation mechanism of H 2 molecules next to P + dopants (as we did for B - and Ga -acceptors), we could find that such reactions are not very favorable and some are actually endothermic. PH 2 complexes are expected to be thermally ionized at room temperature and above, and hence, for the sake of reaction analysis, they are considered in the positive charge state. The results are summarized in Table Another important question is: what does theory anticipate for the energetics of PH pair formation from interactions between H 2 and P + ? The answer is partially found in the last two rows of Table is exothermic, although it does not lead to a substantial potential energy drop (∆E R = -0.41 eV). Of course, at finite temperatures, and most importantly in the solar context, at room temperature and above, several factors are expected to play agains the above reaction. These include changes in configurational entropy, electronic free energy (due to subtraction of two free-electrons), rotational and vibrational free energies (consumption of the H 2 molecules), as well as the capture of photogenerated holes by PH. Let us first estimate the configurational entropy change. For Reaction 2 this quantity can be approximated to ∆S conf = k B ln 8c 2 P /c H + 1 (see Appendix B of Ref. The raise in the Helmholtz electronic free energy across the reaction is estimated from ∆F elec ≈ f (μ -k B T ), which subtracts pV = k B T (for an ideal electron gas) to the Gibbs free energy per free-electron μ ≈ k B T ln(∆n/N c ) (see Ref. Our results suggest that after cooling P-doped Si that was in contact with a high-temperature hydrogen source, e.g. after a fast-firing step for contact formation during solar cell fabrication, PH pair formation is unlikely to occur at the expense of direct reactions between H 2 molecules and P + . This conclusion is indirectly supported by the measurements of Pritchard et al. Here we have a look into several open issues related to carbon-hydrogen complexes in Si, especially regarding their formation, dissociation, and their electronic activity. Interactions between hydrogen and substitutional carbon is likely to occur in solar-grade Si, where the concentration of substitutional carbon can reach 10 16 cm -3 . Complexes that result from hydrogenation of substitutional carbon pairs (C 2 H n ) are only expected in C-rich material, and they are left outside the scope of the present work. We first focus on the CH pair. According to our results the ≡ C-H BC Si ≡ configuration (referred to as CH BC and shown in Figure The binding of free hydrogen ions to carbon in p-type and n-type Si (H + + C → CH + and H -+ C → CH -) is favored by ∆E R = -0.41 eV and -0.71 eV, respectively. These values contrast with the not so favorable reaction energies to produce CH upon interaction of H 2 molecules with C (first three rows of Table Interestingly, we found that BH + C → B -+ CH + BC and PH + C → P + + CH - BC are endothermic with ∆E R = +0.46 and +0.70 eV, respectively (see Table The calculated donor and acceptor transitions for CH BC are estimated at E v + 0.37 eV and E c -0.10 eV, respectively. The acceptor level agrees well with the E3 electron trap at E c -0.16 eV, measured by DLTS in n-type Si by Kamiura et al. DLTS and C-V measurements of wet-etched B-doped samples show that H180 and BH pairs have the same depth profile Additional NEB calculations were performed to understand the dissociation of CH BC . In the neutral charge state, the H jump with the lowest barrier (that is not a reorientation) was also CH 0 BC → CH 0 BC1 , with the saddle point at 1.41 eV above the initial state. On the other hand, in the negative charge state the easiest first step for dissociation was found CH - BC → CH - T1 , with a much lower potential energy barrier, estimated as 0.66 eV. These figures match very well the activation energies for annealing of the E3 electron trap in ntype Si diodes under (1) bias and darkness and (2) at zero-bias under white light illumination BC state) and it was shown to take days to anneal them out at ∼ 60 oC. An activation energy of 1.33 eV (with a prefactor of 10 14 s -1 ) was extracted from isothermal annealing data assuming first-order and Arrhenius behavior. That is very close to the calculated barrier for CH 0 BC → CH 0 BC1 and the prefactor suggests that the mechanism involves simple atomic motion. In (2), the E3 traps had access to a non-equillibrium population of photogenerated electrons and they annealed out in a time-scale of minutes, even below room temperature. The annealing rate under these conditions was estimated as 10 6 s -1 × exp(-0.5 eV/k B T ). Now the barrier is close to that of CH - BC → CH - T1 , and the pre-factor suggests that an electron is captured by CH 0 BC before performing the jump. The CH BC1 defect has also been investigated before in ntype Si As mentioned already, CH AB and CH T1 geometries are quite stable in the negative charge state (0.17 eV and 0.20 eV above CH - BC ) . Like CH + BC1 in proton-implanted Si, they could be precursors to the CH - BC ground state, especially in n-type wet-etched Si. For CH AB we find (0/+) and (-/0) transitions at E v +0.08 eV and E c -0.31 eV. These are about 0.2 eV lower in the gap than the analogous levels of CH BC . This shift toward lower energies can be explained by the absence of repulsion between the 1s state of H (which is now at the antibonding site) and electrons on the Si radical state. The calculated levels are also in line with transitions arising from other Si dangling bond defects, e.g., VOH with donor and acceptor transitions at E v + 0.28 eV and E c -0.31 eV As for CH T1 we find a (-/0) level at E v + 0.19 eV. Also for this defect, the calculations suggest that it cannot trap a second electron (it is a single acceptor). Judging from the estimated error bar of these calculations (∼ 0.1 eV), we are not able connect any of the calculated levels of CH AB and CH T1 defects to other observed traps that were convincingly shown to be C-H related Substitutional carbon in Si is known to trap at least two hydrogen atoms. This effect has been found both in proton implanted material Table Like for the CH pair, formation of CH 2 upon release of H from PH in n-type and BH in p-type Si is not favorable, i.e. are endothermic reactions. This suggests that CH 2 cannot be obtained upon annealing of BH and PH pairs. Similar conclusions can be drawn for the formation of CH 3 complexes (see Table We presented a comprehensive theoretical study of hydrogen-dopant and hydrogen-carbon interactions in silicon using state-of-the-art electronic structure methods. The impact and role of several hydrogen-related complexes was addressed in the context of non-radiative recombination of carriers by defects in solar silicon, in particular of LeTID of Si cells. The interaction of H 2 molecules with B and Ga acceptors was investigated comparatively. We found that both X = {B, Ga} group-III elements act as catalysts for H 2 dissociation, leading to formation of intermediate XH + 2 complexes before attaining a lower energy state consisting of acceptorhydrogen pairs (XH). The activation energy of the acceptorassisted dissociation of H 2 is estimated 1.10 eV and 1.05 eV for B and Ga (to be compared with 1.6 eV for H 2 dissociation in pristine Si). These values are close to the activation energy for the LeTID development in Si cells. These barriers are also the critical steps for formation of BH + 2 and GaH + 2 along H 2 + 2X -+ 2h + → XH + 2 + X -→ 2XH. The BH + 2 was previously assigned to the route-cause of LeTID in B-doped solar cells. However, GaH + 2 are effective-mass-like shallow donors, and therefore, unlikely to lead to analogous recombination activity in cells based on Ga-doped substrates. We find that light-/carrier-induced dissociation of PH pairs cannot be explained by a transformative model, where H jumps between anti-bonding and bond-center sites upon capture of minority and majority carriers. Instead, our results suggest a dissociative mechanism, triggered by a metastable hole trap accessible to the ground state via wagging vibrations of the Si-H AB unit. From there, the height of the potential energy barriers for H detachment are a few tenths of eV only, and H can either escape as H 0 or as H + if it captures a another hole. In the latter case, the escape would be enhanced by the repulsive field of P + . Interestingly, the above model suggests that a defect, which according to a static calculation does not have electrical levels in the gap, is still capable of trapping free carriers, but that can only be explained if we account for electron-phonon coupling and finite temperature effects. Indeed, an important contribution to the dissociation of PH is the raise of configurational entropy. At T = 300 K and in the presence of minority carriers, the magnitude of -T ∆S conf makes the reaction, PH 0 + h + -→ P + + H 0 more likely and a subsequent electron capture by hydrogen leads to further stabilization. The above mechanism for minority carrier enhanced dissociation of PH could explain why its annealing temperature is ∼ 100 oC lower than that of BH pairs, despite the smaller binding energy of the latter. With respect to that, we suggest that PH dissociates above T ≈ 100 oC in the dark with help of the increasing concentration of intrinsic holes. Interactions between H 2 molecules and phosphorus was also investigated. Direct interactions via H 2 + P + → PH + 2 are not favorable (∆E R = +0.06 eV). Although the products are the most stable form of PH 2 , they are shallow donors, and even if they could form, they are not expected to lead to recombination activity, not even to changes in conductivity. We found that PH pair formation at the expense of H 2 molecules and P donors leads to a small energy drop of ∆E R = -0.4 eV, i.e., However, we also find that configurational and electronic entropy alone (without considering roto-vibrational contributions from the H 2 molecule, which favors the reactants side), are able to cancel ∆E R at T 300-400 K. This result suggests that PH formation from direct interactions between H 2 and P + is unlikely during the cooling of n-type solar cells subject to fast-firing treatments. We also explored the details of mechanisms behind the annealing of CH pairs under dark conditions and under white light illumination (or carrier injection). Strong differences stem from different barriers and jump mechanisms as a function of the charge state. For CH + , CH 0 and CH -, dissociation barriers were estimated as 1.61 eV, 1.41 eV and 0.66 eV, respectively. These quantities agree fairly well with the available experimental data, shedding light into an old and unsolved puzzle. We confirm the assignment of two measured carrier traps (H1 CH n complexes are not stable against formation of dopant-H pairs. They could however form transiently in C-rich Si, e.g., under solar cell operating conditions due to lightenhanced dissociation of dopand-H complexes. The CH pair in p-type Si is positively charged, it is stable above room temperature, and could act as a non-radiative recombination center by attracting minority carriers (photo-generated electrons). It is therefore a suspect to consider as LeTID defect in cells based on B-and Ga-doped substrates. CH 2 is electrically inert and CH 3 , although has a deep donor level, it is unstable and unlikely to form. We employed the density functional Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) Formation energies (E f ) and transition levels of defects (for instance with respect to the valence band top, E(q/q ′ ) -E v ) were evaluated using the usual respective methodologies and E(q/q ′ ) -E v = [E def (q) -E def (q ′ )]/(q ′ -q) -ε v , where E def (q) is the total energy of the defect in charge state q (which already includes a periodic charge correction For the calculation of μ ref , energies of Si, H, B, Ga, P and C species were found from the energies per atom in bulk Si, molecular H 2 in Si, substitutional B, Ga, P and C in Si. For instance, the energy per substitutional species X was found from μ X = E(Si 215 X) -215μ Si , where E(Si 215 X) is the energy of a 216 atom cell where one of the Si atoms is replaced by X, and μ Si is the energy per Si atom in bulk Si (silicon chemical potential). The comparison of calculated transition levels of defects in semiconductors with experimental data, notably with levels measured by deep level transient spectroscopy Another effect to consider is the existence of a capture barrier. If the experiment involves the measurement of emission rates only, a capture barrier must be subtracted from the emission activation energy in order to find a level position Temperature-dependent free energies of defects were also estimated within several limitations, including the harmonic and dilute approximations, where anharmonicity and defectdefect interactions are neglected. In these calculations we account for the electronic potential energy, zero-point motion, as well as vibrational, rotational and configurational degrees of freedom. Further details have been reported elsewhere The potential energy landscape of reactions was investigated using the nudged elastic band (NEB) method The above methodology relies on transition-state-theory, where the reactants are assumed to convert into the products once the saddle point -the highest energy state along the minimum energy path between the ends of the reaction -is achieved, the charge and magnetic state of the system is conserved along the way, and electron phonon coupling is neglected. Experimental conditions and limitations also hinder a direct comparison between measured and calculated figures. Important effects include back-reactions, interactions with intrinsic carriers, among other effects, which can only be acknowledged in the analysis, or roughly accounted for. 