In molecular beam epitaxy, the spontaneous formation of GaN nanowires on Si(111) substrates at elevated temperatures is limited by the long incubation time that precedes nanowire nucleation. In this work, we present three unconventional growth approaches to minimize the incubation time and thus facilitate significantly higher growth temperatures (up to 875 • C). We achieve this by: (i) using III/V flux ratios larger than one to compensate for Ga desorption, (ii) introducing a two-step growth procedure, and (iii) using an AlN buffer layer to favor GaN nucleation. The GaN nanowire ensembles grown at so far unexplored substrate temperatures exhibit excitonic transitions with sub-meV linewidths and the low-temperature photoluminescence spectra are comparable to those of state-of-the-art free-standing GaN layers grown by hydride vapor phase epitaxy. In crystal growth, the concentration of points defects as well as the incorporation of impurities decrease with increasing growth temperature. The optimal growth temperature of III-V compound semiconductors has been theoretically predicted to be close to half of their melting point. Unlike GaN films, the spontaneous formation of GaN nanowires (NWs) in PA-MBE does not require the presence of a Ga-adlayer because these nanostructures form only under N-excess. In this context, it is worth noting that recent experiments demonstrated that the maximum achievable substrate temperature for the growth of GaN NWs on Si(111) substrates is not limited by the elongation stage but by the long delay time that precedes the spontaneous formation of GaN NWs in PA-MBE. In this work, we introduce three different growth approaches conceived to decrease the incubation time and thereby enable the growth of GaN NWs on Si substrates at so far unexplored substrate temperatures (up to 875 • C ). The first approach consist in leaving the commonly used growth regime of nominally N-rich growth conditions, i. e., a ratio between the impinging Ga and N fluxes lower than one. Instead, we use nominally Ga-rich growth conditions (i. e., in terms of the impinging fluxes) to compensate for the high desorption rate of Ga adatoms at elevated substrate temperatures. In the second approach, we use a two-step growth procedure. There, a lower substrate temperature is used during the first step to favor NW nucleation. Finally, in the third approach, we enhance GaN nucleation by introducing an AlN buffer layer. Independent of the growth approach, we found that the low-temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of these high-temperature-grown GaN NWs is comparable to those of state-of-the-art free-standing GaN (FS-GaN) layers grown by HVPE. All samples were grown on 2 ff Si(111) substrates in a MBE system equipped with a radio-frequency N2 plasma source for active N and solid-source effusion cells for Ga and Al. The impinging Ga and N fluxes were calibrated in equivalent growth rate units of nm/min, as described in detail in Ref. 6. A growth rate of 1 nm/min is equivalent to 7.3 × 10 13 atoms/cm 2 . The substrate temperature was measured using an optical pyrometer calibrated with the 1 × 1 to 7× 7 surface reconstruction transition temperature of Si(111) (≈ 860 • ). Figures ures, this growth approach allow us to grow GaN NWs at substrate temperatures as high as 875 • C in reasonable times (the growth times for the samples grown at 855 and 875 • C were 7 and 8 hours, respectively). As obvious from the micrographs shown in Fig. Interestingly, at growth temperatures above 850 • C, we observed that Ga reacts with the Si substrate. This phenomena, known as "melt-back etching", is a well-known problem for the growth of GaN on Si at high-temperatures by other epitaxial growth techniques. For the growth approach introduced above, the maximum achievable substrate temperature is still limited by the long incubation time that precedes the spontaneous formation of TETeg eTVa GaN NWs. Our second growth approach aims at reducing the incubation time by using a two-step growth scheme. In the first step, conventional growth conditions, i. e., a moderated substrate temperature and a III/V flux ratio lower than one, are used to keep short the incubation time. Once the formation of the first GaN NWs is detected by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED), After observing the onset of NW formation by RHEED, the substrate temperature and the III/V flux ratio were increased up to 855 • C and 1.5, respectively. The total growth time for this sample was ≈ 6 h, i. e., 1 h less than for the sample shown in Fig. Our third growth approach exploits the fact that the incubation time does not only depend on the growth conditions but also on the type of substrate. The results presented so far show that, by using nonconventional growth approaches, it is possible to grow GaN NWs at significantly higher temperatures than those previously reported in the literature. The high temperature growth of GaN NWs is, however, accompanied by Ga-induced meltback etching of the Si substrate. This phenomenon locally influences the morphology as well as the orientation and distribution of GaN NWs. The melt-back etching is more pronounced in those samples grown under nominally metal-rich growth conditions but still present in all other NW ensem- by HVPE. The dislocation density of the FS-GaN layer provided by SINANO is of the order of XX×10 x cm 2 . As can be seen in the figure, independent of the substrate temperature, the PL spectra of the NW ensembles are dominated by the donor-bound exciton transition (D 0 ,XA) at 3.471 eV. For the samples grown at temperatures up to 835 • C, this transition is accompanied by a feature-less exponential tail toward lower energies. Besides the (D 0 ,XA) transition, we also observe in all samples the unknown exciton (UX) transition [at the same energy as the two-electron satellite (TES) peak in the FS-GaN] as well as the (I1,X) emission from stacking faults (SFs). For the samples grown on bare Si, we found that the SF-related luminescence monotonically increases with increasing substrate temperature. Figure The narrowing of the PL lines with increasing substrate temperature is accompanied by a change in the intensity ratio NW ensembles which exhibit unprecedentedly narrow donor bound-exciton transitions as well as unintentional doping due the to the melt-back etching of the Si substrate. If the contribution of surface donors to the photoluminescence of our high-temperature GaN NW ensembles is negligible, the PL-spectra must resemble the materials quality of the NW cores. When comparing the PL spectra of the NW ensemble grown on bare Si at 875 • C with that of the FS-GaN layer (see Fig. We would like to thank Anne-Kathrin Bluhm for providing the scanning electron micrographs presented in this work, Hans-Peter Scho ̈nherr for his dedicated maintenance of the MBE system, and XXX for a critical reading of the manuscript. Financial support of this work by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft within SFB 951 is gratefully acknowledged.