Unlocking the potential of topological order within many-body spin systems has long been a central pursuit in the realm of quantum materials. Despite extensive efforts, the quest for a versatile platform enabling site-selective spin manipulation, essential for tuning and probing diverse topological phases, has persisted. Here, we utilize on-surface synthesis to construct spin-1⁄2 alternating-exchange Heisenberg (AH) chains Strongly correlated quantum many-body systems and topological phases stand as two pivotal focal points in modern condensed matter physics and have been intensively explored in quantum dots where J 1 > 0 and J 2 > 0 denote the two alternating antiferromagnetic couplings, and Ŝi denotes the vector of spin-1⁄2 operators at site i. Throughout the manuscript we use the convention J 2 > J 1 without loss of generality. Given this condition, the model belongs to the same topological phase as the spin-1 Haldane chains, featuring gapped excitations in the bulk and non-local string order parameters Recent developments in on-surface synthesis As a first step, we validate the realization of the AH model in our nanographene system. The fundamental building block is a Clar's goblet (C 38 H 18 , hereafter referred to as goblet), which harbors two 1⁄2-spins that are antiferromagnetically coupled to each other Both the magnitude and the sign of the measured exchange interactions are well-reproduced by a fermionic Hubbard model solved within the configuration interaction framework with a complete active space (CAS) approximation Fig. Fig. Switching off the outer-most spin sites of the chain converts the terminations to J 2 . As shown in Fig. Although distinct in terms of the emergence of edge spins, AH chains in both even-and odd-Haldane phases share a VB crystal ground state in the bulk, with elemental excitations that are triplon-quasiparticles carrying a local spin-1 and hopping between VB pairs (Fig. To filter out the non-modulated noise and extract dispersive information of triplons, a discrete Fourier transform (FT) was applied to the d 2 I/dV 2 spectra. As illustrated in Figs. For AH chains whose length is shorter or comparable to the spin correlation length (ξ), finite size effects and short-range interactions cannot be disregarded. A direct consequence in the even-Haldane phase is the effective exchange interaction J eff (L) ⃗ S L • ⃗ S R between the emergent edge spins (Fig. as the lowest-energy edge excitation (LEE). The dI/dV edge and bulk spectra of chains with different lengths are shown in Fig. Moreover, the lowest-energy bulk excitation (LBE) also exhibits a decreasing trend with L, reaching a saturation value that we identify as the bulk gap in the thermodynamic limit (Fig. (3) both yielding a bulk gap of ∼21.3 meV. This quantitative agreement between experiment and theory prediction is particularly noteworthy considering that our spin chain is physisorbed on a metallic substrate (which theory neglects), underscoring the predominance of the exchange interaction over substrate influences. Finally, we show reversible spin chain control by combining hydrogenative passivation and dehydrogenative activation, which provides a promising avenue for manipulating spin-based quantum devices. Firstly, atomic hydrogen is dosed into the chamber to passivate all spin sites along the chain by the formation of -CH 2 group Our results highlight the potential for realizing spinful many-body systems in graphene nanomaterials, with energy scales given by chemically tunable exchange interactions. The precise and flexible control over spin sites and interactions may open ways toward the operation of carbon-based quantum spin devices. Precursor molecules of Clar's goblet (see Extended Data Fig. STM and dI/dV measurements STM and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) dI/dV measurements were performed in a commercial low-temperature STM from Scienta Omicron operating at a temperature of 4.5 K and a base pressure below 2× 10 -11 mbar. All the dI/dV spectra were taken with a modulation voltage of 681 Hz by using a CO-functionalized W tip except for the data shown in Fig. Spin manipulation methods Both hydrogenation The starting point for the CAS calculations is a single-orbital tight-binding model where we only consider the p z orbitals of the C atoms that compose the nanographenes. In our approximation, we consider first and third nearest neighbor hoppings, denoted by t 1 and t 3 , respectively. The corresponding tight-binding Hamiltonian reads as ( †) i,σ denotes the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with spin projection σ =↑, ↓ at site i. This single-particle model is diagonalized, leading to a set of molecular orbitals. At charge neutrality, a chain with N goblets (i.e., L = 2N spin-1⁄2 sites) features 2N half-filled zero-energy states, slightly hybridized due to t 3 . For the CAS calculations, we consider a subset of molecular orbitals that includes these 2N zero-energy states, plus the two closest states in energy, necessary to account for the Coulomb-driven exchange mechanism with n i,σ = c † i,σ c i,σ . The many-body Hubbard Hamiltonian H 0 + H U is represented in the restricted basis set, considering all the multi-electronic configurations that can be obtained with N e electrons in the N M O molecular orbitals. Assuming half-filling, we always have N e = N M O . The remaining electrons are thus assumed to fully occupy the molecular orbitals below the active space, implying that these are frozen doubly-occupied orbitals; the occupation of the molecular orbitals above the active space is also assumed to be frozen, featuring zero electrons. Finally, the resulting (truncated) Hubbard Hamiltonian is diagonalized numerically. Modelling dI/dV spectroscopy To model the dI/dV spectroscopy we consider a spin chain that is coupled to two electron reservoirs: the STM tip and the substrate. In our description, we consider two types of electron scattering that can produce a spin flip in a given site of the chain 