In this research, the ambient-cured one-part alkali-activated material (AAM) containing graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs), fly ash, slag and silica fume has been investigated after hightemperature exposure to 200 -800 o C. Their compressive strength, thermal properties, microstructure, pore structure were characterised through visual observation, isothermal calorimetry, TGA, XRD, SEM/EDS and X-ray mCT. The research findings indicated high strength characteristics of the developed AAM (~ 80 MPa) at ambient condition, which could further reach to approx. 100 MPa after being heated up to 400 o C. GNPs provided nucleation effects for promoting geopolymerisation and crystallisation. As observed from X-ray CT, a high extent of severe cracks initiated from the core and propagated towards the surface. From SEM/EDS analysis, high Na/Al and Na/Si ratios or low Si/Al and Ca/Si ratios highly correlated to thermal stability. Overall, the research outcomes implied the promising use of the nanoengineered AAMs for thermal energy storage (TES) at 400 -600 o C. Global energy consumption has doubled that of the last four decades. With the ever-increasing trend in energy demand of society, global energy consumption amounted to around 440 EJ (i.e., ~122,000 TWh) in 2021 Sustainable and durable materials have gained extensive attention globally in a bid to alleviate the adverse impacts on the environment Among graphene derivatives, graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) have emerged as a competitive material due to their multi-layer honeycomb lattice geometry. GNPs is also a highly thermally conductive materials with thermal conductivity range from 6 W/mK (perpendicular to surface) to 3000 W/mK (parallel to surface) Their high specific surface areas facilitate a stronger contact with geopolymeric binders Although some preliminary studies as aforementioned displayed the promising mechanical outcome due to the incorporation of graphene derivatives in geopolymer matrices, investigations into the high-temperature stability of AAM incorporating carbon-based nanomaterials has been limited and remains unclear. Hence, this study aims to develop an ambient-cured nano-engineered AAM with excellent thermal characteristics. Different AAM mixes were synthesised from Class F fly ash (FA), ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS), silica fume (SF), GNPs and sodium metasilicate (SMS)a solid alkaline activator. After being subjected to 200 o C, 400 o C, 600 o C and 800 o C, AAM mixes were characterised for their thermal properties (i.e., thermal lag, specific heat) and residual compressive strength. Phase assemblage, chemical components and pore structure were also characterised via TGA/DTG, isothermal calorimetry, XRD, SEM/EDS and X-ray CT to analyse the mechanisms behind the thermo-physio-mechanical stability of AAM. These provide a practical viewpoint on the enhanced AAM as a binding agent, developed for high-temperature TES technology. Class F FA, GGBFS and densified SF were the main precursors in this study. As determined through X-ray fluorescence (XRF), the primary constituents of FA are alumina and silica, meanwhile main components of GGBFS are calcium oxide and silicon dioxide, and those of SF is mostly silica. Their detailed chemical oxides/crystallinity is provided in Table Meanwhile, multiple crystalline peaks of quartz, calcite, hematite, magnetite and mullite were detected in FA. Furthermore, the FA (gd = 2.4 g/cm 3 ) supplied by Cement Australia and the GGBFS (gd = 3 g/cm 3 ) contributed by the Independent Cement and Lime Pty Ltd had a relatively small median size d50 = 22 mm and d50 = 14 mm respectively. In contrast, the densified SF (gd = 2.27 g/cm 3 ) supplied by Microsilica Pty Ltd had a lager median size d50 = 86 mm. The solid SMS purchased from Redox Ltd had a molar SiO2/Na2O of 0.9, density of 1.2 g/cm 3 and median particle size of approx. 1 mm. The GNPs in a powder form, supplied by First Graphene Ltd, possessed a maximum lateral size of 50 mm. The superplasticiser (SP) -Master Glenium SKY 8379, was used for improving the dispersion and workability of mixes. Five mixes with different unary, binary and ternary blends were designed to compare their performance at elevated temperature. For F and S samples, 100% FA and 100% GGBFS were used as the reference. FS sample was the binary combination of FA (60%) and GGBFS (40%). Meanwhile, FSSF and FSSFG samples comprised the ternary blend (55% FA + 40% GGBFS + 5% SF). Only FSSFG sample included further 0.1% GNPs. For more details, the mix proportions and molar ratios were displayed in Table For SEM/EDS characterisation, a small section (10 × 10 × 10 mm 3 ) was cut out from broken parts of AAMs after mechanical testing. The SEM sample preparation procedures (i.e., grinding and polishing) was followed other studies All samples prepared for microstructural characterisation, thermal and chemical analysis were pre-treated with acetone to eliminate the moisture content The Tetlow furnace with a maximum temperature of 1300 o C was used in this investigation. micrometer. An x-ray energy of 140 kV and 300 microAmp was used with a 0.25 mm Cu filter to preharden the x-ray beam. Volume reconstruction of the micro-CT data was performed using the phoenix datos|x reconstruction software applying an inline median filter, ROI filter and beam hardening correction filter. Volume reconstructions were imported to Avizo (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for analysis. A combination of interactive thresholding and interactive tophat thresholding was used to segment the internal porosity and cracks forming within the concrete cubes. A volume fraction tool was used to determine the % porosity distribution in cross-sectional slices through samples. A pore size distribution was determined by running a label analysis on the segmented pore structure to determine the volume and equivalent spherical diameter of separate pores. The physical appearance of AAM specimens after high temperature exposure was monitored to observe the colour change and crack behaviour (Fig. The variation in compressive strength of AAM pastes at high temperatures with trendlines and equations are shown in Fig. Apparently, S specimens reached to the highest 28-day compressive strength with over 80 MPa under ambient condition. With the incorporation of GNPs, FSSFG samples could obtain an equivalent strength to S specimens, meanwhile FSSF and FS samples exhibited a negligible difference in strength (~ 74 MPa) at 28 days. Interestingly, high heat and build-up vapour pressure at elevated temperatures were likely to establish the autoclaving condition inside AAM pastes, which facilitated further geopolymerisation process for strength improvement. Also, the expelled water from the geopolymer matrix during high temperature exposure could result in a discontinuous nano-pore network, thereby enhancing the strength of geopolymers Among all, the thermal lag of FS, FSSF and FSSFG samples seems to be equivalent. Interestingly, there was a downward trend in the specific heat capacity (Cp) of AAM when exposing to elevated temperatures, as displayed in Fig. Fig. Noticeably, there was hardly any sign of second peak observed from F samples. In contrast, high Ca 2+ contents in S specimens were prone to boost the main reaction peak in the acceleration periodt, which was also reported in another study After the second peak, there was no other noteworthy peak as the heat of reaction was prone to gradually decelerate. This was due to the growth of C-(A)-S-H gel layer on the surface of precursors to form the reaction product shell, by which the OH -ions crossing the shell was hindered at a very low speed and then the reaction gradually stopped In the temperature range of 100 -230 o C, the physically-bound water was constantly evaporated for condensation process followed by the formation of geopolymeric binding gels, thereby further amplifying mass loss. Such weight loss in the first stage could somewhat reflect the degree of geopolymerisation since it was closely associated with the formation of N-A-S-H and C-(A)-S-H gels. In addition, the shallow peak appeared around 350 o C for S, FS and FSSF samples, which was ascribed to the liberation of interlayer water of geopolymeric gels during geopolymerisation. This phenomenon also correlated to the high strength of FS and FSSF mixes at this temperature range (see Fig. The peak at around 750 °C was associated with the decarbonation of calcite and rendered S samples less thermally stable at elevated temperature than the other AAMs. Also, the appearance of nepheline phases (see Fig. The XRD diffractograms of one-part AAM pastes at high temperatures are presented in Fig. 2), along with an appearance of crystalline nepheline at 800 o C, which was also reported by Park et al. The relative pore diameter and porosity evolution of AAMs at various heating temperatures is displayed in Table → 10 → 5 mm depth from the surface), the crack branching transformed from dense and narrowly spaced to wider spacing with a larger crack width. Crack propagation was attributed to the devitrification and volume deformation of gels/phases (i.e., incongruent thermal shrinkage and expansion). The structural densification and viscous sintering softened the gels surrounding the pores, resulting in the shrinkage and cracking 1. Without heat energy consumption for curing, the nano-engineered ambient-cured AAM developed in this study still achieve high strength characteristics of approx. 80 MPa at 28 days. When exposing to elevated temperatures, high heat and build-up vapour somewhat establish an autoclaving condition inside AAM pastes, which promotes further geopolymerisation and hydration. This phenomenon facilitates the strength enhancement upon exposure to 400 o C, where the FSSFG obtains a 28-day strength of approx. 100 MPa, followed by the FSSF and FS. 5. High Si/Al and Ca/Si ratios associated with high strength but low thermal stability. Low Na/Al and Na/Si ratios also correlate to intensive cracking. 6. Thermal expansion, shrinkage-induced stress and built-up of vapour pressure triggered intensive cracking in the core of specimen where it has the highest constraint effect. The dissipation of internal stresses led to crack propagation towards the surface with a shift in crack profile from narrow crack width with dense spacing to large crack width with wide spacing. 7. There is a promising use of nano-engineered one-part AAM as high-temperature binder, which can later on combine with aggregate for TES applications at around 400 -600 o C. Despite the good thermal performance of ambient-cured one-part AAM developed in this study, the matrix still contains a significant proportion of unreacted particles (see section 4.8). This is considered as one of the limitations of one-part AAM, which necessitates further research on the optimisation of mixing methods to maximise their hardened properties. The utilisation of microwave radiation curing can also be considered to improve microstructure. It should be noted that this study merely focused on high-temperature performance of AAM binder, which will be further developed in a combination with aggregate in the next study together with cyclic heat treatment to examine their potential for TES applications. 100 MPa (~ 20% increment) upon exposure to 200 o C. Nonetheless, they were vulnerable to higher temperatures of 400 -800 o C that led to a huge strength loss by approx. 47 -87% and remained the lowest strength (around 12 MPa) among investigated AAM mixes at 800 o C. Such considerably low residual strength of S samples at elevated temperatures was mainly attributed to the brittle nature of C-(A)-S-H susceptible to thermal deformation, dehydration and crystallisation