Silicon photonics with the advantages of low power consumption, low cost, and high yield is a crucial technology for facilitating high-capacity optical communications and interconnects. The graphene photodetectors (GPDs) featuring broadband operation, high speed, and low integration cost can be good additions to the conventional SiGe photodetectors, supporting silicon-integrated on-chip photodetection in new wavelength bands beyond 1.6 μm (e.g., U-band and 2 μm). Here we realize a siliconintegrated four-channel wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) optical receiver based on a micro-ring resonator (MRR) array and four p-n homojunction GPDs. These GPDs based on the photo-thermoelectric (PTE) effect operating under zero (current) bias exhibit responsivities of ~1.1 V W -1 and flat frequency responses up to 67 GHz which is set-up limited. The GPDs show good consistence benefiting from the compact active region array (0.006 mm 2 ) covered by a single mechanically exfoliated hBN/graphene/hBN stack. Moreover, the WDM graphene optical receiver realized the 4×16 Gbps non-return to zero (NRZ) optical signal transmission. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first GPD-array-based optical receiver using high-quality mechanically exfoliated graphene and edge graphene-metal conduct with low resistance. Apparently, our design is also compatible with CVD-grown graphene, which can also result in a good consistence of the GPDs. This work shed light on the largescale integration of GPDs with high consistency and uniformity, enabling the application of high-quality mechanically exfoliated graphene, and promoting the development of the graphene photonic integrated circuits. The ever-growing demand of global data traffic is driving the development of nextgeneration optical communication and interconnection technologies, standards and modules such as transmitters and receivers Extending the optical communication bands is a direct and effective solution for capacity improvement Moreover, as a two-dimensional material, graphene can be integrated onto photonics platforms without lattice mismatch, and can even be compatible with CMOS back-end line processing Recently, large-bandwidth graphene photodetectors (GPDs) have been demonstrated using photoconductor or phototransistor structures based on PV effect The integration methods of graphene on photonic platforms have two ways. The CVD-grown graphene is usually used by wet-transfer Moreover, the mechanical exfoliated graphene can usually be encapsulated by hBN/graphene/hBN stack structure In this work, we propose and demonstrate an integrated four-channel WDM optical receiver based on MRR wavelength demultiplexing filters and PTE GPDs with mechanically exfoliated monolayer graphene. A large hBN/single layer graphene (SLG)/hBN heterostructure is transferred by the mechanical exfoliation method onto a specially designed active region array with total footprint of only 100×60 μm 2 . The four PTE PDs are based on thin-silicon slot-waveguide as our previous work introduced When operating at 1550.25/1548.7/1546.4/1544.68 nm, the present GPDs achieve responsivities of ~1.1 V W -1 and flat frequency response up to 67 GHz (set-up limited). The linear dynamic ranges are measured from 0.01 mW to 0.34 mW under zero current. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work using mechanically exfoliate graphene to realize arrayed GPDs, based on which a WDM optical receiver supporting 4×16 Gbps NRZ transmission is demonstrated. In this work, the wavelength band of ~1.55 μm is chosen for convenience of device test. This work can be easily extended to longer wavelengths (e.g., U-band, 2-μm-band and beyond). Design and simulation. Figure For each channel #x, the optical signal is transmitted through a MRR and a multimode interferometer (MMI) with a power splitting ratio of 90%/10%. The 10% port is connected to an output grating coupler for optical coupling alignment. The 90% power optical signal is then input to the corresponding GPD #x. In each GPD, the injected optical TE0 mode is converted to the fundamental quasi-TE mode of the slot waveguide where the active region locates by a strip-to-slot-waveguide mode converter. As Fig. To ensure all the four active regions can be covered by the mechanically exfoliated hBN/SLG/hBN stack, we designed a compact active region array with a footprint of <100×60 μm 2 . The spacing between the adjacent GPDs are ~4.6 μm. All the GPDs share the same structure which is like our previous work The active region waveguide is optimized for efficient optical absorption in graphene, resulting in parameters of ridge width = 0.6 μm, gap = 0.15 μm. Figure The simulation of PTE processing has been discussed in our previous work , where e is the electron charge, kB denotes the Boltzmann constant, and μc is the graphene chemical potential. Figure was obtained by solving the heat diffusion partial differential equation For each WDM channel, the signal was then injected to the GPD through the passive optical devices. Here a bias-Tee was used to apply the zero-current bias and collected the RF response simultaneously. Since the corresponding passive MRR is involved in the reference calibration path with help of the broadband MMI power splitter and the grating couplers, the influence of the narrow-band MRR can also be calibrated. Under an open circuit test mode (zero-current bias), the measured high frequency response of the all four GPDs are shown in Fig. The self-driven GPDs with large bandwidth features low power consumption and highspeed data reception. More details of the high frequency response measurements are given in Supplementary Note 5. The static and high frequency performance of the four GPDs show good consistency, which can be contributed to the single 2DM stack strategy using a compact active region array. The 3dB-bandwidths >67 GHz is comparable to the state-of-the-art works In conclusion, we demonstrated a 4-channel WDM graphene optical receiver based on the MRR array and PTE GPDs operating at zero current. The MRRs realized a homogeneous spectral transmission at the bandwidth of 100 nm with ~1.5-nm channel spacing. The active region array of the GPDs is specially designed within a compact footprint of ~0.006 mm 2 , enabling the cover of a single high-quality mechanically exfoliated hBN/SLG/hBN stack. In this way, the GPDs show good consistency of the experimental performance. Specifically, the four GPDs exhibit similar responsivities of ~1.1 V W -1 with flat frequency responses up to 67 GHz which is set-up limited. Using our graphene optical receiver, the transmission of 4×16 Gbps NRZ optical signal is demonstrated with carrier wavelengths of 1550.25 nm, 1548.7 nm, 1546.4 nm, and 1544.68 nm. This work can be easily extended to longer wavelengths, e.g. U-band, 2μm-band or even beyond. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the inaugural application of mechanically exfoliated high-quality graphene in the scale integration of GPDs, being a step forward in the application of graphene photonic devices in optical communications and interconnects. Apparently, our design is also compatible with CVD-grown graphene, whose compact active region array can result in an improved consistency of GPDs in contrast to the conventional designs. In the future, the waveguide platform with a flat top-interface can be employed to eliminate the impact of graphene strain on the responsivities of PTE GPDs, thereby enabling higher-speed data reception. Transceiver Fabrication. The thin silicon platform with 100-nm-thick Si layer was obtained from a standard SOI wafer with a 220-nm-thick top Si layer by using thermal oxidation and buffered oxide etch (BOE). The passive ridge silicon waveguides and circuits were fabricated by the processes of EBL and ICP dry-etching. For each GPD, the silicon slot ridge waveguide has a ridge width of 1.5 μm, a slot width of ~120 nm, an etching depth of 100 nm. Next, the 90-nm-thick aluminum (30 nm) /Aurum (60 nm) gate-electrodes were fabricated by EBL, EBE and lift-off in acetone, forming ohmic contacts with two parts of the silicon slot waveguide separately. Then, a 10-nm-thick Al2O3 layer was deposited on the slot ridge waveguide by the atomic-layer deposition (ALD) process. The hBN/SLG/hBN stack was transferred onto the chip. Then, the Cr (5 nm)/Au (150 nm) electrodes were fabricated by EBL, EBE and lift-off processes, forming the edge contact between graphene and the source/drain electrodes. Finally, the hBN/SLG/hBN stack is patterned by the EBL and RIE etching processes to isolate the adjacent GPDs electrically. Transfer Process of Graphene. The hBN/SLG/hBN stack was fabricated by van der Waals assembly technique. The graphene and hBN flakes were exfoliated from highly oriented pyrolytic graphite and hBN crystals using Stoch tape and heat release tape respectively. The graphite and hBN crystals were purchased from HQ Graphene Company. The hBN/SLG/hBN stack was picked up by a stamp composed of a polycarbonate (PC) layer supported by a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) block. For more details on the van der Waals assembly technique, please refer to ref. 