This work aims to study the insertion of AlCl À 4 anion in the crystalline structure of oriented pyrolytic graphite (PG) at the point of view of the anion itself. The electronic and atomic structures of the anion at different intercalation stages are studied. In particular double-edge (bicolor) X-ray absorption spectroscopy at the Al and Cl K-edges is carried out, highlighting a contraction of the anion bonding at the highest intercalation degree obtained electrochemically (stage 3), while the electronic population changes for both the edges upon cycle. Understanding the processes behind the phase transitions, particularly the property of some solids to host different species, is of extreme interest. Indeed this phenomenon has a practical application in energy storage and conversion systems such as high-energy-density batteries and hydrogen storage, which are very important topics due to the need to store and convert energy from renewable sources. In our previous studies, we have comprehensively characterized the graphite intercalation compound (GIC) formation in aluminum graphite dual-ion cell (AGDIC) by combining operando smalland wide-angle X-ray scattering In this article we study the behavior of AlCl À 4 anions during the intercalation process in PG layers by X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy at both the Cl and Al absorption K-edges. This bicolor technique being selective to two elements gives a new insight into the intercalation process from the point of view of the intercalant species, clarifying some aspects that have so far remained questionable. The article is structured as follows. The first part shows the electronic structure of the anion at Al and Cl K-edges for different intercalation stages. The second part focuses on quantifying the anion uptake at the different intercalation stages, while the third one aims to highlight the structural changes due to the strain and the compression of the graphite lattice on the anion. The electrochemical processes of the AGDIC function are the following. During the charging process at the negative electrode, Al 2 Cl À 7 anions in the ionic liquid electrolyte react at the Al anode side forming AlCl À 4 anions and Al metal. Concurrently at the positive electrode, AlCl À 4 anions intercalate into the PG graphitic structure. Figure In order to better understand the molecular composition of the intercalated species, first we compared the X-ray absorption nearedge spectra (XANES) jump (absorption discontinuity due to the ionization cross section at the K-edge) at the Al and Cl K-edges, as shown in Figure where N AlCl À 4 is the number of uptake molecules, which can be evaluated from XAS jump and the cross section of the element and Each peak of the XANES signal is associated with an electronic transition as reported in Table In order to comprehensively analyze the AlCl À 4 atomic anion structure during the intercalation process, a double-edge analysis (Al and Cl K-edges) of the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) part of the XAFS data is presented. An advanced technique based on multiple scattering (MS) calculations of the absorption cross section in the framework of GNXAS program Here we have a clear contraction of ΔR AlÀCl=ClÀAl $ 0.01 and 0.02 Å for the electrode fully charged for the first cycle and after five cycles, respectively (see Table An XAFS study of the AlCl À 4 anion intercalated in PG at different intercalation stages has been studied at Al and Cl K-edges. The XANES structure shows differences in the features and intensities of both edges revealing an active part of the Cl in the electronic exchange with PG upon cycling. The high level of strain in the PG structure causes an increase in the disorder level in the local structure detected at both edges. From the double-edges analysis, AlCl À 4 , the last intercalation stage 3 shrunk its interatomic distances probably due to the high level of strain in the PG structure. Sample Preparation: The electrolyte 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride:aluminum trichloride EMIMCl:AlCl3 in a 1:1.5 mole ratio was provided by IOLITEC. The water content of the electrolyte was lower than 100 ppm. The electrochemical tests were performed using high-purity aluminum (Al 99.99% Alfa Aesar) as anode and PG with a thickness of 25 μm and a loading of 4.71 mg cm À2 as the cathode material. Al K-Edge XAFS: The XAFS were realized in the near-edge region of the Al K-edge (i.e., XANES measurements ranging from ≈1550 to 1600 eV for Al) and the extended regime (i.e., EXAFS measurements ranging from ≈1570 to 1840 eV for Al) by varying the incident photon energy from 1490 to 1837.5 eV in variable-energy steps at the plane-grating monochromator beamline of PTB for undulator radiation. Cl K-Edge XAFS: The XAFS measurements on Cl were carried out at PTB's four-crystal-monochromator beamline. Phys. Status Solidi A 2024, 2300776 © 2024 The Authors. physica status solidi (a) applications and materials science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH © 2024 The Authors. physica status solidi (a) applications and materials science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH 18626319, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pssa.202300776 by University Di Roma La Sapienza, Wiley Online Library on [20/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License