In this work, we report on a twin-core fiber sensor system that provides improved spectral efficiency, allows for multiplexing and gives low level of crosstalk. Pieces of the referred strongly coupled multicore fiber are used as sensors in a laser cavity incorporating a pulsed semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA). Each sensor has its unique cavity length and can be addressed individually by electrically matching the periodic gating of the SOA to the sensor's cavity roundtrip time. The interrogator acts as a laser and provides a narrow spectrum with high signal-to-noise ratio. Furthermore, it allows distinguishing the response of individual sensors even in the case of overlapping spectra. Potentially, the number of interrogated sensors can be increased significantly, which is an appealing feature for multipoint sensing. The use of optical fibers in sensing applications for real-time monitoring of parameters such as strain and temperature has attracted much interest, as in those fields, their intrinsic properties such as small size, lightweight and electromagnetic immunity can be exploited. Moreover, thanks to their capability to be embedded in materials such as concrete or composites, and to operate over long distances, they are an appealing alternative for many applications that require a precise tracking of any of the aforementioned parameters along large structures or areas 1 . To this end, multipoint sensing is often used, which consists of interrogating in a simple and versatile way several individual sensors 2,3 , and whose spatial resolution is linked to the capability to discern between adjacent sensing elements. This configuration has gained much relevance for structure health monitoring in particular 4,5 . Among multipoint sensing techniques, the most common is wavelength division multiplexing 6 , where each sensor operates at a different wavelength. Thus, the wavelength shift of each sensor and the interrogation window are the constraining factors that define the maximum number of elements that can be interrogated. In contrast, time division multiplexing is based on interrogating each sensing element individually by means of analyzing the reflected light 7 , as the arrival times of the reflections are directly proportional to the distance from the light source to each sensing element. Furthermore, wavelength and time division multiplexing can be combined in order to increase the number of sensing elements that can be interrogated individually In recent years, strongly coupled multicore fibers (MCFs) have been introduced as an alternative for sensing. Some appealing features of MCFs are their versatility, interrogation ease, sensitivity In this paper, a multipoint interrogation system with MCFs is presented. It is based on using segments of a coupled twin-core fiber (TCF) as sensing elements inside a laser cavity that incorporates a pulsed semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA). As explained and demonstrated in the following sections, lasing improves the spectral efficiency of the sensor, and the system allows for multiplexing, increasing the number of sensors that can be interrogated unmistakably. In the proposed system, the key to multiplex several MCF-based sensors relies on creating ring cavities with different lengths that resonate at a particular RF frequency in the MHz range. In each cavity, the sensing device acts as a laser mirror that reflects the light that is launched by a SOA. The latter is gated with a waveform generator, which allows programming the frequency rate and width of the emitted pulse. As a result, only the optical feedback from a sensor head that is synchronous to the nanosecond electrical gating of the SOA is amplified and recirculates through the cavity, whereas the optical signal arriving at another time is absorbed. When the optical pulse passes multiple times through the SOA, and provided the amplification exceeds the loss, the interrogator operates as a laser, whose emission takes place at the cavity gain peak with significant spectral narrowing The setup of the proposed system is shown in Fig. For monitoring purposes 10% of the light was used: half connected to a spectrometer (I-MON512-USB, Ibsen Photonics) and the other half to an InGaAs avalanche photodetector (Thorlabs APD430C/M) and an oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS3034) for spectral and temporal measurements, respectively. With the former, any wavelength shift in the spectrum could be tracked and stored with picometer accuracy, whereas with the latter, any shortening of the optical pulse could be measured, as the traces of electric pump and optical pulses could be displayed. Such interrogation system has been combined typically with FBGs The TCF used in this work was manufactured from a standard telecom preform with a central core and one extra core added to its drilled cladding. The two cores were approximately equal in size and physical properties, and the center of the side-core was located 15.5 μm away from the fiber center (see Fig. The operating principle of coupled MCFs in general and of this TCF in particular can be explained by the Coupled Mode Theory, as it can be assumed that each of the cores acts as a waveguide According to the mathematical expressions in Refs. (2) where n = 0.873 × 10 -4 for this TCF at 1550 nm and at room temperature according to the results provided by PhotonDesign simulation software. Equations ( As it can be noticed from Eqs. (2) to (5), the coupling period is unaltered regardless of interrogating the structure in transmission or reflection. The wavelength at which the maxima takes place in the spectrum ( m ) is unaltered as well, and occurs when the period equals a multiple integer ( m ) of π. Thus, if we excite the TCF with a SOA whose pulses are tuned to the f r of the cavity (~ 10 6 Hz), the system will lase at m , providing a unique, much sharper and narrower peak in the spectrum compared to the broad maxima and minima obtained when such MCFs are interrogated with a broadband light source To demonstrate such operating principle, two SMF-TCF-SMF structures were manufactured (TCF1 and TCF2) and placed in the setup in Fig. As predicted, the spectra of the devices that are interrogated via intracavity in a lasing configuration are much narrower (FWHM = 5.13 nm for TCF1 and FWHM = 4.26 nm for TCF2) than those from the samples interrogated with a continuous broadband light source and in an open loop (FWHM = 12.83 nm for TCF1 and FWHM = 13.79 nm for TCF2). The optical signal measured in a lasing mode of operation consists of a single peak, in contrast to the response of the same sensor operated in the conventional configuration, when other peaks of comparable amplitude are visible, making it difficult to be used for sensing. This spectral narrowing and The first test consisted in subjecting both samples to vibrations of identical frequency (1 Hz) and amplitude (500 mVpp). To that end, TCF1 and TCF2 were surface bonded longitudinally to the center of the upper side of two thin and flexible wooden beams of ~ 1 m length. As illustrated in Fig. The results are summarized in Figs. For the cases in which only one of the sensors was vibrating, the good SNR measured at 1 Hz, the narrowness of the peak and the low level of the harmonic components in the frequency domain were significant. In fact, the SNRs for the cases in Fig. When both sensors were subjected to identical vibrations simultaneously (see Fig. The next test consisted in evaluating the performance of the interrogation system when more than two sensors were connected at the same time. To that end, the setup in Fig. The results are summarized in Figs. The 1 Hz oscillation was recorded by the device that was subjected to vibrations in each case (TCF1 in Fig. The last test consisted in measuring different parameters with each sensing head. Taking into consideration that the temperature sensitivity of this TCF has been reported already When TCF3 was interrogated with a continuous broadband light source, the FWHM of the maximum peak was of 6.63 nm, whereas the FWHM of the unique peak that appears on the spectrum when it was interrogated by the pulsed SOA was only of 1.16 nm. The results from these tests are shown in Figs. Results indicate that vibration and strain cycles have been tracked correctly by each sensor in all the tests. On the one hand, for strain measurements, when only TCF3 was subjected to it, the SNR was of 27.38 and the wavelength shift was of 1875 pm in the tested range (see Fig. In this work, we have proposed and demonstrated the feasibility of a multipoint interrogation system for coupled MCF-based sensors. Its operating principle is based on creating several ring resonant cavities in which each of the sensor heads acts as a laser mirror that reflects the light that is launched by a gated SOA. In this manner, each cavity can be easily and individually addressed by tuning the frequency of the gating, as the latter is directly proportional to the physical length of each of the cavities. Thus, if the sensors are distributed at different lengths, each of them will have a unique resonant frequency that will allow for their unmistakable identification. Moreover, as the identification depends solely on the length of the cavity, sensors with similar or even identical spectra could be multiplexed in the same system. A major advantage provided by the proposed system is the significant improvement of the spectral efficiency of coupled MCF-based sensors. Compared to the output spectra provided by these devices, which is comprised of multiple and broad peaks when they are interrogated by a continuous broadband light source; when the same devices are interrogated by the gated SOA, the output spectra from each sensor solely has a unique, sharp and narrow peak, as the system makes a multiple peak clean-up and only lases at the wavelength at which the cavity gain peak is located. These features make it possible to include a larger number of sensors in the interrogation window, which added to the possibility of using sensors with identical spectra, allows increasing significantly the number of devices that could be interrogated by means of this system. The feasibility of the proposed interrogation system has been demonstrated for a setup with 2 sensors that consisted of segments of TCF of different lengths that were subjected to the same (vibration) and to different stimuli (vibration and strain). In all cases, the system was able to detect and measure the applied effect with high sensitivity, high SNR and a significantly low level of crosstalk, even in a configuration that simulated a situation with 8 sensors. Hence, the high sensitivity provided by MCFs for the simultaneous measurement of different parameters, combined with the high spectral efficiency, high SNR and low level of crosstalk provided by the interrogation setup, suggest that the proposed system may be appealing for applications that require accurate multipoint sensing with minimal intrusiveness and interrogation ease, such as structural health monitoring of aircrafts, buildings, etc. In addition, as the proposed system is compatible with any MCF, it allows for multiplexing and interrogating MCFs with different geometries simultaneously within the same setup. Scientific Reports | (2022) 12:11797 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-16103-8