Quantum computers open up new avenues for modelling the physical properties of materials and molecules. Density Functional Theory (DFT) is the gold standard classical algorithm for predicting these properties, but relies on approximations of the unknown universal functional, limiting its general applicability for many fundamental and technologically relevant systems. In this work we develop a hybrid quantum/classical algorithm called quantum enhanced DFT (QEDFT) that systematically constructs quantum approximations of the universal functional using data obtained from a quantum computer. We benchmark the QEDFT algorithm on the Fermi-Hubbard model, both numerically and on data from experiments on real quantum hardware. We find that QEDFT surpasses the quality of groundstate results obtained from Hartree-Fock DFT, as well as from direct application of conventional quantum algorithms such as VQE. Furthermore, we demonstrate that QEDFT works even when only noisy, low-depth quantum computation is available, by benchmarking the algorithm on data obtained from Google's quantum computer. We further show how QEDFT also captures quintessential properties of strongly correlated Mott physics for large Fermi-Hubbard systems using functionals generated on much smaller system sizes. Our results indicate that QEDFT can be applied to realistic materials and molecular systems, and has the potential to outperform the direct application of either DFT or VQE alone, without the requirement of large scale or fully fault-tolerant quantum computers. Materials systems constitute large, interacting and inhomogeneous quantum many-body problems. As such, understanding and describing their properties is a notoriously difficult problem. Exact simulation of materials on classical computers is restricted to small system sizes. Quantum simulation on quantum computers promises precise computation of their dynamics, but remains out of reach of current hardware At the atomic scale, Density Functional Theory (DFT) The kinetic energy term T [n], the Coulomb (or "Hartree") term U H [n], the external potential E ext The kinetic, Hartree, and external terms can be computed classically within KS DFT Instead, in DFT, various heuristic approximations of the XC functional are used. Simple and compact approximations are often the most useful, interpretable and computationally efficient However, the performance of DFT is intrinsically limited by the accuracy of the XC functional approximation. The most basic and best-known of these is the local density approximation (LDA), which is determined by exact computation of the homogeneous, non-interacting electron gas Despite these many successes, a number of challenges still remain: from choosing the most appropriate functional for each system, to the general failure of XC functionals when applied to strongly correlated systems. There are many functionals which have impressive records across broad material classes when predicting certain properties, while completely failing for others. For example, many functionals tend to struggle with describing bond disassociation: when electrons localise on ions as the inter-atomic distance is increased. And this is closely related to the misprediction of lattice constants in solids even when the electronic structure is qualitatively correct In recent years, quantum many body approaches such as the Dynamical Mean Field Theory (DMFT) Recently, quantum computing hardware has become sufficiently advanced to allow non-trivial demonstrations of quantum computation of groundstate properties. Many different quantum algorithms have been proposed for finding groundstates. However, the most widely studied on near-term quantum hardware is the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) However, in contrast with classical variational algorithms, in VQE the state |ψ⟩ is generated -and its energy E(|ψ⟩) = ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩ with respect to the Hamiltonian H measured -on a quantum computer. This requires that a suitable, efficiently preparable class of quantum states |ψ(⃗ p)⟩ be chosen, with parameters ⃗ p over which to optimise. Because quantum computers are able to efficiently construct states that cannot be described or computed effi-ciently on classical computers, VQE has the potential to outperform classical variational methods. The accuracy of VQE results depends on whether this variational class contains a good approximation to the groundstate, and many different variational classes have been proposed and studied However, the current regime of noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) hardware is notoriously subject to significant rates of noise and error. The success or otherwise of VQE therefore also depends, crucially, on hardware noise. Although non-trivial VQE computations have now been demonstrated on real quantum devices In this work, we introduce and benchmark a new hybrid quantum/classical approach to the many-body electronic structure problem: quantumenhanced DFT (QEDFT), which combines the complementary strengths of DFT and quantum computation. Rather than using the quantum computer to find the groundstate itself, we instead use the quantum computer to approximate the XC functional, which is then fed into a classical DFT iteration. Thus the quantum computer is not tasked with finding the groundstate itself, but rather with steering the DFT iteration towards an accurate solution. In this work, we focus on using VQE for the quantum part of the QEDFT computation. But we note that our approach is general, and any other quantum groundstate approximation algorithm could be used in QEDFT. We find that combining DFT and VQE in this way outperforms both Hartree-Fock DFT alone, and quantum VQE alone. Moreover, this remains the case even when the VQE computation itself is very noisy, and its output is far from the true XC functional. Despite the VQE output being quantitatively inaccurate, it captures key qualitative features of the exact XC functional that classical approximations struggle to reproduce. And this suffices to steer the DFT iteration to more accurate solutions than it would otherwise converge to. To carry this out, the evaluation of the XC functional must be transformed into a groundstate computation suitable for VQE. At a high level, there are two possible approaches: we can compute the XC functional via VQE during the DFT loop, at the density in the current DFT iteration; we call this the online approach. Or we can use VQE to approximate the entire universal XC functional in advance, and then use this VQE-computed XC functional in the DFT iteration; we call this the offline approach. There are pros and cons to each approach: the online approach only evaluates the XC functional at densities actually required during the DFT iteration; whereas the offline approach may compute it at many densities that are not actually needed. However, the online approach requires calling out to the quantum computer during the DFT computation, thereby limiting the speed of the DFT computation; whereas the offline approach decouples the quantum and classical computation. Moreover, since we are approximating the universal functional, in principle the VQE functional approximation only needs to be computed once, and thereafter the same functional can be used in multiple QEDFT computations. For large systems, the XC functional is essentially a continuous object, whereas a quantum computer can only compute (or approximate) its value at a discrete set of points, with intermediate points approximated by interpolation. In principle, assuming the VQE algorithm were able to compute the exact value of the functional at any given point, the finer the discretisation the more accurate the functional approximation. However, the fact that a discretised functional is being computed has a significant benefit. The number of points in the discretisation corresponds directly to the size of the quantum system used in the quantum computation to compute the value of the functional. Therefore, even if the quantum hardware is too small to fit the full system being simulated, we can still use VQE to approximate the XC functional on the quantum computer at the finest discretisation that will fit on the device, and then use this in a DFT calculation of the groundstate density of the much larger system of interest. Our empirical study shows that QEDFT has a number of advantages over both Hartree-Fock DFT alone, and VQE (or other purely-quantum) approaches alone: 1. QEDFT usually achieves better accuracy than either Hartree-Fock DFT alone, or quantum VQE alone. 2. QEDFT does not necessarily rely on quantitatively accurate quantum computations (eg high fidelity with the true groundstate), so it may provide a path to quantum advantage even when the quantum hardware is noisy. 3. QEDFT can be applied to large many-body systems on small quantum hardware, so it may still be able to provide a quantum advantage for real materials even while the available hardware is too small to fit a full quantum simulation of the material. All of the numerics and hardware experiments across 1D and 2D Fermi-Hubbard systems serve to support these claims. We highlight a subset of our results that illustrate the above claims. Figure The first studies of DFT and quantum computing analysed its computational complexity Finally, two recent works We also note that functional design for correlated lattice models has also been explored classically in the context of various lattice inhomogeneities. It was first used in semiconductor models In the rest of this paper, we describe the QEDFT algorithm in more technical detail, and apply it to a number of many-body lattice models. Lattice models are good systems to benchmark the approach on, as they allow direct comparison to other quantum algorithms which have largely been tested in the lattice setting. Furthermore, because quantum computers consist of qubits, fundamentally any quantum simulation must be reduced in some way to a discretised model. Thus a lattice formulation of QEDFT is required in any case, whether explicitly or implicitly. In Section 2, we review the formulation of DFT on lattices, which differs slightly from the more familiar continuum formulation of DFT. In Section 3, we describe how the XC functional is transformed into a groundstate problem amenable to quantum computation. We also explain how a quantum treatment on small system sizes can be used to interpolate approximations of the XC functional, which can then be used in DFT for much larger system sizes. As a simple illustrative example, we first show in Section 4 how our QEDFT approach looks for the Hubbard dimer and then extend this to more complex Fermi-Hubbard models. In Section 5, we compare the performance of the QEDFT algorithm numerically with both (simulated) VQE, and with DFT under a number of choices of classical functional approximations. We also explore the qualitative features of the QEDFT functional and their contribution to the algorithm's performance. In Section 5.1.2, we run the QEDFT algorithm on the 1D Fermi-Hubbard model using VQE data obtained on Google's quantum device. We consider the general Hamiltonian for the following many-body fermionic system defined on a lattice L, where T , Ĥint and Ĥext are the non-interacting, interacting and external field contributions respectively. DFT enables the efficient solution of this problem where v ext i is the external potential. The first Hohenberg-Kohn (HK) theorem establishes a one-to-one mapping where ⟩ is known as the universal functional, as it doesn't depend explicitly on the external potential. The exact analytical form of this functional is not known for many fermionic systems of interest and requires the solution of many body problems that do not scale efficiently in the system size on classical computers. Routine approximations of F [n] are made to allow for practical implementations of DFT. The error in the estimation of groundstate observables depends on the quality of those approximations. A necessary reduction is then made from the original problem to an auxiliary non-interacting (KS) Hamiltonian where is the kinetic energy of the auxiliary non-interacting system, U H [n] is the Hartree energy, and E XC [n] is the exchange-correlation energy functional. By minimising Eq. ( which has a solution that is the groundstate density. This equation is equi-valent to a non-interacting system with an effective potential defined as, where V H [n i ] is the Hartree potential and V XC [n i ] is the exchange correlation potential, which is the object that is typically approximated. The effective non-interacting single-particle system is known as the KS Hamiltonian, This system of equations is then solved self-consistently where at each iteration the groundstate density at site index i is constructed from the eigenvectors of the KS system, by summing over the occupied single particle states of the KS eigenvectors (accounting for spin), where ĤKS φ j = ε j φ j is the full eigensolution of the KS system. Here we treat the example spin unpolarised lattice DFT, but we note that spin polarised lattice DFT can be treated by separating the Kohn-Sham states into their up and down spin channels. The groundstate energy of the original many-body system in terms of the KS eigenvalues and density is given by, The KS solution is converged self-consistently by iteratively updating the input density by computing Eq. ( where j is the DFT iteration index and α is a linear mixing parameter that is used for numerical stability. When the groundstate observables no longer change up to a tolerance δ then the groundstate energy and density are equivalent to those of the interacting problem, if the true XC energy functional is used. To summarise, the groundstate density minimises the total energy functional which enforces the functional derivative to be zero and results in a variational equation for auxiliary wavefunctions that can construct the groundstate density. This equation takes the form of a single-particle equation which can be treated as a standard eigenvalue problem. All of manybody physics manifests in the exchange correlation potential contribution Algorithm 1: The lattice DFT algorithm Choose the inhomogeneous representation (i.e the external potential) of the fermionic system to be used Eq. ( 1. Choose initial density; 2. Construct the KS potential Eq. ( 3. Solve for (φ j , ε j ) in the KS system of equations ĤKS φ j = ε j φ j with ĤKS Eq. ( 4. Construct density estimate from the KS eigenvectors Eq. ( 5. Compute energy of the system Eq. ( 7. If converged, exit loop and compute groundstate properties. If not, go back to step (1) and use new estimate of density as the input density Eq. ( Table of an otherwise fully determined effective single particle potential. These equations are solved self consistently, as the XC potential depends on the density, and the density depends on the unknown auxiliary wavefunctions. At self consistency, these wavefunctions no longer change and are used to construct groundstate observables, most notably the density and energy. The algorithmic procedure is presented in Table In this section we present the quantum-enhanced DFT algorithm for fermionic systems within the lattice DFT formalism presented in Section 2. The main difference between lattice DFT and normal (ab initio) DFT is that the former is discrete, while the latter uses continuous basis sets. The algorithm consist of two parts (a) the computation of the XC potential and energy using a quantum machine and (b) application of the potential and energy within a DFT loop, which essentially follows the steps outlined in Section 2. We discuss QEDFT in its offline mode, where the quantum computer is called during the first stage only and the second stage is a purely classical computation that queries that results from the first stage. Our approach is motivated by the deficiencies of classical DFT approximations to systematically incorporate the effects of exchange and correlations. On the other hand, quantum computations natively include these effects, so building functionals out of their computations has the potential to improve upon classical approximations. In Table where P α ∈ {I, X, Y, Z} ⊗M are Pauli operators and λ α are real coefficients. This mapping is necessary due to how operations are executed on the quantum device and its choice depends on the system under consideration. A quantum circuit representation |Ψ QC [n]⟩ is then created that can be used by quantum algorithms to predict the groundstate energy of the system for a fixed number of fermions. The variational quantum eigensolver (Section 1.2) can be used for this step, where a quantum circuit is parameterised by real parameters that are variationally optimised for. At each allowed fermionic filling, the quantum algorithm is run to compute the groundstate energy, (15) At this stage, there is still the combinatorially many possibilities for the densities at each site of the lattice L as n = {n 1 , . . . , n L }. To further reduce the complexity we employ the local density approximation, where we just scan over states with total density N e /L. This naturally fits in the state preparation of |Ψ[n]⟩ as the total density is a conserved quantity, so the VQE minimization rearranges the local density profile while maintaining N e . From now on, within the offline QEDFT mode all computations are executed on a classical machine that post-processes the function E(n) with a spacing 1/2L. We introduce the quantum-enhanced local density approximation ε QELDA for the energy Eq. ( over the domain Ne L ∈ [0, 2]. Therefore, as the system size is increased, the number of grid points that can be be accessed by ε QELDA ( Ne L ) increases and the resolution of the local energy increases. The local XC energy can also be obtained via, where ε HF ( Ne L ) is the local Hartree Fock (HF) energy which can be obtained efficiently on a classical machine. In this representation, the total exchange correlation energy is approximated as a linear combination of the local energy generated by the local density at each site, i.e. The QE-XC potential is then obtained by taking the numerical derivative of Eq. ( As Eq. ( In this section, we present some examples for how the QEDFT algorithm can be applied to the Fermi-Hubbard model. Here we will describe each of the necessary steps required for implementing the QEDFT algorithm for the prototypical 1 × 2 inhomogeneous Fermi-Hubbard model at half-filling. The model that QEDFT solves is: Algorithm 2: Obtaining the quantum-enhanced XC potential and energy Choose system of interest and construct its homogeneous fermionic Hamiltonian representation, i.e Eq. ( 1. Encode the fermionic Hamiltonian into qubits via a fermion-to-qubit mapping Eq. ( 2. Create a quantum circuit representation for computation of groundstate energy; 3. Use a quantum computer to compute the groundstate energy at each allowed fermionic filling (Eq. ( 4. Use a classical computer to obtain the exchange correlation energy Eq. ( 6. Interpolate the exchange correlation potential and energy to obtain continuous representations and store on a classical computer. 7. Use exchange correlation potential and energy in the DFT loop (Table Following the algorithmic protocol presented in Table assuming each spin-orbital has been assigned a unique index with a chosen Jordan-Wigner ordering (e.g. all up orbitals, followed by all down with the lattice sites in a snake ordering It has been shown in numerical simulations that one layer of the Hamiltonian variational ansatz where θ, φ are variational parameters, and For each fermionic filling the groundstate energy at a fixed U/t needs to be computed, i.e E(N e , U/t) ∀N e ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}. For N e = 2, VQE with the ansatz in Eq. ( where the QEDFT energy is found by obtaining the following energies on a quantum machine, The mean field energy can be computed classically by solving the noninteracting homogeneous Fermi-Hubbard model and computing: Then, the QEDFT XC potential is found by taking the numerical derivative of Eq. ( Finally, the QEDFT XC potential is interpolated so that it can be queried at any density between 0 and 2. This concludes the first phase of applying QEDFT to the Fermi-Hubbard dimer which creates a classical queryable function that can be used in a DFT computation. Now, having a continuous representation for the XC energy and potential we can return to solving Eq. ( The KS potential is then initialised for the two lattice sites, which allows for the full single particle KS Hamiltonian of the system to be expressed as, where we have separated the spin channels, which we consider splitting into two independent problems as we deal with the spin unpolarised case by dealing with the total density at site i as n i = n i↑ + n i↓ . The KS system of equations is then diagonalised, i.e H KS φ j = ε j φ j , where ε j are the KS eigenvalues and φ j are the KS eigenvectors. Explicitly, for the Fermi-Hubbard dimer, the KS matrix for a given spin channel is, defined by, The spectrum of the KS problem consists of the eigenvalues {ε 1 , ε 2 } and eigenvectors {φ 1 , φ 2 }, that are of dimension L. From the KS eigenvectors a new density is constructed, for the half-filled system this is: where φ i (j) is the j th element of the i th KS eigenvector. This density is then used as the input to the next iteration of the DFT iterative algorithm, i.e. Eq. ( The algorithm concludes when the difference between the energy at two successive iterations is less than a chosen tolerance δ. At this point the results of the DFT algorithm for a chosen functional can be compared to the results produced via an exact method, which is possible as the Fermi-Hubbard dimer can be efficiently solved both analytically and numerically due to its small size. We extend the dimer by adding more sites for a specified geometry to produce the generalised inhomogeneous Fermi-Hubbard model given by, where v ext i is the external lattice potential, U is the interaction strength, t is the hopping parameter and L is the system size. Here ⟨ij⟩ indicates a sum over nearest neighbours, and σ denotes the spin. KS theory then maps Eq. ( for a given spin channel σ, which we now omit as we treat both spin channels equally going forward by setting the density variable as n i = n i↑ + n i↓ . The effective KS potential for the generalised Fermi-Hubbard model is written as a combination of the external, Hartree, and XC potentials, V QE-XC (n i ) is the unknown XC potential, which is approximated according to the methods prescribed for Eq. ( The result of this diagonalisation are the KS eigenvalues, {ε 1 , . . . , ε L }, and the KS eigenvectors, {φ 1 , . . . , φ L }. The KS eigenvectors are used to construct a new approximation to the density via Eq. where only the first N e KS eigenvalues are included in the summation, with N e corresponding to the fermion filling of the inhomogeneous model Eq. The entire protocol for the generalised Fermi-Hubbard system is illustrated in Fig. To test and validate the QEDFT algorithm described in Section 3, we performed numerical simulations on classical hardware for 1D and 2D Fermi-Hubbard systems, and computations for 1D Fermi-Hubbard systems using data from Google's Rainbow quantum hardware In this section, we present results of the QEDFT algorithm for 1D Fermi-Hubbard systems, both in simulations and in computations using data from real quantum hardware, and comparing these to conventional DFT methods. 1D Fermi-Hubbard systems are readily solvable classically, both by analytic and numerical methods. The purpose of testing the algorithm on these systems is not, therefore, to compare the QEDFT performance to the best known classical methods, but rather to test the algorithm on wellcharacterised systems and assess (1) how close it gets to the correct solution, and (2) to compare its performance with classical DFT methods that scale to 2D and other systems (but which are not the optimal methods for 1D systems). To obtain (good approximations) to the exact 1D solutions against which to benchmark, we use exact diagonalisation (ED) for system sizes small enough for this to be possible, and classical DFT with the BALDA functional For the 1D simulations, we take Hartree-Fock as a representative classical DFT method to compare and contrast QEDFT to. This is of course an artificial comparison, as 1D systems can be solved very effectively classical by other DFT methods such as BALDA DFT. But as QEDFT is a general method that is not tailored to 1D systems, it is useful to compare also to conventional DFT methods that are similarly generally applicable. Thus the comparison to Hartree-Fock DFT (HF) on 1D Fermi Hubbard systems allows us to gain insight into how QEDFT compares to conventional DFT methods that are applicable to general systems, but on a simple, well-characterised solvable model where we can also compare both to exact solutions. Because the results in this section are obtained by simulating QEDFT (or more precisely, the VQE subroutine) on a classical computer, we can only compute the VQE functionals used in QEDFT on small lattice sizes. For such small lattices, simulated VQE with perfect quantum gates can readily find the exact ground state, so that QEDFT reduces to DFT with ED functionals. Therefore, in order to gain insight into how QEDFT performs when the VQE functionals are not perfect, which will always be the case when one runs VQE on real quantum hardware with lattice sizes that are beyond the reach of classical simulation, we deliberately hobble the VQE by restricting the VQE circuit depth such that it is not able to obtain the exact ground state. In Fig. Importantly, the QEDFT methods capture the coexistence of the localised incompressible region with that of the metallic compressible phase, a key feature of the correlated regime. The correlated driven plateaus are entirely absent from the HF result and hence serve as a demonstration that low depth and low quality QEDFT functionals can be qualitatively superior Figure in their descriptive capabilities in the strongly interacting regime. Additional analysis of the energy convergence as function of the DFT iterations is presented in Appendix C. These results give evidence that QEDFT usually achieves better accuracy than Hartree-Fock DFT its own, without requiring extremely accurate quantum computations. To demonstrate that our emulated results are not valid only for a single U/t value, we present the effect of varying the interaction strength on the 1 × 200 system, shown in Fig. We also apply the 1 × 8 QEDFT functional derived from data taken on real quantum hardware, to the much larger 1 × 200 inhomogeneous Fermi-Hubbard model in the presence of an external quadratic potential at U/t = 4. Our parameter selection here was constrained by the parameter selections used for the hardware study Applying the functional generated in a small scale instance to an inhomogeneous larger system serves as a first step to make quantum-generated data on small devices useful for relevant applications. In order to test the validity of our results, we treat more challenging systems, where access to an exact functional is not possible. In this section, we present results of ap-Figure plying QEDFT to 2D Fermi Hubbard systems, using classical simulations and computations using real hardware data, as well as computations using classical DFT methods. We do this by extending our analysis to a 20 × 20 inhomogeneous Fermi-Hubbard system for U/t = 4 at quarter-filling. The inhomogeneities are generated by a cluster of impurites at the centre of the lattice in the presence of a weak background disordered potential. Exact solutions for this system would require diagonalising a matrix of dimensions 4 20×20 × 4 20×20 , which is not possible with classical computers. DFT, on the other hand, only requires the diagonalistion of a matrix with dimensions (20 × 20) × (20 × 20) which can be easily achieved. Fig. We see that the QEDFT functional of depth 2 is more in likeness to the DFT ED result, both in contrast to the classical HF functional and QEDFT Figure Using the algorithm presented in Table In order to do so, we must first discuss the general properties of the XC functionals for Fermi-Hubbard systems. The continuous lines in Fig. The XC potential has a discontinuity at n = 1 due to the cusp in the exchange correlation energy, commonly known as the derivative discontinuity (DD). The DD is a known property of the exact XC potential which a number of classical approximations fail to reproduce Having established that it is possible to generate the XC potential using VQE, in Fig. for larger systems, as illustrated via the comparison of the 1 × 8 and 1 × 12 functionals. Thus if the VQE functional is generated on finer meshes for sufficient depth, then finite size physical errors, as well as those related to the interpolation scheme, can be reduced. In Fig. We furthermore extend the analysis of the effect of system size and interaction strength to VQE functionals generated on 2D lattices, shown in Fig. in each 2D emulated functional that impacts the continuous representation, particularly noticable for the 3 × 3 system. However, there is considerably better agreement at U/t = 4, indicating that low-depth functionals can approximate the ED functionals for lower values of the interaction strength in 2D, with additional evidence explored in Appendix B. Density Functional Theory is the de facto standard for simulating molecular and materials groundstate properties on traditional computers. Its overwhelming popularity and success relies on choosing appropriate classical approximations to the unknown exchange correlation energy functional on a system-by-system basis. For many cases, especially those with strongly correlated electrons, the classical approximations are inadequate, and sophisticated approaches beyond DFT are needed that are not efficiently scalable on traditional computers. Simulating materials is regarded as a promising application for quantum computers In the majority of cases considered, QEDFT outperforms pure quantum VQE alone, with respect to the accuracy of the groundstate energy and density of both the 1D and 2D inhomogeneous Fermi-Hubbard model. It also provides ground state properties which are more accurate than classical Hartree Fock theory. QEDFT captures exact properties of the XC potential functional, such as the derivative discontinuity at half-filling, which are not present in many well-known classical approximations. The derivative discontinuity and groundstate properties from QEDFT show impressive robustness to hardware noise and shallow variational layers. A hallmark of the QEDFT method is that it does not rely on highly accurate quantum computations to produce groundstate properties of either inhomogeneous or homogeneous lattice systems. Another quintessential feature is that QEDFT can be applied to large many-body condensed matter systems using only small quantum hardware. We achieve this by generating continuous representations of the QEDFT XC potential using classical interpolation schemes. In particular, we have shown this by solving 1×200 and 20×20 Fermi-Hubbard models using QEDFT, demonstrating that shallow VQE functionals of at most two variational layers can unambiguously capture Mott plateaus in the groundstate densities of large inhomogeneous models. We have also shown that our results improve by increasing the system size that the XC potential is generated from, highlighting that our approach can benefit from running quantum simulations on larger devices. Extending the application of QEDFT beyond Fermi-Hubbard models to realistic atomic systems requires broadening the scope of the inhomogeneous Hamiltonians under consideration. In particular, the inclusion of additional effects is imperative to enhance the descriptive capabilities of QEDFT functionals to capture a rich variety of important physical processes such as multiorbital couplings, beyond nearest-neighbour interactions, lattice connectivity, and electron-phonon interactions, to name only a few important effects. Another important consideration for realistic systems is the effect of the underlying basis set used to represent continuous inhomogeneous models. This choice is well known to have significant technical consequences for how to setup the DFT problem and has recently also been explored in the context of quantum simulation In conclusion, QEDFT presents a new way in which to bring together DFT with quantum simulation, that is applicable across a broad range of physical fermionic Hamiltonians describing real atomic, molecular, and materials systems. It has the benefits of being noise resilient and only requires modest quantum resources on small quantum machines that can produce ac-curate groundstate properties of systems not able be simulated directly. We have implemented QEDFT for the prototypical Fermi-Hubbard lattice model and demonstrated that it is a powerful hybrid quantum/classical approach that can compete with state-of-the-art classical methods and outperform conventional variational quantum algorithms. QEDFT holds the potential to optimise the utility of near-term quantum machines for accurate simulations of many-body quantum systems such as materials and molecules. Figure iterations using a density mixing of α = 0.95 with the initial density ansatz being chosen such that it is proportional to the external potential. In Fig. When U/t is smaller, i.e ≤ 4, it is sufficient to use a VQE functional of depth 1 for all system sizes up to 1 × 12, as the overall error metric is on a similar scale as that for the VQE functionals of depth 2. Indeed, our results suggest that the XC functional in 1D is more sensitive to increases in the interaction strength than similar increases in the system size, indicating that there exists legitimate regions of applicability for low-depth VQE functionals in DFT computations. This bias is due to the structure of the ansatz circuit for VQE, that uses the non-interacting groundstate at U = 0 as a starting state. Potential improvements could be made by varying this ansatz. In Fig. In Fig. We extend our analysis to understand how QEDFT deals with the impact of changing the type of external potential for the 1 × 12 Fermi-Hubbard model. In Fig. Focusing on the case of no potential, which is equivalent to the homogeneous problem from which the XC functionals are generated, we emphasise that even here the QEDFT approach yields better groundstate density estimates than VQE alone. That is to say, by first doing a VQE computation and then doing a QEDFT computation using the VQE data we are able to arrive at a more accurate description of the groundstate density. This suggest a wide range of applicability of the QEDFT approach for general homogeneous and inhomogeneous 1D Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonians, where the QEDFT functionals can provide an avenue for using small quantum machines to improve over pure VQE as well as classical approximations. The strength of interactions U/t determines how correlated the groundstate of the Fermi-Hubbard model is, which is largely captured within the XC potential V XC . As U/t is increased, classical HF theory breaks down in its ability to describe groundstate properties as it explicitly sets the XC po- tential to zero and reduces the Fermi-Hubbard problem into a purely single particle problem in the absence of exchange and correlation. In Fig. In Fig. Another pertinent question related to the scalability of the QEDFT method is if the performance of the functional improves as a function of system size. We probe this question by using functionals generated on 1 × 6 and 1 × 12 homogeneous systems applied to 1 × 12 inhomogeneous models with a quadratic potential. In the top panel of Fig. However, in the bottom panel of Fig. We analyse the effect of this noise by implementing first the QEDFT functional for the 1 × 8 model for different homogeneous and inhomogeneous 1 × 8 Fermi-Hubbard models. We choose this model as it represents the case where the XC potential possesses significant hardware noise, in order to assess how this manifests in the DFT results. The results are shown in Fig. We now proceed with the DFT analysis of Fermi-Hubbard models in 2D, beginning with the energy convergence of the DFT energy, presented in Fig. For the homogeneous model we observe that the convergence of DFT energy is initially unstable, as evidenced by the jagged spikes for the first 50 iterations. This behaviour is present in all functionals studied, indicating that this instability is not associated with the particular form of the XC potential but rather the stability of the single particle Kohn-Sham approach for the chosen parameter regime. A high density mixing parameter (α = 0.95) ensures that early instabilities cannot propagate towards erroneous fixed points. However, inhomogeneities introduce more noticeable instabilities in the DFT algorithm, as evidenced by the jaggedness of the energy convergence around a fixed value. While not severe in this case, a combination of more accurate XC interpolation methods and higher density mixing parameters should remove convergence to multiple fixed points. It is clear that in all cases using a VQE approach is superior to Hartree Fock, which for example has an error in the converged energy of ≈ 44% for the homogeneous model, in contrast to the most accurate VQE method (QEDFT at depth 2) ≈ 6%. Indeed, we further see that QEDFT at depth 2 attains an accuracy closer to the exact solution than pure VQE alone, which is not achieved at QEDFT depth 1. In contrast to the 1D results, this suggests that going beyond depth 1 QEDFT functionals is not only beneficial, but also necessary, to improve upon using pure VQE. Finally, the ED functional produces the groundstate energy with an error of ≈ 0.1%, indicating that the local density approximation when sampled at the converged density produces a good, but not exact, estimate of the groundstate energy for 2D systems also. In Fig. We arrive at a set of slightly different conclusions for the DFT groundstate densities as compared to the energies. For the densities, the DFT methods are always more reliable than pure VQE, which produces errors per site that are mostly all above 0.1%. QEDFT at depth 2 highly resembles the DFT ED and DFT HF solutions, indicating that low-depth QEDFT methods can compete with classical state-of-the-art approaches for predicting the groundstate density in 2D. Moreover, despite potential errors arising in the interpolation of the XC potential due to rogue data points, i.e as seen in Fig. To quantify this error further we study the effect of varying U/t on the absolute errors with respect to the groundstate energies and densities for the quarter-filled 3 × 3 inhomogeneous impurity system, illustrated in Fig. We now revisit examining in 2D how well QEDFT scales as the functionals used are increased in the system size. In Fig. We study the 2 × 4 Fermi-Hubbard system using the hardware functional without an external potential and in the presence of a single impurity at the (1, 1) site embedded in a disordered external potential. The results are shown in Fig. We also find that the DFT hardware energetics, while consistently better than classical HF, is either slightly worse or essentially no better than exact emulations of pure VQE. As there is no hardware data for the direct implementation of VQE for these target problems we cannot directly com- pare DFT VQE to pure VQE on hardware, but anticipate DFT VQE to outperform the latter as we consistently observed that in emulation. The hardware data is also used to assess the accuracy of DFT for the groundstate density of the inhomogeneous 2 × 4 problem in Fig. The algorithmic procedure to generate a classical representation of a quantum-enhanced XC potential and energy