In this study, we investigated the performance of two 2D superconducting quantum interference filter (SQIF) arrays fabricated from YBCO thin films at a temperature of 77 K. Each array consisted of 6 Josephson junctions (JJs) in parallel and 167 in series. We conducted both experimental and theoretical analyses, measuring the arrays' voltage responses to an applied magnetic field and their voltage versus bias-current characteristics. To properly model the planar array layouts, our theoretical model used the stream function approach and also included the Johnson noise in the JJs. The model further divides the superconducting current density of the arrays into its Meissner current, circulating current, and bias current parts for practicality. Since the fabrication process of YBCO thin films cannot produce identical JJ critical currents, we assumed a log-normal distribution to model the JJ critical current disorder. Our model predictions, with a JJ critical current spread of 50%, agreed well with our experimental data. Using our model, we were able to study the dependence of the voltage modulation depth on critical current disorder and London penetration depth. We also analyzed the observed reflection asymmetries of the voltage versus magnetic field characteristics, which might provide insight into the degree of critical current disorder. Overall, our findings suggest that the use of YBCO thin films in SQIF arrays is promising, despite the critical current disorder inherent in their fabrication process. Our study highlights the importance of theoretical modeling in understanding the performance of superconducting devices and provides insights that could inform the design of future SQIF arrays. When fabricating 2D superconducting quantum interference filter (SQIF) arrays (or superconducting quantum interference (SQUID) arrays) from YBCO thin films, the critical currents I ck and electric resistances R k of the Josephson junctions (JJs) exhibit significant variability and thus have wide distributions. This I c -R-disorder in the arrays is thought to result in a decrease in the magnetic-field-to-voltage transfer function of the array, which is an undesirable outcome as the goal is typically to achieve a transfer function that is as large as possible for optimal performance in applications. How detrimental such an I c -R-disorder is in real devices, is still unknown. This is in contrast to low-temperature superconducting thin-film arrays, where the I ck and R k values can be well controlled. In this paper, we aim to provide a quantitative analysis of the impact of the I c -R-disorder on the performance of two specific YBCO 2D SQIF arrays that we have recently fabricated and measured. Our discussion will focus on the effects of I c -R-disorder in these particular arrays, while the broader impact of I c -R-disorder on 2D SQIF (or SQUID) arrays of varying dimensions and with different screening and thermal noise parameters will be addressed in a forthcoming publication. Previously, we extensively modeled a structurally wide, thin-film 1D parallel SQUID array with center current biasing and used a brute-force approach to calculate the voltage-to-magnetic-field characteristics, as described in II. 2D SQIF ARRAY LAYOUT, FABRICATION AND MEASUREMENT SETUP Two different SQIF arrays were fabricated lithographically from a thin-film of YBCO grown by e-beam evaporation on a 1 cm 2 MgO substrate. The thickness of the film was d =113 nm and its superconducting transition temperature was T c = 85.9 K. Before film deposition, steps were etched into the MgO surface (see Fig. FIG. Each array consists of N s = 167 identical 1D parallel SQIF arrays (the rows) which are connected in series via superconducting YBCO thin-film busbars. Each 1D SQIF array has N p = 6 JJs in parallel. Table I lists the design parameters of S1 and S2, i.e. the SQIF hole height, the hole widths (left to right), the busbar height, and the number N s of identical 1D parallel SQIF arrays connected in series. The tracks leading to the JJ's have the same width as the JJs themselves (Table Figure The bias currents I tot b for S1 and S2 were chosen to optimize the voltage modulation depths ∆V . ∆V can be used as a measure of the maximum transfer function dV /dB a | max of the center dip Figure The differential resistance at large I tot b defines the total resistance R tot of the array which is given in Table for optimal bias current I tot b,opt (see Table Our fabricated step-edge JJs have negligibly small capacitances and behave like short JJs as the JJ width is much less than their Josephson penetration depths at 77 K. Therefore, we use the resistively shunted junction model (RSJ model) to describe our 2D SQIF arrays. The current I k flowing through the k th JJ (Fig. Here Φ 0 is the flux quantum and t the time. Introducing the dimensionless time τ = 2πRI c t/Φ 0 where R is the average JJ resistance and I c the average critical JJ current, one can write Eq. ( Here ξ and η are N s N p × N s N p diagonal matrices with diagonal elements ξkk = R k /R and ηkk = I ck /I c , respectively. The components of ⃗ φ are φ k and those of --→ sin φ are sin φ k , while the components of ⃗ i N are I N k /I c and those of ⃗ i are I k /I c . From Kirchhoff's law one obtains for a 2D array with uniform bias current injection as indicated schematically in Fig. Here ⃗ J is the circulating current vector with components J m flowing around hole m (Fig. where ⊗ is a tensor product with ÎNs×Ns an N s × N s identity matrix and κ an N p × (N p -1) matrix with elements (κ Here δ ij is the Kronecker δ. Using the second Ginzburg-Landau equation one can relate neighboring JJ phases within each row via the expression Here λ is the London penetration depth. The index m is the index for the circulating currents J m and for the holes. (The index m is related to the JJ index k via the relation k = m + Int{m/(N p -1) -ε} where Int{} is the integer part of its argument and ε is an infinitesimally small positive real number.) Φ m in Eq. ( The magnetic flux Φ m in Eq. ( Here, Φ m is the flux through hole m produced by the transport bias currents flowing vertically through all the JJ's from the top to the bottom (Eq. ( In a similar way, the supercurrent density ⃗ j in Eq. ( Here ⃗ j (Mei) is the Meissner shielding current density, ⃗ j (J) the current density from all the circulating currents, and ⃗ j (I b ) the transport bias current density in the array. The bias current I b not only flows through the leads (Fig. By using Eqs. ( where the fluxoids Φ 1,m , Φ 2,m and Φ 3,m are defined as and The fluxoid Φ 1,m in Eq. ( where A eff m is the effective hole area of hole m, with The effective hole area A eff m does not depend on B a , because both Φ (Mei) and ⃗ j (Mei) are proportional to B a . How we determine A eff m is outlined further below. Furthermore, the fluxoid Φ 2,m in Eq. ( where L is the N s (N p -1) × N s (N p -1) inductance square matrix of the array, with each matrix element the sum of a geometric and kinetic term. How we determine the inductance matrix L is outlined further below. And, the fluxoid Φ 3,m in Eq. ( where we name ⃗ L I b the bias current inductance vector which has N s (N p -1) components. Each component is the sum of a geometric and kinetic term. How we determine the bias current inductance vector ⃗ L I b is outlined further below. Finally, using Eqs. ( Here D is an N s N p × N s (N p -1) matrix of the form where δ is an (N p -1) × N p matrix with elements ( δ The differential equation Eq. ( The set of dynamic equations for the JJ phase differences φ k (Eq. ( where + 1 2 where k is a function of m as stated above. The potential U can be obtained from energy considerations or conjectured directly from Eq. ( The time averaged voltage V of the SQIF array, measured between its top and bottom ends, is given by The noise current vector ⃗ i N (τ ), which appears in Eq. ( where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T the operating temperature of the array. In this section we show how, for superconducting thin-film arrays with extended busbar structures (Fig. For a superconducting thin-film of thickness d in the xy-plane, the super-current density ⃗ j(x, y, z) becomes independent of the perpendicular direction z if λ > d Using Eq. ( where B a is the applied magnetic field pointing in z direction and x -x ′ y -y ′ ⃗ n dl ′ . In Eq. ( The kernel Q in Eq. ( where ∆x and ∆y are the grid spacings used when solving solving Eq. ( Having determined the stream function g(x, y) allows us to calculate the magnetic fluxes Φ m of the holes m as well as the ∂Ωm ⃗ j d ⃗ l terms. One obtains where h(x, y) is defined as By choosing different boundary conditions for the stream function g(x, y), one can separately address the three different current densities in Eq. ( There are 2N s N p + 1 unknown parameters in our model. These unknown parameters are the N s N p = 167 × 6 = 1002 values for the JJ critical currents I ck , the N s N p = 1002 values for the JJ resistances R k , and the London penetration depth λ. Experimentally it has been found that in YBCO JJs, I ck and R k are approximately anti-correlated according to the empirical law ck , where j ck is the JJ critical current density The critical currents of YBCO step-edge junctions have a spread in values and previous measurements have found wide I c -distributions of approximately Gaussian or even log-normal Here μ = -γ 2 /2 and γ = ln(1 + σ 2 ). A log-normal distribution is similar to a Gaussian distribution for small σ. In our modeling, we cannot use Gaussian random variables for ηkk because they would lead to unphysical negative I ck /Ic values, particularly for large σ. In the following we call the standard deviation σ the I c -spread. The number of unknown parameters is reduced slightly further by the relation between the measured total resistance R tot (Table Here the symbol kk ← ij means that the ij indices (where i = 1 to N s is the row index and j = 1 to N p , the column index) are mapped onto the k index which runs from 1 to N s N p . For arrays with sufficiently large N s N p , due to the introduction of p(η) and Eq. (32), one no longer is dealing with N s N p + 1 parameters but instead one only has to deal with three parameters, which are I c , λ and σ. Because S1 and S2 were produced from the same YBCO thin film on the same substrate, one can expect λ and σ to be the same for S1 and S2. But ) curves are very sensitive to I c and that decreasing λ shifts V (B a ) upwards and increases the voltage modulation depth ∆V , whereas increasing σ only decreases ∆V . Because of the I c -disorder and the finite size of the arrays, the parameters I c , λ and σ can only be determined with our procedure with some uncertainties which we estimated to be about 2%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Previously, in DC-SQUIDs Though each of our 2D SQIF arrays contains N s N p = 1002 JJs, N s is still not large enough for V (B a ) and V (I tot b ) to become independent of the chosen I c -disorder set {η kk }. We have investigated 40 different randomly chosen sets {η kk } for both S1 and S2, and selected the two I c -disorder sets that fitted our S1 and S2 experimen-tal data best. Figure To gain a better understanding of the role of the London penetration depth λ, Fig. Figure (5)), which is known as the Pearl penetration depth We measured the V (B a ) characteristics at optimal bias currents and the V (I tot b ) characteristics at B a = 0 of two 2D SQIF arrays with N s = 167 and N p = 6. To model our experimental data, we developed a theoretical model that takes into account the Johnson noise in the JJ resistances R k , the spreads in I ck and R k , and the wide, thin-film busbar structure of the arrays. The model was made numerically efficient by dividing the superconducting current density into its Meissner current, circulating current, and bias current parts. Using the stream function approach for λ > d, we calculated the effective areas of the array holes, inductance matrices and bias current inductance vectors. The calculations revealed that the busbar height was sufficiently large such that the inductive row-row coupling could be neglected. This significantly simplified the numerical calculations and made the investigation of the I c -R-disorder of our N s = 167 arrays computationally possible. Empirical findings that R k can be expressed in terms of I ck reduced the parameter space, and we could identify {I ck } sets from a log-normal distribution that produced V (B a ) characteristics that agreed well with our experimental data. Our calculations demonstrated that the voltage modulation depth ∆V , which is a measure for the maximum transfer function, decreases with increasing λ due to the increase in kinetic inductances which are proportional to λ 2 /d. Most of all, our calculations showed how ∆V decreases with increasing I c -spread σ, where the decrease was more rapid for the high inductance array S2. Our experimental data were best described by σ = 0.5, showing that the I c -R-disorder in our arrays reduced ∆V by 45% in S1 and 60% in S2. We observed slight reflection asymmetries in our experimental V (B a ) characteristics, caused by the I c -Rdisorder, and our model predicted a similar degree of asymmetry as observed experimentally. Generally, the refection asymmetry increases with increasing I c -spread σ, but decreases when N s is increased. The calculated V (I tot b ) characteristics did not fully agree with our experimental data at low I tot b , possibly due to the choice of a log-normal distribution that did not sufficiently emphasize low I ck values. Modifying our log-normal distribution would give better agreement with V (I tot b ) without affecting much the V (B a ) results. Our calculations also showed how the V (I tot b ) characteristic changes with temperature (T = 0 to T = 77 K) and with σ (σ = 0 to σ = 0.5). Our findings suggest that the use of YBCO thin films in SQIF arrays is promising, as the critical current disorder inherent in their fabrication process reduces the transfer function in our case only by about a factor of 2. This is one of our important results. Our study highlights the importance of theoretical modeling in understanding the performance of superconducting de-vices and provides insights that could inform the design of future SQIF arrays. While our detailed theoretical modeling provided valuable insight into the role of I c -R-disorder for the specific arrays tested, more general investigations are needed to fully understand its role as a function of screening parameter β L , noise strength Γ, kinetic inductance fraction, N s and N p values, and different array planar geometries. Appendix A: Effective hole areas By choosing any constant applied magnetic field, B a > 0, and the boundary condition g| ∂Ω = 0, for all boundaries ∂Ω, one can calculate numerically, by solving Eq. ( # I tot b,opt [ μA ] ∆V [mV] R tot [ Ω # Ic [μA] λ [μm] σ [