We report a comparative study of temperature-dependent photoluminescence and structural dynamics of two perovskite semiconductors, the chalcogenide BaZrS3 and the halide CsPbBr3. These materials have similar crystal structures and direct band gaps, but we find that they have quite distinct optoelectronic and vibrational properties. Both materials exhibit thermally-activated nonradiative recombination, but the non-radiative recombination rate in BaZrS3 is four orders-ofmagnitude faster than in CsPbBr3, for the crystals studied here. Raman spectroscopy reveals that the effects of phonon anharmonicity are far more pronounced in CsPbBr3 than in BaZrS3. Further, although both materials feature a large dielectric response due to low-energy polar optical phonons, the phonons in CsPbBr3 are substantially lower in energy than in BaZrS3. Our results suggest that electron-phonon coupling in BaZrS3 is more effective at non-radiative recombination than in CsPbBr3, and that BaZrS3 may also have a substantially higher concentration of non-radiative recombination centers than CsPbBr3. The low defect concentration in CsPbBr3 may be related to the ease of lattice reconfiguration, typified by anharmonic bonding. It remains to be seen to what extent these differences are inherent to the chalcogenide and halide perovskites and to what extent they can be affected by materials processing. Halide perovskites exhibit outstanding optoelectronic properties and are under intensive development for photovoltaic (PV) applications Many researchers, including ourselves, have argued that the outstanding optoelectronic properties of halide perovskites are intertwined with their strongly anharmonic structural dynamics Here, we employ temperature-dependent PL and Raman scattering spectroscopy, alongside first-principles self-consistent phonons simulations, to compare two exemplary single-crystal samples: the chalcogenide perovskite BaZrS 3 and the halide perovskite CsPbBr 3 . BaZrS 3 and CsPbBr 3 share the same distorted perovskite, corner-sharing, orthorhombic crystal structure (space group P nma) within the studied temperature range We use Raman spectroscopy and first-principles simulations to show that the phonon spectrum in BaZrS 3 extends to nearly double the frequency in CsPbBr 3 . Raman analysis demonstrates that CsPbBr 3 exhibits pronounced anharmonic characteristics, even at low temperatures. In contrast, BaZrS 3 exhibits predominantly harmonic vibrational behavior akin to traditional tetrahedrally-bonded semiconductors. Our findings are consistent with the hypotheses that the lower-frequency and strongly anharmonic structural dynamics in CsPbBr 3 may reduce carrier capture cross sections due to Franck-Condon effects We grew single crystals of BaZrS 3 with dimensions of approximately 100 μm using a flux method as reported previously We performed Raman scattering in a home-built system in back-scattering geometry. We used a 1.58 eV CW pump-diode laser (Toptica Inc., USA), which is below the band gap of BaZrS 3 (1.9 eV) The sample temperature was controlled using a liquid-N 2 -or liquid He-cooled high-vacuum optical cryostat (Ja-nis Inc., USA) for T ≤ 400 K. For higher temperature measurements, the temperature was controlled in an optical furnace (Linkam TS1000) under N 2 flow. We performed measurements for a series of increasing temperatures. We took precautions to isolate the effect of sample temperature on PL intensity by maintaining stable measurement conditions, refocusing the laser before every measurement, and taking repeated measurements across the whole temperature range. The measurement system and protocols are further described in Refs. We calculate normalized PL yield (Y ) by analyzing the integrated PL intensity, including both the band-toband peaks and the shoulders. The PL data is measured in counts, and we compute intensity by dividing by the acquisition time. We define Y as the ratio between the PL intensity emitted from the sample (I PL , measured in counts/sec) and the excitation laser intensity that reaches the interior of the sample (I in ): We measure the laser intensity I 0 (in photons/sec) at the microscope entrance. We compute I in from I 0 by accounting for losses due to reflection from the cryostat windows and the sample surface. The same cryostat window reflection losses affect the collected PL intensity and cancel in the expression for Y , leaving only a dependence on the sample surface power reflection coefficient (R s ). Further details are presented in Sec. S1 in the Supplemental Material (SM) In Fig. BaZrS 3 and CsPbBr 3 are direct band-gap semiconductors and strongly absorb the pump laser. At the pump laser energy of 2.54 eV, the absorption coefficient of BaZrS 3 is 1.68×10 5 cm -1 , and that of CsPbBr 3 is 4.04×10 5 cm -1 E a and E b are the activation energies of two nonradiative recombination mechanisms, and A = k 0 nr,a /k r and B = k 0 nr,b /k r are ratios of exponential prefactors that compare non-radiative to radiative recombination rates. As discussed below, two non-radiative recombination mechanisms are required for a minimal model of the data. This model assumes that all radiative recombination has a sufficiently small activation energy that appears barrierless within the measurement window. The effect of this assumption is that the PL internal quantum efficiency (IQE) approaches unity at low temperatures. The best-fit model parameters are presented in Table We find that BaZrS 3 and CsPbBr 3 feature a nonradiative recombination process with similar activation energy E a = 68 ± 7 and 86 ± 5 meV, respectively. This is apparent by eye in the Arrhenius plot (Fig. To explain the divergence in PL intensity, we invoke a second non-radiative recombination mechanism in BaZrS 3 , with activation energy E b too low to be determined in our measurement window. We also assume a similar second mechanism in CsPbBr 3 for consistency in the model function. By construction, the thermal scale E b /k B falls well below our experimental temperature window, and therefore, E b cannot be determined by regression. This low-temperature process is saturated within the measured temperature range, and e -E b /kBT ≈ 1. With this assumption, we fix the temperature scale E b /k B at a low value and fit the data to determine B. In Fig. Both materials have comparable optical absorption coefficients near their band edge; therefore, we can approximate (k r,CPB /k r,BZS ) ≈ O(1). We therefore conclude that the rate k 0 nr,b of low-(or zero-) barrier non-radiative recombination is O(10 4 ) times faster in BaZrS 3 than in CsPbBr 3 . We analyze the PL linewidth (Γ PL ) for insight into how excited states couple to lattice vibrations. In Fig. Γ 0 represents temperature-independent contributions to Γ PL , such as heterogeneous broadening due to quenched structural disorder. The second term describes broadening due to coupling between excited states and lattice vibrations with characteristic energy E ph and electronphonon coupling constant γ. These lattice vibrations are likely longitudinal optical phonons (see below), and the electron-phonon interactions can be described through deformation potentials. We find that luminescent band-edge states couple to vibrations with characteristic energy that is similar in both materials: E ph = 24 ± 7 meV for BaZrS 3 , and 17 ± 4 meV for CsPbBr 3 (see below). The electron-phonon coupling constant γ is larger for BaZrS 3 (200 ± 100 meV) than for CsPbBr 3 (50 ± 10 meV). γ is related to deformation potentials and polar-optical coupling. The higher value in BaZrS 3 may be related to the stronger covalent nature of the Zr-S bonds compared to Pb-Br bonds: 32% covalent for Zr-S, compared to 26% for Pb-Br, according to the Pauling scale. This implies enhanced sensitivity of electron energies to bond angles in the chalcogenide, as we have studied previously The lower luminescence yield and larger PL broadening in BaZrS 3 , compared to CsPbBr 3 , are related to differences in lattice vibrations. To better understand these relationships, we turn to theoretical and experimental studies of the phonon spectra. In Fig. Longitudinal optical (LO) phonons couple to electronic excitations and therefore likely contribute most to the temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening. In Fig. The characteristic energy of lattice vibrations responsible for PL broadening in CsPbBr 3 , E ph ≃ 17 meV (≈ 140 cm -1 ), is comparable to the most prominent LO phonon in the calculated spectrum. For BaZrS 3 , E ph ≃ 24 meV (≈ 190 cm -1 ) falls roughly in the middle of the calculated spectrum. Likely, band-edge states couple to a diversity of lattice vibrations in both materials through polar-optical coupling and deformation potentials, and the characteristic energy determined by PL broadening represents a distribution of processes. Similar conclusions have been reached in studies of ultra-fast lattice rearrangement following optical excitation of halide perovskites, including CsPbBr 3 In Fig. The Raman spectra of CsPbBr 3 exhibit sharp firstorder peaks (one photon scattered by one vibration) At low temperatures, the Raman spectra of BaZrS 3 resemble those of CsPbBr 3 and other halide perovskites We can more quantitatively compare the structural dynamics of BaZrS 3 and CsPbBr 3 by considering the temperature dependence of the phonon frequencies and linewidths. We model the Raman spectra as a convolution of pseudo-Voigt peaks multiplied by the Bose-Einstein occupation factor CsPbBr 3 exhibits a similar monotonic and linear trend in frequency and linewidth with increasing temperature up to 280 K, above which the data deviate substantially, including sharp blue shifts and rapidly increasing linewidth (see Fig. The extent of anharmonicity in the phonon dynamics can be further quantified by analyzing the deviation from linearity of the temperature dependence of the phonon frequencies and linewidths. A linear temperature dependence is expected within perturbation theory for weak phonon-phonon interactions. Therefore, strong and anharmonic interactions are indicated by deviations from linearity. In Fig. Lead halide perovskites excel as PV absorbers largely due to their slow rates of defect-assisted Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) non-radiative free energy loss. Electronphonon interactions mediate SRH recombination processes, converting excited-state energy into phonons and heat Chalcogenide perovskites have an untested potential for PV mainly due to challenges in thin film synthesis. There are few published measurements of the optoelectronic properties of chalcogenide perovskites, and the results are ambiguous. We reported time-resolved PL data that suggest long radiative lifetimes in BaZrS 3 and the Ruddlesden-Popper compound Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 , comparable to lead halides and other high-performing PV materials such as CIGS SRH recombination is much faster in BaZrS 3 than in CsPbBr 3 due to an unidentified recombination pathway that is active even at low temperature, implying that it has a very low thermal activation energy (Fig. The same harmonic model also predicts that SRH recombination rates increase with the extent of lattice distortion accompanying defect charge capture; this distortion can be parameterized by the Huang-Rhys factor The effect of anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions on SRH recombination remains an open question. It would be enlightening to compare a model calculation of vibrational wavefunction overlap during multi-phonon recombination with and without anharmonic lattice vibrations and for varying Huang-Rhys factor for otherwise similar phonon energies. Model system calculations could help to understand the conflated effects of low phonon energy, lattice distortion at defects, and anharmonic vibrations on SRH recombination rates. However, full quantum calculations are likely needed to accurately model the differences in carrier capture rates between halide and chalcogenide perovskites. The discussion to this point has focused on the effects of lattice vibrations on SRH recombination rates via the carrier capture processes. However, another significant unknown is the concentration of recombination-active defects. Anharmonic vibrations indicate softer bonds, a more pliable crystal lattice, and lower activation energy for ionic diffusion Defect characterization by methods such as deeplevel transient spectroscopy (DLTS) and related forms of impedance spectroscopy could directly measure defect concentrations and quantify the extent of selfhealing Interpretation of DLTS data is challenging for halide perovskites due to mixed ionic-electronic conduction, but progress has been reported We have presented a detailed spectroscopic comparison between two perovskite semiconductors, the chalcogenide BaZrS 3 and the well-studied halide CsPbBr 3 . We find that the PL emission yield of CsPbBr 3 is over four orders of magnitude higher than that of BaZrS 3 for the singlecrystal samples considered here, indicative of a far higher concentration of very-low-barrier, non-radiative recombination centers in BaZrS 3 . Ab initio simulations show that BaZrS 3 exhibits higher LO vibrational frequencies than CsPbBr 3 : this may increase carrier capture cross sections due to Franck-Condon effects We are optimistic that the fast SRH recombination rates observed here for BaZrS 3 can be reduced through sample processing. Large sample-to-sample variability, and preliminary results on BaZrS 3 epitaxial thin films (not shown), suggest that low PL yield may not be intrinsic to BaZrS 3 Ṫhe usefulness of BaZrS 3 (and likely other chalcogenide perovskites) for optoelectronic applications will hinge on continued progress in defect control during synthesis and processing -as has been historically required for other semiconductors. Figure We model the band-to-band PL intensity by fitting four Gaussian peaks to the spectra for BaZrS 3 and three in the case of CsPbBr 3 . Figure Intensity (Counts/sec) We fit the normalized PL yield data to Eq. We require two considerably overlapping Gaussian peaks to model the band-to-band PL lineshape of both materials. Therefore, we numerically calculate the linewidth (full-width-half-maximum, Γ PL ) of these combined peaks. We fit the results using Eq. (4) S3. Raman Data and Analysis S3.a. BaZrS 3 Raman Data Over a Wide Temperature Range In Fig. At low temperatures, the Raman spectra are characterized by sharp isolated peaks assigned to first-order scattering from single normal-mode vibrations (one photon scattering by one vibration). As often happens, the first-order peaks slightly red shift and broaden with increasing temperature Normalized Intensity (arb. units) are the spectra at 10 K that were used to identify the first-order peaks at higher temperatures. Inset -deconvolution of the high-frequency modes of BaZrS3. In the case of CsPbBr 3 , the sharp peaks at 80 K broaden significantly at higher temperatures, making it possible to determine their scattering order only at low temperatures (see Fig. To substantiate our assignment of the modes of BaZrS 3 , we compare the temperature dependence of the integrated intensity to the expected dependence of first-and second-order scattering Therefore, for Stokes scattering, it follows that where Ξ is the proportionality factor that contains the Raman tensor and properties of the material affecting the scattering, and J j is defined as the temperature-independent Fourier transform of the pair displacement correlation S12 3. Integrate the fitted pseudo-Voigt peaks and the sum of reproduced line shapes separately. 4. Assuming the set of J j is temperature-independent, recalculate the expected line shape at T ̸ = T 0 for the given set through the Bose-Einstein distribution. 5. Compare the temperature-dependent integrated intensity of the fitted peaks and the recalculated line shapes. Figure Dashed lines are to guide the eyes, and grey-dotted lines are expectation curves. The integrated intensity of the low-frequency sharp modes varies by ≈ 50% within the temperature range, which is within our allowed error range, considering the complexity of a real crystal and the experiment. Furthermore, according to our analysis of second-order Raman scattering, there is an excellent correlation between the integrated intensity of the high-frequency peaks and the expectation. The expected curve was drawn using fitting parameters from the 80 K fit. Nevertheless, using the fitting parameters of other temperatures produced similar results (data not shown). The case of the broad low-frequency features presented in the right panel is more complicated -their integrated intensity remains constant for T ≤ 200 K, then increases dramatically with temperature, almost following a second-order scattering trend. The dramatic change correlates well with a reported increase in dielectric response at kHz frequencies regression of Ω j (T ) (left) and Γ Rj (T ) (right) of BaZrS 3 (diamonds) and CsPbBr 3 (circles) as a function of the peak index j. The R 2 value and slope are presented in the top and bottom panels, respectively. Table 