Densified SiO 2 glasses, obtained from different pressure and temperature routes have been annealed over a wide range of temperature far below the glass transition temperature (500°C-900°C). Hot and cold compressions were useful to separate the effects of pressure and the compression temperature. Insitu micro-Raman spectroscopy was used to follow the structural evolution during the thermal relaxation. A similar glass structure between the non-densified silica and the recovered densified silica after the temperature annealing demonstrates a perfect recovery of the non-densified silica glass structure. While the density decreases monotonically, the structural relaxation takes place through a more complex mechanism, which shows that density is not a sufficient parameter to fully characterize the structure of densified silica glass. The relaxation takes place through a transitory state, consisting in an increase of the network inhomogeneity, shown by an increase in intensity of the D2 band which is associated with 3 membered rings. The activation energy of these processes is 255±45 kJ/mol for the hot compressed samples. The kinetic is overall faster for the cold compressed samples. In that last case the relaxation is partially activated by internal stresses release. Because its importance to several fields as geology, telecommunications, industry, silica glass has been without doubt the most studied material, with a considerable documentation. While the inner structure has been characterized really soon in the early studies for the short range order, the network formed by the SiO 4 tetrahedral units reveals a greater complexity. From the initial study of Bridgman Since this initial work, considerable efforts have been made on the densification of silica glass. From High Pressure and High Temperature (HP-HT) runs, Long time after the first ex-situ HP-HT runs, a more careful and quantitative approach on such processes was shown. Poe et al. demonstrated that the application of high temperatures during compression affects mainly inter tetrahedral angles, while SiO 4 units are quite preserved. It is known that the density evolution during the compression is supported by different kinds of structural changes, reviewed in Ref. 15. Because of this, no direct correlation between a spectroscopic signature and the density can be found in the whole pressure range. Nevertheless, the interest of a spectroscopic signature as a density marker has been a matter of debate for the recovered samples. At the end of the discussion we will try to extend our results to a more generalized vision of glass in terms of polyamorphism and presence of internal stresses. Using commercial Suprasil 300 ([OH] < 1 ppm) as initial SiO 2 glass, six densifications were performed (see Table The pressure was first increased up to the desired value, and then the sample was slowly heated up (≈1°C/s) and maintained at the desired temperature for 10 minutes, and then cooled to room temperature. Finally, the pressure was released to room pressure and the sample recovered. The macroscopic densities were determined using buoyancy measurement in Toluene. Three other silica Suprasil 300 samples were densified using a Chervin-type Diamond Anvil Cell (DAC) to provide pure hydrostatic compression as it has been previously detailed. Pressure was determined in-situ from the emission of 2 E-4 A 2 (R 1 line) Cr 3+ transition of ruby spheres introduced in the experimental volume. No significant modification was observed. The densification rate is deduced from the density-maximal pressure reached calibration curve. The Raman spectra were recorded with a Renishaw RM 1000 spectrometer with a resolution of 1.6 cm -1 , using the 532 nm excitation of a Nd 3+ :YAG laser. A piece of glass was introduced in a Linkam TMS 1500 device. The Linkam cell was set under a ULWD x 20 Olympus objective with an incident laser power below 15 mW on the sample. The in-situ experiments have been realized at a fixed temperature. Each temperature mentioned in this paper corresponds to a different experiment. The annealing temperatures are reached after an increase of 50°C/minute and then kept constant. The Raman spectra have been collected with acquisition times ranged from three to ten minutes, depending on the speed of the relaxation. The beginning of the isotherm, t=0, was taken at the time at which the temperature of equilibrium was reached. For very short relaxation times, this definition of the starting time could introduce an underestimation of the time. This point will be discussed later in the discussion section. To allow in situ measurements of the density, a numerical program was developed to calculate sample surfaces. Optical pictures were taken just before the Raman acquisition and treated to extract the surfaces by numerical integration. Since the expansion is isotropic, it is possible to link the surface evolution to the volume, in order to deduce the densification ratio. Samples were platelet like shaped to minimize errors due to variations in the normal direction. Using the isotropic nature of the expansion, we followed the simple relation V = S 3 2 ⁄ for the volume calculation. Each image outline was defined by the eye. To evaluate the error introduced by this method for each image, the analysis was realized several time, the overall standard deviation was determined and taken as error bar. The flat and large Belt samples are particularly suited for this method. The errors obtained here less than 0.02 for densities are of the same order of magnitude than for previous reported technics, 0.01 for the lithographic mask method The Fig. It gives a good representation of the glass structure and shows a strong robustness to the presence of noise in the spectra due to its integration nature. This allows us to quantify the relaxation during an isotherm at temperature T as a function of the time t, by introduce transformation degree y, defined as This expression can be simplified by applying the following considerations. A study in temperature of the pristine glass showed that its Raman spectra evolves in such a way from room temperature to 1000°C that its σ value is independent of temperature. This independence of sigma with temperature is surprising. Usually due to anharmonicity the vibrational frequencies are expected to decrease with temperature. The position of the main band however, as observed by McMillan, Similarly, if we consider that no relaxation takes place during the fast heating of the densified glass up to T then σ(T, t = 0) is the same than σ(298 K, t = 0). In Fig. This new expression allows to deduce the y value. Nevertheless, the first Raman spectrum at t=0 or for the full relaxed state at t= could not be acquired due to too fast or too slow transformation. The only spectrum difference lies in the low frequency HWHM of the main band. The half width of the main band, denoted ΔL 1/2 is related to the distribution of the Si-O-Si angle (see Fig. It has been shown previously from ex situ data To verify this hypothesis during our study on structural transformations, we plotted the evolution ΔL 1/2 versus density. As specified in the experimental part, surface calculations of flat samples were performed and we were able to obtain in situ densities. The temperature was increased step by step up to 1000°C to cover the full transformation range, and the Raman spectra were collected at each step. The data of Martinet For each densified sample, we performed a comparison of the Raman spectra with similar transformation rates, obtained after different annealing isothermal temperatures. samples, and the same result has been obtained. This means that for the same initial silica sample, which has been densified from high pressure and at a given temperature, whatever the annealing temperature, the structural evolution of this glass sample is the same for a given transformation rate, y. Then, this parameter can be used with confidence as a kinetic parameter. Different isothermal annealing were performed for all the densified samples (except for the DAC 16% sample). In Fig. samples. For all the samples, the application of high temperature (500 to 900°C) allows to reach quickly a less dense silica glass, partially relaxed. After about 10 3 s for the DAC 21% sample and in a smaller extent after about 10 4 s for the Belt 16.5% sample, an apparent saturation on the curve appears in Fig The presence of these apparent saturations means that the structure evolves so slowly that no further significant evolution can be observed in a reasonable time at the given temperature. At low annealing temperatures, i.e. 500°C or 600°C, compared to the T g of silica glass which is 1200°C, the structural evolution was very slow, and long-time measurements (about 15 hours) were realized, in order to extract a significant evolution. We can also follow structural data, for example: ΔL 1/2 , band areas or band positions as a function of the degree of transformation. A special attention was given to the D2 band area evolution as a function of y. The D2 band area was normalized by the area under the Raman signal integrated between 200 cm -1 and 900 cm -1 . For a same densified sample the data from the different isotherm can be plotted together (see low part of Fig. We found out that the D2 line area undergoes a surprising non-monotonic behavior. Indeed, the D2 area increases at the beginning of the relaxation process and a maximum has been observed between y = 0.1 and 0.3 for all densified samples. This first increase was totally unexpected. At higher y the D2 line area decreases as a function of y to reach back the value of the pristine glass as expected. Unfortunately, we were not able to follow the Raman active D1 band, relative to the four membered rings, since it was shown that only the pump probe technic is able to discriminate properly this band from the main band. Their D2 band areas are reported in Fig Both methods of densification realised here are useful to understand more clearly the effect of pressure and temperature applied in the compression decompression cycle on the structural modifications. Because all samples were compressed at room temperature, the temperature relaxations on the DAC samples will highlight the effect of pressure on densification. In the other hand, the relaxation of the samples densified in the Belt press will give indications on the effects due to the applied temperature during the compression. The variation of the compression parameters (P,T) allows the preparation of a wide variety of structure. A more exhaustive discussion about the structural differences between silica samples densified in Belt press and Diamond Anvil Cell can be found in previous papers. From the calibration curve presented in Fig. The value ΔL 1/2 measures then more specifically the extent of the large angles contribution. In the first regime, between 2.2 and 2.4, the large angles seem to contribute strongly to the density evolution. In the second regime, between 2.4 and 2.7, large angles evolve only slightly with density and some other structural mechanisms take place as modification of ring sizes. The small ring populations can be observed on the high frequency part of the main band. In Fig. In order to extract relaxation times from our data, we used a stretched exponential function, also called Kohlrausch-Williams-Watts (KWW) function. As a common feature in glass science, the stretched exponential function (Eq. 4) provides accurate fit and satisfactory computation of the parameters. Examples of the fit result are presented in Fig. However, the parameter β, comprised between 0 and 1, has unclear origin and signification. Consequently, efforts have been made in order to provide a microscopic origin to the stretched exponential function. In particular, the model of diffusion of excitations into traps, developed by Grassberger and Proccacia 32 has received experimental support by Philipps In another point of view, β is usually interpreted as a consequence of the inhomogeneity of the glassy material. Indeed, the stretched exponential can be rewrite as follow From Eqs. ( It can be seen from Table At this point, one should take in consideration that the stretched exponential stands for a distribution in relaxation time. Thus the characteristic time to enter in the Arrhenius formula is the average relaxation time  while the  parameter given by the fit is the most probable relaxation time. The average relaxation time is defined as : 35 Here Γ is the gamma function. An immediate consequence of this definition is a very large increase for  as β decreases, with the same trend for the errors. Indeed the errors on  are larger than the nominal value for all the points from the relaxation of DAC samples. Thus the computation of the activation energies becomes non rigorous for these samples, and we focused on the Belt samples in this part. We plotted in Fig. The great difference between this value and the one found in our study indicates that the structural changes responsible for the density relaxation are different than the ones associated with viscous flow. Thus the structural modifications implied here are fundamentally different from the classical viscous structural relaxation, i.e. the relaxation of a glass close to the glass transition temperature. Few references can be found in the literature to compare other values of E a in the case of pure silica glass. Similar relaxations of densified silica samples have been carried, but mostly to explain the density versus refraction index behaviour, Thus the E a value given by Höfler Many authors use the Eq. 6 without considering . In this study, at least a minor part of the relaxation is released during the heating ramp. It is necessary to evaluate this part on the determination of the activation energies. Using back the kinetic coefficient fitted, it was possible to estimate the equivalent relaxation time reached during the heating ramp. For all the experiment a delay between 25 and 50 s was found. Thus, we assume that the errors arising from this unfollowed relaxation part are within the errors determined by the fit (see error bars reported in Table As shown in Fig. These data are represented as a function of the averaged β values from all the annealing temperatures for each initial densification. Doing so, the aim is to test if some links can be established between the initial inhomogeneities due to the presence of three membered rings (initial D2 band area), the transitory state (increase in D2 band area Δ) and the inhomogeneities associated to the relaxation time distribution (coefficient β). From Fig. The 3 membered rings are one of the most compact structure that can be found in the medium range order. Their increase should induce a densification however we observed a monotonous density decreases. Although counter intuitive, the creation of the 3 membered rings is not a consequence of the relaxation but it is actually a necessary step of "transitory states". In other words, it could be understood as a volume of activation. The created 3 membered rings increase the density fluctuations, leading to higher contrast of interstitial volumes where densification relaxation occurs trough an opening of the Si-O-Si angles and changes in the dihedral angle. More than only related to SiO 2 , the existence of this transitory state seems to confirm the existence of an energy barrier between the densified and pristine glasses. In a landscape theory approach that means that densified and pristine glasses are inside separate mega basins. Following Denis Machon Densification relaxation abled us to get many glasses with different densities. It was found that a good correlation could be found between the low frequency half width at half maximum and the density. This correlation could be a promising calibration between Raman signatures and density since it remains valid whatever the temperature and pressure history. The comparison between the two paths of densification allowed us separating the effect of pressure and temperature. The main difference was found in the stretching coefficient  which is related with sample homogeneity. It can be then interpreted that the use of high temperature during densification introduced homogeneity in the glass. More the initial glass is homogeneous more it will take time to relax at a given temperature. All the kinetic terms were determined satisfactory for the first time for the samples densified at high temperature. The dominant role of internal stresses contribution in the relaxation has been put in evidence for the cold densified samples. The observation of a transitory state during relaxations was unexpected and seems to indicate that very local structural rearrangements rule the overall process. Even if the density relaxation is a continuous phenomenon local density heterogeneities are needed to allow an overall relaxation. A direct observation of these inhomogeneities could be done by tracking density fluctuations using small angle X ray scattering or Landau Placzeck ratio. Such measurements will confirm our observed transitory state. band °C d = 2.66 ± 0.02 Δρ/ρ = 21% DAC 21%