Phonons, as quantized vibrational modes in crystalline materials, play a crucial role in determining a wide range of physical properties, such as thermal and electrical conductivity, making their study a cornerstone in materials science. In this study, we present a simple yet effective strategy for deep learning harmonic phonons in crystalline solids by leveraging existing phonon databases and state-of-the-art machine learning techniques. The key of our method lies in transforming existing phonon datasets, primarily represented in interatomic force constants, into a force-displacement representation suitable for training machine learning universal interatomic potentials. By applying our approach to one of the largest phonon databases publicly available, we demonstrate that the resultant machine learning universal harmonic interatomic potential not only accurately predicts full harmonic phonon spectra but also calculates key thermodynamic properties with remarkable precision. Furthermore, the restriction to a harmonic potential energy surface in our model provides a way of assessing uncertainty in machine learning predictions of vibrational properties, essential for guiding further improvements and applications in materials science. All materials are made up of atoms, which vibrate ubiquitously, even at absolute zero temperature, due to quantum effects. When present in periodic solids, these vibrations can be quantized as quasiparticles, known as phonons. The study of phonons is an integral part of solid-state physics and materials science, as they play an essential role in many physical properties of materials, including thermodynamic stability, thermal conductivity, and electric conductivity Data-driven, or machine learning (ML), approaches are becoming a method of choice for materials design, discovery, and property prediction, thanks to their extraordinary capability of modeling complex compositionstructure-property mapping in materials Another category of ML approaches to modeling phonons relies on directly constructing machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP). The key idea is to learn the statistical relation between structure and potential energy without knowledge about the relevant interactions. Recent advances lead to an extensive collection of MLIPs, including kernel-based learning approaches and artificial neural networks, such as Behler-Parrinello neural network potentials (NNP) Applying these MLUIPs to directly modeling phonons is appealing. Meanwhile, challenges arise when one aims to train highly accurate MLUIPs due to the limitations of available training datasets. For example, the DFT crystal structure relaxations used to train the M3GNet model consist of only small unit/primitive cells and suffer from relatively low DFT convergence criteria, typically used for constructing large materials databases. Therefore, the resultant MLUIPs are intrinsically unreliable in yielding longer-range interatomic interactions and accurate forces, which are crucial to converge phonon calculations. To overcome these limitations, in this letter, we propose a strategy to leverage existing phonon databases and convert these databases into a proper form suitable for training MLUIPs. This is inspired by phonon databases usually being constructed from high-quality DFT calculations of supercell structures, which can better capture the longer-range interatomic interactions and exhibit accurate forces. Afterward, we focus on constructing a specific form of MLUIPs: a machine learning universal harmonic interatomic potential (MLUHIP) to deep learning phonons. We show that such a restriction of the potential energy surface to the harmonic form not only enables efficient model parameterization but also provides physicsinspired uncertain quantification for phonon predictions. The key of our proposed strategy relies on conversions among different representations for describing interatomic interactions. For example, as shown in Fig. To evaluate the feasibility of our strategy for deep learning harmonic phonons, we developed a GNNs-based MLUHIP to model harmonic phonons in crystalline solids. We used one of the largest phonon databases, i.e., the phonon database at Kyoto University Next, we prepared a broad dataset for training a GNNs-based MLUHIP with the following procedures. First, we carefully screened all and down-selected compounds whose squared phonon frequencies are all nonnegative to ensure dynamical stability. This step ensures that the compounds entering the training dataset are all dynamically stable, thus making the harmonic phonon approximation valid. This screening leads to a total number of 8229 compounds out of the original dataset. Second, since the calculated harmonic phonon for each compound in the original dataset is represented using IFCs, we then converted the IFCs representation to the FD representation by randomly perturbing atoms around their equilibrium positions, as illustrated in Fig. To train a GNNs-based MLUHIP using the constructed FD dataset, we employed the Directional Message Passing Neural Network (DimeNet) model. DimeNet was initially introduced by Gasteiger et al. While our trained MLUHIP model predicts reasonably accurate forces for unseen compounds, its capability of predicting the full harmonic phonon spectrum needs to be assessed. To directly compare the predicted and the DFT-calculated phonons, we utilized CSLD Having validated our MLUHIP model, an important question arises concerning the uncertainty estimation when applying the model to unseen datasets/materials. The capability of obtaining reliable uncertainty estimation is of great importance because it can be used to determine whether or not additional DFT calculations are required to improve model accuracy or perform active learning. We find that the restriction of potential energy surface to the harmonic order, as reflected in our MLUHIP model, naturally leads to an effective assess-ment of model uncertainty. This is because any additional terms beyond the quadratic form that appear in the model's predicted forces could be viewed as model uncertainties. Moreover, such uncertainties can be directly quantified by estimating the force prediction error when we fit the FD dataset by truncating at harmonic IFCs. For example, within the CSLD framework, the relative CSLD force fitting error (|δF |/F ≡ ||F -Φ CS u|| 2 /||F|| 2 , wherein F are predicted forces by an MLUHIP model, u are random atomic displacements, and Φ CS are fitted harmonic IFCs) can be used to indicate the model uncertainty, for instance, the error in predicted phonon frequency. Indeed, Fig. Before closing, we briefly comment on future research directions. Building on the current research, potential work could explore several promising directions. First, the implementation of more advanced machine learning models, such as equivariant neural networks with inherent symmetry In conclusion, our study demonstrates a simple yet effective strategy for deep learning harmonic phonons using machine learning universal interatomic potential based on graph neural networks and existing phonon databases. By converting the interatomic force constants representation from existing phonon databases into a more machine learning-friendly force-displacement representation, we could train our model on a large and diverse dataset, ensuring its applicability across various materials. The model's performance in predicting harmonic phonon frequencies and fundamental thermody-namic properties confirms its high accuracy and potential for widespread application in the field of materials science. Additionally, our approach to uncertainty quantification, inherent in our harmonic potential energy surface model, represents a significant step forward in the reliable application of machine learning models to materials beyond those included in the training dataset. This capability to estimate uncertainty is crucial for identifying the need for further data refinement or model improvement, paving the way for more informed and efficient research in materials design and discovery involving vibrational properties. See supplementary material for more detailed descriptions of the validation of the machine learning model, the compressive sensing lattice dynamics approach, the equation for generating temperature-dependent atomic displacements, and the comparison of phonon dispersions for the testing dataset.