Herein we present the fabrication of hydrophobic and oleophilic poly(methyl methacrylate)-based nanocomposite fibrous mats with magnetic properties, and their utilization for the oil removal from stable water-oil emulsions. The incorporation of ferromagnetic iron nanoparticles into the polymeric fibers increases the selectivity and oil removal performance of the fibers, as well as introduces magnetic actuation properties to the material. In all the water-oil emulsions used in this work ranging from 5 to 30 v.%, the functional mats can obtain oil absorption efficiencies up to 90%. The oil removal efficiency can reach nearly 100% with just two successive absorption cycles. The high performance achieved makes the presented material a promising candidate for efficient water-oil emulsions separation. Oily wastewaters produced by petrochemical, pharmaceutical, polymer, metal, cosmetic, textile, and food industries are currently a persistent and common problem, presenting potential environmental and health risks 1 . There are three main categories of oily wastewaters, and different approaches are used to remediate or prevent their adverse effects, usually by separating and removing the oil from the water 2 . The first category is wastewaters where very small amounts of oil are dispersed in the water, and therefore the oil present is classified as soluble oil 2 . The main methods employed for the oil removal in this case are deep treatment with adsorbents, nanofiltration or reverse osmosis, and even advanced oxidation technologies. In the second wastewater category, oil is present as free oil 3 , term employed when significant amount of oil is present as a separated phase. In this case, the remediation typically requires the use of physical techniques such as gravity separation, absorption, and skimming. The last category of oily wastewaters is the water-oil emulsions, where one of the phases is dispersed in the other. In this case, the separation of the phases and the removal of the oil is more difficult than in the previous categories, especially when the emulsions are stabilized by particles or surfactants. For this reason many removal technologies have been applied, such as chemical treatment . Furthermore, during the fabrication procedure, fibers can be aligned 23 , while superhydrophobic membranes can be formed without any permanent supporting substrate Please do not adjust margins interconnected open pore structure. Following a different approach Si et al. 26 developed nanofiber-assembled cellular aerogels using polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and SiO 2 nanofibers as well as SiO 2 NPs. These aerogels exhibit optimal properties such as ultralow density, reusability, superhydrophobic-superoleophilic properties, and high pore tortuosity leading to filtration through an effective gravity driven separation of a surfactant-stabilized water-oil emulsion, with an extremely high separation efficiency. On the contrary, to the best of our knowledge, fibrous mats have not been applied so far as absorbers for the water-oil emulsions separation. Nonetheless, this approach, widely applied for the remediation of wastewaters with free oil, presents significant advantages, such as the possibility to be applied in-situ, without collecting contaminated water for treatment. In the case of the selective absorption of free oil from aqueous media, the design of suitable fibrous functional materials requires once more the surface of the fibers to be superhydrophobic and oleophilic proved that polypropylene fiber-assemblies exhibit higher sorption capacity (84.6 g/g) compared to the kapok and milkweed fibers (61.6 g/g and 44.3 g/g, respectively) at a rather constant porosity ~ 0.98. Finally, it was shown that the optimization of the fiber-features leads to outstanding oil absorption capacities. For instance, Lin et al. Materials. Fibers were produced starting from amorphous poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) (Mw ~120,000 by GPC, ρ=1.17 g/cm 3 at 25 °C, Sigma-Aldrich). Iron nanopowder with hydrophobic carbon shell with particle sizes ranging from 5 to 200 nm and average primary particle size ~30-60 nm was purchased from PlasmaChem (Germany), and employed as nanofiller for the development of the nanocomposite fibers. Chloroform (CHCl 3 , Purity (GC) > 99.80 %, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as received. Mineral oil (ρ=0.84 g/ml at 25 °C, Sigma-Aldrich) and distilled water were mixed to obtain emulsions, using Span80 (Sorbitan monooleate, non-ionic, viscosity 1200-2000 mPa.s at 20°C, HLB value 4.3±1.0, ρ=0.986 g/ml at 25 °C, Sigma-Aldrich) as an emulsion stabilizer. Fabrication of the fibers. The pure PMMA fibers (PFbs) samples were obtained by loading a syringe (diameter of 4.5 mm and 21G needle) with 1 ml of PMMA dissolved in Chloroform (0.5 g/ml). The electrospinning process was performed at room temperature (RT), placing the syringe into a syringe pump (NE-1000, New Era Pump Systems, Inc.), and using a fixed feed rate of 1000 μl/h. A ground target covered with aluminum foil was used as the collector. The metallic tip of the syringe was placed at a distance of 20 cm from the collector, while a voltage of 12 kV was applied between the needle and the collector. The magnetic nanocomposite fibers with incorporated iron NPs (MFbs) were fabricated following the same procedure. Briefly, the iron NPs were mixed with chloroform (60 mg/ml) and placed in an ultrasonication bath for 2 h. The nanocomposite solution was obtained by dissolving 0.5 g/ml of PMMA in the aforementioned solution (24 h shaking at 800 rpm and RT). The final solution was used for the electrospinning process, using the same parameters as the ones of the pristine PFbs, and obtaining the MFbs with 10.7 wt.% of NPs. In both cases, the distribution of the obtained fibers mat over the target was not completely homogeneous. Therefore, the prepared fibers were compacted using a hot plate press, kept at 50°C and 98 kPa for 5 min. The absorption experiments were performed using 0.02 g of PFbs or MFbs pressed fibers, shaped in a rectangular piece with dimensions 4x6 cm 2 and thickness about 700 μm. Initially, an appropriate amount of Span80 (0.5 v.%) 32,33 was dissolved into the oil phase and mixed by shaking. This amount was previously determined as the minimum quantity needed to obtain simultaneously stable emulsions and optimum oil absorption (greater amounts of Span80 slightly reduce the absorption capacity, see Supplementary Information, Figure S.1). Next, the aqueous phase was added into the mixture to form the Span80-stabilized emulsions using a high intensity ultrasonication tip (VCX 750, Vibra cell, SONICS) at 40% amplitude for 15 secs at RT. The concentrations of the emulsions are expressed using the volume percentage of the oil (v.%). The oil absorption experiments were carried out using 2 ml water-oil emulsions with the following oil contents of 5-10-20-30 v.%, which correspond to oil masses of 0.084-0.168-0.336-0.504 g, respectively. Experimental techniques. Average diameter and distribution of the fibers were determined using FIJI / ImageJ 34 on micrographs obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL Model JSM- Please do not adjust margins 6490). The fiber samples were coated with gold using a Cressington 208HR sputter coater (Cressington Scientific Instrument Ltd., U.K.) prior to the SEM observations. Porosity of the fiber mats (V f = 1 -ρ f /ρ s ), defined as the ratio between the gaseous phase volume and the total volume of the porous sample, was estimated from the ratio between the bulk density of the fibers (ρ f , determined from the weight and geometrical volume of the pressed fiber mats) and the density of the solid PMMA or the nanocomposite (ρ s , 1.17 and about 1.58 g/cm , and gauge length: 10 mm). Samples were cut into 4x10 mm 2 blocks and five specimens for non-pressed and pressed PFbs were tested. In order to control the stability of the water-oil emulsions a Nikon 139 Eclipse 80i Digital Microscope was employed. To prepare the samples for the microscope analysis, a small amount of the emulsion (one drop) was placed on a microscope glass slide. Then it was covered by a cover slip and finger pressed to make it as thin as possible. Finally the drop size distribution was analyzed using FIJI / ImageJ 34 on the obtained micrographs. The wetting properties of the fibers were determined measuring the water contact angle (WCA) and oil contact angle (OCA) using a KSVCAM200 (Kruss, Germany) contact angle goniometer. The average and standard deviation contact angle values were determined from two samples of each kind (PFbs and MFbs), taking 5 measurements for each sample using 5 μl drops. Absorption capacity (C) of the fibers was determined as follows. Three samples of each kind (PFbs or MFbs) were placed into 2 ml of distilled water, oil, or emulsion for 15 minutes. Absorption experiments on emulsions were carried out under shaking, to improve the contact of the fibers with the dispersed phases. The absorption capacity was calculated dividing the amount of the liquid absorbed by the amount of fibers. To this aim, the weight of the fibers before (w 0 ) and after (w 1 ) being in contact with the water, oil, or emulsion was measured, and employed for the calculation of C as reported in Equation Please do not adjust margins The added NPs had a remarkable influence in the wetting properties of the fibrous mats (Figure In addition, the experiments on the oil wetting properties of the fibrous mats revealed that both kinds of fibers absorb the oil (Figure Please do not adjust margins study this behavior at higher oil concentrations (over 40-50 v.%) due to the partial dispersion of the fibers, independently from their fabrication procedure, in the emulsion during the absorption tests performed with shaking. Therefore, it cannot be experimentally established whether this trend continues or reaches a plateau. However, it can be expected that the oil absorption reaches a plateau for oil contents over 30 v.%, as both types of fibers reached at this point absorption capacities comparable to their maximum oil absorption capacity measured after 15 min in oil (18 g/g for PFbs and 20 g/g for MFbs). As already observed for the isolated liquids, the MFbs present a better performance than the PFbs in the entire range of oil concentrations. In particular, in all cases the increase of the oil absorption capacity for the pressed MFbs is about 2 g of oil per g of fibers compared to the PFbs. This increase is particularly significant at low concentrations of oil In this study PMMA nanocomposite fibrous mats were utilized for the oil removal from stable water-oil emulsions. It was demonstrated that the incorporation of ferromagnetic NPs to the polymer matrix offers the desired wettability characteristics by increasing the hydrophobicity and preserving the superoleophilicity of the neat PMMA fibers, as well as induces magnetic actuation properties to the material without modifying the morphology or the diameters of the fibers. Taking advantage of their improved wettability properties, the PMMA nanocomposite fibers were employed for the demulsification process by removing oil from stable water-oil emulsions. It was found that the presence of nanoparticles improved the performance of the mats reaching absorption capacities up to 20 grams of oil per gram of fibers. Moreover, oil removal efficiencies up to 90% were reached when the fibers are employed to treat stable water-oil emulsions with a mass up to 100 times higher than the fibers' mass, independently from the oil content in water which ranges from 5 to 30 v.%. Finally, taking advantage of these features it was possible to reach oil removal efficiencies about 98% by successive absorption cycles. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J. Name., 2013, 00, 1-3 | 3