We investigated the effect of Ni doping in a recently proposed quantum spin liquid (QSL) candidate Li4CuTeO6. We performed a comprehensive study on the structural and magnetic properties. We find that the anti-site disorder between Li + and Cu 2+ persists until 50% Ni doping in which Ni and Cu occupy different crystallographic sites. As a result, while Cu sits in both triangular and honeycomb layers in Li4CuTeO6, Ni forms only honeycomb layer in Li4NiTeO6 and Li4Cu0.5Ni0.5TeO6. Our magnetic susceptibility measurements show that the Weiss temperature decreases from -145.68 K in Li4CuTeO6 to -6.15 K in Li4NiTeO6 as Ni doping increases, and find no hint of magnetic ordering or freezing down to 1.8 K. Our analysis implies the existence of abundant low energy excitations in these materials. Triangular-lattice antiferromagnets host various exotic quantum states. Structurally, Li 4 CuTeO 6 and Li 4 NiTeO 6 form the same crystal structure, and site-mixing between Li and Cu/Ni happens in both compounds. The difference comes from specific crystallographic sites Cu or Ni occupies: Cu partially occupies sites in both honeycomb and triangular layers (4g and 2d sites, respectively) whereas Ni partially occupies the 4g site in the honeycomb layer. It implies that their quantum ground states might be deeply related to the details of their crystal structures. Therefore it is essential to understand their structure changes with varying Cu/Ni contents and corresponding physical properties. Here, we investigate a systematic study of crystal structures and magnetic properties in Li 4 Cu 1-x Ni x TeO 6 with x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1. We find that, with increasing Ni doping, the lattice parameters a and c decrease while the lattice parameter b increases, leading to a unit cell volume reduction of 1% for x = 1. Interestingly, we observe that Ni 2+ partially occupy the 4g site in the honeycomb layer and do not sit in the triangular layers in any Ni doping levels. We do not find any hint of magnetic ordering or freezing in all our samples down to 1.8 K, implying possible quantum magnetic ground states across all doping levels. An inverse power law behavior in the magnetic susceptibility suggests the abundance of low-energy excitations in these compounds. We synthesized polycrystalline Li 4 Cu 1-x Ni x TeO 6 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1) compounds using the solid-state reaction technique. The starting materials Li 2 CO 3 (99.999% Alfa Aesar), TeO 2 (99.998% Alfa Aesar), NiO (99.995% Alfa Aesar), and CuO (99.995% Alfa Aesar) were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio and placed in an alumina crucible with a lid and heated to 750 • C in 4 h and held there for 18 h in air, after which furnace was cooled to room temperature. The resulting mixture was ground and pelletized, placed in an alumina crucible heated to 850 • C in 4 h, and held there for 16 h before cooling to room temperature. The X-ray powder patterns (XRD) were obtained at room temperature using a Proto AXRD Benchtop Powder X-ray Diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation and were quantitatively analyzed using the Rietveld method by the GSAS software package. Figure (Color online) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns for Li4Cu1-xNixTeO6 for x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1 (black circle). The solid curve (red) through the data is the Rietveld refinement. good fit. Previous studies found that due to a larger ionic radius difference between Li + and Ni 2+ , Ni would preferably replace only a honeycomb "4g" sites in Li 4 CuTeO 6 . For the structural analysis of intermediate Ni doped (x = 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5) compounds, if we allow Ni randomly goes into both 2d and 4g sites as in Li 4 CuTeO 6 , our Rietveld refinements give a high reliability parameter (goodness of fit), χ 2 ≥ 20. However, if we restrict that Ni can only go into the 4g site in the honeycomb layers and Cu can go into the 2d site in the triangular layers similar to the model used in Li 4 NiTeO 6 , Figure The inverse susceptibility (χ -1 ) is plotted in the inset of Fig. Further, as T → 0 K, χ(T ) exhibits a steep increase with- In spin-1/2 quenched disordered quantum paramagnetic systems, the exponent α is observed to describe M T -α versus H/T for T ≪ H. We investigated a series of polycrystalline Li 4 Cu 1-x Ni x TeO 6 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1) compounds. We found no hint of magnetic ordering or freezing down to 1.8 K. Magnetic susceptibility measurements provide evidence that the Cu and Ni atoms carry effective spin, S = 1/2 and S = 1, respectively. AFM exchange interactions persist in the entire Ni doping, evidenced by the change of the Curie-Weiss temperatures from θ CW = -145 K [Li 4 CuTeO 6 (x = 0)] to θ CW = -6 K [Li 4 NiTeO 6 (x = 1)]. The absence of any long-range magnetic order implies the randomness driven QSL-like state in Li 4 Cu 1-x Ni x TeO 6 (x =0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1) compounds, as suggested by Ref. Our detailed X-ray analysis shows that, in the parent Li 4 CuTeO 6 , Li and Cu are mixed randomly on both the 2d and 4g sites. With Ni doping (up to 50%), we find that Ni (S = 1) substitutes for Cu (S = 1/2) on the 4g site while the Cu in the 2d site remains almost unchanged. It implies that increasing Ni concentration does not impact the frustration caused by Cu (S = 1/2) in the triangular layer. Due to the exchange of magnetic species in the honeycomb layer between Cu (S = 1/2) and Ni (S = 1), the origin of the AFM interactions changes from S = 1/2 to S = 1 and from the combined triangular and honeycomb layers (Li 4 CuTeO 6 ) to the honeycomb layer alone (Li 4 CuTeO 6 ). Therefore, it is likely that either the mechanism or the nature of quantum magnetic ground states in Li 4 Cu 1-x Ni x TeO 6 changes with increasing Ni concentrations. Not only the details of site-mixing in triangular and honeycomb layers but also the change of magnetic species play a crucial role in these materials. Li 4 Cu 1-x Ni x TeO 6 are excellent materials to study systematically how this exotic magnetic ground state evolves between different spin states, between different geometrical frustrations, and in a combination of spin states and geometrical frustrations. The data supporting this study's findings are available within the article. FIG. 3. Variation of lattice constants a, b, and c as a function of Ni doping x in Li4Cu1-xNixTeO6.