We present optimized tight-binding models with atomic orbitals to improve ab initio tight-binding models constructed by truncating full density functional theory (DFT) Hamiltonian based on localized orbitals. Retaining qualitative features of the original Hamiltonian, the optimization reduces quantitative deviations in overall band structures between the ab initio tight-binding model and the full DFT Hamiltonian. The optimization procedure and related details are demonstrated by using semiconducting and metallic Janus transition metal dichalcogenides monolayers in the 2H configuration. Varying the truncation range from partial second neighbors to third ones, we show differences in electronic structures between the truncated tightbinding model and the original full Hamiltonian, and how much the optimization can remedy the quantitative loss induced by truncation. We further elaborate the optimization process so that local electronic properties such as valence and conduction band edges and Fermi surfaces are precisely reproduced by the optimized tight-binding model. We also extend our discussions to tight-binding models including spin-orbit interactions, so we provide the optimized tight-binding model replicating spin-related properties of the original Hamiltonian such as spin textures. The optimization process described here can be readily applied to construct the fine-tuned tight-binding model based on various DFT calculations. Constructing Hamiltonians is an essential starting point to investigate physical systems. For condensed matter systems, electronic structures and related properties are derived from Hamiltonians. The tight-binding model, in which electrons are described in terms of hopping processes between neighboring localized orbitals, is one of modeling methods widely used to construct Hamiltonians for condensed matter systems. The tight-binding model constructed to investigate a given system can further be used to study extended systems derived from the original system, such as defected systems The tight-binding model construction begins with a relevant set of localized orbitals that mainly contributes to electronic structures around the Fermi energy From a general point of view, the fitting procedure is an optimization problem in which the tight-binding model parameters can be obtained by minimizing a cost function quantifying deviations between targeted electronic bands and ones computed by the tight-binding model Alternatively one can use DFT calculations to construct realistic tight-binding Hamiltonians. Not only do DFT calculations provide energy band structures targeted by the fitting procedure described above, but DFT calculations themselves also produce tight-binding Hamiltonian as a result of computations. DFT calculations based on atomic-like localized orbitals produce the tight-binding Hamiltonian by construction after the self-consistent calculations, and the Hamiltonian constructed by plane-wave based DFT calculations can be converted into the tight-binding one via the Wannier function transformation Despite the advantages mentioned above, the ab initio tight-binding Hamiltonian is very large, since localized orbitals of the Hamiltonian are generally extended over several unit cells. Since the coupling strength decreases as the inter-site distance increases, one can simplify the ab initio tight-binding Hamiltonian by truncating the Hamiltonian within a finite range of couplings, i.e., first or second nearest-neighboring couplings as suggested in Ref. In this work we construct the optimized tight-binding model with atomic orbitals by using the truncated ab initio tight-binding Hamiltonian. Recalling that the truncated ab initio tight-binding Hamiltonian retains qualitatively reliable properties of the full DFT calculations as discussed in Ref. To demonstrate the construction of the optimized tight-binding model based on the truncated ab initio Hamiltonian, we consider Janus transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) monolayers This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we describe atomic configurations of monolayer Janus 2H-TMDC and summarize details of DFT calculations, which produce the full ab initio tight-binding Hamiltonian based on the Wannier functions. Section 3.1 starts with the tight-binding model construction based on energy integrals and symmetry considerations, by following the Slater-Koster theory In this work we consider the Janus TMDC monolayer in the 2H type, whose atomic configuration is depicted in figure 1 First we perform DFT calculations on Janus TMDC monolayers, MoSSe and NbSSe. We use Quantum Espresso In the Slater-Koster scheme where E m,n (R) is an energy integral, which is where |φ m (R)⟩ is the mth basis state, whose center is located at the lattice vector R The energy integrals respect crystal symmetries of the system. Without the mirror-reflection symmetry with respect to the transition metal plane, monolayer Janus 2H-TMDC satisfies the C 3v point-group symmetry, which includes symmetric operations { Ê, Ĉ3 , Ĉ2 3 , σv , σ′ v , σ′′ v } 3 are rotational operations by 2π/3 and 4π/3 around the z axis, respectively. σv , σ′ v , and σ′′ v represent the mirror-reflection operations whose reflection planes, which are perpendicular to the monolayer plane, include in-plane vectors (⃗ a 1 -⃗ a 2 ), (2⃗ a 1 + ⃗ a 2 ), (-⃗ a 1 -2⃗ a 2 ), respectively. Here ⃗ a 1 and ⃗ a 2 are in-plane unit vectors as shown in figure Note that the point group C 3v has three irreducible representations A 1 , A 2 , and E Here {• • •} indicates basis states related to one another via irreducible representations of symmetric operations. When a basis state is denoted by |φ α iμ ⟩, where α = d, p represents whether the state is d or p orbital, and μi means that ith basis state belonging to the μ irreducible representation, basis states are written as Energy integrals E m,n (R) = E αβ μi,νj (R) are related to one another throughout symmetric operations Ô = { Ê, Ĉ3 , Ĉ2 3 , σv , σ′ v , σ′′ v } as follows where D μ ( Ô) is the representation matrix corresponding to the μth irreducible representation of the symmetric operation Ô. For the irreducible representation A 1 , the corresponding matrix is unity, i.e., where Irreducible representations E correspond to the following matrices depending on symmetric operations of the C 3v point group: Using equations ( In this way one can derive relations among energy integrals. The full list of energy integrals are summarized in the supplementary data (available online). Energy integrals in equation ( Symmetry constraints dictated by the crystal symmetry can be directly imposed to the maximal localization procedure of the Wannier transformation, which is called as symmetry-adapted Wannier functions Note that the symmetry conditions respected by TB models with atomic orbitals are maintained throughout the optimization process discussed in the subsequent subsections. Thus, the final hopping parameters as a result of the optimization procedure also satisfy the symmetry condition, equation Magnitudes of energy integrals in the WF construction decrease as the inter-site distance |R| increases, but a very large distance is required to make energy integrals absolutely zero. Thus, instead of keeping all WFs over the whole set of R, one can construct TB models including only energy integrals within a certain cut-off radius |R| c : The truncation process accompanies the loss of finite energy integrals, so the resulting band structures do not perfectly match DFT band structures. One can increase the cutoff radius |R| c in order to obtain accurate band structures, but the model complexity accordingly increases. Thus it is obvious that the truncation radius |R| c is needed to carefully choose so that the resulting TB Hamiltonian reproduces the DFT band structures. We call the TB model obtained by truncation from the WF Hamiltonian as the truncated TB (tTB) model. Here we introduce the following notations in order to represent the truncation radius. When M and X denote transition metal and chalcogen atoms respectively, the ith nearest neighbors between A and B atoms are represented by iAB, where A, B ∈ {M, X}. For example, the second nearest neighbors between M and X are denoted by 2MX. When iAB is the farthest nearest neighbor under consideration, the corresponding truncation range is denoted by ⟨⟨iAB⟩⟩. For example, the truncation range ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩ includes 1MX, 1MM, 1XX, 2MX, 3MX, 2MM, 2XX, 3MM, and 3XX. Note that ∥1MX∥ < ∥1MM∥ ≤ ∥1XX∥ < ∥2MX∥ < ∥3MX∥ < ∥2MM∥ ≤ ∥2XX∥ < ∥3MM∥ ≤ ∥3XX∥, where ∥• • •∥ denotes the distance between neighbors. For ∥iMM∥ ≤ ∥iXX∥ the equality holds when chalcogen neighbors are on the same plane. The deviation of the tTB model from the WF Hamiltonian can be reduced by constructing the optimized TB model with atomic orbitals. Despite the deviation between the tTB model and the WF Hamiltonian due to the truncation, the tTB model is still physically close to the DFT Hamiltonian, so the tTB model can be a good initial start for the optimization procedure to guarantee a physically reliable solution. Optimizing TB models can be done by adopting the least-squares fitting method commonly used in regression analysis and optimization problems where N b and N k are numbers of bands and k sampling points, respectively. In this work we use the Nelder-Mead method where the second term is the penalty term emphasizing band structures of S b at S k . Here λ is the penalty weight factor to control the relative importance of the penalty term to equation (d2) oTB : 3XX can be re-written as a weighted sum of squared errors (wSSE): where a weight factor ω ij = 1 if ik j / ∈ S b ∩ S k and otherwise ω ij = 1 + λ. The penalty weight factor λ is needed to appropriately choose in order to achieve the accuracy of both overall energy bands and local electronic structures of the subset S b ∩ S k . If the penalty weight factor λ is too small, it is likely to fail to have accurate local structures of the subset S b ∩ S k . On the other hand, if the penalty weight factor λ is chosen to be too large, one can obtain local structures of the subset S b ∩ S k best-fitted to DFT calculations, but the overall band structures can be significantly deviated from DFT energy bands. Figures Here band structures of TB models are compared with those of DFT calculations, which are in a good agreement with the well-established database of two-dimensional materials In the upper panels of figures 3 and 4, it is clearly shown that band structures of tTB models approach those of the DFT calculations as the truncation range increases. Especially the tTB model with ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩ well reproduces DFT band structures not only qualitatively but also quantitatively. There are some discrepancies, for example, for four topmost unoccupied bands and two lowest occupied ones, but they are very small. When the truncation radius is smaller than ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩, it is noticed that deviations between tTB bands and DFT ones are evidently observed over the whole band manifolds. Although the truncation range ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩ fairly reproduces DFT band structures as discussed in Ref. For MoSSe (NbSSe) the RMSE in equation ( For the semiconducting monolayer MoSSe, main physical properties are determined by valence and conduction bands in the vicinity of the K point, where the semiconducting energy gap is located. As seen in figures 3(a1)-(d1), the tTB model predicts valence band energy E v (K) and conduction band one E c (K) at the K point that are deviated from those energies from DFT calculations. In addition, curvatures of valence and conduction bands around the K point are different between the tTB model and DFT calculations. For the metallic TMDC monolayer NbSSe, the resulting energy band at the Fermi level ε F of the tTB model with ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩ is problematic as shown in figure The aforementioned discrepancies of the metallic energy bands between tTB models and DFT calculations are also observed when Fermi surfaces are calculated as shown in figures 6(a1) to (d1). For the tTB model with ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩, the resulting Fermi surfaces are completely different from those of DFT calculations; While DFT Fermi surfaces exhibit two hole pockets around Γ and K, the tTB model leads to two circles surrounding the Γ point as illustrated in figure 6(a1). This observation is consistent with the fact that the metallic band of the tTB model with ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩ has no crossing point with the Fermi level along M K, but there are two crossing points both on ΓM and KΓ. For the cases of tTB models with ⟨⟨3MX⟩⟩, ⟨⟨2XX⟩⟩, and ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩, resulting Fermi surfaces share the same topology with those of DFT calculations: hole pockets at Γ and K. The hexagon-like hole pocket around Γ is well matched with that of DFT calculations. Hole pockets at K have different shapes against DFT calculations, when truncation ranges ⟨⟨3MX⟩⟩ and ⟨⟨2XX⟩⟩ are considered. The tTB model with ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩ perfectly reproduces DFT Fermi surfaces. Next we perform the optimization process in order to show that deviations between TB bands and DFT ones are minimized by constructing oTB models. As shown on lower panels of figures 3 and 4, band energies from oTB models are in a very good agreement with DFT band structures. In particular, the five topmost bands are noticeably improved throughout the optimization process. When the optimization is performed, the penalty function discussed in equation ( For the semiconducting monolayer MoSSe, the penalty function with λ = 10 in equation ( Figure For monolayer NbSSe, when we perform the optimization without imposing the penalty function onto the partial occupied band around the Fermi level, it is found that Fermi surfaces constructed by the oTB model do not match those of DFT calculations, as illustrated in figures 6(a1)-(d1). In contrast, the inclusion of the penalty function in equation 18 significantly resolves the discrepancy observed in Fermi surfaces. The partially occupied bands of the oTB model and DFT calculations cross the Fermi level at the same k-points as shown in figures 4(a2)-(d2). In fact, as illustrated in figure -5 For the case where the penalty function is added to the cost function in equation where n (S) stands for the number of elements included in a set S and S c is the complement set of S. Equation ( For optimized TB bands of MoSSe (NbSSe), (RMSE) 1 in equation ( It is also needed to confirm that the resulting TB model not only correctly reproduces energy bands of DFT calculations, but also retrains physical properties of the system. Technically the TB model construction based on fitting of energy bands is the minimization process, so it is possible that the construction might reach some undesirable local minimum, which is not a physically correct Hamiltonian. Since the optimization described here starts with tTB models originated from DFT calculations, it is highly likely to obtain a physically reliable TB model. Here we compare orbital characters of the oTB models and DFT calculations, in order to confirm whether the oTB models are physically reliable. Figures In summary, the oTB models constructed here provide electronic structure properties well matched with DFT calculations for all of the chosen truncation ranges. It is in a sharp contrast to tTB models whose deviations against DFT calculations increase as the truncation radius decreases. It means that one can use the oTB model with the smaller number of hopping parameters to well represent electronic properties, instead of using the ab initio Hamiltonian truncated at the larger truncation radius. For example, while the tTB model with ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩ consists of 178 parameters, the oTB model with ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩ has 78 parameters. Despite the difference in the number of parameters, electronic properties reproduced by the two models are comparable as shown above. Here we introduce the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) to monolayers TMDC with the broken mirror-reflection symmetry. Atomic SOC terms for d and p orbitals added to the TB model read as follows: which is written with the basis of |z which is written in the basis of |p z , ↑⟩, |p y , ↑⟩, |p x , ↑⟩, |p z , ↓⟩, |p y , ↓⟩, and |p x , ↓⟩ Here λ M and λ X are atomic spin-orbit coupling parameters for transition metal and chalcogen atoms, respectively. First we calculate band structures by inserting bare atomic SOC (bSOC) terms into the tTB model. Let us call this model as tTB+bSOC. Here bare means the atomic SOC calculated from DFT calculations when an isolated atom is placed inside a very large cubic unit cell, whose side is 20 Å in our case Note that here we do not construct Wannier functions including the SOC. The tTB model is obtained by truncating the Wannier Hamiltonian constructed without inclusion of the SOC. The SOC terms, equations ( Band structures calculated by tTB+bSOC models are shown in figures 9(a1)-(d1) and 10(a1)-(d1) for MoSSe and NbSSe, respectively. Since the tTB models with ⟨⟨2XX⟩⟩ do not well reproduce DFT band structures as shown in figures (3)(a1) and (4)(a1), corresponding tTB+bSOC models also do not provide quantitatively good SOCcorrected band structures compared to DFT ones. In contrast the tTB+bSOC models with ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩ maintain the quality of the tTB models despite discrepancies in four topmost bands around M and K points. See figures 9(a4) and 10(a4). We can also calculate band structures by combining oTB models developed in Sec. 4 with bare SOC terms, equations ( Note that penalty functions in equation ( For NbSSe we impose not only constraints on Fermi surfaces as done in the subsection 3.3, but also another penalty term to the cost function to elaborate spin textures along Fermi surfaces. The 2H structure of monolayer TMDC has no inversion symmetry, so the monolayer generally has spin-split band structures + λ 1 where Ŝj is the spin operator for j = x, y, z, and ⟨ Ŝj ⟩ DFT(TB) ik is the spin expectation value of Ŝj with respect to DFT (TB) Bloch state |Ψ DFT(TB) (ik)⟩. Varying truncation ranges from ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩ to ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩, Fermi surfaces calculated by oTB+bSOC and oTB+rSOC models are compared by DFT calculations in figure Furthermore we calculate spin textures on Fermi surfaces by using oTB+bSOC and oTB+rSOC models, and compare them with DFT calculations in figures 13 and 14. According to DFT calculations in figure We also compute spin textures of oTB+bSOC and oTB+rSOC models by extending truncation ranges from ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩ to ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩ in figure (RMSE) 3 of oTB+bSOC (oTB+rSOC) corresponds to 0.011 (0.006), 0.011 (0.005), 0.005 (0.003), and 0.004 (0.002) for ⟨⟨2MX⟩⟩, ⟨⟨3MX⟩⟩, ⟨⟨2XX⟩⟩, and ⟨⟨3XX⟩⟩, respectively. In this work we have presented the detailed process to construct the optimized tightbinding model with atomic orbitals by using the truncated ab initio tight-binding models. Applying to semiconducting and metallic Janus TMDC monolayers, it is shown that the optimization process improves the accuracy of overall band energies when the optimized tight-binding models are compared with the full DFT calculation where the ab initio tight-binding models are derived. Furthermore we have shown that the optimization well reproduces detailed local band structures of interest such as valence and conduction band edges for semiconductor or Fermi surfaces and spin textures for metallic systems, by imposing additional constraints to the minimization process in terms of penalty functions. The resulting fine-tuned tight-binding model can be used to develop further simplified theories such as the k • p expansion. Here we have used planewave-based DFT calculations accompanied by the Wannier function transformation, but the optimization process discussed here is not limited to the construction method of the fully ab initio Hamiltonian. The optimization process can be applied to DFT calculations based on atomic localized orbitals. Different from Wannier functions that are by construction orthogonal to one another, atomic localized orbitals are generally non-orthogonal to those at different sites, so the ab initio tightbinding Hamiltonian based on atomic localized orbitals requires to use the overlap matrix Here we provide a full list of energy integrals in the tight-binding (TB) model consisting of five d-orbitals of transition metal atom and six p-orbitals of chalcogen atoms as well as on-site Hamiltonians at transition metal atoms and chalcogen ones. The transition metal atom site M possesses the following on-site Hamiltonian H M , where is written with the basis of |d z 2 ⟩, |d x 2 -y 2 ⟩, |d xy ⟩, |d zx ⟩, and |d yz ⟩. The Hamiltonian H X at chalcogen atom sites reads where is written with the basis of |p uz ⟩, |p ux ⟩, |p uy ⟩, |p lz ⟩, |p lx ⟩, and |p ly ⟩. Here u and l stand for upper and lower chalcogen layers. Equation ( , and R 6 = ⃗ a 2 . Energy integrals among nearest-neighboring d orbitals are written as follows: (1) z 2 ,zx - xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,zx - ) xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz - xy,yz (74) xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz - xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,zx + 3 4 E (1) xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,zx + 3 4 E (1) xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz - x 2 -y 2 ,zx + 3 4 E (1) xy,zx xy,yz (82) x 2 -y 2 ,zx + 3 4 E (1) xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz + xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz + x 2 -y 2 ,zx + 1 4 E (1) xy,zx ) xy,zx 1) xy,zx xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz - xy,zx xy,yz (98) xy,yz (99) xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz + xy,zx x 2 -y 2 ,yz - Note that there are fifteen independent energy integrals among nearest neighboring d orbitals: E (1) x 2 -y 2 ,xy , E x 2 -y 2 ,zx , E x 2 -y 2 ,yz , E yz,yz , where (120) As shown in Fig. (2) (2) x 2 -y 2 ,x 2 -y 2 + √ 3E (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) x 2 -y 2 ,xy ( R5 ) = 0 (157) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) x 2 -y 2 ,yz + √ 3E (2) (2) x 2 -y 2 ,yz - Here parameters E ij denote energy integrals between the d-orbital i at origin and the d-orbital j located at the second nearest neighbor vector R1 : The TB model for the second nearest neighboring d-orbitals includes thirteen independent energy integrals, E yz,z 2 , E x 2 -y 2 ,x 2 -y 2 , E zx,zx , and E The TB model relating third nearest neighboring d-orbitals contains fifteen independent parameters, E x 2 -y 2 ,xy , E x 2 -y 2 ,zx , E zx,yz , and E (3) yz,yz . The TB model between p-orbitals includes six p-orbitals, which are p x , p y , and p z orbitals at upper and lower sublayers of chalcogen atoms. Figure H αz,βy (R 2 ) = - H αz,βy (R 3 ) = - αz,βy + αz,βy (R 5 ) = - αz,βy (R 6 ) = - αz,βy - αz,βy - E (1) αy,αy (R 1 ) = E (1) αy,αy E (1) αy,αy (R 4 ) = E (1) αy,αy E (1) αy,αy (R 3 ) = E (1) αy,αy (R 5 ) = 1 4 E (1) αy,αy + 3 4 E (1) αx,αx E (1) αy,αy (R 6 ) = E (1) αy,αx (R 1 ) = E (1) αy,αx αy,αy -E (1) αy,αx + E (1) αy,αx (R 3 ) = √ 3 4 E (1) αy,αy + E (1) αy,αx - E (1) αy,αx (R 4 ) = -E (1) αy,αx E (1) αy,αx (R 5 ) = - 1) αy,αy + E (1) αy,αx + αy,αy -E (1) αy,αx - E (1) αx,αx (R 1 ) = E (1) αx,αx H αy, ᾱy (R 1 ) = E (1) αy, ᾱy H αy, ᾱy (R 3 ) = αy, ᾱy + H αy, ᾱy (R 4 ) = E (1) αy, ᾱy αy, ᾱy + 3 4 E (1) ᾱy,αx αy, ᾱx + αy, ᾱy - αy, ᾱx - (1) ᾱy,αx αy, ᾱx + αy, ᾱy - αy, ᾱx - αy, ᾱy - (1) αy, ᾱy + 1 4 E (1) ᾱy,αx αy, ᾱy -√ 3 4 E (1) ᾱy,αx αy, ᾱy -√ 3 4 E (1) ᾱy,αx Here α, β = u or l where u and l stands for upper and lower chalcogen sublayers, respectively. TB parameters E αi,βj are energy integrals between p-orbital i of the α chalcogen sublayer at origin and p-orbital j of the β chalcogen sublayer at the lattice vector R 1 : Here independent TB parameters E αi,βj are E uz,uz , E lz,lz , E uz,lz , E uz,uy , E uz,ux , E uz,ly , E uz,lx , E lz,uy , E lz,ux , E lz,ly , E lz,lx , E uy,uy , E ly,ly , E ux,ux , E lx,lx , E uy,ux , E ly,lx , E uy,ly , E ux,lx , E uy,lx , and E (1) ly,lx , which are 21 in total. The second nearest-neighbors Energy integrals of second nearest-neighboring p-orbitals are given as follows: αz,βx ( R5 ) = 0 (280) αy,βy ( R1 ) = E (2) αy,βy βy,αy + √ 3E (2) βy,αx αy,βy ( R5 ) = E (2) αy,βx ( R2 ) = 0 (289) αy,βx ( R5 ) = 0 (292) αx,βy ( R2 ) = 0 (295) αx,βy ( R5 ) = 0 (298) αy,βy - αy,βy - αy,βx + E αy,βy , (305) As shown in Fig. Three nearest neighboring vectors between d and p orbitals on the xy plane are written as Energy integrals for nearest-neighboring transition metal d-orbitals and chalcogen atom p-orbitals are summarized as follows: E (1) αz,xy (δ 1 ) = E (1) αz,xy E (1) αz,xy (δ 3 ) = 0 (316) E (1) αz,zx (δ 3 ) = 0 (322) E (1) αy,xy (δ 3 ) = 0 (334) E αx,x 2 -y 2 (δ 3 ) = 0 (340) E (1) αy,yz (δ 1 ) = E (1) αy,yz E (1) αy,yz (δ 2 ) = E (1) αy,yz E (1) αy,zx (δ 3 ) = 0 (349) E (1) αx,yz (δ 3 ) = 0 (352) Here energy integrals between p-orbitals i at origin and d-orbitals of nearest neighbors are defined as where α = u or l. Here independent energy integrals are E αz,z 2 , E αz,xy , E αz,zx , E αy,z 2 , E αy,x 2 -y 2 , E αx,xy , E αy,yz , E αx,zx , for α = u or l, which are sixteen in total. Energy integrals for second nearest-neighbors between p-orbitals and d-orbitals j are derived as follows: E (2) αz,xy ( δ3 ) = 0 (362) Here TB parameters E αi,j is defined as the following energy integrals, E αi,j ≡ E αi,j ( δ1 ) = ⟨αp i (0)|H|d j ( δ1 )⟩. (399) The independent energy integrals are E αz,z 2 , E αz,xy , E αz,zx , E αy,z 2 , E αy,x 2 -y 2 , E αx,xy , E αy,yz , and E (2) αx,zx for α = u or l, which are 16 in total. The third nearest-neighboring vectors on the xy plane are δ1 = 5 3 ⃗ a Energy integrals of third nearest-neighbors between p-orbitals i on the α chalcogen layer and d-orbitals j reads E (3) αz,zx ( δ1 ) = E (3) αz,zx E (3) αx,xy ( δ1 ) = E (3) αx,xy (f 1)p lx + p ly (f 2)p lx + p ly (f 3)p lx + p ly (f 4)p lx + p ly (f 5)p lx + p lyΓ M K Γ -5 0 5 (g1)p lz Γ M K Γ (g2)p lz Γ M K Γ (g3)p lz Γ M K Γ (f 1)p lx + p ly (f 2)p lx + p ly (f 3)p lx + p ly (f 4)p lx + p ly (f 5)p lx + p lyΓ M K Γ -5 0 5 (g1)p lz Γ M K Γ (g2)p lz Γ M K Γ (g3)p lz Γ M K Γ eV (b1) Γ M K Γ (b2) Γ M K Γ (b3) Γ M K Γ (b4) oTB+bSOC Γ M K Γ -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 eV (c1) Γ M K Γ (c2) Γ M K Γ