Exceptional points (EPs) refer to degeneracies in non-Hermitian systems where two or more eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors coalesce. Recently, there has been growing interest in harnessing EPs to enhance the responsivity of sensors. Significant improvements in the sensitivity of sensors in optics and electronics have been developed. In this work, we present a novel ultrasensitive surface acoustic wave (SAW) gas sensor based on EP. We demonstrate its ability to significantly respond to trace amount of hydrogen sulfide ( 2 HS) gas by tuning additional loss to approach the EP, thereby enhancing the responsivity compared to the conventional delay line gas sensors. In addition to high sensitivity, our sensor is robust to temperature variation and exclusive to 2 HS gas. We propose an innovative method for designing a new generation of ultrasensitive gas sensor. In non-Hermitian physical systems, exceptional points (EPs) are singularities in the parameter space where eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors coalesce. Systems exhibiting parity-time (PT) symmetry provide an excellent platform for studying EPs 1-3 , and significant advances have been achieved in fields such as photonics 4-7 , electronics 8 and acoustics EPs, small perturbation  will lead to frequency detuning: Even in the proximity of the second-order EP, the sensor exhibits much greater sensitivity than the linear frequency response under small perturbations. Therefore, leveraging this characteristic of EPs has been theoretically explored to enhance sensing performance Surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors have broad application prospects owing to their compact size, digital output, high sensitivity, and ease for wireless passive application piezoelectric substrate to design efficient SAW gas sensors In this study, based on a passive PT-symmetric system comprising two coupled resonators defined by Bragg mirrors, we present the experimental demonstration of a SAW gas sensor with significantly enhanced sensitivity to detect trace amount of hydrogen sulfide ( 2 HS) gas effectively. A 2 SnO thin film, which is sensitive to 2 HS gas, is deposited onto one of the resonators. As 2 HS is adsorbed by 2 SnO thin film, additional loss is introduced to the system. By carefully managing the additional loss to render the system in the proximity of EP, a small perturbation in the form of loss is deliberately introduced, resulting in extremely obvious frequency splitting in the transmission peak. Notably, that frequency splitting scales proportionally to the square root of the perturbation strength, which is more sensitive than conventional linear response gas sensor. Furthermore, our sensor is of excellent performance in sensing, such as rapid response to little gas, robustness to temperature variations, exclusivity in 2 HS gas detection and good recoverability. Our ultrasensitive sensor represents a departure from conventional SAW gas sensors, offers a novel sensing approach and proposes pioneering scheme applicable to gas sensing systems (but not limited to), thereby opening up a new perspective for the development of the next-generation sensors. To date, some efforts have been made to introduce gain to balance spontaneous loss to construct PT-symmetric systems, including tuning the power of the pump laser in photonics However, when we inject 0.4ppm of 2 HS gas into the reaction chamber, as time goes by, the two transmission peaks merge into a single peak until the system stabilizes in the "PT-broken phase" regime, as is shown in the lower panel of Fig. The key to our sensor's effective working lies in tuning the additional loss to ensure the resonant detuning occurs in the proximity of the transmission peak degeneracies , which can be determined by pre-experiment of the individual thin film and numerical fitting of pre-experimental results (details can be found in Supplementary Materials S3). As depicted in Fig. We fabricate the sample according to the simulation determined structural parameters and measure the transmission spectrum with the injection of 0.4ppm 2 HS gas. The evolution of transmission peaks (Fig. In order to facilitate the observation of two-peaks-to-one-peak transition process in experiment, we record the evolution of transmission spectrum over time with the injection of 0.4ppm 2 HS. Applying temporal coupled mode theory, the transmissivity can be expressed as where, 0   =denotes the frequency detuning, c  is the coupling strength between the coupled resonators system and the transmission line, 0  is the symmetric inherent loss in two resonators. As is shown in Fig. The most common sensing strategy of conventional SAW gas sensors is measuring the center frequency shift caused by disturbance from target gas. To facilitate a comparison with conventional gas sensors and highlight the advantages of our sensor, we also design a delay line gas sensor, which only removes all the Bragg mirrors from our passive PT-symmetric SAW gas sensor (the schematic diagram can be seen in Fig. T  = , the frequencies of transmission peaks can be determined as: From Eq. ( It must be pointed out that this coalescence point of transmission peaks is not EP, i.e. 2    This discrepancy between transmission-peak splitting and eigenvalue splitting is due to the coupling between the coupled resonators system and the transmission line. Then, the appearance of a single transmission peak does not imply the system is certainly in the "PT-broken phase" regime. The detailed analysis about transmissivity can be found in Supplementary Materials S2. In    regime, when  is in the proximity of   , we define =     as a perturbation and the frequency splitting of the two peaks is , which exhibits that the frequency splitting scales proportionally to the square root of the perturbation strength. Such square root behavior originates from the underlying EP degeneracy of the eigenfrequencies. As shown in Fig.  and more sensitive than conventional linear response sensors. In this section, we demonstrate some sensing performance tests of our SAW gas sensors. Fig. Fig. 2 SnO film is a universal sensing material to exclusively respond to 2 HS gas, that makes our sensor having excellent selectivity to detect 2 HS in a mixed gas, which is distinctly demonstrated in Fig. Loss, which leads to energy dissipation and the decrease of the quality factor in sensor device, is usually recognized as a drawback and is minimized as much as possible. However, in this work we positively utilize the additional loss to obtain ultrasensitive sensing performance. The introduction of the additional loss in a two coupled SAW resonators structure forms a passive PT-symmetric system. Even a tiny amount of 2 HS gas is injected, our device exhibits a process in which two peaks merge into single peak in the transmission spectrum. When the system is in the PT exact phase regime and approaches the coalescence point of two transmission peaks, their frequency difference is proportional to the square root of perturbation strength, which is much more sensitive than the conventional linear response delay line sensor. Our sensor also presents outstanding robustness against temperature variation and exclusiveness to other gases. Our approach can be easily extended to design other types of sensors and implement other functions, such as wireless sensor, the detection of other gases or a more sensitive sensor based on higher-order EP. In addition, SAW system provides an excellent platform to realize non-Hermitian system. Besides loss, SAW system is also convenient to tune the resonant frequency and coupling strength. It is feasible to manufacture diverse non-Hermitian devices for the exploration of intriguing and rich non-Hermitian physics. Our experiment setup (Fig. We utilize COMSOL Multiphysics to simulate the experiment based on the 2D cross-section module of SAW device. We apply solid mechanics module and electrostatics module, and consider the couple of strain field and electrostatic field due to the piezoelectric effects. The whole device except the top surface is surrounded by perfectly matched layers to absorb the radiated waves. The Bragg mirrors are set as floating potential. We use mechanical damping module and dielectric loss module of piezoelectric substrate in area where the thin film has been deposited to simulate the additional loss from the thin film.