The ability of high-entropy alloys (HEAs) for hydrogen storage is a rather new topic in the hydrogen community. HEAs with the C14 Laves phase have shown a high potential to reversibly store hydrogen at room temperature, but most of these alloys require a high-temperature activation treatment. This study explores the role of interphase boundaries on the easy activation of HEAs at room temperature. Two chemically similar HEAs with single and dual phases, TiV1.5ZrCr0.5MnFeNi (C14 + 4 vol% BCC phases) and TiV1.5Zr1.5CrMnFeNi (single C14 phase), are designed and synthesized. While the dual-phase alloy readily absorbs hydrogen at room temperature without any activation treatment, the single-phase alloy requires a high-temperature activation. It is suggested that interphase boundaries not only provide pathways for easy hydrogen transport and activation of HEAs at room temperature but also act as active sites for heterogeneous nucleation of hydride. This study introduces interphase-boundary generation as an effective strategy to address the activation drawback of HEAs. Hydrogen is a promising fuel to meet the energy demands in the future because of its high abundance on the Earth, high energy density, and the potential of its clean production. The combustion of hydrogen produces only water vapor, which makes it an environment-friendly fuel A recent solution concerning the high-temperature requirement for hydrogen absorption and desorption in metal hydrides is the use of high-entropy alloys (HEAs) and corresponding highentropy hydrides The objective of this study is to clarify the effect of interphase boundaries on the activation of HEAs for hydrogen storage. To accomplish this, two different AB-type HEAs (A are the elements with a strong affinity for hydrogen and B are the elements with a weak affinity for hydrogen) with C14 Laves + BCC phases (TiV1.5ZrCr0.5MnFeNi) and single C14 phase (TiV1.5Zr1.5CrMnFeNi) were synthesized. Both alloys were designed by keeping the valence electron concentration (VEC) greater than 6, electronegativity higher than 7 and atomic size mismatch more than 5% High-purity titanium (99.9%), vanadium (99.7%), zirconium (99.2%), chromium (99.99%), manganese (99.9%), iron (99.9%) and nickel (99.99%) were used to make the HEAs TiV1.5ZrCr0.5MnFeNi and TiV1.5Zr1.5CrMnFeNi via vacuum arc melting on a water-cooled copper mold, as attempted earlier The microstructure was first studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. The mirror-like polished discs were used to examine the microstructure and the compositions of phases using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The fraction of phases present in SEM micrographs was also determined using the image segmentation tool in MATLAB. The nanostructure was studied using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) and scanning-transmission electron microscope (STEM). For TEM and STEM, the ingots were crushed in a medium of alcohol and these crushed samples were dispersed onto carbon grids. High-resolution imaging, fast Fourier transform (FFT) and EDS were utilized to study the nanostructure from TEM and STEM at 200 kV. The hydrogen absorption-desorption pressure-composition-temperature (PCT) analysis and kinetics test were performed by a Sievert-type machine at 303 K. For hydrogen storage tests, crushing of the sample was done in the air followed by passing the crushed powders through a sieve of 75 μm size. The hydrogenation of the alloys was first conducted without any activation treatment, but the alloy that did not absorb hydrogen was further activated under vacuum at 673 K for 1 h. After the third cycle of PCT analysis at 303 K, the kinetics test was conducted for 1 h under an initial hydrogen pressure of 3.5 MPa at 303 K. The hydrogenated samples were examined by XRD in less than 5 min after their removal from the reactor of the Sievert-type machine to identify the hydride phase. XRD analysis, shown in Fig. The SEM micrograph for the TiV1.5ZrCr0.5MnFeNi alloy is shown in Fig. The PCT isotherms for the dual-phase TiV1.5ZrCr0.5MnFeNi alloy are shown in Fig. The alloy absorbs hydrogen without any activation process at room temperature. The amount of hydrogen absorbed by the alloy is 1.2-1.3 wt% (hydrogen-to-metal atomic ratio of H/M = 0.7-0.8) and the alloy shows good reversibility. The kinetics test, as shown in Fig. Hydrogen storage results are shown in Fig. Difficult activation is a general drawback of many room-temperature hydrogen storage materials such as TiFe intermetallics and Ti-V-based alloys (ii) Mechanical treatment is another activation treatment that is conducted by ball milling cold rolling HEAs and particularly those with the C14 Laves phase structure are perhaps the newest type of hydrogen storage materials that can even function at room temperature, but their activation problem should be solved interphase boundaries are suggested to be added to HEAs to activate them. It is found that while single-phase HEA cannot absorb hydrogen without a high-temperature activation treatment, the dual-phase alloy can absorb hydrogen without any activation treatment. Such easy activation cannot be attributed to the difference in crystal structure because both alloys have C14 Laves phase structure. Moreover, the single-phase alloy, which is not active, has higher lattice parameters and lower VEC which are expected to ease its activation It should be noted that interphase boundaries not only act as a carrier medium for the transport of hydrogen from the surface to bulk but also amplify the heterogeneous nucleation of hydride Figure This study reports the significant effect of interphase boundaries on the activation of highentropy alloys (HEAs) for hydrogen storage at room temperature. It is shown that while a TiV1.5Zr1.5CrMnFeNi alloy with a single C14 phase does absorb hydrogen without a hightemperature activation, the presence of small amounts of BCC in dual-phase TiV1.5ZrCr0.5MnFeNi leads to its hydrogenation at room temperature without any activation problem. It is suggested that interphase boundaries mainly act as hydrogen pathways from the surface to bulk and partly as active sites for the heterogeneous nucleation of hydride. These findings introduce a rational strategy to develop active HEAs for room-temperature hydrogen storage.