The expected shortage of Li due to the strong increase in electromobility is an important issue for the recovery of Li from spent Li-ion batteries. One approach is pyrometallurgical processing, during which ignoble elements such as Li, Al and Mn enter the slag system. The Engineered Artificial Minerals (EnAM) strategy aims to efficiently recover critical elements. This study focuses on stabilizing Limanganates in a synthetic slag and investigates the relationship between Mn 4+ and Mg and Al in relation to phase formation. Therefore, three synthetic slags (Li, Mg, Al, Si, Ca, Mn, O) were synthesized. In addition to LiMn 3+ O2, Li2Mn 4+ O3 was also stabilized. Both phases crystallized in a Ca-silicate-rich matrix. In the structure of Li2MnO3 and LiMnO2, Li and Mn can substitute each other in certain proportions. As long as a mix of Mn 2+ and Mn 3+ is present in the slag, spinels form through the addition of Mg and/or Al. The usage of critically relevant elements, such as Li, will be increasingly in demand due to their use in various technological areas The geological supply of such elements is limited, thus the recovery of e.g. Li from the industrial waste stream such as from old LIBs is indispensable Studies by Elwert et al. In a complex slag system consisting of Li2O, MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, CaO, and MnO, mainly binary and ternary oxide compounds are formed, followed by a residual melt The Li2O-MnOx system (1 ≤ x ≤ 2) must be considered for the investigation of possible Mn-containing EnAMs. Due to the redox sensitivity of Mn, the formation of various Li-manganates with different concentrations and Mn speciations are possible. The phase equilibria in Li2O-MnOx system at air is shown in Figure Above 800 °C, Li2MnO3 and LiMn2O4 decompose into Mn3O4 and O2 alongside layered LiMnO2. From 1000 to 1060 °C, orthorhombic LiMnO2 can coexist with lithiated hausmannite (LixMn3-xO4) According to Mishra and Ceder experimentally studied the phase equilibria in the Al2O3 rich part of the diagram and made calorimetric measurements of heat capacity for intermediate phases. The calculated phase diagram is shown in Figure Two stable modifications of LiAl5O8 with spinel structure but with different space groups were found in the alumina-rich side of the phase diagram. High temperature modification of spinel is inversed and stable with some homogeneity range. No evidences of LiAl11O17 were found in the microstructures and thus, LiAl11O17 is not treated as stable. Another important area of Li-rich phases is the Li2O-SiO2 system, with the following stable phases: Li2Si2O5, Li2SiO3, Li4SiO4 and Li8SiO6 (ordered by decreasing Si concentration). According to the latest results, Li6Si2O7 phase is treated as metastable. Li2SiO3 is formed from a Li2O-SiO2 rich melt. Studies by Chakrabarty et al. Hausmannite can be regarded as a low temperature phase as well as a deformed spinel under normal conditions (1 atm; 25 °C) and low oxygen partial pressure. Hausmannite forms from Mn2O3 at 1445 K and air oxygen partial pressure. It can form solid solutions with other spinel compounds. One of the most important spinel in the MnO-Al2O3 system is galaxite (MnAl2O4) Tetragonal spinel transforms to cubic at 1443 K probably due to disproportionation reaction Mn +3 → Mn +2 + Mn +4 to reduce Jahn-Teller distortion caused by Mn +3 . Phase diagrams of other important systems containing the spinel phase, like MgO-MnOx and MgO-Al2O3 systems are also shown in Figure For the melting experiment, the same batch of precursors was used as in the study by Schnickmann et al. The gel-combustion method was used to prepare the precursors. For this purpose, common procedures to remove the residual carbon. In Table The mineralogical composition of the slags was quantitatively and qualitatively identified using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The crystalline phases in the slag sample were analyzed with PXRD (Panalytical X-Pert Pro Diffractometer). For the measurement (2θ-angle range from 5 ° to 100 °; step size 0.0066 °; 150.45 seconds per step) a Co-X-ray tube (Malvern Panalytical GmbH, Kassel, Germany, λ = 1.7902 Å, 40 kV, 40 mA) has been used. The individual crystalline phases were classified via the American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database The elemental composition of single grains/crystals in the prepared thin sections were determined with EPMA (Cameca SXFIVE FE Field Emission, CAMECA SAS, Gennevilliers Cedex, France) using the Kα lines (Mg, Al, Si, Ca, Mn). For the measurement (15 kV beam diameter 100 -600 nm; Schottky type In order to validate the measurement method and obtain consistent results, repeated measurements were carried out, also on different days, using the international standard rhodonite (MnSiO3; Astimex). The low standard deviation (0.03) of Mn indicates that this element content can be analyzed very precisely and is suitable for calculating the Li content via virtual compounds (Table However, the presence of the two phases cannot be clearly verified with this method due to line overlaps. Schnickmann et al. With EPMA the following phases were determined: • Li(1-x)Mn(1+0.33x)O2 / Li(1+x)Mn(1-0.33x)O2 (slag 1,2,3) • Li(2-x)Mn(1+0.33x)O3 / Li(2+x)Mn(1-0.33x)O3 (slag 2) • Li2SiO3 (slag 1,2) • LixMn(3-x)O4 (slag 1,2,3) • CaSiO3 (slag 1,2,3) • Ca3Si2O7 (slag 1,2) • Ca2SiO4 (slag 3) • Residual melt (slag 2, 3) These phases were identified based on the elemental content of the individual grains (point measurements, linescans) and the crystal shape. The crystal shape provides additional information regarding the processes during solidification (Figure Two different Li-manganates (Li2Mn 4+ O3 and LiMn 3+ O2) were found in the slag samples. Li2MnO3 was only detected in slag 2 with EPMA, were 2 wt.% Mg was added. This phase theoretically contains 47.03 wt.% Mn and 11.88 wt.% Li. Within this phase, the average measured Mn content was 47.08 wt.% (min.: 46.88 wt.%; max.: 47.28 wt.%) (Figure LiMnO2 (average) LiMnO2 (min.) LiMnO2 (max.) Lithium-rich hausmannite was found in all three slag samples. Hausmannite consists of a mixture of Mn 2+ and Mn 3+ occupying tetrahedral and octahedral sites, respectively. When Mn +2 is substituted by Li +1 , Mn +4 can appear in the octahedral sublattice to balance the charge without change of oxygen stoichiometry. However, there is not enough crystallographic data for site occupancies of delithiated hausmannite. Additionally, tetragonal Mn3O4 and orthorhombic LiMnO2 are intergrown together. With an average crystal size of 10-30 μm, these crystals are significantly smaller than LiMnO2. In all three slag samples, the incorporation of other elements into the crystal lattice was detected. The incorporation of Li was recorded in all slag samples. The largest amount of Li was incorporated into S1 with 1.59 wt.%, followed by S2 with 0.80 wt.% and S3 with 0.51 wt.%. In addition, an average incorporation of 0.84 wt.% Mg and 0.82 wt.% Al was observed in S3. For the calculation of the spinel solid solution in S3 the following virtual compounds were defined: Mn3O4, MnAl2O4, MgAl2O4 and Li2Mn2O4. This solid solution can be expressed by the following generalized stoichiometric formula: (Li(2x),Mg(x),Mn(1-2x))1+x(Al(2-z),Mn 3+ (z))2O4 and for Li-rich hausmannite in S1 and S2 these following generalized stoichiometric formula: (Li(2x)Mn((1-x))1+x(Mn 3+ )2O4 was applied (Table The main matrix forming mineral is wollastonite (CaSiO3) followed by rankinite (Ca3Si2O7) in S1 and S2 and larnite (Ca2SiO4) in S3. All three phases form xenomorphic crystals, which indicates crystallization at the end of solidification. Due to approximately equal ionic radii of Mg 2+ , Ca 2+ and Mn 2+ , Ca can be replaced by Mg and Mn in the crystal lattice The aim of this study was to investigate the stabilization of Mn 4+ in the slag and to verify also which Lirich phases are formed. Moreover, it should be investigated whether Mn 4+ forms a compound with Mg or Al. Based on the phase diagrams, the experiment provides an overview of which phases crystallize in a synthetic slag consisting of Li2O, MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, CaO and MnOx. As can be seen from Figure The addition of MgO together with Al2O3 will increase stability range of cubic spinel in the Li2O-MnOx-MgO-Al2O3 system. The tetragonal-to-cubic transformations for the spinel phase in the MgO-MnOx and Al2O3-MnOx systems are driven by the Jahn-Teller distortion of octahedral sites, primarily occupied by Mn 3+ ions. In the cubic phase, assuming a disproportionation of Mn 3+ into Mn 4+ and Mn 2+ and occupation the octahedral sites by Mn +4 and distribution of Mn +2 between tetrahedral and octahedral sites, a general formula for cubic spinel (Al 3+ , Mn 2+ )1 (Al 3+ , Mn 3+ , Mn 2+ , Mn 4+ ,Va)2 (Mn 2+ , Va)2 (O 2-)4 is employed in Al2O3-MnOx system and (Mg 2+ , Mn 2+ )1 (Mg 2+ , Mn 3+ , Mn 2+ , Mn 4+ ,Va)2 (Mg 2+ , Mn 2+ , Va)2 (O 2-)4 in MgO-MnOx system. This formulation accommodates the variation in oxidation states of Mn within the crystal lattice. The cubic spinel phase is further characterized by the inclusion of vacancies (Va) on the octahedral sites and Mn +2 /Mg +2 in interstitial site. The vacancies are introduced into the spinel model to extend the homogeneity ranges towards Al2O3 side and interstitial site to model extension towards MnOx/MgO side. The applied models account for deviations from a perfectly ordered structure to describe disordering in cationic sites and to describe homogeneity ranges of spinel thus enhancing the model applicability in a large range of conditions (compositions, temperature, oxygen partial pressure). Modelling of tetragonal spinel differs from cubic by introducing Mn +3 into tetrahedral site and by absence of Mn +4 in octahedral site in both systems. Tetragonal phase is stable at lower temperatures and in more narrow composition range than cubic spinel. The octahedral sites are substantially occupied by Mn 4+ in cubic spinel in the MgO-MnOx system in the whole possible composition range. Low concentration of Mn 4+ is found in the spinel phase with compositions close to stoichiometric MnAl2O4 in the Al2O3-MnOx system even at high oxygen partial pressure. Thus, the introduction of Mg into the spinel phase not only enhances the stability but also effectively increase the Mn 4+ concentration. This suggests a more pronounced role of Mg in maintaining the desired Mn oxidation state within the spinel structure. The Li addition introduces a notable impact on the Mn 4+ ion concentration on the octahedral sites. Substitution of Mn +2 for Li 1+ in the tetrahedral sites reduces the charge of cations in spinel. In order to preserve the electroneutrality of this structure the fraction of Mn +4 in octahedral sites occupied by Mn +3 in tetragonal spinel should be increased. The increase of Mn +4 in octahedral site should also reduce Jahn-Teller effect caused by electronic structure of Mn +3 cation. It should be noted that in the stoichiometric spinel LiMn2O4 cation Li +1 completely occupies tetrahedral site and the ratio of Mn +4 /Mn +3 in octahedral site is equal to one. In case of Li content is higher than in stoichiometric spinel, Li +1 partially occupies octahedral site and ratio Mn +4 /Mn +3 becomes larger than one. With the temperature increase spinel becomes enriched by Mn with the shift of composition to stoichiometric spinel LiMn2O4 and even higher content of Mn. Therefore, spinel with high Li content stable at lower temperature, with the temperature increase will decompose to spinel with lower Li content and Li2MnO3 phase (Figure According to the phase diagram shown in Figure and therefore small amounts of these elements are not a problem for Li-manganate (LiMnO2 or Li2MnO3) forming processes. As long as Mn 2+ and Mn 3+ are present in the slag, spinels with Mg, Al and Mn are formed, which can interfere with the formation of EnAMs. In order to produce large and pure EnAM crystals that can also be efficiently separated from the rest of the slag, it must be ensured that LiMnO2 or Li2MnO3 crystallize out of the melt first. A total of four Li-containing phases crystallized out in the slag. These phases include the two Limanganates LiMnO2 and Li2MnO3, as well as the Li-silicate Li2SiO3 and Li-containing hausmannite. With an average of 0.51 wt.% (S3) to 1.59 wt.% Li (S1), the Li content in hausmannite is too low to be a potential EnAM. The Li +1 is incorporated at the tetrahedral site and replaces Mn 2+ in the crystal lattice. The incorporation of Li +1 into cubic LiMn2O4 can occur by balancing Mn 4+ on the octahedral site, but it also can occur by deviation from stoichiometry of oxygen by introducing vacancies As shown in Figure Firstly, it is an early crystallite with large, idiomorphic crystals and containing more Li compared to LiAlO2 (10.35 wt.% Li). The stabilization of only Mn 4+ in the slag has the additional advantage that spinel formation with Mn could be suppressed and that the Jahn-Teller effect does not cause deformation. In addition, LiMnO2 (7.39 wt.% Li) can also be considered as a potential EnAM. The low incorporation of Al (0.83 wt.%) does not seem to have any effect on the crystal lattice. According to Kong et al. Nevertheless, it remains to be determined which of the two Li manganates, LiMnO2 or Li2MnO3, formed first. It is possible that LiMnO2 forms first as a high temperature phase and remains stable during cooling. At low temperatures, according to phase diagram the stable phases are spinel and Li2MnO3. The alternative would be that Li2MnO3 forms first and decomposes to LiMnO2 and Li2O, which reacts with SiO2 forming Li2SiO3. The presented results indicate that it was possible to stabilize the Mn 4+ containing Li-manganate Li2MnO3 in a synthetic slag. However, the conditions under which Li2MnO3 was formed and how Mn 4+ was stabilized throughout the slag remain to be clarified. A promising approach would be to investigate phase relations (experimentally and theoretically) and to develop thermodynamic databases for a complex system (e.g. a slag system consisting of several elements such as Li, Mg, Al, Si, Ca, Mn, O). Elemental composition of the precursors in wt.% and at.%. The precursors have the same composition as %) and in S3 57.88 wt.% (min.: 57.02 wt.%; max.: 58.17 wt.%) (Figure