Directional couplers are ubiquitous components for power distribution in silicon photonics integrated circuits. Despite significant advances in their performance, architectures providing tailorable coupling ratios over increasingly broad bandwidths are still sought after. Compact footprint and low losses are also essential features for circuits comprising multiple coupling stages. In this work, we propose a compact directional coupler with arbitrary coupling ratio, based on dispersion engineering through subwavelength metamaterials. Low losses and a flat spectral response over a broad bandwidth are experimentally demonstrated for multiple coupling ratios between 0.08 and 1. Results show average excess losses below 0.24 dB and coupling ratio deviations below ±1 dB for a 170 nm bandwidth completely covering C, L and U telecommunication bands (1505 -1675 nm). ILICON-ON-INSULATOR (SOI) platforms provide compact and efficient photonics integrated circuits (PICs) while leveraging the maturity of microelectronics fabrication for reduced manufacturing costs Directional couplers (DCs) are one of the most widely used Jaime Vilas, Irene Olivares, and Antonio Dias-Ponte are with Alcyon Photonics S.L, Madrid 28003, Spain (e-mail: j.vilas@alcyonphotonics.com, irene@alcyonphotonics.com, antonio.dias@alcyonphotonics.com). 2×2 power splitters, owing to their structural simplicity and straightforward design In this Letter, we report on the design and experimental demonstration of a compact SWG-based DC, geometrically engineered to achieve ultra-low losses and a broad bandwidth with a tailorable cr. Experimental measurements show average excess losses below 0.24 dB and coupling ratio deviations below ±1 dB over a 170 nm bandwidth, covering the C, L and U communication bands. The architecture of our 2×2 SWG DC is depicted in Fig. The taper region (B in Fig. Finally, the input/output regions, labelled C in Fig. In order to optimize our SWG DC and evaluate its performance, we define the following figures of merit. Coupling ratio deviation (Δcr) is defined as the deviation from the central cr within a given bandwidth. Said coupling ratio is computed as cr = Pcross/(Pcross+Pthrough), where Pcross and Pthrough are the power output at the cross and through ports, respectively. Likewise, excess losses are defined by EL = -10log(Pcross/(Pcross+Pthrough)). Since our SWG DC can be designed with an arbitrary cr, we further define the mean excess losses (EL) as the average EL of all DCs under analysis with cr ∈ (0,1). We also define EL . as the EL of a DC with cr = 0.5, in order to facilitate comparison with other 3-dB DCs of the state of the art. The proposed architecture was optimized for transverse electric (TE) polarization in an SOI platform with a Si core thickness of 0.22 μm, and SiO2 cladding and buried oxide (upper cladding thickness of 2.2 μm). Wire waveguide width was set to 0.45 μm for mono-mode operation. Through full three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D FDTD) simulations, we firstly optimized the geometric parameters of the coupling region. Notice that as Λ increases, the beat length decreases Then, taper length was optimized to 1.56 μm (Nt = 6). Taper impact on cr was evaluated by simulating a device with backto-back tapers (Np = 0), resulting in cr = 0.08. This value sets the minimum design threshold for cr and needs to be taken into account when setting the coupling section length for a target cr. Total coupling in the cross port (cr = 1) is obtained for Np = 40 at ff = 0.54. These limits result in device lengths (A+B sections) between 3 and 13.4 μm. Finally, we set the length of the Sbends (Lbend) to 5 μm, with a final separation of 2.95 μm between ports. We embedded the S-bends 0.65 μm into the tapers to further reduce coupling in the interface between sections B and C. In order to experimentally demonstrate the performance of the device for different cr, we fabricated 11 DCs with linearly increasing Np between 0 and 40, and replicated the designs for all three ff scenarios. Fabrication was carried out using the electron-beam (e-beam) lithography process of Applied Nanotools (NanoSOI). The mask pattern was defined by exposing the resist to a 100 keV e-beam lithography system, followed by an anisotropic reactive ion etching process for pattern transfer. SiO2 cladding was deposited by chemical vapor deposition. High-efficiency broadband SWG edge couplers were included to minimize fiber-chip coupling losses Focusing on ff = 0.54, Fig. As shown in Table In conclusion, we have designed and fabricated a novel lowloss directional coupler based on subwavelength gratings metamaterials. Experimental characterization of the device for coupling ratios ranging from 0.08 to 1 shows average losses below 0.24 dB and maximum coupling ratio deviation below ± 1 dB across a bandwidth of 170 nm. Maximum coupling ratio deviations within the individual C, L and U bands are reduced to ±0.3 ±0.5 dB and ±0.5 dB, respectively. Given the slightly steeper coupling ratio slope at higher wavelengths, device performance could be further improved by optimizing SWG metamaterial design for a greater central wavelength. Coupler length ranges from 3 μm (cr = 0.08) to 13.40 μm (cr = 1), including input/output tapers. These results showcase that the proposed design provides a tailorable coupling ratio while maintaining high performance and ensuring both a compact footprint-length and a manufacture-friendly minimum feature size. The performance of our device makes it as a strong candidate for general power distribution in SOI PICs, and in particular, for the implementation of multi-stage MZI-based optical filters. VI. © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information. This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LPT.2023.3325660 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.