The influence that the atmosphere (N2 or Ar) and sintering time have on microstructure evolution in liquid-phase-sintered -SiC (LPS--SiC) and on its mechanical properties at high temperature was investigated. The microstructure of the samples sintered in N2 was equiaxed with a grain size of 0.70 μm and a density of 98% of the theoretical value regardless of the sintering time. In contrast, samples sintered in Ar had an elongatedgrain microstructure with a density decreasing from 99% to 95% and a grain size increasing from 0.64 to 1.61 μm as the sintering time increased from 1 to 7 hours. The mechanical behaviour at 1450 °C showed the samples sintered in nitrogen to be brittle and fail at very low strains, with a fracture stress increasing from 400 to 800 MPa as the sintering time increased. In contrast, the samples sintered in Ar were quasi-ductile with increasing strain to failure as the sintering time increased, and a fracture stress strongly linked to the form and size of the grains. These differences in the mechanical properties of the two materials are discussed in the text. During mechanical tests, a loss of intergranular phase takes place in a region, between 50 and 150 μm thick, close to the surface of the samples -the effect being more important in the samples sintered in Ar. In the last few decades, much effort has been put into developing structural ceramics due to the demand of industry for materials to be used in ever severer conditions. Amongst them, SiC has been one of the most widely studied due to its remarkable mechanical properties at high as well as at low temperatures, its low density, and its excellent resistance to corrosion and thermal shock. However, it is difficult to obtain fully dense SiC materials due to the covalent bonding between Si and C and the low diffusion coefficient of the two species. It has been necessary to develop sintering techniques to reduce temperatures and stresses. In this regard, Prochazka 1 in 1975, using B and C as additives, obtained a high densification of -SiC powders at temperatures above 2000 °C. Coppola et al. The mechanical properties of these liquid phase sintered SiC (LPS-SiC) materials depend strongly on the microstructure, and this in turn on the amount and type of the liquid phase, type of starting powder, temperature, time, and sintering atmosphere. Knowledge of the relationships between the sintering process parameters, the microstructure, and the mechanical properties is fundamental to obtaining SiC with desired properties. Several workers have connected the microstructure of liquid-phase-sintered SiC to its mechanical properties at high temperatures. Nagaro et al. Schneider et al. The objective of the present work was to correlate the microstructure and mechanical behaviour of an LPS--SiC, with Y2O3 and Al2O3 as liquid phase (10%-wt), and sintered in two atmosphere (N2 and Ar) for different process times. The mechanical tests were performed at a constant strain rate, and the microstructure before and after deformation was determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The powder used in this work was composed of 90% -SiC and 10% Y2O3 and Al2O3 as intergranular phase in the ratio 3/5 to get yttrium aluminium garnet Y3Al5O12 (YAG). The powders were sintered at 1950 °C in two different atmospheres (Ar and N2) for several times from 1 to 7 hours in the Department of Metallurgy and Material Science Engineering, Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, USA. For more details see references The microstructure characteristics -grain size and morphology, pore distribution, and damage after high temperature tests -were determined using a Philips Model XL-30 scanning electron microscope (SEM; electron microscopy service, University of Seville, Spain) operating at 30 kV using backscattered and secondary electrons. Prior to observation, the samples were polished with diamond paste of grain size down to 1 μm, and plasma (CF4 and O2 in the ratio 1:6) etched for 2 hours (Plasma Asher K1050X, Emitech). In some cases, the samples were sputter-coated with gold to avoid charge effects during observation. The morphological characteristics were determined using a Videoplan image analyzer (Videoplan MOP 30, Kontron Electronik). Specimens of 5×2.5×2.5 mm of the different materials were machined out and polished to a 3 μm finish. Uniaxial compression tests were performed in air at 1450 °C using an Instron universal testing machine (Model 1185) with the square face (2.5×2.5 mm) normal to the loading axis. The specimens were sandwiched between two solidstate-sintered SiC platelets in order to avoid damage to the Al2O3 pushing rods. A constant crosshead of 5 μm min -1 was used, corresponding to an initial strain rate (  ) of 1.7 10 -5 s -1 . The load-displacement data was recorded continuously and analyzed in terms of engineering stress and engineering strain. One observes that the SiC grains (dark contrast) are surrounded by the intergranular phase (light contrast). Also, the intergranular phase is homogeneously distributed, and there exists a small amount of residual porosity. This porosity is consistent with the density of the samples as measured by Archimedes' method. Table Figure In Fig. The anisotropic evolution of a few grains for the longer sintering time (7 hours) can be understood as the result of the presence of a certain amount of  phase seeds in the -SiC starting powders. At the sintering temperature, the  phase transformation takes place within these grains, resulting in grains with a composite / nature. The silicon and carbon species dissolve in the liquid and re-precipitate as -SiC onto -SiC regions in order to minimize the free energy of the system, thereby leading to the grains having a much higher aspect ratio which increases with annealing time Figure The morphological parameters of the grains for the different types of sample were determined from SEM micrographs of different parts of the samples, using at least 350 grains in each case. Figure The other grain parameters measured for the different types of sample were the form factor (F=4•area/perimeter 2 ) and the aspect ratio Fasp, defined as the ratio between the maximum length and the minimum width taken perpendicular to the length in the planar section of the grains. Table Uniaxial compression tests were performed at constant cross head speed in air at 1450 °C. Figure Figure The SEM micrographs of the deformed samples show that the intergranular phase was absent in a region (between 50 and 150 μm thick) close to the surface, (Fig. The samples presented a viscous-looking surface layer (Fig. The SEM micrographs in the centre of the samples showed, in all the cases, that the size and form factor of the SiC grains remained unchanged after deformation. The deformation was thus not due to the transport of point defects (Nabarro-Herring or Coble mechanisms), because in such cases the grains would undergo almost the same deformation as the sample. This can be understood in terms of the low diffusion coefficient of Si and C at these temperatures (1450 °C) Although it is possible for dislocations to be activated under the conditions of the tests The situation was different for the nitrogen atmosphere sintered samples. As was noted above, while the morphology of the grains remained unchanged with sintering time, the mechanical behaviour was markedly different (Fig. The rigidity of the glass network and the higher binding energy due to the incorporation of nitrogen into the glass phase seem to be the causes of the increase in flow stress and maximum stress with annealing time. The microstructure of this type of material after deformation (Fig. • The microstructure characterization of the as-received samples showed a homogeneous distribution of the intergranular phases, and a density close to 98% of the theoretical value independently of the sintering time for samples sintered in nitrogen. For samples sintered in argon, the density decreased as the annealing time increased, being 95% for the longest annealing time. • The microstructure of the samples sintered in nitrogen was unchanged with increasing sintering time, and the grains were equiaxed with an average size of 0.70 μm. For the samples sintered in argon, the grain size increased from 0.64 to 1.61 μm, and the grains became ever more elongated as the sintering time increased from 1 to 7 hours. • For the nitrogen sintered samples, the flow stress increased from 350 to 750 MPa and the maximum stress from 400 to 800 MPa as the annealing time was prolonged from 1 to 7 hours. This was a consequence of the incorporation of nitrogen into the intergranular phase. • For the argon sintered samples, the flow stress remained between 350 and 400 MPa and the failure stress between 500 and 550 Mpa, almost independently of the sintering time. For the longest sintering time, the flow stress was 650 MPa and the failure stress was 800 MPa, due to the large elongated grains present in the microstructure. • The almost unchanged morphology of the grains after deformation and the redistribution of the intergranular phase indicated that grain boundary sliding and the squeezing of the intergranular phase constituted the mechanism controlling deformation. The absence of any accommodation process led to the creation of cavities and cracks, and their coalescence was the cause of the failure of the material. • The differences in behaviour between the nitrogen and the argon sintered samples were due to the different microstructures generated in the two types of sample, and to the incorporation of nitrogen into the intergranular phase leading to increased viscosity at high temperatures and rigidity of the glass network. • The squeezing of the glass phase of a zone close to the surface, between 50 and 150 μm thick, increased the density of pores. This pore density was greater the closer to the surface. The phenomenon was more significant in the argon sintered samples due to the lower viscosity of the glassy phase. After deformation at 1450 °C, a viscouslooking layer appeared in the surface of the samples rich in Y, Al, and O. 