In this paper, the dynamic behavior of a one DoF contactless linear slider based on superconducting magnetic levitation is experimentally analyzed. The device is intended for precision positioning of an optic mirror in cryogenic environments. Different prototypes of this device have been tested at cryogenic temperatures (77 K), and their mechanical behavior characterized in the sliding direction for forced and unforced oscillations. Experimental results reveal that the slider is self-stable at the initial equilibrium position and the dynamic behavior fits well an underdamped harmonic oscillator. Finally, the device showed great potential for horizontal vibration isolation, acting as a low-pass filter with a resonance at about 0.9 Hz. The applications of classical mechanical joint and mechanisms to cryogenic applications present several limitations, such as wear, cold welding, the limited number of options for lubrication at cryogenic temperatures and the presence of hysteresis, all of which are mainly induced by contact between moving parts Precision positioning, both at room temperature and in cryogenic environments, has become an important development for precision mechanisms and device: refocusing mechanisms, optical path difference actuators (OPDA), cryogenic motors, multi-axis positioning stages, conveyors and actuators The device studied in this paper is a slider mechanism for precision positioning in cryogenic environment. It is mainly composed of a static guideline, made of two 45 mm diameter superconducting polycrystalline YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x disks (HTS) It has been demonstrated that the performance of the mechanism can be easily tuned by geometric modifications of the prototype The central equilibrium position can be easily relocated along the stroke of the mechanism by modifying, with an open-loop control strategy, the current in two coils placed at either end of the stroke of the mechanism (3). The axes of the coils are parallel to the magnetization axis of the PM. Finally, these coils have been specially designed to provide improved stability to the PM and only exert distance magnetic forces in the sliding direction. The experiments have been developed using the experimental set-up presented in Fig. The actuation system is composed of a couple of coils (3) with rectangular shape (110x60 mm2) and 10 mm in height with 190 AWG18 wire turns each located at each end of the stroke and connected in anti-serial configuration unless other is specified. This connection present the advantage that while one of the coils repels the PM, the other attracts it therefore increasing the magnitude of the force exerted and reducing the power consumption with regard to other configurations. The measured resistance of each coil at room temperature is about 3.8 Ω. Once a configuration of the prototype is selected (d and HFC) the superconductors are cooled and, after a short period of time for the stabilization of the temperature, the spacers removed leaving the PM able to levitate. After levitation has been established, the coils (3) were supplied with a DC or AC current provided either by a Velleman DC power supply model ps613 or a Promax function generator model gf-855. The DC power source has been used to provide the current in the coils for the motion of the slider in sections 3.2 to 3.4. The AC signal generator has been used in order to study the dynamic response of the slider under sinusoidal forced oscillations, introduced in section 3.5. In all cases, the current in the coils has been measured using a multimeter from ICE Instrumentazione, model 5600, with 0.01 mA accuracy. In order to measure the position of the slider in its path, a laser triangulator ILD 1402 from Micro-Epsilon, with a resolution of about 10 μm, has been used (4). The slider carries an aluminum cube (5) on which the laser beam is reflected. The height of the prototype with respect to the beam from the laser triangulator can be regulated thanks to a lab-jack stand Paper No. VIB-13-1183 , Valiente-Blanco, I. 5 The X position of the slider vs. the DC current in the coil is plotted for different values of d in Fig. INSERT FIG. In order to characterize the damping and natural frequency of the mechanism for unforced oscillations, the following experiment has been developed: initially, the coils are supplied with a constant DC current and the slider moves to the limit of the stroke (X ~ +10mm). Then, once the position has been stabilized, the coils were switched off and the position of the slider was measured until it stabilizes its position at the equilibrium point of the system (X = 0). The results of this experiment are presented in Fig. The damping of the system can obtained from Fig. The dashed line in Fig. Paper No. VIB-13-1183 , Valiente-Blanco, I. 6 the data plotted in Fig. No significant harmonics are appreciated in Fig. Natural frequency from experimental data is about 0.92±0.04 Hz in very good agreement with which it was predicted in section 3.2, supporting the idea that the behavior of the slider can be described with good accuracy by an underdamped harmonic oscillator. The speed of the slider has been derived from the position vs. time data in Fig. The motion of the slider for forced harmonic oscillations has been studied with the following procedure. A sinusoidal current of constant magnitude (about 90 mA) was supplied to both of the coils in the mechanism. These coils were connected in anti-serial configuration, so that when one of the coils attracts Paper No. VIB-13-1183 , Valiente-Blanco, I. 7 the PM the opposite one repels it. This connection is intended to increase the sensitivity of the motion of the slider with respect to the configuration adopted in section 3.2 and simplify the control of the position of the mechanism Transmissibility can be calculated from experimental data and compared to the transmissibility expected in the corresponding harmonic oscillator using eq. 2. A o is the amplitude of the response, A i is the amplitude of the vibrational input: Displacement amplitude for f ~0 Hz equal to 2.3 mm, is the frequency ratio, and is the damping ratio. Results of these measurements are plotted in Fig. No further results for frequencies higher than 100 Hz are presented, because the amplitude of the transmitted oscillation is less than the displacement sensor resolution. However it seems clear that the device behaves like a low-pass filter for vibrations in the horizontal direction, with its resonant frequency at about 0.9 Hz. Besides, the transmissibility of the device can be described with reasonable accuracy by a harmonic oscillator. The dynamic behavior of a levitating superconducting linear slider is presented. A set of experiments at 77 K and ambient pressure has been developed with different prototypes. Despite dynamic behavior of plenty of superconducting devices in literature has been found complex, even chaotic, experimental analysis on the device presented in this paper show that the motion of the slider in the horizontal direction can be described with good accuracy by an underdamped harmonic oscillator with damping linearly dependent on the speed of the slider. Results for transmissibility experimental analysis for sinusoidal forced oscillations also support the idea that the slider behaves like a harmonic oscillator. Ultimately the characteristic parameters of the oscillator that have been experimentally characterized are summarized in Table In addition, the device showed the potential to become a contactless passive or active system for horizontal vibration isolation with a low natural frequency below 1 Hz with a quality factor about 3. Finally, results obtained in this study will allow engineers to design different devices for vibration isolation and precision positioning in cryogenic environments. Paper No. VIB-13-1183 , Valiente-Blanco, I.