We report scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurements on uncapped and SrTiO3 (STO) capped NdNiO2 realized by pulsed-laser deposition and topotactic reduction process. We find that untreated NdNiO2 surfaces are insulating and contain Ni mostly in a nominal Ni 2+ oxidation state. Room temperature STM shows signatures of a striped-like topographic pattern, possibly compatible with recent reports of ordered oxygen vacancies in uncapped nickelates due to incomplete oxygen de-intercalation of the upper layers. A metallic surface and a full Ni 1+ oxidation state is recovered by ultra high vacuum annealing at 250 • C, as shown by STM and XPS. STO-capped NdNiO2 films, on the other hand, show Ni mostly in Ni 1+ configuration, but Nd 3d 5/2 core level spectra have a relevant contribution from ligand 4f 4 L states, suggesting the formation of a NdTiNiOx layer at the interface with the STO. By in situ unit-cell by unit-cell Ar-ion sputtering removal of the STO capping and of the non stoichiometric interface layer, we were able to address the surface electronic properties of these samples, as shown by high resolution valence band photoemission spectroscopy. The results provide insights in the properties of infinite-layer NdNiO2 thin films prepared by the CaH2 topotactic reduction of perovskite NdNiO3 and suggest methods to improve their surface quality. Rare-earth nickelates RNiO 3 (R= rare-earth) have been the leitmotiv of intense theoretical and experimental research efforts towards the realization of novel high-Tc superconductors mimicking the electronic structure of cuprates, as suggested by a seminal work From these studies it emerges that the intrinsic electronic properties of nickelates cannot be easily accessed by surface-sensitive techniques, in particular, angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS). It is then quite crucial to establish methods to restore the surface properties of these compounds in order to fully study their electronic properties. Among the important questions to be undisclosed, we cite the need to establish the role of rare-earth 5d -electronic states Here, we report a thorough study of the surface electronic properties of STO-capped and uncapped undoped NNO films realized by CaH 2 topotactic reduction of the perovskite phase. We studied films realized at the CNRS-IPCMS in Strasbourg by the PLD technique followed by the topotactic reduction, and then introduced from the ambient atmosphere into surface analysis set-ups: lab-based x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) at the CNR-SPIN Modular Oxide Deposition and analysis (MODA) Facility, and high-resolution valence band (VB) photoemission spectroscopy at the Cassiopee beamline of the SOLEIL synchrotron radiation facility. We show that as received uncapped samples have insulating surfaces, which contain a substantial fraction of Ni in nominal Ni 2+ electronic configuration, while in capped NdNiO 2 Ni is mostly in Ni 1+ valence state. However, the unit-cells at the interface with the STO overlayer of capped NdNiO 2 are also not ideal, with some Ni in higher valence state and surprisingly Nd 3d 5/2 core level spectra having a relevant contribution from ligand 4f 4 L states, thus differing from ideal Nd 3+ . A metallic state with a robust Ni 1+ valence in uncapped NNO is nevertheless achieved by ultra high vacuum (UHV) annealing at 250 • C, while the removal of the STO-capping-layer and of the interfacial NNO-layer by unit-cell by unit-cell Ar-ion sputtering in capped NNO gives rise to a metallic surface state and a substantial recover of Nd 3d 5/2 spectra towards ideal Nd 3+ . The results provide insights into the properties of infinite-layer NdNiO 2 thin films prepared by the CaH 2 topotactic reduction of perovskite NdNiO 3 , and suggest methods to improve their surface quality. Perovskite NdNiO 3 (NNO3) thin films of 10 nm in thickness were grown onto STO single crystal by PLD as described in Refs. To study the surface structural properties of NNO samples, we performed UHV-STM measurements on uncapped samples. In Fig. To get insight into the electronic properties of infinitelayers nickelates, and the effect of the topotactic process, in Figure While a full understanding of the core-level Ni 2p spectra is beyond the scope of this work requiring sophisticated theoretical calculations, due to the formal Ni 3d 9 ground state configuration of infinite-layer nickelates, it is reasonable to look for analogies between XPS Cu corelevel data of undoped cuprates and those of the capped NNO sample. The latter exhibit a valence closer to Ni 1+ , thus a Ni 3d 9 configuration similar to Cu 2+ in the CuO 2 planes. In cuprates, the features B and A in the 2p 3/2 core level XPS have been interpreted as 2p 5 3d 10 L local screened, and 2p 5 3d 10 Z non-local screened final states, where Z stands as Zhang-Rice Singlet (ZRS) In order to get more insight into the electronic prop-erties of as-grown capped and uncapped NNO, we performed core-level XPS Nd 3d measurements and compared the results to perovskite NNO3 samples, as shown in Figures First, we studied the non-ideal and barely reduced surface of uncapped NNO. To reduce excess oxygen and the amount of adsorbed species due to the ex-situ exposure to the atmosphere from the surface unit cells of uncapped NNO, the films were annealed in situ in UHV at 250 • C for 12h, as described above. Figure In this work, we investigated the surface/interface electronic properties of uncapped and capped infinite-layer nickelates. The experimental results of our combined STM and photoemission spectroscopy studies show that the surface and interface unit cells of uncapped and capped NNO are not ideal. While uncapped NNO is characterized by an insulating surface state and a Nivalence remarkably similar to reference NNO3 perovskite, capped NNO shows mostly Ni in Ni 1+ configuration. On the other hand, at the interface with the STO capping an intermixed non-ideal layer, presumably of NdTiNiO x composition (and possibly excess hydrogen), is formed. A metallic surface with a Ni 1+ valence state was restored via annealing in UHV at 250 • C in uncapped NNO, while an Ar + ion sputtering process was necessary to access the electronic properties of capped NNO samples by removing the STO layers and the interfacial (non-ideal) unit cell. In this way, we could provide an experimental study of the VB of Ni 1+ NdNiO 2 nickelate and access the near Fermi level electronic properties, giving further support to the classification of these oxides as Hubbard or intermediate between Hubbard and charge transfer insulators. Our work represents a step towards the goal of creating an ideal NdNiO 2 surface state, which could allow deep investigations by surface spectroscopy methods like angle-resolved photoemission. While annealing in UHV and ion-sputtering are not yet sufficient to establish longrange atomically flat ideal NiO 2 surfaces on samples prepared by ex-situ CaH 2 topotactic reduction of perovskite NdNiO 3 samples, their opportune combination and optimization are promising for future studies aimed at preserving not only the stoichiometry but also the long-range surface structural order. These methods combined with the novel in-situ approaches of realization of infinite layer nickelates, like hydrogen thermal cracker technique 