Motivated by the recent observation of superconductivity in the pressurized trilayer La4Ni3O10 Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) nickelate, we explore its structural, electronic, and magnetic properties as a function of hydrostatic pressure from first-principles calculations. We find that in both the bilayer and trilayer nickelates, an orthorhombic(monoclinic)-to-tetragonal transition under pressure takes place concomitantly with the onset of superconductivity. The electronic structure of La4Ni3O10 can be understood using a molecular trimer basis wherein n molecular subbands arise as the d z 2 orbitals hybridize strongly along the c-axis within the trilayer. The magnetic tendencies indicate that the ground state at ambient pressure is formed by nonmagnetic inner planes and stripe-ordered outer planes that are antiferromagnetically coupled along the c axis, resulting in an unusual ↑, 0, ↓ stacking that is consistent with the spin density wave model suggested by neutron diffraction. Such a state is destabilized by the pressures wherein superconductivity arises. Despite the presence of d z 2 states at the Fermi level, the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals also play a key role in the electronic structure of La4Ni3O10. This active role of the d x 2 -y 2 states in the low-energy physics of the trilayer RP nickelate, together with the distinct electronic behavior of inner and outer planes, resembles the physics of multilayer cuprates. Since the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity (HTS) in the cuprates, identifying analogous materials that could help determine the essential components for HTS has posed a significant challenge in condensed matter physics The field has been recently reinvigorated after the discovery of superconductivity under pressure (∼ 14 GPa) in bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 with a maximum T c ∼ 80 K For an emerging novel class of superconductors, it is crucial to find the analogies and differences among the members of the family. Here, using first-principles calculations, we analyze the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of the trilayer RP nickelate La 4 Ni 3 O 10 and contrast them to those of the bilayer material La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . We find that in both materials, an orthorhombic (monoclinic)to-tetragonal transition under pressure takes place that is concomitant with the onset of superconductivity. The electronic structure of La 4 Ni 3 O 10 can be understood using a quantum-coupled unit -a molecular trimer basisfor the trilayer wherein n molecular subbands (bondingnonbonding-antibonding) arise as the d z 2 orbitals hybridize strongly along the c-axis. A similar picture has been proposed for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 We have used density-functional theory (DFT)-based calculations to investigate the structural properties, electronic structure, and magnetic tendencies of La 4 Ni 3 O 10 under pressures up to 30 GPa The electronic structure for each optimized crystal structure was subsequently calculated using the allelectron, full-potential DFT code wien2k Figure Analogous structural relaxations for La 4 Ni 3 O 10 using either the monoclinic P 2 1 /c or orthorhombic Bmab crystal structures as a starting point To gain further insight into the lattice dynamics driving the transition towards a tetragonal structure with pressure in La 4 Ni 3 O 10 , we calculate the evolution of the phonons in the high-symmetry tetragonal (I4/mmm) setting (see Fig. Overall, our results strongly favor the transformation of the crystal structure to a tetragonal setting in both the bilayer and trilayer RP nickelates under pressure. Therefore, we conclude that the tetragonal phase in these materials is, most likely, the phase linked to the onset of superconductivity. We begin our analysis by examining the pressureinduced variations in the nonmagnetic electronic structure of La 4 Ni 3 O 10 . A formal valence count for La 4 Ni 3 O 10 renders an (average) Ni 2.67+ ion corresponding to a d 7.33 filling of the Ni(3d) shell. Within each trilayer complex (three NiO 6 layers), one has (on average) four electrons in the Ni-e g orbitals while the Ni-t 2g orbitals are completely filled. In order to clearly understand the band fillings in La 4 Ni 3 O 10 , the site-and orbital-resolved band structures are shown in Fig. The odd symmetry nonbonding (NB) state (ε = 0), which does not involve the inner Ni site, as shown by the corresponding eigenvector, is midway in energy between the even symmetry bonding (B) and antibonding (AB) states. This clean picture of molecular orbitals explains the siteand orbital-resolved band structures we obtain. Importantly, this picture survives the application of pressure and the structural phase transition, with increased splittings among the different molecular orbitals as pressure is applied. The molecular orbital picture applies to the bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 material as well, but in that case, one has only two molecular subbands for the dimer forming a bondingantibonding complex (and no effective difference between the two layers exists in terms of filling, in contrast to the trilayer material). As a consequence of this splitting, in the bilayer nickelate (where we have an average Ni valence Ni 2.5+ (d 7.5 ), which corresponds to three electrons to be filled for each bilayer in the Ni-e g orbitals, with the Ni-t 2g orbitals also being completely filled) two spin states are possible depending on how the three electrons fill the e g states: (i) a low-spin (LS) state, wherein the d z 2 bonding state is doubly occupied, whereas the antibonding state is empty, with the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals being 1/4 filled; or (ii) a high-spin (HS) state, where the bonding d z 2 and d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are all half-filled (i.e. the majority spin channel is occupied), and the antibonding d z 2 state remains empty. We have found Returning to the trilayer nickelate case, with the above considerations about the d z 2 splittings (and keeping in mind that the d x 2 -y 2 states are equally occupied for all the Ni atoms), how can one fill up the available four electrons in the e g levels? The different possible states are the following (see Fig. Fermi surface.-To draw comparisons, we start by briefly describing the fermiology of the bilayer RP La 3 Ni 2 O 7 (see Fig. The fermiology of La 4 Ni 3 O 10 is somewhat similar to that of its bilayer counterpart -with some relevant differences arising with pressure. At ambient pressure, the Fermi surface is comprised of two different types of sheets (see Fig. Applying pressure to La 4 Ni 3 O 10 , the Fermi surface exhibits many of the same features (α and β pockets) with the addition of the γ pocket of dominant d z 2 character at the zone corner (see Fig. At ambient pressure, La 4 Ni 3 O 10 is known to display a metal-to-metal transition that results from intertwined charge-density and spin-density (SDW) waves Thus to (approximately) test this magnetic state (that we denote M/0/M), as well as other types of orderings with pressure (ferromagnetic (FM), A-type antiferromagnetic (A-AFM), C-type antiferromagnetic (C-AFM) and G-type antiferromagnetic (G-AFM), as depicted in Fig. We have studied the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of the trillyer La 4 Ni 3 O 10 Ruddlesden-Popper nickelate as a function of hydrostatic pressure (and compared them with its bilayer counterpart La 3 Ni 2 O 7 ) from a first-principles perspective. In both materials, an orthorhombic(monoclinic)-to-tetragonal transition under pressure is found, that is concomitant with the onset of superconductivity. Their electronic structure can be understood using a quantum-coupled unit, wherein n molecular subbands arise as the d z 2 orbitals overlap strongly along the c-axis (with a bonding-antibonding complex being formed for the bilayer and a bonding-nonbonding-antibonding complex for the trilayer) that is hybridized with active Ni-d x 2 -y 2 in the plane. In the nonmagnetic state, the electronic structure does not change significantly with pressure, other than for the introduction of an extra pocket of d z 2 character at the corner of the tetragonal zone in La 4 Ni 3 O 10 . The magnetic tendencies of the trilayer RP nickelate indicate that the ground state at ambient pressure is consistent with the spin density wave model suggested by neutron diffraction data, with distinct inner (nonmagnetic) and stripe-ordered outer Ni layers (antiferromagnetically coupled along c), giving rise to an overall ↑, 0, ↓ stacking. Such a state is destabilized by the pressures wherein superconductivity arises. The distinct behavior of the inner and outer planes in the trilayer RP nickelate indicates that superconductivity might arise from layer differentiation, similar to multilayer cuprates. Table I summarizes layer-resolved Ni-e g moments for different magnetic configurations that are representative of the different spin states described in the purely ionic limit as shown in Fig. 