We propose a theory for how the weak phonon-mediated interaction (JA = 1 ∼ 4meV) wins over the prohibitive Coulomb repulsion (U = 30 ∼ 60meV) and leads to a superconductor in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG). We find the pairing mechanism akin to that in the A3C60 family of molecular superconductors: Each AA stacking region of MATBG resembles a C60 molecule, in that optical phonons can dynamically lift the degeneracy of the moiré orbitals, in analogy to the dynamical Jahn-Teller effect. Such induced JA has the form of an inter-valley anti-Hund's coupling and is less suppressed than U by the Kondo screening near a Mott insulator. Additionally, we also considered an intra-orbital Hund's coupling JH that originates from the on-site repulsion of a carbon atom. Under a reasonable approximation of the realistic model, we prove that the renormalized local interaction between quasi-particles have a pairing (negative) channel in a doped correlated insulator at ν = ±(2 + δν), albeit the bare interaction is positive definite. The proof is non-perturbative and based on exact asymptotic behaviors of the vertex function imposed by Ward identities. Existence of an optimal U for superconductivity is predicted. In a large area of the parameter space of JA, JH, the ground state is found to have a nematic d-wave singlet pairing, which, however, can lead to a p-wave-like nodal structure due to the Berry's phase on Fermi surfaces (or Euler obstruction). * These authors contribute equally to this work. A striking feature of magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) Inspired by the recent experimental evidence of significant coupling between flat band electrons and A 1 , B 1 phonons at ω ph =150meV Before detailed derivations, let us outline the chain of approximations and methodology employed in this work. After integrating out the fast A 1 , B 1 phonons We devote this work to investigating the pairing instability of the Fermi liquid at ν = -2 -δν in the presence of J A,H . An immediate difficulty arises: Since U ≫ J A,H , the bare interaction is positive definite and does not support any pairings A powerful theoretical tool that enables our analysis is the Ward identity With the pairing channel identified, we next study the SC on the moiré lattice. Consider the RPA pairing susceptibil- ity χ p = χ p0 /(1 + χ p0 Γ p ), where χ p0 is the non-interacting susceptibility (bubble diagram) from the heavy quasi-particle excitations on the lattice, and Γ p is the effective local interaction. Technically, Γ p is given by the local 2PI vertex, connected to the local 1PI vertex via Fig. Due to the particle-hole symmetry of the model Effective model. We write the free action for an Anderson impurity as Here ω is the fermion Matsubara frequency, ε f is the on-site energy, and ∆(ω) is the hybridization function. In a Fermi liquid phase, ∆(ω) can be well approximated by ∆ 0 sgn(ω) for low energy physics. ∆ 0 should be understood as a phenomenological bare parameter that reproduces the correct T K Here indices with a bar represent the opposite indices of the same degree of freedom. We consider three interaction terms: an on-site Hubbard U term (58meV) contributed by Coulomb repulsion of 2D electron gas U 0 disfavors double occupation on a carbon atom, and the α = 1, 2 f -orbitals are mainly distributed on the A and B graphene sub-lattices Flattened interaction. To study the pairing instability of the Fermi liquid phase at ν = -2 -δν, we argue that the complex interaction Hamiltonian defined by Fig. Ref. [84] provides a more quantitative justification for the flattened interaction by a phenomenological susceptibility analysis. It shows that, if the original interaction is adopted, the breaking of U(1) ×4 ×SU(2) ×2 symmetry in the renormalized theory is finite but weak. The flattened interaction also applies to the T K ≫ J A,H limit where any multiplet splitting becomes irrelevant at the Kondo energy scale. Constrained by the U(1) ×4 ×SU(2) ×2 symmetry, a general parametrization of S I reads where τ is the imaginary time, N αη and S αη are respectively the charge and spin operators in the valley η and orbital α. The bare flattened interaction is given by Quasi-particles in heavy Fermi liquid. In the Fermi liquid phase, the local Green's function has a quasi-particle part z/[iω -ε f + i ∆ 0 sgn(ω)] and a featureless incoherent part. Here z = (1 -∂ iω Σ(ω)) -1 | ω=0 is the quasi-particle weight with Σ(ω) denoting the self-energy, ε f = z(ε f + Σ(0)) is the renormalized on-site energy, and , where D is the bandwidth, and T K will be further suppressed by finite J A,H . In this work we regard T K ∼1-10K, ν f ≈ -2, and z ∼0.1-0.3 Renormalized interaction in the ∆ 0 ≪ J ≪ U limit. In this limit the Kondo temperature T K ∼ ∆ 0 defines the single energy scale of the local Fermi liquid To derive U 1,2,3,4 , J , we make use of the Ward identities where Setting O I to be the electric charge σ 0 τ 0 ς 0 (l = c), spin ς z (s), valley τ z (v), and orbital σ z (o) operators and exploiting δ f = π/4, we obtain For the d-wave ground states (Fig. U 1 has been determined to be negative, hence at least one of the renormalized pairing channels with energies, U 1 ∓ J (given after Eq. ( Renormalized interaction in the J ≪ ∆ 0 ≪ U limit. In this limit, J plays a minor role in the local Fermi liquid, and all two-electron states equally participate in the Kondo screening We carry out the calculation at ν = -2.5 using z = 0.3 and J p -U p 1 in the range from 0.5 to 2meV (Fig. that breaks the C 3z symmetry. Here φ sets the orientation of the nematic order. When J p -U p 1 <0.7meV, the chiral state has a slightly lower energy than the nematic state. When J p -U p 1 >0.7meV, the nematic state has a significantly lower energy than the chiral state. p-wave-like nodal SC. An intermediate pairing strength leads to a p-wave-like nodal structure, as shown in Fig. Projecting the nematic d-wave pairing onto the FS, we obtain cos( As the FS encloses an odd number of Dirac points (Fig. As the pairing becomes stronger, nodes on the two FSs will merge, leading to a gapped phase (Fig. Discussion. Our theory provides insights into the strong coupling features of SC in MATBG. The pairing potential J p -U p 1 is a few times larger than T K , and the Fermi energy E F ∼ T K (Fig. In the intermediate regime where T K ∼ J A , multiplet split-tings breaking the U(1) ×4 × SU(2) ×2 symmetry should be considered. The remaining Ward identities cannot fully constrain the renormalized interaction. However, the continuity (Fig. where K is the complex conjugation. Their actions on the second quantized operators can be obtained directly In this work we do not distinguish the single-particle and the second-quantized representations of symmetry operators. If we write a unitary (anti-unitary) symmetry operator g as a matrix D g (D g • K), as exampled in Eq. (A1), then its action on secondquantized operators is defined by We denote the fermion creation operator of the p z orbital at the carbon atom belonging to the layer l (=+ for the top layer and for the bottom layer) by ψ † lrs . Here s is the spin index, r ∈ L l,1 + L l,2 is the position of the atom, and L l,β is the β-sub-lattice of the layer l, where we associate the A-, B-sub-lattices of graphene to β = 1 and 2, respectively. Projected ψ † lrs can be written in terms of the f operators as Here ±K l are the momenta of Dirac points in the layer l, K + = 4π 3aG (cos θ 2 , sin θ 2 ), K -= 4π 3aG (cos θ 2 , -sin θ 2 ), with a G = 2.46 Å being the graphene lattice constant and θ ≈ 1.08 • the magic twist angle. The length of K l is given by 2 a 2 G is the area of a graphene unit cell. w lβ,α (r) is the localized Wannier functions constructed in Ref. 2 ) , (A5) 2 ) , w At the magic-angle, the parameters are estimated as where The widely studied Coulomb interaction in MATBG is where and is the double-gate-screened Coulomb interaction. Here ξ is the distance between the two gates, U ξ = e 2 /(4πεξ), and ε ≈ 6 is the dielectric constant. For ξ = 10nm, there is U ξ = 24meV. This interaction respects a valley-U(1) symmetry. Bilinear terms due to the normal order form of operators are omitted because they can be absorbed into the chemical potential for the single-site problem. The Fourier transformation of V (r) is The projected intra-valley scattering interaction between ρ (ηη) and ρ (η ′ η ′ ) has been calculated in section S3B of the supplementary material of Ref. where N is the particle number operator. There is no other term, e.g., Hund's coupling, contributed by the intra-valley scattering due to the symmetry of MATBG. One can see discussions around Eq. (S135) of the supplementary material of Ref. , it gives a δ-like interaction on the microscopic graphene lattice. The projected interaction on the moiré orbitals can be estimated being the moiré unit cell area. Therefore, this inter-valley scattering interaction contributed by V (r) is indeed much weaker compared to the intra-valley one. Another usually omitted Coulomb interaction is the on-site Hubbard repulsion U 0 of the p z orbital of carbon atom. U 0 is estimated as large as 9.3eV Projecting it onto the f -orbitals, we obtain Notice that U 0 Ω G ≈ 4.7 × 10 4 meV• Å2 (U 0 taken as 9eV) is one order larger than V (±K l ). As the Wannier functions have the , quasi-angular momentum conservation gives the constraint Using the Gaussian wave-functions in Eqs. (A5) and (A6) and the valley-U(1), C 3z symmetries, we find there are only two types of matrix elements in H I2 . We summarize them in the following table The two parameters are The projected H I2 can be written as The parameters in Eq. (A7) give J H = 0.3590 × 10 -3 U 0 , and J ′ H = 0.1392 × 10 -3 U 0 . We can also calculate the two parameters using the numerical Wannier functions constructed in Ref. One can see that the intra-orbital Hund's coupling is stronger than the inter-orbital Hund's coupling. We can rewrite the J H term in Eq. (A19) as Using the relation μ=0,x,y,z ς μ s1s2 ς μ s3s4 = 2δ s1s4 δ s2s3 , the above expression equals where and N = α N α . Similarly, we can rewrite the third and forth terms in Eq. (A19) as However, the second term in Eq. (A19) cannot be written in terms of charge and spin operators. In summary, H I2 can be written as 3. A1, B1-phonon mediated inter-valley anti-Hund's coupling * Ref. is a continuous version of Eq. (A4) that is limited to the valley η and sub-lattice is the coupling constant and λ RG ≈ 3.2 is an enhancement factor due to the renormalization effect from higher energy (≳ 200meV) electron and phonon states [106] to obtain the T-IVC (time-reversal inter-valley coherent) state at the fillings ν = ±2. The projected H I3 is calculated in Ref. Here we directly give the results with 3meV, where the subscript A stands for anti-Hund's coupling. Using the relation μ=0,x,y,z ς μ s1s2 ς μ s3s4 = 2δ s1s4 δ s2s3 , we can rewrite H I3 as with being total charge and spin operators in the valley η, respectively. Adding up H I1,2,3 , we have We have made use of the relations where Ŝ is the total spin operator, in the derivation. Ŝ± here are Ŝη for η = ± and one should not confuse them with the raising and lowering operators. We note that this interaction enjoys a U(1) ×3 × SU(2) continuous symmetry. The three U(1) factors are generated by and the SU(2) factor is generated by In particular, the orbital angular momentum U(1) emerges due to the following reason: although in the lattice model, the orbital angular momentum is only conserved modulo 3 (generated by ), on the effective Anderson impurity, any bilinear terms and quadratic terms that respect C 3z must also respect a continuous rotation symmetry generated by σ z τ z . We now study all the two-electron eigenstates, , where F † i is a bilinear of two f † operators, and also stands for an eigen-channel for two-particle scatterings. We normalize F † i such that ⟨0|F i F † i |0⟩ = 1, and label them with [ρ, j], where ρ denotes a representation of the D 6 space group, and j = 0, 1 denotes the total SU(2) spin. Note that the valley U(1) charge is also conserved, but as it does not commute with C 2z ∈ D 6 , we have not analyzed how it is represented yet. As it will turn out, all the levels that are to be obtained belong to one of the two following cases: Either 1) ρ is by itself an irreducible representation (irrep) of D 6 , and transforms trivially under valley U(1) (zero valley charge); or 2) ρ is a summation of two irreps of D 6 , but they are related to each other by a valley U(1) action. For both cases, [ρ, j] forms an irrep of the entire symmetry group, with both D 6 and the valley U(1) taken into consideration. To solve the two-particle levels of Eq. (A32), notice that the third row of Eq. (A32) only acts on two electrons that are in the same orbital and the opposite valleys. The states 2 ), and do not feel the third row of Eq. (A32), which would render N α no longer good quantum numbers. Its energy can be directly calculated as have ), and its energy can be calculated as Similarly, we can obtain other eigenstates that are annihilated by the third row of Eq. ( The singlet states the third row of Eq. (A32) vanished. The third row of Eq. (A32) scatters the singlet state with α = 1 to the singlet state with α = 2 and vice versa. The two singlet states then form the bonding and anti-bonding states would have the energy E = U +J A if the third row of Eq. (A32) vanished. The third row of Eq. (A32) scatters the triplet states with α = 1 to the triplet states with α = 2, e.g., and vice versa. The two triplet states then form the bonding and anti-bonding states )), we find that the two-electron ground states must be one of Eqs. (A35), (A39), (A42) and (A46). To be concrete, the ground states are and the triplets (Eqs. (A39) and (A46)) if J H > 3 2 J A . According to the crystalline symmetries in Eq. (A1), the singlets Φ d,α in Eq. (A48) transform as d x 2 -y 2 and d xy orbitals under operations in the D 6 point group, belonging to the E 2 representation; the singlet Φ s in Eq. (A49) transforms as the s orbital and belongs to the A 1 representation. Using the parameters U 0 = 9eV 5. Flattened interaction and the U(1) ×4 ×SU(2) ×2 symmetry Eq. (A32) is difficult to address analytically when coupled to a bath of itinerant electrons. To simplify the problem, we study an alternative interaction Hamiltonian H I that captures the main features of Eq. (A32). We require H I to satisfy the following conditions: 1. H I should reproduce the correct two-electron ground states |Φ d,α ⟩ (Eq. (A48)), which are inter-valley inter-orbital spin singlets that belong to the E 2 representation of the point group D 6 . 2. The two-electron spectrum of H I should be positive definite due to the large Coulomb repulsion U . In other words, H I itself does not have a pairing channel. 3. The gap between the two-electron ground states and excited states should be at the order of J A . 4. H I should have as high as possible symmetry for the sake of analytical convenience. We find the following H I can match these requirements where J ∼ J A is an inter-valley inter-orbital anti-Hund's coupling that favors the Making use of the relation μ=0,x,y,z ς μ s1s2 ς μ s3s4 = 2δ s1s4 δ s2s3 , we can rewrite H I as where are the charge and spin in the orbital α and valley η, respectively, and N is the total charge operator. In order to calculate the eigenstates of H I , we expand H I as The energies can be directly read from this expression once the good quantum numbers are known. H I has an U(1) ⊗4 ×SU(2) ⊗2 symmetry. The four U(1) factors are generated by We call σ z τ z ς 0 angular momentum because σ z τ z is the quasi-angular momentum of the C 3z operator (Eq. (A1)), which is now promoted to a continuous rotation symmetry. The two SU(2) factors are generated by respectively. They are independent spin rotations in the σ z τ z = 1 and -1 flavors, respectively. We now calculate all the two-electron eigenstates of Eq. (A51). First, we classify the two-electron states into angular momentum sectors. If the total angular momentum is 0, there must be one state in the σ z τ z = 1 flavor and one in the σ z τ z = -1 flavor. Due to the two independent SU(2) rotations, all these states should be spin-degenerate. We find the energies and eigenstates are The degeneracy between different orbitals and valleys are protected by the discrete symmetries (Eq. (A1)). If the total angular momentum is 2, the two electrons must occupy (α, η) = (1, +) or (2, -) flavors. If both particles occupy the same α, η, they must form a singlet; otherwise they form a singlet and a triplet. The same analyses also apply to the sector with total angular momentum -2. We find the energies and eigenstates as The degeneracies between different valleys and orbitals are protected by the discrete symmetries in Eq. (A1). As there is no accidental degeneracy in the two-electron spectrum, Eq. (A51) is already in the most generic form allowed by the U(1) ⊗4 × SU(2) ⊗2 symmetry. We choose U 1 = U -J , U 2 = U 3 = U 4 = U , J ∼ J A such that the inter-valley inter-orbital singlets have the energy U -2J , while all the other states have the energy U . Such parameterized H I can be thought as a "flattened" interaction where all the excited two-electron states are made degenerate. One can also design a flattened interaction H ′ I with the intra-orbital s-wave singlet (Eq. (A42)) and B 2 singlet (Eq. (A43)) as the ground states. For a single site problem, H ′ I is equivalent to H I because they are related by the gauge transformation f α-s → f α-s , f α+s → f α+s . Thus, all the formal discussions on the single impurity problem with H I also apply to the one with H ′ I . However, H I and H ′ I lead to physically different pairings because the lattice model is not unchanged under this gauge transformation. H ′ I can be used to study the s-wave pairing. (The B 2 pairing should have a higher energy than s-wave pairing on the lattice model because it cannot open a full gap.) In this subsection, we show that the inter-site interactions are all negligible. We have considered three different microscopic origins of interactions: 1) long-range gated Coulomb repulsion of 2D electron gas, 2) the atomic Hubbard U 0 , and 3) the A 1 , B 1 -phonons. For 1), For 2), we remark that the atomic Hubbard is extremely short-ranged, hence the inter-site strength should be vanishingly weak, due to the highly localized nature of f -orbitals. We carry out a specific estimation below, referring to Eq. (A13). In general, each ψ † lrs operator can overlap with f -orbitals f † Rαηs on different AA-sites R, with the overlap given by where the overlap w lβ,α (r -R) dacays in a Gaussian form with respect to |r -R|. Eq. (A4) has only kept the closest AA-site to r. Inserting Eq. (A61) into Eq. (A13), we obtain where we used the following fact that, if and only if η 1 + η 2 = η 3 + η 4 , all the fast oscillating factors e iK l •r can neatly cancel, so that the summation over r can produce a finite value. It suffices to check those inter-site terms that conserve the charge of each site separately, as otherwise two charge excitations that each costs energy U would be involved. Moreover, as the Wannier functions w (η) lβ,α (r -R) decay in a Gaussian form with increasing |r -R|, it suffices to check the strengths of the nearest-neighbor bonds. Two different cases can arise -A) The type A) preserves the spin SU(2) of each site, and takes a density-density-like form, while type B) swaps the spin. The strengths are of the same order of magnitude, hence it suffices to evaluate one, e.g. the case A). The strength is given by Referring to Eq. (A5) to Eq. (A6), each Wannier factor can be (approximately) upperbounded by |w . The integration over r can be decomposed to along two directions -perpendicular or parallel to R. The perpendicular integration produces a factor of order 1 λ2 , but the parallel integration is strongly suppressed by the localization of the Wannier functions ( λ2 a M = 0.1910), as Altogether, the nearest-neighbor strength is approximately × 2 × 10 -7 < 10 -5 meV, which is indeed vanishingly weak. For 3), the A 1 , B 1 -phonons can propagate for a finite range on the microscopic lattice, but the inter-site strengths will still be much weaker than the on-site strengths λ RG × 1.3meV. The detailed estimation of the phonon-mediated nearest-neighbor interaction can be found in B. Anderson impurity problem with the flattened interaction 1. Effective action * The effective free Hamiltonian of the single impurity problem is where d αηs (ε), satisfying {d αηs (ε), , is an auxiliary bath reproducing the (retarded) hybridization function π . It is convenient to calculate susceptibilities and vertex functions in the path integral formalism. By introducing the Grassmann variables f αηs (τ ), where τ is the imaginary time, and their Fourier transformations with T being the temperature and ω = (2n + 1)πT the fermion Matsubara frequency, the partition function can be written as Here S 0 is the free part The i∆(ω) term in S 0 is obtained by integrating out the auxiliary bath One can see that in the low-frequency regime (|ω| ≪ D), there is ∆(ω) ≈ ∆ 0 • sgn(ω). As the frequency dependence is not relevant, in the rest of this manuscript we consider a flat hybridization function, i.e., S I is the interaction part where ν = 2πT n is bosonic Matsubara frequency, and are the charge and spin in the orbital valley flavor (α, η), respectively. It may be worth mentioning that the bilinear term (the first term) in Eq. (A51) does not appear in S I . When one writes the partition function as a path integral of Grassmann variables, one should write the Hamiltonian in the normal ordered form with respect to the vacuum. Thus S I should be first written in a normal ordered form where all f are on right hand side of f † . Then one rewrites S I in terms of S η and N η . However, interchanging Grassmann variables does not yield the bilinear terms as interchanging second-quantized fermion operators. For later convenience, we formally rewrite S 0 (Eq. (B5)) and S I (Eq. (B8)) as and respectively, where f (1), f (2) are shorthand for f I1 (ω 1 ), f I2 (ω 2 ), etc., and I i=1,2,3,4 = (α i , η i , s i ) are composite indices. The Arabic numbers can be regarded as composite indices including frequencies. Γ 0 (1, 2; 3, 4) ≡ Γ 0 I1,I2;I3,I4 (ω 1 , ω 2 ; ω 3 , ω 4 ) is the anti-symmetrized bare vertex function, which satisfies Γ 0 (1, 2; 3, 4) = -Γ 0 (2, 1; 3, 4) = -Γ 0 (1, 2; 4, 3) = Γ 0 (2, 1; 4, 3) . (B12) It should give the same interaction as Eq. (B8) (or Eq. (A50)). We can read the (not anti-symmetrized) vertex function from Eq. (A50) where the factor 4 is due to the factor 1 4 in Eq. (B11) and Γ 0 U 1,2,3,4 = U 1,2,3,4 and Γ 0 J = J . After anti-symmetrization, we have 2. Quasi-particle and vertex function * The Matsubara Green's function is defined as where ⟨• • •⟩ is the average weighted by e -S0-S I , and ⟨• • •⟩ 0C is the average weighted by e -S0 , and with only the connected diagrams included. Due to the U(1) ⊗4 ×SU(2) ⊗2 symmetry and the discrete symmetries (Eq. (A1)), G must be proportional to an identity in the α, η, s indices. One can formally write G as The self-energy satisfies the Hermitian condition Σ(ω) = Σ * (-ω). If the ground state is a Fermi liquid, then Σ(ω) behaves as around zero-frequency, where Σ(0) is a real number and is the quasi-particle weight. According to the Friedel sum rule For later convenience, we define the scattering phase shift It is 0 when the f orbital is empty (ε f + Σ(0) → ∞), π 2 at half-filling (ε f + Σ(0) = 0), and π when f orbital is fully occupied (ε f + Σ(0) → -∞). The density of states (per flavor) at the Fermi level, or the spectral height at zero-energy, is One can see that A(0) is completely determined by δ f and the hybridization ∆ 0 , and is independent of the interaction. The full anti-symmetrized vertex function Γ(1, 2; 3, 4) is defined by the following skeleton diagrams up to infinite orders of the bare interaction Here the black dots represent the bare interaction (denoted as Γ 0 ) and the solid lines are the full Green's functions with selfenergy corrections. For now we are only interested in the zero frequency part of Γ(00; 00). Notice that Γ 0 , read from H I in Eq. (A50), is already in the most generic form allowed by the symmetries because H I has no accidental degeneracy. Thus, Γ(00; 00) must have the same form as Γ 0 , i.e., Γ I1,I2;I3,I4 (0, 0; 0, 0 except that the bare values Γ 0 U 1,2,3,4 , Γ 0 J are replaced by renormalized values Γ U 1,2,3,4 , Γ J . It is convenient to define an effective field theory for the low-energy quasi-particle excitations 00; 00) , (B25) 00; 00) -Γ 0 I1,I2;I3,I4 (00; 00) . (B27) The decomposition of S into S qp and S c is exact. S qp describes the low-energy Fermi liquid fixed point, and S c -the counter term -guarantees that there is no further renormalization to S qp λ 0,1 and Λ can be expressed in powers of Γ 0 , i.e., i , where n represents the order of Γ 0 . These expressions should be determined order by order in such a way that they cancel all the further renormalizations, i.e., the quasi-particle self-energy Σ(ω) and the quasi-particle full vertex function Γ satisfies Σ(0) = 0, ∂ Σ ∂iω ω=0 = 0, Γ(00; 00) = Γ 0 = z 2 Γ(00; 00) . (B29) We will carry out this perturbation calculation in Appendix B 7. One should be aware that Σ can have higher-order frequencydependence such as ω 2 terms and Γ can also have frequency dependence. Nine independent charge neutral spin-0 channels in the susceptibility of the four-orbital Anderson impurity model with the flattened interaction. We now consider the susceptibility where ν is the bosonic Matsubara frequency, We will only focus on the static response, i.e., χ AB (ν → 0 + ). It describes the response δ⟨ Â⟩ with respect to a static external field -h B B, i.e., χ AB (0 + ) = ∂⟨ Â⟩ ∂h B . The symmetries can help us identify independent channels of the susceptibilities, since χ AB should be block-diagonal in the irreducible representations. We first classify the spin-0 operators σ 0,x,y,z τ 0,x,y,z ς 0 . According to the U(1) symmetry generators in Eq. (A54), these operators can be labeled by (i) valley (τ z ) charge, (ii) orbital (σ z ) charge, and (iii) angular momentum (σ z τ z ). We summarize the U(1) charges of the sixteen operators in Table 1. The four operators σ 0 τ 0 , σ 0 τ z , σ z τ 0 , σ z τ z in the first column form four different one-dimensional representations of the D 2 point group generated by C 2x = σ x , C 2z = σ x τ x . Therefore, each of them is an eigenmode of the susceptibility. (We do not need to consider the C 3z symmetry here because it is already promoted to the continuous rotation generated by the angular momentum σ z τ z .) 2. The four operators in the second column can be recombined to the hermitian matrix basis σ x,y τ 0,z . The four hermitian operators do not couple to each other because they belong to four different one-dimensional representations of the D 2 point group. The susceptibilities for σ y τ 0,z must be same as as that of σ x τ 0,z due to the orbital U(1) symmetry generated by σ z . Therefore, we only need to consider the two representative channels σ x τ 0,z . 3. Analyses for the second column also apply to the third column, except that the roles of valley and orbital are exchanged. 4. The four operators in the fourth and fifth columns can be recombined to the hermitian matrix basis σ x,y τ x,y . Again, they belong to four different one-dimensional representations of the D 2 point group and do not couple to each other. Due to the valley-U(1) (τ z ) and orbital-U(1) (σ z ), we only need to consider the susceptibility of σ x τ x . We second classify the spin-1 operators. Due to the global SU(2) symmetry, we only need to consider the σ μ τ ν ς z (μ, ν = 0, x, y, z) operators. As the valley-U(1), orbital-U(1), angular momentum, and D 2 point group operators are independent of spin, all the discussions in the last paragraph apply to σ μ τ ν ς z . Therefore, there are at most nine independent spin-1 channels, which are given by the operators in the last row of Table I multiplied by ς z . We now show that the spin-1 operators only contribute three new independent channels: 1. Spin-1 operators descended from the first column of Table I are σ 0,z τ 0,z ς z . Nevertheless, the σ 0 τ 0 ς z and σ z τ z ς z operators are related to each other by the successive global and relative SU(2) rotations e i π 4 σ 0 τ 0 ς y •e -i π 4 σ z τ z ς y (Eq. (A55)), thus they must have the same susceptibility. Similarly, the other two operators σ z τ 0 ς z and σ 0 τ z ς z are also related by e i π 4 σ 0 τ 0 ς y • e -i π 4 σ z τ z ς y . Therefore, we can choose σ 0 τ 0 ς z and σ 0 τ z ς z as the representative operators. 2. Spin-1 operators descended from the second column of Table I are σ x τ 0,z ς z . The successive orbital U(1) and relative SU( In summary, there are twelve independent channels in the susceptibility. We use the notation O μνρ = σ μ τ ν ς ρ to represent these operators. The twelve eigenmodes can be chosen as Operators in the first row are generators of the continuous symmetry group, whereas operators in the second row are not. We now apply perturbation calculation of χ to the first order of S I . Applying Fourier transformation to Eq. (B30), we obtain where i = 1, 2, 3, 4 are composite indices and O(i, j ′ ) = O Ii,Ij . To the zeroth order of S I , the susceptibility is where tr[• • • ] represents the trace over α, η, s. To the zeroth order of ν we have where δ f = π(ν f + 4)/8 is the scattering phase shift. To the first order of S I , we have Applying Wick's theorem, there is δ ω5+ω6,ω7+ω8 Γ 0 (5, 6; 7, 8) The factor 4 comes from equivalent contractions, which are equal to one another because Γ 0 is fully anti-symmetrized. The contraction equals Hence, Since O and Γ 0 does not depend on the frequency, we can separate the summations over frequency and matrix indices. Introducing the factor we have Adding up the zeroth and first-order contributions, we obtain Eq. (B41) is not very useful as Γ 0 is usually large and cannot be treated as a perturbation. However, we can obtain the quasi-particle susceptibility by replacing ∆ 0 and Γ 0 with the renormalized values ∆ 0 = z∆ 0 and Γ 0 = z 2 Γ(00; 00) Considering Γ 0 in Eq. (B24) is already renormalized, which means it is the full quasi-particle vertex function at zero frequency Γ(00; 00), there will be no higher order correction to the above equation. But Eq. (B42) is also not obviously exact because it omits the frequency dependence of the Γ. It also omits the frequency dependence of the quasi-particle self-energy Σ(ω) (beyond quasi-particle weight correction), e.g., ω 2 terms in Σ(ω). Nevertheless, we will prove in the next subsection through Ward identities that Eq. (B42) equals the exact susceptibilities of the bare particles if O is a generator of the continuous symmetry group. We now determine the factor κ[O, Γ 0 ] (Eq. ( For the seventh and eighth operators O x00 , O xz0 , there are ). The involved vertex function elements are For the ninth and tenth operators O 0x0 , O zx0 , the roles of orbital and valley are exchanged, thus the κ factors should be the same except the inter-orbital repulsion U 3 is replaced by the inter-valley repulsion U 2 : For the eleventh and twelfth operators O xx0 , O xxz , there are ). The involved vertex function elements are For later reference, we explicitly write down the quasi-particle susceptibilities here. Taking O = O 000 , O 0z0 , O z00 , O zz0 , O 00z , we obtain the charge, valley, orbital, angular momentum, and spin susceptibilities As the above five channels are given by generators of the continuous symmetry, they are exact susceptibilities of the bare particles, as will be proven in the next subsection. The remaining channels We consider a perturbation where V (1) = V α1η1s1 is a diagonal matrix and is independent of frequency. Then the first order correction to the Green's function can be written as The subscript 0C in the first row represents the connected diagrams, and the factor 4 in the second term of the second row comes from four equivalent contractions. Summing over all the terms to infinite order, we obtain the exact result which can be represented by the skeleton diagram Here bare Green's functions and vertex function are replaced by the full Green's functions and vertex function respectively. Writing δG(1) = -[G(1)] 2 • (-V (1) -δΣ( Here I i = (α i , η i , s i ) is a composite index. We consider the perturbation term V I = -h O • O I with O being a diagonal matrix, then there is We then consider a gauge transformation f ′ I (ω) = f I (ω + ν • O I ). On the one hand, there must be Here G 0 (ω 1 ) = (iω 1 + i∆ 0 • sgn(ω 1 ) -ε f ) -1 is the free propagator. On the other hand, one can rewrite the action There is no other perturbation term in ∆S as long as O is a generator of the continuous symmetry such that it leaves all the instantaneous terms (ω-independent terms) invariant. Substituting ] -1 into Eq. (B67) and comparing it to Eq. (B71), one obtains We do not explicitly write ∂ ω2 [G 0 (ω 2 )] -1 as i + 2i∆ 0 δ(ω 2 ) because it will lead to the ill-defined term [G(ω 2 )] 2 δ(ω 2 ), where G(ω 2 ) is discontinuous at ω 2 = 0. This problem comes from abuse of the δ-function. Here we avoid this problem by rewriting The derivative ∂ ω2 G(ω 2 ) consists of a continuous part at ω 2 ̸ = 0 and a δ-function peak at ω 2 = 0 that is responsible for the discontinuity of G(ω 2 ), i.e., This expression is correct in the sense that integrating it gives the correct antiderivative. Then there is Substituting this expression into Eq. (B73) yields According to the Friedel sum rule (Eq. (B21)), there is and hence Comparing Eq. (B79) to Eq. (B70), we have Now we consider the response to the external field -h O O I . Making use of the Ward identity Eq. (B80), we can replace the h-derivative by the ω-derivative is the continuous part of the Green's function derivative (Eq. ( Thus, where the first term vanishes. Making use of the identity Eq. (B70), we rewrite the above equation as Now we have expressed the exact susceptibility in terms of the derivatives of zero-frequency self-energy. To relate the susceptibility to the vertex function, we replace the ∂ h O Σ I (0) by the ω-derivative via Eq. (B80) equals inverse of the quasi-particle weight z -1 , there is We now have expressed the exact susceptibility in terms of quasi-particle weight z, hybridization ∆ 0 , filling δ f = π(ν f + 4)/8, and full vertex function at zero-frequency. It is worth emphasizing that this identity applies only when O is a generator of the continuous symmetry. Applying it to the O operators discussed in the last subsection, we find the five susceptibilities in Eqs. (B55) to (B59) are exact. Following the same procedure in Appendix B 3, we can calculate the pairing susceptibilities χ p . One can diagonalize the pairing susceptibilities by enumerating distinct two-electron representations, which have been discussed in detail in Appendix A 5. There are five non-degenerate two-electron levels (Eqs. (A56) to (A60)). To proceed, we choose the following five operators to represent the five channels where O μνρ = σ μ τ ν ς ρ . Each of them is chosen as a linear combination of a few degenerate two-electron states in Eqs. (A56) to (A60). To apply Eq. (B30) to pairing susceptibility, we should define for O matrices given in the above equations. Notice that O is always anti-symmetric. Fouriering Eq. (B30), At the zeroth order of S I , where we used . Thus the zeroth order susceptibility can be written as At the first order of S I , where the ×4 factor is contributed by equivalent contractions. The contraction gives p Replacing ∆ 0 , Γ 0 by the effective parameters of quasi-particles ∆ 0 , Γ 0 , we obtain the quasi-particle contributed pairing susceptibilities where One should be aware that Γ 0 equals the exact full vertex function Γ of quasi-particles at zero frequency, but the frequency dependence of Γ has been omitted in the above equation. We have also omitted the frequency dependence of the quasi-particle self-energy Σ(ω) (beyond quasi-particle weight correction), e.g., ω 2 terms in Σ(ω). Therefore, Eq. (B101) is an approximate result. We find κ p [O, Γ 0 ] is nothing but the energy (in terms of bare Γ 0 ) of the two-electron states defined by O. Readers may directly verify this. Here we prove this statement. O defines a two-electron state We consider to decompose χ p into a summation of ladder diagrams -ω' where Γ p is the two-particle irreducible vertex in the pairing channel. Γ p cannot be divided into two by cutting two left-going Green's function lines. Due to the U(1)×U( Neglecting the frequency dependencies of Γ p and the renormalized self-energy, the pairing susceptibilities can be written in terms of effective interactions as Equaling these equations to Eqs. (B103) to (B107), we obtain the effective interactions (in the pairing channel) in terms of the renormalized interactions 6. Asymptotic behavior of exact vertex function a. Bethe ansatz as a benchmark As reviewed in this subsubsection, Ward identity has been used to extract local 1PI previously Following Eq. (B42) and discussions thereafter, they should be when expressed in terms of renormalized interactions. We then have ∆0 = . In large U limit, χ c ≪ χ s , for which we easily see that χ c ≪ ∆-1 0 = π(χ c + χ s )/4. Combined with Eq. (B118), this implies Ũ = π ∆0 . We can also explicitly verify b. The U ≫ J ≫ TK limit The ν f = ±2 states. We focus on the doped correlated insulators at the total fillings ν = ±(2 + δν), where 0 < δν < 1. According to the (approximate) particle-hole symmetry of the problem, we only consider the ν = -2 case. According to the calculations in Ref. will participate in the Kondo screening The same argument also applies to valley, orbital, and spin degrees of freedom because they are also frozen at the Kondo energy scale and are not contributed by quasi-particles. The constraints χ c,v,o,s • ∆ 0 ≪ 1 imply The two-electron energies of a generic H I are given in Appendix A 5. Replacing the bare interaction parameters with the renormalized interaction parameters, we can obtain eigenvalues of Γ 0 as U1 -J = -π ∆0 sin 2 δ f -J (inter-valley inter-orbital singlet), U1 + J = -π ∆0 sin 2 δ f + J (inter-valley inter-orbital triplet) . (B125) Here δ f = π 4 . One of the last two must be negative. Therefore, we prove the statement that the renormalized interaction has at least one negative channel. Unlike the charge, valley, orbital, and spin, the angular momentum (σ z τ 0 ς z ) is not quenched in the ground state of H I . Thus, the quasi-particle contributed part of χ a should diverge at the order ∆ -1 0 in the ∆ 0 → 0 limit. χ a expressed in terms of J is Requiring χ a non-negative leads to the condition J ≤ 2 π ∆0 sin 2 δ f . We can also extract useful conditions from the other quasi-particle susceptibilities in Eqs. (B60) to (B64) and (B103) to (B107). Even though they are not related to the exact susceptibilities of the bare particles, they should also be positive for the Fermi liquid theory to be valid. Then we have the inequalities As the susceptibilities are approximate, we use "≳" rather than "≥" in these inequalities. This requirement leads to We have plotted the estimated range for all the five pairing channels ( U 1 ∓ J , U 2,3,4 ) correspondingt to Eq. (B131) in Fig. One can directly verify that the inter-orbital inter-valley singlet pairing fluctuation (χ xxy p ) is the strongest among all the pairings. The universality hypothesis states that T K , or ∆ 0 , is the only energy scale in the Kondo regime, implying that the ratio J / ∆ 0 is a universal constant. Our analyses above show that this ratio is in the range from 4.6 to 10.3. For later convenience, here we also express the effective interactions in the pairing channel as functions of J (Eqs. (B114) and (B115)) The ν f = 0 states. The flattened interaction (Eq. (A51)) is designed for the ν f = ±2 states in the actual MATBG in such a way that it reproduces the correct two-electron ground states, as explained at the beginning of Appendix A 5. Thus, it may not apply to the ν f = 0 states in the actual MATBG. However, here we still discuss the physics at ν f = 0 for the flattened interaction (Eq. (A51)) for theoretical interests. The four-particle ground state is unique, which can be understood as filling the doubly degenerate ν f = -2 ground states simultaneously. It has N αη = 1, S 2 αη = 3 4 for all αη flavors, and (S 1+ + S 2-) 2 = (S 1-+ S 2+ ) 2 = 0. Its energy can be read from Eq. (A53) as E = 6U -2J . Apart from χ c,s,v,o • ∆ 0 ≪ 1, there is also χ a • ∆ 0 ≪ 1 in the ∆ 0 ≪ J limit, which thus fixes J = 2 π ∆ sin 2 δ f = 2π ∆ 0 , where δ f = π 2 at ν f = 0. Substituting the renormalized interactions and δ f → π 2 into Eqs. (B103) to (B107), we have tan One can see that the inter-orbital inter-valley singlet fluctuation is the only one that is promoted by interaction. However, as ∆ 0 is negligible at ν f = 0 c. The U ≫ TK ≫ J limit We only focus the states at ν f = -2 in this subsubsection. On the one hand, only the charge degree of freedom is frozen in the U ≫ T K ≫ ∆ 0 ∼ T limit, implying (Eq. (B121)) J is barely renormalized in the Fermi liquid phase because it is much smaller than the Kondo energy scale. Thus, there must be J ≈ J . On the other hand, the model has an U(8) symmetry in the J → 0 limit. This approximate U(8) symmetry implies U 1 ≈ U 2 ≈ U 3 ≈ U 4 . Therefore, we have The ground state of the renormalized interaction is still the d-wave E 2 states (Eq. (A59)). It has the energy This result implies that the pairing potential should start becoming negative when J ∼ T K . Combined with the discussions in the last subsubsection, this shows that the pairing potential is negative when T K ≪ J and remains negative to the regime T K > J as T K increases, as shown in Fig. In this section we demonstrate how the counter term (Eq. (B26)) is determined perturbatively in terms of Γ 0 . The first order Γ (Fig. where Λ (1) is the first-order counter term. Γ (1) (00; 00) equals Γ 0 (00; 00) by definition (Eq. (B29)). Thus, Λ (1) = 0. The first order self-energy is given by the diagrams in Fig. where the factor e i0 + ω2 factor is due to the time-ordering in the Green's function -⟨f (-0 + )f † (0)⟩ such that the creation operator is before the annihilation operator. The interaction factor is (Eq. (B44)) The frequency integral is Define z = iω 2 , the function is analytical in the half plane Im[z] > 0. We can continuously deform the integral line from (0, i∞) to (0, -∞), then we have Therefore, there is The condition Eq. (B29) implies This also implies Σ (1) (ω) = 0. The second order vertex is contributed by diagrams in Fig. We also do not attempt to calculate the full second order self-energy Σ (2) . Instead, we only show how to calculate its linear frequency-dependence, i.e., ∂ ω Σ (2) . The condition ∂ ω Σ (2) = 0 (Eq. (B29)) will determine the counter term λ (2) 0 . Σ (2) is contributed by the diagrams shown in Fig. is the density of states at the Fermi level. Due to Eq. (B75), the leading order ω 1 -dependence of Σ (2,1) can be obtained as We define the dimensionless function then we can write ∂ ω Σ (2,1) (ω) as We find where C ≈ 0.915966 is the Catalan's constant. The result ξ(π/2) can also be found in Ref. It can be seen that, J 2 , and J 3 are flavor-dependent Hund's, similar to J , which merely exchange spins but do not violate any flavor charge conservation, while V 2 and K 2 are pair-scatterings that violate the orbital charge conservation. V 2 is spinindependent, and K 2 exchanges spins in the meanwhile. In particular, the bare interaction obeys parametrization of Eq. (C1) as well. The corresponding values (without tildes) can be easily read off by comparing Table It can also be seen that, V 2 and K 2 correspond to the last and second-last terms in Eq. (A32). Next, we need to express the susceptibilities of all the charge-0 operators through the zero-frequency vertex function Γ 0 , using Eq. (B42). If any susceptibility is asymptotically frozen in the Kondo regime, then the asymptotic behavior of Γ 0 will be restricted. The charge O 000 , valley charge O 0z0 , and the total spin O 00z are still conserved, hence by virtue of the Ward identities, Eq. (B42) provides an exact relation between the exact charge χ c , valley χ v and spin χ s susceptibilities and the exact vertex Γ 0 . When the ground states are dominated by the [E 2 , 0] states, χ c,v,s still freeze as in the flattened case, giving rise to 3 exact equations constraining the 9 unknown parameters, The κ functions are defined by Eq. (B39), and will be evaluated in Eq. (C11). The 'orbital charge' O z00 , on the other hand, no longer remains conserved, thus Eq. (B42) only estimates the corresponding quasi-particle susceptibility χ o . As the exact susceptibility χ o will exactly equal to χ o when the orbital U(1) is recovered, we argue that Eq. (B42) still approximates χ o if the orbital U(1) is weakly broken in the effective theory. In the following, we show the self-consistency of this approximation by checking that the renormalized interaction indeed approximately respects the higher U(1) ×4 ×SU(2) ×2 symmetry. Since the [E 2 , 0] states still hold as eigenstates of zero eigenvalue for the O z00 operator, χ o should be asymptotically frozen as well. This contributes the fourth constraint, albeit with approximation, Crucially, we note that, in the flattened case, the operators O zzz and O 00z have been shown as linked by a symmetry action in the large U(1) ×4 × SU(2) ×2 group (Appendix B 3), therefore, for the [E 2 , 0] ground states, the two susceptibilities, χ zzz and χ s , are frozen simultaneously. Physically, this can be understood as follows: O 00z ±O zzz 2 probes the spin susceptibility of each angular momentum flavor, while for both states in the [E 2 , 0] irrep, each angular momentum flavor either is empty, or owns a spin singlet, hence neither flavor can exhibit a net spin. With the symmetry broken to U(1) ×3 × SU(2), 1) O zzz no longer remains conserved, hence we can only approximate χ zzz ≈ χ zzz with χ zzz expressed through Eq. (B42), and 2) χ zzz should rely on the new 4 parameters of Γ 0 in a different way from χ s . However, as long as the same [E 2 , 0] ground states dominate in the heavy Fermi liquid, χ zzz will be frozen as well as χ s , and by its different reliance on Γ 0 , this imposes a fifth constraint, The five κ functions are evaluated according to Eq. (B39) as follows, six out of which arise from spin-0 operators, 0 -1 0 0 0 -2 0 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 0 -2 2 1 0 0 -1 0 0 0 -2 -2 -1 -1 0 0 0 -2 0 0 -1 -2 -1 0 0 0 -2 0 0 1 2 2 -2 -2 1 1 -1 -1 0 0 Energy in unit of Δ̃0 FIG. E. Quasi-particle mean-field theory of the superconductivity The free part of topological heavy fermion model is given by The parameter λ is the spread of the Wannier functions of f -electrons, and it suppresses the hybridization at large momentum. In this work we adopt the parameters: γ = -24.75meV, v ⋆ = -4.303eV • Å, v ′ ⋆ = 1.623eV • Å, λ = 1.4131/k θ , M = 3.697meV. The resulting band structure is shown in the inset of Fig. The free Hamiltonian has time-reversal T and D 6 point group, generated by C 2z -rotation, C 3z -rotation, and C 2x -rotation symmetries. Their representations on f -electrons and c-electrons are given by (Eq. (A1)) and T = (σ 0 τ x ς 0 ⊕ σ 0 τ x ς 0 )K, C 2z = σ x τ x ς 0 ⊕ σ x τ x ς 0 , C 3z = e i 2π 3 σ z τ z ς 0 ⊕ σ 0 τ 0 ς 0 , C 2x = σ x τ 0 ς 0 ⊕ σ x τ 0 ς 0 , (E4) respectively. Detailed derivations of these symmetries are given sections S2A and S2B of the supplementary material Ref. Eq. (E1) with Coulomb interaction is solved within the framework of dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) in Refs. To describe the quasi-particles at ν = -2 -δν, we express f -electron operators in terms of the quasi-particles operators as f Rαηs = z 1 2 f Rαηs . We also introduce the DMFT self-consistent on-site energies ε f , ε c1 = ε c2 , ε c3 = ε c4 for f -electrons, a = 1, 2 c-electrons, a = 3, 4 c-electrons, respectively In DMFT, the two-particle irreducible vertex in the lattice is purely local and equals the two-particle irreducible vertex of the impurity model, for which the susceptibility in the lattice model can be evaluated as χ -1 q = χ 0 q -1 + Γ loc , Γ loc = χ -1 locχ 0 loc -1 , where χ q (χ 0 q ) is the momentum dependent interacting (free) susceptibility in the lattice model, χ loc (χ 0 loc ) is the susceptibility in the interacting (free) single impurity model, and Γ loc is the two-particle irreducible vertex in the single impurity model The explicit form of the corresponding interaction can be constructed as projectors to Eq. (A59) We only consider the order parameters where Φ G is the ground state. Due to the spin-SU(2) symmetry (iς y ), there must be The mean-field decomposition of H p reads We can see that (η, s) = (+, ↑) electrons only couples to (-, ↓) electrons, whereas (-, ↑) electrons only couples to (+, ↓) electrons. Thus, the BdG Hamiltonian is block diagonal. We can write the total Hamiltonian as H + is the BdG Hamiltonian for the (η, s) = (+, ↑) and (-, ↓) electrons where is a two-by-two matrix. Here f k+↑ and f † -k-↓ are column vectors consisting of f kα+↑ and f † -kα-↓ , respectively. c k+↑ and c -k-↓ are column vectors consisting of c k+G,a+↑ and c -k-G,a-↓ , respectively, where k is in the moiré Brillouin zone and G, regarded as a matrix index, is moiré reciprocal lattice. The H (c,η) and H (cf,η) matrices are defined as σ z τ z ς z transform them to spin-0 operators σ x τ z,0 ς 0 . Thus these operators do not contribute new channels.3. Spin-1 operators descended from the third column of TableIdo not contribute new channels for the same reason as above.4. The only spin-1 operator descended from the last two columns of Table I is σ x τ x ς z .