Weak coherent source (WCS) and spontaneous parametric down-converted heralded single photon pairs have found applications in quantum key distribution (QKD) and quantum imaging (QI) experiments. Decoy state methods have also been used to enhance the security for QKD and QI. We study quantumsecured imaging with the decoy-state heralded single photon source (HSPS). The HSPS's superior performance in low-photonnumber regimes makes it an ideal candidate for integrating quantum key distribution protocols to reduce measurement uncertainty and ensure secure QI. Furthermore, our results also infer the influence of the decoy state WCS, due to its higher operating speed than decoy state HSPS, would be effective in conditions that allow higher mean photon numbers for quantum-secured imaging. Ubiquitous quantum properties of nonclassical light sources and their possibility of being integrated into systems for advanced sensing, imaging and secured information processing have been the focus of research and technological revolution in the recent past Where q is a parameter depending on the QKD protocol, Q 1 is the gain of single photons, H is the binary Shannon entropy, e 1 is the error rate od single photon states, E μ is the overall quantum bit error rate, and f(E μ ) is the error correction efficiency. This calculation ensures that a secure key is generated, accounting for the presence of multi-photon states. The decoy state method has been applied with WCS for QKD and QI experiments and also with HSPS for QKD implementation Correlated photon pairs from SPDC significantly enhance the signalto-noise ratio, especially in scenarios with low light levels We propose QSI with decoy-state HSPS and carries out a comparative analysis of WCS and HSPS with decoy states. We evaluate HSPS and WCS sources based on their statistical properties, similar to recent experimental demonstration Moreover, the SPDC-based HSPS source is potentially valuable for biological imaging and stealth quantum secure satellite-based imaging applications due to its sub-Poissonian characteristics. HSPS also include a higher contribution of single photons and reduced fluctuations in secure key rate at low mean photon numbers with its thermal mean photon number statistics. Our case involves transmitting and detecting a signal after reflection from a target, resulting in a more significant loss. However, with a reconstruction algorithm, it is estimated that an image can be discernible with as few as 7000 photons In conclusion, two types of single-photon sources SPDC as well as WCS have been investigated under low-light conditions. The SPDCbased HSPS decoy state source have the advantage of having sub-Poissionian statistics and quantum correlations to improve measurements and suppress background noise 