The role of near-neighbor electron attraction V in strongly correlated systems has been at the forefront of recent research of unconventional superconductivity. However, its implications in the doped Hubbard model on expansive systems remain predominantly unexplored. In this study, we employ the density-matrix renormalization group to examine its effect in the lightly doped t-t ′ -Hubbard model on six-leg square cylinders, where t and t ′ are the first and second neighbor electron hopping amplitudes. For positive t ′ in the electron-doped case, our results show that the attractive V can significantly enhance the superconducting correlations and drive the system into a pronounced superconducting phase when the attraction exceeds a modest value Vc ≈ 0.7t. In contrast, in the hole-doped regime with negative t ′ , while heightened superconducting correlations have also been observed in the charge stripe phase, the systems remain insulating with pronounced charge density wave order. Our results demonstrate the importance of the electron attraction in boosting superconductivity in broader doped Hubbard systems and highlight the asymmetry between the electron and hole-doped regimes. High-temperature superconductivity (SC) in cuprates is one of the central topics in the field of condensed matter physics With the significant advancements in numerical methods, many progresses have been made in searching potential factors that can induce or enhance SC by supplementing the Hubbard model. Recent density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) study on four-leg square cylinders has shown that the next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) electron hopping t ′ can play an essential role in tipping the balance between SC and charge density wave (CDW) order such that quasi-long-range SC can be realized in the doped t-t ′ -Hubbard model In this study, we have performed large-scale DMRG simulation to investigate the influence of NN electron attraction V on the diverse phases exhibited by the tt ′ -Hubbard model on six-leg square cylinders. Our results uncover a significant interplay between NN electron attraction V and SC within the extended Hubbard model. Notably, NN electron attraction substantially bolsters superconductivity while concurrently mitigating CDW stripe order in the electron-doped (t ′ > 0) region of the model where we find that a moderate V is sufficient to drive the system into a pronounced SC phase with dominant SC correlations. Conversely, although NN attraction markedly intensifies SC correlations on the hole-doped (t ′ < 0) side of the phase diagram, our findings indicate that this electron attraction is insufficient to transition the systems into a SC phase. Consequently, despite the enhancement in SC correlations, the system remains still insulating in the hole-doped case. We employ DMRG method Here ĉ † i,σ (ĉ jσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of spin σ electron on site i. The electron hopping amplitude t ij = t for NN bond and t ′ for NNN bond. niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ is the electron density operator of spin σ. The on-site Hubbard repulsion is denoted by U , and the NN attractive interaction is V . We take the lattice geometry to be cylindrical with periodic boundary condition in the ŷ = (0, 1) direction and open boundary condition in the x = (1, 0) direction. We consider finite square cylinders with width L y and length L x , where L x and L y are the number of sites along x and ŷ directions, respectively. The doping concentration is defined as δ = N h /N = 1-N e /N , where N h = N -N e is the number of doped holes, N e is the number of electrons in the system and N = L x × L y is the number of sites. For the present study, we focus on six-leg square cylinders with width L y = 6 and various length L x and for simplicity fix the hole doping concentration δ = 1/12. We set t = 1 as the unit of energy and report results for V ≤ 1.0 and U = 12. We perform up to 130 sweeps and kept up to m = 43,000 states in each DMRG block to reach a typical truncation error of ε ≲ 3 × 10 -6 . Previous DMRG studies of the doped t-t ′ -Hubbard model have observed the simultaneous presence of quasilong-range d-wave SC and CDW orders in the electrondoped (t ′ > 0) region on both four-leg and six-leg square cylinders. The Luttinger exponents K sc and K cdw , derived from the decay rate of the correlation functions for SC and CDW orders, were found to be comparable To answer this question, we have calculated the equaltime spin-singlet SC correlation function defined as where creates a spin-singlet pair on bond α = x or ŷ emerged from site (x, y). (x 0 , y 0 ) is the reference site with x 0 ∼ L x /4 and r is the distance between two bonds along the x direction. We first calculate the SC correlation functions Φ αβ (r) for t ′ = 0.4 on six-leg square cylinders with V = 0 ∼ 1.0 and an interval of ∆V = 0.2. As shown in Fig. The pairing symmetry of SC order is determined by measuring the SC correlation functions Φ αβ (r, δ y ) = ∆ † α,(x0,y0) ∆ β,(x0+r,y0+δy) between the two bonds sep- arated by δ y sites along ŷ distance. For instance, as depicted in Fig. Charge density wave: To identify the prevailing quasilong-range order within the phase where SC and CDW orders coexist, we have also examined the behavior of long-distance correlations in the charge density channel. For instance, we calculate the charge density profile n(x, y) = ⟨n(x, y)⟩ and it's rung average density n(x) = L -1 y n(x, y) at δ = 8.33% with different V . The evolution of charge density as the attraction V increases is detailed in Fig. ( Here, n 0 is the average charge density, K cdw is the Luttinger exponent of the CDW order, A and φ are model dependent parameters. When V = 0, the value of the exponent is K cdw = 0.8(4), which is found to be larger than the exponent for the SC correlation, K sc = 1.5(2). This suggests that, within a certain area of the phase diagram the CDW correlation might be dominant, agreed with the previous results of extended Hubbard model on 6-leg ladder. Other properties: The single particle properties of the system is examined by measuring the equal-time Green's function, Contrary to both the SC and CDW correlations, the single-particle Green function decays exponentially at long distances and can be well fitted by an exponentially decaying function G(r) ∼ e -r/ξ G , where ξ G is the single particle correlation length. For the t ′ = 0.4 case, a long but finite correlation length, ξ G ≈ 20, is observed across a range of attraction strengths V from 0.0 to 1.0 (Details are in the supplemental material (SM)). This indicates that the system's single particle gap remains small but largely unaffected by V . This observation aligns with previous DMRG findings for the model when V = 0.0 Due to constraints from the DMRG block dimension in our simulations on six-leg cylinders, the local spin ⟨S z i ⟩ remain finite at each site. However, the profile of ⟨S z i ⟩ exhibits a simple period-2 antiferromagnetic pattern, lacking any anti-phase domain walls and showing little to no dependence on the attraction V strength (more details are provided in the SM). To ensure the accuracy of our results over long distances, we have carefully examined the potential impact of finite size effects by analyzing the SC pair-pair correlation functions on longer cylinders. As shown in Fig. FIG. The observed enhancement in SC correlations on the electron-doped (positive t ′ ) side of the t-t ′ -Hubbard model on six-leg square cylinders prompts a natural inquiry into how electron attraction V affects other phases within the model. Previous DMRG study In this study, we have explored the impact of NN electron attraction V on SC and CDW orders within the t -t ′ -Hubbard model on six-leg square cylinders. We have shown that incrementing the attractive V systematically amplifies SC correlations in both the SC and charge stripe phases. Notably, for electron-doped (positive t ′ ) case, an increase in V markedly enhances SC correlations while simultaneously diminishing CDW ordering, underscoring the pivotal role of electron attraction in augmenting superconductivity in the doped Hubbard model. The threshold attraction strength V c , at which SC correlations become dominant over CDW correlations, is found to be around V c ≈ 0.7, in agreement with experimental observations on cuprates While we also note an increase in SC correlation in the hole doped side (negative t ′ ) within the charge stripe phase, unlike the electron doped case, such an enhancement is insufficient to surpass the established long-range CDW order. Future research delving into mechanisms that could boost SC ordering in the negative t-t ′ -Hubbard model, such as the anti-ferromagnetic Heisenberg interaction induced by the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger type electronphonon interaction B 65, 165122 (2002).