Although BiFeO3 is one of the most studied multiferroic materials, recent magnetization and neutron scattering studies have revealed a new magnetic phase in this compound-the transverse conical phase. To study the collective spin excitations of this phase, we performed THz spectroscopy in magnetic fields up to 17 T at and above room temperature. We observed five spin-wave branches in the magnetic phase with long wavelength conical modulation. Using a numerical spin dynamics model we found two kinds of excitations with magnetic moments oscillating either along or perpendicular to the static fields. Remarkably, we detected strong directional dichroism, an optical manifestation of the magnetoelectric effect, for two spin-wave modes of the conical phase. According to our experiments, the stability of the conical state is sensitive to the magnetic field history and it can become (meta)stable at or close to zero magnetic field, which may allow exploiting its magnetoelectric properties at room temperature. Among magnetoelectric multiferroics, i.e., materials with coexisting ferroelectric and magnetic orders Even though BiFeO 3 has been studied extensively, large, ferroelectric monodomain single crystals became available only in the last ten years The perovskite structure of BiFeO 3 (see Fig. At temperatures above 150 K, recent magnetization and polarization measurements Spectroscopic techniques have provided valuable information on the complex magnetic structure of BiFeO 3 and the interactions stabilizing it. Inelastic neutron scattering experiments revealed the magnon dispersion over the Brillouin zone, from which the nearest and next-nearest neighbor Heisenberg interactions were deduced In this paper, we present the magnetic field dependence of the THz spectra measured in ferroelectric monodomain BiFeO 3 samples at 300 K and 350 K up to 17 T. At such high temperatures, our magnetic field range covers all the above-mentioned three phases. Besides the resonances of the cycloidal and the CAFM phases, we observed five THz active resonances in the transverse conical phase. In increasing fields, three resonances disappear and the remaining two modes continuously evolve to the resonances of the CAFM state. Remarkably, we observed strong NDD for two modes of the conical phase. Furthermore, we derived spin model parameters which describe well the resonances of the cycloidal and CAFM phases, and qualitatively capture the spin-wave modes of the conical phase near room temperature. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy was performed on high-symmetry cuts of ferroelectric monodomain single crystals of BiFeO 3 . Three pieces, large face normal to X,Y and Z directions, were the same as used in works Magnetic-field dependence of the THz transmission was measured up to 17 T in two configurations. In Faraday configuration, the light propagation vector k is parallel to the external magnetic field B, whereas in Voigt geometry, k is perpendicular to B. Before recording the spectra at 300 and 350 K, a magnetic field of 17 T was applied at low temperatures. This created a magnetic monodomain with the cycloidal-order q-vectors aligned perpendicular to the applied field. We obtained the absorption spectrum following Ref. where I(B ) is the intensity of the transmitted light at magnetic field B, and d is the sample thickness. Next, the zero-field spectrum is recovered by calculating the median of the absorption coefficient at each frequency, which reproduces the absorption at the resonances as they are well separated and shift considerably with the field. Finally, the zero-field spectrum is added to ∆α B to calculate ∆α. We obtained directional dichroism as the absorption difference detected upon the reversal of the magnetic field instead of the light propagation vector following earlier experiments Absorption spectra measured in Faraday configuration at 300 K and 350 K are shown in Fig. Upon decreasing the field, the conical state remains stable until 12 T, then the magnetic state changes back to cycloidal. The difference in B c1 for B ∥ X and B ∥ Y detected in increasing fields may come from the in-plane magnetic anisotropy THz spectra measured at T = 350 K and in field B ∥ Y are shown in Fig. To analyse the magnetic field dependence of the resonance frequencies deduced at T = 300 K, we plotted them in Fig Altogether, we observed seven modes in the cycloidal phase that we labelled following Ref. (2) 1 gains intensity only in finite fields just like Φ (1) 1 at about 2 cm -1 higher energy. Ψ 0 , Ψ 1 , Ψ (1) 1 and Φ (1,2) 2 are present already in zero fields at 13.4 cm -1 , 17.6 cm -1 , 18.5 cm -1 and 24.3 cm -1 , respectively. When B ∥ Y, the weak Ψ (1,2) 2 mode also gains strength in finite fields, appearing at 25.4 cm -1 . The selection rules of these modes are mostly in agreement with the low-temperature results of Ref. 1 , that is observed in Ref. In the transverse conical phase, between B c1 and B c2 , we observed five modes, see Fig. The two strongest modes of the conical phase, #2 and #4, evolve into the lower-and higher-energy modes of the CAFM phase. These resonances are present in all polarization configurations. However, mode #2 is weak for B ω ∥ Y when B ∥ X and also for B ω ∥ X when B ∥ Y (see black and green symbols in Fig. The other three modes are weaker and lose their intensity with increasing fields. Mode #1 with decreasing energy and strength is active in all configurations when B ∥ Y. Even though we observed this mode in only two polarization configurations for B ∥ X, we can not draw further conclusions as it is close to the low-frequency cutoff of the THz spectroscopy setup. Similarly, mode #5 is close to the high-frequency cut-off set by the 40 cm -1 lowpass filter. For both B ∥ X and B ∥ Y, mode #3 is silent in one polarization configuration, for B ω ∥ Y and E ω ∥ Z, and for B ω ∥ X and E ω ∥ Z, respectively (green symbols in Fig. In the high-field CAFM phase, two resonances emerge from the strongest modes of the conical phase. The lowerfrequency mode is strong in two polarization configurations for both external field directions. When B ∥ X, those are B ω ∥ X and E ω ∥ Y and B ω ∥ Z and E ω ∥ Y. And when B ∥ Y, the favored polarizations are B ω ∥ Y and E ω ∥ X and B ω ∥ Z and E ω ∥ X. This lower-frequency mode is also present for B ∥ X, B ω ∥ Y and E ω ∥ X, but much weaker than in the former cases. Therefore, the lower-frequency mode interacts weakly with in-plane B ω perpendicular to B. The higher-frequency mode is present in all configurations, but very weak when B ω ∥ X and E ω ∥ Y, for both B ∥ X and B ∥ Y. As can be seen from Fig. A finite-frequency manifestation of the ME effect is the so-called NDD FIG. Studying the sum rule of NDD spectra may provide information about the static ME susceptibility where ∆α k = α +k (ω)-α -k (ω) is the difference of the absorption spectra. The ω 2 dependence of Eq. ( The static ME effect of the conical phase has been studied in Ref. Following the literature where a is the pseudo-cubic lattice constant, see Fig. We performed the simulations for a cell consisting of 6 layers along the Z direction, enabling the use of periodic boundary conditions when considering the three alternating in-plane atomic positions in the pseudo-cubic lattice along this direction and the antiferromagnetic alignment between neighbouring layers. The system size was larger along the wave-vector direction, i.e., X perpendicular to the field direction for modelling the cycloidal structure and Y along the field for the conical spiral, while the size was kept minimal along the direction perpendicular to the long side. Periodic boundary conditions were used along all directions and a single period of the spin spiral was included in the cell. The period of the spiral, i.e., the length of the long side of the cell, was optimized at each magnetic field value by calculating the ground-state energy per spin for various cell sizes. The energy was found by initializing a system in a harmonic spin cycloid. The energy of this state was minimized first by numerically solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation using the full Hamiltonian, then speeding up the relaxation close to the energy minimum by aligning the spins with the direction of the local effective magnetic field in each step. The convergence was stopped when the torque expressed in frequency units became smaller than 10 -8 meVg/h at each lattice site. The spin-wave frequencies were calculated within linear spin-wave theory close to this energy minimum. The spin-wave eigenvectors of each mode n were used to determine the response function |χ n 0 | 2 to a spatially homogeneous external magnetic field at the spinwave frequency, i.e., the response function is proportional to the magnetic dipole strength of the mode. Details of the calculation method and the definition of the response function are reported in Ref. The calculated spin-wave resonances are compared with the experimental results in Fig. where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, and we introduced the following effective fields: and B S = (J1-4J2)S gμ B describes the motion of spins in the cycloidal phase as the modes labelled as Ψ and Φ indeed correspond to the out-of-plane and in-plane oscillations of the spins. The parameter values in set #1 are similar to, although somewhat lower than, the ones applied to describe the low-temperature resonances In the transverse conical state, the model qualitatively describes the field dependence of the resonances and gives an almost field-independent q-vector in accordance with recent neutron-scattering experiments Despite the qualitative agreement between theory and experiment, calculations predict lower frequencies in the conical phase and also a lower transition field, B c2 ≈13.8 T. The upper critical field may be found as the field below which the CAFM phase becomes unstable against periodic modulations, i.e., the energy of a finite-q spin-wave becomes negative Therefore, once the spin-wave frequencies in the zero-field cycloidal state and in the CAFM phase are fixed, B c2 cannot be modified by tuning the parameters. By introducing a finite J 2 in the original parameter set (see set #2 in Table We studied the spin-wave excitations of the transverse conical state of BiFeO 3 by THz spectroscopy. We determined the magnetic-field dependence of spin-wave excitations in all three phases at room temperature and above: the cycloidal, the transverse conical and the canted antiferromagnetic (CAFM) phases. Moreover, we analysed selection rules for the linearly polarized THz radiation absorption spectra. In the transverse conical phase we observed five modes, among which two evolve into the resonances of the CAFM phase. As a manifestation of the magnetoelectric effect, we also observed non-reciprocal directional dichroism, which is the strongest in the conical state. We developed a numerical model that describes well the resonances of the cycloidal and CAFM phases. The agreement between theory and experiment is qualitative in the conical phase indicating the importance of magnetostriction. Based on this model, we classified the resonances of the conical state into two groups: active for magnetic moments oscillating either along or perpendicular to the static field. Finally, we found that the conical state, which shows strong linear magnetoelectric effect and directional dichroism, may become (meta)stable at or close to zero magnetic field. Given the straintunability of the magnetic phases in BiFeO 3 