We study analytically the effect of charge-neutrality breaking on the spectrum of localized Josephson plasma waves (JPWs) in a plate of layered superconductor of finite thickness for the case of layers parallel to the interface. This effect results in the appearance of additional eigenmodes with anomalous dispersion and an additional forbidden region in the spectrum of localized modes near the Josephson plasma frequency. We consider both the surface and waveguide eigenmodes with symmetric and antisymmetric field distribution with respect to the middle plane of the superconducting plate. Layered superconductors, e.g. high-temperature cuprate superconductors or artificially grown layered structures of 2dimensional Josephson junctions, draw the attention of researchers because of their unique properties related to the high anisotropy. The characteristic frequency range for the electromagnetic excitations in these materials -Josephson plasma waves (JPWs) -is the terahertz (THz) range. Devices operating within this range have many possible practical applications in many different fields from quality control to astrophysics In this paper, we will investigate the eigenwaves in a finite plate of layered superconductor considering the effect of charge-neutrality breaking in geometry when the layers are parallel to the interfaces. The spectrum of these waves (both surface, decaying exponentially inside the plate, and wave-guide, oscillating across the layers) was studied in We study the TM-polarized waves of the frequency ω, localized on a plate of layered superconductor containing (2l 0 + 1) thin superconducting layers, see Fig. We study the electromagnetic eigenwaves with both symmetrical and anti-symmetrical magnetic field distribution with respect to the middle plane, z = 0, of the plate. In both cases, it suffices to determine the field in the upper half-space, z > 0. The field in the lower half-space, z < 0, is easily found using the mentioned symmetry. In the vacuum region, |z| > l 0 D, we consider the plane waves to be evanescent in the z-direction, with the well-known dispersion relation, x -ω 2 /c 2 . Here k x is the longitudinal wave number, and c is the speed of light. The ratio of tangential components of electric and magnetic fields right above the plate surface is easily obtained from the Maxwell equations. Inside the plate, for |z| < l 0 D, the field distribution is determined by the set of coupled nonlinear sine-Gordon equations for the phase difference of the order parameter in the neighboring superconducting layers. For the JPWs, we can linearize these equations and rewrite them for the magnetic fields between the superconducting layers Here the operator of the discrete second derivative, λ ab and λ c are the London penetration depths in directions perpendicular and parallel to the layers, respectively, ω J is the Josephson plasma frequency, α is the constant characterizing the effect of charge-neutrality breaking. For the natural crystals (for example, Bi2212 or Tl2212), α ∼ 0.05 -0.1 Due to the symmetry of the problem, inside the plate, the JPWs can be either symmetrical or anti-symmetrical ("+" or "-" in the upper index, respectively): Substituting Eq. ( The last equation is quadratic with respect to κ: and, therefore, we have two solutions for k 2 s . In the nondissipative model, the wave number k s can be either real or imaginary, resulting in a real value of sinh 2 (k s D/2). So, the discriminant of Eq. ( It is easy to see that, at any finite value of ω ̸ = ω J , the left part of the last inequality tends to infinity at α → 0. So, without the charge-neutrality breaking, this condition is satisfied. Using the London equation for the magnetic field near the upper interface (z = l 0 D) in discrete approximation, where E l ≡ E x z=lD , and expression (5), we obtain the following ratios for the tangential components of the electric and magnetic fields at z = l 0 D right below the plate surface: The ratios (10) and ( that is consistent with the result for the semi-infinite plate obtained in for the symmetrical, Eq. ( Matching the ratios (E x /H y ) on the plate interface, Eq. ( It should be emphasized that Eq. ( The spectrum of localized eigenmodes determined by the dispersion relation ( In Fig. In the continuum limit (13)-( The 2-nd type solution of ( One can notice that the curves of the 1-st and the 2-nd type intersect, i.e., the spectrum is degenerated at certain parameters. These intersection points correspond to two different values of the wave number k s for different curves and the value of k s is higher for the dashed curves. The problem of the wave excitation and the question about which one of the two degenerated eigenmodes will be excited should be solved taking into account the so-called additional boundary conditions (see, e.g., As for the surface modes, they are practically the same Fig. In Figs. Another interesting outcome of the charge-neutrality breaking is the appearance of the eigenmodes with anomalous dispersion. All the dashed curves in Figs. The anomalous dispersion can result in absolute wave instability under the propagation of a cylindrical beam of charged particles along the plate. This allows us to propose layered superconductors as the delaying media in nanoscale devices for the generation of surface and waveguide waves without a need to provide additional feedback in the system. In this theoretical paper, we investigate analytically the spectrum of localized JPWs in the layered superconductor with the effect of charge-neutrality breaking. We demonstrate that the non-zero coefficient characterizing this effect significantly affects the spectrum. First, the spectrum degenerates at frequencies higher than Josephson frequency: the dispersion curves of the first type, similar to the ones without chargeneutrality breaking, intersect with the new additional curves resulting from the effect. Second, near the Josephson frequency, the spectrum has a band gap whose width is proportional to the square root of the charge-neutrality breaking coefficient. The dispersion curves of both types are joining at the boundary of this forbidden region. Third, probably the most interesting in practical terms, all the additional dispersion curves include sections with anomalous dispersion near the light line. Therefore, layered superconductors can be used as a delaying media in nanoscale devices.