We applied a tabletop, ultrafast, high-harmonic generation (HHG) source to measure the elementspecific ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) in ultra-thin magnetic alloys and multilayers on an opaque Si substrate. We demonstrate a continuous wave bandwidth of 62 GHz, with promise to extend to 100 GHz or higher. This laboratory-scale instrument detects the FMR using ultrafast, extreme ultraviolet (EUV) light, with photon energies spanning the M-edges of most relevant magnetic elements. An RF frequency comb generator is used to produce a microwave excitation that is intrinsically synchronized to the EUV pulses with a timing jitter of 1.1 ps or better. We apply this system to measure the dynamics in a multilayer system as well as Ni-Fe and Co-Fe alloys. Since this instrument operates in reflection-mode, it is a milestone toward measuring and imaging the dynamics of the magnetic state and spin transport of active devices on arbitrary and opaque substrates. The higher bandwidth also enables measurements of materials with high magnetic anisotropy, as well as ferrimagnets, antiferromagnets, and shortwavelength (high wavevector) spinwaves in nanostructures or nanodevices. Furthermore, the coherence and short wavelength of the EUV will enable extending these studies using dynamic nanoscale lensless imaging techniques such as coherent diffractive imaging, ptychography, and holography. Magnetic multilayer and device structures are the fundamental building blocks of data storage and magnetic random access memories (MRAM), as well as emerging spintronic, magnonic and spinorbitronic devices. For over a decade, x-ray detected ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy (XFMR) has served as an enhancement to FMR by detecting the spin precession with an element-specific probe (x-rays or extreme ultraviolet light). Higher-energy photons in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) or x-ray -as opposed to optical or microwave wavelength -provide element-specific information through direct access to atomic core level transitions. In this technique, x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) and FMR are combined by exciting the sample with a radio frequency (RF) or microwave source that is generated directly from the master clock of the synchrotron, and is therefore synchronized to the x-ray pulses. Advances in tabletop light sources, such as high-harmonic generation (HHG) sources, open new opportunities to advance laboratory-based measurement capability to compliment the capability of synchrotrons. HHG sources have been used to measure ultrafast processes including magnetization dynamics, owing to the exceptionally small pulse width approaching the attosecond regime. In this paper, we report on development of the first tabletop-scale XFMR instrument (shown in Fig. An important characteristic of our approach is that there is no constraint on the substrates that can be used since measurements can be performed in either transmission or reflection geometries. This is especially advantageous when combined with imaging devices since special fabrication on membranes or specialized substrates such as MgO for fluorescence detection are not needed. In transmission, either magnetic linear dichroism (MLD) or magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) can be used. An overview of the setup used to generate the phase-stable microwave excitation and EUV probe is shown in Fig. We use a regenerative Ti:sapphire laser amplifier to produce 3 kHz, ~1 mJ, 35 fs pulsed light with 800 nm wavelength. We use this to perform high harmonic generation (HHG) by focusing it into a hollow-core glass capillary filled with 300-700 Torr Neon gas. This produces a spectrum of discrete harmonics with photon energies spanning 35-70 eV, thus spanning the M-edges of most magnetic elements. Moreover, these harmonics are separated by 3 eV, are pulsed at a 3 kHz rate with a time duration shorter than the driving laser (typically < 10 fs), and have a linear polarization matching that of the driving infrared (IR) light. We use horizontally polarized light so that the beamline can be in the plane of the optical table even after reflecting from the sample around Brewster's angle for the EUV. Once the EUV is generated, we attenuate the driving IR using two mirrors oriented near Brewster's angle for the IR, and further extinguish the IR by absorbing it in thin metal foil(s) (usually 0.5 μm Al). Then, the EUV passes through a variable-diameter aperture, and is focused onto the sample using a 6° angle of incidence (AOI), grazing-incidence toroidal mirror. This mirror is placed 2 m from the glass capillary and has a focal length of 750 mm, resulting in a spot size of approximately 40 μm diameter [the width of the center conductor of the coplanar waveguide samples, Fig The pulse width of the EUV is <30 fs, which sets an intrinsic frequency limitation well above 10 THz. Therefore, the practical frequency limitation for XFMR with this instrument is set by the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR, which is sample-dependent and decreases at higher frequency due to smaller precession cone angles) and the timing jitter between the microwave excitation and the EUV probe, which has a measured standard deviation of roughly 1.2 ps, as seen in Fig. To minimize the timing jitter between the microwave excitation and the EUV probe, we generate the microwaves directly from the IR laser. In particular, we use a similar approach to that taken at synchrotron facilities, wherein an RF frequency comb generator (FCG) produces harmonics of the master clock that times the electron bunches. An upper bound of the short-term phase jitter can be made by measuring the microwave signal with a sampling oscilloscope that is triggered on a fast photodiode (rise time: 30 ps) that views the 3 kHz laser that drives the HHG process. Shown in Fig. While we need to excite FMR with a single frequency, the FCG outputs a large series of spectral lines that span several hundred harmonics of the fundamental 82 MHz repetition rate of the oscillator. As shown in the simplified schematic diagram in Fig. With our current setup, we are able to vary the base frequency of the FCG from 8.5 GHz to 12 GHz. This limitation is simply set by the bandwidth of the microwave components (including YIG filters, amplifiers, circulators, high-speed switch, etc.) that we had available on hand; however, standard, commercially available products can be used for other/wider bands --extending both to lower and higher frequency ranges. In our current setup, higher frequencies are achieved by inserting frequency multipliers (2x and 3x) that enable us to extend the output frequencies to values exceeding 60 GHz (see Appendix B). The advantage to this approach is that most of the circuit remains unchanged (i.e., operates at its base bandwidth) since the frequency multiplier is inserted just before the sample, requiring only one higher frequency amplifier and components after the multiplier. Figure After we have generated femtosecond-duration EUV light in the appropriate range of photon energies (45-70 eV) and generated microwaves that are phase-synchronized to those EUV pulses, we can perform XFMR using the following steps. We first set the excitation microwave frequency (e.g., to 17 GHz) by coarsely tuning the YIG filter currents to select a tooth of the RF frequency comb. Fine-tuning the currents about this point will control the phase shift of the microwaves. To quantify this in situ, we use a sampling oscilloscope, which is triggered on the 800 nm laser that drives HHG, to measure the microwaves, and sweep the YIG voltages independently to determine the phase shift per volt (approx. 600 deg/mA at 8.5 GHz) and the accessible range of phase shifts. After setting the frequency and calibrating the phase-shifting YIG control currents, we use our in situ inductive FMR setup to determine the magnetic fields to perform XFMR (i.e., resonance field and linewidth), as well as the proper microwave power to maximize our signal but suffer no effects from heating and ensure that we stay within the linear regime of the magnetization dynamics. The inductive FMR trace will show a linear combination of the real and imaginary parts of the microwave reflected from the sample. It is easiest to interpret the imaginary part, which we achieve by use of RF phase shifting components. Once we know the fields over which to perform XFMR, we send EUV light onto the sample. We can then measure and optimize our system using a static T-MOKE spectrum obtained by energizing a small coil magnet above our sample. By switching the polarity of the current, the magnetic state of the sample will reverse and this will write itself onto the harmonic spectrum; in other words, the harmonic peaks at the photon energies within the Fe M-edge will change intensity proportionally to the magnetic moment of the Fe. By measuring the distance between the grating and the camera and then counting the number of pixels between the specular beam and the harmonic peaks of interest, we can estimate the photon energy of each harmonic peak and determine which element is magnetized by using the grating equation (λ = T sin(θ) /q, where λ is the wavelength, T is the period of the grating, θ is the diffraction angle, and q is the diffraction order). To improve the SNR of our static T-MOKE measurements, we average several frames (typically 20 frames per magnetic field polarity) and generally use an exposure time of 5 seconds for each frame while 4x4 binning. To avoid condensation issues on the camera sensor due to operating in only high vacuum conditions, we do not cool the sensor. Finally, if we fix the applied magnetic field and the YIG currents, then each EUV pulse will impinge on the sample at a consistent phase of the applied microwaves, and therefore at the same precessional phase of the spins within the sample. We again use 5 second exposure times for each frame and average over many frames (typically 100 with microwaves applied and 100 without). A difference spectrum is obtained by recording alternating spectra with the microwaves turned on/off and subtracting them from each other. As a result, the difference spectrum is proportional to the projection of the magnetization onto the vertical axis at a particular phase in the precession; as the phase is shifted through 360°, this measures a sinusoidal response. This process can be repeated at a series of magnetic fields to map out the full, element-resolved, field-swept ferromagnetic resonance peak. To maximize the SNR, we adopt an on/off measurement scheme, in which every other measured spectrum is made without the microwave signal applied. By subtracting the spectrum with the microwaves off from that with the microwaves on, the effect of longertimescale fluctuations of the EUV intensity can be minimized. Since our exposure times were 5 seconds, the effects of fluctuations on this timescale or shorter are not suppressed. We partially correct these shorter-term instabilities by assuming that they are perfectly correlated across all the harmonic peaks (including those with no magnetic signal) and dividing all peaks by the frame-toframe fluctuations of the peak intensities far away from the magnetic absorption edges. This is only approximately correct, but consistently improves our data quality. Samples were fabricated using optical lithography combined with lift-off processes on thermally oxidized Si wafers. The first step was to pattern the waveguide structure. This consists of a coplanar waveguide (CPW) structure that is designed to mate with a commercial high-frequency end-launcher on one end. In this study, we focus on three magnetic samples, whose structures are summarized in Figure As a first demonstration, we measured the XFMR response of a 10 nm thick Ni80Fe20 (permalloy) sample. The individual spectra at the microwave phase giving the maximum magnetic signal are shown in Figure The amplitude of the asymmetry should vary sinusoidally at the microwave driving frequency. To capture the amplitude and phase of the response for each element, the magnetic spectra are recorded at several values of the rf phase. The amplitudes at the Fe and Ni M-edges are plotted as a function of the phase in Figures where, H1 = H +Meff, H2 = HH1+H 2 eff, H3 = ΔH(2H+Meff), Heff = 2πf/γμ0 is the effective field, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ0 is the permeability of free space, f is the frequency, H is the applied field, Meff is the effective magnetization, ΔH is the linewidth, and A0 is an amplitude. Unique fits for Meff and Heff are not possible when fitting to a single resonance curve, so we set μ0Meff equal to 1 T for the fits. Since the goal of this work is not to extract values for these parameters, such an assumption was used solely to allow the fit to converge. The simultaneous fit is indicated in the figure as solid lines. The identical response between the Fe and Ni is expected based on the strong exchange coupling and standard models for FMR. This provides rudimentary validation of the approach. Furthermore, the quality of the simultaneous fit highlights the agreement between the measured and expected behavior as the external bias field is swept through the ferromagnetic resonance. To confirm the measurement of the FMR, we overlay as a red line the field-swept FMR spectrum that we obtain via the in situ inductive method by measuring the amplitude of the reflected microwaves from the CPW sample structure. Good agreement is seen between the XFMR and inductive FMR methods. The small difference in linewidth between the inductive FMR and XFMR could be due to the fact that XFMR is probing a localized area of the sample, whereas the inductive approach is probing the entire sample which will likely have more inhomogeneity. This is especially true given the fact that the current sample was fabricated in a lift-off process on a thick Au layer. This produces edge regions with both line edge roughness and thickness variation, coupled with the fact that the Au underlayer itself induces additional film roughness. Finally, we note that since our EUV beam is focused in a roughly-Gaussian spot with a peak intensity near the center of the waveguide, our EUV measurements intrinsically probe the center region of the waveguide more than the edges. The second sample that we studied is Co25Fe75; due to its high Ms, we were able to measure XFMR at 17 GHz even with magnetic fields as low as μ0H ≈ 150 mT. Notably, at 50° from grazing, our setup has a low contrast for the magnetic signal at the Co M-edge as shown in Figure Repeating this measurement at μ0 H ~125 mT shows the opposite behavior, where the precession amplitude of the Ni signal is significantly more than that of the Fe. Furthermore, in both cases there is a noticeable phase shift between the precession of the two elements. Such a phase shift is to be expected since the resonance fields (and therefore phase shift through the resonance) are at different locations. Any dipolar coupling would also induce a relative phase shift. Measurements taken at more fields across the resonances would in principle enable us to determine the amount and type of coupling between the layers. Measuring such phase shifts in structures where the coupling is more complicated (e.g., from spin currents or weak exchange) allows quantification of such interactions. This highlights the ability to separate dynamics within different layers or sublattices in scientifically interesting or industry-relevant samples. This work shows that high-bandwidth, element-specific measurements of dynamic magnetic phenomena can be achieved in a laboratory. Despite the fact that no reference beam was used to correct for intensity fluctuations and drift, small deviations of the magnetization with cone angles below 5 degrees were easily observed at high-frequency. Going forward, many straightforward improvements can be made to increase the sensitivity and SNR, allowing more subtle phenomena to be observed along with significantly smaller cones angles and allow for more field steps across the resonance. The latter will be particularly important as measurements are pushed to higher frequencies. Here, we discuss several improvements that can be made to greatly improve performance. First, a reference beam that provides reference spectra of the EUV light incident on the sample can be used to normalize and divide out intensity fluctuations on both short and long timescales. The absence of this in the current setup represents one of our biggest barriers to achieving higher SNR. The frame-toframe RMS intensity is approximately 5% for 5 sec exposures, and there is also similar drift on longer time scales. Furthermore, the fluctuations of each harmonic are not necessarily correlated (though our analysis assumes that they are). Such normalization is critical at synchrotrons since the beam intensity also varies significantly over time. Recently, the use of a reference beam in HHG systems used to measure spin dynamics was shown to increase SNR by almost an order of magnitude. Third, while we have shown adequate synchronization of the EUV pulses to 62 GHz microwave fields, the timing jitter we measure supports extension to significantly higher frequencies by using commercially available components. Furthermore, it may be possible to improve the timing jitter by replacing the photodiode that is used for the input to the frequency comb generator. We found that using a sharper rise time on the input to the frequency comb generator reduced the timing jitter. Since the current photodiode still has a relatively long rise time (low bandwidth) of 1 ns, which depending on the electronic noise present can produce additional timing jitter, we anticipate that using a photodiode with a shorter rise time will further improve the timing jitter. Also, in addition to using multipliers, synchronized 100+ GHz tones with higher signal-to-noise ratio can be generated by driving an electrooptic modulator with a 10 or 20 GHz harmonic of the 80 MHz laser repletion rate. We have demonstrated the ability to bring element-specific, x-ray detected ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy (XFMR) to a laboratory setting. We did so by combining a high-harmonic generation (HHG) light source, which generates 35-70 eV light, with an RF frequency comb generator, and were able to generate phase-stable microwaves (timing jitter < 1.1 ps) above 60 GHz that we can use for XFMR measurements at the M-edge of most magnetic elements. The instrument can perform measurements in transmission or reflection; we showed reflection-mode measurements here that use the transverse magneto-optic Kerr effect (T-MOKE) geometry for magnetic contrast even on samples with opaque substrates (e.g., thick silicon). We used our instrument to perform high-frequency XFMR measurements on three samples: permalloy (8.5 GHz), Co25Fe75 (17 GHz), and a Ni/Fe multilayer sample that showed different dynamics in the Ni and Fe layers (8.5 GHz). This system provides the capability in the near future to measure element-, layer-, or sublattice-specific dynamics in industry-relevant and scientifically interesting magnetic thin films. Moreover, by introducing variable-angle measurements into this system, we will enhance the SNR and depth-sensitivity of the technique to be able to monitor precisely the spin transport and accumulation across interfaces. Finally, the spatial coherence of the source, combined with the ability to synchronize electrical pulses to the EUV probe, lays the foundation for performing these measurements in-operando on individual or arrays of functional spintronic devices. 