Asbestos is a term commonly used to describe silicate minerals that have a typical fibrous form and crystallize as separable fibers. Due to its extraordinary properties (high tensile strength, resistance to high temperatures, oxidation, corrosion, abrasion, biological degradation, etc.), it has been used for decades mainly in the construction industry. These minerals are usually found as naturally occurring decaying fibres which may be released into the environment as a result of natural processes and anthropogenic activities. Therefore, there is a need to intensify geo-environmental monitoring of the occurrence of natural asbestos on a global scale. However, the study of this material is not only important to clarify the impact of asbestos on public health, but also to know the exact requirements for asbestos replacement materials, which may be man-made mineral and synthetic fibres. At present, the technical but also the environmental reasons for switching to these fibres are more difficult, as asbestos replacement materials are subject to considerable demands -not only technological and economic, but also demands for their biological safety. The aim of this paper is to summarize the partially current knowledge concerning the extensive problems of asbestos occurrence in general and in the Pilsen region, to search for and possibly determine a suitable methodology for detecting the presence of asbestos in soil sediments based on experimental analyses motivated by analyses in other countries and to determine the exact types of asbestos from one series of samples, and we have been greatly inspired by research in Southern Nevada Asbestos is a naturally occurring fibrous mineral that has been widely used, particularly in the 20th century. These minerals are united by a major common property, which is a fibrous structure. However, in recent decades, considerable research has focused on the strong association between fatal diseases and exposure to asbestos-like minerals present in various environmental matrices. Asbestos is a very dangerous substance which, after years of widespread use in industry and construction, has been identified as a carcinogenic substance with mutagenic effects that poses a risk to the human body and should be treated with caution. When asbestos is disturbed, it releases fibres in the form of dust which can pose a serious health risk. Detailed analytical procedures have so far been established to determine the amount and type of dust particles in the air. However, analyses in soil sediments still leave room for finding the correct and then refining the whole procedure to accurately identify the different types of asbestos. Samples for the analyses were taken from four different locations in the same area of the Pilsen region around the Plaska dam, as shown in Figure The basic elemental analysis and fiber morphology study of the samples was studied using a Quanta 200 thermoemission SEM with an EDS detector in ESEM mode for non-conductive samples without the need for plating. The morphological investigation was carried out by comparing asbestos standards and fibers found by us. Image analysis was carried out using NIS Elements or Fiji (Image J) software to accurately determine the size of the fibres found. All asbestos fibres, without exception, are classified as proven human carcinogens by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC, part of the WHO) and the harmfulness of exposure depends on the type of fibre, its size, the method of processing or on the dose to which the body is exposed. Another analysis was X-ray diffraction, which provided us with an accurate determination of the types of asbestos minerals from the soil sediments collected, based on the known elemental composition of the samples determined by SEM with EDS. Samples were measured using a Panalytical X'Pert PRO automatic powder X-ray diffractometer with geometry Bragg-Brentano with a Cu Kα1 radiation source (λKα1 = 0.154 nm). The entire sample preparation, including the collection itself, was carried out under strict security measures (use of resealable and leak-proof bags for storage of the samples collected, protective masks and clothing, cleaning of the collection instruments after each individual collection, respiratory mask with the required level of filters...etc.). Asbestos is a proven human carcinogen and should be handled with great care. For this reason, the need to find a correct and unique procedure for the preparation of soil samples and subsequent analysis is all the more important because working with such a hazardous material causes very serious diseases, which will be discussed later in this article. Asbestos is an occupational and environmental pollutant. Its fibres tend to split along their length, producing very small fibres. If these fibres become airborne, they become flammable. Health studies report that the long-term presence of asbestos fibres in the human body causes very serious diseases, with the primary organs affected being the lungs, pleura or peritoneum, and in other cases the heart, digestive tract or ovaries. Inhalation of asbestos dust can result in simple dusting of the lungs, called asbestosis, in which healthy lung tissue is replaced by connective tissue. This disease is usually asymptomatic in the long term and is often found quite incidentally on X-ray examination because of the increased deposition of calcium in the connective tissue. Asbestosis, like hyalinosis of the pleura (connective tissue changes in the pleura), can be lived with. But a far more serious disease is bronchogenic lung cancer, a malignant disease more common in smokers than nonsmokers. Another of the serious diseases caused by asbestos is pleural or peritoneal mesothelioma (cancer of the pleura or peritoneum). The fine-grained fraction of the soil samples in the original state without annealing and the annealed fraction at 530°C were attached to the scanning electron microscope sample holder using carbon tape. Fibers were searched for that would correspond in morphology to the mineral fibers of some asbestos group. The fibers found were compared to asbestos type standards and the local elemental composition of these fibers and their surroundings were further measured using an EDS detector. The above morphological investigation of the first batch of samples showed the presence of fibres whose morphology was consistent with asbestos fibres in all four samples in the pre-annealing condition and in three samples in the post-annealing condition. In the fourth sample, after annealing, this presence was not demonstrated due to the impossibility of analysis because of the lack of material studied. During annealing, most of the fourth sample studied was burned because it contained mostly organic components. In the first three samples, smooth fibres with pointed ends were found, corresponding to the amphibole group. In the fourth sample, both smooth fibers from the amphibole group and wavy, flexible fibers from the serpentine group, which tend to clump together, were found. Morphological analysis of these samples was challenging given the low percentage of occurrence of the fibers of interest in the sediment studied overall. Sediments containing a range of mineral and organic constituents made analysis and the possibility of finding asbestos fibres difficult. The images (Figures The basic building unit of the silicate structure of asbestos is the silicon-oxygen tetrahedron [SiO4] 4-. Chrysotile, as a representative of the first group of asbestos serpentines, is a hydrated magnesium silicate and its stoichiometric chemical composition can be given as Mg3Si2O5(OH)4. However, the geothermal processes that produce chrysotile fibre formations usually involve the simultaneous deposition of various other minerals. It is thus observed that the chemical composition of the fibrous phase is closely related to the composition of the surrounding rock matrix and can thus be variable, as shown in Table The chemical composition of the minerals that make up the second group of asbestos, the amphiboles, reflects the complexity of the environment in which they were formed and can vary considerably in terms of major and trace elements and other contributing factors. The chemical composition of amphibole minerals can be represented as: A0-1, B2C5T8O22 (OH, O, F, Cl)2 , where A is (Na, K), B is (Na, Ca, Mg, Fe +2 , Mn, Li), C is (Al, Fe +2 , Fe +3 , Ti, Mg, Mn, Cr) and T is (Si, Al), with A, B, C representing cation sites in the crystal structure. From this general representation of the chemical composition of amphiboles it may be deduced that the fibers of amphiboles may be regarded as a series of minerals in which one cation is successively replaced by another, as shown in Table The chemical composition was measured repeatedly for all samples, but like the measured chemical composition,the patterns of these minerals are only indicative and idealised given the above information, and therefore the results of the EDS analysis of the soil sediments should be considered only marginally and rather as input information for further analyses. For this reason, also in our experiment the elemental composition analysis was taken as indicative and mainly guided us in the coarse partitioning of serpentines or amphiboles with respect to the presence of some elements that distinguish the different types of asbestos. For example, tremolite and actinolite can be considered as "related" because they differ in composition only in the presence of iron (magnesium in tremolite is partially replaced by divalent iron in the "C" position to form actinolite), sodium indicates the possible presence of crocidolite, and calcium indicates the possible presence of tremolite. Thus, the identification of asbestos fibres from natural sources is not possible on the basis of elemental composition analysis alone, since their composition reflects the natural diversity, variability and constant metamorphosis of minerals. X-ray diffraction analysis was necessary to confirm our hypotheses and results from SEM. The found fibers were measured using the NIS Elements. The search was for fibres that met the WHO requirements for the size of 'respirable' fibres. Fibres of this size have been found to be essential for the risk of respiratory cancer or other asbestos-related diseases in humans. Almost all of the fibres found (Table Table However, from the point of view of mineralogy and the thorough study of asbestos materials, the infinite cleavability of these minerals must be taken into account. The slightest manipulation of material containing asbestos fibres produces fibres of a size capable of entering the human body and causing serious diseases. Therefore, for the subsequent processing of the next series of samples in our experiment, we eliminate the complex and laborious step of image analysis in the NIS Elements program. In fact, the mere confirmation of the presence of these fibres in the samples will be sufficient to establish the fact that the interference or manipulation of natural deposits (or improper handling of man-made asbestos-containing products) of these minerals will produce fibres dangerous to the human body due to their cleavability. As mentioned, X-ray diffraction analysis measurements were chosen to confirm the original hypotheses from the SEM and the presence of asbestos fibres in the samples of this series. Powder X-ray diffraction appears to be a very suitable method for determining the phase composition of the relevant sample together with the possibility of determining the percentage of the relevant asbestos mineral. The determination of the phase composition of asbestos minerals involves a number of problems. Additional phases are present in asbestos-containing soil sediments, the diffraction of which may cause many overlaps in the diffraction maxima of the asbestos phases observed. This results in very similar elemental compositions of the different phases. This problem is solved by progressively refining the measured diffraction record of the sample under investigation. By using databases of standards The measurement range of all samples was identically chosen in the range of Figures XX to XX show the diffraction records of each sample in turn, before and after firing, with the identified phases marked from 20 to maximum 40°[2θ]. The numerical designation of these phases corresponds to the numerical designation of the identified phases in Table All samples were then subjected to annealing in an oven after initial measurement in their original state (only airdried to reduce moisture). This procedure was chosen in order to reduce the organic parts present in the samples. These organic phases can cause an increase in the background of the measurements and their presence can cause some of the weaker diffractions of the observed phases to overlap. The effect of annealing is evident in all samples (except for sample 4 -dog blanket, where the organic fraction was so reduced that analysis could not be performed after annealing). In all samples there was a partial reduction of the background present, at the same time there was a reduction of some phases that are sensitive to higher temperatures. The asbestos phases are not affected by this effect, due to their resistance to the temperature used. There is only a reduction or disappearance of some diffractions from inappropriately rotated crystallographic planes. Figure From the phase composition results above, it is clear that the presence of asbestos fibres was confirmed in all samples. After completing the results of all analyses, we can say with certainty that chrysotile from the serpentine group is present in the first, third and fourth samples. This is the least dangerous form of asbestos. We can also say that in all samples the presence of anthophyllite from the amphibole group is confirmed and in the fourth sample the presence of actinolite (also from the amphibole group) is confirmed. According to the morphology of the fibres, the third sample most probably also contains crocodolite, but this was not confirmed by XRD. The fourth sample could not be analysed after annealing due to the small sample size. Almost all of the measured fibres from both the pre-and post-annealing samples met the WHO definition and were therefore classified as 'respirable' and highly hazardous. Apart from chrysotile, there is a confirmed occurrence of amphibole types of asbestos, i.e. significantly more hazardous from a health point of view than chrysotile. The impact of asbestos on human health is well known. The threshold for exposure to asbestos cannot be established medically, as even a single fibre of the 'right' size and composition is enough to cause serious disease. In the initial phase of the research, we searched for fibres in the samples that would meet the WHO conditions with regard to fibre size and respiration, i.e. fibres with a width of less than 3 micrometres, a length of more than 5 micrometres and a length to width ratio of less than 3:1. However, we concluded that this step was unnecessary in view of the infinite cleavability of these minerals and, as a result, the exact type of asbestos found is known. The cleavage of these materials depends on natural influences, mechanical stresses, human intervention, etc. Previously, fibres shorter than 5 micrometres were not counted in accordance with the standard and were not considered critical. However, their health hazards are not ruled out, and considerable research and studies are under way on the possibility of their riskiness with regard to their chemical composition. The source of contamination of free air with asbestos fibres, especially actinolite in the Pilsen region, has been clearly demonstrated and officially confirmed for many years. For this reason, further detailed investigations of Plzeň and its surroundings are needed due to the significant ecological contamination by asbestos in the air and now in soil sediments, which must be clarified and further investigated in order to achieve better and more objective results and conclusions, to which other specialists from the medical and geological fields are gradually being invited. Although the presence of asbestos in soil and water can also pose a serious health risk, there has been little research and regulation of asbestos minerals in the past. Several factors influence the pathogenicity of asbestos minerals, the most important of which are the morphology and chemical composition of the fibres. Fibres longer than 10 micrometres cannot be completely absorbed by macrophages and therefore fibre length is still considered to be the main (although not the only) cause of adverse biological effects. . Phases in soil sediment samples identified by the Panalytical X ́Pert Pro powder diffractometer [24][25][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37]