We experimentally investigate whether crystal polarity affects the growth of GaN nanowires in plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy and whether their formation has to be induced by defects. For this purpose, we prepare smooth and coherently strained AlN layers on 6H-SiC(0001) and SiC(0001) substrates to ensure a well-defined polarity and an absence of structural and morphological defects. On N-polar AlN, a homogeneous and dense N-polar GaN nanowire array forms, evidencing that GaN nanowires form spontaneously in the absence of defects. On Al-polar AlN, we do not observe the formation of Ga-polar GaN NWs. Instead, sparse N-polar GaN nanowires grow embedded in a Ga-polar GaN layer. These N-polar GaN nanowires are shown to be accidental in that the necessary polarity inversion is induced by the formation of SixN. The present findings thus demonstrate that spontaneously formed GaN nanowires are irrevocably N-polar. Due to the strong impact of the polarity on the properties of GaN-based devices, these results are not only essential to understand the spontaneous formation of GaN nanowires but also of high technological relevance. In crystal growth, certain materials are known to exhibit a pronounced tendency to spontaneously form nanostructures for specific growth conditions. Prominent examples of such materials include the technologically important semiconductors ZnO, for which the disposition to form a variety of nanostructures prevails even in homoepitaxial growth, Empirically, it is well established that GaN NWs grow exclusively under N-rich conditions with the polar (0001) axis parallel to the growth direction. The possible role of defects has not been addressed at all. On Si(111), the NWs actually grow on an amorphous SixN interlayer. It is shown that GaN NWs do grow on these high-quality substrates and, unlike epitaxial films, they do not necessarily preserve the polarity of the underneath buffer layer, since they are found to be always N-polar. In other words, even if the substrate polarity is expected to induce the formation of Ga-polar GaN NWs, only N-polar GaN NWs grow. In addition, we also found that the substrate polarity strongly influences the nucleation, distribution, and morphological properties of GaN NWs. Therefore, the results presented in this work show that defects are not required to grow GaN NWs, and demonstrate that crystal polarity plays a major role for the spontaneous formation of GaN NWs. All samples were grown in a DCA Instruments P600 MBE system equipped with two radiofrequency N2 plasma sources for active N, and solid-source effusion cells for Al and Ga. The as-received on-axis 6H-SiC(0001) and SiC(0001) substrates were chemically cleaned and before initiating growth, 40 monolayers (ML) of Ga were deposited at 550 • C and flashed-off at a temperature of 800 • C to remove residual contaminants from the surface. construction caused by 1/3 ML of Si atoms adsorbed on the surface. Gatan Enfina parallel electron energy-loss spectrometer system. A 6 nm spot size was used for CBED and EELS measurements. , where the AlN buffer layer frequently does not possess a single, well-defined polarity. EELS signals exhibit a remarkable difference between (0002) and (0002 ̄) Bragg conditions that can be used to identify NW polarity. These results seemingly contrast with those recently published by Chen et al. The possibility to grow Ga-polar GaN NWs by MOVPE but not by MBE can be the result of the inherent differences between these two growth techniques. MBE growth of GaN NWs is mainly governed by kinetic processes whereas the MOVPE growth of Ga-polar GaN NWs is carried out under very specific growth conditions that favor reaction-limited mechanisms rather than diffusionlimited (kinetic) transport. For MBE growth, a well known difference between the (0001) and (0001) surfaces of GaN is that the kinetic barriers for the diffusivity of Ga and N adatoms, which depend on the III/V ratio (they are higher for III/V < 1), are lower for the former surface. Another potential explanation lies in the fact that (0001) and (0001) surfaces are expected to exhibit different surface energies. If, as it has been recently proposed by Dubrovskii et al., In this context, it is intriguing to compare our findings to those obtained for ZnO, a material also exhibiting a strong disposition for the spontaneous formation of NWs. Despite the obvious similarities between these materials with regard to crystal structure and related properties, ZnO NWs have recently be shown to be Zn-polar regardless of substrate polarity, Independent of the reason for the fundamental role of the polarity for NW formation, the present findings are essential for establishing an understanding of the spontaneous growth of GaN NWs, and of high technological relevance due to the major influence of the polarity on the properties of GaN-based electronic and optoelectronic devices.