The cumulant expansion of the Green's function is a computationally efficient beyond-GW approach renowned for its significant enhancement of satellite features in materials. In contrast to the ubiquitous GW approximation of many-body perturbation theory, ab initio cumulant expansions performed on top of GW (GW+C) have demonstrated the capability to handle multi-particle processes by incorporating higher-order correlation effects or vertex corrections, yielding better agreements between experiment and theory for satellite structures. While widely employed in condensed matter physics, very few applications of GW+C have been published on molecular systems. Here, we assess the performance of this scheme on a series of 10-electron molecular systems (Ne, HF, H 2 O, NH 3 , and CH 4 ) where full configuration interaction estimates of the outer-valence quasiparticle and satellite energies are available. The cumulant expansion is a versatile mathematical and theoretical tool that finds applications in various fields of physics. In condensed matter physics, the cumulant expansion has been particularly fruitful and is often used in the framework of Green's function theory. where G 0 (t) represents a reference Green's function and C(t) is the so-called cumulant. This exponential ansatz shares obvious similarities with coupled-cluster (CC) theory The cumulant has been also employed in realistic molecular systems Fundamentally, the cumulant approach is rooted in electronboson (or polaron) models where one or more fermions are coupled to bosons. In 1970, Langreth, One year before this, Lundqvist had shown that the approximate solution of this model, correct up to second order, is closely linked to the GW approximation. The plasmaron was actually first observed in the uniform electron gas (UEG) by Hedin, Lundqvist, and coworkers, Langreth's polaron model provided crucial theoretical insights and found early applications in core-level spectroscopy. Building upon Langreth's work, In 1996, Aryasetiawan et al. One year later, Holm and Aryasetiawan conducted a thorough study on the impact of self-consistency within the cumulant approach applied to the UEG. Following a period of relative quiet, Lucia Reining's and John Rehr's groups revived the general interest in GW+C, applying this approach to semiconductors, specifically silicon. In a subsequent investigation, detailed in Ref. 20, the group extended their work to graphite, maintaining a similar approach to Ref. 17. Their data revealed multiple satellite replicas of intrinsic origin, augmented by extrinsic losses. Note that, in this material possessing more than one significant plasmon, there was no manifestation of a plasmaron at the GW level. In lower-dimensional materials such a doped graphene In 2014, Kas, Rehr, and Reining introduced a variation of the cumulant expansion employing the retarded Green's function instead of the time-ordered Green's function, with a first application on the UEG. In the same timeframe, several notable developments emerged: (i) Vigil-Fowler et al. In 2018, Vleck presented, using a stochastic GW approach, Finally, in 2020, Kowalski, Peng, and coworkers initiated developments of a real-time EOM-CC approach for cumulants, We denote as G T and G R the time-ordered and retarded Green's functions, where T and {•, •} are the time-ordering and anticommutation operators, respectively, Θ(t) is the Heaviside function, and |Ψ N 0 ⟩ is the exact N-electron ground-state wave function. In the following, the indices i, j, k, and l are occupied (hole) spinorbitals; a, b, c, and d are unoccupied (particle) spinorbitals; p, q, r, and s indicate arbitrary spinorbitals; and ν labels single (de)excitations. Here a p (t) and a † p (t) are annihilation and creation operators in the Heisenberg picture, i.e., Introducing the greater and lesser components of the Green's function, the time-ordered and retarded Green's functions are expressed as In frequency space, the corresponding elements of the spectral function, which is directly related to the photoemission spectrum of the system (see Sec. II), are given by The greater and lesser components of G can be combined in various ways which are equivalent if observables are calculated consistently. where the ε p 's are the one-body energies employed to build G 0 (t) [see Eq. ( For the retarded Green's function, hole and particle states contribute to both the electron addition and removal spectra, which explains the more symmetric definition of the following retarded Green's function As mentioned in Sec. II, in the time-ordered formulation of the cumulant, there is a separation between the electron and hole branches, as readily seen in Eqs. (8a) and (8b), leading to spectral functions that exhibit asymmetry. While this electron-hole branch decoupling is appropriate for core levels, it poses a notable limitation when approaching the Fermi level. Therefore, in the following, our derivation is based on the retarded Green's function. As explained in Chapter 5 of Ref. 10, the poles of retarded quantities must be shifted to the lower part of the complex plane by an infinitesimal amount due to the requirement of causality. This is a major difference from the more conventional time-ordered quantities where the poles are displaced in the upper or lower plane depending on their relative position with respect to the chemical potential. The derivation of the cumulant expansion can be approached through different methods: diagrammatic techniques, By definition, the cumulant ansatz of the Green's function is where, at the HF level, we have and the ε HF p 's are HF one-electron orbital energies. We start from the Dyson equation that links the Green's function to the HF Green's function via the correlation part of the self-energy where we have taken into account the time-translation invariance of the Hamiltonian and x is a composite variable gathering spin and space. Expanding Eq. ( where we have omitted, for the sake of simplicity, the spinspatial coordinates. In order to determine C(t) up to first order in W, the second terms of the right-hand side of the two previous equations are equated, which gives This last identity represents the general expression of the matrix elements of the cumulant within the linear response approximation. Using the expression of the elements of the HF retarded Green's function in frequency space enforcing the diagonal approximation for the self-energy, i.e. Σ pq (ω) ≈ δ pq Σ pp (ω), and applying a frequency shift, one gets Substituting Eq. ( The cumulant is often expressed as a function of the cumulant kernel as This expression is known as the Landau form of the cumulant (see the supporting information for a detailed derivation). 88 To derive the GW+C expression of the Green's function, let us now consider the diagonal elements of the GW retarded self-energy, which reads where the ε p 's are potentially quasiparticle energies depending on the level of self-consistency. The transition densities are given by where ⟨pq|rs⟩ are the usual two-electron integrals in Dirac notation and the matrices X and Y gather the eigenvectors of the direct RPA problem where the diagonal matrix Ω contains the positive RPA eigenvalues Ω ν . The matrix elements of the (anti)resonant block A and the coupling block B read Substituting the GW retarded self-energy into Eq. ( ζ paν e -i∆ paν t + i∆ paν t -1 (26) with and Therefore, defining where is the quasiparticle shift, the diagonal elements of the Green's function in the frequency domain are given by where is the quasiparticle weight (or renormalization factor) and the last term of Eq. ( agree up to first order, as readily seen by comparing Eqs. ( Expanding the last term of Eq. ( which features two sets of satellites at energies each located on a different branch and associated with the respective weights where one can readily see that they are directly proportional to the quasiparticle spectral weight. Here, we limit our analysis to these two sets of satellite peaks (especially the satellite peaks on the hole branch) as expanding to second order would produce satellites with even smaller weights and further away from the quasiparticle peak. The GW+C scheme has been implemented in quack, In the G 0 W 0 calculations, we set η = 0.001 E h in the expression of the self-energy [see Eq. ( At the G 0 W 0 level, satellite transition energies have been obtained via the linear version of the GW equations as described in Refs. 94-97. Within this scheme, the so-called "upfolded" matrix is diagonalized in a larger space that includes the 2h1p and 2p1h configurations, the satellite energies being obtained as higher/lower roots. Although this procedure is more computationally expensive than the usual "downfolded" version where one solves the non-linear equation (38), it is still technically feasible for the present systems and ease the obtention of satellite energies which are extremely challenging to get as solutions of the non-linear equation. Satellite energies are not computed at the qsGW level due to the static nature of this approximation. At the GW level, the spectral function is 2 (39) where the expression of the elements Σ c pp (ω) is given in Eq. (22). At the GW+C level, the spectral function reads (see supporting information) where the quasiparticle part is pressions: The outer-valence spectral function A(ω) = p A p (ω) (where the sum is performed on the outer-valence orbitals) computed at the G 0 W 0 and G 0 W 0 +C levels for each 10-electron molecular system is represented in Fig. Percentage of error with respect to FCI for the outer-valence ionization energies reported in Table Figure Concerning the satellites (see Fig. In the present article, we have reviewed the literature on cumulant Green's function methods, provided a detailed derivation of the associated equations, and investigated the performance of this scheme in the context of molecular systems where solid reference data for satellite transitions are now available. In particular, we have compared the satellite transition energies obtained via the GW+C scheme and the "upfolded" version of the GW equations. In a nutshell, G 0 W 0 +C does sometimes improve upon G 0 W 0 but it is far from being systematic. The cumulant version of qsGW has been found to usually overcorrect satellite energies. However, the cumulant approach allows us to estimate satellite energies without solving the dynamical GW equations or its larger (hence more expensive) upfolded version. These observations show that the development of new Green's function methods capable of describing accurately satellite states in molecular systems would be extremely useful. There are no conflicts to declare.