The experimental investigations of the magnetic interactions in an atomically thin magnetic layer are essential to understand the physics of low-dimensional magnets. The full spectrum of collective magnetic excitations (magnons) would provide an access to these fundamental interactions on the atomic scale. Here in order to be able to excite the magnons by means of spinpolarized electrons we couple a Ni monolayer to one and two atomic layers of Co and probe the full experimental magnon dispersion relation up to the Brillouin zone boundary. Comparing to the results of ab initio calculations we quantify the complex pattern of the magnetic exchange interaction in the Ni monolayer. We show that although the magnons in this system are rather stiff, the Heisenberg exchange coupling between the Ni spins is weak. We unravel the origin of the observed large magnon stiffness constant being a consequence of the small spin density of the Ni atoms. The collective excitations of magnetic solids can be described by their representative quasi-particles, called magnons. Of particular interest are the high wavevector magnons, since they are governed by the magnetic exchange interaction between neighboring spins Several experimental techniques based on the inelastic scattering of neutrons, photons and electrons have been successfully implemented to probe magnons in bulk and ultrathin films of Fe and Co down to the monolayer and even submonolayer regime. However, so far it has been challenging to probe the full magnon dispersion relation in Ni, in particular a Ni monolayer. This may have several reasons. (i) The inelastic scattering cross-section of neutrons as bulk probes by magnons scales with the mag-netic form factor which, in turn, is directly related to the spin density of the unit cell. Owing to its rather small magnetic moment and its itinerant magnetism character, Ni has not been in the favor of the neutron scattering experiments The magnons and the fundamental magnetic interactions in the Ni monolayer are also of great interest in the context of unconventional topological superconductivity in the Bi/Ni bilayer, where the interfacial Ni magnons are proposed to be responsible for the superconducting pairing mechanism being of d xy ± id x 2 +y 2 character Besides their importance for the fundamental understanding of the physics of low-dimensional solids, magnons are also of great interest to the field of magnonics, where the idea is to use the magnons as information carriers In this Letter by performing spin-polarized high resolution electron energy-loss spectroscopy (SPHREELS) experiments on specifically designing multilayer structures we probe, for the first time, the full dispersion relation of the magnon mode, which is partially localized in the Ni monolayer. We show that the Ni magnons are rather stiff and show a notable dispersion relation up to the surface BZ boundary. This is in sharp contrast to the results of the Fe monolayer on the same substrate or on W(110) and Pd(001), where the magnons are found to be rather soft. Comparing the results to those of first-principles calculations we shall comment on the observed large magnon stiffness constant. Moreover, we will provide the complex pattern of HEI in the Ni monolayer. We have shown earlier that in multilayer structures the spatial localization of the magnons depends on the pattern of J ij All the sample preparation and magnon spectroscopy experiments were performed under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. We first examine the Co/Ni/Ir(001) epitaxial system. The surface of Ir(001) was cleaned using the standard cleaning procedure, described in details in Refs. where k i∥ and k f ∥ denote the parallel momentum of the incoming and outgoing beam, respectively [see the inset of Fig. In order to quantify the strength of HEI and to unravel the origin of the probed magnon mode we resort to the first-principles calculations of the magnetic exchange parameters in both Co/Ni/Ir(001) and 2Co/Ni/Ir(001) systems. Our first-principles calculations are based on density functional theory and the fully relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker electronic structure method. In this approach the values of J ij are computed within the framework of the magnetic force theorem Our first-principles calculations indicate that the nearest neighbor intralayer and interlayer interaction with (without) considering the surface reconstruction are only J N ∥ = 1.03 (1.24) meV and J N ⊥ = 5.71 (6.48) meV, respectively. Likewise, the interaction between spins located at larger distances are also rather weak. The second nearest neighbor intralayer and interlayer interaction with (without) considering the surface reconstruction are only J N N ∥ = 0.164 (0.29) meV and J N N ⊥ = 0.24 (0.2) meV, respectively. The values of J ij and the magnetic moments are provided in Tab. I. The fact that the HEI in Ni is weak is in agreement with the calculations for bulk fcc Ni Within the adiabatic formalism (linear spin-wave theory) the magnon dispersion relation is given by E where g = 2 is the gfactor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, μ i is the magnetic moment of the origin site, R 0j represents the displacement vector of site j with respect to the origin and q denotes the three dimensional vector of the magnon momentum. A careful investigation of the electronic DOS reveals that the Ni atoms possess a low spin density. A low spin density leads to both a weak exchange interaction as well as a small magnetic moment [0.55 (0.52) μ B for the reconstructed (unreconstructed) Ir(001)]. The fact that the magnetic moment of Ni is much smaller than that of the Co has experimentally been verified by probing both bulk samples Recently, the emergence of topological superconductivity in the Bi/Ni bilayer is attributed to the magnetic excitations at the interface and their coupling to the surface state electrons In conclusion, we prepared atomically architectured multilayers composed of Ni and Co epitaxial monolay-ers on Ir(001). Owing to the large magnetic moment of the surface Co monolayer and the fact that the excitation cross-section at Co surfaces is high, the magnons in such designed multilayers can be very efficiently excited by spin-polarized electron scattering experiments, e.g., SPHREELS. The acoustic magnon mode of these systems was found to be localized in both the Co as well as in the Ni monolayers. The full experimental acoustic magnon dispersion relation, probed up to the surface BZ, enabled us to quantitatively resolve the complex pattern of HEI in the Ni monolayer. We observed a rather weak exchange coupling within the Ni monolayer, even though the magnon exchange stiffness is rather large (much larger than that of an Fe monolayer on various substrates). The large magnon stiffness constant is a consequence of the low spin density of Ni atoms, as confirmed by our first-principles calculations. In addition to the fact that our results resolve the long-standing question regarding the quantitative values of HEI in the Ni monolayer, they are also of the interest to the field of topological superconductivity in magnetic/topological materials heterostructures.