Optical frequency combs are indispensable links between the optical and microwave domains, enabling a wide range of applications including precision spectroscopy 1-5 , ultrastable frequency generation The generation and stabilization of optical and microwave frequencies have had a significant impact on scientific and technological advancement. Optical atomic clocks To overcome these limitations, a combination of EO and Kerr nonlinearities have been utilized. Two leading approaches involve EO pulse-pumped DKS Our hybrid Kerr-EO approach for frequency comb generation on TFLN cascades a dispersion-engineered microresonator and a high-speed, efficient EO phase modulator. The microresonator outputs a DKS comb with a comb spacing in the range of hundreds of GHz. Each soliton line is subsequently phase modulated, and EO FIG. sidebands are formed in a cascaded manner around each DKS comb line such that the original DKS comb spacing is fully divided into microwave-rate spacing set by the EO modulation frequency. The required integrated-photonic components are schematically shown in Fig. The TFLN photonic platform is a prime candidate on which to implement the hybrid Kerr-EO approach for broadband, microwave-rate frequency comb generation, due to its large Kerr and EO nonlinearities. It hosts low-loss microresonators To further unlock the potential of DKSs in TFLN, we demonstrate an octave-spanning single soliton frequency comb from 131.3 THz to 263.8 THz with a spacing of 660 GHz, initiated under 372 mW of on-chip pump power (Fig. High-speed EO modulation on TFLN Next, we characterize the second piece to our approach, a TFLN EO phase modulator operated at multiple wavelengths sampled within the source DKS bandwidth. The waveguide-based integrated modulator operates with a travelling-wave electrode configuration. 2 cm-long microwave strip lines are used to induce a larger optical phase shift and reduce the V π value, simultaneously exhibiting large operational bandwidth Five continuous-wave optical frequencies in the telecommunications L, C, S, and E bands are separately coupled onto the chip through bilayer-taper mode converters, and EO sidebands are generated around each frequency, as shown in Fig. Combining self-starting and stable TFLN DKSs with efficient and high-speed EO modulation, a fully integrated hybrid Kerr-EO comb is realizable. By sending a lowthreshold, 410.319 GHz-spaced DKS into our EO phase modulator, we obtain a hybrid Kerr-EO comb spanning 75.9 THz end-to-end with a spacing of 29.308 GHz (Fig. Next, we set ∆f to be a nonzero value of around 2.107 GHz to elucidate the spacing relationship. As the microwave drive frequency (which sets f RF ) is linearly decreased in steps of 0.01 GHz, the ∆f linearly increases, as shown in Fig. In summary, we outlined a hybrid Kerr-EO approach for integrated frequency comb generation and demonstrated TFLN as a material platform that realizes this approach completely. Our work is enabled by the outstanding second and third-order nonlinear properties of TFLN, hosting self-starting, low threshold, and stable free-running THz-rate DKSs, while supporting on-chip EO phase modulation capabilities with excellent bandwidth, efficiency, and speed. Currently, the comb line power difference between the DKS source and the hybrid Kerr-EO comb is attributed to EO power redistribution into the sidebands (about 10 dB pump mode suppression near 1550 nm), the off-chip coupling loss from the DKS chip (about 6 dB), and the insertion loss of the EO modulator chip (about 8 dB, both chip facets and propagation loss included). The latter two losses, totaling 14 dB, does not present a fundamental limitation and can be reduced significantly using improved coupling methods such as hybrid integration taking advantage of low-loss, multi-layer couplers Our integrated comb source, serving as a broadband, microwave-rate frequency reference spanning 75.9 THz around the telecommunications band, is suitable for the measurement, control, and mutual stabilization of optical frequencies. Such frequencies may take the form of independent chip-scale lasers Dissipative Kerr soliton (DKS) devices are fabricated on a Z-cut thin-film lithium niobate (Z-TFLN) on insulator wafer supplied by NanoLN. The initial film thickness is 600 nm of Z-TFLN on top of 2 μm thermal oxide and 0.525 mm silicon. Nanophotonic waveguides are patterned on hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) resist using electron-beam lithography (EBL). The patterned resist undergoes multiple iterations of Ar + -based reactive ion etching and wet etching until an etch depth of about 345 nm is reached, leaving about 255 nm of slab. This iterative etching process results in a waveguide sidewall angle of about 72 degrees, owing to the prevention of excess redeposition buildup during the dry-etching process. Finally, the HSQ resist is stripped using dilute hydrogenfluoride (HF) and the devices are annealed in a high temperature, oxygen-rich environment. Routing waveguides for coupling light on and off the chip are exposed through manual cleaving, resulting in coupling losses of about 6 dB per facet. Electro-optic (EO) phase modulator devices are fabricated on a X-cut thin-film lithium niobate (X-TFLN) on insulator wafer supplied by NanoLN. The initial film thickness is 600 nm of X-TFLN on top of 2 μm thermal oxide and 0.525 mm silicon. The fabrication process is identical to that for DKS devices up to etching of the waveguides (320 nm etch depth and 280 nm slab, instead). Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) is used to deposit a silica top cladding layer. Bilayer taper mode converters are fabricated by first opening photolithography-defined rectangular windows in the top cladding using HF wet etching. Subsequently, the mode converter tips are defined using aligned EBL and another round of Ar + -based reactive ion etching. Finally, the devices are cleaned and cladded with PECVD silica once again. Two centimeter long gold microwave electrodes are defined near the waveguides using aligned EBL and photolithography and metalized using electron-beam deposition followed by liftoff process. Facets at the mode converter tips are exposed through reactive ion etching through the X-TFLN, thermal oxide, and silicon, resulting in a total EO phase modulator insertion loss of about 8 dB. The 6 GHz half-wave-voltage (V π ) is about 4 V when optically pumped in the C-band. The microresonator dispersion is defined by the integrated dispersion where μ is the azimuthal mode index The experimental setup for DKS device characterization and soliton generation is schematically illustrated in Extended Fig. The experimental setup for electro-optic (EO) phase modulator performance characterization is schematically illustrated in Extended Fig. The experimental setup for hybrid Kerr-EO comb generation is schematically illustrated in Extended Fig. To generate the hybrid Kerr-EO combs as in Fig. The electrical power required to electro-optically divide 410.319 GHz of DKS spacing into microwave-rate (29.308 GHz) separated lines was calibrated to be 2.51 W (34.5 dBm) after accounting for microwave losses in the system, at 29.158 GHz modulation frequency. We specifically selected a microwave power such that the highest power sidebands would appear at the N/2 = 7 sideband. This choice ensures that the comb lines separated by the difference frequency ∆f would generate a microwave beatnote with high signal-to-noise ratio and phase locking ∆f to the stable microwave oscillator would yield a high-quality phase lock in the locking demonstration. The EO phase modulator measured in the C-band has a V π L ∼ 8.84V • cm at 6 GHz modulation frequency and a 3 dB EO bandwidth of 31.47 GHz. The electrical power consumption may be further lowered by 5.3 dB using state-of-the-art TFLN EO phase modulators with V π L ∼ 4.8V • cm (extrapolated from quoted 2.4V • cm for a dual-drive amplitude modulator) Soliton spacing detection, locking, and stabilization When generating the hybrid Kerr-EO comb, a nonzero difference frequency ∆f is introduced when f DKS is not an integer multiple of f RF . In our experiment in Fig. Comparing our work with state-of-the-art integrated frequency comb technologies surveying various material platforms, such as octave-spanning DKS combs and microresonator-based EO-combs, we find that the hybrid Kerr-EO comb of this work produces the largest span (75.9 THz) while simultaneously capable of directly interfacing with conventional fast-electronics, which we define as a sub-50 GHz spacing between adjacent comb lines. These features are augmented by a record number of 2,589 lines produced using a comb-generator consisting of purely integrated components. This comparison is graphically illustrated in Extended Fig. 