The mechanism of the peculiar transport properties around the magnetic ordering temperature of semiconducting antiferromagnetic EuCd2P2 is not yet understood. With a huge peak in the resistivity observed above the Néel temperature, TN = 10.6 K, it exhibits a colossal magnetoresistance effect. Recent reports on observations of ferromagnetic contributions above TN as well as metallic behavior below this temperature have motivated us to perform a comprehensive characterization of this material, including its resistivity, heat capacity, magnetic properties and electronic structure. Our transport measurements revealed quite different temperature dependence of resistivity with the maximum at 14 K instead of previously reported 18 K. Low-field susceptibility data support the presence of static ferromagnetism above TN and show a complex behavior of the material at small applied magnetic fields. Namely, signatures of reorientation of magnetic domains are observed up to T = 16 K. Our magnetization measurements indicate a magnetocrystalline anisotropy which also leads to a preferred alignment of the magnetic clusters above TN. The momentum-resolved photoemission experiments at temperatures from 24 K down to 2.5 K indicate the permanent presence of a fundamental band gap without change of the electronic structure when going through TN that is in contradiction with previous results. We performed ab initio band structure calculations which are in good agreement with the measured photoemission data when assuming an antiferromagnetic ground state. Calculations for the ferromagnetic phase show a much smaller bandgap, indicating the importance of possible ferromagnetic contributions for the explanation of the colossal magnetoresistance effect in the related EuZn2P2. In recent years, materials showing unusual transport properties like anomalous Hall effect or a colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) were studied intensively In EuCd 2 P 2 , a pronounced peak in the resistivity appears above T N which can be suppressed in magnetic field by several orders of magnitude Here, we present a detailed study of the magnetic properties of EuCd 2 P 2 in connection with its heat capacity, resistivity and CMR effect. Also in understanding of transport properties an essential point is how the electronic structure of material changes in the temperature range where the CMR effect is observed. Therefore, we perform a photoemission study of the electronic band structure accompanied by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Single crystals of EuCd 2 P 2 , Fig. Single-crystal diffraction data were collected at 213 K on STOE IPDS II two-circle diffractometer equipped with the Genix 3D HS microfocus Mo K α X-ray source (λ = 0.71073 Å). The finalization of the data, including empirical absorption corrections, was done using the CrysAlisPro software (Rigaku Oxford Diffraction, 2022). The initial structural model was taken from those for EuZn 2 P 2 The electrical transport measurements on the EuCd 2 P 2 samples were carried out using a standard four-point configuration. Low-resistance electrical contacts were made by thermal evaporation and deposition of 200 nm gold with a 7 nm chromium wetting layer onto the polished surface of the crystals. The electric connection then was made using gold wire and silver paste. In order to verify ohmic behaviour, I-V characterization was performed using low-frequency lock-in technique at various temperatures. The resistivity was calculated using the contact geometry and dimensions of the a -a plane and the c axis. The heat capacity (HC) measurements were carried out using the standard semiadiabatic relaxation method implemented in the Physical property measurement system (PPMS) by Quantum Design. The samples were placed on a calibrated sample puck with Apiezon N grease. At each temperature set point three decay curves were measured applying a heat pulse of 2 %. HC curves were measured at different magnetic fields up to 2 T. The sample was first cooled in zero-field to 2 K before turning on the magnetic field. The data were then collected while heating the sample to 30 K, where the magnetic field was removed. Magnetic susceptibility, χ(T ), at fixed magnetic fields over the range of T = 2 -300 K and magnetic moment versus field, M(H), at constant temperatures were measured using the vibrating sample magnetometry option of the PPMS by Quantum Design. For low fields, χ(T ) was measured in zero-field cooled (ZFC) and fieldcooled (FC) mode. Before each ZFC measurement, the temperature was set to T = 35 K. Afterwards the temperature was lowered to 2 K before applying a respective magnetic field. The data were then collected while heating the sample. The FC curves were subsequently obtained by cooling the sample down with the applied magnetic field. We needed to correct the sample mass, due to tin inclusions in the measured crystals. The amount of tin was determined by analyzing the drop in χ(T ) at T SC = 3.7 K. The amount was between 2 and 10 wt.% and the utilized sample mass was corrected accordingly. At very small fields, the signal is strongly influenced by the background contributions stemming from the sample holder and the glue (GE-varnish) and we therefore show the low-field data in arbitrary units. Ab initio electronic structure calculations were performed using the OpenMX code (ver. 3.9), which implements a fully relativistic norm-conserving pseudopotentials the pseudopotential cutoff radius in a.u. is followed by a basis-set specification). The strongly localized Eu 4f electrons were treated using the effective Hubbard potential U ef f = 2.4 eV within a simplified approach proposed by Dudarev et al. ARPES experiments were performed at the U125-2-PGM beamline of BESSY II synchrotron at the One-Cube end-station. Atomically clean surface of the EuCd 2 P 2 crystals were achieved by in situ cleavage at around 40 K while the pressure in the vacuum chamber was better than 10 -10 mbar. The temperature-dependent resistivity is shown in Fig. In EuCd 2 P 2 the application of magnetic field along the c direction results in a substantial reduction in resistance, as illustrated in Fig. T e m p e r a t u r e [ K ] at μ 0 H = 0.05 T to -99.3 % at 1 T. Such a behaviour has been reported previously The resistivity peak at around 14 K in zero magnetic field shifts to higher temperatures, broadens, and nearly levels out when a magnetic field of 5 T is applied, with a maximum CMR of -99.96 % at 5 T as shown in Fig. The samples investigated in The heat capacity measured with H ∥ [210], Figs. To distinguish unconventional features in the heat capacity and magnetic properties of EuCd 2 P 2 , we perform a comparison of experimental data with a simple meanfield model that is described further in the text. In general, the model heat capacity contains two contributions related to the splitting of the 4f states by the external field and by the exchange magnetic field. The exchange field vanishes at T N producing a sharp kink. With the increase of the external field this kink shifts to lower temperatures and disappears since the external field suppresses the AFM order induced by the exchange field. While the kink shifts to lower temperatures quickly for low in-plane fields, the suppression needs slightly higher fields for H ∥ [001]. Upon further increase of the field, a broad peak develops due to the field-induced splitting of the 4f states. This peak gets broader and shifts to higher temperatures upon the increase of the splitting. Such behavior qualitatively correlates with the experimental data for the [001] direction. However, for the [210] direction the shift of the sharp kink is not resolved; it smoothly transforms into a broad peak as it would be expected for a ferromagnetic material. The field dependence of the heat capacity maximum is shown in Fig. In Fig. The average magnetic moment per Eu 2+ in dependence of the field, M (H), measured with the field applied along the [210] and [001] directions, Fig. [210] c = 0.17 T at T = 2 K, a much higher field, B [001] c = 1.04 T, is needed for field aligned along [001]. At T = 2 K, for neither of the field directions, a spinflop transition is observed as it can be seen in Fig. ) presents the largest anisotropy at μ 0 H = 0.23 T for 2 K (not shown). Remarkably, while at 2 K the anisotropy almost vanishes above 2 T, we still observe a significant anisotropy for 10 K and 20 K at high fields. The occurrence of the anisotropic shift of the heat capacity maximum for higher fields shown in Fig. In Fig. From the data in Fig. We performed careful measurements of M (H) in the low field region in order to investigate the proposed static ferromagnetic order We performed a more detailed analysis of the magnetic hysteresis in χ(T ) since it is present in the temperature range between the maximum in the heat capacity and that of the resistivity where the occurrence of ferromagnetic clusters was proposed In the present case, the change of the domain distribution occurs at very low fields meaning that it requires a very low energy. In other antiferromagnetic systems To simulate the magnetic properties, we used a meanfield linear-chain toy model with two Eu sublattices. The respective Hamiltonian, which acts only on the 4f |M J ⟩ states of Eu, has the form where N is the number of Eu sublattices, ⃗ μ i is the magnetic moment operator, ⃗ H is the external magnetic field, T ij are the exchange interaction parameters, K 1 defines the single-ion uniaxial anisotropy, ⃗ M is the magnetization, γ is the demagnetizing factor, which depends on the shape of the crystal. We used γ = 1/3, as for a spherical object. The second sum is equivalent to the Heisenberg model Hamiltonian, although we used the total angular momenta J i instead of spins, which differ only in a constant factor. Although the model does not include valence electrons explicitly, the interaction of localized moments with itinerant electrons is taken into account implicitly by including it into the exchange interaction parameters, since exchange interaction between the 4f moments is realized through their coupling to itinerant electrons. Note that our toy Hamiltonian does not include the possibility of FM clusters formation. The Hamiltonian (1) was diagonalized self-consistently using an iterative scheme. We started from several intuitively selected magnetic structures and arrived at a few magnetic configurations from which the one with minimal energy was chosen. The exchange interaction parameters T ij were fitted together with K 1 to obtain correct T N and best agreement between the theoretical and experimental dependencies M (H) at 2 K (Fig. We continue with the analysis of electronic structure of EuCd 2 P 2 obtained from ab initio calculations and ARPES measurements. Figure The hybrid states rapidly lose the weight of 4f character on their way to the valence band maximum and finally the latter is formed mainly by the P 3p states. On the other hand, the bottom of the conduction band is dominated by the s orbitals of Cd and P. Our calculations indicate that EuCd 2 P 2 is a semiconductor with a direct and narrow band gap at the Γ point regardless of the magnetic ordering. In the case of A-type AFM order (Fig. It is worth noting that the electronic structure of EuCd 2 P 2 is very similar to that of EuZn 2 P 2 studied recently Let us now focus at the ARPES study of the band structure. Figure In agreement with the DFT+U calculations, the ARPES measurements clearly show semiconducting properties with the Fermi level located above the valence band maximum. We have to emphasize that no traces of the step related to the Fermi function were detected at any temperature. Figure In summary, we have grown and comprehensively characterized high-quality single-crystals of EuCd 2 P 2 with the size of up to 3 × 3 × 1 mm 3 . The transport measure-ments ultimately indicate a strong peak in resistivity at 14 K and not at 18 K as it was reported recently. Further, we focused on the heat capacity measurements and characterization of the magnetic properties of EuCd 2 P 2 . The Curie-Weiss analysis of the inverse susceptibility shows that the system is expected to enter the magnetically ordered phase at ∼ 20 K, which is essentially above its T N of 10.6 K. Thus, in the temperature range of 10.6 -20 K the magnetic ordering is suppressed and at that the resistivity peak is observed. The measurements of resistivity and heat capacity as a function of applied magnetic field revealed correlated changes in the positions of the characteristic peaks in these dependencies. This indicates that the resistivity is connected to the behavior of the Eu 4f magnetic moments, that dominates the heat capacity. For the fields above 0.3 T we observed a shift of the heat capacity peak towards higher temperatures. The shift is significantly larger than that predicted by the mean-field model for an AFM material. This points to the increase of ferromagnetic interactions above T N . Our mean-field model also indicates that AFM coupling in this system is even weaker than the dipole FM interaction implying that the two interactions are in strong competition. Performing ZFC and FC χ(T ) measurements, we detected a hysteresis above T N up to ≈ 12.5 K. It indicates that some FM ordering is present at the low-T side of the resistivity peak. We furthermore observed a reorientation of magnetic domains at temperatures up to ≈ 2 T N confirming the presence of magnetic order. This is in qualitative agreement with the results of Ref. We can rule out the reorientation of magnetic domains being the main mechanism of the CMR effect, but observe that the strongest suppression of the resistivity peak is observed for fully field-polarized moments. To characterize the electronic structure of EuCd 2 P 2 and to shed some light on possible metallicity reported in Ref. We acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) via the SFB/TRR 288 (422213477, project A03, B02) and via the SFB1143 (47310070, project C04). We acknowledge the support from the Saint Petersburg State University (Grant No. 95442847). The work of D.Yu.U. was partially supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (No. FSMG-2023-0014) (modeling of magnetism) and RSF 23-72-30004 (electronic structure analysis). We acknowledge the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie for beamtime allocation at the One-cube ARPES instrument at the BESSY II synchrotron.