Variations with oxygen concentration of titanium lattice parameters are obtained by means of ab initio calculations, considering the impact of oxygen ordering. The quasi harmonic approximation is used to take into account the thermal expansion at finite temperature. Results show that lattice parameters depend mainly on oxygen concentration and to a lesser extent to the ordering state. Knowing these theoretical variations, one can get insights on the composition of ordered compounds existing in Ti-O binary alloys from their lattice mismatch measured experimentally by X-ray diffraction. The approach is used in a binary alloy containing 6000 ppm in weight of oxygen. It is concluded that the ordered compounds, which are observed after a recrystallization heat treatment, do not have the expected Ti 6 O stoichiometry but have a composition close to the nominal concentration. Oxygen ordering proceeds therefore before oxygen partitioning in titanium. Oxygen is one of the major hardening elements of titanium, used to strengthen the hexagonal close-packed (hcp) α phase But suboxide compounds with a Ti 6 O and a Ti 3 O stoichiometry are known to exist below the solubility limit with potentially important consequences on titanium mechanical properties These ordered compounds could be imaged by transmission electron microscopy through the superlattice reflections arising from oxygen ordering. Lattice mismatches between the ordered precipitates and the α matrix could also be measured at room temperature with X-ray diffraction (XRD). But no information on their composition could be obtained. In particular, it remains unclear if these ordered precipitates have a Ti 6 O composition, as expected from thermodynamics As oxygen addition is known to increase the lattice parameters of the Ti α-phase, one can attempt to deduce the composition of ordered compounds from the lattice mismatches measured by XRD. But one needs first to better know the impact of oxygen ordering on titanium lattice parameters, in particular to be able to separate variations arising from oxygen ordering and from oxygen enrichment. The aim of this article is to use ab initio calculations to fully relate the variations of titanium lattice parameters to oxygen concentration and order state. We first perform ab initio calculations at 0 K and then extend them at finite temperature, considering thermal expansion through the quasi-harmonic approximation. The theoretical variations obtained for lattice parameters are finally compared to the ones measured by XRD in a Ti-O binary alloy at different temperatures, allowing to conclude on the composition of the ordered compounds observed in this alloy. Ab initio calculations are performed within non-spin polarized density functional theory (DFT) using the Vasp code Interactions between core and valence electrons are accounted for by the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Integration is performed with the Methfessel-Paxton broadening scheme, using a 0.1 eV width. According to our convergence tests, this leads to a precision better than 1 meV per atom on total energy differences. Each structure is fully relaxed, i.e. both periodicity vectors and atomic coordinates, to achieve a force convergence lower than 0.02 eV/ Å and an energy convergence of 10 -6 eV. Although the supercells can theoretically become monoclinic during the relaxation, the underlying lattices remain always close to the initial HCP crystal, with only a small orthorhombicity, which may appear when the symmetry of the initial structure allows for different relaxations in different directions of the basal plane. Oxygen occupies the octahedral interstitial sites of the hcp lattice formed by Ti atoms. The ground state with the lowest oxygen content is known to have Ti 6 O stoichiometry We check that our ab initio approach predicts the right ground state in the concentration range 0 ≤ x O ≤ 1/6, where x O = N O /N Ti is the occupation of the octahedral interstitial sites Formation energies are calculated with reference to pure Ti and to TiO compound, i.e. structures with all octahedral sites either empty (x O = 0) or occupied by oxygen atoms (x O = 1). Considering that the alloy is actually an oxygen-vacancy binary system on the octahedral interstitial sites of the hcp lattice formed by the Ti atoms, all formation energies are defined per interstitial site, leading to where E[Ti n ] and E[Ti n O n ] are the energy of pure Ti and TiO in the same supercell as the Ti n O m compound. Fig. Ab initio calculations show that both a and c lattice parameters increase with the oxygen content (Fig. 3 ) shows that ab initio calculations correctly predict the increase rates of both lattice parameters with the oxygen concentration, despite a slight underestimation of the absolute value. As ab initio calculations are performed at 0 K while experimental data have been obtained at room temperature, such an underestimation is indeed expected. Besides, DFT approximation is known to be not fully quantitative when predicting absolute values for lattice parameters, with a dependence on the functional used for the electronic exchange and correlation (see appendix B). According to these ab initio calculations, the lattice parameters mainly depend on the oxygen concentration, with a marginal impact of the ordering state: for a same oxygen composition, a random solid solution and an ordered compound have almost the same lattice parameters at 0 K (Fig. To go beyond 0 K calculations, we now take into account thermal expansion by including the contribution of atomic vibrations in the formation free energy of the different compounds. Calculations are performed in the quasi-harmonic approximation, as described below, con- This is done by coupling Phonopy A 15 × 15 × 15 ⃗ q grid is used for Fourier transform. Comparison with results obtained with 10 × 10 × 10 and 20 × 20 × 20 grids shows that this is enough for the supercell considered in this work. The total free energy F (V, γ, T ) = E coh (V, γ) + F vib (V, γ, T ) is obtained by adding the cohesive energy E coh (V, γ) directly given by DFT calculations. One could also consider the contribution F el of electronic excitations to this free energy For each structure, the phonon spectrum is calculated on a 4 × 4 grid corresponding to 4 different volumes V and 4 different γ = c/a ratios choosing a variation ∼ ±10% around the equilibrium values of the cohesive energy. The free energy can then be defined on this (V, γ) grid for each temperature and a continuous representation obtained thanks to a smooth interpolation with second rank polynomials (Fig. Variations of lattice parameters with temperature are calculated for two different oxygen compositions, Ti 6 O and Ti 12 O, in addition to pure Ti. For each composition, we considered a random solid solution, as given by SQS method, and a fully ordered structure with the most stable AV BV stacking of basal planes (Fig. To a good approximation, one can neglect the variations with the temperature of the Pure Ti increase rates α O a and α O c . The variations of the lattice parameters with the temperature and with the oxygen concentration are then reasonably well described by the equations showing that the increases with temperature T and with oxygen concentration x O can be factorized. Parameters given in Table A. Material and methods scans are recorded at each temperature step and then summed up for the analysis. Lattice parameters of both α matrix and ordered precipitates are determined thanks to a Rietveld refinement using the Maud software. The refinement takes account of the nonmonochromatic feature of the X-ray beam and allows to assign the shoulder on the right of the peaks to the K α2 ray of the cobalt source. The Caglioti parameters of the diffractometer are first calibrated with a LaB 6 powder. The COD (Crystallographic Open Database) ID #9008517 is chosen for the crystal structure of the α matrix. Ordered precipitates have a Ti 6 O structure, which corresponds to an ordering of the oxygen atoms in the octahedral interstitial sites of the hcp Ti-lattice Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations of the Ti-O alloys are performed with a JEOL TEM after the recrystallization heat treatment, using the same sample preparation as in Refs. TEM observations confirm the presence of precipitates with a nanometric size (Fig. These precipitates, which have been previously imaged in dark-field conditions using the superlattice diffraction of the Ti 6 O ordered structure This lattice misfit leads to the presence of shoulders on the diffraction peaks in the XRD diffractograms (Fig. the signature of the larger c lattice parameter of the ordered compounds compared to the one of the matrix. Note that this shoulder appearing for the basal {0002} planes cannot be explained by a martensitic transformation of the hexagonal α phase to the orthorhombic α ′′ phase as such a transformation will lead to a splitting of all diffraction peaks except the ones corresponding to basal planes. This shoulder on {0002} diffraction peaks can be explained only by a mixture of two phases with different c lattice parameters. Such a left shoulder is also visible on the peak corresponding to pyramidal {1011} planes (46.5 • < 2θ < 47 • ). On the other hand, because of the sample texture, the intensity of the peaks corresponding to {1010} prismatic planes is not high enough to detect any shoulder. It is also observed that the signature of the ordered compounds is not very intense and almost disappears at 723 K and above (Fig. This is an indication that the ordered compounds have started to dissolve and that O solubility limit at these temperatures is higher than the sample nominal concentration, i.e. 6000 wppm, which looks reasonable according to the theoretical phase diagram Rietveld refinement of XRD diffractograms allows extracting the lattice parameters a and c of pure Ti, as well as of both the matrix and the ordered compounds in the Ti-O alloy (Tab. V). As expected, the ordered compounds have larger lattice parameters than the matrix in the Ti-O alloy for all the considered temperatures. To compare the lattice parameters measured in the Ti-O alloy with the ones deduced from ab initio calculations, we compute the differences δa and δc between the parameters measured in the alloy and in pure Ti at the same temperature, as these variations are less sensitive to the choice of the exchange-correlation functional used for ab initio calculations than absolute values a and c (cf appendix B). We neglect, for experimental data, the presence of 0.18 at.% oxygen in pure Ti, as it only has a marginal impact on the obtained δa and δc values. δa and δc characterize the increase of lattice parameters induced by the presence of oxygen. The increase δc measured for the matrix phase is almost constant with the temperature and its value corresponds to the theoretical one obtained for a random solid solution with the same nominal concentration as the Ti-O alloy (Fig. Despite the uncertainty existing on both the theoretical and experimental variations of Ti lattice parameters with oxygen content and with ordering state, one can try to determine the composition of the ordered compounds and of the matrix from the increases δa and δc of the lattice parameters, which have been measured by XRD at the different temperatures. A least square fit of both a and c parameters leads to the following expression for the occupation of the octahedral interstitial sites Using the lattice parameters of pure Ti, a Ti and c Ti , determined experimentally at each temperature with the theoretical lattice increase α O a and α O c given in table IV, thus neglecting their variations with the temperature, one obtains the compositions x O given in table V and shown in Fig. Their composition starts to rise at the two highest temperatures considered in this study, 748 and 773 K, but without reaching the Ti 6 O composition. However, as noted before, the intensity of the diffraction peaks assigned to the ordered compounds is not very intense at these two temperatures (Fig. Considering now the stays (∆t = 3600 s) at different temperatures for the XRD measurements, the composition of the precipitates remains almost unchanged up to 723 K (Fig. Better characterization of the kinetic evolution of the ordered compounds will require additional experimental techniques like synchrotron XRD with in situ heating to follow more precisely the evolution of the matrix and compounds lattice parameters, and hence of their composition, during the different heat treatments. In situ heating experiments in a TEM are also appealing to image the evolution of these precipitates, in particular of their size, shape, and density. Once the thermal conditions have been found to get closer to equilibrium without dissolving the precipitates, it should be possible to use analytical TEM or atom probe tomography to check that equilibrium precipitates have a composition close to Ti 6 O stoichiometry, as expected from the equilibrium phase diagram Ab initio calculations correctly predict an increase of titanium lattice parameters with the oxygen concentration for compositions between pure Ti and Ti 6 O. The increase is more important for c than for a parameter, in agreement with experiments. The ordering state of oxygen atoms in the octahedral sites of the hcp lattice has an influence on these lattice parameters, but the impact is less important than the one of oxygen concentration: for a same oxygen composition, an ordered compound has a slightly larger (respectively lower) c parameter (respectively a parameter). This is true both at 0 K and at finite temperature, when lattice expansion is considered in the ab initio approach through the quasi-harmonic approximation. Knowing the impact of both oxygen concentration and oxygen ordering on lattice parameters, it is theoretically possible to relate the lattice mismatches of ordered compounds existing in Ti-O binary alloys to their composition. Although the approach cannot be fully quantitative, because of the limited accuracy of ab initio phonon calculations and their difficulty to predict small variations of lattice parameters, it nevertheless leads to new information on the composition of the different phases. Applying the approach to an alloy containing 6000 wppm O (x O = 1.81%), one can conclude that the ordered compounds, which are present after a heat treatment at 1023 K followed by a water quench, do not have the expected Ti 6 O stoichiometry but a composition close to the alloy nominal concentration. This makes these precipitates undetectable by experimental techniques which are sensitive only to chemistry, like analytical TEM or atom probe tomography. Oxygen ordering proceeds therefore at a faster pace than partitioning in this alloy: these precipitates have a long-range order corresponding to the Ti 6 O structure, as has been previously shown with TEM Equilibrium lattice parameters obtained from ab initio calculations are known to depend on the functional used to describe the electronic exchange and correlation. To test how the exchange-correlation functional impacts the obtained variations of the lattice parameters, we have performed additional calculations using the local density approximation (LDA) with the parameterization of Perdew and Zunger One can also define the oxygen concentration, c O = N O /(N Ti + N O ), i.e. the ratio of the number of oxygen atoms to the total number of atoms.