Extracting relevant information from atomistic simulations relies on a complete and accurate characterization of atomistic configurations. We present a framework for characterizing atomistic configurations in terms of a complete and symmetry-adapted basis, referred to as strain functionals. In this approach a Gaussian kernel is used to map discrete atomic quantities, such as number density, velocities, and forces, to continuous fields. The local atomic configurations are then characterized using n th order central moments of the local number density. The initial Cartesian moments are recast unitarily into a Solid Harmonic Polynomial basis using SO(3) decompositions. Rotationally invariant metrics, referred to as Strain Functional Descriptors (SFDs), are constructed from the terms in the SO(3) decomposition using Clebsch-Gordan coupling. A key distinction compared to related methods is that a minimal but complete set of descriptors is identified. These descriptors characterize the local geometries numerically in terms of shape, size, and orientation descriptors that recognize n-fold symmetry axes and net shapes such as trigonal, cubic, hexagonal, etc. They can easily distinguish between most different crystal symmetries using n = 4, identify defects (such as dislocations and stacking faults), measure local deformation, and can be used in conjunction with machine learning techniques for in situ analysis of finite temperature atomistic simulation data and quantification of defect dynamics. Macroscopic properties of materials are governed by generation and propagation of defects at the atomic scale and their interaction with the microstructure. Atomistic simulations methods, using ab initio or empirical interatomic potentials have enabled us to study these processes with atomic scale resolution. The extraction of information from these atomistic simulation techniques often relies on identifying and categorizing the local configurations/geometries around atomic centers. For example, in simulations of crystalline materials, deformation processes give rise a variety of defect structures (vacancies and interstitials, point defect clusters, dislocation loops, stacking faults, twins etc.) that can be identified by the distinct local geometries of the atoms associated with the defects. A wide variety of techniques have been developed to achieve these goals and these have been reviewed by Stukowski who has pointed out the relative merits and limitations of the various techniques. We present an approach for characterizing atomic geometries and identifying symmetry elements based on the technique of moment analyses. Moment analyses have been used for several decades as a means to characterize three-dimensional (3D) structures, especially for image/pattern analysis. The goal here is to consolidate these types of approaches through fourth order in an extensible framework appropriate for the interpretation of deformations. Fourth is the minimal order required to distinguish most crystal symmetries and deformations, where sixth order would be required to distinguish variations of hexagonal symmetry. We aim to develop a complete, general, and symmetry-adapted method that utilizes symmetry elements derived from local neighborhood moments to develop descriptors for describing these atomistic geometries. As the descriptors cannot depend upon the relative orientations of the experimental and observation frames, they can be defined within the 3D rotation group, SO (3), and all features of the deformation must be describable using the rotationally invariant basis functions of that group. These basis functions can be expressed in terms of functions that carry angular momentum (e.g. spherical harmonic or harmonic polynomial functions) that are combined and contracted using the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Such a framework has been previously utilized in the development of the Steinhardt parameters, Beyond the immediate goal of describing the local deformations in atomic neighborhoods, the method of moment expansions has other physical significance. Foremost, there should be a strong relationship to similar tensorial expansions of physical properties. For this initial development, we will consider a system where all of the atoms are of the same type. The standard difficulty in defining strains (and other continuum physical quantities) of atomistic systems is that the atomic positions are treated as discrete points, and some sort of smoothing function or kernel must be applied in order to map the discrete quantities to a continuum function. As will become apparent below, these functions then define the characteristics of the "neighborhood" of each atom. Various techniques, such as cubic splines or gradated step functions, This is defined with respect to the position of the b th atom, rb, where r is a general coordinate in space and ) is the width of the Gaussian which has units of length. The kernel function itself, wb, has units of 1/volume. The integral of this normalized function over all space simply equals 1. This expression is used to define the continuum number density function N (number of atoms per volume) at an arbitrary point in space as shown in eq. 2. Here, because all of the atoms are the same type, we assume the length scale to be independent of the atomic identities and factor out a constant scalar volume, V0, defined in eq. 2b. This same approach can be used to define analogous continuum property fields such as mass density, momentum and stress. We now consider defining the Taylor series expansion of the number density in the neighborhood of atom a, as shown in eq. 3 given below: This expression is written in tensor form, where the terms associated with the n th derivative are a rank n tensor of dimension 3. The general three-dimensional coordinate 7 = [+, E, F] is redefined in terms of a small displacement ∆7 with respect to the chosen central position of 7 & . The symbol ⊗ designates the vector outer product where ∆7 ⊗ ∆7 is a rank 2 tensor of dimension 3 (or the 3x3 matrix Tij), and the next term in the sequence, ∆7 ⊗ ∆7 ⊗ ∆7, is a rank 3 tensor of dimension 3 (or the 3x3x3 array Tijk). The symbol ⊙ indicates the scalar product (total contraction) between two rank n tensors. In general, the n th order derivatives of the atomic number density can then be written as in eq. 4. Here, H * is defined as the n th order tensor formulation of the Hermite polynomial expressions, Here ,, M, N are all non-negative integers and , + M + N = 6. These define the general set of harmonic polynomials, where the Hermite polynomials are a subset of that class. Multiplying the Hermite polynomials by factors of r 2m , with m = 0, 1, 2, ... would then span the range of harmonic polynomials. The individual terms in eq. 3 can then be evaluated by substituting in the definition in eq. 2a. The first term for the local density given by equation 2a, with 7 = 7 & . The subsequent terms (derivatives), given through fourth order, take the following forms: < # 1 <7 # ? In these equations, ! &! denotes the function ! ! (#) evaluated at 7 = 7 & and [M]S denotes the symmetric trace of tensor M where the trace has been expanded back into the full rank order of the initial tensor M. For example, the trace of a 3x3 matrix (e.g. eq 6b) is a simple scalar, and the reconstituted symmetric trace tensor is that scalar times the 3x3 identity matrix. This follows the approach of Coope, et al. The terms are directly interpretable. The number density at the position of the a th atom depends upon how many other atoms are in its neighborhood, with a Gaussian weight that depends upon the distances to the other atoms Properties of the Gaussian become quite useful in defining the subsequent derivatives: the derivative of the Gaussian is the product of the scaled vector contained in the argument times the original Gaussian. This recursive property greatly simplifies how the derivative functions are expressed. The right-most term in eq. 6a emphasizes that, by using the Gaussian kernel, the first derivative can be simply related to the Gaussian-weighted sum of the vector distances to the atoms of the system. Consequently, the gradient of the number density is equivalent to the first order moment of the spatial distribution of the atomic positions in this Gaussian-weighted neighborhood. In addition, Gaussian weighting functions enable ready access to the higher order derivatives that cannot be achieved with either discrete or low order polynomial neighborhoods. The second derivative is given in eq 6b. Considering just the first term in the parentheses in eq. 6b, this contains the second order moment of the spatial distribution of the atomic positions in this neighborhood. This can be related to the second order strain and measures the amounts of uniaxial and shear deformations. The subtraction of the identity matrix basically modifies the trace of the matrix so that the resulting expression has different effective weights for the deviatoric components, which measure the change in shape of the local neighborhood, versus the trace which measures the level of volumetric strain, i.e. change in size. This difference in weighting depends upon the original choice of the weighting function and is also tied to making the subsequent moment expressions orthogonal to one another. The expressions for the third and fourth derivatives are given in eqs. 6c and 6d, respectively. Overall, these are symmetric rank 3 and rank 4 tensors, respectively. The forms have a structure similar to eq 6b, where there are separate terms based on the traces of highest order tensor. This suggests a further reduction of transforming all of the tensor expressions to traceless versions, denoted by [M]T, where eqs 6b-d can be rewritten as eqs 7a-c, respectively. Further details are given in Supplemental Material (S.1). < " 1 <7 " ? < / 1 <7 / ? The final terms of such a reduction cannot be reduced further. For the even-powered derivatives, the final term becomes a scalar, which would be rab 2 for eq 7a and rab 4 for eq 7c. For the odd-powered derivatives, the final term depends on a vector of 3 terms, which is ) for eq 7b. This derivation again follows the approach given by Coope The angular dependence, captured in the ST, is independent of the spherically-symmetric radial function. At the top level, this is a restatement that any physics problem that involves a radially symmetric field can be separated into radial and angular components, where the latter can usually be succinctly expressed in terms of spherical harmonic functions. We wish to emphasize a deeper level here where the radial node pattern supplies an additional partitioning into the SO(3) subspaces. While complete, recognizing the shapes or deformations expressed in Cartesian moments is difficult and only works well when the coordinate axes happen to be aligned with any symmetry axes of the system. To simplify this, the Cartesian moments can be recast into expressions based on spherical harmonics, which can then be re-expressed in a rotationally invariant format. Both Jerphagnon, et al. Here, Q̃ is the scaled magnitude of the distance, Q is the magnitude of the vector 7, s is the scale factor from the Gaussian weighting process, n is the overall order of the polynomial, l is the overall order of the harmonic polynomial, and [ 5 These \ 5(*) 8 terms, which are complex, have the same indices as the solid harmonic polynomials and have the same behavior as angular momentum functions. These terms contain the information of the moment tensors expressed in this solid harmonic basis and are called Spherical representations of the irreducible moment tensors Table There are 2l+1 components for each order l of the ^@(A) vectors, and they can be generally written as a complex vector as shown in eq 10. Here the l+1 \ 5(*) 8 coefficients (0≤m≤l) are real quantities which define the magnitude of the m-th component, and the l b 8 angles (1≤m≤l) are the phase angles that define the complex terms (the b % angle is zero because that term has no dependence on the rotation about the z axis). This defines the 2l+1 number of degrees of freedom that uniquely define these vectors / ST in a fixed frame. An alternative method for expressing this vector is to resolve all the complex components into real expressions by appropriate addition / subtraction of conjugate components as below. Such formulations are generally referred to as Real Spherical Harmonics, and the tilde is added to signify that the magnitude has been modified by √2. 53 The real spherical tensor is then generally written as in eq 12. We illustrate these functions in Figure phases. Their appearance is very similar to typical atomic orbital representations (p, d, f and g orbitals for l = 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively) which would have an exponential decay in density with distance compared to the Gaussian damping used here. These show the density changes that would result for that type of deformation. Also included in the figure are the Schoenflies notation for the point group that describes the symmetry of deformation. to highlight where density has been added (red) and depleted (blue). Also included are the Shoenflies notation for the point group of the deformation. Clebsch-Gordan coupling. The second step in the process is to derive rotationally invariant descriptors from these \ 5(*) One can somewhat arbitrarily take the product between any two ST (or between an ST and itself) by the expression in eq. 13. The N terms are the components of the ST s of rank h that results from the CG procedure and |p| ≤ h. The terms in the brackets 〈 〉 are the CG coefficients which specify how different terms are coupled, where there are somewhat restrictive rules as to which terms are allowed to combine. We particularly note the restriction that only values of h = |l1-l2|, |l1-l2+2|, ..., |l1+l2-2|, |l1+l2| have non-zero coefficients. Notice that there is no explicit dependence of the CG coefficients on the (n1, n2) values in these expressions, only the (l, m) values. For the cases where l = n, we will subsequently drop the n label to simplify the notation. The resulting vectors s[j D , j # ] J have the same type of angular momentum properties as the initial vectors, and contain 2h+1 terms which could be specifically identified by the superscript k. These were called "composite" vectors by Lo&Don, where the original definition of the CG coefficients came from the addition or coupling of two angular momentum vectors. Given the uncertainty in the relative directions of those vectors, the CG coefficients define the probability that some desired product vector would be observed from that coupling procedure. This gives rise to a different set of normalizations constants compared to other treatments of vector or matrix manipulations. Further additions between these "composite" vectors and the original vectors can also be formed. As such, there are an unlimited number of such contractions that can be formed. For the case where h = 0 (and implicitly p = 0), a scalar (zeroth rank tensor) results which then has no angular dependence. These terms contain the desired rotational invariance properties required to describe the geometries in a coordinate independent frame. That is, these expressions provide direct algebraic links back to the initial vector compositions and thus provide a pathway by which those compositions can be determined. Unfortunately, there are still an unlimited number of such contractions that can be formed. The approach of Moment Tensor Potentials (MTP) The first step in this process is to recognize that the ST are initially expressed in an arbitrary frame. By rotating that frame appropriately, various terms of the vector can be zeroed out. The resulting form of the vectors is shown in eq 14 below, where the rotation matrix to achieve this is discussed in Appendix A. The three DOF that have been eliminated by this process are \ d 5(*) D , b D , and b 5 . As the m=1 terms are the lowest symmetry components of the expansion (see Figure The rotation angles are also altered in the process such that hb z 8 = hb 8 -jb 5 , hence the addition of a bar accent to those terms. Rank 0 and 1 terms. First, we consider the rank 1 tensors. These are simply vectors and are somewhat an exception to the rules we will subsequently use. There is one invariant for this class which simply the norm of the vector, which is defined in the CG sense below: The results are defined in both the initial unrotated frame (\ d 5 In the rotated frame, only y D % would be non-zero (and aligned with F̅ ), and two angles would describe the orientation of that axis with respect to the original frame. We note that the CG normalization factors are different from the normal Cartesian definitions, where these had been defined to achieve a unitary sum of possible combinations of the angular momentum vectors. These factors are scalars of order 1, ~O(1), and do not otherwise impact the results, so we do not correct for them. It is appropriate to normalize the invariants by the Gaussian-weighting factors though and convert them into unitless quantities. The first invariant of our overall expansion comes from the zeroth order term which is simply the sum of weights: The label P indicates that this comes from the positions of the atoms, where similar metrics could be defined for other atomic quantities (e.g. velocity, force, etc.). This P0I0 term is a density metric which has been normalized by the reference volume. The second invariant then comes from the rank 1 tensor which then is normalized by this first term: By taking the square root of this invariant, the term is properly normalized by dividing by P0I0, rather than its square. And, although the term is unitless, this effectively scales its units as being in terms of (r/s) l with l=1. This pattern will be followed for the subsequent invariants. Rank 2 terms. Next, we consider the rank 2 tensors, which have previously been considered in a similar context by Kindlman This term nominally characterizes the <r 2 > value of the neighborhood. This would correspond to the pressure element of the stress tensor or the change in volume element of the strain tensor. These elements then have a separable mechanical response compared to the deviatoric stress/strain elements. The second invariant of the rank 2 tensor is then the norm of the \ # 8 vector defined below: In the general orientation, this is simply the sum of the magnitudes of the three component terms. In the special HS orientation, this reduces to the sum of the magnitudes of the two possible distortion types, the cylindrically symmetric (tetragonal) y # % and the orthorhombic ). In general matrix theory, this value corresponds to the root mean square (rms) of the difference in the eigenvalues about their mean. The third invariant of the rank 2 tensor is found by the procedure of Lo & Don: 28 first, the rank 2 outer product of the \ # 8 vector with itself is formed, and then this is contracted with the original vector. This is given in eq 17 below. The expression for this invariant in general coordinates is rather complicated and not readily interpreted. However, in the HS orientation, the expression simplifies considerably and depends primarily on the difference in magnitudes of the two distortion types. In general matrix theory, this quantity measures the skewness or the cubic difference of the eigenvalues about the mean. We normalize these invariants in the manner above and define them below ~21(4) = - The terms are all defined to effectively have units of (r/s) The interpretation of the second order terms is illustrated in Figure Thus, one could also consider a ratio between those two moments as a means to characterize the invariants, similar to the approach by Kindlmann. Here, however, we prefer to keep all of these terms defined in the same dimensional units for a more direct comparison between them. In this form, all of the terms can be interpreted as a net physical displacement from some reference geometry. The P2I2 term is a characterization of the r 2 distribution of the neighborhood. In particular, it characterizes whether the weighted values of r 2 are larger or smaller than (3/2) ) # . As such, it represents a metric of the size and distribution of the atomic positions in the neighborhood, as suggested in the figure. While this weighting with a radial node function should make this moment orthogonal to the base density metric of P0I0, the unevenness of the distribution of the atomic centers (i.e. there are no atoms that are close to the central atom), results in some correlation between those two terms. However, the inclusion of both terms insures the mathematical completeness of the analysis. These three shape invariants, in combination with three orientation factors to be defined later, cover the original 6 DOF contained in the 3x3 symmetric matrix. As noted by Lo&Don, n [3,3] This is the sum of the magnitudes of all of the l=3 distortions shown in Figure Consequently, contractions to other rank orders must then be explored for invariants. The first of these is the norm of the rank 2 contraction. When evaluated in the random orientation, this yields a complicated expression that depends on all seven variables (see Supplemental Material S.3). However, when rotated to the HS configuration, the dependence on the rotation angles disappears and the term depends only on the magnitudes of the components as shown below. The skewness of the rank 2 contraction can also be calculated like the skewness of the rank 2 tensor above. One constructs the rank 2 composite of the rank 2 composite with itself and then contracts that with the rank 2 composite. The result in the HS configuration is somewhat more complicated than the term above and now depends on the three magnitudes and the one rotation angle b z # , as shown below. Performing similar higher order self-contractions of the rank 2 contraction generates terms that depend on the lower order contractions as shown below. Hence, there is no further information to be gained along that path of contractions. Next we examine the rank 4 contractions. The norm of the first contraction has a fairly simple form in the HS configuration, similar to that of the rank 2 contraction. In studying the behavior of these terms in the analysis of MD simulations, it was apparent that there was some direct relationship between this term and the norm of the rank 2 contraction (eq 27). Similar relationships were apparent also with the norm of the rank 6 contraction. Straightforward algebraic manipulations produced the following relationships: Because of these relationships, it is apparent that the norms of the rank 4 and rank 6 contractions do not contain any independent information compared to that of the rank 2. It is also apparent that the rank 4 term is complementary to the rank 2 (eq 31a); where one is large, the other should be small for the same value of n [3,3] % . From the behavior illustrated in Figure By zeroing out different combinations of the three magnitude terms, it becomes apparent that the four equations 25, 27, 28 and 32 capture different aspects of the third order shapes. Since there are only 4 DOF for the HS configuration, these invariants are then sufficient to describe that shape space. The skewness of the rank 6 contraction produced a similar, but more complex expansion than eq 32, and the higher order contractions that were examined were found to be repetitive. Those four invariant terms were then normalized similarly to the second order terms, where the terms are all defined to effectively have units of (r/s) ~32(4) = The significance of the first invariant P3I0 is straightforward. It is the net magnitude of the different possible third order distortions shown in Figure Figure The P3I2 invariant is the primary skewness metric for the P3I1 distortion which characterizes the nature of the non-tetrahedral distortion. In the negative extreme, the structure becomes the axially symmetric ≥ H[ \ d " % structure, while in the positive extreme the structure becomes the flatter D3h \ d " ±" structure. For a value of P3I2 = 0, the structures have a lower symmetry of Cs or C2v. In the Figure, the shapes were drawn in the HS configuration. This emphasizes that the ≥ H[ axis of the \ d " % structure and C3 axis of the D3h \ d " ±" structure coincide with the internal z axis of the HS structure. Further, the three-fold lobes of the D3h \ d " ±" structure define the xy plane, with one lobe aligned with the x axis. This behavior is very similar to the P2I1 metric shown in Figure Figure These terms are dipolar in nature (Figure This is then normalized similar to the other invariants as shown in eq 38. The units here are then (r/s) These third order shape invariant terms are then analogous to the standard strain gradient terms that are defined for mechanical solids. There is a fair level of correspondence between these basic deformation patterns. For the extensional gradient (first column, A), there is an increased density at one end of the sample, a decreased density at the other, with no gradients in the transverse direction. This is well reproduced by the gradient term captured in \ D(") % . For the trapezoidal distortion (B), there are symmetric transverse gradients which result in an outward expansion of the material at the top and a densification at the bottom similar to the bell-shaped distortion of \ " % . For the curvature distortion (C), material is moved forward in the middle of the left, while it is pulled back at the two right corners. This is similar to the trigonal distortion of \ " ±" . The twist distortion (D) is directly thought of as the twisting a cube. However, it can also be thought of as increasing the density or adding material at alternate corners of the cube and decreasing the density at the others. This amounts to a tetrahedral distortion of the cube, captured by the \ " ±# distortion. The discrepancies partially result from the finite element displacements not being fully orthogonal to one another the way the spherical harmonic representations are. Also, the Gaussian-weighting will foreshorten the displacements as a function of distance from the center while the mechanical representations emphasize those. Still there is a clear correspondence between these deformations. We emphasize that in our current analysis, the extensional strain gradient corresponds to a separate subspace that the other third order displacements. Thus, the mechanics of its displacement should be separable in the same manner that volumetric strain and stress (pressure) should be separable from their deviatoric components. Rank 4 terms. Next, the fourth rank tensor is considered, building off the approach developed above. First, the rank 4 subspace will be examined, and terms analogous to those derived for the second and third rank tensors will be examined. The first invariant is readily defined as the norm of the rank 4 spherical tensor defined in eq 25 below. n [4,4] This is the sum of the magnitudes of all of the l=4 distortions shown in Figure Additionally, we reduce that expression to a simpler functional form where we only list the polynomial forms (and their sign dependence where appropriate). Here, this makes is obvious that all terms are quartic polynomials, and that not all possible terms are present. This is an important aspect for recognizing the completeness of the invariants. The skewness of the rank 2 contraction is also then calculated similar to the skewness of the rank 2 contraction of the third order tensor above. The result in the HS configuration is somewhat more complicated than the term above, and it is given in the supplemental material S.5. The functional form is given below where this is now a sixth order polynomial, and again it is seen that not all possible terms are present. These terms are normalized to their invariant forms as has previously been done for the lower order forms. ~42 The units here are now (r/s) Figure Similar to what was observed for the moments of the third rank tensor (see eqs 31), it is not difficult to show that the N[N [4,4]x,N [4,4]x]0 moments for x = 4, 6, 8 can be simply related back the moment for x = 2 and N [4,4]0 (Supplemental Material S.6-8). Consequently, they contain no additional information. Additionally, the terms with x = odd are all zero by symmetry. Similar to the third rank tensor, the skewness of the rank 4 contraction is then constructed and the signs of the various terms are given below, with the full expression given in the supplemental material (S.9). This expression contains many terms in common with the rank 2 skewness term given in eq 41 where they are both sixth order polynomial forms. However, there are differences in the signs of some terms as well some terms that are absent in one or the other. This demonstrates that they capture different attributes. For example, the first four terms (which would describe the shape when there is distortion in only one of the fundamental modes) have different sign patterns: both terms would be positive if a y / % distortion is present and would be negative if a y / " distortion is present. However, the two terms would have opposite signs is only a y / # or a y / / distortion is present. Also of particular note is the last term in the fifth line: . This term will be non-zero only when contributions from both y / # and y / / are present. And if only those two terms are non-zero, then almost all of the other terms will be zero; only -(y / # ) 1 , (y / # ) / (y / / ) # and -(y / # ) # (y / / ) / would survive. Consequently, the P4I3 term should have a strong dependence on b z # , the rotation angle of the y / # contribution relative to y / / contribution. These characteristics identify this term as the next invariant of the fourth order expansion, which is given in eq 46. It is normalized similarly to the analogous term in eq 36, measuring the skewness of the rank 4 contraction. (46) The characteristic behavior of this metric is illustrated in Figure The effect of the rotation angle b z # is illustrated by the structures contained in the yellow box in the middle of Figure Orientation functions. There are several options available for defining the orientation functions which can depend upon the particular application and the information desired. At least one of the ranks must be defined with respect to the external axis frame. The remaining ranks can then either be defined with respect to that chosen rank (defining a completely internally defined structure) or with respect the external axis frame. For the current application of characterizing MD simulations of metals, we will choose the latter. As discussed further below, the rank 4 tensors tend to carry information about the orientation of the local crystal domain. The lower rank tensors tend to carry information about the deformation of that crystal (shear strains, strain gradients) which tend to be predominantly oriented by an externally applied strain. For the subspaces within each rank, we choose to define their orientation with respect to the highest order subspace. This is because the deformations within those subspaces are likely interrelated. We will start with the latter. As pointed out in the discussions above, the rank 2 contractions of any of the rank n tensors identify the internal xyz axes of that rank defining the HS coordinate frame. There are then three degrees of freedom (rotations) that define the relative orientations between any of these axis frames. These can be found from the 2 and 3-way rank 2 contractions of those tensors. This is illustrated in Appendix A where it is shown how to extract the Euler angles that define the orientation of a rank 2 ST with respect to an arbitrary coordinate frame. As discussed there, the selection of an absolute direction orientation is has subjective aspects to it. However, the invariants which define the relative orientations provide fixed values. For the rank 4 space, we define these invariants as follows: ] # , n [4,4] # ] (P[/,/] ) * P[#(/),#(/)] ) ) %// P[P[/,/] ' ,P[/,/] ' ] ) * (P[#(/),#(/)] ) ) %/' * T%U%(&) (55) ] These terms are written in a way that emphasizes the three possible rank 2 contractions of two rank 2 ST multiplied by normalization factors. The denominators of the latter are all distinct and scale the contractions by the magnitudes of the component tensors. Multiplied by the leading contractions, this would constrain those products to have values in the range of [-1,1] and could be defined as an inverse cos function of an angle between the component tensors. The numerator of the normalization factors are the same and are the geometric mean of the magnitudes of main rank 4 ST and the rank 2 subspace of that. This gives all three invariants effective units of (r/s) Similar functions can be defined for the rank 3 space. A distinction here is that the rank 1 subspace is only defined by the direction of a line, so only two angles (and invariants) are required to define its orientation with respect to the rank 3 ST. Those invariants are defined below, where eqs 57 and 58 are analogous to eqs 54 and 55. The analog to eq 56 does not contain any additional information. Finally, we consider the orientation of the main ST themselves. One obvious choice would be to simply use the orientation framework that defines the HS orientation. While this would be useful for some applications, it is not very useful for the current application of MD simulations for metals. Considering bcc and fcc metals in particular, the x, y and z axes can be readily interchanged for the ideal structure and they cannot be distinguished. Given some low level of thermal fluctuations, there will be distortions away from that ideal structure, often dominated by an orthorhombic distortion. The C4 axis of that structure will defined as the Z axis for the HS structure. Given that the initial structure was aligned with the external xyz frame, one tends to observe structures that are randomly aligned with one of the x, y or z axes and these will fluctuate with time. For somewhat higher temperatures, one would also observe trigonal distortions that would align the Z axis with the 111 crystallographic direction. For higher temperatures, though still below melting, all sense of directionality will be lost because of the large of distortion. An alternative approach would be to use a template matching approach. Here, one would define the ideal structure (e.g. fcc or bcc) in terms of its shape invariants and oriented in a preferred reference frame. A comparison with the shape invariants would define how close it is to the ideal structure, and then the rank 2 contractions of the rank 4 ST (eqs 54-56) would define the amount of misorientation. This avoids the explicit definition of the Z axis of the HS configuration and would identify the best match with a minimal rotation. A minor limitation of this is that the ideal geometry must defined which will then have issues identifying the orientation of highly distorted geometries. For more general applications, we favor a compromise approach. For each rank n tensor, we calculate the dot products with the ≈ A = , ≈ A A and ≈ A 9A tensors defined in the desired reference frame. By normalizing these with the magnitude of the rank n ST, these orientation functions will have values in the range of [-1, 1]. These are defined below: The size of the Gaussian neighborhood, i.e., the value of s, will obviously affect the magnitudes and relative values of the SFDs. Figure where is the per-atom volume calculated using the equilibrium lattice constant. In case that the underlying lattice structure is not known or does not exist, 3 & can be approximated locally using a spherical neighborhood or globally using the volume of the simulation cell. The following observations can be made from Fig. 3) The distribution of SFDs tend to get broader for less dense structures and also with increase in value of 6 . (4) Using the normalization of 4 3 ⁄ p for 3 & , which is equivalent to approximating the atoms as spheres in contact, is a poor choice as the SFDs provide very little information with this choice of ). The presence of an optimum s for the calculating the SFDs is easy to rationalize: If the width of the neighborhood is very small, no neighbors are detected and the SFDs quickly go to zero. Conversely, too many neighbors are included if the width is too large i.e., the neighborhood becomes isotropic and the SFDs rapidly goes to zero. We subsequently employ the choice of s corresponding to (2p) " # $ ) " = 3 & for all the results presented in this manuscript. Such a Gaussian neighborhood includes mostly contributions from the first nearest neighbor shells and some from the second nearest neighbors, respectively, but contributions from further atoms fall off rapidly in significance. For an fcc structure in equilibrium, the contribution is down to 10 -6 by the 4 th nearest-neighbor shell. Note that the SOAP/GAP analysis treats s as an arbitrary value, typically 0.5 Å, for both amorphous In this section, we present some applications of the SFD analysis to MD simulations of defect-free and defective crystals. All MD simulations were performed using the LAMMPS 58 molecular dynamics software. All analysis involving Common Neighbor Analysis, Centro symmetry parameter, and Dislocation Extraction Algorithm (DXA) were performed using the OVITO 59 software, which was also used for visualizing atomic geometries. Figure The behavior of SFDs during volume-preserving trigonal deformation and tetragonal deformation (along the Bain path) of the FCC structure was investigated. Figure We also investigated the robustness of SFDs during melting. As a representative case, we studied homogeneous melting of Cu at P= 0 atm. The simulation was performed with 3D periodic boundary conditions using a 12×12×12 supercell with the ≥ / axes oriented along the Cartesian x, y, and z directions. The simulation cell was initially equilibrated to a temperature of 300 K using a Nose-Hoover thermostat. Following the equilibration, NPT simulations were performed at P= 0 atm using a heating rate of 1.0e 12 Ks -1 . As the volume is not preserved, we used a variable ) for the SFD analysis, which was calculated as ) = À( \)/(2p) " # $ Õ % -, where 3 is the instantaneous volume of the simulation cell and 1 is the total number of atoms. Figure Plastic deformation in crystalline materials are closely linked to generation, propagation, and interaction of one-dimensional defects called dislocations. Figure Our final test was to apply machine learning classification algorithms (i.e., unsupervised learning) to automate detection of defect structures in a finite temperature MD simulation. The SFD basis comprise a natural descriptor set for classification algorithms. As a test case, we performed MD simulations of isothermal compression of Cu along [001], with a barostat applied to [100] and [010] directions to maintain zero normal stresses. Simulations were performed at T= 77 K and 300 K, at a constant strain rate of 1e 9 s -1 . The initial simulation cell consisted of a 34×34×34 cube with a total of 157216 atoms and was equilibrated in a canonical ensemble using a Nose-Hoover thermostat for 50 ps before the start of deformation. The simulation cell was deformed to a total strain of 12% to generate defective structures. This was followed by a 100 ps long equilibration in the microcanonical ensemble to achieve the steady state defect structures. Among the variety of classification algorithms available, we chose the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), Figure We developed a complete and symmetry-adapted set of descriptors, referred to as Strain Functional Descriptors (SFDs), for characterizing atomistic geometries. Using a Gaussian kernel, which has been shown to be the least-biased kernel for localizing information, discrete atomistic quantities are expressed as continuous functions. The SFDs are derived from n th order central moments (i.e., gradients) of the continuum representation of the local number density using techniques from group theory. The SFDs characterize atomic environments in terms of shape, size, and orientation of local neighborhood and can identify presence/absence of symmetry elements. We show that the SFDs can be used to distinguish between different crystal symmetries, characterize phase transformations, and identify defect structures in finite temperature MD simulations. We also coupled SFDs to unsupervised machine learning techniques (classification algorithms) and demonstrated their ability to automatically identify complex dislocation networks, stacking faults, and vacancies in finite temperature MD simulation data. These classifiers can, in principle, be trained using small scale (hundreds of thousands of atoms) simulations, which can in turn be used for automated, on-the-fly, analysis of extreme-scale atomistic simulations. ( "$ ! -/ ! ( "$ : "$ ( "$ ; "$ ( "$ : "$ : "$ ! -/ ! : "$ ; "$ ( "$ ; "$ : "$ ; "$ ; "$ ! -/ ! < That matrix can then be separated into a portion that depends on the distance vector and one that depends only on s. The former term can be simplify identified as the outer product of the rab vector with itself and the latter term is simply / ! times the 3x3 identify matrix, I2. The first matrix can then be made traceless and that trace added to the second matrix to result in an expression based on the traceless and diagonal (trace) components. The traceless component of a matrix/tensor M is denoted by the notation [M]T. The diagonal term could be simply represented as a scalar, but the full expression is retained here to be consistent with the subsequent formulations for higher order tensors. The third derivative of the weight function generates the 3x3x3 tensor below. As above the tensor can be separated into one part that does not depend on s and one that does, as shown below. ( "$ + ( "$ ! : "$ ( "$ ! ; "$ < 9 ( "$ ! : "$ ( "$ : "$ ! ( "$ : "$ ; "$ < 9 ( "$ ! ; "$ ( "$ : "$ ; "$ ( "$ ; "$ ! < 9 ( "$ ! : "$ ( "$ : "$ ! ( "$ : "$ ; "$ < 9 ( "$ : "$ ! : "$ + : "$ ! ; "$ < 9 ( "$ : "$ ; "$ : "$ ! ; "$ : "$ ; "$ ! < 9 ( "$ ! ; "$ ( "$ : "$ ; "$ ( "$ ; "$ ! < 9 ( "$ : "$ ; "$ : "$ ! ; "$ : "$ ; "$ ! < 9 ( "$ ; "$ ! : "$ ; "$ ! The first tensor is simply the three-fold outer product of $ '( with itself [$ '( ⨂$ '( ⨂$ '( ], while the second has rather interesting symmetries which can be correlated with the trace of a symmetric rank 3 tensor. The trace of the symmetric rank 3 tensor D3 is generally written as a simple vector as below, with three independent components. OF = P7($ '( ⨂$ '( ⨂$ '( ) = (7 "$ ! ( "$ , 7 "$ ! : "$ , 7 "$ ! ; "$ ) 7 "$ ! = ( "$ ! + : "$ ! + ; "$ ! In general, a rank 3 tensor will have three distinct traces that depend upon which axes the contraction occurs along. The average of those three traces is equal to the trace of the symmetric portion of the general rank 3 tensor. [$ '( ⨂$ '( ⨂$ '( ] -(T, U, V) = OF(T)W ./ + OF(U)W 0/ + OF(V)W 0. The resulting tensor, given below, is seen to have the same symmetries as the second tensor in the expression for D3 above and is simply related to it by the scalar X 37 "$ ! ( "$ 7 "$ ! : "$ 7 "$ ! ; "$ < 9 7 "$ ! : "$ 7 "$ ! ( "$ 0 < 9 7 "$ ! ; "$ 0 7 "$ ! ( "$ < 9 7 "$ ! : "$ 7 "$ ! ( "$ 0 < 9 7 "$ ! ( "$ 37 "$ ! : "$ 7 "$ ! ; "$ < 9 0 7 "$ ! ; "$ 7 "$ ! : "$ < 9 7 "$ ! ; "$ 0 7 "$ ! ( "$ < 9 0 7 "$ ! ; "$ 7 "$ ! : "$ < 9 7 "$ ! ( "$ 7 "$ ! : "$ 37 "$ ! ; "$ The traceless version of the original rank 3 tensor is then found by subtracting off the trace multiplied by (1/5), contrasted to the (1/3) factor used for the rank 2 tensors. Similarly, the fourth derivative defines the expression The fourth rank tensor can be similarly separated into terms that depend upon the factor of / as below ( "$ : "$ ( "$ ; "$ ( "$ : "$ : "$ ! : "$ ; "$ ( "$ ; "$ : "$ ; "$ ; "$ ! < This can then be expanded back to rank 4 tensor as below Note that it has 6 independent quantities. The second symmetric trace tensor, which is a scalar, is defined from the trace of T4 as below: Note that this tensor has only 1 independent component, 7 "$ & , which is simply related to the 7 "$ ! term from the T4 tensor. As above, the expression for D4 can be further rewritten in terms of traceless tensors as below: The deformations represented in Figure 