Accurate prediction of electron transport coefficients is crucial for understanding warm dense matter. Utilizing the density functional theory (DFT) with the Kubo-Greenwood formula is widely used to evaluate the electrical and thermal conductivities of electrons. By adding the non-local potential correction term that appears in the dynamic Onsager coefficient and using two different norm-conserving pseudopotentials, we predict the electrical and thermal conductivities of electrons for liquid Al (1000 K) and warm dense Al (0.2 to 10 eV). We systematically investigate the effects of non-local terms in the pseudopotentials and the frozen-core approximation on the conductivities. We find that taking into account the non-local potential correction and validating the frozen core approximation is essential for accurately calculating the electrical and thermal transport properties of electrons across a wide range of temperatures. Warm dense matter (WDM) is a state of matter characterized by extremely high temperature, high density, and high pressure that commonly exists and plays a significant role in the interiors of giant planets In recent years, various first-principles methods, such as the Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KS-DFT) Several methods have been developed to describe the ion-electron interactions within the framework of DFT. First, adopting norm-conserving pseudopotentials (NCPPs) The electrical and thermal transport properties are essential in fields such as laser heating Notably, when employing the KG formula, the presence of non-local potentials in NCPPs leads to a correction term in this formula (vide infra). Unfortunately, some previous works have overlooked the influences of these corrections on the computed properties The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we provide a brief introduction to the Kubo-Greenwood formula and explain the formulas to implement the nonlocal potential corrections with the plane wave basis set. Additionally, we outline the setup for calculating the electrical and thermal conductivities of Al. In Sec. III, we present our results and analysis for Al. The concluding remarks are shown in Sec. IV. To calculate the electrical and thermal conductivities, we first need to compute the dynamic Onsager coeffi-cients L mn (ω) (m, n = 1, 2) using the Kubo-Greenwood formula. The equation is as follows: where ω represents the frequency, e is the elementary charge, Ω denotes the volume of the cell, μ refers to the chemical potential. Ψ ik represents the wave function of the i-th band with k being a point in the first Brillouin zone, and the corresponding eigenvalue is ε ik . vα denotes the α-th component of the velocity operator v. The Fermi-Dirac distribution function of electrons is f , and δ is the delta function. In practice, the delta function is approximated by a Gaussian function: where ∆E determines the width of the Gaussian function. In this work, we set the full width at half maximum (FWHM = 2.3548∆E) to 0.1 eV. With the above formulas, the electrical conductivity σ and thermal conductivity κ of electrons respectively take the form of In addition, to allow for extrapolation to zero frequency, we employ specific functions to fit the frequencydependent lines, which can be found in Supplementary Material. It is worth noting that the choices of different fitting functions do not substantially affect the results when the fitting range is close to the zero frequency ω=0. The velocity operator Here, Ĥ represents the Hamiltonian operator, and r represents the position operator. For Hamiltonian that contains the non-local pseudopotential, an additional commutator enters the formalism as where p is the momentum operator, m e is the mass of electrons, and VNL depicts the non-local pseudopotential operator. When dealing with the Hamiltonian that only contains the local potential terms, the velocity operator can be represented by the momentum operator alone. However, for systems with non-local potential terms, the correction term in the second part of Eq. ( In this work, we adopt the plane-wave basis set with the periodic boundary conditions and the k-point sampling method where G depicts the plane wave basis and {c ik } are the coefficients of plane wave basis sets for band i. We denote the wave vector as q = k + G, which satisfies q |q⟩⟨q| = I with I being an identity matrix. c ik (G) takes the formula of Thus, the non-local correction term in the velocity matrix has the form of Since the position operator r is ill-defined in a periodic system, the [ VNL , r] operator can be calculated in the reciprocal space To compute the above term, we need to first calculate the non-local pseudopotential term in the plane wave basis, which is where N t is the number of atom types, V κ NL (q, q ′ ) is the non-local pseudopotential of the κ-th element, and the first part S κ is the structure factor of the κ-th element, given by where N κ denotes the number of κ-type atoms and τ represents the position of the atom. In this case, we find Furthermore, the second part is the non-local potential for the κ-th element and can be calculated using the formula of where β κ lm (q) is the non-local projector of NCPPs expanded with the plane wave basis. Additionally, the atom type is κ and the coefficient matrix of projectors is D lm,l ′ m ′ . In detail, β κ lm (q) is written as Here, the radial part is obtained by In this equation, rF κ l (r) is a one-dimensional non-local projector read from the pseudopotential file, j l depicts the spherical Bessel function and Y lm (q) is the spherical harmonic function. Based on the above formulas, the key part of the nonlocal potential correction term can be expressed as where g κ lm (q) represents the gradient of β κ lm (q) with respect to q and has the following form It should be noted that the gradient of q l Y lm (q) is used instead of the gradient of Y lm (q) to avoid the singularity at q = 0. In total, the velocity matrix ⟨Ψ ik |v α |Ψ jk ⟩ in Eq. (1), can be evaluated in the reciprocal space with plane wave basis as where the second term is calculated through Eqs. With the above formulas implemented, we performed a systematic study on the electrical and thermal conductivities of Al at temperatures ranging from 0.2 to 10 eV. The densities were chosen to be 2.35 and 2.70 g/cm 3 . First, to obtain atomic configurations of Al at various temperatures, we utilized Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics (BOMD) simulations based on OFDFT. The Wang-Teter (WT) kinetic energy density functional Second, we employed the Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KSDFT) and the Kubo-Greenwood formula, as shown in Eqs. ( Finally, both OFDFT and KSDFT simulations employed the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) ) ω ( e V ) E x p . : M i l l s e t a l . R h i m e t a l . B r a n d t e t a l . C a l . : K n y a z e v e t a l . R e c o u l e s e t a l . simulations were performed using the ABACUS v3.2 package Figs. 1(a) and (b) respectively illustrate the calculated frequency-dependent electrical and thermal conductivities of liquid Al with and without the non-local pseudopotential corrections. In addition, first-principles data from previous works Notably, we find both zero-frequency electrical and thermal conductivities (ω = 0) of Al obtained with the non-local potential correction (labeled as NC11 corr. fitting) yield substantially smaller values than the ones without the correction (labeled as NC11 fitting). In detail, the calculated electrical conductivity at ω = 0 with the non-local potential correction shown in Fig. We also compare the calculated results with previous computational works by Firstly, in the temperature range studied in Fig. Figs. On the contrary, when the NC11 pseudopotential is used, we observe that the non-local potential corrections tend to exhibit another trend of becoming substantially smaller at around 2 eV and higher temperatures. Since the errors introduced by an insufficient number of electrons are minimized, we attribute this trend to the velocity operator shown in Eq. 6 comprising both the kinetic energy term and non-local potential term of electrons, with the former one becoming increasingly larger than the latter one as the temperature rises. We also compare the relative differences of electrical and thermal conductivities obtained by the two different pseudopotentials, i.e., NC3 and NC11. At low temperatures below 2 eV, the two pseudopotentials yield similar results, but as the temperature rises over 2 eV, the differences become increasingly larger, indicating again that the invalidity of the frozen-core approximation for the NC3 pseudopotential at higher temperatures. The temperature ranges from 0.2 to 10 eV while the density of Al is chosen to be ρ=2.7 g/cm 3 . We also compute the electrical and thermal conductivities by using the NC3 pseudopotential. In addition, available experimental results are added for comparison. Although the trends exhibited by the conductivities at the density of ρ=2.7 g/cm 3 are similar to those of ρ=2.35 g/cm 3 shown in Fig. We compare our calculated data in Fig. Fig. Additionally, we plot the Fermi-Dirac function for each temperature. We can see that as temperatures increase, the slope of the Fermi-Dirac function becomes smoother. By checking the occupations of these energy states, we find at temperatures of 0.5 and 5 eV, the 2s and 2p orbitals of Al are fully occupied, and the electrons of the 2p orbitals start to ionize at 10 eV. The ionization degree of the 2p orbitals is 0.36% at the temperature of 10 eV, as evaluated from the occupation number. This is further confirmed by seeing that the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at 10 eV begins to deviate from 1 at the peak position of the 2p orbitals. Meanwhile, the DOS of the scattering states (3s3p and other higher-energy orbitals of Al) around the Fermi level shifts to higher energies as temperature arises, which is captured by both NC3 and NC11 pseudopotentials. In conclusion, even though core electrons are almost nonionized at the temperature of 5 eV, the energy levels of 2s and 2p electrons move towards higher energies and affect the computed conductivities, suggesting that a pseudopotential with 11 valence electrons is a more appropriate choice than the NC3 pseudopotential for warm dense Al. We define a new quantity named decomposed electrical conductivity Σ(ω, ε) to analyze the contributions of different orbitals to the electrical conductivity. The formula of Σ is which satisfies the relationship of Here σ(ω) is the frequency-dependent electrical conductivity. The results of Σ(ω, ε) as computed by two different pseudopotentials (NC3 and NC11) with and without the non-local potential corrections are displayed in Fig. As shown in Fig. On the one hand, at the low temperature of 0.5 eV, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, as the temperature respectively rises to 5 eV and 10 eV in Fig. However, the electrical conductivities obtained from the NC3 and NC11 pseudopotentials exhibit substantial discrepancies when the energy ε -μ is around the peak of distributions. While the density of states (DOS) of Al calculated by NC3 and NC11 are similar in Fig. Besides, the relative difference of the NC11 pseudopotential continues to decrease to a small value due to the predominance of the kinetic energy, indicating that the correction becomes less significant with more excited electrons and a shift of peak to higher energies as the temperature rises. In contrast, for the NC3 pseudopotential, the relative differences are in general larger than those from the NC11 pseudopotential, except when ε -μ is small. The Lorenz number L ( 1 0 -8 where T is the temperature. Here κ and σ refer to the thermal conductivity and the DC electrical conductivity, respectively. According to the Wiedemann-Franz law Second, the Lorents number obtained by the NC11 pseudopotential with and without the non-local potential corrections are close, indicating that the corrections influence the electrical and thermal conductivities in the same proportion. In contrast, by utilizing the NC3 pseudopotential at the temperature of 8 eV and higher, the non-local potential corrections become pronounced. Third, at temperatures up to 1 eV, the Lorenz number agrees well with the Wiedemann-Franz (WF) law, indicating the inherent relationship between electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity is valid. Meanwhile, the degeneracy parameter, defined as the ratio of temperature to the Fermi temperature T /T F , is 0.086 at the density of 2.7 g/cm 3 and 0.094 at 2.35 g/cm 3 , indicating a high degree of degeneracy in these Al systems. Fourth, importantly, as the temperature exceeds 1 eV, which falls into the intermediate degenerate range, the Lorenz number starts to decrease and reaches a minimum at the temperature of approximately 8 eV. Specifically, at the density of 2.7g/cm 3 , the Lorenz number is 36.7% lower than that predicted by the WF law, while at the density of 2.35 g/cm 3 , it is 35.1% lower. The observed trend of the Lorentz number demonstrates that in this region, we cannot calculate thermal conductivity directly from the electrical conductivity using the Wiedemann-Franz law. Fifth, we compared our results with those of previous works Accurate prediction of electron transport coefficients is vital for comprehending warm dense matter. The Kubo-Greenwood formula is extensively employed to calculate the electrical and thermal conductivities of electrons. Nonetheless, the existence of non-local terms in the pseudopotentials and the use of the frozencore approximation in first-principles calculations lead to inaccuracy when the Kubo-Greenwood formula is adopted. In this work, we implemented the non-local potential corrections with the use of norm-conserving pseudopotentials and plane wave basis under periodic boundary conditions within the ABACUS package. We calculated both electrical and thermal conductivities of liquid Al at 1000 K and warm dense Al with temperatures ranging from 0.2 to 10 eV. To ensure converged results, we used converged numbers of atoms and k-points in our calculation. We examined the electrical and thermal conductivities of liquid Al at a temperature of 1000 K. By incorporating the non-local potential corrections, we obtained results that agreed well with the experimental data. Next, we simulated warm dense Al with temperatures ranging from 0.2 eV to 10.0 eV at a density of 2.35 g/cm 3 . Compared to the results without using the non-local potential corrections, we observed lower conductivities when the corrections were applied. Notably, two different norm-conserving pseudopotentials, NC3 and NC11, yielded similar electrical and thermal conductivities at low temperatures. However, as temperatures exceeded 2 eV, discrepancies emerged due to the inadequate frozen core approximation of the 2s and 2p electrons of Al. We also simulated Al at a density of 2.70 g/cm 3 . The results exhibited similar behaviors to those at 2.35 g/cm 3 and showed reasonable agreement with available experimental data. We also compared our calculated results to those obtained by previous works. To gain further insights into the computed conductivities, we analyzed the DOS and the decomposed electrical conductivity at temperatures of 0.5, 5, and 10 eV. We found the core electrons are almost nonionized at the temperature of 5 eV. However, the core electrons affect the high-energy electronic states, resulting in substantially different conductivities as compared to the N3 pseudopotential. In conclusion, the NC11 pseudopotential provides a more accurate prediction than the NC3 pseudopotential for warm dense Al. In summary, our findings emphasize the importance of incorporating non-local potential corrections when calculating the conductivities of electrons using pseudopotentials. Additionally, the choice of pseudopotential is crucial in accurately determining conductivities, and the frozen-core approximation becomes invalid for calculating conductivities at temperatures before the ionization of corresponding core electrons. However, limited by high computational costs for electrons at extremely high temperatures, traditional KSDFT only allows conductivity calculations for warm dense Al up to a few tens of eV. To overcome this limitation, recent advancements in stochastic DFT 