Acousto-optic integration offers numerous applications including lowloss microwave signal processing, nonreciprocal light propagation, frequency comb generation, and broadband acousto-optic modulation. State-of-the-art acousto-optic systems are mainly implemented entirely using in-house fabrication processes, which despite excellent performance typically suffer from low yield and are not compatible with mass production through foundry processes. Here, we demonstrate a highly efficient wideband acousto-optic modulator (AOM) implemented on a silicon photonics foundry process enabling high-yield low-cost mass production of AOMs with other photonic and electronic devices on the same substrate. In the reported structure, a 150 μm long AlScNbased acoustic transducer launches surface acoustic waves (SAW), which modulate the light passing through a silicon optical waveguide. A modulation efficiency of -18.3 dB over a bandwidth of 112 MHz is achieved, which to our knowledge is the highest reported efficiency and bandwidth combination among silicon based AOMs, resulting in about an order of magnitude BW(V π L) -1 figure-of-merit improvement compared to the state-of-the-art CMOS compatible AOMs. The monolithically integrated acousto-optic platform developed in this work will pave the way for low-cost, miniature microwave filters, true time delays, frequency combs, and other signal processors with the advanced functionality offered by foundry-integrated photonic circuits. Acousto-optic systems harnessing phononphoton interactions offer significant advancements in many applications such as microwave photonics, optical frequency shifting, non-reciprocal photonics, sensing, spectroscopy, and quantum information control Conventionally, acousto-optic modulators are implemented using bulk-crystalline materials, which despite excellent performance, are often bulky, expensive and not suitable for large scale integrated applications due to a rather weak acoustic wave confinement Surface acoustic wave (SAW) based modulators offer a high degree of acoustic wave confinement on the surface of the structure and can be cointegrated with photonic devices on the same platform Aluminum nitride (AlN) is another piezoelectric material that has been used for integration of SAW transducers on silicon photonic chips To date, AlScN based SAW transducers integrated with photonic systems are entirely based on in-house photonic fabrication processes, which despite innovative approaches, suffer from limited yield, high cost, and incompatibility with mass production. Here we demonstrate the first AlScN-based acoustic transducer implemented using a commercial silicon photonics process. To our knowledge, compared to other reported CMOS compatible AOMs, this work achieves the highest measured acousto-optic modulation efficiency, and does so over more than five times larger operating bandwidth. The AOM device is implemented by post processing directly on photonic structures fabricated using the AMF silicon-on-insulator (SOI) photonics process. The implemented modulator achieves a modulation efficiency of -18.3 dB measured at 23.2 dBm RF input power, corresponding to a V π L of 1.12 V-cm. Furthermore, the device exhibits a modulation bandwidth of 112 MHz (around 5.5 GHz) resulting in about an order-of-magnitude BW(V π L) -1 figure-of-merit improvement over stateof-the-art reported silicon-based CMOS compatible AOMs. The demonstrated integration of highly efficient acoustic devices on a CMOS-compatible commercial photonics process enables mass production of high-yield, low-cost acoustic, photonic, and CMOS devices on the same chip, resulting in advances in many applications from sensing and imaging to signal processing and computation. . 1 | -. , structure and , cross-sectional view of the device. The surface acoustic wave (SAW) launched by an acoustic interdigitated transducer propagates and produces strain when impinging upon the optical waveguide. The strain induced refractive index change results in phase modulation of the optical wave. IDT: interdigitated transducer. The schematic and cross-section of the implemented acousto-optic modulator are shown in Figs. where ω o , Ω = 2πf, f, α(L) = -2πΔn eff Lλ 0 -1 , λ 0 , L and Δn eff are the angular frequency of the optical wave, the angular frequency of the RF signal, the frequency of the RF signal, the amount of optical phase shift due to acousto-optic modulation, the wavelength of the optical wave, the interaction length and the acoustically induced effective index change, respectively. The cross-section of the photonic chip fabricated in the AMF process is shown in Fig. A micrograph of the fabricated acousto-optic device and its zoomed-in version are shown in Figs. The fabricated acoustic transducer on the commercial photonic chip was characterized using a vector network analyzer, VNA (Keysight E8361A), which was operated at an input power of -10 dBm and a port impedance of 50 . A one-port frequency sweep from 2 GHz to 6 GHz using a ground-signal (GS) probe was performed. The VNA was calibrated to the probe tips using the open-shortload procedure prior to testing of the acoustic transducer. The electrical reflection coefficient (S11) response of the acoustic transducer as a function of frequency is shown in Fig. The transducers, as illustrated in Fig. The electrical reflection coefficient (S11) response of the acoustic transducers fabricated on the commercial photonic chip and FEM simulations showing the strain at resonant frequencies around 4.5 GHz and 5.5 GHz (for both transducers). Simulations confirm that both modes launch SAWs as the strain fields are confined in the top layer stack (Au/AlScN/Oxide) on the chip. Due to a larger strain, the 5.5 GHz mode is expected to have higher AOM efficiency. The response of the transducer with 5 finger pairs has a larger bandwidth, however, the device with 20 finger pairs is better matched to the source impedance. pairs were fabricated. As evident from the S11 measurements in Fig. The propagation modes for the two IDTs were simulated using COMSOL Multiphysics (Fig. Since the propagating SAW at 5.5 GHz mode has a larger strain in this case, a relatively stronger acoustooptic modulation is expected at this frequency. The modulation efficiency of the implemented AOM device was measured using a heterodyne detection scheme as depicted in Fig. The output of a tunable laser (Agilent 8164A), emitting 5 dBm at 1550 nm, is polarization adjusted and coupled into the chip using a grating coupler. The output of an RF synthesizer also coupled into the chip after being amplified by a modulator driver and is used to acousto-optically modulate the coupled light. The modulated light is coupled out of the chip, combined with the output of another tunable laser (Agilent 8164A) and photo-detected and amplified by a photoreceiver system (Thorlabs RXM40AF). The difference between the wavelength of the two laser sources was set such that their beat note frequency is around 7 GHz. To find the frequency response of the AOM, the frequency of the RF synthesizer was swept from 2 GHz to 6 GHz. The heterodyne spectrum for the device with 20 fingers, normalized to the beat-note power, is shown in Fig. To study the effect of the number of IDT finger pairs on device performance, we have implemented other IDT devices with 5 finger pairs and compared the performance of the IDT devices with 20 finger pairs and 5 finger pairs. The results are shown in Fig. The performance of the AOM devices developed in this work is compared with the performance of other works in Table The performance of the implemented transducer could be further improved by fabricating an acoustic reflector to realize an unidirectional transducer with a higher efficiency The photonic devices were fabricated using AMF SOI process with a 3 μm thick buried oxide layer. The transmission loss of the photonic structure is mainly dominated by the grating coupler coupling loss (~5 dB). No significant change in the optical loss was observed after AlScN deposition. Acoustic IDTs were produced on the photonic chip using in-house microfabrication process. The chips received from AMF foundry were first cleaned using acetone, isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and deionized water followed by nitrogen drying prior to growth of AlScN piezoelectric layer. During the AlScN growth, a shadow mask was used to protect certain areas of the photonic chip where AlScN growth was not desired. The targets in PVD system were conditioned to ensure a high quality AlScN deposition. In the PVD system, separate 4-inch diameter Al and Sc targets and nitrogen gas were used to deposit the AlScN. Before the deposition, the process chamber was pumped to a base pressure of approximately 9x10 -8 mbar and the substrate temperature was raised to 350 C. To achieve the desired composition of 30% Sc in the deposited film, during the deposition, respective cathode powers of 555 W and 1000 W for Sc and Al targets were used while the nitrogen flow was set to 20 sccm. The ebeam resist used for IDTs patterning was ZEP 520A, which was spin coated on the chip at 2200 rpm and backed at 120 C temperature for 5 minutes before exposer in ebeam lithography. Microposit remover 1165 at 65 C temperature was used for liftoff to pattern Au IDT fingers. To fabricate pads and bus lines, microposit S1800 series photoresist was spin coated at 3000 rpm, backed at 125 C, expose and developed in microposit MF CD-26 developer at room temperature. The same microposit remover 1165 at 65 C was used for lift-off. To evaluate the quality of the AlScN deposited on the commercial photonic chip, atomic force microscope (AFM) analysis of the deposited AlScN was performed as shown in Extended Data Fig. To characterize the acoustic IDTs, a Keysight E8361A VNA and a ground-signal (GS) probe were used in the setup. The VNA was calibrated at the probe tips using the standard open-short-load (OSL) technique. The heterodyne measurements are performed by beating two lasers with different frequencies. The wavelength of the probe laser passing through the chip was set to 1550 nm, whereas the heterodyning laser wavelength was set to 1550.058 nm, resulting in a beat-note frequency of around 7 GHz. When two beams are combined and photodetected, two sidebands around the 7 GHz beatnote are observed on the spectrum analyzer. The sidebands and beat-note levels are measured for AOM efficiency calculations. For each RF power level, multiple data points are recorded, and the average value of the efficiency is reported. The efficiency values in Fig. To calculate V π of the modulators, the impedance of the devices is extracted by utilizing the measured S11 data. Then, the voltage across the devices (V dev ) is calculated when they are driven by an RF source with 50 Ω output resistance. The voltage level of the source is determined by utilizing the power level (P RF ) measured when the output of the modulator driver is directly connected to the spectrum analyzer. Finally, V π = (π α(L)) ⁄ V dev is calculated. The V π L product is calculated by multiplying the V π value with the aperture length (L) of the devices. Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. These authors contributed equally: Mertcan Erdil, Izhar. Corresponding authors: e-mail: firooz@seas.upenn.edu, e-mail: rolsson@seas.upenn.edu 1|.