We present a spectroscopic investigation into the vibrational and optoelectronic properties of WS 2 domes in the 0-0.65 GPa range. The pressure evolution of the system morphology, deduced by the combined analysis of Raman and photoluminescence spectra, revealed a significant variation in the dome's aspect ratio. The modification of the dome shape caused major changes in the mechanical properties of the system resulting in a sizable increase of the out-of-plane compressive strain while keeping the in-plane tensile strain unchanged. The variation of the strain gradients drives a non-linear behavior in both the exciton energy and radiative recombination intensity, interpreted as the consequence of a hybridization mechanism between the electronic states of two distinct minima in the conduction band. Our results indicate that pressure and strain can be efficiently combined in low dimensional systems with unconventional morphology to obtain modulations of the electronic band structure not achievable in planar crystals. Since the discovery of graphene, research on layered materials has progressively grown, making them one of the most studied field in Condensed Matter Physics as promising building blocks for the next generation of electronic devices. In 2D systems, the in-plane confinement limits the available phase space and reduces the electrostatic screening, leading to enhanced carrier correlations and quantum effects. As a result, these crystals exhibit outstanding optical, electronic and magnetic properties, not achievable in their bulk counterparts 1L-WS 2 hydrogen-filled domes were produced by proton irradiation of bulk WS 2 flakes, as reported in ref. Figure To carry out high-pressure measurements, a WS 2 bulk flake was irradiated by a hydrogen dose equal to about 10 16 ions/cm 2 at 150 • C leading to the formation of bubbles as displayed in figure High-pressure micro-PL measurements, with the same hydrostatic medium, on a monolayer WS 2 directly As shown in figure On increasing pressure, the relative intensity of the A 1g mode of the 1L-dome rapidly decreases with respect to its bulk counterpart (see figure The different pressure trend exhibited by the in-plane and out-of-plane phonon frequencies can be ascribed to a different response of the strain components at work in the 1L-dome. According to ref. As for the peak intensities, knowing that, in the pressure range we measure (0-0.65 GPa), the Raman spectrum of 1L-WS 2 is not expected to exhibit appreciable intensity changes, the progressive vanishing of the 1L-dome features has to be ascribed to pressure-induced changes in the 1L membrane morphology. In particular, it seems reasonable to argue that the application of pressure drives a reduction in the dome height h, until the distance between 1L crystal and bulk reduces to the sub-nm scale. In this configuration, the vdW interaction between the dome and the underlying bulk increases to the point that the former progressively looses its free-standing monolayer character, leading to a strong quenching of the 1L-dome features in the Raman spectrum. This hypothesis is strongly supported by the estimates of the dome height h obtained at each pressure assuming that: (i) the basal radius r remains constant, (ii) the dome can be modelled as a spherical cap, and (iii) the H 2 gas inside the dome volume behaves as an ideal gas. Under these approximations, by the ideal gas law, we find for the height h a non-linear decreasing trend under pressure, which closely resembles those shown in figure Based on these results, we see that on increasing pressure the aspect ratio h/r of the domes is strongly modified, with the basal radius remaining fixed, as witnessed by the spatial maps discussed in the Experimental section, while the height rapidly decreases. Quite remarkably, this abrupt morphological change seems to leave the in-plane tensile strain component unaffected, while the compressive out-of-plane strain steadily increases with pressure. Combining the results obtained for the pressure evolution of morphology and strain in the 1L-dome we see that the Poisson relations governing the mutual dependence between strain and aspect ratio at ambient conditions At ambient conditions, the micro-PL spectrum of the system displays a high-intensity contribution below ∼1.9 eV and a very low intensity band above 1.9 eV. The former exhibits an asymmetrical profile, which can be accounted for by a two-band fit with centres at ∼1.77 and 1.80 eV; see figure In analogy to the Raman case, once the pressure on the sample is released, the original PL spectrum at ambient conditions is restored, indicating the complete reversibility of both the dome shape and the optoelectronic properties of the crystal, which confirms the exceptional elasticity and robustness of pressurized domes The specific response of each PL contribution to the applied pressure allows for a reliable assignation of the three bands to distinct radiative recombination mechanisms. The high-intensity peaks below 1.9 eV can be ascribed to excitonic recombinations involving carriers at the K point of the first Brillouin zone of the monolayer dome, i.e. the direct exciton (A 1L-dome ) and the negative trion (T 1L-dome ) at higher and lower energy, respectively The increase in the 1L-dome band gap, witnessed by the blueshift of both A and T bands, is entirely ascribable to the pressure-induced enhancement of the compressive out-of-plane strain in the monolayer membrane, while the in-plane tensile strain is assumed to remain constant, as discussed in the previous section. Although unaffected by the application of pressure, the in-plane strain gradients at work in the 1L-dome strongly modify the response of its main electronic transitions, determining an evolution for the excitonic contributions which is completely different from that observed in a planar system. As shown in figure The final remark is on the pressure trend of the relative intensity of A 1L-dome with respect to T 1L-dome , shown in figure The spectroscopic investigation of WS 2 micrometric domes under pressure allowed us to study the system response to compression at the 0.1 GPa scale. By combining the results from micro-Raman and mico-PL measurements, we could frame a complete scenario for the pressure evolution of the system, which includes its morphological evolution, the variation of its strain gradients, and the modification of its electronic band structure. Taking advantage of the well-defined orientation of the lattice displacement in the WS 2 phonons, we provided a reliable estimate for the pressure-induced variation of the in-plane and out-of-plane strain components at work on the 1L-dome. Remarkably, the former were found to remain practically unaffected by the great morphological changes undergone by the system, evidencing the need of a radical reformulation of the Poisson relations in the description of the dome response under pressure. The non-trivial, coupled evolution of morphology and strain in the 1L-dome leads to an anomalous pressure evolution of the band extremes in the CB, responsible for the pronounced non-linearity observed in both the intensity and energy trend of the exciton band under pressure. A hybridization mechanism between distinct CB extremes was proposed at pressure values much lower than those predicted for planar monolayers, resulting in an exciton emission with mixed direct/indirect nature and in-plane/out-of-plane orbital character. Our study demonstrates that external pressure and morphological strain can be efficiently combined in TMD semiconductors to obtain modulations of the electronic band structure not achievable in planar monolayers, defining a new approach to investigate and, possibly, engineer the optoelectronic properties of low dimensional crystals. The obtained results point to a scenario in which the tight entanglement of in-plane and out-of-plane strain gradients prevents a straightforward identification of the microscopic processes associated with the evolution of the single components. Although the picture we propose is coherent with the experimental evidence, we believe that an accurate theoretical approach is needed in order to shed light on the mechanisms ruling the system response under pressure. The robustness of the domes under pressure, the complete reversibility of their optical spectra, and the absence of interaction with external substrates, which considerably affect the PL spectrum of supported monolayers, make this system an ideal playground to push forward the investigation of low-dimensional systems under the simultaneous application of pressure and strain.