Interlayer coupling can significantly influence the physical properties of layered transition metal compounds. The superconductivity in layered Mo2C systems, belonging to the emergent family of MXene, has garnered considerable attention. However, the impact of interlayer coupling on superconductivity, and the anisotropic superconducting properties in these systems are not yet clear. By performing first-principles calculations of electron-phonon coupling and anisotropic superconducting properties, we show that the interlayer coupling in bilayer 1T -Mo2C suppresses superconductivity, resulting in a significant drop in superconducting transition temperature (Tc) from 4.2 K in its monolayer form to nearly 0 K. By introducing lithium atoms into the interlayer space of the bilayer, the interlayer coupling can be effectively weakened, transforming the system into a two-gap superconductor with a Tc above 10 K. A 3% tensile strain can further transform the system into a three-gap superconductor with a significantly enhanced Tc of approximately 24.7 K, which is very high in the Mo2C related systems. The enhancement of the superconductivity induced by the strain is mainly due to the downshift of an energy band with a flat dispersion to the energy near the Fermi level. The in-plane vibrations of Mo atoms and the d-orbital electrons of Mo atoms are most important for the formation of the superconductivity. Our method can also be applied to multilayer Mo2C systems. Given the successful synthesis of layered Mo2C systems and the experimental realization of alkaline metal atom depositions, our work presents a practically feasible strategy for achieving high Tc and multigap superconductivity in layered Mo2C. The interlayer coupling effect can vary across different layered systems. Take, for instance, the case of 2H-NbSe 2 : the transition from a monolayer to a multilayer results in the enhancement of superconductivity while the weakening of the charge density wave Transition metal chalcogenides have garnered widespread attention due to their rich physical proper-ties, such as the interplay between charge density waves and superconductivity, two-dimensional superconductivity, topologically nontrivial states, and magnetic order. More recently, the scope of investigation has extended to emergent transition metal compounds, two-dimensional transition metal nitrides, and carbonitrides, so-called MXenes. Among these, Mo 2 C has received considerable interest, owing to its feasible synthesis, fascinating properties, and promising applications. Mo 2 C can be crystalline in multi-structure phases, among which orthorhombic α phase, and hexagonal H and T phases are of particular interest. They are experimentally feasible In contrast to the extensive experimental and theoretical investigations of superconductivity in α-Mo 2 C, research on the superconductivity of layered H-and arXiv:2402.13886v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 21 Feb 2024 T -Mo 2 C is currently predominantly on the theoretical aspect. Theoretical calculations reveal that monolayer 1T -Mo 2 C and 1H-Mo 2 C both exhibit superconductivity, with T c approximately 5.9 K and 3.2 K, respectively In this study, we employed first-principles calculations to investigate the electronic structure, electron-phonon coupling, and anisotropic superconducting properties of few-layer Mo 2 C, with a particular focus on bilayer configurations. We found that bilayer Mo 2 C exhibits strong interlayer coupling, which acts to suppress its superconductivity, reducing the T c from 4.2 K in its monolayer counterpart to 0 K. Interestingly, the introduction of lithium atoms into the interlayer space, serving to weaken the interlayer coupling through expanding interlayer space and simultaneously introducing electron doping, transforms the bilayer Mo 2 C into a two-gap superconductor with a T c exceeding 10 K, surpassing that of its monolayer counterpart. Remarkably, applying a small tensile strain of 3% significantly enhances superconductivity, transforming the system into a three-gap superconductor with a T c of approximately 24.7 K, which is notably high compared to other layered Mo 2 C-related systems. The methodologies applied here can also be extended to induce superconductivity in multi-layer Mo 2 C systems. Additionally, we will discuss the structure of superconducting gaps and the potential for Ising superconductivity in the system. Density-functional theory and density-functional perturbation theory calculations were performed using the PBE exchange-correlation functional where λ qν is a phonon-momentum-resolved EPC constant, Ω BZ the volume of the first Brillouin zone. The Dirac delta function δ (ω -ω qν ) is approximated by a Gaussian function with a broadening of 0.5 meV. The k-resolved superconducting gaps on the Fermi surface at a temperature T , denoted as ∆(k, T ), were determined by solving the anisotropic Midgal-Eliashberg equations on an imaginary axis where N (0) is the electronic density of states at the Fermi level We start by examining the crystal structure, electronic properties, and electron-phonon coupling in bilayer Mo ), respectively, which are in line with a previous work Our findings suggest that it is energetically unfavorable to directly insert alkaline metal atoms into the interlayer space of Mo 4 C 2 , primarily due to strong interlayer coupling (see Sec. S4 These findings underscore the thermal stability of the LiMo 2 C with the lithium atoms adsorbed above the bottom Mo atoms, indicating its resistance to decomposition into other compounds with different stoichiometries. The phonon dispersion calculation shown in Fig. After analyzing the Li depositions, we found that a monolayer Mo 2 C is energetically favorable to cover the Li adlayer, forming the Li intercalated bilayer LiMo 2 C with a stoichiometry of LiMo 4 C 2 . We identified three different configurations with the same stoichiometry of LiMo 4 C 2 , but with different stacking orders of the two internal monolayers. For the T m -LiMo 4 C 2 , as illustrated in Fig. where the S donates an area of a two-dimensional unit cell for the LiMo 2 C, we found that the T m , T ab and T aa phases have the formation energies of -0.124, -0.128 and -0.095 eV/ Å2 , respectively, as labeled in Figs. Tm-LiMo4C2 The increase of N (0) leads to the increase of EPC in T m -LiMo , where e j q,ν is the component of the atom j in the polarization vector related to ω qν , and n is the unit projection direction vector, pointing to the in-plane (xy) or out-ofplane (z) direction. The integration of α 2 F (ω, j, n) leads to the atomic-vibration-resolved EPC constant λ(j, n) as illustrated in Fig. The enhancement of EPC strength and the presence of a multiband Fermi surface result in two-gap superconductivity with an enhanced superconducting T c in T m -LiMo 4 C 2 , as demonstrated below. We employ the imaginary-time anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg formalism, followed by analytic continuation to the real axis using Padé functions, through which the k-resolved superconducting gaps at Fermi surface under finite temperature, ∆(k, T ), can be obtained. In solving the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations, the estimated μ * = 0.208 based on N (0) is used (see Sec. II for details) . The histogram in Fig. Tm-LiMo4C2 induced by a small tensile strain Given possible in-plane strains in ultrathin materials, which can be induced by a substrate, the potential discrepancies in lattice constants between PBE calculations and experimental measurements,and the significance contribution to the EPC of T m -LiMo 4 C 2 from Mo xy vibration, it is necessary to investigate the evolution of EPC and superconductivity in response to in-plane strains for this material. We apply biaxial strains to T m -LiMo 4 C 2 by adjusting the in-plane lattice constant and then opti- mizing its internal coordinates. We define a biaxial strain as (a-a 0 )/a 0 , where a 0 = 3.01 Å is the optimized hexagonal lattice constant of T m -LiMo 4 C 2 without strains, and a is the lattice constant under strains. In Fig. To further elucidate the mechanism of the strain effect on the EPC, we present the α 2 F (ω) plots for both the unstrained and 3% tensile-strained T m -LiMo 4 C 2 in Fig. In addition to the lithium atoms, we have also explored the utilization of other alkali metal atoms for the intercalation, including sodium, potassium, and rubidium atoms. We found that only the sodium atoms are energetically favorable to adsorb on the monolayer Mo 2 C surface. The formation energies are also negative when another monolayer Mo 2 C is covered onto the sodium adlayer to form NaMo 4 C 2 . This suggests that the sodium intercalated bilayer Mo 2 C can also be prepared (Sec. Furthermore, in Sec. S11 [41], we show that the lithium intercalations can also increase the N (0) in multilayer Mo 2 C including trilayer, four-layer, and bulk Mo 2 C. The extents of N (0) enhancements due to lithium intercalation in the trilayer, four-layer and bulk Mo 2 C are similar to that observed in the bilayer, as discussed above. This suggests that superconductivity can also be induced by lithium intercalation in multilayer Mo 2 C other than the bilayer. In summary, we have computationally studied the crystal structure, electronic structure, phonon, EPC, and superconductivity in bilayer Mo 2 C and related systems. We find that strong interlayer coupling diminishes the N (0) of bilayer 1T -Mo 2 C, subsequently reducing the superconducting T c from 4.2 K in its monolayer counterpart to 0 K. A two-step method, involving the deposition of lithium atoms and subsequent covered with a Mo 2 C monolayer, enables the intercalation of lithium atoms, resulting in the formation of T m -LiMo 4 C 2 and T ab -LiMo 4 C 2 crystals. The insertion of lithium atoms not only increases the interlayer spacing of the bilayer system, weakening the interlayer coupling, but also introduces electron doping. These combined effects significantly enhance the N (0) and the EPC in the LiMo 4 C 2 systems. By computing the anisotropic superconducting properties, we find that both T m -LiMo 4 C 2 and T ab -LiMo 4 C 2 systems exhibit two-gap superconductivity, with T c s of 10.2 and 11.2 K, respectively. The vibrational modes of Mo atoms and the anisotropic EPC of the electronic states near the Fermi surface, particularly involving the d-orbital states of Mo atoms, play dominant roles in the formation of the two-gap superconductivity. A 3% biaxial tensile strain can further induce a transition from two-gap to three-gap superconductivity in T m -LiMo 4 C 2 , with a significantly enhanced T c of 24.7 K. This transition is primarily attributed to the downward shift of a flat dispersion near M points to the vicinity of the Fermi level, which not only enhances the N (0), but also brings in the k states with exceptionally strong EPC strengths. From the perspective of atomic vibrations, the substantial enhancement of EPC due to the in-plane vibrations of Mo atoms plays a crucial role in this superconducting transition. Meanwhile, the 3% biaxial tensile strain can also induce a three-gap superconductivity in T ab -LiMo 4 C 2 , raising the T c to 18.9 K. The methods described in this work can be possibly applied to multilayer Mo 2 C systems. Considering that layered Mo 2 C systems have been successfully synthesized 