Developing hybrid materials and structures for electromagnetic wave engineering has been a promising route towards novel functionalities and tunabilities in many modern applications. Despite its established success in engineering optical light and terehertz waves, the implementation of meta-resonators operating at the microwave band is still emerging, especially those that allow for on-chip integration and size miniaturization, which has turned out crucial to developing hybrid quantum systems at the microwave band. In this work, we present a microwave meta-resonator consisting of split-ring and and spiral resonators, and implement it to the investigation of photon-magnon coupling for hybrid magnonic applications. We observe broadened bandwidth to the split ring modes augmented by the additional spiral resonator, and, by coupling the modes to a magnetic sample, the resultant photon-magnon coupling can be significantly enhanced to more than ten-fold. Our work suggests that combinatorial, hybrid microwave resonators may be a promising approach towards future development and implementation of photon-magnon coupling in hybrid magnonic systems. The emerging needs for quantum technologies require information propagation over long distances and with preserved coherence. This can be achieved by developing hybrid systems consisting of two subsystems operating in a strong-coupling regime Among various strategies for improving the photonmagnon coupling strength, engineering the microwave (MW) photon mode, whether in 3-D cavities In general EM wave engineering, using hybrid structures allows strong localization and field enhancement which enable important novel functionalities with improved compatibility for various applications In this work, we present a combinatorial double-splitring resonator (DSRR) incorporating a spiral-shaped, meta-resonator for hybrid magnonic applications. Compared to the single split-ring that has been dominantly used, the use of a double-split-ring spectrally extends the bandwidth to a lower frequency region, and more importantly, spatially re-distribute the magnetic field (h-component) towards the center of the resonator Here, we incorporate a spiral resonator in the center of the DSRR and construct a metamaterial MW resonator with structural symmetry breaking, termed as spiral(s)-DSRR, leveraging its multi-resonance characteristics and an enhanced magnetic coupling (to magnetic samples) due to the increased filling factor and the formation of localized, trapped microwave modes We study the spatial properties of the electric-and magnetic-field distribution of the meta-resonator and investigate its application in the context of strong photonmagnon coupling with magnetic YIG samples. We show that additional MW photon modes emerge by adding a spiral resonator to the generic DSRR, and the resultant photon-magnon coupling can be significantly enhanced to more than ten-fold. The results are further corroborated by using microwave simulations. Our design of a combinatorial DSRR and spiral resonator may be treated as a general design protocol for the unit-cell of MW metamaterial future construction of photon-magnon coupled systems. Figure We implement the meta-resonator to either a transmission-line, Fig. The split-ring structure introduces the inductive and capacitive responses to the time-varying electric and magnetic fields from the transmission line or the microstrip. The use of DSRR spatially re-distributes the magnetic field (h-component) towards the center of the resonator (in the dielectric) and with higher uniformity, as opposed to localize on the resonator side near the gap to the MW feed. The spiral loop inside the DSRR is then introduced in the middle. Such a combination enhances the magnetic coupling between the magnetic sample and the subwavelength-based meta-resonator structure, and gives rise to improved polarization characteristic which further enhances the negative electric and magnetic susceptibility. The metallic layer of copper exhibits the inductive response, where as the dielectric substrate and the space between the metallic arms, are responsible for the capacitive response. For the edge-coupled stripline in Fig. We first focus on the meta-resonator coupled to the transmission line, Fig. We investigate the photon-magnon coupling of our s-DSRR to magnetic YIG samples. Both planar YIG film (cut into the size of the spiral resonator) and YIG spheres are used. The thickness of the YIG film is 2.0 μm on a 0.5 mm thick gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) substrate. The nominal diameter of the YIG sphere is 1.0 mm. After loading the YIG sample (either the planar film or the sphere), slight shifts of the photon modes can be observed due to the change of impedance. In addition, new modes emerge which are unique to the s-DSRR compared to the original DSRR. Figure The coupling of all four DSRR modes to the YIG planar film were rather insignificant. For example, Fig. The same effect is also observed for using the YIG spheres. Likewise, Fig. Similar observation was also found for the other edgecoupled resonator, see Fig. Finally, similar conclusion can be drawn from the other higher spiral resonator mode, at 5.42 and 5.76 GHz for YIG film and sphere loads, respectively, in Fig. To gain an in-depth understanding of the enhanced coupling, we performed simulation and modeling of the YIG-loaded DSRR and s-DSRR using the High Frequency Structure Simulator (HFSS) from ANSYS. The two-port microstrip line structure is used to excite the meta-resonators. Both the planar YIG and the spherical YIG are investigated, with the dimensions of the YIG components given in section II B. Specifically, in HFSS, the permeability of the YIG component is modeled with the Polder's tensor To elucidate the nature of the extra resonances, we here take the planar YIG as an example and investigate the EM field distribution. As shown in Figure Next, we compare the simulated magnetic field distribution for the DSRR and s-DSRR with the planar YIG load. As an example, we focus on the spiral resonator modes with pronounced photon-magnon coupling, at 3.58 GHz in measurement (3.11 GHz in simulation) for the planar YIG. Figure In addition, Figure Phenomenologically, the value of coupling strength g is directly proportional to the form factor η of the magnetic sample by the magnetic component of the resonator's EM field, h, that is perpendicular to the external bias field, H, and the coupling strength can be written 23 : where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, S is the total spin number, whose value is proportional to the magnetic moment of the magnetic sample and the number of spins (N s ), h is the reduced Plank constant, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and ω p is the photon mode frequency. The spin concentration (n s ) then relates to the total spins of the sample and the magnetic sample volume, by n s = N s /V m . When the form factor η = 0, none of the resonator's h-field is perpendicular to the external bias field, whilst when η = 1, all of the h-field is perpendicular to the sample. Notably, the role of η has been traditionally overlooked, and an estimation of the relationship: g ∝ √ N s is often claimed, hinting further: g ∝ √ V m . However, increasing the volume of the sample also changes the η, therefore affecting the coupling strength. Such an effect can be corrected by taking into account the geometrical configurations like the magnetic filling factor, ζ m , of cavity field contained in the sample by g = ω c √ χ eff ζ m , where χ eff is an effective susceptibility determined by material properties and the overlap of the specific cavity and magnon modes In our hybrid design, the DSRR component induces a negative magnetic susceptibility for applied transverse EM waves, and its combination with a spiral resonator improves the electric and magnetic polarization and therefore further enhances negative electric and magnetic susceptibility. The mode volume of such dark mode is constricted due to its near-field confinement, which enables a strong spatial overlapping between the photon and magnon modes. Thus, the magnetic field distribution across the spiral structure increases the magnetic coupling within the spiral loop area and therefore enhances the magnetic filling factor of the sample Theoretically, The interaction 3 between the individual photonic components of this system (either the spiral or the DSRR) and the YIG sample can be modeled by two coupled classical oscillators O 1 and O 2 . Their equations of motion can be written as 45 : where O 1 represents the s-DSRR and is driven by a plunger with a constant frequency ω. O 1 is connected to the plunger by a spring with resonant frequency ω c . The plunger represents the microwave transmission line and applies a driving force to the spring. β is the damping due to a viscous force, α is the Gilbert damping factor, and g is the coupling strength between the two oscillators. O 2 is connected to a fixed wall by another spring with resonant frequency ω m . To explore the effect of the coupling strength g and by extension, the magnetic filling factor ζ m , the dispersion of this system must be calculated. x 1 and x 2 can be expressed as plane waves (x 1 , x 2 ) = (A 1 , A 2 )e -iωt . Using this representation, Equations ( The dispersion can be found by calculating the poles of the determinant of the interaction matrix M. Since the coupling between the photon and magnon modes is what is being investigated, the region near where ω c = ω m is all that is relevant. In this region, the detuning ∆ω << ω c + ω m , so a rotating wave approximation can be made To evaluate the effect of the magnetic filling factor on the dispersion, the difference between the two solutions of the dispersion at the resonance condition (ω c = ω m ) must be calculated: ) Experimentally determined values of these constants show that g 2 >> α -β, so ω gap = 2ω c χ ef f ζ m . Since O 1 represents the s-DSRR, the microwave transmission S 21 is proportional to A 1 . Therefore, solving Eq. 4 for A 1 allows us to construct the |S 21 | 2 spectrum. In this system, ω c is the mode determined by the structure of the resonator and has no magnetic field dependence. However, ω m has a field dependence determined by the shape of the YIG sample. For the samples investigated above, the field dependences are represented by the Kittel equations for a planar magnetic film, ω m = γ (H + H A )(H + 4πM + H A ), where M is the magnetization of the sample and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, and H A is the uniaxial anisotropy energy. Using Fig. In summary, we fabricated and characterized a combinatorial double-split-ring and spiral meta-resonator, and demonstrated its application for photon-magnon coupling in hybrid magnonics. Compared to the traditional single split-ring, the use of a double-split-ring spectrally extends the bandwidth to a lower frequency region and spatially re-distribute the magnetic field towards the center of the resonator. In addition, the double-split-ring allows to further couple it to an additional metallic spiral resonator. The spiral resonator photon modes can be effectively excited owing to its strong coupling to the double-split-ring, which further gives rise to multiresonance characteristics as well as an enhanced magnetic coupling (to magnetic samples) due to the increased filling factor and the formation of localized surface dark modes. Our results imply that the dark modes arising from meta-resonators hold a great promise towards strong photon-magnon coupling at room temperature, and have the potential to be miniaturized and integrated with auxiliary optical systems 