Ferroelectric materials promise exceptional attributes including low power dissipation, fast operational speeds, enhanced endurance, and superior retention to revolutionize information technology. However, the practical application of ferroelectric-semiconductor memory devices has been significantly challenged by the incompatibility of traditional perovskite oxide ferroelectrics with metal-oxide-semiconductor technology. Recent discoveries of ferroelectricity in binary oxides such as Zn1-xMgxO and Hf1-xZrxO have been a focal point of research in ferroelectric information technology. This work investigates the ferroelectric properties of Zn1-xMgxO utilizing automated band excitation piezoresponse force microscopy. Our findings reveal the coexistence of two ferroelectric subsystems within Zn1-xMgxO. We propose a "fringing-ridge mechanism" of polarization switching that is characterized by initial lateral expansion of nucleation without significant propagation in depth, contradicting the conventional domain growth process observed in ferroelectrics. This unique polarization dynamics in Zn1-xMgxO suggests a new understanding of ferroelectric behavior, contributing to both the fundamental science of ferroelectrics and their application in information technology. Ferroelectric materials have been a focal point of research for over five decades because of their potential applications in information technology. These in turn are believed to offer a constellation of exceptional attributes encompassing low power dissipation, fast operational speeds, enhanced endurance, and good retention. However, the practical implementation of ferroelectric-semiconductor memory has been hindered by the fact that metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology is generally incompatible with the film growth of traditional perovskite oxide ferroelectrics. Despite over three decades of research towards the integration of classical ferroelectrics and semiconductors, sustained and scalable solutions have not yet been found. The discovery of ferroelectricity within hafnia solid solutions has been a disruptive change. To accelerate the exploration of the large parameter spaces corresponding to the possible switching conditions, we developed a high throughout domain writing and imaging approach based on using AEcroscoPy, Whether the polarization can be switched depends on the magnitude and duration of the applied DC pulse, often larger and longer DC pulse can lead to polarization nucleation and reversal, and subsequent expansion of the polarization reversed domain, i.e., domain growth. Here, we can modify the pulse parameters and perform BEPFM maps in an automated manner, allowing us to conduct high throughput experimentation to systematically study the domain growth dependence on pulse condition; also, a subsequent high resolution PFM image after each pulse allows visualization of more detailed local polarization state compared to an entire observing scan after applying all pulses. We first study the ZMO-32 film by applying DC pulses with a magnitude ranging from negative 40 V-70 V and a duration ranging from 0.1 ms to 5000 ms. Figure However, exploration of the domain switching in ZMO have led to the observation of very unusual domain dynamics. For this material, we observed two kinds of resulted domain structures, one is a shadow domain (domain-1) at the top left, and the other is a normal domain structure (domain-2) at the bottom right that shows dark amplitude contrast at domain walls. Several representative domain-1 amplitude and phase images are amplified in Figure Two domain states are highly reproduced in films with different composition. The immediate interpretation of the shadow domains would be surface charging, giving rise to the domain-like contrast on non-ferroelectric surfaces and leading to well-known difficulties in interpretation of the PFM data and hysteresis loops, as explored in depth over the last two decades. Giving both domains and hysteresis loops show two states, we propose that domain-1 and domain-2 links to loop-1 and loop-2, respectively. To check this, we design an experiment that includes a DC set-pulse (SP) before FORC-BEPS measurement, as shown in Figure These studies also demonstrate that that the location change of the small loop is reversible, as shown in Figure • hypothesis I: surface charging or selvedge properties, • hypothesis II: vertical tubular structures with different compositions that switch independently, • hypothesis III: bulk responses due to four well potential, presence of two order parameters, nano phase separation, or unusual domain dynamics. To systematically explore these possibilities, we performed a set of depth-and spatially resolved characterization. As a first step, we performed Atom Probe Tomography (APT) to investigate whether there are tubular structures or phase separation. APT provides 3D compositional mapping with sub-nanometer resolution, As a next step, we consider possible bulk models, including the presence of multiple order parameters and low symmetry. We were able to reproduce the experimental PFM behavior by introducing monoclinic materials (see Suppl Mat., part II.E). However, this model is falsifiable and predicts formation of complex domain patterns during switching that does not agree with the lateral PFM experiment as shown in Figure Note that the verification of the possible bilayer-type, columnar-type or cross-type spatial orientations of FE1 and FE2 layers/regions can be performed experimentally. Since the spatial separation in chemical composition is absent, columnar-type and cross-type geometries of the FE1 and FE2 regions should be excluded, and so only bilayer-type geometries, shown in Figure Below we consider the model when the concentration of free carriers and hence screening capability in layers "1" and "2" is different. Within our model the screening properties is defined by the spatial distribution of the Debye-Hückel screening radius. Due to diffusion, the bottom layer can be enriched by electrons coming from the bottom electrode, so that the electron concentration can be significantly higher in the 10-20 nm thick layer near the bottom electrode than outside this layer. Since the exact distribution of these trap states densities is unknown, we consider several distributions of R d (x 3 ), namely the sharp step (solid curve), the diffuse step (dotted curve), and the maximum at the interface (dashed curve; see Figure To determine the spatial-temporal evolution of the polarization in the ZMO we use the Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) approach. In Eq.( In this case, the Euler-Lagrange equations with different LGD coefficients for polarization are valid for both layers; and electric fields in the layers differ due the influence of charge carriers considered in the Debye-Hückel approximation. Dynamic hysteresis loops of local polarization P 3 calculated for a slowly increasing amplitude of the tip bias (from red to magenta curves), increasing thickness h 1 from 10 nm to 60 nm and fixed h 2 =20 nm is shown in Figure It is seen from Figure To summarize, we report highly unusual ferroelectric behavior of Zn1-xMgxO, the only selfconsistent model aligned with all experimental evidence is one where two independent ferroelectric subsystems coexist in an initially layered geometry. Using band excitation piezoresponse force microscopy (BEPFM) and spectroscopy (BEPS), the research highlights distinct polarization switching dynamics, contrary to traditional depolarization field coupling theories. The discovery of a fringing-ridge mechanism, characterized by lateral nucleation expansion without significant depth propagation, presents a novel type of ferroelectric switching. This diverges from the usual domain growth process observed in ferroelectrics. This could be indicative of more complex dynamics in similar binary oxide or nitride wurtzite systems. The implications of these findings are significant for the semiconductor and information technology industries, both by linking to the macroscopic switching dynamics and suggesting strategies for materials optimization. The unique polarization behavior of Zn1-xMgxO, especially the fringing-ridge mechanism, offers insights into designing more efficient and scalable ferroelectric materials. These materials are vital for applications like high-density information storage and ferroelectric random-access memories (FeRAMs). The study enhances understanding of ferroelectric materials' compatibility with CMOS technology, potentially paving the way for innovative memory solutions with low power dissipation, fast operational speeds, enhanced endurance, and improved retention. ZMO samples are fabricated on Pt bottom electrodes on sapphire substrates. Pt is deposited by RF magnetron sputtering at 350 °C using a 5 nm Ti adhesion layer. ZMO films are reactively RF magnetron sputtered from 2" diameter Zn and Mg metal targets at room temperature. Both targets are 99.99% pure on a metals basis (Kurt J. Lesker). Gun power settings establish the Zn:Mg ratio. The sputtering atmosphere is a 1 mTorr mixture of 6:1 Ar:O2. The magnetrons are oppositely opposed with a 45° angle from the substrate normal, target-to-substrate distance is approximately 5 cm. Deposition rates vary for different Zn:Mg ratios but are in the range of 15 nm/min. 4-circle x-ray diffraction (Panalytical Emperyan) is used to quantify film crystallinity, phase, orientation and thickness. Zn:Mg ratios are measured using energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (Oxford Instruments). BEPFM and BEPS were measured on a commercial Cypher AFM system (Asylum Research, Oxford Instruments Co.), which is equipped with a band-excitation generator. A Pt/Ir coated AFM tip (ElectriMulti75-G (Budget Sensors)) with a nominal stiffness of 3 N m -1 was used. The automated experimentation was achieved via AEcroscoPy ToF-SIMS measurements were carried out using TOF.SIMS.5-NSC instrument combining AFM and ToF-SIMS in the same vacuum chamber. Bismuth liquid metal ion gun (30 keV energy, 0.5 nA current in DC mode and ~120 nm spot size) was used as a primary ion source for extracting of the sample secondary ions. Cs sputter source (1 keV energy, ~80 nA current) was used for depth profiling and oxygen sputter source (500 eV energy, ~100 nA current) was used for wage sputter. Time-of-flight mass analyzer was used for detection of the secondary ions in negative ion detection mode and allowed mass resolution m/m = 100 -300. PFM and switching spectroscopy measurements on the crater structure were carried out using AFM in the same vacuum chamber with ToF-SIMS, using a suit of external electronics. Standard lift-out and annular FIB milling procedures were done using an FEI Nova 200 Dual-Beam FIB-SEM instrument to prepare the APT specimens. 