Recently, LiGa5O8 was identified as a cubic spinel type ultra-wide-band-gap semiconductor with a gap of about 5.36 eV and reported to be unintentionally p-type. Here we present first-principles calculations of the native defects and various of their complexes to try to explain the occurrence of p-type doping. Although we find Li-vacancies to be somewhat shallower acceptors than in LiGaO2, and becoming slightly shallower in complexes with donors such as VO and GaLi antisites, these VLi based defects are not sufficiently shallow to explain p-type doping. The dominant defects are donors and in equilibrium the Fermi level would be determined by compensation between donors and acceptors, and pinned deep in the gap. Recently, LiGa 5 O 8 in the spinel structure was grown in thin-film form by mist-chemical vapor deposition and reported to have a gap of 5.39 eV and as grown p-type conductivity. The spinel structure of LiGa 5 O 8 was established by Joubert et al. We use the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Because the cubic unit cell (shown in Fig. where D q indicates the defect D in charge state q, C : D q means the crystal with defect an C without defect, ε v is the valence band maximum (VBM) with respect to the average electrostatic potential which is aligned far away from the defect with that of the perfect crystal by means of the V align correction and E corr is a Madelung correction for the electrostatic energy of the periodic array of localized defect charges in the homogeneous background used to compensate the defect charge. This and the alignment term for charge defects are obtained using the Freysoldt-Neugebauer-Van de Walle (FNV) procedure First we determine the chemical potential range in which LiGa 5 O 8 is stable. As can be seen in Fig. The V Li appears to be the only somewhat viable acceptor but p-type doping is not predicted from it because its binding energy is rather deep and secondly it would be compensated by O-vacancies and Ga Li . Considering that under conditions E and F the system is rather O-rich and Ga-poor, the Ga Li antisite is apparently a low energy of formation donor. Nonetheless, it is remarkable that the 0/-transition level for the V Li is significantly lower than in LiGaO 2 , where it is 1.03 eV. Next, we study various defect pair complexes. Our reason for doing so is that we found in our recent study of donor acceptor pairs in LiGaO 2 Fermi level (eV) Formation energy (eV) Fermi level (eV) Formation energy (eV) Fermi level (eV) Formation energy (eV) Fermi level (eV) Formation energy (eV) Fig. and Ga Li , under chemical potential condition F. Fermi level (eV) Fig. As the most relevant example, let's consider V Li + V O1 . When the Fermi level is close to the VBM, the V O1 is in a 2+ state while the V Li is neutral. Increasing the Fermi level, the first transition of the complex is 2 + /+. However, we can see that the 2+/+ transition level of the complex is indeed closer to the VBM than the 0/-level of the isolated V Li . Thus, in some sense the acceptor level becomes shallower, and this corresponds indeed to the V Li emitting a hole to the VBM, which one might think of as contributing to p-type conductivity. However, overall the defect is still a donor and is then still in a positive charge state, which requires it to be compensated either by free electrons or by a negative defect. Thus by itself, this complex cannot lead to p-type doping because we combined a double donor with a single acceptor. Similar considerations apply to the V Li -Ga Li pair. Eventually, at higher Fermi level position in the gap, we can see a narrow range of 0 charge state and a transition to the -1 charge state. This point again lies higher than the corresponding donor 2 + /0 transition. Unexpectedly, for the V Li -V O2 complex the 2 + /+ transition is higher than for the isolated V Li . The Li Ga acceptor is a double acceptor and when it combines with a double donor such as V O1 , we obtain a 2+/0, transition and a 0/2-transition at high Fermi energy. Thus all the complexes essentially display ampho-teric behavior, combining donor and acceptor like properties. Close to the VBM, they are dominated by the donor-like behavior and close to the CBM by the acceptor like behavior. For the double acceptor double donor pairs a large region of neutral charge state occurs in the center of the gap. Finally, for the V Ga based complexes, we combine a triple acceptor with a double donor. However, none of them show promising shallow acceptor like behavior. An overview of all the transition levels is given in Fig. The concentration of defects in various charge states and the net free electron and hole concentrations in the bands are governed by the charge neutrality condition where N i is the density of sites available for a given defect, q i its charge and g i a degeneracy factor. For example if the charged defect features a state with a single electron, (such as the V 0 Li ) it can be in spin up or spin down state and the degeneracy is 2 but if it is filled or empty, the degeneracy is 1. Its formation energy in a given charge state depends on the electron chemical potential, ∆E f or (D qi i ) = ∆E f or (D qi i , μ = 0) + q i μ. The band electron and hole concentrations n and p also depend on the electron chemical potential and temperature, As long as the chemical potential is not too close to the band edge, with m n the electron effective mass and similar equations hold for the hole concentration. Together, these equations can be solved for a given temperature, say the growth temperature, where we assume the system was in thermodynamic equilibrium before the defects concentrations were frozen in by quenching the system to room temperature. They then determine the position of the chemical potential (i.e. the Fermi level) as well as the defect concentrations and free carrier concentrations. In practice because of the exponential dependence on the energies of formation only the lowest energy for formation defects play a significant role and if the Fermi level stays deep in the gap, the n and p are negligible. Keeping only the V -1 Li , V +2 O and for simplicity equating the formation energy of the two types of O, and Ga 2+ Li charged defects in the neutrality equation, and using a growth temperature of 1200K, we can solve for μ graphically, using Mathematica and find μ = 3.25 eV. This is close to the crossing point of the V -1 Li formation energy with the Ga 2+ Li , indicating that even the V O may be neglected. In that case, the equilibrium Fermi energy is set by because the density of available sites for V Li and Ga Li is the same and both their degeneracies are 1, which can be simplified to 3μ = kT ln 2 + ∆E f or (V Li ) -∆E f or (Ga Li ). Even at T = 1200 K, kT ln 2 = 0.072 eV is pretty small compared to the difference in formation energies of 9.74 eV, but there is no problem in keeping it and we find μ = 3.25 in almost perfect agreement with the calculation including the O-vacancies. Thus we conclude that considering only the native defects, the Fermi level is pinned at the intersection of the dominant donor Ga Li and the shallowest acceptor-type defect V Li . This is under condition F which is most Li-poor and hence the likeliest to give Li-vacancies and Ga on Li antisites. But the Fermi level is then pinned deep in the gap and insulating behavior is expected. Considering now the complexes, these are less likely because the density per unit volume of ij pairs is N i N j and of those only the nearest neighbor ones correspond to the pair considered. In spite of this pre-factor disadvantage of the complex, its energy is lowered by the bonding between donor and acceptor and as this goes in the exponential, it has a more important effect. Numerical solution of the neutrality equation, shows that μ now shifts to 3.54 eV, in other words, it shifts close to the intersection of the V -1 Li and the [V Li -Ga Li ] +1 , which now becomes the lowest energy donor. So, even though the 2 + /+ level moved closer to the VBM, the lower energy of these complexes ultimately shifts the Fermi level even higher in the gap. We also consider what happens to the chemical potential at room temperature if we assume the defect concentrations from the growth temperature are frozen in but their charge state might change and including the free carrier concentrations. When we only include the native defects, we find that the chemical potential then drops to 0.82 eV above the VBM but the hole concentration is still negligible ( ∼ 10 6 cm -3 ) and the neutrality is still produced by the equilibrium between Ga 2+ Li and V -1 Li defects which have a concentration of 2.1×10 22 cm -3 and 4.2×10 22 cm -3 respectively. We indeed need twice the concentration of single negative acceptors as 2+ donors to obtain neutrality. When we include the lowest energy of formation defect pairs, we find the room temperature chemical potential at 0.83 eV, the hole and electron concentrations are negligible (p≈ 1.4 × 10 6 cm -3 ) and the neutrality then comes from the balance of V -1 Li with [V Li -Ga Li ] +1 complexes, both of which are found around 7.2×10 23 cm -3 with a smaller concentration of Ga +2 Li of or 7×10 19 cm -3 . Thus in thermal equilibrium, even if we include complexes, our calculations unambiguously predict insulating behavior because the Fermi level stays too far away from the valence band edge. We also considered some impurity doping candidates for p-type doping such as N substituting for O and Zn substituting for Ga. The results are shown in Fig. Fig. In spite of a rather exhaustive study of the possibilities, our calculations are unable to explain p-type doping in LiGa 5 O 8 . In equilibrium we clearly find donors like Ga Li to compensate the potential V Li acceptor. The Li vacancy acceptor itself is somewhat shallower than in LiGaO 2 where it occurs in tetrahedral coordination as opposed to octahedral coordination found here. This different environment does avoid the polaronic distortion and we find a more spread out vacancy wave function, but, despite this being somewhat encouraging, the level is still too deep in the gap to provide p-type behavior. Complex formation with V O or with Ga Li can push the lowest transition levels closer to the VBM. Such complexes have less available sites but may nonetheless become slightly favored by the binding energy lowering of the energy of formation. However, these complexes are net amphoteric or donors rather than acceptors. Thus, they play the role of compensating the isolated V Li acceptors but do not become acceptors themselves. The lowest energy complex found here is the V Li -Ga Li pair and because it is lower in energy and becomes a single donor it shifts the Fermi level even deeper in the gap. Even if we consider that, after cooling to room temperature, the defects may change their charge state and thereby affect the free carrier concentrations, we find the Fermi level to still be at about 0.8 eV above the VBM, which is too high to give p-type doping. The maximum p-type concentration we obtain in this way is of order 10 6 cm -3 . The only way to explain the observation of p-type conduction is then a non-equilibrium situation. One might envision, regions of the sample where V Li occur or their complexes occur and emit holes but these p-type regions would then have to be compensated by opposite charge space charge regions. This non-equilibrium could possibly occur near grain boundaries, or other extended defects or near surfaces. In 