Machine learning approaches have recently emerged as powerful tools to probe structure-property relationships in crystals and molecules. Specifically, Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIP) can accurately reproduce first-principles data at a cost similar to that of conventional interatomic potential approaches. While MLIP have been extensively tested across various classes of materials and molecules, a clear characterization of the anharmonic terms encoded in the MLIP is lacking. Here, we benchmark popular MLIP using the anharmonic vibrational Hamiltonian of ThO2 in the fluorite crystal structure. This anharmonic Hamiltonian was constructed from density functional theory (DFT) using our highly accurate and efficient irreducible derivative methods, and then used to generate molecular dynamics trajectories. This data set was used to train three classes of MLIP: Gaussian Approximation Potentials, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and Graph Neural Networks (GNN). The results were assessed by directly comparing phonons and their interactions, as well as phonon linewidths, phonon lineshifts, and thermal conductivity. The models were also trained on a DFT molecular dynamics dataset, demonstrating good agreement up to fifth-order for the ANN and GNN. Our analysis demonstrates that MLIP have great potential for accurately characterizing anharmonicity in materials systems at a fraction of the cost of conventional first principles-based approaches. Phonon anharmonicity plays an essential role in the thermodynamics of materials systems. Thus, constructing accurate vibrational Hamiltonians is critical for materials property prediction at finite temperatures. In particular, faithfully resolving phonon interactions up to fourth-order is essential for capturing leading order behavior of the phonon linewidths, phonon lineshifts, and thermal conductivity. In order to systematically assess the phonons and their interactions, it is critical to use the minimum set of derivatives allowed by group theory, which may be computed using irreducible derivative approaches MLIP aim to represent the total energy of a given atomic configuration in terms of individual contributions from each atom. Since the complete space of atomic displacements is high dimensional for very large molecules and crystals, several descriptors have been developed to encode local atomic environments While understanding how well certain descriptor sets can represent anharmonic energy surfaces is important, it will not be directly discussed in this work and will be the subject of further study. Our present goal is to assess the most prevalent MLIP in the literature, using the commonly associated descriptors. Therefore, our benchmarks will be limited to three popular classes of potentials with publicly available software. The first MLIP considered in this work is the Gaussian approximation potential (GAP) While not directly formulated as a MLIP, several potential energy surface fitting approaches, such as compressive sensing lattice dynamics (CSLD) The second class of machine learning approaches we consider is the high dimensional artificial neural network first described by Behler and Parrinello (BPNN) Finally, the most recent developments in machine learning interatomic potentials have focused on graph neural networks In this work, we benchmark how well MLIP recon-structs anharmonic potentials. We trained the GAP, BPNN, and GNN using two datasets: one containing configurations evaluated by an anharmonic Taylor series, which does not contain noise, and one generated using DFT calculations. In our analysis, we quantify errors at the level of the irreducible derivatives of the potential energy surface, making our benchmark more robust than benchmarks using integrated observables. In all three models, third-order derivatives are in good agreement with the reference. Up to fifth-order derivatives are mostly reproduced by the ANN and GNN, with the GNN demonstrating particularly promising accuracy. We also provide comparisons of observables such as phonon dispersions, phonon linewidths, phonon lineshifts, and thermal conductivity to quantify the effects of the errors in the irreducible derivatives. DFT calculations were performed using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method implemented in the Vienna ab initio software package (VASP) using the local density approximation Two datasets were prepared to train the machine learning models. The first dataset derives from a vibrational Hamiltonian containing second, third, and fourth-order irreducible derivatives computed from DFT. Datapoints are generated by performing molecular dynamics on the irreducible derivative Hamiltonian using the microcanonical ensemble, which we refer to as irreducible derivative molecular dynamics (IDMD) All three MLIP were trained on IDMD, and only the BPNN and GNN were trained on DFTMD. The GAP model was generated using the quantum mechanics and interatomic potentials (QUIP) code To demonstrate the practical impact of the errors in the computed irreducible derivatives, we compare several observables computed using irreducible derivatives obtained from each model. We begin by presenting the phonon dispersion (see Fig. In summary, we have benchmarked three popular machine learning interatomic potentials on the anharmonic irreducible derivatives of ThO 2 . We have developed two training datasets: one that is computed from the anharmonic vibrational Hamiltonian of ThO 2 , containing up to quartic terms, and one that is representative of training conducted via ab initio methods in the literature. The Behler Parrinello artificial neural network and the graph neural network yield robust irreducible derivatives up to fifth-order, while the Gaussian approximation potential is only able to accurately capture anharmonic interactions up to third-order. Our work demonstrates the promising potential of machine learning methods in characterizing anharmonicity in materials systems. While we obtained accurate results using MLIP in the present study, it would be interesting to verify that our findings hold in systems with sensitivities, such as soft phonon modes. Future work will include extending this analysis to strongly correlated electronic materials, where the generation of accurate training data comes at a significant premium. Additionally, to study materials with strong anharmonicity, further work will be conducted to develop training algorithms to more accurately capture sixth-order and beyond interactions. 