A Foster's equivalent circuit for 2-D Planar Periodic Structures (PPSs) that exhibit an arbitrary geometry is presented for first time in this paper. The proposed 4-port network shows an invariant circuit topology to the PPS geometry and is completely comprised of invariant-frequency lumped elements. The circuit is the simplest in terms of number of elements within the bi-mode bandwidth for a certain geometry, and its topology makes it possible both a standardized process to obtain the equivalent circuit of an arbitrary geometry and the use of the circuit theory to design a multitude of devices. To perform a validation, the equivalent circuit of two different PPSs (a rotated dipole and a defected slotted ring) have been obtained and analyzed in single and multi-layer configurations. The circuit is also used as a tool to develop Elliptical to Linear (or Circular) Polarization converters. One of the designs presented at 20 GHz (in transmission) converts an incident elliptical polarization of Axial Ratio 5 and tilted φ=20o into a purely linear vertical polarization of XP<-30 dB, with nearzero reflections and insertion loss better than 0.1 dB. The designed device is also manufactured and tested, and the measurements are in good agreement with simulations. HE 2-D periodic distributions of planar metallic scatters, known as Planar Periodic Structures (PPSs), are commonly used in the development of a multitude of devices that operate in non-guided systems. Spatial and spectral filters (known as Frequency Selective Surfaces, FSS Significant efforts have been invested in the literature to obtain accurate equivalent circuits of a variety of PPS geometries The main parameters to evaluate the viability of an equivalent circuit to describe a certain structure are: the bandwidth within the circuit can accurately predict the electrical behavior of the structure, the number of elements used, the topology of the circuit and the type of elements used (dependent or independent on the frequency). Another important parameter is the type of excitation and the number of modes that the circuit is able to consider, as some circuits of PPSs are proposed just for normal incidence or for oblique incidence in the main planes. In this regard, the Foster's circuits present certain properties that make them interesting as an additional tool for the designer together with the aforementioned circuits reported in the state of the art. On the one hand, a Foster's form does not represent every phenomenological energetic interchange in the structure, but they are encompassed in lumped elements that are frequency-independent. Thus, the resulting circuit is the simplest in terms of number of elements Some works have proposed and used Foster's circuits to model and design devices based on waveguides In this paper a bi-mode Foster's equivalent circuit of 2-D PPSs with no restrictions on the symmetry of the geometry is presented. The approach used to obtain this circuit is completely different from that used in Let us consider a square period single layer Planar Periodic Structure ("PPS" or "metasurface"), which is placed in the vacuum at z=0 and is made up a zero-thickness metallizations of arbitrary geometry (Fig. If an incident field impinges normally on the PPS, there are two degenerated modes (zero cut-off frequency) at both sides of the discontinuity: Vertical (V) and Horizontal (H) (Fig. Because the metallizations do not show any type of In ( Since the discontinuity has zero-thickness, the field continuity must be produced mode by mode, so that the following relationships can be obtained: (3) Therefore, it is clear that the scattering matrix of an arbitrary PPS in these conditions can be described by three independent parameters: The distribution of elements in (5) allows the architecture within the box in Fig. These equations yield to the next matrix distribution for the impedance of the 4 port network: where ( ) It is interesting to point out that Z is ill-conditioned (there is no admittance matrix, Y), as expected from all-parallel structures. From From Thus, it can be concluded that a combination of frequencyindependent lumped elements allows the full electrical behavior of an arbitrary PPS to be described, provided that the operating frequency is lower than the cutoff of the first high order mode. In the most general case, the PPS does not exhibit any type of symmetry, and the cutoff frequency of the first evanescent mode (TE10), and therefore the bandwidth of validity of the circuit (dual-mode bandwidth), is given by: where P the period of the unit cell. The number of terms to be used in It should be highlighted that the parameters Z11 and Z22 are positive-definite (their residues are real-positive) so that the slope of the reactance curves is also positive. However, the reactance of Z12 can be positive or negative. Consequently, the elements of the equivalent T or П forms could show negative values of inductances and capacitances, which do not invalidate the use of the equivalent circuit and neither infringes the fundamental postulates that support the circuit theory In the particular case that the PPS geometry presents a symmetry with respect to one of the two diagonal axes (S11=S22), the lattice topology (which always provides positive lumped elements) can be introduced (Fig. It is very important to point out that the equivalent circuit presented here is valid for an arbitrary geometry of the PPS and period. A change of the geometry (dimensions or shape) just produces the variation of: the number of poles, the values of their frequency positions and the residues. The circuit presented in Fig. Other generalization is allowed for rectangular periods simply by multiplying the impedances of the ports by the factors (√Py/Px) and (√Px/Py). The electrical effects of a non-zero metal thickness can be also accounted in the circuit if two air transmission line sections are included, one on each side of the connecting two-port network, provided that the thickness of the metals (tm) is a little fraction of the wavelength (tm<λ/20). Otherwise, the metals would form a new periodic transmission line of length tm, whose particular set of modes differ from those of the Floquet The equivalent circuit proposed here has certain advantages when compared to other circuits reported in the literature to model planar 2-D periodic structures When compared to other mathematical tools that can be used to model the electrical behavior of a PPS (i.e. Artificial Neural Networks, ANN It should be also highlighted that the proposed circuit is especially appropriated to perform design procedures for devices that allow a standardized synthesis among those studied in the classical circuit theory (filters, LP-CP converters, which can use the coupler theory As regards the drawbacks, two main limitations are clearly identified. On the one hand, the proposed circuit is only valid within the bi-mode bandwidth of the PPS. Although most of the devices work in this band, it can be possible that the device includes thicknesses and/or permittivities for which the evanescent modes may not be enough attenuated (at least 10 dB) between discontinuities, so the accuracy of the circuit can be drastically deteriorated. Therefore, other circuits should be considered in these cases (i.e. On the other hand, in spite of the generality of the circuit (no symmetries are required for the PPS geometry), it has been only studied and validated for normal incidence. The normal incidence can be used to perform a large number of devices or even be a good starting point to design devices at oblique incidence. It should be noted that if the proposed circuit is able to model the absence of physical symmetries, it could be possible that the absence of symmetries in the excitation (oblique incidence) were also appropriately modelled. Some recent results we have obtained make us very optimistic about the capability of the proposed circuit to model an arbitrary oblique incidence, provided that the appropriate basis of modes (impedances and propagation constants) are selected at each port. This analysis will be addressed in further works. In this section, the equivalent circuit presented above is numerically evaluated by analyzing two different PPS architectures that have been used in the literature to develop mm-wave devices. The first geometry is that shown in Fig. Firstly, the parameters of the equivalent circuit have been obtained for the dimensions (L=13 mm and S=3 mm), to evaluate the accuracy of the equivalent circuit in terms of bandwidth. Thus, the S parameters were calculated from 1 to 15 GHz using the EM simulator CST [44], from which the elements of the lattice, Za and Zb, were obtained. Fig. To calculate the values of the lumped elements, any curve fitting technique can be used. The poles of Zb are quite separated, which helps to find the pairs (Cb=1,259 pF, Lb=1,47 nH) and (Cbb=1,355 pF, Lbb=0,147 nH). The calculus of the parameters (Ca=0,442 pF, La=1,172 nH) does not suppose any significant problem. Fig. Since a dimensional variation of the PPS does not change its geometry drastically, the same spectral behavior shown in Fig. The second geometry analyzed is shown in Fig. The element shows four independent physical parameters (L, W, α and P), although the width and the period will be fixed again to simplify the analysis: W=0.5 mm and P=10 mm. Because the cell does not exhibit any type of symmetry, the Tequivalent topology was selected for the two-port interconnection network. Fig. The values of the lumped elements were calculated, resulting in: (Ca=0,2724 fF, La=12,203 nH) (Cb=-0,409 fF, Lb=-1,893 nH) and (Cc=0,123 fF, Lc=13,072 nH). Fig. Fig. Note that that the values of lumped elements in the range (α=46o to 90o) can be obtained from those calculated from α=0o to 45o, since (Za, Zc) interchange to each other with respect to the diagonal the cell. Similarly, the values from α=91o to 179o (α=-89o to -1o) can be also easily deduced from those previously calculated just by considering the mirror structure of Fig. It is important to note that the calculus of the inductances (La, Lb, and Lc) is very sensitive in this case because of the capacitive behavior of the rotated dipole. However, the inductances cannot be neglected from the equivalent circuit, as they are important to appropriately describe the frequency behavior of this PPS. Therefore, particular attention should be paid to the meshing of the EM simulations or the accuracy of the fitting strategy used to calculate the elements. As an example to evaluate a multi-layer cell, the structure comprising the PPS shown in Fig. This section is focused in the study and development of devices capable of converting an arbitrary elliptical polarization into a purely vertical linear or circular polarization (EP-LP or EP-CP converters), thus combining the rotation and the cancelation of field components at the same time. These devices are selected to demonstrate the accuracy of the circuit in order to efficiently perform complex polarization controller devices. The first design consists on a transmissive (EP-LP) converter that operates at 20 GHz, which is made up of a single layer PPS. Fig. where (±) indicates a Left Hand (LH, +) or Right Hand (RH, -) polarization. In this particular case, a LH elliptically polarized incident field tilted φ=20o and whose axial ratio is 5 (M=1 and m=0.2), is considered at 20 GHz (see Fig. Similarly, the reflection fields at port 2 (R2) and the Fig. transmissions to ports 3 (T3) and 4 (T4) are: ) where the relations ( Because these conditions require of non-symmetrical PPSs, the structure used for the design is that shown in Fig. Two different solutions that cancel the transmission to port 4 (T4) can be appreciated in Fig. To perform a transmissive (EP-CP) converter, the transmitted field must fulfill the circular polarization condition: As explained in section IV.A, more than one PPS layer are required to accomplish R1=R2=T4=0, as the relations (1)-( In accordance to our best knowledge, the circuit theory does not provide a standardized circuit synthesis that allows to design this device when two generators are used, contrary to what happens with the LP-CP converters The design process has five variables: the lengths, rotations and the separation (P=10 mm and W=0.5 mm are fixed), which is complex for a pure electromagnetic optimization. In accordance with the results in Fig. The results and the viability of the proposed equivalent circuit as part of the design procedure of complex polarization controller devices have been demonstrated previously, as the results were compared with those calculated by an electromagnetic simulator (CST). However, an experiment must be carried out to evaluate if the proposed PPS geometry (rotated dipole) is appropriate to perform the EP-LP designed in section IV.C. Thus, the proposed circuit has been used to design a new two layer EP-LP converter, which includes the materials where the dipoles must be printed. A 0.5 mm-thick GML 1000 substrate (ɛr=3.38, tanδ=0.003) has been chosen as supporting material for both layers, and a period of P=7 mm is considered (W=0.5 mm). Thus, the equivalent circuit used to perform the design is shown in Fig. Since the thicknesses of the substrates are fixed, the electrical performance of this new design is slightly worse than that obtained in section IV.C at 20 GHz: XP<-25 dB, reflection levels better than (R1=-18 dB, R2=-24 dB) and insertion loss lower than 0.1 dB. The designed EP-LP converter has been manufactured using micromachining techniques, and the resulting prototype is made up of 24x24 cells. A 1.5 mm-thick framework of dielectric material was also manufactured to perform the air spacer. Fig. Fig. V. CONCLUSION A Foster's equivalent circuit of a Planar Periodic Structure (PPS) with an arbitrary geometry is presented. The proposed bimode circuit (4-port network) shows an invariant circuit topology to the PPS geometry, is completely made up of invariant-frequency lumped elements and is the simplest in terms of number of elements. The topology makes it possible to carry out a standard process to obtain the circuit independently of the geometry of the scatter and allows using the classical circuit theory to design a multitude of devices. The circuit is suitable within the bi-mode bandwidth of the cell for normal incidence and when the dielectric spacers are thicker than λ/8. In the particular cases of a defected slotted ring or a rotated dipole, six lumped elements are required to accurately predict the electrical behavior within the whole bi-mode bandwidth of the cell for any arbitrary set of dimensions. The cell based on the rotated dipole has been also evaluated to design EP-LP or EP-CP converters with the aid of the equivalent circuit, which is demonstrated as an efficient predesign tool. In the case of devices based on a single layer, the incident elliptical polarization must exhibit a relatively low axial ratio (AR<2) to obtain acceptable return loss. If the axial ratio is higher than 2, two layers are necessary at least to achieve reasonable XP levels (<30 dB) and the cancelation of the reflections. The bandwidth of the device depends on the number of layers, so that a narrow bandwidth is achieved using a twolayer structure. Manuscript received November 25, 2019. This work was supported in part by the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness, under the project TEC2016-75103-C2-1-R. ©2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future, media including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.