The recent discoveries of surprisingly large anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in chiral antiferromagnets have triggered extensive research efforts in various fields, ranging from topological condensed-matter physics to antiferromagnetic spintronics, and energy harvesting technology. However, such AHE-hosting antiferromagnetic materials are rare in nature. Herein, we demonstrate that Mn2.4Ga, a Fermi-level-tuned kagome antiferromagnet, has a large anomalous Hall conductivity of about 150 Ω -1 cm -1 at room temperature that surpasses the usual high values (i.e., 20~50 Ω -1 cm -1 ) observed so far in two outstanding kagome antiferromagnets, Mn3Sn and Mn3Ge. The spin triangular structure of Mn2.4Ga guarantees a nonzero Berry curvature while generates only a weak net moment of about 0.05 μB per formula unit in the kagome plane. Moreover, the anomalous Hall conductivity exhibits a sign reversal with the rotation of a small magnetic field, which can be ascribed to the field-controlled chirality of the spin triangular structure. Our theoretical calculations indicate that the large AHE in Mn2.4Ga originates from a significantly enhanced Berry curvature associated with the tuning of the Fermi level close to the Weyl points. These properties, together with the ability to manipulate moment orientations using a moderate external magnetic field, make Mn2.4Ga extremely exciting for future antiferromagnetic spintronics. Kagome-based materials with topologically nontrivial electronic structures have attracted tremendous attention in the past decade in various fields, ranging from topological condensedmatter physics to materials science, and energy harvesting technology. Here we report on the first experimental realization of the long-sought-after last member of the Mn3X kagome antiferromagnet family, off-stoichiometric Mn3Ga (Mn2.4Ga) in the form of single crystals which shows the large anomalous Hall conductivity by tuning the Fermi level close to the Weyl points. We show that, despite a very small magnetization of ∼0.05 μB per formula unit in the kagome plane, the single crystal of Mn2.4Ga exhibits a strikingly large anomalous Hall conductivity in zero magnetic field of approximately 150 Ω -1 cm -1 at room temperature and approximately 530 Ω -1 cm -1 at 10 K. The angular dependence of the AHE measurements further confirms that the small residual in-plane magnetic moment plays no role in the observed effect, except to control the chirality of the spin triangular structure. Our theoretical calculations demonstrate that the large AHE in Mn2.4Ga originates from a significantly enhanced Berry curvature associated with the tuning of the Fermi level close to the Weyl points. Our work demonstrates the great potential of the Fermi-level-tuned Mn3-xGa for future antiferromagnetic spintronics. The manganese-based binary alloys Mn3-xGa are known to crystallize in different structures such as cubic, tetragonal and hexagonal phases, depending on the annealing temperature and the composition. We have performed the electronic band structure calculations of Mn3Ga, which are consistent with previous calculations. The anisotropy of AHC for Mn3Ga, i.e., zx in the x-z plane, zy in the y-z plane and xy in the x-y plane are further calculated, and the results are shown in Figure We first provide clear evidence of the large AHE observed in single crystals of Mn2.4Ga. All the transport measurements were performed on Hall devices with about 15 μm × 7 μm ×1μm channels for longitudinal and Hall resistivity measurements (see Experiment Section and Figure Notably, the experimental results are highly consistent with the theoretical predictions: large AHE are observed in zx and zy, but not in xy. Therefore, the nonzero Berry curvature related to the noncollinear antiferromagnetism is believed to be responsible for AHE. It should be noted that an artificial AHE signals could be induced by inhomogeneous Hall signals due to thickness variation, defects, and interface modification. However, these extrinsic factors can be safely excluded in this work. More importantly, the reliability of the experimental protocols was further confirmed by the Mn3Sn single-crystals devices fabricated using the same microfabrication method. A detailed validity analysis of the AHE can be found in Figure To confirm that the observation of a large AHE originates from the noncolinear antiferromagnetic spin structure in the kagome plane, we have performed magnetization measurements with the field parallel to different crystallographic directions. Figure Based on our magnetization data, it is evident that the present kagome-based Mn2.4Ga antiferromagnet has a weak in-plane ferromagnetism and nearly zero net magnetic moment along [0001] (z) direction. We thus argue that the weak in-plane ferromagnetism occurs due to the geometrical frustration of the Mn moments, which are arranged in a triangular noncollinear configuration in the x-y plane. Such configuration is robust against an external field of up to 16T (inset Figure The observation of a large AHC in the xz and yz planes, while a very small effect in the x-y plane is also consistent with symmetry analysis. It should be pointed out that all antiferromagnet kagome Mn3X alloys are off-stoichiometry triangular antiferromagnet. The hexagonal Mn3Ga can be only stabilized with the Ga-rich compositions, To confirm that the weak in-plane ferromagnetism observed in Mn2.4Ga does no effect on the large AHE, we performed angular dependence of AHE measurements for various configurations of magnetic field H and current I. Below, we will demonstrate how drastically the AHC in Mn2.4Ga depends on the measurement configuration. Figure Furthermore, such small in-plane field-induced change of chirality can persist up to room temperature. In Figure The zero-field AHC at various temperatures was extracted from the magnetic field dependance of the AHC by extrapolating the high magnetic field part back to zero field. As shown in Figure To further scale the transport properties of the Mn2.4Ga, we have summarized the relation between the Hall conductivity σH and the longitudinal conductivity σ of the AHE materials (Figure As we mentioned above, the temperature perturbation noncollinear antiferromagnetic structure will result in the temperature dependent intrinsic AHC as well as the σ dependent intrinsic AHC. On the other hand, the magnetization dependence of the spontaneous Hall conductivity σH of the Mn3X alloys and other ferromagnetic materials are plotted in Figure We have demonstrated on the first experimental realization of the long-sought-after last member of the Mn3X kagome antiferromagnet family, the off-stoichiometry Mn3Ga in the form of single crystals, which shows large AHE at room temperature. By tuning the Fermi level close to the Weyl points, we found the non-stoichiometric Mn2.4Ga single crystal exhibits strikingly large anomalous Hall conductivity in zero field of approximately 150 Ω -1 cm -1 at room temperature and approximately 530 Ω -1 cm -1 at 10 K, despite a very small magnetization ∼0.05μB per formula unit in the kagome plane. The angular dependence of the AHE measurements further confirms that the small residual in-plane magnetic moment has no role in the observed effect except to control the chirality of the spin triangular structure. Our theoretical calculations demonstrate that the large AHE in Mn2.4Ga originates from a significantly enhanced Berry curvature associated by tuning the Fermi level close to the Weyl points. In addition, we have fabricated the polycrystals of hexagonal structures over the range of Mn2.35Ga-Mn2.8Ga and exhibits a layered kagome antiferromagnetic structure with a tunable magnetic and AHE (see Figure Sample preparation: Single crystals of Mn2.4Ga were prepared by Pb flux method. Firstly, the bulk polycrystalline Mn2.4Ga were prepared by arc melting with high-purity Mn (99.99 wt. %) and Ga (99.99 wt. %) under an argon atmosphere. Secondly, polycrystalline sample and Pb with the molar ratio of Mn:Ga:Pb=2.4:1:22.5 were placed in a Al2O3 crucible which was sealed in quartz tubes later. Then the quartz tubes were put into an electric furnace, were slowly heated to 1423 K and held on for 2 days. Then the quartz tube was cooled down to 1023 K at a rate of 4 K/h to reach the low temperature phase region. After that the quartz tubes were cooled down to the 953 K at a slower rate of 2 K/h for the growth of single crystals. Finally, to obtain the isolated single crystals, the quartz tubes were moved quickly into a centrifuge to separate the Pb flux at 953 K. The Mn3-xGa polycrystals were prepared by the melt-spinning method. Details can be found in our previous work The single crystals of Mn3Sn were prepared by Sn self-flux method. Pieces of Mn (99.99%) and Sn (99.99%) were mixed with an atomic ratio of Mn:Sn = 7:3 and placed in an alumina crucible. The crucible was sealed in a quartz tube under vacuum. The quartz tubes were slowly heated to 1423 K and held on for 1 days. Then the quartz tubes were cooled down to 1273 K at a rate of 25K/h. After that the quartz tubes were cooled down to the 1173 K at a rate of 1 K /h. Finally, to obtain the isolated single crystals, the quartz tubes were moved quickly into a centrifuge to separate the Sn flux at 1173 K. The crystal structure and orientation of the asgrown single crystals were determined using single-crystal X-ray diffraction (RAPID, Rigaku) at room temperature. The lattice parameters were obtained by Rietveld refinement. All the samples were shown to be in single phase, with lattice parameters close to those found in previous polycrystals work. According to the energy dispersive X-ray analysis with a scanning electron microscope, the composition of single crystals was determined to be Mn2.4Ga. The magnetization measurements on orientated samples were conducted using a commercial SQUID magnetometer (MPMS, Quantum Design) equipped with the high temperature module in the temperature range of 2K-800 K. The high magnetic field measurements were conducted using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) with a maximum applied magnetic field 16 T. Device fabrication: First, thin flakes with different orientations were fabricated from the single crystal of Mn2.4Ga using a focused ion-beam system (Helions PFIB CXe). Second, the thin flakes were then transferred to a copper chip by the tungsten needle to further reduce the thickness of the flakes to ~1μm. Third, the thin flakes were transferred to the silicon wafer with pre-made electrodes. Finally, the electrodes and the flake were connected by the plating Pt. Mn3Sn devices were fabricated using similar procedure. Transport measurements: The longitudinal resistance and Hall voltage signals of devices were measured simultaneously in standard five-probe geometry. Measurements at temperatures of 10-300 K were performed in the PPMS system (Quantum Design). In order to eliminate the influence of probes misalignment, the Hall contributions to the longitudinal resistivity and vice versa were eliminated by adding and subtracting the resistivity data taken at positive and negative magnetic fields. First principles calculations: Calculations were conducted using density functional theory (DFT) implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package 