New materials with magnetic order driven topological phases are hugely sought after for their immense application potential. In this work, we propose a new compound EuMn2Bi2 from our first principles density functional theory calculations to host novel topological phases such as Dirac/Weyl semimetal and topological insulator in its different magnetic states which are energetically close to one another. We started with an isostructural compound EuMn2As2 where the magnetic structure has been studied experimentally. From our calculations we could explain the nature of two magnetic transitions observed experimentally in this system and could also establish the correct magnetic ground state. Our electronic structure calculations reveal the insulating nature of the ground state consistent with the experiments. By replacing all As by Bi in EuMn2As2 and by optimizing the new structure, we obtained the new compound EuMn2Bi2. We observe this compound to be dynamically stable from our phonon calculations supporting its experimental preparation in future. By comparing the total energies of various possible magnetic structures we identified the ground state. Though the magnetic ground state is found to be insulating in nature with tiny band gap which is an order of magnitude less than the same in EuMn2As2, there were other magnetic states energetically very close to the ground state which display remarkable non-trivial band topology such as Dirac/Weyl points close to the Fermi level and topological insulator state. The energetic proximity of these magnetic order driven topological phases makes them tunable via external handle which indicates that the proposed new material EuMn2Bi2 would be a very versatile magnetic topological material. The interplay between magnetism and band topology in quantum materials has created a huge surge in research activities of late V. K. Anand et.al Both Mn and Eu spins display non-collinear magnetic ordering with spin moments pointing towards diagonal direction In this work we have tried address the two important issues mentioned above. Firstly, we performed a thorough investigation of the nature of non-collinear magnetic ground state and if there is any spin re-orientation in EuMn 2 As 2 using first principles density functional theory calculations. Secondly, we explored the properties of a new compound (not reported experimentally yet) EuMn 2 Bi 2 by substituting As of EuMn 2 As 2 by Bi. Remarkably, we find EuMn 2 Bi 2 in its magnetic ground state to have a very tiny band gap, an order of magnitude less than the same in EuMn 2 As 2 . More importantly, certain low energy excited states with different magnetic orders or spin orientation are found to be topologically non-trivial. Slight change in the magnetic order of Eu or Mn sublattice or the spin orientation seems to be driving the system to a We performed total energy and electronic band structure calculations for EuMn 2 Bi 2 using DFT calculations with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (PBE-GGA) The computations were carried out utilizing the projector-augmented wave (PAW) Ground state magnetic order and spin reorientation: As discussed above EuMn 2 As 2 undergoes two magnetic transition and it is believed that the higher temperature one at 135K is caused by the Mn spin ordering whereas the lower one around 14K is caused by the Eu spin ordering To investigate the magnetic ordering at lower temperatures (below 14K) where it is believed that in addition to Mn, Eu spins also order, we carried out calculations considering Eu 4f electrons as valence. Keeping the Mn spin moments in C0-AFM and G0-AFM (energetically the lowest two) arrangements, we calculated total energies for Eu spin moments in FM and A-AFM (as G-AFM and C-AFM are frustrated in triagular geometry) within GGA+U approximation. We observe that in the lowest energy state the Eu spins order in A-AFM which is consistent with the experimental observation Further to establish the preferred orientations of Eu and Mn spin moments, we performed total energy calculations within GGA+U+SO approximation with Eu and Mn both parallel to c, both parallel to a, Eu along c and Mn along [110], Eu and Mn both along [111] direction totalling 32 different"non-collinear," "non-coplanar," and "non-collinear coplanar" magnetic configurations (see Table Dynamical Stability: Next, we delved into exploring the magnetic ground state and electronic structure of a new compound EuMn 2 Bi 2 . We started with the experimental structural data of EuMn 2 As 2 and performed a full structural relaxation after substituting all As with Bi. We carried out phonon spectrum calculations to assess the dynamical stability of the structure. Remarkably, all phonon frequencies were found to be positive throughout the entire Brillouin zone, as illustrated in Magnetic ground state: Similar to EuMn 2 As 2 , we performed calculations to determine the magnetic ground state of the Mn sublattice in EuMn 2 Bi 2 by retaining the 4f electrons of Eu in the core. Within GGA+U, the C0-AFM is found to be the ground state for range of U ef f values (i.e. 0 eV, 3 eV, 5 eV, 7 eV and 11 eV) with the energy difference between the C0-AFM and G0-AFM being 12.76 meV, 9.3 meV, 6.46 meV, 4.5 meV, and 2.3 meV, respectively. These differences are notably smaller compared to the same in EuMn 2 As 2 . After incorporating spin-orbit coupling in the calculations within GGA+U+SO approximation, the magnetic moments of the Mn atoms are found to align between the crystallographic a and b axes [110] for the C0-AFM configuration, establishing it as the ground state exactly same as EuMn 2 As 2 . Lastly, upon considering the Eu 4f electrons as valence, Eu moments are found to order in A-AFM with Mn moments in C0-AFM. Our GGA+U+SO calculations performed for same 32 different configurations as shown in Table Electronic structure: The DOS and band structure for the magnetic ground state of EuMn 2 Bi 2 , calculated using the GGA+U+SO approximation are presented in . Looking close into this region around Γ point we observe that there exists a tiny band gap (∼16 meV) with band inversion between Bi s and Bi p bands (see Fig Topological properties: While the C0-AFM3 magnetic order of EuMn 2 Bi 2 exhibits greater stability compared to 32 other magnetic configurations, the energy differences are minimal, typically around 10 meV or even less in some cases. Recent investigations have shown that in the case of hexagonal Eu compounds like EuCd 2 As 2 , which contains only one magnetic element (Eu), the manipulation of magnetic order is possible by adjusting growth conditions to produce either AFM or FM Dirac semimetal and topological insulator: First we consider the G0-AFM1 and G0-AFM2 configurations as shown in This strongly indicates that the system becomes a topological insulator from Dirac semimetal when the moments deviate from z direction in G0-AFM phase. Similarly, G0-AFM3, G0-AFM4 will also be topological insulators. Weyl semimetal and normal insulator : In our subsequent analysis, we explore the C0-AFM1 and G0-AFM5 configurations, pictorially represented in phases. Same will be the case of C0-AFM5. However, when Eu/Mn moments deviate from the z direction (e.g. C0-AFM2, C0-AFM3 and C0-AFM4), a band gap emerges due to the breaking of the (C 3z ) symmetry, rendering it a normal insulator (Fig Using first principles DFT calculations we have performed a thorough study of the nature of two magnetic transitions and the magnetic ground state of EuMn 2 As 2 which has been previously studied experimentally 