Weyl semimetals are predicted to host signature magneto-optical properties sourced by their peculiar Landau level structure, including the chiral level. Analytical studies are often leaving out the Hall component of the conductivity due to its complicated nature, and even though the chiral anomaly requires Weyl nodes to come in charge-conjugate pairs, toy-models hosting only one node are considered almost exclusively; numerical studies including several Weyl nodes are on the other hand often limited to high-field quantum limits or DC studies. Here, I present a twofold purpose study, where I a) analytically derive a closed-form expression also for the Hall conductivity of a generic Weyl semimetal using linear response theory, and b) apply this general framework to evaluate the transverse conductivity components for Weyl systems with two nodes. I study how various model parameters, including the tilt, momentum separation, and energy location of the nodes, as well as the chemical potential affect the magneto-optical conductivity, and complement these studies with deriving an analytical expression for the DC Hall conductivity, which is also evaluated in various systems. Including a chiral pair of nodes result two important differences compared to earlier studies; the contribution from the chiral level is equal in size but opposite at the two nodes, making the net contribution to disappear; the energy scales at which intraband transitions occur is smeared out and approaches that of interband transitions, strengthening the hypothesis that intraband transitions mask signature optical features in materials. This general formalism can be applied for a large family of generic Weyl semimetals, and comprise an important piece towards unravelling the source of the mismatch between theoretical predictions and experimental observations in candidate materials. Topological phases of matter have been extensively studied both from a theoretical and experimental perspective since the observation of the quantum Hall effect in the 1980s The existence of Weyl nodes have furthermore indicated that Weyl semimetals ought to host unique transport properties related to electromagnetic response. Salient examples are negative magnetoresistence The magneto-optical conductivity, for example, is predicted to host a series of asymmetrically spaced peaks, caused by optical transitions between Landau levels Studies on magneto-optical transport properties in Weyl semimetals are usually carried out with two rather different approaches. Either, simplified pictures including systems with only one Weyl node are studied analytically The study shows that a charge-conjugate pair of Weyl nodes makes the contribution from the chiral level to cancel, and further indicate that the energy scales at which intraband transitions appear are smeared out, strengthening the hypothesis that these are responsible for the disagreements between theory and experiments. This analytical framework thus comprise a natural step towards an agreement between theory and experiment, and can in principle work as a tool to make transport predictions for material candidates as long as the corresponding band structure is provided (e.g., using DFT). It furthermore contributes to an increased and more complete theoretical understanding of transport features in three dimensions, including the three dimensional quantum Hall effect, thanks to the corresponding analytical expressions for the respective quantity. The rest of the article is structured as follows. We set the stage in Sec. II and provide a brief background of previous works and analytical techniques. In particular, we show how the Landau level splitting works in generic Weyl systems, and provide a simplification of the expressions for the dissipative conductivity components, before we turn to deriving the closed-form expressions for the corresponding reactive components and the DC Hall conductivity. In Sec. III, the formalism is applied to various Weyl systems with two Weyl nodes. We investigate how the tilt of the respective nodes, and hence the presence of trivial and non-trivial Fermi pockets, is manifest in transport. In particular, we study the different features present in the type-I and type-II regimes, try to identify the interplay between these two regimes. We discuss the results and their relevance in Sec. IV, and provide additional plots for when the two Weyl nodes are at different energies, and for the corresponding DC-conductivity. We summarise and conclude in Sec. V. Take as starting point a generalized Weyl Hamiltonian, where k = (k x , k y , k z ) is the lattice momentum, σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) the Pauli matrices, σ 0 the 2 × 2 identity matrix, v F the Fermi velocity and h(k z ) and g(k z ) continuously differentiable functions of k z only. The function h(k z ) introduces a tilt in the k z -direction, and g(k z ) specifies the position of the Weyl nodes in the spectrum. To study magneto-optical transport, we couple the Hamiltonian to an external magnetic field through minimal coupling. For concreteness, the magnetic field is aligned with the direction of the tilt, i.e., B = (0, 0, B), which in the Landau gauge corresponds to introducing a vector potential on the form A = (0, Bx, 0). The minimal coupling transforms the momentum as ħk i → Π i = ħk i -e c A i . By introducing creation and annihilation operators as a = l B √ 2ħ (Π x -iΠ y ) and a † = l B √ 2ħ (Π x + iΠ y ), which satisfy a, a † = 1, the system under the influence of a magnetic field can be effectively described by, The corresponding eigenvalues are with λ = ±1, and the eigenstates cast the form A. Dissipative components of the response function The magneto-optical conductivity is, in the one-loop approximation, calculated using linear response theory and specifically expressed in terms of the response function (in what follows, we will omit certain dependencies of parameters, and re-introduce them when appropriate), Small, but finite, and positive ε regulates the integral, and can be thought of as an inverse impurity scattering lifetime τ via ε = ħ 2τ . The current operators j μ are given by In Ref. We do not repeat this derivation here, but instead further simplify these expressions, with the final goal of also deriving a closed-form analytical expression for the reactive parts of the response function. The final result of Ref. Re with θ(x) the Heaviside step function, and k i the value of k z that satisfies Eq. The Kramers-Kronig relations tells us that the reactive and dissipative components of the response functions are given in terms of each other as where PV denotes the Cauchy principal value of the corresponding integral. This means that to derive analytical expressions for Re [χ xx (ω)] and Im [χ xy (ω)], respectively, we need to evaluate the corresponding principal value integrals. This will be topic of the following subsection. Finally, the conductivity tensor is given by the Kubo formula, For generic Weyl systems, the Landau levels are completely non-degenerate, meaning that E n,λ (k z ) ̸ = E n ′ ,λ ′ (k z ) for every n ̸ = n ′ , every λ and λ ′ , and all k z . Therefore, χ μν (0) will vanish in the clean limit, ε → 0, and for ω ̸ = 0, the conductivity components for clean Weyl systems can be put on the form This makes it clear that to obtain the Hall conductivity, the principal value has to be computed, which is the main motivation for finding a closed-form expression for it. The reactive components of the response functions are directly related to the dissipative components through the Kramers-Kronig relations, Eqs. ( In this limit, the dissipative components of the response functions will host singularities only when The singularity at ω ′ = ω is a simple pole located at the real axis, while the remaining singularities are square-root branch points, the location of which we need to identify. For this, we first recall that for causality reasons, the response function is analytic in the upper half complex ω-plane, meaning that for Im (ω ′ ) > 0, χ μν (ω ′ ) is analytic. Furthermore, the branch points related to g [k i (ω ′ , n)] = 0 and g ′ [k i (ω ′ , n)] = 0 necessarily come in respective complex conjugate pairs, since both g(k i ) and g ′ (k i ) are purely real [recall that g(k z ) defines the energy eigenvalues, which are bound to be real]. But since there are no poles in the upper half complex ω ′ plane, g = 0 and g ′ = 0 cannot be satisfied for any complex ω ′ . This means that all singularities, both poles and branch cuts, are constrained to the real line. Using this along with the relations PV the principal values can be evaluated using contour integration techniques. To do this properly, we first need to specify what branch cuts to use. This will depend on the value of ω. Denote the branch points as ω i , they form the set {ω j } 2m j=1 , and are ordered such that ω j < ω j+1 for all j. Then, we will have the following two different cases: the branch cuts are formed between neighboring branch points, i.e., all branch cuts are finite and made between ω 2j-1 and ω 2j , for j = 1, ..., m. If ω 1 < ... < ω 2a-1 < ω < ω 2a+1 < ... < ω 2m for some 1 < a < m -1, we have infinite branch cuts on the interval (-∞, ω 1 ] and [ω 2m , +∞), and finite branch cuts between neighboring pairs ω 2j and ω 2j+1 , for 1 < j < m -1. These are schematically depicted with the resulting integration contours in FIG. Knowing where the branch cuts are located, we can now specify what contour to use. The first integral in Eqs. ( , ω has even number of poles to the left, - , ω has even number of poles to the left, which is the central result of this section. The expressions derived above are only valid for non-zero frequencies, meaning that the DC-limit (ω → 0) has to be studied separately. In terms of the response function, this has FIG. to be done with caution as the order of various limits and integrations not necessarily commute. Recalling the Kubo formula, the conductivity reads in the DC-limit reads (26) Instead of carrying out this derivative, we here choose to employ the Kramers-Kronig relations once again, and illustrate how these can be used to arrive at an analytical closed-form expression for the DC Hall conductivity. This reads Before formally taking the limit, we need to make sure that this can be done in a consistent way with respect to the choice of branch cuts. For this, we assume that ω is very small, so that there exists no branch points between ω ′ = 0 and ω ′ = ω. This corresponds to case 1 in Sec. II B, and thus the DC Hall conductivity reads If the limit ω → 0 is now naively taken before the integration is performed, the pole at ω ′ = 0 will become a pole of order 2 instead of order 1. Consequently, the integration along the small semi-circular contours around ω ′ = 0 will not vanish, but rather result in divergences which not necessarily cancel each other. Therefore, this is as far as the analytical simplifications go, and we will use Eq. ( We now turn to apply the techniques developed above for concrete setups. We will use a model whose dispersion is given by where all the constants are real. Such a system has inversionsymmetric Weyl nodes at k z = ±α. Both g(k z ) and h(k z ) are taken to be fourth order, and the parameters can be tuned such that potential Fermi pockets in connection to the nodes will be kept finite in size. The coefficients of h(k z ) will be defined through where E W± denote the energy at the Weyl node at k z = ±α, and η ± controls the tilt at k z = ±α. Manually setting a to assure finite Fermi pockets, and E W± = 0, the coefficients of h(k z ) are defined as Initially, we will investigate how the conductivity behaves when varying the tilt parameters. For the sake of clarity, we will treat different kinds of systems in separate subsections. We will focus on the real parts of σ xx and σ xy for the results, i.e., we will display one dissipative and one reactive component of the response function. The band structure in the absence of a magnetic field is shown in (c), while (d) and (e) show the Landau level structure at kz = ±α. The peak structure in σxx is kept also when two nodes are considered and corresponds to interband transitions between Landau levels, but the contribution from the transition between the chiral level and the first Landau level is cancelled. This is because there will be exactly opposite contributions from the two nodes, one from the chiral level to the first Landau level at one node, and the reversed transition at the second node. Since there are no Fermi pockets, there are no allowed intrarband transitions, causing σxy to be vanishing for all ω. Let us start with a system where both nodes are untilted, i.e., where η + = η -= 0. The real parts of σ xx and σ xy are displayed in FIG. In FIG. When the tilt is increased further, the valence and/or conduction band may fully cross the Fermi level, and the Weyl semimetal enter the type-II-phase. This phase is distinguished from the type-I phase by that the Fermi surface becomes finite and thus is no longer point-like. In the context of conductivity, this allows for intraband transitions, i.e., transitions between neighboring Landau levels of the same chirality. Just as for the interband transitions, they appear at energies corresponding exactly to the energy difference the respective Landau level pairs, which in this case are spaced much closer together. This can be seen in FIG. When just slightly tilting the previously untilted node, noting interesting initially happens (cf. FIG. Another interesting phenomena that might be present in Weyl semimetals, is trivial Fermi pockets. These are formed when any of the bands cross the Fermi energy away from a Weyl node. This also allows for intraband transitions, and these systems are therefore very much reminiscent of a type-II-system. In FIG. The results in Sec. III show that studying systems with a chiral pair of Weyl nodes gives two important differences compared to those including only one node; the contribution from the transition to/from the chiral level at the Weyl nodes exactly cancel each other, and the frequencies at which intraband transitions occur are smeared out. This claim is supported by comparing the systems studied in Sec. III to those studied in, e.g., Ref. All the results presented in Sec. III display a very sharp peak structure, something that is not seen in experiments In this work, we have restricted ourselves to present plots of systems where the Weyl nodes are spaced symmetrically in momentum space, and where they both appear at zero energy. It should be noted that the general reasoning, and hence the expressions for the linear response function is applicable to any general polynomials g(k z ) and h(k z ), and that the restriction is only in terms of the displayed plots. However, as the behaviour of both σ xx and σ xy can be thoroughly understood in terms of Landau level transitions, this restriction can be made almost without loss of any generality. This can be The conductivity properties changes qualitatively with the energy difference between the nodes, as it allows for some additional transitions, and forbids some that was previously allowed. For instance, the first interband transition for μ = 0.06eV is not the same as for the other values of μ, which can be seen in (a) as the first peak of the yellow curve coincides with the second peak of the other curves. Having a nonzero energy difference between the nodes also gives a Hall response, seen in (b), but this time as a consequence of allowed intraband and interband transitions. The former further gives a sharp response at lower frequencies in (a). understood as follows. Consider first the case where the nodes are not inversion symmetric. Regardless of at what momenta they are located, the Landau levels at the Weyl nodes will be equally split in energy-this splitting is not depending on the position of the nodes in momentum space, but rather by the magnetic field [recall that they appear exactly when g(k z ) = 0]. The position of the nodes might however affect the Landau level splitting at the points where the intraband transition occurs, as these generically happen at momenta where g(k z ) is non-zero. But this is also the case for inversion symmetric nodes, as the tilt at the respective nodes will source similar features in the Landau level splitting. Hence, breaking inversion symmetry is not expected to give rise to any new physics, but will rather change the location of the intraband transitions in a way similar to what the tilting at the respective nodes does. Now, what would happen if the nodes appear at different energies? Again, this will not change the Landau level splitting at the nodes, but it will change the allowed transitions and break the symmetry between the transitions among the nodes. This would allow for contributions from interband transitions to the Hall conductivity, illustrated in FIG. Albeit the analytical tools used in this work are not ideal in terms of stability for investigating the DC-limit, we will devote this subsection to understanding the DC Hall conductivity as a function of various system parameters. But before evaluating Eq. ( The chemical potential is not alone responsible for controlling which intraband transitions that are allowed. The tilts at the different nodes has a similar effect, meaning that the piecewise structure should be observed also as a function of η + and η -in Eqs. ( Another feature of the Hall conductivity is its relation to the spacing between the Weyl nodes. From field theoretical techniques, it is predicted that the current related to the Hall conductivity is proportional to this distance (in momentum space) in the presence of an electric field As all the general and illustrated results are carried out in the limit of zero temperature, the effect of going to finite temperature must be mentioned. We will exclusively focus on the temperature dependence of the Hall conductivity, as it has previously been noted that the peak structure in the σ xxcomponent is not notably affected at finite temperatures where m ≤ 0 to maintain the analytical properties of the response function in the upper half complex ω plane. Thus, in addition to retaining the original pre-factors A λλ ′ n (k i ) in terms of the Fermi distribution functions, there will be contributions on the form where ω j solves Eq. ( In this work, we have expanded on the analytical and general theory calculating magneto-optical conductivity in Weyl semimetals. To complement the previous works where the dissipative components of the linear response function have been computed, we here also provide analytical closed-form expressions for the reactive components in terms of a sum of finite integrals (an potentially semi-infinite integrals). This allows for the analytical calculation of the optical Hall conductivity beyond the high-field quantum-or DC-limit for generic Weyl semimetals, and for understanding of physical features directly by studying the corresponding band structure in combination with the analytical expressions. The theoretical and abstract calculations are then applied to a Weyl system hosting two nodes with potential tilts, which further extends previous works where systems hosting only one node are typically considered. Importantly, the simulation includes systems where fourth-order momentum terms are taken into account to make sure that potential Fermi pockets are finite in size. This allows us to study magneto-optical transport in principle including contributions from all Landau levels as a function of tilting at both nodes, Weyl node splitting in momentum space, and chemical potential, without the needs of unphysical cut-offs in momentum or energy. Apart from the AC optical conductivity, a closed-form expression also for the DC-limit of the Hall conductivity is derived, from which phenomenological conclusions matching with existing literature are made. Our study has further verified that neither higher-order corrections in momentum, nor the existence of additional Weyl nodes, changes individual signatures of the magneto-optical spectrum significantly-the individual features linked to interband and intraband transitions seen in the simulations in this work can also be studied in simpler systems hosting only one node. There are, however, two important deviations, the first being the absence of a contribution from a transition in-volving the chiral Landau level, as opposite transitions occur at charge-conjugate Weyl nodes. The second, and more important, deviation, is that the relative energy range at which intraband transition occurs seems to be significantly larger in systems with two nodes, than in those with only one node. This further strengthens the hypothesis that these transitions, that comes with a significantly larger response signal, are the main reason for the predicted sharp peak structure sourced by interband transitions to be masked in experiments; if intraband transitions are allowed at the same energy scales as interband transitions, the signal from the intraband transition will dominate. The general tools developed in this and previous works A natural extension of this work would be to generalize the calculational tools to include higher-order Weyl nodes, which in recent works have shown to impact the tilt structure in the optical response which yield the following Also, the following simplifications can be done to the remaining factors of the response functions, -ω 2 , (A16) with g(k i ) := ω v F g(k i ). Then, we arrive at, -ω 2 sgn (-ω) -ω 2 sgn (ω) Even though the contribution from the chiral level is, at least schematically, covered by the reasoning above, it serves a purpose to spell it out explicitly. Initially, this reads,