Extensive efforts have been undertaken to combine superconductivity and the quantum Hall effect so that Cooper-pair transport between superconducting electrodes in Josephson junctions is mediated by one-dimensional (1D) edge states Proximity superconductivity based on quasi-1D conductors acting as weak links have attracted considerable interest from both fundamental and applied perspectives. This includes phenomena involving magnetic flux tunneling superconducting quantum interference devices operational in high B. Of particular interest is the use of the quantum Hall (QH) conductors as weak links because not only this allows control of the mediating 1D states by gate voltage but also can lead to the realization of topologically-protected many-body quasiparticles (see, e.g., refs. 8,9). Despite the long-term interest in JJs incorporating QH conductors, the experimental progress has so far been limited mainly to the observation of influence of superconducting electrodes on normal-state transport and studies of so-called chiral Andreev edge states (CAES) that appear at superconductor-QH conductor interfaces In addition to the imaging, we employed normal-state electron transport to evaluate NDW within the examined JJs. To this end, two-probe conductance was measured at the neutrality point (NP) in high B (filling factor ν = 0). For JJs without DWs, their NP conductance approached zero, indicating that the MTGB bulk became insulating at ν = 0 (Extended Data Fig. To characterize JJs in the superconducting state, we measured their IV characteristics using small ac currents Iac of typically 2-5 nA and varying dc bias Idc ('Characterization of MTGB junctions' in Methods). First, we focus on JJs' behavior at high gate-induced electron densities (positive n > 10 12 cm -2 ) which provided a low-resistance NS interface between MTGBs and NbTi electrodes (~10 Ω μm). In low B ≲ 50 mT, all our devices exhibited similar characteristics, independent of NDW and their design (including the reference JJs). Examples are provided in Fig. From the semiclassical perspective, ballistic junctions enter the QH regime if the cyclotron diameter 2rc becomes smaller than L so that only skipping orbits along edges (or DWs) connect the superconducting electrodes directly. In the normal state, the onset of the QH regime was evident as a rapid increase of the two-probe resistance and the concurrent appearance of Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations (Extended Data Figs. 2a,5,10a). In this regime, no supercurrent could be discerned in any JJ without DWs, neither for the edged nor edgeless geometry, nor in reference devices (Fig. For JJs with multiple DWs, the behavior could also be understood from the same perspective. For two DWs, the supercurrent was approximately twice as high as for one DW and showed oscillations nearly periodic in B (Fig. The most revealing feature of the behavior observed for single-DW junctions is minimal variations in Ic over a wide range of B. If the supercurrent were due to Andreev bound states arising from QH states counterpropagating at the opposite sides of the DW, one would expect Aharonov-Bohm oscillations with the periodicity ΔB ≈ φ0 /(w+2rc)L < 0.1 T where 2rc accounts for the extent of QH edge states into the graphene bulk ('Steady supercurrent along a single domain wall' in Methods). No sign of such oscillatory behavior was observed in our JJs (Figs. 1d,2b; Extended Data Figs. The magnitude of the supercurrents observed in the QH regime (up to 20 nA per DW) is also revealing. In zero B, the Ic(T) dependence (Extended Data Fig. MTGBs were prepared using the 'cut and stack' method Using the imaged domain structures, we designed JJs trying to align DWs along the shortest distance between the superconducting electrodes (Extended Data Fig. As the superconductor, we used 60 nm of NbTi (atomic ratio: 55 to 45%) with a 3 nm thick adhesion layer of Ta. Additional 3 nm of Ta followed by 5 nm of Pt were deposited on top of NbTi to protect it from oxidation. The 4-layer film was deposited by RF sputtering at a rate of 6 nm per min under a controlled argon pressure of ~10 5 bar. The NbTi electrodes were found to exhibit Tc ≈ 7.0 K and Hc2 ≈ 9.5 T. They were separated by the distance L of 100 to 200 nm and had the width W between 0.5 and 4 μm (Extended Data Fig. By comparing junctions with different numbers of DWs, we noticed a clear correlation between NDW and R2p at ν = 0 (neutrality point) such that magnetoresistance monotonically decreased with increasing NDW. The correlations are illustrated in Extended Data Fig. To quantify the DW channel's conductance, we employed two complementary approaches. Using the curves such as in Extended Data Fig. To illustrate how the critical current behavior evolved with the number of DWs, Extended Data Fig. To demonstrate that the robust supercurrents observed in the QH regime were due to DWs rather than any other possible mechanism In the QH regime, JJs with multiple DWs exhibited pronounced fluctuations in Ic(B) with a characteristic period of the order of one flux quantum φ0 piercing the junction area W ́L (see the main text). Accordingly, these oscillations were attributed to quantum interference loops made of supercurrents propagating along different paths It is instructive to compare temperature dependences of Ic in low and quantizing fields (Extended Data Fig. where kB is the Boltzmann constant. This dependence is characteristic of so-called long JJs, in which the suppression of Ic is caused by thermally-induced decoherence between energy levels of quantumconfined Andreev bound states. In ballistic junctions, δE is expected to be ~ hvF/4π 2 L 31,32 , which we estimate as ~ 0.3 meV for the device in Extended Data Fig. At T below 2 K, zero-B differential resistance curves became hysteretic, exhibiting different superconducting boundaries for sweeping the dc current up and down. This is seen in Extended Data Figs. 8a,b as notable asymmetry for positive and negative Idc. The transition between zero-and finiteresistance states happened abruptly, which resulted in seemingly diverging dV/dI at the transition (Extended Data Fig. In quantizing B, the measured dV/dI curves were non-hysteretic and fully symmetric at all T. This is shown in Extended Data Figs. 8c,d for the case of B = 3 T, well above the onset of the QH regime but sufficiently below Hc2. Superficially, the temperature dependence in Extended Data Fig. For completeness, we show that the proximity superconductivity along DWs in MTGBs could also be observed as the inverse ac Josephson effect. The latter effect arises from phase locking between microwave (RF) radiation and the supercurrent through JJs which leads to so-called Shapiro steps in IV characteristics. The steps appear at quantized voltages: where frf is the radiation frequency and M the step index The Shapiro steps observed in the QH regime for JJs with one and multiple DWs are shown in Extended Data Fig. where JM is the Bessel function of order M, and Vrf is the ac (radiation) voltage applied along the junction. To determine ΔIM experimentally, we measured the differential resistance dV/dI(Idc) as a function of the RF power for fixed B, n and frf (Extended Data Figs. As discussed in the main text, our JJs with AB/BA domain walls exhibited pronounced FP oscillations in the critical current. Those appeared only in the QH regime where MTGB's conductance was dominated by electron transport along DWs. An example of these oscillations was shown in Fig. Although the theory provided in this supplementary section was presented in ref. 29, we believe it would be useful to briefly review the calculations and somewhat simplify them, focusing on parameters most suitable for our experimental situation and, in particular, the case of DWs with w ≈ 10 nm where the interlayer shift is assumed to be zero for AB stacking (large negative x) and reaches the Burgers vector value on the BA side. The effective width w of AB/BA walls depends on the interlayer adhesion energy and graphene's elastic constants but may also be affected by the presence of encapsulating hBN, DW orientation and strain induced during fabrication. Below we assume w = 10 nm, as estimated in ref. 50 and consistent with experimental images of DWs in MTGBs To describe electronic states in the vicinity of DWs, we use a 4×4 hybrid k ⋅ p -tight-binding Hamiltonian with a position-dependent (local) interlayer hopping: Here, σ ⃗ ± = &±σ : , σ ; ( is the 'vector' of two Pauli matrices for ±K valleys, γ + ≈ 380 meV is the interlayer hopping parameter, r ⃗ 7 = O0, + √% a + uP is the lateral interlayer offset counted from AA stacking and ±K 9 9⃗ 7,+,! are the triads of equivalent Brillion zone corners corresponding to ±K valleys. Note that hopping matrices T ? ± are same in the two valleys, and k 9⃗ = -i&∂ : , ∂ ; ( -< ħ (0, Bx) incorporates the magnetic vector potential (in the Landau gauge). Without magnetic field, the calculated spectra in the vicinity of a DW are shown in Extended Data Fig. In quantizing B, the spectral continuum splits into Landau levels (LLs) shown in Extended Data Figs. Using the described calculations, we evaluated the Fermi wavevector k ; ? for 1D DW-bound states as a function of the global carrier density in bilayer graphene After the manuscript was accepted, a series of papers was brought to our attention, including refs. 53 and 54. They report proximity superconductivity in 3D bismuth nanowires in high magnetic fields and attribute it to chiral surface states. Although not directly related to the subject of our report (superconductivity in the quantum Hall regime), the work can be of interest for experts working on topologically-protected quasiparticles and Josephson junctions in general.