We focused on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as a substrate for replication, micropatterning, and construction of biologically active surfaces. The novelty of this study is based on the combination of argon plasma exposure of micropatterned PDMS scaffold, where the plasma served as a strong tool for subsequent grafting of collagen coating and their application as cell growth scaffolds, where the standard has been significantly exceeded. As part of scaffold design, templates with a patterned microstructure of different dimensions (50 x 50, 50 x 20 and 30 x 30 μm) were created by photolithography followed by pattern replication on a PDMS polymer substrate. Subsequently, the prepared microstructured PDMS replicas were coated with a type I collagen layer. The sample preparation was followed by the characterization of material surface properties through various analytical techniques, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). To evaluate the biocompatibility of the produced samples, we conducted studies on the interactions between selected polymer replicas with micro-and nanostructures and mammalian cells. Specifically, we utilized mouse myoblasts (C2C12) and our results demonstrate that we achieved excellent cell alignment in conjunction with the development of a cytocompatible surface. Consequently, the outcomes of this research contribute to an enhanced comprehension of surface properties and interactions between structured polymers and mammalian cells. The use of periodic micro-structures holds the potential for advancing the creation of novel materials and scaffolds in tissue engineering. These materials exhibit exceptional biocompatibility and possess the capacity to promote cell adhesion and growth. Newly developed materials are frequently designed to mimic the physicochemical properties of natural materials. Furthermore, the objective is for the biomaterial to function as the extracellular matrix (ECM), which governs tissue structure and cell phenotype at the microscale level Advances in precursor and stem cell biology, coupled with increasing interest in bioactive materials, have paved the way for the successful regeneration of potentially any tissue in the body Therapeutic approaches in TE must be tailored to the specific characteristics of the target tissue. To achieve this specificity, parameters such as surface topography and physicochemical properties, including surface wettability and surface charge, should be considered A wide range of techniques are available for synthesizing polymer nanostructures, which are generally categorized as "top-down" and "bottom-up" approaches. In the former, existing objects are reduced in size, thus, transforming microstructures into nanostructures. These techniques are based on different processes such as photolithography, ablation, and etching Conversely, the bottom-up approach generates novel structures by synthesis from smaller basic building units such as atoms and molecules. The so-called self-assembly is an example of a bottom-up technique that facilitates creating of nanostructures in a natural way using interactions between molecules and their self-organization into desired structures Due to the extremely small dimensions of nanostructured materials, their characterization typically demands specialized equipment and techniques Biological responses to immobilized microscale and nanoscale surface topographies, especially how the cellular responses are influenced by biochemical and biomechanical interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) was studied by Goering et al. Poly(dimethylsiloxane) [PDMS] is an extremely versatile elastomer with excellent properties such as high optical transparency in a wide wavelength range (240-1,100 nm) In this study, we designed a microstructure that faithfully imitates the branched architecture of vascular and capillary networks. The combination of argon plasma activation of PDMS microstructures with collagen coating exhibits outstanding results for cell guidance of mouse myoblast cells. The summarizing Table Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to monitor and assess the success of photoresist pattern replication on the PDMS substrate. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis was not suitable since the dimensions of these periodic patterns are on the microscale. To study the surface morphology, PDMS samples prepared by replication from photoresist patterns with the dimensions of 50 x 50 and 30 x 30 μm were selected. The images from the SEM analysis (Figure Chemical changes occurring in collagen-coated PDMS after freeze-drying were monitored using energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) (Figure To study cytocompatibility of the prepared samples, PDMS replicas of photoresist patterns with the dimensions of 50 x 50 μm and 30 x 30 μm were selected, while TCPS was chosen as a control substrate. On these samples, adhesion (day 1) and proliferation (day 3) of mouse C2C12 myoblasts were studied. We have also attempt to determine the number of cells after 6 day from seeding, but the cells was so well spreaded, also in multiple layers, that we were not able to determine the cell number precisely, so we only introduced the images which show perfect cell alignment due to the prepared microgrooves. From the results shown in Figure Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer kit Sylgard 184® with the base/curing agent ratio 10:1 was purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Merck, USA). The phosphor bronze wafer was milled using a Gravos GV21 CNC robotic micromill. A circle of 2.5 inch in the diameter was cut out to serve as a substrate for depositing the photoresist layer. For better adhesion and better optical properties of the photoresist, the bronze wheel was etched with a mixture of HNO3:H2O in a ratio of 1:2. The wheel was then placed in an ultrasonic bath for 5 min. to remove grease and dirt. The surface was then rinsed with isopropanol and deionized water and enabled to dry in an oven. Photoresist SU-8 3035 from the German company Micro Resist Technologies enabled the creation of microstructures on a phosphor bronze wafer. The development of the photoresist is carried out by the mr-600 developer from the same manufacturer. The recall time varies between 4-5 min. Its great advantage is sufficient adhesion to the metal substrate without the need to apply an adhesive layer. A total of five types of microstructures were designed with different gap sizes ranging from 10 x 10 μm to 100 x 100 μm (width dimension x gap dimension), while the linear motif of the grooves always remained the same (see Figure In the first step, taking into account the desired shape and size of the photoresist patterns, a PETG mold was designed, which was used for casting PDMS replicas. After the 3D printing was completed, the molds were properly washed and dried. The next step was the preparation of the PDMS mixture itself, which consists of two main components -a silicone elastomer and a catalyst. Correct component ratios are important to achieve optimal PDMS properties, while the recommended weight ratio of 10:1 (elastomer: catalyst) was followed. The prepared PDMS mixture was carefully cast into a PETG mold. To ensure better spreading of the PDMS mixture and to remove air bubbles, the mold was placed in a desiccator for 20-30 min. After desiccation, the molds were transferred to a laboratory oven at 80 °C for 60 min. to enable faster curing of the PDMS. After the PDMS mixture had solidified, the replicas of the photoresist patterns were removed from the PETG mold with gentle movements or with the help of a scalpel. Sterilization of the PDMS replicas took place in a Tuttnauer ML series laboratory steam sterilizer for 20 min. The sterilization temperature was of 121 °C under an increased pressure of 210 kPa. This additional pressure is created by injecting steam into the autoclave chamber, which increases the temperature and pressure inside the chamber and enables the material to be sterilized. After reaching the desired sterilization time and temperature, the steam is discharged from the chamber and the pressure is again reduced to the atmospheric value. The surface of the PDMS replicas intended for cytocompatibility tests was modified with plasma on a table-top Sputter Coater, model SCD 050 from BAL-TEC in etching mode. Four samples were evenly distributed on the cathode in the chamber so that they did not overlap and their distance from the anode was 5 cm. Plasma exposure took place at a working pressure of 8 Pa. This process took place for 80 s at a power of 8 W. After the modification was completed, the samples had to be sterilized again. The chosen sterilization method this time was exposure to UV radiation for 20 min. on both sides to avoid undesired exposure of the samples to water vapor. During the plasma modification of the PDMS surface with argon plasma, argon atoms, and ions collide with PDMS molecules on the surface of the material. These collisions can lead to the formation of active sites, such as radicals (e.g., methyl or peroxide radicals) and ions, which can react with surrounding molecules. These radicals can react with the surrounding PDMS molecules and lead to the formation of new functional groups, such as carbonyl (-C=O) and hydroxyl (-OH) groups (Figure Plasma modification of the PDMS surface improves the ability of its surface to adhere to other biomolecules [101], such as, among others, collagen. The resulting active sites on the PDMS surface can further react with the amino groups in the collagen structure, thus, creating strong bonds between the two materials. Without prior functionalization of the PDMS surface with argon plasma, low adhesion of the collagen coating may occur, which increases the risk of its delamination or peeling. The coating of the PDMS surface with bovine type I collagen was performed in a sterile laminar flow cabinet. In addition to type I collagen, type IV collagen also exists. However, type IV collagen reduces the contact angle of PDMS with water by only 10°, which was found to be insufficient regarding water contact angle changes in previous studies The morphology of the sample surfaces was characterized using the scanning electron microscope FIB-SEM LYRA3 GMU (Tescan, Brno, Czech Republic). The acceleration voltage was set to 10 kV. To ensure the conductivity of the samples, their metallization was performed using the sputtering technique (Quorum Q300T) by deposition of a Pt layer (the thickness of 20 nm, Pt target, purity of 99.9995 %). The elemental composition was measured by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, analyzer X-ManN, 20 mm 2 SDD detector, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom), while the accelerating voltage for SEM-EDS analysis was set to 10 kV. The elemental composition on the material surface was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a spectrometer ESCAProbeP (Omicron Nanotechnology Ldt., Taunusstein, Germany). As a source, a monochromatic X-ray at an energy of 1486.7 eV was used. Atomic concentrations of elements were determined from the individual peak areas using CasaXPS software. The techniques of elemental analysis were used for the detection of changes induced by collagen grafting, however for more specific analysis some addition techniques may be used Wettability of the studied samples was determined by measurement of contact angles (CA, θ) on goniometer Advex Instruments (Brno, Czech Republic) connected to the SEE System 7.1 program. Analysis of CA performed at room temperature with 8 μL drops of distilled water (dyed with methyl violet) using a Transferpette® automatic pipette (Brand, Wertheim, Germany) at 6 different positions of 3 samples in parallel and perpendicular direction. Subsequently, the drops were photographed and evaluated by 3 marked points. Before bioassays, the samples were sterilized for 30 min. in 70% (v/v) ethanol in water. Then, the samples were placed into 12-wells cell culture plates and carefully rinsed with PBS (1.5 mM, pH of 7.4) solution, which was then aspirated and changed for high-glucose Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium with stable L-glutamine (DMEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The thus prepared PDMS samples were then inoculated with mouse myoblasts (C2C12; 15,000 cells per cm 2 ; three replicates, received from Sigma-Aldrich s.r.o.) so that the resulting volume in the well was 1 mL. The cell cultivation took place for 6 days at 37 °C, 95% humidity, and 5% CO2. Tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) was used as a control material. After 1, 3, and 6 days, C2C12 cells were rinsed with PBS (37 °C) and then fixed with 4% (v/v) formaldehyde in PBS for 20 min. in the dark. Subsequently, the fixative was removed, and the samples were washed twice with PBS and stained for 20 min. with a solution of phalloidin-Atto 488 (1 μg•mL -1 ; Atto-TEC GmbH, Germany) and DAPI (0.3 μg•mL -1 ; Merck, USA) in PBS in the dark. Then, the staining solution was removed, the samples were washed with PBS twice, and subjected to fluorescence microscopy (Olympus IX-81; EMCCD camera, Hamamatsu) using 10× objective (total magnification 100×) so that at least 10 fields of view from the entire sample were taken. FITC and DAPI filter cubes (Olympus, Japan) were used, and the images from individual channels were merged and background-corrected. In this research study, we have designed and prepared PDMS scaffolds using templates with a patterned microstructure of varying dimensions. These templates were generated by using photolithography, and the resulting patterns were replicated onto a PDMS polymer substrate. Subsequently, the fabricated microstructured PDMS replicas were coated with a type I collagen layer and subjected to cytocompatibility testing using C2C12 mouse myoblasts. Notably, the PDMS photoresist replicas were found to significantly promote the growth of C2C12 cells, resulting in cell densities exceeding those observed on the control substrate (TCPS). Another advantage of these patterns lies in their ease of use for further biopolymer replication, such as for PLLA or PLGA biopolymers.