This paper introduces a novel method for characterizing fracture mechanisms in composite materials using 3D image data gained by computed tomography (CT) measurements. In mineral liberation, the understanding of these mechanisms is crucial, particularly whether fractures occur along the boundaries of mineral phases (intergranular fracture) and/or within mineral phases (transgranular fracture). Conventional techniques for analyzing fracture mechanisms are focused on globally comparing the surface exposure of mineral phases extracted from image measurements before and after fracture. Instead, we present a virtual reassembling algorithm based on image registration techniques, which is applied to 3D data of composite materials before and after fracture in order to determine and characterize the individual fracture surfaces. This enables us to conduct a local quantitative analysis of fracture mechanisms by voxelwise comparing adjacent regions at fracture surfaces. A quantitative analysis of fracture mechanisms is especially important in the context of geometallurgical recycling processes. As primary deposits are decreasing worldwide, the focus is shifting to secondary raw materials containing low concentrations of valuable elements such as lithium. To extract these elements, they can be enriched as engineered artificial minerals in the slag phase of appropriately designed cooling processes. The subsequent liberation through comminution processes, such as crushing, is essential for the extraction of valuable minerals. A better understanding of crushing processes, especially fracture mechanisms in slags, is crucial for the success of recycling. The reassembling algorithm presented in this paper is evaluated through a simulation study, followed by an application to a naturally occurring ore and a slag resulting from a recycling process. Fracture mechanisms causing mineral liberation was initially investigated by Gaudin In the present paper, we propose a virtual reassembling algorithm based on image registration techniques utilizing 3D CT measurements of composite materials before and after fracture. More precisely, before fracture a single non-broken particle is visualized in a CT image and, after fracture, another CT image shows how the particle has been broken into smaller fragments. By reassembling the non-broken particle from fragments, we can voxelwise extract the fracture surfaces. This detailed information about the fracture surfaces is essential for the quantitative characterization of fracture mechanisms. In particular, this method can be used to locally determine whether fractures occur predominantly intergranular, transgranular or as a superposition of these fracture mechanisms by comparing adjacent regions at fracture surfaces. In more detail, in the reassembling algorithm we employ an image registration technique that involves translation and rotation of a given pattern (so-called moving image) within a larger image (so-called fixed image) In the literature, there exist various approaches for image registration, with some involving the placement of markers on both (moving and fixed) images, followed by an alignment of the markers In the present paper, we first evaluate the goodness of fit of the reassembling algorithm by means of a simulation study. Here, we utilize CT data of a non-broken particle and virtually generate fragments using distance-based tessellation models, which are commonly employed for creating random grain architectures of polycrystalline materials CT-data of nonbroken particle A quantitative analysis of fracture mechanisms is especially important in the context of geometallurgical recycling processes. In view of the progressive depletion of primary deposits on the world market, there is growing interest in the development of resources from secondary raw materials. However, they often contain low concentrations of valuable elements, with lithium being a prime example. Nevertheless, the increased attention on secondary raw materials stems from the need to explore alternative sources and implement sustainable practices to meet the increasing demand for valuable elements in various industries. This shift is a strategic response to the challenges posed by the decreasing availability of primary deposits and the need to secure a more sustainable resource base. A well-known approach to extract valuable elements from secondary raw materials involves enriching them as engineered artificial minerals in the slag phase of geometallurgical recycling processes. A comprehensive understanding of generation and comminution processes of slags for the optimization of subsequent separation processes, aimed at enriching valuable minerals, requires insight into the fracture mechanisms within the slag. Moreover, the understanding of fracture mechanisms in naturally occurring composite materials is also of great interest, particularly in the mining industry, since also here the aim is to extract valuable materials, e.g. from ores. Therefore, we apply the reassembly algorithm, proposed in the present paper, to two different kinds of composites, where we characterize the fracture mechanisms of a greisen ore as well as of a slag produced in a real geometallurgical recycling process. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a description of the particulate composite materials considered in this paper and how these materials are fractured by in-situ experiments. Section 3 outlines the segmentation methods employed, including the separation of foreground (particle phase) from the background by means of binarization. Subsequently, a phase-based segmentation is performed to extract and analyze different mineral phases observed in CT image data. Section 4 presents the reassembling algorithm, which is evaluated in a simulation study by means of goodness-of-fit measures, see Section 5. Then, in Section 6, the reassembling algorithm is applied to two different composite materials, where their fracture mechanisms are analyzed through a local quantitative fracture characterization. Section 7 concludes. In this paper, a greisen ore from the Zinnwald deposit in the Erzgebirge region is considered for characterizing the fracture mechanisms in natural occurring composite materials. The main component in this ore is quartz, followed by zinnwaldite, topaz, muscovite, and traces of further minerals. The greisen ore was crushed using a jaw crusher and a cone crusher, and subsequently, it was further reduced to particles with sizes of approximately 4 mm using a flat cone crusher, followed by sieving and dividing. A particle with a size from the 4 -5 mm size fraction was selected for in-situ compression, described below. Notably, the greisen ore does not exhibit dendritic structures. Additionally, a lithium-aluminum slag was chosen for in-situ compression experiments, especially for its unique manufacturing and cooling process conducted at the IME Process Metallurgy and Metal Recycling -RWTH Aachen. At first, a selection of salts has been heated to their melting temperature, allowing for the homogenization of the melt. Then, the melt underwent controlled cooling at a rate of 50 K h -1 . The resulting slag exhibits a dendritic microstructure which indicates that the cooling rate was too large for a controlled crystallization and enrichment of specific minerals. Thus, the microstructure of the slag differs significantly from the naturally occurring greisen ore, which results from slower cooling rates. Analogously to the greisen-ore particle, a slag particle with a size of 4 -5 mm was selected for in-situ compression. In order to acquire 3D image data of the non-broken greisen/slag particles and the fragments after fracture, a load cell was coupled with a CT measuring device. More precisely, the CT5000 5 kN in-situ load cell from Deben UK, customized for the Zeiss Xradia Versa 510 CT system, was utilized. The non-broken particle is placed in the load cell between ceramic pistons that are held in position by a guiding tube and measured at 5 N, a force selected to ensure particle stability and prevent movement during the CT measurement. The particle is gradually loaded until a drop in force in the force-displacement curve and a change in X-ray transmission can be seen in the live projection image, indicating that the particle is broken. Following the force drop, the stress on the particle will be stopped only when the force increases again to ensure that the crack remains opened. Subsequently, another CT measurement is conducted. The measurement and reconstruction parameters for an in-situ measurement series, corresponding to a either the ore or slag particle, have been chosen consistently, see Table A quantitative characterization of the 3D microstructure of a particle before fracture and, thus, the characterization of the fracture mechanisms cannot be performed directly on image data, which is obtained from CT measurements as described in Section 2. Some image preprocessing is required for further characterization. First, we apply a binarization step to the CT image data of the particle before and after fracture to separate the foreground (particle) from the background in the CT images (Section 3.1). This is followed by a phase-based segmentation step to extract mineral phases from the non-broken particle (Section 3.2). Then we apply a watershed-based segmentation step to the image data of the particles after fracture to obtain an image of each fragment (Section 3.3), as the fragments are generally connected with each other in the raw image data of the broken particle, i.e., they are present as one contiguous region. For each composite particle we obtained grayscale images by CT measurements before and after fracture, which are formally defined as mappings I intact : W intact → {0, . . . , 65535} and I broken : W broken → {0, . . . , 65535}, where the sets W intact and W broken of voxels are finite subsets of Z 3 . The mapping I intact assigns each voxel x ∈ W intact to its respective grayscale value I intact (x). Analogously, I broken assigns each voxel x ∈ W broken to its respective grayscale value I broken (x). To separate the foreground (particle) from the background in the CT images before and after fracture, we employ a multi-step segmentation process. Initially, we reduce noise in the CT images by applying a Gaussian filter with a standard deviation of 0.2. Subsequently, an unsharp mask filter for each x ∈ W intact . Analogously, we obtain the image M broken : W broken → {0, 1}, which assigns each voxel either to the foreground or background of the broken particle. Furthermore, denote the sets of voxels, which are assigned to the foreground of the non-broken and broken particle by , respectively. Furthermore after binarization, we set I intact (x) = 0 for all voxels x ∈ W intact for which M intact (x) = 0. Analogously, we set I broken (x) = 0 for all voxels x ∈ W broken for which This allows us to check if the extracted non-broken particle and the fragments of the broken particle have the same volume. Note that a large discrepancy between these volumes would indicate an insufficient preprocessing result or missing fragments. Therefore, we computed the volume of the extracted non-broken particle as well as the volume of the fragments of the broken particle, and 993 for the ore particle, and |W ′ broken |/|W ′ intact | = 0.995 for the slag particle, which means that the image measurement and processing steps discussed so far seem to be correct. Minor disparities in particle volumes before and after fracture may arise from partial volume effects and the potential absence of small fragments that are not captured in the CT images after fracture. Figures This preprocessing step enables the extraction of different mineral phases, where we assume that they can be identified by means of the grayscale values observed in the CT images, facilitating a quantitative analysis of the phase-based fracture mechanisms. To extract different mineral phases from the image measurements of the particles before fracture, we employ a k-means clustering algorithm In addition to the mineral phases within the slag body, there are also air bubbles present. Initially identified as part of the background, these air bubbles are subsequently labeled as an additionally phase in the phase-based segmentation. Note that due to partial volume effects, the grayscale values of voxels located close to the background are influenced by neighboring particles or the background. Thus, this makes it challenging to correctly label mineral phases especially at the boundary of particles. Nevertheless, in the present paper we provide a phase-based segmentation for identifying mineral phases, which can be further improved incorporating other measurement techniques like diffraction contrast tomography or correlative tomography After extracting n phases ≥ 1 different mineral phases, we obtain a phase-based segmentation I phases : W intact → {0, 1, . . . , n phases } of I intact , which assigns each voxel a mineral phase or the background. More precisely, I phases is given by for each x ∈ W intact . In Figures In our case, both composite particles consist mainly of a single phase, called P 1 in the following, which has the largest volume fraction, see Table Grayscale images of broken particles do not directly provide a segmentation into individual fragments, because the fragments are partially interconnected, making it impossible to identify single fragments as connected components. Therefore, we employ a combination of the watershed algorithm The output of our segmentation procedure is an image S : W broken → {0, . . . , n F } where n F ≥ 1 denotes the number of fragments and S assigns each voxel to the i-th fragment or the background. More precisely, it holds that for each x ∈ W broken . Then, we get n F fragments F 1 , . . . , F n F ⊂ W broken , where F i = {x ∈ W broken : S(x) = i} for each i = 1, . . . , n F . For the purpose of reassembling a fragment F ∈ F = {F 1 , . . . , F n F } in Section 4, we need the grayscale value I broken (x) for each voxel x ∈ F. Therefore, we define the fragment image I F : W F → {0, 1, . . . , 65565} by cropping, i.e., for each x ∈ W F , where W F ⊂ Z 3 denotes the smallest cuboidal sampling window which contains the fragment F. Thus, the mapping I F , assigning each voxel of x ∈ F the corresponding grayscale value of I broken , can be considered to be a cutout of I broken representing the fragment F. Furthermore, we consider the mask M F : W F → {0, 1} of the fragment F, where M F (x) = 1 for each x ∈ F, and M F (x) = 0 for x ∈ W F \ F. This section outlines the virtual reassembling algorithm which is used to virtually arrange a family F = {F 1 , . . . , F n F } of fragment images to a new image, reassembling the reference image I intact of a non-broken particle. In the reassembling process, the fragment image I F is iteratively registered by aligning I F with the reference image I intact for each F ∈ F . This alignment involves finding a transformation that minimizes the discrepancy between the transformed fragment image and the reference image of the non-broken particle. More precisely, we determine the translation and rotation of fragment images I F = {I F } F∈F with masks M F = {M F } F∈F , taking into account that during fracture, a fragment F ∈ F may shift and rotate away from its original position in the non-broken particle, where the transformation of a fragment image I F , which aligns it within I intact , is determined by applying a so-called mask-based image registration approach. In the present paper, we use an intensity-based image registration approach The rest of this section is divided into two parts. In Section 4.1. to make our paper more self-contained, the mask-based image registration approach is explained for a general setup. Then, in Section 4.2 we describe how the reassembling algorithm iteratively utilizes the mask-based image registration approach in order to reassemble a set of fragments. In order to determine the translation and rotation of an image with respect to a reference image, image registration algorithms can be utilized An important step in implementing image registration algorithms is to determine a suitable function T : R 3 → R 3 , which maps a point x m ∈ R 3 to a point x f ∈ R 3 , i.e., T(x m ) = x f . Such functions can be used to define transformed images, where, in the context of image registration, the transformed moving image should resemble the fixed image. As we consider translation and rotation operations in the registration process, the function T is a superposition of a function T t : R 3 → R 3 which shifts a point x ∈ R 3 by a translation vector t ∈ R 3 to the new position x + t ∈ R 3 , and a function R θ : R 3 → R 3 which rotates a point x ∈ R 3 by a vector of Euler angles for each x ∈ R 3 . Thus, the transformed moving image I m t,θ : W f → {0, . . . , 65535} is given by for each x ∈ W f . If, for some x ∈ W f , the value of T -1 t,θ (x) on the right-hand side of Eq. ( , which maps parameter pairs of shift and rotation, t ∈ R 3 and θ ∈ [0, 2π) × [0, π) × [0, 2π), onto the similarity f (t, θ) between I m t,θ and I f . The goal is to maximize f (t, θ). In other words, we seek an optimal shift parameter t opt ∈ R 3 and an optimal rotation parameter It is important to note that maximizing f (t, θ) with respect to both parameters t and θ simultaneously can be challenging in practice due to the complexity of the optimization problem stated in Eq. ( To determine an optimal shift t θ ∈ R 3 for a given rotation parameter θ, we employ a mask-based image registration procedure which is implemented via FFT, as outlined in for each x ∈ W f . Furthermore, we consider the set for any shift t ∈ R 3 and orientation angle vector θ ∈ [0, 2π) × [0, π) × [0, 2π), where D t,θ contains those foreground voxels of the fixed image I f which are foreground voxels of the transformed moving image I m t,θ . To assess the similarity between a transformed moving image I m t,θ and the fixed image I f , restricted to the set D t,θ given in Eq. ( , where values of MNCC t,θ (I f , I m ) close to 1 indicate a large similarity of I m and I f . The mean values I f t,θ and I m t,θ are given by Note that in the case of D t,θ = ∅ we put MNCC t,θ (I f , I m ) = -1, i.e., to the smallest similarity. The evaluation of the sums in Eq. ( for any t ∈ R 3 and θ ∈ [0, 2π) × [0, π) × [0, 2π). As mentioned above, for any fixed rotation θ ∈ [0, 2π) × [0, π) × [0, 2π), the optimal shift t opt,θ ∈ R 3 such that can be computed efficiently using the FFT-based method outlined in f (t opt,θ , θ), and t opt = t opt,θ opt . Thus, in Eq. ( In order to numerically solve the optimization problem formulated in Eq. ( As output of this procedure we obtain an optimal pair of rotation θ opt and shift t opt , which can then be used to obtain the optimally transformed moving image I m : W f → {0, 1, . . . , 65565} given by for each x ∈ W f . Furthermore, we obtain the optimally transformed moving mask M m : W f → {0, 1} given by for each x ∈ W f . This section describes the virtual reassembling algorithm that is applied to a family of fragments F = {F 1 , . . . , F n F } represented by the images Simply speaking, the algorithm works iteratively by reassembling one fragment in each step before continuing with the next fragment. In this context, the reassembling of a fragment F ∈ F can be achieved by considering I F as the moving image with mask M F and I intact as the fixed image with mask M intact , followed by applying the image registration method described in Section 4.1. In each step of the iterative reassembling algorithm, the reassembling results of the previous steps are taken into account. Therefore, in each step the fixed image I f used for image registration is updated by removing the fragment registered in the current step from the fixed image. In this manner, further fragments tend to be moved/rotated to regions of the fixed image in which no fragments have been placed in previous steps. By incorporating this modification into the algorithm, the outcome of the reassembling algorithm depends on the quality of the reassembled fragment at each step. Consequently, we introduce a similarity measure in Section 4.2.1, which is then used in each step of the algorithm to assess the quality of a reassembled fragment. Furthermore, it has turned out that the order of fragments being reassembled influences the reassembling result. Thus, we provide a strategy on how to reassemble fragments. Overall, the reassembling algorithm is designed as sketched below. Algorithm 1 Virtual reassembling algorithm function VIRTUALREASSEMBLEFRAGMENTS(Set of fragments F , images of fragments I F , masks of fragments M F , image of non-broken particle I intact , mask of non-broken particle M intact ) {F i } n i=1 ← FragmentSetPartition(F ) as described in Section 4.2.3 ) by means of Eq. ( by means of Eq. ( Typically, there are multiple fragments which have to be reassembled. Thus, we need a strategy for choosing the fragment which, after reassembly, leads to the best result. It turned out that the MNCC given in Eq. ( Recall that for each fragment F ∈ F with image I F and mask M F , we registered the moving image I m = I F within the fixed image I f = I intact , using the mask-based registration procedure described in Section 4.1, where the registration leads an (optimally) transformed moving image I m with mask M m , see Eqs. ( for each x ∈ W f . Note that I f coincides with the mask-based registration result I m within its mask M m , where I f is compared to I f using MSSM. More precisely, we evaluate the structural similarity of the images I f and I f , restricted to the set D = {x ∈ W f : M m (x) = 1}, by means of where the formal definition of SSM is given in the Appendix. Here, we just remark that SSM I f , I f (x) is a structural similarity measure of I f and I f evaluated at x ∈ D. Moreover, the definition of SSM immediately implies that MSSM(I f , , where values of MSSM(I f , I f , M m ) close to 1 indicate a high degree of structural similarity. In particular, in the context of reassembling, a value of MSSM(I f , I f , M m ) close to 1 indicates that the fragment F is well reassembled. In this section, we explain how the fixed image I f , used in the mask-based registration procedure, is updated after identifying the best reassembled fragment F ∈ F , i.e., that fragment F ∈ F which leads to the largest value of MSSM in comparison to all other fragments. Note that without updating I f , we would not take the reassembling result of F into account in subsequent steps of the reassembling algorithm, which could lead to overlapping of reassembled fragments. More precisely, we update I f as follows: After identifying the best reassembled fragment F ∈ F , with (optimally) transformed image I F and mask M F determined by means of Eqs. ( for each x ∈ W f . Analogously, we replace M f by the image M f : W f → {0, 1}, where for each x ∈ W f . By incorporating I f as the new fixed image during registration of a fragment image in the next step of the algorithm, we take into consideration the outcomes of previous steps. This approach effectively constrains the range of potential translations and rotations for reassembling fragments in the following steps of the reassembling algorithm. We observed that choosing a random order in which we register fragment images does not lead to satisfactory reassembling results. A reason for this is that fragments can vary in terms of their size (fragment volume), shape and original position within the non-broken particle. The reassembling process for fragments entirely contained within the non-broken particle relies solely on the texture exhibited in the interior of the non-broken particle. In contrast, the reassembling process for fragments located at the boundary of the non-broken particle is influenced by both texture and the shape of the boundary, i.e., further information is available which in turn makes registration easier. Moreover, an additional challenge arises when reassembling small fragments. These smaller fragments often exhibit a more homogeneous texture, leading to a wide range of appropriate translations and rotations within the registration step of the algorithm which results in a good reassembling quality. Therefore, we introduce a heuristics with which we prioritize the registration of "promising" fragments. Then, due to the subsequent updates of the fixed image, the set of potential translations and rotations decreases in size, see Section 4.2.2. In other words, this leads to less ambiguity when registering more difficult, low priority cases like images of small fragments. More precisely, we partition the set F of all fragments into n ≥ 1 pairwise disjoint subsets F 1 , . . . , F n ⊂ F with F = n i=1 F i , where each subset F i contains n (i) ≥ 1 fragments for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. The specification of this partitioning influences the quality of reassembling results, where partitioning of the set F of fragments based on their sizes turned out to be a reasonable choice, as larger fragments are more likely to share their boundary with the boundary of the non-broken particle. Therefore, it is reasonable to reassemble larger fragments first, i.e., the subsets F 1 , . . . , F n of F are defined such that F 1 contains the largest n (1) fragments in F , the subset F 2 contains the largest n (2) fragments in F \ F 1 , and so on. This procedure is repeated until all fragments of F are assigned to some set F 1 , . . . , F n . The number n of subsets and their sizes n (1) , . . . , n (n) depend on the number and sizes of fragments considered in the given virtual reassembling task. Note that in the case of the experimental data from both the ore and slag particles described in Section 2, where the number of fragments is small, no partitioning of F is required. However, in the simulation study considered in Section 5 we have a larger number of fragments and, thus, we assign three fragments to each set F 1 , . . . , F n-1 , and the remaining fragments to F n . In other words, the reassembling algorithm works as follows: First, all fragments of F 1 are reassembled and the MSSM is computed for each F ∈ F 1 as described in Section 4.2.1. Second, the fragment F ∈ F 1 with the largest MSSM value is identified. The fixed image is then updated by the reassembling result of F, as described in Section 4.2.2, Then, this process is repeated on the set F 1 \ { F} with the updated fixed image. Once all fragments in F 1 are reassembled, the algorithm proceeds to the next set F 2 and continues this process until all fragments are reassembled. The reassembling algorithm creates an image I R : W intact → {0, 1, . . . , n F }, which assigns each voxel of W intact to a reassembled fragment F i ∈ F for some i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n F }, or to the background, where I R is constructed iteratively and initialized as I R ≡ 0. After each reassembling step, when we identified the best reassembled fragment F i ∈ F for some i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n F } with (optimally) transformed image I F i and mask M F i determined by means of Eqs. ( for each x ∈ W intact . In Section 6, the finally obtained image I R is used to determine the fracture surfaces. In order to evaluate the reassembling algorithm described in Section 4, we applied the algorithm to various sets of virtually generated fragments. Below we explain the simulation study we conducted for this purpose. In Section 5.1, we describe the virtual generation of fragments and, subsequently, in Section 5.2 we introduce several evaluation measures to assess the goodness of fit of the reassembling algorithm, considering both the overall reassembling outcome and, in particular, the fit of the fracture surfaces. In the following, we provide a brief overview of the procedure involved in generating virtual fragments by employing (distance-based) Voronoi tessellations where ∥•∥ denotes the Euclidean norm in R 3 . For the purpose of generating virtual fragments, suitable point patterns P = {s i } m i=1 have to be chosen. In this simulation study, we uniformly sample points in the convex hull of W intact for generating point patterns P, with an adjustable number m ≥ 1 of points. By varying m, we can generate different tessellations with varying numbers of cells, thus resulting in different numbers of generated fragments, where a larger number of points leads to a larger number of fragments, while a smaller m produces fewer fragments. For details on simulating random point patterns (also referred to as point processes), see e.g. Recall that we denoted the set of voxels associated with the non-broken particle by W ′ intact ⊂ W intact , see Section 3.1. In order to generate virtual fragments within the non-broken particle we need to find all cells of T , which overlap with W ′ intact , i.e., to identify those C ∈ T for which C ∩ W ′ intact ̸ = ∅ holds. In this way, we obtain a tessellation Then, for each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m ′ }, the i-th virtually generated fragment corresponds to C ′ i . Furthermore, for each fragment C ′ ∈ T ′ we get the fragment image I C ′ : W C ′ → {0, 1, . . . , 65565} by cropping, i.e., for each x ∈ W C ′ , where W C ′ ⊂ Z 3 denotes the smallest cuboidal sampling window which contains the fragment C ′ . Thus, the mapping I C ′ , assigning each voxel of x ∈ C ′ the corresponding grayscale value of I intact , can be considered to be a cutout of I intact representing the fragment C ′ . Besides this, we consider the mask M C ′ : W C ′ → {0, 1} of C ′ , where M C ′ (x) = 1 for each x ∈ C ′ , and M C ′ (x) = 0 otherwise. Additionally, we consider the image S ′ : W intact → {0, 1, . . . , m ′ }, which assigns each voxel to a generated fragment or background, i.e., for each x ∈ W intact . This image serves as the ground truth for evaluating the reassembling algorithm.The workflow of generating fragments by means of tessellations is sketched in Figure To account for the possible rotations of fragments during fracture, we select a rotation angle θ ∈ [π 6 , π 6 ] 3 at random for each fragment C ′ ∈ T ′ . Subsequently, the images I C ′ and M C ′ are rotated by means of the rotation function R θ : R 3 → R 3 , as described in Section 4.1. The choice of a random rotation within the range of [-1 6 π, 1 6 π] 3 was intentional, as component-wise larger rotation angles led to greatly extended computation times for achieving satisfactory reassembling results. Furthermore, for the experimentally acquired datasets of ore and slag, described in Section 2, only minor rotations of fragments are typically encountered. To evaluate the reassembling algorithm introduced in Section 4, we apply this algorithm to the virtually generated fragments as described in Section 5.1. Therefore, we consider two performance measures to evaluated the goodness of fit of the resulting reassembled particles, by comparing the image I R given in Eq. ( and the fraction λ fracture ∈ [0, 1] of correctly assigned voxels located on the fracture surface, defined as where the images I fracture : W intact → {0, 1} and I fracture R : W intact → {0, 1} describe the fracture surfaces observed in S ′ and I R , respectively. More details on the definition and computation of I fracture and I fracture R are given in Section 6.1. To evaluate the reassembling algorithm, we generated 20 different sets of fragments as described in Section 5.1, where the number of fragments in these sets varies between 2 and 13. The performance measures provided in Eqs. As already mentioned above, a deeper understanding of whether fractures during fragmentation of particles occur along grain boundaries (intergranular fractures), randomly (transgranular fractures) or as a superposition of both fracture mechanisms is important for the liberation of minerals. To characterize fracture mechanisms locally, we need to analyze the fracture surfaces between adjacent fragments. Therefore, in Section 6.1 we explain how fracture surfaces can be determined voxelvise from the output of the virtual reassembling algorithm presented in Section 4. Then, in Section 6.2, two different descriptors of fracture surfaces are considered, which characterize global and local features of fracture mechanisms. Finally, in Section 6.3, these tools are applied in order to analyze the fracture mechanisms of two (ore and slag) composite particles, which consist of three mineral phases as described in Section 3.2. Recall that the output of the reassembling algorithm considered in this paper is an image I R : W intact → {0, 1, . . . , n F } of the virtually reassembled particle, where each fragment is associated with a label i ∈ {1, . . . , n F }, as described in Section 4.2.4. In this context, it is important to note that gaps between labeled fragments may occur in I R . The number and sizes of these gaps depend on the quality of the reassembling and the discretization effects that arise when rotating discrete images during reassembling. These gaps prevent the determination of fracture surfaces directly from the reassembled fragments and need to be filled first. Therefore, we define the image I gaps : W intact → {0, 1}, which assigns each voxel of W intact either to 1 or 0, provided that the voxel belongs to a gap or not. i.e., for each x ∈ W intact . To extract the fracture surfaces in I R , we first utilize a region-growing approach based on the Euclidean distance transform After filling the gaps resulting from reassembling, all boundary voxels between adjacent fragments are identified. Hereby, we consider any voxel as a boundary voxel, which is not completely surrounded by voxels corresponding to the same fragment with respect to the 6-neighborhood, where the 6-neighborhood of a voxel x ∈ W intact is given by the set M x = {y ∈ W intact : ∥x -y∥ ≤ √ 2}. The boundary voxels defined in this way correspond to the fracture surfaces of adjacent reassembled fragments. Thus, the fracture surfaces observed in I R are given by the binary image I fracture R : W intact → {0, 1}, which assigns each voxel of W intact to the boundary between adjacent fragments, or the background, i.e., 1, if x belongs to the boundary between adjacent reassembled fragments, 0, otherwise, for each x ∈ W intact . We explore two different descriptors that characterize fracture surfaces and thus enable us to analyze whether fractures occur typically intergranular, transgranular or as a superposition of both fracture types. First, we investigate the global behavior of fracture mechanisms, considering the set F fracture of voxels which are located at fracture surfaces, i.e., where I fracture R is given in Eq. ( Furthermore, we investigate the local (voxelwise) behavior of fracture mechanisms, considering the local entropy E(x) ∈ [0, ∞) for each x ∈ F fracture R , which is defined as follows. For each x ∈ F fracture R and for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n phases }, we consider the relative frequency p (i) x ∈ [0, 1] of neighbors of x belonging to the i-th material phase, where Then, the local entropy E(x) of x ∈ F fracture R is given by where log 2 denotes the logarithm to the basis 2 (i.e., s = 2 log 2 (s) for all s > 0). Note that E(x) can be interpreted as degree of disorder of the mineral phases in the local neighborhood of x ∈ F fracture R . In other words, a fracture voxel has a large value E(x) if many neighboring voxels are assigned to different mineral phases. Vice versa, if E(x) = 0, then all neighboring voxels of x ∈ F fracture R are assigned to the same mineral phase. Therefore, a voxel x ∈ F fracture R with E(x) = 0 indicates an intergranular fracture, whereas transgranular fractures are typically indicated by local entropy values larger than zero. In particular, for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n phases }, the transgranular fraction λ trans i ∈ [0, 1] of the i-th mineral phase is given by whereas the intergranular fraction λ inter i ∈ [0, 1] of the i-th phase is given by In Table Comparing the values of ρ fracture i with those of the corresponding global volume fraction ρ i , i.e., the fraction of all voxels associated with the i-th phase, we can observe slight discrepancies between these values, see Table Given that in the ore particle, P 1 constitutes the phase with the largest volume fraction (ρ 1 = 0.96), fractures predominantly occur within this phase, i.e., fractures in phase P 1 of the ore particle occur predominantly transgranular. In contrast, regarding the other two phases, there is no clear indication of fractures occurring either intergranular or transgranular, i.e., it seems that both P 2 and P 3 exhibit a mixture of both fracture mechanisms. With respect to latter aspect, the fracture behavior of the slag particle is different. Furthermore, note that there is a more pronounced balancing between the volume fractions of the three mineral phases of the slag particle, i.e., there is not only one predominant phase, see Table We introduced a novel method for characterizing fracture mechanisms in composite materials by means of 3D CT image data. In mineral liberation, the understanding of these mechanisms is crucial, particularly whether fractures occur along the boundaries of mineral phases (intergranular fracture) and/or within mineral phases (transgranular fracture). Conventional techniques for analyzing fracture mechanisms are focused on globally comparing the surface exposure of mineral phases extracted from image measurements before and after fracture. Instead, we presented a virtual reassembling algorithm based on image registration techniques, which is applied to 3D data of two different composite particles before and after fracture in order to determine and characterize the individual fracture surfaces. This enabled us to conduct a local quantitative analysis of fracture mechanisms by voxelwise comparing adjacent regions at fracture surfaces. The algorithm has been validated through a simulation study and subsequently applied to image data of two composite particles: a natural occurring ore and a slag from a geometallurgical recycling process. Since the characterization of the fracture mechanisms cannot be performed directly on image data obtained from CT measurements, some image preprocessing was required, where we binarized the CT image data of the ore and slag particles before and after fracture, followed by a phase-based segmentation step to extract mineral phases from the non-broken particles. However, since different mineral phases may have similar X-ray attenuation coefficients leading to similar grayscale values where μ I f (x) ∈ R is the local mean grayscale value of I f at x ∈ D with and * denotes convolution. The function k : K = {-5, . . . , 5} 3 → R in Eq. (37 is a (truncated) Gaussian kernel for any x ∈ K and σ ≥ 0, where the normalizing constant ν > 0 is chosen such that ∑ x∈K k(x) = 1. In our case, it turned out that σ = 1.5 is a suitable choice. Note that the convolution of I f and k considered in Eq. ( for each x = (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) ∈ D, where we put I f (x 1i, x 2j, x 3k) = 0 if (x 1i, x 2j, x 3k) / ∈ D for some (i, j, k) ∈ K. For further details regarding convolutions, we refer to where • denotes the voxelwise multiplication of two images. The local standard deviation σ I f (x) of I f is defined analogously. Finally, the local covariance σ I f , I f (x) is given by for each x ∈ D. The constants c 1 and c 2 in Eq. ( 