Thermal energy storage using sensible heating of a solid storage medium is a potential low-cost technology for long-duration energy storage. To effectively get heat in and out of the solid material, channels of heat transfer fluid can be embedded within the storage material. Here we present design principles to improve performance of channelembedded thermal energy storage systems, and we apply these principles to a hightemperature system using graphite as the storage material and liquid tin as the heat transfer fluid. We first analyze the impact of geometry and material properties on the performance of the system, determining the ideal channel spacing and length to achieve high (dis)charge temperature uniformity. We then analyze how controlling the fluid flowrate, heating infrastructure, and heat engine can increase discharge power uniformity and accelerate charging. Finally, we model 100 high-temperature graphite storage blocks using a porous media approximation and implement the developed design principles to demonstrate significant improvement in performance for both discharging (constant discharge power for >90% of rated duration) and charging (>90% charged within 4 hours). Overall, the hierarchical design procedure presented here enables the design of cheap yet high-performing solid thermal energy storage systems. Renewables such as solar produce clean but intermittent electricity. Large-scale penetration of solar requires long-duration energy storage (>10 hours) to reliably meet demand and provide cleanly generated electricity at night or on cloudy days. As shown in Figure The challenge of using a solid storage material is that it may perform poorly from a heat transfer perspective. Specifically, the system would ideally output a constant temperature (and power) with time, to operate like an electrochemical battery, be in alignment with how the grid is currently operated, help improve reliability, and take advantage of price spikes. Systems that use liquids as the storage material, in either one or two tanks, can generally output high-temperature heat as long as hot fluid remains in the tank. Data used to create this plot is presented in Section S1. (b) Thermal energy grid storage (TEGS) system considered in this work. The system can be divided into charging and discharging infrastructure. For charging, electricity from any desired source is used to heat up liquid tin to high temperatures (~2400oC) with resistive heating. The hot tin then flows through graphite storage blocks to heat them up, storing the energy in the form of sensible heat. During discharge, cold (~1900oC) tin flows through the graphite blocks, heating up, and the hot tin then flows to the power block featuring multi-junction thermophotovoltaic (TPV) cells which convert the heat to electricity. Graphite is the storage medium and liquid tin is the heat transfer fluid. (c) Side cross-section view of a graphite storage block with embedded liquid tin channels, and top view of a graphite storage block showing the tin channel inlets. Dashed lines show how the larger block can be split into 25 sub-blocks, each with only 1 channel. Several previous works have investigated different heat exchanger designs and performance improvement strategies. One simple heat exchanger design is to use particles of solid storage medium surrounded by a heat transfer fluid, as investigated by many researchers including ELSihy et al., Therefore, this study will focus on how to design for effective heat transfer in a large-scale, channel-embedded solid thermal energy storage system during both discharging and charging. We have developed general design principles to maximize performance, with performance metrics defined for constant-power discharge and accelerated charging. We then use these design principles to analyze a specific solid sensible thermal energy grid storage system called TEGS (Thermal Energy Grid Storage). While only the TEGS system is analyzed here, the design principles are applicable to many solid storage systems, as discussed throughout. An overview of the TEGS system is shown in Figure One way to answer these questions would be to model the entire storage system, including coupled fluid flow and heat transfer, and radiation between the blocks. However, this quickly becomes computationally intractable due to the large size (~1GWh) and long duration (~30 hours) of the systems of interest. Therefore, we have developed a hierarchical design and modeling methodology to determine design principles that result in optimal performance. We started with analyzing the impact of physical (material properties, geometry) and operational (flowrate) variables on the performance of a single HTF flow path, then apply the insights generated to a model of a multi-block grid-scale TES system. Given a storage system, the duration of storage (hours) is defined as the thermal energy (Wh) divided by the power extracted (W). Thermal energy is defined as: where m ! is the total mass of the solid blocks, c ",! (T) is the specific heat of the solid as a function of temperature, and T %&',! is the maximum operating temperature while T %(),! is the minimum operating temperature of the storage system. If the specific heat does not change significantly over the temperature range, it can be considered constant and the integral can be simplified, where ΔT ! = -T %&',! -T %(),! /. The thermal power extracted (or provided) is calculated by: where ṁ* is the flowrate of HTF through the system, c ",* (T) is the specific heat of the HTF as a function of temperature, T *,+,-is the HTF outlet temperature from the storage blocks, and T *,() is the HTF inlet temperature to the storage blocks. Again, if the specific heat can be considered constant, this expression can be simplified where ΔT * is the difference in HTF outlet and inlet temperatures. During discharge, hot HTF leaves the storage heat exchanger, is cooled by the heat engine, and returns to the storage system cooled (top right loop in Figure We can now define a characteristic time scale τ, non-dimensional time t * , nondimensional temperature as a function of time Θ(t), and non-dimensional temperature as a function of non-dimensional time Θ * (t * ), for a given storage system: In reality, the ideal outlet temperatures discussed above are not achievable. As a solid thermal storage medium discharges and cools, the outlet temperature of the HTF decreases. Conversely, during charging the HTF outlet temperature increases as the storage medium heats up. Thus, there is non-ideality in real system operation. To get some intuition for this phenomenon, we can simulate a real system as an example. We model a simplified version of the TEGS system (a single block of graphite as the solid storage medium and one flow channel liquid tin as the HTF), with the specific geometric, material, and operational parameters described in Section 5.1. In this simulation, we start with a graphite block at Θ = 1 and flow tin in at Θ = 0 until the entire block is at Θ = 0. Figure One simple strategy for improvement is over-sizing storage capacity such that the storage system is never discharged more than e.g., 25%. However, this directly increases costs, as large amounts of storage material are never fully utilized. It also reduces the charging speed as the system would always be at a high temperature, reducing the ΔT available for charging power. These effects are discussed further in Section S2. Because of these issues, oversizing is ruled out as a potential solution. Instead, we are interested in determining how performance can be maximized based on changes to geometry, operation, and block arrangement in the storage system. We first define a temperature-based figure of merit (FOM) as, If Θ * (t * ) was an idealized square curve, this integral would evaluate to 1, so this FOM serves as an indicator of how ideal the actual (dis)charge profile is. While this is a useful non-dimensional metric, it has some limitations, namely that it only considers temperature and not power. What we care about practically are (a) how long we can output a constant electrical power during discharge, and (b) how fast the system can charge. Thus, to be more explicit, we first define electrical discharge and charging power as where η 1(!23&456 is the efficiency of the heat engine used to generate electricity (P +,-) from the thermal power discharge from the storage (Q +,-), and η 23&456 is the efficiency of the heaters used to generate heat (Q () ) from electricity (P () ). We then define two powerbased FOMs. For discharge, FOM 7,1(!23&456 = t 7 !"# τ which compares the amount of time that the storage system can output the nominal electrical power -t 7,%&' /, to the rated storage duration (τ) as defined in Equation Because modeling the entire storage system is computationally intractable due to the large system size (~1 GWh), long durations (~10 hours), and large range of geometry sizes (~1mm to ~1m), we propose a hierarchical design procedure to methodologically model and optimize performance, in increasing levels of fidelity to a real system, as summarized in Figure First, we utilize dimensional analysis to help determine the impact of geometric parameters and material properties on performance. We are particularly interested in (a) how to design the channel-embedded heat exchanger, namely the channel spacing and length, and (b) how the thermal properties of the storage medium affect performance. For this analysis, we simplify the geometry to consider a cylindrical storage block with a single HTF channel. Figure Conducting dimensional analysis on the 15 variables with 4 dimensions results in 11 dimensionless Π groups, all of which are provided in Section S3. Rearranging in terms of known variables, we find that These 9 dimensionless groups define the state space of possible channelembedded thermal storage designs. By varying these 9 parameters, we can explore the impact of different variables on the FOM. To demonstrate how this tool can be used in a real system, we consider the TEGS system with liquid tin as the HTF and graphite as the storage medium. From previous works, Additionally, we assume laminar tin flow meaning constant Nu = Based on these assumptions, we can simplify the expression above such that FOM $ can be written as a function of 3 dimensional groups: Where @ ; % is an aspect ratio, . Visually, we first note that we can quickly identify the region of design space we want to operate in, namely the high-FOM yellow region. This allows quick evaluation of whether a designed configuration will be high performing. However, we also note that these plots look very similar across different k ratios, which is unexpected because we previously determined a lower solid thermal conductivity k ! should reduce performance. Instead, we notice that the impact of k ! comes in the x-axis, since k ! also appears in α ! = While this non-dimensional map is useful, it is not immediately clear how to use the map to design a high-performing system. We thus demonstrate an example of how the mapped design space can be used practically, to design the geometric parameters of the TEGS system. We first consider a storage duration (τ) of 30 hours and a graphite Thus, using the input variables τ, k ! , L, and D ! , we can calculate U and therefore all 3 of the dimensionless groups, and can use the non-dimensional map to determine the FOM $ . The results are shown in Figure Although the FOM monotonically increases with reduced D * , the reduction in D * does cause an increase in pressure drop, which should be avoided due to higher parasitic power consumption of the motor, wear on mechanical parts, and higher leakage potential. We recall that pressure drop in a tube is defined as: suggesting that we should not go to the extreme of D * → 0 if we want to prevent high pressure drops. This demonstrates the tradeoff between low D * improving performance while increasing pressure drop. The second important trend is that increasing the tin channel length L improves FOM, but this effect plateaus quickly, as seen in Figure Thus, optimizing the FOM with the constraint of minimizing pressure drop (minimizing L and maximizing D) suggests an optimal operating point of D 9 = 20cm (D * = 2cm) and L = 10m to achieve an FOM $ of 90%. This analysis is repeated for storage duration τ = 100 hours and graphite thermal conductivity k ! = 1 W/m/K in Section S4 to demonstrate applicability to a different configuration. While only the TEGS system is considered here, the design procedure can be applied to any channel-embedded solid thermal storage system, by (a) applying the dimensional analysis derived here for the system in question and mapping the state space, (b) selecting a storage duration and material properties, and (c) determining the maximum diameter and minimum length that provides a high FOM (e.g. 0.9) based on the state space map. Now that an understanding of the effect of physical parameters has been developed, we can consider operational variables and how the storage block would be integrated with charge and discharge infrastructure. Given a solid storage geometry from the previous section, we can now determine how the operation of the storage system impacts performance. There are two specific items to improve. First, output electrical power should ideally be constant over time, at the rated output power of the storage system, which is what utilities would expect and is what power plants and electrochemical batteries provide. However, as seen in Figure For discharging, while we could use FOM $ above, it is not fully appropriate for a few reasons. First, it only considers temperature and not power directly. Second, the setup of FOM $ assumes the HTF flowrate does not change with time, which is the simplest operation mode but may not be optimal. Third, the integral form obscures potentially important discharge dynamics -for example, a system that outputs 100% of rated power for 80% of rated duration has the same FOM $ as a system that outputs 80% of rated power for 100% of rated duration. However, the first system is more ideal because utilities expect the rated power output. Of course, the most ideal system would output 100% of rated power for 100% of rated duration; therefore, we define an FOM directly based on duration of constant power output, namely, where t 7,%&' is the amount of time that the storage system can output the nominal electrical power, and τ is the storage duration as in Equation We now introduce a technique to maximize FOM 7,1(!23&456 for a general thermal storage system. First, if we want to output constant electrical power, we need to ensure constant thermal power is being output. We noted previously that the cause of thermal power decrease over time is the drop in outlet temperature due to the storage medium being cooled. To counteract this, as the outlet temperature (and therefore ΔT * ) drops, we could concurrently ramp up mass flowrate of the HTF, keeping output thermal power constant as defined by Q(t) = ṁ*(t)c ",* ΔT * (t). Thus, we have We must bound ṁ* however, to avoid extreme flowrates as ΔT * drops to 0. Therefore, we define a maximum flowrate ṁ% &' and a maximum flowrate factor f = %̇! "# . Thus, the flowrate is able to keep up with the drop in ΔT * until ṁ*(t) = ṁ% &' , and we can calculate the ΔT * at that point as where we have defined a threshold ΔT *,-346! below which output power starts to decrease because the flowrate cannot increase further. This suggests that the thermal power output as a function of time is Higher values of ṁ% &' (and therefore higher f) will result in lower values of ΔT *,-346! , from the equation above. This then implies that higher f results in longer durations of constant power output at Q %&' , since ΔT * (t) will be higher than ΔT *,-346! for longer. To make this approach clear, we consider an example using the TEGS system, of a single cylindrical graphite block of length L = 10m and diameter D J = 0.2m (tin channel diameter D 9) = 0.02m), with a graphite thermal conductivity of 10 W/m/K, based on the geometric optimization done in the previous section. We then consider a storage duration of 31.6 hours and a maximum flowrate factor f = %̇! "# %̇' +! = 5.6 (for demonstration purposes -we will consider additional values later). We can then numerically model the system while incorporating the approach above, with the results shown in Figure To give an example of how a heat engine may follow this strategy, we consider the heat engine used in the example TEGS system, which is thermophotovoltaics (TPV). TPV converts the energy radiated by a heat source, in this case the liquid tin HTF, to electricity. However, as the temperature of the HTF drops, the intensity of emitted radiation decreases, meaning more TPV area is required to keep the generated electrical power constant. To demonstrate this, we develop a simple model: where q"(T) is the net (radiative) heat flux from the HTF to the TPV (modeled based on experimental data), T *,&K5 (t) is the 4th order average of HTF temperature as a function of time, and A $7L (t) is the active area of the TPV as a function of time. As the HTF temperature decreases, q"-T *,&K5 / will also decrease, suggesting more TPV area will need to be exposed to the HTF to extract the same amount of thermal power from the tin (Q +,-) and generate the same electrical power (the thermal power Q +,-is converted to electrical power P +,-at a TPV efficiency η $7L ). In the schematic of the TEGS system shown in Figure Figure We have thus far only considered a storage duration of 31.6 hours, so next we expand our analysis to durations ranging from 10 to 100 hours, as shown in Figure Next, we note that the percent increase in TPV area added (relative to f = 1 for each storage duration) is independent of the storage duration. To understand this better, we consider a flowrate factor f -we can calculate the threshold ΔT *,-346! = In summary, in this sub-section we introduced a technique for keeping discharge electrical power constant. First, we keep output thermal power constant by counterbalancing the dropping HTF outlet temperature with an increasing HTF mass flowrate. To convert this thermal power to electrical power, we throttle the heat engine at the beginning of discharge to allow for high power output later, when the HTF temperature is low and flowrate high. There is a tradeoff between performance and cost, which should be evaluated with technoeconomic analysis in a future work. We can apply the same approach to the second objective of fast charging. For this objective the uniformity of power over time is not as important, rather we care about charging the system as fully as possible within the charging duration. We therefore define a charging FOM as the ratio between the electrical energy input over the charging duration to the energy capacity: which is essentially the state of charge of the system after charging is complete. Since η 23&456 depends on the type of heating infrastructure used and is generally fixed, for this analysis we will focus on the thermal power in the numerator. Maximizing FOM 7,23&456 therefore corresponds to maximizing the amount of thermal power input into the system. To motivate the above methodology for charging, if we keep the flowrate constant then as the outlet temperature of HTF from the solid storage increases (as the solid heats up), the amount of thermal power we can supply to the HTF through the heaters drops, since the ΔT between the HTF outlet temperature and the maximum operating temperature of the system decreases. Therefore, we can increase the flowrate to keep the thermal power input constant. We evaluate the effectiveness of the methodology presented in the context of the TEGS system. For this analysis, we consider a graphite block of the same dimensions as the previous subsection (length L = 10m, diameter D J = 0.2m, tin channel diameter D 9) = 0.02m, determined from dimensional analysis). For the accelerated charging analysis, we first consider a short charging duration of τ = 5 hours, which corresponds to, for example, the amount of time abundant solar might be available during the day. The nominal flowrate for such a system would be ṁ) +% = O/M3 2 *,,' (M00°Q) . To accelerate charging, we define a similar maximum flowrate ṁ% &' and a flowrate factor f = . The flowrate is allowed to increase with time as the outlet temperature drops, to keep the power input at its maximum (rated) value, until reaching this maximum flowrate. The results for the given system, with 5 hours of charging duration and various flowrate factors, are shown in Figure In summary, accelerating charging by increasing HTF flowrate to establish a nearconstant power input is promising, as it has the potential to reach almost complete charging in a short duration. Although it increases pressure drop, it requires minimal infrastructure to implement (only additional pumping throughput), so there is little tradeoff between performance and cost. Other options for accelerating charging are presented in Section S7, but are shown to be not effective for various reasons. In our analysis thus far, we have only considered a single channel-embedded cylinder. In the following section, we will analyze a larger block consisting of multiple channels and will add modeling of radiation between blocks, to determine how different configurations impact performance, as well as how to improve poorly performing configurations. To analyze a large array of blocks, approximations must be made to reduce the computational expense of solving the full fluid and temperature profiles within each block. We employ a porous media approximation for each block. The details of the porous media approximation are provided in Section 5.2, with the essence being that the porous block is made to exhibit equivalent heat transfer and fluid flow as the channel-embedded block by matching porosity, permeability, and the solid-fluid heat transfer coefficient. The resulting approximation shows good agreement to the fully coupled channel-embedded model with 2-3 orders of magnitude faster computation (see Section S6). To show how this porous media approximation can be used for design, we consider the TEGS system with graphite as the storage medium and tin as the HTF. We consider large rectangular graphite blocks of dimensions 1m x 1m x 4m, which was determined by quotes from manufacturers and structural limitations of resting the blocks on porous insulating materials. From the previous dimensional analysis, we found that 0.02m tin channel diameter with 0.2m spacing is ideal -therefore each graphite block must have a 5x5 array of tin channels to allow a spacing of 0.2m (as shown in Figure We consider a grid-scale system of ~200 MWh of thermal energy storage capacity, corresponding to 100 blocks. Using the porous media approximation, we investigate 5 different block arrangement configurations, as shown in Figure Next, we consider 3 more practical configurations using a grid of blocks. Configuration 3 (Figure Configurations 3 and 4 are also similar. In both cases, most blocks are exposed on all 4 sides to other blocks. The temperature difference between adjacent blocks is possibly much higher than in configuration 2, which helps explain the difference in performance. GIFs of the temperature evolution of the blocks for configurations 3 and 4 are present in Section S8. Configuration 5 is worse than configurations 3 and 4. This difference can be partially explained by the short tin flow path of 4m in configuration 5, which is less than the 10m ideal discovered through dimensional analysis. As seen, the discharge performance of the 10x10 grids needs to be improved. We thus employ the technique outlined in Section 4.2.1 of increasing flowrate and TPV area with time to improve the power uniformity during discharge. As seen in Figure The outlet power from the tin to the discharging infrastructure, for the 1x100 reference case (conf 2), as well as the 10x10 grid case (conf 4) implementing the flowrate ramping technique presented previously (for f = 1 through 10), showing the 10x10 grid can perform better than the 1x100 case when implementing flowrate ramping. (c) Demonstrates the impact of increasing maximum flowrate on the discharging FOM for the 10x10 grid. GIFs of temperature profile vs. time for configuration (3) and ( Further, it is evident that charging performance needs to be improved, since the tin outlet temperature has not reached 2400C within the 4 hours (which would indicate a fully charged system). For accelerating charging, we use the technique introduced in Section 4.2.2 of increasing flowrate above nominal as the temperature rises to create a constant power input. Figure Overall, these simulations show that for a grid of blocks, the choice of flow path is minimally important as long as the tin flow path length is higher than the minimum determined by dimensional analysis. If no modifications to flowrate were used, a thermally isolated string of blocks would be ideal, but this would be impractical due to the drastically high insulation costs. Although the grid is worse due to radiation between the blocks, the techniques developed in this work can be utilized to enhance performance. COMSOL Multiphysics® was used for coupled fluid flow and heat transfer modeling. Low-quality graphite was used was the storage medium while liquid tin was used as the heat transfer fluid. An axially symmetric 2D model was used with the outer boundary being adiabatic. Other dimensions and flowrates were determined based on user inputs. As mentioned, laminar flow was used as the primary purpose was to accurately model heat transfer, and turbulent flow only minimally impacts heat transfer as detailed in Section S4. For the example case presented in Section 3, a block of diameter 0.2m, length 10m, and channel diameter 0.02m was used, with a tin flowrate of 0.04 kg/s, and other material properties given above. During discharging we have assumed a constant η 1(!23&456 of 0.4, and during charging we have assumed a constant η 23&456 of 0.99. Figure where κ is the permeability, μ is the viscosity, and u is the velocity. The permeability was tuned such that the pressure drops matched. Next, the porous media approximation keeps track of two temperature fields, one for fluid and one for solid. They are coupled with a heat source/sink term involving a relative heat transfer coefficient. The governing heat transfer equations in the solid and fluid, respectively, are: where ε " is the porosity, s subscripts indicate solid while f indicates fluid. A and V are the pore surface area and volume, which are calculated directly from the geometry of the reference block. h !* is the heat transfer coefficient between the solid and fluid. In our case, it includes convection and conduction resistances. Namely, Where C / is a correction factor to both convert the cylindrical conduction resistance to rectangular and to convert the conduction resistance to a convection resistance, as was done in Xu et al. To validate this approximation, we consider the TEGS system, and model a large graphite block with 25 tin channels. We compare the tin outlet temperature vs. time for both the full geometry case and the porous media approximation for a variety of flowrates. This comparison is shown in Figure For each of the configurations, we consider surface-to-surface radiation between blocks and the insulation, which is externally adiabatic. We use a spacing of 10cm between the blocks and insulation, and 20cm between blocks. We assume all surfaces have emissivity 0.9, which is slightly higher than the reported emissivity of graphite at high temperatures, In summary, this work introduces design principles for sensible heat solid thermal storage systems to improve their (dis)charge performance. We consider the channelembedded configuration, which features channels of heat transfer fluid embedded within the solid storage medium. Typically, these systems may have poor performance, facing challenges in output power uniformity during discharge and slow charging rates. Further, if the sensible heating occurs at high temperatures as required for high round-trip efficiency, radiation between blocks can degrade performance. This suggests design optimization is necessary. However, grid-scale versions of this system are computationally intractable to model fully. Therefore, in this work we have utilized a hierarchical approach to design optimization, developing design principles for channelembedded thermal storage systems at each step of the hierarchy. We then apply these design principles to a specific system that uses graphite as the storage medium and liquid tin as the heat transfer fluid (called thermal energy grid storage or TEGS). First, we investigate the impact of geometric parameters on performance using dimensional analysis. We define an FOM based on temperature uniformity with time and derive the non-dimensional groups that impact this FOM for a general system. To demonstrate how this analysis can be used for a specific system, we consider the TEGS system, which allows us to simplify some terms and develop a relationship between storage medium diameter, heat transfer fluid flow path length, and FOM. Specifically, for a storage medium of thermal conductivity 10 W/m/K, we find a diameter of 20cm and length of 10m achieves a temperature FOM of 90% for a discharge duration of 30 hours. While we have generated these numbers for TEGS specifically, the dimensional analysis is generalizable to other channel-embedded thermal energy storage systems using different materials and storage durations. Next, we investigate how varying the operation of the storage system can help optimize discharging and charging performance. For discharge, we define an FOM based on the time the storage system can provide the nominal power compared to the rated storage duration. We find that increasing HTF flowrate as the outlet temperature drops enables near-constant power output, but requires throttling of the heat engine. Using the TEGS system as an example, we find that allowing flowrate to increase by 5x and TPV area to increase 50% allows >90% discharge FOM. For charging, we define an FOM based on the fraction of storage capacity able to be charged in a certain charging duration, i.e. the state of charge after the charging duration. We find that we can apply the same methodology from discharging of ramping up flowrate as temperature difference drops, to keep input power constant at its maximum value. For TEGS, allowing flowrate to ramp up by 5x allows 90% charging within 5 hours. Finally, we model the full grid-scale system and propose a porous media approximation that is calibrated to match the heat transfer and fluid flow properties of the fully coupled case to accelerate computation. We apply this to TEGS to find and consider 100 1m x 1m x 4m commercially available graphite blocks (corresponding to a thermal energy capacity of 200MWh) arranged in various configurations to determine the effect of radiation between the blocks. We first find that blocks should be connected in series to achieve the minimum tin flow path as determined by dimensional analysis (at least 10m). We then find that the 10x10 grid arrangement of blocks (minimizing insulation costs) underperforms compared to arrangements featuring blocks that are thermally isolated from each other. By utilizing the insights generated in previous parts, this thermal performance can be improved to near its maximum, and we demonstrate discharging and charging FOMs of >90%. In this work we have primarily studied heat transfer considerations and have briefly discussed their impact on cost where appropriate. A more rigorous technoeconomic analysis evaluating each proposed improvement to performance is warranted and should be the focus of a future study. Further, while we have considered discharging and charging in isolation, it is also important to consider the transition between the two. While a detailed analysis is outside the scope of this work, many results in the literature suggest that flow should be reversed between discharge and charge, to ensure thermoclines developed in the storage media are maintained. Further, it would be useful to model the grid integration of such a thermal energy storage system with realistic power input/output profiles. This would involve further modeling and approximations to the large-scale model to enable longer duration simulations. Overall, this work develops design principles to improve the performance of cheap thermal energy grid storage systems, which in turn facilitates its adoption and helps increase renewables penetration for a cleaner future. Data and code are available on GitHub. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Award Nos. 1745302 and 2141064. Conceptualization, S.V., C.K., A.H.; Methodology, S.V., C.K., K.B., A.L., A.S., A.H.; Investigation, S.V.; Writing -Original Draft, S.V.; Writing -Review and Editing, S.V., K.B., A.L., A.S., A.H.; Supervision, A.H. A.H. has founded a company for thermal energy storage based on the TEGS system discussed in this work, and therefore has a financial interest. Material data was obtained from the CRC handbook We could design a system with a nominal power output P %&' for τ hours, but only discharge it for τ 4&-61 hours, where τ 4&-61 is defined as where Θ(t) is the non-dimensionalized (dis)charge temperature as a function of time, and Θ * (t * ) is the non-dimensionalized (dis)charge temperature as a function of nondimensionalized time (as shown in Figure The other downside of oversizing the system is that the charging efficacy is lowered. Because the system temperature is always high, the heat transfer into the block during charging is limited due to a smaller ΔT. Therefore the system is unable to provide as much charging power, and the charging duration is lengthened. We are therefore interested in determining how performance can be maximized based on changes to geometry, operation, and block arrangement in the storage system, while keeping f 4&-61 = 1. Now that we have verified the dimensional analysis, we can map the design space by sweeping over the grouped parameters. Figure ? for various values of k (reproduced from main text). We next conduct a deeper analysis of the k = 10 case. We probe the design space for constant diameter D (solid lines) or constant flow length L (dashed lines), for a given storage duration τ, as shown in Figure Then, we can plot how FOM $ varies as these parameters change, as shown in Figure In the main text we set the storage duration τ to 30 hours and the graphite thermal conductivity to 10 W/m/K to find the ideal diameter of the channel-embedded cylinder and tin flow path length. If instead we were interested in a longer storage duration of 100 hours and an alternative material with a thermal conductivity of 1 W/m/K, the optimization would be different, as shown below. In certain flow cases, the Reynolds number of the flow may be higher than 4000. We are interested in determining if this impacts the heat transfer. We first calculate the Reynolds number for liquid tin flowing through a 2cm pipe at 1m/s: From our dimensional analysis, we found that the limiting heat transfer resistance is conduction through the storage material, especially if its thermal conductivity is low. Therefore, we focus on improving heat conduction. Given that conduction heat transfer can be approximated by q" = ?V$ @ , we could either reduce the conduction length, or increase the ΔT. We consider 4 additional options for maximizing FOM 7,23&456 . The first two options rely on reducing conduction length, while the last two rely on increasing the ΔT. For option 1, we could reducing the conduction distance in the storage material, either by (a) scaling down both the storage block diameter and the HTF channel diameter, or (b) keeping the HTF channel diameter constant while reducing the storage block diameter, For option 2, we similarly reduce the conduction distance in the storage material, but this time by relying on radiation to transfer heat between the HTF channel and a cylindrical shell of storage material (with the same volume as the original cylindrical block). For option 3, we could increase the inlet temperature of the HTF above the highest operating temperature of the storage material, to accelerate the heat conduction into the storage material by increasing the temperature difference. For option 4, like the methodology presented in the main text, we could increase the flowrate, but in contrast, always have the flowrate at a high value. This increases the power output throughout the charging process, so requires additional heating power, but may be more effective. We analyze all 4 options in the context of the TEGS system. No new methodology is introduced for option (1) or (4). For option (2), we note that the radiative resistance between the tin pipe and the graphite block is potentially much smaller than the conduction resistance through the graphite block, due to the high temperatures of the system. By adding a gap between the tin tube and the cylindrical graphite shell, we can reduce the thickness of the shell while keeping the volume of graphite constant, reducing conduction resistance. For option (3), we keep the amount of thermal energy in the blocks the same, but increase the maximum tin inlet temperature, which allows greater charging power from Equation To summarize, option 1 involves resizing the storage system, option 2 involves adding a spacing to exploit low radiative resistance, option 3 involves supercharging the tin inlet temperature above 2400oC, and option 4 involves increasing the charging power. For option 1, we re-do the geometry optimization from Section 4.1 given shorter storage durations, namely 5 and 3 hours, as shown in Figure Detailed analysis of option 1(b) is not presented here as it would require a separate dimensional analysis since the fraction of ; ,' ; 2 is not assumed to be constant. Generally, from the analysis above, it is expected that increasing the channel diameter without increasing the graphite diameter would improve FOM. However, it would increase cost as more tin would be required per volume of graphite, and it would reduce energy density, as more overall volume would be required to have the same volume of graphite. Therefore, this option is not practical. The second option for fast charging is to add a spacing between the tin tube and graphite block and exploit the low radiative resistance at these high temperatures. The radiative resistance and conduction resistance within the graphite block can be written as The third option is to supercharge the inlet tin to above 2400oC. This increases the temperature difference between tin and graphite and therefore increases the heat flux. The charging process was simulated for various tin inlet temperatures, as shown in Figure The fourth option is to increase the flowrate and therefore charging power through the entire charging process. We evaluate the effectiveness of this methodology in the context of the TEGS system. For this analysis, we consider a graphite block of the same dimensions as the previous subsection (length L = 10m, diameter D J = 0.2m, tin channel diameter D 9) = 0.02m, determined from dimensional analysis). For the accelerated charging analysis, we first consider a short charging duration of τ = 5 hours, which corresponds to, for example, the amount of time abundant solar might be available during the day. The nominal flowrate for such a system would be ṁ As seen in Figure Next, we consider various charging durations from 1 to 10 hours, as shown in Figure As mentioned previously, the increase in performance comes at a cost of increasing charging power, as shown in Figure While the options all enable increases in FOM 7,23&456 , they were deemed impractical for various reasons, which are summarized here. For option 1(a), the smaller tin tube diameter introduces issues with higher pressure drop, surface tension, and cavitation. For option 1(b), the smaller graphite diameter means less volume of storage material, which means additional volume is required which increases insulation costs and reduces energy density of the battery. For option 2, the cylindrical shell geometry similarly requires additional area for insulation (and lower energy density) as well as increasing the heat loss out of the system due to the gap between the tin channel and the block. For option 3, the higher tin temperature introduces issues with sublimation and boiling. For option 4, the increase in charging power cost is impractical. GIFs of temperature profile vs. time for 10x10 grid, with 1 path vs. 10 parallel paths available here: https://github.com/shomikverma/graphitedischarge/blob/main/plots/GIF_discharge_animation.gif In this paper, we have discussed charge and discharge cycles separately, but another important consideration is the charge-discharge transition. For example, if the cost of electricity suddenly drops while discharging, the system may want to immediately switch to charging. To optimize this process, we introduce the concept of flow reversal, to ensure the outlet temperature of the storage blocks is optimized. For example, for unidirectional flow, halfway through discharge, the temperature of the end of the block is still relatively high. Thus, there is limited charging potential. In contrast, if the flow is reversed, halfway through discharge, the top of the block is likely cold, allowing full charging capability. To analyze this phenomenon, we investigate each case (unidirectional vs. reversed) separately. For both cases, we consider a block designed for 19 hours of storage and model several cycles of 9.6 hours of discharging and 2.4 hours of charging. We use Equation 2 to find the power required for each of discharge or charge. To ensure constant power during discharge and charge, we use Equation 3 to vary the flowrate, using a maximum flowrate factor of 10. During discharge, we use an inlet tin temperature of 1900°C, while during charge we use an inlet tin temperature of 2400°C. For uni-directional flow, we keep the top of the block as the inlet and the bottom as the outlet. For flow reversal, we use the top of the block as the inlet for discharging, and the bottom of the block as inlet for discharging. Figure Other arguments for flow reversal include minimization of exergy destruction and limiting thermal cycling of the graphite blocks. In the unidirectional case, during charging hot tin is put in contact with cold graphite, destroying more exergy than if hot tin was put in contact with hot graphite. In the flow reversal case, one side of the graphite remains hot while the other remains cold, reducing the number of thermal cycles the graphite sees. GIFs of unidirectional vs. reversed flow available here: https://github.com/shomikverma/graphitedischarge/blob/main/plots/GIF_charge_discharge_animation.gif %