To overcome the physical limitations of electrically small antennas, strain-mediated magnetoelectric antennas have been studied experimentally and theoretically. However, current closedform analytical models include solely one-dimensional approaches. This paper proposes a twodimensional closed-form analytical model of a laterally-excited multiferroic antenna. To model thickness-shear vibrations, we propose an extended Mason model to two dimensions. This theory solves unidirectionally-coupled elastodynamics-magnetization dynamics-electrodynamics. Without using the infinitesimal dipole approximation, this model provides a closed-form solution of the radiated electromagnetic field with an explicit dependency of the antenna response on the physical parameters, enabling their optimization. Furthermore, we compare the efficiency-bandwidth product of different multiferroic antennas with Chu's limit in the Akhiezer regime, which delimits the highest achievable mechanical quality factor for acoustic resonators at GHz frequencies. We show that phonon-phonon coupling of Akhiezer damping is most likely to limit multiferroic antenna radiation, not Chu's limit. Moreover, judicious choice of materials can enhance the maximum efficiency by more than an order of magnitude. The increasing demand for short-range sensors for biomedical applications, portable wireless devices for monitoring applications, and long-range sensors for extremely low-frequency communication systems has led the path for antenna miniaturization. However, traditional electrically small resonant antennas suffer from physical limitations such as low efficiency and bandwidth, and the platform effect due to the proximity with the ground plane. These limitations have caused antennas to be the constraining factor on many systems over the past several decades In recent years, mechanical antennas have been developed based on a mechanically induced radiation mechanism. In this mechanism, static electric charges, electric dipoles, or magnetic dipoles are accelerated through mechanical motion, potentially alleviating the difficulties associated with traditional electrically small antennas Among these new kinds of antennas, the latter, also referred to as multiferroic antennas, when integrated into film bulk acoustic wave resonator (FBAR), have shown * shihyuan@ntu.edu.tw to be of particular interest for GHz frequencies applications Later, numerical methods have been proposed to study bulk acoustic wave (BAW) multiferroic antennas. Yao et al. introduced a three-dimensional unconditionally stable finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) algorithm for the study of BAW multiferroic antennas near ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) through the simultaneous solving of the coupled Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert/Newton's/Maxwell's equations system We propose here a two-dimensional closed-form analytical model of multiferroic antennas integrated into a laterally excited FBAR (XBAR). The XBAR generates thickness-shear modes, implying mechanical vibrations in both thickness and lateral directions. A Mason model extended to two dimensions is proposed to account for the mechanical wave propagation in both directions. Considering a unidirectional coupling between the governing equations, the knowledge of the mechanical displacement in the ferromagnetic layer enables us to obtain a closed-form analytic solution of the space-timedependent spin wave. The spin wave is plugged into the vector potential as a source term and allows us to calculate the radiated EM field without infinitesimal dipole approximation. The closed-form solutions explicitly specify the parametric relationships, leading the path for an optimization of these parameters. Finally, the efficiencybandwidth product of different multiferroic antennas is compared with Chu's limit in the Akhiezer regime. The Akhiezer regime refers to the phonon-phonon scattering, which sets for an acoustic resonator, the highest mechanical quality factor achievable in the GHz frequencies. We show that with a proper selection of piezoelectric and ferromagnetic materials, multiferroic antennas operating at the Akhiezer limit can approach Chu's limit. A. Operating principle of multiferroic antennas The multiferroic antenna consists of a thin-film piezoelectric material deposited on a silicon substrate with a pair of electrodes placed along the x-axis. On top of the piezoelectric is deposited a thin-film ferromagnetic material. The silicon substrate is etched away to create an air cavity beneath the piezoelectric, enabling vibrations in both lateral and thickness directions. As shown in Fig. The dynamic response of the multiferroic antenna is predicted with a set of equations comprising Maxwell's equations for EM radiation, the Landau-Lifshitz (LL) equation for magnetization dynamics, and Newton's Law for acoustic waves: In ( Hooke's law relates the stress and strain fields through the material elastic stiffness tensor C and the viscosity tensor η. For a non-piezoelectric material: In the piezoelectric, Hooke's law takes the form of the so-called piezoelectric constitutive equations: where e is the piezoelectric constant in the stress-charge formulation, and ε is the piezoelectric permittivity. The system of equations is solved in a unidirectional way. First, we solve Newton's law combined with the extended two-dimensional Mason model. Only the Villari effect (inverse magnetostriction) is considered in this work. Thus, the displacement vectors obtained through elastodynamics enable us to find the expression of the magnetoelastic field, the major source of magnetization rotations. Subsequently, the LL equation is solved which gives the spin wave. Finally, the spin wave is plugged into Maxwell's equations as a source term to obtain the EM far-field. The electrodes placed along the x-axis generate particle displacement on the xz-plane, namely thickness-shear modes. The dominant stress in the structure is the shear stress in the same plane. The shear stress vanishes at the lateral boundaries at x = 0 and x = L, which leads to the following general form for the x and z components of the displacement vector in the structure: The propagation constant along the lateral direction x is directly fixed in each layer by the boundary conditions and its value is k n = (2n-1)π L where n ∈ N. u xn and u zn are the eigenvectors. The piezoelectric and the ferromagnetic materials have different mechanical properties, rendering the bilayer structure inhomogeneous. As a consequence, the wavenumber k z along the thickness direction varies from one layer to another. It will be denoted as k p in the piezoelectric and k f in the ferromagnetic layer. The two propagation constants along the thickness direction cannot be determined merely by the application of boundary conditions. They are determined by the dispersion relations. Inserting u x and u z in Newton's Law and examining individual modes gives the dispersion relations in each layer (See Supplemental Material [23]). In ( where η s is the viscosity constant. The dispersion relations relate known quantities, the frequency of the AC applied voltage ω and the wavenumber k n in the lateral direction, to the unknown wavenumbers along the thickness direction (k p , k f ). Therefore, the latter can be extracted from the dispersion relations. However, the two dispersion relations taken separately cannot uniquely determine the structure's resonance frequencies. A tool is thus needed to obtain the resonance frequencies of such a multi-layer structure, and this is accomplished by the proposed extended Mason model. In the study of BAW resonators, conventionally, the Mason model has only been employed as a 1D approximation for obtaining the structure's electrical response: the resonance frequencies through the input impedance or the reflectivity of acous-tic mirrors for instance We define an extended Mason model per unit length and extend it to two dimensions taking advantage of the coupling in Newton's law between the x and z components of the displacement vector. Suppose we project Newton's equation onto the z-axis and examine the waves propagating along the positive and negative thickness directions. In that case, one can find the coupling relation between the magnitudes along x and z. In the piezolayer for instance (See Supplemental Material [23]): where U p is the coupling constant defined by: In other words, the coupling constant U p allows a circuit representation of a 2D structure where the wave propagation in one direction is considered first and the wave propagation in the other direction is directly deduced by Owing to the orthogonality of the mechanical waves, we modify the definition of the shear force by taking the weighted integral along the x-axis of the shear stress. In the piezolayer: where t p = z 1 is the thickness of the piezolayer, V the time-varying voltage applied to the electrodes, and e 15 the piezoelectric coupling constant for an electric field applied along the x-axis. Defining the modal shear force as a weighted integral allows two things. First to quantify how much each mode couples with the applied electric field in the lateral direction, represented by the coefficient 2 (2n-1)π . Second to account for the coupling between the waves propagating in the thickness and lateral directions in the definition of the mechanical impedance Z p : In the circuit, the currents are the magnitude of the acoustic velocities along the lateral direction denoted as v x (z). Applying Kirchhoff's laws, we can solve for the magnitudes of the acoustic velocities at the planes z = 0 and z = z 1 : Zp tan(kptp) + 1 where W p is the width of the piezolayer. Note that the modal current is a sin (k n x) function. Therefore, we modify the classic Mason model again by taking the modal current's mean value. It enables to take into account the contribution of the propagation in the lateral direction to the modal current's magnitude: The input admittance Y in can be obtained by expressing the total current I as a function of the applied voltage V . The total current I is defined as the sum of the static current, related to the piezoelectric static capacitance, and the current flowing in the motional branches. The latter is the sum over all the modes of the mean current Ĩn . The input admittance Y in can now be written as: where is the piezoelectric static capacitance, and k 2 ef f,n is the effective electromechanical coupling coefficient of the n-th mode that can be expressed as: where (2n-1) 2 corresponds to the lateral component and follows from the Berlincourt's formula where E x is the electric field induced by the applied voltage along the x-axis. The input admittance is now defined. The mechanical quality factor Q of the XBAR multiferroic antenna can be expressed as where S 11 can be expressed in terms of the input admittance as: where Z s = 50 Ω is the system impedance. Material properties of AlN and Ni layers, along with the Pt electrodes, are tabulated in Table Fig. We show here that the extended two-dimensional Mason model allows us to describe particle displacement in both the thickness and lateral directions. In the piezolayer, the relation between the displacement magnitude (u + x , u - x ) and the acoustic velocities magnitude (v x (0), v x (z 1 )) is (See Supplemental Material [23]): Recall that ( where a 1 , a 2 are constants defined as: The continuity of the stress is automatically considered in the circuit when Kirchhoff's laws are applied. As a consequence, only the continuity of the displacement vector at the piezoelectric-ferromagnet interface needs to be verified. Taking into account the stress-free condition at the top surface of the ferromagnetic layer leads to the following displacement vector components in the ferromagnetic layer: where a 3 , a 4 are constants defined as: In each layer, the shear stress and strain in the xz-plane are derived using Hooke's law: where we considered pure shear stress. In the present study, we considered the active region as a bilayer structure for simplicity. In the case where a structure with more than two layers is considered, the solution procedure of the problem is similar. Adding extra layers of non-magnetic buffer materials will shift the resonance frequencies and similarly to the present case, the continuity of the shear force would be automatically considered in the circuit. The continuity condition on the displacement vector solely needs to be applied to define in each layer the mode shape. Figs. 2(a)-2(d) plot in the active region, at the first two resonances, the magnitude of the displacement vector obtained with this model and with COMSOL. At the first resonance or 3.49 GHz, we observe zero displacements at z ≈ 450 nm. The displacement magnitude starts to increase when leaving the plane z ≈ 450 nm. It indicates that the shear force, proportional to the displacement gradient, is higher at this plane. At the second resonance or 6.63 GHz, the displacement gradient is higher in the middle of both layers, indicating that the shear force is maximized in the middle of each layer. This is indeed verified by the plots of the stress magnitudes at the first and second resonances shown in Figs. The knowledge of mechanical displacement enables us to define the magnetoelastic field, the principal component of the effective magnetic field that generates the torque that rotates the magnetization. As will be detailed next, the spin wave is calculated analytically for both time and space dependencies with a unidirectional coupling considered. The LL equation describes the magnetization precession around an effective magnetic field H eff , which can be decomposed into several components: where H 0 = H 0 ⃗ x is the bias magnetic field oriented along the x-axis in this study. H exc the exchange interaction field, H ani the magnetocrystalline anisotropy field, and H me the magnetoelastic field. For thin ferromagnetic films, the demagnetizing field along the thickness direction forces the magnetization to lie in the xy-plane. In the absence of a strong out-of-plane external magnetic field that would cancel the demagnetizing effect, the magnetization unit vector m has a weak z component. We will neglect this component and consider the magnetization unit vector to lie entirely in the xy-plane: where φ is the angle between m and the x-axis. For a cubic crystal, the exchange interaction field, the magnetocrystalline anisotropy field, and the magnetoelastic field are written respectively: A exc is the exchange stiffness constant, K 1 the cubic anisotropy constant and λ 111 the magnetostriction constant along the crystallographic direction Acoustically actuated magnetoelectric antennas radiate electromagnetic waves through a perturbation of the magnetization The boundary condition verified by φ at z = z 1 and z = z 2 is: where n = z is the vector normal to the xy-plane. More-over, the ferromagnetic layer thickness is much smaller than the lateral direction t f ≪ L, so the boundary condition at the lateral boundaries x = 0 and x = L can be approximated by a magnetic wall The solution of (33) can be decomposed into a timeharmonic term that corresponds to the magnetoelastic contribution and a decay term. The time-harmonic term only plays a role in the radiation and is given by (See Supplemental Material [23]): where σ n is the magnitude of the stress in the ferromagnetic layer in Recalling the definition of the magnetic field B = μ 0 (H + M), in a ferromagnetic material, a time variation of the magnetization, equivalent to a time variation of the magnetic field, generates an electric field through the Maxwell-Faraday equation. The radiation source is: where we used the small angle approximation ∂φ ∂t e jk0r ′ cos ψ dv ′ (38) where W f is the width of the ferromagnetic layer, r the distance to the observation point, r ′ spans the ferromagnet volume and k 0 is the free-space wave number. r is the angle between the vector that goes from the origin of the coordinate system to the observation point and the vector that goes from the origin to the source point. (See Supplemental where Z 0 = μ 0 /ε 0 is the vacuum impedance and ⃗ e φ , ⃗ e θ the unit vectors in spherical coordinates. The radiation power is given by: The radiation efficiency is calculated by: where P in is the accepted power by the multiferroic antenna, expressed in terms of the input admittance Y in , the applied voltage V , and the system impedance Z s as We show in this section the impact of the viscosity constant and the thicknesses of the piezolayer and ferromagnetic layer, on the performance of the multiferroic antenna. Fig. where ρ is the mass density, v a the average Debye acoustic velocity, γ avg the average Grüneisen's parameter, κ the thermal conductivity, T the ambient temperature and ω the frequency of the AC voltage applied to the electrodes. For simplicity, we consider the Q a of the bilayer structure to be the Q a of the piezolayer. The minimum Comparison with Chu's limit of the efficiency-bandwidth product of different multiferroic antennas when the Akhiezer damping is considered. k 0 a is the product of the free-space wavenumber k 0 and the minimum radius a, of a sphere enclosing the antenna. achievable viscosity constant is calculated taking the inverse of the quality factor η min = Q -1 a . To vary the resonance frequency of the multiferroic antennas, we vary the thickness of the piezolayers from 100 to 1000 nm, with a fixed thickness of the Terfenol-D layer of 500 nm. At low frequencies, the viscosity constant is low and the bandwidth-efficiency product increases until reaching the maximum value allowed by the structure. Once the maximum value is reached, the bandwidth-efficiency product decreases along with the increase of the resonance frequency, and thus along with the increase of the viscosity constant. The AlN case has a very low efficiency-bandwidth product because of its low experimental effective electromechanical coupling coefficient k 2 t : where f s and f p are the series and parallel resonances. LiNbO 3 and LiTaO 3 with higher k 2 t show efficiencybandwidth products close to Chu's limit, with values of 1.27 × 10 -7 and 6.9 × 10 -8 at k 0 a = 6.9 × 10 -3 and k 0 a = 5.38 × 10 -3 , respectively. As shown in Fig. This paper demonstrates a two-dimensional closedform analytic model of an XBAR multiferroic antenna. An extended Mason model to two dimensions is proposed to account for the particle displacement along the thickness and the lateral directions. The extended Mason model enables not only to obtain the electrical response of the structure, as the conventional Mason model would do in one dimension, but also allows to obtain the mechanical response through the mode shape. This theory, developed here based on a bilayer piezoelectricferromagnet heterostructure, is also applicable to structures with more than two layers. Indeed, adding extra layers of buffer non-magnetic materials only modifies the equivalent impedances seen by the piezoelayer at its top and bottom surfaces, shifting the resonant frequencies. The displacement vector in the ferromagnetic layer, needed for the computation of the electric vector potential, can be obtained similarly as the two-layer case, by application of continuity conditions on the displacement vectors. Moreover, using a unidirectional coupling between the governing equations, we found closed-form solutions for the spin wave and radiated EM field without the use of infinitesimal dipole approximation. The dependencies between the antenna response and the parameters that compose it are explicitly specified. As a consequence, optimization of these parameters can readily be conducted for the study of radiation enhancement through the definition of the adequate thickness of the piezoelectric and ferromagnet layers leading to the maximum radiated power. Finally, the efficiency-bandwidth product of different multiferroic antennas is compared with Chu's limit. The comparison is conducted with the highest achievable mechanical quality factor in the piezolayer, known as the Akhiezer limit. We show that at this fundamental mechanical limit, the efficiency-bandwidth products of LiNbO 3 /Terfenol-D and LiTaO 3 /Terfenol-D mul-tiferroic antennas approach Chu's limit. Furthermore, the choice of Terfenol-D ferromagnetic material combined with LiNbO 3 or LiTaO 3 piezoelectric materials allows a radiation efficiency enhancement of approximately two orders of magnitudes compared to AlN/Terfenol-D. Thus, the fundamental factor limiting radiation efficiency is Chu's limit. However, when considering the coupled physics nature of multiferroic antennas, phonon-phonon scattering in the Akhiezer regime is most likely to limit the antenna radiation for GHz devices, and not Chu's limit.