Hole-doped high-temperature copper oxide-based superconductors (cuprates) exhibit complex phase diagrams where electronic orders like a charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity (SC) appear at low temperatures. The origins of these electronic orders are still open questions due to their complex interplay and correlated nature. These electronic orders can modify the phonons in the system, which has also been experimentally found in several cuprates as a softening in the phonon frequency at the CDW vector. Recent experiments have revealed that the softening in phonons in cuprates due to CDW shows intriguing behavior with increasing hole doping. Hole doping can also change the underlying Fermi surface. Therefore, it is an interesting question whether the doping-induced change in the Fermi surface can affect the softening of phonons, which in turn can reveal the nature of the electronic orders present in the system. In this work, we investigate this question by studying the softening of phonons in the presence of CDW and SC within a perturbative approach developed in an earlier work. We compare the results obtained within the working model to some experiments. High-temperature copper oxide-based superconductors (cuprates) are paradigmatic examples of a complex interplay between several orders like a quasi-two-dimensional incommensurate charge density wave (CDW) A change in doping not only tunes the electronic orders, but also changes the electronic structure and the associated Fermi surface. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments Owing to such a complex phase diagram and Fermi surface evolution, the nature of the interactions which induce the electronic orders still remains an open question. A possible direction for disentangling various interactions is to study the collective modes associated with the electronic orders To explain the phonon softening below T c , in an earlier work We organize this paper in the following manner. In Section II, we briefly discuss the theoretical model, where the effects of CDW and SC orders on phonons are investigated. In Section III, we study the doping evolution of the phonon softening for model Fermi surfaces representing doped LSCO and BSCCO systems. In Section IV, we present a discussion of our work and compare with experimental observations. In Section V, we present a summary of the work. In this section, we describe the theoretical model of a coupled electron-phonon system in the presence of the CDW and SC orders. The total Hamiltonian 1 is given by H tot = H e + H ph + H e-ph , with In Equation (1), H e depicts the electronic Hamiltonian in the presence of CDW and SC orders at the mean-field level, where c k and c † k are the electronic annihilation and creation operators. ξ k , χ k and ∆ k are the tight-binding single-particle dispersion, CDW gap and SC gap, respectively. The Hamiltonian for the phonons is given by H ph , where b q and b † q are the phonon annihilation and creation operators and ω q is the bare phonon frequency. The interaction between electrons and phonons is given by the Hamiltonian H e-ph , where g(k, q) is the electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling element and N is the number of lattice sites. In our model, we consider g(k, q) = g a constant number. We construct the matrix H e in the extended Nambu basis , where Q is the CDW wave vector. The Green's function corresponding to H e is given by Ĝ-1 (iω n , k) = (iω n -Ĥe ) and has a matrix form as follows: where ω n is the Matsubara frequency. Now, we analyze the change in the phonon spectrum due to the presence of both CDW and superconducting order. Because of the presence of the CDW with wave vector Q, the new phonon propagator can be written in terms of a matrix Green's function given by D m,n (q, τ ) = -⟨T φ q+mQ (τ )φ † q+nQ (0)⟩ 34 , where T is the time-ordering operator and φ q is given by b † q + b -q with m, n = ±. We also note that D ++ = D --:= D 1 (z, q) and D +-= D -+ := D 2 (z, q). The modified propagators can be calculated by treating the electron-phonon interaction perturbatively, as long as g is small. For a single-dispersion-less phonon mode, an estimate for g can be obtained by using the dimensionless coupling constant λ , where N (E F ) is the density of states at the Fermi energy and ν 0 is the bare phonon frequency. As typically ν0 N (E F ) ≪ 1, the approximation remains valid even for large values of λ. Following the results obtained in the paper 1 , the self-energy corrections [Σ 1,2,3,4 (z, q)] for phonon propagators due to the presence of both CDW and SC orders are where G ab with [a, b = 1, 2, 3, 4] are the various matrix elements of the Green's function matrix defined in Equation ( The renormalized phonon propagators can be written using the Dyson equations obtained by using the above self-energies (Equation ( where D 0 (z, q) = 2ω q /(z 2 -ω 2 q ) is the bare phonon propagator. We obtain the renormalized modes for phonons in the presence of CDW and SC orders by decoupling Equation ( where The dispersion of the renormalized phonon modes corresponds to the values of z for which the denominator of Equation ( We notice, that in the ordered phase where CDW and SC have formed, there are two normal phonon modes as given by Equation ( In the last section, we described the general formalism for calculating the renormalized phonon frequency in the presence of CDW and SC orders. Now, in this section, we concentrate on the specific case for the hole-doped cuprates. After decades of research on the phenomenology of the CDW phase, its correlations with superconductivity and pseudogap phase are strongly debated, and there is a common belief from theoretical To mimic the doping evolution of the Fermi surface on a qualitative level, we perform minimal changes in the band structure (Equation ( The computed phonon self-energies Σ(q) as a function of q are plotted in Figure In order to capture the broad features of the evolution of the Fermi surface from hole-like to electron-like for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ , we consider a six-parameter tight-binding model band structure with t 1 = -0.5908, t 2 = 0.0962, t 3 = -0.1306, t 4 = -0.0507 and t 5 = 0.0939. Here, for simplicity, we only change the chemical potential μ to capture the qualitative behavior of the topological transition of the Fermi surface, as observed in the ARPES experiment To study the renormalized phonon frequency, we choose both ∆ max and χ max to be 0.02 eV, a value realistically obtained. In Figure Figure In this work, applying a perturbative approach, we study the Fermi surface evolution of the phonon softening in model cuprate bands, specially focusing on the parameter regimes where the Fermi surface approaches a topological Lifshitz transition. In particular, we focus on two cuprate systems LSCO and BSCCO, where ARPES experiments also observed a topological transition from a hole-like Fermi surface to an electron-like Fermi surface due to a change in doping. In this work, to only focus on the possible effects of the change in the geometry of the Fermi surface due to doping on phonon softening, we have excluded the doping dependencies of the CDW and SC gaps. Furthermore, as the theoretical tight-binding parameters are not fitted to experimental Fermi surfaces, the doping levels (x) (as shown in Figure For the case of the model system representing BSCCO, we have found that the phonon softening is continuously suppressed (Figure It would also be interesting to compare the results obtained from the theoretical models to the experiments. However, these comparisons must be considered at a qualitative level. A recent RIXS experiment In the context of LSCO, we now discuss some aspects which need further investigation. The RIXS experiment Besides the doping dependence, another vital aspect of phonon softening in cuprates is their temperature evolution. The RIXS experiment in BSCCO 32 observed an enhancement in the phonon softening between T c and low temperature for some doping regime. The RIXS experiment 30 in LSCO measured phonon softening at T c and above T c . Curiously, for both BSCCO To summarize, in this work, by employing a perturbative technique, we have theoretically studied the effect of Fermi surface evolution close to the topological Lifshitz transition on phonon softening for two simple model tight-binding band structures broadly capturing doped LSCO and doped BSCCO systems in the presence of a charge density wave and superconductivity. We have found interesting features of phonon softening in these two materials and have compared them with experimental observations.