We thank Prof. David Steigmann for his discussion The discussion below follows the notation in We agree with Steigmann that our statement in Remark 4.8 is incorrect. This error stems from our incomplete proof provided in Appendix 5 of i.e. δc α is solely expressible through δa αβ . Eq. ( given in Steigmann's discussion. Here, c α := c • a α , J = det s F , λ = ∥F L∥, c 0 α := c 0 • A α , c αβ := c α c β , c α := c • a α , l αβ := l α l β , l α := l • a α , L αβ := L α L β and L α := L • A α . We thank Steigmann for providing relation (2). We were not aware of this relation in our derivation of Appendix 5 (see Eq. ( is identical to Eq. ( This follows from Eq. ( which is also found in Steigmann's discussion. That is, the rate of geodesic curvature, κg , is fully expressible in terms of ȧαβ and Ṡγ αβ . Since these are symmetric w.r.t. α and β, the stress symmetrization employed in the power balance of Eq. ( is equivalent to the internal power expression given in in our notation. This follows from inserting Eq. ( Eq. ( the internal power expression proposed in Concerning Steigmann's discussion of Remark 4.9 Steigmann's discussion of Remark 4.9 concerns two points: The well-definedness of the in-plane bending power term, and its parametrization-dependence. We agree that the internal power of Steigmann, see (8), is not wrong and does not miss any contributions in the present context. This was shown above. Also it does not depend on the surface parameterization (i.e. the choice of curvilinear coordinate system), as Steigmann rightly points out. However, there is still an issue with the last term in (8): It can lead to constitutive models for in-plane bending that are not well-defined for some deformations. Steigmann's expression (8) leads to the constitutive equations for the membrane and bending stresses, based on the stored energy function W = W a αβ , b αβ , S γ αβ . Our expression (10) on the other hand, leads to the constitutive equations based on the stored energy function W = Ŵ a αβ , b αβ , bαβ . In general, the in-plane bending behavior of fibers should be related to a change of their curvature κ g . Thus, the in-plane bending energy should be a function of κ g . This means that in general the in-plane bending energy cannot be a function of S γ αβ alone, as it does not fully describe κ g according to (4). The problem with the third terms in Eqs. ( The issue can be illustrated by the following example, see Fig. with a circular fiber located at r = r 0 . The domain is deformed by applying the displacement field where a 1 and a 2 are parameters of u that have sufficiently small magnitude to avoid singularities in the deformation x = X + u. For any admissible a i , displacement u is zero along the fiber, and hence does not change its curvature, which remains equal to 1/r 0 . (The fiber is only stretched in lateral direction.) Without curvature change, no fiber bending moment should appear. However, according to the model of which increases with a i , see Fig. As the example shows, the last term in Eq. ( Steigmann claims that our "force and torque balance laws are postulated on the basis of free-body diagrams without reference to the Principle of Virtual Power". This is not true. Our formulation constructs the force and torque balance laws and the constitutive equations systematically from linear momentum balance, angular momentum balance, and the mechanical power balance in Secs. 3.3, 3.4 and Sec 3.5 of Steigmann further states that our formulation does "not make explicit the famous Kirchhoff boundary conditions and corner forces established by Kirchhoff". Such corner forces are fully contained in our formulation. They appear when the boundary traction T is replaced by its effective counterpart and the domain boundary of the shell surface is not smooth, which is shown in Appendix B below. The corner forces are part of the external virtual work, and so the internal virtual work expression presented in Singular boundary fibers are indeed not studied in our work. But they do not affect the examples presented in Appendix A: Derivation of the bending moments in the example of Fig. and their derivatives From this follows and which leads to the dual tangent vectors The Christoffel symbols thus become The corresponding quantities for the reference configuration (A α , A α,β , A αβ , A αβ , A α and Γγ αβ ) follow from this with a 1 = a 2 = 0 and g = 1. Thus which is only zero for vanishing a i . Further J = det[a αβ ]/ det[A αβ ] = g. For the fiber at r = r 0 , the fiber direction (before and after deformation) is such that With this, the curvature-invariant of such that fiber bending energy of increases with a 1 and a 2 . Here, B is the material constant for in-plane bending. The fiber director follows from l by a counterclockwise rotation of 90 With this and L ,2 = -c e 1 -s e 2 , the two contributions of the geodesic curvature in (4) become for the present case, where there is no fiber stretch (λ = 1). The full geodesic curvature thus is which is the expected value for the example. This is equal to the geodesic curvature in the reference configuration (i.e. κ 0 g = 1/r 0 ). All the relative curvature measures of vanishes for all a i . In our formulation the in-plane bending moment in the fiber is which gives m0 = B κ g -κ 0 g = 0, here. Eq. ( for general fibers with L α = λ l α . With Eqs. ( 