BiTeI is a polar semiconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) that produces large Rashba spin splitting. Due to its potential utility in spintronics and magnetoelectrics, it is essential to understand how defects impact the spin transport in this material. Using scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, we image ring-like charging states of single-atom defects on the iodine surface of BiTeI. We observe nanoscale variations in the Rashba energy around each defect, which we correlate with the local electric field extracted from the bias dependence of each ring radius. Our data demonstrate the local impact of atomic defects on the Rashba effect, which is both a challenge and an opportunity for the development of future nanoscale spintronic devices. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) plays a crucial role in the rich phenomena observed in condensed matter systems. where α R is the Rashba parameter that quantifies the strength of the Rashba effect, k and σ are the electron momentum and spin, respectively, and ẑ is the unit vector perpendicular to the surface. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( BiTeI is a non-centrosymmetric semiconductor with a strong Rashba effect both in the bulk and at the surface. Here we use STM and STS to characterize the electronic behavior around single atom defects in BiTeI. First, we observe the charge states of the defects using the tip-induced band bending (TIBB) effect, which manifests as circular rings surrounding defects on the I-terminated surface. We use the bias-dependence of the ring size as a local probe of the electric field at the surface. Second, the Rashba band splitting leads to van Hove singularities whose measured spectral width gives the local Rashba energy. We discover that the local Rashba energy is correlated with the local electric field, demonstrating a pathway for nanoscale Rashba engineering via atomic dopant control. 5 Single crystals of BiTeI were grown by the Bridgman method, We acquire dI/dV maps at both positive bias [Fig. Here we focus on ring-like structures around defects at negative bias on the I-terminated surface due to TIBB show the simultaneously-acquired topography and dI/dV maps of the I-terminated surface. Within the 50 × 50 nm 2 scan region, six charging rings are visible, labeled A1 to A6. The radius of the charging rings increases as the sample bias decreases, as shown in Fig. In Fig. where V s is the sample bias, and r is the ring radius. The two fitting parameters are a, which encodes the E-field dependence of the surface electrons, and V 0 , which encodes the ionization energy of the defect. The quadratic fits are plotted as dashed lines in Fig. The defects fall into three groups: A5 and A6 (V 0 ∼ -0.3 V), A1 and A3 (V 0 ∼ -0.2 V), and A2 and A4 (V 0 ∼ -0.1 V). However, the leading coefficients differ, even for defects with similar intercepts. Though the absolute values of the intercepts and the leading coefficients depend sensitively on tip-sample distance, where m * is the effective mass, E 0 is the energy at the band bottom, and the Rashba energy E R defines the energy difference between the crossing point of the bands and the band bottom, which is proportional to α 2 R (see Supplementary Information 32 for details). This simple model captures the main picture of Rashba physics, though local disorder can add more complexity to the problem. Intriguingly, we find that the Rashba energies around the defects correlate with the leading coefficient a of the charging ring dispersion, as shown in Fig. The electric field results from three intrinsic factors in BiTeI. First, BiTeI has a polar surface with a net electric field from the (BiTe) + and I -dipole moment. charge on the surface, which also contribute to the local electric field. Third, surface electrons affect the electric field through Coulomb screening. All three factors, together with the gating effect from the tip, form a net local electric field. The charging ring states inherently capture the behavior of the surface electrons in response to this local field: the larger the leading coefficient a of the ring dispersion, the larger the effective electric field, which increases the asymmetry of the electron wavefunction near the nucleus. Increased asymmetry enhances the Rashba splitting and Rashba energy. In conclusion, we observe the charging states of defects on the iodine termination of BiTeI and use the charging ring radius as a probe of the local electric field. We extract the local Rashba energies from dI/dV spectra by fitting the van Hove singularities originating from the Rashba band splitting. We demonstrate that the local Rashba energies correlate with the effective electric field. Our work shows that atomic dopants can modify the local Rashba energy in BiTeI, which presents an exciting opportunity for engineering nanoscale spintronic devices. topological insulators, TIBB manifests as rings around defects in the differential conductance (dI/dV ) map. Defects on the semiconductor surfaces act as either electron donors or acceptors, which form energy levels within the gap. Since a typical tip-sample distance for STM is a few angstroms, the electric field between the tip and sample has a gating effect on the sample surface. The electric potential gradient across the tunneling barrier includes contributions from both the applied bias and work function difference between the sample and the tip. When the tip is far from the defect, the defect level and the local band structure are not affected by the tip [Fig. The spectra for all 6 regions are averaged over a 3.3 × 3.3 nm 2 region centered at the center of the charging rings. All spectra are zero-shifted to avoid negative differential conductance. We normalized the data by dividing dI/dV by I/V to make the peak more prominent. We fitted and subtracted a linear background to the data above the band crossing point. We fit the Rashba energy E R and the band bottom energy E 0 using Eq. (3) in the main text. We constrained the fit value of E 0 to be between 920 meV and 950 meV. APPENDIX D: COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS DFT calculations including spin-orbit coupling were performed with the VASP package 7,8 using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchange-correlation functional, 9 the DFT-D3 method (zero damping) to account for van der Waals forces between layers, 10 and projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials with 15, 6, and 7 valences electrons for Bi, Te, and I, respectively. The BiTeI crystal structure can be visualized as a Bi layer sandwiched between a layer each of Te and I forming a triple-layer (TL) unit. The curves in Fig. 