Two-dimensional (2D) multiferroic materials with coexisting ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism have garnered substantial attention for their intriguing physical properties and diverse promising applications in spintronics. For example, multiferroic materials with electronically controlled broken central symmetry provide a versatile platform for designing and manipulating topological skyrmions and diverse spintronic applications. Here, we investigate the complex magnetic properties of room-temerature multiferroic material MoPtGe2S6 and its electrical control of topological skyrmions using first-principles calculations and atomistic micromagnetic simulations. A sizable Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) (2.1 meV) is found in the multiferroic material MoPtGe2S6 with an electrically polarized ground state. The magnetic skyrmions can be stabilized in monolayer MoPtGe2S6 under zero magnetic field, and the chirality of skyrmions can be reversed with electric field-induced flipping of electrical polarization due to the reversed chirality of the DMI. Furthermore, an external magnetic fielc can reverse the magnetization direction and topological charge of the skyrmions as well as tune the size of skyrmions. These results demonstrate that the monolayer MoPtGe2S6 can enrich the 2D skyrmion community and pave the way for electronically controlled spintronic devices. Topologically protected skyrmions are promising as basic memory units due to its nanometer size and small driving current Cr2Ge2Te6 Recently, two-dimensional ferroelectric materials have attracted wide attention for the potential applications in non-volatile nano-devices. Moreover, the manipulation of topological charge and size of skyrmions can be achieved through an external magnetic field. Monolayer MoPtGe2S6 thus provides an excellent platform for realizing tunable skyrmion-based spintronic devices. We performed first-principles calculations on MoPtGe2S6 monolayer properties using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) was chosen to treat the exchange-correlation The MoPtGe2S6 monolayer was constructed with a slab model with a 15 Å vacuum layer. On-site Hubbard U was equal to 2.0 eV and 0.5 eV for Mo-4d and Pt-5d electrons, as reported in a previous study Atomistic micromagnetic simulations were performed using the software package VAMPIRE surrounded by three S atoms. Figures1(b) and 1(c) show the FE phase with the +P and -P polarization directions. For the PE phase, Ge-Ge atomic pairs are located between the upper and lower S atoms planes. For the FE phase, Ge-Ge atomic pairs shift along the z-axis, accompanied by spontaneous out-of-plane polarization. When the system transitions from the PE to FE phases, the geometric symmetry will break as the Ge-Ge atomic pair shifts along the z-axis, which also leads to the separation of The spin density of monolayer MoPtGe2S6 for FM states is shown in Fig. Here, Si (Sj) refers to the spin vector of the Mo atom at site i (j). 퐽 푖푗 , 퐾 푖푗 and 퐷 푖푗 stand for the parameters of Heisenberg isotropic exchange coupling, single-ion magnetic anisotropy, and DMI. Note that the SOC interaction should be considered in the calculations of the last two items. The collinear magnetic order was investigated using a 2 × 2 supercell, considering both ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) states in the total energy calculation. The evaluated exchange interaction parameter, as listed in Table Simultaneously, the DMI competes with the Zeeman energy to stabilize skyrmion and prevent their collapse into the FM state. In summary, we study the non-collinear magnetic properties of multiferroic MoPtGe2S6 monolayer, by combining first-principles calculations and atomistic spin model simulation. Our results indicate that a sizable DMI is found in multiferroic monolayer MoPtGe2S6, which stabilizes the topologically nontrivial magnetic skyrmions with nanometer size under zero magnetic field. The electric-field switch of the chirality of skyrmions and DMI is realized in MoPtGe2S6. The magnetization direction and topological charge of the skyrmion can be reversed under a positive magnetic field, and the size of skyrmions can be tuned by an external magnetic field. The multiferroic monolayer MoPtGe2S6 holds promise for designing and developing an electric-field and magnetic-field control of topological magnetism.