Computing the temperature and stress dependence of the full elastic constant tensor from firstprinciples in non-cubic materials remains a challenging problem. Here we circumvent the aforementioned challenge via the generalized quasiharmonic approximation in conjunction with the irreducible derivative approach for computing strain dependent phonons using finite difference, explicitly including dipole-quadrupole contributions. We showcase this approach in ferroelectric PbTiO3 using density functional theory, computing all independent elastic constants and piezoelectric strain coefficients at finite temperature and stress. There is good agreement between the quasiharmonic approximation and the experimental lattice parameters close to 0 K. However, the quasiharmonic approximation overestimates the temperature dependence of the lattice parameters and elastic constant tensor, demonstrating that a higher level of strain dependent anharmonic vibrational theory is needed. Ferroelectric materials have been widely studied due to technological importance and interesting physics The standard approximation for computing finite temperature elastic constants is the quasiharmonic approximation (QHA) DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) We begin by showcasing the computed phonons in the supercell ŜBZ = 4 1 (see Fig. We now present selected generalized Gruneisen parameters, which encapsulate the first order strain dependence of the phonons along a given strain (see Fig. Having computed the strain dependence of the phonons, we apply the generalized quasiharmonic approximation to compute the a and c lattice parameters at finite temperature and stress (see Fig. where definitions and notation are equivalent to Ref. Having computed the lattice parameters, we now discuss the strain curvature of the free energy at finite temperature and stress. There are three experimentally rel-evant quantities related to the free energy curvature at finite stress where ε∞,S is the relaxed-ion dielectric tensor at fixed strain and e αi is the relaxed-ion piezoelectric stress coefficient We compute the elastic constant tensor at finite temperature and stress, and compare with experimental values measured under unstressed conditions We proceed with the computation of the piezoelectric strain coefficients as a function of temperature and stress, and compare with existing experimental values measured under unstressed conditions where BE ij denotes the stress-strain coefficient under a constant electric field. The experimentally measured values of the piezoelectric strain coefficients In summary, we have demonstrated the application of the generalized quasiharmonic approximation to a noncubic crystal, ferroelectric PbTiO 3 , under conditions of Piezoelectric strain coefficients -d31, d33, and d15 computed with QHA (lines) under unstressed (blue) and stressed (red) conditions compared with existing experimental measurements (circles) finite temperature and stress. The irreducible derivative approach to computing phonons from finite difference yields the strain dependent phonons, where dipolequadrupole effects are successfully incorporated in the Fourier interpolation. The thermal expansion, elastic constants, and piezoelectric strain coefficients are computed at finite temperature and stress. The temperature dependence of the thermal expansion and elastic constants at zero stress are over estimated by the quasiharmonic approximation, illustrating the need to solve the vibrational Hamiltonian of PbTiO 3 using a straindependent theory which explicitly accounts for phonon interactions. Our observed limitations of the QHA are not unexpected, as discrepancies of the QHA are well known in various anharmonic materials 