The requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate for all possible deformation histories is generally imposed on plastic constitutive relations. This is a constraint analogous to the Coleman-Noll Theories of plasticity, as opposed to theories of thermoplasticity, are based on conservation laws (momentum, mass and energy) that only involve deformation measures, stress measures and internal variables. Temperature only enters through the possible dependence of material parameters on a temperature that is related to the evolution of plastic dissipation. The requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate is a thermodynamic-like requirement analogous to the 2nd law of thermodynamics as expressed by the Clausius-Duhem inequality. However, the Clausius-Duhem inequality differs from the basic conservation laws in that it emerges as a statistical limit for a large number of discrete events over a long time and has a probability less than one of being satisfied when the the process under consideration involves discrete events that take place over a sufficiently small region for a sufficiently short time, see e.g. Evans and Searle Despite these observations, for continuum formulations at any scale, the Coleman-Noll At the micron scale, plastic deformation almost always, if not always, is a consequence of the evolution of processes that are discrete in both space and time, such as discrete dislocations for crystal plasticity and discrete shear transformation zones (STZs) for plasticity of amorphous solids. Imposing the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate for the evolution of individual discrete defects can lead to strong restrictions, that are not consistent with atomistic modeling and/or experiment, see e.g. Needleman These observations suggest that imposing the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate for all possible deformation histories on continuum formulations of plasticity may, in general, be overly restrictive. To provide a perspective on this possibility, the following questions are considered: 1. To what extent does the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate emerge from the 2nd law of thermodynamics? 2. What are the consequences of imposing the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate on a phenomenological theory of crystal plasticity? 3. What are the consequences of imposing the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate on discrete defect plasticity theories? 4. For both phenomenological and discrete defect theories of plasticity, what are the consequences of imposing the stronger requirement that the plastic dissipation rate is non-negative for all possible deformation histories? 5. What are the consequences for stability when the dissipation rate is negative? To begin, statements of the first and second laws of thermodynamics are presented. Attention is confined to small deformation kinematics with quasi-static deformation histories with the only loading being imposed surface tractions and/or imposed surface displacements. Energy densities are written per unit reference volume rather than per unit mass. The focus is on a purely mechanical formulation, i.e. the independent field variables entering the formulation are stress and displacement, along with their time and spatial derivatives (such as strain and strain rate), and possible constitutive internal variables. The conservation laws of continuum mechanics -conservation of mass, conservation of linear momentum; conservation of angular momentum, and conservation of energy -hold for all points of the body and for all time. In particular, for a purely mechanical formulation and quasi-static deformation histories, conservation of energy (the 1 st law) for the body requires where W is the mechanical work input, Φ is the energy stored in the body, D is the material dissipation in the body and ( ̇) = ∂( )/∂t. Eq. ( The quantities W , Φ and D can be calculated for a body and for any sub-volume of that body in terms of volume densities so that Here, V is the volume of the body or of the sub-volume. If Eq. ( for all points x k of the body and for all times. 3 The 2 nd law Consideration of the 2 nd law requires the introduction of entropy and absolute temperature which are assumed to be well defined even though plastic deformation processes are not necessarily thermodynamic equilibrium processes. The second law of thermodynamics is taken to be expressed by the Clausius inequality where Θ is the absolute temperature. From conservation of energy, Eq. ( The entropy change per unit volume, ∆s, is defined at each point of the body by so that if Eq. ( holds at each point x k in the body. Note that satisfaction of Eq. ( When Eq. ( which is the Clausius-Duhem inequality. The Coleman-Noll In addition to, or instead of, thermal entropy, configurational entropy (and configurational temperature) can be included in a thermodynamic formulation, see for example Bouchbinder and Langer In a purely mechanical formulation, entropy and temperature do not enter, and the condition analogous to the Clausius-Duhem inequality, Eq. ( Eq. ( If ξ ≥ 0 at all points of a body then Ḋ ≥ 0. Eq. ( Hence, the left hand side of Eq. ( Possible restrictions that can be imposed to preclude a negative dissipation rate in a purely mechanical formulation include: (i) ξ ≥ 0 for all points of the body; (ii) ξ ≥ 0 for all possible deformation histories (analogous to the Coleman-Noll The constraint imposed by Eq, ( Following Nye The lattice curvature components, κ e ij are given by the spatial gradient of the lattice rotation vector so that κ e ij is not symmetric, i.e. κ e ij ̸ = κ e ji , Nye where σ ji is the work conjugate stress and M ji is the work conjugate bending moment. From Eqs. ( In continuum slip crystal plasticity, the deformation rate due to slip is given by Here, γ(β) is the slip rate, s is the slip direction and m (β) j is the slip plane normal for slip system β. The total strain rate, εij , is with up ij given by Eq. From Eqs. ( where is the Schmid resolved shear stress on slip system β. Because plastic deformation is only due to slip, the dissipation rate can be written as The requirement that the dissipation rate at each point x k of the body is non-negative, Eq. ( A less restrictive requirement is with V the volume of the body. In developing crystal plasticity constitutive relations, the requirement typically imposed is that π (β) γ(β) ≥ 0 for each β. However, crystal structures/slip modes may be possible where at least one π (β) γ(β) < 0 but ξ ≥ 0 so that this requirement could be overly restrictive for satisfying Eq. Nye Nye's dislocation density tensor, α ij , and the lattice curvature tensor κ e ij are related by, Nye where δ ji is the Kronecker delta. Within the context of small deformation continuum slip plasticity theory with e ikl being the alternating tensor, Gurtin where χ Using Eq. ( The right hand side of Eq. ( The slip rate gradients, γ(β) ,k , do not enter the expression for the dissipation rate because they only enter this formulation through their role in inducing elastic lattice bending. i.e. via Eq. Plastic deformation of solids is almost always, if not always, associated with the evolution of discrete defects. Plastic deformation can then be modeled by calculating how such a collection of discrete defects evolves. Individual discrete defect events can take place over a small distance for a short time (a key issue, of course, is what constitutes "small" and what constitutes "short"). There is no fundamental reason to expect the Clausius-Duhem inequality, Eq. ( The main mechanism of plastic deformation in crystalline metals at room temperature is the glide of dislocations on specific lattice planes. In discrete dislocation plasticity, the dislocations are represented as line defects in a linear elastic solid. The dislocations have a characteristic vector with the dimension of length, b, termed the Burgers vector. Plastic dissipation is mainly associated with the change in configurational energy as the dislocations glide. The dissipation rate can be written as 3 Note that an equation of the form of Eq. ( from that in Eq. ( where N is the number of dislocations, v K is the dislocation velocity, the integration is over the dislocation line and P K , the Peach-Koehler (configurational) force, is given by Here, b K is the Burgers vector associated with dislocation K, σnb is a stress induced by the boundary conditions, σ nb is the Schmid resolved shear stress given by σ nb = bK i σ ij n K j with bK i a unit vector in the Burgers vector direction of dislocation K and |b K | the Burgers vector amplitude. A kinetic relation for v K needs to be specified. For modeling crystals such as fcc metal crystals, a linear relation of the form is typically used where C K is the dislocation mobility. Eq. ( where ρ K and c M are constitutive parameters, σ mt = m K i σ ij t K j with m K i and t K j unit vectors in directions that differ from n i and/or bi . The dissipation rate is with C K ≥ 0 and Q K = P K , Ḋ in Eq. ( for each K and all possible stress states. Discrete dislocation plasticity formulations with non-Schmid kinetic relations have been developed, e.g. by Wang and Beyerlein In discrete dislocation plasticity, the most direct calculation is for ḊK . However, ξ can also be calculated as in Benzerga et al. Plastic deformation of amorphous materials, such as metallic glasses, typically occurs via local atomic re-arrangements termed shear transformation zones (STZs). In the context of continuum mechanics, STZs have been modeled as transforming Eshelby The dissipation rate Ḋ is calculated via Eq. ( For a body with a collection of N STZs and with a stress field σ 0 ij (x k , t) arising from the imposed loading where the integration is over the volume of STZ K and σ T J ij (x k , t) is the transformation stress associated with STZ J that is uniform in STZ J for an elliptical inclusion, Eshelby A non-negative dissipation rate Ḋ requires The requirement analogous to the Coleman-Noll and the condition Eq. ( where each K K ijkl is a positive definite fourth order tensor so that Employing Eq. (37) for a shear transformation or a volumetric transformation limits the maximum allowable transformation strain to values that are smaller than indicated by atomistic calculations and experiment, as discussed by Vasoya et al. As for discrete dislocation plasticity, it is simpler to calculate ḊK than it is to calculate ξ at each point of the body. At least in some contexts, the requirement, analogous to the Coleman-Noll Although conditions to impose for maintaining stability in plasticity calculations where a negative dissipation rate occurs are not available, a simple one dimensional wave propagation calculation showed that it is possible for stability to be be maintained with a negative dissipation rate occurring for a short time, Needleman There is anecdotal evidence (i.e. seen in some calculations that I was involved in) that a negative dissipation rate can occur in a discrete defect plasticity calculation with no indications of an instability. The dissipation rate restriction required for stability to be maintained while one or more discrete events have a negative dissipation rate has not yet been developed. In this regard, it should be mentioned, that there is the possibility that a full thermodynamic discrete defect plasticity framework, including temperature and entropy, is needed to provide a formulation that appropriately accounts for a negative dissipation rate. In such a framework, the Clausius-Duhem inequality, Eq. ( One use of discrete defect plasticity modeling is to develop the background for a higher level crystal plasticity constitutive relations and the consequence of allowing the possibility of a negative dissipation rate for individual discrete events for the higher scale modeling remains to be investigated. Quite generally there is a need for continuum mechanics formulations that maintain stability and, consistent with statistical mechanics, allow for a negative dissipation rate in a small region for a short time. 7 Concluding remarks 1. The Clausius-Duhem inequality emerges from a statistical description of interacting discrete entities in the limit of a large number of discrete entities interacting for a long time. It is not a fundamental physical requirement for all discrete events. (i). In plasticity formulations, a restriction on dissipation rate can be phrased in terms of: (i) the pointwise dissipation rate ξ; or (ii) the volume integrated dissipation rate Ḋ. The requirement that ξ or Ḋ be non-negative for all possible deformation histories can be overly restrictive in some contexts. In such a context, the appropriate dissipation rate measure to restrict and the appropriate restriction to impose remain to be determined for various plasticity formulations. 2. The requirement in a purely mechanical theory of plasticity that the plastic dissipation rate is non-negative at each point of the body is related to, but not strictly derived from, the Clausius-Duhem inequality except in the special, and questionable, case of a plastic dissipative process with no change in entropy. 3. When plastic deformation is characterized by a collection of discrete events, the requirement that each discrete event gives rise to a non-negative dissipation rate can be overly restrictive. (i) In particular, for discrete defect plasticity, the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate for each discrete event imposes strong restrictions on discrete defect evolution equations that can preclude modeling experimentally observed and/or atomistically predicted processes. 4. When a negative dissipation rate is permitted for a small region for a short time, the requirement for ensuring stability remains to be developed. "There have been nearly as many formulations of the second law as there have been discussions of it." P.W. Bridgman