Phase winding effects in hollow semiconductor nanowires with superconducting shells have been proposed as a route to engineer topological superconducting states. We investigate GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires with half-shells of epitaxial aluminium as a potential platform for such devices, where the thin InAs shell confines the electron wave function around the GaAs core. With normal contacts we observed pronounced h/e flux periodic oscillations in the magnetoconductance, indicating the presence of a tubular conductive channel in the InAs shell. Conversely, the switching current in Josephson junctions oscillates with approximately half that period, i.e. h/2e, indicating transport via Andreev transport processes in the junction enclosing threading magnetic flux. On these structures, we systematically studied the gate-, field-, and temperature-dependent evolution of the supercurrent. Results indicate that Andreev transport processes can occur about the wire circumference indicating full proximitization of the InAs shell from the half-shell superconducting contacts. Josephson junctions, at their core, are two superconductors separated by a thin insulating barrier or a weak link. They allow the dissipationless and coherent transfer of bosonic quasiparticles, i.e. Cooper pairs. The resulting supercurrent flows without the application of an external voltage and is only driven by the phase difference between the macroscopic wavefunctions in the superconducting electrodes, i.e. the Josephson effect. Realizations of such devices with a semiconductor nanowire (NW) as the weak link have generated significant attention for their potential in the realization of superconducting quantum circuits, particularly within the realm of quantum computing. The appeal of these junctions lies in their multifaceted advantages. Firstly, the incorporation of a semiconducting weak link enables precise control of junction parameters through field-effect manipulation. This attribute permits dynamic adjustments of the quantum circuit's properties, making it a flexible platform for quantum information processing. Secondly, the unique combination of a large Fermi wavelength and a small nanowire diameter enables the design of junctions wherein only a limited subset of quantum states, known as Andreev bound states, play a pivotal role in carrying * p.zellekens@mailbox.org the Josephson supercurrent Moreover, semiconductor nanowire hybrid structures play a central role in the quest for realizing topological qubits Tunnel-and microwave spectroscopy studies in InAs/Al nanowire/full-shell devices confirmed the existence of the characteristic lobe structure of the Little-Parks effect, but did not find any clear evidence of Majorana zero modes or other topological excitations By combining a wide bandgap core, e.g. GaAs, with a shell made out of a narrow bandgap material such as InAs, it is possible to confine the charge carriers and thereby enhance the radial quantization of the system. These core/shell systems cannot only act as Aharonov-Bohm (AB) type systems The GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires are grown selectively by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on prepatterned substrates using the self-catalyzed vaporliquid-solid method. Details about the nanowire growth can be found in the Methods section. In short, the polymorphic GaAs nanowires are grown selectively, resulting in a typical length of 4 μm and a diameter of between 100 nm and 200 nm (See Supplementary Material for details). Subsequently, the InAs shell is grown by vaporsolid overgrowth of the GaAs core. The total thickness of the InAs shell is about 20 -30 nm. Two growth runs are performed with identical parameters. The nanowires of the first growth run are equipped with Ti/Au normal contacts for magnetotransport measurements (device A). In the second growth run, a 20 -30 nm thick Al halfshell is in-situ deposited on the GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowire. In Figs. A. Magnetoconductance in GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires First, the transport properties of bare core/shell GaAs/InAs NWs are studied. Figure Following earlier experiments on core/shell nanowire devices In the case of the Josephson junction the highly visible oscillations allow simple extraction of the period, as shown in Fig. Figure To gain a more detailed picture of the origin of the observed flux-periodic supercurrent oscillations in connection to the geometrical conditions, we investigate the transport in device C at temperatures above T c of the aluminum half-shell and at bias voltages outside of the induced proximity gap, as shown in Figs. The findings for the gate-, temperature-and currentdependent evolution of the junction response indicate a clear correlation between the special device properties, i.e. the complex geometric topology, and the h/2eoscillations. Furthermore, the observation of supercurrent oscillations goes beyond the earlier results reported in Refs. In a second interpretation, the effect arises from the Josephson junction transport. Here, the oscillations are based on superimposed Andreev reflection trajectories that loop around the perimeter of the InAs shell and enclose magnetic flux. A similar interpretation has recently been employed to explain the magnetic response of topological insulator nanowire Josephson junction devices in which surface states dominate the transport Lastly, we investigate the relation between the supercurrent oscillations and the orientation of the magnetic field, i.e. the effect of an off-axis misalignment of the applied magnetic field, on the flux periodicity in device B (see Fig. The study of topological quasiparticles in nanowiresuperconductor hybrid structures remains a challenging task due to the strict requirements on the device properties. However, more advanced device layouts such as full-shell nanowire Josephson junctions are a promising approach to loosen the tight margins and making the topological phase space more easily accessible. Here, an essential prerequisite is a fine control of the position of the electron wave function within the conductive area of the nanowire. This can be achieved by employing GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires, where the electrons are confined in the narrow InAs quantum well. Indeed, our GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires equipped with normal contacts revealed pronounced h/e flux-periodic conductance oscillations which confirm the presence of a tubular channel in the InAs shell. Moreover, in nanowires contacted with a pair of closely spaced superconducting Al electrodes, h/2e periodic supercurrent oscillations are observed. By subjecting the system to elevated temperatures and high currents, thereby surpassing the induced proximity gap, we can dynamically switch the oscillation period from h/2e to h/e, transitioning from a twoparticle to a single-particle effect. This, paired with the possibility to suppress the oscillatory behavior of the supercurrent by means of an asymmetrically applied gate voltage, as well as the fact that no such oscillations are observed in devices without an etched junction channel, is a clear indication that the effect originates from the superposition and interference of different Andreev reflection processes within the nanowire Josephson junction and that the complex geometric topology can indeed be imprinted onto the transport in the device. The latter is further confirmed by a semi-classical simulation that investigates the relation between interface transparency, contact geometry and the resulting oscillations. Lastly, we provide compelling evidence for an anomalous relation between magnetic field orientation and oscillation period that can be explained by an enhanced depairing effect and the rapid suppression of the superconducting gap. Our measurements show that GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires are a promising platform for more advanced device concepts based on the Little-Parks effect and to study topological quasiparticles in nanowiresuperconductor hybrid structures. In addition, they provide a template for further investigations regarding the relation between device geometry and the supercurrent oscillations, e.g. the effect of very long junction channels or very short or asymmetric Al contact regions. The GaAs/InAs core/shell nanowires are grown by molecular beam epitaxy on pre-patterned (111)-Si substrates using the self-catalyzed vapor-liquid-solid method. Prior to the growth, the (111) Si substrates are covered with a 20 nm thick thermally grown SiO 2 layer. This is subsequently patterned via electron beam lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE) to generate a set of hole arrays with different diameters ranging from d = 40 nm to 80 nm and varying hole pitches of p = 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 μm. The preparation procedure can be divided into seven process steps (see Ref. The growth procedure of the GaAs/InAs core/shell NWs is initiated by exposure of the pre-patterned substrate to a Ga-flux (about 0.11 μm/h) for 10 min at a growth temperature of 620 • C. During this step, Ga droplets are formed in the holes and act as catalyst particles. Subsequently, the As shutter (BEP(As) = 5 × 10 -6 mbar) is opened to start the growth of the GaAs NW core for a duration of about 105 min, which leads to an average NW length of about 4 μm. Since the Ga flux is kept constant all the time, the GaAs core growth is polymorph, i.e. containing segments of wurtzite and cubic crystal stucture along the NW axis. More details on the growth dynamics of such polymorph GaAs NWs on prepatterened substrates are presented in Ref. Subsequently, the InAs shell growth is performed by vapour-solid overgrowth of the GaAs core. Here, an In flux of about 0.1 μm/h and the same As flux as for the GaAs core growth is applied. The growth temperature is set to 450 • C. In contrast to older studies (see At the end of the InAs shell growth the sample is cooled-down and in-situ transferred to the metal deposition chamber to deposit the Al half shell. No sample rotation is applied for this step and the growth temperature is about -115 • C in order to achieve a smooth Al coverage of the InAs surface. The overall half-shell thickness is about 20 -30 nm. Scanning electron micrographs of the grown core/shell nanowires covered with an Al half-shell are shown in Figs. After the growth, nanowires were transferred from the growth substrate onto a Si(100) substrate. Here, a SEM-based micromanipulator, equipped with a tungsten tip, is used in order to achieve a high level of accuracy. Depending on whether bare core/shell GaAs/InAs or GaAs/InAs/Al half-shell nanowires were character-ized, different types of substrates were utilized. In the case of bare core/shell GaAs/InAs nanowire, highly ndoped Si(100) substrates covered with 150 nm of SiO 2 were used. This layer is employed as the gate dielectric, through which the electron density is varied in the nanowire by applying a global back-gate voltage V g . By means of electron beam lithography and subsequent metallization, Ti/Au contact fingers were defined. Before deposition of the contact fingers Ar + cleaning was applied. To study the dynamics of Josephson junctions in GaAs/InAs/Al half-shell nanowires, we use the measurement platform introduced in For the side view analysis, the nanowires were transferred from growth arrays to carbon grids by gently rubbing the two surfaces. The cross sections were prepared using focused ion beam (FIB) on nanowires transferred to Si substrates by the very same method. The subsequent TEM analysis was carried out using doubly corrected JEOL ARM 200F and JEOL 2100 microscopes, both operating at 200 kV. The EDX measurements were carried out using an Oxford Instruments 100 mm 2 windowless detector installed within the JEOL ARM 200F. Low-temperature magnetotransport measurements of the core/shell nanowires with normal contacts were carried out in a variable temperature insert cryostat at temperatures between T = 1.7 K and 20 K, under an axially applied magnetic field up to B = 4 T. Biasing with a current I = 20 nA between the two outer contacts, measurements were performed in four-terminal configuration by recording the voltage drop with standard lock-in technique between two inner contacts with measurement segment length of 1 μm. Measurements on Josephson junction devices were performed using a four-terminal setup to the NbTi leads contacting the nanowire. Measurements were performed in a dilution refridgerator with a base temperature of 14 mK, equipped with a two axis superconducting vector magnet allowing accurate alignment of field paral-lel to the wire growth axis. Electrical transport measurements were performed using current bias with custom battery powered electronics (TU Delft QT-IVVI rack) (https://qtwork.tudelft.nl/ schouten/ivvi/indexivvi.htm). Measurements of dV /dI at elevated temperature and higher currents in Figs. Here, we employ a semi-classical model adapted from the work of Himmler et al. In practice, following Himmler et al. ˆds ˆdk s j(s, k s ), where θ t is the angle of the trajectory with respect to the cut line in the z direction around the nanowire cross section perimeter. Each path carries a current given by the expression for the zero-temperature current phase relationship of a short channel junction , where τ is the transparency for the given trajectory, and φ 0 -2γ is the gauge-invariant phase difference with Φ the magnetic flux and Φ 0 = h/2e the magnetic flux quantum. In practice, the term γ is zero except for trajectories which cross between the source and drain superconductor while traversing the normal region on the underside of the nanowire. Much like Himmler et al. • Type 1 -Trajectories that begin at s = W S and end at s = W S + L. These trajectories have the same angle of incidence θ i on both superconducting leads. • Type 2 -Trajectories with one end at the short edge of the superconducting leads (at s = W S or s = W S + L) and one end along the long edge of the superconducting lead (z = 0 or z = C). • Type 3 -Trajectories that both begin and end at the long edge of the superconducting leads (z = 0 or z = C). These three types differ in terms of the angle of incidence θ i of the trajectory with the superconductor interface and its relationship with the trajectory angle θ t . In contrast to the work of Himmler et al. where Ẽ = E/∆ 0 is the normalized energy and Z eff is an effective tunnel barrier strength given as where Z = U 0 /ħ v N F v S F is the dimensionless barrier strength introduced by Blonder and Tinkham where r k = k N F /k S F the ratio of wave numbers in the normal conductor and superconductor. The critical incident angle θ c = arcsin (1/r k ) has the effect of cutting off contributions of many trajectories. The critical angle accounts for the suppression of the Andreev reflection probability when momentum cannot be conserved due to the parallel momentum in the normal region exceeding the Fermi momentum of the superconductor. For additional discussion of the modelling and simulation results under different conditions see the Supplemental Material Section VI. In all simulations we have assumed that r v = r k = 1. and M. D. R. prepared the device chips for the DC and AC junction measurements and fabricated the Josephson junctions. P. Z. and R. S. D. carried out the lowtemperature experiments on Josephson junctions and the subsequent data analysis. R. J. and A. M. S. carried out the TEM and EDX studies. P. Z., F. B., A. P., R. S. D. and T. S. wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the discussions. We note that the observed apparent reduction of oscillation period ∆B of the differential resistance dV /dI with off-axis application of magnetic field is similar to an effect observed in InAs nanowire devices with a full aluminium shell. As an example, in Supplementary Figure , where Ψ(z) is the digamma function where ξ is the coherence length, Φ ∥ (B ∥ ) = B ∥ A ∥ is the magnetic flux threading the cylinder where A ∥ = πd 2 F /4 is the cross sectional area, and n is the number of flux quanta. The term α ⊥ (B ⊥ ) applies a pair breaking effect for field perpendicular to the cylinder where Φ ⊥ (B ⊥ ) = B ⊥ A ⊥ . When implemented by Vekris et al. To illustrate the effect of depairing due to an applied perpendicular magnetic field, example simulation results are shown in Supplementary Figures 