We investigate the effect of magnetic field on a photonic-crystal Josephson traveling-wave parametric amplifier (TWPA). We show that the observed change in photonic bandgap and plasma frequency of the TWPA can be modeled by considering the suppression of the critical current in the Josephson junctions (JJs) of the TWPA due to the Fraunhofer effect and closing of the superconducting gap. Accounting for the JJ geometry is crucial for understanding the field dependence. In one in-plane direction, the TWPA bandgap can be shifted by 2 GHz using up to 60 mT of field, without losing gain or bandwidth, showing that TWPAs without SQUIDs can be field tunable. In the other in-plane direction, the magnetic field is perpendicular to the larger side of the Josephson junctions, so the Fraunhofer effect has a smaller period. This larger side of the JJs is modulated to create the bandgap. The field interacts more strongly with the larger junctions, and as a result, the TWPA bandgap closes and reopens as the field increases, causing the TWPA to become severely compromised already at 2 mT. A slightly higher operating limit of 5 mT is found in out-of-plane field, for which the TWPA's response is hysteretic. These measurements reveal the requirements for magnetic shielding needed to use TWPAs in experiments where high fields at the sample are required; we show that with magnetic shields we can operate the TWPA while applying over 2 T to the sample. Superconducting parametric amplifiers have become a key tool in quantum technology because they enable low-noise readout of weak microwave signals Here we present measurements and a theoretical description of the effect of magnetic field on a photoniccrystal Josephson-junction (JJ) TWPA dependent on JJ geometry. Due to the distinct values of the critical field and Fraunhofer period, we can tell apart the two contributions to the tuning of the JJs, which was difficult in previous experiments Two TWPAs are used in this work, each of the commercially available Argo model, made by Silent Waves. The data in Section I, Section II and Section III is measured on one such device, which we call TWPA A, while the data in Section IV was measured on a second TWPA, TWPA B. A detailed description and a summary of device parameters can be found in Appendix A. The circuit diagram and JJ geometry are shown in Fig. The transmission S 21 of the TWPA without a pump and with an optimized pump are shown in Fig. To understand the magnetic field dependence of the TWPA we start with the B ∥,1 direction [as defined in Fig. Starting from the circuit model described in Ref. The full model can be found in Appendix C; the best fit obtained using equations (C6), (C8), and (C11), and using as fit parameters the field B Φ,1 corresponding to a flux quantum through area A, the average Josephson inductance at zero field LJ and the parameter governing the current distribution χ, is shown in Fig. After understanding the effect of the magnetic field based on the pump-off transmission data and circuit model, we now proceed to look at how the amplifier figures of merit, in particular gain and bandwidth, change with B ∥,1 for the TWPA pumped with a microwave tone of frequency f pump and power P pump . An example of the TWPA gain profile is shown in Fig. on the background subtraction). The gain profile shows strong fluctuations that depend on f pump and P pump . In an actual experiment, if one wants to optimize the amplifier gain at a particular frequency, the f pump and P pump can be optimized to give the best signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at that particular frequency. We have instead decided to smooth the gain profile with a 500 MHz window filter and optimized on the maximum smooth gain [see Fig. We have tuned up the TWPA at different fields by optimizing the maximum smooth gain varying f pump and P pump as free parameters using the Nelder-Mead method In this section, we show how the TWPA responds to magnetic fields applied in the other principal field directions B ∥,2 and B ⊥ , as indicated in Fig. There are striking qualitative differences between the dependence on B ∥,2 and on B ∥,1 . In Fig. The B ⊥ field dependence [see Fig. We compare the optimized gain as a function of B ∥,2 and B ⊥ in Fig. From the previous measurements, one can estimate the magnetic shielding required to operate a TWPA in a dilution refrigerator with strong magnetic fields at the device under test. The cryostat used in this experiment features a 6 T/1 T/1 T vector magnet. If the TWPA is mounted on the mixing chamber stage, the stray fields at 6 T will be on the order of 30 mT, which is incompatible with TWPA operation. The magnetic shielding needs to keep the field at the TWPA below 1 mT. For TWPAs with SQUIDs, the shielding requirements are likely more stringent, because the SQUID periods are often chosen to be on the order of 100 μT. A strong magnet that is not operated in persistent-current mode can also lead to considerable low-frequency noise To test the magnetic shields, we measured the transmission through the TWPA and also the optimized gain as a function of the field at the magnet center. If the shielding setup were perfect, no change in the transmission or gain would be observed. We optimized the gain at zero field and ramped both 1 T coils (B x and B y in the magnet coordinate system) of the vector magnet to the maximum and saw no change in f g or in the gain. However, the shields are not sufficient to fully shield the stray fields of the 6 T magnet B z , which likely saturates the Cryoperm shield which also leads to the failure of the superconducting aluminum shield. As shown in Fig. A wide range scan from 6 T to -6 T and additional details can be found in Appendix F. There we show that we can still get high gain at fields up to 3.5 T, but only by running the gain optimization procedure again, since f g shifts the pump settings need to be adjusted. Between 4 T and 5 T, the TWPA transmission eventually breaks down, showing that the shielding can still be improved. However, sweeping the magnet back down, TWPA transmission is restored with a slight shift in f g . We confirmed that a thermal cycle above 1.5 K can reset the device and the shielding capabilities, showing that the shields are not permanently compromised. To have more flexibility and be able to measure even with a compromised TWPA, we installed cryogenic switches that allow bypassing the TWPA (see Appendix F). To use the TWPA with higher fields at the sample, one could either improve the shielding or increase the distance between TWPA and magnet. In our case, the magnet is below the mixing chamber and we simply mounted the shielded TWPA above at a distance of about 40 cm from the magnet center. While one could mount the TWPA higher up and still attach it to the mixing chamber, we investigated the temperature dependence of the TWPA's performance to explore the possibility of mounting it at a higher stage of the dilution refrigerator (see Appendix G). We only measured the gain and transmission and found no change in performance up to about 0.3 K. While we did not perform detailed measurements of the added noise as a function of temperature, our data would suggest that mounting the TWPA at the cold plate (T ≈ 0.1 K) is a viable option. In conclusion, we characterized the magnetic field dependence of a Josephson junction TWPA and found that it strongly depends on field direction. In-plane magnetic field along the direction perpendicular to the junction array can be an option for tuning the frequency of the amplification band of a JJ TWPA by 2 GHz at similar gain and bandwidth with fields up to 60 mT. Magneticfield tuning of a TWPA with 100 μT out-of-plane fields has been shown previously in TWPAs with SQUIDs Regarding the use of the TWPA in a setup with high magnetic fields at a sample, with magnetic shields and about 40 cm distance between TWPA and magnet center, we show that we can operate the TWPA at more than 2 T at the sample. Between 4 T and 5 T, stray fields break superconductivity in the TWPA, but after sweeping the field back down and thermal cycling the TWPA recovers. We also implemented cryo-switches to bypass the TWPA, realizing a versatile test setup for cQED experiments at high magnetic field with a quantum-limited amplifier. The setup was controlled based on QCoDeS (https://github.com/QCoDeS/Qcodes) drivers and logging Datasets and analysis in the form of Jupyter notebooks that create the figures are available on Zenodo with doi 10.5281/zenodo.10728283. The TWPAs in this work are of the Argo model, commercially available and made by Silent Waves. The field dependence with the TWPA at the magnet center is measured on TWPA A, while the shield performance and the temperature dependence are measured on TWPA B. The TWPAs are fabricated and packaged by Silent Waves and delivered as a module with SMA connectors. The two TWPAs are similar to the one described in Ref. Silent waves measured the TWPA figures of merit in their setup before shipping. Electrical losses in the TWPA, a combination of insertion loss and loss within the TWPA, were estimated to be 4-5 dB in the factory calibration. These losses have to be offset by the gain to improve performance. The factory calibration estimated an SNR improvement of 6 dB for a gain similar to the one measured in this work. The measurement setup for the magnetic field dependence of the TWPA is illustrated in Fig. of a bottom-loading dilution refrigerator (Triton 500, Oxford Instruments) with a nominal base temperature of ∼10 mK. A 3-axis 6 T/1 T/1 T vector magnet is used to apply magnetic fields to the sample. In this paper, we do not perform field cooling of the TWPA, but we change the magnetic field while keeping the device at base temperature. During the cooldown, the magnet was shorted and disconnected from its power supply to avoid the creation of vortices during the superconducting transition of the TWPA. For the B ∥,1 axis we mainly used the Oxford Instruments Mercury iPS power supply, which can supply sufficient current to reach a magnetic field of 1 T. For the other two axes, we used a Keithley 2461 SourceMeter as a current source which can only reach magnetic fields of 0.16 T but is more fine-grained and less noisy. For all measurements of the shielded setup, the Mercury iPS was used for all field directions, so we could see the shield performance with up to 6 T of magnetic field at the sample. The alignment of the magnet axes was such that B x , B y , B z , correspond to B ⊥ , B ∥,1 , B ∥,2 . We took angular scans of the magnetic field at fixed |B| to estimate the degree of misalignment, but in particular for the B ⊥ direction, the hysteresis is more significant than any potential misalignment. Misalignment is likely less than 1 • . The TWPA transmission and gain measurements were performed with a Vector Network Analyzer, and an additional microwave source was used as a pump. The wiring was such that we could use a room temperature microwave switch to measure the TWPA in reflection or transmission and to also reverse the pump direction (see wiring diagram Fig. superconducting islands, which we will index with integers n = 0, 1, ..., N J . We will index the Josephson junction between two islands with half-integers: the junction between islands n and n + 1 is indexed n + 1/2. Since the modulation of the Josephson junctions is periodic, we can define the entire array using a small set of parameters. Let LJ and CJ be the average Josephson inductance and capacitance respectively, and let Cg be the average capacitance to ground of an island. Define N p the period of the modulation, η the junction area modulation amplitude. Then we have for any island n and any junction n + 1/2 that where G = 2π/N p . Note that the modulation amplitude of the junction area determines the modulation of L J , C J and C g . For L J and C J , this is clear: these are inversely proportional and proportional to the junction area, respectively. The ground capacitance C g is proportional to the area of the islands because it is achieved using a single ground plane on top of the entire junction array. Then the modulation of C g follows from the geometry of the device, as each island consists of two junction areas, and a negligible area connecting the two junction areas (see Fig. We first consider the plasma frequency f p , above which transmission through the TWPA is strongly suppressed. For any junction it is given by ω p = 1/ L J,n+1/2 C J,n+1/2 . Note that the modulation cancels so that at zero field we get the same plasma frequency for each junction: In general the Josephson inductance L J is related to the critical current I c of a JJ via LJ = Φ 0 /(2πI c ), where Φ 0 is the superconducting flux quantum and I c is proportional to the superconducting gap ∆ and the junction's conductance. An in-plane magnetic field is perpendicular to the current flow in the tunnel barrier, so we expect a Fraunhofer pattern in the critical current I c . Additionally, the superconducting gap is suppressed with field, causing a decrease in I c (the gap suppression is discussed in more detail in Appendix C 3). Therefore, we model the in-plane field dependence of the critical current as where I c,0 and ∆ 0 denote quantities in zero field, φ = BA with A the area penetrated by flux [cf. Fig. For the B ∥,1 magnetic field direction, the Fraunhofertype modulation of I c is identical for all junctions in the array because the field is applied perpendicular to w, the dimension of the Josephson junction that is not modulated. As such, we can apply Eq. (C5) to LJ , rather than separately to each junction. Therefore The Fraunhofer pattern depends on junction geometry as well as on the spatial distribution of the current through the junction. In particular, the sinc functional dependence is derived for a rectangular junction with uniform current. In Ref. where L is the size of the junction (either h or w), and x ∈ [-0.5L, 0.5L]. The uniform current case is recovered in the limit χ → 0. For increasing χ the current density in the interior decreases while the edges stay at J max . The corresponding Fraunhofer pattern amounts to the substitution in Eq. (C6) sinc y → F(y, χ) ≡ χ 2 χ 2 + y 2 y sin y χ tanh χ + cos y . (C8) We now turn to the calculation of the bandgap in the low-power limit. In this regime to calculate the edges of the bandgap, we can use the linearized version of a set of equations found in Appendix B of Ref. relating the amplitudes A and B of waves with wavevector k and k -G and frequency ω. Here l s is the Coulomb screening length, l s = CJ / Cg . For η = 0 (no modulation) the two equations are decoupled and give degenerate solutions for k = G/2 (that is, at the band edge), and for η > 0 a bandgap opens at k = G/2 (see for example Fig. where the prefactor ω p on the right-hand side should be understood to depend on magnetic field as in Eq. (C6). With this formula, we can fit the experimental data. As shown in Fig. For the B ∥,2 direction, due to the modulation in the dimension h of the junctions normal to the field [cf. Fig. where, based on the junction geometry (see In practice, we treat B Φ,2 as a fit parameter and then check for consistency with the expectation from this equation; we find a discrepancy of order 4 %, see Sec. III. This small difference might effectively account for the possibly different current distributions in the two directions, which are not known (in other words, the χ values, which for simplicity we assume to be identical, could, in fact, differ for the two directions). In writing Eq. (C12) we assume B ∥,2 ≪ B c so we can ignore gap suppression for simplicity; it can be straightforwardly included by multiplying the right-hand side of Eq. (C12) by ∆(B ∥,2 /B c )/∆ 0 , see Eq. (C5). The measurable plasma frequency is then given by the smallest one at the given field: For the bandgap, assuming η ≪ 1 and ηπB ∥,2 / BΦ ≲ 1, we can find a simple generalization of Eq. (C11) as follows: we expand Eq. (C12) to first order in η and cast the result in the form similar to Eq. (C12) itself, where y = πB ∥,2 / BΦ,2 . Then repeating the procedure used to arrive at Eq. (C11), we find that the expression for the bandgap has the same form as in that equation if we replace η → βη in the numerator and in the prefactor. ∥,2 at which the bandgap closes can be found by requiring ω + = ω -, which leads to the condition This should be contrasted with the condition β = 0 that corresponds to the (approximate) suppression of the spatial modulation of the Josephson inductance (or critical current). However, with our parameters we have β c ≃ -0.716 and an approximate solution to Eq. (C21), when using Eq. (C18) for β, is , n = 0, 1, . . . The first term on the right-hand side satisfies the condition β = 0; the correction -that is, the second termbecomes smaller (and the approximation more accurate) as n increases. Finally, we note that an approximate position for the center ω c of the bandgap is found by setting η = 0 in Eq. (C11), s . This formula can be easily generalized to estimate the position of the next bandgap by replacing G → 2G, cf. Fig. Here we consider the dependence of the gap on the parallel magnetic field. Such a field can suppress superconductivity through two mechanisms: the Zeeman splitting of the electrons forming a Cooper pair, and the so-called orbital effect -the suppression of the order parameter by the supercurrent that arises to screen the applied magnetic field. In films thin compared to the penetration depth, t ≪ λ, the screening of the field can be ignored, but not the effect of the supercurrent on the order parameter. Whether the Zeeman effect plays a significant role or not depends on the dimensionless parameter where D is the electron diffusion constant, l the meanfree path, and μ B the Bohr magneton Having to consider only the orbital effect simplifies the calculation of the order parameter suppression, which is analogous to that due to paramagnetic impurities, as studied by Abrikosov and Gorkov (AG) with γ = (12 -π)/(4 -π) ≃ 10.32. As shown in Fig. Note that due to the large exponent γ, the last term under the square root in Eq. (C24) can be dropped if α is not too close to unity; even with this additional approximation the deviation from numerics remains below 2% for α ≲ 0.7, corresponding to B/B c ≲ 0.84 (see inset). In this range, we can therefore write where Bc = 2B c / √ π ≃ 1.128B c . This shows that up to fields not too close to the critical one, the gap suppression (at zero temperature) takes the form familiar from Ginzburg-Landau theory [valid near the critical temperature, see Eq. (4.52) in Ref. Given the above discussion of the approximate expression in Eq. (C25), one may wonder if the data can be satisfactorily fitted just by using the Ginzburg-Landau formula shown there. However, setting the critical field to the measured value cannot reproduce the f p of the second Fraunhofer lobe accurately, see Fig. Based on the model we can also estimate the TWPA impedance Z as a function of field, see Fig. Here we briefly discuss some aspects of the TWPA behavior in perpendicular field. In Fig. for the bandgap edges with a different B offset for the two sweep directions. We do not consider a Fraunhofer contribution in this direction as the field is parallel to the JJ current. This model can describe the data reasonably well for a plausible B c,⊥ = 10. which gives ξ ≃ 180 nm. Also, the ratio between B c,⊥ and the parallel critical field B c,∥ for thin films depends on film thickness t as [44] From this expression and the measured critical fields, we would estimate t ≃ 27 nm, within a factor of 2 from the thickness of the thicker film (which has a lower critical field compared to the thinner one). Finally, let us consider the question of hysteresis, which we assume is due to the presence of at least one stable vortex in some of the junctions. For a superconducting strip of width w, the field B L at which a vortex is stable is given by where we used the width w in Table As mentioned in Appendix B the setup allowed measuring the TWPA transmission |S 21 | and the reflection |S 11 | using a circulator at the TWPA output. In the modeling above, we focus on the frequencies of TWPA features (f g and f p ), and in the gain measurements, the calibration of the fridge lines is not so essential. This is partly because the setup to measure the TWPA in field was not particularly adapted to TWPA characterization experiments, where one would carefully calibrate the input and output lines to understand the insertion loss and dissipation inside the TWPA. Nonetheless, we have measured the TWPA |S 21 | and |S 11 |, see Fig. the Fraunhofer minimum, where the transmission drops, the TWPA |S 11 | increases to similar levels as the maximum |S 21 | at low field. Thus we can conclude that the TWPA mostly becomes reflective as expected from the model. Looking closer at the reflection data, we see smaller moving ripples in the TWPA reflection moving as a function of B ∥,1 . They are also visible in the TWPA transmission, but reflection measurements are likely better for seeing small impedance mismatches. It is conceivable that these features can be understood and thus that the disorder in the JJ array can be understood better from measuring a magnetic field dependence of the TWPA reflection because ultimately the Fraunhofer-like patterns contain information about the current profile inside the JJs. Thus, it is possible that magnetic field dependence of TWPAs can be an in-situ diagnostic that can help understand how to make more uniform JJ arrays. We also looked for signs of the TWPA becoming more dissipative for the B ⊥ direction due to vortices in the JJ array or in the large bond pads at the input and output. To this end, we compared the transmission and reflection data as a function of B ⊥ (not shown) with the data in Fig. A TWPA is an amplifier, therefore it has the usual figures of merit, e.g. gain, added noise (noise temperature or noise figure), bandwidth, and saturation power. For the scope of this work, we have focused on gain, bandwidth, gain fluctuations, and saturation power to understand how they change with magnetic field. We took some measurements to estimate the saturation power, but mostly use P pump as a proxy. The setup in the fridge with the magnet was not prepared to accurately measure the added noise of the TWPA precisely, but the TWPA was characterized by Silent Waves before shipping (see Table To estimate gain as a function of frequency, one would ideally do a full calibration of the setup and compare the S 21 with and without the optimized TWPA in the line. Our setup for the magnetic field dependence did not allow this and we did not take a calibration measurement without the TWPA that could be subtracted. There are different ways to still estimate the gain, but they have limitations. One can subtract the pump-off transmission from the pump-on transmission [cf. Fig. We can now compare the three different field directions. In Fig. To understand the TWPA tune-up for a changing f g , we also consider the pump frequency f pump and power P pump , obtained by optimizing the maximum smooth gain at every field, see Fig. Appendix F: Setup and field dependence for the shielded TWPA In this section, we describe the mounting of the TWPA with magnetic shielding and cryogenic switches that allow bypassing the device. This setup then allows flexible use of the TWPA when needed up to the fields allowed by the shielding. The setup is illustrated in Fig. With these stray fields in mind, we contacted a company to make a mu-metal-like shielding setup for the TWPA. A schematic of the shields is shown in Fig. To preserve different functionalities in the fridge, we also installed current-operated cryogenic switches that allow bypassing the TWPA. This is useful, as the TWPA does not work at high fields, and because it only gives a signal-to-noise improvement in a frequency range that is narrow compared to the HEMT. Also, when it is not pumped, it adds frequency-dependent attenuation to the line, as is evident from the wiggles in the pump-off transmission figures. The wiring diagram is shown in Fig. In the main text, |S 21 | data for the shielded TWPA is only shown up to 3.5 T and f gap starts to drop significantly for B z > 2.5 T (see Fig. For the gain measurement as a function of B z for the shielded TWPA, shown in Fig. Appendix G: TWPA temperature dependence We investigate here the temperature dependence of the TWPA response. If the TWPA could be mounted at a higher, warmer temperature stage of the fridge, that would increase the distance to the magnet and decrease the stray field [see Fig. Apart from mounting the TWPA away from a magnet, the temperature dependence is interesting to compare to the magnetic field dependence, because both suppress the superconducting gap. For a BCS superconductor such as aluminum, a good approximation (within less than 2 %) for the temperature-dependent gap is where we estimate the critical temperature T c = 1.27 K based on the thicker 50 nm aluminum film which would have the smaller T c Up to 0.3 K, the almost unchanged |S 21 | and gain suggests that the TWPA is not strongly compromised, but we did not explicitly measure the added noise at each temperature. Given that the TWPA added noise is likely on the order of 0.4 K 