Correlated phenomena such as magnetism and Mott phase are a very controversial issue in twodimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). With the aim of finding the value of correlation strength and understanding the origin of ferromagnetic order in TMDCs, we first identify relevant low-energy degrees of freedom on both octahedral T and trigonal prismatic H lattices in M X2 (M =Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni; X=S, Se, Te) and then determine the strength of the effective Coulomb interactions between localized d electrons from the first principles using the constrained random-phase approximation. The on-site Coulomb interaction (Hubbard U ) values lie in the range 1.4-3.7 eV (1.1-3.6 eV) and depend on the ground-state electronic structure, d -electron number, and correlated subspace. For most of the TMDCs we obtain 1 < U/W b < 2 (the bandwidth W b ), which turn out to be larger than the corresponding values in elementary transition metals. On the basis of the calculated U and exchange J interaction, we have checked the condition to be fulfilled for the formation of the ferromagnetic order by Stoner criterion. The results indicate that experimentally observed MnX2 (X=S, Se) and VX2 (X=S, Se) have an intrinsic ferromagnetic behavior in pristine form, although V-based materials are close vicinity to the critical point separating ferromagnetic from paramagnetic phase. Electron correlation has been an important issue in low-dimensional systems after the experimental synthesis of graphene In the mentioned systems, synthesis of the 3d TM dichalcogenides (TMDCs) such as M X 2 (M =V, Cr, Mn; X=S, Se, Te) has led to a huge experimental and the-oretical interest due to the existence of incredibly rich correlated phenomena ranging from room temperature intrinsic ferromagnetism To prevail over the problems of band gap underestimation in Density functional theory (DFT) based on the local density approximation (LDA) or generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and to improve band dispersion to find proper valley polarization, GWA (in particular self-consistent GW + spin orbit coupling) was performed to induce many-body correction In this systematic study we first identify appropriate correlated subspaces by constructing Wannier function and then by employing the cRPA approach within the full-potential linearized augmented-planewave (FLAPW) method, we determine the effective onsite Coulomb interaction of the d electrons in M X 2 (M =Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni; X=S, Se, Te) for both H and T phases. We find 1 < U/W b < 2 in most 3d-M X 2 , making them moderately correlated materials. In nonmagnetic state, among the metallic TMDCs, the correlation strength U/W b turn out to be 2.7 in T-MnX 2 and 1.8 in H-VX 2 with values much larger than the corresponding values in elementary TMs. Based on U and exchange interaction J values, we discuss the tendency of the electron spins to order ferromagnetically by Stoner criterion. The results indicate that experimentally observed MnX 2 (X=S, Se) and VX 2 (X=S, Se) have an intrinsic ferromagnetic behavior in pristine form. Moreover, V-based materials are close to the edge of paramagnetic to ferromagnetic transition There are two common types of crystal structures in monolayer of TMDCs, which are trigonal prismatic (H) and octahedral (T) coordination For H-M X 2 , because of the trigonal prismatic coordination Fig. The basic unit cell is hexagonal in all TMDCs and consists of three atoms. We consider M X 2 (M =Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni; X=S, Se, Te) for both T and H phases. M X 2 unit cells containing one M and two X atoms, are simulated based on the slab model having a 25 Å vacuum separating them. For the non-spin-polarized as well as for the spin-polarized DFT calculations, the FLAPW method as implemented in the FLEUR code We employ GGA in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) parameterization The DFT calculations are used as an input for the SPEX code To find strength of screened Coulomb interaction we need to identify correlated subspace which helps to construct Wannier functions properly. So, at first we calculate both non-magnetic and magnetic orbital-resolved density of states (DOS) for all systems which will discussed in next section by details. Here, we have only presented the orbital projected band structure of VSe 2 in two phases ,namely T-VSe 2 and H-VSe 2 , in Fig. As shown in Fig. In the H-VSe 2 , a single half-filled band which is predominantly d z 2 orbital character is well separated from the other bands in the non-magnetic calculation. Thus, to find minimal correlated subspace in the H phase we construct Wannier functions for the d z 2 , e g orbitals. These energy levels are mainly responsible for the electronic, magnetic, and transport properties of H-VSe 2 . Note that e ′ g states are far from Fermi level and do not contribute to construct half-filled band at E F . The comparison of the DFT-PBE band structure with Wannier interpolation (see Fig. Note that, since one of the aim of this paper is to determine effective Coulomb parameters for low-energy model Hamiltonian of correlated TM materials, the results before symmetry breaking take place, such as non-magnetic U should be calculated. Despite this, we have done spinpolarized calculation for a few systems. As shown in Fig. In the following, we briefly describe cRPA method. The fully screened Coulomb interaction Ũ is related to where ε(r, r ′′ , ω) is the dielectric function. The dielectric function is related to the electron polarizability P by where the RPA polarization function P (r ′′ , r ′ , ω) is given by Here, φ m (r) are the single-particle DFT Kohn-Sham eigenfunctions, and η a positive infinitesimal. ∆ mm ′ = ε m ′ -ε m with the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues ε m . ß In the cRPA approach, in order to exclude the screening due to the correlated subspace, we separate the full polarization function of Eq. ( where P d includes only the transitions (m → m ′ ) between the states of the correlated subspace and P r is the remainder. Then, the frequency-dependent effective Coulomb interaction is given schematically by the matrix equation It contains, in P r , screening processes that would not be captured by the correlated subspace and excludes the ones that take place within the subspace. The matrix elements of the effective Coulomb interaction in the MLWF basis are given by where w nR (r) is the MLWF at site R with orbital index n, and the effective Coulomb potential U (r, r ′ , ω) is calculated within the cRPA as described above. We define the average Coulomb matrix elements U , U ′ , and J in the static limit (ω = 0) as follows ? ? : where L is the number of localized orbitals, i.e., two for e g and three for t 2g orbitals. This parametrization of partially screened Coulomb interactions is the so-called Hubbard-Kanamori parametrization. Similar to the definition of U (U ′ , J), we can also define the so-called fully screened interaction parameters Ũ ( Ũ ′ , J) as well as unscreened (bare) V . The bare V provides information about the localization of Wannier functions and is a useful parameter in the interpretation of the screened Coulomb interaction parameters. We start with the discussion of appropriate correlated subspace moving from early TiX 2 to late NiX 2 for both T and H phases. To define correlated subspace and also to identify the contribution of different M atoms in the screening, in Fig. For the H phase of M X 2 , the situation for defining the proper subspace is more complicated and differ from one system to another system. The behavior of the electronic structure of 3d orbitals across the TM atoms, from X=S to Te, is similar to the case of T-phase. So, we only depicted the orbital resolved DOS only for M Se 2 materials in Fig. The calculated U values for T-M X 2 (H-M X 2 ) lie between 1.4 and 3.7 eV (1.1 and 3.6 eV) and depend on the ground-state electronic structure, d-electron number, chalcogene X, and correlated subspace. Since, all screening channels with an excitation energy larger than a few eV around E F are contributed in cRPA calculations of M X 2 systems, we see strong screening with large difference V -U values in these materials. As seen in Table SchoNhoff et al. Note that exclusive correlated subspaces must be incorporated into the U calculation, thus, becomes meaningless to compare the Coulomb matrix elements results of H-M X 2 (M =Ti,V,Co,Ni) and T-NiX 2 monolayers with the corresponding results of other M X 2 compounds. For instance, considering the single band d z 2 as a correlated subspace for H-phase of VSe 2 , there is an extra sizable screening channels via d z 2 → e g transition which can reduce Hubbard U with respect to U for the d z 2 + e g subspace. On the other hand, the value of U =1. 43 eV for H-VSe 2 is smaller than the U =1.62 eV for H-TiSe 2 , which does not follow the increasing trend across the TM series. It can be described by the M -3d and X -p projected DOS around the Fermi energy in Fig. On going from S to Te within each M X 2 systems, the lattice constant increase, as a consequence, the longer bond lengths lead to smaller orbitals overlap. It can bring the states closer together energetically as shown in Fig. In Table So far, we focus on the partially screened Coulomb interactions U . To analysis the screening within the correlated subspace, we also calculate fully screened Coulomb interactions Ũ and are reported within parentheses for T- In the following, we discuss the strength of the electronic correlations, namely the ratio of the effective Coulomb interaction U to the bandwidth W b (U/W b ) in TMDCs. Note that the U/W b values are determined for a non-spin-polarized state. Let us start by the results for T phase presented in Table The U/W b for the H-phase of TMDCs does not show any clear trend with significant fluctuation around U/W b = 1 from one system to another. We find that in H-M X 2 (M =Ti, V) with d z 2 correlated subspace, the correlation strength U/W b is maximum, bringing them closer to the Mott phase. It is interesting to compare our calculated U/W b values with reported ones for elementary TMs and other layered materials containing TM atoms. While, the obtained 1 < U/W b < 2 values for TMDC compounds turn out to be larger than the corresponding values in elementary transition metals U/W b < 1 6 , they are significantly smaller than the ones calculated for TM-halides U/W b > 2 As seen above, most of the metallic TMDC compounds having almost large correlation strength are expected to TABLE I: Lattice parameter, orbital type of correlated subspace, bandwidth W b , on-site intraorbital bare V , intraorbital partially (fully) screened U ( Ũ ), interorbital partially (fully) screened U ′ ( Ũ ′ ), partially (fully) screened exchange interaction J( J), correlation strength U/W b , and the DOS at the Fermi level D(EF ) for T-M X2 compounds. H-VSe 2 and T-MnS 2 were among the first TMDCs materials in which room temperature ferromagnetism were detected experimentally in the monolayer limit. Despite this, a few works indicated that the ferromagnetism observe in the TMDCs is not intrinsic and stem from defects or proximity effects We have systematically determined the correlated subspaces and effective on-site and interorbital Coulomb interactions between localized electrons in 3d M X 2 (M =Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and X=S, Se and Te) by employing first ab initio calculations in conjunction with a parameter-free cRPA scheme. These Coulomb interactions not only provide a fundamental understanding of the correlated phenomena such as magnetic ordering, charge density wave, or Mott phase in TMDCs, but these effective cRPA parameters can also be used in model Hamiltonians thus increasing the predictive power of model calculations. Based on Hubbard U , exchange interactions J, and electronic structure, we find that for most of the TMDC compounds the correlation strength U/W b are large enough to be able to put them in moderate and even strong correlated regime. Among TMDC materials, the maximum value U/W b =2.7 eV is obtained in MnS 2 which is almost three time larger than the corresponding value in elementary Mn. We thus expect electron correlations play an important role in model Hamiltonian studies of the 3d-TMDC. Since, there is no agreement on the magnetic ordering of these materials, in particular experimentally observed systems like VSe 2 and MnS 2 , we have checked the condition to be fulfilled for the formation of ferromagnetic order by Stoner criterion I.D(E F ) > 1. The results indicate that both MnX 2 (X=S, Se) and VX 2 (X=S, Se) have an intrinsic ferromagnetic behavior in pristine form, with difference that V-based materials are close vicinity to the critical point separating ferromagnetic from paramagnetic phase T-TiX 2 (X=S, Se, Te), CrS2, and CoX 2 (X=Se, Te) do not satisfy the Stoner criterion. Almost all theoretically predicted ferromagnetic TMDCs fulfill the Stoner criterion, which is reasonably consistent with the our results of spin-polarized total energy calculations and the sizable