The Casimir-Lifshitz force is calculated between a heterogeneous gapped metal surface and a silica sphere attached to an AFM cantilever tip. We demonstrate that heterogeneous surface patches with different off-stoichiometry surface properties lead to changes in the predicted distances for a specific force. This can incorrectly be interpreted as occurrences of surface roughness. With the development of solid-state physics and quantum theory, it becomes clear that the interaction between closely spaced objects originate from the fluctuation of the electromagnetic field defining the Casimir interaction Moving from this theoretical framework to practical investigation, atomic force microscopy (AFM) the technique of choice when the Casimir interaction play a dominant role. Consider, for instance, the case of AFM measurements of materials roughness, where the typical materials profile is extracted based on a specific physical guess of involved interactions. In the case of homogeneous samples, such material profiles can be well theoretically motivated. However, for commonly observed heterogeneous samples, different regions of the samples can result in different interactions with the tip. The observed force is highly sensitive to both surface roughness and optical properties at separations less than 100 nm, as reported by Broeret al. To study and model the dielectric properties of the relevant materials, we performed first-principles calculations using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchangecorrelation functional From the imaginary part (ε ′′ i ) of the dielectric function, the quantity related to forces can be obtained: where the Matsubara frequency is ξ m = 2πkT m/ħ, and the subscript i indicates the medium. As seen in Fig. ( Here, ω j and C j represent the characteristic frequencies and the oscillator strength, respectively. The parameters for each gapped metal are provided in the Supplementary Materials where σ = TE, TM, k B is Boltzmann's constant, ħ is Planck's constant, temperature is T=300 K, and the prime in the sum above indicates that the first term (m = 0) has to be weighted by 1/2. The Fresnel reflection coefficients between surfaces i and j for the transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) polarizations are given by Here κ i = q 2 + ε i ξ 2 m /c 2 , with i = 1, 2, 3 and the Matsubara frequency being ξ m = 2πk B T m/ħ. The relationship between the distance-dependent retarded Hamaker constant, A ret (d), and the corresponding free energy, F (d, T ), is expressed as This figure demonstrates how the interaction strength changes for different material combinations as the distances between particles vary. An attractive interaction can be determined by a positive retarded Hamaker constant, which decreases with increasing distance due to retardation. In the non-retarded (NR) limit of small distances (d → 0) for each material combination, A NR takes a constant value, as listed in Table A N R δ where s correspond to the stoichiometric system (i.e. BaNbO3 and Ca6Al7O16, respectively) and o are the corresponding offstoichiometric system. As a comparison, we show the retarded relative surface correction at ds=80 nm in the right column. truly a constant allowing us to calculate a relation between Hamaker constants and the deviations in surface separation (∆d), and the percentage correction relative to the stoichiometric surface, The resulting percentage corrections in the nonretarded limit are given in Table To this aim, we plot, in a slightly unusual manner, the distance versus force for different Ba 1-x Nb 1-y O 3air-SiO 2 in Fig. The "inverse design" used in the current work means that we study functions d(f ) rather than f (d). The fitting function for d as a function of x = f /[2πR] can thus be written as d = x a log(x) x b e c where a, b and c are unitless fitted parameters given in the Supplementary Materials To conclude, we point out that the current proof-ofconcept calculations considered a sphere made from SiO 2 . However, for an insulating material, one can not apply any potential to perform electrostatic calibration. Hence, it is not possible to estimate contact potentials allowing for the application of a compensating potential during force measurements to minimize electrostatic contributions. As a result, the forces measured in an experimental setup with insulating materials can in principle be contaminated from uncompensated electrostatic contributions due to trapped charges. This is a potential problem that limits any experimental verification of the theory predictions. We stress that while Fig. 