To investigate the transport properties in random alloys, it is important to model the alloy disorder using supercells. Though traditional methods like Virtual Crystal Approximation (VCA) are computationally efficient, the local disorder in the system is not accurately captured as artificial translational symmetry is imposed on the system. However, in the case of supercells, the error introduced by self-image interaction between the impurities is reduced and translational symmetry is explicitly imposed over larger length scales. In this work, we have investigated the Effective Phonon Dispersion (EPD) and transport properties, from first principle calculations using supercells in Al x Ga 1-x N alloy systems. Using our in-house developed code, the EPD of AlGaN is obtained and the individual modes are identified. Next, we discuss our in-house developed method to calculate low-field transport properties in supercells. First to validate our methods we have solved the Boltzmann Transport Equation using Rode's method to compare the phonon limited mobility in the 4 atom GaN primitive cell and 12 atom GaN supercell. Using the same technique, we have investigated the low field transport in random Al x Ga 1-x N alloy systems. Our calculations show that along with alloy scattering, electronphonon scattering may also play an important role at room temperature and high-temperature device operation. This technique opens up the path for calculating phonon-limited transport properties in random alloy systems. In the last decade, ultra-wide bandgap (UWBG) materials have gained significant interest for power electronics applications. Several materials such as SiC 1 , GaN 2-5 , Ga 2 O 3 6,7 has been explored extensively for RF, power, ultraviolet(UV) LEDs and space applications due to their promising properties. Among these materials, there has been significant success of nitride materials for light emitting diodes (LEDs), ultraviolet (UV) LEDs To capture the full disorder of the alloy system, SQS (Special Quasirandom Structures) For a 40-atom supercell conventional DFPT calculations obtained by Fourier interpolation of the dynamical matrix give 120 phonon modes. The large number of phonon modes becomes clustered within the energy window making it difficult to distinctly identify the individual modes. Thus we have used our in-house developed program to calculate the Effective Phonon Dispersion (EPD) which folds the 120 modes into 12 modes. The EPD formalism is based on the scheme proposed by Boykin The projection probability is used to calculate the phonon spectral function which eventually gives us the Effective Phonon Dispersion. The expression for the spectral function is given in Eq.2 where A is the spectral function, p runs over all the SC modes, E p is the supercell phonon eigenenergy in mode p and wavevector ⃗ Q and ε is the energy grid with an increment of 0.01eV. The δ function is approximated as a Gaussian with a standard deviation of 0.0025eV. In the lower Al fraction range, the modes behave similar to GaN but as we further increase the Al fraction in the alloy, the modes tend to behave more like AlN-like modes. However, due to numerical noise in our simulations, the silent B 1 (l) mode is diffused and couldn't be identified distinctly as the others. This technique opens up the path to identify the individual phonon modes in AlGaN alloys which play a crucial role in thermal conductivity properties. The EPD formalism gives us an understanding of the broadening of the phonon modes due to alloy disorder and the characteristics of the individual modes. However numerical noise in the EPDs makes it challenging to calculate the transport properties from the unfolded phonon spectra. It also becomes difficult to calculate the unfolded phonon displacement vectors from the SC to PC atoms which are required for evaluating the electron-phonon interaction matrix elements. Thus in this section, we discuss our in-house developed method to calculate the phonon-limited low-field mobility directly from supercells. In low-field transport calculations, the short-range deformation potentials do not play a significant part, thus in our calculations the acoustic deformation potential and optical deformation potential scattering mechanisms are modeled analytically. The long-range polar optical phonon scattering and the piezoelectric scattering mechanisms are calculated from ab initio first principle calculations. The ionized impurity scattering is modeled using the Brooks-Herring model. The idea discussed in the preceding section can be applied to compute the transport properties in random alloy systems modeled using SC. In this section, the low field transport properties in Al x Ga 1-x N are investigated for different Al fractions. For the transport calculations, the 24-atom SC is generated from the 10-atom PC as the fundamental repeating unit in the 3 × 2 × 1 configuration. To overcome the computational demands associated with extensive simulations, the dimensions of the supercell were reduced from 40 to 24. In our low-field transport calculations for alloys, the alloy scattering mechanism is included in addition to polar optical phonon scattering, piezoelectric scattering, deformation potential scattering, and ionized impurity scattering. Using the concept discussed in the previous section, the polar optical phonon scattering rate is calculated for an electron concentration of 5.5e16 cm -3 at room temperature as shown in Fig. In Fig. In this work, the effective phonon dispersion (EPD) of Al-GaN alloys was investigated using a supercell approach. The individual phonon modes were identified which are in agreement with previously reported experimental data. We have also developed a method to calculate the low-field mobility in supercells using a modified q-grid approach. Our calculations for GaN supercells show good agreement with GaN primitive cell calculations which validates our method. This technique opens up a path to calculate phonon limited mobility from a first principles approach in disordered alloy systems modeled using supercells. The low field transport mechanisms in Al-GaN alloys are investigated which shows that along with alloy scattering, electron-phonon scattering mechanisms may also play an important role in limiting the low field mobility at high temperatures. . Calculated and experimental phonon energies at Gamma Point for Al 0.25 Ga 0.75 N Al 0.5 Ga 0.5 N J. Casady and R. W. Johnson, "Status of silicon carbide (sic) as a widebandgap semiconductor for high-temperature applications: A review," Solid-StateElectronics 39, 1409Electronics 39, -1422Electronics 39, (1996)). 2 S. Nakamura and G. Fasol, The blue laser diode: GaN based light emitters and lasers (Springer Science & Business Media, 2013).