Nanoporous gold (np-Au) has found use in applications ranging from catalysis to biosensing where pore morphology plays a critical role in performance. While morphology evolution of bulk np-Au has been widely studied, knowledge about its thin film form is limited. This work hypothesizes that mechanical compliance of the thin film substrate can play a critical role in the morphology evolution. Via experimental and finite-element-analysis approaches, we investigate the morphological variation in np-Au thin films deposited on compliant silicone (PDMS) substrates of a range of thicknesses anchored on rigid glass supports and compare those to the morphology of np-Au deposited on glass. More macroscopic (10s to 100s of microns) cracks and discrete islands form in the np-Au films on PDMS compared to glass. Conversely, uniformly-distributed microscopic (100s of nanometers) cracks form in greater numbers in the np-Au films on glass than on PDMS, with the cracks located within the discrete islands. The np-Au films on glass also show larger ligament and pore sizes possibly due to higher residual stresses compared to the np-Au/PDMS films. The effective elastic modulus of the substrate layers decreases with increasing PDMS thickness, resulting in secondary np-Au morphology effects including a reduction in macroscopic crack-to-crack distance, an increase in microscopic crack coverage, and a widening of the microscopic cracks. However, changes in the ligament/pore widths with PDMS thickness are negligible, allowing for independent optimization for cracking. We expect these results to inform the integration of functional np-Au films on compliant substrates into emerging applications, including flexible electronics. Nanoporous metals are a subclass of functional nanostructured materials that have drawn significant attention from the research community for a combination of unique characteristics including large surface area-to-volume ratio, high electrical and thermal conductivity, and a network structure of interconnected pores with feature sizes that can be tuned from the nanometer to micrometer range and biomedical devices The thin film forms of nanoporous metals enable their integration into functional devices (e.g., sensors) via conventional photolithographic techniques In this work, we focus on the crack and ligament-pore morphology evolution in np-Au thin films deposited on compliant silicone substrates of varying thicknesses that are secured to an additional rigid substrate. This system modulates the "effective elastic modulus" of the substrate experienced by the np-Au thin film as a function of the silicone layer thickness. In addition, we provide a comparison of the morphologies in the np-Au films on the compliant substrates to those of the films on the rigid substrate which has a much higher elastic modulus. Thermo Scientific glass slides (25 × 75 × 1 mm) were used to anchor the polydimethyl siloxane (PDMS) "silicone" substrates. 15 × 8 mm PDMS substrates of thicknesses 0.25, 0.50, 1.59, and 3.18 mm (as per manufacturer datasheet) were prepared from BISCO HT-6240 silicone sheets obtained from Rogers Corporation. Silver (Ag), gold (Au), and chromium (Cr) sputtering targets of 99.95% purity were procured from Kurt J. Lesker. Nitric acid (70%) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The glass slides were cleaned with isopropanol followed by drying with a nitrogen gun before attaching the PDMS substrates. The glass and PDMS surfaces forming the glass/PDMS interface were exposed to air plasma for 1 minute at 30 W in a PDC-32G plasma cleaner from Harrick plasma. This treatment facilitated the covalent bonding between exposed surfaces of the PDMS and the glass. A Lesker LAB Line sputter system was used to deposit the AuAg alloy film (precursor to np-Au thin film), which consisted of sequential deposition of a Cr adhesion layer (~160 nm-thick), a planar Au intermediate layer (~80 nm-thick), and finally a Au 0.24 Ag 0.76 (atomic%) alloy layer (~600 nm-thick). Prior to deposition, the substrate surface was treated in air plasma at 30 W for 2 minutes to improve adhesion of the thin film to the substrate. The AuAg thin film samples were dealloyed for 15 minutes by immersing them in 70% nitric acid heated to 55°C on a hotplate followed by rinsing in deionized water and drying them under nitrogen flow. To characterize the morphology of the np-Au thin films at micro-and nanometer length scales, top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained using a FEI Nova NanoSEM430 microscope at magnifications ranging from 150X to 150,000X. The atomic percentages of Au and Ag in the thin film before and after dealloying were determined by an Oxford X-Max Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) detector in conjunction with a FEI Scios Dualbeam FIB/SEM system. The SEM images were processed and analyzed by a combination of ImageJ Overlay masks in ImageJ were used on segmented images to obtain pseudo-colored visualizations of the individual islands bound by macroscopic cracks. The thicknesses of the thin films were measured using a Park Systems XE7 atomic force microscope (AFM) over a step of the thin film by masking part of the glass substrate with a Kapton tape during deposition. The AFM was also used to characterize the topographies of the np-Au film surfaces by scanning 50 × 50 μm areas of the film in the tapping mode. The AFM images were processed and analyzed using Gwyddion to extract a "waviness" parameter. Briefly, a total of nine line scans along the x-axis on the AFM topographic images of three different np-Au islands (three lines separated by 10-15 μm per island) were analyzed for each np-Au/substrate combination. The analysis line locations were adjusted to avoid adsorbed particulates that could cause artifacts in the scan profile. The waviness profiles along those lines were extracted using a cutoff wavelength of 4 μm to filter out the roughness. The average waviness for each line scan (i.e., the average heights of the waviness profile along each line scan) were then computed. To corroborate the results of the experiments, finite element analysis (FEA) simulations were performed using COMSOL Multiphysics software. These involved simulating np-Au thin films on a PDMS substrate with the PDMS fixed at the bottom to mimic the rigid glass substrate. The first set of simulations was performed to calculate the "effective elastic modulus" of the anchored PDMS substrates wherein the PDMS layer was 5 mm in both length and width with the thickness varying from 0.01 mm to 5 mm. A tetrahedral mesh with an element size range of 0.501 μm to 2.5 μm was used for this set of simulations. The second set of simulations was performed to estimate the elastic strain energy in the thin film-substrate system, and the horizontal and vertical edge displacements at the metal film/substrate interface before and after dealloying. We refer to the Cr and Au layers as the adhesion layers for the rest of the paper. The PDMS layer was 2.5 mm in both length and width for these simulations with the thickness varying from 0.05 mm to 5 mm. The thicknesses of the AuAg (post-deposition) and np-Au (post-dealloying) films were 600 nm and 500 nm, respectively, and the Cr and Au adhesion layers had thicknesses of 160 nm and 80 nm, respectively. A free quadrilateral mesh with an element size range of 0.079 μm to 318 μm was used. A swept mesh was applied for all the layers (Figure A minimum of two different samples with a minimum of three different images per sample per length-scale was used for statistical comparisons. A student's t-test was performed to compare two different sample groups, with p-values below 0.05 deemed statistically significant. The statistical tests were performed with OriginPro. Figure The films on glass are instead free from macroscopic or microscopic cracks prior to dealloying but show profuse microscopic cracking after dealloying. As seen in Figure Higher magnification SEM (35kX) reveals the presence of "microscopic" cracks in the thin films as shown in Figure That is, the maximum percent crack coverage on thicker PDMS is ~25 times higher than the maximum coverage on thinner PDMS. At the smallest length scale, we investigated the ligaments and pores at 150kX magnification in the np-Au thin films as shown Figure To simulate the effective elastic moduli of anchored PDMS of different thicknesses h P , a twodimensional PDMS mesh consisting of tetrahedral elements with a minimum size of 0.501 μm was generated (Section 2.4). A force of f = 0.0001 N along the x direction was applied to two points that were w 0 = 200 μm apart on top of the PDMS, and the resulting distance w between the points was recorded (Figure Equating this with the elastic strain energy E P ε 2 /2 in an isotropic linear elastic solid and solving for the Young's modulus E P as a function of PDMS thickness h P gives Figure The most prominent differences in the np-Au film morphologies occur between the np-Au/glass and np-Au/PDMS/glass systems and constitute the main experimental observation. This is attributed to the difference in the surface stiffness experienced by the metal thin film deposited on rigid glass versus compliant PDMS with elastic moduli of ~70 GPa MPa where the subscripts f and s correspond to the film and substrate, respectively, E ̅ = E/(1 -ν 2 ) and f(ν) = (1 -2ν)/[2(1 -ν)] for the plane strain condition, E is the elastic modulus, and ν is Poisson's ratio. Equation Here, we will separate the discussions into the main effects (comparison of morphological features between glass and PDMS) and the secondary effects (comparison of morphological features within different PDMS thicknesses). As seen in Figure Our AuAg thin film deposited using the same procedure should result in a comparable residual stress for AuAg. Considerable volume contraction in the np-Au film during dealloying However, the macroscopic cracks in np-Au/glass occur at a smaller length scale than those on np-Au/PDMS and the crack patterns are different. In the np-Au/PDMS films, the pre-existing macroscopic cracks in the precursor film widen and additional macroscopic cracks appear due to dealloying stresses, resulting in the formation of discrete islands which are not observed in np-Au/glass films. In contrast to the substrate-dependent trend of macroscopic cracks described in the previous section, np-Au/glass films exhibit a higher crack surface coverage compared to the np-Au/PDMS films (Figure The mechanisms for microcrack formation in the np-Au films differ for glass and PDMS substrates. Initially the thin films in the stack (AuAg, Au, Cr) have similar effective elastic moduli after deposition. After dealloying, the elastic modulus of the top film layer (np-Au) is reduced by approximately four times. The eigenstrain that develops in the np-Au film during dealloying increases the tensile stress in the film overall despite the increased compliance of the np-Au, while the compatibility condition at the substrate interface subjects the substrate to a compressive stress as evidenced by the increasing deformations in PDMS as a function of its thickness (Figure As shown in Figure As discussed in the previous section, there were significant differences in thin film morphology between glass and PDMS substrates where the latter has at least two orders of magnitude lower effective elastic modulus. Although not as prominent, there were also morphological differences in np-Au films on PDMS substrates as a function of the substrate thickness, and these are referred to as secondary effects. With increasing PDMS thickness, these effects include a marginal decrease in the island widths indicating a higher density of macroscopic cracks (Figures As mentioned in Section 4.1.2, we attribute the emergence of microcracks in np-Au films on thicker PDMS substrates to increasing buckling due to their decreasing effective moduli (Figure Taken together, larger buckling amplitudes results in larger crack widths as a function of increasing PDMS thickness (Figure It is important to note that with decreasing PDMS thickness, the film cracking behavior should gradually approach that of glass. This likely occurs around a thickness of 0.01 mm at which the effective elastic modulus passes above the modulus of np-Au (showed by the dashed red line in at 20 GPa in Figure The morphology and topography evolution in np-Au thin films at different length scales on rigid glass substrates was compared to that on compliant PDMS substrates anchored to glass supports. In addition, the variation in the film morphology with the change in PDMS thickness (0.25-3.18 mm) was investigated. There was no crack formation in the as-deposited films on glass, but cracking occurred at all length scales after dealloying np-Au on glass. The density of the larger macroscopic cracks for np-Au/glass was on par with that of the films on the thickest PDMS, though they occurred at a slightly smaller length scale due to different underlying mechanisms. The average crack area and crack coverage percentage of the microscopic cracks for np-Au/glass films, however, were more than two-fold higher than the maximum values for any np-Au/PDMS film. The median ligament and median pore widths in np-Au/glass were also markedly higher compared to those in np-Au/PDMS, possibly due to higher tensile stress experienced by the films on the stiffer glass substrate. The cracking pattern evolved from rigid glass to compliant PDMS, with the extent of cracking changing with the variation in PDMS thickness. Unlike the macroscopic cracks in np-Au/glass, those in np-Au/PDMS formed discrete islands with the island widths decreasing with increasing PDMS thickness, indicating an increase in crack density. The microscopic cracks in np-Au/PDMS showed a similar trend as the macroscopic cracks, with the extent of cracking increasing with PDMS thickness. The microscopic cracks were absent in the films on thinner PDMS substrates, but on thicker PDMS substrates the average crack area and crack coverage percentage increased by several fold. However, the median ligament and median pore widths did not exhibit any significant variation with the change in PDMS thickness. In summary, by changing the thickness of a compliant substrate and hence modulating its effective elastic modulus at the substrate-thin film interface, the crack architecture across different length scales could be engineered for np-Au thin films. It would likely be possible to fabricate nearly crack-free np-Au films on PDMS by changing the deposition conditions (e.g., using cryogenic sputtering, or pre-straining the PDMS before sputtering) to suppress the postdeposition macroscopic cracking in AuAg and by choosing the optimum thickness of PDMS (~ 0.50 mm) to eliminate the microscopic cracks. Thus, the findings here are expected to inform the design of np-Au functional coatings on compliant substrates for a variety of applications, including wearable sensors. where pores turn into pure black (0) and the ligaments turn into pure white (255) pixels. The segmentation was followed by the application of a median filter to smoothen the edges of the morphological features. The resulting binary image was considered as a matrix of pixel values consisting of 0 and 255. A chord length distribution (CLD) approach was used to measure the ligament and pore widths where a chord is a line segment with each of its interior points located in one of the two phases (ligament or pore) and the end points touching the interfaces with the other phase. To find the CLD, we used a custom MATLAB script which scans pixel-by-pixel along each row and column of the matrix and records whenever it encounters the pixel value of the desired phase. For example, after the code starts running, each time the algorithm detects a pixel value of 0, it records it as one of end points of a pore chord and stops assigning pixels to that chord after a value of 255 is encountered. This identifies the chord of a specific length corresponding to a pore and after scanning along every row, all the horizontally-oriented pore chords were identified. Similarly, scanning along the columns provided the ligament and pore widths along the vertical axis. The macroscopic cracks on glass do not form discrete islands and hence, cannot form elliptical outlines. Therefore, the SEM images for np-Au/glass were made binary to segment the cracks (Figure SI 4) and the MATLAB script for ligament and pore width extraction was applied to the binary images to compute the distances between neighboring cracks. However, distributions of distances found by the two methods do not match exactly since the definitions of crack-to-crack distance are different for the two methods. To make the crack-to-crack distances in np-Au/glass comparable with those in np-Au/PDMS computed by the elliptical outline method, the distances on glass were multiplied by a factor of 1.53. This factor was found by applying the MATLAB script to images of np-Au on 3.18 mm-thick PDMS to measure the crack-to-crack distances. Then, the ratio of the median distances by the elliptical method (~153 μm) to that obtained by the MATLAB code (~100 μm) was used as the upscaling factor for the distances on glass. The rationale for choosing the 3.18 mm-thick PDMS substrates for calculating the upscaling factor is that the density of cracks in the films supported by them is visually similar to those in the glasssupported films. Three images from each sample (total two samples) at different locations for each type of filmsubstrate combination were analyzed. We performed an additional set of experiments where we performed 5 minutes of dealloying at To estimate the effective surface modulus, two points on the PDMS top surface were displaced axially in the x-direction per the nominal strain values, and the effective stiffness was estimated from the force-displacement plots. The initial separation distance between two such points on the PDMS was fixed at 200 μm. To estimate the variation in strain energy upon dealloying, the thermal strains in the AuAg, Au, and Cr layers are applied as a pre-strain in the dealloying simulations.