Fibrous mats with hydrophobic and oleophilic properties have been fabricated and used as absorbents of oil from stable water in oil emulsions. The mats were prepared by initially mixing two polymers, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polycaprolactone (PCL), in a common solvent. The subsequent electrospinning of the prepared solutions resulted in the production of mechanically stable fiber mats, with enhanced oil absorption capacity and oil absorption selectivity from the emulsions, compared to the pure PMMA or PCL mats. Furthermore, the formed fibrous substrates have been successful in the absorption of oil from different emulsions with a wide range of oil content, from 10 to 80 v.%. The performance of the fibrous mats was optimized by the incorporation of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles, reaching oil absorption capacities of 28 g/g and negligible water uptake, in the emulsions with 80 v.% oil content. hydrophobicity, to flocculate oil droplets, and then remove the oil attached to the nanoparticles by using their magnetic response Despite the high efficiency of these demulsification processes, a significant drawback should be noted. These approaches present severe risks of producing secondary pollution (i.e. release of the nanoparticles) on the treated/recovered liquids and the environment Trying to avoid these risks, polymeric materials with specific wetting properties (simultaneous hydrophobicity/ oleophilicity) Regarding the separation of stabilized emulsions, nanocomposite coated electrospun poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) nanofiber mats were able to separate by filtration oil in water emulsions with 0.1 wt.% oil concentration, stabilized by a nonionic surfactant To do so, we followed a common approach to tune the properties of electrospun fiber mats, which is the solvent blending of two compatible polymers, PMMA and polycaprolactone (PCL). The appropriate selection of the blends' composition plays a key role to the final characteristics of the fiber mats, such as the fibers' morphology and size, fibrous mat's porosity, fibers' entanglement, surface properties, and thermal and mechanical properties The maximum oil absorption capacity reached is 25.3 g/g for the emulsions with 80 v.% of oil, but with simultaneous absorption of a small amount of water. To further improve the oil absorption capacity of the system, and especially its oil selectivity during the emulsions separation process, we modified the PMMA/PCL fiber mats by introducing 1.0 wt. % of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles as fillers. In this way, we formed highly selective nanocomposite fibrous mats, able to remove oil efficiently from a broad range of water in oil emulsions, with maximum oil absorption capacity 28.0 g/g and negligible water absorption, for the emulsions with 80 v.% oil concentration. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) (Mw ~120,000 by GPC, ρ=1.17 g/cm 3 at 25 °C) and polycaprolactone (PCL) (Mw ~80,000 by GPC, ρ=1.15 g/cm 3 at 25 °C) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich in the form of pellets. Chloroform (CHCl3, Purity (GC) > 99.8%, ρ=1.48 g/cm 3 at 20 °C Sigma-Aldrich) was used as received. Hydrophobic silicon oxide fumed nanoparticles (AEROSIL® R 812) with sizes between 5 and 40 nm (ρ≈2 g/cm 3 at 20 °C, Evonik Industries AG), were used as nanofillers for the fabrication of the nanocomposite fibers. Light mineral oil (ρ=0.84 g/cm 3 at 25 °C, Sigma-Aldrich) and distilled water were mixed to obtain emulsions, using Span80 (Sorbitan monooleate, non-ionic, viscosity 1200-2000 mPa•s at 20 °C, HLB value 4.3±1.0, ρ=0.986 g/cm 3 at 25 °C, Sigma-Aldrich) as an emulsion stabilizer. Preparation PMMA/PCL fiber mats: First, PCL and PMMA were dissolved separately in CHCl3 at concentrations of 0.164 g/mL and 0.370 g/mL, respectively, by shaking for 24h at room temperature (RT). Then, the PCL and PMMA solutions were mixed in the appropriate proportions to obtain P MMA-PCL blends with weight ratios of 30/70, 50/50 and 70/30 (PMMA-PCL) and were shaken for 24h at 800 rpm and RT The fiber mats morphology was examined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL Model JSM -6490). Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) was employed to identify the presence and distribution of the SNPs on the surface of the fibers. The fibers were coated with a thin gold layer (10 nm) using a Cressington 208HR sputter coater (Cressington Scientific Instrument Ltd., U.K.) prior to the SEM observations. Their average diameter and distribution were determined using FIJI / ImageJ The porosity of the fiber mats (also known as volume fraction of voids (Vf)) is defined as the ratio between the gaseous phase volume and the total volume of the porous sample. It was calculated according to the Equation 1, where ρr represents the relative density of the porous material, and equals to the ratio between the bulk density of the fiber mats (ρf) and the density of the corresponding solid materials (ρs) The mechanical properties of the fiber mats were experimentally determined by uniaxial tensile tests using an Instron 3365 machine. Tensile testing was conducted under environmentally controlled conditions (20 °C, 40% RH). To collect stress-strain curves, the samples were stretched at a rate of 5 mm min -1 . The Young's modulus, ultimate tensile strength (UTS), and elongation at maximum load were extracted from the resulting curves. Five specimens for each type of sample were tested (PCL, PMMA, as well as 70/30, 50/50, and 30/70 PMMA/PCL, and SNP/PMMA/PCL with SNPs 1.0 wt.%), and the results were averaged to obtain a mean value and the standard deviation in each case. Finally, the water contact angle (WCA) and oil contact angle (OCA) average values and standard deviations were determined by taking 5 measurements for each kind of sample using 5 μl drops, with a KSVCAM200 (Kruss, Germany) contact angle goniometer at RT. To from stable water in oil emulsions using light mineral oil, one surfactant with low Hydrophilic-Lipophilic Balance (HLB) values, between 4 and 6, is needed. For this reason, the Span80 (HLB value 4.3±1.0) was chosen. The emulsions were prepared by dissolving Span80 into the oil phase (0.5 wt.%) and shaking for 24h In order to control the stability over time (5, 15, 30, and 60 min) of all the water in oil emulsions (10, 30, 50, and 80 v.% of oil) a Nikon 139 Eclipse 80i Digital Microscope was employed for their morphological characterization. To prepare the samples for the microscope analysis, a small amount of the emulsion (one drop) was placed on a microscope glass slide. Then it was covered with a coverslip, and finger pressed to make it as thin as possible. Finally, the drop size distribution was analyzed using FIJI / ImageJ 44 on the obtained micrographs for all the aforementioned time intervals. The absorption capacity (C) experiments were performed using three samples of each type of fiber mats. Samples of 0.02 g and dimensions of ~2.000x2.000x0.025 cm 3 were placed into 2 ml of pure water, pure oil, or emulsions. The maximum oil or water absorption capacity (Cmax) of the fiber mats was calculated by measuring the weight of the fibers before (wb) dipping into pure oil or pure water for 15 minutes, and immediately after (wa) their extraction from the liquids (Equation C max = (w a -w b )/w b [2] C oil = (w a′ -w b )/w b [3] C water = (w a -w a′ )/w b [4] Among the different kinds of fiber mats produced by electrospinning (PCL, PMMA, and PMMA/PCL), the PMMA ones were the less compact, and thus, more difficult to handle. Indeed, the PCL and PMMA/PCL fibers were forming macroscopically homogeneous and compact membranes during the electrospinning process, indicating that the presence of PCL improves the structural integrity of the fiber mats, forming durable substrates as shown in Fig. To investigate the possibility to use the composite fibers as oil adsorbents for water-oil separation, their wettability properties were first determined, as this is a crucial factor for the materials' ability to separate emulsions Accordingly, the hydrophobicity of PMMA/PCL fibers increased by increasing the PCL content, with WCA values of 135°±3° for the 70/30 PMMA/PCL fibers, 142°±1° for the 50/50 PMMA/PCL fibers, and 145°±4° for the 30/70 PMMA/PCL fibers, with the values of the last two being even higher than the ones of the pure PCLFbs. This is most likely attributed to the increased surface roughness of these two kinds of samples, resulting in an increased area of air (WCA=180°) trapped under the measured water drops, and thus in augmented WCAs However, despite their high WCA values, the fibers' surfaces in all cases present a significant water adhesion, which can lead to some water entrapment between the membranes' voids upon their immersion in water. This is confirmed by dipping the fibers for 15 minutes in distilled water and measuring their water absorption capacity, using equation ( (1.6±1.6 g/g). Regarding the oil wettability of the produced fiber mats, when oil droplets are placed on the mats' surface, they rapidly spread and penetrate the structure within few seconds (OCA≈0o), independently of the fibers' composition. After dipping the fiber mats in pure oil, the maximum oil absorption capacity is determined using equation ( In fact, the low structural integrity of the pure PMMA fibers upon oil absorption is the limiting factor for their oil absorption capacity. Subsequently, the performance of the developed fibrous systems as oil absorbers in stable water in oil emulsions is presented. Initially, different stable water in oil emulsions were prepared (10, 30, 50, 80 v.% of oil) using Span80 as emulsifier (see Supporting Information S.I-3), with the vast majority of droplets' diameter well below 2 m. As shown in Fig. On the other hand, PCL fiber mats are mechanically stable upon immersion in all emulsions but show an almost constant and low oil absorption capacity (about 3.9±0.3 g/g) independently of the oil concentration in the emulsion. However, when mixed with PMMA, their performance changes completely with the 70/30 and 50/50 PMMA/PCL mats to reach maximum oil absorption capacities of 25.3±1.1 g/g and 24.4±0.2 g/g, respectively, for emulsions with the highest oil content (80 v.%). The 30/70 PMMA/PCL are much less efficient to remove the oil from the emulsions, with oil absorption capacities below the one of the PMMA, independently of the oil content, possibly attributed to the high amount of PCL, which reduces their performance. Regarding the water absorption simultaneously with the oil during the emulsions separation experiments (Fig. Fig. Therefore, it is established that the incorporation of SNPs in the 50/50 PMMA/PCL fibers (SNP/PMMA/PCL mats) is necessary, in order to obtain a suitable material for water-oil separation by oil absorption from stable water in oil emulsions. The SNP/PMMA/PCL mats reach optimal oil selectivity in the emulsions' separation tests (i.e. negligible simultaneous water uptake), and as enhanced maximum oil absorption capacity of 28.4 g/g (for oil content 80 v.% in the emulsions), indicating that the fibrous nanocomposite mats are ideal for the proposed application reaching a high efficiency of separation. Although it is not possible a direct comparison of the performance of these fibers as oil absorbents with previous works from the literature, in which fiber mats have been successfully employed as filters for stable emulsions In summary, we demonstrate that electrospun fiber mats composed by PMMA and PCL can effectively remove oil from stable water in oil emulsions in a large range of oil contents. In particular, combining the right concentrations of PMMA and PCL, the fiber mats can have significantly higher oil absorption capacity than the fiber mats made of each polymer separately. The proposed PMMA/PCL fiber mats can be efficiently used in a wide range of emulsions with oil contents from 10 to 80 v.%. The ability to remove oil from high oil content emulsions without any damage of the fiber mats was found to be related to the mechanical properties and the good entanglement of the PMMA/PCL fibers. Addition of 1.0 wt.% of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles in the 50/50 PMMA/PCL fibers, results in an optimization of the oil selectivity and of the oil absorption capacity of the system, reaching the final value of oil absorption of 28 g/g with a simultaneous negligible water absorption from all the stable emulsions tested. The possibility to form the fiber mats with a straightforward and single step process and to use them efficiently in a wide range of stabilized emulsions makes them a suitable candidate for the remediation of the oil present in emulsified industrial wastewaters. The authors acknowledge Simone Lauciello (Electron Microscopy Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia) for his assistance with the HRSEM analysis. 