High temperature superconductivity was recently found in the bilayer nickelate La3Ni2O7 (La327), followed by the discovery of superconductivity in the trilayer La4Ni3O10 (La4310), under high pressure. Through studying the electronic correlation of La4310 with DFT+DMFT, and further comparing it with that of La327, we find that the eg orbitals of the outer-layer Ni cations in La4310 have a similar (but slightly weaker) electronic correlation to those in La327, in which the electrons behave as a non-Fermi liquid with Hund correlation and linear-in-temperature scattering rate. Our results suggest that the experimentally observed "strange metal" behavior may be explained by the Hund spin correlation featuring high spin states and spin-orbital separation. In contrast, the electrons in the inner-layer Ni cations in La4310 behave as a Fermi liquid. The weaker electronic correlation in La4310 is attributed to more hole-doping, which may explain its lower superconducting transition temperature. Recently, the experimental discovery of La327 hightemperature superconductor with a maximum transition temperature (T c ) of 80 K under high pressure has attracted considerable attention The nickelate Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phases La n+1 Ni n O 3n+1 are of perovskite-like structure with n-layer NiO 6 octahedrons. The NiO 2 layers in RP phase is structurally similar to the CuO 2 layer in high-T c cuprate superconductors In the past years, studies on La4310 primarily have been focused on the metal-to-metal phase transition at approximately 130 to 160 K In this Letter, we investigate the electronic correlation in La4310 and further compare it to that in La327 using density functional theory based calculations combined with dynamical mean-field theory calculations (DFT+DMFT). We find that the correlations are layerdependent as well as orbital-dependent. The underlying reason is the different occupation numbers and hence different valences for the Ni cations, which implies different hole dopings. The inner NiO 2 layer is more hole doped and weakly correlated, where the Ni cations have a higher valence. Similar to the NiO 2 layer in La327, the outer NiO 2 layers in La4310 are more correlated and behave as a non-Fermi liquid with a characteristic T -linear scattering rate for the electrons, given rise to by the Hund spin correlation indicated by high-spin states and spin-orbital separation. Compared to La327, the slightly weaker correlation in the outer NiO 2 layers and the Fermi-liquid middle NiO 2 layer in La4310 may explain its lower superconducting T c . Method. We carried out charge self-consistent DFT+DMFT calculations using the code EDMFT, based on WIEN2K Results. We studied the newly reported RP phase of the nickelate family, focusing on the trilayer La4310 under high pressure of 44.3 GPa, whose structure belongs to the space group I4/mmm (No.139) with lattice parameters a = 3.661 Å, c = 26.278 Å Orbital-dependent and layer-dependent electronic correlation. We calculated the self-energy of the correlated two e g (Ni 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 ) orbitals of the inner and outer Ni layers. The imaginary parts of the Matsubarafrequency self-energy ImΣ(iω n ) are shown in Fig. On the other hand, for both the outer-layer Ni e g orbitals, the magnitudes of their ImΣ(iω n ) are larger than those of the inner-layer, and the corresponding intercepts of their ImΣ(ω) can be observed around zero frequency, indicating the outer-layer Ni atoms have stronger correlation than the inner-layer ones, as shown in Fig. T -linear scattering rate. Then, we studied the electronic scattering rate γ ≡ -ImΣ(ω = 0) for the different orbitals. It corresponds to the inverse of the quasiparticle lifetime To reveal the physical origin of the T -linear scattering rate, we further studied the imaginary-time spin-spin correlation functions C ss (τ ) = S z (τ )S z (0) and orbitalorbital correlation functions C oo (τ ) = O(τ )O(0) , where S z is the total spin, and O is the charge difference n(d z 2 ) -n(d x 2 -y 2 ). In Fig. The temperature dependence of C ss (τ )/C ss (τ = β/4) and F (τ )/F (β/4) Conclusion. We have investigated the non-Fermi liquid and Hund correlation in La4310 using DFT+DMFT. Our findings indicate that the inner layer possesses weak Hund correlation and a Fermi liquid behavior, mainly because of more hole doping and a higher valence than +2.67. The outer layers, similar to the NiO 2 layers in La327, possess strong Hund correlation, which gives rise to a non-Fermi liquid. In addition, the outer layers have a T -linear scattering rate, may explain the "strange metal" observed in experiments, whose origin is suggested to be the Hund spin correlation. Compared with La327, the slightly weaker electronic correlation in La4310 may explain its lower superconducting T c . This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11934020). Computational resources were provided by Physical Laboratory of High Performance Computing in RUC.