Sapphire and rubies (undoped and Cr-doped α-Al 2 O 3 single crystals) have been deformed in compression at temperatures lower than those previously used in studies of dislocations in the basal slip plane (see part I). Above 1400°C, several features associating stacking faults out of the basal planes and partial dislocations (dissociation, faulted dipoles) have been observed in previous transmission electron microscope investigations. The formation of these features involves climb controlled by atomic diffusion. Properties of climb dissociated dislocations are discussed in relation with dislocation dynamics. TEM examination of dislocation structures at lower deformation temperatures (1000-1100°C) shows that similar features are formed but that they often imply cross-slip. A new mechanism for the formation of faulted dipole by glide is presented and an explanation for the 30° Peierls valley orientation is proposed. The presence of chromium has a small influence on stacking fault energies on planes perpendicular to the basal plane. In the first part of this work (part I), we have investigated the dislocation microstructures introduced in sapphire and ruby (undoped and Cr-doped α-Al 2 O 3 single crystal) deformed under a specific load orientation, dubbed aa. The deformation temperature at which the behaviour of basal dislocations can be explored in samples void of deformation twins is lowered to near the brittle to ductile transition (900-1000°C) It is generally agreed that in the course of a deformation test at elevated temperature, whenever a non-screw dislocation is arrested at some obstacle, climb-dissociation then nucleates and proceeds, forming a sessile configuration In this context, the present paper focuses on the fine structure of dislocations and their debris in sapphire and rubies deformed by basal slip to the lower yield point, down to 900-1000°C, with special attention paid to the influence of the Cr dopant. Details on the experimental procedure can be found in part I. It is worth emphasizing that further to the foils sliced parallel to the basal plane used in Part I, other foils with normals far away from 2.1. Dissociation distance and habit plane. substantially between {10 1 0} and {1 1 20} planes, in accord with shell-model computations To further characterize dissociation properties in sapphire and the influence of doping on climb dissociation, we have conducted a dedicated determination of the stacking fault habit plane and of the dissociation width in this plane. This was achieved through a stereographic analysis of dislocations introduced by deformation at 1300°C. The distance d between the images of the two partial dislocations is shown as a function of the angle  between the electron beam and the [0001] direction in Table where  is a measure of the deviation of the dissociation plane from the plane perpendicular to the basal plane, corresponding to pure climb dissociation. One has: The dissociation distance h and the stacking fault habit plane can be determined from this formula and the various ( i , d i ) pairs measured experimentally (table One can see from table 2 that Cr 3+ impurities do not modify the stacking fault habit plane which remains nearly perpendicular to the (0001) plane in all cases (  0). Dissociation thus occurs essentially by pure climb as this had been previously reported for sapphire The question arises as to which extent the stacking fault energy reduction by Cr additions could affect mechanical properties in the range of temperatures where dissociation by climb operates. When climb-dissociated, dislocations are unable to drag a stacking fault (the backstress given by 3 1/2  bas /b where  bas is the stacking fault energy in the basal plane, amounts to about 7.3 GPa for  bas = 2 J.m -2 ) and they are therefore sessile in basal slip unless they can recombine forming a glissile core Moreover, the CRSS dependence on temperature is smooth and monotonous for sapphire It is then interesting to understand why the formation of sessile dislocations in overwhelming proportions should have little effect, if any, on the mechanical properties of sapphire and rubies. In order to appreciate the stresses involved in the transformation from a climb-dissociated to a glissile configuration, one may consider the stress experienced by one partial on its way toward recombination. When, for instance, this partial is located at 5b from its companion, the interaction stress is actually of the order of several GPa, clearly in excess of the CRSS. It is therefore pointless to assume that the recombination of a climb-dissociated dislocation could be assisted by the external stress, let alone the necessary matter transport and rearrangement between partials. In this respect, we believe that the conclusions drawn by Shibata et al. The apparent insensitivity of mechanical properties to climb dissociation might imply either that there is always a large amount of undissociated dislocations available for glide in sapphire or else that dissociated dislocations can be easily rendered mobile, for instance by taking advantage of constrictions (also dubbed nodes) along the stacking fault ribbon. Although the former mechanism is possible but difficult to prove, only the latter possibility is actually consistent with observations. The constrictions that are observed in places on climb-dissociated dislocations (e.g. C in Figure Suppose now that before the above climb-dissociated portion had time to expand sideways, a similar nucleation event occurs elsewhere on a still compact core portion of the dislocation under consideration. Then there is a finite probability for the partial that had climbed "down" at the other site, to climb "up" in this new location. The two segments are dissociated in opposite directions with respect to the basal slip plane. Climb dissociation subsequently proceeds to equilibrium separation, expanding from both nucleation sites until the two dissociated portions merge at which point the partial that had climbed up on one side must connect to the partial that has climbed down on the other side, and vice versa. In doing so the two partials must pass through a unique configuration at which they both belong to the basal plane. We believe that this is where the constriction is formed as a result of the high value assumed by the stacking fault energy calculated in this plane 2.4. Zigzagged dissociated dislocations. In accord with previous observations in sapphire deformed at 1400-1500°C We note that since the configuration is all coplanar in the prism plane, no explanation in terms of a possible anisotropy of the stacking fault energy may apply. By making use of the method developed in One is left with an interpretation in terms of Peierls valleys for partial dislocations that directions in { 10 1 0 } and {12 10} planes, respectively. A high chromium concentration would result in shallower minima thus smoothing out the segmentation. Although other loops or hairpin-like dipoles are not observed in the vicinity of the perfect elongated loop (a) shown in Figure The (a) configuration of Figure Faulted dipoles have been reported in previous studies In addition to the profuse dipolar defects such as (b) in Figure With μ = 157 GPa, b = 0.475 10 -9 m, R a = 100 R,  = 0.2 J/m2 and  = 0.25, one finds that the faulted and unfaulted dipoles have the same energy for R = 83 nm. In other words, elasticity predicts that perfect and faulted dipoles should be energetically favoured for heights larger and smaller than 83 nm, respectively. This is in fairly good agreement with the separation of 50 nm reported for faulted dipoles As for pseudo dipoles, the above mechanism involving a reaction between two partials yields a similarly faulted configuration when the two pseudo-dipolar dislocations are both 30° in character. They indeed exhibit a pair of screw partials with antiparallel Burgers vectors which may therefore mutually annihilate by glide. The resulting faulted pseudo-dipole is comprised of the remaining two 60° partials which, at variance from the dipole case, exhibit non collinear Burgers vectors. This configuration has not been identified by TEM so far. If the two pseudodipolar dislocations are 30° and edge, only one partial out of four is screw and one can easily show that there is no driving force for cross-slip annihilation. It is likely that a variant of the preceeding glide-mediated faulting mechanism has operated in the configuration shown in Figure TEM examination of dislocations after deformation at 1000-1300°C of sapphire and rubies reveals many features similar to those observed previously after deformation above 1400°C. Dissociation out of the slip plane is observed down to 1100°C, a temperature at which offslip-plane configurations can be attained by glide in certain orientations. The later mechanism is essentially activated at low temperature at 30° dislocation where one partial is screw and can glide in a prism plane. This mechanism is consistent with the formation of faulted features in sapphire deformed at low temperature. The stacking fault energy in the prism plane is roughly the same in {112 0} and {1 1 00} planes. It decreases slightly in the presence of about 1% chromium in sapphire. Climb dissociation is largely irreversible but glide might be reactivated at constrictions that are formed randomly on climb-dissociated dislocations. In the vast majority of documented cases, such as ordered alloys (e.g. DO where  is the angle between the Burgers vector of the parent dislocation and the dislocation line direction. The contributions of the screw and edge components are written   