In the context of electromagnetic absorption, it is obvious that for an infinite planar periodic structure illuminated by a plane wave, the maximum attainable absorptance, i.e., perfect absorption, is theoretically limited to 100% of the incident power. Here we show that an intriguing possibility of overcoming this limit arises in finite-size resonant absorbing arrays. We present a comprehensive analysis of a simple two-dimensional strip array over an infinite perfectly conducting plane, where the strips are loaded by reconfigurable impedance loads. The absorptance is defined as the ratio of the dissipated power per unit length of the strips to the incident power on the unit length of the array width. The results show that even regular arrays of impedance strips can slightly overcome the limit of 100% absorptance, while using aperiodic arrays with optimized loads, absorptance can be significantly increased as compared with the scenario where the strips are identical. In principle, by tuning the reconfigurable loads, high super-unity absorptance can be realized for all angles of illumination. Absorbers for electromagnetic waves have a pivotal role in various applications, such as, for example, energy harvesting Conventional realizations of thin resonant absorbers are based on metasurfaces, most commonly in the form of multi-element resonant arrays In this work, we examine a simple, analytically solvable example of a two-dimensional array of impedance strips and present two distinctive absorbers based on arXiv:2402.11971v1 [physics.app-ph] 19 Feb 2024 finite-length arrays. One scenario concerns the truncated periodic array where all the strips are loaded by identical impedance loads, while the other focuses on arrays with globally optimized load impedances. Both of these absorbers exhibit absorptance that exceeds 100% for a certain angle of plane-wave incidence. Our results show that optimization of load impedances globally can enable absorption of more incident power as compared to conventional finite-width regular arrays. This research reveals that it is possible for absorber designs to go beyond "perfect absorption" in electrically thin metasurfaces. We consider geometrically periodic strip arrays placed over a perfectly conducting (PEC) ground plane at a distance h. The strips are periodically loaded by impedance loads with the impedances per unit length equal to Z L [Ω/m]. The distance between the insertions l is electrically small, so that the loaded strips can be considered as effectively uniform impedance strips. As the reference case and the initial design step, we first consider an infinite periodic array, where all the load impedances Z L are identical. The array is illuminated by a TE polarized plane wave E inc = E 0 e -jk0 sin θiy-jk0 cos θiz x, where k 0 = ω 0 √ ε 0 μ 0 is the wave number in free space, see an illustration in Figs. For simplicity of analysis, we assume that the array is in free space. According to Ref. where the grid parameter α ABC = k0d π log d 2πr eff (see For an infinite strip array, the induced currents flowing on the strips are calculated by where the reflection coefficient R for TE polarized plane . The induced currents at infinite strip array absorbers, given by (3), will be later utilized for comparison with finite-sized absorbers. In practice, designed periodic arrays need to be truncated to finite-size structures. The corresponding finitesize strip array is shown in Figs. where the dissipated power is and the incident power on the array's geometric area (per unit length along x) is . This definition is used to evaluate whether the designed absorber has a super-directive property or not. If the absorptance is larger than 100%, it means that the designed absorber is a super-directive absorber, as it absorbs more power than is falling on its surface. For finite-sized absorbing arrays, the total external electric field E ext x (y, z) = -j2E 0 sin(k 0 cos θ i z)e -jk0 sin θiy at the coordinate (y, z) is the superposition of the incident wave and its reflection from the ground plane. For a given set of load impedances ⃗ Z L = (Z L,0 , Z L,1 , . . . , Z L,N -1 ) T , the induced current can be easily obtained by a simple matrix operation according to [17, Eq. ( where the column vector of the induced currents is represented by ⃗ I = [I 0 , I 1 , . . . , I N -1 ] T , while the total external voltage vector is represented by , and the mutual impedance matrix Z m . The entry of the self impedance matrix 0 (2k 0 h) is the self-impedance of strips n, and the entry of the mutual impedance is the mutual impedance between strips m and n. After knowing the induced currents, the absorptance and dissipated power can be found from ( For an infinite array, the required load impedance for perfect absorption, corresponding to various designated incident angles, is calculated by The absorptance for such an infinite-sized strips array can be calculated analytically as 1 -|R| 2 , since there is no transmission. Here, results are obtained by using commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics. The absorptance as a function of the incident angle is depicted with a black dashed curve in Figs. For oblique incidence at θ i = 80°, I inf = j9.5579×10 -6 A, the amplitude is a constant number while the phase varies linearly, as e -jk0 sin θiy . The induced current distribution is depicted in Figs. ef. Opt. FIG. In practical designs, the infinite periodic is trancated into a finite-sized strips array where all elements are loaded by identical impedance loads, calculated from the theory of infinite arrays. The corresponding load impedance is obtained from For a better understanding of the super-absorption mechanism, the induced current distributions are depicted in Figs. As is seen from Fig. Here, the genetic algorithm (GA), a global optimization method, is used to find the optimal load impedances. The objective function is defined as O = min.{-P dis }, that is, the goal is to dissipate as much incident power as possible. The absorptance of the optimized arrays as a function of the incident angle is shown by blue dashed curves in Figs. Superdirective arrays usually have narrow frequency bandwidth due to fast variations of the currents and associated high-amplitude reactive fields. Because also in the optimized absorbers we observe fast variations of the induced currents, we next investigate the frequency bandwidth of absorption, comparing the frequency response of the optimized and reference absorbers of different sizes. In order to find the frequency response of the designed structures, one needs to define the frequency dependence of the load impedances as passive bulk loads. We assume that the load resistances do not depend on the operation frequency, R(Z L,n ) = R n , while the reactive (capacitive) parts of the load impedances I(Z L,n ) depend on the operation frequency as that of capacitors: The load capacitances C n are found by setting them to the values that correspond to the required reactances I(Z L,n ) at the design frequency f 0 . Then, we model the loads in COMSOL Multiphysics as capacitors and resistors, so that the frequency response of the structure can be calculated. The calculated absorptance as a function of the normalized frequency for different-sized absorbers is depicted in Fig. To conclude, we have shown that simple finite-size geometrically periodic arrays can absorb more power than is incident on their surfaces and discussed the physical mechanism of this effect. Superabsorption is achieved by optimizing the induced surface waves whose strong currents enhance absorption in the array elements. The fields of these waves have fast variations over the array plane. Thus, the key requirement for achieving superdirective absorption is the use of arrays with a subwavelength period, to allow proper control of surface modes. Comparing performance of conventional uniform arrays with the optimized arrays, we have found that especially for arrays designed to absorb waves at near-grazing angles, the absorptance can be significantly increased over the conventional limit of 100%. For the case of optimized arrays, both the induced currents and load impedances change rapidly over the surface, leading to higher dissipated power. Numerical simulations of scattered fields show a shadow that is wider than the array cross section, as well as the fields of the excited surface waves that enhance the dissipation process over the whole array surface. Although here we considered a simple, analytically solvable example of thin impedance-loaded strips, similar effects can be possibly achieved in arrays of arbitrary small antennas loaded by bulk impedance loads. Importantly, the structure can be reconfigured for super-