We show by extensive Monte Carlo simulations that we need a multi-spin interaction in addition to pairwise interactions in order to reproduce the temperature dependence of the experimental magnetization observed in the perovskite compound Pr0.67Sr0.33MnO3. The multi-spin interaction is introduced in the Hamiltonian as follows: each spin interacts simultaneously with its four nearestneighbors. It does not have the reversal invariance as in a pairwise interaction where reversing the directions of two spins leaves the interaction energy invariant. As a consequence, it competes with the pairwise interactions between magnetic ions. The multi-spin interaction allows the sample magnetization M to increase, to decrease or to have a plateau with increasing T . In this paper we show that M increases with increasing T before making a vertical fall at the transition temperature TC , in contrast to the usual decrease of M with increasing T in most of magnetic systems. This result is in an excellent agreement with the experimental data observed in Pr0.67Sr0.33MnO3. Furthermore, we show by the energy histogram taken at TC that the transition is clearly of first order. We also calculate the magnetic entropy change |∆Sm| and the Relative Cooling Power (RCP) by using the set of curves of M obtained under an applied magnetic field H varying from 0 to 5 Tesla across the transition temperature region. We obtain a good agreement with experiments on |∆Sm| and the values of RCP. This perovskite compound has a good potential in refrigeration application due to its high RCP. There is always a challenge for theorists to elaborate models which yield quantitative agreements with experiments in materials science. On the one hand, this is because experimental samples are not always "clean" due to various causes such as the presence of impurities, dislocations, domains etc. in addition to the method of sample preparation. On the other hand, theoretical models are often too simple to describe experimental samples. Of course, if models contain some main ingredients, they can at best get qualitative agreements with experiments. In magnetism, theories often start with a Hamiltonian containing pairwise interactions with a spin model (Ising, XY, Heisenberg, Potts, ... spins). The interaction can be of short range, long range or can be of various kinds causing frustration In this paper we are interested in a family of perovskite compounds. Perovskite compounds have recently used in many applications ranging from solar cells with high-efficiency photovoltaics In the particular case of the perovskite compound Pr x Sr 1x MnO 3 , we have however seen that experimentally M can have a plateau from T = 0 up to the transition temperature T C as seen in Pr 0.9 Sr 0.1 MnO 3 In this paper, we use again the multi-spin interaction to study the case of the compound Pr 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 . This compound has been experimentally studied. It shows an unusual behavior of M different from the previous cases: M increases as T increases up to T C . before making a very sharp transition In section II, we describe our model Hamiltonian and discuss about the multi-spin interaction. The numerical simulation method is also explained. In section III, we show our results and compare to the experimental data on the temperature dependence of M . In section IV, we calculate the magnetic entropy change |∆S m | under an applied magnetic field μ 0 H up to 5 Tesla. We deduce the RCP for μ 0 H=1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Tesla. These results are in good agreement with experimental data. Concluding remarks are given in section V. A. Experimental results of Pr0.67Sr0.33MnO3 Let us describe the structure of Pr 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 . It is crystallized in an orthorhombic structure with Pnma space group comprising lattice parameters on three crystalline axes a = 5.4734 Å, b = 7.7284 Å and c = 5.4880 Å. This structure can be modelized as a body-centered tetragonal lattice with the longest axis is the b crystal axis. The Mn 3+ and Mn 4+ occupy the basal planes (a, c), the centered sites are occupied at 67% by Pr 3+ and 33% by Sr. Since Sr has no spin, the centered sites are magnetically dilute. The outermost spins of Mn 3+ occupy the orbital 3d 4 , so its spin is S = 4 × 1/2 = 2 by the Hund's rule. The outermost spins of Mn 4+ occupy 3d 3 , so its spin is S = 3 × 1/2 = 3/2. As for Pr 3+ its outermost electrrons occupy the orbital 4f2, so its spin is S = 1 by the Hund's rule. Note that the Mn 3+ and Mn 4+ ions occupy randomly the basal sites while Pr 3+ occupy random centered sites . We show in Fig. Experiments have been performed on this compound FIG. The Pr x Sr 1-x MnO3 compounds have complicated structures due to the random mixing of spins S = 2 of Mn 3+ , S = 3/2 of Mn 4+ and S = 1 of Pr 3+ in addition to the zero-spin Sr sites . These are strongly disordered systems of mixed spins, specially when x is between 0.4 and 0.8. To our knowledge, there are so far no theoretical works taking into account the above-mentioned factors, except our two previous There are 6 kinds of pairwise interactions in addition to the multi-spin interaction: J 1 : Interaction coupling of a Mn 3+ ion with a NN Mn 3+ ion, J 2 : Interaction coupling of a Mn 3+ ion with a NN Mn 4+ ion, J 3 : Interaction coupling of a Mn 4+ ion with a NN Mn 4+ ion, J 4 : Interaction coupling of a Pr ion with a Mn 3+ ion, J 5 : Interaction coupling of a Pr ion with a Mn 4+ ion J 6 : Interaction coupling between two Pr ions on the adjacent bct units. The pairwise Hamiltonian is written as where S i is the spin at the lattice site i, <i,j> is made over spin pairs coupled through the exchange interaction J ij . H is a magnetic field applied along the z axis. Depending on the kinds of the ions at lattice sites i and j, we have J ij equal to one of the above six kinds of interaction. Using only these interactions and with spin models Ising and Heisenberg, we did not succeed to reproduce the curve M versus T without a multi-spin interaction, as shown in The multi-spin interaction is written as where K is the interaction strength and the sum runs over all Mn sites i. The spins S i interacts simultaneously with its four nearest neighbors (NN) S i1 , S i2 , S i3 and S i4 on the xy plane (see Fig. FIG. Note that the Ising pairwise interaction obeys the reversal symmetry, i. e. the properties of the system are invariant by the operation (S i → -S i ,S j → -S j ). Also, the properties of the system do not change under the Mattis transformation (S i → -S i ,J ij → -J ij ). This transformation just changes the feromagnetic ordering to antiferromagnetic ordering, but the transition temperature and the critical exponents remain the same (see Ref. Let us note that in our model the spin of amplitude S is a multi-state Ising spin, taking its values among -S, -S + 1, .., S -1, S (2S + 1 values). This is contrast to the standard Ising model ±S. The multi-state Ising spin allows for a smooth variation of energy in the spin updating. We first use the Metropolis algorithm x Mn 4+ 1-x with x = 0.67 We use periodic boundary conditions in all directions to reduce surface effects. The first 10 5 MC steps are used to equilibrate the system, and the averaging of physical quantities is taken during the following 10 5 MC steps. The calculated physical quantities are: the average internal energy E per spin, the specific heat C V per spin, the magnetization M and the susceptibility χ per spin. They are defined by where M l (l = 1, 2, 3) is the average of spins of kind l: l = 1 for Mn 3+ , l = 2 for Mn 4+ , and l = 3 for Pr 3+ , defined as where N l is the number of spins of kind l. Note that the Landé factor g in ( Let us emphasize that in the updating of spins, we use the over-relaxation method by Creutz Before showing our results, let us emphasize that for the purpose of the present paper, we do not need to use highperformance MC techniques such as the multi-histogram method The temperature dependence of M is the main experimental data which is used for our modeling. The energy is not experimentally accessible. The specific heat and the susceptibily are not experimentally available. To fit with the experimental M , the best set of parameters we found are where J is the energy unit for the simulations. Its real value is obtained when we fit the simulation M (T ) curve with the experimental M (T ). C is the reduction coefficient applied for interactions along the z axis whose lattice constant is much longer than those in the xy plane. Using the above interaction values we obtained the MC transition temperature T C (M C) ≃ 3.684J. To find the value of J, we use the equality T C = 291K = 3.684J since the transition temperature is proportional to the energy unit. We have J ≃ 79 Kelvin. This J is however an effective interaction since there are several kinds of interaction. Let us show the MC curve and the experimental magnetization M in Fig. Several remarks are in order: • The MC data coincide with the experimental magnetizatio for the whole temperature range from 0 to T C , • The magnetization increase slighly with increasing T up to T C , this unusual behavior was also experimentally observed in early works • The peak of χ is very sharp. Knowing J, we can calculate the interactions J 1 , J 2 , ..., J 6 in real unit. For example the dominant interaction J 2 = 1.95J = 154.04 Kelvin, and J 1 = -0.1J = -7.9 Kelvin etc. The MC result gives E 0 (M C) = -14.1 in unit of k B J. The GS energy in real unit (meV) is Now, if we view the system as an "effective" ferromagnet with an effective exchange interaction J ef f , we can use the following expression for the ground-state (GS) energy where Z = 6Mn+8 × 0.67Pr=11.36 is the effective coordination number at a Mn lattice spin, S ef f is the effective spin length given by S ef f = (0.67 × 2 + 0.33 × 1.5 + 0.67 × 1)(0.67 + 0.33 + 0.67) ≃ 1.503. Note that this value of the effective exchange interaction, very close to J (=79 K), is in the order of magnitude of interactions in magnetic materials with T C at the room temperature Let us show the internal energy per spin E and the specific heat C V in Fig. • The GS energy is 14.1 in unit of k B J in the figure which is -96 meV [see • E has a very stiff slope at T C . We will show below by energy histograms that in fact E is discontinuous at T C , • The peak of C V is extremely high as a consequence of strong fluctuations due to the muli-spin interaction. We will give a discussion below. We show now in Fig. In the theory of phase transitions and critical phenomena, a transition of first order is characterized by a discontinuity of the first derivatives of the free energy (see chapter 7 "Phase Transitions" in Ref. We have realized the energy histogram at and near T C . We show in Fig. To conclude this section, we emphasize on two points: i) the multi-spin interaction allows for an excellent agreement on M (T ) between our model and experiments, ii) the energy histogram technique clearly shows evidence that the transition in the present perovskite compound is of first order. In order to calculate the magnetic entropy change, we apply a magnetic field H i ∈ (0, ..., H) on the sample at a given T . We calculate the magnetization M (T, H). This is shown in Fig. Let us calculate the magnetic entropy change |∆S m | defined by the Maxwell's formula FIG. where δM is the variation of the magnetization at H when T varies from T to T + δT . This formula is discretized and used in experiments and simulations as The experimental magnetic entropy change |∆S m | using this formula is shown in Fig. . We show in Table In this paper, we proposed a model Hamiltonian which includes a multi-spin interaction in addition to the pairwise interactions to study the magnetic properties of Pr 0.67 Sr 0.33 Mn 3+ 0.67 Mn 4+ 0.33 . We compared our results with experimental measurements of the magnetization M versus temperature T which shows that M (T ) unusually increases with increasing T before making a vertical fall at the transition temperature T C . With our model Hamiltonian, we performed numerical simulations and obtained results of M (T ) in good agreement with experiments for the whole range of temperature from 0 to T C . In addition, we showed a clear evidence of the first-order character of the transition, using the energy histogram technique. We also calculated the magnetic entropy change and the Relative Cooling Power (RCP) for applied fields from 1 to 5 Tesla. These results are in agrrement with experimental data. The high coefficients RCP make the present compound a potential candidate for magnetic refrigeration. We note that with the multi-spin interaction, we previously succeeded to obtain results for Pr 0.9 Sr 0.1 Mn 3+ 0.9 Mn 4+ 0.1 To conclude, we believe that the multi-spin interaction is necessary for studying materials with complex structures such as in the above-mentioned compounds whose behaviors are unusual.