A series of First Principles calculations is undertaken to characterize and explain the enhancement of the catalytic activity of oxygen on top of very disordered nanomaterials of Pt. As the adsorption of OH fragment on top of the surfaces is known as the limiting factor in the Oxygen Reduction Reactions (ORR) process in these systems, our calculations propose to determine the influence of the local geometry of the various sites on the adsorption energy of OH in order to discover a simple descriptor allowing to predict the reactivity at these surfaces as a function of their morphology and strain. For this purpose, the geometry of Pt slabs with various thickness Electrochemical storage and conversion systems such as electrolysers and fuel cells will be major actors. They can store electrical energy into chemical energy via water electrolysis (for example into the H-H bond of the H2 molecule), and convert back this chemical energy into electrical energy via a fuel cell when needed The research in electrocatalysis has focused on binding electrochemical reactions intermediates in a balanced way (that is neither too strong nor too weak). A prominent example is the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), the cathodic reaction in low temperature proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). Weakening the chemisorption energies of the ORR intermediates (OHads, OOHads and Oads), and thus enhancing the overall kinetics proved experimentally possible on platinum (Pt, the most active pure catalyst for the ORR in acidic media at medium temperature T 353 K) surfaces alloyed with an early In this context, we pursue our investigation of distorted Pt surfaces as an elementary model for the walls of the Pt nanomaterials. Following a detailed analysis of the geometry of these systems that can be found in Ref. After relaxation of the slabs, DFT calculations permit to access the full distribution of distances around every surface sites. This work aims to use this knowledge to form a geometrydependent descriptor, capable of predicting the adsorption energy of OH without having to consider the impossible DFT calculation of all the adsorption energies on every sites. For this purpose, we realized that the sites could be recast into families or types that shall be describe in details in paragraph 2.a. For selected sites of these families, a series of DFT calculations of the adsorption energy of OH were operated and stored in a data base. This allowed an acceptable and feasible amount of calculations permitting to fit the behaviour of this energy with respect to a suitable variable, representing the aspect of the local geometry of the site on which the adsorption is considered. We establish this law of behaviour in paragraph 4 before illustrating its scope. a. Strategy of calculation. Although made of an assembly of fcc nanocrystals of Pt, orientated both [111] surface (hexagonal symmetry). Slabs of 3, 5 and 7 8x8 layers involving 200 to 448 atoms were prepared (see Fig. As the amount of vacancies involved in the process of elaboration of our nanoparticles is unknown, the number of point defects we introduced in the slabs were considered as a variable in our problem : for this purpose, in the case of the 5 layers slab which is considered as our reference, , the density of vacancies, denoted ρv in the followings, were varied from a low value of 30 % to the upper limit of 50 %, by successive increase of 5 %. Below 30 %, the phenomena of reconstruction of surface were found similar to the one encountered in the 30 % case and 50 % found large enough to explore all the variety of morphologies made possible by the massive introduction of vacancies in these systems. Such a procedure led after relaxation to the determination of the equilibrium structure (surface and inner structure) of the walls of the Pt nanoparticles for various thickness, obtained under varying conditions: the larger ρv, the more our model of wall is supposed to represent an actual wall resulting from a large and penetrating diffusion of atoms of the Ni substrate during its elaboration. Low densities of defects could result from a slow and moderate diffusion of Ni inside the Pt multilayers under forming. b. Settings of the calculation. To compute structural and electronic properties of our slabs, we applied the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Numerical integrations in the Brillouin zone were performed by means of the Hermite-Gaussian method. A single k-point mesh (Γ point) was found enough for total energies of the investigated compounds to be converged within 10-3 eV. To optimize the geometry of cells, we have performed a volume optimization of the computational cell as well as internal relaxations of the atomic positions using the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. Since the large amount of defects we introduce at random in the slab is expected to break the overall symmetry, this later were switched off in order to allow the forces on the ions as well as stress tensor to be calculated without the constraint to follow the space group operators imposed by the initial geometry. We have considered the atomic coordinates are fully relaxed as the size of the individual forces were less than 0.001 eV/Å. We applied a residual minimization method for this purpose. A series of brief first principle molecular dynamics simulations aiming at heating the soobtained equilibrium geometries until 700 K and immediately followed by a quench (relaxation at 0K of the heated conformation) were performed in order to check the stability of our structures. This paragraph is devoted to the detailed study of the slab made of 5 layers of Pt and ρv=40%. This particular slab, selected among all the ones we have investigated will allow us to extract and comment the major features of our Pt nanoparticles. It has to be viewed as a reference and starting point from which further studies can be carried out. Indeed, this slab were selected because it presents the advantage to display a rich variety of surface geometries. Moreover, the acceptable number of atoms it contains (380 atoms) allows to perform the large number of very timeconsuming calculations needed to get a first valuable insight into the physics and chemistry of our compounds. Our results will be generalized and augmented in section 3 by making use of the data of our whole set of slabs of lower (3 layers) and upper (7 layers) dimensions. a. Categorization of the sites. Despite all the sites of surface are found non-equivalent due to the strongly disordered character of the surface and inner structure of our compounds, a categorization of these sites into groups of similar behavior has to be attempted in order to get a clear picture of their space distribution into the surfaces (are the sites distributed at random or in domains) as well as their response towards the ORR activity. To achieve our goals, a series of variables defining such a categorization has to be chosen: these variables have to permit to recast the sites into classes of atomic sites of similar structural parameters, and, here, hope is at this stage, that each class will display a similar behavior regarding ORR activity. The analysis of the local geometry of numerous sites of surface belonging to slabs of Pt of various thickness and densities of defects (see Figure i.e. where σλ and σδ are the acceptance limits corresponding to the discrete values of the average first neighbor distances, λi, and spectral width, δi of site i as obtained by our DFT calculations, respectively. N is the number of sites in the surface. Figure These plots of density in the (λ,δ) map reveals that: i/ Most of the surface sites display a CN of 6, 7 and 8. The sites with remaining CN ii/ for a fixed CN, the average first neighbor distance hardly varies from one site to another. iii/ two types of population are obtained for each sites of same CN: one with small values of δ (rather ordered sites) and one with larger values of δ (rather disordered sites). We have fixed at δc=0.2 Å, the critical value of δ separating both these distinct populations. This choice may appear quite arbitrary but was actually motivated by the very clear frontier obtained graphically in Figure iv/ the average first neighbor distance increases together with the CN of the site, as revealed in the plot of Figure despite an unavoidable overlapping, distinct colored strips are clearly noticeable. This result was actually expected: the more numerous the neighbors are, smaller their input of charge must be to close the electronic shell of the central site: they have to move away to achieve it, so that their average neighbor distance increases. Thus, and from now on, the various sites may be considered as belonging to distinct classes of atoms and the following color code has to be kept in mind to distinguish in between them in the continuation of this paper: sites with CN=5 will be plotted in violet, CN=6 in green, CN=7 in red and CN=8 in blue. The atoms circled in black will reveal the more ordered character of the site (δi < δc), the most disordered sites will not be circled: thus, a sub-categorization is operated for each value of CN. In the rest of this paper, we shall denote sites with δi < δc as S-site (fcc-symmetry) and sites with δi < δc as D-sites (Disordered geometry). b. A first insight into the dispatching of these categories within a surface. Here, we are studying both surfaces of one particular single slab. These results will be augmented in section 3 by studying the additional surfaces obtained by the variation of the slab thickness and density of defects initially contained in this latter. Figure Figure Regarding 8-chains, the more rectangular shape of the DOS of the D-sites (Figure confirms the rather amorphous character of the 8-sites, identified, in the previous paragraph, as accommodation sites. The less numerous S-sites display more formed peaks due to the higher symmetry. However, the shape of the DOS is found in neat discrepancy with the one of perfect Pt surfaces, confirming the very particular status of these 8-sites, capable of absorbing the strain and accommodating between domains. Notice that it is made possible by the development of peaks at the bottom of the DOS of the S-sites, bringing stabilization energy to the system. Figure Let's now incorporate all the material acquired by the optimization of geometry of all our slabs involving 3, 5 and 7 atomic layers with various densities of defects (30%, 35%, 40%, 45% and 50%). The question we address here is how do these new surface morphologies affect the population in the various classes that we have determined for the 5 layers slab with ρv=40%. Before investigating the evolution of the distribution of the domains as the thickness and amount of defects are varied, let's turn first, with The first observation is that the number of sites with CN=7 remain majoritary whatever the slab may be. Their number vary slightly but quite probably as an effect of the initial implementation of the point defects made at random. Populations with CN=6 and 8 comes in more or less in the same proportion as our previous reference, the slight differences arising from the same reason as for CN=7. In general, it appears that the same phenomena of reconstruction are observed for our slabs, justifying a posteriori our focus on the 5 layers slab with ρv=40% to draw the main trends More interestingly, Fig. (blue) conserve their linear arrangement and still accommodate between the regions of different nature. Regarding the sites with CN=6 (green) the already observed trend to create slim 2D domains intensifies. They grow proportionally to the shrinkage of the bent 7-domains. This is the option found by the surfaces to compensate the inability of the 2D 7-domains to persist when the surface is corrugated in a stronger manner. 4. Adsorption energies of OH. a. An apparent chaotic behavior, but a linear dependence revealed by the local geometry. In their original paper The choice of the function defining the local geometry variable as a function of the interatomic distances were essentially driven by its upmost transferability or ability to recover a linear dependence of energy of adsorption as a function of this latter with a minimum of fitting parameters. Our choice turned to where cni is our effective coordination variable centered on site i, alpha and lambda our fitting parameters, d ij the interatomic distances between the selected site, i, and its neighbors, j, n j the number of atoms included in the sphere of coordination and, a, the average lattice parameter in the surface plane. This latter scaling parameter for the interatomic distances were found mandatory to recover an acceptable linear behaviour for the energies as a function of cni . The result of this fit is displayed in Fig 8 .b. The introduction of the a parameter as well as the combined usage of the exponential function appears to be crucial to reduce to allow a similar weight for the atoms whose distances are close below and above the average average inner latice parameters, to bring a strong weight to the neighbors with very small interatomic distances and gradually attenuate the influence of the most distant neighbors. In this work, we made intensive use of DFT calculations to rationalize the catalytic activity of very distorted surfaces of Pt nanomaterials. Our investigations led us to realize that the various inequivalent sites of such surfaces may be classified into families according to their coordination number. Such a classification allowed us to determine that a specific role could be awarded to each family as far as the morphology of the surface is considered : 2D domains and rather flat regions concern the sites with a CN=7, while sites with CN=6 or 8 are found to arrange under the form of linear chain, accommodating in between the 2D domains. The other sites appears as isolated and sacrificed as far as we consider the crystallographic point of view. Let us recall that the size of the area of 2D domains strongly depends on the shape of the surface induced by the reconstruction, and that this latter tends to be shrunk as the surface bends. This step were found mandatory to select specific sites to study the reactivity of the surfaces : a reasonable number of sites had to be considered to provide a representative panel of behavior by means of a minimum of these very time-consuming calculations. From these data, a law piloting the values of the adsorption energies of OH as a function of the local geometry has been derived. Relying on two single fitting parameters and matching the DFT points with exactitude, a great confidence seems to be awarded to this latter to predict the energies of adsorption by the single knowledge of the distributions of the interatomic distances of the catalytic sites. We provide in Figure Table