I consider a nonlinear response of conventional superconductors contaminated with nonmagnetic impurities or imperfections to a circular polarized light. I focus on dc contributions to the induced current density which describe the emergence of the static magnetization in a superconductor. This effect is known as inverse Faraday effect. By employing quasiclassical theory of superconductivity I derive an expression for the induced static magnetization as a function of frequency of external ac field and disorder scattering rate. The scattering of electrons off potential impurities is taken into account within the framework of the self-consistent Born approximation. It is found that the magnitude of the inverse Faraday effect decreases with an increase in disorder scattering rate. I have also discovered that the value of the induced magnetization has a characteristic minimum at a frequency which approximately equals twice the value of the pairing gap in a clean superconductor. This minimum appears due to the resonant excitation of the amplitude Higgs mode. In the last decade there have been significant advances in state-of-the-art optical measurements and techniques that have spurred a lot of interest in the physical phenomena related to nonlinear responses in conventional and unconventional superconductors Inverse Faraday effect (IFE) in dispersive medium was discovered by L. P. Pitaevskii In the context of the present work it must be mentioned that in the earlier works Within the theoretical framework of the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity In this paper I formulate a microscopic theory of inverse Faraday effect in disordered superconductors in which the effects of potential disorder are treated self-consistently. In particular I demonstrate that under the action of external ac electric field the self-energy correction due to disorder scattering leads to the renormalization of the quasiparticle energies and pairing amplitude similar to the renormalization effects which appear due to the presence of paramagnetic impurities. I analyze the IFE by calculating the static contribution to the charge current density to the second order in external electric field. I have found that the magnitude of the induced dc magnetization decreases with the increase in disorder scattering rate. Intriguingly, I also find that the magnetization as a function of disorder scattering rate is suppressed most strongly when the frequency of electric field coincides with the resonant frequency of the amplitude Higgs mode ω res . Furthermore, magnetization as a function of frequency for a fixed disorder strength exhibits a minimum at ω = ω res . Therefore, based on these observations I suggest that induced dc magnetization via IFE in conventional superconductors contains a 'fingerprint' of the amplitude Higgs mode. When a conventional superconductor is subjected to a monochromatic external electric field with E 0 = E 0 (x + iŷ) (here x and ŷ are the unit vectors), Fig. , where function γ ω ∝ 1/ω 3 is determined by the microscopic details such as disorder, interactions between the constituent quasiparticles etc. In the context of IFE in superconductors this aspect of the problem -importance of the particle-hole symmetry -has been previously emphasized by several groups Indeed, the fact that the excitation of the amplitude mode is also crucial for the IFE in superconductors has been surprisingly overlooked so far. Furthermore, given the discussion above it follows that the induced magnetization must also exhibit a non-monotonic frequency dependence -a minimumaround ω ≈ 2∆ 0 which corresponds to the resonant frequency for the excitation of the amplitude Higgs mode (see above). However, in order to check how prominent this feature will be it requires a microscopic calculation. In passing I note that since the amplitude fluctuations can only produce second order gradient corrections, these fluctuations alone cannot contribute to the IFE and so at this point it is not immediately clear how to capture this effect if one chooses to work in the dirty limit τ∆ 0 ≪ 1 by employing the Usadel equation In the problems which are concerned with response of superconductors to the application of external electromagnetic radiation, it proves important to write down the equations for the gauge invariant single-particle propagators within the framework of the quantum field theory for nonequilibrium systems In this equation (2) = 12×2 ⊗ τ1(2) are first and second Pauli matrices, which act in Nambu and Keldysh spaces and are diagonal in Keldysh space. In all the mathematical expressions throughout the text which include two vectors a and b in the combination ab the dot-product is always implied. Lastly, the commutator is defined according to Given the expression for the electric field (1), I will look for the solution of (3) in the form ǧ(nε; rt) = ǧ(nε; kω)e i(kr-ωt) + ǧ(nε; -k, -ω)e -i(kr-ωt) . (6) It is important to emphasize here that equation (3) does not preserve the norm of ǧ, i.e. ǧ2 = 1 will be satisfied only when either E(r, t) = 0 or in the limit |ε| → ∞ In the ground state, the Keldysh propagator is just a parametrization where T is temperature. In the ground state I can set ∆ ′ = ∆ 0 , ∆ ′′ = 0 and choose ĝR(A) . By employing the normalization condition ĝR(A) The value of the superconducting order parameter in equilibrium is then determined self-consistently from where λ is the dimensionless interaction strength and ω D is the Debye frequency. Naturally, the disorder scattering rate does not enter into this expressions since the commutator in (3) with the first term in (4) vanishes in equilibrium. The expressions for the particle density and particle velocity for a given v F are expressed in terms of the Keldysh propagator as follows: Here ν F is the single particle density of states at the Fermi level. In terms of these quantities, the macroscopic current density is defined as Although the expressions above are valid in any spacial dimenions, for the calculation of the averages over the Fermi surface, it will be assumed without loss of generality that I have a two-dimensional superconductor, Fig. A. Linear analysis: retarded and advanced functions I start by computing the linear corrections to ĝR(A) . I will look for the solution of equation (3) with where ĝR(A) Inserting this expression into (3) and keeping only terms to the linear order in E 0 I obtain the following equation for the matrix function ĝR(A) 1 (nε; kω): where Q 0 = iev F E 0 , function δ∆ kω is the Fourier component of the linear correction to the superconducting order parameter δ∆(r, t) = δ∆ kω e i(kr-ωt) and I suppressed the superscripts R(A) for brevity. In deriving this equation I have used the auxiliary expressions listed in Appendix A. Let me first average both sides of this equation over the Fermi surface. Denoting ⟨ĝ 1 (nε; kω)⟩ n = Ĵkω (ε) I have where a new notation ε = ετ 3 -i∆ 0 τ2 has been introduced for brevity. Two comments are in order: (1) note that the terms which contain disorder scattering rate do not appear in this equation; (2) here I have neglected the higher order derivatives of the bare propagator by replacing the commutator [δ ∆(r, t) • , ĝ] with its equilibrium expression [δ ∆(r, t), ĝ] since the terms which contain δ∆ kω will be irrelevant for the IFE. Because δ∆ kω must be proportional to the electric field, it will be convenient to use function δ∆ ω instead, which is defined by δ∆ kω = (kQ 0 /2)δ∆ ω . By the same token I will redefine Ĵkω (ε) = (kQ 0 /2)δ Ĝε (ω). In what follows I can also neglect the anomalous part of the third term on the right hand side of equation ( Next, I multiply both sides of equation ( where ⟨(nk)ĝ 1 (nε; kω)⟩ n = (kQ 0 /2) ĜR(A) ε (ω) and I have introduced functions εR(A) and a R(A) ε+ω/2 )/ω. For ω = 0 formulas ( To summarize, the expression for the linear correction to the retarded and advanced parts of ǧ is formally given by ĝR(A) 1 (nε; kω) = ĜR(A) Expressions for the components of the functions ĜR(A) Note that there are contributions to δG R(A) ε (ω) which cancel out and this is the reason why I have had to retain the normal component of ⟨nkĝ 1 (nε; kω)⟩ n in equation ( The Keldysh components of the quasiclassical function ǧ1 can be computed in full analogy with the calculation of ĝR(A) 1 . In particular, since the equation for ⟨nkĝ K 1 ⟩ n is identical to ( I proceed with the equation for the Keldysh component of ĜK ε (ω) which reads: This equation is, of course, quite similar to the equation where In the case of strong disorder when τ∆ 0 ≪ 1, I see that both functions The solution of this matrix equation can be found in the form ĜK I am providing the expression for F K ε (ω) for completeness since this function does not contribute to the IFE. I note that temperature enters into these expressions only through the relation Having computed the linear-in-electric-field corrections to the Keldysh Green's function and Here the electric field E(r, t) = E 0 e i(kr-ωt) and I used equation Alternatively, one can derive Here on the last step I took into account that coefficients a ε (ω) and b ε (ω) are proportional to 1/ω and, as a consequence, G K ε (ω) ∝ 1/ω, so that function γ ω ∝ 1/ω 3 , while function I(ω, τ) encodes the effects of disorder on the induced magnetization. Function I(ω, τ) appearing in In Fig. In Fig. In this paper using the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity I have investigated how potential impurities may affect the emergence of the inverse Faraday effect in conventional superconductors. Scattering on potential impurities have been taken into account within the self-consistent Born approximation. The normal contribution to the current must still be determined by the diffusion coefficient D ∝ τ, while the superfluid component of the current is suppressed by the pair breaking processes due to non-equilibrium Apart from the quantitative difference between the results presented here and those of Ref. I certainly hope that my theoretical prediction of the minimum in the dc magnetization as a function of frequency can be verified experimentally. Performing such a measurement could provide yet another important insight into the physics of the collective excitations and their impact on the IFE in conventional superconductors. I would like to thank A. V. Balatsky for bringing this problem to my attention and useful discussion. I also would like to thank Yantao Li for bringing several important references related to the main subject of this work to my attention. This work was financially supported by the National Science Foundation grant NSF-DMR-2002795. In this Appendix I provide some auxiliary expressions which are used to derive the quasiclassical equation a. Time derivatives. First simplification arises due to our choice for the time dependence of the electric field: Here I use the bare propagators since this terms always enter in the combination with external electric field, which is assumed to be small. This expression can be further simplified if I take into account the definition of function E. For example, for the combination in the second line in (A1) it obtains: Similarly, for the expression in the third line in (A1) I find Lastly, I note that the last term in the right hand side of this expression is canceled out by the term which contains the vector potential in the main equation, Eq. ( b. Self energy part. For the commutator which involves the self energy part σ = -i 2τ ⟨ǧ⟩ n after retaining the linear order terms in powers of electric field I have (A4) Note that the averages over the Fermi surface are nonzero only for the contributions to ǧ1 which are directly proportional to the dot product nk (see e.g. 