Owing to the strong spin-orbit coupling and the related fascinating physical properties, heavy 5d transition-metals exhibit desirable application prospects. However, up to now, the 5d magnetic materials are still very limited, especially very rare for tungsten. In this work, we theoretically predict a two-dimensional multiferroic W3Cl8 monolayer. Intrinsic 5d magnetism of tungsten is activated by the W ions' fractional valence in a breathing Kagome lattice of reduced effective dimension. A coplanar Y-type antiferromagnetism composed by ferromagnetic W3 trimers is confirmed as the magnetic ground state. The spontaneous ferroelectric polarization mainly originates from the ion displacement induced by the breathing distortion of Kagome lattice. An intrinsic magneto-optical Kerr effect with sizable Kerr angle can be observed to detect this trimeric Y-type antiferromagnetism, and it depends strongly on the detailed magnetic order. Thereby, we propose a general scheme for realizing more 5d magnetism in two-dimensional multiferroic systems. Compared to the well-known 3d magnetism and substantial 3d magnetic materials, the intrinsic magnetism from 5d electrons was relatively much less reported. The ferromagnetic order can be stabilized in 3d metal bulks, but it hardly exists in 5d metals at room temperature due to the wider bands and weaker on-site Coulomb interaction Generally, the reduction of dimension can suppress band width and thus help to electron localization. However, it is not easy to achieve 5d magnetism of tungsten even for lowdimensional structures, because the 5d orbitals are more delocalized than those of 3d elements. As a pioneering work, Xu et al. predicted a multiferroic ReWCl6 monolayer with magnetic moment of 1 μB coming from W 5+ -d 1 electrons, and investigated the electrical control of magnetic phase transition Since the 1960s, layered Nb3X8 (X=Cl, Br, I) bulks with a breathing Kagome lattice had been synthesized and investigated In this work, based on first-principles calculations and atomistic simulation, we predict a 2D multiferroic W3Cl8 monolayer. The intrinsic 5d magnetism is triggered on W due to its fractional valence in a breathing Kagome lattice of reduced effective dimension. A coplanar trimeric Y-type antiferromagnetism is confirmed as magnetic ground state. Meanwhile, the out-of-plane ferroelectric polarization mainly originates from the ion displacement induced by the breathing distortion. Moreover, an intrinsic magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) with sizable Kerr angle is revealed in this antiferromagnetic (AFM) monolayer, which shows different dependences on detailed magnetic order for different chiralities. Thus, we propose a general scheme for realizing 5d magnetism of tungsten in 2D multiferroic systems, and provides an excellent platform for exploring magneto-optical phenomena and new technological applications. The spin-polarized calculation is implemented in the framework of density functional theory (DFT) Since the Hubbard U for 5d element is relatively small and it is sometimes ignored in previous works Based on the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) To investigate the magnetic ground state of W3Cl8 monolayer, an atomistic simulation has been performed with the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation as executed using the SPIRIT package For 2D finite thick materials with threefold rotational symmetry, the complex Kerr angle can be evaluated as where θK specifies the Kerr rotation angle and ηK specifies the ellipticity. ξxy=σxyZ0 and ξxx=σxxZ0, where Z0 is the vacuum impedance. ns is the vacuum refractive index. σxy and σxx are elements of the optical conductivity tensor (OCT) which can be obtained via the first principles calculations ( ) where Etotal is the energy of monolayer W3Cl8. EW and ECl are the energies of single W and Cl atoms, respectively. The calculated Ecoh is 3.96 eV/atom, which is comparable to those of other common monolayers like Be2C (4.86 eV/atom) These calculations confirm the stability of W3Cl8 monolayer. As shown in Fig. Such a semiconducting behavior is general for this material family with fractional valence and breathing Kagome lattice Under the octahedral crystal field, the d orbitals are always split into two groups: the low-lying t2g triplets and energy higher eg doublets. The trimerization of W ions leads to the reconstruction of molecular orbitals and further splitting of these t2g orbitals into 1e, 1a1, 2e, 2a1, 3e, and 1a2 As a cluster magnet, this magnetic moment is delocalized on the trimer, which can not be assigned to each individual W ion. Such a robust cluster magnetism is conventional for the materials with a breathing Kagome lattice, such as Nb3X8, Ti3X8 (X = Cl, Br, or I) Then the MAE of this moment is calculated by setting a ferromagnetic (FM) order. As shown in Fig. Thus, in the following, we only consider those textures with spins lying in the xy-plane. Before the determination of the magnetic ground state, we first check the magnetic texture within W3 trimer, since the intra-trimer magnetic coupling should be much stronger This Y-AFM order of W3-spins on triangular lattice has diverse morphologies. For example, the vector chirality (κ) can be defined as where <ij> refers to the nearest-neighboring W3-spins. As indicated in Fig. Such a ferroelectric polarization can be flipped between the +P and -P states by a breathing process of the Kagome network. The intermediate state without W3 trimerization can be considered as the parent paraelectric (PE) phase, as illustrated in Fig. Note here the energy barrier can only be considered as a theoretical upper limit, while the real barrier may be lower via more complex switching paths. Anyway, due to the ultrathin thickness and the vertical polarization of W3Cl8 monolayer, a sufficiently strong electric field can be applied perpendicularly to achieve ferroelectric switching According to the DFT calculations, all the trimeric Y-AFM states with different φ and the same κ are nearly degenerate in energy, and the energy of κ = +1 is about 1 meV per unit cell lower than that of κ = -1 in the same +P phase, due to the different directions of Pm. In recent years, the detection and manipulation of antiferromagnetism is vital for spintronics, but technical challenging. The MOKE provides a powerful tool for detecting the electronic and magnetic properties of materials, which was first used to detect nonzero net magnetization in ferromagnets and ferrimagnets The noncollinear W3-spin texture in W3Cl8 monolayer provides an opportunity to utilize the 5d antiferromagnetism. It is fortunate that the trimeric Y-AFM order in the W3Cl8 monolayer can be detected by MOKE. It is noteworthy that this trimeric Y-AFM state is a noncollinear configuration composed by FM W3 trimers, and thus this is actually a Y-AFM texture on the triangular lattice. It is different from previously reported MOKE-active noncollinear AFM states in those bulk materials, where the Y-AFM texture is on the Kagome lattice plane. Therefore, different symmetries appear in these two cases, and thereby different MOKEs can be observed. Here the time reversal symmetry is broken, and its combination with other crystal symmetry operation is also not a "good" symmetry. Thus the Kramers degeneracy is lifted, accompanied by a strong SOC from W's 5d orbitals, which leads to a significant MOKE signal For those systems with threefold rotational symmetry, i.e. W3Cl8 monolayer, σxy ≠ 0 means that the MOKE is activated. Our first-principles calculation indeed finds the maximum Kerr angle (θKmax) to be -0.357° under 1.5 eV incident light, as shown in Fig. When the spatial inversion operation I is performed on this system, the +P phase with κ=+1 transforms into the -P phase with κ=-1, but the Kerr spectrum remains unchanged, as displayed in Fig. The change of magnetic chirality can also tune the MOKE signal. For given +P state and φ = 0°, both κ=1 and κ=-1 lead to the MPG 3m', but their MOKE signals are not identical, as shown in Fig. (the pure chirality switch between κ=1 and κ=-1), are summarized in Fig. The magnetic configurations in the +P phase without MOKE. Here, M (1) , M (2) , M (3) represent In addition, the MOKE signal of W3Cl8 monolayer is greatly influenced by the details of magnetic texture. According to Eq. 1, in the 3m case, σxy=0 and thus no MOKE exists. While for the MPG 3, nonzero σxy means an observable MOKE, as listed in Table In conclusion, by using first-principles calculations, we predicted a stable multiferroic W3Cl8 monolayer with a breathing Kagome lattice. The reduced dimension and the fractional valence activate 5d magnetism of tungsten, forming the molecular-orbital magnetic moment of W3 trimers. The strong easy-plane magnetic anisotropy and the dominant AFM couplings lead to the noncollinear Y-AFM state composed by FM W3 trimers as the magnetic ground state. It is revealed that an intrinsic MOKE with sizable Kerr angle appears in this AFM monolayer. Since the Y-AFM order of W3-spins on triangular lattice may have different chiralities and diverse morphologies, corresponding to different symmetries, rich MOKEs are observed strongly dependent on the detailed magnetic order. Moreover, the evolutions of Kerr spectra with spin orientation are distinguishable for different chiralities, suggesting that MOKE can be used to detect the details of AFM orders. Meanwhile, the W3 trimerization and the breathing distortion of Kagome lattice induce ion displacements, and thus result in a spontaneous ferroelectric polarization. This ferroelectric polarization can be reversed by the breathing process of the Kagome network, together with the displacement of magnetic trimers. Our study opens a route to realize more 5d magnetism/ferroelectricity/multiferroicity of tungsten-based compounds, especially in the low-dimensional forms, which may provide an excellent platform for investigating magneto-optical phenomena and exploring new technological applications.