Rhenium-based superconductors have recently attracted significant interest due to their unconventional superconducting properties. In this work, we report the synthesis and properties of new superconducting Re7X3 (X = Nb, Ta, Ti, Zr, Hf) binary alloys which maintain a fixed composition of rhenium while crystallizing in centrosymmetric to non-centrosymmetric crystal structures, depending on the elements of the X site. Comprehensive structural and superconducting properties were investigated using powder x-ray diffraction, AC transport, magnetization, and specific heat measurements, and on the basis of these measurements, the superconducting phase diagram was constructed. The results suggest a complex interplay of crystal structure and the Re/X ratio, which governs the strength of spin-orbital coupling and controls the unconventional superconducting behavior in Re-based superconductors. The unconventional superconductor pairing mechanism, along with its unique physical properties, offers a new paradigm for advanced understanding of the complex properties of quantum materials and their practical application in quantum technologies Polycrystalline samples of Re 7 X 3 , (X = Nb, Ta, Ti, Zr, Hf) series were prepared by arc melting. High-purity metals (3N) Re, Nb, Ta, Ti, Hf and Zr in a stoichiometric ratio were melted several times to ensure the homogeneity of the samples in a pure argon atmosphere. Phase purity and crystal structure analysis were performed using a CuK α (1.5406 Å) PANalytical powder x-ray diffractometer. Fullprof software Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns at room temperature for the five polycrystalline samples are shown in Fig. where, ρ sat stands for saturation resistivity and the temperature-dependent resistivity ρ(T ) represented by the following Eq. ( where ρ 0 is residual resistivity, θ D is the Debye temperature, and b is a material-dependent factor. The second term in Eq. ( Temperature and field-dependent magnetization experiments were conducted on the five alloys using zero field-cooled warming (ZFCW) and field-cooled cooling (FCC) modes, with an applied field of 1 mT. All compounds exhibited bulk superconductivity. The onset temperature (T C ) of superconducting transitions for NCS and CS Re 7 X 3 compounds is shown in Fig. where t = T /T C , Eq. ( We have estimated the upper critical field H C2 (0) using the field dependence of the superconducting onset temperature and the mid point of zero drop resistivity obtained from temperature-dependent magnetization and resistivity measurements. H C2 (T ) was plotted against temperature and can be well described by the GL relation (Eq. ( GL fits using Eq. ( Using the initial slopes -dH C2 (T ) dT at T = T C for all samples and α = 0.693 in dirty limit superconductivity, the orbital limiting field was estimated as H orb C2 (0) = 7.25(1), 4.15(2), 1.01(5), 1.99(1), 1.13(8) T for Re 7 X 3 (X = Nb, Ta, Ti, Zr, Hf), respectively. For BCS superconductors, the Pauli limiting field H P C2 = 1.86T C ξ GL (0) + 0.12 . where, Φ 0 = 2.07 ×10 -15 T m 2 , the magnetic flux quantum is the relative strength of Pauli and the orbital limiting effect Temperature-dependent specific heat measurements were performed on all samples in the zero field. C/T vs T 2 data were fitted above T C , using the Debye model represented by Eq. ( where γ n is the Sommerfeld coefficient, β 3 and β 5 are the phononic and anharmonic contributions to the specific heat. Fitting normal state specific heat data using Eq. ( which depends on the estimated values of θ D and T C as where μ * is screened Coulomb repulsion, considering μ * = 0.13 as described for the transition metals Temperature-dependent electronic specific heat data can provide information about superconducting gap symmetry. Normalized entropy (S) in the superconducting region and the electronic-specific heat can be related as C el = t dS dt where t = T /T C , the reduced temperature. Within the framework of the BCS approximation where, , where E(ξ) is the energy of the normal electrons measured relative to the Fermi energy, y = ξ/∆(0), and ∆(t) = tanh[1.82(1.018((1 /t)-1)) 0.51 ] resembles temperaturedependent superconducting energy gap To investigate electronic properties, we have solved a set of equations simultaneously and derived the Uemura classification of superconductors and the Fermi velocity (v f ) is related to the electronic mean free path (l e ) and n by the relations , respectively, where k B is the Boltzmann constant, m * is the effective mass of the quasiparticles, V f.u. is the volume of the formula unit, N A is the Avogadro number and ρ 0 is the residual resistivity. In dirty limit superconductivity, BCS coherence length is much larger than the mean free path ( ξ0 le ≫ 1). As a result, the scattering of electrons with impurities may affect the superconducting properties. At T = 0 K, the GL penetration depth relates to the London penetration depth (λ L ) by expression λ GL (0) = λ L (1 + ξ0 le ) 1/2 , where λ L = ( m * μ0ne 2 ) 1/2 and BCS coherence length relates to G-L coherence length by the expression ξ GL (0) ξ0 = 0.1 As described in ref. where k F = 3π 2 n, the Fermi wave vector. The ratio T C /T F classifies superconductors into the conventional or unconventional category. According to Uemura et al. Fig. Interestingly, in the NCS phase, the lattice parameters and cell volume initially increase from Re 7 Ti 3 to Re 7 Nb 3 , then decrease from Re 7 Nb 3 to Re 7 Ta 3 , reflecting distinct trends in T C , λ e-ph , θ D , and γ n . These trends are also consistent with variations in the H C2 values and the lattice parameters, as shown in the upper and lower part of Fig. Based on both above phase diagrams, we try to understand the interplay of crystal structure, elemental composition and SOC in the Re-based superconductor, which has been proposed as the key factor for unconventional superconductivity. Comparative study of cubic NCS superconductors Re 7 X 3 and hexagonal NCS Re 7 B 3 conventional superconductors In summary, we successfully synthesized a new series of Rhenium-based binary superconducting series of alloys, Re 7 X 3 , where X represents Nb, Ta, Ti, Zr and Hf, encompassing centrosymmetric (CS) and non-centrosymmetric (NCS) crystal structures. Our specific heat measurements have confirmed the presence of a nodeless gap with s-wave pairing across all samples, characterized by weak electron-phonon coupling. The upper critical field (H C2 ) of the Re 7 X 3 series with NCS structures closely approaches the Pauli limit, with the exception of Re 7 Ti 3 , while compounds with CS structures exhibit significantly lower H C2 values compared to the Pauli limiting field. A comprehensive analysis of the compounds in the Re 7 X 3 series with various Re-based superconductors underlines the intricate interplay between crystal structure, elemental composition, and antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) to determine superconducting properties. These findings suggest that the superconducting characteristics of Re-based superconductors can be fine-tuned by considering these factors carefully. Our results suggest that high-resolution crystallographic studies combined with density functional theory are necessary to elucidate the Fermi surface and ASOC effects and to comprehend unconventional superconducting phenomena like time-reversal symmetry breaking observed in both NCS and CS compounds, which have not been properly understood till date. Furthermore, the crystallization of Re 7 X 3 compounds in intrinsically disordered NCS and less disordered non-symmorphic CS structures offers an ideal platform to explore the impact of the disorder on superconducting ground-state properties. Microscopic techniques such as μSR on the Re 7 X 3 series compounds will further enhance our understanding of superconducting gap symmetry, the underlying pairing mechanism and the impact of the disorder on these characteristics. This, in turn, facilitates advances in understanding unconventional superconductivity in Re-based superconductors. VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT R.K.K. acknowledges the UGC, Government of India, for SRF fellowship. R.P.S. acknowledges the SERB Government of India for the Core Research Grant CRG/2023/000817.