Soft materials such as rubbers, silicones, gels and biological tissues have a nonlinear response to large deformations, a phenomenon which in principle can be captured by hyperelastic models. The suitability of a candidate hyperelastic strain energy function is then determined by comparing its predicted response to the data gleaned from tests and adjusting the material parameters to get a good fit, an exercise which can be deceptive because of nonlinearity. Here we propose to generalise the approach of Rivlin & Saunders [Phil Trans A 243 (1951) 251-288] who, instead of reporting the data as stress against stretch, manipulated these measures to create the 'Mooney plot', where the Mooney-Rivlin model is expected to produce a linear fit. We show that extending this idea to other models and modes of deformation (tension, shear, torsion, etc.) is advantageous, not only (a) for the fitting procedure, but also to (b) delineate trends in the deformation which are not obvious from the raw data (and may be interpreted in terms of micro-, meso-, and macro-structures) and (c) obtain a bounded condition number κ over the whole range of deformation; a robustness which is lacking in other plots and spaces. A great variety of models are available in the literature to describe the nonlinear behaviour of rubber-like materials in large deformations. Once an appropriate strain energy function W is selected for a given specimen, the important next step is to fit the model's predictions to the acquired experimental data. In a good case scenario, the outcomes of an accurate fitting produce low relative errors (e.g., To address these issues, As reviewed recently by The well-known representation formula of the Cauchy stress for incompressible isotropic materials reads: where p is the arbitrary Lagrange multiplier enforcing the condition of incompressibility, I is the identity tensor, B is the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, and W 1 and W 2 are the partial derivatives of the strain energy function W with respect to I 1 = trB and I 2 = trB -1 , the first and second principal invariants of B, respectively, with I 3 = 1 due to incompressibility. For uniaxial deformations, B = diag (λ 2 , λ -1 , λ -1 ), where λ is the uniaxial stretch. By setting T 22 = T 33 = 0 as the boundary conditions to establish p, the relationship between the uniaxial Cauchy stress T 11 and the stretch λ is obtained as: Equation ( Instead of reporting the Cauchy plot (T 11 against λ) or the engineering plot (P against λ), Rivlin and Saunders created the Mooney plot by transforming Equation (3) into: and reported the data as M against ζ. Then, on using the Mooney-Rivlin model, where C 1 and C 2 are constants, it becomes clear from Equation ( so that fitting the Mooney-Rivlin model to uniaxial data becomes a matter of straightforward linear regression in the Mooney space; a clear advantage given the computational power available at the time. Interestingly, However, in using the classical Mooney plot of Equation ( Accordingly, in this paper we present a systematic approach to define a generalised Mooney space in which a linear regression is achieved for various strain energy functions W by devising appropriate corresponding measures of M and ζ. It is therefore our aim to recast the classical Mooney plot into a canonical form, namely the generalised Mooney plot, which allows the transformation of the fitting process into a standard linear regression problem for several strain energy functions W . We demonstrate that for some W functions the classical Mooney plot is not always the ideal means to represent the modelling results versus the experimental data. Depending on the particular form of W , we show in §2 that alternative functional forms of M may be formulated within the generalised Mooney space which result in a proper linear regression for the demonstration of the model fittings to the data. We use the simple extension deformation as our point of departure. Then in §3 we extend the idea of the generalised Mooney spaces and plots to other standard deformation modes (e.g., equi-biaxial tension, pure shear, simple shear and simple torsion). Finally, we provide concluding remarks in §4. To showcase the mathematical concept of the generalised Mooney space, or GMS for short, here we take the archetypal example of simple tension deformation as our starting point. The kinematics of this deformation is described by the deformation gradient F = diag(λ, 1/ √ λ, 1/ √ λ), and thus by the single variable λ, the principal stretch in the direction of tension. Then, in uniaxial deformation tests, ordered pairs {λ i , P i } are measured and collected, where P is the engineering stress. We define the GMS as a space where, for a given model with material parameters C j , two data sets M and ζ can be constructed from the ordered pairs {λ i , P i } to yield a relationship in the form: (where A is a finite subset of Q), so that the C j 's are determined by a linear curvefitting exercise. We show below that this representation is highly illuminating from the perspective of highlighting deformation regimes and trends that are not apparent in other spaces. More crucially, however, it can be demonstrated using the condition numbers associated with the stress quantities P , T , M that curve fitting in the GMS is more advantageous than in the classical Cauchy or engineering spaces. Recall that the condition number κ of a one-variable function f The condition number is in effect a measure of how sensitive a regression is to perturbations in the data points Let us take the Mooney-Rivlin model as an example. We find from Equations ( showing that in the Cauchy and engineering spaces the data is presented in such a way that the condition number cannot be smaller than 1 lim λ→∞ κ T , κ P = 1 and becomes extremely large at small stretches lim λ→1 κ T , κ P = ∞ . In contrast, in the GMS the condition number κ is found from Equation ( Hence the condition number κ obtained by fitting the Mooney-Rivlin model to the experimental data in the GMS is never greater than 1 (for small stretches, as ζ → 1). Therefore, the GMS facilitates obtaining more robust fits to the data compared with the Cauchy or engineering spaces. We now present examples of the transformation of various models and the data into the GMS and obtain the ensuing generalised Mooney plots (GMPs) in this space, contrasting them with the plots in the classical Mooney space. Note that the term 'model' in this work is used exclusively in reference to the strain energy function W . The modelling tool is the GMS defined by M and ζ via Equation ( (where the λs are the principal stretches), the model proposed recently by Anssari-Benam and Bucchi (2021): or the Gent+Gent model proposed by where μ i , α i , μ, N , C 2 and J m are material parameters. The GMPs presented henceforth have been obtained by minimising the relative error. We emphasise that it is crucial in curve fitting exercises to minimise the relative error, and not the absolute error (as is often done by default in the literature). The absolute error changes from one stress measure to another, and thus a curve fitting exercise based on absolute errors would predict different optimal material constants for the same test depending on whether the experimentalist chose to report, for example, the Cauchy or the engineering stresses. Accordingly, here we conduct the linear optimisation procedure based on minimising the relative error, because it yields the same optimal set of material constants independently of the stress measure Consider first the cubic Yeoh model From Equation Because in uniaxial tension I 1 = λ 2 + 2λ -1 , the function M for the Yeoh model is thus: A generalisation of this model is the polynomial neo-Hookean model (pnH) as: This model recovers the Yeoh model and also the Taylor series approximation of the many existing generalised neo-Hookean strain energy functions in the literature; see, e.g., which leads to the following M function in the GMS: On using the uniaxial data due to Now we consider the classic Gent-Thomas model For this model we have: noting that in uniaxial deformation I 2 = λ -2 + 2λ. It is straightforward to see that we can form a linear regression problem as: Figure It is evident from Equation ( Next, we consider the Gent model where μ is the infinitesimal shear modulus and J m is the stiffening parameter. On using Equation (3) we find: It then follows that: so that we arrive at the linear regression problem: where: Here, M G and ζ are a mixed set of stretch and engineering stress measures. Clearly, in this case it is not straightforward to ascribe a direct physical interpretation to the GMS. However, the GMS is still useful for investigating the goodness of the fit provided by the Gent model. If the data is linear in ζ within this space, we find directly the value of J m as the inverse slope of the line and of μ as its intercept. Moreover, the fitting exercise has been transformed from a nonlinear procedure, see Equation ( Another example of a widely used strain energy function W in the literature, particularly pertaining to the biomechanics of soft tissues, is provided by the exponential Fung-Demiray model where μ is the infinitesimal shear modulus and b is the stiffening parameter. On transforming this model into the GMS we also find a linear formula as: where: The plots in Figure Similar to the trend observed for the modelling results pertaining to the Gent model, a V-shaped pattern in the experimental data is highlighted again in the GMS. As Equation (28) demonstrates, the Fung-Demiray model can only capture the whole data as a single line. However, the GMS allows the identification of the V-shaped pattern in the data, and so enables the fitting of the model to either branches separately as a straight line. The apex of the V is located at ζ ≃ 0.06, corresponding to λ ≃ 1.15. See the blue lines in Figure In the previous sections we presented the concept of the GMS by appealing to the simple tension deformation as a descriptive example. However, the application of the GMS is not restricted to uniaxial, nor to homogeneous, deformations. As a general rule, when the deformation depends only on one kinematic variable we may find a M function for linear regression in a similar manner to that devised for the uniaxial deformation case. Here, accordingly, we extend the application of the GMS to other classes of deformation: equi-biaxial tension, pure shear, simple shear and torsion. The derivations of the M and ζ domains for the archetypical strain energy functions considered in this study under the foregoing deformations are similar to those presented in §2. For brevity, here we only present the final results, see Table Similarly, our analysis of the condition number κ (not reproduced here) shows that, as in the case of simple extension, the fits obtained in the GMS for these deformations are also a priori more robust than those achieved in the Cauchy or engineering spaces, since the values of κ M for all the foregoing deformation modes are bounded to far lower values than those of κ T and κ P . In Table Table Mooney-Rivlin Yeoh Gent-Thomas Gent Fung uniaxial tension: engineering stress P , stretches simple torsion: axial load N, twist per unit undeformed length φ, undeformed radius R 0 fit -π Our aim in this paper was to put forward a systematic view of the mathematics and mechanics at play in the Mooney plot. Our analysis highlights that in the arena of modelling the finite deformation of rubber-like materials, there is not a single Mooney plot, but many Mooney plots, depending on the model chosen to fit the data and on the mode of deformation. These Mooney plots, however, may all be constructed under a canonical concept which we have coined in this paper as the generalised Mooney space (GMS). To the best of our knowledge, a clear and explicit rationalisation of the underlying reason(s) that prompted The usefulness of the GMS reveals itself first as an improvement on the fitting process. Although computational power has increased dramatically since the early days of research on rubber, nonlinear curve fitting exercises are fraught with potential pitfalls, as uniqueness of an optimal set of parameters is not guaranteed In view of the foregoing, and of the analyses and results presented in this work, we conclude that the GMS allows for the possibility of gaining meticulous insights into the performance of different models in ways that are not easily accessible in the current classical spaces. For this reason we believe that the GMPs are a new class of tools that enable a clearer and more quantitative assessment of the performance of many models of the nonlinear elasticity theory. Given that the variety of the proposed models continually increases in the literature, this new tool may provide a fundamental assistance to understand the focal points in solving the Hauptproblem.