To advance the development of materials through data-driven scientific methods, appropriate methods for building machine learning (ML)-ready feature tables from measured and computed data must be established. In materials development, X-ray diffraction (XRD) is an effective technique for analysing crystal structures and other microstructural features that have information that can explain material properties. Therefore, the fully automated extraction of peak features from XRD data without the bias of an analyst is a significant challenge. This study aimed to establish an efficient and robust approach for constructing peak feature tables that follow ML standards (ML-ready) from XRD data. We challenge peak feature extraction in the situation where only the peak function profile is known a priori, without knowledge of the measurement material or crystal structure factor. We utilized Bayesian estimation to extract peak features from XRD data and subsequently performed Bayesian regression analysis with feature selection to predict the material property. The proposed method focused only on the tops of peaks within localized regions of interest (ROIs) and extracted peak features quickly and accurately. This process facilitated the rapid extracting of major peak features from the XRD data and the construction of an ML-ready feature table. We then applied Bayesian linear regression to the maximum energy product (BH)max, using the extracted peak features as the explanatory variable. The outcomes yielded reasonable and robust regression results. Thus, the findings of this study indicated that 004 peak height and area were important features for predicting (BH)max. In an effort to accelerate material development via data-driven science, the construction of a machine learning (ML)-ready feature table from measurement or computation data is essential. This necessitates appropriate analysis tools that extract the interpretable low-dimensional features from high-dimensional data such as spectra and images. In materials development, X-ray diffraction (XRD) is an effective technique for analysing crystal structures and other microstructural features that have information that can explain material properties. The crystal structure of a material can be understood by analyzing the diffraction peaks in the XRD data. However, XRD data often has numerous peaks and observation points, making it difficult to fully automatically extract the peak features from XRD data without the bias of an analyst. The peak search method employing differential operation is often used in XRD analysis In recent years, XRD data analysis methods have been proposed for the automatic extraction of material information This study aimed to develop a method for automatically extracting high-intensity peak features. We challenge peak feature extraction in the situation where only the peak function profile is known a priori, without knowledge of the measurement material or crystal structure factor. This study demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed framework in predicting the maximum energy product, (BH) max , an important magnetic property in permanent magnets such as neodymium. Our framework first extracted the region of interest (ROI) for predicting the material property using partial least squares (PLS) regression In this study, (BH) max was regressed using the peak features based on the Bayesian linear regression model with the feature selection We measured the XRD and magnetic properties, such as the maximum energy product (BH) max , of Neodymium magnets fabricated by hot extrusion. In the dataset denoted as {(D m , t m )} M m=1 , M is the number of data samples. In this paper, an XRD datapoint is denoted as where N is the number of data points, and a data point (x n , y n ) indicates the observation angle 2θ [degree] and intensity [counts], respectively. Figure In this measurement data, the number of XRD data was 176, and one XRD dataset had 9000 data points. The range of the observation angle 2θ was 10.0-100.0 [degree], and the observation step was 0.01 [degree]. The intensity unit of XRD datapoints was the counting unit [counts]. The concept of our framework is to quickly formulate of the ML-ready feature table from XRD data. In particular, we focused on the peak features to achieve high interpretability. To realize the rapid construction of feature tables, the proposed method extracted peak features for ROIs with large peak intensities. This method estimated the posterior distribution of the peak features by extracting the peaks through Bayesian estimation using the replica exchange Monte Carlo method. This facilitated discussions on the estimation accuracy of the extracted peak features. Furthermore, the method provided analyst-independent global solutions so that the extracted peak features were less analyst-dependent. In addition, we regressed a material property on the peak features using Bayesian linear regression with feature selection. Thus, the proposed method provides peak extraction and regression analysis based on a full Bayesian framework. In this study, we constructed an ML-ready peak feature table from XRD data following three steps. Figure The proposed framework first extracted the ROI from XRD data using PLS regression. PLS regression reduces the dimensionality of the input data to latent variables based from which the objective variable (material properties) can be predicted. We de- cided that the ROIs should be those with information that could predict the objective variable. Figure Extracting peak features is crucial for the understanding of humans. This sub-section presents the results of XRD peak fitting. The peak decomposition model is described in Appendix A.1. Appendix A.1 describes the setting of the prior distributions in the Bayesian estimation of the peak features. In the defined model, we set the intensity spread σ h , the position spread σ c , width mode μ σ , and width spread σ σ as the hyper-parameters of the prior distribution. We set the hyper-parameters of the prior distribution to σ h = 2.0, σ c = 1.0, μ σ = 0.1, σ σ = 0.2. Our method extracted peak features focusing on the four ROIs. We performed peak fitting by assuming the existence of one dominant main peak in the ROI for improved interpretability and high calculation throughput. Thus, the fine structure of the peak hem was not considered However, if the minor peaks cannot be assigned, a bias is observed in the estimation of the major peaks. Therefore, in this study, a method was developed to automatically extract the major peak features. In this case, the bias of the minor peaks was removed by using information related only to the peak tops. Figure We also considered the peak area a k as a peak feature. In this study, we denoted the feature vector for material properties as z = {h k , c k , σ k , a k |k = 1, . . . , K = 4}. Figure This sub-section shows the prediction of the magnetic property (BH) max using the peak features. In particular, our method automatically selected the peak feature needed to perform predictions using Bayesian estimation. We described the Bayesian linear regression model in Appendix A.2. In this study, we set the variance λ -1 to 0.05. Further, we used the replica exchange Monte Carlo (REMC) method in sub-section A.3 to sample from the poster distribution p(g, w|t, z). As a result, we estimated the optimal noise level (the optimal inverse temperature) using Bayesian free energy. Figure Figure Our framework calculated the features by focusing on ROIs with large peak intensities to accelerate the process and eliminate the intentional genre of an analyst. Therefore, our framework did not consider small peaks of intensity. Thus, the method cannot extract important features if small amounts of impurities contribute significantly to the material properties. The proposed method required a certain number of ROIs to be the focus of attention. The larger the number of ROIs considered, the more likely it is to obtain important features, although this increases the computational complexity of feature extraction. It is recommended to set the number of ROIs at an acceptable computational cost. This study established a methodology for fast and robust creation of ML-ready peak feature tables from XRD data. Our framework used Bayesian estimation to perform peak feature extraction from the XRD data and regression analysis with feature selection on the material properties using the peak features. Bayesian estimation facilitated discussions about the reliability (Bayesian posterior distribution) of the extracted features and regression results. In addition, our method focused only on peak tops in local ROIs for fast extraction of peak features. As a result, we could quickly obtain the main peak features and construct ML-ready feature tables from the XRD measurement data. We applied our framework to XRD data of Neodymium magnets. We extracted the peak features with Bayesian posterior distribution from 176 XRD datapoints in about 180 min even though XRD data was analyzed in sequence. Therefore, our method enabled us to obtain peak features with confidence intervals in approximately 1 min. The magnetic properties were subjected to Bayesian linear regression using the extracted peak features and reasonably good regression results were obtained. The peak height and peak area of the 004 and 006 peaks were important as the necessary features, which were reasonable and interpretable. 