We demonstrate the spontaneous reversal of spin chirality in a single crystal sample of the intermetallic magnet EuAl4. We solve the nanoscopic nature of each of the four magnetically phases of EuAl4 using resonant magnetic x-ray scattering, and demonstrate all four phases order with single-k incommensurate magnetic modulation vectors. Below 15.4 K the system forms a spin density modulated spin structure where the spins are orientated in the ab plane perpendicular to the orientation of the magnetic propagation vector. Below 13.2 K a second spin density wave orders with moments aligned parallel to the c-axis, such that the two spin density wave orders coexist. Below 12.2 K a magnetic helix of a single chirality is stabilised across the entire sample. Below 10 K the chirality of the magnetic helix reverses, and the sample remains a single chiral domain. Concomitant with the establishment of the helical magnetic ordering is the lowering of the crystal symmetry to monoclinic, as evidenced the formation of uniaxial charge and spin strip domains. A group theoretical analysis demonstrates that below 12.2 K the symmetry lowers to polar monoclinic, which is necessary to explain the observed asymmetry in the chiral states of the magnetic helix and the spin chiral reversal. We find that in every magnetically ordered phase of EuAl4 the in-plane moment is perpendicular to the orientation of the magnetic propagation vector, which we demonstrate is favoured by magnetic dipolar interactions. The bivalent nature of chirality, i.e a chiral system is either left or right handed, lends itself well to the encoding of binary information for classical computation. This is reflected in a surge in interest to control the chiral magnetic states of a material through electronic and spin degrees of freedom, for instance via non-collinear or polarised spin currents In the latter case it is often the coupling between the macroscopic order parameter that breaks the inversion symmetry, and spin that allows for the field controlled reversal of the chirality Besides the complex and intriguing zero field magnetism, demonstrated by a cascade of four different phase transitions in a temperature interval of only 5 K, EuAl 4 is also shown to stabilise seven different magnetic phases and four different skyrmion lattices under an applied magnetic field In this manuscript we demonstrate the spontaneous reversal of spin chirality. We solve the nanoscopic nature of each of the four magnetically phases of EuAl 4 using resonant magnetic x-ray scattering. We show that all four phases are single-k, where the AFM1 and AFM2 phases are characterised by spin density wave order, and the AFM3 and AFM4 phases by magnetic helices of a single chiral domain. In the AFM4 phase, the nature of the magnetic ordering does not change, a magnetic helix of a single chirality is still present, but its chirality reverses. We find that in all four magnetically ordered phases the in-plane component of the spins are orientated perpendicular to the direction of the propagation vector, which we demonstrate is favoured by magnetic dipolar interactions. Using a group theoretical approach to symmetry analysis we demonstrate that at the onset of the helical magnetic ordering below T 3 , the symmetry lowers to polar monoclinic, which explains the observed asymmetry in the chiral states of the magnetic helix. Resonant elastic x-ray scattering (REXS) measurements were performed at the I16 beamline at Diamond Light Source In the first magnetically ordered phase, AFM1, present between T 1 and T 2 , we observed two modulation vectors; k qq = (0.097(5),0.093(5),0) and k qq = (0.092(5),-0.087(5),0), as shown in Fig. , where the magnitude of the propagation vector jumps from 0.175(5) to 0.165 In order to probe the spatial arrangement of the modulation vectors in each of the phases, and thus attempt to clarify its multi-k vs single-k nature, the incident x-ray beam was focussed to 100μm by 37μm spot, and the response across the sample was measured in each of the magnetically ordered phases. To identify the orientation of the spins we performed azimuthal dependencies, as in Ref. In the AFM1 phase, the k qq and k qq magnetic satellites of the (0,0,8) reflection were present across the entire sample, as shown in Fig. In the AFM2 phase, the k qq , k qq , k 2 0q and k 2 q0 were observed to exist at all points on the sample, Fig. As k 2 0q and k 2 q0 are equal to k qq + k qq and k qq -k qq respectively, within the experimental error, these could be the peaks that would appear in the presence of a multi-k structure. However as they are magnetic and not structural, it would necessitate the appearance of magnetism at the Γ-point so that the free energy term coupling these order parameters is fourth power, and therefore invariant upon time-reversal. Physically this would manifest as ferromagnetic order, which was not observed from magnetometry data While the k 2 0q and k 2 q0 propagation vectors were approximately of equal intensity in the AFM2 phase, in the AFM3 phase the intensity of k 3 q0 was considerably reduced, by a factor of 5 compared with the k 3 0q and was not present across the entire sample, it could only be found in a 300 μm by 300 μm region, as shown in Fig. To fit the azimuthal scan of the k 4 0q satellite of the (0,0,8) reflection collected in the AFM4 phase, we repeated the procedure outlined above, and found that the best fit was still a helical magnetic structure solution with moments orientated in the ac plane, but with a reversal of the chirality, such that now the best fit to the azimuthal data, Fig. As the x-ray beam does not probe the entire sample, we questioned whether we had measured a reversal in chirality or a shift in the magnetic chiral domain pattern that may occur with temperature. To clarify this matter we rastered the entire sample with the focussed beam spot, first using CR incident light, and then with CL polarised light at 7 K and 10.6 K, representative of the AFM4 and AFM3 phases respectively. We found there to be a small variation in the difference in intensity scattered from the circular light, but largely the sign of the difference was constant across the entire sample for a given temperature, as shown in Fig. For the rare earth ions, with the exception of Gd 3+ that has a half-filled 4f sub-shell, anisotropic interactions typically arise from perturbative effects of the crystalline electric field on the free ion wavefunctions of the rare earth ions Treating the 4f states as a spin-polarised core that is well localised, and the 5d and 6s as the hybridised valence conduction bands, which from angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy measurements Besides the spin orbit coupling from the 5d-6s bands, the 4f dipolar interactions are also expected to contribute to the magnetic anisotropy for each of the different spin structure solutions, whilst varying both the magnitude of the Eu moment and the ratio of the a/b lattice parameters, and the results are shown in Fig. FIG. Fig. Below T 3 we observed a change to the average crystal structure, from a splitting of the (1,0,7) reflection in the hk plane as shown in Fig. Nevertheless from a phenomenological point of view, an asymmetry between two spin chiral states would not occur unless the crystal structure itself was chiral or polar. Indeed an analysis of the symmetry of the magnetic and nuclear structures suggests that the symmetry is lowered to a polar monoclinic space group below T 3 . The structure of the CDW below T CDW is reported to be described by the F mmm(00γ)s00 We further note that in inversion symmetric crystals one expects to establish equal equally populated chiral magnetic domains that restores the global parity of the crystal The establishment of a polar symmetry below T 3 can break the degeneracy between the two chiral states of the magnetic helix. Without the chiral or polar structural distortions, the two chiral states of the magnetic helix represent degenerate chiral domains. A change to the polarity or chirality of the crystal structure could then induce a change to the magnetic chirality, if the magnetic and structural order parameters were coupled To summarise, we demonstrate a spontaneous reversal of spin chirality in a single crystal sample of the intermetallic magnet EuAl 4 . In the AFM1 phase EuAl 4 orders to form a SDW with moments aligned in the ab plane, perpendicular to the propagation vector. The AFM2 phase is characterised by the coexistence of two spin orders, the SDW present in the AFM1 phase, and a SDW with m||c. In the AFM3 phase the ordering of the magnetic modulations change, and a magnetic helix of a single chiral domain is stabilised, where one component of the moment is in the ab plane, perpendicular to the propagation vector, and the second is along c. We find that in every magnetically ordered phase of EuAl 4 the in-plane moment is perpendicular to the orientation of the magnetic propagation vector, which we demonstrate is favoured by magnetic dipolar interactions. Below T 4 the magnetic chirality of the helix reverses, and the sample remains as a single chiral domain. Concomitant with the establishment of the helical magnetic ordering is the lowering of the crystal symmetry to monoclinic, as evi-denced the formation of uniaxial charge and spin strip domains. A group theoretical analysis of the nuclear and magnetic structures demonstrates that below T 3 , the symmetry lowers to polar monoclinic, explaining the observed asymmetry in the chiral states of the magnetic helix. We find that the change in the CDW symmetry at T 3 and its now chiral nature is necessary to explain the observed spin chiral reversal. The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical support provided at the I16 Beamline at Diamond Light Source to perform the resonant x-ray scattering measurements (Exp. MM31813-1 and Exp. NR35465-1). Resonant x-ray scattering (RXS) measurements were performed in the vertical scattering geometry with an incident beam size of 180 μm in the horizontal direction and ∼30 μm in the vertical. The sample was mounted so that the (0,0,l) was specular, and the azimuthal reference was (h,0,0), such that at φ = 0 the a axis was parallel to the incident beam. An ARS closed cycle refrigerator was used to cool the sample from room temperature to 5 K. A Pilatus 100K area detector was used to measure the diffracted intensity when it was not analysed into the σ and π channels. To analyse the diffracted beam a Cu (220) crystal orientated close to 44.66°with respect to the incident beam was used together with a Merlin area detector. We note that at 6.972 keV the attenuation length of the x-rays is expected to be approximately 10μm for a grazing incident angle greater than 40°, which serves as an estimate for the x-ray penetration depth. The incident polarisation of light was tuned between linear horizontal (σ), linear vertical (π) and two circular polarisations of opposite handedness, circular right (⟳) and circular left (⟲), using the light transmitted through a 1 mm diamond (0,0,1) plate orientated close to the (1,1,1) reflection in the asymmetric Laue mode. We note that the conversion of the light from linear vertical to circular is not perfect, and thus a fraction of the light remains σ polarised. Polarised light can be described by the three real Stokes parameters, P 1 , P 2 and P 3 , which form the vector P as in Ref. 2 ), which assumes the beam is partially circular polarised and partially linearly polarised, and determined the value of P 2 to be 0.88. B. Resonant magnetic x-ray scattering η scans measured in the σσ ′ and σπ ′ channels and an energy dependence of the magnetic satellites of the (0,0,8) reflection in the AFM1, AFM2 and AFM4 phases is shown below. An absence of scattering in the σσ ′ channel and the presence of scattering in the σπ ′ confirms the magnetic origin of the intensity at these satellite reflections. To determine the magnetic structures predicted by symmetry, the space group of the parent crystal structure was maintained as I4/mmm. Whilst the space group symmetry is likely to be lower, given the onset of the CDW precedes the condensation of the magnetic order, one can use a higher symmetry parent space group when performing the analysis, especially since a determination of the crystal structure was not performed below T CDW . The symmetry analysis was performed using ISODIS-TORT from the ISOTROPY Software Suite The magnetic representation of the Wyckoff positions of the Eu11 and Eu12 ions in the I4/mmm symmetry for the incommensurate propagation vector, (α,α,0), decomposes into three irreducible representations, each of which corresponds to a distinct ordering of the Eu spins, as summarised in Table. moments are either ||c, ||ab or ||a b. An analysis of the irreducible representations of the magnetic representation for the Wyckoff positions of the Eu11 and Eu12 ions in the I4/mmm symmetry for the the incommensurate propagation vector, (α,0,0), can be found in Ref. 