The influence of pressure on the hydrogen bond ordering in the perovskite metal-organic framework [(CH3)2NH2]Mn(HCOO)3 has been investigated by dielectric, pyroelectric adn magnetic measurements in a piston-cylinder cell. Under ambient pressure the ordering of hydrogen bonds takes place at TC = 188 K and induces a first-order ferroelectric phase transition. With increasing pressure to p = 3.92 kbar, the order-disorder transition shifts to a lower temperature and retains the first-order ferroelectric nature. However, under higher pressures, the ordering process of hydrogen bonds is split into two transitions: a broad antiferroelectric transition at high temperature and a first-order ferroelectric transition at low temperature. With increasing pressure, the antiferroelectric phase is enhanced whereas the ferroelectric phase is greatly suppressed, which implies that compression of the perovskite framework favors antiparallel arrangement of the hydrogen bonds. The canted anti-ferromagnetic transition was almost unchanged when pressure up to 10.85 kbar. Our study demonstrated that the perovskite metal-organic frameworks are more sensitive to external pressure than conventional perovskite oxides so that their electric properties can be easily tuned by pressure. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) that combine inorganic and organic elements have been extensively studied in the past decade due to their potential applications in gas storage, catalysis as well as rich physics in optics, magnetism, and ferroelectricity The ordering of hydrogen bonds induces either ferroelectricity or antiferroelectricity with the transition temperature between 190 and 160 K It is well known that MOFs have relatively soft and flexible structures so that external pressures could deform them easily, which may induce significant modifications in both electric and magnetic properties They found that DMA-Mn undergoes only one transition near 55 kbar at room temperature during which its structure changes from R-3c symmetry into P1 symmetry, suggesting antiferroelectric (AFE) order. In addition, calculations on high-pressure magnetic behavior of DMA-Fe predicted a high-spin to low-spin transition near 45 kbar In this work, we have investigated the pressure effect on the hydrogen bond ordering in DMA-Mn which has the highest transition temperature and the largest electric polarization among the DMA-Ms family. The temperature dependences of dielectric permittivity and electric polarization under pressures up to 15.19 kbar were measured and a pressure-temperature phase diagram was obtained. It is found that external pressure would suppress FE ordering and favor AFE ordering of hydrogen bonds in DMA-Mn. The single-crystal samples of [(CH3)2NH2]Mn(HCOO)3 (DMA-Mn) were synthesized by hydrothermal method. 5 mmol MnCl2•4H2O was dissolved in a 60 mL solution containing 50% volume of dimethylformamide (DMF) with deionized water. Then,the solution was heated in 100 mL Teflon-lined autoclaves for 3 days at 140°C. After the autoclaves were air cooled, the supernatants were removed into a glass beaker for crystallization by slow evaporation method at room temperature. Finally, the colorless crystals were harvested after 3 days and were washed by ethanol for 3 times. The single-crystal XRD patterns at room temperture suggest that the crystals are naturally grown layer by layer along the [012] direction as shown in Fig. The electric properties under several pressures were measured with a clamp-type piston cylinder cell Temperature dependence of magnetization M(T) under high pressure was measured with a miniature piston-cylinder cell (Quantum Design Japan) in a commercial magnetic property measurement system (MPMS-III) from Quantum Design. The DMA-Mn single crystals together with a piece of Pb was loaded into Teflon capsule filled with Daphne 7373 as the pressure transmitting medium. The magnetic field was applied along the [012] direction. The pressure at low temperatures was determined from the superconducting transition of Pb The dielectric permittivity was measured with an Andeen Hagerling 2700A capacitance bridge at the frequency of 1kHz, 10 kHz, 20kHz and 100kHz in a PPMS (Quantum Design). In order to obtain the temperature (T) dependen electric polarization (P), the sample was poled with a 4.2 kV/cm electric field during cooling from a high temperature in the paraelectric phase. After removing the poling electric field, the electrodes were shorted for 40 minutes to release the space charges. Then, the sample was warmed at a rate of 0.5 K/min while the pyroelectric current (I) was recorded by an electrometer (Keithley 6517B). Finally, P was obtained by integrating the pyroelectric current with time. Fig. In order to detect how external pressure affects the ordering process of hydrogen bonds in DMA-Mn, we measured the temperature dependence of dielectric permittivity and electric polarization under various pressures. As shown in Fig. The nature of the two successive transitions is revealed by the measurements of temperature dependence of pyroelectric current and electric polarization. As shown in Fig. The magnetization curves and it's derivative curves of DMA-Mn with the applied magnetic field of 0.1 T under pressure are shown in Fig. A temperature-pressure phase diagram of DMA-Mn can be constructed based on the dielectric, pyroelectric and magnetic data under pressures. At high temperatures, DMA-Mn exhibits the PE behavior due to the disorder of hydrogen bonds. Under zero or low pressures, the disordered hydrogen bonds become collectively parallel alignment upon cooling down. As a result, a sharp first-order phase transition from the PE to FE phase occurs. However, external pressure destabilizes the parallel alignment of hydrogen bonds and favors antiparallel ordering. With decreasing temperature, partial hydrogen bonds become antiparallel alignment, which yields the AFE phase at T2. With further cooling, the remaining disordered hydrogen bonds develop into the parallel ordering, which makes the AFE and FE phases coexist below T1. Under a high pressure of 15.19 kbar, the FE phase completely disappears and only the AFE phase remains. Previous studies of the Raman spectra and single-crystal X-ray diffraction under pressures suggest that the metal-formate framework of DMA-Ms is much more susceptible to external pressures than the hydrogen bonds In summary, our study reveals that the ordering process of hydrogen bonds in the perovskite MOF, DMA-Mn is very sensitive to external pressure. Under weak pressure, a sharp first-order phase transition from the PE to FE state is induced by the collective alignment of hydrogen bonds. When applying a relatively high pressure, the ordering process of hydrogen bonds is broadened and split into two transitions, which results in a coexistence of the FE and AFE phases. The FE phase is completely suppressed under 15.19 kbar but the AFE state is stabilized. It is concluded that external pressure favors the antiparallel ordering of hydrogen bonds so that the FE state decays rapidly with increasing pressure. These results demonstrate that pressure 