We present high-quality angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) and density functional theory calculations (DFT+U) of SmCoIn5. We find broad agreement with previously published studies of LaCoIn5 and CeCoIn5 [1, The origin of heavy quasiparticles with f electron character is of fundamental interest due to their participation in unconventional superconductivity. In heavy fermion metals with a valence band of metallic s, p, and d electrons, the conduction electrons can turn into heavy quasiparticles by hybridizing with the localized f electrons. Hybridization of this type, involving the formation of entangled Kondo singlets that screen the f magnetic moments, has been observed in a variety of Ce-based intermetallics The single-ion properties of Sm 3+ (4f 5 , S = 5 /2, L = 5, J = 5 /2) make it an analogue of Ce 3+ in CeCoIn 5 (4f 1 , S = 1 /2, L = 3, J = 5 /2) with the same nominal J, while exhibiting similar single-ion properties, including the crystal field environment and atomic spin-orbit coupling. The case of SmCoIn 5 presents with predominantly localized f electrons, as well as an additional delocalized f component To develop a microscopic picture of the Kondo screening environment in SmCoIn 5 , we conducted ARPES measurements at T=12 K and built an electronic structure model using DFT+U calculations. Our results confirm that SmCoIn 5 is dominated by the Sm 3+ configuration Looking in more detail, we first show (Fig. The second "hot spot" for f hybridization in SmCoIn 5 is the high-symmetry R position (Fig. Finally, our model shows unambiguously that a globally flat band appearing at E = -0.7 eV in SmCoIn 5 , as well as in LaCoIn 5 and CeCoIn 5 Fermi surface and band structure of SmCoIn5 Fig. In Fig. To understand the details of the hybridization between Sm f electrons and the other bands, we projected our DFT calculations into the basis of different atomic shells and studied the "hot spots" near the Fermi energy that contain Sm states. In Fig. From both the model calculations and experimental data, the γ Z = (0.25, 0, 0.2) hot spot in SmCoIn 5 is smaller and more isolated compared to CeCoIn 5 . Specifically, we find no evidence that the f states at γ Z are distributed over the larger Z-centered Fermi surface pocket at E F (see supplementary figure 4(g); cf. Ref. we show the In(2) character in Fig. Turning to the hot spot at the R point k = (0.5, 0, 0.5), in Fig. In our DFT+U calculations, the density of states of the Co 3d electrons appears predominantly between E F and about E B = 3 eV, and exhibits a strong flat band (𭟋) near E = -0.7 eV. Flat bands in general are hosts of electronic localization (e.g. If the 𭟋 band is globally flat because of geometric frustration, analysis of the 115 crystal structure can elucidate how this occurs. In the 115 structure, Co atoms occupy a square lattice. Therefore, one possibility is that the band structure of the 115s hosts a very specific hierarchy of couplings involving the square lattice, such as the checkerboard lattice proposed in The appearance of geometric frustration does not necessarily imply that the ground state of the frustrated sublattice is the ground state of SmCoIn 5 . Since the 𭟋 band in the 115s is not situated at the Fermi energy, its quasiparticles are not thermally activated. However, since the Co d-shell is partially unfilled, the magnetic interactions within the 𭟋 band can nevertheless directly influence the itinerant quasiparticles. Also, as we have shown in SmCoIn 5 , direct hybridization can occur between heavy quasiparticles with specific Co d orbitals (in our model, with d xz /d yz at the R-point), proving that the effects of the Co flat band can be felt directly by the partly delocalized f states. Therefore, in CeCoIn 5 , where the delocalized f states participate in a superfluid condensate, interactions arising from the 𭟋 band of d states might also influence the superconducting pairing mechanism. In a DMFT study of CeCoIn 5 , different multiplets of the Ce f electrons were shown to selectively hybridize with the β band between X and M, and with the γ band between Γ and X Finally, we address the magnetic exchange in the Sm-Sm, Sm-Co, and Co-Co subsystems. In the tetragonal lattice structure of SmCoIn 5 , the Sm and Co atoms both form two-dimensional square lattices parallel to the basal ab plane, as shown in Fig. In addition to the RKKY mechanism, the role of direct magnetic exchange and magnetic superexchange can be generally important for d and f electrons in rare earth intermetallics. For instance, in (La,Tb)Mn 2 Si 2 , it was proposed that an R-Mn-R interlayer superexchange mechanism is responsible for stabilizing AF order, while the Si atoms could act as mediators for superexchange between neighboring planes of Mn atoms along the c axis In summary, close agreement between ARPES measurements and DFT+U calculations shows that the band structure of SmCoIn 5 exhibits coupling of the localized Sm f states at the Fermi level via hybridization with specific In 5p and Co 3d metallic states. Our model shows that heavy quasiparticles containing Sm f character can hybridize at multiple positions in the Brillouin zone, including a position supporting Sm-In(2)[5p x ] hybridization that is similar to previous results on CeCoIn 5 , and a second position at the zone boundary supporting Sm-Co[3d xz ] hybridization (simultaneously with the equivalent orbitals 5p y and 3d yz , respectively, along the other in-plane direction in the crystal). Meanwhile, the Co d orbitals exhibit a globally flat band (𭟋), which has a likely origin in geometric frustration. The magnetic interactions arising from coupling of the itinerant quasiparticles to the Co layer, whether through direct hybridization (e.g. at R), through mean field interactions (because of a partly unfilled Co d shell), or through superexchange interactions involving the In(2) sites, all point to the importance of the Co d states in determining the ground state. Since the d shell is common to all "115" materials, electronic localization may play an overlooked role in the ground states found in this family, including unconventional superconductivity. In SmCoIn 5 , the delocalized nature of Sm states at the hot spots shows how magnetic interactions can go beyond the typical RKKY mechanism, and may explain why the Sm f states in SmCoIn 5 exhibit both a delocalized component and localized magnetic order. SmCoIn 5 single crystals were grown using an indium flux method that we described previously Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments were carried out at the soft-x-ray endstation All the density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the Quantum ESPRESSO package The data used to produce the simulation results presented in this work are available at the Materials Cloud Archive 