AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb and Cs) have attracted much recent attention due to the coexistence of multiple exotic orders. Among them, the charge density wave (CDW) order has been shown to host various unconventional behaviors. Here, we investigate the CDW order by a combination of both bulk and surface doping methods. While element substitutions in bulk doping change both carriers and the crystal lattice, the surface doping primarily tunes the carrier concentration. As such, our results reveal a two-dimensional phase diagram of the CDW in doped CsV3Sb5. In the lightly bulk doped regime, the existence of CDW order is reversible by tuning the carrier concentration. But excessive bulk doping permanently destroys the CDW, regardless of the carrier doping level. These results provide insights to the origin of the CDW from both electronic and structural degrees of freedom. They also open an avenue for manipulating the exotic CDW order in Kagome superconductors. Kagome metals have attracted much attention due to the special lattice structure and associated physical properties Two scenarios have been primarily suggested In this paper, we investigate the evolution of CDW order in CsV3Sb5 via a combination of both bulk and surface doping. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements, which are sensitive to both doping methods Next, Cs surface doping is gradually carried out on the CsV3-xTixSb5 (x=0.13) sample at a fixed low temperature (10K). As illustrated in Fig. In order to further understand the evolution of the CDW order, the surface Cs doping is carried out on another CsV3-xTixSb5 sample, but with a higher bulk doping level (x=0.39) at 10 K. Apparently, the CDW order is completely suppressed in this sample before the Cs surface doping, evidenced by the absence of the CDW gap (Fig. The above bulk and surface doping dependent measurements (Fig. In order to better understand the role of lattice, we have calculated the total energy profiles of CsV3-xTixSb5 In summary, by utilizing high-resolution ARPES measurements, we have revealed a two-dimensional phase diagram of the CDW in CsV3Sb5 as a function of both Ti bulk substitution and Cs surface deposition. The distinct evolutions in this phase diagram reveal the roles played by both electrons and lattice. These observations provide key insights to understand the driving mechanism of the CDW order in Kagome metals. and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 53. Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 