Composite oxides have been indeed proved to be valuable materials in optoelectronic applications. The combination of indium oxide and gallium oxide and other materials can lead to enhanced optical and electronic properties, making them suitable for a variety of optoelectronic devices. Meticulous analysis of the various optical properties helped to draw conclusions about the heterostructure of Indium and Gallium oxide and its use as a suitable semiconducting material in the medium bandgap range. The density of states and the band structure have been obtained from the density functional theory calculations. Real frequency phonon density of states supports dynamical stability of the crystal structure. A favorable energy band gap is achieved in the visible region of the spectrum, indicating that this mixed oxide is well suited for optoelectronic devices such as LEDs and solar cells. Nanomaterials have various electrical and optical properties that offer interesting applications in biomedicine (MRI contrast agents), cosmetics, batteries, textiles, paints, storage devices and optoelectronics (low-power LEDs) In recent studies conducted about semiconductor oxides, the doped oxides have shown significant and promising features, and applications in low-power electronics, memories, gas sensors, electrochromics and display applications Indium oxide itself has a wide band gap of around 2.1 eV, which makes it a transparent material in the visible range that can be used in many areas for advantageous applications For advanced semiconductor applications, when indium oxide is combined with another semiconducting oxide, a new path is made for bipolar devices with enhanced conductivity. Doping, tunable mobility and contact properties will act as the key requirements for further use In this field of optoelectronics, researches are still exploring the various properties of these composite materials. The dynamical stability of this structure is determined using phonon density calculation. This paper aims to first geometrically optimize the heterostructure and then perform the energy bandgap and density of states calculations for this composite oxide of Indium oxide and Gallium oxide. An in-depth analysis of the optical properties has been carried out using density functional theory and optical constants. All of the optical properties including the refractive index, absorption and dielectric function are estimated. The van der Waals heterostructure of the indium oxide and gallium oxide was formed theoretically, in which the layers of indium oxide are stacked over gallium oxide in (001) direction. Here, the ground state of the compound oxide containing indium oxide and gallium oxide is investigated for its optimized electronic structure (FIG. The results of density functional theory are discussed in this section. This compound crystal has a P-1 symmetry with lattice parameters a=b=c 13.9981 Å and α = β = γ = 90 • . The atom's stability hinges on the self-consistent fieldcalculated energy, and we opt for the structure with the minimum energy to get insight into its other properties A visual voyage into the band structure reveals a vivid picture of the electronic structure of a material, highlighting the valence band and conduction band, two key concepts in understanding basic physical properties. The valence band, spanning from -5 eV to 0 eV, represents the energy levels occupied by electrons that are tightly bound to their respective atoms. These electrons are involved in chemical bonding and are not free to move about the material with the illustrious Fermi level demarcated by a dotted line. On the other side, the conduction band takes center stage on the right, showcasing its energy states from 0 eV to 5 eV. The band ranges from -5 eV to 5 eV is considered because all the important phenomena are considered to be observed in this range. The interplay between the valence band, conduction band, and Fermi level governs the electronic behavior of materials, shaping their electrical conductivity, optical properties, and thermal characteristics. Understanding these concepts is essential in fields such as semiconductor physics, materials science, and device engineering while proposing a new material. The band gap found here is new and improved from its component layers. While the indium oxide shows a lower band gap around 2 eV and gallium oxide shows a band gap of about 5 eV the compound shows a gap of around 3 eV. Our observations of direct band gap is important because it makes the material sufficiently bright and electron-hole radiative lifetime is small. This section delves into the optical properties (FIG. The real part of the dielectric function (FIG. These findings suggest promising avenues for exploration in the field of optoelectronics. The materials' ability to absorb and emit light in specific frequency ranges could lead to the development of novel light sources, detectors, and other optical components. Further research is warranted to fully unlock the potential of these materials and harness their unique optical properties for practical applications. The intricate results of optics indeed reveal captivating insights into the material's properties. The refractive index, a measure of how light bends as it passes through a material, is observed from the refractive index vs energy graph (FIG. In conclusion, the composite crystal studied here unfurls a lot of possibilities in the opto-electronic fields. The union of Indium oxide and Gallium oxide in a heterostructure holds the promise of elevated optical prowess, and the results echo the potential for substantial contemporary value. Delving into the depths of dynamical stability adds another layer of comprehension to this crystal's stability. The strategic use of a heterostructure emerges as a key player, and putting together all the results shows both electrical and optical properties, culminating in a commendable band gap energy value. This, in turn, opens doors to a plethora of applications, particularly in the field of solar cells and other opto-electronic devices. The dielectric function and optical conductivity shows a peak after 3 eV proving the existence of a band gap. The refractive index and the static value of dielectric constant is having a value of 1.1 which is a promising value for designing optical materials. Armed with a favorable band gap nestled in the visible spectrum of the electromagnetic realm, these materials promise towards the construction of innovative opto-electronic devices. The meticulous exploration of this crystal's structure, guided by the results from the DFT method, adds a possible optoelectronic material made of two oxides. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.