Rational synthesis of robust layered double hydroxides (LDHs) nanosheets for high-energy supercapacitors is full of challenges. Herein, we reported an ultrasonication-assisted strategy to eco-friendly fabricate NiFe-LDHs nanosheets for the enhanced capacitive behavior. The experimental results combined with different advanced characterization tools document that the utilization of ultrasonication has a profound effect on the morphology and thickness of the as-obtained NiFe-LDHs, alternatively affecting the capacitive behavior. It shows that NiFe-LDHs nanosheets prepared with 2-h ultrasonic treatments display the exceptional capacitive performance because of the synergetic effect of ultrathin thickness, large specific surface area, and high mesoporous volume. The maximum specific capacitance of Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs nanosheets with the thickness of 7.39 nm and the specific surface area of 77.16 m 2 g À1 reached 1923 F g À1 , which is competitive with most previously reported values. In addition, the maximum specific energy of the assembled NiFe-LDHs//AC asymmetric supercapacitor achieved 49.13 Wh kg À1 at 400 W kg À1 . This work provides a green technology to fabricate LDHs nanosheets, and offers deep insights for understanding the relationship between the morphology/structure and capacitive behavior of LDHs nanosheets, which is helpful for achieving high-performance LDHs-based electrode materials. Supercapacitors (SCs) are extreme high-power, great energy efficient and long-term cycling energy storage devices, which are widely used in portable electronic devices, electrical vehicles, and military applications Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are a kind of hydrotalcite-like two-dimensional (2D) materials, which have drawn tremendous attention as electrode materials for SCs Several strategies have been utilized to overcome the disadvantages of LDHs, including exfoliation/delamination of bulk LDHs into LDHs nanosheets, combination of LDHs with highly conductive substrates, and preparation of LDHs derivatives (metallic oxides, sulfides, etc.) Ultrasonication is a simple and reliable treatment to exfoliate LDHs nanosheets by producing shock waves and microjet flows on LDHs The present work systematically investigates the relationship between the morphology/structure and capacitive behavior of NiFe-LDHs nanosheets. NiFe-LDHs nanosheets with different morphologies were achieved by controlling the ultrasonic time. The morphology and the structure of NiFe-LDHs were characterized by a series of advanced measurements including X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET). The capacitive performance of NiFe-LDHs were examined as electrode materials in SCs using cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and cycling tests. This work is expected to provide a clear direction for designing and optimizing the structure of the ultrasonicationassisted exfoliated LDHs nanosheets for energy storage. All chemicals were used without any treatment and purification. NiFe-LDHs nanosheets were synthesized according to the previous reported processes Material and electrochemical characterizations of NiFe-LDHs are described in Supplementary Information. The crystal structures of Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs were investigated by X-ray diffraction method. As shown in Fig. The nanosheets of Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs-2 were also analyzed using scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to determine the composition of LDHs. The EDX mappings (Fig. AFM was used to measure the thickness values of NiFe-LDHs (Fig. BET measurements was carried out to decide the specific surface area, total pore volume, and pore size, which are key factors for determining capacitive performance of NiFe-LDHs. Fig. The electrochemical performance of NiFe-LDHs was evaluated through CV, GCD and EIS in three-electrode system. Fig. In general, the considerable reasons of the excellent capacitive performance of the LDHs nanosheets could be ascribed to the synergetic effect of appropriate structural parameters, including the ultrathin thickness, large specific surface area, and high mesoporous volume. These structural parameters are controlled by suitable ultrasonic time. Excessive ultrasonic treatment could destroy the structure of LDHs nanosheets, giving rise to deactivation of active sites of charge storage. In this work, 2 h is the most suitable ultrasonic time for NiFe-LDHs nanosheets as electrode materials of SCs. As listed in Table An asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device is designed to further demonstrate the potential for practical application of Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs electrodes. The ASC device was denoted as Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs//AC ASC. Fig. In Fig. In summary, we have successfully synthesized NiFe-LDHs nanosheets with a facile ultrasonication-assisted methodology. For comparison, bulky NiFe-LDHs were also fabricated without ultrasonic treatment. The structure and the composition of NiFe-LDHs were confirmed by XRD and TGA results. The interlayer spacing of NiFe-LDHs was enlarged with the aid of ultrasonic treatment during the synthesis process. The NiFe-LDHs nanosheets prepared with 2-h ultrasonic treatments possessed the ultrathin thickness (7.39 nm), large specific surface area (77.16 m 2 g À1 ), and high mesoporous volume (0.080 cm 3 g À1 ), leading to the excellent capacitive performance. However, excessive ultrasonication could decrease number of active sites of energy storage. The maximum specific capacitance of Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs nanosheets prepared with 2-h ultrasonic treatments reached 1923 F g À1 , which is almost 1.4-fold and 1.7-fold of that of bulky Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs and Ni 3 Fe 1 -LDHs nanosheets prepared with 3-h ultrasonic treatments, respectively. The characterization results clearly demonstrate the complicated relationship between the morphology/thickness and capacitive performance of LDHs with the utilization of ultrasonication. Additionally, the assembled NiFe-LDHs//AC ASC achieved a great specific energy of 49.13 Wh kg À1 at 400 W kg À1 . This work provides a guidance for designing and optimizing the structure of the ultrasonication-assisted exfoliated LDHs nanosheets for SCs. Y. Wang et al. / Green Energy & Environment 7 (2022) 1053-1061