Recently, the Kagome metal CsTi3Bi5 has exhibited several novel quantum properties similar to CsV3Sb5, such as nontrivial topology, double-dome superconductivity, and flat band features. However, CsTi3Bi5 lacks the charge-density wave (CDW) present in CsV3Sb5, making the study of its emergence of double-dome superconductivity a focus of research. In this work, we have identified an order parameter, the three-band Z2 topological index, that can describe the superconducting phase diagram of CsTi3Bi5 under pressure. Its evolution with pressure follows the expected behavior for superconductivity. Furthermore, the results of the Fermi surface under pressure reveal the potential presence of a Lifshitz transition in the vicinity of the vanishing point of the superconducting temperature change with pressure in CsTi3Bi5. These results indicate that the superconducting behavior of CsTi3Bi5 under pressure is caused by changes in the electronic structure leading to alterations in the topological properties, provide new insights and approaches for understanding the superconducting phenomenon in Kagome metals. Currently topological superconductor is the most focusing candidate for quantum computation. In the past years it has anticipated that dope-or pressure-tuning topological insulators could become topological superconductor Meanwhile, another kind Kagome metal CsTi3Bi5 was also found to be superconducting In this letter, we present the systematical study of the evolutions of the structural stability, electronic states and topology of CsTi3Bi5 with the increasing hydrostatic pressure up to 40 GPa. We find that the crystal structure CsTi3Bi5 with the space group P6/mmm is stable at the pressure smaller than 40 GPa. When the pressure increases from ambient to 40 GPa, CsTi3Bi5 undergoes a series Z2 topological states in superconducting phases and trivial states in the normal phases. The symmetry-protected surface states also appear in the Z2 topological phases. The Fermi surfaces also experience considerably changes with increasing pressure. These results clearly suggest that CsTi3Bi5 is possibly a realistic topologically-nontrivial superconductor, and hydrostatic pressure-could tune the topological states crossovers. Pressure-dependent atomic structures: As shown in FIG. The variation of the electronic structure of CsTi3Bi5 as a function of pressure will be discussed. At 0 GPa, considering the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), the band structure of the system is shown in FIG. At 30 GPa, the δ band at the M point is suppressed below the Fermi level, and the γ band reappears with vHS characteristics. At 40 GPa, both bands are further suppressed, and at the M point, the γ band goes below the Fermi level. In terms of the DOS under pressure, we observed a trend of downward energy shift in the peak corresponding to the flat band as the pressure increases. Discussions: Here, we present a brief discussion on the relationship between topology and superconductivity in CsTi3Bi5. Our results indicate a correspondence between the topological phase diagram at pressures of 1 -40 GPa and the two-domed superconducting phase diagram, suggesting the coexistence of topological and superconducting phases under pressure. Although the controversial existence of superconductivity in CsTi3Bi5 at 0 GPa Finally, we discuss the potential existence of a Lifshitz phase transition. We note that the sister system RbTi3Bi5, after K atoms doping, exhibits a similar phenomenon where the top of the δ band is tuned from above to below EF, resembling the suppression of the δ band below the Fermi level in CsTi3Bi5 under pressure of around 30 GPa. We speculate that K atom doping in RbTi3Bi5 induces lattice contraction, mimicking the effect of increased pressure. In fact, pressure manipulation is experimentally simpler, and we believe that pressure modulation of the Lifshitz phase transition holds promising prospects. Summary: As a summary, we investigate the topological and electronic properties in CsTi3Bi5 under pressure using first-principles calculations. Our results reveal that the Z2 topological invariant of the three bands near the Fermi surface exhibits a similar trend to the existing superconducting phase diagram with pressure. Additionally, the approximate location of the possible Lifshitz phase transition point coincides with the superconducting phase diagram. These findings highlight the importance of considering the topological and electronic properties in CsTi3Bi5 and call for further research in this area. This work is expected to provide valuable insights for understanding the emergence of a two-domed superconducting phase diagram in CsTi3Bi5.