Here, we investigate the thermoelectric properties of the marcasite-type compounds MSb2 (M = Ta, Nb) in the temperature range of 310-730 K. These compounds were synthesized by a solidstate reaction followed by the spark plasma sintering process. The Rietveld refinement method confirms the monoclinic phase with space group C 2/m for both compounds. The observed values of Seebeck coefficients exhibit non-monotonic behaviour in the studied temperature range, with the maximum magnitude of -14.4 and -22.7 μV K -1 for TaSb2 and NbSb2, respectively at ∼444 K. The negative sign of S in the full temperature window signifies the n-type behaviour of these compounds. Both electrical and thermal conductivities show an increasing trend with temperature. The experimentally observed thermoelectric properties are understood through the first-principles DFT and Boltzmann transport equation. A pseudogap in the density of states around the Fermi level characterizes the semimetallic behaviour of these compounds. The multi-band electron and hole pockets were found to be mainly responsible for the temperature dependence of transport properties. The experimental power factors are found to be ∼0.09 and ∼0.42 mW m -1 K -2 at 310 K for TaSb2 and NbSb2, respectively. From the DFT-based calculations, the maximum possible power factors for p-type conduction are predicted as ∼1.14 and ∼1.74 mW m -1 K -2 , while these values are found to be ∼1.16 and ∼1.80 mW m -1 K -2 for n-type TaSb2 and NbSb2, respectively at 300 K with the corresponding doping concentrations. The present study suggests that the combined DFT and Boltzmann transport theory are found to be reasonably good at explaining the experimental transport properties, and moderate power factors are predicted. The performance of thermoelectric (TE) materials is evaluated by the dimensionless figure-of-merit, ZT = S 2 σT κ , where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity, κ is the thermal conductivity (which is the sum of electronic, κ e and lattice thermal conductivity, κ l ), and T is the absolute temperature. The value of ZT determines the conversion efficiency; the higher the ZT value, the better the TE performance. Finding materials having ZT higher than unity is still a challenging task, though the research in TE has made in progress for many decades Realizing high ZT has always been a challenging task due to the strong correlation among the TE parameters through charge carriers In recent decades, the TE properties of FeSb 2 were extensively studied because of ultra-high S of up to -45000 μV K -1 at 12 K, resulting in the highest power factor reported ever In this work, we have synthesized marcasite-type compounds MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb) using the combined solidstate reaction and spark plasma sintering process. All the TE properties are measured and analyzed. Firstprinciple calculations and Boltzmann transport equations are utilized to understand the experimental results. The multi-band electron and hole pockets are found to reasonably explain the experimental data. The maximum possible power factors for p-type and n-type of MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb) are also predicted using the DFTbased calculations. MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb) were synthesized using a combined solid state reaction (SSR) and spark plasma sintering (SPS) process. The high purity powder of Ta (99.99%), Nb (99.99%) and Sb (99.99%) from Sigma-Aldrich were taken as starting materials. The desired amount of metal powder were ground in alumina mortar and cold pressed at 25 MPa to form pellets. Then the obtained pellets were heated at 700 °C for 3 days in vacuum-sealed quartz tube. Although the target phase for both compounds were obtained in SSR, but the pellets were too brittle for the transport measurements. In order to get dense pellets, we ground the SSR pellets and did the SPS (SPS-1080, SPS Syntex Inc.) at 750 °C for 8 minutes. During the SPS, the constant uniaxial pressure of 50 MPa was applied to a graphite punch of 10 mm diameter under a partial argon atmosphere. The relative densities were calculated from the sample densities determined by Archimedes principle, which are found to be ∼95% and ∼94% for TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 , respectively. The obtained pellets were cut into the required dimensions for the transport measurements. The simultaneous measurement of the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient were performed using ZEM-2 (ADVANCE RIKO) under partial helium environment. The dimensions of TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 were taken as 4.11 × 1.92 × 7.57 mm 3 and 4.11 × 1.62 × 7.39 mm 3 , respectively. The thermal conductivity was obtained using the formula: κ = D ×C p ×ρ. The ρ is the density of the sample. The D is the thermal diffusivity, which is measured using the laser flash diffusivity method implemented in LFA-467 Hyper flash (Netzsch) instrument. The heat capacity, C p was estimated using a standard sample (pyroceram-9060) in LFA-467. The circular pellets of TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 with diameter of 10 mm and thickness of 1.3 mm and 1.6 mm, respectively were used for the measurements. X-ray diffraction (XRD) were taken (Smart Lab3, Rigaku) in 10-90°as shown in Fig. In order to understand the experimental transport properties, we have carried out the ground state electronic structure calculations within (DFT) A. EXPERIMENTAL TRANSPORT PROPERTIES Fig. , where S h,e is the Seebeck coefficients of holes and electrons and σ h,e is the electrical conductivity of holes and electrons. The sign of the S is determined by the major contribution coming from the electrons or holes, because electrons generally yield the negative S, while holes give positive S. Therefore, the negative sign of S in Fig. Using the measured S and σ, the power factors are calculated as ∼0.91 × 10 -1 and ∼4.17 × 10 -1 mW m -1 K -2 at 310 K for TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 , respectively. At 730 K, the power factors are calculated as ∼0.39 × 10 -1 and ∼2.32 × 10 -1 mW m -1 K -2 , respectively. Usually, semimetals possess low S with high σ. But recent studies have shown that the S of the semimetals can be tuned by magnetic field, strain, etc The thermal conductivities (κ) of TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 are measured in the temperature region 300-750 K as shown in Fig. To understand the experimentally measured transport coefficients, we have calculated the electronic structure of MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb). The band-structures for TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 are calculated along the lines between high symmetry points (Γ-C-C2-Γ-M2-D2-A-L2-Γ-V2) in the first Brillouin zone, which are shown in Fig. In this sub-section, we discuss the calculated transport properties, viz., the temperature dependence of Seebeck coefficient (S ), electrical conductivity divided by relaxation time (σ/τ ) and electronic thermal conductivity divided by relaxation time (κ e /τ ) as calculated using the BoltzTraP2 package The RBA means that the band-structure is independent of temperature and doping. At first, we have calculated the S at E F , which are ∼1 and ∼20 μV K -1 at 310 K for TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 , respectively. These positive values of S are far away from the experimental negative values of ∼ -10 and ∼ -21 μV K -1 for TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 , respectively at the same temperature. At this point, it is important to note that the calculations of S have been done on single crystalline stoichiometric compounds. But, it is very common to have off-stoichiometry in any synthesized polycrystalline samples. This off-stoichiometry may come from many factors, including the purity of the starting materials, inaccuracy in weighing the raw materials, inhomogeneous mixing during the synthesis process, evaporation of low melting element during the heat treatment etc. These factors are mainly responsible for the defects and/or disorders in the samples which may affect the S of the sample. In addition to this, the anisotropy often matters when comparing the calculation of single crystal with the experimental polycrystalline one. All these factors can be addressed in the calculation by shifting the chemical potential (μ) of the compound. But, quantifying the exact value of μ is a challenging job for any compound. For doing this, we have calculated μ dependent S at different temperatures as shown in Fig. The T dependent S of TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 at μ ≈ 64 and 82 meV, respectively can be understood through elec- tron/hole pockets formed with the bands 1 and 2 in the band-structure of Fig. where e is an electronic charge, τ n (ε n (k)) is the relax- ation time of an electron of n th band with wave vector k and ε n (k) is an energy band. The v n (k) is the mean velocity of an electron of n th band with wave vector k. The f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, which takes care of the temperature dependency of the compound. As we discussed earlier, the BoltzTraP2 code We have calculated κ e /τ for MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb) using the following equation where k B in the Boltzmann constant. Then the κ e is computed using the temperature dependent τ . Fig. Finally, the chemical potential dependence of the power factor divided by relaxation time of MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb) is calculated in the temperature range of 300-1000 K as shown in Fig. The thermoelectric properties of MSb 2 (M = Ta, Nb) are studied in the present study. These compounds were prepared by a combined solid-state reaction and a spark plasma sintering process. The monoclinic phase with space group C 2/m is confirmed for both compounds through Rietveld refinement. The negative sign of the Seebeck coefficient indicates the n-type behaviour of these compounds. The DFT-based electronic structure calculations were carried out in order to understand the experimentally observed thermoelectric properties. The semimetallic behaviour of these compounds was confirmed from the band-structure and density of states calculations. The multi-band electron and hole pockets are found reasonably good in explaining the experimental results. Further study of computational calculations gives the maximum possible power factors of ∼1.14 and ∼1.74 mW m -1 K -2 for p-type conduction of TaSb 2 and NbSb 2 , respectively at 300 K, while these values are found to be ∼1.16 and ∼1.80 mW m -1 K -2 at 300 K for n-type conduction, respectively. In conclusion, the combined DFT and Boltzmann transport theory are found to be reasonably good at addressing the experimental transport properties, and moderate power factors can be obtained if these compounds are synthesized with the proper doping concentration. This work was supported by JST Mirai Program Grant Number JPMJMI19A1.