In this work, we extend the two-flavor Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model to one capable of exploring quark and nuclear matter consistently. With an extra term standing for quark-nucleon interactions, nucleons could automatically emerge as color-singlet three-quark entities by following a process similar to mesons. Besides the quark part in mean field approximation, both mesons and nucleons could contribute to the thermodynamic potential thus possibly give rise to quarkyonic matter beyond mean field. In the study, two kinds of "confining" couplings are adopted for the new interaction term and two different quark masses are considered for comparison. It turns out that only confined nuclear matter or deconfined quark matter is possible for all the cases at zero temperature, thus quarkyonic matter is not favored at all. Even more strictly, only the case with stronger confinement effect and a smaller quark mass admits a physical first-order phase transition from nuclear matter to quark matter around twice saturation density. In 1961, Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio developed a dynamical model of nucleons to explain the origin of nucleon mass based on an analogy with superconductivity In mean field approximation, the quark NJL model predicts that the approximate chiral symmetry gets restored through a crossover at finite temperature (T ) and zero baryon chemical potential (μ B ) but a first-order transition at zero T and finite μ B So in order to study cold, dense QCD matter more realistically, how could nucleon consistently emerge from the quark NJL model? Previously, people extended the quark NJL model by including a four-quark interaction in the most attractive diquark channels The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the extended NJL model is discussed and overall formalism is developed for the study of chiral symmetry breaking and restoration. In Sec. III, by choosing two different quark masses and two different couplings for the six-quark interaction term, numerical calculations are carried out mainly to explore the features of chiral symmetry and system constituents at zero T and finite μ B . Finally, a brief summary would be given in Sec. IV. A. The extended Lagrangian The Lagrangian density of two-flavor NJL model with quark degrees of freedom was given by where ψ(x) = (u(x), d(x)) T is the two-flavor quark field and τ ≡ (τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 ) is the Pauli matrix vector in isospin space. In this model, the SU A (2)chiral symmetry is slightly violated by the small current quark mass m 0 but would be significantly broken with chiral condensation due to the strong coupling constant G 2 . Now, we are going to introduce a six-quark interaction term that accounts for three quarks interacting through nucleon channels. Then first of all, how can we present a nucleon in term of three-quark current? According to the discussions in the QCD sum rules with C = iγ 2 γ 0 . Here, ǫ abc is the Levi-Civita symbol in color space that makes sure a color singlet of nucleon. Later, it was found that each form can be separated into two independent terms With the developments of lattice QCD simulations, we realized that the scalar diquark channel is the most attractive one, so it is reasonable and convenient to present the two-flavor nucleon field compactly as Here, ǫ c are the antisymmetric matrices in color space, that is, (ǫ c ) ab = ǫ abc with indices a, b, c = (r, g, b) and ǫ abc the Levi-Civita symbol. Next, how can we present the six-quark interaction term? As we can check, the effective four quark interaction terms in Eq.(1), corresponding to σ and pion channels, completely respect chiral symmetry and Lorentz invariance of the basic QCD theory. To keep these symmetries, the simplest six-quark interaction term can be given as where ψ C = C ψT and ψC = ψ T C are charge-conjugate spinors, and the coupling constant G3 could be ∂ 2 dependent. Finally, at finite temperature and baryon chemical potential, the Lagrangian of the extended NJL model can be given in four momentum space as where Pν ≡ P ν + μ B δ ν0 with P = q 1 + q 2 + q 3 . As can be seen, the coupling is effectively G3 P for the six-quark interaction term and would vanish in the limit | P | → 0 if G3 is a constant. To respect the confinement feature of QCD, lim | P |→0 G3 | P | = ∞ must be assumed, so we will take G3 = G 3 /| P 2 | d (d = 1, 3/2) with G 3 a constant for example in the study. Though confinement seems not so important for the spectra of mesons In the standard processes, chiral condensation is usually studied in mean field approximation and the properties of mesons are then explored in random phase approximation (RPA) with σ ≡ -2G 2 ψψ and π ≡ -2G 2 ψiγ 5 τ ψ. In the mean field approximation with σ = mm 0 = 0, the thermodynamic potential can be easily evaluated by integrating out quark degrees of freedom as Here, the quark energy E k = (k 2 + m 2 ) 1/2 , Λ is the three-momentum cutoff, N f and N c are flavor and color degrees of freedom of quarks, respectively. At this level, the dynamical mass m is then determined according to the gap equation given by ∂Ω 0 /∂m = 0. Based on the mean field approximation, the propagator of a quark with color c is Then, by taking the bare propagators of mesons to be -2iG, their full inverse propagators can be evaluated through RPA approximation as [5] with Γ σ = 1, Γ π = iγ 5 τ , and the trace Tr over Dirac, flavor, color, and momentum spaces. After substituting Eq.( Then, beyond mean field approximation, the contribution of pions to the thermodynamic potential can be evaluated in pole approximation as with In the case of high isospin density, charged pions are actually collective excitations of quark-antiquark pairs around the Fermi surface of (anti-)quarks and also contribute to isospin density By following the same logic as the Hubbard-Stratonavich transformation, we introduce the nucleon degree of freedom as N ≡ G3 ψ c ψ T Cτ 2 ǫ c γ 5 ψ , and the six-quark interaction term in Eq.( Here, the bare nucleon propagator S N0 = i/ / P is in a massless form, and we have defined the quark-nucleon interaction vertex as Γ(P, μ B ) ≡ G3 S -1 N0 . To explore nucleonic properties, the full propagator of nucleon has to be evaluated by taking into account the interaction with quarks. Inspired from the cases with mesons, a RPAlike scheme can be adopted to derive the full propagator, S N ≡ T N N (T is the time-ordering operator), see the diagrammatic representation in Fig. where the self-energies of diquark and three-quark irreducible correlation are, respectively, Note that in Eqs.( The regularized integrals in Π(P ) are usually finite, so if we choose G3 ≡ G 3 | P 2 | d with d > -1/2, we would find lim | P 2 |→0 S N = S N0 and zero mass becomes a trivial pole of the propagator. That is of course not physical as the true nucleon mass is large in the vacuum -this is another reason why we choose d = 1, 3/2 in the study. The self-energies Π q∆ (P ) and Π qqq (P ) are explicitly evaluated in Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively, by substituting the quark propagator Due to the commutativity between time and scalar components, the nucleon propagator Eq.( So, the pole mass of nucleons can be obtained by solving the following equation self-consistently: and their contribution to the thermodynamic potential can be evaluated in pole approximation as with . In this way, nucleons are naturally the collective excitations of three quarks around the Fermi surface of quarks by following a similar picture as pions at large isospin density. Thus, quarkyonic matter could be systematically realized if considerable nucleons are found to coexist with a large density of quarks in the χSR phase. In total, the beyond mean field thermodynamic potential is In principle, beyond-mean-field dynamical quark mass can be self-consistently obtained by finding the global minimum of Ω with pion and nucleon masses solved from Eqs. ( with the Fermi momenta For m N = N c m q , p FN = N c p Fq and thus n BN = N 3 c n Bq . It indicates that nucleons are more efficient to establish high baryon density when m N ∼ N c m q as is the case for nuclear matter. By following the scheme of Ref. As m q = 0.320 GeV in vacuum, we refer to such a set of parameters as "large quark vacuum mass (LQVM)" in the following. At zero temperature, the numerical results are presented in Figs. Beyond mean field (BMF) approximation, the thermodynamic potential is given by Eq.( In the IBMF approximation, the pressures of χSB phase become smaller than those of χSR phase beyond the intersections, so phase transition happens and is of first order for both d. However, the decreasing of pressures with μ B just before the transition points would indicate negative baryon densities thus is not physical. In the CBMF approximation for d = 1, the pressure of χSB phase is always larger than that of χSR phase, so no phase transition occurs at all. While in the CBMF approximation for d = 3/2, the pressure of χSB phase is exceeded by that of χSR phase at μ B = 1.02 GeV and the phase transition is of first order. In fact, even though the quark mass is almost the same, the results are quite subtle to the effective nucleon mass: m N is a bit larger in the χSB phase for d = 3/2 thus the pressure is suppressed more, compare the upper panels of Fig. In this work, we extend the two-flavor Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model to include a chiral symmetric six-quark interaction term, standing for three quarks interacting via nucleonic channel. Then, similar to mesons, nucleons could emerge as collective excitations of quarks with their masses evaluated in random phase approximation. Beyond mean field approximation, collective excitations also contribute to the thermodynamic potential and are simply presented in pole approximation here. For all the cases considered, quarkyonic matter is never found to exist due to the great enhancement of nucleon masses with chiral symmetry restoration, thus only nuclear and quark matters are possible phases of cold, dense QCD matter. For d = 1, chiral symmetry never restores in the consistent scheme and nuclear matter would survive to a very large baryon density; while for d = 3/2, chiral symmetry gets restored through a first-order transition and the QCD system becomes quark matter at a large baryon density. It is well accepted that the dominant degrees of freedom would alter from nucleons to quarks with increasing baryon density, since the mean distance between nucleons would become smaller than the diameter of nucleons. In this sense, only the case with stronger effect and a smaller quark mass gives reasonable results, and the corresponding first-order transition occurs weakly around the baryon density 2n 0 . In this model, quarks and nucleons can be treated at the same level, thus it is very suitable for a consistent and systematic study of transitions among nuclear, quark and quarkyonic matters. In the future, several important issues must be taken care of, such as accounting for feedback of nucleonic pairing to quarks and reproducing saturation property of nuclear matter. In the last step, the variable transformation Qk ↔ k has been performed to the second term in the integrand, which then becomes the same as the first term. Here and in the following, to simplify the expressions, we assume that the cutoff Λ to the three-momentum integral is large enough to ensure the validity of such a transformation. Then, remembering the summation over the color index c in Eq.( . For P = 0, the expression can be simplified as . Here, regarding the second term in the integrand, we have transformed lk to -l in the second step and used symmetries under s ↔ t, k ↔ l in the last step. To facilitate numerical calculations, we complete the integration over the angle between l and k, and find with L s t ( P0 , k, l) ≡ ln . If we define Π q∆ ( P0 ) ≡ i γ 0 Π 0 q∆ ( P0 ) + Π s q∆ ( P0 ) , then the time and scalar components are, respectively, In the vacuum with T = μ B = 0, they are reduced to Their explicit forms can be evaluated as the followings. Π 0 qqq (P ) = -i 2 3s E l t E k + m 2 + 3(lk) Λ Λ l dl k dk 16π 4 E l E k