Quantum phases of matter such as superconducting, ferromagnetic and Wigner crystal states are often driven by the two-dimensionality (2D) of correlated systems. Meanwhile, spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is a fundamental element leading to nontrivial topology which gives rise to quantum phenomena such as the large anomalous Hall effect and nontrivial superconductivity. However, the search for controllable platforms with both 2D and SOC has been relatively overlooked so far. Here, we control and study the electronic ground states of iridate ultrathin films having both 2D and SOC by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) calculations. The metallicity of SrIrO3 ultrathin films is controlled down to a monolayer by dimensional and strain manipulation. Our results suggest that the iridate ultrathin films can be a controllable 2D SOC platform exhibiting a variety of phenomena for future functional devices. The field of condensed matter physics has advanced remarkably over the past decades, driven by the research on exotic quantum phenomena such as high-temperature superconductivity In addition to the reduced dimensionality in 2D, spinorbit coupling (SOC) is also a quintessential ingredient leading to various non-trivial topological phenomena in materials Our alternate approach is to create artificial 2D iridate systems by growing ultrathin iridate films. Growing samples in ultrathin film form provides an additional benefit of controlling the atomic structure of the material by using different substrates and buffer layers. With this motivation, we investigate the electronic structure of ultrathin SrIrO 3 (SIO) films down to a monolayer by using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) The SIO films with different thicknesses (30, 3, 2, and 1 unit-cell (uc)) are grown on a SrTiO 3 (STO) substrate by the pulsed laser deposition method (details of sample preparation and characterization are provided in the Methods section and Fig. Γ-X high symmetry cuts (orange solid lines in Fig. Figure To investigate the effect of dimensionality reduction in SIO films, we perform density functional theory (DFT) + SOC + DMFT calculations for ultrathin layers of SIO (see Fig. The electronic properties of an insulating 1 uc SIO can be described by the total DOS and the real frequency spectral functions, as shown in Fig. We further investigate the ground state of SIO ultrathin films with a relatively low value of U eff = 4.5. As shown in Fig. The DMFT results suggest that the electronic ground state of 1 uc SIO can be manipulated by tuning U eff ; that is, a small decrease in U or an increase in W can make the insulating monolayer iridate metallic. One possible way to manipulate U or W is to control the strain applied to the film To control the U eff of 1 uc SIO, we apply more compressive strain by growing the SIO film on a (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 TaAlO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) (001) substrate. The lattice mismatch between SIO and LSAT is ∼2.1%, which is higher than that between SIO and STO (∼1.1%); note that the lattice constants of SIO, STO, and LSAT are a pc = 3.95 Å, 3.905 Å, and 3.868 Å, respectively. As shown in Fig. In short, our results indicate that 1 uc SIO is on the verge of the Mott insulator-to-metal transition, and even a small increase in thickness or strain can lead to the collapse of the Mott state. Figures To explore the changes in electronic structures with strain, we plot the second derivative of the energy-momentum band dispersion along the Γ-X direction (Fig. Note that previous experimental results in SIO films have been reported with a particular focus on the metal-insulator transition. Metal-to-insulator transition of SIO films on the STO substrate has been explored from 3 uc (∼1.2 nm) to 35 nm films In the case of thick SIO films, various properties, including the metal-insulator transition, have been reported In summary, we control the electronic ground states of SIO ultrathin films by tuning thickness and strain. The Mott insulating state of the SIO is stabilized at a thickness of 1 uc, while the Mott state collapses when small perturbations are introduced into the system. Our DMFT results show that the 1 uc SIO is on the verge of a metal to Mott insulator transition. The newly discovered metallic monolayer state can provide a new platform for studying novel phenomena, such as possible high-temperature superconductivity, which has been intensely investigated in doped Sr 2 IrO 4 . Our observations could potentially be used to develop new functional devices in applications. Furthermore, the state tunability of 2D SIO films can help realize a research platform to explore novel emergent phenomena in transition metal oxides, such as J eff = 1/2 superconductivity or unusual magnetism Epitaxial SIO ultrathin films are grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) and (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 TaAlO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) substrates via pulsed laser deposition (KrF; 248 nm wavelength), employing a SrIrO 3 ceramic target overdoped with 10 % Ir. Prior to growing SIO ultrathin films, a 10 unit-cell (uc) STO buffer layer is deposited on the substrate, followed by a 10 uc SIO charge reservoir layer, and subsequently, a 10 uc STO buffer layer After film growth, the samples are transferred in-situ to the preparation chamber and post-annealed at 500 • C for 10 min. The samples are then transferred in-situ into the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) chamber For the DFT band-structure calculations, we employed the full-potential augmented plane-wave band method implemented in the WIEN2k package We performed the DFT + SOC + DMFT computation using the TRIQS library -0.8 -0.4 0.0 -0.8 -0.4 0.0 -0.8 -0.4 0.0 -0.4 -0.8 0.0 k x (Å -1 )k x (Å -1 ) Γ X Γ