Early results on the plasma deposition of dielectric thin films on acoustic wave (AW) activated substrates revealed a densification pattern arisen from the focusing of plasma ions and their impact on specific areas of the piezoelectric substrate. Herein, we extend this methodology to tailor the plasma deposition of metals onto AWactivated LiNbO3 piezoelectric substrates. Our investigation reveals the tracking of the initial stages of nanoparticle (NP) formation and growth during the submonolayer deposition of silver. We elucidate the specific role of AW activation in reducing particle size, enhancing particle circularity, and retarding NP agglomeration and account for the physical phenomena making these processes differ from those occurring on non-activated substrates. We provide a comparative analysis of the results obtained under two representative plasma conditions: diode DC sputtering and magnetron sputtering. In the latter case, the AW activation gives rise to a 2D pattern of domains with different amounts of silver and a distinct size and circularity for the silver NPs. This difference was attributed to the specific characteristics of the plasma sheath formed onto the substrate in each case. The possibilities of tuning the plasmon resonance absorption of silver NPs by AW activation of the sputtering deposition process are discussed. Acoustic waves (AWs) generated by the electroacoustic excitation of piezoelectric materials are currently used for many applications in a large variety of fields. Handling of liquids in microfluidics, This investigation has contributed to shed light into the understanding of the physical processes involved upon AW activation of substrates. In addition, it has been possible to establish a series of principles to control the nucleation and growth processes of silver NPs prepared by sputtering. The disclosed mechanisms offer new engineering possibilities to adjust the size, shape, and 2D distribution of silver NPs, establishing a series of principles that can be straightforwardly transferred to practical applications where it is required a strict control over particle morphology and properties. Silver has been deposited by plasma sputtering using two different experimental methods to disclose how NP growth is influenced by the interaction between the AW field and the plasma and to determine possible modifications due to the plasma characteristics. Selected plasma sputtering methods were the diode sputtering (DS) and the more widely utilized magnetron sputtering (MS). These two methods operate at two different pressures and therefore entail a different mean free path of particles within the plasma gas. They also differ in the thickness of the plasma sheath generated on the substrate surface. The MS procedure consisted of a DC-pulse MS deposition system, making use of an oblique angle deposition (OAD) geometry. In this configuration, the substrate is rotated with respect to the target surface (with substrate rotation of 850 in our case). Unlike the common use of this geometrical configuration to get nanocolumnar thin films, Deposition under AW activation was carried out on transparent LiNbO3 single crystal plates (20x10x0.5 mm) cut through the 011 ̅ 2 ̅ crystallographic plane (1280 Ycut). These plates were provided by Roditi International Corporation Ltd. The plates were held in a specially designed sample holder, where damping and possible attenuation of the AWs were minimized. Essentially, the LiNbO3 plate was backcontacted with two metal electrodes (1x0.5 cm) placed on the two sides of the plate, according to a lateral field excitation (LFE) configuration. The two metallic contacts on the back side of the plate were used for electroacoustic excitation through the application of a sinusoidal voltage AC signal (112 V and 10 V amplitude for the DS and MS experiments, respectively) with a frequency in the range of 3.4 MHz, matching the resonance conditions of the plate. A schematic description of the holder setup, its location, deposition geometry, substrate and electrodes, and other experimental details can be found in the supporting information, Figure Along the text, the samples selected for characterization and analysis will be designated as Dt, Dreft, MSt and MSref t, where ref means reference (i.e. without AW activation), D and MS diode and magnetron sputtering correspondently, and t stands for the deposition time utilized in each case. The deposited silver particles were optically characterized by UV-vis transmission spectroscopy in normal configuration in a Cary 100 instrument. In the MS samples an optical microscope (Olympus SZ40 Stereomicroscope) was also utilized to characterize the unbalanced distribution of silver NPs in the different submillimeter domains developed in this case. Particle size, shape and distribution were characterized by Scanning electron microscopy in a Hitachi S4800 microscope provided with a field emission source (typically working with an acceleration potential of 2 kV) and an EDX detector capable of mapping the silver distribution over the surface (EDX Bruker-X Flash-4010). Both optical and SEM images were analyzed by the ImageJ software. The deposition of silver onto the AW-activated substrates was monitored following the evolution of the return loss spectra recorded with the VNA during the deposition. This evolution was registered for the MS experiments, where the deposition rate is high enough to ensure a proper control of the deposition process within a reasonably short period of time. Figure Taking this into account, we have selected 1 and 2 min of deposition time for the MS experiments. In the DS experiments, similar but less defined changes in the S11 parameter due to thermal drifting were found for longer deposition times between 16 and 40 min. First, silver deposition under AW activation was investigated for DS experiments. From the common knowledge about the plasmon properties of plasmonic nanoparticles, this behavior suggests that nanoparticles are smaller, more homogeneous in size, and present a lesser coalescence in the AW-activated samples than in the reference ones. At first sight, it appears that NPs are bigger in samples Dref than in D and that an incipient aggregation has occurred in samples Dref30 and Dref40. This assessment was fully confirmed by analyzing the particle size distribution and circularity with ImageJ software. Figure Data in Table Interestingly, the percentage of substrate area covered by silver is rather similar in Since the deposition rate by MS is much higher than by DS deposition, much shorter deposition times, on the order of 1-2 min were required to achieve a similar coverage in both cases. For samples MS1 and MSref1, Figure The color map of the grey scale distribution (Figure A detailed characterization of the particle size distribution in these samples was obtained by SEM. it is also apparent that the NP size is smaller in the whitish spots than in the bluish zones. A more complete set of SEM results for sample MS1 is reported in the supporting information section, Figure Complementary evidence about the distribution of silver NPs in the whitish and bluish domains of sample MS1 refers to the percentage of substrate surface covered by silver in each type of domain (this magnitude can be taken as a semiquantitative estimate of the amount of silver). An evaluation of this parameter obtained by the particle contour maps in Figure In previous work we have shown that the lateral field electroacoustic activation of a piezoelectric LiNbO3 substrate with an AC signal at a frequency around 3.4-3.5 MHz gives rise to the generation of plate standing bulk AWs with a predominant shear character A general result of the AW activation during deposition is that NP size was smaller, circularity higher, and their agglomeration degree smaller than in reference samples. By MS deposition, a characteristic submillimeter patterning of the NP distribution has also been found. These differences had a direct correlation with the plasmon resonance spectra as shown in Figures Nucleation and growth of silver NPs by sputtering have been widely studied either experimentally A rough estimation of the percentage of substrate area covered by silver renders values that were approximately 35% smaller in the AW-activated samples (cf. Table Since AW activation was effective in altering NP formation and distribution only if applied during deposition (i.e., when ad-atoms become adsorb and diffuse onto the surface), the aforementioned changes with respect to reference samples should consider the interaction of plasma with the activated substrate as the main activation phenomenon. In our previous work on the AW-activated MS deposition of dielectric layers, we proved that the main factor accounting for the 2D patterning of the films was a focused bombardment with accelerated Ar + plasma ions, an effect that was due to the polarization field generated at the piezoelectric substrate during excitation. The main difference between samples D and MS is the absence of any 2D patterning in the former case, although they still present similar differential tendencies when comparing the features of their NPs with those in samples Dref. In a recent work on the plasma characteristics of a cylindrical diode sputtering discharge The previous results and discussion have shown that following the evolution of the AW resonances of piezoelectric substrates during the plasma deposition of metals provides a monitoring procedure to assess the formation and agglomeration of particles. It has also been found that NPs formed by plasma deposition techniques under AW activation differ in size, shape, and agglomeration state from those prepared without AW excitation. This provides an effective way to tailor particle sizes and shapes, provided that the deposition/activation processes are well controlled. The interaction of the electrical polarization field generated at the substrate with the plasma ignited during MS deposition gives rise to a 2D pattern where nucleation and growth of sputtered NPs occur differently due to the interaction with focused and accelerated Ar + plasma ions. We prove that these focused ion impingement phenomena do not occur during diode sputtering, where plasma characteristics and gas pressure preclude achieving the conditions required for the focusing phenomena to occur. The observable differences in NP size and circularity with respect to reference samples must stem from a combination of excitation phenomena including a residual ion bombardment, the mechanical activation of ad-atoms and/or acousto-thermal effects. In general, the modulation of the sputtering deposition by AWs can be used as an efficient mechanism to retard the agglomeration stage of NPs, a typical step by the deposition of silver thin films. This permits the fabrication of NPs with a higher circularity and smaller size than when the deposition is carried out without AW activation. A 2D patterning and the formation of domains, where NPs depict different sizes and circularities, is another output result of this activation by AWs. *The two values provided in these columns correspond to the bluish (MSb) and whitish (MSw) domains developed in MS samples.