NiCo-LDHs nanosheets on biomass waste-derived porous carbon (BC) were achieved using in situ growth method. In situ growth process under ultrasonication realizes the rational arrangement of NiCo-LDHs nanosheets. NiCo-LDHs/BC material possesses an ultra-high specific capacitance of 2390 F g À1 (956 C g À1 ) at 1 A g À1 . The high electrochemical performance is attributed to large surface area, high conductivity, and enhanced wettability. The depletion of fossil fuels and rapid climate changes accelerate the development of high-performance energy storage devices Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are considered as excellent cathode materials for HSCs with advantages, including large surface area and controllable layered structure Recent research works have utilized carbon materials including porous carbon (PC), graphene, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), and carbon nanotube to further promote the rate capability and charge capacity of LDHs nanosheets Herein, we successfully synthesized porous carbon materials with hierarchical porous structure from abundant biomass wastes, Dicranopteris dichotoma. Subsequently, the NiCo-LDHs nanosheets were in situ synthesized and grown on the biomass waste-derived porous carbon (BC) to achieve hydrophilic NiCo-LDHs/BC materials with ultra-high charge storage capacity for high-performance HSCs (Fig. All chemical materials were purchased and used without any treatment and purification. Dicranopteris dichotoma stems were washed with ultrapure water (18.25 MΩ cm) and dried at 120 C for overnight. Then the dried stems were ground into powders using ball-milling and filtered through a 150 mesh stainless steel sieve. Typically, 1.0 g Dicranopteris dichotoma powders, 3.0 g potassium bicarbonate (KHCO 3 , ACS, 99.7%-100.5%, Aladdin), and 1.0 g urea (AR, 99%, Macklin) were mixed in 20 mL ammonia solution (AR, GHTECH) for 24 h. Afterwards, the mixture was transferred to a 100 mL stainless steel autoclave for the hydrothermal reaction at 180 C for 24 h. Subsequently, the mixture was activated in a tube furnace at 120 C for 3 h, 450 C for 3 h, and 750 C for 3 h under a nitrogen atmosphere. After cooling down naturally, the resulting powders were ultrasonicated in 2 M hydrochloric acid (AR, Guangzhou Chemical Reagent Factory) for 1 h, and then washed with ultrapure water and ethanol (AR, ! 99.7%, GHTECH) repeatedly until the pH value of filtrate was 7. Finally, BC powders were obtained after vacuum drying at 60 C for 12 h. O, 98%, Alfa Asear) in ultrapure water, respectively. Firstly, BC powders were dispersed in 100 mL ultrapure water/ethanol (1:1) mixed solvent under ultrasonication for 30 min. Then, 4 mL of 1 M Ni 2þ solution and 2 mL of 1 M Co 2þ solution was added under ultrasonication for another 30 min. Afterwards, 0.8 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH, AR, 96%, Aladdin) and 0.2 M sodium carbonate (Na 2 CO 3 , GR, ! 99.9%, Macklin) aqueous mixed solution was dropped slowly until the pH value was 8.5. In the titration process, ultrasonication (40 kHz) and mechanical stirring (300 rpm) treatments were applied simultaneously for exfoliating LDHs. After ultrasonication/mechanical stirring for 1 h, the resulting solution was transferred and sealed for the hydrothermal treatment at 120 C for 3 h. Finally, NiCo-LDHs/BC powders were obtained after centrifugation and vacuum drying at 80 C for overnight. In this work, specific BC mass (0 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg) was controlled and the corresponding samples were denoted as Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC0, Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC25, Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50, and Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC75. For comparison, NiCo-LDHs/BC with different molar ratios of nickel and cobalt (Ni 1 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50, Ni 3 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50) were also prepared following the same experimental procedures. NiCo-LDHs thin films were prepared by electrodeposition. The electrodeposition process was proceeded using an electrochemical workstation (Multi Autolab M204) with a three-electrode configuration. A nickel foam (MTI Corporation), a platinum filament (CHI115), and a Hg/HgO electrode (GaossUnion) were served as working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode, respectively. The electrolyte for electrodeposition was a mixed aqueous solution with the composition of 0.1 M Ni 2þ and 0.05 M Co 2þ . Typically, the galvanostatic deposition was performed by applying the current density of 0.1 A cm À2 for 2 min. The synthesized NiCo-LDHs thin films were rinsed with ultrapure water and vacuum dried at 60 C for 12 h. The thin-film materials were denoted as Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs-TF. Material and electrochemical characterization methods of BC and NiCo-LDHs/BC materials are given in Supporting Information. black with the addition of BC. The crystal structures of BC and NiCo-LDHs/BC materials were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD), which are shown in Fig. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements were also carried out to study the compositions of NiCo-LDHs/BC materials. As seen from TGA curves (Fig. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) was performed to study the morphologies of BC and NiCo-LDHs/BC materials. As shown in Fig. Furthermore, the morphology of NiCo-LDHs microspheres in assynthesized materials was studied using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) technologies. The transparent edges in TEM images (Fig. The porosity parameters including specific surface area and pore volume of as-prepared materials were characterized by the nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms. For BC, the nitrogen adsorption/ desorption isotherm (Fig. The capacitive performance of as-prepared BC and NiCo-LDHs/BC electrodes were evaluated using CV, GCD, EIS with a three-electrode system in 6 M potassium hydroxide (KOH) electrolyte. Fig. Fig. From Fig. To further understand the effect of carbon components, EIS analyses of NiCo-LDHs/BC electrodes were carried out in the frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz as depicted in Fig. The high electrochemical performance of NiCo-LDHs/BC materials in this work can be ascribed to the synergetic effect of the proper arrangement of ultrathin LDHs nanosheets, large specific surface area, and high conductivity with the addition of BC. Except for above considerable reasons, improvement of the wettability is also proposed to disclose the reasons for the increased specific capacitance. A controlled experiment was designed to compare the specific capacitance of Ni 2 Co 1 - LDHs/BC0, Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50, and Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs-TF. As shown in Fig. To evaluate the practical applications of the Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50 electrode materials, a HSC was fabricated using Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50 as the positive electrode material and commercial activated carbon YP-80F as negative electrode material (Fig. The Ragone plot is a functional tool for comparing the electrochemical performance of various energy storage devices. As depicted in Fig. In summary, we successfully synthesized hydrophilic NiCo-LDHs nanosheets on biomass waste-derived porous carbon (BC) framework with a facile in situ growth method. The in situ growth could greatly prevent the aggregation of LDHs nanosheets, and further improve their specific surface area, electronic conductivity, and wettability. The rational arrangement of NiCo-LDHs nanosheets on the surface of BC gives rise to a remarkable specific capacitance of 2390 F g À1 (956 C g À1 ) at 1 A g À1 . Besides, a HSC using Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50 as the positive electrode and YP-80F as the negative electrode manifests a high specific energy of 52.47 Wh kg À1 at 375 W kg À1 , which is superior to most candidates previously reported. In addition, the HSC shows excellent cycling stability, remaining 75.9% of original specific capacitance after 4000 cycles at 10 A g À1 . Finally, this work not only provides an economical synthesis method of LDHs nanosheets based electrode materials but also accelerates the prosperous development of energy storage devices. reflecting that the Ni 2 Co 1 -LDHs/BC50 electrode relies on capacitive mechanism at high scan rates. Y.Wang et al. Green Chemical Engineering 3 (2022) 55-63