Exploring novel strategies to manipulate the order parameter of magnetic materials by electrical means is of great importance, not only for advancing our understanding of fundamental magnetism, but also for unlocking potential practical applications. A well-established concept to date uses gate voltages to control magnetic properties, such as saturation magnetization, magnetic anisotropies, coercive field, Curie temperature and Gilbert damping, by modulating the charge carrier population within a capacitor structure 1-5 . Note that the induced carriers are non-spin-polarized, so the control via the electricfield is independent of the direction of the magnetization. Here, we show that the magnetocrystalline anisotropy (MCA) of ultrathin Fe films can be reversibly modified by a spin current generated in Pt by the spin Hall effect. The effect decreases with increasing Fe thickness, indicating that the origin of the modification can be traced back to the interface. Uniquely, the change in MCA due to the spin current depends not only on the polarity of the charge current but also on the direction of magnetization, i.e. the change in MCA has opposite sign when the direction of magnetization is reversed. The control of magnetism by the spin current results from the modified exchange splitting of majority-and minority-spin bands, and differs significantly from the manipulation by gate voltages via a capacitor structure, providing a functionality that was previously unavailable and could be useful in advanced spintronic devices. Spin torque (spin transfer torque and spin-orbit torque), which involves the use of angular momentum generated by partially spin-polarized and pure spin-polarized currents, is a well-known method for manipulating the dynamic properties of magnetic materials. In structures such as giant magnetoresistance or tunnel magnetoresistance junctions, the flow of a spin-polarized electric current through the junction imparts spintransfer torques on the magnetization in the free ferromagnetic layer While the impact of a spin current on the orientation of the magnetization (M) is widely recognised, there has been no explicit observation so far of successful spin current driven manipulation of the magnitude of M  representing the static properties of magnetic materials. To explore this prospect, Fig. To prove the above scenario, Pt(6 nm)/Al(1.5 nm)/Fe(tFe = 4.5, 2.8, 2.2 and 1.2 nm) multilayers with different Fe thicknesses tFe are grown on a single two inch semi-insulating GaAs (001) wafer by molecular-beam epitaxy (Fig. The Pt layer with strong spin-orbit interaction serves as the source of the spin current injected into the Fe layer The ultra-thin Fe films grown on GaAs (001) substrates allow us to investigate the expected modification of the magnetic properties for two reasons: Fe/GaAs (001) shows I) very low Gilbert damping values  in the sub-nanometer thickness regime ( = 0.0076 for tFe = 0.91 nm) Typical ferromagnetic resonance FMR spectra for tFe = 2.2 nm and for the charge current applied along a [110]-oriented device are shown in Fig. A clear modification of the FMR spectrum is observed with the application of a dc current. Each curve is well fitted by combining a symmetric (Lsym = H analyzing the position of HR, we have also confirmed that the application of the charge currents does not have detrimental effect on the magnetic properties of the Fe films (Supplementary Note 3). The dependence of H on I for I-H = ±90 o is summarized in Fig. Here H0 is H for I = 0, d(H)/dI quantifies the modification of linewidth by the spin current and c1 accounts for a possible Joule heating effect on H. A detailed measurement of d(H)/dI as a function ofI-H shows that d(H)/dI varies strongly around the HA. The angular dependence can be well fitted by considering the SHE of Pt with an effective damping-like spin-orbit torque efficiency of 0.06 (Supplementary Note 4). The weaker Bychkov-Rashba-like and Dresselhaus-like spinorbit interactions arising from the Fe/GaAs interface play a negligible role in the linewidth modulation Having identified the modification of the FMR linewidth by SHE, we now focus on the modification of the resonance field, which is related to the magnetization and magnetic anisotropies of Fe. Figures In the presence of the in-plane magneto-crystalline anisotropies, the dependencies of HR on f along the easy axis H R EA and the hard axis H R HA are given by the modified Kittel formula 33 2πf where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, HK the effective magnetic anisotropy field due to the demagnetization field along <001>, HB the biaxial magnetic anisotropy field along <100>, and HU the in-plane uniaxial magnetic anisotropy field along <110>. The magnitude of HK, HU and HB at I = 0 for each tFe is quantified by the angular and frequency dependencies of HR (Supplementary Note 1). Obviously, a change of the magnetic anisotropy fields HA (HA = HK, HU, HB) by HA (HA = HK, HU, HB) leads to a shift of HR and the magnitude of the shift HR, defined as HR = HR(HA)HR(HA+HA), depends on the excitation frequency. In the measured frequency range (10 GHz < f < 20 GHz), the HRf relations induced by HA can be calculated by eq. 3, and their dependencies on f are summarized in Table Since h Oe/FL , generated by the dc current, also shifts the resonance field along the EA and HA axes by ± and HU have the same sign, which is also consistent with a monotonic increase (decrease) of HB, HK, and HU as temperature decreases (increases) (Supplementary Note 6). Moreover, these results also show that HU is more sensitive to the spin current than HK and HB, highlighting the importance of UMA to enable the observation of the modifications. The much smaller HB value is due to the fact that HB is 1-2 orders smaller than HU and HK in the ultra-thin regime (Supplementary Note 1). The change of magnetic anisotropy HK is directly related to the change of magnetization M, which can be attributed to the additional filling of the electronic dband. Strictly speaking, the induced filling of the bands in Fe occurs mainly close to the interface and is not homogeneously distributed, since it depends on the spin diffusion length of the spin current in Fe. In other words, the measured modulated magnetic anisotropies are averaged over the whole ferromagnetic film. To first-order approximation and for simplicity, we neglect the spin current distribution in Fe and assume that it is homogeneously distributed. The spin accumulation at the interface 9 is given by u = 2eλξE tanh , where e is the elementary charge,  the spin diffusion length, E (= j/) the electric-field, j the current density and  the conductivity of Pt. The areal spin density nSHE transferred into Fe, is obtained as n = u λN On the other hand, since the UMA shows a larger modulation than effective demagnetization and biaxial anisotropy, it is clear that the band structure of the interfacial Fe/GaAs plays a major role for the observed effect when the Fe film is sufficiently thin In contrast, the spin-down d-states shift up in energy, leading to their depopulation. Therefore, to mimic the effect of spin current on the UMA and magnetic moment, we have investigated the dependence of the UMA on the external magnetic-field on the basics of first-principle electronic band structure calculations for Fe/GaAs. The resulting modification of UMA has been determined by means of magnetic torque calculations Our results have shown that the intrinsic properties of ultra-thin ferromagnetic materials, i.e., the magnitude of M and the magnetocrystalline anisotropies, can be varied in a controlled way by spin currents, which has been ignored in the spin-transfer physics so far. This unique route of controlling magnetic anisotropies is not accessible by other existing ways using electric-field 