Spin-orbit interaction affects the band structure of topological insulators beyond the opening of an inverted gap in the bulk bands, and the understanding of its effects on the surface states is of primary importance to access the underlying physics of these exotic states. Here, we propose an ab initio approach benchmarked by pump-probe angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy data to model the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the surface states of a topological insulator. The critical novelty of our approach lies in the possibility of accounting for a partial transfer of the spin-orbit coupling to the surface states, mediated by the hybridization with the surface resonance states. In topological insulators, the fraction of transferred spin-orbit coupling influences the strength of the hexagonal warping of the surface states, which we use as a telltale of the capability of our model to reproduce the experimental dispersion. The comparison between calculations and measurements, of both the unoccupied and part of the occupied Dirac cone, indicates that the fraction of spin-orbit coupling transferred to the surface states by hybridization with the resonance states is between 70% and 85% of its full atomic value. This offers a valuable insight to improve the modeling of surface state properties in topological insulators for both scientific purposes and technological applications. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in topological insulators (TIs) is responsible for the opening of an inverted bandgap between the valence and the conduction band that endows the band structure with non trivial topology In addition to the TSS, the bandstructure of model TIs in the vicinity of the Fermi level comprises several features, summarized in Fig. On the other hand, this approach was applied to the Rashba surface state of Au(111) in order to investigate the effect of SOC on topologically-trivial surface states from an ab initio perspective The evidence of a partial SOC transfer in surface states of simple metals raises the question of whether this mechanism is common also to the surface states of TIs. The two cases are rather different, since topological surface states retain a marked bulk character via the hybridization with the SRSs. Hence, at variance with the case of Au(111) Rashba states, the SOC is mediated to the surface states via hybridization with the SRSs. Our study indicates that it is possible to model the hybridization-mediated transfer of SOC from the bulk to the surface states in the framework of an ab initio theory. This coupling allows the transfer to surface states of a fraction of the atomic SOC, similarly to the case of Au(111) Rashba states. Along with other changes in the dispersion, the fraction of transferred SOC influences the strength of the TSS warping, in agreement with the prediction of the k • p Hamiltonian. On these bases, we performed one-step photoemission calculations for the prototypical topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 (Fig. In topologically trivial systems, the emergence of surface states is related to the symmetry breaking introduced by the surface itself. The surface properties are best accounted for by a realistic potential barrier, in our case of Rundgren-Malmström type Since the existence of the TSSs directly derives from the topologically nontrivial nature of the bulk bandstructure, the bulk character of the TSSs is much more pronounced in TIs than in metal surfaces, with the consequence that the TSS extends for several layers inside the The quintuple layers are highlighted by purple tetrahedra. This panel was generated using the atomic coordinates from the Materials Project database bulk. From the bandstructure point of view, the bulk character is transferred to the TSS by the hybridization with SRS surface states and resonances are fully taken into account, the SOC of the atoms in the first 20 layers is reduced to a tunable fraction of its atomic value. In this way, the model reproduces a situation where the bulk bandstructure is determined with the full SOC, while only the surface states experience a smaller fraction of SOC, hence effectively modeling the partial SOC transfer through the hybridization with the SRS. The modification of the SOC was applied in the spectroscopic calculations in the first 20 layers of the semiinfinite stack of atomic layers, accounting for a reduction of the SOC strength as felt by the surface-related electronic structure. Since Bi atoms are twice as heavy as the Se atoms and thus the SOC is stronger, the SOC reduction is operated on Bi atoms only. The underlying approach focuses on the SOC term of the first-principle Hamiltonian while leaving all other relativistic corrections unchanged The electronic structure calculations were performed self-consistently in the ab initio framework of fully relativistic spin-density functional theory, solving the corresponding Dirac equation. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof parametrization was used for the exchange and correlation potentials The measurements were performed at the Time-Resolved ARPES endstation of the T-ReX laboratory (Elettra, Trieste). The setup is based on the output of an Yb-doped fiber laser (Coherent Monaco), a fraction of which is used as a pump (1.2 eV). A cascade of harmonic generation stages in BBO crystals and in Xe gas generates the ninth harmonic of the other part of the beam (10.8 eV). The incidence angle of the pump and the probe beams on the sample at normal emission is of 30 • , which applies to all the measurements of this work. Further details on the setup are reported elsewhere The pump-probe measurements were performed at the fixed time delay ∆t ∼1 ps between the pump and the probe pulses, at which the population in the vicinity of the Fermi level is maximum due to the cascade relaxation mechanism of the charge carriers The CESs were measured with the p-polarized probe by rotating the sample in steps of 0.5 • along the tilt axis (perpendicular to the analyzer slit, corresponding to k y in our axis system for the reciprocal space) and recording an E vs. k x map for each angle. These maps are stacked together to obtain the full 3D map of the I(E, k x , k y ) photoemission intensity, which can be visualized by slicing it at constant energy. To analyze in detail the impact of the SOC on the TSS we scale its strength from 100 % of its full atomic value to 50 %. Figure Upon decreasing the SOC strength, several changes occur in the band structure. We first observe that the "M" shape of the dispersion below the DP is smeared out in favor of a monotonic dispersion (panel (d)). The TSS also broadens, with a width that increases with the distance from the DP. Alongside with this, an increase in the BCB population is visible as a gradual change of contrast between the area enclosed by the TSS and that outside. The small intensity of the BCB with respect to the TSS is due to a matrix element effect at this photon energy The occupied band structure is investigated with equilibrium ARPES measurements. Figure In the measured dispersion along ΓK (Fig. The dashed blue lines mark the energies at which the momentum distribution cuts (MDC) have been extracted, i.e. at intervals of ∼ 100 meV from the DP to E F and integrated in an energy window of 10 meV. The MDCs are reported in panels (b-e) in light-blue and compared to the MDCs extracted from the calculated maps at variable SOC strength: (b),(g) 50 %, (c),(h) 70 %, (d),(i) 85 %, (e),(j) 100 %. Comparison of the dispersion in the vicinity of the DP evidences the inadequacy of the full SOC (red MDC) to account for the measured dispersion, where the TSS shows no "M"-like shape: its linearity is instead best reproduced at 50 % SOC (Fig. Panel (f) shows the measured dispersion for the ΓM direction. The intensity distribution is more symmetric than in panel (a), both for the TSS and for the 2DEG. Along this direction also the dispersion in the vicinity of the DP for a SOC of 85 % is evidently inadequate, since the bands are bending upwards (see the bump in the MDC at k ≃ -1 Å-1 ). Upon approaching the Fermi level, the difference among the theoretical dispersions becomes more evident. Due to the same overestimation of the band velocity commented above, the 100 % SOC seems to agree better with the experimental dispersion at the Fermi level, since the effect of the warping is a detectable reduction of the band velocity along ΓM. The experimental dispersion, however, is not reflecting the strong warping experienced by the 100 % SOC case (Fig. The comparison between measurements and calculations for the occupied part of the spectrum constitutes a first benchmark for the SOC fraction transferred to the TSS. The 100 % SOC calculation does not satisfactorily reproduce the dispersion deduced from the experiments below the DP, for both directions. In addition, the full SOC predicts at E F a warping larger than the one ob-served in the experiment. This leads to the first conclusion that the effective fraction of the SOC transferred to the surface states is smaller than the full atomic value. Since the warping increases with the distance from the DP The measurement along ΓM is shown in panel (f). The right branches of the TSS and of the 2DEG display a larger intensity, which is also reflected in the presence of a red signal up to higher energies. This might be due to a delay-dependent matrix element effect The inspection of the pumped E vs. k maps proves that the intensity from the BCB is small compared to the TSS and the 2DEG. It also allowed to confirm that the dispersion along ΓK is linear also above E F . The dispersion along ΓM instead shows a strong warping that is compatible with the highest values of SOC. The inspection of CESs makes it easier, with respect to the E vs. k dispersion, to visualize the symmetry and the degree of deformation of the CESs, so to evaluate which strength of the SOC is more appropriate in describing the shape of the experimental CESs. The result of this procedure is shown in Fig. The CESs were calculated for the sole SOC values of 70 % and 85 %, i.e. those that yield the best agreement with the experimental E vs. k data. Panels (f-j) show the 85 % SOC case. The "M" shaped dispersion commented in Fig. The comparison between the measured and the calculated CESs gives indications in agreement with what is found from the analysis of the E vs. k maps. The shape of the CES close to the DP suggests a SOC value lower that 85 %. On the other hand, the hexagonal deformation of the 70 % SOC occurs closer to E F than the experiment suggests, and the size of the CES contour above E F is smaller, pointing to a value of the SOC closer to 85 %. The CESs also further show that the calculations correctly account for matrix element effects. The present study combines state-of-art ab initio onestep photoemission calculations with equilibrium and pump-probe ARPES measurements, to investigate the physics of the SOC at the surface of the model TI Bi 2 Se 3 . Our study proves that the influence of the SOC on TSSs can be modeled within a theoretical framework capable of taking into account the partial transfer of the atomic SOC to the surface states, which occurs via hybridization with the surface resonance states. The calculations show that the most severe changes in the TSS dispersion upon changing the fraction of transferred SOC occur along the ΓM direction, where the TSS branches bend outwards for higher SOC values. At the same time, they remain linear at all SOC strengths along ΓK. Therefore, a stronger SOC induces a stronger warping, in qualitative agreement with the prediction of the k • p model. The comparison of the SOC-dependent calculations for the surface states with the ARPES measurements shows that the highest values of SOC are incompatible with the experimental evidence in the vicinity of the Dirac point. In addition, the bare atomic SOC predicts a warping in excess of the one found in the experiment. Instead, the unoccupied part of the spectrum shows that the warping is compatible with the highest values of SOC, hence indicating a transferred SOC fraction larger than 70%. The comparison between measured and calculated CESs confirms that a SOC value between 70% and 85% correctly accounts for the shape and intensity distribution of the CESs. In conclusion, the agreement of our ARPES data with the calculations performed for a reduced value of the SOC proves that our model correctly accounts for the physics of the transfer of SOC to the surface states of a topological insulator. Moreover, it allows estimating the fraction of transferred SOC between 70% and 85% of its bare atomic value. This indicates that, in order to correctly model the physics of topological surface states, the hybridization with surface resonance states is a crucial ingredient. This accounts for the proven weak coupling between bulk and surface states and offers a way to model the partial SOC transfer from the former to the latter, hence leading towards a clearer understanding of the electronic mechanisms that ultimately shapes the surface band structure of Bi 2 Se 3 . We illustrate the procedure followed to determine the binding energy of the Dirac point, as outlined in the main text. Figure 