We present a detailed study of the dielectric response of ZnO using a combination of low-loss momentum-resolved electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) and first-principles calculations at several levels of theory, from the independent particle and the random phase approximation with different variants of density functional theory (DFT), including hybrid and DFT+U schemes; to the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE). We use a method based on the f -sum rule to obtain the momentumresolved experimental loss function and absorption spectra from EELS measurements. We characterize the main features in the direct and inverse dielectric functions of ZnO and their dispersion, associating them to single-particle features in the electronic band structure, while highlighting the important role of many-body effects such as plasmons and excitons. We discuss different signatures of the high anisotropy in the response function of ZnO, including the symmetry of the excitonic wave-functions. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a transparent semiconductor material with attractive properties for electronics, spintronics, optoelectronics, and nanotechnology ZnO has also attracted considerable interest from the ab-initio community due to the difficulty of reproducing its experimental quasi-particle (QP) band structure from first principles. At the density functional theory (DFT) level, calculations with standard semi-local functionals such as the local density approximation (LDA) or the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) underestimate the electronic bandgap of ZnO at zero Kelvin by as much as 80% (see e.g. Refs. Such G 0 W 0 methods also find too shallow d-band positions compared to photoemission measurements Alongside the band structure, the response function of pure and doped ZnO has also been studied both experimentally Another distinct feature of the dielectric response of ZnO is its strong anisotropy along the direction perpendicular to the hexagonal plane of its wurzite crystalline structure. In particular, the static dielectric constant of ZnO is about 10% smaller in this direction In this work, we conduct ab-initio electronic structure and response function calculations combined with momentum-resolved EELS experiments, to examine the role of different physical effects on the momentum and energy-dependent response functions of ZnO, including a theoretical description of the anisotropy at finite q. Several theoretical approaches are used, allowing us to systematically unravel the key many-body features in the spectra. We perform DFT calculations with standard and hybrid functionals, including DFT+U . We then benchmark optical calculations with the different DFT inputs at the IPA and RPA levels. The DFT+U scheme, which results in a better agreement with the EELS spectra, is then chosen to study the excitonic contributions at the BSE level. The paper is organized as follows: Sec. II introduces the theory and main concepts behind EELS experiments and first-principles calculations at the different levels of approximation. Sec. III provides experimental and computational details. In Sec. IV we describe and analyze the main results, and finally, Sec. V holds the conclusions. In EELS experiments, the double-differential scattering cross-section, σ, per unit of volume resolved in energy ω and momentum Q, proportional to the solid angle φ, is given by (in atomic units) where γ = 1/ 1v 2 e /c 2 is the relativistic factor stemming from the velocity v e of the incident electrons; k i and k f are the initial and the final momenta of the electrons with The loss function is defined by the imaginary part of the macroscopic inverse dielectric function, M , is related to the macroscopic polarizability, χ M , by: ( Note that the macroscopic momentum transfer, Q, can exceed the first Brillouin zone. The macroscopic and microscopic density-density response functions are related by where Q = q + G, q is confined to the first Brillouin zone, and G is a reciprocal lattice vector. χ GG ′ (q, ω) is the Fourier transform in space and time of the non-local dynamic polarizability function χ(r, r ′ , tt ′ ). In the many-body theory, the microscopic polarizability can be evaluated perturbatively from Kohn-Sham DFT by solving the Dyson equation for this operator: where for simplicity the dependencies, GG ′ and (q, ω), have been omitted, χ 0 is the independent-particle polarizability, and the kernel K defines the given level of theory. At the IPA level, K IPA = 0, only single-particle transitions are accounted for, while local field effects are included in RPA, K RPA = v(q + G). Electronhole interactions can also be included in Eq. ( , where W is the dynamically screened Coulomb potential. In practice, the dynamical effects are neglected by considering only the W GG ′ (q, ω = 0) term at the RPA level (W = v + vχv), leading to a simplified Bethe-Salpeter equation with a static kernel In this work, we compute the IPA polarizability χ 0 from Kohn-Sham (KS) eigenvalues and eigenvectors as where the factor 2 accounts for the spin degeneracy, the v and c indices run respectively over valence and conduction bands, ρ vck (q, G) ≡ ⟨vk|e i(q+G)•r |ck -q⟩ are transition matrix elements, the f factors are the occupations of the KS states, Ω KS vckq = (ε ck -ε vk-q )-iδ are KS singleparticle transitions, and the limit δ → 0 + is implicit and ensures the correct time ordering To make a reliable comparison between EELS measurements and the theoretical loss function, the QP band structure used as input for the computation of the spectra needs to be in good agreement with the experimental band structure and the corresponding density of states, such as obtained from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) A precise theory-experiment comparison of the loss function also requires careful processing of the EELS measurements. The recorded intensity is proportional to the differential cross-section defined in Eq. ( In this work, we use transferred momenta constrained to the first Brillouin zone (Q = q), for both experiments and ab-initio calculations. Both theoretical and experimental data are given in coarse grids along different directions in q-space, while the frequency grid is denser with respect to the energy range we consider. Thus, firstorder spline interpolation is used to obtain the smooth color-maps in Secs. IV B and IV D. Single crystal ZnO with at least 99.99% purity was purchased from the MTI Corporation. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) specimens were prepared by mechanical grinding using an Allied Multiprep system and polished with a Gatan Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS) II. Two different samples were prepared to access both the in-plane and out-of-plane directions. Momentum-resolved EELS measurements were obtained in TEM mode, using a Gatan GIF Quantum 965 spectrometer attached to a monochromated FEI Titan G2 60-300, operated at 60 keV. We used the ω-q mapping technique, where an angle-selection slit was placed along the ΓM , ΓK, M K, and ΓA high-symmetry lines in the diffraction plane. The spectrometer disperses the electrons according to their velocity perpendicular to the direction of the slit, and the resulting ω-q map is a 2D intensity distribution as a function of energy loss (eV) and momentum q ( Å-1 ). The momentum resolution is estimated by the effective width of the angle-selecting slit to be 0.6 Å-1 in the in-plane directions and 0.45 Å-1 in the out-of-plane one, as given by the angular range used in each case. The energy resolution is estimated as ≲ 0.30 eV, quantified by the full-width at half-maximum of the zero-loss peak (ZLP), consisting of electrons elastically scattered or transmitted with energy losses below the resolution of the instrumentation. The energy dispersion of the spectrometer was set to 0.025 eV/channel, as a compromise between energy resolution and signal intensity. At the Γ points (q → 0), the ZLP is dominated by quasi-elastic scattering, while the relative contribution of inelastic scattering increases at finite q. The finite size of Bragg spots around Γ constrains the accessibility to the q → 0 limit. Moreover, the dynamic range of the detector does not provide a good signal-to-noise ratio for the full q-range of interest. Therefore, the data acquisition was split in two q-ranges to optimize the quality of the signal: q in ≤ 0.15 Å-1 and q in ≥ 0.20 Å-1 in the in-plane directions, and q out ≤ 0.30 Å-1 and q out ≥ 0.35 Å-1 in the out-of-plane one. The individual EELS spectra were extracted from the full data sets by summing few adjacent spectra in a maximum range of ∼ 0.1 Å-1 , for statistical averaging. The resulting spectra were then extracted in intervals of 0.05 Å-1 . The background from the ZLP was subtracted using the standard power law model described in Ref. DFT calculations were performed using the plane wave implementation of the QuantumEspresso package For hybrid PBE0-type calculations, the exact exchange fraction is set to 0.22, slightly lower than the default value of 0.25, selected to reproduce the experimental bandgap at room temperature. Similarly, for PBE+U calculations, U values for O and Zn atoms were set to U O = 7.5 eV and U Zn = 9.5 eV. This combination reproduces both the experimental bandgap and the position of the d-states obtained from ARPES and XPS measurements in Refs. One-shot G 0 W 0 and QP self-consistent GW 0 and GW calculations starting from PBE results were performed with the yambo code The calculations of the optical spectra within IPA, RPA, and BSE were also performed with yambo, including the use of scissors operators The results of our work are presented in four subsections. Sec. IV A describes DFT results obtained at the PBE, PBE0, and PBE+U levels of theory, and the role of orbital hybridization in the band structure of ZnO. Its importance for interpreting the main features in the loss function is highlighted in Sec. IV B, by comparing our theoretical and experimental spectra with previous studies in the optical limit. In Sec. IV C we provide a more detailed description of the direct and inverse dielectric functions, as obtained at finite momentum along different directions in the Brillouin zone. The in-plane ΓM line, which has the most accurate experimental data, is used to benchmark the different IPA and RPA approaches, and select the best input for BSE calculations. We discuss the dispersion of the main features defined in the optical limit, including single-particle and plasmonic excitations and the strong anisotropy along the out-of-plane direction. Finally, Sec. IV D is dedicated to excitonic effects. To facilitate the following descriptions, here we introduce some useful concepts: the peaks in Im[-ε -1 ] and Im[ε] will be called two-body or many-body states, or simply excitation states. For instance, such peaks could be originated from single-particle transitions from valence to conduction states, or have plasmonic or excitonic character. The dispersion of such excitation states with transferred momentum, q, defines a band structure of excitations in q-space, for both Im[-ε -1 ] and Im[ε], analogous to the standard band structure of valence and conduction (one-body) states in k-space, like the plot in panel a) of Fig. A. Band structure and electronic density ZnO computed with PBE, PBE0, and PBE+U . We obtain a fundamental gap of 0.87 eV for PBE, 3.36 eV for PBE0 and 3.38 eV for PBE+U with the chosen parameters. Here, scissors corrections of 2.51 eV and 0.02 eV respectively, align the PBE and PBE0 band structures to the PBE+U gap. The comparison shows very similar conduction bands in the three approaches, except for a slight stretching of the PBE0 bands compared to those of PBE and PBE+U . However, the valence bands differ considerably, in particular, the positions of the d-states (located at the bottom part of the figure) of PBE and PBE0 bands are too high in energy compared to those of PBE+U and the ARPES experiments of Ref. Perturbative approaches, whether simple schemes such as correcting KS energies with scissors and stretching operations, or advanced methods such as one-shot or QP self-consistent GW , rest on the assumption that DFT with standard functionals provides quantitatively accurate electronic orbitals, and associated electronic density, but this is not the case for ZnO Our PBE+U PDOS results confirm the importance of having a correct orbital hybridization. They also show that by tuning the U parameters it is possible to improve the description of both features, the gap and the d-states, as compared to ARPES B. Response properties in the optical limit Fig. IPA@PBE+sciss IPA@PBE0 IPA@PBE+U RPA@PBE+U Experiment allows us to asses the accuracy of the different levels of theory, and facilitates the interpretation of the features with respect to previous studies. The experimental loss function exhibits a sharp onset at F1, with an optical gap of 3.2 eV, estimated from standard parabolic fitting used in EELS After the onset, there is a prominent peak at 9.4 eV (F2) and a shoulder structure between 12 and 15 eV (F3). At larger energies we find the bulk plasmon, with a double peak located at 18.4 eV and 18.9 eV (F4), followed by two shoulders around 20.8 eV (F5) and 23.1 eV (F6). Finally, there are two shallow hills, the first one around 32 eV (F7), which vanishes in the q → 0 limit, and a more prominent one around 36 eV (F8) showing only small variations with q. The measured energy-loss spectrum is in very good agreement with previous EELS experiments On the theoretical side, the onset F1 is smoother and lower in intensity, mainly due to the absence of electronhole interactions in the IPA and RPA approximations. The position of the F2 peak is overestimated by 0.8 eV, 0.5 eV, and 0.7 eV, for PBE, PBE0, and PBE+U , respectively. The agreement in the PBE0 case is slightly better due to the asymmetry caused by the superposition of two peaks, absent in the other theories and the experiment. For all the four types of calculations, the shoulder F3 arises from a set of peaks. In the case of PBE and PBE0, the width of the F3 region is larger, while PBE+U agrees better with the experiment and shows better-defined peaks. The intensity of F2 and F3 is also lower in the theory, which is linked to the overestimation of the position of the plasmon and its tail. The theoretical spectra also exhibit an extra subtle shoulder around 18.3 eV for PBE and PBE+U , and 18.8 eV for PBE0, which is not present in the experiment. As in the experiment, the plasmon presents a double peak shape, with maximums located at 19.8 eV and 22.0 eV for PBE, 20.6 eV and 22.7 eV for PBE0, and 19.9 eV and 21.6 eV for PBE+U , overestimating the experimental value on 3.1 eV, 3.8 eV, and 2.7 eV, respectively. In all the theoretical approaches, the intensity is larger for the second peak, pronouncedly so for PBE and PBE0. In general, the relative intensity among the different features in PBE+U is in much better agreement with the experiment, due to a better description of F4. Moreover, whereas F5 and F6 are subtle shoulders in the PBE and PBE0 spectra, in PBE+U they are prominent peaks at 23.9 eV and 25.6 eV respectively. Last, the agreement between experiment and theory is very good for the F7 and F8 hills. The position of F7 is around 30.9 eV for PBE, 31.8 eV for PBE0, and 32.3 eV for PBE+U , the latter being more structured. F8 is located around 34.7 eV, 35.8 eV and 37.0 eV, for PBE, PBE0, and PBE+U , respectively. The intensities of these peaks are also affected by the position and tail of the plasmon, which are higher for PBE and PBE0 than for PBE+U . In particular, the RPA@PBE+U intensity of F7 tends to vanish in the q → 0 like in the experiment, as described in the next section. While the theory overestimates the position of the plasmon and there are several other smaller shifts for the rest of the features, the overall agreement between theory and experiment is quite good. Except for some contraction of the spectrum beyond 9 eV, the overall shape of scissorcorrected PBE is very similar to that of PBE0, which can be attributed to a similar orbital hybridization with some stretching of the PBE0 bands compared to PBE, as discussed in Sec. IV A. In contrast, PBE+U , with its improved description of the d-states gives a spectrum much closer to the experiment, even if a significant shift toward larger energies remains. Comparing the IPA and RPA results in Fig. A better understanding of the main orbital character of the features in the loss function of ZnO, can be obtained by analyzing the dipole matrix elements and identifying the bands responsible for the main electronic transitions that form the given features. Such an analysis is provided in Sec. II of the Supplemental Material [92], at the IPA@PBE+U level of theory. Overall, we find that the compositions of all these features is consistent with previous works According to our results, F1 and F2 are dominated by excitations from O-p states, while previous analyses based on DFT calculations with a GGA-based functional A double-peaked plasmon has not been previously reported in Refs. The comparison with the experiment in Fig. In this section, we address several properties of the momentum dependence of the direct and inverse response functions of ZnO. Even if PBE+U results are closer to the experiment in the q → 0 limit, it is not obvious whether this simple approach provides accurate results also at finite momentum. Therefore, in Fig. At low energy and momentum, both the experimental and computed onset, F1, disperses quadratically with q, as expected from the dispersion of the bands slightly below and above the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. In all the panels, the F2 peak is fairly non-dispersive in energy while its intensity decreases quickly with q. After half the ΓM distance, small deviations are observed due to the emergence of different states at energies slightly above F2. In the case of PBE0, F2 is separated into two peaks from the beginning. In agreement with the FIG. The plasmon (F4) and all the following features (F5-8), are non-dispersive in their energy position, while changing mainly in intensity with q, as found in both theory and experiment. This non-dispersive nature is related to the localization of the d-states, which have very flat dispersions in the band structure of Fig. In Fig. Fig. In Fig. Focusing on Im[-ε -1 ], there are features along ΓA not present in the in-plane lines, for example the peak between F2 and F3 at ∼ 12 eV, as also identified in Refs. valleys that alternate from Im[ε] to Im[-ε -1 ]. In other words, the hills and valleys above 8 eV in Im[ε] can be identified respectively as valleys (dark blue features) and hills (light blue features) in Im[-ε -1 ]. The origin of the zigzag spectra in the anisotropic direction can be related to the band crossings around the middle of the ΓA line shown in Fig. In Fig. As mentioned in the introduction, the static macroscopic dielectric constant Re[ε(q → 0, ω = 0)] is anisotropic. Although there is a range of experimental values reported in the literature In Fig. As described in Sec. IV B, excitonic effects in ZnO cause a very sharp step-like onset in the EELS spectrum in the optical limit. These effects are highlighted in the imaginary part of the dielectric function, obtained by Kramers-Kronig analysis. In this case, the onset becomes a prominent peak, characteristic of an excitonic nature resulting in a lower optical gap, as found in other experiments measuring directly the absorption spectrum By describing intrinsic excitonic effects at the BSE level of theory, we here focus on the main broad effects on the computed spectra, since our EELS measurements do not resolve the fine excitonic structures. Moreover, due to the high computational cost of the BSE calculations, the accuracy of the resulting spectra is limited by the convergence parameters specified in Sec. III B. Despite this limitation, the BSE calculations provide key insights to understand the role played by electron-hole interactions in the response functions of ZnO. The excitonic binding energy between the top of the valence and the bottom of the conduction band is experimentally found to be around 60 meV In Fig. At small energies, the dispersion of the onset F1, in-dicated by the solid green and dashed purple lines in Fig. Fig. with previous experimental results At finite q, the BSE results are also in good agreement with the experiment, except for the slower diminishing of the intensity of the excitonic peak with transferred momentum, as discussed above. Thus, for the selected values of q along each direction, the experiment is very close to the RPA spectra, which do not account for excitons. The rapid decay of the experimental intensity, shown in both Figs. The BSE results in Figs. From theoretical arguments on the symmetry ordering in ZnO (wurtzite crystal) In this work, we have thoroughly studied the lowenergy response functions of ZnO, by characterizing their main features up to 42 eV and their dispersion with transferred momentum. To do so, we have combined momentum-resolved EELS experiments and firstprinciple calculations at different levels of the many-body theory. We have identified and described the orbital character of eight main features in the loss function. The quantitative comparison between theory and experiment, of both, the momentum-dependent direct and inverse dielectric functions, allows us to link some of the main low-energy signatures, like the onset of the spectra and their dispersion, with the bandgap and other features of the electronic band structure, like crossings and band reorderings, that are usually measured in angle-resolved photoemission and inverse photoemission experiments. Our results emphasize the importance of performing an accurate post-processing of the EELS measurements to obtain a quantitative comparison between the theoretical and the experimental loss functions, especially their dispersion in q-space. We have used a procedure based on the f -sum rule, computed partially with a finite cutoff energy, to impose a momentum-dependent normalization on the intensity of our EELS measurements and be able to extract the experimental loss function from them. The proposed method is a key ingredient to perform Kramers-Kronig analysis on our EELS measurements at finite momentum. The obtained absorption spectra have an accuracy comparable to direct measurements using, e.g., absorption spectroscopies and ellipsometry, while accessing the full q dependence. Relevant many-body interactions, such as plasmons and excitons, have been unraveled by systematically increasing the level of the theoretical calculations, from DFT at the PBE, PBE0, and PBE+U level to optical calculations at the IPA, RPA, and BSE level. We highlight the strong anisotropy of ZnO along the perpendicular direction with respect to the hexagonal plane of its crystalline structure, illustrated by very clear signatures in its momentum-resolved dielectric response and its excitonic wave-functions. Moreover, we provide a theoretical and experimental description of the dispersion with transferred momentum of the excitonic peak that gives shape to the onset of the imaginary part of the dielectric function. The double differential cross-section obtained in EELS is in practice affected by the finite momentum and energy resolutions of the experiment. As mentioned in Sec. III, it is difficult to obtain the loss function directly from the measurements. The main effect of the momentum and energy convolution is the different scale and dispersion of the intensity of the spectra as a function of momentum, q. We address this issue by proposing a q-dependent normalization based on the physical constraint given by the f -sum rule As done in Ref. According to the f -sum rule, if the integration is performed to infinity, the resulting quantity, S ∞ , is independent of q and proportional to the electronic density of the system. This condition has been used in momentumresolved IXSS experiments to normalize the measured intensities If we apply Eq. (A1) with the same maximum energy to the EELS measurements, we find a different q dependence for S EELS , since the intensity of the experiment corresponds to a different quantity. However, we can use two inputs from our RPA calculations to define a q dependent normalization and find the experimental loss function as where I EELS is the measured intensity, S RPA is the theoretical sum rule in the q → 0 limit and a RPA is the fitted amplitude of the parabolic dispersion. A plot of the resulting experimental loss function of ZnO is provided in Sec. IV of the Supplemental Material [92]. The proposed normalization uses an additional parameter, a, with respect to previous methods based on the f -sum rule, as applied in IXSS In Fig. In Fig. F4-8 have also mixed characters, although not in the same proportion. In particular, the double-peak trait of the IPA@PBE IPA@PBE0 IPA@PBE+U RPA@PBE+U BSE@PBE+U EELS FIG. 