The phase diagram of the lithium niobatelithium tantalate solid solutions was investigated using experimental data from differential thermal analysis (DTA) and crystal growth. We used XRF analysis to determine the elemental composition of crystals. Based on the Neumann-Kopp rule, essential data of end members lithium niobate (LN) and lithium tantalate (LT) was created. The heats of fusion of end members given by DTA measurements of LN (103 kJ/mol at 1531 K) and LT (289 kJ/mol at 1913 K) were given as input parameters to generate the data. This data served as the basis for calculating a phase diagram for LN-LT solid solutions. Finally, based on the experimental data and thermodynamic solution model, the phase diagram was optimized in the Calphad Factsage module. We also generated thermodynamic parameters for Gibb's excess energy of the solid solution. A plot of segregation coefficient as a function of Ta concentration was derived from the phase diagram. In contemporary materials science, lithium tantalate (LiTaO3, LT) and lithium niobate (LiNbO3, LN) are two of the most researched oxide compounds. The various applications of these materials in functional electronics have generated curiosity about their utilization in thin films, micro-and nanopowders, single or polycrystalline crystals, and ceramics. Additionally, they may differ in their chemical composition, be congruent or stoichiometric, and include different dopants. Such a wide range of types and applications necessitates extra study to adjust and improve material characteristics LiNb 1-x Ta x O 3 (LNT) solid solutions have lately received attention, and they present opportunities for combining the benefits of the two materials. According to the literature, they form solid solutions over the whole composition range. And by this way, the physical properties of materials, particularly ferroelectric and nonlinear optical properties, can be tuned as a function of composition. For instance, tuning the birefringence and refractive index as a Ta/Nb ratio function. A previous study shows zero birefringence in a composition range of 0.93 ≤ x ≤ 0.94 at 293K The solid solutions of LNT may serve as the foundation for ceramic materials with ferroelectric, superionic, semiconductor, and even mixed properties. As a result, this quasi-binary material system is extensively investigated using various techniques LN and LT endmembers are isostructural, have comparable lattice and atomic positional parameters, and have similar ionic radii and valence states for Ta and Nb. However, the separation between solidus and liquidus lines in the LN-LT phase diagram is large Several studies have reported that the Ta/Nb ratio in LNT affects structural characteristics such as lattice parameters, phase transition temperature etc. Furthermore, LNT single crystal specimens used in this study were taken from large volume crystals which are in the size of 5 cm in length and 1.5 cm in diameter. The previous LNT single crystals grown by Bartasyte et al. Single crystals were grown from LNT melts using the Czochralski process with induction heating. A cylindrical crucible made from platinum (for niobium-rich compositions with low melting temperature) or iridium (for moderate to high tantalum contents) measuring 60 mm in height and 60 mm in diameter was employed. The latter process was conducted in a protective atmosphere, namely argon with a small (< 1 vol%) addition of oxygen, otherwise in air. Starting materials were mixtures of the congruently melting LN, respectively LT, prepared from lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, Alfa Aesar, 5N), niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5, H.C. Stark, 4N5), and tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5, Fox Chemicals, 4N), all dried before use. The congruent compositions of LN and LT are at 48.38% Li2O Energy dispersive micro X-ray fluorescence (μ-XRF) measurements determined the elemental (Nb, Ta) distribution in the grown single crystals. The measurements were carried out with a Bruker M4 TORNADO spectrometer at a low-pressure environment (20 mbar). The X-ray source was a tube with Rh anode working at 50 kV and 200 μA. Bremsstrahlung was focused at the sample surface using polycapillary X-ray optics, yielding a high spatial resolution (beam width) of about 20 μm, and the measurement time per pixel was 20 ms. The fluorescence signal was detected with a circular silicon drift detector. Quantification was done by the built-in routines of the spectrometer using the fundamental parameters database. A NETZSCH STA 449C "Jupiter" thermal analyzer was used to perform simultaneous thermogravimetry (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA). A DTA/TG sample holder outfitted with platinum crucibles, Pt/Pt90Rh10 thermocouples, and a flowing mixture of 20 ml/min Ar and 20 ml/min O2 enabled readings up to 1923 K. Figure For the thermodynamic assessment of the phase diagram, FactSage 8/8.2 was used. The JANAF Figure Figure Before proceeding with a solution model for the phase diagram calculation, the thermodynamic parameters for LN and LT end members are required in the database. This database was used to determine the thermodynamic parameters (specific heat capacity (Cp), standard enthalpy (∆H), and entropy (∆S)) of LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 based on Neumann-Kopp (NK) rule from the Factsage mixer module Table To make the phases stable in the Li2O-(Nb,Ta)2O5 system, the initial values of H o 298 (∆HLN = -1080 kJ/mole, ∆HLT = -1140 kJ/mole) were corrected to final values listed in Table Since the end members are lithium niobate and lithium tantalate, the following reaction is considered based on Hess law The Gibbs excess energy G excess for LN-LT mixtures is assumed to be relevant only in the solid phase. This is, because Nb and Ta possess very similar chemical properties, and the ionic radii of Nb 5+ and Ta 5+ in octahedral coordination are almost identical (78 pm). Indeed, it turned out, that already the assessment of the solid mixture phase could reproduce the experimental results satisfactory, if the liquid phase was treated ideal. Many simple models exist for solid solutions of iso-structural compounds. Although these models are for mineralogical systems the assumptions on which the models are based are similar to the ones developed in this study. For example, Wood et al. uses the so-called Bragg-Williams model, which considers the substitution of Si by Al in Mg3Al2Si3O12 system In this model complete mixing of end members is considered, and the charge balance is maintained during the cationic substitution. Therefore, this model is also applicable to our system. Another model is used by Ringwood et al. which considers the substitution of Fe +2 by Mg +2 in a Fe2SiO4-Mg2SiO4 system The experimental results of specific heat capacity are discussed in detail in our previous work Under constant temperature and pressure, The Redlich-Kister polynomial is used to model the excess molar Gibbs free energy in the context of solution thermodynamics, particularly in the study of non-ideal solutions. The polynomial is often employed to describe the composition dependence of Gibbs free energy in binary systems, Lj are the interaction coefficients determined through regression analysis based on experimental data, and j is the order of interaction. The Redlich-Kister polynomial provides a flexible means of representing the nonideality in solution. The specific form of the Redlich-Kister polynomial may vary depending on the order chosen and the particular details of the system under consideration. Higher-order terms in the polynomial can capture more complex deviations from ideal behavior The optimized phase diagram was then constructed by the FactSage "CALPHAD" module. Figure From the phase diagram (Cs) composition corresponds to any point on the solidus. The corresponding melt composition can be determined by drawing an isotherm (horizontal tie line) on the liquidus (Cl) as shown in Figure The vertical projection from the end points of the horizontal line on x-axis corresponds to crystal and melt compositions (vertical dashed lines in Figure Where Cs is the concentration of solute in the solid, Vs is the volume of a solidified fraction of the melt, and Vo is the volume of the liquid when growth commences. The Scheil plot in Figure The LNT solid solutions were investigated with DTA and a detailed phase diagram is proposed based on a thermodynamic solution model. The phase diagram shows complete miscibility over all compositions (x = 0 -x = 1) and a narrower separation between solidus and liquidus as compared to the previously studied phase diagram. A plot of the Gibbs excess energy shows significant deviation from ideality. The segregation coefficient of Ta calculated from the phase diagram is greater than unity for all compositions. The differences in composition upon solidification (e.g., Scheil cooling) must be considered to obtain useful and optimized crystals for the intended application. From the phase diagram, the values of standard enthalpies corresponding to Lj coefficients of equation 2 are extracted. Using the coefficients and Ta/Nb compositions in equation 2, a plot of G excess (red curve) of the LNT solid solution is obtained as shown in figure