We investigate the structural, dielectric relaxation, electric modulus and impedance behavior of Ni-doped NASICON ceramic Na3+2xZr2-xNixSi2PO12 (x = 0.05-0.2) prepared using the solid-state reaction method. The increase in dielectric constant with temperature and decrease with frequency is explained on the basis of space charge polarization using the two-layer model of Maxwell-Wagner relaxation. The dielectric loss peak at lower temperatures follows the Arrhenius-type behavior with frequency having activation energy of 0.27±0.01 eV of dipolar relaxation, suggests similar type of defects are responsible for all the doped samples. The real (ε ′ ) and imaginary (ε ′′ ) permittivity variation with frequency shows the broad relaxation behavior indicates the non-Debye type of relaxation in the measured temperature range. The permittivity values decrease with the amount of doping due to the increased number of charge carriers upon Ni doping at the Zr site. The impedance variation with frequency at various temperatures shows two types of relaxation for all the samples correspond to grain and grain boundary contribution in total impedance. The grain contributions are observed at higher frequencies, while grain-boundary contributions occur at the lower side of frequencies. The imaginary part of the electric modulus also shows two types of relaxation peaks for all the samples indicating similar activation energy at low temperatures and variable activation energy at higher temperatures. The fitting of the imaginary modulus using KWW function shows the non-Debye type of relaxation. We find that all modulus curves merge with each other at low temperatures showing a similar type of relaxation, while curves at high temperatures show the dispersed behavior above the peak frequency. The a.c. conductivity data are fitted using the double power law confirming the grain and grain boundary contributions in total conductivity. The double power law exponent variation with temperature shows the small polaron hopping conduction over the measured temperature range for all the doped samples. I. The NASICON structures [Sodium(Na) Super Ionic CONductors] having the chemical composition of Na 1+x Zr 2 Si x P 3-x O 12 (0<x<3) have generated great research interest in the field of sodium-based solid-state batteries The NASICON ceramic sample preparation requires high sintering temperature, which may create a composition imbalance in the system due to the volatile na-arXiv:2403.14136v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 21 Mar 2024 ture of Na and P ions, resulting in an unwanted impurity phase in the sample. These impurities accumulated at the grain boundaries give a reduction in overall conductivity. The required stoichiometry of Na and P can be maintained by lowering the sintering temperature at the cost of decreased density and dense microstructure. In order to reduce the overall sintering temperature and increase in total conductivity, various methods such as liquid phase sintering In general, the conductivity of NASICON ceramics is altered by doping at the Zr site, as the ionic radius mismatch leads to changes in the bottleneck area available for conduction, reduces the densified temperature, and optimizes the grain-boundary phase with increased conductivity. The maximum ionic conductivity for doped samples depends on the valence state of the dopant atom, concentration, and ionic radius of the doped element. For example, the doping of divalent and/or trivalent atoms at the Zr site increases the density and lowers the monoclinic to rhombohedral phase transition due to the shear deformation of the unit cell, as well as increases the number of free carriers leading to an increase in total conductivity. It has been reported that NASICON doped with divalent elements at the Zr site can alter its lattice constants, free carrier concentration, and crystal structure, enhancing the total conductivity as well as improves the density of these ceramics Therefore, for this paper, we have synthesized NASI-CON structured bulk samples having the chemical composition of Na 3+2x Zr 2-x Ni x Si 2 PO 12 (x = 0.05-0.2) using the solid-state reaction method and investigated its structural and electrical transport properties. The phase and purity are checked using XRD measurement at room temperature. The structural analysis using the Rietveld refinement confirms the monoclinic phase (space group-C 2/c) for all samples. The temperature-dependent resistivity measurement shows the semiconducting behavior. Moreover, the a.c. and d.c. conductivity are measured and data are fitted using the appropriate models. Further, the electric permittivity, dielectric loss, total impedance, and phase angle are studied as a function of frequency at different temperatures. The relevant models are used to understand the relaxation dynamic. The polycrystalline bulk Na 3+2x Zr 2-x Ni x Si 2 PO 12 (x = 0.05-0.2) samples are prepared using the conventional solid-state reaction method. The SiO 2 crystals were preheated at 160 • C for 16 hrs to remove any moisture present in silica. All the precursors such as Na 2 CO 3 (purity 99.5%), ZrO 2 (purity 99.5%), NiO(purity 99.8%), SiO 2 (purity 99%) and NH 4 H 2 PO 4 (purity 99.9%) were taken in stoichiometric ratio with 10% excess of Na 2 CO 3 and NH 4 H 2 PO 4 to compensate the loss of Na and P ions due to high temperature sintering. All of these precursors were thoroughly ground using an agate mortar pestle for uniform mixing of all chemicals and the initial calcination reaction was performed at 1000 • C for 6 hrs in air. The resultant powder became light green in color and were obtained in colloidal form. The calcinated powder was further grinded using an agate mortar pestle, to have a uniform distribution of particles. The grinded powder was pressed into circular pellets having a diameter of 10 mm with a thickness equal to 1.8 mm using the hydraulic pressure of 1000 psi with a holding time of 5 min. Finally, these prepared pellets were sintered at 1150 • C for 15 hrs with heating and cooling rates of 5 • C/min. The structural investigations of all the samples (at room temperature) were performed by the x-ray diffraction (XRD) using the Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer in Bragg-Brentano geometry equipped with the Cu-K α radiation of wave-length (λ=1.54 A • ) in the 2θ range of 10 • -80 • with an accelerating voltage of 40 V and 30 mA current. The XRD patterens were analyzed using the FullProf Suite software where various parameters like scale factor, unit cell parameters, structure factor, position parameters, and occupancy factors were refined. The surface morphology of the Ni-doped samples was obtained using JEOL JSM-7610F Schottky Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. As these samples are in insulating nature, Pt metal thin film of thickness around 10 nm was coated on all samples to avoid any charging effect. The temperature-dependent d.c. resistivity (ρ-T ) data were recorded using Keithley make electrometer (Model-6517B) by applying the source voltage of 1 V and measuring the resultant current. The frequency-dependent measurements are performed in 4 T (terminal) configuration using an Agilent LCR meter (Model-E4980A) in parallel circuit mode. To avoid any error due to parasitic residual components open, short, and cable length corrections (calibrations) were performed before starting any frequency-dependent measurements. Both sides of these pellets were coated using silver paste and dried at 150 • C for 1 hr before performing the temperature-dependent (100-400 K) measurements like parallel capacitance (C P ), dielectric loss (D=tanδ), total impedance (|Z|) and phase angle (θ) parameters in the frequency range of 20 Hz-2 MHz. During all of these measurements, an input perturbation of 1 Volt a.c. signal was applied and the resultant current was measured. The temperature during these measurements was recorded using a Pt-100 sensor and the temperature was varied using the Lakeshore temperature controller (Model-340). The experimental data are recorded keeping the temperature stability of 100 mK with a stability time of 1 minute during entire measurements. The electrometer, LCR meter, and temperature controller are interfaced with LabView software for automatic measurements. The sample holder was placed in a liquid nitrogen-based dipstick bath for uniform cooling across the samples. The vacuum of the order of 10 -3 mbar was maintained near the sample during the measurements. Figures Here, the ρ T is the experimentally measured resistivity at temperature T, ρ 0 is the pre-exponential factor of resistivity, E a is the associated activation energy of thermally generated charge carriers and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Using equation 1, the slope of ln(ρ T ) versus ( 1000 T ) [shown in the insets of Figures Figures here, the ε r (ω) is the dielectric constant measured at an angular frequency ω, C P is the measured parallel mode capacitance, C 0 is vacuum capacitance (when no dielectric is present between parallel plates) given by C 0 =ε 0 A d , where ε 0 is the free space permittivity (8.85 × 10 -12 F/m), A is the cross-sectional area of electrodes and d is the thickness of dielectric material. It is observed from experimental data that the electric permittivity depends on the applied frequency and the measured temperature. The increasing behavior of electric permittivity with temperature and decreasing with the frequency can be explained using the Maxwell-Wagner two-layer model of space charge polarization; according to this model, a material is considered to be made up of large well-conducting grains separated by small poorly conducting grain boundaries, and the charge carries (dipoles in this case) under the influence of applied field piles up at the grain-boundary creates the local in- terfacial polarization Here, the τ 0 is the characteristic relaxation time of charge carriers has the order of atom vibrational period (10 -13 sec), E relax is the activation energy of charge carrier relaxation, k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the measured temperature. The activation energy of dipolar relaxation is determined using the slope of the linear plot between ln τ versus ( 1000 T ), and the characteristic relaxation time using the intercept in the curve for each sample. The activation energy of all the Ni-doped samples is shown in the inset of Figures To further understand the relaxation phenomena, the t e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) t e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) frequency dependence of real and imaginary parts of the electrical permittivity at various temperatures are shown in Figures The complex electric permittivity data can be fitted using the modified Cole-Cole equation as given below Here ε 0 and ε ∞ are the static and high-frequency values of electrical permittivity, respectively, ω is the applied angular frequency, τ is the mean relaxation time, and α is a parameter measures the distribution of relaxation times and represents the deviation from ideal Debye response. In an ideal Debye-type relaxation process there is no interaction between dipoles (α=0) producing a sharp relaxation peak. If we consider significant interactions among the dipoles in this case we have α> 0, which shows a broad relaxation peak with a distribution of relaxation times Here, z = ln(ωτ ), ∆ε= ε 0 -ε ∞ and β=1-α. Using equation 4, 5a and 5b the real (ε ′ ) and imaginary (ε ′′ ) part of electric permittivity can be fitted and various parameters like ε 0 , ε ∞ , β and τ can be obtained as a function of temperature. The imaginary part of electric permittivity, as presented in Figure The relaxation inside the material is due to grains, grain boundaries, electrode-interface contributions, or combinations of these. To find out the exact origin of the relaxation process, the combined analysis of impedance data and electric modulus are required The complex electric modulus spectroscopy was introduced by Macedo for the analysis of dynamical electrical transport properties of non-conducting samples, as in modulus study the smallest capacitance exhibits the largest peak in the M ′′ vs frequency plots Here, ω is the applied angular frequency, C 0 is the vacuum or geometrical capacitance given by (C 0 = ε 0 A d ), where d is the distance between the electrodes, A is the area of electrodes and ε 0 is the permittivity of free space. The frequency dependence of real (M ′ ) part of complex electric modulus (M * ) for the Na 3+2x Zr 2-x Ni x Si 2 PO 12 (x = 0.05 -0.2) samples are shown in Figures The imaginary part of electric modulus (M ′′ ) has also been studied in the temperature range of 140-400 K and the data are shown in Figures The increased relaxation frequency leads to decreased relaxation time due to enhanced charge carrier mobility. The heights of these relaxation peaks are nearly constant with temperature suggesting the associated capacitance is weakly temperature dependent Here, ω 0 is the pre-exponential factor, k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute measured temperature and E a is the activation energy of the relaxation. a n g u l a r f r e q u e n c y ω ( r a d / s e c ) a n g u l a r f r e q u e n c y ω ( r a d / s e c ) The activation energy is calculated from the linear least square fit of ln(ω m ) versus 1000/T data, which found to be nearly the same for all the samples and the value is around 0.27 eV, as shown in Figure As we know that the imaginary part of the electric modulus (M ′′ ) represents the energy loss inside the ma-terial under the influence of the applied electric field. So, the M ′′ can be expressed in terms of relaxation function as given below: here, φ(t) represents the evolution of the electric field inside the material, which can be expressed as Kohlraush-Williams-Watts (KWW) decay function: where, τ is the characteristic relaxation time of charge carriers and β is the Kohlrausch parameter known as stretched exponent related to the asymmetry observed in the relaxation peak, which varies between 0 to 1 and characterizes the type of relaxation behavior (Debye or non-Debye) as well as represents the interaction among charge carriers. For the ideal Debye type relaxation where dipole-dipole interactions are neglected and the value of β is found to be one. However, the value of β deviates from unity when considering the significant interaction among the dipoles for non-Debye type behavior. To analyze the imaginary modulus data directly in the frequency domain, Bergman has modified the KWW function, as given below where, M ′′ max is the peak maximum in the M ′′ spectra, ω m is the frequency corresponding to the peak maximum and β is the stretched exponent that decides the range of relaxation time distributions or type of interaction among the charge carriers. The value of β is calculated using equation 10 and the obtained values are in the range from 0.28-0.41 (less than unity), which confirm the non-Debye type relaxation among the carriers in all the Ni-doped NASICON samples. The value of β is found to be increased with temperature suggesting the weak interaction among charge carriers in the material. Further, in order to determine the type of relaxation process, we scaled the imaginary part of electric modulus (M ′′ ) for all the Ni-doped samples. The scaling at low temperatures is shown in Figure 2 . 1 0 2 1 0 3 1 0 4 1 0 5 1 0 6 1 0 7 ity, whereas, if these curves do not coincide with each other the relaxation is due to the short-range mobility of carriers In order to understand the a.c. conductivity of Nidoped NASICON samples Na 3+2x Zr 2-x Ni x Si 2 PO 12 (x = 0.05 -0.2), we perform the measurements in the frequency and temperature range of 20 Hz-2 MHz and 300-400 K, as shown in Figure Here, d is the thickness of the dielectric material, A is the area of the capacitor electrode, Z ′ and Z ′′ are the real and imaginary parts of the total impedance Z. The frequency-dependent behavior of a.c. conductivity can be explained using the jump relaxation model given by Funke ) a n g u l a r f r e q u e n c y ω ( r a d / s e c ) ( c ) x = 0 . 1 5 follows the Jonsher power law as given by here, σ dc (T) is the temperature-dependent d.c. contribution in total conductivity, coefficient A, and exponent n are temperature-dependent and depends on the type of materials. The second term in equation 12 related to the dispersive behavior of total conductivity. However, none of the Ni-doped samples follow the power law relation within the measured temperature range. The frequencydependent a.c. conductivity shows the two types of dispersed behavior (i) at low frequency, the dispersed region is due to the contributions from grain boundary (having the large capacitance value), and (ii) at higher frequency abrupt behavior is due to contributions from the grains (having the lower capacitance value). To describe the different contributions in conductivity, we apply the jump relaxation model and fitted the data with the double power law given by here, the 1 st term represents the long-range translational hopping of charge carriers due to the availability of large time scale, which gives the direct current contribution in the total conductivity, and coefficients A, B, and exponents m, n are material and temperature dependent parameters. The 2 nd term (Aw m ) belongs to the middle frequency (large capacitance) region of the conductivity, which corresponds to the translational motion due to short-range hopping over the potential barriers and gives the grain-boundary contribution, where the exponent m is having the values between 0 and 1. Whereas, the 3 rd term (Bw n ) at higher frequencies (smaller capacitance) corresponds to the localized or reorientation hopping motion within the grain, where the exponent n values lie between 0 and 2. The a.c. conductivity data fitted using the double power law are shown in Figure In summary, we successfully prepared the Nidoped samples having the chemical composition of Na 3+2x Zr 2-x Ni x Si 2 PO 12 (x = 0.05-0.2) using the solidstate reaction, which show the monoclinic phase with C 2/c space group along the small amount of ZrO 2 and Na 3 PO 4 impurity phases. The scanning electron microscope images show the non-uniform distribution of grains with dense microstructure. The d.c. resistivity measurements show the semiconducting nature and follow the Arrhenius-type thermal conduction. The temperature and frequency dependence of the dielectric constant were explained using the space-charge polarization and Maxwell-Wagner relaxation mechanism. The relaxation peak in dielectric loss data follows the Arrhenius-type relaxation mechanism with nearly the same activation energy for all the samples. The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric constant shows the broad distribution of relaxation peak indicating the non-Debye type relaxation. The electric impedance analysis with frequency at various temperatures shows two types of relaxation peaks cor-responding to the grain and grain-boundary relaxation. The peak frequency of grain and grain-boundary relaxation shifts towards the higher frequency side with an increase in temperature. The imaginary part of the electric modulus is fitted using the KWW function confirming the non-Debye type relaxation. The electric modulus peak frequency follows the Arrhenius type relaxation with similar type relaxation energy at lower temperatures. The scaling analysis shows a similar type of relaxation at lower temperatures, while different types of relaxation at high temperatures above the peak frequency. The a.c. conductivity data were fitted using the double power law confirming the contribution from grain and grain-boundary conductivity. The temperature dependence of the double power law exponent shows the small polaron hopping type conduction over the measured temperature range for all the samples. See the supplementary information for further analysis figures of activation energy, electric modulus, and Power law exponents. V.