We report on the evolution of the charge density wave (CDW) and spin density wave (SDW) order of a chromium film following photoexcitation with an ultrafast optical laser pulse. The CDW is measured by ultrafast time-resolved x-ray diffraction of the CDW satellite that tracks the suppression and recovery of the CDW following photoexcitation. We find that as the temperature of the film approaches a discontinuous phase transition in the CDW and SDW order, the time scales of recovery increase exponentially from the expected thermal time scales. We extend a Landau model for SDW systems to account for this critical slowing with the appropriate boundary conditions imposed by the geometry of the thin film system. This model allows us to assess the energy barrier between available CDW/SDW states with different spatial periodicities. Significant condensed matter research is focused on correlated electron materials in which emergent phenomena arise from the interplay between degrees of freedom such as charge, spin, and lattice. This work demonstrates this critical slowing of the magnetic and structural ordering in elemental chromium (Cr) thin films. In bulk, Cr is an antiferromagnet that exhibits an incommensurate spin density wave (SDW) and charge density wave (CDW) that leads to a periodic lattice distortion as a second harmonic of its SDW (see Figs. The sample studied is a 28-nm Cr [001] film grown on MgO (001) as detailed in Refs. 23-27. The Néel transition is broad and centered at T N = 290 ± 5 K, The expected value (green triangles) is calculated from the bulk SDW wave vector assuming a 28 nm film (data from Ref. 28). The observed value for the film during cooling (blue squares) and warming (red circles) was found in previous work. as determined by transport measurements. The SDW and CDW wave vectors are directed perpendicular to the film surface and pinned such that the CDW exhibits a half-integer number of wavelengths spanning the film from substrate to surface. Figure Time-resolved x-ray diffraction measurements were conducted at the XPP instrument at the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) x-ray free-electron laser, with 8.9 keV x-ray pulses of duration 15 fs. The sample was excited by 800 nm optical pulses with a duration of 45 fs and fluences of 4.2 mJ/cm 2 , 7.4 mJ/cm 2 , and 9.2 mJ/cm 2 at initial sample temperatures ranging from 130 K to 300 K. The inset in Fig. We will focus our discussion on the response at 10 ps and longer after photoexcitation. The sub-10-ps response is discussed in detail in Refs. 24-27. Following photoexcitation, a lattice expansion is observed through a shift in the Bragg peak and Laue fringes consistent with lattice heating through electron-phonon coupling, as shown in Fig. Figure Figure The normalized 7 th fringe intensity for the same five temperatures and pump fluence are shown in Fig. Since we expect the CDW satellite peak to appear primarily on the 7 th and 8 th fringes for this film based on previous static x-ray diffraction measurements, Similar measurements were made with different pump fluence (see supplementary material Fig. We describe the recovery of structural order with two distinct time constants τ fast and τ slow to follow an exponential decay function: The constant C is needed within the hysteretic region to account for the presence of a mixed phase. Some example fits are shown in supplementary material Fig. back into the appropriate lower temperature state. In an energy landscape, we can consider energy wells at each possible spin configuration, with excitation into a state which prefers fewer CDW wavelengths. As the system recovers thermally, the potential surface evolves back to its initial state, however there is an activation energy required to reconfigure each SDW/CDW domain back to its initial state. This energy barrier can be calculated using an Arrhenius model, where τ 0 is the attempt time. Figure The energy barrier appears to go to zero for the 7.5 wavelength to 8.5 wavelength transition at around 125 K, though this depends on the attempt time used for the calculation (see supplementary material Fig. The free energy density as a function of depth for a film with a SDW/CDW can be described with the Landau formalism in Refs. 27, 34-36: where ψe iφ is the SDW order parameter with amplitude ψ and phase φ, q is the SDW nesting wave vector, and a i is the coefficient for the i th term. The first two terms follow from the Landau form for expansion of the free energy and includes the temperature dependence of the free energy with a 1,2 ∝ (T -T N ). The third term adds energy with spatial variation of the order parameter, which we assume to be zero here. The fourth term accounts for the energy cost to change the SDW wave vector from the natural wave vector. The fifth term describes an energetic preference for the SDW to be commensurate with the lattice. We integrate this over the depth of the film and add a term which describes potential wells that restrict the available wave vectors to values that force a half-integer number of CDW wavelengths: where L is the film thickness and G enforces the boundary conditions with allowed wave vectors Q j corresponding to N CDW = j. The q-dependence of the free energy lies in the fourth, fifth, and sixth terms, which are used to model the Landau free energy surface shown in Fig. With this energy surface, we are able to explain the measured CDW response following photoexcitation. With the initial laser pulse, the preferred SDW/CDW order has changed. As the film cools past the switching temperature, there is an energy barrier to reforming the order. This energy barrier can be found from the surface in Fig. In conclusion, we have observed the slowing down of the recovery of CDW order following photoexcitation from temperatures that approach a discontinuous hysteretic reorientation of spin and charge in thin film Cr to several orders of magnitude longer than expected from thermal recovery. An Arrhenius model allows us to make an estimate of the energy barrier between these states. We have extended the Landau SDW model to account for the boundary pinning observed in films and describe both the temperature dependence of the SDW and CDW ordering and the evolution of the potential wells with temperature. Raw data were generated at Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS), SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Derived data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Critical slowing of the spin and charge density wave order in thin film Cr following photoexcitation: Supplemental Information In particular, the magnitude of the decrease in intensity of the 8 th fringe with the initial laser pulse is comparable for the medium and high laser fluence, where it is expected that the satellite peak will completely disappear from the 8 th fringe and appear on the 7 th fringe. For the lowest fluence, the drop is much lower, as the sample is not heated to a temperature above the transition to 7.5 CDW wavelengths. At 190 K (see Fig. Fitted Fluence As the temperature approaches the hysteretic regions, the time scales slow and we are limited by the maximum achievable delay of 400 ns. The quality of the fits suffers as a result. Table where τ 0 is the attempt time. The attempt time for magnetic systems varies widely from 10 -11 to 10 -8 s for different materials T. Berndt, A. R. Muxworthy, and G. A. Paterson, "Determining the magnetic attempt time τ 0 , its temperature dependence, and the grain size distribution from magnetic viscosity measurements," J. Geophys. Res.: Solid Earth, 120, 7322-7336 (2015).