Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM) is one of the most widespread methods for investigating and visualizing ferroelectric domain structures down to the nanometer length scale. PFM makes use of the direct coupling of the piezoelectric response to the crystal lattice, and hence is most often applied to spatially map the 3-dimensional (3D) near-surface domain distribution of any polar or ferroic sample. Nonetheless, since most samples investigated by PFM are at least semiconducting or fully insulating, the electric ac field emerging from the conductive scanning force microscopy (SFM) tip, penetrates the sample, and hence may also couple to polar features that are deeply buried into the bulk of the sample under investigation. Thus, in the work presented here, we experimentally and theoretically explore the contrast and depth resolution capabilities of PFM, by analyzing the dependence of several key parameters. These key parameters include the depth of the buried feature, i.e. here a domain wall (DW), as well as PFM-relevant technical parameters such as the tip radius, the PFM drive voltage and frequency, and the signal-to-noise ratio. The theoretical predictions are experimentally verified using x-cut periodically-poled lithium niobate single crystals that are specially prepared into wedge-shaped samples, in order to allow the buried feature, here the DW, to be 'positioned' at any depth into the bulk. This inspection essentially contributes to the fundamental understanding in PFM contrast analysis, and to the reconstruction of 3D domain structures down to a 1-μm-penetration depth into the sample. Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM) is a contact-mode scanning force microscopy (SFM) technique that allows analyzing and visualizing ferroelectric domain structures There is a strong interest in non-destructive imaging of domains, such as recently demonstrated by tomographic scanning electron microscopy In contrast, any feature that lies below the surface and is susceptible to PFM imaging, can also be measured nondestructively, since the electric field emanating from the spherical, conductive SFM tip converges to zero at an infinite depth, only. PFM thus, in principle, can provide depth information as well, provided some critical parameters in the PFM performance are known. Lu et al. In the work presented here, this PFM probing depth is explicitly examined, both theoretically and experimentally, on a periodically-poled lithium niobate (PPLN) sample polished into a shallow-angled (α ∼ 3°) x-cut wedge to create welldefined domain transitions at a defined depth into the crystal [see Fig. PFM measurements are performed on a Park NX10 SFM using the two internal LIAs. Typical scan parameters used in this study are an applied ac voltage amplitude of +10 V at an oscillation frequency of ∼ 80 kHz, and a cantilever set-point force of ∼ 950 nN. In the instance of varied scan parameters, these values are used whilst a singular parameter is varied. Solid platinum tips manufactured by Rocky Mountain Nanotechnology, LLC of the type 25Pt300B, with a spring constant of 18 Nm -1 are used for the majority of the measurements presented here. For tip-radius-dependent measurements, spherical shaped, high-density diamond-like carbon tips from nanotools GmbH of the types biosphere B20-FM (spherical tip with radius r tip = (20 ± 5) nm), biosphere B30-FM with r tip = (30 ± 5) nm, biosphere B50-FM with r tip = (50 ± 5) nm, biosphere B100-FM with r tip = (100 ± 10) nm, and biosphere B150-FM with r tip = (150 ± 10) nm are used. While these tips are not as conductive as the full metal tips, their conductivity is sufficient to allow for PFM measurements. If not otherwise noted, for the experiments reported here, it is the lateral PFM signal (in-plane signal) that was recorded (since the FE polarization points along the ±zdirection, i.e. in-plane for the x-cut LiNbO 3 sample). To do so, the cantilever is mounted with its long axis aligned in parallel to the y-direction of the crystal (see Fig. Measurements are performed on a commercially available periodically-poled 5%-MgO-doped lithium niobate (PPLN) single crystal having a periodic spacing Λ = 16 μm and a duty cycle of nearly 50%. Lithium niobate (LNO) is a uniaxial FE that, hence, allows the FE polarization to align along the +z and -z axes, only. For PPLN, the polarization hence alternately switches between these two orientations, resulting in a simple arrangement of 180 • domain walls (DWs) A schematic of the experiment as performed here, is depicted in Fig. Finally, Fig. The PFM response and hence the resulting cantilever deflection heavily depends on the local deformation of the crystal as a function of applied electric field ⃗ E. The crystal deformation is described by the strain tensor ε that has 6 independent components d i j associated to uniaxial and shear strain. For piezoelectric materials, ε is proportional to ⃗ E as: where d i j is the materials inverse piezoelectric tensor Here, the ferroelectric domain structure determines the spatial distribution and (local) numerical values of the piezoelectric tensor, whilst the local electric field is determined by the tip's location and shape with respect to the placement on the sample surface. The impact on the tip motion along different axes can be calculated by determining the total displacement at the tip's point of contact via integrating the local strain tensor component over the complete structure, weighed by the local electric field. For more accurate results further aspects like the elastic properties of the sample or the tip-sample-interaction need to be taken into account The sample is assumed to extend infinitely in the yz-plane, and is treated as a plan parallel layer of thickness D for the +z domain that sits on an infinitely thick domain with -z orientation, as shown in Fig. In Eq. ( Thus, the magnitude of the electric field E x within the sample is inversely proportional to R 2 x . With these assumptions, the PFM amplitude A can be readily calculated by integrating the piezoelectric response over the relevant volume, i.e. the electric-field-induced strain according to Eq. ( where (d 15 ) and (-d 15 ) describe the addressed tensor elements in the +z and -z domain, respectively. Even when other tensor elements d i j are addressed, e.g. leading for example to an out-of-plane PFM signal, the same proportionality for the PFM amplitude signal holds, because, in any case, the piezoelectric tensor elements only change sign between domains of opposing polarization direction, at least for LNO. Therefore, the same calculus can be applied accordingly. The above calculation may also easily be expanded to describe hetero-structures of layered FEs or other DW types common to the ferroic crystal family, by using the appropriate magnitude and relation of the correct tensor elements. Scanning along the z-direction on the wedged PPLN crystal hence produces plots of the integrated PFM amplitude A(D) as displayed in Fig. To extract an easy-to-compare parameter between different experiments and simulations, it is convenient to define the 90% depth d 90% , which is the depth at which the PFM amplitude has recovered to 90% of the maximum amplitude at infinite thickness D, similar to Johann et al. which is dependent on the tip-radius and a constant value, only. This means that with larger tip radii r tip , domain transitions at proportionally larger depths can be detected. Conversely, the electric field emerging from a increasingly larger tip decreases at a slower rate. Nonetheless, a larger tip radius r tip also results in loosing the lateral resolution, hence causing a trade-off between depth and lateral resolution. The depth resolution, i.e. the error ∆D at a given depth D that can be achieved, depends on the amplitude noise level ∆A. When normalizing the recorded PFM amplitude A to the maximum possible PFM amplitude A max , the relative amplitude A rel (D) is obtained via the previous integrals as: In order to examine how strongly ∆D varies for an extracted depth D, the difference ∆A between two recorded amplitudes as resulting from the difference ∆D in the extracted corresponding depths is considered. This results in: When combining with the definition of A rel (D) in Eq. ( r tip -D. The uncertainty in depth ∆D is the key value in order to determine, up to which depth D PFM measurements are still feasible. A graph exploring the possible probing depths for a given resolution of ∆D = 10 nm as a function of relative amplitude noise level ∆A and tip radius r tip , is depicted in Fig. The aim of this work is to experimentally analyze the impact of buried structures at a variable depth on the PFM signal. To identify a suitable location with a domain transition, several overlapping PFM images of the wedge surface were taken and stitched together as shown in the supplemental Fig. However, when comparing that signal shape with the theoretical prediction in Fig. Hence, when accurate quantitative data is required, a correction by a full mathematical treatment yields the best PFM results. Nevertheless, this is not always necessary. As shown in the supplement, if the intrinsic background is sufficiently large (more than twice the signal amplitude) the 90% depth can be readily corrected by a flat multiplication factor of 19/9 (as shown in the supplement) for a buried domain. Here, yields a depth of (1170 ± 40) nm, which is within accuracy limits identical to the results from fitting the corrected data set in Fig. In order to explore the potential parameter space that influences the PFM probing depth, various scanning parameters were varied and compared as a function of the 90% probing depth, as defined above. The results can be seen in Fig. Fig. Whilst the lateral signal extraction indicates a larger 90% depth than the normal signal extraction, no dependencies were found as a function of magnitude of applied ac excitation voltage. The minor discrepancies seen in the difference between the fitted 90% extracted from lateral and normal signals, is likely due to the reduced signal in the normal instance, given that the sample is poled in the lateral orientation. A similar lack of dependence of the PFM 90% probing depth can be seen in the frequency dependence of the applied excitation voltage. Alongside the data extracted for the 90% depth, in Fig. Due to the theoretical prediction that tip radius should directly change the probe depth of a given scan, it was also necessary to examine the effect of the cantilever force set point, given that this may challenge most directly the assumption of a SFM tip as a sphere due to indentation. Presented in Fig Finally, the effect of tip radius was examined, and presented in Fig 4(d). A linear relationship between the tip radius and the 90% depth is predicted. A variety of different tips with different r tip was applied, with both tip radii and error values taken from their respective data sheets. A good theory and experimental agreement can be seen for larger r tip , with a less good agreement below r tip = 100 nm. Nonetheless, that experimental trend also indicates a linear dependence. This lack of agreement is likely due to the tip not being spherical for small r tip , and other effects Despite being renowned as a surface sensitive technique, PFM inherently probes far deeper than the top layer of a sample. Analysis of periodically-poled domains in an uniaxial ferroelectric prepared to have constantly varying thicknesses of domains, has shown that the presence of domains buried below the surface are clearly visible beyond the 1 μm depth, more than 50 times larger as compared to a typical tip radius of 20 nm. The probing depth was shown both mathematically and experimentally to depend entirely on the radius of curvature of the SFM tip, with all other typical PFM scanning parameters (applied ac volatage amplitude and frequency, tip force set point) to have no effect on the probing depth in these experiments. Despite the relatively simple analytical model, good quantitative agreement between theory and experiment could be achieved. Even the presence of an intrinsic background in measurement data can be quantitatively treated. These results further motivate the use of PFM beyond simply imaging the 2D/3D ferroelectric's domain structure, but pushing PFM to become a quantitative, tomographic tool for exploring subsurface behaviors of polar nanostructures, as deep as ∼ 1 μm into the (ferroelectric) material. These analyses reported here exhibit the caution required whenever inspecting thin-films or 2D (ferroelectric) materials below the 100-nm thickness. Since material applications of ferroelectrics typically need to be mounted on some substrate in order to carry out the PFM measurements, that substrate might equally affect the overall measured PFM signal, both in amplitude and frequency.