Replacing the bulky cryoliquid-based cooling stages of cryoenabled instruments by chipscale refrigeration is envisioned to disruptively reduce the system size similar to microprocessors did for computers. Electronic refrigerators based on superconducting tunnel junctions have been anticipated to provide a solution, but reaching the necessary above the 1-K operation temperature range has remained a goal out of reach for several decades. We show efficient electronic refrigeration by Al-AlOx-Nb superconducting tunnel junctions starting from bath temperatures above 2 K. The junctions can deliver electronic cooling power up to approximately mW/mm 2 , which enables us to demonstrate tunnel-current-driven electron temperature reduction from 2.4 K to below 1.6 K (34% relative cooling) against the phonon bath. Our work shows that the key material of integrated superconducting circuits-niobium-enables powerful cryogenic refrigerator technology. This result is a prerequisite for practical cryogenic chip-scale refrigerators and, at the same time, it introduces a new electrothermal tool for quantum heat-transport experiments. The ability to control the thermodynamic temperature of matter down to fractions of a degree from the absolute zero is important for modern science and technology. Landmark scientific milestones enabled by access to a low-temperature range from the discovery of superconductivity At low temperatures, the degrees of freedom of free charge carriers and lattice phonons in metals and semiconductors become so decoupled that even minute heat flows to the different subsystems can introduce large temperature differences between them Due to the straightforward fabrication process by evaporation and thermal oxidation that produces high-quality oxide tunnel barriers, Al has been the superconductor of choice for N-I-S devices. However, the magnitude of its superconducting transition temperature (approximately 1 K) limits the N-I-S device operation below approximately 500 mK. Exploitation of higher critical temperature elemental superconductors el-ph Figure The refrigerator was fabricated on a 150-mm p-type Si wafer with 200-nm-thick thermally grown SiO 2 , using a variant of side-wall spacer passivated structure (SWAPS) fabrication process, which was originally developed for Nb-Nb Josephson junctions A key figure of merit in the quality of superconducting tunnel-junction processes is the normalized subgap leakage, typically parametrized through the phenomenological Dynes parameter Figure The refrigerator was characterized in a cryostat first by dc biasing the cooler junctions and recording the corresponding voltage to find the regions of interest in the current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics. The junctions were biased with current sources due to the low resistance of the junctions (from below 1 Ω to 1.5 kΩ as a function of temperature) compared to the line resistances in the cryostat (approximately 0.3 kΩ per line). Figure The measured cooler I-V characteristics at several bath temperatures T bath are shown in Fig. The thermometer I-V s were recorded by utilizing a method suited to eliminate the voltage drift from the preamplifier to accurately resolve the μV-level voltages for the I-V s near zero bias (ZB). High resolution and voltage drift-free measurement allowed us to measure temperature close to zero-bias regime, thus neglecting self-heating effects from the thermometer. The measurement scheme is shown in Fig. The thermometer I-V s near ZB with the cooler inactive i.e. cooler bias I clr = 0 were recorded at several T bath are shown in Fig. To characterize the cooling performance of the refrigerator, the two measurement schemes discussed above were combined, thus utilizing the full circuit shown in Fig. Biasing the cooler at the points of interest in the I-V shown at Fig. Figure V clr (mV) V clr (mV) I clr (μA) at the best found cooler bias values are shown as a function of T bath on the right-side y axis of Fig. The NDR feature and its temperature dependence observed near the energy gap edge at V clr ≈ 3 mV can be attributed to overheating of the Nb electrode due to the large power injected to the superconductor at high biases Cooling power of superconducting tunnel-junction refrigerator scales both as a function of temperature and the superconductor energy gap. In the optimal case, the gap is matched for the operating temperature (∆ ∝ T ), which results in cooling power density ∝ T 2 In conclusion, we have demonstrated significant cooling of free electrons with respect to lattice phonons up to 2.4-K bath temperature. At 2.4 K, we observe cooling of electrons down to 1.6 Kequivalent to 34% relative cooling. The temperature range was limited by the electron thermometry, i.e., the cooling effect is expected to work similarly also above 2.4 K. The cooling result was enabled by developing Nb-based superconducting tunnel-junction refrigerator technology. With our modern foundry-compatible Al-AlO x -Nb tunnel junctions, we obtained a cooling power density of approximately mW/mm 2 , which is expected to enable substantial cooling in practical chip scale refrigerators. Most significantly, after decades of research on tunnel-junction-based electronic coolers, here we demonstrated a device that can operate at the base temperature of 4 He pulse tube refrigerators, thus paving the way for replacing bulky dilution refrigerators by miniaturized electronic coolers that operate without rare and expensive 3 He. The NIS cooling efficiency, based on energy-filtering principles, is strongly dependent on the quality of the energy gap in the superconducting electrode. To assess the suitability of our Al/Nb junction process, we fabricated and characterized diagnostic cross-wire junctions with a material stack comparable with the one adopted for the cooler devices considered in the main text. The differences are: 1) moderately higher junction opacity (≈ 55 Ω μm 2 ), 2) significantly thicker base Al layer (≈ 100 nm) and 3) essentially semi-infinite lateral volume of the Al part. Compared to the situation for the cooler devices, these choices limit potential temperature differences between junction's Al quasiparticles and phonons; in the following we assume exact and uniform quasiparticle thermalization to the cryostat temperature T = T bath for both electrodes. Due to the presence of zero-bias anomaly, eventually developing a S-I-S supercurrent branch at low enough temperature, we fit experimental dI/dV data in the voltage range V ∈ [0.5, 3.0] mV (Figure where the Nb gap is parametrized by the Dynes density of states, defined as: In the latter, low values of γ (≈ 10 -3 or better) are associated with high-quality superconducting gap and result in efficient N-I-S cooling, i.e., unimpeded by sub-gap leakage. The numerical fit is performed by least-square minimization of residuals with uniform weights in logarithmic scale. R T and γ are global parameters for the full dataset (figure Figure Figure The thermometer used in the work was calibrated to a temperature range of 1.4 to 2.4 K where the zero bias resistance R ZB has a monotonous behavior as a function of the bath temperature T bath . Here we present additional data of the thermometer at temperatures above 2.4 K, and at some intermediate to high cooler bias values. Figure Additionally, we observe R ZB values of the thermometer exceeding any of the values obtained at the calibration curve at some cooler operating points. This occurs when biasing the cooler at points between the two negative differential resistance features in the cooler I-V at the lowest T bath , or at biases over I clr ∼ 55 μA, as shown in Fig. T bath = 1.9 K T bath = 1.9 K Figure The heat transport in normal state Al was modelled with a finite element method to obtain an estimate for the cooling power density and the temperature under the cooler junctions. The model gives estimates at higher bath temperatures but is expected to fail when the temperature of Al is at or below the critical temperature. The electron-electron thermal conductance and the electronphonon coupling in Al are suppressed below the critical temperature due to the emergence of energy gap in the electron density of states, whereas our model assumes normal state Al. We used a two-dimensional model depicted in Fig. 