One of the main degradation mechanisms of methylammonium lead iodine (MAPI), which is an important material for perovskite based solar cells, is the migration of iodide ions. It is believed that this phenomenon is in fact dominated by the diffusion of iodide vacancies. In this paper, we suggest that the addition of a small amount of OH -ions can help suppress the migration of iodide and increase the overall stability of the material. Through the use of molecular dynamics simulations, we show that the OH -ions can bind to the positively charged iodide vacancies and can block the access of the negative iodide ions into those vacancies. The hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite materials, and in particular the methylammonium lead iodine (CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 , or MAPI), have become a significant topic of interest in the last decade due to their photovoltaic properties. Since 2013, perovskite based solar cells have increased in efficiency from 13% to roughly 25%, making this category one of the fastest-growing photovoltaic devices. The main interest in the perovskite material is that it is able to convert light into electricity within its natural structure, significantly lowering the manufacturing costs Quantitative data about the dynamics of the iodide diffusion is difficult to extract from experiments since it depends on several factors, such as temperature, boundaries, various types of defects, intrinsic electric field, etc. Nevertheless, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have shown that, at least in the homogeneous MAPI material, the dominant diffusion mechanism is the migration of the iodide vacancies, with an estimated diffusion coefficient between 2.5-4.3×10 -6 cm 2 /s, whereas the diffusion coefficient of iodide interstitial ions is smaller by one order of magnitude or more Another known cause of degradation of the perovskite-based solar cells is the introduction of humidity (water) into the device. Water molecules can have multiple effects. Depending on the amount of H 2 O molecules, the absorption factor may significantly decrease Atomistic calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) have shown that the dissociation of a water molecule into H + and OH -ions in MAPI requires an energy of 0.75 eV in dark, and 0.57 eV in the presence of photo generated electrons In this paper we use MD simulations to show that an OH - interstitial can reduce the migration of the iodide ions inside MAPI, by binding to an iodide vacancy, and blocking the path of the iodide ions through that site. We have also tested, using density functional theory (DFT) based calculations, that the presence of hydroxyl ions at the interfaces of MAPI with the electron and hole transporter materials (TiO 2 and Cu 2 O, respectively) does not have a significant effect on the energy gaps and band alignment. We utilize MD simulations to describe the movement of all atoms in the MAPI system. The simulations were performed using the LAMMPS software package To describe the interatomic forces we used the MYP potential derived by Mattoni et al. The simulated system was made of 256 unit cells (MAPbI 3 ), with a total of 3072 atoms, which were relaxed by energy minimization followed by ramping up and maintaining its temperature at 300 K and the constant pressure of 1 bar for 1 ns. This produces samples from an isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble controlled by the Nose-Hoover thermostat and barostat. Once the system was relaxed, a single iodide was removed, theoretically making the system positively charged. However, due to the large size of the system, there are no artificial implications on the simulations. To see if there was a way to mediate the migration, the hydroxyl group was placed within the system at varying positions and distances from the initial vacancy, and each case was run as a separate simulation. The positions of all iodine atoms in the NPT ensemble as function of time were recorded during each simulation. Further justification on the choice of the ensemble and other calculation details can be found elsewhere DFT based simulations were also performed to test the impact of OH substitutions on the band gap and band alignment at the interfaces between MAPI and hole and electron transporter materials, respectively. They were carried out using the SIESTA software In the case of the hole transporter, the simulation cell consisted of 218 atoms, grouped in 2x2x6 unit cells of Cu 2 O, and 1x1x3 tetragonal MAPI. The Brillouin zone was sampled using a Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh of 7×7×1. The system was then allowed to relax until the forces on each atom were less than 0.04 eV/ Å. The resulting optimized structures were further utilized to determine the electronic states. The partial densities of states (PDOS) were analyzed to determine the band gap and band alignment, using the same Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh. The energy cutoff for the basis set was 100 Ry. A similar computational setup was used to check the influence of OH substitutions of iodine atoms at the interface between the MAPI and a TiO 2 layer which has the role of electron transporter in the solar cell device. This time the interface contained 198 atoms, and it was composed from a rutile TiO 2 layer, obtained by multiplying the unit cell with 2x2x5, and a MAPI 1x1x3 tetragonal layer. We computed with LAMMPS the mean square displacement (MSD) of all iodide ions included in the simulation cell, as a function of the time t, with N being the total number of iodides and r i the position of the particular ion i. The diffusion coefficient associated with the mobile ions can be obtained as which in practice is calculated using the slope of the MSD vs. time, divided by the double of the spatial dimension As we have shown in a previous study A natural question is whether the presence of hydroxyl ions in the MAPI does not harm other properties of the solar cell. While only an experimental study can have a definite answer to this question, here we check if the band alignments of MAPI with the electron and hole transporter layers are affected. The band alignment at the interface between MAPI and Cu 2 O, seen as a hole transporter material, was determined us- ing ab initio DFT calculations with SIESTA software. Initially, the band alignment of the ideal interface was computed, and the PDOS for each material was determined for the bulk-like regions, i.e. excluding the layers in the immediate vicinity of the interface and of vacuum, which introduce additional states. Next, a random iodine atom was replaced with OH, and this procedure was repeated 10 times, each time substituting a different iodine. The results for the ideal interface and three cases with OH are presented in the upper part of Figure We performed similar tests on the MAPI/TiO 2 , TiO 2 being a known electron transporter material for MAPI. Four situations were simulated, with the OH group replacing the iodine atoms, to be compared with the case without iodide vacancies. A picture qualitatively similar to the case of the hole transporter emerges, as shown in the lower part of Figure The binding of OH -to positively charged iodine vacancy is in principle possible in the context of humid environments. Previously, it was shown that, under ambient conditions, superoxide (O - 2 ) can be generated at the position of iodine vacancies, which triggers perovskite degradation, leading to the formation of lead iodide, molecular iodine, gaseous methylammonium and water The proton H + resulting from the dissociation of water, being very light, should be harmless to MAPI. Still, it might bind strongly to iodide, neutralizing and blocking the migration of the slow iodide interstitial ions, or eventually can create iodide vacancies which can be immobilized by the OH -. In conclusion, we have shown that a negatively charged hydroxyl ion present in MAPI can form a neutral complex with a positively charged iodide vacancy, thereby reducing the migration of the iodide ions via their vacancies.