Probabilistic bit (p-bit)-based compute engines utilize the unique capability of a pbit to probabilistically switch between two states to solve computationally challenging problems. However, when solving problems that require more than two states (e.g., problems such as Max-3-Cut, verifying if a graph is K-partite (K>2) etc.), additional pre-processing steps such as graph reduction are required to make the problem compatible with a two-state p-bit platform. Moreover, this not only increases the problem size by entailing the use of auxiliary variables but can also degrade the solution quality. In this work, we develop a unique framework for implementing a K-state (K>2) p-bit engine. Furthermore, from an implementation standpoint, we show that such a K-state p-bit engine can be implemented using N traditional (2-state) p-bits, and one multi-state p-bit-a novel concept proposed here. Augmenting traditional p-bit platforms, our approach enables us to solve an archetypal combinatoric problem class requiring multiple states, namely Max-K-Cut (K=3, 4 shown here), without using any additional auxiliary variables. Thus, our work fundamentally advances the functional capability of p-bit engines, enabling them to solve a broader class of computationally challenging problems more efficiently. Modern information processing has relied largely on digital computers based on the von Neumann architecture. However, with the explosion in data and its applications, there is an increasing demand for solving computational problems, many of which are still considered challenging in the digital computing framework. This top-down shift driven by applications, combined with the slowing down of Moore's law at the hardware end, has created a strong impetus to explore non von Neumann computing paradigms that can complement digital computing. The search for alternate computational approaches has led to a plethora of models and corresponding hardware platforms that range from quantum annealers The p-bit essentially denotes a bit that probabilistically switches between two states, typically represented by '-1' / '1', or '0' / '1'. From a computational standpoint, the number of states (two here) signifies the representational capability of a p-bit, an important consideration when mapping a problem to a p-bit based computing platform. As a case in point, the two sets created when solving the MaxCut of a graph can be elegantly mapped to the two states of the p-bit; computing the MaxCut of a graph is an archetypal combinatorial optimization problem that entails dividing the nodes of a graph into two sets such that the total weight of the edges common to both the sets is maximized. The same is true for other problems such as integer factorization where the binary digits (0 and 1) can also be directly mapped to the two states of the p-bit. However, such a mapping no longer remains straightforward when the problem requires more than two states. For instance, computing the Max-3-Cut, an extension of the MaxCut problem, entails the creation of three sets such that the number of edges common to any two sets is maximized Overcoming this constraint then entails additional processing steps such as using graph reduction techniques that reduce the problem to a format that is compatible with the two-state property of the p-bits Such added pre-processing entails the introduction of auxiliary variables (that need additional pbits) which effectively increases the size of the problem that must be solved by the p-bit platform. For instance, solving the Max-3-Cut problem on a graph of N nodes will typically entail using up to 3N p-bits We first illustrate the formulation of a K-state p-bit engine using K=3, and subsequently, generalize it to K states. To develop a 3-state p-bit engine, we first consider a p-bit (σ ̅) with three states, wherein the three states are defined using three orthogonal unit vectors (e 1 ̂, e 2 ̂, e 3 ̂). The p-bit is designed such that if and when a bit transitions from its existing state, it does so to one of the other M (= K-1; here, two) states with equal probability. Using these characteristics, the objective function for computing the Max-3-Cut can now be expressed by the following energy function: where [J] is the adjacency matrix for the input graph. Solving the Max-3-Cut problem entails antiferromagnetic coupling i.e., J ij = -1(0) when an edge is present (absent) between nodes i and j, respectively; we consider unweighted graphs in this work. Equation Using an approach similar to the conventional p-bit engines, the weighted synaptic feedback (φ) to the α th p-bit can be formulated as . The resulting output of the 3state p-bit is expressed as: Where, f(φ α ) represents the non-linear transformation on the synaptic input φ α along with a stochastic component represented by state (here, e 2 ̂ or e 3 ̂) is favorable, f( ) tends to 0. Moreover, the transition to the other M (=K-1, here 2) states is designed to be equally probable since g (= r {0,1} ) is drawn from a discrete uniform distribution. Figures Next, we extend the theoretical framework developed above for a 3-state p-bit engine to a probabilistic engine with K states. The state update rule is then expressed as: where g = {g 1 , g 2 , ... , g K-1 } is a random one hot vector of length M= (K -1), i.e., only one element of g is 1 while the rest are 0. Essentially g is defined such that the state to which the bit will probabilistically transition, is also randomly selected. Here, f(φ α ) is the non-linear transform on the synaptic input similar to that shown in equation 2b. To illustrate the functionality of the Kstate (K>3) p-bit network, we compute the Max-4-Cut for the same graph considered in Fig. Hardware implementation of a K-state p-bit engine: Equations 2 and 3 help guide the hardware implementation of the K-state p-bit engine. The probabilistic switching behavior in response to the synaptic input that governs whether the state of the p-bit will switch or retain its current state can be realized using the traditional two-state p-bits. In other words, the f(φ α ) function can be efficiently implemented using the two-state p-bits. However, in addition to this, we also need an additional 'multi-state' p-bit capable of randomly selecting one out of the remaining M states to transition into (if the synaptic input favors such a transition, f(φ α ) (<0)). Such a multistate p-bit effectively implements g in equation Thus, a K-state p-bit engine with N nodes can be implemented with N two-state p-bits and a multistate p-bit that selects one of the M states with uniform switching probability. We note that for K=3, the multi-valued p-bit can effectively be implemented using an additional two-state p-bit programmed to switch with a uniform probability of p=0.5. Fig. (a) the output of the α th two-state p-bit; and (b) the output of the multi-state p-bit (shared among all the bits). These two outputs along with the current state of p-bit can be used to compute the synaptic feedback, and subsequently, update the state using equation 3. We also note that when computing the synaptic feedback for a node (say α), the output of the multi-valued p-bit is only required when the corresponding 2-state p-bit is set to transition out of its original state i.e., f(φ α ) < 0. If f(φ α ) > 0, the node will retain its existing state, thus, eliminating the need for the output of the multi-state p-bit. One approach for implementing this functionality is to use an N:1 MUX, that activates the multi-valued p-bit only when the corresponding p-bit output is 0. However, the MUX design used to control the activation of the multi-state p-bit is optional if multi-valued p-bit is designed to be 'free running'. Many hardware technologies ranging from MTJs (magnetic tunnel junctions) ferroelectrics, to CMOS VO2 exhibits an electronically driven insulator-metal transition (IMT) that is accompanied by abrupt, volatile, and hysteretic resistance switching between the high-resistance insulating state and the low-resistance metallic state. An illustrative figure for the resistance switching is shown in Fig. voltage at which the device transitions from the insulating to the metallic state) and hold voltage (VH: voltage at which the device transitions back from the metallic state to the insulating state) exhibit cycle-to-cycle variation, a process that has been extensively studied and characterized in prior works Empirically, the observed variation in VH is much smaller than the variation in VT, and therefore, variation in VH has not been considered here. Similar to the original MTJ-based two-state p-bit design, the VO2-based p-bit can be implemented using a two-terminal VO2 device in series with a transistor. While the operation of the VO2 p-bit has been detailed in Appendix I, the underlying idea behind the stochastic behavior relies on the probabilistic intersection of the transistor load line with the stable (insulating state) versus the unstable portion of the curve (associated with the transition between the insulating and the metallic state) owing to the cycle-to-cycle variation in the threshold voltage. The latter results in the device switching to the metallic state while in the former case, the device remains in the insulating state. Thus, the probability can be expressed in terms of the probability of switching to the metallic state. For implementing an M state p-bit, the design entails the use of M parallel branches of the VO2 device, each with a resistive element as shown in Fig. In summary, we have developed the underlying framework for realizing a p-bit engine with Kstates (K>2). Our approach reduces the computational overhead traditionally associated with a given problem compatible with the two-state behavior of traditional p-bit engines. We also showcase a pathway to implementing a multi-valued p-bit, a key component of the K-state p-bit engine. Thus, our work contributes to enhancing the computational capabilities of p-bit-based computing platforms for solving computationally challenging problems. implementation was simulated using the 14nm PTM model. All default parameters, except for PDIBL1=12.3 which effectively lowers the output resistance, were used. The value of the series resistance in the 4-state VO2-based p-bit is 2 KΩ. equation (2a) evaluate to 0, respectively. Furthermore, the synaptic input φ and f( ) are designed such that when the present state is 'favored', f( ) tends to 1, whereas when a switch to a different