Continuum or discrete polarizable models for the study of optoelectronic processes in embedded subsystems rely mostly on the restriction of the surrounding electronic dielectric response to its low frequency limit. Such a description hinges on the assumption that the electrons in the surrounding medium react instantaneously to any excitation in the central subsystem, treating thus the environment in the adiabatic limit. Exploiting a recently developed embedded GW formalism, with an environment described at the fully ab initio level, we assess the merits of the adiabatic limit with respect to an environment where the full dynamics of the dielectric response is considered. Further, we show how to properly take the static limit of the environment susceptibility, introducing the so-called Coulomb-hole and screened-exchange contributions to the reaction field. As a first application, we consider a C 60 molecule at the surface of a C 60 crystal, namely a case where the dynamics of the embedded and embedding subsystems are similar. The common adiabatic assumption, when properly treated, generates errors below 10% on the polarization energy associated with frontier energy levels and associated energy gaps. Finally, we consider a water molecule inside a metallic nanotube, the worst case for the environment adiabatic limit. The error on the gap polarization energy remains below 10%, even though the error on the frontier orbitals polarization energies can reach a few tenths of an electronvolt. The description of the electronic properties of a quantum subsystem embedded in a large and complex electrostatic and dielectric environment stands as a severe challenge to quantum mechanical modeling. Such an environment can be very large, disordered, dynamical in the case of molecular solvation, so that brute force quantum mechanical treatments may prove out-of-reach. Still, in many applications pertaining to organic optoelectronics, wet chemistry, biology, etc., the surrounding medium cannot be ignored, driving significant shifts of the electronic energy levels and optical excitations. Such a situation spawned hybrid strategies, merging the quantum mechanical treatment of the "active" subsystem, with a simplified description of the environment as an effective continuum or atomistic medium. Numerous benchmarks for gas phase molecular systems, with in most recent studies comparisons to higher-level coupled-cluster reference calculations, are now available. Together with the integration of the GW formalism with polarizable continuous models (PCM), Taking the environment electronic susceptibility χ(ω) in its low frequency limit (ω → 0) hinges on the assumption that the electrons in the environment respond instantaneously to an electronic excitation in the central subsystem. This is an adiabatic approximation for the environment . Such an approximation is expected to be valid if the gap of the environment is much larger than that of the central subsystem. In other situations, where such a decoupling is not verified, in particular when the environment is characterized by a gap smaller than that of the embedded subsystem, such approximations needs to be validated. A critical assessment was recently proposed on the basis of model solutes and solvents. The error associated with the energy gap remains below 10%, but with errors as large as a few tenths of an eV for individual frontier orbitals. We compare the accuracy of various implementations of the adiabatic approximation for the environment within the GW framework. Our results suggest to favor a strategy where the central subsystem is treated at the fully dynamical GW level, while the environment static reaction field is treated within the analog of the static Coulomb-hole plus screened-exchange approximation. In the following, we briefly describe the salient features of the GW formalism and its merging with a polarizable environment, including the specific aspects associated with the definition and construction of the reaction field. Extended details about the GW formalism can be found in the literature, from seminal articles The GW formalism is a specific Green's function many-body perturbation theory taking the one-body time-ordered Green's function G(r, r ′ ; ω) as a central variable, in place e.g. of the charge density in Density Functional Theory (DFT). Rather than performing a perturbation theory in terms of the bare Coulomb potential v, the GW exchange-correlation self-energy can be understood as a first-order expansion in the screened Coulomb potential W: with η a positive infinitesimal. Contrary to standard DFT exchange-correlation functionals, the selfenergy is dynamical. Performing GW calculations in a polarizable or dielectric environment relies straightforwardly on the relation between W(r, r ′ ; ω) and the electronic susceptibility χ(r, r ′ ; ω) : with χ related to the non-interacting susceptibility χ 0 : where the latter equation holds within the random phase approximation (RPA). Starting traditionally from a Kohn-Sham or Hartree-Fock calculation, the input Green's function and susceptibility are built from the resulting mean-field one-body eigenstates: where { f n/m } are occupation numbers and μ the zero-temperature chemical potential. The analysis of the independent-electron susceptibility, the main computational bottleneck, shows that it can be built with an O(N 4 ) computational effort with respect to the number of electrons N, but various space-time, interpolative separable density fitting, stochastic or moment-conserving reformulations can dramatically reduce this computational complexity. where the index (i) runs over the occupied states. In the static COHSEX approach, only the low-frequency W(ω → 0) screened Coulomb potential is required. An important observation is that taking abruptly ω to zero for the screened Coulomb potential W(ω) in Eq. ( An elegant and simple way to recover the full COHSEX approximation, while having as an information only the low-frequency limit of the screened Coulomb potential W(ω → 0), or equivalently of the susceptibility χ(ω → 0), is to assume a simple pole model, namely: with (λ) a unique pole energy for simplicity. Such an expression has the correct low and high frequency limits and time-ordering structure in the energy plane. As shown in the Appendix A, the full static COHSEX expression can be simply recovered by taking the pole energy (λ) to infinity after performing the energy integration. The same strategy will be used here below in order to merge properly a polarizable environment, restricted to its low-frequency susceptibility limit, with a fully dynamical GW formalism for the central subsystem. Our embedding strategy relies on the fragment, or subsystem, approximation, assuming a weak overlap between the wavefunctions of the various fragments. Such an approximation was already implemented at the many-body GW and Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) levels, not only in the ideal case of weakly interacting molecular systems, Partitioning the system into the central subsystem of interest (labeled by 1) and the environment (labeled by 2), and assuming non-overlapping wavefunctions between subsystems (1) and ( where we dropped the position variables. The restriction W 11 of the screened Coulomb potential to the solute then reads, using block notations: where e.g. v 12 is the bare Coulomb potential connecting points in the central subsystem (1) to points in the environment (2). The latter equation can be rewritten: where χ (1) upon excitation generates through the v 21 Coulomb interaction a charge density change in the environment (2) proportional to χ χ(1) (ω) appears as an interacting susceptibility of the central subsystem of interest (1) when its Coulomb interactions are renormalized by the reaction field created by the environment (2). In several studies merging the GW formalism with semi-empirical or fully ab initio polarizable environments, the polarization energy was efficiently calculated as an energy difference between two static COHSEX calculations performed with and without the environment, with ε n the n-th energy level. The absolute energy levels for the embedded system can be obtained by adding these polarization energies to the gas phase GW energy levels. In that respect, such an approach is essentially perturbative. This simple and efficient scheme will be labeled ∆COHSEX below. As seen in Eqs. (6a) and (6b), the COHSEX approximation to the GW self-energy only requires the low-frequency limit of the screened-Coulomb potential. As such, it offers an obvious route for treating the environment in the adiabatic limit. Further, both the embedded and embedding subsystems are treated on the same footing. It remains however that the static COHSEX approximation is known to dramatically overestimate gaps, resulting from a sizeable overestimation/underestimation of the ionization potential (negative of the HOMO energy) and electronic affinity (negative of the LUMO energy). Taken as an energy difference between the gas and embedded environments, it was found that reasonable polarization energies could be obtained, stemming presumably from a cancellation of errors between the gas and embedded COHSEX calculations. While computationally very efficient, we will show nevertheless that this approach can yield sizeable errors as compared to a fully dynamical treatment of both the embedded and embedding subsystems, presumably due to an incomplete cancellation of errors, together with the error inherent to the adiabatic approximation for the environment. To avoid relying on the cancellation of errors at the static COHSEX level, we now merge the fully dynamical GW formalism with a polarizable environment described in its low-frequency susceptibility limit χ with G the subsystem (1) Green's function and removing the space positions. The integral of the (W 11 -ṽ11 ) contribution does not present any difficulties when χ The integral involving v reac (r, r ′ ; ω) taken in its static limit is reminiscent of the static COHSEX approximation and care must be taken to properly include the analog of the COH term. Following the treatment exposed in Appendix A, we model the environment susceptibility as a simple pole susceptibility χ that provide the P COH n and P SEX n direct contributions of v reac to the polarization energies: As explained above, switching straightforwardly ω to zero for the reaction field in Eq. ( would lead to neglect P COH . Anticipating on the upcoming results, we analyze in Table The advantage of working with a fully ab initio description of the environment is that the extension to dynamical screening is formally straightforward, requiring to calculate χ where χ (I) g (ω) is the gas phase interacting susceptibility of fragment (I) and where the V I J are the bare Coulomb interactions coupling different fragments. Since each fragment is described by its gas phase interacting susceptibility, the Coulomb interactions inside a given fragment are already accounted for. In the ∆COHSEX and QM GW /QM COHSEX simplified approaches, such an equation needs only to be inverted in the static ω = 0 limit. In the reference fully dynamical approach, the inversion is required for each real/imaginary frequency needed in our contour deformation scheme (see Technical details II D below). Each isolated fragment susceptibility is constructed following Eqs. ( g (ω) blocks can be obtained at no cost from a single fullerene gas phase susceptibility. In the limit of a very large number of fragments, the remaining cost lies essentially in inverting the Dyson equation (21). We now discuss how to dramatically reduce such a cost. In the present Coulomb fitting resolution-of-the-identity (RI-V) formulation, 111,112 the susceptibility for each fragment is expressed in the auxiliary basis set {P} designed to expend the charge density and its variations: With the def2-TZVP-RIFIT auxiliary basis set used in the present study, this represents 5700 basis functions per fullerene, limiting the environment to a few shells of neighbors to keep reasonable the memory and computing time associated with equation (21). As shown in a recent publication, designed to preserve the resulting central fragment polarization energies within less than a meV. The effective {γ} polarization vectors are expressed as a linear combination of the auxiliary {P} basis functions. Such an optimal representation can be formulated as a variational problem, minimizing the difference between the reaction fields generated by the full and model χ (I) g (ω) fragment susceptibilities. The components of the {γ} vectors and matrix coefficients X The construction of the effective {γ} polarization vectors was explored and validated We conclude this subsection by emphasizing that the central fragment and its first shell of neighbors susceptibilities are described within the full {P} auxiliary basis set. Fitting by optimal polarization basis sets is thus used only for second-nearest-neighbor fragments and beyond. Our calculations are performed with the beDeft (beyond-DFT) package where (i, a) index occupied/unoccupied levels and W scr = (Wv) the so-called screening potential. The energy integration is thus performed along the imaginary-frequency axis, completed by residues involving the value of the screened Coulomb potential along the real-axis (second and third lines). The imaginary frequency-axis integration is performed with a 12-point quadrature optimized grid that was shown to yield quasiparticle energies at the meV-accuracy level. In the case of the water-inside-nanotube system, containing 323 atoms, the tube relaxation has been performed with the Siesta package 120 at the double-zeta plus polarization level within the local density approximation (LDA). We now study the case of a fullerene at the (111) surface of a face-centered cubic (FCC) C 60 crystal. Photoemission spectroscopy is very much surface sensitive due to the large absorption of incoming photons/electrons by the first layer. Fullerene surfaces have been extensively studied experimentally, Due to screening, the surface fullerene gap is closing with a (1/R) scaling law, with R the radius of the environment hemisphere. Equivalently, the gap closes linearly with respect to N -1/3 C60 , where N C60 is the total number of fullerenes. The quality of the linear fit indicates that the considered N C60 are large enough to enter the asymptotic 1/R scaling law regime. In the infinite limit, our dynamical calculations provide a polarization energy of -1.2 eV for the surface fullerene gap. This can be compared with experimental values of -1.1 eV, 126 -1.2 eV 127,128 or -1.4 eV 129,130 obtained by subtracting the experimental 4.9 eV gas phase fullerene HOMO-LUMO gap 131 to the experimental surface peak-to-peak gap. We show in the Supplementary Material (SM) how to recover the same surface limit by growing the crystal layer-by-layer, as in a slab calculation, with a (1/n) convergence of the polarization energy, where (n) is the number of layers (Fig. We now address the central issue of the present study, namely the impact of assuming that the environment responds instantaneously to an electronic excitation in a surface fullerene. In the case of a fullerene inside a fullerene crystal, the decoupling of excitation energies between the central subsystem and its environment is clearly not satisfied. The resulting errors on the polarization energy, as compared to a fully dynamical calculations, are provided in Fig. We now address the case of the QM GW /QM COHSEX scheme (blue dots), merging a fully dynamical GW calculation for the central subsystem with the proper static screening limit for the environment. The error is found to be significantly reduced as compared to the ∆COHSEX scheme, with an asymptotic error of -0.034 eV, amounting to a much reduced 2.9% error with respect to the fully dynamical asymptotic P Gap = -1.19 eV. As another important difference with the ∆COHSEX scheme, the error essentially builds within the first-shell of neighbors. This really means that in the QM GW /QM COHSEX scheme, only the closely lying molecular fragments really need to be treated at the full dynamical level to fully reproduce the effect of the environment dynamical response. Similar results can be obtained for the polarization energy associated with the individual HOMO and LUMO levels (SM, Fig. The reason why the static approximation induces larger errors at short-range, namely for polarizable fragments located close to the central subsystem of interest, was hinted in Ref. 100. Focusing e.g. on the φ H HOMO eigenstate with energy E H , the fully-dynamical SEX-like contribution to the polarization energy reads: ⟨φ In the limit of a smoothly varying reaction field over the extent of the central subsystem, orthogonalization of the molecular orbitals reduces the sum to the (i=HOMO) terms, and only the static The same reasoning holds for the P COH term. Adding far standing fullerenes amounts to adding components of the reaction field that are more and more smoothly varying on the central subsystem, with decreasing contribution to the total error associated with the static limit. In the same smoothly varying limit, one observes that the P SEX contribution vanishes for the polarization energy associated with unoccupied states, while for occupied states the P COH term amounts to (-1/2) of the P SEX contribution. 100 To further explore the impact of the adiabatic limit for the polarizable medium, we consider an environment of fictitious fullerenes where the HOMO-LUMO gap has been artificially changed in a scissor fashion, namely moving rigidly in energy the occupied manifold with respect to the unoccupied one. Such modified Kohn-Sham energy levels are used to construct the χ The PBE0 energy levels for the central (surface) C 60 are not modified (PBE0 HOMO-LUMO gap of 2.99 eV). We plot in Fig. the adiabatic approximation for the environment becomes formally better validated and the error induced by the static approximation is reduced. Again, both in the small and large environment gap limits, the QM GW /QM COHSEX scheme (blue dots) provides the smallest error, with a 3.9% maximum error in the limit of a small environmental gap. In such a limit, the adiabatic approximation for the surrounding medium is expected to fail. We provide in the SM (Fig. We conclude this exploration by considering the case of a water molecule inserted inside a long section of a metallic (10,10) carbon nanotube. The behavior of water inside carbon nanotubes has been the subject of many studies, targeting a better understanding of the structure of confined water and the nature of friction at the water/tube interface 132 for applications to energy generation through inverse osmosis and water desalinization. Such studies stand much ahead of the present exploration aiming at better understanding the impact of dynamical versus static screening. The case of a metallic surrounding medium offers a stringent test for the assumption that the environment responds instantaneously to an electronic excitation in the central subsystem. Our model system is represented in Fig. eV, LDA value). The water and nanotube are treated as separate fragments, namely we do not allow hybridization between them and focus on long-range screening. The closing of the water molecule HOMO-LUMO gap from the gas phase to the nanotube-intercalated geometry amounts to -2.09 eV, -2.23 eV and -2.41 eV, at the fully dynamical, QM GW /QM COHSEX and ∆COHSEX schemes, respectively. Again the QM GW /QM COHSEX scheme yields the smallest error (∼7%) as compared to the ∆COHSEX approach (∼15% error). This is consistent with the data of Fig. As a conclusion, we observe that even in a situation where the environment adiabatic treatment is expected to fail, the static reaction field approximation yields an error on the gap smaller than 10% when treated correctly. This is consistent with the findings of Ref. 100 where the case of a benzene molecule facing a graphene sheet was considered. We note that what should matter is the relative position of the neutral excitation spectra for the embedded and embedding subsystems. In that respect, comparing just the HOMO-LUMO gaps may not stand as an accurate criteria. Within the framework of an embedded QM/QM' GW framework, we have studied the validity of the adiabatic approximation for the environment, namely the assumption that the electronic degrees of freedom in the environment (treated at the QM' level) respond instantaneously to an excitation in the central subsystem (treated at the QM level). In practice, this amounts to restricting the environment electronic susceptibility to its low frequency χ Reference calculations are performed at the QM GW /QM GW level, where both embedded and embedding subsystems are treated at the fully dynamical level within a fragment approximation. Our findings are that the proper adiabatic limit for the environment consists in a QM GW /QM COHSEX approach where the reaction field from the environment is treated in the same fashion as the static COHSEX (Coulomb-hole plus screened exchange) approximation to the full GW self-energy. Maximum errors on the polarization energy, that is the energy shift of the energy levels from the isolated (gas) to the embedded geometry, are found to remain below 10%, except for the case of a metallic environment (nanotube) where the shift on the individual frontier orbitals can be as large as a few tenths of an eV. If better accuracy is desired, we found that treating the first-nearestneighbors only at the fully dynamical level, while assuming the adiabatic limit for farther lying fragments, allows to reduce the error to negligible values. Such a scheme may be regarded as a QM GW /QM GW /QM COHSEX approach. In contrast, the scheme employed in previous work consisting in following the shift of the energy levels from a gas phase QM COHSEX to an embedded QM COHSEX /QM COHSEX calculation, namely an approach where both the embedded and embedding subsystems are treated consistently in the static COHSEX limit, is found to induce much larger errors. As compared to the more accurate QM GW /QM COHSEX calculation, we speculate that the well-known COHSEX inaccuracy, as compared to GW, for the calculation of the energy levels of the central (embedded) subsystem, does not fully cancel out between the gas and embedded systems. The fragment approximation transfers most of the computer time requirements to the cubicscaling inversion of the Dyson equation for the screened Coulomb potential. In the fully dynamical scheme, this inversion must be performed nω times, with nω the number of frequencies sampling the real or imaginary axis (nω=12 in the present study 113 ). In the QM GW /QM COHSEX scheme, the construction of the static v reac (ω = 0) reaction field requires inverting only once a Dyson equation over the environment degrees of freedom. In the limit of large systems, the dynamical scheme is thus formally nω times more expansive than the QM GW /QM COHSEX one. In practice, due to the fixed cost of calculating the bare Coulomb potential matrix elements over the environment within the RI-V approach, an embedded GW calculation over 534 fullerenes amounts, in the present stage of implementation, to 420 CPU hours and 150 CPU hours at the QM GW /QM GW and QM GW /QM COHSEX levels, respectively (def2-TZVP non-self-consistent G 0 W 0 calculations). The present results, concerned with the treatment of the electronic dynamics, is expected to remain valid for approaches attempting to go beyond the fragment approximation. Strategies based on fragments-dimer corrections, 1.78 for water). See the Supplementary Material for Using Eq. ( with (i) indexing occupied states, and (a) the empty ones. The limit λ → ∞ results in the frequency- where the sums [ ai ] can be reformulated as [ n -2 i ], leading to the static COHSEX approximation : = Σ SEX (r, r ′ ) + Σ COH (r, r ′ ), (A9) as defined in Eqs. (6a) and (6b). We have used the same approach in Sec. II B 3 to obtain the proper expression for the contribution of the reaction field in the static limit for the environment χ at the meV level on the polarization energies. Following the definition of the susceptibility expressed in the full auxiliary basis {P} (Eq. ( In the present study, the same scheme was adopted for the needed dynamical susceptibilities X (I) g (γ, γ ′ ; ω). For sake of simplicity, we adopt the static optimal polarization basis vectors {γ(ω = 0)} and only reoptimize the matrix elements X To show the accuracy of this approach, we study the energy levels (HOMO, LUMO and gap) for a central fullerene surrounded by two shells of neighbors (see Inset Fig. C 60 hemisphere. We observe that while the reaction field P SEX contribution accounts for most of the polarization for the HOMO-LUMO gap, this is not the case for individual energy levels. As a matter of fact, the P SEX contribution to unoccupied states is small. Clearly, for the absolute position of individual levels, P COH cannot be neglected. A similar analysis can be found in Ref. 100 in the case of a molecule facing a graphene substrate. For sake of consistency, one can verify that using a one-pole χ