Bridged triarylamines, so-called N-heterotriangulenes (N-HTAs) are promising organic semiconductors for applications in optoelectronic devices. Thereby the electronic structure at organic/metal interfaces and within thin films as well as the electronically excited states dynamics after optical excitation is essential for the performance of organic-molecule-based devices. Here, we investigated the energy level alignment and the excited state dynamics of a N-HTA derivative adsorbed on Au(111) by means of energy-and time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy. We quantitatively determined the energetic positions of several occupied and unoccupied molecular (transport levels) and excitonic states (optical gap) in detail. A transport gap of 3.20 eV and an optical gap of 2.58 eV is determined, resulting in an exciton binding energy of 0.62 eV. With the first time-resolved investigation on a N-HTA compound we gained insights into the exciton dynamics and resolved processes on the femtosecond to picosecond timescale. N-heteropolycyclic aromatic compounds represent a promising molecule class for applications in functional organic materials, since their electronic structure and the resulting individual molecular properties are efficiently tuneable by number and position of nitrogen atoms in the aromatic structural backbone. The isosteric replacement of a C-H unit by N leaves the geometric structure unchanged, while the electronic structure are altered. For instance, they are promising candidates for electron-transporting (n-channel) semiconductors, which are of great interest for organic field effect transistors. 1-5 N-heterotriangulenes (N-HTAs), in which the originally propeller-shaped triphenylamine unit is locked into a planar configuration via bridging with appropriate molecular moieties (e.g. carbonyl or dimethylmethylene) 6-8 is a class of functional molecules with high potential for optoelectronic materials. 9-12 In electron donor/acceptor systems N-HTAs act as the donor compound. tions. Inter alia, we found that the additional -C=C-bridge forming the 7-membered ring in N-HTA-557 resulted in a pronounced reduction of the optical gap size by 0.9 eV from 3.4 eV in N-HTA-550 to 2.5 eV in N-HTA-557 due to an increase of the π-conjugated electron system. Here we thoroughly elucidated the electronic structure of N-HTA-557-P/Au(111) in detail, including the determination of transport levels, the optical gap and accordingly the exciton binding energy. In particular for applications of this material in organic field effect transistors or solar cells knowledge about the energetic positions of transport levels (affinity levels and ionization potentials) are extremely important. Moreover, fs-time-resolved 2PPE, allowed to gain insights into the exciton dynamics. Our study represents the first time-resolved investigation on a N-HTA-derived compound, which is of great interest with respect to applications of this donor material in organic solar cells. To gain insight into the energy level alignment, i.e., the energetic positions of adsorbatederived occupied as well as unoccupied electronic states we conducted photon-energy-dependent 2PPE measurements. On the basis of their photon-energy-dependency they are assigned to occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals as well as an excitonic state (see Fig. In Figure Hence, the exciton binding energy (E B ) of this lowest excitonic state amounts to 620 meV. For comparison, N-HTA-557-P in solution (CH 2 Cl 2 ) possesses an optical gap of 2.61 eV (see supporting information, Fig. All other 2PPE features are assigned to vibronic contributions related to the LUMO, and UMO 2 as well as to the HOMO. They exhibit an equidistance energy different of around 200 meV, which can be related to an excitation of ν(C-C) and δ(C-H) vibrational modes of the N-HTA-557 moiety of N-HTA-557-P located at 1636 cm -1 (see supporting information Fig. We used femtosecond time-resolved 2PPE to study how the electronic coupling between the N-HTA-557-P molecules and the metal substrate influences the dynamics of optically excited states such as excitons in N-HTA-557-P. For low coverages (1-2 ML) none of the electronically excited states, e.g. the LUMO or excitonic states, exhibit a detectable lifetime, thus τ < 10 fs. The reason for these ultrashort lifetimes is a strong electron coupling enabling an efficient electron transfer from the molecule back to the metal. Such short lifetime in the order of a few femtoseconds have been found also for other adsorbates on metal surfaces. In summary, we employed energy-and time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy to quantitatively determine the energetic positions of unoccupied and occupied electronic states as well as an excitonic state and to resolve the exciton dynamics in a novel π-expanded N-heterotriangulene derivative adsorbed on Au(111). A transport gap of 3.20 eV and an optical gap of 2.58 eV have been identified, resulting in an exciton binding energy of 0.62 eV. Hot and delocalized excitons have found to localize on a femtosecond timescale followed by an exciton decay within picoseconds. The quantitative determination of the energetic positions of molecular electronic levels, the achieved detailed understanding of the electronic structure and insights into the exciton dynamics is an essential prerequisite for the design of new functional organic molecules for (opto)electronic devices. 2PPE measurements were conducted in an ultra-high vacuum chamber. A clean Au(111) substrate was prepared by a standard procedure including Ar + sputtering and subsequent annealing to 800 K under ultra-high vacuum conditions. The N-HTA-557-P molecules were synthesized according to Ref., 