Understanding the pivotal role of oxygen-containing organic compounds in serving as an energy source for living organisms and contributing to protein formation is crucial in the field of biochemistry. This study addresses the challenge of comprehending protein-protein interactions (PPI) and developing predicitive models for proteins and organic compounds, with a specific focus on quantifying their binding affinity. Here, we introduce the active Bayesian Committee Machine (BCM) potential, specifically designed to predict oxygen-containing organic compounds within eight groups of CHO. The BCM potential adopts a committee-based approach to tackle scalability issues associated with kernel regressors, particularly when dealing with large datasets. Its adaptable structure allows for efficient and cost-e↵ective expansion, maintaing both transferability and scalability. Through systematic benchmarking, we position the sparse BCM potential as a promising contender in the pursuit of a universal machine learning potential. Organic compounds containing oxygen atoms are used as an energy source for all living organisms, and they also form proteins by combining them with other atoms. For proteins, protein-protein interaction (PPI) constitutes a cornerstone in various cellular processes, encompassing signal transduction pathways, metabolic regulation, and cell cycle progression Quantifying the binding affinity for PPI often involves equilibrium dissociation constant (K d ) and Gibbs free energy (ΔG) With the continuous expansion of available data and advancements in machine learning technology, there is an ongoing opportunity to enhance methods for a more efficient and accurate analysis of PPI networks and their underlying mechanisms One noteworthy approach involves the use of the Force Field method Over the past decade, machine learning-based interatomic potentials (MLPs) have emerged as a promising avenue to provide accurate non-parametric representations of potential energy surfaces MD simulations serve as a powerful tool for detailed atomic-level understanding, complementing experimental results. The accuracy of the Potential Energy Surface (PES) can be assessed through comparisons of MD simulation results with experimental observations, such as phase diagrams and radial distribution functions To address challenges associated with the SGPR algorithm streamlines the training process but also overcomes computational challenges associated with inverting large kernel matrices (FIG. Eight groups, distinguished by CHO atoms and classified as alcohol, aldehyde, carboxyl, ester, ether, sugar, lactone, and olide groups, were selected from the ChEMBEL database The MD simulations ran for 3 ps at 300 K with a 0.25 fs time step. The reference potential energy surfaces are from density functional theory (DFT) calculations, performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The expert SGPR model for each molecular category was set with 300K and 3 ps, and instantaneously generated through short MD simulations of relevant molecules. For SGPR models of alcohol, aldehyde, carboxylate, ester, ether, sugar, lactone, and alkylide groups, a Bayesian Committee Machine (BCM) method is employed to combine them into a single universal model for the smooth estimation of CHO with an arbitrary number of double bonds. The model is reconstructed using both sampled ab initio data and derived descriptors during the training process of ML potential experts for the 8 groups. To assess the efficiency of estimating the values correctly, a sample from the training set is selected, and the estimation efficiency based on the presence or absence of the potential for the group to which the sample belongs is investigated through individual ab initio MD simulations. The results indicate that when the potential for the sample is present in all groups, it requires less than 12 times the energy compared to when it is absent (Table Regarding the combination of 8 groups into a single universal model, consisting of sets of C, H, O atoms, the estimation efficiency for single universal model was calculated using training sample for each group. As a result of examining the RMSE of 8 groups of samples for a single universal potential, most RMSE of force was lower than 200 meV per angstrom, and RMSE of per-atom energy was lower than 20 meV per atom (Table The CHO molecule exhibits an extremely diverse range of structures, with over 112 million predicted molecules even when considering only 13 carbon atoms The analysis of structural energy, including structural energy analysis of triple bonds between C and C, and shared bonds between molecules, will be considered in the further research. Handling more complex structures requires further e↵orts to train MLPs and flexibility to expand the current model. Additionally, the creation of a system to acquire information, including grid shapes and ion positions for C, H, O molecules, using an automated method or building systems based on canonical smiles and unique atomic information when data is unavailable, poses a significant challenge and requires additional research. These e↵orts aim to establish an efficient dataset for improved molecular dynamics simulations of CHO molecules. Using the real-time adaptive sampling and SGPR algorithm, training results for 8 groups yielded MLPs consisting of fewer than 500 atoms each. Furthermore, each MLPs scored under 11 meV per angstrom with potential MAEs for single atom, The energy value learned by each single MLP shows a significantly lower di↵erence in meV per angstrom compared to the DFT energy. Particularly, the BCM method was employed to estimate values for previously trained molecular structures and untrained molecular structures. While BCM considers the weight ratio of MLPs based on the structure of the molecule, providing an advantage in energy estimation, it may occasionally o↵er slightly lower estimates than well-trained single MLP results. Whether to check the extent to which the single universal model can be estimated or not, a test was performed selecting a molecule containing a combination of polycycles and double bonds, such as grandiflorenic-acid. As a result of estimation and testing with 100 points, it showed 59.91 meV per atom and 930.97 meV per angstrom. This holds expectation for extending the study to more diverse molecular binding methods and molecules composed of multiple atoms beyond CHO. Further research is planned to investigate the criteria for weight due to Covalent loss when calculating single MLPs through the BCM method. The combination of SGPR algorithm and BCM method demonstrates a fast and robust approach for on-the-fly machine learning of potential energy surfaces. This combination, coupled with an efficient adaptive sampling algorithm, can generate models consisting of groups of MLPs with hundreds of molecules in the training dataset. Furthermore, the expert model approach provides a modular approach for complex polymer compounds, ultimately leading to the creation of a single universal model. a The number of sample