We conduct local magnetic measurements on superconducting thin-film samples of Sr2RuO4 using scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) susceptometry. From the diamagnetic response, we extract the magnetic penetration depth, λ, which exhibits a quadratic temperature dependence at low temperatures. Although a quadratic dependence in high-purity bulk samples has been attributed to non-local electrodynamics, our analysis suggests that in our thin-film samples the presence of scattering is the origin of the quadratic dependence. While we observe micron-scale variations in the diamagnetic response and superconducting transition temperature, the form of the temperature dependence of λ is independent of position. Finally, we characterize flux trapping in superconducting rings lithographically fabricated from the thin films, paving the way to systematic device-based tests of the superconducting order parameter in Sr2RuO4. Since the discovery of superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 The dependence on temperature, T , of the magnetic penetration depth, λ, contains information about the gap structure of superconductors. A nodal superconducting gap gives rise to a power-law dependence of λ(T ) at low temperature, while a fully-gapped superconductor exhibits an exponential temperature dependence. In Sr 2 RuO 4 , the observation of λ(T ) ∼ T 2 in high-quality bulk single crystals provided early evidence for the presence of nodes in the superconducting gap function Here, we study the superconducting penetration depth in a 30 nm thick Sr 2 RuO 4 thin film grown by molecularbeam expitaxy. The substrate is (LaAlO 3 ) 0.29 -(SrAl 0.5 Ta 0.5 O 3 ) 0.71 (LSAT) with the c-axis oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface. The LSAT substrate preserves the tetragonal symmetry of Sr 2 RuO 4 and induces a small tensile strain of approximately 0.045% when the sample is cooled to low temperatures. Details of the growth of these films are described in Ref. Our experimental approach is illustrated schematically in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. Fortunately, an important feature of Eq. 1 is that its sole temperature dependence originates from λ(T ), which appears in a simple prefactor. This implies that by mea-suring M as a function of temperature at a constant height above the sample, we can accurately extract relative changes in λ(T ), even in the presence of uncertainties in the geometric factors. To determine the temperature dependence of λ, we measure M at a fixed position as a function of temperature, while maintaining light mechanical contact with the sample. Assuming that M measured at 50 mK reasonably approximates λ 0 = λ(T = 0) at a given position, we can obtain λ(T )/λ 0 -1 = δλ(T )λ 0 from M (zo,T ) M (zo,T =0) = λ 2 0 λ 2 (T ) . Fig. In Fig. For nodal superconducting order parameters in the clean limit, a linear temperature dependence, δλ(T ) ∼ T is expected. In Sr 2 RuO 4 single crystals, the δλ(T ) ≈ T 2 temperature dependence was attributed to non-local electrodynamics of the nodal quasiparticles To assess if scattering can explain the temperature dependence of the penetration depth, we examine the superfluid density across the full temperature range. The normalized superfluid density is directly related to the penetration depth through ρ s (T )/ρ 0 = λ 2 0 /λ 2 (T ), where ρ 0 is its zero temperature value. Figure In general, the temperature dependence of ρ s depends among other factors on the gap structure of the superconductor, the underlying band structure and scattering in the sample. Nevertheless, it is useful to compare the temperature dependence of ρ s to expectations from different simplified phenomenological models. In Fig. To include the effect of scattering on the superfluid density, we estimate the strength of pair-breaking scattering in our samples using the theory of Abrikosov and Gor'kov where Ψ is the digamma function, Γ N = ħ/2τ k B characterizes the strength of pair-breaking scattering with τ the corresponding scattering time, k B the Boltzmann constant, ħ the reduced Planck's constant, and T c0 is the zero-disorder limit of T c . Here we take T c0 = 1.5 K, the highest value of T c observed in bulk crystals Here we assume that the Abrikosov-Gor'kov theory is applicable to both thin-film and bulk samples The agreement between this model and the data is remarkable given the simplicity of the Fermi surface and gap structure used in the calculations. Further refinement of this model by introducing multiband effects, the experimentally determined Fermi surface and a realistic pairing potential may improve the agreement between the model and data further. We next discuss characterization of micrometer-scale rings fabricated from a Sr 2 RuO 4 thin film. Lithographically defined devices are enabled by thin film samples of Sr 2 RuO 4 and promising for future device-based tests of the superconducting order parameter symmetry. We patterned an array of rings on a second Sr 2 RuO 4 thin film sample grown on an LSAT substrate using standard photolithography and argon ion milling. We present characterization of rings with an inner diameter of 4 μm and an outer diameter of 10 μm. In Fig. To understand the magnetic response of the rings, we turn to the following London equation which determines the current distribution in the ring, where ⃗ j is the supercurrent density, μ 0 is the vacuum per- meability, Φ 0 = h 2e is the superconducting flux quantum, θ is the order parameter phase and ⃗ A is the magnetic vector potential. Integrating over the film thickness and introducing cylindrical coordinates r and φ with respect to the center of the ring gives, where we have enforced single-valuedness of the superconducting order parameter with the integer N the number of vortices trapped inside the ring, and g φ (r) the sheet current density flowing along the azimuth φ of the ring. A φ is the azimuthal component of the magnetic vector potential. This model captures the main qualitative features of our data. We interpret the sudden jumps in Fig. A quantitative prediction of the jump height requires a self-consistent solution of g ρ (r) in the presence of the A φ generated by the field coil excitaion. For our samples and susceptometer, where the field coil dimensions are comparable to the ring dimensions, these calculations must be carried out numerically In summary, we find that the penetration depth in thin-film Sr 2 RuO 4 shows a λ(T ) ∝ T 2 dependence at low temperatures similar to reports in single crystal bulk samples. This suggests, as is expected, that the gap structure in our thin films is comparable to single crystal samples and features nodes. Analysis of the full temperature dependence of the superfluid density shows that it can be explained by a nodal superconducting gap combined with scattering in our samples. While this does not exclude non-local effects in the Meissner screening, scattering is in our case the simplest explanation. In addition, we provide the first magnetic characterization of mesoscopic superconducting rings lithographically patterned from a Sr 2 RuO 4 thin-film. Looking forward, our work shows that the delicate superconducting state of Sr 2 RuO 4 can be preserved in high-quality thin film devices, which is an important first step towards devicebased tests of the order parameter symmetry. Furthermore, the effect of biaxial strain on the superconducting state in Sr 2 RuO 4 may be studied by choosng suitable substrates. Uniaxial strain has proven to be an effective tuning parameter for superconductivity in bulk Sr 2 RuO 4 To avoid spurious signals from vortex motion during the penetration depth measurements, the susceptibility data were collected conducted under near zero field conditions. A superconducting solenoid was used to adjust the out-of-plane magnetic field threading the sample until no vortices were observed within the 140 ×140 μm 2 field of view after warming and cooling the sample and SQUID through their respective critical temperatures. This procedure places a rough upper bound of Φ0 140 ×140 μm 2 ≈ 100 nT on the magnetic flux density in the sample environment. Before and after conducting the temperature sweeps used to acquire the magnetic susceptibility data, the SQUID was used to acquire an image confirming that vortices were absent from the measurement area. In the main text, we utilized an analytical expression (Eq. 1) relating the magnetic penetration depth to the geometry of our magnetic susceptibility measurement. Although the data is well-fit by this model, it is strictly only valid deep in the Pearl limit where, λ >> d. Muon spin relaxation measurements of the zero-temperature penetration depth in Sr 2 RuO 4 have found that at the lowest temperatures, λ(T ) ≈ 190 nm To extract the temperature dependence of λ(T ) from the magnetic susceptibility measurements, we observe that the expression Eq. 1 may be separated into the product of a temperature-dependent part and a temperatureindependent part that depends only on the geometric configuration of the SQUID and sample, Where A geo (z) = -ad 2 1 -2z √ a 2 +4z 2 , encodes the sample-susceptometer geometry. From this expression, the temperature dependence of the penetration depth, δλ(T )/λ o may be written, allowing δλ(T )/λ o to be directly calculated from measurements of M (z o , T ). Appendix B: Superfluid Density Calculations In this work we calculate the superfluid density in the weak-coupling limit of BCS theory. To calculate the superfluid density in the presence of disorder, we turn to the self-consistent t-matrix approximation Where, with a the lattice spacing. Given this Fermi surface and pairing potential, we find solutions to the gap equation, Here, ∆ k = ψ(T )Ω k is the superconducting gap, with ψ(T ) the temperature-dependent gap amplitude. are the fermionic Matsubara frequencies and ⟨• • •⟩ F S denotes an average over the Fermi surface. Adding disorder to the system renormalizes the Matsubara frequencies: Where c is the cotangent of the scattering phase shift and Γ parameterizes the density of scattering sites. The limits c << 1 and c >> 1 correspond to strong (unitary) and weak (Born) scattering respectively. For this work, we observe that impurities appear to act as strong pairbreaking scatterers in Sr 2 RuO 4 (B5) Equations B5 and B4 may be solved self-consistently at a range of temperatures to obtain ωn and ψ(T ). Once ωn and ψ(T ) are known, the superfluid density in the presence of disorder may be calculated, To check the consistency of our local measurements of the superfluid density, we compared the results presented in the main text to additional measurements performed in a new field of view on the same sample In total, we have performed temperature sweeps at five different locations an the sample surface. We collected these sweeps at locations where the local T c and n s where higher than average as well as locations where the local T c and n s were lower than surrounding points. Regardless of where we collected our temperature dependent data, we found that the normalized superfluid density to collapse onto a single curve We provide an optical image of the lithographically patterned Sr 2 RuO 4 ring sample in Fig. In Fig In the main text, we used the local T c measured with the scanning SQUID to estimate the value of the impurity scattering rate Γ N in our samples. Using this value of Γ N we fould good agreement between a simple model for the superfluid density which includes both nodes in the gap fundction and disorder. In Fig 