First-principle calculations were employed to analyze the effects induced by vacancies of molybdenum (Mo) and sulfur (S) on the dielectric properties of few-layered MoS 2 . We explored the combined effects of vacancies and dipole interactions on the dielectric properties of few-layered MoS 2 . In the presence of dielectric screening, we investigated uniformly distributed Mo and S vacancies, and then considered the case of concentrated vacancies. Our results show that the dielectric screening remarkably depends on the distribution of vacancies owing to the polarization induced by the vacancies and on the interlayer distances. This conclusion was validated for a wide range of wide-gap semiconductors with different positions and distributions of vacancies, providing an effective and reliable method for calculating and predicting electrostatic screening of dimensionally reduced materials. We further provided a method for engineering the dielectric constant by changing the interlayer distance, tuning the number of vacancies and the distribution of vacancies in few-layered van der Waals materials for their application in nanodevices and supercapacitors. Dielectric screening is one of the most basic parameters of solids determining electron transfer, Coulomb interaction between electrons, charge carriers, magnetic and optical properties. Exfoliation techniques are extensively used to produce various vdW 2D nanosheets, In previous studies, The static dielectric function, 3(r,r 0 ) based on the linear response theory is given by dV ðrÞ 1⁄4 Ð dr 0 3 À1 ðr; r 0 ÞdV ext ðr 0 Þ, where dV is the calculated change in the total potential and dV ext stands for the applied external potential. The subsequent Fourier transform of the above equation gives us dV ðqÞ 1⁄4 P 3 À1 ðq; q 0 ÞdV ext ðq 0 Þ. As q 0 / 0, the expression can be reduced to dV(q) 1⁄4 3 À1 (q,0)dV ext (0). For bulk q / 0, which resembles the dimensional average of dV(r) over a microscopic region. The microscopic interpretation of the dielectric constant is given by the ratio of the average change of the external potential to the total potential, and it equals 3 À1 (0,0). Therefore, the dielectric constant is given by the ratio of the external to internal electric eld between the layers, which gives Here, Ẽin and Ẽext denote the internal and external electric elds, and h Ẽin i is the mean slope calculated using a smoothed derivative of the potential between the bilayers. The dielectric constant is a measure of the materials response to an applied electric eld; especial interest is the degree of charge separation. The response to an applied electric eld is a function of the electric eld, state variables, frequency, temperature, pressure, mechanical stress, polarization, and surface charge density. where 3 r is the dielectric constant, 3 0 is the free space permittivity, N is the number density of the molecules per cubic meter, and a is the atomic polarizability in C m 2 V À1 unit. In this work, assuming the weak eld regime and using the linear response theory, we explicitly compared the external and screened electric elds, and demonstrate that screening caused by layer stacking; thus, it also includes the defect effects on the bilayer, such as Mo and S vacancy. We only considered the point defects due to their low formation energies and very likely to occur in the materials. There are many different stacking kinds of stacking in MoS 2 and stacking conguration are highly sensitive towards electronic properties of materials. The characteristic of vdW interlayer distance and stacking mainly inuence its relative energy with respect to G and valence band splitting at K, as well as, the value of the optical excitations and the electron-hole binding energy. All the calculations were performed using the rst-principles method based on the DFT. Structural optimization was performed until the Hellmann-Feynman force acting on each atom was less than 0.001 eV A À1 . Therefore, the calculated screening effects included the electron and ion contributions and neglected spurious interactions by the Coulomb interaction between the slabs; the vacuum gap in the vertical direction was at least 25 A. Our calculations of vertical dielectric screening use periodic boundary conditions, We studied AA-stacked bilayer MoS 2 , which comprises different point defects, namely the Mo and S vacancies (V Mo and V S ). We considered bilayer MoS 2 as displayed in Fig. Vacancy concentration was dened by the ratio of the number of vacancies over the total number of atoms. It is reported that 2.56% to 8.10% of Mo vacancy 48 and 2.56% to 11.11% of S vacancy 49 can be formed. By our notation, (Mo-Mo,1-2,1-1) correspond to 5.26% of V Mo concentration, and (S,1,1) is equivalent to 2.56% of V S concentration. Only bilayer MoS 2 systems consisting randomly distributed point defects were considered. We note that (Mo,1,2) and (Mo,2,2) are indistinguishable due to the mirror symmetry. First-principle calculations for the intrinsic bilayer MoS 2 was carried out rstly, and then the number of defects and distributions were varied to determine the electric properties. To investigate the dielectric constant of the few-layered MoS 2 , the potential differences were obtained by DFT calculation with and without the gated eld, DV(z) 1⁄4 V gated (z) À V ungated (z). Then, the dielectric constant was given by eqn (1), based on the linear response theory. Therefore, as shown in Fig. In Fig. Fig. Therefore, the dielectric constant in the uniformly distributed vacancies case is obtained by where Ẽin and Ẽext denote the internal electric eld including the polarization effect, and the external electric eld, respectively. The dielectric constant is related to the electronic polarization of the material. Material polarization is dened as the sum of the dipole moments per unit volume, given by P 1⁄4 NaE, and a is related to the dielectric constant by eqn (2). From the above model, Ẽind and Ẽpol are important for determining the dielectric constants of vdW materials. Uniform and non-uniform distributions of vacancies were considered, and it is believed that their dependence on offplane dielectric screening can be explained by the polarizability dependence of vdW materials. In the case of nonuniformly distributed vacancies (Fig. Next, the effect of Mo vacancies on the vertical dielectric screening of bilayer MoS 2 was considered. We obtained the charge densities without and with the gated electric eld (Fig. As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, based on the linear response theory and DFT calculations, we investigated the dependence of vertical dielectric screening of MoS 2 on point defects, such as Mo and S vacancies. By exploring the uniformly and non-uniformly distributed vacancy cases of S and Mo for vdW bilayer MoS 2 , we concluded the following: (1) the dielectric constant of MoS 2 with point defects remarkably depends on the distribution of vacancies, because of the polarization effect. In the case of nonuniformly distributed S vacancies, the dielectric constant decreases. On the other hand, for uniformly distributed S vacancies, the dielectric constant increases due to the interlayer polarization. For Mo vacancies, the dielectric constant increases both for uniformly and non-uniformly distributed cases, because Mo linkage with neighbouring atoms induces comparable polarization. (2) The dielectric constant strongly depends on the vacancy concentration, even in the small concentration we can see the signicant changes on the dielectric properties. (3) The dielectric constant for hetero-vacancies exhibits the same behaviour as in the Mo vacancies case, owing to the dominant effect of Mo vacancies, which in turn increases the overall effect of polarization; therefore, the dielectric constant increases in both cases. Out model can be widely used for understanding how vacancies affect the electronic properties of vdW materials and the off-plane (vertical) dielectric screening of 2D materials. From the application point of view, our results can be used in nanocapacitors engineering for energy storage, and dielectric constants of supercapacitors. The dielectric constant of 2D materials can be widely adjusted by controlling the type of vacancy, interlayer distance, and distribution of vacancies. On the other hand, we can also investigate the location of vacancies (defects) along the z-axis, by comparing intrinsic behaviours. Using this, the distribution of defects can be deduced from observed off-plane dielectric constant of vdW materials. We proposed a method for developing vdW materials whose dielectric constants can be widely tuned and engineered, which is advantageous for future applications in the elds of nanoscience and nanotechnology. | RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 40309-40315 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019