This paper focuses on the development of the atomistic framework for determining the lower scale mechanical parameters of single components of a metal matrix composite for final application to a micromechanical damage model. Here, the deformation and failure behavior of NiAl-Al2O3 interfaces and their components, metal and ceramic, are analyzed in depth using molecular statics calculations. A number of atomistic simulations of strength tests, uniaxial tensile, uniaxial compressive and simple shear, have been performed in order to obtain a set of stiffness tensors and strain-stress characteristics up to failure for 30 different crystalline and amorphous systems. Characteristic points on the strain-stress curves in the vicinity of failure are further analyzed at the atomistic level, using local measures of lattice disorder. Numerical results are discussed in the context of composite damage at upper microscopic scale based on images of the fracture surface of NiAl-Al2O3 composites. Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are advanced materials that have extensive applications in aerospace, the automotive industry, defense, and various fields of engineering. MMCs can be customized to exhibit exceptional characteristics, including improved performance at high temperatures, high specific strength and stiffness, improved wear resistance, as well as superior thermal and mechanical fatigue properties, surpassing those of alloys that lack reinforcement The current state of knowledge points to the necessity of research towards a better understanding of the relations between the microstructure and the material properties of MMCs at different scales The most recent studies and scientific challenges encountered in the numerical simulation of metal/oxide interfaces at the nano/micro scale, as well as microscopic analysis related to the microstructure, are nicely reviewed in The structural stability of (5×2)β-Ni1-xAlx(110)/(3× √ 3)Al2O3(0001) interface and work of separating such interface, pure and alloyed, was examined by an ab initio study in Using first-principles calculations, the ideal strength and elastic behavior under the tensile and shear loadings of differently oriented ideal NiAl crystals were analyzed in Unlike the mentioned papers concerning the modeling of the individual components separately, the present paper focuses on a comprehensive investigation of the deformation and damage behavior of all single structural components of a NiAl-Al2O3 composite (Fig. Last but not least, this paper aims at determining the parameters for the upper scale modeling atomistically. The elastic properties and strength necessary for the performance of micromechanical models have been evaluated for single structural components in the form of monocrystals and amorphous ones, representing grain boundaries. Simulations of uniaxial tensile, compressive and shear tests have been performed in order to evaluate the corresponding properties. The effect of the crystallographic orientations and their impact on elastic/damage properties have also been studied. A detailed formulation of the problem, the motivation for this work, and the method of modeling are presented in Section 2.1. Following the multiscale description of materials, the macroscopic mechanical properties of MMCs arise from material effects occurring at the microscopic and atomistic scales. The deformation and damage behaviour of particle-reinforced composites depends on the sort of matrix material, as well as on the type, morphology, dimensions, volume fraction, orientation, and spatial distribution of the reinforcing ceramic phase within the composite. In addition to these microscopic attributes, the quality of the interfacial bonding between the metal and ceramic components has significant importance, as highlighted in Going deeper into the damage characteristics of MMCs, a fracture can occur intergranularly or/and transgranularly, through the main components of each phase-the grain boundaries and/or the grains themselves (Fig. The initial category, which encompasses intergranular fracture, intergranular stress corrosion cracking, fatigue, and liquid metal embrittlement, among others, remains among the most critical challenges in materials engineering, as referenced in These particles create a pathway for the propagation of a crack, subsequently diminishing the material's fracture toughness and damage tolerance Transgranular fracture refers to the propagation of a crack through the grains following a pathway with the greatest intensity of stress. In the case of MMCs, when the ceramic reinforcement is under compression, the whole matrix is likely to be under tension, which provides a path for the propagation of a crack through the matrix grains alone (type I transgranular fracture, Fig. Alternatively, a semi-coherent interface may exist when the lattice parameter mismatch is small, but the thickness of each layer exceeds a particular threshold value As was presented above, it is not possible to fully capture the wide range of material effects that occur at various levels of scale during composite deformation using a single-scale approach. Macroscopic models do not explicitly take into account the microstructure of the composite material and describe it by establishing complex constitutive relations, just like the Gurson-Tvergaard-Needleman (GTN) model, which is currently among the primary material damage models employed for assessing the load-bearing capacity of metal engineering structures. Alternatively, the deformation and failure of a composite can be modeled by micromechanical discrete models, such as the discrete element method where Kn, Ks are the contact stiffnesses in the normal and tangential direction, respectively, un is the penetration of the two particles, and \us\ is the relative displacement at the contact point in the tangential direction. The contact bond between two discrete elements can be conceptualized as an elongated bar with a certain length L = 2r ̄ and uniform cross-sectional area A = (2r ̄)2 . Considering the simple geomtrical relations presented, the stiffness modulus Kn is given by the following expression: with the contact stiffness modulus Ec as a certain scaling constant correlated with the Young's modulus of the equivalent continuum material E If we denote the maximum tensile and shear stresses in the bar connecting a pair of particles by σc and τc, respectively, we can represent the corresponding strengths of the bond as φn and φs using the following expression: Due to the troublesome issue of how to determine the input parameters for micro-and macroscopic models, multiscale numerical modeling has seen widespread application in various scientific and engineering disciplines. In the work presented in the present paper, the numerical analysis at a lower level will provide parametric data to the upper level in a similar way as The input parameters of the microscopic models (just like DEM) have been determined via a simulation from the lower scale. The molecular dynamics framework provides valuable insights and guidance to describe the deformation of composites at the atomistic scale accurately. In the present paper, the theory of linear-elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) has been employed due to the expected brittle/semi-brittle deformation and failure character of NiAl-Al2O3 composites. LEFM has been successfully applied in qualitatively as well as quantitatively determining fracture properties, such as the fracture strength or fracture toughness The deformation and damage behavior of the pure NiAl matrix and the pure ceramic Al2O3 inclusion have been investigated separately at the atomistic scale using two different states: monocrystal and amorphous. As the NiAl monocrystals reveal relatively high cubic anisotropy effects as the representation of the elastic behavior of a cubic anisotropic material, similarly to where C11, C12 and C44 are three independent elastic constants. In the case of an isotropic material, these constants become C11 = 2μ + λ, C12 = λ and C44 = μ, with μ and λ being the La mé constants. The degree of deviation of a cubic material's behavior from an isotropic one is frequently quantified by the Zener ratio: which is equal to 1 in the isotropic case. Moreover, in order to evaluate the averaged representation of the fracture characteristics of the grain boundaries of the NiAl matrix and the ceramic Al2O3, an amorphous sample has been investigated Finally, the mechanical properties of the metal-ceramic interface have been determined by simulation of the atomistic strength tests of two bonded monocrystals For the Ni-Al system, the embedded-atom method (EAM) potential To obtain the components of the elasticity tensor, CIJ , for all pre-relaxed structures, the stress-strain method with a maximum strain amplitude of 10 -4 was employed To obtain stress-strain profiles, three numerical molecular homogeneous deformation tests were performed using the MS approach 0 0 1 whereas the deformation gradient F for simple shear in the Y Z direction is where γ = tan(Φ) and Φ is the angular change. The simulation box was sheared by γ=40% and returned along the same path to the initial configuration. Since the deformations used in the simulations are significant, the Biot strain tensor, EBiot = (F T F) 1 / 2 -I, is used in the figures, it provides a correct description of the finite deformations and at the same time is the closest to the small strain tensor ε, see To visualize the studied structures on an atomistic level, the OVITO All the results obtained for the 30 (4×NiAl×3 + 2×Al2O3×3 + 4×Al2O3-NiAl×3) simulations are available in the Appendix A. The findings include the determined initial stiffness tensors and stress (Cauchy)strain (Biot) curves for uniaxial tensile-compressive, simple shear in the XZ direction and simple shear in the Y Z direction tests. Among these tests, we selected those for which pronounced damage was obtained and additionally analyzed them at the atomistic level. These selected results are presented below. To assess the reliability of the results obtained, we will compare those obtained here with those available from other authors. Analyzing the stressstrain relations for NiAl in Figs. i.e., C11=208.2 GPa, C12=134.5 GPa and C44=118.4 GPa. This confirms, of course, the good quality of the interatomic potential used, but also the correctness of our molecular statics calculations. NiAl monocrystal is strongly anisotropic, i.e., the universal elastic anisotropy index A U = 3.92, so naturally the representations of the stiffness tensor must differ, see Tables However, when we calculate for these three orientations such quantities as the isotropised bulk B, the shear G, Young's modulus E, Poisson's ratio ν and A U , we see that they are identical, i.e., B = 158.90 GPa, G = 64.37 GPa, E = 170.13 GPa, ν = 0.32 and A U = 3.92. It is worth mentioning here that these values are in good agreement with those from experiments with polycrystalline NiAl B = 158.90 GPa, G = 64.37 GPa, E = 170.13 GPa, ν = 0.32 and A U = 3.92. By analyzing the stress-strain relations for Al2O3 in Figs. the maximum stress was about 60 GPa at a strain of 0.22. Similar results from molecular calculations in the uniaxial tensile test, i.e., 50.7±4.4 GPa at a strain of 0.24, were obtained in Examining the stress-strain curves for the NiAl-Al2O3 interface in Figs. 389 Atomistic analysis of the damage for all four interfaces studied shows a similar mechanism: we can observe a significant increase in the cohesive energy per atom and the centrosymmetry parameter for a strain around ε T ≈0.1 and sudden bond breaking between NiAl-corundum, see Fig. the Stiffness tensors for all four NiAl-Al2O3 interfaces depicted in As was discussed in Section 2.1, the macroscopic strength of the composite is a complex combination of the strength of the matrix, the strength of the reinforcement, the strength of the interface, and the residual stresses induced by thermal expansion mismatch First of all, the NiAl-Al2O3 interface seems to be a key factor in the context of composite failure. A strong and well-bonded interface can hinder crack growth, while a weak interface can promote crack initiation. As was reported in detector conducted along the designated line traversing the interface, revealing variations in the Ni, O, and Al content. These variations, as depicted in Fig. In contrast with the various metal-ceramic interfaces with high cohesion energy resulting in relatively considerable strength, the NiAl-Al2O3 interface is quite weak. The presented atomistic results are confirmed by several experimental analyses identifying the main failure mechanism of the NiAl-Al2O3 composite as interface failure On the one hand, the presence of the Al2O3 reinforcement forces the crack to follow a tortuous path through the ceramic material, significantly extending its route and consequently enhancing the strength of the composite The weak bonding between the NiAl and the Al2O3 does not allow taking full advantage of such a toughening mechanism. Generally, it is rare that fractures are exclusively transgranular or intergranular or due to interfacial failure: a mixture of these modes often occurs Such conclusion are in line with literature data. At room temperature, the plastic deformation of NiAl is in the range of 0 to a maximum 4% The low fracture toughness and low ductility of NiAl is associated with a limited number of slip systems. Much research has been devoted to understanding the main sliding mechanism in both monocrystalline Experimental studies of NiAl grain boundaries carried out after compression and tensile tests confirm that the low ductility is the result of inconsistency in shape changes of neighboring grains caused by a limited number of slip systems The atomistic results about NiAl monocrystals with various orientations with respect to the loading direction have shown that there is a high anisotropy effect regardless of the type of mechanical test (Fig. The presented work can be summarized in the following remarks: 1. An atomistic study of the deformation and failure behavior of crystalline and amorphous components of NiAl-Al2O3 composite has been performed. The molecular statics framework has been employed to calculate the upper scale parameters, the elastic constants and strength, of each composite element: the metal and ceramic monocrystals, their grain boundaries, and the metal/ceramic interface. This effect has been confirmed by the application of local measures of lattice disorder-the cohesive energy per atom and the centrosymmetry parameter-making it possible to explain the reason for the brittle behavior of the material at the atomistic level. 5. The atomistic calculations confirmed the well-known experimental fact that corundum is much stiffer elastically and has a higher strength than NiAl. This effect can be confirmed by fractographic analysis, which excludes ceramic particle cracking as the damage mechanism. 6. The molecular statics framework proved that the lower-scale mechanical parameters can be successfully evaluated from atomistic simulations and furthermore transferred to upper-scale models of the deformation and damage of the metal matrix composite. The deformation gradient F for simple shear in XZ direction can be written as 0 0 1 whereas the deformation gradient F for simple shear in YZ direction as ( reduction to isotropy: reduction to isotropy: • Stiffness tensor: NiAl amorphous direct simulation result: • Stiffness tensor: 12×7×4 orthorhombic Al2O3 basic cells and • Stiffness tensor: Al2O3 amorphous and NiAl amorphous direct simulation result: