We propose a superconducting diode device comprising a central superconducting film flanked by two wires carrying an applied DC bias, suitably chosen so as to generate different asymmetric field profiles. Through numerical simulations of the coupled Ginzburg-Landau and heat-diffusion equations, we show that this design is capable of efficiently breaking the reciprocity of the critical current in the central superconductor, thus promoting the diode effect in response to an applied AC current. By adjusting the DC bias in the wires, we find the optimum inhomogeneous field profile that facilitates the entrance of vortices and antivortices in a given polarity of the applied AC current and impede their entrance in the other polarity. This way, the system behaves as a superconducting half-wave rectifier, with diode efficiencies surpassing 70%. Furthermore, we detail the behavior and diode efficiency of the system under different experimental conditions, such as the substrate heat transfer coefficient and the sweep rate of the external current. In modern electronics, the search for faster and efficient devices is a permanent practice aiming for enhanced performance. In the midst of this search, the superconducting diode has played a prominent role At the core of the superconducting diode lies a fundamental characteristic, the absence of symmetry in current flow, expressed as I + c ̸ = I - c , where I ± c is the critical current leading to the resistive state at a given current direction. However, the superconducting diode concept originated decades ago as a mean of manipulating the density and motion of magnetic flux quanta, known as vortices, within superconductors Recently, superconducting diodes have gained renewed interest, fueled in part by the discovery of novel intrinsic mechanisms governing nonreciprocal current flow. This resurgence encompasses diverse systems, ranging from heterostructures composed of superconducting materials and topological insulators or ferromagnetic materials Intrinsic superconducting diodes rely on non-reciprocal pair-breaking mechanisms inherent to the material During the resistive state of a vortex-based diode, the material is still superconducting and dissipation is induced by vortex motion (flux-flow). Since the flux-flow resistance is necessarily lower than the normal state resistance, the measured DC signals in this case are relatively small. This is a clear disadvantage when compared to diodes where the dissipationless superconducting state for current applied in one direction transitions directly to the fully normal state when the current is reversed, leading to a considerably larger DC signal. We shall refer to these two scenarios as flux-flow dominated (FFD) and normal-state dominated (NSD) diode effects, respectively. Remarkably, Hou et al. These recent advances emphasize the necessity of better understanding the role of heating effects in superconducting diodes. Additionally, the suggestion that a FFD diode can be made into a NSD diode redirects the research on vortex diode systems towards the optimization of the diode efficiency, defined as Tackling these challenges is a key point for obtaining more efficient and reliable superconducting diodes. In the present work, we investigate the interplay between the flux-flow dominated (FFD) and normal-state dominated (NSD) operation modes of the superconducting diode effect in thin superconducting films exposed to external asymmetric fields. By integrating the coupled time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau and heat diffusion equations, we explore simple inhomogeneous field landscapes, from asymmetric fully positive to antisymmetric (half-positive, half-negative) flux profiles, induced either by ferromagnetic films or DC currents in nearby wires as illustrated in Fig. The outline of this work is as follows. In Sec. II we present our system and the theoretical formalism used to investigate it. Our results and their discussion are presented in Sec. III. Finally, we present our concluding remarks in Sec. IV. The resistive state of superconductors in the presence of a driving current can be described by the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equations. In reduced units, these equations can be written as: where ψ is the superconducting order parameter, A is the vector potential, σ is the normal conductivity, and κ = λ(0)/ξ(0), with λ(0) the London penetration depth and ξ(0) the coherence length at zero temperature. Here we fix u = 5.79, and γ = 20. In Eqs. ( To account for the dissipation effects caused e.g. by v-av collisions, Eqs. ( where ν, ζ, and η are the thermal capacity, thermal conductivity of the material, and the heat transfer coefficient of the substrate, respectively, and T 0 is the temperature of the thermal bath. In this work, we have used ν = 0.03, ζ = 0.06, and varied η from 2.0 × 10 -5 to 2.0 × 10 -3 . The inhomogeneous field that allows the emergence of the diode effect can be introduced through different routes. Panels (a) and (b) of Fig. In what follows, the side stripes have width w = 50ξ(0), thickness d s = 5ξ(0) and their separation from the edges of the central superconductor is s = 5ξ(0). As it follows from elementary magnetostatics, the z component of the total field produced by the stripes is: The central superconductor has width L y = 200ξ(0), thickness d = ξ(0), and is driven by an applied AC current given by J ac (t) = J a sin(2πt/τ ), where τ is the period of each oscillation. Eqs. ( To analyze the conditions for the occurrence of the superconducting diode effect or the vortex diode effect in our system, we have varied both the amplitude of the applied AC current and the values of J 1 and J 2 carried by each side stripe. We limit J 1 and J 2 to be lower than 0.52 σħ/2eξ(0)t GL . With the thermal bath temperature fixed at T 0 = 0.96T c A. Fully positive asymmetric flux profiles (J1 ̸ = 0, J2 = 0) We start our analysis by considering the case where the asymmetric flux profile is positive everywhere in the superconducting film. This situation is accomplished by choosing J 1 > 0 and J 2 = 0 in Eq. ( Fig. In panel (b), we show the voltage as a function of time for a case inside the large V DC region. The reason for the jump in the output voltage now becomes clear. For the positive polarity of the AC current, the vortex dynamics produces enough heat to completely destroy the superconducting state for a certain interval of time. A similar behavior was found in Ref. Finally, panel (c) shows the voltage for a case of low V DC values that occurs after the large V DC region. Here, as we have also encountered for panel (b), the system goes to the normal state for the positive polarity. The difference now is that the current is sufficiently strong to completely destroy the superconducting state in both polarities. As a result, the asymmetry between the two halves of the period decreases, so decreasing V DC . Nevertheless, the average voltage continues to be finite, once the time lapse that the system remains at the normal state is larger for the positive polarity. Animations of the evolution of the order parameter for the three cases presented in Fig. As can be seen, the region of the phase-diagram depicted by panel (a) of Fig. Once panel (b) represents the more interesting case of the superconducting diode effect with enhanced V DC , let us take a closer look at the vortex dynamics that leads to this physics. Figs. As the current is further increased, the vortex velocity increases and, simultaneously, the magnitude of the AC current becomes sufficiently large to allow the penetration of antivortices in the opposite side of the superconductor, as depicted in panels (e) and (f ). The vortices and antivortices annihilate in pairs near the bottom edge of the superconductor, in a process that dissipates enough heat to induce hot spots. In this panel, to help the dynamics visualization, a few vortices and antivortices are indicated by the labels v and av, respectively. Finally, for a sufficiently large magnitude of the AC current (see panels (g) and (h)), the nucleation and annihilation of vortex pairs become more frequent and the hot spots are able to spread across the sample. This ultimately leads to the complete suppression of the superconducting state, which is only reestablished at a later time after the applied current is decreased. The vortex dynamics for the negative current branch is rather different. At t = τ /2, the vortices again arrange themselves in the conformal crystal like pattern, as shown in Fig. In Fig. In panel (b), while the negative current branch continues to present a null voltage signal, vortex creation and annihilation process is now sufficient to force the transition of the system to the normal state in the positive current branch. This is also the case for the positive current branch in panel (c), which also presents a new behavior for the negative branch. Here, for a certain time interval, the AC current magnitude is large enough to overcome the surface energy barrier imposed by the inhomogeneous field and vortices begin to flow in the superconductor, inducing a finite voltage. Animations of the evolution of the order parameter for each panel in Fig. To further describe our diode system, in this Subsection we detail how the vortex response to the applied current leads to the destruction of the superconducting state for positive current polarity. Fig. From panels (a) and (b), we can identify that, among the processes of vortex creation, flow and annihilation, it is the latter that dissipates more heat, once each of the more pronounced hot spots seen in panel (b) corresponds to a v-av collision observed in panel (a). Here, we can note that the perfect antissymmetric profile of the inhomogeneous field guarantees that v-av annihilation always occurs, once both objects colide at the center of the film. For small currents much smaller than I + c , the hot spots formed by the dissipated heat of a vav collision gradually disappears due to the heat removal mechanism. Comparing panels (b) and (d), we can see an example of this in the three hot spots on the left side of panel (b). In contrast, the hot spots by the right of panel (d) depict the mechanism that leads to the destruction of superconductivity at I + c . In this case, heat removal is not strong enough to overcome the additional heat generated by new vortex-antivortex pairs at the same location (see panel (c)). As a result, the elevated temperature locally suppress the superconducting state, which attracts yet more vortex-antivortex pairs into the region. This chain reaction leads to the formation of stripes of depleted superconductivity across the width of the sample, as shown in panels (e) and (f ). Finally, panels (g) and (h) shows the configuration of the system just before the total destruction of the superconducting state. As we can see, more stripes are formed along the sample and the hot spots spread throughout the superconductor. Let us now investigate the efficiency of our superconducting diode device when operating in the NSD mode, defined as ε N SD = (I - c -I + c ) / (I - c + I + c ), where I ± c is the critical current for the complete destruction of the superconducting state for a given current polarity. To do this, we replace the sine wave AC current by a linear current cycle, with total sweep time τ = 10τ 0 = 10 5 t GL , thereby mimicking the usual experimental procedure of measuring the voltage in current-sweep mode. We keep J 1 = J 2 = 0.26 fixed, once these parameters make possible the occurrence of the superconducting diode scenario with largest efficiency. Fig. From Fig. It is worth mentioning that our 2D simulations are limited to the assumption that the thermal healing length is smaller than the combined thicknesses of film and substrate. In actual experiments, this condition is not generally fulfilled and typical values of η can be much smaller than those used in our simulations Another important factor that influences the efficiency of the diode device is the total sweep time τ , which determines the sweep rate along the current cycle. Fig. F. Optimizing diode efficiencies: the role of the inhomogeneous field amplitude and shape In the above discussion, we have studied the efficiency of our diode system considering a fixed antisymmetric field profile, given by J 1 = J 2 = 0.26 and distance s = 5ξ(0) between the superconducting film and the lateral stripes. Here we investigate how the diode efficiency changes when varying the amplitude and shape of the external field profile. For that, we fix We start by maintaining s = 5ξ(0), fixing J 1 = J 2 = J and vary varying the value of J. We perform the calculations for a linear current cycle with sweep time τ = 10 6 t GL and η = 2 × 10 -5 . Panel (a) of Fig. This discrepancy in the behavior of the system for each polarity leads to the existence of an optimal value of J that gives the largest efficiency. Panel (b) of Fig. Although the previous discussion specifically deals with an inhomogeneous field generated by the side stripes currents, we note that existence of a maximum efficiency does not depend on the origin of the inhomogeneous field, but solely on its magnitude. For instance, the external field could be produced by a ferromagnetic material, as discussed in Fig. Let us now investigate how the diode efficiency depends on the shape of the inhomogeneous field. Different shapes can be induced by changing the separation s between the wires and the main superconducting film: for small separations, the profile is more concentrated at the film edges, while for large separations the profile tends to a linear shape (see solid curves in panel (b) of Fig. In conclusion, we have explored the interplay between different operation modes of the superconducting diode effect in thin superconducting films subjected to external asymmetric flux profiles. Our findings highlight the potential of inhomogeneous fields to create highly asymmetric conditions for vortex entrance and exit, unveiling highly efficient vortex diode effects in plain superconducting films. Notably, the diode effect observed in our study does not require sophisticated nanofabrication techniques, as the inhomogeneous field can be induced by plain ferromagnetic films underneath the superconductor or by currents injected in microsized superconducting wires coplanar with the main superconducting film. A centimeter-sized version of the latter setup, but using an in-plane homogeneous field, was explored long ago in Moreover, our results demonstrate that the perfect antisymmetric flux profile represents the most efficient scenario for the diode effect. This profile maximizes the difference between the Bean-Livingstone barriers in opposite edges, leading to the highest vortex diode efficiency. Additionally, the built-in coexistence of vortices and antivortices in this scenario promotes a high rate of vortexantivortex annihilations at the equatorial line of the sam-ple during the positive current branch. This induces hot spots, even in the early stages of the flux-flow regime, bringing forward the transition to the normal state. In contrast, during the negative current branch, the current self-field compensates the external antisymetric field profile, eliminating vortices and antivortices from the sample, thus inducing the system into a perfectly superconducting state. Overall, for a wide range of parameters, the system behaves as a superconducting half-wave rectifier, presenting no resistance or heat flow for half the current cycle. Finally, we have demonstrated that the efficiency of the superconducting diode effect can be significantly enhanced by reducing the heat removal capabilities of the substrate and adjusting the sweeping rate in current sweep measurements or the frequency of the AC excitation in DC versus AC measurements. These insights not only contribute to the fundamental understanding of extrinsic diode effects in superconducting systems but also offer practical strategies for optimizing the performance of superconducting diode platforms in various applications.