In this paper we present two design generations of metasurface-based planar microlenses implemented on Front-Side Illumination SPAD pixels. This kind of microlens is an alternative to conventional reflow microlens. It offers more degrees of freedom in term of design, especially the capability to design off-axis microlens to gather light around the SPAD photodiode. The two generations of microlenses have been fabricated on STMicroelectronics SPAD and characterized. We validated the sensitivity improvement offered by extended metasurface-based microlens. We also confirmed the impact of lithography capability on metasurface performances, highlighting the need have access to advance deep-UV lithography. Planar microlenses are well suited for SPAD pixels, which usually work under monochromatic illumination (Time-of-Flight or Fluorescence-Lifetime applications) and exhibit rather large pixel size with lower fill-factor compared to state-of-the-art CMOS pixels. We previously demonstrated Fresnel Zone Plate lenses Our unitary structure, or meta-atom, is a nanoscale pillar of high refractive index material (amorphous silicon) embedded in a low refractive index medium (silicon oxide). The phase shift induced by a pillar is controlled by its geometry which is defined by the pitch, the capping thickness and the pillar's parameters: height and diameter (see Fig. Fig. We have also considered the paving strategy. For the first generation of metasurface-based microlens, we considered square paving for meta-atom arrangement. In order to improve the spatial sampling, triangular paving (see Fig. First generation of libraries is based on 500nm and 420nm pitches whereas the second generation is more aggressive with meta-atom pitch of 370nm. In both case, the minimum CD and space considered are 100nm. For this development, we consider 32 × 32 SPAD arrays. SPAD are sharing N-well and thus are grouped 4 × 4 into a 86.4 × 86.4μm 2 cell (see Fig. We divide the 32 × 32 array of SPAD into 8 areas of 8 × 16 SPAD. Each area is covered by a given design of microlens (see Fig.  One area without any microlens, to get the bare SPAD sensitivity as reference  One area with a microlens having the same footprint as the reflow one ( S 1 = 10.5 × 11.5μm 2 ). This will be used for direct comparison with refractive microlens.  Three area with microlens having intermediate footprint S 2.25 = 16.5 × 16.5μm 2 , which is 2.25 times larger than the reference surface.  Three area with microlens having the largest possible footprint S 3.86 = 21.6 × 21.6μm 2 , 3.86 times larger than the reference. It should be noted that for microlenses with footprint larger than the reference, the design differs according to their position inside the 4x4 group of SPAD (see bottom left picture in Fig. The process flow starts on 40nm CMOS Front-Side Illumination SPAD wafers The electro-optical characterization of the SPAD arrays are done at wafer-level with dedicated probe station based on Accretech 300mm prober. The light source is a Thorlabs M940L3 LED filtered with a Thorlabs bandpass filter FBH940-10 ( FWHM = 10nm). Uniform illumination over the array is ensured by a LabSphere integrating sphere. Fixed distance between the sphere output and the wafer emulate an f/10 angular distribution. The light intensity is recorded using calibrated radiometer (UDT 221). To evaluate microlens performances, we calculate Photon Detection Efficiency (PDE), i.e. the quantum efficiency: With Φ 940nm the optical flux in photon. m -2 . s -1 at the surface of the wafer, a SPAD 2 the surface of the SPAD pixel (i.e. 21.6 × 21.6μm 2 ), LCR the Light Count Rate and DCR the Dark Count Rate, which are the frequency of SPAD triggering respectively under illumination and in darkness. As these count rates usually depend of the excess bias, above the breakdown voltage of the SPAD, we first evaluate the mean breakdown voltage of each circuit. The excess bias is set to 1.5V above the breakdown voltage for LCR and DCR measurement. Both generation of metasurface-based microlens have been characterized as well as SPAD with refractive microlens (process of reference) and bare SPAD without microlens. The Fig. As expected, for bare SPAD and for microlens with unitary surface ( S 1 = 10.5 × 11.5μm 2 ) the PDE are almost the same whatever the SPAD. Indeed, the layout of the 4 kind of SPAD (center, top, corner, side) are almost the same over this surface S1. In this configuration, the refractive microlens leads to higher sensitivity than metasurface-based microlens as it bends the phase in a continuous way, contrary to metasurfaces that sample the phase profile, spatially and in phase value. For extended surfaces (S2.25 and S3.86), we clearly see that the PDE depends on the position (center, top, corner, side): the central ones (dots in Fig. This work validates the interest and the feasibility of metasurface-based microlens at pixel level. We demonstrate our capability to process deepsubwavelength pillars of amorphous silicon encapsulated in silicon dioxide on top of Front-Side Illumination CMOS wafer to generate microlenses. Measurement on 32x32 SPAD array confirms the interest of such technology. With the capability to design off-axis microlenses, we take advantage of space available around the 4x4 SPAD group to improve the PDE compared to the classical reflow microlenses.