This work presents a comparative review and classification between some well-known thermodynamically consistent models of hydrogel behavior in a large deformation setting, specifically focusing on solvent absorption/desorption and its impact on mechanical deformation and network swelling. The proposed discussion addresses formulation aspects, general mathematical classification of the governing equations, and numerical implementation issues based on the finite element method. The theories are presented in a unified framework demonstrating that, despite not being evident in some cases, all of them follow equivalent thermodynamic arguments. A detailed numerical analysis is carried out where Taylor-Hood elements are employed in the spatial discretization to satisfy the inf-sup condition and to prevent spurious numerical oscillations. The resulting discrete problems are solved using the FEniCS platform through consistent variational formulations, employing both monolithic and staggered approaches. We conduct benchmark tests on various hydrogel structures, demonstrating that major differences arise from the chosen volumetric response of the hydrogel. The significance of this choice is frequently underestimated in the state-of-the-art literature but has been shown to have substantial implications on the resulting hydrogel behavior. Hydrogels, a class of versatile soft materials with the unique ability to absorb and retain fluid within their three-dimensional network structures, have gained widespread attention in recent years across various industrial applications. Their diverse uses include serving as drug carriers in biomedical applications Several comprehensive reviews have emerged in the study of hydrogels, discussing topics ranging from hydrogel deformation theories to the microstructural impact on mechanical behaviors. Modeling the diffusion-deformation process in hydrogels necessitates a comprehensive understanding of the material's behavior during swelling and mechanical deformation. This understanding hinges on a mathematical formulation that simultaneously accounts for the diffusion of fluid molecules within the hydrogel's polymer network and the corresponding mechanical deformations induced by swelling. Two primary approaches can be employed to describe these phenomena: mixture theories and macro-scale theories. Mixture theories, representing the porous medium as spatially superimposed interacting layers Over the years, various models have been developed to describe coupled diffusiondeformation effects in elastomeric gels. These models couple a common general poroelastic framework with the effects of different physical fields, resulting in a wide range of stimuli-based responses encountered in various applications. Regarding the general poroelastic framework, for instance, A shared mathematical characteristic of these models is the saddle point structure of the underlying variational formulation. As a result of the finite element implementations, the Ladyzhenskaya-Babuska-Brezzi (LBB), i.e., discrete inf-sup, condition might be violated, requiring equilibrated inf-sup stable finite element spaces. Otherwise, oscillatory distributions of chemical potential as the primary variable controlling species diffusion arise. These challenges can be addressed in several ways. To name a few of these approaches, in Overall, there is no consensus on formulating a constitutive model for hydrogels and its numerical implementation. This study emphasizes the essential building blocks found in common across various hydrogel theories, mainly focusing on the standard poroelastic description. It is unclear whether the underlying constitutive choices at the free energy level are equivalent. The significance of fundamental choices in coupling diffusion and deformation is frequently overlooked. For example, such choices may relate to whether volume changes in the hydrogel are solely attributed to fluid content or involve elastic mechanisms as well. In the latter scenario, the detailed description of the volumetric response plays a crucial role. We aim to analyze the impact of such assumptions on the constitutive model. Not only do these fundamental constitutive choices lead to differences in the observed physical response, but they also influence the feasibility and appropriateness of different numerical solutions. Some theories lend themselves to a monolithic implementation of the coupled problem, while others favor a staggered approach. Despite their importance, these considerations have been largely neglected in existing literature. This paper reviews some of the most notable models that describe the diffusion-deformation process of elastomeric gels. The models were selected based on their consistency with thermodynamic principles, their ability to represent different behaviors, and the easiness to reproduce the results using the open-source computing platform FEniCS Traditionally, researchers have relied on custom numerical solvers or commercial software like Abaqus or COMSOL. While Unlike commercial software packages, open-source projects, like FEniCS, generally allow the user to have a direct hand in implementing the problem statement, the discretization, the numerical solution, and specific manipulations since all instances can be accessed. To this end, more information about the mathematical-numerical classification and design of algorithms is required. While this provides an advantage, granting users more liberty to develop and test novel numerical algorithms and discretizations, it also constitutes a challenge. The need for more hands-on implementation and debugging is time-consuming. To include readerships interested in open-source software and as part of the broader scope of our paper, we establish mathematical classifications to derive numerical algorithms for the coupled problem, enabling the precise study of well-posedness and facilitating rigorous numerical analysis. This includes introducing inf-sup stable Taylor-Hood finite elements for spatial discretization and using a strongly A-stable, first-order, implicit Euler scheme for temporal discretization. These technical developments are summarized into compact mathematical formulations that serve as the starting point for our FEniCS implementation, allowing for meticulous examination of the numerical algorithms. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 1. Unification in the formulation and notation of some representative diffusion-deformation theories applied to the large deformation of hydrogels. 2. Mathematical classification and subsequent derivation and computational comparison of monolithic and staggered numerical solutions accuracy in a variational setting using the finite element method (FEM). 3. One-to three-dimensional numerical simulations of well-known prototype problems to study the theories' capabilities and robustness of the FEM implementation. 4. Comparison of the different constitutive models in a single benchmark problem highlighting their main characteristics. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a common background knowledge of gels and the basic formulations of the chosen theories using a unified notation. Section 3 is devoted to the mathematical classification and numerical approximation using the FEM in variational settings. Section 4 explains the general setting of the numerical simulations campaign. Section 5 presents the simulation results for some well-known prototype problems of the diffusion-deformation of hydrogels. Section 6 presents a unified benchmark problem for the diffusion-deformation of hydrogels. Concluding remarks are given in Section 7. In this section, we summarize some of the well-known theories describing the diffusiondeformation mechanisms in elastomeric gels that undergo large deformations under isothermal conditions. As notation rules, we denote gradient in the reference and current configuration by Grad(•) and grad(•), respectively, whereas the divergence in the reference and current configuration is denoted by Div(•) and div(•), respectively. The time derivative of any field is denoted by ∂ t (•). The operator tr(A) refers to the trace of the second-order tensor A. We denote the spatial dimension with d, and in this paper, we exclusively work with d = 3. Finally, let I := (0, T ) be the time interval with end time value T > 0 and Ī its closure. Consider a continuum homogeneous elastomeric body B living in the Euclidean space R 3 and its boundary ∂B = ∂B u ∪ ∂Bt = ∂B φ ∪ ∂B JR . Here, ∂B u denotes the displacement boundary (Dirichlet), ∂Bt the traction boundary (Neumann), ∂B φ the fluid concentration-related boundary (Dirichlet), and ∂B JR the fluid flux boundary (Neumann). The outward normal vector to the domain boundaries in the reference configuration is denoted by n R ∈ R d . The current configuration of this homogeneous body at any instant of time can be described by a one-to-one transformation mapping φ t : B R → R d , where B R refers to the reference configuration. In principle, selecting any state as the reference state B R (e.g., the stress-free dry gel) is possible. For convenience, authors have also chosen to define the initial state B R as an isotropically swollen configuration from the dry state, leading to better reproduction of experimental conditions The position vector in the reference configuration X ∈ B R is related to the one in the current configuration x ∈ B by x = φ t (X, t). The displacement field reads u(X, t) = x -X. The transformation map φ t (X, t) can be described in terms of the deformation gradient, with J = J(X, t) = detF > 0, the determinant, representing the volume change of a volume element dv = JdV from the reference (dV ) to the current (dv) configuration, and I being the identity tensor. As is standard, denote the right and left Cauchy-Green tensors, respectively. Additionally, the first invariant of C is given by The solvent component of the hydrogel is described by introducing its chemical potential μ, that is, the energy absorbed or released due to a change in its content. Fluid absorption/desorption is kinematically described through an inelastic part of the deformation F f . The volume change J f = detF f associated with fluid absorption/desorption is linked with the referential fluid concentration variable c R , i.e., the number of absorbed fluid molecules per unit volume of the reference configuration, by enforcing: where Ω denotes the volume of a mole of fluid molecules. This relationship can also be equivalently described by introducing the polymer volume fraction variable φ, defined as: resulting 0 ≤ φ ≤ 1. The dry state of the gel corresponds to φ = 1, and φ < 1 represents a swollen state. A generally adopted choice is to assume an isotropic swelling deformation F f , hence reading as: where λ s represents the polymer network stretch due to swelling. It is noteworthy that, since c R > 0 by definition, it results in J f , φ, λ s > 0. The total deformation of a hydrogel is obtained from the superimposition of the fluid-related deformation gradient F f and the elastic one F e . The latter originates from the effects of mechanical actions to restore compatibility. Based on the previously introduced choices, we obtain: At this standpoint, depending on the volume change associated with the elastic deformation J e = detF e = J -1 f J, a general classification between two classes of models is introduced: 1. elastic compressible models (non-constrained formulations). In this case, the elastic part of the deformation is assumed to be compressible. It is then allowed J e ̸ = 1; 2. elastic incompressible models (constrained formulations). In this case, the elastic part of the deformation is assumed to be perfectly incompressible, and the total volume change of the hydrogel is related only to fluid volume changes. In other words, it results in J e = 1 and the kinematic constraint, has to be enforced within the theoretical formulation. The two governing partial differential equations (PDEs) for the vector-valued displacements u : BR → R d and scalar-valued, time-dependent, fluid content in terms of the concentration c R : BR × Ī → R when expressed in the reference configuration, consist of: 1. The local form of the balance of linear momentum reads: Here, P : B R → R d×d denotes the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, and P 0 : B R → R d×d its initial value at t = 0. An alternative stress measure also commonly employed is the Cauchy stress tensor σ = J -1 PF T . External actions consist of body forces per unit deformed volume in the reference configuration b R : B R → R d . Moreover, boundary conditions prescribe displacement ū : B R → R d and traction t : ∂Bt → R d on separate portions of the boundary. Notice that inertial effects have been neglected due to the considerably slow dynamics of the fluid diffusion evolution w.r.t. the time scale of the wave propagation. 2. The local form of the mass balance of fluid content inside the hydrogel reads: Here, J R is the fluid flux vector in the reference configuration, related to the one j in the current configuration via J R = JF -1 j. Boundary conditions prescribe values of chemical potential μ : ∂B φ × I → R and fluid flux JR : ∂B JR × I → R d in the reference configuration on the boundaries. Moreover, μ 0 : ∂B φ → R refers to the initial value of the chemical potential inside the hydrogel. Notice that the mass balance of fluid content is written in terms of c R and J R , but its corresponding boundary and initial conditions involve a different variable, the chemical potential μ. The connection of equation ( This section introduces constitutive equations for the stress and chemical potential, addressing both compressible or perfectly incompressible formulations. Following standard thermodynamic arguments where ψ R : B R × I → R is the free energy density function (per unit reference volume). Guided by equation ( Consequently, equation ( and the following thermodynamically-consistent constitutive relations can be established for the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor (PK1): and for the chemical potential: Alternative formulations can be found in the state-of-the-art for defining stresses and chemical potential, built upon elastic stress and active chemical potential concepts. These are reviewed and discussed in appendix A, showing that both approaches lead to identical results. Incompressible models require a special treatment of the kinematic constraint in equation ( where p represents a pressure-like Lagrange multiplier to enforce the kinematic constraint in equation ( since ∂J/∂F = JF -T and ∂J f /∂c R = Ω. From equation ( and for the chemical potential: Such an approach has been followed, for instance, by Alternatively, the kinematic constraint in equation ( Then, equation ( since ċR = Jf /Ω = J/Ω from the incompressibility constraint. From equation ( As previously noted, the fluid concentration c R can no longer be considered as an independent variable. Therefore, the chemical potential μ shall now be considered as the problem's primary variable. Consequently, a special treatment is required for the ∂ t c R term in the mass balance equation ( which yields From equation ( with c the solvent concentration in the current configuration, related to the nominal concentration by c R = Jc, and D is the solvent diffusivity assumed to be a constant. Notice that grad(μ) can be pulled back to the reference configuration by grad(μ) = F -T Grad(μ). Hence, the flux in the reference configuration reads: Inserting equation ( with μ = μ(F, c R ) from equation ( and b is dimensionless. Some authors have defined constitutive equation (26) in terms of RT , where R is the gasses constant, (see, e.g., Specific choices for the free energy function characterize different state-of-the-art models linking stress and chemical potential variations with diffusion-deformation mechanisms. We introduce constitutive models in accordance with the framework outlined in equation ( Unless explicitly specified otherwise, we choose to characterize fluid content using the concentration variable c R . As a result, we express fluid-related volume changes and polymer volume fractions as functions of c R , denoting them as J f = J f (c R ) and φ = φ(c R ), respectively, based on equations ( The free energy function is, in general, written in a separable additive form: Here, ψ mix R describes the mixing of the solvent with the polymer network. Overall, there is a rather consensus agreement that this is well described by the Flory-Huggins/Flory-Rehner theory (see, e.g., where μ 0 is the chemical potential of the unmixed pure solvent, k B refers to Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, and χ is a dimensionless parameter named Flory's interaction parameter. The latter represents the disaffinity between the polymer and the fluid. In particular, if χ is increased, the fluid molecules are expelled from the gel, and it shrinks, while if χ is decreased, the gel swells. Furthermore, ψ mech R is the contribution to the change in the free energy due to the deformation of the polymer network, for which elastic incompressible or compressible formulations differ by considering: where Ψ s R is an entropic component and Ψ en R an energetic contribution. The entropic component is usually defined following the arguments of classical statistical mechanics models for rubber elasticity, where I 1 is given in equation ( Two incompressible constitutive models are presented here. Constitutive model I: Following the ideas by where the mixing part of the energy Ψmix ) with c R (J) = (J -1)/Ω from equation (5) under the condition of equation ( Here, p μ is the equivalent volumetric stress: Constitutive model II: This model has been introduced by ) and the total free-energy reads: The first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor is derived from equation ( where P = pJ is the pressure term in the reference configuration. To be consistent with the original model, the fluid concentration c R is replaced in the formulation with the polymer volume fraction φ by means of equation ( where P = pJ = pJ f = pφ -1 follows directly from equations ( Compressible models are characterized by the superposition of an entropic energetic component (given in equation ( where K > 0 represents the bulk modulus of the gel. The following formulation is based on the ideas by with: The chemical potential is obtained from equations ( It is worth noting that the mass balance equation ( where M = M(F, J f ) denotes the species mobility tensor: Constitutive models IV and V: Starting from the original incompressible model introduced in Chester and Anand (2010) (constitutive model II ), the same group of authors presented alternative compressible formulations by adding energetic components as given in equations ( and, for constitutive model V with (39) 3 , as: Equation ( with: It is noteworthy that, in the original papers, authors formulate the theories based on the elastic PK1 and the active chemical potential, leading, however, to identical results as proved in appendix A. Moreover, in these contexts, the mass balance equation ( where M is given in equation ( In the context of compressible models, we can gain valuable insights by examining how different choices of the energy component Ψ en R impact the stress constitutive relationships. To illustrate this, let us focus on equation ( Furthermore, as previously highlighted, constitutive models IV and V serve as the compressible counterparts to constitutive model II. This connection becomes evident when we observe that the Lagrange multiplier P in equation ( The solution of the coupled PDE system consists of a vector-valued field of displacements (u) and, depending on the formulation, a scalar-valued field (φ) given either by the concentration (c R ), polymer volume fraction (φ), or chemical potential (μ). Hence, it results φ ∈ {c R , φ, μ}. Here we adopt standard notation for the usual Lebesgue and Sobolev spaces, e.g., Here, X := B R . Specifically, a function w ∈ H 1 (B R ) d , if it satisfies the following conditions, namely w is square integrable: B R |w(x)| 2 dx < ∞ and the first-order partial derivatives of w exist and are square-integrable such that The norm associated with this space is given by This norm induces a complete metric space with respect to which the functions in H 1 (B R ) d can be well-defined and approximated. The coupled system of equations is formulated in terms of a variational coupled system. To this end, we define the trial and test spaces as follows: We notice that in Q φ, the boundary conditions may be given explicitly or implicitly through the relation h(φ) = h. This is seen in the set of equations (11). To elucidate this, let us consider two distinct scenarios: i. for constitute models II, IV, and V, we seek φ, and the boundary condition is φ = φ, i.e., h(φ) := φ and h := φ. On the other hand, ii. in constitutive model III, we have φ := J f and h := μ. Then, we solve the coupled problem for J f and μ, where J f is implicitly obtained from equation ( To formulate both problem statements in an abstract fashion, we introduce for the displacement system the semi-linear form a((u, φ))(v), which is nonlinear in the first argument (trial function) and linear in the second argument (test function). Furthermore, let b(v) be the given right-hand side data. Next, for the balance of fluid concentration, we use c((u, φ))(q) and d(q). Then, the weak formulation can be written as: where with " : " denoting the double contraction of the second-order tensors P and ∇v, where P(u, φ) is defined by either equation ( Notice that the two balance equations are fully coupled through the constitutive equations of the stress P(u, φ) and the species mobility tensor M(u, φ). In this section, based on Formulation 1, we explain numerical coupling strategies, provide mathematical classifications, and introduce spatial and temporal discretizations. These derivations serve as a starting point for the implementation in FEniCS. The reader is referred to the introduction to understand the importance of this section, particularly when testing novel algorithms, comparing them, and pursuing our own numerical developments, including code debugging. This section provides the link between the strong form problem statements in Section 2 and the numerical simulations carried out in Section 5 by following the road map outlined in There exist several ways for realizing numerically the coupling of several PDEs. Here, we discuss two fundamental strategies to be implemented later, namely, monolithic and partitioned approaches. In the former, Formulation 1, it treated all-at-once, while in a partitioned approach, the two subproblems are decoupled and solved in an iterative fashion. Here, we closely follow the concepts and notation introduced by Wick (2020)[Chapter 3]. Variational-monolithic coupling: In the variational-monolithic setting, the coupling conditions are realized in an exact fashion in the weak (i.e., variational) formulation. Formulation 1 is given in such a variational-monolithic fashion and, more specifically, the coupling conditions are of volume-coupling type In the monolithic approach, the entire PDE system can be either solved all-at-once, which usually requires physics-based preconditioners. Either the system is decoupled on the solver level within an outer monolithic iteration, e.g., GMRES (generalized minimal residual) or multigrid, and the preconditioner is constructed based on decoupled subproblems. In general, monolithic solutions can be computationally demanding depending on the complexity of the problem at hand. The monolithic scheme can be naturally extended to account for time-dependent problems. In this case, we need to introduce a suitable time discretization scheme and solve the previous problem at each time step. As an alternative, a global space-time formulation can be formulated, discretized, and solved accordingly; see e.g., Partitioned (staggered) approach: Conversely, in the partitioned approach, the system of PDEs is broken down into smaller subsystems, and each subsystem is solved independently using its own numerical method. The solutions of these subsystems are then coupled to obtain the solution of the entire system. The partitioned approach typically involves the following steps: 1. Initialization: provide initial guesses û0 and φ0 for the unknown fields u and φ. 2. Iteration: Let (û j , φj ) and (û j-1 , φj-1 ) be the trial values of u and φ at the current and previous iterations, respectively. Algorithm 1. For j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , iterate: 3. Check for convergence: compare the updated and previous trial values. The iteration is considered converged if the difference is below a specified tolerance. That is, check whether If the criterion is fulfilled, stop and assign u = ûj and φ = φj . If not, increment j → j +1 and return to step 2. The previous procedure extends to discrete formulations of time-dependent problems, for which a sequence of unknown fields u n and φ n at time points t n with n = 1, 2, 3, ..., N is sought for. Here, the previously introduced algorithm remains identical and performed at each time point t n . In this context, trial quantities at iteration step j and time t n can be denoted as ûn,j and φn,j . We follow the ideas presented by 1. Orders in time and space: Equation (10) represents a quasi-static problem with no time derivatives and second order in space. In the thermodynamic context, this quasi-static problem is in a thermodynamic equilibrium at each instance. Equation ( In this section, we discuss the discretization in time and space. A classical finite difference scheme is employed for the temporal discretization of the fluid balance concentration PDE, resulting in a quasi-stationary solution in space at each time point. The spatial discretization is based on a Galerkin FEM formulation Assume the computational domain B R is partitioned into open elements K that depend on the spatial dimension d. A mesh consists of quadrilateral, triangular, or hexahedron cells K, all of them available in FEniCS. Here, we employ hexahedron cells. They perform a nonoverlapping cover of the computational domain B R ⊂ R d . Let T h = {K} be a conforming mesh of the bounded domain B R ⊂ R d , with mesh size h. We employ Taylor-Hood elements, i.e., a pair of finite element spaces (V T H h , Q T H h ), where: • V T H h ⊆ V is the space of continuous, piecewise quadratic functions on T h , i.e., Here, P 1 (K) denotes the space of linear polynomials over the element K in R and P 2 (K) d denotes the space of quadratic polynomials over the element K in R d . Thus, the discrete variational monolithic formulation for the diffusion-deformation model reads: Formulation 2. (Semi-discrete in space variational monolithic diffusion-deformation of gels in Moreover, the discrete variational formulation using the staggered approach reads: Formulation 3. (Semi-discrete in space variational diffusion-deformation of gels in T h ). Find until the iteration converges, i.e., equation (57) is fulfilled. The time-dependent term in the balance of fluid concentration is approximated using the first-order implicit Euler discretization for n = 1, 2, . . . , N f , with N f the final simulation time index at the final time T , as where φ n and φ n-1 are the value of φ at the current and previous time step, respectively, and ∆t is the time step increment. Following Then, the difference approximation of the time derivative with time step increment ∆t yields: Then, the fully discrete variational monolithic formulation for the diffusion-deformation model reads: Formulation 4. (Fully-discrete in space variational monolithic diffusion-deformation of gels in T h ). Let h be the spatial discretization parameter and n the current time point index. Find We notice that the abstract cycle from monolithic problem statements until the final linear solution is outlined in , with φ(0) = φ 0 , such that, for the nonlinear iterations j = 1, 2, . . . and n = 1, . . . , N f it holds a((û n,j h , φn,j-1 until the iteration converges at time point t n , i.e., equation (57) is fulfilled, and then proceeds to t n+1 . Then, we set as initial guesses of the nonlinear iterative scheme at the next time step The numerical consequences of our previous classification (specifically the type of nonlinearities) are that we will always have to solve at least one fully nonlinear PDE, independently of whether the problem is solved in a monolithic, Formulation 4, or staggered way, Formulation 5. Here, we utilize a Newton-type solver and corresponding right-hand side: with the joint unknown, trial function, U n h := (u n h , φ n h ) and the joint test function Ψ h := (v h , q h ). This corresponds to Step 4 Step 5 (Newton's method) in In this work, automatic differentiation offered by FEniCS was employed rather than calculating the Jacobian by hand. Sparse LU decomposition (Gaussian elimination) is used inside each Newton step to solve the arising linear equation systems. As we have the specific derivations in Formulation 4 and Formulation 5 at hand, a future extension is to employ iterative methods, like GMRES -generalized minimal residuals Finally, it is well known that Dirichlet boundary conditions on the chemical potential, see equation ( The coupled diffusion-deformation problem is faced by solving equations ( Two campaigns of numerical simulations will be presented. Section 5 addresses different representative prototype problems by adopting parameter settings presented in the original papers where each constitutive model has been originally presented. The aim is to explore the robustness of the developed numerical implementations. Section ?? presents a unified benchmark problem to have a unique reference simulation example that shows the differences in the response for each constitutive equation. The solution strategy outlined in Section 3.1 is adopted in all simulation cases. The algorithms are implemented in FEniCS, and the code is provided so the reader can reproduce and verify the results (online repository link: https://doi.org/10.25835/5v49yfk0). The following material parameters remain constant in all cases: The remaining material parameters vary depending on the specific constitutive model and the adopted simulation setup. They can be found in the caption of the figures associated with each numerical result. For the sake of notation, let E 1 , E 2 , E 3 be introduced as a Cartesian coordinate system in the reference configuration (resp., e 1 , e 2 , e 3 in the current one), parametrized in X, Y and Z (resp., x, y and z). Moreover, let the following stress components be introduced: Numerical results will be reported in terms of displacements u, stretch λ, and the evolution of μ since they are the most relevant to analyze from a physical viewpoint. Four representative prototype problems are introduced. First, we consider a one-dimensional transient swelling of a hydrogel bar along the Y -direction. The bar is fixed at Y = 0 and free at Y = 0.01 Note: The rationale behind the selected solution strategies is detailed in the text of Section 5 for each constitutive model. occurring along the Y direction. For perfectly incompressible models (i.e., constitutive models I and II ), it then results in det(F) = λ = J f = φ -1 , that is the total stretch is equal to the swelling volume change and inversely proportional to polymer volume fraction. Furthermore, from the equilibrium condition (10), it follows that ∂P/∂Y = 0, which, after considering traction free boundary conditions, leads to P Y = 0 and, in consequence, σ y = 0. This problem has been studied previously by both linear and nonlinear theories, e.g., As a third example, we consider the transient free-swelling in a two-dimensional setting (in the (X, Y ) plane) of a polymer gel with an initially square cross-section. A free hydrogel block is immersed in a non-reactive solvent. Due to the symmetry of the deformation, only a quarter of the whole model needs to be considered (see Figure Free swelling: with λ 2D ∞ referring to the (constant) 2D final stretch at the steady state. The fourth and last example corresponds to the extension of the two-dimensional block example into three-dimensions, namely, a cube is immersed in a non-reactive solvent to swell due to the solvent absorption freely (see Figure Free swelling: with λ 3D ∞ referring to the (constant) 3D final stretch at the steady state. This simulation resembles that presented, e.g., by We estimate the convergence order with a well-known heuristic formula. Let us denote the errors by E h , E h/2 , and E h/4 , where h is the mesh size parameter as before. Under the assumption that our discretized problem has a convergence order of p, then each error should be roughly (1/2) p times the previous error. Therefore, we can estimate p by taking the logarithm base 2 of the error ratios as: One-dimensional transient swelling. Here, we follow the ideas presented by Additionally, the fluid balance equation ( Differentiating equation ( Substituting equation ( The weak discretized form of equation ( where ∂μ n h /∂Y is given by equation ( The numerical results after solving equation ( Two-dimensional constrained hydrogel slab. Constitutive model I is now solved for the constrained hydrogel slab considered in Figure Figure From Figure Next, a computational convergence analysis is performed to investigate the robustness and computational cost of the monolithic approach. We focus on investigating the effect of mesh density and the time step size on the behavior of the implemented numerical algorithm. We aim to understand how these parameters influence the performance of the algorithm in solving the nonlinear system of equations associated with the FEM discretization. First, we conduct performance studies of the Newton solver for each time step to assess its efficiency in solving the nonlinear equations. We observe whether the mesh density and time step size influence the number of Newton iterations, determining if it remains consistent throughout the simulation. Figure Additionally, we examine the Newton algorithm's convergence behavior at five different time points during the simulation. We aim to confirm whether the Newton iteration has quadratic convergence in error. We also investigate whether changes in mesh density or time steps impact the Newton iteration's convergence. Figures After establishing that the Newton solver is reliable, we test whether using Taylor-Hood elements and the Euler method leads to the expected convergence in space and time. Specifically, we measure the L 2 error for various mesh densities and time step sizes with respect to the highest fidelity solution and the values of both displacement and chemical potential at the center of the top face of the two-dimensional hydrogel slab. The convergence analysis is detailed in Tables Finally, it is noteworthy that we tested both monolithic and partitioned approaches for the solution of the constitutive model I by Two-dimensional free swelling of a square block. A square block is immersed in a solvent with a reference chemical potential μ 0 = 0, as illustrated in Figure Figure It is noted that the two-dimensional and three-dimensional problems are addressed without altering the diffusion-deformation model or its constitutive equations. Nonetheless, adjusting the diffusivity coefficient value was necessary. This is because a pronounced stretch gradient results in high-stress values and excessive distortion of the elements used for domain discretization as more degrees of freedom are added to the problem. This stability issue is commonly encountered in diffusion-deformation studies of hydrogels with non-reactive solvent absorption (refer to The second model under consideration is composed of the balance equations ( One-dimensional transient swelling. Here, we follow the ideas presented by Hence, it results: Notice that this expression for P is case specific and equation ( equation ( obtained after differentiating equation ( where ∂μ n h /∂Y is given by equation ( after the definition of P . The numerical solution of equation ( Two-dimensional constrained hydrogel slab. Constitutive model II is solved for the constrained hydrogel slab considered in Figure limitations of such approximation, the stress for the two-dimensional case hence reads: after replacing equation (78) into equation (37). Since the same approximation for P would be inaccurate in a free swelling condition, we will not face these case studies for constitutive model II. Figure In Figure In We decided to test an alternative approach. That is, to find a suitable expression for Grad(μ) in equation ( We conduct an investigation to assess the staggered approach's behavior. We verify the number of staggered iterations between the displacement and polymer volume fraction subsystems and, as for the monolithic case, we examine the effects of mesh density and time step size on the algorithm's performance, focusing particularly on the Newton solver's efficiency and convergence. For the staggered solution, we modify the strategy slightly. Instead of computing the total number of Newton iterations required for convergence, we compute the average number of Newton iterations over the inner iteration loop for each time increment for the displacement and polymer volume fraction sub-systems. This approach provides us with insights into the staggered solution's convergence behavior and whether the number of staggered and Newton iterations remains stable throughout the simulation time. It allows us to gauge the efficiency and stability of the staggered approach, and compare it to the monolithic approach. Figure The convergence patterns for the Newton iterations and the impact of variations in mesh density and time step size were consistent with those observed in the monolithic approach. Figures 9b, e focuses on the Newton iteration for the displacement sub-system, whereas Figure Additionally, we explored the Newton algorithm's convergence behavior at five distinct simulation moments, examining the quadratic convergence in error and the influence of mesh density and time step size. Figure The observed similarities in the convergence behaviors between the monolithic and staggered approaches further underline the robustness and reliability of the numerical solutions, confirming the applicability of both methods to the coupled problem at hand. Concerning convergence analyses for the discretization itself, for the Taylor-Hood elements and Euler method, our findings for spatial and temporal discretization yielded a second-order and first-order convergence, respectively. These outcomes are summarized in Tables The third model under consideration comprises the balance equations ( One-dimensional transient swelling. The basic ingredients to describe the hydrogel deformation considering an energetic constraint were presented by with and where λ 0 refers to the initial swelling ratio of the gel. The discretized weak form of equation ( where γ(λ n h ) and ξ(λ n h ) are given by equations ( and respectively. Notice that J f in equation ( Here we tried to find a suitable expression for Grad(μ) in equation ( It should be highlighted that among the constitutive models accounted for in this work, constitutive model III numerical solution is the most fragile. There is not much room to explore different values for the model parameters. Small changes in their values would lead to the divergence of the Newton-Raphson algorithm. It is also not possible to arbitrarily increase the mesh density or make the time step smaller. This is not surprising since Due to this numerical fragility, it was not possible to perform a convergence analysis in the same manner as for the two previous constitutive models. However, for the chosen simulation setup presented in this sub-section, both the absolute and relative errors decay faster as the Newton iterations increase, in a manner similar to that observed for constitutive model II (see Figures Two-dimensional free swelling of a square block. Figure In this section, the two-dimensional square block problem is studied again as a unified benchmark problem for the diffusion-deformation of hydrogels. As a matter of fact, previous results cannot be directly compared due to the disparate value of the material parameters selected by authors in the original papers (and adopted for the prototype problems presented in the previous section). Our goal here is to have a unique reference simulation example and show the differences in the response for each constitutive equation. We are interested in testing how much the diffusion-deformation behavior is affected by the different constitutive choices under the same simulation setup. Hydrogels are a type of material that can vary significantly in their physical properties due to factors such as the particular polymer used, the degree of crosslinking, and the presence of any additives Similarly, the bulk modulus, which is a measure of a material's resistance to uniform compression, can also vary widely for hydrogels. The bulk modulus is typically larger than the shear modulus. For many hydrogels, the bulk modulus can range from around 10 [kP a] to several [M P a]. However, these values should only be used as a rough guide, as the specific values for any particular hydrogel can vary significantly depending on its formulation and preparation details. One needs to refer to specific experimental data for the particular hydrogel of interest for a precise value. The most common value for K reported in the reviewed papers was K = 100 G 0 . In the present study, motivated by state-of-the-art values, we choose G 0 = 1 [M P a] and K = 100 [M P a]. The diffusion coefficient is used as the free parameter to tune the simulation such that the results become comparable and the numerical stability is guaranteed. parameters remain the same as for the previously reported simulation results. Notice that this simulation setup is similar to the one used to solve constitutive models II, and IV -V and it was inspired by Figure From Figure It is important to note that the diffusivity values used in the benchmark problem for constitutive models I and III are the lowest possible before encountering numerical issues. For constitutive models III -IV, it is feasible to set the diffusivity to 8.5 × 10 -3 [m 2 s -1 ], matching constitutive model I. However, given our simulation setup, this is an exceptionally high value. Consequently, the system will reach steady in both scenarios almost immediately, eliminating any transient behavior. In summary, the mentioned diffusivity values differ significantly from each other. They belong to different time scales. This difference can be attributed to the distinct solution strategies adopted for solving the diffusion equation in each case. We delved into the specifics of this when introducing each constitutive model. One takeaway drawn from this comparison study is that further refinement may be required for the constitutive models such that closer predictions are achieved. In particular, each model predicts a different level of deformation and requires a fine-tuning of some parameters to ensure numerical convergence. This can complicate the model's experimental validation because it could lead to different values of the material parameters and, for instance, ambiguity regarding which values are correct and their interpretability. Nonetheless, there is still room for improvement in selecting the energetic component of the constitutive model, which can fix the issue. In the end, all constitutive models capture the diffusion-deformation process in a reasonable way and offer valuable insights into the coupled problem. This study presented a detailed classification and analysis of various nonlinear models that depict the diffusion-deformation process in hydrogels caused by non-reactive solvent absorption. We have consolidated these theories into a unified framework, demonstrating that, despite not being evident, all theories follow equivalent thermodynamic arguments. For instance, while having a common set of governing equations, each model showcases differences in the enforcement of incompressibility and formulation of the constitutive model -particularly in terms of the free energy function's components, mainly at the energetic level. At present, further research appears necessary to conveniently account for the energetic component, ultimately aiming for a cohesive and unified constitutive model. Different numerical approaches adopted by various researchers to solve these models were analyzed. Our implemented numerical methods presented reasonable predictions for the diffusion-deformation process. However, our findings suggest that the superiority of one strategy over another remains inconclusive. The selection of an appropriate model should be grounded in a comprehensive understanding of the hydrogel's composition and must be validated experimentally. Notice that some of the theories here introduced have been extended to account for temperature variations, chemical reactions, and damage (refer to, e.g., We emphasized on discerning the differences among the leading models in the literature and verifying whether the results presented by different authors are still valid in light of opensource general-purpose software available nowadays, such as FEniCS. To this end, an important part of this work is Section 3 with the mathematical classification and resulting numerical discretization and algorithms. These allowed us to carefully design mathematical formulations, which were then implemented and used to study the previously mentioned models. Advances in automated solution techniques for the finite element method (FEM), such as FEniCS, provide the user with a streamlined approach for solving systems of partial differential equations compared to traditional model development. Unlike models implemented on commercial software (e.g., Abaqus), the implementation of our models grants users considerable control over several components. The simulation results indicate that there is not a one-size-fits-all model compatible with the parameters across all scenarios. Depending on the specific problem configuration being simulated, adjustments to one or multiple parameters are necessary to guarantee the numerical stability of the solution. Our observations in Section 5 revealed a strong dependency of the numerical solution's convergence on the diffusion coefficient and bulk modulus value. In fact, very different diffusion coefficients for each example featured in this study were required. Nonetheless, once a suitable value for the material parameters is identified, the numerical solution achieves reliable accuracy and robustness, as evidenced by the convergence analysis. Here, a consistent number of Newton iterations was displayed along the simulation time to reach absolute and relative errors smaller than 10 -10 . Moreover, concerning the spatial and temporal discretization, quadratic and linear convergence orders, respectively, for the FEM and Euler schemes for both the monolithic and staggered approaches were observed. Furthermore, constitutive model III stands to be the more fragile in terms of numerical stability. Because constitutive model III directly penalizes the material compressibility, it calls for a numerical solution using a mixed formulation where the stress becomes a primary variable as it is standard in the literature dealing with incompressible materials (see, e.g., Another observation was regarding the application of boundary conditions. Depending on the specific simulation scenario, it might be necessary to adopt a time-ramping strategy to prevent numerical instabilities, which is well known in continuum mechanics and due to the mathematical functional framework in order to have compatible conditions. However, these mathematical assumptions might not be met in many engineering applications. Therefore, one must be careful with any assumption made while numerically solving the problem at hand to avoid unphysical numerical results. As an overall outcome, in Section 5, we found that each model presents diverse deformation states and solute concentrations within the hydrogel, highlighting the complexity of the investigated problem. It is evident that pinpointing a single appropriate model to describe the diffusion-deformation of hydrogels remains a challenge, given the different calibration mechanisms each offers. These differences underscore the need for more comprehensive experimental data to reconcile these theoretical distinctions with actual observations. With the models' validation, we can transition from merely describing the process to predicting hydrogel behavior, thereby using the model for designing new materials or optimizing the mechanical properties of existing ones. Some efforts have been made to validate the diffusion-deformation process of hydrogels as predicted by the coupled model. For example, Chen et al (2020) performed a validation of a very similar theory as presented by Supplementary information. No supplementary information was produced from this research. https://www.dealii.org/ https://www.openfoam.com/ https://mooseframework.inl.gov/ https://fenicsproject.org/