The evolution of the vortex glass (VG) phase transition and vortex creep with decreasing film thickness is studied in ultrathin, polycrystalline niobium films, with thickness in the range 7.4 nm to 44 nm, using current-voltage characteristics measurements in perpendicular magnetic field. Standard methods, including scaling laws, allow to identify VG transition in the thickest film, while in thinner films creep produces large uncertainty in the putative VG transition temperature and scaling exponents. Using strong pinning theory we perform analysis of the creep, and extract the dependence of the activation energy for vortex pinning on temperature, magnetic field, and film thickness. This analysis provides more information on vortex dynamics than the standard evaluation of critical current density. The results reveal two distinct regimes of pinning, which we propose to identify with δl or δTc-types of pinning (due to spacial fluctuation of mean free path l or spacial fluctuation of superconducting transition temperature Tc, respectively). In the thickest film δl pinning is observed, but with the decrease of film thickness the second pinning regime appears, and becomes dominant in the thinnest film. We link these pinning regimes with the structural disorder due to grain boundaries, which produce charge carrier scattering in the thickest film, but with decreasing film thickness gradually evolve into amorphous inclusions, producing fluctuations in the Tc. Vortex matter in the mixed phase of type-II superconductors is one of the most fascinating research topics in condensed matter physics. On the one hand, it provides a ground for testing of new concepts and theories, such as various ordered phases and phase transitions between them, with the primary example of melting of ordered Abrikosov vortex lattice in clean superconducting (SC) systems, or melting of vortex glass (VG) in systems with quenched disorder Both the VG phase and flux creep phenomenon have been intensively studied in the past, mostly in high temperature superconductors where thermal fluctuations play an important role. Evaluation of these subjects is also important in case of ultrathin conventional SC films, which are frequently employed in nanoscale devices. Of particular interest is the role of disorder, which is introduced into the films with decreasing thickness, leading eventually to granular (or fractal) superconductivity In this work we use the current-voltage characteristics (IVC) measurements to examine the evolution of vortex dynamics with decreasing thickness of ultrathin, polycrystalline niobium (Nb) films, with thickness d in the range 7.4 nm to 44 nm. This set of films has been studied by us before, and growing disorder with decreasing thickness has been documented by structural studies, leading eventually to structural transition to purely amorphous structure below about 3.3 nm In general, depending on the strength of vortex-defect interactions, two different pinning schemes are considered, weak collective pinning, induced by many atomicsize, weak point defects, which collectively give rise to an average pinning force Another classification of pinning relies on the mechanism of vortex-defect interaction, which may originate from the spatial variations of the SC transition temperature, T c (δT c pinning), or from variation in the mean free path l of carriers, caused by scattering near lattice defects (δl pinning); these mechanisms lead to different behaviors of the critical current density, J c , with the change of temperature, magnetic field, or film thickness Therefore, the usual method of distinguishing between these mechanisms is to evaluate the dependence of J c on magnetic field, temperature, and film thickness. In our study we go beyond these type of evaluations. Namely, we use recently developed strong pinning theory in the presence of thermal fluctuations The films were grown on glass substrates by magnetron sputtering in the high-vacuum chamber at room temperature, with niobium sandwiched between silicon buffer layers to avoid Nb oxidation, as already described In the present study we focus on polycrystalline films, with d between 7.4 nm and 44 nm. Both the thin amorphous layer at the interface, and the tiny admixture of Si ions, introduce disorder into polycrystalline films, which is likely to play increasingly important role when d is decreasing. Most importantly, polycrystalline films consist of grains, which are created during the film growth, with the grain boundaries affecting various film properties. For example, normal-state resistance (R N ) is observed to depend on film thickness as R N ∼ d -2 Fig. Using the value of the T c and the upper critical field, H c2 (defined at R sq /R N = 0.95), measured at small magnetic field perpendicular to the film surface in the vicinity of the T c , we estimate the value of the H c2 (0) and the in-plane coherence length ξ(0) = [Φ 0 /2πH c2 (0)] 1/2 following pair-breaking theory In the next section in order to verify the possible VG nature of the zero-resistive state in these samples, we compare the resistance and the IVC experimental data with predictions for VG phase We start our analysis with the resistance behavior. The usual method involves verification of the vanishing linear resistance (R lin ) on the approach to the T g from above Here, D is the dimensionality of the system, ν is the static exponent of the diverging vortex-glass correlation length ξ g ∼ |T -T g | -ν , and z is the dynamic exponent for the correlation time τ g ∼ ξ z g . Accordingly, the established method to extract the T g and critical exponents Figure Figure These two high-current features, the jump and the change of slope, require some comments. As it is visible in Fig. Before turning to these issues, it is instructive to proceed first with the analysis of the IVC data using scaling laws of the VG theory, which are customarily done in order to validate the VG picture. The scaling law predicts that the I-V curves near the T g can be scaled into two distinct branches (f ± ) above and below the T g , The black and red arrows show T R g 's and Tg's determined by resistance and IVC's analysis, respectively. The light green areas in show the regions in which strong pinning theory At the T g the I-V isotherm should satisfy the power law: The problem encountered during such analysis is the proper choice of the T g value. Let us point out first that the T R g isotherms may be already affected by creep effects (particularly in case of thinner sample), and this invalidates scaling. Therefore, either the T g is larger than T R g , or the scaling is not valid at all in the present case. In order to settle this issue we select the T g following the standard procedure, which involves plotting the derivative d(log V )/d(log I) versus I, and looking for the temperature T g , at which this plot follows a horizontal line, separating data sets with opposite concavities on decreasing I, downward at T > T g , and upward at T < T g However, it is important to point out here that the choice of the appropriate data sets for defining of the T g is somewhat tricky, particularly in case of the film with d = 7.4 nm, for which the difference between upward and downward curvature is very gradual. This produces larger uncertainty of the T g value in case of the thinnest film. Moreover, the procedure may be affected by two effects. First, finite size effect may modify the shape of the isotherms, leading to Ohmic tails at current density smaller than about J min ∼ k B T /(2πΦ 0 d 2 ) The marginal applicability of scaling analysis does not mean that the VG phase is nonexistent in the films (vanishing resistance is clearly seen at small current values), but it indicates increasing inhomogeneity with decreasing film thickness. Various forms of disorder contribute to this effect. For example, the proximity of the niobiumsilicon interface may lead to small admixture of Si ions into Nb layer, creating point defects, and the surface layer in which these defects are present plays increasingly important role with decreasing film thickness. However, we will show in the next section that the disorder which has the most impact on SC state in the films is related to imperfect fusion of polycrystalline grains. Such grains, which appear during the process of film growth, coalescence into smooth film with increasing film thickness. In very thin films this coalescence is not complete, producing amorphous regions at the grain boundaries. This leads to increasing role of disorder with decreasing d, what may likely lead to fragmented superconductivity at some smaller d. In the present case of polycrystalline films the SC state still appears to be global at low T , but the disorder enhances the chance of creep appearing with increasing current. In Fig. Before the end of this section we return to comment briefly on the observation of intermediate resistive states, evident in Fig. We now turn attention to a more detailed assessment of vortex dynamics in the SC state at current densities below I c1 in the presence of external magnetic field. We focus on the regime of creep, which is marked by light green color in Fig. The method of extraction of the I c value from experimental data is illustrated in Fig. Using the I c and the films dimensions we determine the temperature dependence of the critical current density J c , which is presented in Fig. where J c0 is the T = 0 critical current density, and m is the exponent in the t-dependence. The behavior described by Eq.( The exponent m is seen to be dependent on the film thickness as well (inset to Fig. More insight into this behavior is provided by the evaluation of the I -V data using strong pinning theory introduced by Buchacek et al. , where F c is the critical force density, while exponent α and the coefficient U c depend on the type of pinning; in the strong pinning theory α = 3/2 for any smooth pinning potential. Finally, this results in the modified current-voltage relation, which may be compared with experiment Here I c , R F F and V c are experimentally-accessible parameters (depinning current, flux flow resistance, and V c = R F F I c , respectively), while U c /k B T and v th /v c are two parameters characteristic for creep behavior to be extracted from the fit of Eq. ( where γ = -ln(v th /v c ). small, but they increase with the approach to the T c , in accordance with theoretical predictions which resembles t-dependence of J c given by Eq. ( Coefficient U c0 (U c at t = 0) extracted from the fits is shown in Fig. In order to get more unified picture of the observed behavior of the U c (t), in Fig. Following our discussion of the J c (t) behavior we propose to interpret these findings as the evidence of two distinct mechanisms of pinning, δl in case of large n (n > 1), and δT c when n is small n ≈ 0.5. According to such picture, the results for thickest film indicate observation of δl pinning, while in thinner films the pinning of δT c -type is present in high-t range, close to the T c , as evidenced by red line in Fig. It is interesting to evaluate d-dependence of the U c0 in the low-t range, in which, according to our proposal, single pinning mechanism δl exists. In Fig. Our observations are summarized in phase diagrams, which we propose for two thinner films in Fig. We now discuss possible origins of two different pinning mechanisms, and the saturation region in thinnest film. Point defects, such as created by small interdiffusion of Si atoms into Nb layer, may be excluded from considerations, since such defects, of the atomic size, does not lead to strong pinning effects. Instead, more extended defects, of the size of about coherence length (11 nm in the present case) should be considered. In polycrystalline thin films, which grow by island growth, the most common defect structure contributing to strong pinning originates from the grain boundaries. The polycrystalline grains, of the size 3-5 nm, have been observed by us previously by transmission electron microscopy in the films deposited by magnetron sputtering, similar to the films used in present study; in fact, grain boundary scattering leads to specific dependence of the normal-state resistance on the film thickness, R N ∼ d -2 During the film deposition the island formation is initiated first, followed by coalescence of the islands into smooth film, which, however, leaves slight depression in between the grains, leading to small surface modulation. Experiments on imaging of Nb films with thickness of about 30-80 nm indicate that such modulation, of the lateral size comparable to the coherence length, and of the height not exceeding 10 % of film thickness, forms efficient pinning sites in films Note that we propose to connect the origin of both pinning mechanisms to the same structural imperfections in the films, i.e. grain boundaries, however, with the decrease of film thickness some of these imperfections, randomly distributed, evolve into amorphous inclusions. This interpretation suggests that the region in the phase diagram, in which δl pinning is the sole mechanism re-sponsible for pinning of vortices, should be rapidly suppressed on decreasing film thickness, so that at some film thickness d 0 the δl pinning will be completely replaced by a mixture of δl and δT c mechanisms. This picture is consistent with the d-dependence of U c0 estimated from low-t region and displayed in Fig. Finally, we should address the origins of the saturation region in the phase diagram of the thinnest film. Since the saturation occurs close to the boundary between δT c and δl regions, it is natural to suspect that the competition between two different mechanisms of pinning is responsible for this effect. In the vicinity of the boundary the activation barriers produced by these two types of pins become very close. This likely leads to frustration in the pinning landscape, what facilitates easier creep of vortices, and is reflected in saturation of the U c . The effect is strong in case of thinnest film, because the density of amorphous regions at grain boundaries is large in this film. On the other hand, in thicker film with d = 8.5 nm much smaller density of amorphous grain boundaries produces very narrow saturation region, which is not observed in experiment. In summary, we have used resistance and currentvoltage characteristics measurements in perpendicular magnetic field to study the vortex dynamics in thin Nb films with thickness in the range between 7.4 nm and 44 nm. Standard methods, including scaling laws, are applied to identify the VG transition temperature. While quasi-2D VG transition is confirmed in case of the thickest film, with scaling exponents firmly within theoretically expected and previously reported values, the presence of creep in thinner films complicates this identification, resulting in large uncertainty in the putative VG transition temperature and scaling exponents. The creep regime is subsequently analyzed using recent strong pinning theory. The T -dependence of the activation energy for vortex pinning U c , extracted from this analysis, reveals two quite distinct regimes of pinning, which we propose to identify with δl and δT c -type of pinning. The first of these regimes, δl, with slow increase of the U c /U c0 below T /T c = 1, is observed in thickest film. As the film thickness decreases, the second regime (δT c ) appears, characterized by faster growth of the U c /U c0 below T /T c = 1. We link these two different regimes with the grain boundaries existing in the films, which in thicker film produce carrier scattering, while in thinner films gradually evolve into amorphous inclusions, leading to local depression of the T c . Experimentally obtained T -dependence of the U c does not strictly follow existing theoretical predictions, what calls for more theoretical studies of the subject.