Electrical switching of magnetization is central to spintronics. Despite the enormous efforts on the spin torques and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) effects, some fundamental physics for electrical switching of magnetization is still missing as indicated by a number of remarkable longstanding puzzles. Here, we report the discovery of the long-range intralayer DMI effect widely existing in magnetic heterostructure, which is distinct from the yet-known DMI effects as it describes the chiral coupling of two orthogonal magnetic domains within the same magnetic layer via the mediation of an adjacent heavy metal layer. The long-range intralayer DMI generates a strong perpendicular effective magnetic field (H DMI z ) on the perpendicular magnetization. Characteristically, H DMI z varies with the sign/magnitude of the interfacial DMI constant, the applied in-plane magnetic fields, and the distribution of the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. The long-range intralayer DMI results in striking consequences including the strongly asymmetric current/field switching of perpendicular magnetization, hysteresis loop shift of perpendicular magnetization in the absence of in-plane direct current, and sharp, complete switching of perpendicular magnetization purely by an in-plane magnetic field. Utilizing the long-range intralayer DMI effect, we demonstrate programable, complete Boolean logic operations (i.e., AND, NAND, NOT, OR, and NOR) within a single spin-orbit torque device. These results will stimulate the investigation of the long-range intralayer DMI effect and its impacts on a variety of spintronic devices. Electrical switching of magnetization is central to spintronic memory and computing 1-3 . Despite the enormous investigations in the past two decades 1-8 , the understanding of in-plane current-induced switching of perpendicular magnetization remains elusive as indicated by a number of remarkable long-standing puzzles (see ref. Here, we report the discovery, the characteristics, and the applications of the long-range "intralayer" Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) effect, which is a new type of DMI that is distinct from the yetknown DMI effects (e.g., short-range interfacial DMI coupling of neighboring atomic spins within the same magnetic layer interfaced with a HM layer (Fig. Magnetic heterostructures for switching measurements (Fig. In the domain-wall depinning mechanism that typically dominates the current-induced switching process of PMA Hall bars (Fig. We also observe a significant asymmetry and shift effect in the magnetic field-driven magnetization switching experiments, in which there is no applied direct current and thus no spin-orbit torque. During the field switching experiment, a small sinusoidal electric field of ≈1.5 kV/m is used as the excitation for the detection of the anomalous Hall signal using a lock-in amplifier. The anomalous Hall resistance hysteresis loops are measured by sweeping the external magnetic field in the xz plane (Hxz) at different fixed polar angles (θH) (see Fig. deviates from the 1/cosθH scaling asymmetrically around θH = ±90 o , which is contrary to the conventional chiral domain wall depinning model that assumes a critical role of the interfacial DMI, H sw xz = H sw z /cosθH, and a constant H sw z . The anomalous Hall hysteresis loops are then measured by sweeping the perpendicular magnetic field (Hz) under given in-plane magnetic fields (Hx). Strikingly, all the samples in this work exhibit a strong hysteresis loop shift in the absence of any direct current (see Fig. Next, we show that the nature of the perpendicular magnetic field suggested by the asymmetric switching and the loop shift is most likely the effective field of a "long-range intralayer DMI torque" on the perpendicular magnetization of magnetic layers with finite magnetic anisotropy fluctuations. As schematically shown in Fig. The in-plane magnetic domain is expected to exert an effective perpendicular DMI field on the perpendicular domain, in analog to the interlayer DMI of a vertical trilayer of perpendicular FM/HM/in-plane FM or where the DMI vector D ⃗ ⃗ 12 = ζ D r̂1×r̂2. Here, r̂1,2 is the unit vector linking the mediate HM atom and interacting moment M ⃗⃗ 1,2, D is the interfacial DMI constant of the HM/FM interface, ζ is a parameter related to the dimensions of the interacting domains since the intralayer DMI is expected to be the strongest between the spins near the domain wall boundaries and decays between spins further away within the in-plane and outof-plane domains. For simplicity, we only consider the DMI coupling between the perpendicular M ⃗⃗ 2 and the magnetic component that is orthogonal to M ⃗⃗ 2 (noted as in-plane M ⃗⃗ 1) because any perpendicular component (M ⃗⃗ perpendicular) of a tilted domain or domain wall will have no DMI coupling with M ⃗⃗ 2 for any DMI effects (i.e., M ⃗⃗ perpendicular× M ⃗⃗ 2 = 0). The collection of the in-plane component of a magnetic domain, which is the only part at work for the intralayer DMI effect in this study, is effectively an in-plane macrospin for the perpendicular domain M ⃗⃗ 2. The effective magnetic field of the long-range intralayer DMI exerted on the perpendicular moment M ⃗⃗ 2 via the in-plane moment M ⃗⃗ 1 is H ⃗ ⃗ DMI = -D ⃗ ⃗ 12 ×M ⃗⃗ 1, which has a perpendicular component of where β is the azimuth angle of D ⃗ ⃗ 12 relative to the in-plane moment M ⃗⃗ 1. Equation ( We also note that the occurrence of the long-range intralayer DMI is interesting but not too surprising in terms of the chiral coupling distance. When the effective PMA field Hk is much greater than any applied inplane magnetic field, the domain wall width (∆) of an ultrathin PMA sample can be estimated by where N2πMs 2 is the magnetostatic shape anisotropy of the domain wall and the demagnetizing factor N is approximately (1+∆/tFM) -1 for the Bloch domain wall Therefore, Equation ( For the NOR and OR gates (Fig. We have presented the discovery of the long-range "intralayer" DMI effect in magnetic layers adjacent to heavy metals, i.e., the HM-mediated chiral coupling of two orthogonal magnetic domains separated by a magnetic domain wall within the same magnetic layer. The "intralayer" DMI exerts a strong out-of-plane effective magnetic field (H DMI z ) on the perpendicular magnetization, in analog to the interlayer DMI of the FM/HM/FM trilayers In addition, we have also observed an unexpected increase and reduction of the perpendicular coercivity due to the in-plane magnetic field (Fig. 