Motivated by the recent findings on the T -linear electronic scattering rate in the two-dimensional Hubbard model, we have investigated the three-orbital Emery model and its temperature-dependent electronic and quasiparticle scattering rates by adopting dynamical cluster quantum Monte Carlo simulations. By focusing on two characteristic site energies εp of O-2p orbital relevant to cuprates and nickelates separately, our exploration discovered that, for εp = 3.24 relevant to cuprates, the scattering rate can exhibit a linear-T dependence at low temperature for a range of intermediate densities. In contrast, for larger εp = 6.0 presumably relevant to nickelates, a wide range of densities support a downturn of the scattering rate below the temperature scale T ∼ 0.1 with possibly two consecutive nearly linear-T regimes connected via a smooth crossover around T ∼ 0.1. Furthermore, the temperature dependent quasiparticle scattering rate generically departs from the unity slope as predicted by the Planckian dissipation theory. Our presented work provides valuable insights on the extensively studied three-orbital Emery model, particularly on the quantitative examination of non-Fermi liquid features of scattering rates. As a central topic in condensed matter physics, non-Fermi liquid (NFL) phenomenology is ubiquitous and has been extensively studied in a wide variety of materials One significant issue in the study of unconventional superconductors (SC) is the proper minimal model that captures the essential low-energy physics. In spite of the success of the one-band Hubbard model and its variants in understanding unconventional SC, their common intrinsic assumption is that the parent compounds, which are sometimes charge transfer insulators, e.g. cuprate SC Alternatively, the three-orbital Emery model To this goal, we have explored the NFL behavior of the electronic scattering rate of the two-dimensional Emery model in different doping levels. The additional O degree of freedom introduces one important tuning parameter, namely the site energy ε p of O-2p orbital compared to the 3d orbital (ε d = 0 is fixed). Considering that the recent discovered nickelate SC The three-orbital Emery model where d † i,σ (d i,σ ) creates (annihilates) a hole with spin σ (=↑,↓) in d x 2 -y 2 orbital at site i; while p † j,α,σ (p j,α,σ ) creates (annihilates) a hole with spin σ (=↑,↓) in the p α (α = x, y) orbital. n d iσ = d † iσ d iσ are the number operators; ⟨.⟩ means a sum over nearest-neighbor orbitals. U dd and U pp are the strengths of the d and p on-site interactions, respectively. The chemical potential μ controls the total hole density ρ, where ε d and ε p are the site energies of the d and p orbitals respectively. t ijα pd = t pd (-1) ηij and t jj ′ αα ′ pp = t pp (-1) β jj ′ are the nearest-neighbor d-p and p-p hopping integrals. In the hole language, η ij and β jj ′ take values ±1 following the conventions. In hole language, the phase convention is η ij = 1 for j = i + 1 2 x, α = x or j = i -1 2 y, α = y and η ij = 0 for j = i -1 2 x, α = x or j = i+ 1 2 y, α = y. In addition, β jj ′ = 1 for j ′ = j-1 2 x-1 2 y or j ′ = j + 1 2 x+ 1 2 y and β jj ′ = 0 for for j ′ = j -1 2 x+ 1 2 y or j ′ = j + 1 2 x -1 2 y, α = x and α ′ = y or α = y and α ′ = x, respectively. Other conventions are also applicable due to the gauge invariance In this work, we have endeavored to solve the twodimensional three-orbital Emery model at low temperatures using the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) Our focused physical quantity is the electronic scattering rate γ k ≡ -ImΣ(K, ω = 0), which is extracted from a m-th order polynomial extrapolation of -ImΣ (m) (K, iω n ) in lowest Matsubara frequencies. Although the m value can affect the extrapolation generically, our results show qualitatively similar trend of T dependence at low temperatures so that normally m = 2 is chosen Most of our calculations were conducted with N c =16 sites DCA cluster for fine enough but still computationally manageable momentum space resolution including nodal K = (π/2, π/2) and antinodal K = (π, 0) directions. Despite of its accuracy, the relatively large N c = 16 does not allow accessing low enough temperatures due to QMC sign problem so that some simulations using N c = 4 provide further insights on the lowest temperature features in spite of the lack of the self energy at the nodal direction. Fortunately, different N c lead to quite similar results for high dopings (large ρ) and large ε p . At lower dopings, however, it is not the case anymore so that adopting small N c = 4 can lead to deviations from the physical reality and require more careful examination. Another aspect is the momentum differentiation of the scattering rate, namely the deviation between nodal and antinodal directions, which is conventionally associated with the pseudogap (PG) features A. εp = 3.24 eV for cuprates havior due to its closeness to the charge transfer insulator at half-filling ρ = 1.0. This trend changes to the typical pseudogap (PS) feature akin to the single band model As the doping becomes progressively heavier (when ρ reaches 1.2 or higher), the linear T dependence of γ k at both directions extend to T → 0. Our simulation indicate that the slope of γ k (T ) at two directions are almost the same in a wide range of densities as evidenced in panels (c-f). Interestingly, further hole doping at ρ > 1.25 leads to the nearly isotropic γ k (T ), namely independent on the K direction. This is evidenced by the overlap of the local scattering rate Γ(T ) with the momentum-resolved γ k (T ) for intermediate density range as shown in panels (d-f). It is discovered that the linear-in-T scattering rate persists for quite a wide density regime around ρ ∼ 1.2-1.5, which extends to heavily doped side. Only at even higher density ρ > 1.5, γ k (T ) deviates from the linear evolution at low temperatures. Note that in fact we cannot determine the physical behavior of γ k (T ) at even lower temperatures, where the evolution can change in a qualitative manner. One additional interesting feature lies in the behavior of the local scattering rate Γ at high density, where it deviates from the overlapped γ k of nodal and antinodal directions, which arises from the slightly different behavior at other directions e.g. K = (0, 0), (π, π). Therefore, the truly isotropic scattering rate only applies for the intermediate density regime. The caveat here is that physically the scattering rate should remain non-negative. Nonetheless, the interception of the linear fit (extrapolating γ k to zero via γ k ∼ aT + b) leads to a non-physical γ k (T = 0) < 0. In fact, our simulated curves all show quite small positive or even negative γ k (T = 0). Hence, higher order corrections such as quadratic evolution might develop in γ k at lower T as the indication of the onset of Fermi liquid physics or more complicated NFL features. Unfortunately, our simulations are limited by the severe sign problem for large enough N c so that the physics at T → 0 is not accessible at least for DCA simulations. As discussed previously in the literature More detailed comparison between various situations are displayed in the bottom row of Fig. Firstly, the distinction from the ε p = 3.24 situation is that, at the same density, γ k is globally larger than the values for ε p = 3.24, indicating stronger interaction effects. Note that our model does not include the explicit U pp (to avoid the severe sign problem but its role needs further exploration) so that the sole player governing the electronic interaction seems originating from U dd while it normally leads to momentum differentiation, whose absence in our simulations prompts additional reasons for the observed larger scattering rates. Physically, the large ε p discourages the charge carriers locating onto the p orbitals so that the effectively more carrier density on d orbital induces stronger interaction effects from U dd . The charge redistribution with different ε p can be clearly seen in Fig. Secondly, γ k is almost isotropic with respect to K regardless of the density except for very low hole doping ρ = 1.05 in panel (a). This is further evidenced by the overlap between the local scattering rate Γ and the momentum-resolved γ k in most cases. Owing to this observation, it is plausible to examine the fate of γ k at lower temperature by adopting smaller N c = 4 DCA cluster, which will be discussed later. The most prominent feature for ε p = 6.0 is that the linear-T dependence of γ k occurs only for a limited temperature interval at small density like ρ = 1.05 in panel (a) or large density ρ = 1.7 in panel (h) in spite of the extrapolated negative interception at T = 0. In contrast, for intermediate densities, γ k exhibits a downturn as the temperature decreases as shown in panels (c-g). This phenomena is similar to the recent findings for single band Hubbard model in triangular lattice that is claimed to originate from two types of mechanism The intriguing downturn features motivates us to further explore the associated physics at lower temperatures. Whereas the effectively stronger interaction effects for larger ε p = 6.0 does not allow us to get access to lower temperatures, the isotropy of the scattering rate revealed in two consecutive nearly linear-T regimes of antinodal γ k connected via a smooth crossover around T ∼ 0.08 for intermediate densities as shown in panels (c-g). Nonetheless, this feature is only obvious for N c = 4 simulations while larger N c = 16 seemingly smooths these out so that might question the physical reality of this phenomenology in the Emery model. Despite of this uncertainty, this two linear regimes are still significant in terms of its similarity with other lattice models e.g. single band model in triangular lattice Physically, this is reminiscent of the recent experimental demonstration of the crossovers between different temperature regimes signaling the Fermi liquid (FL), strange metal (SM), and empirical high-temperature bad metal state (similar to the strange metal but does not host well-defined quasiparticle) Apart from the feature of two linear-T regimes, the low density limit shows saturated scattering rate, which cannot be seen at large N c = 16 simulations. This again implies for the intrinsically strong interaction effects arising from large ε p = 6.0. In contrast, at high density ρ = 1.7, the perfect agreement between N c = 4, 16 at high temperatures provides evidence on the crossover to the apparent T 2 behavior seen for N c = 4 curve at lower temperatures. This N c = 4 simulations complements our understanding of ultimate fate of the linear-T scattering rate with an unphysical negative interception extrapolated to T = 0. In addition to the two characteristic values of ε p =3.24 and 6.0, Figure In the presence of electronic interaction, it is worthwhile further investigating the quasiparticle scattering rate or inverse quasiparticle life-time 1/τ k = Z k γ k , which differs from the electronic scattering rate γ k by the socalled quasiparticle weight Z k . The consideration of the quasipariticle scattering rate is essential to account for the many-body interaction effects within strongly correlated systems and is also more closely related to the experimental transport properties than the single particle electronic scattering rate γ k discussed earlier Numerically, Z k can be approximately evaluated One prediction of the Planckian dissipation theory Figure Fig. In summary, motivated by the recent numerical exploration of the non-Fermi liquid signatures in the singleband Hubbard model on square Our numerical simulations reveal that the systems with moderate site energy of p-orbital ε p = 3.24 relevant to cuprates support the linear-in-T scattering rates for a range of intermediate densities ρ = 1.2 -1.5, while the small densities feature PG behavior and large densities show the conventional Fermi liquid characterized by T 2 scattering rates. Nonetheless, in many cases, the interception at T = 0 is negative indicating that other factors have to be included to account for the physical reality. Our study also extends to the relatively large ε p = 6.0 presumably relevant to newly discovered nickelate SC. For these systems, the common feature lies in the downturn of the scattering rate below the temperature scale T ∼ 0.1. Our simulations at smaller DCA cluster N c = 4, which is reasonable owing to the isotropy of the scattering rate, confirms this observation by revealing two consecutive linear-T regimes of γ k . More simulations on other ε p values provide further evidence that only relatively large ε p would induce such a downturn of γ k . To have a complete understanding of the many-body effects, we also illustrated the behavior of quasiparticle scattering rate, which generically departs from the unity slope as the prediction of Planckian dissipation theory. The quasiparticle weight is monotonically increasing with the hole density as expected owing to the enhanced metallicity from the doped charge carriers. Overall, our numerical findings of the three-orbital Emery model generally match with those observed in two-dimensional Hubbard model The hole doping/density range of NFL state is very narrow. Hindered by the negative sign problem, however, we are unable to definitively identify the doping range exhibiting perfect linear-in-temperature behavior in large enough DCA cluster. Our presented work provides quantitative examination of linear-T features of the scattering rates in the celebrated Emery model. Because our current investigation only focused on the scattering rate but neglected other closely related physics such as SC and magnetic/charge ordering, some further directions deserve future exploration. For instance, the most recent transport experiments have revealed some relations between the superconducting T c and the strangemetal's slope A as T c ∼ √ A in the cuprate SC In addition, in light of the most recent experimental demonstration of the cuprate-like electronic structure of infinite-layer nickelates V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT