Training machine learning interatomic potentials often requires optimizing a loss function composed of three variables: potential energies, forces, and stress. The contribution of each variable to the total loss is typically weighted using fixed coefficients. Identifying these coefficients usually relies on iterative or heuristic methods, which may yield sub-optimal results. To address this issue, we propose an adaptive loss weighting algorithm that automatically adjusts the loss weights of these variables during the training of potentials, dynamically adapting to the characteristics of the training dataset. The comparative analysis of models trained with fixed and adaptive loss weights demonstrates that the adaptive method not only achieves a more balanced predictions across the three variables but also improves overall prediction accuracy. Machine learning inter-atomic potentials (ML-IAPs) can be broadly split into two types. The first is descriptor-based ML-IAP, in which the descriptors (or fingerprints) are used to describe the environment of the atoms in a system. Various descriptors have been proposed in the literature, such as Atom-Centered Symmetry Functions (ACSF) The training of most ML-IAPs involves minimizing a loss function, which measures the difference between the predicted outputs of the potential and the actual target value obtained from Ab initio simulations. Typically, an ML-IAP's loss function comprises three components: potential energy, atomic forces, and stress tensor, each weighted by a prefactor (i.e. loss weight). Most of current ML-IAPs assign a predefined loss weight to each component, which stays as a constant throughout the training process The approaches like DeepMD modulate these weights linearly during training, though the rationale and effectiveness of this approach are not fully clear The paper is structured as follows: first, we provide an overview of ML-IAPs based on neural networks, including the formulation of loss functions. Next, we introduce the principle and algorithm of adaptive loss weighting. Then, the results from models using adaptive methods are compared with those from models using fixed loss weights, in order to demonstrate the advantage of the adaptive method. Finally, the paper is concluded with a summary of main findings. The adaptive loss weighting algorithm can be applied to a wide range of ML-IAPs that require minimizing a loss function. In this study, to demonstrate its applicability, we implemented it within the framework of the Behler and Parrinello type of neural network potential In a descriptor-based neural network potential designed for a system with N atoms, the Cartesian coordinates of each atom i are denoted as r i = {r (1) , ..., r (N ) }, which are transformed into a descriptor vector G ij with M components, where j = 1, ..., M . While many descriptor types can be integrated with neural networks, in this study, atom-centered symmetry functions (ACSF) are utilized. The working principle of the neural network potential can be explained in Fig. where i is the index for individual atom that is described by a feature vector with M components. The atomic forces can be obtained from the negative gradients of the total potential energy with respect to the atomic positions, which can be expressed in terms of the derivatives of descriptors using a chain rule where r jα (α = 1, 2, 3) are the Cartesian coordinates of the j -th atom. The derivatives of descriptors, ∂G im /∂r jα , are fed to the network as additional inputs (represented by ∇G ij in Fig. In addition, for solid-state materials, Cauchy stress tensor can be used for training ML-IAPs, which can be written as where V is the current volume and NB i represents the neighbor list of atom i withing the cutoff distance r c . The derivation of Eq. ( The loss function for training neural network potential as well as many other types of ML-IAPs can be written as Eq. ( where α 1 , α 2 , and α 3 are the weight coefficients to balance each component towards the calculation of the total loss. The variables with hat refer to the true values from DFT calculations, and the Voigt notation is applied to stress components. Previous studies have indicated that training of ML-IAP with both energy and force is beneficial as it integrates data from potential energies and their gradients, leading to more stable predictions and a reduction in the quantity of data structures needed for effective training The loss term for stresses has also been shown to be beneficial in promoting transferability of the ML-IAP It is also noteworthy that most prior studies have limited their focus to only the potential energy and force components in training, which could lead to unsatisfactory stress predictions, as our later computation results will show. In previous studies, weight coefficients for ML-IAPs were typically kept constant during training. For instance, in a recent study, a series of ACE-based potentials were trained using various energy and force weight combinations on a copper dataset. The findings suggested that an 0.8 : 0.2 ratio of potential energy to force loss weight was optimal for performance In this study, we propose to dynamically adjust loss weights during the potential training process. This concept is inspired by the work of Heydari et al. k ← loss f n(y, h(x, θ)) Compute loss for current loss weights 5: k Compute total loss using current loss weights Append α end if 16: end for strategy, our method was designed to manage multipart loss functions by dynamically altering each loss weight. This is accomplished by continuously recalibrating the loss weights based on the change in loss values from one epoch to the next, ensuring a balanced optimization process without any single component becoming overly dominant. The advantages of this approach are twofold: it avoids the scenarios for certain loss components to disproportionately impact the training process and eliminates the need for manually determining the optimal fixed weight combination each time the material system or dataset changes. The proposed adaptive method is presented in Algorithm 1. To illustrate the machinery of the algorithm, we first re-write Eq. ( where l 1 , l 2 , and l 3 are the loss components for potential energy, forces, and stresses, respectively. The weight factor α k is calculated at the i-th epoch by where represents the rate of change of k-th loss component, scaled by a hyperparameter β. Eq. ( Due to lack of accessible datasets comprising high-fidelity stress data, we created a benchmark dataset using a two-dimensional Molybdenum Ditelluride (MoTe 2 ) as a model material. The dataset consists of a total of 3, 146 structures, evenly distributed between the 2H and 1T' phases of MoTe 2 . These structures are subjected to various tensile and compressive strains, both uniaxial and biaxial, ranging from -10% to 10%. The data include both the deformed equilibrium structures and the structures in which atoms are random perturbated, i.e., randomly drawn from a normal distribution with 0.1 Å standard deviation. All DFT calculations for data generation were performed using the plane-wave-based Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) The neural network models in this study are designed with a specific architecture, consisting of two hidden validation, and 10% testing. As dicussed in Section 2.2, while various weighting schemes have been used in the literature, a detailed study that simultaneously considers potential energy, forces, and stresses in the loss function and investigates their weightings' impacts on the training performance is still missing. To address this, we first conducted a sequence of studies focusing on the effects of fixed loss weights. This involved systematically varying these weights and analyzing their impact on the performance of the trained model in terms of predictive capabilities in comparison with DFT calculations. The results are shown in Table In model 1, where the loss function incorporates only potential energy, the model's predictions for the forces and stresses are notably poor. Additionally, the testing error for energy in this model is an order of magnitude higher than that of other models despite favorable training error. This suggests that the model trained with energy alone lacks generalization capabilities. In the case of model 2, which is trained on both potential energy and atomic forces, we observe good performance in predicting energy and forces. However, this approach leads to inaccurate stress predictions. Apparently, the absence of stress data during training notably deteriorates the model's ability to predict stress accurately. Although this was observed in this particular dataset, it is likely applicable to others as well. Model 3, which is trained on all three components delivers more balanced results across all metrics. The comparison between model 2 and 3 emphasizes the importance of incorporating stress data in training ML-IAPs to more accurately predict the stresses, in addition to energies and forces. Models 3 to 5 were each trained with distinct weight combinations, specifically designed to prioritize one of three variables: potential energy, force, or stress. The results showed that the weight coefficient for one variable improves its corresponding result but at the cost of reducing accuracy in the other one or two variables. Specifically, model 3, which prioritized potential energy, exhibited the lowest testing loss for potential energy but did so by sacrificing stress prediction accuracy. Model 4, focusing on force, achieved the lowest force testing loss, but compromising energy and stress accuracy. Similarly, model 5 achieved the best results for stress at the expense of potential energy and force accuracy. This observed trade-off pattern suggests that previously reported approaches, which favor the forces during potential training (such as α 1 : α 2 = 1 : 10) As discussed in the previous section, achieving optimal results for potential energy, force, and stress simultaneously may require iteratively adjusting the loss weight ratios based on material and dataset characteristics. By contrast, we propose the Softadapt method to dynamically balance each term's contribution to the loss function. In this section, the results of models trained using Softadapt are compared with those trained using fixed weights. For a fair comparison, all neural network models implementing the adaptive algorithm were configured with the same architecture and activation function to their fixed weight counterparts. The results of models trained with Softadapt algorithm are presented in Table We proposed an adaptive loss weighting method to dynamically adjust the contribution of penitential energy, force, and stress, based on their corresponding loss values during the training of machine learning interatomic potentials. Leveraging a benchmark dataset, we conducted a comparative analysis between models trained with fixed and adaptive loss weights. The key findings are summarized as follows. • Stress data proves critical for the accurate prediction of stress values when training machine learning potentials. • Models employing fixed loss weights yield imbalanced predictions for potential energy, force, and stress, as they enhance the accuracy of a prioritized variable at the expense of others. • Models utilizing the adaptive algorithm demonstrate an ability to balance the contributions of the three variables, thereby yielding more balanced and accurate predictions. layers, each containing 30 neurons. A hyperbolic tangent function serves as the activation mechanism. The optimization is performed using the Adam optimizer, set at a learning rate of 0.001. Training of these models