All-optical signal processing based on nonlinear optical devices is promising for ultrafast information processing in optical communication systems. Recent advances in two-dimensional (2D) layered materials with unique structures and distinctive properties have opened up new avenues for nonlinear optics and the fabrication of related devices with high performance. This paper reviews the recent advances in research on third-order optical nonlinearities of 2D materials, focusing on all-optical processing applications in the optical telecommunications band near 1550 nm. First, we provide an overview of the material properties of different 2D materials. Next, we review different methods for characterizing the third-order optical nonlinearities of 2D materials, including the Z-scan technique, third-harmonic generation (THG) measurement, and hybrid device characterization, together with a summary of the measured n2 values in the telecommunications band. Finally, the current challenges and future perspectives are discussed. All-optical signal processing based on nonlinear optical devices is an attractive technique for ultrahigh speed signal processing for optical communication systems. It offers broad operation bandwidths, ultra-high processing speeds, together with low power consumption and potentially reduced footprint and cost. Integrated nonlinear optical photonic chips have been based on a few key materials including silicon (Si) quantum entangling To overcome these limitations, newly emerging materials have attracted significant attention, particularly 2D layered materials, such as graphene Graphene, and its derivative, graphene oxide (GO), have been intensely studied due to their excellent mechanical, electrical, and optical properties Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) with the formula of MX2 (where M is a transition metal and X is a chalcogen), is another widely studied family of 2D materials. Different to the semimetal graphene, monolayer TMDCs, such as MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, are typically semiconductors that have bandgaps from 1 eV to 2.5 eV, covering the spectral range from the near infrared to the visible region Black phosphorus (BP) is another attractive single element 2D layered material which has been widely studied. It has a puckered crystal structure, yielding a strong in-plane anisotropy in its physical properties in the "armchair" and "zigzag" directions, opening new avenues for anisotropic electronic and optoelectronic devices A wide range of other novel 2D low-dimensional materials have been investigated, including h-BN, MXenes, perovskites, as well as MOFs, which greatly enriches the family of 2D materials. h-BN is an electrical insulator with a large bandgap of around 5.9 eV MXenes belong to another family of 2D materials, including 2D transition metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides. Typically, the electronic structure of MXenes can be tuned by varying the surface functional groups. For instance, nonterminated Ti3C2 theoretically resembles a typical semimetal with a finite density of states at the Fermi level, whereas it can transition to a semiconductor when terminated with surface groups, such as OH and F groups Organometal-halide perovskites have a general formula of ABX3, where typically A = CH3NH3 + , B = Pb 2+ , and X = I -, Br -, Cl -or mixtures With their excellent third-order optical nonlinearities, 2D materials are promising functional materials for high-performance nonlinear optical devices. In this section, we review the different methods used to characterize their third-order nonlinear optical response. These include the Z-scan technique, THG measurement, and hybrid device characterization. We also summarize and compare the measured n2 values of different 2D materials in the telecommunications band. The nonlinear optical response of a material in the dipole approximation is given by (1) where the P ̃(t) is the material electronic polarization, E ̃(t) is the incident field, χ (n) are the n th -order nonlinear optical susceptibility. The first-order term χ (1) describes the linear refractive index including refraction and absorption and is a result of the dipole response of bound and free electrons to a single photon Equation ( where ω σ = ω 1 + ω 2 + ω 3 , with ω 1 , ω 2 , and ω 3 denoting the angular frequencies. Different χ (3) effects can be described with different wave frequency combinations, such as THG ( χ (3) (ω σ = 3ω 1 ; ω 1 , ω 1 , ω 1 ) ), non-degenerate FWM ( χ (3) (ω σ = ω 1 + ω 2 -ω 3 ; ω 1 , ω 2 , -ω 3 )) and degenerate FWM (χ (3) (ω σ = 2ω 1 -ω 2 ; ω 1 , ω 1 , -ω 2 )). A key component of χ (3) given by n where n2 is the intensity-dependent refractive index change, known as the Kerr effect and the complex refractive index n can be expressed as where I is the light intensity, λ is the wavelength, n2 represents the Kerr coefficient or Kerr nonlinearity, α2 is the nonlinear absorption induced by the third-order susceptibility χ (3) , and n0 , α0 are the linear refractive index and absorption, respectively. In this paper, we focus on χ (3) of 2D materials for key nonlinear processes that form the basis for ultra-high speed all-optical signal generation and processing, with response times on the order of femtoseconds Measuring the Kerr coefficient of a material is needed in order to design and fabricate nonlinear optical devices. The Z-scan method, introduced in the 1990s [104] is an elegant method to measure the third-order optical Kerr nonlinearity of a material. This technique involves open-aperture (OA) and closed-aperture (CA) measurements, which can be used to measure the third-order nonlinear absorption and nonlinear refraction, respectively. CA Z-scan method is widely used to measure the nonlinear refractive index (Kerr coefficient) of an optical material. The valley-peak and peak-valley transmission curves are the typical results of the CA measurement, as shown in Figure For the CA Z-scan method, the normalized transmittance can be written as where x = z/z 0 , z 0 = kω 0 2 /2 with ω 0 the beam waist radius and k the wave vector. ∆Φ 0 represents the on-axis phase shift at the focus, is defined as In equation ( beyond what a single material can provide, and there has been significant activity in this field To investigate laser tunable optical nonlinearities, an in-situ third-order Kerr nonlinearity measurment for GO films has been conducted with the Z-scan method In addition to Z-scan method, another technique that can be used to directly characterize the third-order optical nonlinearity of a material is THG measurement. As introduced in section 3.1, THG is a fundamental third-order optical nonlinear process in which three photons at the same frequency (ω1) excite the nonlinear media to generate new signal (ω = 3ω1). Measuring the THG of a material provides a direct method to characterize its third-order optical nonlinearity. Figure To quantitatively analyze the THG effect, an equation for the THG intensity (I 3ω ), can be introduced where n ̃ω and n ̃3ω are the complex refractive indexes at the fundamental and harmonic wavelengths, respectively, α is the absorption coefficient at the THG wavelength, Δk is the phase mismatch between the fundamental and harmonic waves, and χ (3) is the third-order susceptibility of the sample. By fitting the THG data with Equation ( [113] investigated the gate-tuneable THG of graphene. Figure The THG intensity was found to be sensitive to the number of GaTe layers (Figure They obtained a large ꭓ (3) of ⁓ 2 × 10 -16 m 2 /V 2 . Z-scan and THG measurements are usually employed to characterize the material property directly. While on the one hand, the properties of a material form the basis for applications to electronic and optical devices, the reverse is true -device performance can also provide key information about the material properties. A typical example is field effect transistors (FETs) which have been one of the main techniques to evaluate the electrical properties of 2D materials. Optical structures and waveguides can also be exploited to characterize the material optical properties. By integrating 2D materials with photonic cavities and optical waveguides, the third-order optical nonlinearity of atomically thin 2D material has been characterized by measuring the nonlinear optical responses of the hybrid devices, such as FWM where λ is the central wavelength, D is the integral of the optical fields over the material regions, Sz is the time-averaged Poynting vector calculated using mode solving software, n0 (x, y) and n2 (x, y) are the refractive index profiles calculated over the waveguide cross section and the Kerr coefficient of the different material regions, respectively. FWM is a fundamental third-order nonlinear optical process that has been widely used for all optical signal generation and processing, including wavelength conversion and measured the FWM CE with different pump and signal detuning wavelengths around 1550 nm, as shown in Figures SPM is another third-order nonlinear optical process that can be used to characterize the optical nonlinearity of 2D materials. By using different characterization techniques discussed above, Kerr coefficient n2 or THG χ (3) value of graphene, GO, TMDCs, BP, and different heterostructures at telecommunication wavelengths have been obtained. In Table Despite these remarkable achievements, challenges still exist for engineering the nonlinear optical properties of 2D materials. First, accurate and efficient characterization of the linear and nonlinear optical properties remains challenging. Although the Z-scan method has been highly successful, the very weak Z-scan signals of ultra-thin films limit its applications in mono-or few layer 2D materials, especially for the layer-dependent measurements. In contrast, integrating 2D films with optical waveguides provides a powerful method to obtain accurate nonlinear parameters of atomic-thin 2D materials by analyzing the nonlinear optical performance of the hybrid device. However, the complicated device fabrication process and resulting relatively low efficiency make this method unsuitable for rapid material characterization which is required for future industrial applications. Second, 2D materials are a large family which include thousands of different materials. For applications of the third-order optical nonlinearity in the telecommunications band, only a very small fraction of them have been investigated. Many newer materials, such as perovskites, MOFs, and graphdiyne, still need more research, which hinders the full exploitation of 2D materials in the fabrication of nextgeneration nonlinear optical devices. Finally, tuning or engineering the properties of materials is important for both optimizing the device performance and enabling new functionalities, as well as the fundamental study of 2D materials. Nevertheless, current advances in the study of third-order optical nonlinearities of 2D materials focus mainly on their fundamental properties. The relative lack of effective methods of tuning the material properties poses another obstacle for 2D materials to move forward to practical device fabrication. While challenges remain and more work is needed, there is no doubt that 2D materials will underpin key breakthroughs and greatly accelerate the developments of next-generation nonlinear optical devices for many applications, particularly high bandwidth optical communications systems. In conclusion, we review recent progress in the study of the third-order optical nonlinearities of 2D materials in the telecommunications wavelength band. We introduce the representative 2D materials, together with their basic material properties followed by a discussion of the main methods for characterizing the third-order optical nonlinearity, reviewing recent achievements in the field. These advances highlight the significant potential of 2D materials in enabling high-performance nonlinear optical devices for all-optical processing functions in optical communications systems. Funding: Please add: This research received no external funding.