We report the physical properties of ThRu3Si2 featured with distorted Ru kagome lattice. The combined experiments of resistivity, magnetization and specific heat reveal bulk superconductivity with Tc = 3.8 K. The specific heat jump and calculated electron-phonon coupling indicate a moderate coupled BCS superconductor. In comparison with LaRu3Si2, the calculated electronic structure in ThRu3Si2 shows an electron-doping effect with electron filling lifted from 100 meV below flat bands to 300 meV above it. This explains the lower superconducting transition temperature and weaker electron correlations observed in ThRu3Si2. Our work suggests the Tc and electronic correlations in kagome superconductor could have intimate connection with the flat bands. Recently, compounds with kagome lattice have attracted lots of attentions for the unique electronic structure and magnetic frustration Recently, new kagome lattice compound CsCr 3 Sb 5 , with flat bands closely above the Fermi level, present moderate electronic correlations and unconventional SC under pressure of ∼4 GPa In this work, we carried out a detailed investigation on the superconductivity and normal state of ThRu 3 Si 2 . The measurements of resistivity, magnetism and specific heat demonstrate bulk SC below 3.8 K. Our experimental results suggest a moderate coupled BCS superconductor with electron correlations. Besides, compared with LaRu 3 Si 2 , the calculated band structure using first-principles density functional-theory (DFT) shows electron-doping effect, with the Fermi level shift from be- low the flat band to above it. ThRu 3 Si 2 polycrystal was synthesized through arc melting. Firstly, the high-purity thorium metal was extracted from thorium oxide as previous reported The resistivity shows metallic behavior with a large hump below 300 K as present in Fig. The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured in zero-field cooling (ZFC) and fieldcooling (FC) modes as shown in Fig. . The H c1 (0), lower critical field at 0 K, is about 89.9(1) Oe. The susceptibility under field of 1 T is nearly independent of temperature above 150 K, and the tail at low temperature is possibly induced by tiny paramagnetic impurities or defects, as present in Fig. The temperature dependence of specific heat C p (T ) is present in Fig. where the μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter with a typical value of 0.13. The λ ep value for ThRu 3 Si 2 is 0.57, which is close to the values of 0.67 in LaRu 3 Si 2 (θ D = 412 K and T c = 7.8 K) and 0.5 in YRu 3 Si 2 To get more insights into the properties of ThRu 3 Si 2 , the density of electronic states and electronic band structure are calculated based on density-functional theory. Fig. Fig. For comparison, we list the physical parameters of LaRu 3 Si 2 and ThRu 3 Si 2 in Table In summary, the bulk superconductivity of kagome metal ThRu 3 Si 2 with T c = 3.8 K are investigated through resistivity, magnetism and specific heat measurements. The temperature dependence of upper critical field suggests two superconducting gaps in ThRu 3 Si 2 with H c2 (0) = 1.45 T, which is well below the Pauli limit. The specific heat jump and calculated electron-phonon coupling indicate a moderately electron-phonon coupled superconductor. On the other hand, affected by the flat bands, the electron correlation in ThRu 3 Si 2 is relatively weakened compared with LaRu 3 Si 2 . Since the Fermi level in ThRu 3 Si 2 shifts up about 400 meV arising from the introduction of extra electrons by substituting La with Th, the flat bands are further away from the Fermi level, which explains the reduction of DOS and electron correlations. Therefore, it is expectable that higher T c and stronger electron correlations may appear in Th slightly 