Recent reports of superconductivity in the vicinity of room temperature have been the subject of discussion by the community. Specifically, features in the resistance-temperature (R-T ) relations have raised questions. We show that many of these features can arise from previously unaccounted-for dynamic effects associated with the AC transport techniques often used in high-pressure experiments. These dynamic AC effects can can cause the apparent resistance (R apparent ) to diverge from the DC resistance (R DC ), sharpen measured superconducting transitions, and produce other features in the measured R-T response. We also show that utilizing the full output of phase-sensitive transport measurements provides a valuable probe of superconducting samples in difficult to measure systems. The discovery of very high-temperature superconductivity in pressurized hydrides has been a major milestone in the route to ambient (i.e., room temperature and pressure) superconductivity. Discoveries include superconducting critical temperatures (T c ) above 200 K in H 3 S Superconductors are characterized using both AC or DC transport methods Figure A common AC measurement technique relies on phasesensitive detection, i.e., lock-in amplification. Lock-in measurements can be modeled using standard in-phase (X ), quadrature (Y ), amplitude (|V |), and phase angle (θ) output signals from the amplifier. Mathematical definitions for each are provided in the Supplemental Information. The discussion will concern parasitic resistances, capacitances, and inductances that contribute to the signal. These parasitic effects are expected to be most prominent in small and/or inhomogeneous samples Transport measurements at high pressures are typically conducted using a four-probe geometry, sometimes referred to as a van der Pauw (VDP) configuration. It is important to note that while a VDP geometry is often stated for these experiments, this does not imply the VDP algorithm In a lock-in measurement, current-regulated sinusoidal signals of the form is injected into the sample through two points (I and II) by a regulated current source (Fig. is then measured across the other two contacts (III and IV), buffered via an active pre-amplifier, and then measured by a lock-in amplifier. Before taking any measurements, it must be ensured that excitation frequencies are within the pass band of all circuitry in the setup. Typically, effective in-phase and quadrature resistances are then defined in terms of X (t) and Y (t) using Ohms law as and respectively. A complex impedance, is then used to estimate R DC . For ohmic materials R ip (t, ω) >> R qd (t, ω), so the apparent resistance is estimated as R apparent (t, ω) = |Z (t, ω)| ≈ R DC (t) for a wide range of conditions. While the voltage across ideal ohmic materials is expected to remain in phase with the excitation current, all real materials exhibit dynamic electromagnetic effects with at least a diamagnetic effect present To understand how these dynamic effects contribute to the measured X and Y , the time-dependent I-V relation may be written where Z (ω, t) is the frequency-dependent impedance. This relation is then converted to phasor notation: where V(t, ω) is a complex sinusoidal voltage signal and H(t, ω) is a complex transfer function that is determined by the physical properties of the sample Modeling H of a system undergoing a complex electronic phase change, such as a granular superconductor, is achieved using passive electrical components (Fig. To capture the dynamics inherent to the AC measurement we choose to model the system using effective resistances, capacitances, and inductances representative of the normal state bulk properties. Previous models disregarded these dynamic effects and considered only resistive networks The admittance of the circuit (Fig. which may be inverted to produce the complex transfer function (Eq. 9). R{H(t, ω)} is the system in-phase steady-state response, which is proportional to X (t, ω) up to an ambiguous phase offset. I{H(t, ω)} is the steady-state quadrature response which is similarly proportional to Y (t, ω) up to a phase and We first consider the case of R apparent deviating from R DC for different resistive loads in this model with constant L = 1 mH and C = 1 nF, values similar to those measured in DAC experiments We now model the resistance as a function of temperature and pressure with R DC (T , P ), L eff (T , P ) and C s values assumed based on previously reported measurements of superconducting transitions under pressure is assumed, where Γ is a constant broadening factor and R DC (T ) is the temperature dependence of the resistance above T c . Inductive effects are magnetic and well described by Lenz's law in which any change in magnetic flux (Φ B ) generates a proportional back electromotive force (E Back ) determined by the sample's effective inductance (L eff ) In our model, the total effective inductance is described by a growing and decaying exponential surrounding T c modulated with a step function to account for the finite L self above T c . Model R(T ) and L eff (T ) relations that exhibit this effect are presented in Fig. We now consider the frequency dependence of these effects using the range of frequencies employed in these measurements (17 Hz to 10 kHz Additional features in R-T curves are present if the reactive contribution from C s is significant (e.g. Fig. We now discuss specific features in reported R-T measurements of hydride high T c superconductors that have given rise to criticisms and concerns (e.g., Refs. We now discuss examples of various features observed in specific high T c hydride materials. As discussed above, in the original study that led to the discovery of superconductivity in LaH 10 Other interesting features are apparent in the R-T curves of compressed H 3 S reportedly measured using an AC bridge circuit (f =13 Hz) (Fig. Superconductivity in the Lu-N-H system near ambient conditions remains a subject of continued investigations. There is evidence of superconductivity in the vicinity of room temperature and pressure in selected Lu-N-H samples We have shown that classical electrodynamics, circuit theory, and plausible values for the bulk electrical properties of the materials can explain features in reported R-T measurements of high T c hydride superconductors under pressure. In particular, we demonstrate that lineshapes in reported AC-based transport measurements that have been pointed out to be anomalous may be explained by considering all signal-processing effects. Many of the features observed in these measurements are expected for a superconducting transition. Sample dependent geometric effects are expected to alter the measured signals,e.g., a larger C s in an inhomogeneous material is expected to drastically enhance the measured Y (T, ω) signal at all frequencies. While instrumental and dynamic electrical effects may result in R apparent diverging from R DC , particularly near and above T c , the physicality of the superconducting transition is unambiguous. While these results are fully consistent with superconductivity, additional measurements using different techniques are, of course, needed to confirm the materials are superconductors. To accurately interpret results and avoid confusion all aspects of the measurements, including the experimental setup and relevant experimental parameters, should be reported (e.g., X , Y , |V | and θ). Analysis of these data can provide additional information about the state of potential superconducting samples. In general, phase sensitive detection exploits the fact that many periodic waveforms are orthogonal up to a phase (see Refs. [S1, S2]). In this work, we use sinusoidal waveforms which have the orthogonality relation, where ω n,m are frequencies and φ n,m are phase shifts. This relation allows for the isolation and detection of small periodic signals, A(t, ω). Even if the measured signal is noisy due to environmental or instrumental noise, by modulating it with a reference signal of known amplitude and ω then integrating over at least one period, A(t, ω) can be recovered. In practice, the SNR can be increased further by integrating over many periods. The orthogonality of the sinusoidal carrier wave 'averages out' any component of A(t, ω) that is not oscillating at ω. The amplifier then outputs the root mean square (RMS) of the signal that is in phase with the reference sinusoid as where τ is an integration time, φ ref is the reference signal phase, and φ A is the signal phase. The phase difference is then θ Typically φ ref is adjusted manually through a unity gain null detector in the lock-in input to ensure Y (t = 0, ω) = 0 before measurements are taken. As φ ip might drift throughout the experiment, whether due to sample properties or parasitic effects, a quadrature measurement (90 o out of phase from the reference signal) can also be measured and used to remove any phase ambiguity. This quadrature signal is given as For τ >> 2π ω equations S2 and S3 reduce to and respectively. To relate the measurements to physical values, output signals can be converted to polar coordinates and root mean square values can be converted into amplitudes, e.g, multiplying by √ 2 for sinusoidal carrier waves. Being mutually orthogonal, X (t, ω) and Y (t, ω) can be defined on a complex plane to give |A(t)| is then the output signal magnitude and θ(t) is the phase offset from the lock in reference signal. In this work |A| is used to denote the output magnitude as opposed to the more common R to avoid any ambiguity with resistance. Throughout this discussion, it is important to keep in mind that the lock-in amplifier only measures X (t, ω) and Y (tω) which are used to calculate with all instrumental noise and uncertainty propagated accordingly. In order to prevent pre-amplifier loading effects, the sample was electrically floating (main text Fig. In order to ensure the signal is not shunted to ground the sample is electrically floating and only a differential voltage is measured (main text Fig. 