Ensuring solid-state lithium batteries perform well across a wide temperature range is crucial for their practical use. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can provide valuable insights into the temperature dependence of the battery materials, however, the high computational cost of ab initio MD poses challenges for simulating ion migration dynamics at low temperatures. To address this issue, accurate machine-learning interatomic potentials were trained, which enable efficient and reliable simulations of the ionic diffusion processes in Li6PS5Cl over a large temperature range for long-time evolution. Our study revealed the significant impact of subtle lattice parameter variations on Li + diffusion at low temperatures and identified the increasing influence of surface contributions as the temperature decreases. Our findings elucidate the factors influencing lowtemperature performance and present strategic guidance towards improving the performance of solid-state lithium batteries under these conditions. Introduction.-A long-standing challenge for developing lithium ion batteries (LIBs) is to ensure their stable performance over a wide temperature range. However, in the lowtemperature regime, the LIBs encounter a series of challenges, including a decline in ionic conductivity, dendrite growth, and electrolyte freezing. In the past, various strategies have been tried to enable the use of conventional lithium-ion batteries with liquid organic electrolytes at low temperatures. These include i) incorporating additives into the electrolyte to decrease the Li + desolvation energy and enhance the transference number of lithium ions The solid-state lithium batteries are regarded as a promising candidate for the nextgeneration rechargeable techniques because of their potentials to achieve high energy den-sity and safety So far, there have been very few attempts in this regard. Heo et al. simulated the effect of microstructures on ion transport using the phase-field approach in the large system composed by Li 7-x La 3 Zr 2 O 12 (LLZO) garnet solid electrolyte particles In solid-state electrolytes, the sulfides always show higher ionic conductivity than oxides because of the weaker binding of Li-S bonds. Among them, LPSC has been extensively investigated due to its high potential technological importance, arising from its high ionic conductivity and low temperature processability In this work, we start by training a machinelearning model to obtain accurate interatomic potentials for the Li-P-S-Cl system, containing both bulk and surface structures in the training dataset, which enabled us to run MD simulations for large models up to 832 atoms and long duration up to 10 nanoseconds (ns) at various temperatures. By analyzing the MD data, we observed distinctive ion migration behaviors under high and low-temperature conditions. Our findings reveal that even minor alterations in lattice parameters exert a substantial influence on ionic conductivity at low temperatures, while their impact is negligible at elevated temperatures. Through simulations of ion transport in a model incorporating surfaces, we identified the predominance of surface transport at lower temperatures in LPSC. Theoretical methods and computational details.-The primary requirement for training a high-quality MLIP is to have a large and accurate dataset from first-principles calculations. To this end, the Atomic-orbital Based Ab-initio Computation at UStc (ABACUS) The Deep Potential Generator (DP-GEN) The Effectiveness of DPMD simulations.-The essential aspect of the present research is to make sure that the trained MLIP is sufficiently accurate, which can be judged by several criteria. The first necessary criterion is the small enough RMSE of the trained model in the energies and forces, as indicated above. In addition, the nearly perfect agreement between the equation of state (EOS) curves as yielded by DFT and MLIP also indicates the high accuracy of the trained deep-potential (DP) model (Fig. By utilizing the MLIP, the MD simulations can be easily extended to the time scale of nanoseconds. Longer simulation time enables the accumulation of more ionic migration events, providing sufficient data for statistically analyzing the MSD even at low temperatures. The blue points in Fig. The DPMD method is also employed for larger models to eliminate the finite-size effect in the simulations. The orange and green dots in Fig. Temperature Effects on Transport Behaviors.-As the temperature increases from low to high, the thermal vibrations of lattice atoms intensify, leading to a series of possible changes including the variations of lattice parameters, thermal expansion coefficients, degrees of lattice disorder, phase transitions, etc. Almost all of these factors are closely associated with the ion migration phenomenon. We carried out DPMD simulations with the NpT ensemble in LPSC unit cell for 1 ns and average the cell volume over the last 0. in Fig. To investigate the temperature effects on ionic conductivity, DPMD simulations with NVT ensemble are conducted for 2 × 2 × 2 supercell at various temperatures. The chosen cell parameters depend on the temperature in a way as given in Fig. The temperature effects cause the lattice expanding to 10.369 Å at 1000 K and contracts to 10.130 Å at 400 K. Sufficient number of statistical hopping events are obtained for temperatures above 500 K, however, no Li + ion migration event is recorded even for simulation time of 10 ns at 400 K, the statistic is not good enough for 400 K, and hence the diffusion coefficient cannot be obtained. When the temperature is above 800 K, despite the gradual increase in lattice parameters, the obtained Li + ion diffusion coefficients show little dependence on the lattice parameters, as indicated by the close agreement between orange dots and red stars in Fig. In addition to the necessity of conducting MD simulations in relatively low temperature range to obtain reliable ionic conductivity at temperatures lower than 300 K, the sensitivity of ionic migration to cell volume also reflects that the lattice parameters play a more crucial role at low temperatures than at high temperatures. As the temperature decreases from 700 K to 400 K, the discrepancy between the diffusion coefficients extracted for considering with and without thermal expansion in 2 × 2 × 2 supercell is increasing gradually. At 400 K, the simulations with subtle smaller lattice parameters even found no hopping events. DPMD simulations for two models with lattice constants of 10.130 Å and 10.230 Åare performed at both 400 K and 700 K for comparison. The variation of the ion migration ability is also manifested in the trajectories of Li ions as shown in Fig. We conduct an extensive statistical analysis focusing on the frequency of cage-to-cage transport events for Li + at various temperatures, as well as the count of Li + involved in these occurrences. The intercage migration events can be identified by jumps between plateaus observed in the MSD as shown in Fig. Surface Transport Characteristics.-Material surfaces, due to their distinct chemical environments compared to the bulk, may exhibit different ionic transport characteristics To detect the transport at the surface region, we construct a slab model containing two (001) surfaces, as illustrated in Fig 3a . The layers near the center of the slab mainly represent the bulk properties, whereas the layers close to z= ±20 Å signify the surfaces. The thickness of the vacuum between two surfaces is 20 Å. The model contains 832 atoms in total, of which 384 are Li + ions. The top layer is the PS 4terminated surface, while the bottom layer is the Li-terminated surface. The DPMD simulations with 1-10 ns are carried out for this system. The lower the simulation temperature, the longer the simulation duration is adopted. The comparison of the Arrhenius relationship between the bulk and surface models is given in FIG. T of the surface part. Because of the existence of vacuum space, the atoms near the surfaces can move towards vacuum space to expand the lattice. At 400 K, the distances between the 1st and 2nd S layer near the surfaces range from 7.4 to 8.5 Å which is larger than the S-layer distance of 7.2 Å in the bulk region. The reason for the increase of ion migration at surfaces is consistent with the influence of lattice parameter discussed in section of thermal effect for the bulk system, in which a subtle increase of the lattice parameter is beneficial to the Li + ion migration, too. It provides possible strategies to improve the low temperature ion migration by adjusting the surface area, e.g. by doping or coating for the surfaces, introducing the second phase particles, or increasing the surface ratio. However, the bond breaking is not sufficiently considered in current surface model because it is simplified by cutting between the Li layer and the PS 4 layer without breaking any P-S bond. The bonding and merging of different surfaces to form interface are still complex processes that need to investigate in the future work. Conclusions.-By constructing a MLIP for Li-P-S-Cl system, we realize MD simulations of solid-state electrolytes with long-term evolution over a wide temperature range. The Sufficient Li + ion migration events are obtained for statistical analysis for temperatures as low as 400 K, thanks to the acceleration of the simulations with MLIP. It provides the chances to discern the temperature effect on ionic transport behavior in Li 6 PS 5 Cl. By exploring the influence of lattice expansion on diffusion coefficient, accounting for simulation time, finite-size effects, and thermal expansion factors, confirming the effectiveness of DPMD simulations and ensuring the necessity of estimated ionic conductivity using low temperature simulations with enough hopping events. A turning point is found around 600 K below which the intercage hopping is not fully activated even for simulations lasting for 10 ns, resulting that the effect of subtle change of lattice parameters in the low-temperature regime on ion migration is more significant than at high temperatures. Besides, the modeling for system with surfaces indicates that as the temperature decreases, the contribution from the surface Li + ion migration is enhanced and the underlying reason is attributed to the loose bonding environment near the surfaces. The simulation method in this work realizes the corre- To analyze the size effect of modeling on the diffusion coefficients, we conducted 5 ns DPMD simulations across various system sizes-52 atoms, 208 atoms, 416 atoms, and 1404 atoms. Observations reveal a noticeable convergence in the diffusion coefficient at a system size of 2 × 2 × 2 within a specific time frame. Balancing accuracy and efficiency considerations, we've selected the 2 × 2 × 2 scale for all subsequent simulations. The DP potential also presents reasonable predictive in lattice scaling, indicating its good extrapolative properties. Then we discussed the influence of lattice expansion or contraction on calculated diffusion coefficients at various temperatures. Fig. When we adjust the simulated cell lattice at 400K, we will find that as the lattice parameters decrease, the number of Li + that undergoes migration decreases as well, as shown in Fig. The Table 