In this work we study the self-heating effect (SHE) in nanoscale Silicon on Insulator Junctionless (SOI JL) FinFET transistor with fin cross section in rectangular, trapeze and triangle form. The lattice temperature dependence on the channel length as well as on buried oxide thickness is considered. It is shown that for considered transistor structure the lattice temperature in the middle of the channel is lower than at lateral sides, near source and drain. Also, we have found at the same conditions the lattice temperature depends on shape of channel cross section too. The scaling of the metall-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFET) is one of the main trends of electronics based on CMOS technology. Decreasing of the transistor sizes leads to decreasing of the consuming energy and increasing the integration degree in integral circuit. However, alongside with it the different degradation effects such as short channel effects Besides it, at manufacturing nanoscale transistors, in technological processes, can be observed deviations of geometrical sizes from stipulated one. For FinFET this deviations can lead to change the stipulated transistor channel shape We have studied a SOI JL FinFET with a equivalent thickness of Hf O 2 gate oxide t ox =0.9 nm , and the width of 978-1-6654-4452-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE. SiO 2 buried oxide (BOX) is W box =69.4 nm. The thickness of the BOX varies between T box =10nm and 150 nm and the length of TiN gate between L gate =10nm and 40 nm. Another main values are: the thickness of the n-Si channel T Si =9 nm, width in the base W f inb = 22 nm and width in the channel top depend on the channel shape, which for considered trapeze cross section is W f int =10 nm, and is zero for triangle cross section (Figure The device simulations were carried out using Advanced Sentaurus TCAD. For device simulation, along with default carrier transport model, mobility degradation model such as doping dependence to account impurity scattering effect where considered. High field saturation model were used to take into consideration velocity saturation effect. Transverse field effect is included to involve degradation at interfaces. To account self-heating, a thermodynamic model for carrier transport, SRH (temperature dependent) models were included. Density gradient quantization model and mobility degradation due to high-k materials were also taken into consideration. Figure In the Figure On the lattice temperature distribution along the device length it is seen that at the middle of the length (in the channel) the temperature is lower than in lateral parts, near source and Fig. where K b is heat conductivity of back oxide material, P t is heat dissipation power, A is contact area to back oxide. Increasing the lattice temperature with increasing the T box is caused by increasing the distance between channel and thermal contact under buried oxide with increasing the T box . Therefore increasing the T box decrease the rate of removing the heat from the channel. From simulation study of SOI JL FinFET of perspective of self heating it is observed that self heating effect is different for transistors with rectangular, trapeze and triangle cross sections at the same bottom width and thickness of the channel. At the same conditions highest lattice temperature in the channel is observed in transistor with rectangular cross section. It is connected with larger area for rectangular cross section. Lowest temperature along channel is seen in the middle for all channel shapes. Lattice temperature, also, depend on gate length L g and buried oxide thickness T box and it is increased linearly with increasing L g and T box . Increasing the lattice temperature with increasing the gate length is result of increasing the area affected by normal gate field, which induce additional kinetic energy for electrons in the channel. Linear increasing the lattice temperature with increasing T box is consequence of increasing the distance between channel and contact under BOX. 