Magnetic Weyl semimetal (MWS) is a unique topological state with open surface Fermi arc states and other exotic transport phenomena. However, most reported MWSs show multiple pairs of Weyl points and complicated Fermi surfaces, which increases the difficulty of the investigation into the intrinsic chiral transport property. In this work, we successfully synthesized a soft magnetic Weyl semimetal Eu3In2As4 with a single pair of Weyl points under magnetic fields. The Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillation with a single frequency, as well as a linear hall resistance with the same carrier density, is observed up to 50 Tesla, indicating a single pair of Weyl points around the Fermi level with a massless fermion (m * = 0.121 m0,  Berry phase). Such a single pair of Weyl points is further confirmed by the density functional theory calculations. The magnetic ordering and band topology can be easily tuned by the external magnetic field. The field-induced MWS Eu3In2As4 with a single pair of Weyl points is a good platform to detect chiral transport properties, including possible quantum anomalous Hall effect. Weyl semimetals characterized by the Weyl point have quickly gained popularity since their discovery. Many Weyl semimetals are experimentally reported, such as TaAs However, most reported ones show complicated Fermi surfaces with multiple pairs of Weyl points To explore MWSs, one possible way is to substitute magnetic ions into nonmagnetic insulators. For example, when substituting Sr with Eu for insulators SrIn2P2 and SrCd2As2 Table To understand the DFT results and the symmetry protection, we construct an effective model of low-energy bands near around Γ. In the absence of SOC, the two low-energy bands belong to Γ 1 + and Γ 3 -irreps (labeled by the point group 2h of Γ). Thus, we construct the 4 × 4 Hamiltonian under the basis of { ↑ , ↓ } ⊗ Γ 1 + , Γ 3 -, according to the theory of invariants (see details in the Supplementary Information). It reads of which the parameters are listed in SI. 3, and where ( ) are Pauli matrices in the spin (orbital) space. Zeeman's coupling Hamiltonian along an arbitrary direction is given by , , which reads , = With an external magnetic field, the FM states along different directions can be achieved. The + , Hamiltonian yields the same results as the DFT simulations. The nodal line in FMc is protected by mz symmetry, while the Weyl points is protected by two-fold rotation in the FMa/FMb states. The two bands around Fermi level at Γ in the absence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) Γ 1 + and Γ 3 -(labeled according to the point group 2h ). The basis set is then chosen to be { ↑ , ↓ } ⊗ Γ 1 + , Γ 3 -. The ⋅ Hamiltonian at Γ is constrained by point group 2h (the generators are 2 , 2 , and ) and time-reversal symmetry T. In such basis setup, the matrix representations of these symmetry operations are Where K is the complex conjugation operator. According to the theory of invariants ()()() † = () , the 4 × 4 effective Hamiltonian is constructed as below, of which the parameters are listed in SI 4. The Zeeman's coupling is obtained as, where = , , , = The mobility of electrons in Eu3In2As4 is evaluated by = 0 , where represents mobility and 0 represents conductivity at around B = 0 T. From the formula, we obtained = 2300 2 • -1 • -1 , = 1600 2 • -1 • -1 and _ = 3900 2 • -1 • -1 at 2 K. Considering that Eu3In2As4 is a nodal line semimetal in the case of B||c, the absence of negative magnetoresistivity is reasonable (I||c) As shown in Fig. where the ∆ , , and represent the oscillatory component, the background, Dingle temperature, and Berry phase. We obtain a reasonable fit to the observed oscillations (bold curve) using just one frequency as shown in Fig. This effect is always noted as the formation of electronic relaxation time described as Note: When completed this article, we became aware of related work 