Coating performance is influenced by factors inherent to formulation design and processing conditions. Understanding the complex interplay of these attributes enables for mitigating defects, such as sag, which is a gravity-driven phenomenon that impacts the aesthetic and functionality of a coating. The work herein investigates the impact of resin molecular weight and solvent choice on drying kinetics and sag velocity in polymer films. These films, ranging in thickness from ~60 m to ~120 m were formulated with 45% by weight polymer resin in one of two solvent packages with different relative evaporation rates (RER). Gravimetry was initially used to track drying kinetics and a one-dimensional diffusion model was utilized to compute the apparent solvent diffusivity. In addition, the film thickness was tracked with optical profilometry. Results from these measurements showed that for fixed molecular weight the drying kinetics increased by approximately two-fold for the high RER solvent, whereas the apparent diffusivity tended to increase with increasing polymer molecular weight. Films formulated from higher molecular weight resins had greater initial viscosities and thicknesses for identical draw down blade clearance. By extension, the higher apparent diffusivities at greater molecular weights were attributed to effects of prolonged evaporation times for the thicker films. The sag velocity was measured through the thickness of the film for these systems at a 5° incline using the Variable Angle Inspection Microscope (VAIM). Measurements showed an increase in sag velocity for thinner and less viscous films, which was somewhat surprising both because a thinner film will experience lower gravitational stress and quicker drying times as compared to a thicker film. From these data we conclude that formulating a coating with higher molecular weight resin, although likely to increase drying time, will tend to deter sag because of the large impact of viscosity on these phenomena. Coatings are a ubiquitous technology, extending from surfaces we see and touch to those we consume (i.e., pharmaceutical coatings) For instance, many coatings provide essential protection, contributing to the longevity of the underlying substrates Additionally, coatings can impart diverse functionalities to a surface, contributing to properties such as its electrical conductivity, catalytic activity, and wetting properties Efforts to advance formulations are primarily motivated by performance improvement, enhanced functionality, new manufacturing processes, or sustainability goals Minimizing sag defects requires a comprehensive understanding of the various factors at play. Parameters inherent to formulation design such as viscosity and solvent choice, as well as processing conditions including substrate geometry and film thickness, work together to impact performance Further, in a multicomponent system, preferential loss of a solvent can result in the polymer being left in a system with an incompatible solvent. This could lead to polymer precipitation and coating failure. Earlier work concluded that for lower polymer concentrations, the diffusion coefficient changes significantly with the molecular weight, whereas at higher polymer concentrations, the diffusion coefficient was indistinguishable and independent of the molecular weight Given the importance of minimizing sag to improve coating operation efficiency and quality, a variety of optical and non-optical methods have been developed to quantify this phenomenon, including the indicator band method, the falling wave technique, and particle-based microscopy techniques While these measurement techniques have practical importance for quickly testing many different formulations, it is difficult to obtain physicochemical understanding of the sag process because of their simplistic and qualitative nature. Drying kinetics was evaluated via gravimetry. A one-dimensional diffusion model, with dynamic thickness measurements, was utilized to compute the solvent diffusion coefficients. The model assumes constant diffusion, which is a reasonable approximation for short intervals Where C(x, t) is the solvent concentration as a function of position and time and D is the solvent diffusion coefficient. The solution assumes constant diffusion at early drying times, negligible advection for a quasi-stationary phase, uniform initial concentration, C 0 , and a boundary condition such that the substrate is impermeable (zero solvent flux through the solid interface), The second boundary condition is set by the mass flux, J, which is proportional to the concentration gradient at the upper surface, J = ρ v D v ∂C(L,t) ∂x = k(c(L, t) -c ∞ ) and is also assumed proportional to the concentration difference between the surface and the bulk vapor phase, where ρ v is the density of solvent vapor and k is a proportionality constant. The model assumes no transport resistance in the vapor phase and that the atmospheric concentration, c ∞ , is zero. Solving via these boundary conditions yields the following expression (eq. 2). Evaluating the volume integral of the above mathematical equality for thickness values ranging between 0 and L(t) results in an expression of the normalized amount of solvent that has evaporated from the polymer film with respect to the total amount present initially (eqs. 3, 4, 5). ] y z dx L(t) 0 (3) ] L(t) 0 (4) Where the volume is equal to the product of thickness, L(t), width, y, and film length, z. M t is the amount of solvent that had evaporated at a given time, and M ∞ is the total amount of solvent that can be lost at the end of the drying process. The model described above requires an instantaneous measure of film thickness L(t) to furnish predictions. The present expression was modified to capture changes in film thickness within a finite liquid volume, accounting for leveling and evaporation effects. Further, film thinning was measured and subsequently incorporated into the desorption model to enhance the goodness of fit. As will be described in detail in the experimental section, the mean film thickness for each scan was evaluated at a distance from film edge on the order of one capillary length, l cap = (σ gρ ⁄ ) Liquid coatings during the flash stage exhibit evaporation-induced drying. This phenomenon occurs as the solvent diffuses out through the polymer matrix, increasing polymer concentration and decreasing in film thickness. Experiments were conducted to track the mass loss over the first 5000 seconds of flash. Shortly after film casting, a roughly constant drying rate was observed. The rapid decrease in coating mass was followed by a gradual tapering off around the ~ 2-hour mark. The coating mass is observed to have an exponential decrease with time, thus fit by eq. 6. The time constant associated with the exponential function, , was then used to compare formulations of varying molecular weights and solvent volatilities. Where M(t) is the sample mass at time t. A is the mass of material undergoing evaporation, M 0 is the offset of the exponential curve, which represents the material that does not evaporate, and α is the exponential rate constant in dimensions of inverse time. Although experimental data were fit with equation 6 allowing all adjustable parameters , A, and M0 to float, note the total mass at t = 0 (M(0) = A + M 0 ) was typically within 1% -0.1% of the experimental value. Although the mass of material that will not evaporate is known a priori, M0 may include trapped solvent at the end of the experiment. For steady, one-dimensional flow down an incline, liquid films experience competing effects of gravitational and viscous forces. Gravity works to pull the liquid downstream, whereas viscosity opposes flow. The maximum velocity is at the coating free surface, with subsequent decrease in magnitude as the region of interest (ROI) approaches the substrate (see Fig. Fluorescent silica particles (~ 1 μm) were synthesized through the Stober method and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH). This initiates a hydrolysis and condensation polymerization reaction which generates monodispersed silica spheres. Rhodamine-B Isocyanate (RBTC) was added to impart fluorescence. Formulations containing probe particles (~ 0.1 % by volume) were transferred to a bath sonicator to ensure homogenous mixing. Twelve acrylic-based model clear coats with known polymer molecular weights, polydispersity index, and compositions were utilized. The polymers are based on different ratios of acrylic, methacrylic, and styrene monomers that have different glass transition temperatures Tg. All twelve polymers were free-radical polymerized with a PPG-standard procedure, producing statistical copolymers with linear architecture. The molecular weights were measured with a gel permeation chromatographer with tetrahydrofuran (THF) as the eluent at room temperature. Reported values are weight averaged molecular weights (Mw) calculated relative to a polystyrene standard. They will differ from absolute values depending on the structural chemical differences between each statistical copolymer and the polystyrene standard. The model clear coats were composed of 45% resin by weight and 55% solvent mixtures (PPG Industries), consistent with established standards for automotive formulations. The resin molecular weights varied from 1744 to 16735 g/mol (see Table The solvents used in this work consisted of mixtures with high relative evaporation rate (RER = 87, Butyl Acetate = 100) and low relative evaporation rate (RER = 27). The corresponding vapor pressures were calculated to be 0.739 Kpa and 0.252 Kpa for the High and Low RER solvent mixtures respectively Samples were placed at 0° and 5° incline planes and were allowed to dry at the laboratory conditions. The film thickness was measured at a rate of one scan per minute for a total of 10 minutes corresponding to flash stage. The scans were conducted at the center of the film along the direction of the blade during application of the coating. The mean thickness was evaluated with a MATLAB script and an average of three experimental repeats was utilized in the desorption model. This allowed for examining the effect of solvent evaporation and gravitational force on the apparent film thickness. Rheological characterization of the model clear coats was carried out via a stress-controlled rheometer (HAAKE MARS III). The measurements utilized a cone-plate geometry (diameter: 35 mm, cone angle: 1°) and a solvent trap to minimize solvent evaporation. The samples were sheared at 100 s -1 for 200 sec and the shear rate was then varied and reduced to 0.1 s -1 . Further, solution densities were measured via a density meter (Anton Paar DMA TM 4500 M). Tabulated data, measured at 22 °C, are provided in the results section. were performed for each formulation. Immediately after film application, the coated substrates were transferred to the VAIM, positioned at 5° angle, for sag measurements that consisted of fluid flow in response to gravitational stress and solvent evaporation (see Fig. RGB color images with dimensions of 1280 x 1024 pixels were collected during the experiments. Data was converted to an 8-bit format and the dimensions were reduced to 900 x 800 pixels. This allowed for including most of the captured tracer particles. All videos were collected at a rate of 10 frames per second (FPS) with exposure time of 70 ms. Videos were analyzed with a particle tracking algorithm executed in MATLAB and the average velocity in each plane was recorded Larger polymer chains with higher molecular weights tend to increase viscosity and resistance to flow Table Table These data begin to suggest a physical picture of solvent evaporation during flash that is dependent on the unique combination of resin and solvent. As molecular weight increases or vapor pressure decreases, solvent tends to evaporate more slowly at short times (~10 minutes) corresponding to the flash step of a coating process. At longer times, the effect of solvent vapor pressure diminishes, but the impact of molecular weight remains such that higher molecular weight resin more effectively retains solvent. One would expect an increase in radius of gyration as molecular weight increases, which potentially could lead to an increase in polymer free volume in which the solvent can be retained measured with optical profilometry during solvent evaporation and in response to a gravitational stress. The thickness was evaluated over an area near the center of the film on the order of one capillary length away from edges where a finite volume of film is uniform in thickness. In general, we expected the thickness of films to decrease over time considering the limited material volume and solvent evaporation. While the mean thickness exhibited an exponential decrease in magnitude, film edges tended to increase in thickness in time because of surface energy and the accumulation of solids because of the coffee ring effect Interestingly, this phenomenon becomes more pronounced with increased material accumulation in the direction of drawdown. Note the progression of peaks upstream (left) with peak value ~ 70 μm and downstream (right) where it reaches ~ 150 μm. solvent evaporates, material accumulation on the outer edge of the film becomes more pronounced. This is seen in the progression of peaks at the upper end of the scan with peak value ~ 70 μm and downstream where it reaches ~ 150 μm. Edge effects, on the order of the capillary length, were excluded from mean thickness measurements. Film mean thickness exhibits an exponential decrease as the solvent evaporates. Error bars represent the standard deviation associated with profilometry measurements for three experimental repeats. Note, similar profilometry scans were performed for coatings positioned at a 5° inclined plane. Those were utilized in the scan design to optimize sag measurements. Sag velocities were tracked in the region at ~ one-third of the distance from the coating upstream to minimize distortions in measurements. The qualitative trends associated with the 'wet' film thickness described above were consistent across all measurements and formulations; note the 'wet' film thickness refers to the actual thickness of the film, whereas the drawdown clearance (of 10 mils or 254 m) was identical for all films. Figure Additionally, samples containing a low RER solvent displayed a slight increase in initial thickness as molecular weight of the resin increased. This is ascribed to the increased solvent viscosity which was measured to be ~ 0.01 cP and 1.3 cP for high and low RER solvents, respectively. , as a function of time over the initial 10-minute period. These data were then fit with eq. 5 to obtain apparent diffusivity D. Though true for assumptions of constant film thickness, eq. 5 was modified to account for the change in the coating's mean thickness obtained via optical profilometry. Further, it provided better agreement between the measured variations and those predicted by the model (see Fig. As expected, the apparent diffusivity displayed an increase for formulations containing high RER solvent as compared to low RER solvent. As was the case with the rate constant shown above, the shift in data is attributed primarily to the difference in solvent volatility, but could also be impacted by polymer volume fraction Namely, that the apparent diffusivity, for the same initial polymer weight percent, increased with increasing film thickness. This effect has been previously attributed to thicker films taking longer to harden after which solvent diffusion is hindered Note the important connection between molecular weight and the resulting viscosity, film thickness, and ultimately solvent mass transport through the film. As revealed with the modeling approach used for this work (see eq. 5), the characteristic time scale for transport of solvent through a film of thickness L is ~L2 /D. Experimental data was found to follow a master curve after scaling time with the quotient of the square of film thickness and apparent diffusivity (i.e. dimensionless time Dt/L 2 ). These data were subsequently averaged across all molecular weights for low and high RER solvents (see Fig. Herein, the thicker films were a consequence of greater viscosity from higher molecular weight resin. This suggests that viscous forces as mediated via formulation choice may be more effective than film build when aiming to mitigate sag. as compared to thinner films over initially lower viscosity. Hence, we conclude for these systems the effect of viscosity plays a more significant role than gravitational stress for sagging films. This work highlights the importance of formulation properties and their impact on coating processability, especially for coating applications that rely on blade or brush coating. We concluded from our work the wet film thickness is far more sensitive to viscosity than what conventionally is thought, and this dependence will extend to drying rate. To address these limitations, we recently developed a particle-based microscopy technique called Variable Angle Inspection Microscopy (VAIM), designed for real-time quantitative measurements of the transient flow-fields in films (see Section 3). by weight, behaved as Newtonian fluids over the range of shear rates relevant to this study before evaporation commenced. The formulation of each coating was systematically adjusted via resin molecular weight and by incorporating high and low Relative Evaporation Rate (RER) solvents. 2.1. Solvent Diffusivity.