Conducting altermagnets have recently emerged as intriguing materials supporting strongly spin-polarized currents without magnetic stray fields. We demonstrate that altermagnets enable three key functionalities, merging superconductivity and spintronics. The first prediction is a controllable supercurrent-induced edge magnetization, which acts like a dissipationless spin-splitter effect. The second and third predictions are a Cooper pair spin-splitter and a filtering effect, respectively. These effects allow for spatial separation of triplet pairs with opposite spin-polarizations and spin-selective tunneling of Cooper pairs. We derive a quasiclassical theory with associated boundary conditions that describe these phenomena and explain how they can be experimentally verified. Our results open a new path for spatial control of spin signals via triplet Cooper pairs using hybrid superconductor-altermagnet devices. Introduction.-The interaction between magnetic and superconducting materials is a significant research topic in condensed matter physics A recent development in the magnetic community is the discovery of a class of antiferromagnetic materials that feature strongly spin-polarized itinerant electrons despite the absence of a net magnetization. Such materials, known as altermagnets As for conventional antiferromagnets, altermagnets have no magnetic stray field and exhibit ultrafast THz spin dynamics. Analogous to ferromagnets, the large anisotropic spin-splitting of electron bands renders the spin degree of freedom more accessible. For these reasons, altermagnets have quickly become promising candidates for spintronics. Their unique anisotropic spin-splitting allows for interesting transport phenomena such as spin-polarized currents On the other hand, the anisotropic spin-split bands have dramatic effects on the pairing symmetry of an accompanying superconducting state, intrinsic or in proximity contact with another material. This interplay between superconductivity and altermagnetism has very recently started to be explored, includ- ing the Josephson effect The use of altermagnets in the field of superconducting spintronics is, however, still underexplored. Here, we will show that altermagnets strongly influence the transport of spin-polarized Cooper pairs. We predict that altermagnets induce two super-conducting spin-splitter effects, as shown in Fig. Theory.-We use the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity to describe proximity-coupled altermagnets with superconductors where ψ σ (r, t) is the electronic wave function for spin σ at position r and time t, α is a dimensionless parameter specifying the strength of the altermagnetic term, and the canonical momentum is p = -i∇. We set ħ = 1. Furthermore, l is the Néel vector defined as the difference between the two sublattice magnetizations, and m is the electron mass. In this work, matrices in spin space are represented by a, while matrices in Nambu space, i.e. the 4 × 4 space of spin and particle-hole degrees of freedom, are denoted by â. Finally, ǎ is a matrix in Keldysh-Nambu space, with the appropriate causality structure contingent on whether ǎ is a Green's function, a self-energy, or an inverse of these where θ parametrizes the orientation of the altermagnet as shown in Fig. Without loss of generality, we define the Néel vector l to be along the ẑ direction in spin space. In the dirty limit, we average over the Fermi surface to find the Usadel equation: where τ ̄3 = diag(1, -1) and the diffusion constant is D = τv 2 F /2 in terms of the elastic scattering time τ and the Fermi velocity v F . We underline that the above equation is derived without utilizing any normalization condition, which is possible due to the assumption of a weak proximity effect The prefactors of the second and third terms on the righthand side of Eq. (4) scale differently with the degree of disorder. The leading order contribution of the altermagnet is captured by the second term on the right-hand side in Eq. ( We derive appropriate tunneling boundary conditions to capture the effects of proximity-coupled superconductors and altermagnets. To this end, we modify the spin-active Kupriyanov-Lukichev (KL) boundary conditions in quasiclassical theory, which are expressed as Here, ǏR is the matrix current on the right side of the junction while ǧL(R) is the quasiclassical Green function on the left (right) side of the boundary, and G 0 is the tunneling interface transparency. The spin-mixing conductance G φ parametrizes interfacial spin polarization in the x-direction. The matrix current operator is modified for altermagnets, and reads For the interface where the AM is on the left side, the boundary condition is obtained by letting ǏR → -ǏL on the left-hand side and ǧL ↔ ǧR on the right-hand side of the boundary condition equation. In Eq. ( Similarly, the singlet-and triplet correlations are coupled as Interestingly, in contrast to conventional diffusive antiferromagnetic metals Here, M 0 = gμ B N 0 Δ 0 and the density of states is N = N 0 Re(Tr{ ĝR })/2 with N 0 being the normal-state value. Moreover, Δ 0 is the superconducting gap in the bulk superconductor. We set the ratio between the normal metal-altermagnet interface conductivity G N 0 and the bulk conductivity in the normal metal G N to be where L N is the length of the normal metal and ξ = √︁ D/Δ 0 is the diffusive coherence length. We fix the altermagnetic strength α = -0.3. Supercurrent-induced spin-splitter effect.-First, we consider an altermagnet oriented with θ = π/4 in a Josephson junction between two conventional BCS superconductors, such as Nb or Al. This setup is shown in Fig. Cooper pair spin-splitter effect.-A similar effect arises for Cooper pairs that are spin-polarized along the Néel vector. We again consider an altermagnet with orientation θ = π/4 to show this. See Fig. As shown in Eqs. Cooper pair spin-filtering effect.-We now consider an altermagnet oriented according to θ = 0 in proximity to an s-wave superconductor with a thin ferromagnetic interface as shown in Fig. Upper Lower contribution to the Usadel equation This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway through Grant No. 323766 and its Centres of Excellence funding scheme Grant No. 262633 "QuSpin." Resources provided by Sigma2-the National Infrastructure for High Performance Computing and Data Storage in Norway, project NN9577K, are gratefully acknowledged. We proceed by introducing 4-vectors in the Nambu-spin space They allow us to write the equations of motion in a compact form, where the part of Ĥ that depends on altermagnetism is collected in the term Here, we introduced the matrix The other contributions to the full Hamiltonian Ĥ are derived in Ref. where we use the shorthand notation (1, 2) = (r 1 , t 1 , r 2 , t 2 ), the matrix ρ3 = diag(1, 1, -1, -1), and 1 is a unit matrix in Keldysh-spin-Nambu space. The way forward is to subtract the two equations of motion in Eq. ( where the derivatives in M (2) work to the left. We define the relative (r, t) and center of mass coordinates (R, T) as and define the Wigner (mixed) representation as the Fourier transform with respect to the relative coordinates, Fourier transforming Eq. ( where we emphasize that the notation ∂ i,l denotes the partial derivative with respect to the cartesian component i of the coordinate r l . When evaluating Eq. ( Inserting this into Eq. ( where we used partial integration to effectively replace ∂ x i → i p i /ħ, pulled center-of-mass derivatives ∂ R i outside the integrals, and used the definition of the Wigner representation. Furthermore, we used the fact that T i j = T ji to simplify the second term in Eq. ( iħ where the energy term comes from the time derivatives in Eq. ( In this subsection, we discuss the length scales of our system and argue why some terms in Eq. ( Let L denote the characteristic length scale for spatial variations, that is, ∇ R Ǧ ∼ 1/L. In the quasiclassical approximation, the relevant momenta are close to the Fermi momentum, i.e. |p| ∼ 1/λ F , and the length scales λ F associated with the momentum are much smaller than all other length scales. Considering the three altermagnetic terms from Eq. ( We now apply the gradient approximation outlined above and introduce the quasiclassical Green's function into Eq. ( The quasiclassical Green's function is sharply peaked at the Fermi surface and is formally defined as We proceed by multiplying the Gorkov equation in Eq. ( i Thus, we have found the Eilenberger equation, including three altermagnetic terms: The last two terms in Eq. ( In the following, we proceed by linearizing the Eilenberger equation ( We consider the retarded component of Eq. ( Due to the general symmetries of the quasiclassical Green's function, f reads where the tilde operation is a composite energy inversion and complex conjugation, i.e., Ã(E) = A * (-E). Moreover, we keep only the self-energy Σtot , and consider the upper right and the upper left 2 × 2 parts of Eq. ( We find two coupled differential equations for the 2 × 2 matrices f ̄o and f ̄d: i where the "u.r(l)." superscript implies the upper right (left) 2 × 2 part of the matrix. In the next section, we argue that we can extract observables from only the off-diagonal equation (32a). This section proposes a setup that renders the diagonal corrections f d negligible. The diagonal component f d arises from the lack of a normalization condition for the quasiclassical Green's function in the altermagnet. However, suppose we consider normal metals connected to the altermagnet, as shown in the main text in Fig. In the following, we compute Green's function in the normal metal due to its proximity to the altermagnet, which hosts superconducting correlations originating from the superconductor. Thus, it has a normal and anomalous correction to its Green's function matrix. The anomalous Green's function in the altermagnet is known from solving Eq. (32a). However, the diagonal part (normal part) of the Green's function is unknown. We write the diffusive, retarded Green's function in the altermagnet as which is a general expression of the symmetries of the quasiclassical Green's function. We emphasize that ( ĝA ) 2 and D ̄are unknown in the altermagnet, but A ̄is known. Next, we consider the normal metal Green's function. For a weak proximity effect (due to the tunnel coupling to the AM), we can write it as where f must be off-diagonal due to the fact that ( ĝN ) 2 = 1 in the normal metal. As a consequence, we have We will now show that we can determine f in the normal metal from the quantity A ̄in the altermagnet alone, allowing us to compute the density of states and magnetization in the normal metal. To do this, we consider the tunnel boundary condition between N and AM, which is given by the KL boundary condition: where G N is the normal metal bulk conductance and G 0 is the interfacial conductance. We proceed by inserting ĝA and ĝN above. We get for the upper right block of this matrix equation that The terms A ̄, D ̄, and f ̄are small. They are corrections in the linearization procedure. In effect, D ̄f ̄should be negligible compared to A ̄and f ̄alone because it is second order in small quantities. Here, D ̄is the correction to ρ3 for the diagonal part of the Green's function in the altermagnet. It should be small in the limit of weak altermagnetism, and f is the correction to the anomalous Green's function in the normal metal, which is also small since it is tunnel coupled to the AM. In contrast, A is a first-order correction to the off-diagonal part of the Green's function in the altermagnet due to its proximity to the superconductor. Thus, we approximate Eq. ( Consequently, the anomalous Green's function in an N tunnel coupled to the AM is independent of the diagonal corrections D ̄to the Green's function in the AM. In the limit of a semi-infinite normal metal, the solution for the anomalous Green's function is More specifically, we assume that the normal metal is longer than the diffusive coherence length and that the interface normal is parallel to the y direction. Here, k = √︁ -2iE/D describes the decay rate of the solution. The KL boundary condition in the normal metal is given in Eq. We set the factor G 0 /(G N L N ) ≡ Ω = 0.2ξ -1 , and insert the solution from Eq. ( which we can solve for C at y = 0: In the next section, we take the diffusive limit and derive the Usadel equation from the linearized Eilenberger. Since we can disregard diagonal corrections in our calculation of observable quantities, we drop the "o" subscript in the following. Defining the direction of the Fermi momentum as e F = p F /|p F |, we expand the (linearized) quasiclassical Green's function to linear order in spherical harmonics, assuming that the strong impurity scattering causes the s-wave part to be much larger than the p-wave part, f ̄s ≫ f ̄p. This is the so-called dirty limit, corresponding to quasiparticle diffusion. In this expansion, the first term is even in momentum, whereas the second is odd. We note that we can isolate the even part of the Green's function by averaging over the (solid angle of the) Fermi surface, similarly, we can isolate the odd part by first multiplying with e F and then performing the average In the following, we split Eq. (32a) into an even and an odd equation. Performing the averages for the altermagnetic terms produces: where we, in the final part of the first equation, used that the T-matrix from Eq. ( We now assume that impurity scattering is the dominating term such that the odd altermagnetic terms are negligible. Using Σimp = -i ǧs /(2τ) for the impurity self-energy We multiply Eq. ( Inserting Eq. ( where we defined the diffusion constant D = τv 2 F /2. The factor 2 in the denominator of the diffusion constant is because this is a 2D system. More generally, the diffusion constant reads D = τv 2 F /d, where d is the spatial dimension of the system. We follow Ref. where f s denotes the superconducting singlet amplitude and d the superconducting triplet amplitudes. We calculate the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( The third term takes the form The spin-active Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions in quasiclassical theory are expressed as where the matrix current can be expressed in terms of the right-hand side material where ǧL(R) is the quasiclassical Green's function to the left (right), and we have included a possible spin polarization in the x-direction. In Eq. (66), G L is the bulk conductance of material L, and L L is the length of the material. For the interface where the AM is on the left side, the boundary condition is obtained by letting ǏR → -ǏL on the left-hand side and ǧL ↔ ǧR on the right-hand side of the boundary condition equation. In the following, we denote the conductance of the altermagnet as G and its length as L. G 0 denotes the interface conductance, and G φ is the (spin-mixing) conductance of the magnetic term. We have assumed the interface polarization to be in the x-direction. The Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions are derived using the quasiclassical current operator and are modified under the presence of altermagnetism in, e.g., the right region: where the repeated Latin indices imply the sum over the Cartesian components. The corresponding equation for the Green's function on the right side of the interface follows from a substitution n → -n and ǧL ↔ ǧR , as well as a modification of the current operator in the altermagnet due to the velocity operator being different from a normal metal. We linearize the (retarded component of the) Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions in Eq. (65), i.e. ĝR = ρ3 + fR , and include terms O( fR ) on the left-hand side, and terms O( f 0 R ) on the right-hand side: where fL(R) has the symmetries described in Eq. The boundary conditions for f ̄d and f ̄o are decoupled to the first order in f . We will not need to consider the diagonal parts in more detail, as described in Sec. II B, and drop the subscript in f ̄o from here. The linearized Kuprianov-Lukichev boundary condition for the anomalous Green's function for any altermagnetic orientation reads It is instructive to consider some special cases of this. We consider an interface along the x-direction and the θ = 0 and θ = π/4 orientations of the altermagnet separately. We assume an s-wave singlet BCS superconductor in L, i.e. where f BCS is the (bulk) value of the anomalous Green's function in the superconductor. Moreover, the spin-active term becomes We detail the two special cases for the altermagnetic orientations in the following. for the singlet/triplet amplitudes f 1/2 = f s ± d z . These equations show that the singlet and triplet amplitudes mix at the boundary and that the mixing scales with the altermagnetic strength α. for the singlet/triplet amplitudes f 1/2 = f s ± d z . This section outlines and summarizes the numerical solution strategy used to solve the derived Usadel equations with the corresponding Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions. We solve for the singlet/triplet amplitudes in the normal metals connected to the altermagnet, as described in Sec. II B, and use these to obtain observable quantities such as magnetization. To do this, we solve the Usadel equations ( Finally, we use the amplitudes in the altermagnet to find the amplitudes in the normal metal using Eq. ( 