The study of 3D magnetic nanostructures has uncovered a range of rich phenomena including the stabilization and control of topological spin textures using nanoscale curvature, dynamic effects allowing controlled spin-wave emission, and novel ground states enabled by collective 3D frustrated interactions. From a technological perspective, 3D nanostructures offer routes to ultrahigh density data storage, massive interconnectivity within neuromorphic devices, as well as applications within health technologies, such as mechanical induction of stem cell differentiation. However, the fabrication of 3D nanomagnetic systems with feature sizes down to 10 nm poses a significant challenge. In this work we present a means of fabricating sub-100 nm 3D ferromagnetic nanowires, with both cross-sectional and longitudinal curvature, using two-photon lithography at a wavelength of 405 nm, combined with conventional deposition. Physical characterization illustrates that nanostructures with lateral features as low as 70 nm can be rapidly and reproducibly fabricated. A range of novel domain walls, with anti-vortex textures, coupled transverse textures, and hybrid vortex/anti-vortex textures are found to be enabled by the cross-sectional curvature of the system, as demonstrated by finite-element micromagnetic simulations. Magnetic force microscopy experiments in an externally applied magnetic field are used to image the injection and pinning of domain walls in the 3D magnetic nanowire. At specific field values, domain walls are observed to hop from trap to trap, providing a direct means to probe the local energy landscape. A simple model is presented demonstrating that thickness gradients and local roughness dictate the variation of pinning probability across the wire. Magnetic domain walls (DWs) in two-dimensional (2D) planar nanowire structures have been studied extensively for over 20 years providing platforms for applications in novel logic A major technological driver for magnetic nanowires is the prospect of magnetic memory devices which rely on the motion and pinning of domain walls, a concept known as magnetic racetrack memory Advancements in nano-fabrication technologies have enabled the wider realization of 3D ferromagnetic nanostructures by design. One such approach is focused electron beam induced deposition (FEBID) which uses a modified scanning electron microscope with a gas injection system Another fabrication technique capable of realising 3D nanostructures is two-photon lithography (TPL), a form of direct laser writing (DLW). It can be combined with existing deposition techniques such as electrodeposition and thermal evaporation to realise 3D magnetic nanostructures Here we exploit DLW using a 405 nm wavelength laser to realize 3D magnetic nanowires with features as low as 70 nm, with both longitudinal and cross-sectional curvature. The novel crescent-shaped cross-section of the nanowire is found to stabilize a number of novel DW types, with the local curvature perturbing the spin texture, and in some cases, stabilizing topological defects such as anti-vortices. We demonstrate by magnetic force microscopy that such domain walls can be injected into the 3D nanowire and moved between pinning sites by using the field from the tip. A simple model based upon the local magnetostatic landscape of the wire is presented, suggesting that the observed DW pinning is due to the thickness gradient in sloped regions of the structure combined with local roughness. An overview of the fabrication process (see Methods) is shown schematically in Figure Resist is drop-cast onto a glass substrate (Figure The resulting structures are 3D ferromagnetic sinusoidal nanowires (SNWs) with both longitudinal and cross-sectional curvature. The longitudinal curvature of the SNWs is controlled through the spatial wavelength L of the sinusoidal exposure trajectory with values L = 1 μm, 2 μm and 5 μm, whilst its amplitude is fixed at A = 500 nm, as sketched in Figure The mean lateral feature sizes w avg of the fabricated SNWs for the three spatial periods were measured using SEM (see Methods) and are plotted in Figure The fits generally yield threshold velocities and voxel widths which agree within the estimated measurement error (see Methods). Example SEM images of SNWs with nominal lateral widths of 80 nm are shown in Figure The Permalloy deposition process was then simulated by linear extrusion of the calculated PSF along the wire, as shown schematically in Figure Overall, the micromagnetic simulations demonstrate a range of novel domain wall spin textures which occur due to the 3D wire geometry with strong cross-sectional curvature. With a good understanding of the possible domain walls, we proceeded to carry out imaging experiments aimed at injection and subsequent pinning of DWs in the 3D nanowire, using magnetic force microscopy (MFM) under externally applied magnetic fields (see Methods). An example 5 μm × 5 μm AFM image of a SNW with period L = 5 μm is shown in Figure To gain insight into pinning positions along the SNWs, multiple MFM images are taken for different fixed fields, and the DW positions are identified on a line-by-line basis (see Methods), as shown in Figure SEM images taken at a 45° viewing angle for L = 5 μm and L = 2 μm are shown in Figures DW pinning typically arises due to the presence of material defects which can include dislocations, impurities, grain boundaries and other inhomogeneities; polycrystallinity and surface roughness We therefore consider SNW surface roughness induced pinning, with clear roughness features observable in the SEM images in Figures $ , where σ is the surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness, and t is the thickness of the Ni 81 Fe 19 layer. We therefore expect the depinning field to scale with roughness and inversely with thickness and consider both in our analysis. Simple geometric considerations yield a local thickness t 0 = t cos θ where θ is the angle between nanowire tangent and substrate and t is the thickness deposited on a flat region. The local RMS roughness for L = 5 μm with value σ = 7.6 nm can vary up to 60% over the nanowire length, and for L = 2 μm with value σ = 8.1 nm which can vary up to 75% over the nanowire length, whilst local variations in wire thickness are up to 15% for L = 5 μm and up to 50% for L = 2 μm. It is therefore anticipated that the sites of largest depinning field will arise from the combined effects of reduced thickness and increased roughness, with roughness dominating for larger L, and thickness variations dominating for smaller L (see Supplementary Figure Overall, the model provides a spatial variation of depinning field that is generally consistent with the experimental data, when also considering the total magnetic field at different points on the wires. We note that some discrepancies between the calculated pinning and experimental data are observed. Most notable is at x = 1.88 μm, for the L = 2 μm wire where |H tot | << |H BK |, and yet no pinning behavior is observed. Such discrepancies could be related to the following three points. Firstly, the total field μ 0 |H tot | is estimated assuming a perfectly aligned tip perpendicular to the sample surface. Slight deviations due to substrate tilt or any imperfections in tip fabrication will yield perturbations in the field experienced. Secondly, the calculated depinning fields are based on a model with planar approximation and this considers neither the non-planar cross-section of the nanowires nor the 3D stray field of the underlying domain walls. Thirdly, we note that the forward and backward scanning of the tip, when combined with a geometric variation in pinning potential will yield stochasticity in DW movement. We have presented a novel means to fabricate sub-100 nm 3D ferromagnetic nanowires with cross-sectional and longitudinal curvature using a modified two-photon lithography direct laser writing system. Physical characterization of these 3D nanostructures shows that we can consistently fabricate nanostructures with lateral features below 100 nm and axial features below 245 nm, as predicted by the numerically modelled PSF. Finite-element micromagnetic simulations demonstrate that such nanowires with crescent-shaped cross-section are home to several exotic DWs not previously reported in the literature. MFM in externally applied magnetic fields has been used to study nucleation and pinning of DWs in the nanowires. The observed pinning behavior can be understood within the context of thickness gradients and surface roughness across the nanowire. It is expected that careful tuning of exposure settings and geometric parameters of the fabrication will allow a reduction in surface roughness, whilst a more conformal coating of magnetic material may be achieved by using atomic layer deposition, as demonstrated recently on 3D woodpile structures Direct laser writing. The nanowire fabrication is performed using a modified two-photon lithography system (Photonic Professional GT, Nanoscribe GmbH). A continuous-wave diode laser of wavelength λ = 405 nm with a peak power of 100 mW (Photon Lines, Omicron, LDM405) is used as the excitation beam. The output beam is passed through an optical isolator From the measured widths in Figure where v is the scanning velocity, r is radial distance from the beam focus, and b (the fitting parameter) is the lateral width of the voxel, using FWHM = 2&ln(2) b, which leads to a FWHM = 107 nm for L = 5 μm , which is a 9% difference compared to the simulated FWHM. For L = 2 μm we find FWHM = 90 nm yielding a 24% difference, and for L = 1 μm a FWHM = 113 nm giving a 4% difference to the simulation. Micromagnetics. The finite-element micromagnetic software NMag , with the reduced magnetization vector m = M/M 5 using the saturation magnetization M 5 . The gyromagnetic ratio is γ 0 = 2.211 × 10 5 mA -1 s -1 and we have chosen a Gilbert damping parameter of α = 0.5 for all simulations to reduce computation time without impact on the final relaxed state ε exc (J/m 3 ) ε mag (J/m 3 ) ε tot (J/m 3 ) (H-H) and tail-to-tail (T-T) configurations.