A new homogenization-free boundary condition is introduced for the design of metasurfaces. The boundary condition, linking the tangential electric field to the induced surface current density within a unit cell, is described as a matrix equation containing a surrogate model of a printed circuit. Full-wave simulations are performed to construct the data needed to capture the physics of a printed circuit's response to exciting fields in terms of its induced current density. The matrix equation takes the form of a boundary condition which can be included in design and optimization algorithms incorporating mutual coupling in the form of an impedance matrix. Modelling the metasurface in this manner allows for direct design of the realizable model avoiding any homogenization or locally periodic approximations leading to a paradigm shift in metasurface design approaches. The surrogate model's construction is described and its use in a 50 printed circuit example is provided. Traditionally, metasurfaces are modeled using the Generalized Sheet Transition Condition or GSTC the surrogate model-based boundary condition links the total tangential electric field to the induced surface current density along a printed circuits surface where [ ( )] is a × matrix learned from full-wave simulations. Its elements are a function of , the geometrical variable parameterizing the printed circuit (see Fig. where [ ] represents the incident field on element , [ ] represents the impedance matrix coupling element to calculated using Green's functions, and [ ] represents the current density on element . The matrix equation (3) can either be solved directly given a metasurfaces geometry (the ′ of each meta-atom's printed circuit) or can be integrated into an optimization loop where each meta-atoms acts as an optimization variable. However now, the design and optimization is directly done on the realized model rather than a homogenized approximation. Thus, the traditionally required non-guaranteed final translation step to a realizable metasurface is completely avoided. Instead, when the optimizer converges, the physical design is the output. This is also in contrast to other approaches which utilize surrogate models and matrix equations where the design is still done on the homogenized model and only post-design is the physical structure created To develop the surrogate model, COMSOL Multiphysics was used to impress 8 different choices of an inhomogeneous background electric field to a medium containing a single 8-finger IDC suspended in free space. The IDC is (2/3) /10 wide and 1.5 /10 tall (see Fig. Where ' = 0.0005 is the coefficient of the ridge regularization, ( denotes transpose operator, and is the identity matrix. Note that ( For the design and optimization of the metasurface, each element of the matrix is interpolated as a function of the meta-atom parameter for the fast evaluation of the function and its derivative. Using this surrogate model not only results in a 10 ) computational speedup, but also enables to evaluate [ ] %×& from [ ] %×& , which COMSOL can't simulate directly. The reduced order model of the matrix fit solves the curse of dimensionality by removing the physical degrees of freedom [ ] %×& from the surrogate model parameters. This leaves a surrogate model which is only a function of a single geometric parameter . [ ] %×& is evaluated by interpolating the , matrix coefficients along the dimension of the meta-atom parameter . A single surrogate model with + . inputs, where . = 1 is the number of geometric parameters, would require training data exponential in ( + .) A metasurface consisting of 50 IDC's suspended in free-space and placed co-linearly along the /-axis was analyzed using the developed surrogate model and (3) expanded to the case of 50 meta-atoms. The metasurface is 5 wide at the excitation frequency of 10GHz, hence, each unit cell is /10. The 0 of the IDC's are chosen to vary linearly from the minimum value of 0.0002mm on the left end to 0.004mm at the right end. The metasurface is excited by an infinite line source placed /2 above the center of the metasurface. The near and far total electric fields were calculated from the solution of (3) resulting in Figs. Next, the metasurface was simulated in COMSOL using the actual IDC's (see Fig. A new homogenization-free boundary condition based on surrogate models was introduced for metasurface modelling. The boundary condition allows for the direct synthesis of the actual realized metasurface rather than of an approximate model thereby avoiding the problem of attempting to recreate the performance of the approximate model post-design, a step which is not always feasible. An example of a 50 IDC metasurface simulated using the new surrogate-based boundary condition was presented with excellent agreement with full-wave simulations thereby validating the approach.