Local translational and scaling symmetries in space-time is exploited for modelling ductile damage in metals and alloys over wide ranges of strain rate and temperature. The invariant energy density corresponding to the ductile deformation is constructed through the gauge invariant curvature tensor by imposing the Weyl like condition. In contrast, the energetics of the plastic deformation is brought in through the gauge compensating field emerged due to local translation and attempted to explore the geometric interpretation of certain internal variables often used in classical viscoplasticity models. Invariance of the energy density under the local action of translation and scaling is preserved through minimally replaced space-time gauge covariant operators. Minimal replacement introduces two non-trivial gauge compensating fields pertaining to local translation and scaling. These are used to describe ductile damage, including plastic flow and micro-crack evolution in the material. A space-time pseudo-Riemannian metric is used to lay out the kinematics in a finitedeformation setting. Recognizing the available insights in classical theories of viscoplasticity, we also establish a correspondence of the gauge compensating field due to spatial translation with Kröner's multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient. Thermodynamically consistent coupling between viscoplasticity and ductile damage is ensured through an appropriate degradation function. Non-ordinary state-based (NOSB) peridynamics (PD) discretization of the model is used for numerical implementation. We conduct simulations of uniaxial deformation to validate the model against available experimental evidence and to assess its predictive features. The model's viability is tested in reproducing a few experimentally known facts, viz., strain rate locking in the stress-strain response, whose origin is traced to a nonlinear microscopic inertia term arising out of the space-time translation symmetry. Finally, we solved 2D and axisymmetric deformation problems for qualitatively validating the model's viability. NOSB peridynamics axisymmetric formulation in finite deformation setup is also presented. As with viscoplasticity, mechanicians have, over the years, sustained an animated research effort at a better understanding of ductile damage, especially from micromechanical or phenomenological perspectives -via both continuum modelling and experiments conducted at different scales. Large plastic deformation that one typically encounters in several industrial applications -machining, metal forming The twin processes of damage and plastic deformation result in macroscopic signatures, viz. stiffness degradation, reduction in effective cross-section that offers resistance against external loads and ductility -perhaps up to a critical state, beyond which rupture may occur. Substantial effort has been invested in unraveling and mathematically describing the physical phenomena underlying the highly nonlinear dynamical processes resulting in ductile damage at the continuum scale. Acceptable predictions of such processes require, among others, a rational coupling of viscoplastic deformation with damage. It also requires an accurate relationship among flow stress, temperature, strain rate and accumulated plastic strain or other internal variables presenting the micro-morphology of polycrystalline solids during plastic deformation and damage. Over the years, many constitutive schemes have been drawn up through phenomenological or physical motivations. For viscoplastic deformation with damage, the phenomenological constitutive model proposed by Local theories of plasticity coupled with damage often fall short in replicating experimental observations, viz., localization of plastic and damage zones induced due to the excessive softening. Gradient-based plasticity and damage models overcome this problem by limiting the width of localized plastic and damage bands due to length scales associated with the higher order gradient terms. For modeling viscoplastic response in the shock wave regime, viz. under extreme strain rates, a few physically motivated models are reported by A rationally grounded continuum model that can reproduce the essential features of ductile damage at the macroscale in good agreement with experimental evidence remains conspicuous by its absence. We may compute the distance between two infinitesimally separated points in terms of the current configuration using the coordinates of the reference configuration and the 4D pulled-back metric. We construct the invariant energy density under the action of local translation in space-time using the components of the 4D pulled-back metric. Next, we derive the relationship between the gauge compensating fields Φ and F p-1 and establish a correspondence with the popular multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient, F = F e F p . Instead of postulating that the covariant derivative of the metric tensor is zero, we imposed a more general Weyl-like condition on the reference metric and construct a space-time gauge-invariant curvature tensor by exploiting the local conformal symmetry. The scalar gauge-invariant curvature is defined by appropriately contracting the space-time gauge-invariant curvature with the metric tensor. The scalar curvature is then employed to construct the invariant energy density associated with ductile damage. Next, the constitutive relations that provide a closure of the governing equations of motion and the thermodynamic restrictions are presented. We also derive the temperature evolution equation employing the laws of thermodynamics. For numerical implementation in the peridynamics framework, the non-ordinary state-based PD formulation of our space-time gauge theory is also presented briefly. We organize the rest of the article as follows. In Section (2), we present the space-time gauge theory and discuss the notion of gauge invariance under local translation and conformal transformation. We present the principle of virtual power and force-balance in Section (3). Subsequently, in Section (4), the constitutive relations are derived. Section (5) deals with non-ordinary state based PD formulation of our model. Illustrative numerical examples are provided in Section (6) before concluding the article in Section (7). Axisymmetric formulation for non-ordinary state-based peridynamics is presented briefly in Appendix (A). This section presents the notion of gauge invariance under local translational and conformal (scaling) symmetries. For completeness, we briefly discuss continuum elasticity kinematics in the spacetime setup in line with We consider the reference and the current configurations as 4-dimensional differentiable manifolds. The reference configuration history is a collection of self-similar copies of the reference configuration at every time t where, 0 t ∈ R + , whereas the current configurations history can be described as a set that includes one reference configuration at t = 0 and all the current configurations for time t > 0. In space-time, time constitutes the first coordinate and the rest three are spatial coordinates. Mathematically, the 4-dimensional reference configuration history is given as, B r = M r | t where, X and x are respectively the four dimensional coordinates of B r and B c . X = X2 , X3 , X4 T and x = x2 , x3 , x4 T represent the spatial coordinates of B r and B c , respectively. We have, x1 = X1 = c el t = t, where t has the unit of length. c el is a material parameter having the unit of velocity. c el ensures consistency among units of space and time coordinates. Next, we define a 4D deformation map that relates space-time reference and current configurations as follows: xi = χi (X, t) = χi X, t ; where, χ and χ respectively denote the deformation maps with real time and scaled time. Now using the 4-dimensional deformation map, the coordinate differentials in the current configuration history may be given as: where, α, β ∈ {1, 2, 3}. F is the classical three dimensional deformation gradient. vα = ∂ χα+1 c el v α is the scaled material velocity and v α is the material velocity. Note that the temporal derivative of the deformation map in Eq. ( The 4D deformation map χ is given as: where, α ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Once more, we recall that deformation in time is not considered in the spacetime continuum elastodynamics, i.e. x1 = X1 . Now we consider the local translation in 4D χ map and attempt to construct the gauge invariant energy density under local translations in space and time. The local translation in the 4D deformation map may be written as: Denoting Υ1 t, X = τ t, X and Υα+1 t, X = Υ α t, X , we may write the local translation in the 4D deformation map more explicitly as: Note that in Eq. ( The gauge covariant definition of the ordinary time differential is given as: where the scalar-valued 1-form Ψ may be written as, Ψ = Ψ t d t + Ψ X dX. By sacrificing some generality in the model, we may choose the space-time gauge covariant temporal derivative as: Specifically, the spatial component of the temporal gauge compensating field is assumed to be zero in Eq. ( Similarly the minimal replacement on ∂ i χ α is given as: Minimal replacement introduces gauge compensating fields Ψ and Φ in time and space, respectively; i ranges from 1 to 4. Note that, D t = D t and M d χ α = M d χ α using the transformations given below in Eqs. ( We may write the 4D coordinate differentials in reference and current configurations using the space-time gauge covariant derivatives as follows: Using the Minkowski metric, distance between two infinitesimally close points in the reference configuration, M r and the current configuration, M c may be computed by the expressions given below in Eqs. ( (dS We may express the coordinate differentials in the current configuration history in terms of those in the reference configuration as: and Φ α β = Φα 1+β . Note that, α, β ∈ {1, 2, 3}. We may express Eqs. ( From Eq. ( where, C e = F eT F e . Now defining the gauge transformation, Φ = F Φ and using the second term on the right hand side of Eq. ( Denoting I -Φ = F p-1 in Eq. ( and, The equivalent plastic strain γ p is defined as: where, N p and ν p denote plastic flow direction tensor and plastic strain rate, respectively. Using Eq. ( The motivation for expressing the gauge compensating field Φ, which has emerged due to local translational symmetry in terms of equivalent plastic strain is two-fold. First one is to reconcile the present theory with the existing viscoplasticity theories which is useful for experimental verification and calibration purposes. Second and the important one is to give a geometric interpretation of the plastic quantifier. Now we construct the invariant energy density associated with the energetic part of the plastic deformation using the gauge compensating field ( Φ) in the next section. This subsection presents the construction procedure of the invariant energy density using various components of the 4D pulled back metric C and the invariants of C e under space-time local translation. The invariant energy density may be written as: The first term in the energy density may be constructed using the (1,1) component of the 4D pulled back metric: The second term in Eq. ( where the volumetric part may be expressed as: The isochoric part is given as: In the present theory, we take the material parameters the same as in Consider a 1-form, z = z i dX i , where i varies from 1 to 4. The 1-form, z is defined as: Then the invariant energy density, Π z is given as, In this subsection, we discuss the conformal symmetry along with scale-invariant transformation on the reference metric. First, we present the concept of local symmetry under conformal transformation and outline the minimal replacement procedure, which is followed by a Weyl-like condition and transformations of the gauge compensating field variables. Finally, the construction of a gauge invariant curvature tensor and invariant energy density pertaining to the ductile deformation is presented. By global conformal transformation on the metric, we imply a uniform scaling of the reference metric, i.e. G = e f G, where the scaling variable f is a scalar constant. This implies that the metric G is scaled homogeneously over the entire body and under such global/homogeneous conformal transformation, the Christoffel symbols associated with the metric compatible connection will remain invariant. However, under local conformal transformation of the reference metric involving a non-uniform scaling, G = e f (X,t) G, where f is a smooth scalar-valued function in space-time, the invariance of the metric-compatible connection is lost and some additional terms arise. Minimal replacement is required to compensate for the additional terms. We define the minimal replacement by imposing the Weyl-like condition on the reference configuration metric as follows: where, Ξ = Ξ μ dX μ denotes a 1-form field in space-time. Using the minimal replacement constructed in Eq. ( The 1-form, Ξ may be decomposed as the sum of an anti-exact part and an exact differential of some scalar valued function, Ξ = F(φ) Ξ ae + dφ; where, Ξ ae is the anti-exact part of the 1-form and dφ represents the exact differential of the real valued scalar function φ in space-time. F(φ) represents a scalar valued function of φ. In component form, (Ξ ae ) μ = Ξt Ξ1 Ξ2 Ξ3 ; wherein the temporal component is given as, (Ξ ae ) 1 = Ξt d t and Ξ = Ξα dX α denotes the spatial components, α ∈ {1, 2, 3}. If the anti-exact part of the 1-form, Ξ ae is zero, then Ξ = dφ and the transformation of φ is given as: φ = φ -1 2 f . Using the modified connection defined in Eq. ( Contracting the 1 st and 3 rd indices in the curvature given in Eq. ( We construct scalar gauge invariant curvature by contracting the second order gauge invariant curvature tensor, Rσν with metric as follows: R = Gσν Rσν . Since we have a referential Minkowski metric, the Riemmanian curvature associated with the metric compatible connection is zero; but the gauge invariant curvature is not. The non-zero nature of the gauge invariant scalar curvature is solely due to the minimal replacement used to make the connection invariant. An explicit expression for the curvature in terms of the scalar valued function φ and the anti-exact part Ξ ae is given as, R = Rt + RX as follows: It is worth mentioning that, Ξ ae is related with the polarization vector and scalar potential of the electric field; see The invariant energy density associated with the gauge invariant curvature may be written as: 3 Principle of virtual-power and force balance Using the principle of virtual power, we obtain the macro-and micro-force balances pertaining to the ductile damage response in a finite deformation setup. The principle of virtual power postulates a balance between the external power W ext (P t ) applied on P t and the internal power W int (P t ) expended within it, where P t is an arbitrary subregion of the reference body at time t. The external and internal power are given as: Note that b represents the macroscopic body force (including inertia) given as, where, b 0 denotes the conventional body force. ζ γ and ζ φ are the coefficients of micro or defect inertia due to the motion of defects such as dislocations and micro-cracks, respectively. Λ γ and Λ φ are the external microscopic tractions on ∂P t , power conjugate with γp and φ respectively. The scalar microstress π γ and the vector microstress ξ γ are power conjugates with γp and ∇ γp , respectively. Similarly the scalar microstress π φ and the vector microstress ξ φ are power conjugates with φ and ∇ φ, respectively. Denoting the generalised virtual velocity by V( χ, F e , γp , φ). χ, F e , γp and φ are the virtual velocities corresponding to χ, Ḟ e , γp and φ, respectively. From the principle of virtual power, we may write: To derive the macro-force balance, consider γp = 0 and φ = 0. Then from Eq. ( Using F e = (∇ χ) F p-1 , we may rewrite Eq. ( Denoting, T = T e F p-T and applying divergence theorem in Eq. ( Upon localization of Eq. ( The macroscopic boundary condition may be given as: For deriving the microscopic force balance associated with plasticity, consider χ = 0 and φ = 0. Then from Eq. ( Thus, Eq. ( Applying divergence theorem, we get: Employing localization of Eq. ( and, Since N p is a symmetric and deviatoric tensor Applying divergence theorem to the first term on the right hand side of Eq. ( Upon localization of Eq. ( and, In this section, we derive the constitutive relations by applying the two laws of thermodynamics. Constitutive closure to the equations of motion is typically achieved by describing a stress-strain affinity for the given material. The goal of the constitutive closure is to express T, ξ γ , ξ φ , π γ and π φ in terms of the geometric quantities and derive closed-form expressions for ζ γ and ζ φ . We derive the evolution of the internal energy density using the first law of thermodynamics, i.e., considering the conservation of total energy of the thermodynamic system and its surroundings The rates of change of the kinetic and the internal energy may be expressed as: and, dW dt Considering the heat flux vector q and heat source h, the thermal power may be given as: Using Eqs. ( Next using the macro-force balance and the micro-force balance given in Eqs. ( We now focus on the thermodynamic restrictions to be placed on the constitutive relations. These restrictions are a result of the compliance of the constitutive relations with the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the entropy production rate should be greater than or equal to zero. We enforce the requirement of the second law of thermodynamics using the local form of Clausius-Duhem inequality given as: η denotes the specific entropy. The free energy density may be written as: where, the elastic energy density constructed in Eq. ( Recognizing the tension-compression asymmetry in the damage process, we define the degradation functions, X 1 and X 2 as follows: where, J := detF and η φ is a small parameter to prevent ill-conditioning of the elastic stiffness at the complete damage state. We define P γ = (γ p /γ p crit ) 2 and, The free energy density may be expressed as: The second Piola-Kirchhoff kind of stress is defined as: S e := 2 ∂Π ∂C e ; where, Using Legendre transformation, we may write: Now using Eq. ( Next, we decompose π γ into energetic and disipative parts as follows: π γ = π en γ + π dis γ . We define Ψ t in terms of the plastic deformation quantifier as follows: kz c 2 el (1+Ψt) 2 = Z(γ p , γp , θ) in Eq. ( Applying the Coleman-Noll procedure to Eq. ( Thus the Clausius-Duhem inequality in Eq. ( Note that we have γp ≥ 0; ∀ t ∈ R + , so the inequality given in Eq. ( Using the constitutive relation for specific entropy given in Eq. ( The specific heat constant is defined as: From Eqs. ( Using the constitutive relations in Eqs. ( Now we need to specialize the constitutive relations. First, we specify the temporal function Z. Note that Z acts as a handle for modelling micro-inertia for different material hardening behaviour. We consider Z in the power-law form given as: where, The material constant r is taken as a quadratic function of temperature, r = α 0 +α 1 θ 0 +α 2 θ 2 0 , where θ 0 is the temperature at time t 0 . The material constants k ρ and k γ are related to the defect or microinertia and the hardening behaviour of the material, respectively. We define γp = γp / γ0 , where γ0 is the reference strain rate. We need to make a valid choice for F that does not violate the dissipation inequality given in Eq. ( one of such valid choice for metal plasticity. S 0 and H 0 denote the yield strength and a hardening constant, respectively. H s represents a negative surface hardening constant due to dislocation absorption at the cracked surfaces satisfying the following constraint, H s ≤ H 0 . We take the material constants, k ρ = 0.5ρl 2 0 and k z = -0.5S 0 l 2 z 5 Non-ordinary state based PD formulation Keeping in mind possibly large deformation and the attendant difficulties involving extreme mesh distortions in the FEM, we intend to use the peridynamics (PD) approach for purposes of numerical implementation. We first present a brief review of the state-based peridynamics and then describe the PD based formulation for our space-time viscoplastic-damage model. State based PD is by itself a nonlocal continuum theory The deformation vector state Y, which maps the bond vector ξ to its deformed vector state, is defined as: where, y ′ = χ (X ′ ) ∈ B c and y = χ (X) ∈ B c . In state based PD, the governing equations are in the integro-differential form unlike classical continuum mechanics where the PDEs cannot directly treat singularities/cracks. Since the PD formulation involves no derivatives with respect to the spatial coordinates, it allows discontinuities to be treated by its very construction. The balance of linear momentum is given as: where ρ, T, b 0 are the mass density, force vector state and the body force density, respectively. Balance of angular momentum implies that the following constraint is satisfied: Constitutive modelling in PD should respect the constraint given in Eq (98). By exploiting an equivalence of certain quantities (e.g. strain energy density) under homogeneous deformation, a constitutive correspondence is proposed by The state of the body is described by the relative displacement vector state, relative damage field scalar state, relative temperature field scalar state and relative equivalent plastic strain field scalar state. The relative displacement vector state is defined as: Similarly, the relative damage field scalar state, the relative temperature field scalar state and the relative equivalent plastic strain field scalar state are given below in Eqs.( where, (•) ′ = (•)(X ′ ). A nonlocal form of the deformation gradient may be given as: ω (|ξ|) denotes the influence function and the shape tensor is defined as: Similarly, the non-local approximation of the damage field gradient vector may be defined as: The non-local versions of temperature gradient and equivalent plastic strain gradient may be written as: In addition to the well-known balances of linear and angular momenta given in Eqs. ( Similarly, the micro-force balance for viscoplastic deformation is postulated as: where, ξ φ and ξ γ represent the micro-force scalar state associated with the damage field and viscoplastic deformation, respectively. The driving force for plastic deformation is given as: πγ (X, t) = π γ -F eT TF pT : N p . We now show that the micro-force balance associated with the damage field and viscoplastic deformation given in Eqs. ( Proposition 5.2.1. If the forces arising out of damage field evolution Eq.( Proof. Integrating Eq.( (110) Note that the interaction with a material point X vanishes outside the horizon H (X), so we may extend the inner integral in Eq.( We have used the notations Thus, Eq. ( We present the PD energy balance equation and describe the constitutive correspondence with the classical material model The external power may be written using the non-local PD states as follows: The rate of heat supply can be expressed as: Using Eqs. ( The following identities hold from the anti-symmetry of the integrand: Using the identities given in Eqs. ( Note the following identities, Using the identities given in Eqs. ( First, we rewrite the evolution equation for internal energy density derived in Eq. ( where, T, ξ γ and ξ φ are the non-local approximations of T, ξγ and ξφ respectively. Substituting the non-local gradients given in Eqs. ( Note that, since T, ξ γ and ξ φ are functions of X only, we may recast Eq. ( Comparing Eqs. ( Similarly, based on entropy equivalence and using Eq. ( where, q represents the non-local approximation of q. We adopt a rational bond breaking criterion (see where, ω (|ξ|) represents the influence function in the undamaged material and we define ω (φ, φ ′ ) as: The bond stretch (λ) is defined as: We may now evaluate the predictive performance of the proposed model using benchmark problems that are of general interest. First, we demonstrate the response of a ductile material specimen in a uniaxial simulation and validate it against experimental data. Following this, we showcase simulation results for an asymmetrically notched specimen under tension and the cup-cone fracture in a dog-bone shaped round bar. We assume that adiabatic conditions prevail, so the divergence term (heat fluxes) in the temperature evolution equation vanishes. First, we present the stress-strain plot for the viscoplastic deformation and its validation against the experimental data reported by Nemat-Nasser and We present stress-strain response of titanium alloy (TA15) under a uniaxial tension test and the validation of the simulated results against the experimental data reported by The material parameters used in numerical simulations of TA15 are given in We now demonstrate strain rate locking in the ductile damage response of Fe370 mild steel observed at very high strain rates. Model predictions are validated against the experimental data reported by Stress-strain response of Fe370 mild steel predicted from the present model is shown in Fig. (5) which shows good agreement with the experimental observation reported in This subsection demonstrates ductile damage in an asymmetrically notched plain strain specimen subjected to tensile loading. The schematic of the specimen is shown in Fig. ( This research article has dwelt on a rationally grounded ductile damage model for metals and alloys. The basis for this development is an exploitation of local translational and conformal symmetries implemented through a space-time gauge theory. The evolutions of plastic flow and damage have been described using two gauge compensating field variables that emerge in the minimal replacement construct. The invariance of the energy density in local space-time translation and scaling is preserved through a space-time gauge covariant definition of partial derivatives. The fracture energy is constructed utilizing the gauge-invariant scalar curvature. This approach has also explicated on the geometric underpinnings of damage through local scaling of the metric, bypassing an internal variables paradigm used in classical modelling routes to ductile damage. The theory furnishes a thermodynamically consistent temperature evolution equation, and thus we eschew the use of the Taylor-Quinney coefficient. Apart from its scientific credibility, the model also allows a ready numerical implementation, with its predicting features showcased herein through several simulation results across different deformation scenarios. In the process, we have been able to reproduce certain experimental observations, e.g. the strain rate locking effect, ductile damage response of titanium alloy (TA15), etc. As an application, a few benchmark problems of ductile damage -ductile fracture in an asymmetrically notched specimen and cup-cone fracture in the dogbone shaped round bar, have been explored numerically. Besides extending the present theory to a unified electro-magneto-mechanical damage model, we also intend to explore the local rotational symmetry breaking for ductile fracture problems at extremely high strain rates, i.e. in the shock wave regime where the effect of lattice orientation could be significant. azimuth direction. Using the cylindrical coordinate system the two-point force state T can be expressed in the component form along the radial (r), azimuth (φ) and height (z) directions as follows: T = T r r, φ, z, r ′ , φ ′ , z ′ e r + T φ r, φ, z, r ′ , φ ′ , z ′ e φ + T z r, φ, z, r ′ , φ ′ , z ′ e z (A.1) Due to axisymmetric loading and the boundary conditions the components of the displacement and velocity vectors along the azimuth dirction will vanish in contrast to the two-point functions and the partial derivatives of any field variables with respect to φ will also be zero. Similarly, the scalar fields φ, γ p and θ are functions of r and z only. In r-z plane, the shape tesor is given as: 2) The non-local deformation gradient may be given as: 3) The relative deformation vector is given as, Y 2D = [y ′ r -y r y ′ z -y z ] T and ξ 2D = [X ′ r -X r X ′ z -X z T denotes the bond vector in the r-z plane. Note that the φφ-component of the deformation gradient is non-zero and given as, F φφ = y r Xr and F 2D is given as: Taking the dot product on the both sides of Eq. ( Note that the horizon domain is extended to B r . Using the identity and the antisymmetry of the integrand given in Eqs. ( 