Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) is currently constructing a new High Field Vertical Magnet Test Facility (HFVMTF) designed for testing High Temperature Superconducting (HTS) cables under high magnetic fields. This facility is expected to offer capabilities similar to those of EDIPO at PSI and FRESCA2 at CERN. The background magnetic field of 15 T will be generated by a magnet supplied by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The primary function of HFVMTF will be to serve as a superconducting cable test facility, facilitating tests under high magnetic fields and a broad spectrum of cryogenic temperatures. Additionally, the facility will be utilized for testing highfield superconducting magnet models and demonstrators, including hybrid magnets, developed by the US Magnet Development Program (MDP). This paper provides a comprehensive description of the current status of two pivotal components of the facility: the Top/Lambda Plates Assembly and the Anticryostat for the Test Sample Holder. The latter will serve as a principal interface component connecting cable test samples with the facility's cryostat.  HE US Department of Energy Offices of Science, specifically the High Energy Physics (HEP) and Fusion Energy Sciences (FES) programs, have collaboratively initiated the construction of a facility dedicated to testing High Temperature Superconductor (HTS) cables. This facility, named HFVMTF, is currently in the construction phase at Fermilab. Engineered to match or exceed the capabilities of European test stands such as EDIPO at PSI and FRESCA2 at CERN in Switzerland, HFVMTF will serve as a crucial resource for the U.S. FES and HEP communities. Its primary objective is to act as a testing platform for HTS cable samples, subjecting them to high dipole fields and elevated temperatures Within the framework of the U.S. HEP Magnet Development Program (MDP) This paper provides a detailed overview of the status of the principal interface of the magnet and the Test Sample Holder with the facility cryostat. This encompasses details related to the designs of the Top Plate Assembly, Lambda Plate Assembly, and Anticryostat for the Test Sample Holder. Based on the interface with cryostat and magnet as well as requirements from the community of users, the main parameters of Top Plate assembly and Anticryostat were selected. Some of the parameters are driven from basic requirements of this test facility described in documented Since the main requirement of cryostat is to cool the magnet up to superfluid helium at a temperature of 1.9K, this requirement imposes the use of double-bath vessel with the Lambda Plate that will separate 4.5K normal liquid helium and pressurized superfluid helium at 1.9K and 1.2bar. The maximum stored energy in the magnet is on the order of 20MJ and in quench sceneries, some of the energy is to be released through Lambda Plate. The Top Plate assembly is designed to mainly support FES experiments, however secondary Top Plate will be built to support MDP experiments. Table In the Anticryostat a sample holder with the HTS test sample will be inserted into the magnet aperture. Its conceptual design is similar to the cryostat at EDIPO The Top Plate Assembly for HFVMTF is in final design process and will go through procurement search for manufacturing contractor in Fall of 2023. Expectation is to have this component for initial zero magnet testing and commissioning of this test stand in Fall of 2024. As for the Vertical Magnet Test Facility (VMTF) at Fermilab, the magnets tested in the new HVMTF cryostat will be supported/suspended from Top Plate Assembly using a custom designed 3-point rod support system. The Top Plate Assembly is composed of 5 mayor components, the Top Plate, the Support Rods, the 80K Shield, the Lambda Plate, and the Adapter Plate (Figure The Support System that will carry the magnet will consist of three 2" stainless steel rods going from Top Plate to Adapter Plate. This support system will compensate the thermal contraction of the materials and therefore the dead load of magnet will be transferred from Top Plate to Lambda Plate during the installation process in cryostat. In this test facility, the magnetic shielding has already been installed in the pit The Top Plate Assembly also serves as a critical component to minimize the heat load and improve the thermal performance of the cryostat. This assembly is composed of a 80K Thermal Shield that consist of copper flat plate with Liquid Nitrogen lines mechanically attached to this plate. Above and below this plate, copper clad G-10 baffles were used with closed cell Rohacell foam as volume displacer and additional thermal barrier (Figure Lastly, the Anticryostat placed in aperture of the magnet, will be attached to Top Plate Assembly, and have opening access on top for sample insertion. The two superconducting magnet systems, each with its own branch of power supplies and quench protection systems, also have their own branch of instrumentation for monitoring and controls. These include quench detection and quench characterization voltage tap wiring, cryogenic temperature sensors, magnet strain gauges, cold pressure transducers, acoustical transducers, quench antenna, and liquid level sensors. There will also be feedthroughs for HTS fiber optic quench detection sensors. In addition, each magnet system will have current source and voltage sense wiring for the magnet protection heaters, and there will be superconducting bus and power leads for the coupling-loss induced quench (CLIQ) systems The Anticryostat and Test Sample Holder are in preliminary design stage, expecting to start finalization of this design after procurement of Top Plate Assembly design, which based on milestones it to be delivered at Fermilab by end of summer 2024. The Anticryostat is designed to hold a sample, a superconducting transformer, and process piping (Figure The second mayor component is sample cable holder (Figure From collaboration meetings, the new user requirements introduced a different configuration of length for Sample Cable Holder to accommodate the joint offset in field and therefore the appropriate spacers will be added to accommodate this offset. Along the sides of the Sample Cable Holder will be a capillary 3/16" (4.7mm) ID tubes that will supply a forced flow 4.5K-50K gas helium at programmable mass flow rate up to 145psi (10bar). Additionally, these capillary tubes will have the ability to be used as supply or return in parallel arrangement or combination of supply and return in series connection of cable sample arrangement (Figure During the R&D test phase, the Anticryostat, also known as the Warm Bore, will utilize magnets similar to those currently in use at other Magnet Test Facilities within Fermilab. The Warm Bore is primarily employed for capturing warm magnetic measurements or conducting quench studies utilizing various probes. It typically accommodates two sizes of warm fingers: 5" (127mm) OD and 2.5" (63mm) OD. Its internal space is anticipated to function under vacuum or room temperature conditions while performing magnetic measurements. However, the intricate design specifics for this operation are slated to be finalized by 2025. In US, the Fermilab is in process of building a new cabletesting facility that will have similar capability of the European cable test facilities EDIPO and FRESCA2. This test facility primarily will serve the communities within the DOE Office of Science, the US Magnet Development Program, and the US Fusion Energy Sciences programs, to test HTS cable samples in a magnetic field up to 15T. This paper reports on the progress of the design and construction of main interface components in facility. The cryostat is in the fabrication process. The Top Plate Assemblies has final engineering design and will soon begin the search of manufacturing vendor for fabrication later this year. From community of user's workshop, the Anticryostat and sample cable holder preliminary design is complete and will soon undergo a review before it gets finalized.