Here, we present surface analysis and biocompatibility evaluation of novel composite material based on graphene oxide traded as Hastalex. First, the surface morphology and elemental analysis of the pristine material were examined by atomic force and scanning electron microscopies, and by energy-dispersive and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies, respectively. The Hastalex surface was then modified by plasma (3 and 8 W with exposure times up to 240 s), the impact of which on the material surface wettability and morphology was further evaluated. In addition, the material aging was studied at room and elevated temperatures. Significant changes in surface roughness, morphology, and area were detected at the nanometre scale after plasma exposure. An increase in oxygen content due to the plasma exposure was observed both for 3 and 8 W. The plasma treatment had an outstanding effect on the cytocompatibility of Hastalex foil treated at both input powers of 3 and 8 W. The cell number of human MRC-5 fibroblasts on Hastalex foils exposed to plasma increased significantly compared to pristine Hastalex and even to tissue culture polystyrene. The plasma exposure also affected the fibroblasts' cell growth and shape. In nature, carbon predominantly exists in two allotropes with vastly different physical properties, namely graphite and diamond. However, due to its stability in three hybridizations (sp, sp2, and sp3), carbon can also form numerous other amorphous and crystalline structures Graphene, which is the fundamental building block of more complex carbon structures, was first successfully prepared in 2004 by graphite exfoliation GO is prepared by oxidizing graphite With the advancing development of carbon nanostructures, they have begun to be considered ideal reinforcements for polymer matrix composites (PMCs) Polymer composites with CNTs are the most extensively researched composite materials to date, as evidenced by the abundance of scientific publications To improve the material properties in a specific direction, methods are being developed to align nanotubes in that direction, such as mechanical stretching Seifalian, marketed by NanoRegMed Hastalex has been designed as a biocompatible material for the human body. The last mentioned property is useful for the production of implants that are intended to be present in the body only temporarily, e.g., stents Moreover, Hastalex might have potential for further medicinal applications, such as implant manufacturing in orthopaedics, prosthetics production in dentistry, or wound healing support in regenerative medicine Previously, we have reported some excellent properties of polymer-carbon composite materials, in which the carbon material has been incorporated into the bulk polymer matrix The studied material was a nanocomposite film (20×20 cm, a thickness of 500 μm) with a polymer matrix and GO reinforcement called Hastalex supplied by Goodfellow. From this film, samples of 1.5×1.5 cm 2 were cut and modified by plasma for 10, 40, 80, 120, 160, 200, and 240 s at 3 and 8 W. The material surface exposure to the plasma was done by the BAL-TEC Sputter coater SCD 050 instrument. The exposure was performed using DC cold Ar plasma (gas purity was 99.997%). Process parameters were: Ar flow 0.3 l s -1 , Ar pressure 10 Pa, electrode area 48 cm 2 , the inter-electrode distance of 60 mm, chamber volume 1000 cm 3 . Further, the samples were subjected to thermal stress at 60 and 100 °C using a BINDER drying oven with the fan speed set to level 30/100. The samples were placed onto glass Petri dishes during the thermal exposure. Gravimetry was used to determine the amount of material removed by the plasma exposure. The prepared samples were weighed five times before and after plasma modification at Mettler Toledo UMX2 automated microbalances with a precision of 0.1 μg. Next, sample wettability and surface energy were determined by measurement of a contact angle between the substrate and a liquid droplet. For this, SEE System optical device and Advex Instruments software were used. Droplets of water (5 μl) and glycerol (8 μl) were deposited onto the material surface, and photographs of the droplets were taken. The images were then analyzed using a three-point analysis method to obtain the contact angle values. The surface energy values were evaluated by the Owens-Wendt method. For the study of surface morphology and roughness, the samples were further subjected to atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a Dimension ICON microscope from BrukerCorp. The measurements were conducted in ScanAsyst mode using a silicon tip. The specific probe used was the Scan Asyst Air probe with a spring constant of 0.4 N•m -1 . Image sizes were captured for an area ranging from 0.3×0.3 μm2 to 30×30 μm2. The surface morphology of the substrates was examined and analyzed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) in a secondary electron mode, specifically, the TESCAN LYRA3 GMU instrument manufactured by TESCAN in the Czech Republic. The SEM analysis was conducted at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Additionally, energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was performed using the same instrument. Detailed information regarding the elemental composition of the sample surfaces was obtained by energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) using the F-MaxN analyzer and a silicon drift detector (SDD) from Oxford Instruments, UK. The applied acceleration voltage during EDS measurements was 10 kV. The surface chemistry of the samples was characterized using an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) instrument, specifically the Omicron Nanotechnology ESCAProbeP. Monochromatic X-ray radiation with an energy of 1486.7 eV was used as the excitation source. A surface area of 2×3 mm2 was analyzed. The relative abundance of elements was determined from the intensity of peaks in the XPS spectra using CasaXPS software. To determine the mechanical properties of the Hastalex film, a Discovery DMA 850 instrument from TA Instruments, an American company, was used. This instrument applies a force ranging from 0.1 mN to 18 N, making it suitable for measuring both rigid and soft materials. The device operates in a temperature range of -160 to 600 °C, thus enabling mechanical testing over a wide temperature range. To evaluate the material cytocompatibility, human fetal lung fibroblasts (MRC-5; Merck, USA) were chosen. The cells were regularly passaged using trypsinization and maintained at the exponential phase of growth. Cultivation media consisted of Minimal essential medium (MEM; Merck, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 % (v/v) nonessential amino acid solution, and 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The MRC-5 cells were kept in a cell culture incubator at 37 °C, an atmosphere with 5 % CO2 and 95 % humidity. The cytocompatibility measurement was done similarly to the refs. After the endpoint incubation periods of the MRC-5 cells on the tested materials, cell fixation by a crosslinking method occurred similarly as described in ref. To visualize inner cell structures as cell cytoskeleton and the nucleus, a phalloidin conjugate and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI ) were used, respectively, as described in ref. The fixed MRC-5 cells were examined using a wide-field inverse fluorescence microscope Olympus IX-81 (Olympus, Japan; xCellence software). The samples were monitored at 100× magnification using a 10× objective with a numerical aperture of 0.30. For fluorescence, a triple, quad filter DAPI/FITC/TRITC (Olympus, Japan) and a high-stability 150-W xenon arc burner (100 % intensity) were utilized. From each sample, at least ten regions of interest were taken, and the images were captured by an EM-CCD camera C9100-02 (Hamamatsu, Japan). Then, the fluorescence images were background-corrected, and the two fluorescence channels (DAPI and FITC) were merged. From the images, the number of cells was evaluated based on the nuclei counting using ImageJ 1.54d. First, the images were binarized and thresholded; then the watershed was applied, and the nuclei were counted by "analyze particles". For each sample, ten regions per sample replicate were analyzed. The data were averaged, and the standard deviation was calculated. First, we prepared a series of samples, which were modified by plasma at 3 and 8 W for 0-240 s, after which their surface wettability and energy were examined using glycerol and water. The contact angles are presented in Fig Plasma modification at 8 W resulted in a more pronounced change and surfaces with higher wettability compared to the 3 W surfaces. The data in Fig. With longer exposure time, the energy even moderately increased to values slightly above 70 mJ•m -2 for an input power of 8 W. It can also be concluded, especially for the higher exposure times, that the input power did not affect the surface energy. With increasing exposure time, this difference disappeared, which was probably due to the surface ablation, which periodically "renews" the surface after a certain period. Therefore, similarly to the trend of wettability data, the surface energy of the films modified with plasma at 8 W was higher than that at 3 W. Next, we have focused on the analysis of surface morphology of pristine Hastalex foil. We have analyzed different surface areas, up to 30 x 30 μm 2 , and we have chosen to present the data for the four squares of different scales in order to present the morphology of Hastalex from "micro" to "macro" scale. From Fig. To determine the elemental composition of the surface layer of both the original and plasma-modified Hastalex samples (up to a few hundred nanometers), energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was employed. We were particularly interested in the carbon-to-oxygen ratio, which was affected by the material surface exposure to the plasma treatment. We found that the plasma modification led to an increase in the oxygen content, with a more pronounced effect observed at an 8 W power level. Since EDS examines the composition of a material to a greater depth, the difference/impact of plasma between pristine and plasma-treated Hastalex was not as pronounced as it would be if only a few atomic layers were considered (the analysis using XPS will be presented in the following paragraph). The EDS results are shown in Fig. to a decrease in the atomic concentration of carbon. It can be concluded that the increase of oxygen-to-carbon ratio confirms the increase of oxygen containing polar functional groups on the Hastalex sample surface. Furthermore, the formation of the oxygen-containing polar functional groups on the Hastalex material surface results in the increase in surface free energy, making the surface hydrophilic at the same time, which explains the decrease in the contact angle after plasma treatment. It is also very important to mention that during plasma surface exposure, ablation took place, as described further in this manuscript. Therefore, partial removal of already modified material was removed from the surface in the form of larger polymeric These outcomes are in good agreement with those observed by the EDS analysis introduced in the previous paragraph. Also, the oxygen concentration was higher than those values determined by EDS since only up to 10 nm of the surface in depth was analyzed, which was more affected by the plasma exposure. Also, the induced difference, the increase in surface oxygen concentration, was significantly higher in the upper layers, which was confirmed by the XPS. To assess Hastalex's suitability as a material for heart valves, given its remarkable strength, a dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) was performed over a temperature range of - As outlined in the description of the methods, calculating the thickness of the ablated layer was challenging due to the lack of knowledge about the material density during the measurements. To estimate its density, we used the known sample area, accurate mass measurements, and the approximate thickness of the foil, which was provided by the manufacturer with an accuracy of ±10%. We considered this value to be constant, enabling us to obtain a rough idea of the relationship between the thickness of the ablated layer and the exposure time. However, the actual thickness values should be regarded as approximate. This relationship is depicted in Fig. To assess the stability in surface properties, mainly in terms of surface wettability, we heated the Hastalex foil for plasma-treated foil with 8 W for 240 s since these more pronounced changes in both surface chemistry and wettability were detected. After plasma treatment, we analyzed the induced changes in surface wettability. Additionally, such treated foils have been kept in standard conditions (RT) to evaluate the changes in surface contact angle during aging time. It was found that a temperature of 100 °C was sufficient to fully restore the material surface wettability to the original level of the unmodified material within 1 h, specifically to the value of 81.1 ± 3.7°. Therefore, we reduced the temperature and repeated the measurements at 60 °C, taking a sample every 20 min. and conducting the measurements for 1 h. The results of surface aging at room temperature and elevated temperature are summarized in Fig. The aging progression during the the initial hours (A) and the 14 days (B) are shown. All these measurements were performed on the most modified film, i.e., with an input power of 8 W for 240 s. It was observed that the wettability returned to the unmodified material value after ca. 125 h continued to decrease. The interaction of a material with cells can significantly affect its cytocompatibility, which is mostly driven by the material properties, such as roughness, wettability, and composition of functional chemical groups present on the surface. These parameters can be efficiently and economically feasibly modified by plasma and/or laser treatment to obtain a material with tailor-made properties in a controllable manner. This is especially advantageous in the case of inert polymers, such as Hastalex. Therefore, in this study, human fibroblasts (MRC-5) were chosen as a cell line model to evaluate the cytocompatibility of a Hastalex material before and after its modification with plasma aiming to achieve a material of wettability and surface chemistry which would support A B cell growth. As a control, tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) was chosen since it is used as a gold standard for cell cultivation. The material cytocompatibility, cell morphology, and growth of MRC¬5 cells were examined after 1, 3 and 6 days of cultivation, see Figs. 11, 12 and 13, respectively. Cell morphology was monitored based on cytoskeleton staining, and as it is apparent from Fig. The shape of these cells was not elongated enough (as in the control) and did not bear the physiologically relevant morphology of fibroblasts. This shape was likely due to the high hydrophobicity of the substrate surface preventing cells from adequately adhering to the material in combination with the "smooth" surface morphology (a surface with very low roughness at the nanometer scale). The change of surface morphology, formation of a surface with higher roughness and globular morphology at the nanometer scale, in combination with the increase in oxygen-containing groups, had a positive effect on cell adhesion on Hastalex polymer, which is apparent from the blue charts in Fig. Moreover, dividing cells were also detected on the modified samples. These all were in coherence with cells growing on TCPS control but in big contrast with pristine Hastalex, on which there were only a few cells of irregular shape, mostly triangular and nonelongated. The positive effect of the nanometer scale roughness increase with the oxygen-containing group augmentation is further visible after 3 and 6 days from seeding. Plasma treatment had a positive effect on the number and shape of cells. A higher exposure time of 240 s of argon plasma led to better cell spreading even after three days of inoculation, while samples treated for only 40 s showed lower cytocompatibility. Six days from seeding, the plasma effect on Hastalex cytocompatibility was outstanding, and significantly higher cell numbers were detected even for lower times and powers of plasma exposure compared to a control sample. The cytocompatibility of plasma-treated foils was also maintained after their heat treatment, which is important for different types of sterilization procedures. As for the last cultivation point measured, day 6, the cells formed a confluent 2D layer on all tested samples as well as on control TCPS, except pristine Hastalex, on which there were significantly fewer cells. However, interestingly, the cells were probably already partially adapted to the pristine Hastalex properties since, in addition to a portion of cells growing in clusters of roundish cells, they were mostly of elongated morphology similar to that observed for control TCPS the first day of cultivation, which might be caused by altered surface morphology at the nanometer scale with a lot of adhesion points for filopodia attachment. This study is focused on the characterization of a new nanocomposite material based on GO traded as Hastalex. The surface of the unmodified material and the effect of the plasma modification on its properties and morphology were examined. The positive effect of plasma modification on Hastalex surface wettability was demonstrated at both input power but was more pronounced at 8 W. The most significant change in contact angle values occurred within the first 10 s, and the effect of a passivating layer was considered. Next, AFM enabled the detection of material surface roughening after the plasma treatment, and at 3 and 8 W, the formation of worm-like structures and spherical clusters occurred, respectively. To investigate this phenomenon further, we employed SEM, the results of which confirmed that of AFM. XPS, in particular, enabled the composition analysis of the topmost layers of the film. As expected, plasma modification led to an increase in the oxygen content on the material surface. The input power had a greater effect on the oxygen content than the length of the exposure time. Finally, changes in wettability over time following plasma modification were investigated, representing the aging phenomenon. It was observed that wettability decreased to the value of the unmodified material within 125 h at room temperature, and the contact angle continued to increase up to 90° within 14 days. The plasma treatment had an outstanding effect on the cytocompatibility of Hastalex foil for both input power of 3 and 8 W. The cell number on plasma-exposed Hastalex foils increased significantly compared to pristine Hastalex and even to TCPS. The plasma exposure also affected the cell growth and shape; after 6 days from seeding, a dense net of MRC-5 cells was formed.