We outline how pairs of strongly immiscible elements, referred to here as antagonistic pairs, can be used to synthesize ternary compounds with low or quasi-reduced dimensional motifs intrinsically built into their crystal structures. By identifying third elements that are mutually compatible with a given antagonistic pair, ternary compounds can be formed in which the third element segregates the immiscible atoms into spatially separated substructures. Quasi-low dimensional structural units, such as sheets, chains, or clusters are a natural consequence of the immiscible atoms seeking to avoid close contact in the solid-state. As proof of principle, we present the discovery, crystal growth, and basic physical properties of La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, Sb), a new family of intermetallic compounds based on the antagonistic pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi. La4Co4X adopts a new orthorhombic crystal structure (space group Pbam) containing quasi-2D Co slabs and La-X polyhedra that stack in an alternating manner along the a-axis. Consistent with our proposal, the La atoms separate the Co and X substructures, ensuring there are no direct contacts between the members of the immiscible (antagonistic) pair. Within the Co slabs, the atoms occupy the vertices of corner sharing tetrahedra and triangles, and this bonding motif produces flat electronic bands near the Fermi level that favor magnetism. The Co is moment bearing in each La4Co4X compound studied, and we show that whereas La4Co4Pb behaves as a three dimensional antiferromagnet with T N = 220 K, La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb have behavior consistent with low dimensional magnetic coupling and ordering, with T N = 153 K and 143 K respectively. In addition to the Pb, Bi, and Sb based La4Co4X compounds, we also were likely able to produce an analogous La4Co4Sn in polycrystalline form, although we were unable to isolate single crystals. We anticipate that identifying and using mutually compatible third elements together with an antagonistic pair represents a novel and generalizable design principle for discovering new materials and new structure types containing low-dimensional substructures. A foundational aspiration of solid state chemistry is to develop general design principles for producing materials with targeted structural motifs and physical properties. Here, we demonstrate how strongly immiscible pairs of elements can be leveraged to synthesize ternary compounds with reduced or quasi-reduced dimensional motifs such as 2D sheets, 1D chains, or 0D clusters intrinsically built into their crystal structures. To introduce the basic idea, consider the two binary phase diagrams for Co-Pb and Co-Bi displayed in Figures The heart of this work is the question: for any given immiscible pair of elements, what third element can be introduced to produce stable ternary compounds? Remarkably, a survey of crystallographic databases reveals that for many ternary compounds that contain an antagonistic pair, the strong immiscibility of the antagonistic elements often remains preserved in the crystal structure, with the third element separating the immiscible elements into distinct, quasi low dimensional substructures. Whereas Co is strongly immiscible with Pb and Bi, all three elements, Co, Pb, and Bi, mix readily with La. We grew the La 4 Co 4 X single crystals by adding small quantities of X = Pb, Bi, Sb to Co-La based melts as follows. Elemental La (Ames Laboratory, 99.9+ %) Co pieces (American Elements, 99.99 %), and Pb (Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %), Bi (Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %), or Sb (Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %) were weighed in molar ratios of La placed in a Ta crucible set with home made Ta caps and filter. EDS and powder x-ray diffraction indicated the larger plates to be the known ternary La 6 Co 13 X (X = Pb or Sb) The composition of the blade-like samples was determined by Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) quantitative chemical analysis using a ThermoFisher (FEI) Teneo Lovac FE-scanning electron microscope (SEM). The data was analyzed using an Oxford Instruments Aztec System with X-Max-80 detector, attached to the Teneo. The measurements were conducted with an acceleration voltage of 20 kV, current of 1.6 nA, working distance of 10 mm, and a take off angle of 35°. We analyzed three separate crystals from each batch, respectively corresponding to Pb, Bi, and Sb containing samples, and the composition of each crystal was measured at 4-8 different spots, revealing good homogeneity in each case. The standards used for reference are internal to the Oxford software. The EDS data for each sample is summarized in Tables S1-S3 in the supporting information. Single crystal X-ray diffraction was performed using a Rigaku XtaLab Synergy-S diffractometer with Ag radiation (0.56087 Å ) operating at 65 kV and 0.67 mA. The samples were held in a nylon loop with vacuum grease, and the data was collected at room temperature. The total number of runs and images was based on the strategy calculation from the program CrysAlisPro (Rigaku OD, 2023). The data integration and reduction were also performed using CrysAlisPro, and a numerical absorption correction was applied based on Gaussian integration over a face-indexed crystal. For La 4 Co 4 Bi, the crystal was irregularly shaped and we were unable to index the faces, so we employed an empirical multi-scan absorption correction using spherical harmonics, implemented in the SCALE3 ABSPACK scaling algorithm. The structures were solved by intrinsic phasing using the SHELXT software package and were refined with SHELXL. The crystallographic data and refinement results are given Tables Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using a Rigaku Miniflex-II instrument operating with Cu-K α radiation with λ = 1.5406 Å (K α1) and 1.5443 Å (K α2) at 30 kV and 15 mA. The samples were prepared by grinding a representative number of crystals (5-10) to a fine powder. The powder patterns were refined using the Rietveld method with GSAS-II software. Temperature dependent resistance measurements were performed between 4-300 K in a closed-cycle cryostat (Janis SHI-950). The AC resistance was measured using LakeShore AC resistance bridges (models 370 and 372), with a frequency of 17 Hz and a 3 mA excitation current. The temperature was measured by a calibrated Cernox 1030 sensor connected to a LakeShore 336 controller. As the crystals naturally grew with a blade-like morphology, we measured the resistances along the long-axis of the blade, which was determined with a Laue camera to be the c-crystallographic axis. To prepare the samples, the surfaces of the crystals were lightly polished, and contacts were made by spot welding 25 μm thick annealed Pt wire onto the (100) faces of the crystals in standard four point geometry. After spot welding, a small amount of silver epoxy was painted onto the contacts to ensure good mechanical strength, and typical contact resistances were ≈ 1 Ω. Magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-classic) SQUID magnetometer operating in the DC measurement mode. The measurements were performed with the field applied along the a, b, and c crystallographic directions, and the samples were oriented with a Laue camera. For La 4 Co 4 Pb and La 4 Co 4 Bi, the samples were mounted between two straws for measurements in the H ∥ b and H ∥ c orientations. To measure with H ∥ a (perpendicular to the thinnest direction of the blade-like crystals), the samples were glued to a Kel-F disc, which was then placed inside of a straw. Prior to measuring, the blank disc was first measured at the same temperatures and fields to use as a background subtraction. For La 4 Co 4 Sb, the sample was mounted to the disc to measure all orientations. Density functional theory (DFT) was used to calculate the electronic structure of La 4 Co 4 X with X = Pb, Bi, and Sb. The DFT calculations were performed by using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchangecorrelation functional within the framework of GGA The La 4 Co 4 X (X = Pb, Bi, or Sb) compounds adopt a new orthorhombic structure type with space group Pbam. The crystal structure is illustrated in Figure in the supporting information. As shown in Figures The existence of stable ternary compounds containing the pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi demonstrates that the extreme immiscibility of Co with Pb and Bi may be overcome by using a third element that is mutually compatible with the antagonistic elements. In this case, Co and Pb/Bi are all soluble in excess La at temperatures above 800°C. In La 4 Co 4 X, the most interesting structural motifs are the quasi-2D slabs of Co the span the bc-plane. As described above, these slabs are composed of corner sharing tetrahedra that form chains along the c-axis and that are linked by pairs of corner sharing triangles along the b-direction. Such networks of corner sharing tetrahdra or triangles form the basis of pyrochlore and Kagome lattices, both of which are currently attracting immense interest as potential platforms for studying many-body topological physics. In the Bi and Sb containing compounds, Figures To estimate the Neel temperatures from the magnetic Figure In La 4 Co 4 Pb, the b-axis magnetization is extremely flat, and essentially independent of field up to 35 kOe, upon which it undergoes a step-like transition to a high-field state in which the magnetization is again nearly independent of field, with a saturated value of 0.53 μ B /Co. In La 4 Co 4 Bi and La 4 Co 4 Sb, the H ∥ b isotherms also show a field induced transition beginning near 55-60 kOe that is incomplete at our maximum field of 70 kOe. However, the transition in the X = Bi and Sb compounds appears substantially broadened compared to that observed in La 4 Co 4 Pb. Finally, we note that for La 4 Co 4 Sb, the small upturn in each isotherm below 5 kOe indicates this sample contains a small quantity of a ferromagnetic impurity (likely La 6 Co 13 Sb with T C = 490 K 5 ), and a similar feature is observed in data collected at 300 K for this sample (see Figure Taken together, La 4 Co 4 Pb exhibits distinct magnetic behavior from that of La 4 Co 4 Bi and La 4 Co 4 Sb. The magnetization of La 4 Co 4 Pb, with Curie-Weiss like M/H in the high temperature paramagnetic regime and a well defined maximum at the Neel temperature, is typical of an intermetallic antiferromagnet with three dimensional coupling and ordering. La 4 Co 4 Bi and La 4 Co 4 Sb differ on both accounts, showing a broad maximum in M/H instead of a sharp peak and non Curie-Weiss like temperature dependence in the paramagnetic regime. Furthermore, at the temperatures and fields applied here, the overall magnitude of M for X = Bi and Sb members is substantially smaller than that measured for La 4 Co 4 Pb. All of these characteristics are similar to the behavior of low dimensional systems, such as chains or sheets of coupled spins. Overall, our measurements show that La 4 Co 4 X is a new family of Co based itinerant magnets in which quasi-2D slabs of Co produce magnetic behavior that is likely sensitive to the band filling. It will be worthwhile to pursue deliberate substitution work, i.e. La 4 Co 4 Pb 1-x Bi x to carefully study how the magnetism changes as a function of the electron count. Furthermore, we intend to also search for isostructural analogues containing moment bearing rare earth atoms to study the more complex magnetic phases likely accessible in such systems. We highlighted how immiscibility can be exploited to target ternary compounds with low dimensional substructures, such as sheets, chains, or clusters intrinsically built into their crystal structures. As a demonstration, we present the discovery of a new family of intermetallic compounds, La 4 Co 4 X (X = Pb, Bi, Sb), that are based on the immiscible pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi. La 4 Co 4 X adopts a new orthorhombic structure with space group Pbam. The La atoms divide the crystal structure into spatially separated Co and X sub-units, where the Co atoms form quasi-2D slabs that span the bc-plane and stack along the a-axis, where they alternate with slabs of face sharing La 9 X polyhedra. Co is moment bearing in each material, and La 4 Co 4 Pb behaves as a three dimensional antiferromagnet with T N = 220 K, whereas La 4 Co 4 Bi and La 4 Co 4 Sb both show behavior more consistent with low dimensional magnetic coupling and order marked by a broad maximum in the magnetization above their respective transitions at 153 K and 143 K. We also have been able to tentatively identify isostructural La 4 Co 4 Sn in polycrystalline form but have not yet isolated single phase samples. This work opens the door to a generalizable strategy of exploiting strongly immiscible pairs to target materials with low dimensional structural motifs. By further studying the chemistry dictating what third elements can be introduced to any given antagonistic pair to produce stable ternary compounds, we believe this concept represents a new design principle for the discovery of new materials and new structure types favorable for exhibiting emergent quantum behavior. Work at Ames National Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. 1 Additional synthetic details and powder X-ray diffraction Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns obtained on the blade-like crystals discussed in the synthetic details section of the main text are presented in Figure Because the surfaces of the crystals were found to darken quickly (within minutes) with exposure to air, we also measured powder X-ray diffraction patterns using a different diffractometer (Rigaku Miniflex I) that is contained inside a nitrogen filled glovebox. Figure The PXRD pattern obtained on the arc-melted and annealed La-Co-Sn button is shown in Figure We used energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy to determine the composition of the blade-like crystals. Figures Figure To determine the effective magnetic moments (μ eff ) in the high temperature paramagnetic state, we fit the magnetization data to a modified Curie Weiss law, where C is the Curie constant, θ CW the Weiss temperature, and χ 0 is a temperature independent term. Because the temperature dependence of M/H is not Curie-Weiss like in La 4 Co 4 Bi and La 4 Co 4 Bi, we only analyzed La 4 Co 4 Pb. We used a Honda-Owen method Figure 