Control of water ice formation on surfaces is of key technological and economic importance, but the fundamental understanding of ice nucleation and growth mechanisms and the design of surfaces for controlling water freezing behaviour remain incomplete. Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) material that has been extensively studied for its peculiar wetting properties with liquid water incl. a heavily debated wetting transparency. Furthermore, graphene is the parent structure of soot particles that are heavily implicated as nuclei in atmospheric ice formation and consequently graphene is often used as a model surface for computational ice nucleation studies. Despite this, to date experimental reports on ice formation on scalable graphene films remain missing. Towards filling this gap, we here report on the water freezing behaviour on scalably grown chemical vapour deposited (CVD) graphene films on application-relevant polycrystalline copper (Cu). We find that as-grown CVD graphene on Cu can be (as we term it) "freezing transparent" i.e. the graphene's presence does not change the freezing temperature curves of liquid water to solid ice on Cu in our measurements. Such "freezing transparency" has to date not been considered. We also show that chemical functionalization of the graphene films can result in controllable changes to the freezing behaviour to lower/higher temperatures and that also the observed freezing transparency can be lifted via functionalization. Our work thereby introduces the concept of freezing transparency of graphene on a metal support and also introduces scalable CVD graphene/Cu as an ultimately thin platform towards control of ice nucleation behaviour on a technologically highly relevant metal. Environmental ice formation from freezing of water on materials can critically impact on their operation performance, safety and running cost in many application fields. Therefore, solutions to control ice nucleation on materials are highly sought after. The formation of ice on a material is however a highly multifaceted and as of yet not sufficiently understood process. For heterogeneous ice nucleation it is intricately linked with a material's surface energies, nano-morphologies and wettabilities. A multi-functional class of novel materials that has been under intense investigation over the past years are atomically-thin, two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene, a monolayer of sp 2 -bonded carbon. In particular, the peculiar liquid water wetting behaviour on graphene incl. existence of a highly debated "wetting transparency" of graphene coated onto metals has recently been extensively studied and discussed. Only two prior reports investigated changes in ice nucleation from graphene coatings, albeit both grown under non-scalable ultra-high-vacuum (UHV) conditions and not on a scalable metal, but on prohibitively expensive Ru/sapphire and Ir/sapphire single-crystal models. Towards filling these critical gaps in the literature, both in terms of experimental study of fundamentals of water ice nucleation on graphene as well as assessing scalable (functionalized) graphene as a potentially ice-control coating, we here report on the water freezing behaviour on scalably grown CVD graphene on application-relevant polycrystalline Cu. The employed Cu supports are hereby not only the most widely used support to produce CVD graphene We show in this report that non-treated, as-grown CVD graphene on Cu can be (as we term it) "freezing transparent" i.e. the graphene's presence does not change the freezing temperature curves of water to ice on Cu in our measurements. Such "freezing transparency" has to date not been reported, and thus also not been considered in the many computational studies that used graphene as model system for ice nucleation surfaces. Furthermore, we investigate how functionalizations to the CVD graphene (incl. -oxygen-containing, -F and -polymethylmethacrylat (-PMMA) via plasma and liquid phase treatments) can result in controllable changes of water freezing curves to lower/higher temperatures and how also the freezing transparency can be lifted. We also explore extrinsic factors necessary for observation of this freezing transparency such as storage time of our samples in ambient conditions and thus linked adventitious hydrocarbon adsorption levels. Our work thereby not only introduces the concept of freezing transparency of graphene on a metal based on first experimental observation, but also introduces scalable CVD graphene as an ultimately thin platform towards control of ice nucleation on a technologically relevant metal. For our ice nucleation measurements we prepare a homogeneously covering, high-quality polycrystalline monolayer graphene film on Cu foils (25 μm thickness) by CVD (graphene/Cu). Microscopic and spectroscopic characterisation of the graphene/Cu and bare Cu samples is shown in Supporting Figure Teflon", Supporting Figure Ice nucleation measurements Multiple individual samples are measured per every sample fabrication run. This data is then presented as freezing curves for each sample condition (e.g., Figure The freezing transparency behaviour of the graphene on Cu in our measurements is also reflected in the calculated T10, T25 T50 and T75 values in Table On the other hand, in Supporting Figure Combined, Supporting Figure Freezing on functionalized graphene/Cu. So far, we have investigated the freezing properties on asgrown graphene on Cu, which displays the here reported freezing transparency and elucidated its time dependence on inevitable adventitious carbon contamination. In order to test if the graphene's freezing behaviour on a metal can also be controlled in a deliberate fashion beyond storage time, Figure This suggests that it is not a different water droplet size distribution that is indirectly responsible for the slightly lower freezing temperatures, but rather suggests that the introduced oxygen-containing groups on the air-plasma-treated surfaces chemically mediate the freezing behaviour to slightly lower temperatures. The oxygen plasma experiments show that functionalization of graphene (here with oxygen-containing groups) can downshift the freezing temperature curve on graphene to slightly lower temperatures. The second treatment we investigate is covalent functionalization of the graphene by F i.e. formation of highly hydrophobic fluorographene or "2D Teflon". This is quite noteworthy, as in contrast the 2 s SF6-plasma-treated Cu reference (dashed light blue curve in Figure The third treatment that we apply to the graphene is wet chemical, non-covalent functionalization with PMMA particles that are persistently anchored onto the graphene. Combined, the results in Figure Interestingly for functionalisation with F, the freezing behaviour on graphene is not affected while on the Cu substrate it is strongly changed (SF 6 plasma in Figure plasma (flourographene) are interesting compared to prior literature: While in our experiments we do not evidence any significant change in freezing behaviour for the fluorinated graphene on Cu, in contrast a prior study 14 reported a lower freezing temperature for flourographene vs. pristine graphene on UHV Ru single crystals (note that possible freezing transparency between graphene/Ru vs. Ru was not studied in this ref. We also note that the here introduced freezing transparency concept not only links to prior work on wetting behaviour/wetting transparency of graphene, but in a wider realm also to other phenomena which rely on substrate properties to emanate through atomically thin graphene/2D materials: In summary, we have experimentally studied the water freezing behaviour on scalable CVD graphene films on application-relevant Cu. It was found that as-grown CVD graphene on Cu can be "freezing transparent", which is a term that we introduce to describe the phenomenon when freezing curves on graphene/Cu vs. bare Cu reference samples are identical i.e. the presence of graphene does not change the water freezing behaviour compared to on its bare underlying substrate. We explored the conditions in which such freezing transparency can be observed and also explored how chemical functionalization of the graphene films can result in changes to freezing evolution to lower/higher temperatures. Our work thus introduces the concept of freezing transparency of graphene on a metal based on the first experimental observation and also introduces scalable CVD graphene as an ultimately thin materials platform for control of ice nucleation and water freezing behaviour on a technologically relevant metal. ( Freezing experiments are recorded as video (20 fps) with temperature-and time stamp and separate temperature log file. Temperature is recorded in ~0.15 K steps, which is therefore our limit for temperature resolution in our measurements. The video is then analysed, either manually with the help of image processing software (ImageJ/Fiji In this state, only the drops should appear as black blobs while the copper sheet should be mostly white. To further isolate the drops, a morphological erosion operation is performed and the connected black regions that are large enough (in the number of pixels) are retained and assigned a label. From this the diameter and position is computed, assuming spherical drops and a region of interest (ROI) is drawn for each drop. At this point the user gets to check if the drop assignment was done correctly before the freezing event detection resumes. To detect freezing events the algorithm analyses the change in brightness between 2 subsequent frames. If inside one ROI, which was computed as previously described, a large enough absolute change in brightness occurs, this is detected as a freezing event. Together with the temperature log file the freezing temperature for individual freezing events is S4 recorded. The output is then manually checked for irregular or double detection of freezing events as contrast change upon freezing may happen over a timespan of more than one frame. This raw data in form of droplet freezing events is converted to freezing fraction curves (0% to 100%) and interpolated between 0.1 K temperature steps with the condition that the freezing fraction is considered constant between freezing events. This results in freezing fraction curves that show a stepwise increase with decreasing temperature. These freezing fraction curves of different experimental runs are then averaged to give the displayed average freezing curves. A visualization of this process is shown in Supporting Figure ). The results in Figure3con the effect of deliberate PMMA contamination to alter freezing behaviour via increased ice nucleation, links well with prior work on PMMA residues (and similar polymer residues) to have an significant effect on graphene wetting.8 Also, the results in Figure3bregarding SF6