Within first-principles calculations, we explore superconductivity in Ca-intercalated bilayer silicene compound, Si2CaSi2. This arises from the coupling of interlayer flower-like Γ-centered Fermi surface formed by the hybridization of Ca-3d and Si-3pz orbitals with low-energy out-of-plane vibrations enabled by silicene's buckling. The consequent large electron-phonon coupling, as evident from the Eliashberg spectral function leads to superconductivity below 5.4 K in this two-dimensional covalent system. Our results reveal the key control parameters to achieve superconductivity in experimentally synthesizable silicon-based thin materials that can find diverse applications. Superconductivity in atomically thin materials are of sustained interest both from fundamental and application perspectives. Such superconductors yield notable enhancements in critical properties, including the critical magnetic field and current, when the coherence length becomes comparable with the system size Intercalation of alkali or alkaline earth metal in bulk graphite, known as graphitic intercalated compounds (GICs) have been known to be superconducting since the early 1960s This has motivated us to use the silicene atomic sheet in place of graphene Electron-doped silicene shows superconductivity under biaxial strain and the T c can be enhanced up to 10K with increase in applied strain, owing to an increase in the DOS at the Fermi level and the creation of new channels for electron-phonon coupling We investigate the superconducting property of Caintercalated bilayer silicene, i.e., Si 2 CaSi 2 in this paper. This system shows superconductivity at 5.4K in absence of any external pressure, owing to the occupied Ca-Si hybridized band and charge-transfer induced softening of the acoustic phonon modes. We adopt ab-initio calculations using plane wave basis as implemented in Quantum Espresso where ǫ, N (ǫ F ), ω qν and Ω BZ are the energy, DOS at Fermi energy, phonon frequency and the BZ volume, respectively. The above integration is done with the Gaussian smearing of 0.04 Ry for Dirac deltas Then the total electron-phonon coupling strength for a specific ω value, λ(ω) can be obtained by When the above integration is taken till the highest ω value, i.e., ω max , we obtain λ which is subsequently used to obtain the T c from the McMillan-Allen-Dynes formulae where, μ * c is the effective Coulomb strength parameter and ω log is the logarithmic averaged of the phonon frequency. First we obtain the relaxed structure of monolayer silicene with position vectors of silicon atoms at (1/3, 2/3, z) and (2/3, 1/3, z ′ ) in the unit cell. Then we construct the bilayer silicene in AA stacking and intercalate Ca atoms in between two layers, in such a way that the Ca atoms sit on top of the silicon hexagons. We denote the interlayer distance as d. Now the Ca atoms are sandwiched in a trigonal manner in between two silicene layers. The top and side views of the structure are depicted in Fig. We calculate the electronic band structure of the Si 2 CaSi 2 system and present the same in Fig. It can be seen that, the intercalation of Ca substantially changes the band dispersions over the full irreducible Brillouin zone, indicating a considerably strong interlayer Ca-Si hybridization. The projected DOS shows large contributions from the Ca-3d and the Si-3p orbitals near the Fermi energy, whereas, the contributions from 4s and 4p orbitals of Ca have negligible contribution. This shows that the original empty d-orbitals of Ca is getting hybridized with the Si-3p orbitals and subsequently gets occupied. Increased Ca-3d occupancy also indicates a strong Ca-Si interaction To gain further insight regarding the orbital contributions, we plot the Ca-3d and Si-3p z orbitals projected band structure in Fig. There are two other dispersive bands cross the Fermi level between K and Γ points. One of the bands, marked with a square shows comparable contributions from Ca-3d and Si-3p z orbitals, revealing the hybridized nature of this band. The other band, marked with an oval exhibits major contributions from Si-3p z orbital. These two bands change their nature in other crystallographic directions. The first one exhibits predominantly Si-3p z contribution while crossing the Fermi level between K and M points, whereas the later one shows contributions from only Ca-3d orbital while crossing the Fermi level between M and Γ points. In Fig. To explore the superconducting properties, we investigate further the phonon behavior and subsequent electron-phonon coupling. We first present the phonon dispersion and the phonon DOS in Fig. In Fig. We present the λ(ω) in Fig. For Si 2 CaSi 2 system, we obtain the electron-phonon coupling strength, λ = 0.85. Incorporating this value along with μ * c = 0.12 We investigate the superconducting property of Ca intercalated AA stacked bilayer silicene compound with the stoichiometry Si 2 CaSi 2 , using first principle calculations. Formation of a flower like interlayer Fermi surface around the Γ point enhances the density of states at the Fermi energy. Coupling of lower and intermediate frequency outof-plane vibrations with such higher electron density near the Fermi energy, as evident from the Eliashberg spectral function, gives rise to superconductivity below 5.4 K. The T c is comparable with that of experimentally reported Lidecorated monolayer graphene 