Weyl superconductivity is a topological phase in three-dimensional crystals in which the Weyl equation describes quasiparticle excitation near band-touching points in momentum space called Weyl nodes. For quasicrystals which lack translational symmetry, a theory of Weyl superconductivity has not been established, in spite of recent extensive studies on quasicrystalline topological phases. Here, we demonstrate the occurrence of quasicrystalline Weyl superconductivity by extending the definition of Weyl superconductivity to periodically stacked, two-dimensional superconducting quasicrystals. We identify quasicrystalline Weyl nodes -topologically protected point nodes in one-dimensional momentum space corresponding to the stacking direction -in terms of a topological invariant given by a change in the Bott index in quasicrystalline layers. We find that these Weyl nodes exist in pairs and that Majorana zero-energy modes protected by the nonzero Bott index between a pair of quasicrystalline Weyl nodes appear on surfaces. These Majorana zero modes form an infinite number of arcs in momentum space, densely and quasiperiodically distributed as a function of momentum in the direction of surfaces within each quasicrystalline layer. In Ammann-Beenker (Penrose) quasicrystals, the quasiperiodicity of Majorana arcs is governed by the silver (golden) ratio associated with the quasicrystalline structure. Quasicrystals (QCs) are materials whose structure is aperiodic with a long-range order One cannot use a topological band theory for QCs because they lack translational symmetry. Nevertheless, in quasicrystalline systems, topological insulator phases beyond a topological band theory Some crystalline topological superconductors show gapless points in momentum space called point nodes. If those points cannot be gapped out by weak perturbations that conserve symmetries of the system, such points are called topologically protected nodes. For example, a Weyl superconductor (WSC) is a three-dimensional (3D) * mhorijapan@gmail.com superconductor with topologically protected point nodes called Weyl nodes, which exist pairwise and are described by the Weyl equation with chirality ±1 In this work, we study periodically stacked, twodimensional (2D) quasicrystalline topological superconductors. We find that this system shows topologically protected nodes in one-dimensional momentum space corresponding to the stacking direction. At these nodes, the Bott index changes its value in the same way as does the Chern number at Weyl nodes in crystalline WSCs. We thus call them quasicrystalline Weyl nodes The paper is organized as follows. We first review a 2D quasicrystalline topological superconductor in Sec. II A and then introduce a layered quasicrystalline superconductor in Sec. II B. In Sec. III A, we extend the definition of Weyl superconductivity in crystals to QCs and obtain a topological phase diagram for a layered quasicrystalline Weyl superconductor. To understand the difference between quasicrystalline and crystalline WSCs, we calculate the spectral density of states (SDOS) for topologically protected zero-energy modes in Sec. III B. Finally, we summarize our work in Sec IV. We consider 2D s-wave topological superconductivity with Rashba spin-orbit coupling in magnetic field perpendicular to the 2D (xy) plane where c † rσ is the creation operator of an electron with spin σ(=↑, ↓) at the rth vertex. We use the vertex model, where the vertices of the quasiperiodic tiling are the lattice sites of a quasicrystal and the electron moves from a vertex to another vertex along the edge of a tile. The 2D normal-state Hamiltonian H 2D 0 (μ) is given by where t rr ′ ≡ -t is the hopping amplitude along nearestneighbor links between the rth and r ′ th vertices, μ the chemical potential, -h z (+h z ) the Zeeman energy due to the magnetic field for spin up (down), λ rr ′ ≡ λ the Rashba spin-orbit coupling constant along nearestneighbor links between the rth and r ′ th vertices, e z a unit vector in the direction perpendicular to the plane, σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) the Pauli matrices acting on spin space, σ 0 an identity matrix, and Rrr ′ the normalized vector from the rth to r ′ th vertices. In the following, we set t as the unit of energy. An s-wave superconducting pairing operator ∆ is defined as where ∆ 0 is the superconducting order parameter. In the following, we set λ = 0.5t, h z = -0.5t, and ∆ 0 = 0.2t. The Hamiltonian Eq. ( To define quasicrystalline Weyl superconductivity, we consider periodic stacking of infinitely many, 2D quasicrystalline topological superconductors described in Sec. II A; i.e., with magnetic field in the stacking (z) direction and intralayer Rashba spin-orbit coupling. As a 2D quasicrystalline system in the xy plane, we use Ammann-Beenker QCs and apply PBC in the z direction. We introduce interlayer nearest-neighbor hopping: where k z and c are, respectively, momentum and the interlayer distance in the z direction, t z is the interlayer hopping amplitude, and c † kzrσ is the creation operator of an electron at the rth vertex in each layer with spin σ(=↑, ↓) and momentum k z . Since there is an infinite number of layers, k z is a continuous variable in the Brillouin zone, -π/c ≤ k z < π/c. Thus, a layered quasicrystalline superconductor is described by Here the 3D normal-state Hamiltonian is given by which can be written as with μ(k z ) = μ -2t z cos k z c. Therefore, μ(k z ) can be regarded as a k z -dependent effective chemical potential in the 2D Hamiltonian. A possible setup for realizing our model is alternating layers of a 2D superconducting quasicrystal and a ferromagnetic insulator. This is analogous to a 2D quasicrystal sandwiched between a superconductor and a ferromagnetic insulator proposed in Ref. We introduce a k z -dependent Bott index B(k z ) for a given k z in RHS of Eq. ( Nonzero χ(k 0 ) implies closing of the spectral gap as the Bott index changes at k z = k 0 . We call such a nodal point in momentum space a quasicrystalline Weyl node at which B(k 0 ) changes from 1 to 0 or 0 to 1, respectively. This can occur if |μ -μ ± | < |2t z | and k ± satisfy Topological phase boundaries are given by Figure It can be seen in Fig. Fig. for a given σ and τ = e (h), where N is the total number of vertices and ψ m,σ,τ (R r , k z ) is the quasiparticle wave function at vertex coordinate R r for a given k z , is the Fourier amplitude for momentum (q x , q y , k z ) of the electron (hole) component of the eigenstate with spin σ. SDOS has been used to investigate the effects of band structure on superconductivity in QCs The left panel in Fig. Weyl superconductivity can also occur in periodically layered Penrose QCs. It is shown in Appendix B that Majorana arcs appear between a pair of Weyl nodes and their quasiperiodic distribution in momentum along each surface of quasicrystalline layers is characterized by the golden ratio, τ g = (1 + √ 5)/2, which is inherent in the structure of Penrose QCs. The quasiperiodic distribution of Majorana arcs in quasicrystalline WSCs is in striking contrast to the periodic distribution of Majorana arcs in momentum space of crystalline WSCs. In Appendix C, we demonstrate periodic Majorana arcs in a layered square-lattice Weyl superconductor. In summary, we have demonstrated the occurrence of quasicrystalline Weyl superconductivity. We have gen-eralized the concept of Weyl superconductivity in 3D crystals to periodically stacked 2D QCs, by identifying quasicrystalline Weyl nodes in one-dimensional momentum space corresponding to the stacking direction, where the Bott index changes its value. Between two quasicrystalline Weyl nodes in momentum space, where the Bott index is nonzero, Majorana zero modes appear on surfaces. By calculating SDOS, we have found that these Majorana arcs appear densely and quasiperiodically as a function of momentum in the direction of surfaces within each 2D QC, whose quasiperiodicity is governed by the silver and golden ratio, respectively, for Ammann-Beenker and Penrose QCs. One of the candidate materials to be a quasicrystalline WSC is a van der Waals-layered Ta 1.6 Te QC -0. in the interval [0, 1) in the x (y) direction, and I is an identity operator. When the spectral gap of the system closes as a system parameter is varied, the value of B can change. In the thermodynamic limit, any 2D system with OBC has B = 0. Therefore, we use approximants of Ammann-Beenker and Penrose QCs with PBC in both directions to calculate B. (a) Band structure of the same system as in Fig. 