Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction technology is key to mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and the energy crisis. However, controlling the selectivity of CO2RR products at low overpotential remains a challenge. In this paper, we predicted five high-performance CO2RR electrocatalysts with different product-specific selectivities at the theoretical level based on the advantages of the compositional structure and the tunable pore size of 2D π-conjugated MOFs. In addition, through the reaction mechanism and electronic structure analysis, we found that the synergistic interaction between metal atoms and organic linkers of 2D MOFs can effectively regulate the electronic structure of the active center. Their pore size as well as the diversity of carbon materials can regulate the spin magnetic moments of the metal atoms, thus affecting the improvement of their catalytic performance. Meanwhile, the oxygen or carbon affinity of the catalyst surface determines the differences in the formation of key intermediates, which ultimately determines the reaction path and product selectivity. These insights we present will be useful for the development and design of highly active CO2RR electrocatalysts. Large emissions of CO2 gas exacerbate environmental problems, such as the greenhouse effect and ocean acidification. The carbon-based single-atom catalysts (SACs) have promising applications in a variety of electrochemical reactions due to their high electrical conductivity, large atomic utilization and low costs. We herein investigated the CO2RR performance of TM-X4 (TM = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu; X =N, O, S and Se) active centers in three types of 2D conjugated MOFs with different porous sizes by performing density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Some 2D conjugated MOFs were confirmed as high-performance electrocatalysts with specific selectivity for CO2RR by tuning metals, ligands and porous sizes. Meanwhile, the structureactivity relationships of 2D conjugated MOFs for CO2RR were illustrated by analyzing their electronic properties. Our results provide theoretical insights for the development of 2D conjugated MOFs as efficient electrocatalysts for CO2RR. Based on the experimentally prepared 2D MOFs Although these 2D MOFs have the homogeneous distribution of TM-X4 active centers, the densities of TM-X4 active centers are different due to different organic ligands bonding TM to form pore sizes. Eight 3d metals, including Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu atoms, were chosen as the targets, based on recent experimental studies. The reaction mechanisms of CO2 reduction involve are complicated and their products are diverse, due to multiple electron processes and various intermediates. Therefore, the investigation of CO2RR mechanisms on 2D MOFs is important for further controlling and improving the catalytic activity of 2D MOFs. Because the CO2 molecule is non-polar and has strong thermodynamic stability, the first hydrogenation process in CO2RR is regarded as the key step, which takes place in the electrolyte solution in the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process, i.e., * + CO2(g) + H + + e -→ *COOH/*HCOO. The proton-electron pair (H + + e) is involved in each elementary step of the CO2RR. The different hydrogenation pathways will lead to various products. Moreover, the competitive selectivity exists between HER and each hydrogenation of CO2RR under the same reaction conditions, these factors will affect the Faraday efficiency of CO2RR. We first studied HER and the first three hydrogenation processes of CO2RR on 76 stable 2D MOFs as CO2RR electrocatalysts with specific selectivity and high performance, as shown in Figure In particular, the hydrogenation of HCOO on Cu3HIB2 and Cu3HITP2 forms HCOOH, which is directly released and there are no by-products, as shown in Figure The charge transfer occurs between the valence electrons of the TMs active center and the reactants or adsorbed intermediates play an important role in elementary reaction. In order to study the origin of the catalytic performance of 2D MOFs for CO2RR, the relationship between the Bader charge of TMs and the change of Gibbs free energy of the first hydrogenation of CO2 into COOH/HCOO was calculated, as shown in Figure Although these five high-performance catalysts have similar metal charge, the selectivity of their CO2RR products is quite different. In the first step of CO2RR protonation, the more positively charged the active metal is the more favorable it is for CO2 protonation to form *HCOO and vice versa for CO2 protonation to form *COOH as shown in Figure In order to further understand the origin of catalytic activity, we studied the partial density of states of the five 2D MOFs candidate catalysts, as shown in Figure Comparing the five high-performance catalysts screened above, it is found that they all have strong spin polarization phenomenon, and in order to explore the effect of spin polarization on the catalytic performance, the relationship between the catalytic activity and the spin magnetic moment of these five different pores with the same active center was further comparatively analyzed as shown in Figure The catalytic activity increases exponentially with the increase of the spin magnetic moment of the metal atom. In previous studies, it has been demonstrated that spin state changes have a significant effect on adsorption and catalytic properties. In summary, we explored the CO2RR catalytic activity and selectivity on three types of 2D MOF materials including TM3HXB, TM3HXB2, and TM3HXTP2 (TM=Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu; X=I, H, T, S) with different pores of TM-X4 active center. By tuning the composition of the metal and ligand molecules, five high-performance CO2RR catalysts with different selectivities were found, Cu3HIB2 and Cu3HITP2 with HCOOH products, Ni3HHB with CH2O products, and Co3HIB and Cr3HTB with CH4 products. Synergistic interactions between the metal and ligand atoms can efficiently tune the electronic structure of the active metal. In addition, the diversity of carbon structures can modulate the spin states of metal atoms, which can affect not only the magnetic moments but also the catalytic properties of the materials. Differences in O or C affinity on the catalyst surface determine the CO2RR pathway and product selectivity. Our insights will be useful for the development and optimization of highly active CO2RR electrocatalysts. All spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed by using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code. 