The group of moiré graphene superconductors keeps growing, and by now it contains twisted graphene multilayers as well as untwisted stacks. We analyze here the contribution of long range charge fluctuations in the superconductivity of twisted double graphene bilayers, helical trilayers, and other multilayers, and compare the results to twisted bilayer graphene. A diagrammatic approach which depends on a few, well known parameters is used. We find that the critical temperature and the order parameter differ significantly between twisted double bilayers and helical trilayers on one hand, and twisted bilayer graphene on the other. This trend, consistent with experiments, can be associated to the role played by moiré Umklapp processes in the different systems. Introduction. The discovery of unconventional superconductivity (SC) in twisted graphene stacks, including twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) Many theories have been proposed to describe SC in moiré graphene, but the subject remains a topic of debate. It has been argued that direct electron-phonon interactions could account for superconductivity Here we investigate superconductivity in TBG, TDBG and hTTG mediated by the screened long-range Coulomb interaction. We use a diagrammatic approach based on the seminal Kohn-Luttinger (KL) analysis The paper is organized as follows: first we describe the KL-RPA mechanism and then analyze the superconducing properties of TBG, TDBG and hTTG at magic-angle. Then we track the evolution of superconductivity in the transition from TDBG to TBG. Finally, we discuss the contributions of different interactions to superconductivity and the implications of the results. Kohn-Luttinger-like mechanism. We adopt a diagrammatic technique based on the KL theory where V mBZ is the area of the Brillouin zone, m and n are band indexes and the factor 4 takes into account the spin and valley degeneracies. The function f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution and ε n,k = E n,k -μ, where μ is the Fermi energy and E n,k is the energy of the n-th band with momentum k. We introduce a generalized form factor, [80] for details). G i is a reciprocal lattice vector resulting from the linear combination G = pG 1 +qG 2 with p and q integers and G 1,2 the primitive reciprocal lattice vectors. This generalized matrix form of the susceptibility involves the connection matrix, M (G) Here V ph is the potential of the electron-phonon interaction (see Sec. X in Ref. [80]). The screened electronic susceptibility is then used to obtain the screened Coulomb potential, V scr (q), within the RPA as The screened potential defined here has a matrix structure, defined by reciprocal lattice vectors, G, G ′ . Hence, a simple effective potential in real space, V scr (r) cannot be directly obtained from the Fourier transform of Color scheme is such that blue and gray lines are for κ h = 1 and 0, respectively. In a) and b) we set θ = 10 Eq. ( Finally, using this pairing potential, we analyze the emergence of the superconducting instability by selfconsistently solving the linearized gap equation. The set of parameters used for the calculations is shown in Table. I. We note that we have used the same set of parameters to determine the SC critical temperature in TBG Superconductivity in TBG, TDBG and hTTG. In order to study the similarities and differences between twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), twisted double bilayer graphene (TDBG), and helical trilayer graphene (hTTG), we define a dimensionless parameter, 0 ≤ κ h ≤ 1 which interpolates between TBG (κ h = 0) and TDBG and hTTG (κ = 1). As sketched in Figure Figure to the coupling scaling parameter. This parameter allows us to perform a continuous transition from the TDBG or hTTG structure to the TBG configuration, enabling the tracking of electronic properties along the transition. In TDBG, the coupling scaling parameter κ h modulates the strength of interlayer hoppings between adjacent layers within the BBG systems, which are rotated in opposite directions to form the TDBG system. When κ h is set to zero, the only remaining interlayer hoppings in the system are those corresponding to the central rotated layers, resulting in an effective TBG plus two isolated MG. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. The insets in Figure It is worth noting that in this case the Fermi energy is very close to half-filling and therefore the vicinity of the Fermi surface occupies a significant fraction of the moiré Brillouin Zone. To determine the relative sign of the OP in the two valleys it is necessary to include an intervalley interaction that splits the valley degeneracy as it was done in Coulomb potential Deformation potential and elastic constants Contributions to superconductivity. Next, we consider the physical processes which drive superconductivity. For TDBG with an E field, we can only resolve T c when both Umklapps and phonon dressing are present, and we find T c ≈ 10 mK, comparable to the experiment ). If either factor is absent T c drops to below 1 mK. Similarly, in TBG we find a critical temperature below 1 mK when either Umklapps or phonons are omitted. However, the inclusion of both leads to a very significant increase in T c to 2 K, indicating that Umklapp phonon dressing of the Coulomb interaction is crucial for superconductivity in the material, distinguishing it from other arrangements. In stark contrast, for hTTG, including Umklapps and phonons yields a T c of 80 mK, but T c only diminishes to 60 mK if Umklapps are omitted. However, phonon dressing remains a key factor for superconductivity in this material, as without it, superconductivity drops below 1 mK. Therefore, all of these moiré stacks differ from non-twisted graphene, for which electron-electron interactions suffice to give rise to critical temperatures in agreement with experiments, while phonon dressing and Umklapp processes do not play a major role The fact that the superconducting critical temperature in TBG is about two orders of magnitude higher than in TDBG and hTTG correlates well with the significantly larger effect of the electron-electron interaction on the shape and width of the electronic bands Discussion. Superconductivity is ubiquitous in graphene multilayers. However, its strength, as well as the conditions for its appearance and enhancement show marked contrasts between different arrangements. The discovery of superconductivity in twisted double bilayer graphene We have investigated superconductivity in TBG, TDBG and hTTG mediated by the screened long-range Coulomb interaction in the RPA. Our model incorporates electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions, We pay special attention to Umklapp processes, induced by the existence of significant inhomogeneities within the unit cell and in the moiré Brillouin Zone. A one parameter interpolation scheme allows us to track the evolution of the superconducting phase from TBG to TDBG, and to hTTG. We find critical temperatures in good agreement with experiments on both TDBG and TBG. We also predict weak superconductivity in hTTG with T c = 80 mK, and a significant rise in T c in stacks where spin-orbit coupling is induced by the proximity to few-layers of WSe 2 Superconductivity in all the twisted systems considered here is weakened when the calculations are performed starting from a model with two electronic flavors, instead of four, as shown in Sec. XII in Ref. It is finally worth noting that isolated theoretical estimates of the critical temperature of a superconductor typically have a strong dependence on the choice of parameters used in the calculation. On the other hand, general trends calculated using the same set of parameters, can be expected to be more reliable. Our calculations describe semi-quantitatively systems where the superconducting properties vary over a large range. This fact suggests that the interactions studied here play an significant role in the superconductivity of these materials. TERIALES AVANZADOS-IMDEA-NC, NOVMOMAT, Grant PID2022-142162NB-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by "ERDF A way of making Europe". M.L. acknowledges support from the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China (Project Nos. 17301721, AoE/P-701/20, 17309822, HKU C7037-22GF), and the HKU Seed Funding for Strategic Interdisciplinary Research. We thank the HPC2021 system under the Information Technology Services and the Blackbody HPC system at the Department of Physics, University of Hong Kong, as well as the Beijng PARATERA Tech CO.,Ltd. (URL: https://cloud.paratera.com) for providing HPC resources that have contributed to the research results reported within this paper. for sufficiently small angles, so that an approximately commensurate structure can be defined for any twist. The mBZ shown in Fig. acting on the Nambu spinor Ψ T = (ψ A1 , ψ B1 , ψ A2 , ψ B2 , ψ A3 , ψ B3 , ψ A4 , ψ B4 ), whose entries are labelled by the sublattice (A/B) and layer (1, . . . 4) indices. Here we defined k l = R (-) l-1 θ/2 (k -K l ), R(θ) being the 2 × 2 matrix describing the counter-clock-wise rotation of the angle θ, and: is a parameter to continuously convert TDBG to TBG by reducing the hopping parameters in the two BBGs that form the TDBG. The 2 × 2 matrix U describes the moiré potential generated by the hopping amplitude between p z orbitals localized at opposite layers of the two twisted surfaces. In real space, U (r) is a periodic function in the moiré unit cell. In the limit of small angles, its leading harmonic expansion is determined by only three reciprocal lattice vectors , where the amplitudes U (G) are given by: In the following we adopt the parametrization of the TBG given in the Ref. where I 2 is a 2 × 2 identity matrix and ∆V an (out of plane) external electrostatic potential. The transition from a TBG to a TDBG is introduced by a coupling parameter κ h , such that κ h = 0 if the external graphene layers are decoupled from the internal TBG structure and κ h = 1 for the full TDBG. We now consider the transition from TBG to hTTG. Labeling the layers consecutively, we twist layers bottom (b), medium (m) and top (t) by -θ, 0 and θ about a fixed hexagon center. To describe the low-energy physics at small angles, we adopt a valley-projected continuum Hamiltonian where q l = (k -K l ) with l = {m, b, t} and U (r) given by Eq. S4. We utilize the same set of parameters as in the TDBG case. The positions of the Dirac cones in the rotated system are indicated in Fig. The Hartree potential is introduced to the main Hamiltonian as a matrix H Hartree with elements given by where n is a band index and β refers to the layer and sub-lattice degrees of freedom. The quantity V C (G) = 2πe 2 /ε |G| is the Fourier transform of the Coulomb potential evaluated at G, where ε is the dielectric constant. The factor 4 takes into account spin/valley degeneracy, and V mBZ is the area of the mBZ. u n is a self-consistent eigenvector resulting from the numerical diagonalization of the total Hamiltonian. In terms of the connection matrix it can be written as The above definition connects the Fourier components of the eigenvector u n (k) that differ by a vector G. I β is a β-dimensional identity matrix, with β = 8 representing layer and sublattice degeneracy in the case of TDBG and β = 6 for hTTG. We can express the Fourier expansion of the Hartree potential in real space as with ρ H (G j ) in general a complex number and V 0 = e 2 /εL m the effective Coulomb potential. To solve the selfconsistent Hartree Hamiltonian, we approximate the charge distribution as ρ H = ρ H + δρ H , where ρ H is a constant that takes into account the total density from all bands not included in the calculations It is worth noting that, for an arbitrary overlap k + q + G ′ , k + G + G ′ , the form factor defined with the connection matrix ⟨u n (k + q)|M (G)|u n (k)⟩ for moiré systems is a generalization of the ordinary form factor ⟨u n (k + q)|u n (k)⟩, where G = 0, and thus M (G) = I. Moreover, we find that the connection matrix allows us to describe the symmetry operations on the Hamiltonian while calculating some physical quantities, such as the screened Coulomb potential, and is better for numerical implementation. As described in Refs. In the narrow bands of TBG or slightly coupled TDBG (see Fig. E n e r g y ( m e V ) a ) E n e r g y ( m e V ) E n e r g y ( m e V ) c ) E n e r g y ( m e V ) filling-dependent TBG Hartree potential is triangular and centers around the AA sites In Fig. Evolution from TBG to TDBG Figure We discuss the effect of a transition from TBG to hTTG. We consider two situations: the first one is a transition from TBG magic angle θ = 1.1 • to hTTG, as shown in Fig. . Evolution of superconductivity from TBG to hTTG at θ = 1.10 • . Green line is the SC dome for TBG+2MG, κ = 0 and blue line for κ = 0.1 where the SC increases due to the small coupling. We cannot find any SC state on another points. For κ > 1 no SC is found. Note that we find SC in hTTG at θ = 1.10 • as described in the main text. While the Hartree potential give us an insight of the overlaps between Umklapp processes, a useful quantity for defining the degree of homogeneity of the wavefunctions is the Marzari-Vanderbilt cumulant where Tr [g] = g xx + g yy is the trace of the metric tensor and N c is the number of k-points in the numerical grid In calculating metrix tensor, we take the difference between one wavefunction (says |u k ⟩) and it's neighbors, through the projection operator Q k = 1 -|u k ⟩ ⟨u k |, this difference is projected into the orthogonal subspace of |u k ⟩. Then the sum of the trace of the metric tensor measures the intrinsic smoothness of the underlying Hilbert space and the trace of the metric tensor at each value of k measures the degree of mismatch between the neighboring Bloch subspaces k and k + q. The MV parameter measures the similarity of the states on one or in composite bands. In addition, both in susceptibility and gap equation, the overlap of states ⟨u n,k |u m,k+q ⟩ weights the coupling process, and therefore this overlap measures the similarity of |u m,k+q ⟩ and |u n,k ⟩, which is also captured by MV factor. In our systems, the parameter Ω I varies with the coupling parameter κ h as it quantifies wavefunction homogeneity. Thus, we can compare its variation with κ h as we transform one system to another. Figure In the transition from TBG to hTTG, wavefunction localization depends on the twist angle. As described in Ref. Figure Here we provide the details concerning the calculation of the screened Coulomb potential in the momentum space and the linearized gap equation used to compute the critical temperature and order parameter of the superconducting instability. We assume that the bare Coulomb potential at momentum q takes the form, where e is the electron charge, d g is the distance from the sample to the metallic gates and ε is the relative dielectric constant of the environment. In this work we use ε = 10 and d g = 40 nm. We adopt the RPA to compute the screened Coulomb potential which ultimately enables the formation of Cooper pairs. We first consider the effect of pure electronic correlations and compute the bare electronic susceptibility, which is the density-density response function due to the electron-hole excitations or bubble diagrams The order of discussion below is as follows: first, we review the charge density and susceptibility in a normal crystal; then, we transition to the moiré system. Finally, we emphasize that the susceptibility in the moiré system is a generalization of that in a normal crystal. The susceptibility in normal (non moiré) crystals is given by The density-density response process in a moiré system is more complex compared to a non-twisted system. Since the Umklapp processes allow interactions with momentum differences of a reciprocal lattice vector and the charge density depends on G, this makes the Umklapp processes non-trivial. The electronic susceptibility χ 0 (q) accounts for the hopping processes from states with momentum k to k + q, with k running over all the BZ. Considering one contribution of the process from k 0 to k 0 + q, the Umklapp process allows interaction up to a reciprocal lattice vector difference, thus the hopping from k 0 + G to k 0 + q + G ′ should be taken into account. Remembering that the bare electronic susceptibility is the product of the charge density weighted by the Lindhard factor and noting that we already introduced the connection matrix to express the charge density, the component of the susceptibility that corresponds to the process we consider is then given by where we introduce a factor of 2 to take into account degeneracy of spin and valley. From the above expression, it is clear that the susceptibility is promoted to a matrix because of the Umklapp process, in other words, the susceptibility now is a rank-2 tensor field over the mBZ. The connection matrix allows us to write the bare electronic susceptibility matrix as a tensor product, where f refers to the Fermi-Dirac distribution and ε n,k = E n,k -μ, where E n,k is the energy and μ the Fermi energy. We introduce an overlap vector to account for the Umklapp processes, given by, We have found that the overlap ⟨u m,k+q |M (G i )|u n,k ⟩ becomes exponentially small as we connect additional G couplings. In practice, we cut off the couplings within the second nearest reciprocal lattice vectors. By restricting the number of reciprocal lattice vectors to one, meaning we only consider G = 0, the corresponding connection matrix is the identity matrix. This brings us back to the normal crystal case. The susceptibility in Eq. S16 for moiré systems then can be viewed as a generalization of that of a normal crystal. We then consider the effect of the phonon-mediated electron-electron interactions. In the following we neglect pairing due to the bare electron-phonon coupling because it is weak compared with electron-electron interaction mediated by acoustic phonons where I is a identity matrix of suitable dimensions and V ph (q, ω) is the potential of the interaction, we note that χ 0 (q) is a matrix and we promote bare Coulomb potential to a matrix with the form V C (q) G1,G2 = δ G1,G2 V C (q + G 1 ), where the expression of the Coulomb potential is given in the beginning. Then, the multiplication and inversion in these equations is an operation on a matrix, studied in Ref. is the Gaussian wavefunction. An alternative to Eq. S24 is given by where The real space Coulomb potential is then obtained by Fourier transforming Eq. S23. Results are shown in Fig. In this section, we present symmetry properties of the Umklapp process, we consider a C 3 rotational symmetry which is common for the systems studied in this work. In calculating susceptibility, we need to evaluate the overlap of . Panel e) display the Coulomb potential for V G 0 ,G 0 (q). Panels f) to h) display the contribution for the states with G i ̸ = G j . In the top of each panel the matrix element is indicated. The units of Vscr are meV. an state between momentum k and momentum k+q. If k+q is out of the mBZ, we can connect the state k+q with an state k + q -G, where k + q -G is within the mBZ and G is a reciprocal lattice vector. The relation between the state at k + q -G and the state at k + q can be determined by considering the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. For an state at k, we can construct a Hamiltonian H(k) and H(k + G) in a similar way. However, when constructing the matrix H(k + G), we can change the indexes of the Dirac cones such that the matrix form of H(k) and H(k + G), which are written in their own basis separately, is the same. Then we found that the eigenvalues at both momentum are the same, except that the eigenstates are defined in a different basis. To change the basis, we can use the connection matrix to do a transformation and we get: For the screened potential, which is a matrix, we need to do a similarity transformation The form factor is an important quantity for describing correlation effects in moiré systems. We see that the form factor is nothing else but the inner product of the states, but the non-trivial terms appear when we take the two states belonging to different Voronoi cells. Now we show that the form factor doesn't change under the translation of arbitrary reciprocal vector in the language of the connection matrix, this allows us to evaluate the form factor in any primitive cell of momentum space. Where the first equation is the definition. We use the transformation rule of the states vector in the second equation. In the third equation we use the relation M † (G) = M (-G), this can be easily checked from the definition of the connection matrix. In the fourth equations, we apply the abelian nature of the connection matrix since M (G)M (G ′ ) = M (G + G ′ ). This can also be checked from the definition. We see that the connection matrix offers great convenience in studying correlation effects in moiré systems. We write again the susceptibility, where |Ψ n,k+G ⟩ is the eigenstate of a band n at momentum q + G. From the spirit of the connection matrix, we also have a Ĉ3 transformation matrix, defined as: The C 3 symmetry of screened Coulomb potential is also expressed as, where in the latter expression we explicitly write the matrix elements. The numerical result is shown in Fig. We now consider the relative strength of different contributions to the superconducting instability in TBG, TDBG and hTTG. We compute the leading eigenvalue of the kernel Eq. S22 as a function of the temperature for the different combinations of direct electron-electron interactions (ee), phonon mediated electron-electron interactions (ph) and Umklapp processes (G). The results, shown in Fig. We now consider the effect of a parent state with a broken flavour symmetry. We approximate this effect by using a degeneracy factor of 2 instead of 4 in the electronic susceptibility in Eq. 1, c.f. Refs. In TDBG, a qualitatively similar reduction of the eigenvalue is observed, suggesting a notable impact on the critical temperature. The non-trivial dependency of the superconducting phase on the appearance of broken-symmetry states seems to be quite different between twisted and non-twisted graphene stacks, and given the considerable aid of WSe 2 in stabilizing superconductivity in these systems, we consider this to be an issue that requires further investigation. In this section, we discuss both the tunable and non-tunable parameters of the KL-RPA framework employed in our calculations. The KL-RPA framework begins with the computation of the electronic susceptibility, Eq. 1, that depends on the chemical potential and the details of the electronic structure. These are determined with the continuum models described in Sec. I and Sec. II. The continuum models depend on a set of well-known fixed parameters summarized in Tab. I and other variable parameters such as the external electrostatic potential ∆V and the scaling coupling parameter κ h . In the calculation of the electronic susceptibility these variable parameters are fixed to contrast their impact in the superconducting instability, thus the only actual tunable parameters are the chemical potential μ and the temperature T . The next step in the KL-RPA framework is to compute the electronic susceptibility screened by the electron-phonon potential following Eq. 2. The electron-phonon potential is given in Eq. S19 and its static limit ω → 0 is considered in the calculations, being totally defined by the Lamé coefficients and the deformation potential. These parameters are fixed to the values summarized in Tab. I, therefore no tunable parameters appear in this step. The screened electronic susceptibility and the Coulomb potential determine the final screened potential in Eq. 3. This potential is being used in the calculation of the superconducting kernel. The Coulomb potential, given in Eq. S12, depends on the distance between the system and the metallic gates and on the relative dielectric constant which are fixed during the calculations to a value summarized in Tab. I. At this point the only tunable parameters keep being μ and T . The last step is to construct the superconducting kernel, Eq. S22, that depends on the screened potential and the details of the electronic structure. The onset of superconductivity is defined by the conditions that make one the leading eigenvalue of the kernel, realizing a solution for the linearized gap in Eq. S21. In the KL-RPA framework the superconducting conditions are fully determined by the set of fixed of parameters summarized Tab. I and by the chemical potential, μ, and temperature T . pierre.pantaleon@imdea.org