Exceptional point (EP)-based optical sensors exhibit exceptional sensitivity but poor detectivity due to their acute sensitivity to perturbations such as noise. When the optical budget is limited as in applications on mobile platforms, high detectivity might be equally important as high sensitivity. In such scenarios, off-EP sensing is advantageous where a slight loss in sensitivity can lead to a significant gain in detectivity. Here, we show that a passive parity-time symmetric plasmonic-photonic hybrid shows a peak in its detectivity off EP where the sensitivity is still very high -surpassing the sensitivities of equivalent fully-plasmonic and fully-photonic systems. We demonstrate the high detectivity of off-EP sensing of anti-mouse IgG protein using this plasmonic-photonic hybrid system. We report a sensitivity of 1.2 nm/nM while requiring a minimum optical budget of 1.3 nJ. Thus, non-Hermitian plasmonic-photonic hybrids could be the best class of nanophotonic sensors for real-world applications. The Exceptional Points (EPs) of non-Hermitian optical devices have garnered much attention, especially in sensing applications, for their exceptional sensitivity. Our passive PT-symmetric sensor employs an array of Si-disk resonators to support nearly lossless photonic modes. We couple these photonic modes to their lossy images in an aluminum ground plane to create a passive PT-symmetric system. Fig. where A is a dimensionless constant that depends on the sensor parameters. Here, S δ is defined as the dimensionless sensitivity defined as the magnitude of the change in eigenvalue for a small detuning δ of the nearly lossless resonator divided by δ. A more common definition of sensitivity used in such studies corresponds to the magnitude of the change in eigenvalue for a small change in the refractive index of the analyte layer, denoted by S n . The two sensitivity definitions are related to each other by a dimensional proportionality constant. Next, we model the noise in this sensor system as shown in Fig. The lineshape of the resonance spectra is assumed Gaussian. When α is zero, the sensitivity of the sensor has no noise to amplify, and hence, EP is the best point of operation. However, even for a small α value of 5%, the situation is entirely different. The highest SNR operation requires an off-EP sensor. The larger the value of α, the farther from EP is the maximum SNR condition. Using the definition of specific detectivity D * det of a detector (the reciprocal of noise equivalent power (NEP) per unit area of the detector), and the equation for SNR in Eq. 2 the overall specific detectivity (D * ) of the optical sensing system is given by Eq. 3. where C ′ is a proportionality constant. Given the same functional forms of detectivity and SNR equations, the sensors designed at the EP are not always the best. To demonstrate the high detectivity of off-EP sensors, we chose a passive PT-symmetric device comprising a hexagonal array of 120 nm-tall silicon cylinders on top of a silica spacer placed on a thick aluminum film. The height of the spacer h ′ is varied from 0 to 120 nm. The distance between the two closest cylinders in the hexagonal array, henceforth called the period P, was 600 nm. The schematic of the structure is shown in Fig. The field distribution across the structure is shown in Fig. Fig. The plasmonic sensor considered here is a cubic array composed of a pair of Al nano-ellipsoids with 80 nm and 160 nm long axes separated by a 10 nm gap. The dielectric sensor is a hexagonal array of 60 nm thick silicon cylinders with a radius of 100 nm on a silica substrate. To calculate sensitivity for these structures, we modeled the analyte interaction by a 5 nm-thick dielectric layer whose index is set higher for higher concentrations of analyte. This layer wraps the ellipsoid-pair in our plasmonic system, sandwiches the silicon and silica layers in our hybrid system, and sits on top of silicon cylinders in our photonic system. The Q-factors of the plasmonic and photonic systems are varied by varying the period of the array. Varying spacer thickness from 50 nm to 120 nm in our hybrid case tuned its Q-factor. The sensitivity vs. Q-factor plot for the three systems is shown in Fig. we get a good fit for the observed relationship between the sensitivity and the Q-factor of our non-Hermitian system. All three systems show a trade-off between sensitivity and Q-factor. We simulated the detectivity of our non-Hermitian structure with various spacer thicknesses by adding an 80 dB detector noise to the reflectance spectra. For different values of α, the net noise at the detector was calculated from our noise model (Fig. The scanning electron microscope image of the fabricated non-Hermitian sample is shown in the inset of Fig. The functionalization of the non-Hermitian metasurface, the preparation of the anti-mouse IgG solution, and other details of biosensing are given in the methods section at the end. We used a microscope-based energy-momentum mapping setup to measure the reflectance and absorption spectra of our samples. We held all the characterization parameters constant while changing only the illumination light intensity using a set of neutral density (ND) filters. We acquired the absorption spectrum on the sample ten times for each ND filter setting. Then, running Gaussian fits on the absorption spectra to estimate the peak shift, we assessed the standard deviation or error in the peak shift estimation. Fig. Non-Hermitian sensors designed to work at EP are not the best choice in practice, especially when the energy budget is limited as on mobile platforms. Here, we showed that an off-EP non-Hermitian sensor is promising for real-world applications where both high sensitivity and high detectivity are required. In a passive PT-symmetric system comprising a plasmonicphotonic hybrid, we showed that the detectivity peaks off-EP where the sensitivity can still be very high. We demonstrated a non-Hermitian nanophotonic sensor for sensing antimouse IgG protein and measured its sensitivity and detectivity. We reported one of the highest values of sensitivity reported in the literature for sensing anti-mouse IgG protein while needing a small minimum optical budget of 1.3 nJ. This work highlighted that non-Hermitian plasmonic-photonic hybrids could be the best class of nanophotonic sensors for real-world applications. This work was supported by the Army Research Organization grant W911NF2120031. Noise simulations: Noise simulations in Fig. Full-wave electromagnetic simulations were performed using a commercial finite-differencetime-domain solver (Lumerical). Si, SiO 2 , and Al optical constants were obtained from Palik Planar nanofabrication was used for fabricating the metasurface. At first, a 120 nm thick aluminum layer was sputtered (AJA ATC Orion sputter system) on a fused silica substrate (0.5 mm thick, MTI Corp.). Next, layers of SiO 2 (60 nm), and Si (120 nm) were deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PlasmaTherm Versaline). A layer of e-beam resist (PMMA A4) and E-spacer was coated on the surface. Then, patterning was performed using standard e-beam lithography (Elionix ELS-G100). Next, a 20 nmthick Al 2 O 3 was deposited as an etch mask using an e-beam evaporator. Following a liftoff in acetone, the nanocylinders are formed using a subsequent reactive ion etch (Oxford, reusing, the device is rinsed to clean off all the added chemicals using SC-1 or a combination of ammonium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, and water in a volume ratio of 1:1:5 at room temperature for 90 minutes. The device is then thoroughly rinsed in DI water before reusing. We use a Fourier-space imaging or energy-momentum imaging setup to measure the spectrum in the normal direction. This setup allows for single-shot measurement of angledependent reflection (Ref ) and transmittance (T r) spectra on small-area samples. Absorption (Abs) is calculated as Abs = 1 -T r -Ref . Inserting a Bertrand lens into a standard imaging spectrophotometer allows projecting the Fourier space onto the imaging device. More details of the setup may be found in our previous work. The optical energy budget for measurement is obtained by multiplying the integration time of the detector (10 s) with the optical power at the detector when the sample is replaced by a mirror. This power is extracted from the total photocurrent recorded by the power meter (ThorLabs, S121C). The spectral shape of the incident light from the quartz halogen bulb (Nikon, 12 V, 100 W, 2000 Hrs), and the transmittance spectra of the short-pass and long-pass filters (Thorlabs FES0800, FESL0700) are used in the estimation of the optical power. ( 