We use density functional theory to investigate effects of spin-orbit coupling and singlestripe-type antiferromagnetic (sAFM) ordering on the crystal structure and electronic properties of SmFeAsO. The results indicate that AFM ordering causes the crystal structure transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic, along with increase in the height of As atoms from Fe layer due to magnetostriction. It also leads to the opening of partial band gaps, the emergence of a prominent peak near Fermi energy (EF) in the density of states (DOS) and a reduction in Fermi surface nesting. The study finds a correlation between the calculated area under the DOS curve, spanning from EF to the first peak above it, and the optimal electrondoped concentration required for inducing superconductivity in SmFeAsO. The findings suggest that spin and charge density waves can play important roles in the superconducting mechanism of Fe-based superconductors. Our calculations demonstrate that spin-orbit coupling reduces electronic correlation. Since the iron pnictide layered superconductors were discovered, a hope was raised that these materials would finally reveal the mechanism of the superconductivity in the high transition temperature (T C ) superconductors (SC) Moreover, DFT has been generalized to describe the superconducting phase as superconducting density functional theory (SCDFT) Although, a lot of attempts have been performed to study 1111-type Fe-based superconductors experimentally as well as theoretically The SmFeAsO compound undergoes a phase transition from a high-temperature tetragonal (P4/nmm) to a low-temperature orthorhombic (Cmma) structure as the temperature decreases. Furthermore, an orthorhombic-tetragonal structural transition occurs during the transition from a normal-state to a superconducting state by doping Since, SmFeAsO compound with transitional Fe and lanthanide Sm ions, is a correlated system, we take the coulomb repulsion into account via applied Hubbard interaction (U) in our calculations through full potential method. In the following, we study the effect of SOC on the electronic correlation through calculating the value of Hubbard U in the presence of SOC interaction. The paper has the following outline: After the computational details in the next section (Sec. 1), we present results and discussions in Sec 2. At first, the calculated characters of the crystal structure are exhibited and inspected in the presence and absence of the magnetic ordering as well as with and without considering SOC (Sec. 2. 1.). Then, we analyze the electronic properties in the various conditions mentioned former through the investigation of partial and total density of states (PDOS and DOS), electronic band structure and Fermi surface (Sec. 2. 2., 2. 3. and 2. 4., respectively). Finally, we use full potential calculations to study the effect of SOC on electronic correlation (Sec. ). Sec. 4. is devoted to the summary of results as a conclusion. Our calculations are based on two approaches. The first one is using pseudopotential and the second one is a full potential method. At the first approach, the ab initio non-collinear spin-polarized calculations are done by the Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) package To treat the electron-nucleus interaction, the ultrasoft (US) pseudopotentials were employed. We assume an oxidation state of +3 for the Sm element and treat their 4f orbitals as core orbitals. Hence, the atomic valence states are as follows: Sm:5s 5p 5d 6s, Fe: 3s 3p 3d 4s, As: 4s 4p, and O: 2s 2p. Based on experimental and theoretical data, the magnetic phase of SmFeAsO is determined to be the single-stripe-type antiferromagnetic (AFM) Lattice parameters are determined after full structural optimization through relaxation of both lattice parameters and ionic positions by Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) method. The geometry relaxations are performed until the total force on each atom becomes smaller than 10 -3 Ry/Bohr in the presence and absence of SOC interaction. The ground state is found to have the ORT crystal structure in agreement with experiment Since, the optimized bond angles of Fe-As-Fe and As height from Fe layer affect the superconducting transition temperature (T C ) We further visualize the calculated Fermi surface in above mentioned different conditions to evaluate the interplay between SOC and the magnetic moments. To illustrate the Fermi surface, the Brillouin zone is sampled by using grids of 14×14×8 k-points mesh based on the Monkhorst-Pack scheme. In the second approach, we employe the state-of-the-art full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (LAPW) method, implemented within elk code Our calculations in this part are based on the optimal constant parameters and ionic positions which are obtained by using a pseudopotential approach in the first step, namely a=3.861, b=3.840 and c=8.108 angstrom. The crystal structure is not relaxed when the U Hubbard and J exchange parameters are applied, as the magnitude of the force acting on each atom remains on the order of 10 -3 Ry/Bohr. For LAPW calculations, we set k max = 7 a.u. -1 , and chose 2.5457, 2.1384, 2.1384 and 1.6365 a.u. for the muffin-tin radius of Sm, Fe, As and O, respectively. It should be mentioned that the calculations based on GGA approximation with and without SOC are not converged in two approaches, therefore, the calculated results based on LDA approximation are just reported. We have performed calculations to determine the optimal lattice parameters of SmFeAsO and the height of the As atoms from the Fe layer under different conditions in both the ORT and Tet crystal structures. The results are summarized in Table . 1 and illustrated in Fig. Starting with the experimental data of the Tet structure associated with the superconducting state of SmFeAsO, we conducted a full relaxation with a constraint on the crystal lattice to remain Tet However, when the experimental lattice constants of the ORT structure are used as the starting point for the full relaxation of the crystal structure, we find that the ORT structure becomes the ground state in the presence of AFM ordering. In the absence of AFM ordering, the ORT structure transforms into the Tet structure (Fig. This transition in the crystal structure occurs through a reduction in the a and c parameters, while the b parameter of the ORT structure increases. Indeed, AFM ordering along a vector enhances a parameter and ferromagnetic ordering along b vector leads to a decrease in the b parameter. The observed modulation and anisotropy in the structure of SmFeAsO when considering AFM order suggest that the tiny orthorhombic ionic distortion is due to magnetoelastic coupling which is the deformation of a material in response to a magnetic field Interestingly, it can be suggested that the CDW in the SmFeAsO compound is derived from a spin density wave (SDW) The calculated As height from the Fe layer (h As ) in various conditions is depicted in Fig. 3.840 3.838 3.856 3.854 3.925 [26, 32] , 3.9323 [20] c (Å) 8.108 8.104 8.067 8.067 8.460 [32] , 8.4714(2) [20] Vunit-cell (Å 3 ) 120.211 120.027 119.946 119.822 130.996 [26, 32] , 131.2763 [20] MFe (μ B ) 0.550 0.560 0.000 0.000 0.34 [32] , 0.66(5) [24] MSm (μ B ) ----0.74 [1] , 0.62(3) [9] α1 72.7 72.7 73.3 73.3 70.80 [26] α2 73.2 73.2 73.3 73.3 71.25 [26] α3 114.5 114.5 115.2 115.2 110.50 [26] DOS(EF) /formula Stable above T=150K a (Å) 3.856 3.853 3.856 3.854 3.9391(2) [32] , 3.9427(1) [27] c (Å) [32] , 8.4923(3 ) [27] Vunit-cell (Å 3 ) 120.303 120.324 119.946 119.837 131.844(6) [32] , 132.012(5) [27] MFe (μ B ) [27] DOS(EF) /formula along with the corresponding experimental data for ORT and Tet crystal structures, respectively. By comparing the computed Fe-As-Fe bond angles of the nomag-nosoc, magnosoc, nomag-soc, and mag-soc phases, it is evident that AFM ordering decreases the bond angles, while SOC interaction enhances them in both the ORT and Tet structures. These two factors are in competition, with the effect of AFM ordering being found to be dominant. It was known from experimental studies that the most effective way to increase T C of Fe-based 1111 superconductors is to decrease the Fe-As-Fe bond angle, thereby reducing the electronic band width The comparison of the total energy difference of the system under various conditions to the nomag-nosoc phase, reveals that the inclusion of the SOC interaction decreases the total energy and enhances the stability of the system. Although the ground state crystal structure is ORT, there is no noticeable difference in energy between SmFeAsO in the ORT and Tet structures. The energy of the ORT structure is only 1 meV lower than that of the Tet structure. Furthermore, the calculated magnetic moment on the Fe site decreases by 0.01 μ B (0.02μ B ) when the SOC interaction is turned on in ORT crystal structure (Tet), as shown in Table . 1. This suggests that the SOC interaction suppresses the magnetic properties. It is essential to note that the 4f orbitals of Sm are considered within the pseudocore, and therefore, the Sm magnetic moment does not contribute to the calculations based on the pseudopotential method. The behavior of the density of states (DOS) at and near the Fermi level is one of the key factors for the occurrence of superconductivity This peak shifts towards the E F level and reaches a value of 0.2 eV. This suggests that the presence of AFM ordering can enhance the charge density modulation. The area under the total DOS curve between the Fermi energy and the first maximum peak energy above the Fermi level has been calculated and found to be 0.23 for the mag-soc phase. This value determines the number of electronic states per unit cell and notably is almost equal to the optimal electron-doping concentration (x=0.2) of SmFeAsO 1-x F x achieved by introducing F atoms, which results in the highest transition temperature to the superconducting phase (T C =55 K). To find out the influence of SOC, AFM ordering and crystal structure on the electronic properties, we have calculated the electronic band structures of SmFeAsO under various conditions. Fig. For a more comprehensive comparison, the energy shifts of the d zx , d yz and d xy bands relative to their energies in nomag-nosoc phase are shown in Fig. In the subsequent discussion, we will concentrate on the yields of the ORT crystal structure, given the significant similarity between the Tet and ORT results. Upon analyzing the electronic band structure, DOS and PDOS in the mag-soc phase and comparing it to the nomag-nosoc phase, it is evident that the d yz and d zx bands undergo deformation throughout the entire Brillouin zone, as well as at anticrossing points. This suggests that the driving mechanism behind the magnetic moments of Fe, with d yz and d zx orbital characters, is not due to Fermi Surface (FS) nesting which is localized in k-space. Conversely, the d yx band remains largely unchanged at the E F in the presence of AFM ordering and SOC effect. The deformation of the d xy band is primarily confined to the band-crossing points. Based on these findings, it can be concluded that the Fe magnetic moment with d xy orbital character is a result of nesting, and the associated electrons can be considered as itinerant electrons The scanning of the Fermi surface (FS) offers valuable insights into the impact of SOC and AFM ordering on the electronic properties. Fig. The introduction of SOC interaction leads to the emergence of gaps in the FS, creating deviation in the direction of the Fermi velocity vector from the k x k y plane towards the k z direction at some points as shown in Fig. Previous studies have shown that the interplay between spin and charge leads to the spontaneous formation of a CDW without relying on repulsive Coulomb interactions or electron-phonon interactions In this section, we present the calculated results using the state-of-the-art fullpotential linearized augmented plane wave (LAPW) method with the LDA+U+J approach. Prior to implementing the Hubbard U on Fe and Sm atoms, the magnetic moment calculated using the LDA functional for Fe atoms shows a satisfactory level of agreement with experimental data Given the importance of the J parameter in accurately describing the electronic structure of materials with strong spin-orbit coupling, we have reperformed our calculations using J= 0.136 eV (0.01 Ry) as the exchange interaction correction. This allows us to assess the impact of the exchange interaction on the appropriate value of U. Fig. Moreover, the influence of SOC coupling on these calculations is illustrated in Fig. . While SOC effect is considered, an anisotropy arises in the magnetic moments of Sm and Fe atoms within AFM ordering The values of M Fe and M Sm have been previously reported as 0.34 (0.66) μ B /Fe and 0.74 (0.62) μ B /Sm, respectively, by Yoichi Kamihara et. al. (Hideo Hosono et. al.) In this analysis, J is set to 0.136 eV, and the satisfactory value of Hubbard U is determined to be 1.633 eV. It is clear that SOC interaction suppresses the magnitude of M Sm while having no effect on M Fe . It suggests that the combination of exchange interaction and SOC reduces electronic correlation, making SmFeAsO a compound with intermediate correlation strength. Since intermediate correlation strength is a fertile ground for superconductivity The electronic band structure, density of states (DOS), and partial density of states (PDOS) calculated using the satisfactory value of the Hubbard U parameter are in excellent agreement with the results obtained through the pseudopotential approach in the initial analysis. In summary, our study focuses on examining the impact of SOC and single-stripetype AFM ordering on electronic and crystal structure properties of SmFeAsO compound through first-principles study. It is found that the presence of AFM ordering causes a distortion in the crystal structure, transitioning from Tet to ORT. The Crystal structure transition due to considering AFM order can be attributed to magnetoelastic coupling, which is augmented by considering SOC effect. Additionally, it is discovered that the introduction of SOC reduces the energy of the ORT structure, making it the preferred ground state. Furthermore, AFM ordering can affect T C of SmFeAsO in the superconducting phase by increasing As height from Fe layer and reducing the angle of Fe-As-Fe. By evaluating electronic band structure, DOS and PDOS and Fermi surface, we deduce that AFM ordering gives rise to strong anticrossing and the opening of orbital-dependent energy pseudo-gaps at E F level and modulation of electronic density of states. SOC interaction has a significant impact on FS nesting, potentially resulting in the creation of shallow nodes or near-nodes on the Fermi surface, particularly in the absence of AFM ordering. However, AFM ordering dominates the SOC effect and induces gap openings at the Fermi surface. Observing Fermi surface nesting, lattice structure distortion, partial gap openings, and the emergence of a noticeable peak near and above the Fermi energy in the electronic density of states provides evidence that the SDW and CDW can coexist interdependently due to AFM ordering. Hence, it can be deduced that the presence of SDW and CDW mutually influences the superconducting mechanism in SmFeAsO. Interestingly, we find that the area under the total DOS curve between the Fermi energy and the first maximum peak above E F is equal to the optimal electron-doped amount required to induce superconductivity in SmFeAsO. At the end, through full-potential calculations, we determine the satisfactory value of Hubbard U parameter on Sm sites to be 2.449 eV. Considering the exchange