The recent observation of unconventional superconductivity in thin films of LaNiO2 (critical temperature, Tc∼10 K) and in bulk single crystals of La3Ni2O7 (327) under pressure (Tc∼80 K), has brought to light a long sought-after class of superconducting nickelates. Through structural measurements in the 327-system, it was shown that the absence of superconductivity is related to bending of the O-Ni-O bonds. Similarly, the bond bending may be linked to the absence of superconductivity in bulk LaNiO2. Neutron diffraction was used on bulk non-superconducting La1-xSrxNiO2 samples to show that the layers are naturally buckled, creating a Ni-O-Ni bond angle of 177 • at 2 K and ambient pressure. The buckling angle increases to 170 • on warming to room temperature. Furthermore, a broad paramagnetic continuum is observed that decreases in intensity on cooling from room temperature signaling a possible transition to a coherent state. However, no antiferromagnetic (AFM) peaks are detected, although enhancement of ferromagnetic (FM) correlations cannot be excluded. High temperature superconductivity in cuprates whose parent compound is an AFM insulator has driven much of the research in strongly correlated electron systems LaNiO 2 is synthesized by reducing the perovskite LaNiO 3 to the infinite layered structure The polycrystalline samples of La 1-x Sr x NiO 2 were synthesized using an alkali molten solution and CaH 2 oxygen reduction method as described in Ref. The neutron scattering experiments were performed at the BT-1 high resolution diffractometer of the NIST Center for Neutron Research (NCNR) Fig. The Fourier transform of the structure function shown in Fig. No long-range magnetic order is present although magnetic fluctuations may persist down to low temperatures. Moreover, the infinite layer is buckled as shown by the local structure analysis. This buckling may be contribute significantly to the absence of superconductivity. If superconductivity were to be observed, this system would benefit from a flat NiO 2 plane. We postulate that superconductivity may be observed in thin films as a result of strain induced 180 • O-Ni-O bond angles that are conducive to superconductivity. Unbuckling the Ni-O bond was proven to be important to the presence of superconductivity in the 327 system T(K) a( Å) a( Å) 4*Ni-O( Å) 8*La-O Å)