Recent theoretical studies have suggested that transition metal perovskite oxide membranes can enable surface phonon polaritons in the infrared range with low loss and much stronger subwavelength confinement than bulk crystals. Such modes, however, have not been experimentally observed so far. Here, using a combination of far-field Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and near-field synchrotron infrared nanospectroscopy (SINS) imaging, we study the phonon-polaritons in a 100 nm thick freestanding crystalline membrane of SrTiO3 transferred on metallic and dielectric substrates. We observe a symmetric-antisymmetric mode splitting giving rise to epsilon-near-zero and Berreman modes as well as highly confined (by a factor of 10) propagating phonon polaritons, both of which result from the deep-subwavelength thickness of the membranes. Theoretical modeling based on the analytical finite-dipole model and numerical finite-difference methods fully corroborate the experimental results. Our work reveals the potential of oxide membranes as a promising platform for infrared photonics and polaritonics. Surface phonon-polaritons (SPhPs) are hybrid optical modes bound to interfaces between optically distinct media, resulting from the coupling of photons with optical phonons in polar materials. They exist within the Reststrahlen bands, the spectral regions (typically in the far-and mid-infrared range) between transverse optical (TO) and longitudinal optical (LO) phonon frequencies where the real part of the optical permittivity is negative The dispersion of the ENZ mode is almost flat in momentum, and it extends inside the light cone, where it becomes a radiative Berreman mode To realize these applications, transferable, scalable single-crystalline thin-film materials exhibiting strong optically active low-loss phonon modes are indispensable. Some quasi-two dimensional van der Waals (vdW) compounds, such as hBN In addition, SrTiO3 exhibits tunable phononic and photonic properties through electrical and optical excitations, strain control, and controlling the concentration of oxygen vacancies and chemical dopants Here, we explore SrTiO3 membranes as a new promising platform for PhPs in the infrared regime. Combining far-field Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and near-field synchrotron infrared nanoscopy (SINS), we experimentally confirm both the antisymmetric and symmetric SPhP modes, including the radiative Berreman mode, in a 100 nm crystalline SrTiO3 membrane transferred onto a thermally oxidized silicon substrate, part of which is covered by gold (Fig. We prepare an epitaxial heterostructure of 100 nm SrTiO3 thin films with a 16 nm Sr2CaAl2O6 water-soluble sacrificial buffer layer synthesized on single-crystalline SrTiO3 substrates by pulsed-laser deposition (Methods and Supplementary Fig. The resulting membrane is free of cracks and wrinkles over an area of several hundred micrometers and of a high crystalline quality, which is retained after the lift-off, as revealed by atomicresolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) (Fig. As a reference for the quantitative analysis of far-and near-field spectral data presented in this paper, we use the dielectric function ε (ω) of bulk SrTiO3 (solid lines in Fig. , where ω , and ω , are the LO and TO frequencies, γ , and γ , are the corresponding scattering rates and ε is the high-frequency dielectric constant (see Supplementary Note 1). The three modes relevant for this paper, ω ,2 = 475±0.3 cm -1 , ω ,3 = 546.1±0.8 cm -1 and ω ,3 = 798.4±1.7 cm -1 , are shown in Fig. Next, we analyze the FTIR reflectivity spectra of the SrTiO3 membrane on different substrates obtained using an infrared microscope (see Methods). Fig. Nevertheless, one can clearly see three dips at about 475, 545 and 790 cm -1 , which are close to ω ,2 , ω ,3 and ω ,3 respectively (the one at ω ,2 is weak but still distinguishable above the noise level, see also Supplementary Fig. A closer look at the experimental and model curves in Fig. From the same fitting (Supplementary Table Further insights into the nature of the phonon polaritons in the STO membrane can be inferred from scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM), which has shown its potential for studies of ultrathin, two-dimensional, and nanostructured materials Scattering of light on the sharp tip provides the necessary momentum for the optical excitation of the phonon-polaritons shows the second-harmonics amplitude spectrum s 2 (ω) obtained on the gold-supported SrTiO3 membrane far away from the sample edges and normalized to signal on bare gold as sketched in Fig. By comparing the near-field spectrum with the momentum-and frequency-dependent Fresnel reflection coefficient r (q, ω) for p-polarized radiation (Fig. Remarkably, there are no features related to the transversal mode at ω ,3 , neither in the measured spectrum nor in the calculated dispersion for the gold-supported membrane. To establish whether this absence is related to the metallicity of the substrate, we show in Fig. Yet, comparing the s-SNOM spectra and the dispersion maps is not entirely straightforward, since the AFM tip interacts with the PhPs with a broad range of momenta. Therefore, we also simulate the spectra using the extended-dipole model (black lines in Fig. Why is the antisymmetric mode only seen in the SiO2/Si-supported membrane, while the symmetric (ENZ) mode is observed on both substrates? To understand this, we present in Fig. Fig. Obviously, the antisymmetric modes are fully suppressed in the gold-supported membrane since the high conductivity of the metal does not allow the field to spread outside SrTiO3. Unlike ENZ modes, the antisymmetric SPhPs, having a positive group velocity, are expected to propagate and cause interference effects when the tip is near the sample edges. To verify this, we perform SINS line scans by moving the tip across the edge of the membrane on the SiO2/Si substrate and recording the near-field spectra (such as the ones on Fig. We note that no spatially dispersing structures are found in the similar SINS scans across the edge where the membrane is supported by gold (Supplementary Fig. In summary, we have experimentally observed a symmetric-antisymmetric phononpolariton mode splitting in a high-quality single crystalline membrane of SrTiO3. Due to the ultrasubwavelength sample thickness, the symmetric mode is pushed to the epsilon-near-zero regime, where the normal component of the electric field is multiple times enhanced inside the sample as compared to the external field. The propagating antisymmetric mode is found to be confined in terms of the wavelength by a factor of 10 as compared to the SPhP mode in bulk SrTiO3. The strong confinement of light and the field enhancement observed here can be exploited for various nanophotonic applications such as mid-infrared subwavelength resonators and metasurfaces. Transferable membranes of SrTiO3 and other oxides are therefore a promising platform to realize perfect absorption and nonlinear nanophotonic applications in the infrared regime. In addition, enhanced light-matter interactions can enable the control over the paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transition in this material Thin-film Growth. The epitaxial heterostructure of 100 nm SrTiO3 films was synthesized with a 16 nm Sr2CaAl2O6 sacrificial layer on (001)-oriented SrTiO3 substrates via pulsed-laser deposition. The growth of the Sr2CaAl2O6 layer was carried out in dynamic argon pressure of 4 × 10 6 torr, at a growth temperature of 710 °C, a laser fluence of 1.35 J/cm 2 , and a repetition rate of 1 Hz, using a 4.8 mm 2 imaged laser spot. The growth of the SrTiO3 layer was conducted in dynamic oxygen pressure of 4 × 10 6 torr, at a growth temperature of 710 °C, a laser fluence of 0.9 J/cm 2 , and a repetition rate of 3 Hz, using a 3.0 mm 2 imaged laser spot. 