The investigation of the structural phase transition in the vicinity of the Curie temperature Tc of LiNb1-xTaxO3 crystals is motivated by the expected combination of advantageous high-temperature properties of LiNbO3 and LiTaO3, including high piezoelectric modules and remarkable high-temperature stability, respectively. Tc marks the ultimate limit for exploiting the piezoelectric properties, however transition related structural modifications might impact this and other properties even below Tc. Remarkably, the phase transition from the ferroelectric to the paraelectric phase, whose temperature strongly depends on the composition x, shows a significant drop in the activation energy of the electrical conductivity. The magnitude, temperature dependence and underlying mechanisms of this drop are discussed from a microscopic perspective. Molecular dynamics calculations in the framework of the density functional theory show that substantial displacements of the cations occur below Tc for both the end compounds LiNbO3 and LiTaO3, and might thus affect the electrical conductivity. Above Tc, the migration of lithium ions is presumably facilitated by a shortened diffusion path for the most favorable jump of the lithium ions. Electronic contributions to the conductivity, which become important above 900 K, are explained within the polaronic picture by the formation and migration of free small polarons. The single crystals of lithium niobate (LiNbO 3 , LN) are well established in the field of optics. They are, for example, highly birefringent and exhibit high electro-optic coefficients. Moreover, the photoelastic as well as nonlinear optical properties are also distinctive Crystals of LiNb 1-x Ta x O 3 (LNT) solid solutions comprises the two border components LN and LT, which share the same crystal structure (space group R3c) but differ in their lattice and positional parameters, as well as their melting and Curie temperatures The paraelectric to ferroelectric phase transitions of LN and LT are considered to be second-order phase transitions This study aims to uncover and explain changes in electrical conductivity that accompany the phase transition across various compositions. Our investigation involves experimental methods such as measuring electrical conductivity even above T c , calorimetry, and theoretical exploration through ab initio molecular dynamics calculations executed on large supercells. The LNT single crystals investigated here are grown at the Leibniz Institute for Crystal Growth in Berlin, Germany (IKZ), using the Czochralski method with induction heating. The starting materials are congruently melting LN and LT powders prepared from lithium carbonate (Li 2 CO 3 , Alfa Aesar, 5 N), niobium pentoxide (Nb 2 O 5 , H.C. Stark, 4N5), and tantalum pentoxide (Ta 2 O 5 , Fox Chemicals, 4 N), all dried before use. Two different LNT crystals are prepared by mixing LN and LT powders with LT mass fractions of 18% and 34%. Crystal compositions of x ≈ 0.42 and 0.64 result respectively. They are determined by averaging the distribution of Nb and Ta in the grown single crystals measured by Energy Dispersive Micro-X-ray Fluorescence (μ-XRF) analysis in a pre-vacuum environment (20 mbar) using a Bruker M4 TORNADO spectrometer. Within the crystal sections used for the experiments discussed below, a variation in the composition of δx = 0.02 is found. In the following, the term composition referes exclusively to x according to LiNb 1-x Ta x O 3 . Seeds are pulled at a rate of 0.2 mm/h. The crystals grow along the [0001] direction (c-axis) in accordance with the orientation of the crystal seed. The process is carried out in a protective argon atmosphere with a small addition of oxygen (0.08 vol%). Details can be found in To enable comparison of LNT with LN and LT, congruent X-cut and Z-cut LN and LT wafers are purchased from Precision Micro-Optics Inc. (PMO, USA). The crystals are cut into rectangular plates of 5 × 6 mm 2 . The only exception represent the samples with x = 0.64. They are slightly smaller and show an irregular shape. To examine the electrical properties, platinum electrodes with a thickness of about 3 μm are deposited by screen printing on both surfaces of the samples using platinum paste (Ferro Corporation, No. 6412 0410). Subsequently, the samples are annealed at 1273 k for about an hour, with a heating rate of 2 K/min. Key information including sample name, composition, orientation, thickness and electrode size are given in Tab. 1. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is performed using a thermal analyzer (NETZSCH STA 449C F3, Germany). According to ASTM E1269, three consecutive measurements are carried out under identical conditions with empty reference and sample crucibles (baseline), Al 2 O 3 powder is used as standard with known C p (T ) function. Four subsequent heating runs are conducted up to 1463 K in a flow mixture of 40 ml/min Ar and 20 ml/min O 2 , with isothermal segments for equilibration. The average C p (T ) functions from the last three heating segments is used for further evaluation. Ab initio molecular dynamics as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) To determine electrical conductivity, the samples are mounted in a furnace using an alumina support. Temperature control is realized using a type B thermocouple located near the sample. Further, a Pt100 thermoresistor is used to compensate for the temperature fluctuations at the cold end of the thermocouple. The thermoelectric voltages are acquired by a digital voltmeter (Keithley-Instruments, USA). Measurements are conducted in air at atmospheric pressure up to 1623 K with a rate of 1 K/min. We perform short-term experiments in that sense that the dwell time at the maximum temperature is only one hour. To determine the electrical impedance, the samples are connected by platinum foils and wires to an impedance/gain-phase analyzer (Solartron 1260, Ametek Scientific Instruments, Hampshire, UK). The impedance spectra are acquired in the frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz with an excitation AC voltage of 50 mV. The electrical conductivity of the samples is described by an equivalent circuit (EC) model consisting of a bulk resistance (R B ) in parallel to a constant phase element (CPE), inferred from the obtained single semicircle in the complex plane. The bulk resistance is derived by least squares fitting of the related model parameters. Figure The electrical conductivity σ can be described by a Arrhenius relation as follows: Here, σ 0 , E A , k B and T represent a pre-exponential constant, the activation energy, the Boltzmann constant, and the absolute temperature, respectively. The factor 1/T reflects the correlation between mobility, relevant for electrical conductivity, and thermally activated diffusion according to the Nernst-Einstein relation. 3 Results The DSC can be seen as a standard method to determine the specific heat capacity C p . Here, the focus is on abrupt changes of C p at the phase transitions temperature only. Lastly, LT has a T c value of 873 K. Fig. The temperature dependence of the T c data determined here can be approximated well by a linear function of the composition x according to ( with α = 1429 K and β = -546 K. x in LiNb 1-x Ta x O 3 Figure AIMD runs have been performed at temperature intervals of 100 K from 300 K to 1100 K for LiTaO 3 and from 900 K to 1600 K for LiNbO 3 . From each MD trajectory, the displacements of Li and Nb/Ta from their equilibrium position in the paraelectric phase can be obtained. According to the R3C symmetry of the paraelectric phase, the equilibrium position of the Li ions is within a (0001) oxygen layer, while Ta/Nb ions are exactly at the center of the oxygen octahedra. This is shown schematically in Fig. The results from the AIMD are shown in Fig. The displacement distribution of the Li ions reveals a striking different behavior, instead. At low temperatures, the Li ions are all above (or all below) an oxygen (0001) layer. All the displacements are again well fitted by a single gaussian curve. When the temperature increases, a fraction of the Li atoms possesses enough thermal enrgy to pass the oxygen layer. In the paraelectric phase, the Li atoms oscillate around the oxygen layer, thus continously passing through the oxygen (0001) plane. The corresponding displacement distribution is bimodal and can be fitted by two gaussian curves. On the one hand, this results in a dipole moment per unit cell that vanishes in average, explaining the absence of a spontaneous polarization at high temperatures. On the other hand, this shows the high mobility of the Li ions, confirming the common assumption that they are the main mobile ionic charge carriers, and the main carrier at all at moderate temperatures. Interestingly, the AIMD shows that both for LiTaO 3 and LiNbO 3 substantial deviations from the equilibrium positions of the ferroelectric structure occur before T C . In particular, Li ions display a non negligible mobility (a fraction of the ions passing the oxygen plane) already a temperature well below T C , which might have an influence on the ionic conductivity. In order to explore whether the Li mobility correlates with the electrical conductivity, the occupation of the Li octahedra is shown in Fig. For the interpretation of the AIMD results, a word of caution is in order. Atomistic calculations model ideal, stoichiometric materials. Real samples will feature a high density of point (intrinsic and extrinsic) and extended defects (dislocations, domain boundaries, etc.). In particular, if the congruent composition is considered, the presence of a high concentration of Li vacancies must be taken into account, which can heavily affect the conductivity. Figure To visualize this observation in more detail, Fig. A more comprehensive picture is achieved by calculation of the logarithmic slope E σT from Eq. 1: If a single conduction mechanism dominates in a sufficiently large temperature range, E σT is constant and can be assigned to an activation energy E A . The approach, in turn, reveals distinct temperature ranges for the electrical conductivity that are not fully recognizable in the Arrhenius representation. Figure (1) At relatively low temperatures from 673 K to about 873 K, E σT is constant and represents the activation energy E AI of the lithium migration mentioned above. Its values are determined by averaging E σT and listed in Tab. 2 together with the associated specific temperature ranges. The values are represented as horizontal lines in Fig. (2) With increasing temperature, a range with slightly increasing E σT up to about 1073 K becomes visible. It is attributed to additional electronic conduction (3) An even stronger increase in E σT is observed above 1073 K. It extends up to about 1273 K and 1573 K for LN and LT respectively. The nature of this contribution is not yet known and subject of ongoing investigations. In the short-term experiments carried out here, degradation obviously plays a minor role, as the data for heating and cooling differ very little. (4) Finally, a decrease of E σT is observed with further increasing temperature. In case of LT, the decrease starts at about 1323 K and coincides with the drop at T c . In case of the other compositions, the decrease starts at even higher temperatures, and is far off T c . A common phenomenological observation in the vicinity of the phase transitions is an increase in E σT with temperature, which is superimposed by an abrupt drop of E σT at the phase transition temperature. This situation enables the extraction of the magnitude of the drop in E σT . In the vicinity, but not at the phase transistion temperature of a sample under consideration, the continuous change in E σT can be approximated by a linear function. In addition, the abrupt change of E σT at the phase transition must be taken into account. The following phenomenological description can be chosen: Here, X = 1/T and X 0 = 1/T 0 represent the reciprocal temperature in general and at the turning point of the sigmoid function used here to describe the width w and magnitude ∆E of the abrupt change in E σT . Furthermore, E 0 and E 1 are the coefficients of the linear function to approximate the continuous change. Since the exact shape of the abrupt change in E σT is unknown, the sigmoid function chosen here is a straight forward approximation that requires the least assumptions. The choice of such a function is justified if a closer look is taken at E σT in the vicinity of the phase transition as done in Fig. The parameters of Eq. 4 are fitted to E σT . Beside ∆E, X 0 is relevant and discussed in relation to T c . Here, w, E 0 and E 1 enable fitting, but are not used further. Figure The numerical results of the fitting are summarized in Tab. 3 and compared with T c from DSC and theory. The first and most remarkable result is the change in activation energy of the electrical conductivity upon the ferroelectric-paraelectric phase transition. The fact is discussed below in concert with the dependence of ∆E from composition. The second key result is the agreement between the (reciprocal) turning points 1/X 0 and the Curie temperatures determined from E σT and DSC data, respectively, for a given composition. Consequently, 1/X 0 represents the Curie temperature, in this case, derived from electrical conductivity. Accordingly, 1/X 0 is also denoted as T c in Tab. 3. The experimental data compared here are highlighted in bold in Tab. 3. Furthermore, the situation is visualized in Fig. The discussion of these results must be done based on the mechanisms of the charge transport. Up to about 600 • C, lithium migration dominates. Above that temperature, transport via free polarons contributes increasingly. This contribution depends on the composition, and is particularly significant in Nb rich LNT The decrease of E σT when exceeding the Curie temperature T c is the most evident phenomenon in case of LT. Here, in the ferroelectric and the paraelectric phase below and above T c , respectively, ranges with constant E σT exist, which can be assigned to activation energies denoted by E AI in Tab. 2. We attribute the decrease of the activation energy to the peculiar distribution of the Li ions on the octahedral sites, which are involved in the phase transition near T c . The occupation of the octahedral sites depends on the temperature, as revealed by AIMD and shown in Figure Figure As long as the contribution of electrons to the electrical conductivity is low, the decrease in activation energy is seen as an effect of the Li transport. The condition is fulfilled for LT around 870 K. Electronic transport in LN is usually interpreted in terms of polaron hopping. A polaron is formed in materials with high lattice polarizability, when the lattice deformation induced by a charge carrier is strong enough to localize the carrier substantially at a single lattice site (small polaron). Charge carriers (electrons or holes, in LN and LT mostly electrons) localized at a regular lattice site are referred to as free small polarons, whereas they are referred to as bound polarons if they are localized at a lattice defect. Due to the lattice distortion, tunneling to equivalent lattice sites is strongly quenched, and only thermally activated hopping allows transport to neighboring sites. Transport can occur in form of hopping, when an activation energy between the initial and final state is overcome. In the case of free polarons, thermally induced phonon excitations might render the electronic energies of the two sites equal, so that a transition between both states by tunneling is greatly facilitated. Differently from free polarons, the coupling to a single point defect removes the Bloch character from bound polarons. The binding to the defect by coulomb interaction causes a more pronounced distortionrelated localization and stabilization. Moreover, the presence of the defect causes an inequivalence between the initial and the available final states of a hopping process. Thus, the mixture of initial and final states is asymmetric, strongly reducing the intensity of a charge transfer transition. The polaronic contribution to electronic transport is therefore expected to stem mainly from free polarons Another aspect that could contribute to the decrease of the activation energy during the transition from the para-to the ferroelectric phase is the narrowing of the band gap accompanying the transition. Many-body perturbation theory indicates a decrease of the band gap energy by 0.5 eV for LN, for example Temperature dependent DSC data and the slope of the electrical conductivity E σT of LN and LT are compared in Fig. Furthermore, Fig. Here, the activation energy of the electrical conductivity decreases between 830 K and 890 K. The related change of C p is observed between 873 K and 890 K. In the case of LN, however, the AIMD calculations overestimate T c , resulting in a small deviation from the experimental values. Here, the changes of E σT and C p are observed between 1390 K and 1443 K and between 1415 K and 1443 K, respectively. Based on the calculated and measured data, it can be concluded that the phase transition is a continuous process that affects the properties of the materials below the critical temperature T c . An investigation of the ferroelectric to paraelectric phase transition of LiNb 1-x Ta x O 3 is presented, which revealed a linear dependence of the phase transition temperature near T c on the composition x. Beside differential scanning calorimetry data, the slope of the electrical conductivity is evaluated. The latter enables to extract T c . Consequently, the measurement of the electrical conductivity is an elegant approach to determine T c . Further, the conductivity slope reveals a significant change in activation energy during the transition. The observation is, on the one hand, attributed to the peculiar distribution of the Li ions on the octahedral sites which affects the Li ion transport. On the other hand, with rising temperatures and, in particular, for low Ta content x, the transport of polarons contributes increasingly to the total conductivity. Here, lattice distortion is expected to affect the hopping of polarons. The latter might become rather mobile at higher temperatures and, consequently, thermal fluctuations of the lattice generate configurations in which the electron energies at the initial and the final sites are equal, thus facilitating polaron hopping. Furthermore, molecular dynamics calculations within the framework of the density functional theory show that substantial cation displacements occur below the transition temperature for both LiNbO 3 and LiTaO 3 , and presumably LiNb 1-x Ta x O 3 . These displacements might, therefore, affect the properties of the materials already below T c .