N-heterotriangulenes (N-HTAs) represent a class of functional molecules with high potential for optoelectronic materials, for example as electron donating compounds in donor/acceptor (D/A) systems. The capability of two different N-HTAs, N-HTA 550 and N-HTA 557, the latter containing an additional 7-membered ring, to act as electron donors at interfaces with strong tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ and F4TCNQ) acceptors is studied using high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy in combination with state-of-the-art quantum chemical calculations. For TCNQ/N-HTA bilayer 1 Charge transfer (CT) in strongly interacting donor/acceptor systems is of fundamental importance for the function of organic (opto)electronic devices, The electronic and structural properties of many donor/acceptor combinations have been investigated All observed spectral features could be assigned to specific electronic states, and moreover, the additional -C=C-bridge forming the 7-membered ring in N-HTA-557 resulted in a pronounced reduction of the optical gap size by 0.9 eV from 3.4 eV in N-HTA-550 to 2.5 eV in N-HTA-557 due to an increase of the π-conjugated electron system. In the present study we again utilize HREELS and quantum chemistry to elucidate possible CT processes between these N-HTA derivatives and the well-known electron acceptors 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) and 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) (see Fig. The HREELS experiments were performed under ultrahigh vacuum conditions at a sample temperature of around 90 K. Au(111) single crystals were prepared by standard procedure of Ar + sputtering and annealing. The N-HTAs, TCNQ, and F4TCNQ were deposited from an effusion cell onto the Au(111) sample held at 200 K (for the evaporation temperatures see supporting information). The coverage was determined by temperature-programmed desorption measurements (see supporting information). HREELS measurements were performed with an incident electron energy of 15 eV. For details see Refs. Before presenting and discussing the results of the mixed N-HTA donor and TCNQ acceptor systems, we briefly introduce the electronic properties of the bare N-HTA-550 and N-HTA-557 donors and the TCNQ and F4TCNQ acceptor compounds analyzed with HREELS. surface to minimize the influence of the metallic substrate on the molecular electronic states. As previously demonstrated, Notably, N-HTA-557 is a stronger electron donor compared to N-HTA-550, which is seen in the computed ionization potentials of these compounds (see below), which is 0.4-0.5 eV lower for the first compared to the latter, independent of the computational model and the polarity of the applied solvation model. This assignment has been supported by the calculated excitation energies at TDDFT/CAM-B3LYP level. and the applied theoretical model has an intrinsic statistical mean absolute error of 0.3 eV 36 overestimating excitation energies, one can not expect a quantitative agreement. Indeed the calculated excitation energies of the neutral compounds deviate from the experimentally determined values consistently by 0.5-0.7 eV, however the qualitative trends and the order of states have been correctly reproduced. The corresponding HREEL data for the acceptor molecules TCNQ and F4TCNQ are shown in Fig. To study possible CT between the N-HTAs and the acceptors we prepared a multilayer of the donor N-HTA on the Au(111) followed by deposition of approximately 1 ML of the acceptor compound, since it is well-known that at least for F4TCNQ a charge transfer from the Au(111) substrate to F4TCNQ is occurring when adsorbing it directly on Au(111) and thus leading to the formation of negatively charged F4TCNQ. Also for the N-HTA557/acceptor systems low-energy contributions are seen, apart from the transitions associated with the single components. In the case of N-HTA-557/TCNQ a much more pronounced peak at 1.3 eV compared to the bare N-HTA-557/Au(111) is observed. For N-HTA-557/F4TCNQ an even more distinct peak at 0.9 eV is visible. As found for the N-HTA-550/F4TCNQ system, the transition in N-HTA-557/F4TCNQ is at a lower energy. The energetic positions and strengths of the lowest peaks seem to be diretly related to the donor and acceptor strengths of the individual compounds of the complexes. Therefore, these lowenergy transitions most likely correspond to CT states at the donor/acceptor interface. To further corroborate this hypothesis we performed state-of-the-art DFT calculations on the electronic properties and spectra of the possibly involved molecular species. As a first step of the computational investigation, let us establish the electronic structure of the ground state of the complexes of the N-HTA and TCNQ derivatives. Based on chemical intuition, it is expected that N-HTA-557 is a stronger electron donor than N-HTA-550 and F4TCNQ is a stronger electron acceptor than TCNQ. This is corroborated by our computations of the corresponding vertical ionization potentials (IP) of N-HTA-557 and N-HTA-550, which amount to 7.38 and 7.81 eV in the gas phase respectively. To estimate whether nuclear dynamics and accompanying changes of the molecular geometry have a large influence on the IPs, we also computed the adiabatic IPs at the optimized equilibrium geometries of the cations. At the level of ∆DFT/CAM-B3LYP/cc-pVDZ they possess values of 7.26 and 7.76 eV for N-HTA-557 and N-HTA-550, respectively (Table Their vertical EAs amount to 3.52 and 3.01 eV and their adiabatic ones to 3.72 and 3.21 eV in the gas phase (Table Including solvation by using a polarizable continuum model with increasing dielectric constants shows the expected stabilization of the charged species, resulting in a decrease of the IPs and an increase of the EAs (Table Table gas phase ε=5 ε=10 ε=20 ε=40 ε=80 When a complex of N-HTA-557 and F4TCNQ is formed, one may expect the formation of a charge-transfer complex and transfer of an electron from N-HTA-557 to F4TCNQ forming a cation and an anion already in the electronic ground state. The corresponding required energy is often estimated via a point-charge model as E CT =IP-EA-1/R. Using this formula and the computed values for the IP and the EA for ε=10, for example, the intermolecular distance for which E CT becomes negative, i.e. when electron transfer will occur, needs to be smaller than 11.7 Å. In the optimized equilibrium geometry of the N-HTA-557•F4TCNQ complex the intermolecular distance is much smaller with only 3.2 Å in an almost coplanar arrangement. In contrast to expectation, the computed dipole moment of the complex is however very small with only 2.52 D using a PCM with ε=10 and the Mulliken charge distribution clearly indicates that no charge transfer takes place between N-HTA-557 and F4TCNQ in the electronic ground state. One important factor neglected in the point-charge estimate is the energy needed to desolvate the free ions to form the complex. In general, this discrepancy between the point-charge model and the actual finding, also demonstrates its inappropriateness for such large molecules at short intermolecular distances. Even when the dielectric constant is increased up to ε=80, no charge transfer complex is observed. Therefore, the formation of ground-state charge-transfer complex can be excluded to be relevant for the interpretation of the HREELS experiments. Nevertheless, due to the experimental setup and the presence of the gold surface, ion formation via electron transfer to or from the surface can generally not be excluded. To investigate whether the observed low-energy peaks in the HREELS spectra can originate from N-HTA-550 and N-HTA-557 cations or TCNQ and F4TCNQ anions, we computed the electronic excited states of the neutral and ionic individuals (Table Table In the N-HTA-557•TCNQ complex, N-HTA-557 possesses a IP that is 0.4 eV lower than the one of N-HTA-550, and hence the excited CT states should again be lower than those of the N-HTA-550•TCNQ complex. Indeed this is the case for the first excited S 1 state with an excitation energy of 1.64 eV. Again, this state corresponds to the transition of an electron from the HOMO at N-HTA-557 to the LUMO located at the TCNQ moiety. The second excited S 2 state, however, is found at higher excitation energy of 2.71 eV, and does not correspond to a pure charge-transfer excited state as it contains admixtures of locally excited determinants. This is in agreement with the observed HREELS spectrum of the N-HTA-557•TCNQ complex, which contains only a single peak in the low-energy region at 1.3 eV, and which can thus be assigned to originate from the S 1 CT state. Since N-HTA-557 and F4TCNQ possess the lowest IP and highest EA of the four species studied, the N-HTA-557•F4TCNQ is expected to possess the lowest lying CT excited states of all studied complexes. According to our TDDFT/CAM-B3LYP calculations, the S 1 state corresponds to the HOMO to LUMO transition (Fig. Two N-heterotriangulene (N-HTA) derivatives, the N-HTA-550 and N-HTA-557, which act as electron donors (D) in combination with the strong tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ and F4TCNQ) acceptors (A) adsorbed in bilayers on Au(111) have been investigated using HREELS, focusing on charge transfer (CT) at the TCNQ/N-HTA interface. For all four D/Acombinations low-energy (< 2.5 eV) electronic transitions have been detected. Our extensive quantum chemical calculations allowed us to assign the spectra of four complexes formed by N-HTA-550 and N-HTA-557 with TCNQ and F4TCNQ. We could exclude the presence of CT complexes in the electronic ground state, since even when modelling highly polar environments electron transfer from the N-HTA donors to the TCNQ/F4TCNQ acceptors could not be observed. Also, characteristic spectroscopic features of the charged species could not be observed in the experiments further corroborating this finding. Instead, the newly occurring spectral features in the low-energy region of the HREELS spectra upon complex formation could be unambiguously determined to originate from electron-stimulated charge transfer from the N-HTA derivatives to TCNQ or F4TCNQ. Although the computed absolute values of the excitation energies deviate from the experimentally determined ones by typical 0.3-0.5 eV, their relative energies are nicely consistent with the computed values of the ionization potentials and electron affinities of the individual compounds, which are the leading quantities determining the energies of the CT states.