Frequency metrology lies at the heart of precision measurement. Optical frequency combs provide a coherent link uniting the microwave and optical domains in the electromagnetic spectrum, with profound implications in timekeeping Frequency is the most accurately measured physical quantity and is pivotal to precision metrology in a multitude of scientific and technological sectors. It was advised by Arthur Schawlow, the Nobel laureate in physics in 1981, to "never measure anything but frequency" Electron spectroscopy uses free electrons to perform spectroscopic measurements of specimens. In particular, electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) measures the energy loss of electrons transmitting through and inelastically scattered by a specimen, based on the spatial distribution of the electron beam bent and dispersed by a magnetic field Figure with m the mode number. A monochromatic continuous-wave (CW) laser is then offset-locked to one comb tooth with a microwave local oscillator (LO), and one obtains a synthesized optical frequency The CW laser is then used to impose a coherent phase modulation onto free-electron wavefunctions where E 0 is the initial electron energy, h is the Planck constant, and N is an integer. Equally, the genera- tion of energy sidebands can be understood as quantummechanical superpositions of electron states corresponding to the absorption or emission of N photons in the inelastic electron-light scattering (IELS) process. In the end, one obtains an electron spectrum consisting of energy sidebands centered at the initial electron energy E 0 with energy change arising from electron phase modulation at an optical frequency synthesized from microwave frequencies. We use a high-quality-factor Si 3 N 4 photonic chipbased microresonator The experimental setup (Fig. As a proof-of-concept demonstration, we apply the aforementioned frequency metrology to the calibra-tion of an EELS spectrometer attached to an unmonochromated TEM with a thermionic electron gun. Recent advances in electron monochromators, spectrometers, and detectors have pushed the energy resolution of EELS to the millielectronvolt level The frequency metrology across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains provides a direct frequency link from precisely measured microwave frequencies to the change of the electron energy (cf. Eq. 3). Therefore, the IELS-broadened electron spectrum serves as an energy reference for EELS calibration, using the energy sidebands located at multiples of the photon energy hf opt as calibration markers. We employ the IELS-broadened electron spectrum in calibrating an electron spectrometer with 2048 pixels set at 50 meV/px nominal dispersion (Fig. turer. Pixel positions (with sub-pixel precision) for the calibration markers are assigned an energy of the corresponding multiples of the photon energy; pixels in between the markers are assigned an energy from linear interpolation. We perform the calibration with two independent exposures, both using electrons modulated by a CW laser at a frequency of 194 567 516 MHz. Figure We further compared the spectrometer calibrations using electrons modulated at four different absolute optical frequencies: 194 567 516 MHz, 193 474 819 MHz, 192 384 387 MHz, and 191 292 697 MHz (with measurement time intervals of 25 min 25 sec, 18 min 17 sec, and 15 min 19 sec). Figure We exhibit an example of electron-based frequency metrology by measuring the optical frequency from the IELS-broadened electron spectrum. With the number of electron energy sidebands and their energy span, one could back-calculate the photon energy and thus the optical frequency. Figure To summarize, we unify frequency metrology across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains. The cascaded frequency link is enabled by an optical frequency comb that unites microwave and optical frequencies and a photonic chip-based electron phase modulator that bridges optical waves and free electrons. Our work connects frequency domains differed by a factor of ∼ 10 13 and carried by different physical objects -electromagnetic waves and free-electron matter waves. The precision of such frequency metrology could be further enhanced by state-of-the-art electron monochromators and spectrometers. The photonic microresonator-based electron phase modulator provides an efficient electron-photon coupling so that the energy sidebands in the electron spectrum cover the full range of the spectrometer and a single acquisition is sufficient for calibrating the whole spectrome-ter. The efficient coupling is also achieved with both the laser and the electron beam in CW mode, making the calibration technique available in any TEM. We anticipate our results would significantly improve the spectral resolution of electron spectroscopy, which already excels at the atomic-scale spatial resolution. This improvement could further the spectroscopic capabilities of free electrons in vibrational spectroscopy Photonic chip design, fabrication, and packaging: The Si3N4 photonic chip (wafer ID: D66_01_F10_C16) was fabricated by the photonic Damascene process Transmission electron microscopy and electron energy-loss spectroscopy: The photonic chip was inserted into a TEM (JEOL JEM-2100PLUS) with a LaB6 thermionic electron gun. The electron beam was emitted by the gun in the continuous-beam mode and accelerated to 120 keV, allowing for phase matching with the microresonator optical modes. The beam current was in the range of 5-10 pA. The initial energy spread of the electron beam was 0.7-0.8 eV. During the experiment, the TEM was in low-magnification (×300 on the control panel) mode with the objective lens off. The electron beam was tightly focused close to the surface of the photonic chip with a spot size at the sample of ∼40 nm (FWHM) at a distance of 20 -30 nm from the chip surface, and a convergence angle of ∼ 100 μrad (50 μm condenser aperture, spot size set with free-lens control of the condenser lenses). The electron spectra were measured with a post-column spectrometer (Gatan Imaging Filter GIF Quantum SE) with a 2048×2048 pixels CCD camera (US1000) and ∼ 5 mrad collection semi-angle. Each EELS spectrum was obtained by summing 5 frames of 2-sec exposure each. The photonic chip was mounted on the tip of a custom-built sample holder with teflon fiber feedthroughs allowing bare optical fibers to enter the TEM column and be coupled to the photonic chip. During the experiments, the surface of the photonic chip was kept parallel to the TEM optical axis and to the electron beam optical axis. The electron energy-loss spectra were acquired in TEM mode with the electron beam focused tangent to the microresonator waveguide and parallel to its surface. The electron spectral broadening was maximized by fine-tuning the electron beam position and the photonic chip tilt. Optical setup: The CW laser was emitted by a tunable external cavity diode laser (Toptica) with a wavelength around 1550 nm and amplified by an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (Keopsys). The optical power sent to the input fiber was 50 -80 mW. The optical polarization was controlled by a fiber polarization controller to excite the transverse magnetic mode family of the microresonator, and the laser frequency was tuned to specific resonant frequencies (shown in Fig. arXiv:2403.10486v1 [physics.optics] 15 Mar 2024