Here we study nonmonotonic features which appear both in magnetoresistivity and anomalous Hall resistivity during the simple magnetization process, by systematically measuring type-II magnetic Weyl semimetal EuCd 2 Sb 2 films over a wide carrier density range. We find that a positive magnetoresistivity hump can be explained as manifestation of a field-linear term in the generalized magnetoconductivity formula including the Berry curvature. As also confirmed by model calculation, the term can be negative and pronounced near the Weyl point energy in the case that the Weyl cones are heavily tilted. Our findings demonstrate extensive effects of the Berry curvature on various magnetotransport in magnetic Weyl semimetals beyond the anomalous Hall effect. Weyl semimetals (WSMs) host pairs of three-dimensional band crossing points called Weyl points in their bulk band structure, where the spin degeneracy is resolved by breaking of either space-inversion or time-reversal symmetry Owing to the large Berry curvature distribution around the Weyl points, magnetic WSMs with time-reversal symmetry breaking exhibit giant magnetoelectric responses such as in anomalous Hall effect (AHE) For magnetic WSMs, 3d-electron systems including Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 Hall resistivity below B s 48,50-52 . Furthermore, it has been theoretically proposed that the Berry curvature can also affect magnetoconductivity or magnetoresistivity especially when the Weyl cones are tilted as in type-II WSMs Here we systematically study magnetotransport of EuCd 2 Sb 2 thin films over a wide carrier density range, particularly focusing on nonmonotonic features appearing below the saturation field. In addition to the nonmonotonic feature in the anomalous Hall resistivity, we find that a broad hump appears in the magnetoresistivity curve. This can be interpreted as manifestation of a field-linear term in the generalized magnetoconductivity formula including the Berry curvature. EuCd 2 Sb 2 single-crystalline films were grown on CdTe (111)A substrate using a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) technique • C for 3 minutes with supplying excess Cd after the growth. Growth orientation is along the c-axis, and the film thickness was designed at 50 nm. Since Cd is easily deficient in EuCd 2 Sb 2 , we have obtained EuCd 2 Sb 2 films with hole densities ranging from 10 18 to 10 20 cm -3 . Longitudinal resistivity ρ xx and Hall resistivity ρ yx were measured with employing a standard four-probe method on a Hall bar. Aluminum wire was connected to the terminals by using an ultrasonic bonding machine and these connections were reinforced by appending silver paste. Low-temperature measurements of ρ xx and ρ yx up to 9 T were performed using a Cryomagnetics cryostat system equipped with a superconducting magnet. Magnetization curves up to 7 T were measured using a superconducting quantum interfer-ence device magnetometer in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). Theoretical analysis on the transport properties were conducted numerically using on-premise pc clusters. Strictly, in some samples such as the film with p 3D = 5.0 × 10 19 cm -3 , the hump structure in ρ AHE yx remains visible up to about 10 K. This also suggests that the nonmonotonic feature is derived from the momentum-space band Berry curvature, because in this case the finite change can be induced by the magnetic field even above T N . Another hump structure only seen in the magnetoresistivity near zero field is probably ascribed to a zero-field centered negative cusp structure caused by weak anti-localization effect To discuss the Berry curvature effect on the magnetoconductivity, here we refer to a generalized formulation derived by solving the Boltzman equation with incorporating the Berry curvature where (f 0 pn ) ′ is the energy derivative of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at zero temperature with momentum p and band index n, and W pn represents b pn × (v pn × B) with the Berry curvature b pn and the velocity v pn . The term J B( F. A. Hames, Ferromagnetic-Alloy Phases Near the Compositions Ni 2 Mnln, Ni 2 MnGa,