We present TopoTB, a software package written in the Mathematica language, designed to compute electronic structures, topological properties, and phase diagrams based on tight-binding models. TopoTB is user-friendly, with an interactive user interface that enables the tuning of model parameters for fitting the target energy bands in a WYSIWYG way. In addition, TopoTB also includes functionalities for processing results from Density Functional Theory calculations. The outputs of TopoTB are rich and readable, and they can be displayed in various styles. These features make TopoTB a useful tool for the theoretical study of materials. Nontrivial topological states have always been a hot research topic in condensed matter physics, and related materials, their theoretical models have also been attracting much attention There are many software packages available for calculating topological properties. For example, WannierTools Here, we introduce the TopoTB software package, which employs Wilson loop methods and Shiozaki methods without the need for any gauge fixing to compute the topological numbers of the TB model, effectively circumventing the ambiguity of wave functions. Additionally, our software package supports the computation of electronic structures for the k • p model. Compared to other software packages such as WannierTools, Z2pack, and PYATB, our software package can directly input the model Hamiltonian matrix and corresponding lattice vectors to compute electronic structures, such as band structures, density of states, spin textures, and more. For computations involving topological properties like Berry phase, Berry curvature, Chern number, Z 2 number, etc., our software package requires supplementary input, such as the number of occupied states. These are the basic capabilities of the software package. In addition, our software package allows for interactive operation of the band structure, facilitating convenient observation of the changes in the bands. Particularly, by utilizing the band structure from DFT codes calculations as a reference, our software can be used to tune the parameters in the model. We also plan to develop the interfaces with other softwares, such as Wannier90, WannierTools, etc. For the construction of the model, the MagneticTB The organizational structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the basic theories related to software packages. In Section 3, we introduce the capabilities of software packages. In Section 4, we introduce the installation and usage of software packages. In Section 5, we provide relevant examples of the main capabilities of the software package. In Section 6, we present the conclusion. The TB model, constructed upon the tight-binding approximation, employs linear combination of atom orbitals (LCAO) as its basis functions. It establishes a direct relationship between the electronic band structure of a crystal and the electronic energy levels of the constituent atoms in their isolated states. For the TB model, there are two gauges called "lattice gauge" and "atomic gauge". To describe these gauges, we consider N lattices, each with M atomic orbitals. If we denote the creation and annihilation operators on the α-th atomic orbital in the i-th lattice as c † iα and c iα (i = 1, 2, ..., N; α = 1, 2, ..., M), respectively, then the Hamiltonian can be written as where t i j αβ = iα|H| jβ . It represents the hopping matrix element from the α-th atomic orbital in the i-th lattice to the β-th atomic orbital in the j-th lattice. This Hamiltonian is in real space, but our focus is in momentum space. Therefore, we need to perform a Fourier transform. It's important to note that different Fourier transforms will lead to different gauges for the TB models. Under the "lattice gauge", the atomic orbital information inside the lattice is ignored implicitly, so the Hamiltonian of the momentum space is written as where R i j = R j -R i , and R i is the lattice vector. That is to say, when constructing the TB model, we need to consider intracell and intercell hoppings separately, and the Fourier transform is performed on these two types of hoppings. Therefore, the Hamiltonian satisfies where G is the reciprocal lattice vector, which is in Bloch form. A schematic diagram of this specification is shown in Fig. where M is the potential energy at C 1 and C 2 sites, t is the hopping parameter, r 1 to r 6 represent hopping vectors from the central lattice to the six nearest neighbor lattices. It can be seen from this that if a hopping parameter in the TB model is independent of k, then the TB model is "lattice gauge". The symmetry of the Berry curvature obtained in this gauge is broken, as shown in Fig. In the "atomic gauge", we consider the hoppings of each atomic orbital in the lattice, and the Hamiltonian can be written as where R i j = R j -R i , and R i is the lattice vector; d αβ = d β -d α , and d α is the position of atoms in a lattice. Applying this, Fig. where M is the potential energy at C 1 and C 2 sites, t is the hopping parameter, δ 1 , δ 2 , and δ 3 represent the three nearest neighbor hoppings from C 1 to C 2 , and the three nearest neighbor hoppings from C 2 to C 1 are represented by their opposite vectors. Because of G • δ i 2πn, where G is the reciprocal lattice vector and n is an integer, this gauge is not in Bloch form. Under this gauge, the "environment" around atomic orbitals is well defined, so the symmetry of Berry curvature is protected, as shown in Fig. where On the contrary, the eigenstate of Equation( The result is the periodic part of the Bloch wave function. Equation where We need to pay attention to the gauges used for each TB model. The two gauges will not affect the properties obtained by considering the entire Brillouin zone. But for the local properties of the Brillouin zone, such as Berry phase, Berry curvature, etc., we should choose "atomic gauge". From the above content, we can see that these two gauges have an impact on the eigenstates (i.e. wave functions). The calculation of topological numbers requires wave function information, so we should pay attention to these two gauges. However, for electronic structure calculations, such as energy bands, density of states (DOS), Fermi surfaces, etc., only eigenvalue information is often required. The eigenvalues of these two gauges are exactly the same, so we don't need to distinguish them. In the TB model, in addition to paying attention to gauges, the basis of the Hamiltonian also needs special attention. For models considering spin-orbit coupling (SOC), common bases include "orbital grouping" and "spin grouping". For "orbital grouping", the orbital space is placed at the front and the spin space is placed at the back, with the basis represented as (↑, ↓, ↑, ↓, ...), where ↑, ↓ is the spin index, the orbital index is ignored. For "spin grouping", the spin space is placed at the front and the orbital space is placed at the back, with the basis represented as (↑, ↑, ..., ↓, ↓, ...), where ↑, ↓ is the spin index, the orbital index is ignored. In two-dimensional systems with inversion symmetry breaking, there exists a potential gradient at the surface or interface, and the SOC of electrons leads to band splitting, resulting in a spin-momentum locked spin texture, which is called the Rashba effect where c i (c † i ) is the annihilation (creation) operator at site i, s = (s x , s y , s z ) is the Pauli matrix, and di j is the unit vector between lattice points, so there is After adding Rashba SOC to the TB model, the spin texture can be calculated as follows where Ω i = τ 0 ⊗ s i ("orbital grouping") or Ω i = s i ⊗ τ 0 ("spin grouping"), and i = x, y, z is the x, y, and z components of the Pauli matrix. The τ 0 and s i represent orbital space and spin space, respectively. The Berry phase where n is the band index, A n (k) is the Berry connection, defined as, Analogous to the formula B = ∇ × A in electromagnetics, we can define the Berry curvature The Berry curvature has different forms and can be written as It can also be written using the Kubo formula as where These formulas are for single-band cases. For multi-band cases, there may be crossing or degeneracy of bands, which is non Abelian. At this point, the formulas for calculating Berry phase and Berry curvature are written as follows where is the band index. The calculation formulas for Berry phase and Berry curvature given above involve taking the derivative of the wave function. Due to the non uniqueness of the wave function, which can differ by one phase factor, it poses difficulties in numerical calculations. In summary, if the TB model is simple, you can apply formulas for analytical calculations, but numerical calculations need to be very careful. Integrating the Berry curvature in the first Brillouin zone (BZ) yields the Chern number, also known as the Thouless-Kohmoto-Nightingale-Nijs (TKNN) number If we directly use the definition of Berry curvature to calculate the Chern number, it will also bring great difficulties to numerical calculations. Therefore, we choose the Fukui-Hatsugai-Suzuki method where l represents the BZ grid into l small plaquettes, n(m) labels the band index, and k l,p are momenta on the corners of the lattice. By summing the lattice field strength in momentum space, we can obtain the Chern number, as follows where l ∈ [0, 2π]×[0, 2π]. Note that this formula can calculate the Chern number of multi-band case. The Hall conductance is the total number of occupied states expressed as σ xy = e 2 h i C i , where i represents the band index of the occupied states. When l is large enough, Equation where M p nm = u n (k p )|u m (k p+1 ) , p is on the selected loop. There are several methods for calculating the Z 2 number, including Pfaffian method Here is the main formula for calculating Z 2 number through the U(2N) non-Abelian Berry connection where n(m) = 1, 2, • • • , 2N represents the sum of 2N occupied states, k x,i = 2πi/N x a x are the discrete points in the k x direction, |m, k x,i+1 , k y is the periodic part of the intrinsic Bloch function. Connect and multiply F i,i+1 end-to-end, and define the W(k y ) matrix as The W(k y ) matrix has 2N eigenvalues where |λ n | = 1, the phase φ n (k y ) of the eigenvalues is the center of the Wanier function for the occupied state of the equivalent one-dimensional system. Ref. where M n represents the winding number of φ n (k y ), and Z 2 number can be expressed as Calculating the Z 2 number requires the TB model to have time reversal symmetry. We define the time reversal operator as where U T is a 2N × 2N unitary matrix that satisfies (U T ) tr = -U T , and K represents complex conjugation. Time reversal symmetry means that In the first Brillouin zone of two dimensions, there are 4 time reversal invariant points (8 for three dimensions) that satisfy where G is a reciprocal lattice vector and n i = 0 or 1 Due to the time reversal symmetry, we only need to perform numerical calculations in half of the first Brillouin zone. We always calculate the Z 2 number on a two-dimensional plane, so we only need 4 time reversal invariant points Γ i = (0, 0), (π, 0), (0, π), (π, π). We introduce the unitary matrix where n(m) = 1, 2, • • • , 2N represents the sum of 2N occupied states. At 4 time reversal invariant points Γ i = (0, 0), (π, 0), (0, π), (π, π), w is antisymmetric. An antisymmetric matrix can calculate Pfaffian, which can be calculated using ResourceFunction[" Pfaffian"][m] where Γ y = 0, π. We define Berry flux as Fl , as given by Equation(20) mentioned earlier. By integrating in half of the first Brillouin zone, the total Berry flux is where l ∈ [0, 2π] × [0, π]. From Equation Calculating the Z 2 number using the Shiozaki method requires us to use the "lattice gauge", otherwise the time reversal invariant point is incorrect. Meanwhile, we also need to determine the time reversal operator and occupied states. Once these are determined, the efficiency of using this method is high. In a three-dimensional system, there are 8 time reversal invariant points and 6 time reversal invariant planes, labeled as (x 0 , x π , y 0 , y π , z 0 , z π ). The Z 2 number of these 6 planes satisfies Therefore, only 4 invariants become independent. We define the Z 2 number of the 3D system as Specifically, when v 0 = 1, the system is called a strong topological insulator The main capabilities of the TopoTB software package are electronic structure and topological properties calculation. In addition, it can also provide a schematic diagram of the Brillouin zone. Specifically, for two-dimensional lattices, it can provide the coordinates of the high symmetry point in the first Brillouin zone, which is particularly useful for irregular twodimensional lattices. The high symmetry point coordinates it provides can assist WannierTools To use the TopoTB software package, you must specify the full path to load the software package via Get or Needs. Alternatively, if the TopoTB software package is located in a directory included in $Path, you can directly call it using Get or Needs. For convenience, either of the following two lines of code can quickly open a directory contained in $Path, place the TopoTB software package in it, and call it directly using Get or Needs. Utilize the FindFile function to locate the installation path of the TopoTB software package and verify whether it is installed in the directory specified in $Path. Load the TopoTB software package using either Get or Needs: (*Run any of the following two lines of code*) <<TopoTB' Needs["TopoTB'"] Get help by running the ?+function. For example, if you input ?ChernNumberCalc, you will receive help related to the ChernNumberCalc function, which explains the inputs and outputs of the function. Please refer to Appendix C.4 for details. Using the Hamiltonian of Equation( In summary, in the TopoTB software package, it is essential to provide the Hamiltonian, lattice vectors, and other necessary inputs, and then output significant data, internally defined plots, etc., in the Dataset format. This format allows for the utilization of the data for replotting purposes. In this section, we demonstrate the capabilities of the TopoTB software package through a few examples. For more examples, please refer to the public code repository: https://github.com/xlhuang-phy/TopoTB/tree/main/examples. The Kane-Mele model where ). The first term is the nearest neighbor hopping term, which is equivalent to considering SOC in Equation(3) or Equation , where di and d j are two unit vectors along the two bonds, and an electron hopping from j to i. s z is the Pauli matrix that describes the z-component spin of an electron. The third item is the Rashba SOC term that breaks the inversion symmetry, s is the Pauli matrix with s = (s x , s y , s z ). The fourth term is the staggered sublattice potential, where ξ i = ±1. To be consistent with Ref. 2 ) and 2 ), and write the Hamiltonian as Here, 5 Dirac matrices and their 10 commutators are as follows: where I denotes the 2 × 2 identity matrix, the Pauli matrices σ k and s k represent the sublattice and spin indices. Under the Pauli-Dirac representation, the four-band Hamiltonian is expressed by the Dirac matrices. The coefficient in the Hamiltonian are where x = k x /2 and y = √ 3k y /2. Next, we will investigate the band structure of the Kane-Mele model using the TopoTB software package. The Kane-Mele model is based on a hexagonal honeycomb lattice. Now, we calculate its reciprocal lattice and high symmetry points using the BrillouinZone2D function. Since the direct lattice of the Kane-Mele model is in twodimensional form, we need to transform it into three-dimensional form as input for the BrillouinZone2D function. The relevant code can be found in Appendix A.1. In the code, we choose the plane determined by a 1 and a 2 as the direct lattice vectors of the Kane-Mele model. The output result is shown in Fig. After obtaining the coordinates of the high symmetry points, we can calculate the band structure along the high symmetry path. Define the Hamiltonian of the Kane-Mele model as a function, which is defined in the software package, so it is directly introduced in Appendix A.2. Of course, it can also be manually written out. Then, write down the coordinates of the high symmetry point and the number of points between the two points to calculate directly. The relevant code is shown in Appendix A.2. The output result is shown in Fig. For interactive testing of band structures, the HSPBand function is required. At the same time, the 1st and 2nd rows in the output result of the Manipulate function are required. Fig. When the band gap of the band structure is closed and reopened, a topological phase transition often occurs. For this purpose, we calculated the band gap phase diagram of the Kane-Mele model, as shown in Fig. In addition to analyzing band structures, studying the density (DOS) Here we will continue to discuss the capabilities of the TopoTB software package in electronic structure calculations. Using the Kane-Mele model, we can calculate its three-dimensional band structure, Fermi surface, and spin texture through the HCalc2D function. As a demonstration, Fig. In the TopoTB software package, we implemented the Wilson loop method The Hamiltonian is H, and the time reversal symmetry is verified through Equation Referring to Ref. The Haldane model (a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) is a vector from a site to its nearest neighboring site, and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the Pauli matrix. Next, we will calculate the Chern number of the Haldane model and provide a phase diagram about the Chern number. By defining the Hamiltonian of the Haldane model as a function and inputting the direct lattice vector and occupied states, we will obtain an output similar to Fig. The TopoTB software package can not only calculate the TB model, but also the k • p model. For the k • p model, there is no concept of Brillouin zone. We can obtain the reciprocal lattice vector by setting the direct lattice vector, and thus calculate the electronic structure of the k • p model in the momentum space. As an example, we consider a simple k • p model where m is the mass of the electron, and α is the coupling strength of Rashba SOC. Taking m = 1 and α = 0.8, we calculate their three-dimensional band structure and spin texture, corresponding to Fig. Now, we demonstrate the post-processing capabilities in the TopoTB package. LaH 2 monolayer is an ideal ferrovalley direct semiconductor with room-temperature ferromagnetic stability Secondly, we use the TopoTB software package to process the calculated results. Import POSCAR, KPOINTS, and PROCAR files, input Fermi energy levels, and calculate them using the VASPPBand function. After the calculation is completed, a .dat file will be output, and functions existing in the TopoTB software package can also be used to plot. In Fig. The TopoTB software package can perform interactive operations on the band structure of the TB model, where the band structure calculated by VASP serves as the background. For example, Fig. where h = te -i(1.23211k x -2.13409k y ) + te i(1.23211k x +2.13409k y ) + t. Through interactive operations, we can take values of M = 0 and t = -2.62. In addition to processing VASP band data, the TopoTB software package interfaces with Wannier90 dat file, and subsequently utilized TopoTB to compute its Z 2 number, indicating its classification as a strong topological insulator. For further details, please refer to https://github.com/xlhuang-phy/TopoTB/tree/main/examples. The TopoTB software package is a user-friendly software with simple input and convenient output and visualization of data. This software is mainly used to calculate the electronic structure and topological properties of the TB model. In addition, it also interfaces with other software such as VASP, Wannier90, WannierTools, etc. Through some examples, we have demonstrated the main capabilities of software and will continuously improve and expand other capabilities. We hope that this software can become an efficient tool for studying the TB model.