The study investigates the effects of chlorine and zinc co-doping on the electronic structure and optical properties of γ-CuI. • Co-doping significantly modifies the band structure and improves the optical absorption properties of γ-CuI. • Co-doped γ-CuI has potential applications in optoelectronic devices and solar cells. Cuprous iodide (CuI) is widely used in different applications such as life science reagents industry due to its antifungal and bactericidal properties, food & feed additive industries to improve animal growth and health, pharmaceuticals, photography, and pigments. It is also commonly used as an ionic conductive material in solid-state batteries, high-performance solar cells, and thermoelectric devices. CuI can also be used as a scintillator material, which has the following advantages Since 1907, when Bädeker iodized metallic copper by iodizing it in iodine vapor, and reported the transparent semiconductor properties of γ-CuI firstly The doping process involves intentionally introducing impurities into a material to alter its electrical conductivity, carrier concentration, and other properties Computer simulation methods play a very important role in scientific research and can provide important theoretical support and experimental guidance for many fields such as materials science, physics, and chemistry. With the development of computing power, the first-principles calculation method has been widely applied in scientific research, especially in the research of novel scintillator materials. Using a first-principles approach, several elements have been found that can be used as activators in scintillators by doping In this work, we choose Cl and Zn elements as the doping elements. Based on our previous researches All the calculations in this paper were carried out with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code In order to study the effects of Cl and Zn doping and co-doping on the electronic structure and optical properties of γ-CuI, we build a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell structure as shown in Figure Then, we also simulated the γ-CuI lattice constants before and after doping, and the results are shown in Figure We calculated the intrinsic γ-CuI energy band structure and the density of states, as shown in Figure In order to investigate the electronic structure properties of doping for γ-CuI, we analyze and discuss the energy band structure as well as the electronic density of states. Figure Figure Next, we discuss the case of Cl and Zn co-doping, Figure In conclusion, we can know that the doping of Cl and Zn elements will reduce the peak density of states and is inversely proportional to the doping concentration; the doping of Zn elements will cause the density of states to move in the direction of energy reduction, but is not related to the doping concentration; the doping of Cl and Zn elements will cause the density of states to produce new peaks, but at different locations, which is in agreement with the conclusion that new energy levels appear in the energy band diagram, and the peak size is proportional to the doping concentration. When Cl and Zn are co-doped, the doping of Cl element will depress the red-shift produced by the doping of Zn element. When CCl>CZn, the doping of Zn element only plays the role of making the density of states red-shift; when C Cl < C Zn , the doping of Zn element enhances the reduction of the peak density of states by Cl element. (C X is the concentration of doping element X.) After discussing the energy band diagram and density of states diagram before and after doping, then we will discuss the optical properties before and after doping. The relatively high luminosity, small light absorption coefficient and reflection coefficient are important parameters to evaluate whether it can be a good scintillation detector material or not. So in this paper, we have calculated the dielectric function, absorption coefficient and reflection coefficient before and after doping. The optical response function can be expressed as a complex dielectric function in the linear response range, and the equation is expressed as follows: where ε 1 (w)is the real part of the dielectric function and ε 2 (w) is the imaginary part of the dielectric function. The real part of the dielectric function can be obtained from the Kramers-Kronig dispersion relation and the definition of the direct jump probability: Dielectric function imaginary part: Absorption coefficient: Where, C denotes conduction band, V denotes valence band; e is the charge of the electron, m is the electron mass, BZ denotes in the first Brillouin zone, K is the inverse lattice vector, and is the momentum leap matrix element, ω is the angular frequency, and C 1 and C 2 are constants. E K C is the conduction band intrinsic energy level, E K V is the valence band intrinsic energy level. Therefore, the absorption coefficient is strongly related to the dielectric function. Based on this, we have calculated the optical parameters before and after doping by first principles calculation, and next, we discuss and analyze the optical property parameters. Firstly, we perform data processing of the calculated results by vaspkit to obtain the imaginary and real parts of the dielectric function, where the real part of the dielectric function reflects the material's polarization ability The static permittivity before and after doping is shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure In conclusion, after Cl element doping, the imaginary part of the dielectric function is larger than the intrinsic γ-CuI in the high energy region (>4.8 eV) and smaller than the intrinsic γ-CuI in the visible range, Zn element doping at energies greater than 2.8 eV, where the imaginary part of the dielectric function is smaller than the intrinsic γ-CuI and inversely proportional to the doping concentration, while in the visible range makes the imaginary part of the dielectric function larger than the intrinsic γ-CuI. When Cl and Zn elements are co-doped, the imaginary part of the dielectric function in the visible range is larger than the intrinsic γ-CuI when the Zn concentration is larger than the Cl concentration. When the Zn concentration is smaller than or equal to the Cl concentration, the imaginary part of the dielectric function in the visible range is smaller than the intrinsic γ-CuI. Overall, when Cl elements are doped and CI and Zn elements are co-doped (the proportion of Zn elements doped is smaller than the proportion of Cl elements), the dielectric function is reduced, which can reduce the absorption in the visible range and improve the probability of being detected, thus improving the detection performance of γ-CuI. Next, we discuss the light absorption coefficients before and after doping to understand more intuitively the effect of elemental doping on optical properties. We can analyze the optical properties of the crystal before and after doping more intuitively from the optical absorption coefficient. Based on the dielectric function, the light absorption coefficient of a γ-CuI scintillator can be calculated by the following equation. where α(ω) is the light absorption coefficient, ε 1 (ω) is the real part of the dielectric function, and ε 2 (ω) is the imaginary part of the dielectric function. It can be seen that the absorption coefficient is positively correlated with the imaginary part of the dielectric function, and the larger imaginary part of the dielectric function, the stronger the light absorption capacity. The above conclusion is consistent with the conclusion drawn from the imaginary part of the dielectric function. A smaller reflection coefficient allows more photons to be detected by absorption, improving the detection efficiency of γ-CuI scintillators. Figure We have calculated the effects of elemental Cl, Zn doping and co-doping on the electronic structure and optical properties of γ-CuI using first-principles calculations. W find that the doping of Cl elements decreases the band gap <Chao Li, Meicong Li, Zhuli Zhang, Qiang Zhao, Naixin Liu, Kailei Wang, Fan Zhang, Xiaoping Ouyang>: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Figure 2: Effect of elemental doping on the lattice constant of γ-CuI. <Chao Li, Meicong Li, Zhuli Zhang, Qiang Zhao, Naixin Liu, Kailei Wang, Fan Zhang, Xiaoping Ouyang>: Preprint submitted to Elsevier <Chao Li, Meicong Li, Zhuli Zhang, Qiang Zhao, Naixin Liu, Kailei Wang, Fan Zhang, Xiaoping Ouyang>: Preprint submitted to Elsevier