The stacking degree of freedom is a crucial factor in tuning material properties and has been extensively investigated in layered materials. The kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5 was recently discovered to exhibit a three-dimensional CDW phase below TCDW ∼ 94 K. Despite the thorough investigation of in-plane modulation, the out-of-plane modulation has remained ambiguous. Here, our polarization-and temperature-dependent Raman measurements reveal the breaking of C6 rotational symmetry and the presence of three distinct domains oriented at approximately 120 degrees to each other. The observations demonstrate that the CDW phase can be naturally explained as a 2c staggered order phase with adjacent layers exhibiting a relative π phase shift. Further, we discover a first-order structural phase transition at approximately 65 K and suggest that it is a stacking order-disorder phase transition due to stacking fault, supported by the thermal hysteresis behavior of a Cs-related phonon mode. Our findings highlight the significance of the stacking degree of freedom in CsV3Sb5 and offer structural insights to comprehend the entanglement between superconductivity and CDW. Exploring the emergent physics from simple lattice models plays a vital role in modern condensed matter physics Recently, layered kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have aroused tremendous research interest, owing to possible unconventional superconductivity, exotic CDW ordering and nematicity More importantly, recent progress has shown that the stacking configuration plays an important role in both the CDW transition and the superconducting transition. For example, it was reported that the CDW transition at 94 K is of order-disorder type In this Letter, we performed polarization-and temperature-dependent Raman scattering measurements on CsV 3 Sb 5 to explore the stacking configuration in its CDW phase. The splitting of the E 2g phonon and the anisotropic polarization-dependent behavior of phonon modes confirm the breaking of C 6 rotational symmetry. Additionally, three distinct domains that are oriented at ∼120 • to each other can clearly be observed. We propose that a π phase shift between neighboring layers can explain both the C 6 rotational symmetry breaking and the three distinct domains. Further, we discover a first-order structural phase transition at approximately 65 K and propose that it is a stacking order-disorder phase transition due to stacking fault, as evidenced by the thermal hysteresis behavior of a Cs-related phonon mode. The CsV 3 Sb 5 single crystal used in this study was grown via the self-flux method The layered kagome metal CsV 3 Sb 5 crystallizes into the P6/mmm (D 1 6h ) space group with alternating layers of V 3 Sb 5 and Cs (Fig. For Raman measurements, a direct way to confirm the breaking of C 6 rotational symmetry is to examine the splitting of the E 2g mode in the CDW phase. For this, polarized Raman scattering measurements are performed with a 785 nm laser (Fig. Another way to confirm the breaking of C 6 rotational symmetry is through polarization angle dependent measurements. We employ the collinear polarization configuration, in which the polarizations of the incident and scattered light remain parallel (ê i ∥ ês ) while rotating the sample around the c-axis. For the D 6h point group, the Raman intensities of the A 1g and E 2g modes should exhibit no angle dependence with I A1g ∝ a 2 and I E2g ∝ f 2 . However, for the D 2h point group, the Raman tensors of the A g and B 1g modes have the following forms, In this case, the Raman intensity of the A g and B 1g mode has twofold symmetry and fourfold symmetry, respectively, with, The polarization angle dependent spectra are shown in Fig. Below, we show that three distinct domains that are oriented at approximately 120 • to each other can clearly be seen (Fig. To understand the breaking of C 6 rotational symmetry and the special angle of 120 • between domains, we demonstrate that the CDW phase is a 2c staggered order phase with neighboring layers having a relative π phase shift (Fig. The above results suggest that the CDW phase is a 2c staggered order phase at low temperatures. Now the question is how the stacking configuration evolves with temperatures. Given that the Cs-triangular layer lies between the V 3 Sb 5 layers, the vibration of Cs ions should be sensitive to the changing of stacking configurations. Thus, to explore the temperature evolution of the stacking configurations, we turn to focus on the temperature dependence of the Cs-related modes. Previous Raman experiments The emergence of a new Cs-related mode indicates a structural phase transition at approximately 65 K, which can be attributed to either an in-plane or an out-ofplane modulations. Having in mind that neither the Cstriangular layers nor the V 3 Sb 5 layers exhibit further inplane deformation in this temperature range To verify the proposal, one can examine the thermal hysteresis behavior of this transition since such an orderdisorder phase transition should depend on the history of the stacking configurations. In Fig. The first-order structural transition observed here should be related to the anomalies reported by other measurements In summary, through systematic polarization-and temperature-dependent Raman measurements, we reveal that the stacking degree of freedom plays a crucial role in determining the properties of CsV 3 Sb 5 . The splitting of the E 2g mode and the anisotropic phonon behavior undoubtedly comfirm the breaking of the C 6 rotational symmetry. We further observe three distinct domains with their principle axis rotated by ∼120 • to each other. The observations enable us to determine that the CDW phase is a 2c staggered order phase with neighboring layers having a relative π phase shift. We further discover a first-order structural phase transition at around 65 K, which can be attributed to a stacking order-disorder phase transition evidenced by the thermal hysteresis behavior of a Cs-related phonon mode. The above results highlight the importance of the stacking degree of freedom in CsV 3 Sb 5 , which add strong constraints on the interpretation of other macroscopic measurements since different stacking configurations or domains may coexist in a single crystal. Moreover, the stacking fault found here offers structural insights to comprehend the pressure/doping induced double superconducting domes and charge instability.