Symbolic-inference methods have recently found a broad application in materials science. In particular, the Sure-Independence Screening and Sparsifying Operator (SISSO) performs symbolic regression and classification by adopting compressed sensing for the selection of an optimized subset of features and mathematical operators out of a given set of candidates. However, SISSO becomes computationally unpractical when the set of candidate features and operators exceeds the size of few tens. In the present work, we combine SISSO with a genetic algorithm (GA) for the global search of the optimal subset of features and operators. We demonstrate that GA-SISSO efficiently finds more accurate predictive models than the original SISSO, due to the possibility to access a larger input feature and operator space. GA-SISSO was applied for the search of the model for the prediction of carbon-dioxide adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides. The obtained with GA-SISSO model has much higher accuracy compared to models previously discussed in the literature (based solely on the O 2p-band center). The analysis of features importance shows that, besides the O 2p-band center, the contribution of the electrostatic potential above adsorption sites and the surface formation energies are also important. Symbolic inference (therein including regression and classification tasks) is a class of statistical-learning methods in which explanatory models for a given data set are learned as algebraic or Boolean expressions containing data features, mathematical or logical operators, functions, and coefficients Recently, some of us developed a method which combines symbolic inference with compressed sensing -the Sure-Independence Screening and Sparsifying Operator The search for the optimal parameters D and Ω is usually done on a grid. For selection of features several schemes have been proposed. Among them variable importance measure of random forests Also recently another way for tackling the problem of a combinational growth of the number of generated features was proposed. Foppa et.al. developed a hierarchical symbolic regression approach -hiSISSO In this work, we present a method for selection of primary features and mathematical operators based on genetic algorithm (GA), and its particular application for SISSO. Genetic algorithm is a natural way of the search for optimal strings of biological genes in nature. It has found broad application in materials science as a tool for global minimum/maximum search for atomic systems Sequential generation of new strings follow at some point finding of the one with the best possible performance. In our method, dubbed GA-SISSO, the genes are primary features and mathematical operators. Each set of features and operators forms a string with certain SISSO cross-validation root-mean-square error (CV-RMSE). GA algorithm explores the space of features and operators searching for a string with lowest CV-RMSE. In our implementation, we generally follow the scheme previously proposed by Bhattacharya et.al. As novel application, we apply GA-SISSO to the prediction of carbon-dioxide adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides. Carbon dioxide is nowadays considered as a gas playing the main role in "green-house" effect. It is released first of all by the chemical industry and during energy production (for example coil burning, etc.). The decrease of its concentration in the air or at least reduction of its emissions is a central societal issue today. One of such ways is its conversion to fuels or other useful organic chemicals. For this reason different chemical reactions of CO 2 reduction are intensively studied by many researchers around the world. The adsorption energies of CO 2 play in such processes a central role because of Sabatier principle which states that carbon dioxide should not be bonded too strongly in order the surface of a catalyst was not poisoned, and it should not be bonded too weakly because otherwise the CO 2 molecules would easily desorb without undergoing chemical transformations. The influence of bonding energies of carbon dioxide on reaction performance was found to play a major role also in reactions of methane oxidation where carbon dioxide is actually an unwanted byproduct The choice of features has significant influence on prediction ability of the SISSO model. In material science for predictions of quantitative or categorical properties the features are often the atomic properties, properties of bulk materials, their surfaces etc. Dependent on a sampling the number of features can range from several ones to hundreds or even thousands. Although the SISSO algorithm does selection of primary and generated features during the SIS and following SO steps, this choice reflects only the training accuracy, and is not responsible for prediction ability of a corresponding model. The choice of mathematical operators is also important since some operators can follow failures in prediction. For example square root or division do not make sense if features or their combinations are negative or equal to zero. Similar to other hyperparameters selected sets of features and operators have to satisfy the bias-variance trade-off -compromise between under-and overfitting. In the Data Science this compromise is often searched through the cross-validation procedure (CV) with respect to hyperparameters. There are several CV schemes. Quite popular is the k-fold CV. Here a data set with N data points is split k times into two subsets of the size N/k and N(k-1)/k, so that there is no overlap between subsets. Next, the models obtained for bigger size subsets are tested on smaller sets providing the overall CV-RMSE. For small size data sets, often the leave-one-out CV is used, in which N-size sampling is split N times, and for each left sample the model obtained for the rest N-1 sampling is tested. These methods have been implemented in our algorithm, and we used leave-one-out CV for the data sets of size of tens samples and k-fold CV for hundreds of samples. For data sets with thousands data points one can test prediction ability splitting the data into a bigger training and a smaller validation subsets. However, in this work we did not use this way since our data sets do not exceed the size of five hundreds data points. GA-SISSO is performed for fixed D and Ω, and includes several steps: (0) Generation of an initial pool of strings with randomly chosen features and operators and the calculation of corresponding CV-RMSE. The size of this pool is at least equal the overall number of primary features implying that probability of each feature to appear in any string within this pool is close to one. Before the actual calculation of CV-RMSE values we adopt a preselection step: single standard SISSO job is done for a given string, and next CV-RMSE is calculated for a truncated set of features and operators -only for ones which are selected by single SISSO, i.e. appear in obtained model. Also after this single SISSO the parameter M (the number of most correlated complex features to the target property or to the residuals) is reduced to the highest ranking number of any complex feature in the model of single SISSO job. This results in significant reduction of the space of complex features ¿ D i M i at SO step of SISSO during CV runs. This preselection procedure of features and operators and reduction of M provide significant reduction of computational time needed for running k jobs in the case of k-fold CV or N jobs for N-size sampling in the case of leave-one-out CV. (1) Selection of two strings according to their fitness function with certain probability of fitness-function inversion inv (see below). (2) Random selection of a half of features and a half of operators from each string selected on the previous step, followed by the combination of these two subsets into a new string (so called crossover). ( (4) We check if the new string is already in the pool of previously considered strings. If not the case, the CV is run for it in the same way as for randomly generated strings at the step 0 including single SISSO job in the beginning. Next, the pool of all considered strings is extended, and the fitness functions are updated. Table here N all is the size of the pool with all strings, and rank i -position of ith string in the list of strings Selection of parent strings is done as follows: a random string is picked from the pool, and if its fitness-function is higher than a random number uniformly selected in the range [0, 1], it is selected for the next steps. Otherwise the procedure is repeated. We also adapted here the inversion of the fitness function as defined in Ref. with a certain probability inv. This guarantees selection of "bad" strings that prevents getting stuck in a local minimum. Fitness-function (1) depends on the pool of strings. So, after adding a new string into the pool, the fitness-function is updated for each of them. For crossover features and operators are randomly chosen. Their number composes 50% of each parent string if the overall numbers are even. In the case if parent strings contain odd numbers of features (l), then from a string with higher value of fitness-function (l+1)/2 features are chosen, and (l-1)/2 otherwise. The same was implemented for operators. The performance of our algorithm was tested for a set of bulk ternary perovskites ABO 3 with lattice constant as the target property Alternatively one can stop GA at the point when desired RMSE is achieved. By setting inversion and all mutation probabilities in GA to zero, not a single string corresponding to the baseline is found (Figure These settings allow to obtain the strings with CV-RMSE close to or even outperforming the baseline. Regarding inversion probability inv, in the study of Bhattacharya Here, we fixed the probability of removal of selected features to 0.1, and the same value for inversion of fitness-function was fixed. The other probabilities were changed according to the observation described above. Besides outperforming the baseline, we have taken into account in how many iterations the minimum can be found. As one can see in Figure The described above tests were done for a relatively small set of primary features Finally we have performed the GA search for SISSO models of a lattice parameter in ABO 3 perovskite materials for all 504 materials for different complexities as in the study of Foppa et.al. We conclude that GA provides SISSO models with consistently improved prediction accuracy compared to simple SISSO. We now present the results of GA-SISSO search for predictive models of carbon dioxide adsorption energies. In several studies, the center of O 2p-band (PC) was considered as a descriptor for adsorption energies on oxide surfaces To obtain the GA-SISSO models of CO 2 adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides, we have used the same training set as in our recent study The range of adsorption energies is quite wide: from very weakly bound molecules with -0.1 eV, to strongly bound CO 2 (-3.6 eV). The set of primary features included properties of gas-phase atoms (ionization potentials, electron affinities, etc.), surfaces (formation energies, work functions, band gap, conduction band minimum and surface O-atoms above which CO 2 molecules are activated and surface cations (geometric properties, projected density of states moments, etc.) -overall 46 features To define optimal dimensionality and complexity {D, Ω} we performed a grid search in the range from 4 to 7 for dimensionalities and 4 to 8 for complexities. Two subsets of primary features have been selected for these jobs. The first one contained sixteen randomly selected features, and the second one composed of sixteen most correlated features to CO 2 adsorption energy. For all these sets we performed 10-fold cross-validation jobs with all mathematical operators (Table with α max -polarizability of surface cations, maximal among all surface cations species, α Opolarizability of surface O-atom above which CO 2 is adsorbed, Δ -band gap, CBm -conduction band minimum, U -highest energy of 2p-band of O-atom, φ l -electrostatic potential above O-atom at the distance l = 1.4 or 2.6 Å, Δφ -difference of electrostatic potentials at 1.4 and 2.6 Å above O atom, and E 1 equal to: here r max LUMO is radius of LUMO of a gas-phase cationic atom, maximal among all cationic species, Model (2) contains five terms. Among them, the one which explains the most of the variance of the adsorption energy is the last one: ||φ For assessment of the importance of other features in description of CO 2 adsorption energies, we performed the analysis of all SISSO strings in the whole GA pool that where generated during the run. In this analysis, for each primary feature k we calculated the so called significance (weighted frequency of appearance of a given feature or operator in the models along the GA): here 1{} is the indicator function which is 1 for True and 0 otherwise. As expected, the most important feature is E 1 (Figure Since E 1 was obtained also on top of the same set of primary features as the model ( The prediction accuracy of the SISSO model about 0.3 eV is obviously larger than the accuracy of the used DFT approach for generation of the training set (~0.1 eV), and it is larger than one would need for example for predictions of catalytic materials in methane oxidation (0.2 eV) Also for some particular tasks active learning can be applied In this work we have developed a method for selection of primary features and mathematical operators in symbolic regression SISSO. The choice of an optimal set is important for avoiding the underfitting and overfitting of the obtained model. This features-selection method is genetic algorithm, and it deals with strings consisting of subsets of features and operators. We tested it for the set of perovskite materials with lattice vector as the target property Next we have applied our GA algorithm for the search of the SISSO model for prediction of CO 2 adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides 