We report on a new technique for measuring the dynamic Young's modulus, E, of quantum materials at low temperatures as a function of static tuning strain, ε, in piezoactuator-driven pressure cells. In addition to a static tuning of stress and strain, we apply a small-amplitude, finite-frequency a.c. (1 Hz < ∼ ω < ∼ 1000 Hz) uniaxial stress, σ ac , to the sample and measure the resulting a.c. strain, ε ac , using a capacitive sensor to obtain the associated modulus E. We demonstrate the performance of the new technique through proof-of-principle experiments on the unconventional superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 , which is known for its rich temperature-strain phase diagram. In particular, we show that the magnitude of E, measured using this a.c. technique at low frequencies, exhibits a pronounced nonlinear elasticity, which is in very good agreement with previous Young's modulus measurements on Sr 2 RuO 4 under [1 0 0] strain using a d.c. method (Noad et al., Science 382, 447-450 (2023)). By combining the new a.c. Young's modulus measurements with a.c. elastocaloric measurements in a single measurement, we demonstrate that these a.c. techniques are powerful in detecting small anomalies in the elastic properties of quantum materials. Finally, using the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 as an example, we demonstrate how the imaginary component of the modulus can provide additional information about the nature of ordered phases. Recent years have witnessed a surge in the study of elastic properties of quantum materials, driven by the discovery of novel collective electronic phases that exhibit a strong coupling to the underlying crystal lattice. A prominent example is the observation of nematicity in a number of unconventional superconductors Similarly, the strong coupling of electronic and lattice degrees of freedom makes such electronic systems particularly susceptible to tuning by physical pressure. Driven by novel developments of pressure-cell technology for tuning quantum materials by hydrostatic and uniaxial pressure As a result, the combination of the two -the ability to measure elastic properties while tuning the physical pressure -has proven to be a powerful addition to the toolbox for studying quantum materials. Recently, measurements of the lattice elasticity as a function of pressure a) caitlin.oneil@cpfs.mpg.de b) elena.gati@cpfs.mpg.de have led to important insights into the fundamental question of the role of the lattice in electronic matter The conclusions above were obtained from measurements of stress-strain relationships under continuouslytuned pressure E remains unchanged with ε in linear elastic systems, i.e., in systems that obey Hooke's law of elasticity. In contrast, the hallmark of non-linear elastic systems is that E varies with strain The new setup described in this paper combines the concepts of DMA measurements with the ability to precisely apply static tuning uniaxial pressures in piezoactuator-driven uniaxial pressure cells A. The uniaxial pressure cell and determination of the static Young's modulus We use a uniaxial pressure cell, which is shown schematically in Fig. The cell uses piezoelectric actuators to apply the force to the sample. In the piezocartridge, three piezoelectric actuators are combined to either apply compressive In this cell, a set of piezoelectric actuators (green) generate a displacement across a gap between moving block A (highlighted in red) and moving block B (highlighted in blue). The sample carrier, on which the sample is mounted, connects A and B so that the displacement is transmitted to the sample. The displacement of the gap is measured by a capacitive sensor mounted under a shield. In addition, the cell houses a capacitive force sensor, which is used for d.c. stress-strain measurements. The cell's spring constant is determined by that of the moving blocks (kA and kB) as well that of the actuators (kP,tot). or tensile forces to the sample, depending on the sign of the applied voltage. In the present design, the two outer actuators apply compression to the sample upon application of a positive voltage, whereas the inner one applies tension (see Fig. The cell contains a second capacitive sensor that acts as a force sensor. The moving block B is connected to the frame of the cell by flexures having a larger longitudinal spring constant compared to the flexures of the moving block A (see Appendix V for details). The capacitor measures the displacement of these flexures, which can then be converted into the applied force using the known spring constant of these flexures. The d.c. capacitances of the displacement and force sensors can be measured separately using high-precision capacitance bridges, such as the model AH2550A from the company Andeen-Hagerling. As described in detail in Ref. 13, these measurements, together with a precise knowledge of the sample dimensions, can be used to calculate the applied stress, σ, and the resulting strain, ε, along the direction of the applied force. Taking the derivative of σ with respect to ε in the post-processing analysis then yields the Young's modulus, E(ε), see Eq. 1. Since these measurements are based on static measurements of σ and ε, we will refer to them throughout the text as static Young's modulus measurements or, in short, the d.c. method. The working principle of our new a.c. technique is based on the fact that piezoelectric actuators themselves can be used to measure the spring constant of the spring on which they exert force, called the 'load spring'. This capability is rooted in their characteristic working curve In Fig. This simplified picture describes the working characteristic of a cell at a fixed piezoactuator voltage for different values of k meas . In our experiment, we want to measure the changes of k meas of a single sample with changing stress and strain, which is achieved by varying the static voltage on the piezoelectric actuator. Specifically, we are interested in obtaining the dynamic Simplified schematic diagram of the uniaxial pressure cell and its working principle. The cell with spring constant k cell applies varying forces to the 'load' spring kmeas, whose magnitude is to be determined in the experiment (see text for details). The displacement of the load spring, ∆d, can be measured by a capacitive displacement sensor and its magnitude is identical to the displacement created by the cell; (b) Working curve of applied force, F , vs. generated displacement, ∆d dc , of the piezoactuator-driven uniaxial pressure cell at a constant supply voltage on the piezoelectric actuators, V dc . The working curve is determined by the parameters k cell , the maximum displacement at this V dc without a load, ∆d dc,0 , and the maximum generated force, F0, in case of an infinite load. It is shown by the brown line following the form F = F0 -k cell ∆d dc . The magnitude of the load spring constant, kmeas, determines the force/displacement provided by the cell at this particular voltage, as seen from the working curve. This is illustrated by showing two linear stress-strain relations, corresponding to two different values of kmeas. The intersection of these stress-strain relationships with the working curve determine the applied force and created displacement. The larger kmeas is, the smaller (larger) the created displacement (applied force) will be; (c) Working curve of the piezoactuator-driven uniaxial pressure cell when an a.c. voltage, Vac, is applied in addition to the d.c. voltage, V dc . The working range is now delineated by the two working curves at V dc ± Vac. The alternating Vac causes an alternating displacement, ∆dac,0, created at zero force. The alternating displacement, ∆dac, induced by Vac at finite load spring constant, kmeas, is related to the magnitude of kmeas, see text for details. moduli from an a.c. experiment. To this end, we apply a small a.c. voltage to the piezoelectric actuators, which creates oscillating stresses and strains. Whereas the a.c. component serves to probe the Young's modulus, we use the d.c. voltages on the piezoelectric actuators to tune a given material. The extended working curve illustrating the situation in our experiment is shown in Fig. The working range of the cell in the presence of an a.c. voltage, V ac , is now delineated by two parallel lines, corresponding to the working curves at V dc ± V ac (see brown area). In analogy to the previous discussion, the a.c. displacement is given by ∆d ac,0 , when k meas = 0, and will be zero, when k meas → ∞. It follows that ∆d ac is directly related to k meas for constant amplitude of V ac . Specifically, the larger k meas , the smaller ∆d ac will be. Since the a.c. voltage is used to measure k meas , the d.c. voltage can be used independently to tune the elastic properties of the material under investigation. C. Electronic setup for determining the dynamic Young's modulus using the new a.c. method Thus, to directly measure k meas , our technique relies on the accurate determination of ∆d ac , which is a mechanical modulation induced by a finite piezoactuator voltage V ac , through a capacitive measurement. To this end, we have designed a home-built capacitance bridge, which al-lows ∆d ac to be measured simultaneously with ∆d dc from a single displacement capacitor. The ability to measure both is important to determine the probing strain (related to ∆d ac ) separately from the tuning strain (related to ∆d dc ). The detailed working principle of the bridge is shown in Fig. In a first approximation, if ∆d ac ≪ d dc , these capacitances are related to the displacements by To extract C ac and C dc from C displ , we use a circuit consisting of a voltage source operating at a second frequency, ω c , and two lock-in amplifiers from Stanford Research Systems: specifically, a SR830 model and a SR860 model (see Fig. The main task of the two lock-in setup is to perform an electrical demodulation of the signal which can be directly converted to C ac . The signal-tonoise ratio of V SR860 will be larger, the greater the difference between ω p and ω c . Using the known calibration of the displacement sensor, i.e., the functional form of C displ vs. d, ∆d ac and ∆d dc can now be calculated from the measured voltages V SR830 and V SR860 . In Fig. As an aside, we would like to remark that the precise determination of ∆d ac and hence ε ac , which we demonstrate here, is also crucial for quantitative measurements of the elastocaloric effect We now discuss how to convert the measured ∆d ac (∆d dc ) into absolute values of the Young's modulus E(ε). This requires two main steps: (i) converting ∆d ac to the measured spring constant, k meas , and (ii) extracting the sample's spring constant from k meas . This second step is necessary because k meas contains contributions from, e.g., the mounting glue and the sample carrier, in addition to the contribution of the sample. This part of the analysis is also required when analyzing the data from the d.c. method and is described in detail in the Supplementary Information of Ref. 13. For the first step, we refer back to the working curve of the cell, which has been introduced in Sec. II C and is shown in Fig. Thus, k meas can be calculated for all values of ∆d ac , when ∆d ac,0 is measured, e.g. when the sample is broken after an experiment. Alternatively, any reference point with finite k meas can be chosen, as long as the value of k meas at a particular strain is well known. The key parameter for converting ∆d ac to k meas is the value of the cell spring constant, k cell , which cannot be determined during the experiment itself. In general, it can be determined from calibration experiments and from simulations, as shown in Ref. 15 for a cell of similar design. Following the same procedure, we determined the cell spring constant of the present cell to be k cell = (3.4 ± 0.5) N/μm (see Sec. V for details). Since titanium, the material of the cell, becomes stiffer upon cooling and calibration experiments were performed at room temperature, we applied a correction factor of 15% to k cell , when analyzing low-temperature data The second step in obtaining E(ε) from the a.c. data is to extract the spring constant of the sample from k meas . Following the protocol established in Ref. 13, the samples are cut into a narrow neck with wide anchor tabs using a Xe Plasma Focused Ion Beam (see Fig. which we label as k neck and k anch . We also include the spring constant of the mounting glue in k anch . In the two-spring approximation, k anch can be calculated from the total measured signal k meas around a reference strain and an independently measured value of E at that reference strain In addition, the sample carrier has flexures with spring constants k car , which are in series with k neck and k anch , as shown schematically in Fig. The spring constant of the carrier, k car ≈ 0.02 N/μm, is per design much smaller than typical values of k meas and can also be calibrated experimentally. Finally, the Young's modulus is obtained from exact knowledge of the length of the necked region, l neck , and the cross-sectional area of the sample, A cs , via E = k neck l neck /A cs . The strain in the neck, ε xx , follows from the measured d dc values via (k meas /k neck ) × (∆d dc /l neck ). The sample of Sr 2 RuO 4 used for our proof-of-principle measurements shown in Fig. In the following, we specify the working range of the a.c. Young's modulus setup, including accessible frequency, amplitude and temperature range. The frequency range of operation is determined by the choice of piezoelectric actuators and the mechanical resonances of the cell. The multi-layer ceramic actuators 32 typically used in the pressure cells operate well in the low-frequency range 1 Hz < ∼ f p = ω p /(2π) < ∼ 1 kHz. Future technical developments might be able to extend the frequency range significantly, e.g., by choosing different type of actuators. The second relevant frequency is that of the capacitance bridge, f c . All measurements in this manuscript were taken with f c = ω c /(2π) = 2.297 kHz, which is of the same magnitude as the frequency of 1 kHz used in the Andeen-Hagerling AH2550A capacitance bridges, employed in the earlier d.c. work. In terms of the amplitude, the maximum voltage that can be applied to the actuators is temperature dependent. At lowest temperatures, the voltage range can typically be extended The piezoacutator-driven uniaxial pressure cells are designed to operate down to very low temperatures, even down to dilution-fridge temperatures. Typically, the lowest-accessible temperature is limited by the cooling power of the fridge and by the heating created by the piezoelectric actuators. In the a.c. setup, heating of the actuators becomes a serious problem at higher frequencies and/or higher a.c. voltage amplitudes. Thus, in practical terms, the lowest accessible temperature may be a trade-off with the frequency/amplitude range of interest. The a.c. Young's modulus measurements can also be performed in a finite magnetic field, which then allows the simultaneous study of the effect of different tuning parameters on the elastic properties of quantum materials. To demonstrate the functionality of our new a.c. Young's modulus setup, we performed proof-of-principle experiments on the ruthenate Sr 2 RuO 4 , whose Young's modulus under finite strain has recently been documented with high precision by d.c. stress-strain measurements The unconventional superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 has been extensively studied in uniaxial pressure experiments In the following, we first discuss the results of the magnitude of the dynamic Young's modulus of Sr 2 RuO 4 . For low-enough frequencies, it may be expected that the magnitude of the a.c. Young's modulus agrees with the one inferred from d.c. measurements. Afterwards, we discuss our measurements of the phase shift in the dynamic signal as we tune the material into its magnetically ordered regime. A. Results: Magnitude of the dynamic Young's modulus of Sr 2 RuO 4 , determined from the a.c. technique In Fig. Importantly, the data show a set of anomalies associated with the rich phase diagram of Sr 2 RuO 4 under [1 0 0] stress. The pronounced softening of E at the electronic Lifshitz transition at around -0.45% strain is clearly resolved. Upon further increasing compression, a second, albeit smaller, anomaly can be discerned in the E(ε xx ) data around ε xx ≈ -0.64%. Although the anomaly is visible in both d.c. and a.c. data sets, it is slightly more evident in the a.c. data. That this small drop in E(ε xx ) does indeed correspond to a thermodynamic phase transition, becomes clear when comparing to the results of elastocaloric measurements, which were performed simultaneously to the E(ε xx ) measurements. The elastocaloric temperature amplitude, ∆T , manifests an anomaly at the same strain as where the small drop in E occurs. In the previous work by Li et al., this feature was associated with the transition into the magnetically ordered phase The a.c. Young's modulus data in Fig. We now demonstrate that the chosen V ac are small enough to not smear out phase transitions. To this end, we show in Fig. |εac,0| sin δ, i.e., a finite δ corresponds to a finite E ′′ . Figure The result of a finite phase between applied stress and resulting strain in the magnetic phase of Sr 2 RuO 4 is a key new insight accessible by extending stress-strain measurements to finite frequencies. It implies that there is an energy dissipation during the (un-)loading stress cycle. Since this phenomenon occurs at low frequencies, compared to typical spin relaxation times, it is likely to be related to interactions between the magnetic order and the crystal lattice, such as domain walls or other collective effects. In elemental chromium (Cr), for example, it was found that the pressure-dependent spin-density wave vector shows a certain degree of irreversibility between increasing and decreasing pressure In this work, we described a new experimental technique to determine the dynamic Young's modulus as a function of pressure, frequency and temperature in piezoactuator-driven uniaxial pressure cells. Our setup exploits the ability of piezoelectric actuators to generate finite-frequency stresses and strains in the Hz-kHz range through the application of an a.c. voltage. Using the ruthenate Sr 2 RuO 4 as a test-bed material for proof-ofprinciple measurements, we have shown that the Young's modulus data from our low-frequency a.c. setup are in very good agreement with data from static Young's modulus measurements. Our a.c. setup is well suited for detecting small anomalies in the strain dependence of the modulus. Furthermore, our a.c. data contains information on the phase between applied stress and resulting strain, which we find to be finite in the magnetic phase of Sr 2 RuO 4 under high compression. Our setup opens up the possibility to study the finitefrequency elastic response function in quantum materials which are subjected to time-varying external stress fields and large, static tuning stresses. This approach is akin to a.c. susceptibility studies We thank You-Sheng Li and Clifford W. Hicks for highly useful insights from technical discussions. Financial support by the Max Planck Society is gratefully acknowledged. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge funding through the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) through TRR 288-422213477 (Project A10) and the SFB 1143 (project-id 247310070; project C09). Research in Dresden benefits from the environment provided by the DFG Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat (EXC 2147, project ID 390858490). C.I.O and Z.H. acknowledges the support of a St Leonards scholarship from the University of St. Andrews. N.K. work is supported by JSPS KAKENHI (No. JP18K04715, No. JP21H01033, and No. JP22K19093). We follow the report of Barber et al. The spring constant of the cell contains various contributions (see Fig. According to the data sheet of the actuators 32 , the spring constant of a single stack of type P-885.51 used here is k p = 50 N/μm at room temperature. Combining the two compression actuators in parallel to each other and in series with the tension actuator gives k p,tot = 33 N/μm. To simulate k B , we apply a force of 10 N to moving block B at the position of the carrier mounting holes and measure its displacement. The resulting spring constant in the simulations was k B = (7.6 ± 0.3) N/μm. We also determined this spring constant experimentally, by hanging various weights from block B and measuring the resulting displacement. This procedure yielded an experimental value of (7.7 ± 0.1) N/μm, which is, within the error bars, consistent with the simulated value. The moving block A is designed to have a small spring constant in the direction of the applied force and a large spring constant in the orthogonal directions, to avoid torque on the sample. These rotational spring constants dominate k A . For the simulations of k A , we consider the application of force of 10 N to an infinitely stiff sample. Since the sample is infinitely stiff, there is zero displacement between the carrier mounting points on block A and B (∆d = 0) upon the application of 10 N. Due to the finite rotational spring constant of block A, the actuators must apply a slightly higher force than 10 N. Our simulations showed that a force of 10.45 N is needed. We then evaluated the difference in actual displacement between the carrier mounting holes on block A and the actuator attachment area. Note that, even though there is zero relative displacement across the gap, block A is still displaced because block B moves under applied force (see Ref. 15 for further details on this simulation). The present simulation gives an estimate of k A = (7.7 ± 2) N/μm. Taking k p,tot , k A and k B together in series yields k cell = (3.4 ± 0.5) N/μm at room temperature.