Recently developed Josephson junction array transmission lines implement strong-coupling circuit electrodynamics compatible with a range of superconducting quantum devices. They provide both the high impedance which allows for strong quantum fluctuations, and photon modes with which to probe a quantum device, such as a small Josephson junction. In this high-impedance environment, current through the junction is accompanied by charge Bloch oscillations analogous to those in crystalline systems. However, the interplay between Bloch oscillations and environmental photon resonances remains largely unexplored. Here we describe the Bloch oscillations in a transmontype qubit attached to high-impedance transmission lines with discrete photon spectra. Transmons are characterized by well-separated charge bands, favoring Bloch oscillations over Landau-Zener tunneling. We find resonances in the voltage-current relation and the spectrum of photons emitted by the Bloch oscillations. The transmon also scatters photons inelastically; we find the cross-section for a novel anti-Stokes-like process whereby photons gain a Bloch oscillation quantum. Our results outline how Bloch oscillations leave fingerprints for experiments across the DC, MHz, and GHz ranges. The introduction of the fluxonium qubit In the insulating state (Z > R Q ), Coulomb blockade of the small junction wins over the Josephson effect. The resulting differential resistance of the junction, R(I) = dV /dI, becomes a decreasing function of the direct current (DC) passing through the circuit. The dissipative nature of the DC charge transport is associated with the Bloch oscillation of charge occupying the small junction capacitance The notion of the Schmid transition and aforementioned dissipation mechanism assume a featureless frequency dependence of the superinductor impedance Z(ω) "seen" by the small junction. A featureless dependence, approaching a finite constant Z in the limit ω → 0, would require an infinitely-long unrealistic superinductor. A superinductor of finite length, along with the impedance mismatch at its interface with the external microwave circuit, results in standing wave resonances and a frequency-dependent Z(ω). Unless carefully matched [see, e.g., Our goal is thus two-fold. First, to find the ramifications narrow resonances in Z(ω) have for the V (I) dependence in the nominally-insulating small junction. Second, to build a theory of photon emission and inelastic photon scattering in the presence of Bloch oscillations excited by a direct current passing through the circuit. We focus on the most interesting case of high-impedance Josephson junctions arrays (Z ≫ R Q ), allowing for strong Bloch oscillations, and transmon junctions, for which the insulating state is the most striking. In the following Sections, we introduce the model for a DC-biased transmon (Sec. II), analyze the manifestations of Bloch oscillations in the voltage-current characteristic (Sec. III), in photon radiation (Sec. IV), and in inelastic photon scattering (Sec. V), and draw connections to present experimental platforms (Sec. VI). All the while, we will bring the effects of impedance mismatch to the fore. We consider the circuit depicted in Fig. The phase difference across the junction, φ, is a canonical conjugate to the number of transferred Cooper pairs N : [ φ, N ] = i. E C and E J are the junction charging and Josephson energies, respectively, and n is the displacement charge across the junction (see below). In a transmon involving the two lowest bands (hereinafter we use units with ħ = 1). The bandwidths λ 0,1 are associated with the amplitude of a phase slip across the Josephson junction in the absence or presence of a plasmon excitation, respectively. Hence, the energy separation between the bands is approximately ħω Q . Next, consider the charge waves propagating along the Josephson junction array. We assume its junctions belong to the "classical" limit, corresponding to a negligible probability for their phases to slip. Therefore, the array serves as a harmonic medium for the waves. Their spectrum ω(k) is linear, ω(k) = v 1 k, for wavelengths longer than the unit cell a of the periodic array, k ≪ 2π/a. [In practice, the junctions' plasma resonance places a lower cutoff on k.] The excitations in the linear part of the spectrum can be described Here v 1 is the wave velocity in the array. Fields θ(x) and φ(x) satisfy the following commutation relation Finally, K is a dimensionless parameter characterizing the wave impedance of the array: We will consider only circuits deep on the insulating side of the Schmid transition, that is K ≪ 1/2, which occurs at fairly high impedance Z 1 . To capture the impedance mismatch at the interface with the external low-impedance circuit, we complement Eq. ( and a proper current conservation condition at x = x 0 . The dimensionless parameter K e = R Q /2Z 2 (0) corresponds to the low-frequency impedance of the environment. Taking the lead from experiments The first contribution here is a c-number that describes the external direct current bias I, dN /dt = I/2e. The second contribution describes dynamical charge (in units of 2e) associated with quantum fluctuations in the line. The galvanic coupling with the array stipulates φ = φ(x = 0). In what follows, we will focus on the range of current values I satisfying This condition means the oscillations in n induced by the current are much slower than the transmon's Josephson plasma frequency. Therefore, a transmon initially in its ground state remains in the lowest Josephson plasmon "band" (i.e., in the ground state |0⟩ defined by the instantaneous displacement charge n) upon application of the current I. By projecting Eq. ( The sinusoidal modulation in Eq. ( The junction nonlinearity causes Bloch oscillations to also modulate the scattering of high-frequency (ω ≈ ω Q ) photons off the transmon. This is analogous to the mixing of a baseband signal (Bloch oscillation) and a carrier wave (photon) in radio transceivers. The mode mixing occurs due to the low-frequency modulation of the energy of the excited transmon state |1⟩ described by a projected Hamiltonian In typical implementations, there is a large impedance mismatch between the two segments described by Eqs. ( In what follows, we assume that Z 1 (0) > Z 2 (0), i.e., r > 0. Reflection leads to the formation of standing waves in the array. This results in a resonant structure in the V I-relation of the transmon. We show that an appreciable voltage develops across the transmon only when the Bloch oscillation frequency Ω = πI/e (determined by the bias current I) is resonant with one of the standing wave frequencies. The coupling between the Josephson junction and the transmission line is described by Eq. ( Here a † q and a q are the creation and annihilation operators of excitations propagating in the entire electromagnetic environment described by Hamiltonian see Eqs. ( We denote the displacement field in a mode q by θ q (x). The impedance mismatch is reflected in the dependence of θ q ≡ θ q (x = 0) on ω q : where t 0 = 2x 0 /v 1 is the round trip time for a wave in the array (0 < x < x 0 ). For 1-r ≪ 1, θ q has sharp resonance peaks at standing wave frequencies ω q = n • δω, where n in a non-negative integer and is the spacing between the resonant modes. We find the V I-relation in two steps. First, we compute the power P (I) dissipated from the junction at a given current I in the form of waves. Then, division by I yields the dissipative DC voltage as a function of current, V (I) = P (I)/I. To evaluate the power P (I) dissipated into the electromagnetic environment, we apply Fermi's golden rule. Denoting the initial and final states of the system as |i⟩ and |f ⟩, respectively, we obtain at T = 0: where we abbreviated θ ≡ θ(x = 0). Performing the summation over the final states, we find Here the averaging is over the ground state of the system unperturbed by Eq. ( where Here we regularized the logarithmically divergent integral by introducing a factor e -ω/ωQ ; the cutoff frequency scale (more precisely, γ is a contribution to the loss rate associated with the mode leakage into the low-impedance circuit). For Z 1 (0) ≫ Z 2 (0), the loss rate satisfies the condition πγ ≪ δω. That allows us to represent the part of the integrand in Eq. ( where . Substituting this representation into Eq. ( Here J res (t) encodes the contributions of modes with n ≥ 1, while J 0 (t) comes from n = 0 only. For J res (t) we find The n = 0 contribution can be expressed in terms of a dimensionless function J (γt): J 0 (t) varies on a "slow" timescale ∼ 1/γ. Its influence on the resulting resonant structure of P (I), Eq. ( e 4Ke iωnt e -γ|t| /n . (26) Factor (δω/ω Q ) 4K describes the renormalization of the amplitude of phase slips by the high-frequency modes; it stems from the first term in parentheses in Eq. describes a process with an emission of p photons of frequency ω n . Application of expansion This is the nominal Bloch oscillation frequency. Were the single-photon emission the only process possible, we would find in P (I) resonant lines of a fixed, small width eγ/π ≪ (e/π)δω at I ≈ eω N /π (here N = 1, 2, 3, . . . ). However, a photon with frequency ω N can also "split" into several photons of lower frequency, ω N = q i=0 ω ni . As we will show, the higher the N , the larger the typical number of emitted photons, m typ . The fixed "uncertainty" γ in the frequency of each additional photon results in the linewidths increasing with the resonance mode number N . For sufficiently high N , the resonances are washed out completely. The phase space available for the photon splitting is vast when N ≫ 1. Therefore, the frequencies of photons produced in a splitting event are almost always pairwise different, motivating us to restrict the summation in Eq. ( Here q is the total number of the emitted photons in which the drive quantum of frequency πI/e splits. The sum over n i depends logarithmically on N . For N ≫ 1, we find n1,...,nq Using this relation in Eq. ( The sum over m is dominated by a typical number of the emitted photons m typ satisfying m typ (I) ≈ 4K ln(πI/eδω). We see that although m typ ≫ 1 is logarithmically large in parameter πI/eδω ≫ 1 it is still relatively small compared to the relevant values of N ≈ πI/eδω in Eq. ( where we wrote (δω/ω Q ) 4K as (π|I|/eω Q ) 4K • exp{-4K ln(π|I|/eδω)}. Lastly, we use and the relation V (I) = P (I)/I to obtain: Equations ( The width of the N -th peak is proportional to the typical number of the emitted photons associated with it, γ N = γ • m typ (N eδω/π), see Eq. By comparing γ N with δω, we expect an exponentially large number For higher currents, I ≳ I res , the resonant structure in the V I-relation is smeared out. We can find the V I-relation by noting that the summation over k in Eq. ( The sharp resonances present at I ≲ I res are washed out, and replaced by an exponentially small oscillatory term here. The leading monotonic dependence in V (I) is insensitive to the mismatch and agrees To illustrate our results we will use experimentallyrelevant parameters Z 1 = 4R Q (K = 1/8), δω/2π = 100 MHz, and ω Q /2π = 10 GHz throughout.. In Fig. Due to the Bloch oscillations, the transmon radiates waves into its environment. In this section, we find the radiation spectrum S(ω, Ω) of a transmon biased by current I ≡ eΩ/π, see Eq. ( Applying the Fermi golden rule to evaluate the time derivative of a photon mode's occupation, we derive with F (Ω/δω) given by Eq. ( As discussed above, Bloch oscillations of a fixed frequency Ω excite multiple photons, whose energies sum up to Ω. Thus, clearly S(ω, Ω) ̸ = 0 only at ω < Ω; this is reflected by the step function in C θ (Ω ′ ) in Eq. ( The total emission power is the largest when Ω hits a resonance with one of the modes in the array. When this occurs, emission S(ω, Ω) has sharp peaks at ω = ω n with ω n < Ω. Here the resonances in Ω are of the same nature as those in V (I) dependence. The power emission spectrum ω × S(ω, Ω) is illustrated in Fig. Bloch oscillations in the current-biased transmon also affect the transmon's microwave response properties, such as its fluorescence spectrum. In this Section, we find the cross-section σ(ω → ω ′ ) of inelastic scattering of a microwave photon off the transmon. We show that mixing of the photon with Bloch oscillations creates thresholds in σ(ω → ω ′ ) at ω ′ = ω ± Ω (as in the previous Section, Ω = πI/e is the Bloch oscillations frequency). The threshold behavior is determined by the line impedance Z 1 (0), and further modified by the resonances in the environment. Specifically, we consider how a photon is scattered by the transmon in nearly resonant conditions, i.e., when the photon frequency ω is close to the transmon frequency ω Q . Such a scattering occurs predominantly in the elastic channel. However, with a small-yet-nonzero probability the scattering may be accompanied by a phase slip. This makes scattering inelastic and dependent on the quantum dynamics of the transmon. To describe this inelastic scattering, we use the effective Hamiltonian derived , respectively, and therefore the former peaks have comparable height while the latter grow as ω approaches Ω [cf. Eq. ( (we remind one that Ω = πI/e, see Eq. ( Here ∆ = πv 2 /L is the frequency spacing of the modes in the entire environment; 1/Γ would be the radiative lifetime of the excited state |1⟩ of the transmon were it connected to a semi-infinite array (x 0 → ∞): Here C is the capacitance of the junction related to its charging energy E C = e 2 /2C. The excited state |1⟩ decays because of the transmon hybridization with the array, therefore 1/Γ scales with the impedance Z 1 (0). In the following, we consider the most interesting case In this limit, hybridization shifts frequencies ω n of a large number of the superinductor eigenmodes with ω n within the interval |ω n -ω Q | ≲ Γ. The shifted frequencies ω n are solutions (The waveguide plasmon spectrum is generally dispersive, so the "bare" mode spacing around ω Q will be a somewhat smaller δω ′ < δω. The hybridization in Eq. ( The second line of Eq. ( cf. Eqs. ( The final results are independent of a specific value ω c , as long as K < 1/2, see Ref. (49) In terms of the hybridized states, the Hamiltonian acquires the form Let us now assume that the system is initially in a state with a single photon of energy ω k : |i⟩ = |k, 0⟩ (0 indicates that there are no "soft" photons in the line). We are interested in the inelastic scattering cross-section of this photon into a photon with a different (yet close) frequency ω k ′ . The respective final state is |k ′ , f ⟩, where f abbreviates the multiphoton state formed by a number of "soft" photons. The inelastic scattering may reduce or increase the frequency of the outgoing photon. The former process happens already at zero bias. In contrast, inelastic scattering to higher frequency occurs exclusively due to the up-mixing of Ω with the incoming photon of frequency ω k . In the following, we will focus only on the latter, anti-Stokes component of inelastic scattering. We can evaluate the scattering cross-section σ aS (ω k → ω k ′ ) for this process using Fermi's golden rule: Using Eqs. ( Here the correlation function C θ (Ω) is defined the same way as C θ (Ω) in Eq. ( Here γ N is given in Eq. In this work we describe Bloch oscillations in a small Josephson junction embedded in a high-impedance electromagnetic environment. That such environments can be implemented by Josephson junction arrays, with plasmon standing wave modes, begs the question of their importance. Indeed, the interaction between these photons and the (unbiased) junction is well understood Let us recapitulate our main results and their experimental implications. We found that resonant peaks appear in the V I relation when the Bloch oscillation frequency Ω = πI/e due to a DC bias coincides with a waveguide mode frequency ω n . Multiphoton processes broaden the resonances, as shown in Eq. Besides direct measurement of the V I characteristic, Bloch resonances can be evidenced in the radiation spectrum emitted to the transmission line. The photon emission rate, given by Eq. ( We may compare our results to recent experiments Circuits comprised of a small Josephson junction galvanically coupled to a high-impedance transmission line were mostly probed by microwave spectroscopy, which revealed the presence of inelastic scattering channel, along with the elastic one 