VCP Mixer SLC CRL φ F VCΑ φ BPF F φ HE progress in laser frequency stabilization and optical frequency synthesis resulted in impressive advances in generating spectrally-pure microwave signals Fig. As the first step in the PLL design, we measured the frequency tuning coefficient of the sapphire oscillator dfosc/du as a function of Fourier frequency. These measurements involved: (i) phase-locking of an external microwave frequency synthesizer (Keysight 8257D) to the sapphire oscillator; and (ii) measurements of the complex transfer function H between the VCA control port and frequency synthesizer FM-modulation port (see Fig. At Fourier frequencies within the bandwidth of the PLL in Fig. A correctly designed PLL, apart from allowing the reliable phase tracking of the reference oscillator, must also be efficient in suppressing its phase fluctuations outside the loop bandwidth. Both these conditions were met in our case. First, we measured the SSB phase noise of the synthesizer L φ synth and sapphire oscillator L φ SLCO . They proved to be almost equal at F = 1 Hz, whereas, at F = 10 Hz, the SSB phase noise of the sapphire oscillator was 20 dB less than that of the synthesizer. Next, we measured the amplitude transfer function between "Mod in" and "Integrator out" ports of the PLL filter in Fig. Two microwave oscillators were constructed, each featuring the SLC resonator with an intrinsic Q-factor close to 200000. Fig. At Fourier frequencies from 20 to 100 kHz, oscillator phase noise L φ SLCO < -170 dBc Hz ⁄ , which is comparable with the best noise levels reported in In the next stage of experiments, we studied how efficiently one can suppress the oscillator phase noise by extracting the output signal from the resonator transmission port. In Finally, we evaluated the short-term frequency stability of the phase-locked sapphire oscillator. We used Keysight 8257D phase-locked to 8607 OCXO from Oscilloquartz as a frequency reference. The beat note frequency was 300 kHz, and counter gate time was 1 s. The data were collected for 4 hours. Fig. Compared to optoelectronic oscillators based on femtosecond laser technology, microwave sapphire oscillators are characterized by small footprints and low g-sensitivity. These features make them well-suited for various mobile applications We acknowledge the valuable technical assistance of the South Australian company QuantX Labs, which provided two temperature-stabilized sapphire resonators for the project.