The control of magnetization using electric fields has been extensively studied in magnetoelectric multiferroic insulator materials. Changes in magnetization in bulk metals caused by electric currents have attracted less attention. The recently discovered metallic magnet Ce3TiBi5 has been reported to exhibit current-induced magnetization. Here we determined the magnetic structure of Ce3TiBi5 using neutron diffraction, aiming to understand the microscopic origin of this magnetoelectric phenomenon in a metal. We established that the antiferromagnetic order emerging below TN = 5 K is a cycloid order described by P 63/mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss with small moment sizes of 0.50(2) μB and propagation vector k = (0, 0, 0.386). Surprisingly, the symmetry of this magnetic structure is inconsistent with the presence of current-induced magnetization and potential origins of this inconsistency with previous results are discussed. Additionally, our results suggest that moments order along their hard magnetic direction in Ce3TiBi5, a phenomenon which has been observed in other Kondo systems. The possibility to induce magnetization with an electric field, or an electric polarization with a magnetic field is a well known effect in magnetoelectric multiferroic materials and of relevance to novel electronics The Ce 3 TiBi 5 compound is another interesting candidate to study magnetoelectric effects caused by toroidal order in a metal without local inversion symmetry. This material, first synthesized only recently Methods -Single crystals of Ce 3 TiBi 5 were grown using the Bi self-flux method Starting material of cerium (99.9%), titanium (99.99%) and bismuth (99.999%) in a ratio 3:1:20 were placed in an alumina crucible. Growth batch A was obtained by sealing the crucible in a quartz ampoule with argon. The ampoule was heated to 1000 • C at 50 • C/h, kept at this temperature for 11h and cooled down to 500 • C at a rate of 2 • C/h. The Bi excess was removed by centrifugation immediately after removing the ampoule from the oven. The obtained needle-shaped crystals are air-sensitive: in air they decompose in a few days and burn when broken or crushed. They were kept and handled in a controlled atmosphere in a glovebox, and transported to experiments in sealed containers. The Ce 3 TiBi 5 phase was confirmed by x-ray powder diffraction using a domed sample holder with crystals powderized in the glovebox. Several large ∼ 50 mg single crystals were obtained in this batch and one with dimensions ∼ 5 × 1 × 1 mm 3 was used for the single crystal neutron diffraction experiment. Growth batch B was obtained by sealing the alumina crucible in a quartz ampoule under vacuum. In that case, the ampoule was kept at 1000 • C for 15h and cooled down at a rate of 1 • C/h, with all the other conditions identical to batch A. The resulting crystals were slightly smaller than in batch A. Needle-shaped crystals were isolated and powderized in a glovebox. The obtained 3.4 g powder was used for the powder neutron diffraction experiments. Powder neutron diffraction measurements were performed using the HRPT and DMC instruments at SINQ, Paul Scherrer Institut. The 3.4 g powder was loaded in a vanadium can and sealed in a helium atmosphere. The sample was loaded in an orange cryostat and data were collected using neutron wavelengths λ = 2.45 Å and 3.81 Å for HRPT and DMC instruments, respectively. Single crystal diffraction measurements were performed on the ZEBRA diffractometer at SINQ. The 50 mg sample was mounted in a Joule-Thomson cryostat in a 4circle geometry and measured with λ = 1.383 Å neutrons. Data were analyzed with the FULLPROF program Experimental results -High resolution powder neutron diffraction patterns were measured using the HRPT diffractometer at T = 1.74 K and 8 K, i.e. below and above T N . The pattern and associated refinement for T = 1.74 K is presented in Fig. Magnetic peaks were revealed by measurements on the DMC diffractometer, optimized for magnetic structure determination. A difference pattern of 1.6 K and 8 K data, presented in Fig. 0.97 Å-1 as well as two weaker peaks around 1.4 Å-1 . These peaks are insufficient to establish unambiguously the propagation vector associated with the antiferromagnetic order. The propagation vector k = (0, 0, δ) with δ = 0.386 was determined by single crystal diffraction with the ZEBRA diffractometer. Fig. Refinement of the ZEBRA magnetic datasets also indicates that the two m∆ 2 -generated MSGs are the best solutions with agreement factors R F = 17.4 and 21.0 for P 6 3 /mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss and P 6 3 cm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)0sss, respectively. Comparable agreement factors can only be obtained with m∆ 5 -generated MSGs, which are disregarded in the following due to their lower symmetry. Considering that both m∆ 2 solutions provide comparable agreement with the data, the first, higher symmetry P 6 3 /mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss structure is assumed to be the correct description of Ce 3 TiBi 5 antiferromagnetic order. The refinement result for this MSG is shown in Fig. The evolution of the magnetic moments M i along the propagation axis can be expressed by where Z i is the position along c of site i in lattice units. Moments M i within one unit cell are related to each other by the symmetry operators of the MSGs. For the P 6 3 /mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss group, M cos i and M sin i are constrained to be orthogonal and lie in the xz plane. Here, x is along the local 2-fold axis while z is along the caxis. Specifically, the magnetic components are given by M sin i = (M sin x , 0, 0) and M cos i = (0, 0, M cos z ). This describes a conventional cycloid order when M sin x and M cos z are accidentally equal. If M sin x ̸ = M cos z , it corresponds to a cycloid order with an ellipsoidal enveloppe having principal axes along x and z. Our single-crystal data refinement presented in Fig. x , 0, M cos z ). The added degree of freedom of this MSG compared to P 6 3 /mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss allows the generation of a cycloid order with an ellipsoidal enveloppe with principal axes away from x and z, or of a non-cycloid amplitude-modulated order. For this MSG, the single-crystal data refinement leads to magnetic components describing a structure that approximates the cycloid order obtained for the higher symmetry P 6 3 /mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss group. χ 2 values were evaluated for various angles θ between M sin i and M cos i while constraining equal amplitudes For θ = 90 • , the structure is identical to the higher symmetry P 6 3 /mcm.1 ′ (0, 0, g)00sss solution. We find that χ 2 values are almost unchanged for 60 • < θ < 120 • and increase further away from orthogonality. Therefore, a small distortion of the magnetic structure breaking inversion symmetry would not be in disagreement with our results. We emphasize that the dominant character of the structure remains a cycloid order with moments lying in the plane of the zigzag chain. The same dominant cycloid character is obtained for all the lower-symmetry m∆ 5 -generated MSGs that provided comparable agreement factors to the m∆ 2 solutions. Discussion -Surprisingly, the observation of a singlek incommensurate magnetic order in Ce 3 TiBi 5 indicates directly that the current-induced magnetization effect is not allowed by symmetry, in clear contradiction with reported experimental results While a second k-vector cannot be fully excluded, our results bring into question the intrinsic nature of the current-induced magnetization effect observed in the challenging experiment reported in Ref. While our results indicate that Ce 3 TiBi 5 does not exhibit a ferrotoroidal order and that the current-induced magnetization could be an experimental artefact, its magnetic properties appear unconventional. Interestingly, the established magnetic structure of Ce 3 TiBi 5 , together with its peculiar magnetic susceptibility, suggests that Ce 3 TiBi 5 might be another example of an antiferromagnetic Kondo system ordering along the magnetic hard direction Another indication of hard-direction ordering is given by the magnetization resulting from fields applied in the ab-plane. Indeed, the magnetization starts to saturate at ∼ 1 μ B /Ce above H = 7 T In summary, we established the magnetic structure of Ce 3 TiBi 5 to be a cycloid order with moments lying in the plane of the zigzag chain. This structure does not allow a ferrotoroidal order and calls into question the intrinsic nature of the reported current-induced magnetization effect. The determined magnetic structure, together with the previously measured magnetic susceptibility, suggests that this material exhibits an order along its magnetic hard direction, comparable to what has been observed in other Kondo systems. An accurate determination of the CEF parameters, from techniques such as neutron spectroscopy, is required to establish the single-ion moment anisotropy that could support the hard-plane ordering scenario. Furthermore, the role of Kondo fluctuations in this peculiar phenomenon could be evidenced by chemical substitution, e.g. by replacing itinerant Ce moments with localized Nd moments 