Atomically thin cuprates exhibiting a superconducting phase transition temperature similar to bulk have recently been realized, although the device fabrication remains a challenge and limits the potential for many novel studies and applications. Here we use an optical pump-probe approach to noninvasively study the unconventional superconductivity in atomically thin Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 0.92 Y 0.08 Cu 2 O 8+δ (Y-Bi2212). Apart from finding an optical response due to the superconducting phase transition that is similar to bulk Y-Bi2212, we observe that the sign and amplitude of the pump-probe signal in the atomically thin flake vary significantly in different dielectric environments depending on the nature of the optical excitation. By exploiting the spatial resolution of the optical probe, we uncover the exceptional sensitivity of monolayer Y-Bi2212 to the environment. Our results provide the first optical evidence for the intralayer nature of the superconducting condensate in Bi2212, and highlight the role of double-sided encapsulation in preserving superconductivity in atomically thin cuprates. The successful isolation of monolayer (ML) Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (Bi2212) has opened up many exciting possibilities for studying two-dimensional (2D) superconductivity and fabricating novel devices using atomically thin high-Tc superconductors (2D-HTSCs) Ultrafast optical pump-probe spectroscopy has been successfully applied to study superconductivity in bulk HTSCs In contrast, such a bottleneck effect is absent in the non-superconducting phase, where τ becomes shorter than 1 ps In this work, we push the limit of this optical sensing technique and apply it to atomically thin Y-Bi2212. We find that the majority of the bulk behaviors persist in the atomically thin limit. Specifically, we find a similar change of the decay time constant τ near the phase transition and the ability of a strong pump pulse to induce a non-superconducting phase below Tc. These agreements with the bulk observations elucidate the 2D nature of Cooper pairs in Bi2212 Details about the experimental methods can be found in the Supporting Information. We first identify the characteristics of the time-resolved signals at temperatures both below and above the bulk crystal Tc with a pump fluence of 44.5 μJ/cm 2 . At base temperature (1.6 K), the pump reduces the transient reflection of the probe. The negative signal initially rises in ~100 fs and then gradually recovers over a few ps. At 100 K, the pump-probe signal is positive and the decay occurs mostly within one ps (Figure The results at intermediate temperatures are more complicated as they involve both positive and negative components due to the pump-induced phase transition of some regions from the SC phase to the PG phase. We fit these signals with the combination of two exponential decays The existence of both SC and PG components at intermediate temperatures can be explained by a photoinduced phase transition (PIPT) triggered by a pump pulse above a certain threshold fluence (Φth) The pump-induced mixed phase can be clearly seen in our 4L sample even at 1.6 K (Figure As the pump fluence increases, the dynamics gradually changes from a single-exponential recovery to a double-exponential decay at intermediate temperatures. When the fluence is small, the fitted amplitude B increases linearly with the fluence and the amplitude A is negligible (Figure Therefore, we conclude that the intrinsic PIPT threshold fluence is not changed in the atomically thin Bi2212, implying that the phase coherence of the SC condensate is not related to the coupling between layers. So far, we have demonstrated that the atomically thin Bi2212 manifests many similar optical properties as the bulk. In addition to the above findings, we have discovered novel properties that arise from the atomically thin nature of 2D-HTSC. Specifically, we find that the pump-probe response of a thin flake can be significantly modified by the environment. This environmental contrast provides us with the ability to resolve the complex permittivity change associated with different optical excitations. To this end, we conduct experiments on flakes prepared on substrates prepatterned with hole arrays. The SiO2 substrate and holes provide large permittivity contrast at the optical frequency, which allows us to measure different pump-probe responses at 1.6 K. To avoid complications due to the hBN encapsulation layer, we use a relatively thick Y-Bi2212 flake (40 nm), which is more robust to oxygen dopant loss, but still thinner than the optical skin depth 42 (~ 100 nm). In the area supported by the substrate, we observe a response similar to that of the 4L flake: with a strong pump above the threshold fluence, the signal shows a slow SC component with a negative sign and a fast PG component with a positive sign (top panel in Figure Through a series of calculations based on the transfer-matrix formalism, we conclude that the contrast stems from the nature of the optical excitations. We simulate the sign and amplitude of the pump-probe response using the transfer-matrix method based on each layer's dielectric function and dimension. The pump-induced optical conductivity change of the sample is modeled as a relatively small permittivity change (≤ 10 -4 ), either in the real (ε1) or imaginary (ε2) part of the sample layer, while other layers are unaffected by the pump. To compare with the experiment, we normalize the reflectivity change of the probe beam between the pump on and off conditions to the absolute reflectivity. As the calculation result in Figure The calculated ΔR / R contrast between the supported and suspended area is summarized in a ratio plot (Figure According to this model, the PG component is attributed to a pump-induced broadening of the Drude peak so that mainly the ε2 contribution is transiently modified. On the other hand, the SC component stems from the pump-induced changes in the Lorentzian oscillator of the interband transition at 1.5 eV, leading to changes in both ε1 and ε2. Our probe light measures a different combination of ε1 and ε2 in the supported area and the suspended area. As a result, the PG component (with mainly changes in ε2) is associated with enhancement in the transient reflectivity in both areas, while the SC component (with changes in both ε1 and ε2) induces opposite ΔR / R changes between the two areas. The unique contrast in the permittivity change between the PG and the SC components is interpreted as an indication of an unconventional superconductivity-induced carrier kinetic energy loss In contrast to the red-dotted position, the sample at the other two locations shows no response above the noise floor at base temperature, indicating a complete quench of the superconductivity, which cannot result from the dielectric environment difference according to our transfer matrix calculations. We expect the null signals to have the following two potential causes: (i) The sample becomes amorphous after reacting with the residual water vapor in a gaseous environment 10 ; (ii) The sample becomes insulating as the oxygen dopant leaves over time at room temperature Remarkably, we find that the superconductivity in the monolayer sample is extraordinarily sensitive to exposed surfaces, which highlights the importance of protective encapsulation layers. Our understanding of optical properties of atomically thin cuprates may pave the way for their potential applications in optoelectronics and photon-based quantum computing Supporting Information: Detailed experimental methods, temperature dependence analysis, and the additional transport experiment (PDF)