We report a phenomenological magneto-structural model based on competing free-energy terms that couple either polar or chiral distortions in cubic quadruple perovskites, depending on the global direction of magnetic moments. The model naturally explains why some compounds in this material system host magnetically-induced ferroelectricity at low temperature, while others such as CaMn3(Cr3Mn)O12, which we characterise experimentally, do not. Importantly, our results suggest a new approach towards developing an applied multiferroic functionality, and can be generalised to other multi-sublattice systems where the magnetic interaction between sublattices is prohibited by spatial inversion. Coupling between structural distortions lies at the heart of many applicable material functionalities such as piezoelectricity and piezomagnetism, linear and nonlinear magneto-electric effects, hybrid ferroelectricity, and optical effects associated with a lack of spatial inversion. In all such cases, physical properties can be anticipated by phenomenological symmetry analysis, making this technique a powerful tool for advancing our understanding and discovery of material functionality. One of the most pronounced examples of coupling phenomena determined by symmetry is the spin driven electric polarization in multiferroic materials. These systems are unusual as they combine at least two ferroic orders in the same phase, and they have garnered significant interest in physics and materials science due to their complex phenomenology and potential for application in new solid-state technologies In 2015, X. Wang et al. In this paper, we report the synthesis and characterisation of the quadruple perovskite CaMn 3 (Cr 3 Mn)O 12 (CMCMO). We show that this compound adopts the same G-type magnetic structures reported in the A = La, Bi, and Pb compounds described above (up to the global moment direction which again cannot be determined from powder diffraction). Similar to the case of PbMn 3 (Cr 3 Mn)O 12 , we found that CMCMO does not develop an electric polarisation below T 2 . In light of this result, we propose a phenomenological model of magnetostructural coupling that naturally explains why some such compounds are electrically polar below T 2 while others are non-polar and chiral, depending on the global direction of magnetic moments. Importantly, our model implies novel schemes of multiferroic functionality that may be generalised to other material systems. CaMn 3 (Cr 3 Mn)O 12 was synthesized from a stoichiometric mixture of CaMnO 3 , Mn 2 O 3 , and Cr 2 O 3 by a high-pressure, high-temperature method at about 6 GPa and about 1800 K for 1 hour in Pt capsules. Magnetic susceptibility measurements were performed on a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS-XL-7T) between 2 and 400 K in a 7 T applied field under field-cooled on warming (FCW) conditions. Specific heat, C p was recorded on cooling by a pulse relaxation method using a commercial calorimeter (Quantum Design PPMS). Dielectric properties were measured on a Quantum Design PPMS using a novocontrol Alpha-A High Performance Frequency Analyzer between 5 and 300 K on cooling and heating in the frequency range of 100 Hz and 2 MHz. Pyrocurrent measurements were performed on a dense polycrystalline cylindrical pellet of thickness 0.95 mm. Gold contacts of area 17.35 mm 2 were applied on either face, and the sample was poled on cooling from 80 to 25 K under a 100 V potential. An oscillatory background signal of frequency ∼ 2 Hz was removed from the data through fast Fourier transform. Neutron powder diffraction data were collected using the WISH diffractometer at ISIS, UK The specific heat of CMCMO, measured as a function of temperature, is shown in Figure Neutron powder diffraction experiments were performed to characterise the magnetic state within each phase. Figure The refined magnetic structures are the same as those found in the other A x+ Mn 3 (Cr 1+x Mn 3-x )O 12 compounds described in the introduction, up to the global direction of magnetic moments which have not been determined experimentally for any of these compounds. This result suggests that CMCMO may host a magnetically induced electric polarisation below T 2 , as observed in the A = La and Bi compounds Taking the Im 3 crystal structure as the parent, one can show that the A' and B sublattice G-type magnetic structures transform by different 3D irreducible representations (irreps), mH + 4 (η c , η a , η b ) and mH - 4 (ε c , ε a , ε b ), respectively. Here, the respective order parameter components are given in parenthesis, where the subscripts denote the direction of magnetic moments of a G-type structure. For example, a B sublattice G-type magnetic structure with moments along c is associated with the 3D order parameter (ε c , 0, 0). Given that the A' and B magnetic structures transform by different irreps, they are not coupled in Im 3 symmetry, i.e. the B-site magnetic 'exchange-field' at any given A-site is exactly equal to zero and the symmetry equivalent A'-B exchange interactions are exactly frustrated, as shown in Figure We now identify symmetry breaking atomic displacements that will allow finite exchange coupling between A' and B magnetic sublattices below T 2 . We require symmetry-adapted displacive modes that form trilinear free energy terms, invariant with respect to the parent Im 3 symmetry, and including both mH + 4 (η c , η a , η b ) and mH - 4 (ε c , ε a , ε b ) order parameters. Translation and parity invariance immediately imply Γ-point, noncentrosymmetric displacive modes. The full Γ-point representation of atomic displacements of the Im 3 structure decomposes into 6 physically real irreducible representations, three of which are antisymmetric with respect to inversion; Γ - 1 (δ), Γ - 2 ⊕ Γ - 3 (χ 1 , χ 2 ), and Γ - 4 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 , ξ 3 ), where order parameter components are given in parenthesis. Systematic searches using the isotropy software tool found five trilinear coupling invariants of the required form (which we label I, IIa, IIb, IIIa, or IIIb): I I , I IIa , and I IIb are symmetric under exchange of A' and B sublattice magnetic order parameters, i.e. η i ↔ ε i , while (I IIIa + I IIIb ) and (I IIIa -I IIIb ) are symmetric and antisymmetric, respectively. One can show that all symmetric terms are optimized for collinear A' and B magnetic structures, as observed experimentally. Conversely, the antisymmetric case, I IIIa -I IIIb , is exactly zero for collinear sublattices. I I is isotropic in the magnetic degrees of freedom, and facilitates coupling between A' and B sublattices by inducing a displacive mode that transforms as Γ - 1 . In this case the crystal point group symmetry is lowered from m 3 to 23; a non-polar, chiral group. I IIa and I IIb are anisotropic in the magnetic degrees of freedom, optimized for moments along a, b, or c, and exactly zero for moments parallel to the cubic body diagonals. This invariant facilitates coupling between A' and B sublattices by inducing a displacive mode that transforms as Γ - 2 ⊕ Γ - 3 , which lowers the crystal point group symmetry to non-polar, chiral 222. The direction of the Γ - 2 ⊕ Γ - 3 order parameter, (χ 1 , χ 2 ), depends on the relative magnitudes of the respective free energy coefficients and the direction of the magnetic moments In summary, we have shown that CaMn 3 (Cr 3 Mn)O 12 undergoes two magnetic phase transitions at T N = 159 K and T 2 = 59 K, below which the B and A' sublattice moments order with collinear G-type antiferromagnetic structures, respectively. The same sequence of magnetic phase transitions was observed in LaMn 3 Cr 4 O 12 , where a magnetically induced electric polarization was also observed below T 2 . We found that this multiferroic electric polarization is absent in CaMn 3 (Cr 3 Mn)O 12 . To account for this difference, we present a phenomenological model of trilinear magneto-structural coupling that describes secondary, symmetry breaking structural distortions necessarily occurring at T 2 to facilitate coupling between the two sublattices. Our model predicts that if magnetic moments lie along the body diagonal a polar crystal structure is stabilized with electric polarization parallel to the body diagonal. To the contrary, if magnetic moments are aligned along the primary cubic axes, a chiral but non-polar structure results. This phenomenology is an exemplary manifestation of the general principle that in high symmetry crystals the direction of magnetic moments can determine the global symmetry of the system via magneto-structural coupling. Importantly, the presence of competing polar and chiral ground states implies an intriguing paradigm of multiferroic behavior. A spontaneous electric polarization can be switched on and off at fixed temperature just by changing the direction of the antiferromagnetic magnetic moments (Néel vector). Conversely, and of great significance to antiferromagnetic spintronics, the direction of the Néel vector can be controlled with an external electric field. Finally, we stress that our phenomenological model may be generalized to other crystalline systems that support similar network topologies of magnetic frustration for which magnetic interactions between sublattices are prohibited by spatial inversion.