A unitary transformation is applied to the Hubbard model, which maps the Hubbard interaction to a single particle term. The resulting Hamiltonian consists of unconstrained fermions, which is then mapped to a Hamiltonian of spinless fermions coupled to pseudospins. The fermions are integrated out using second order perturbation theory in 1{U , resulting in an effective spin Hamiltonian. An order parameter is identified, stabilizing d-wave superconductivity. The groundstate energy of classical spin configurations is minimized at a finite value of this order parameter after a critical chemical potential, resulting in d-wave superconductivity at non-zero doping. This suggests, that the onset of high-Tc superconductivity is governed by the groundstate of a classical spin system. The Hubbard model in the strong coupling regime is believed to describe the emergence of high-T c superconductivity in cuprates Notable similar approaches are ones based on strong coupling expansions Other weak coupling expansions include The square lattice repulsive Hubbard model with U ą 0 and t ă 0 is given by In this convention half filling is at μ " 0 and the system is hole doped with μ ą 0. δ runs over the two vectors p1, 0q, p0, 1q. We apply a unitary transformation arXiv:2403.09765v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 14 Mar 2024 to the Hamiltonian where we relabeled c r,1 " c r,Ò , c r,2 " c r,Ó . We have introduced a third fermion species c r,3 at every lattice site, which has no contribution in the original Hamiltonian cr,n " c : r,n `cr,n . The unitary transformation (3) performs the following mapping from the original basis |fermions, n 3 y to the |n 1 , n Notice, that all, at large U and half filling, prohibited states, so double and 0 occupancy states, are mapped to a vacuum state of fermion species 1, while all low energy states are mapped to ones, where fermion 1 is fully occupied. This allows us, to effectively integrate out double and 0 occupancies by perturbation theory. With c2 r,n " ́1, c2 r,n " 1 Applying U r to the Hubbard interaction maps it to a single particle term where we used U : r " U r . The chemical potential term is mapped to Finally, the hopping term is mapped to "K r,δ c : r,1 c : r`δ,1 `p1 `Ar,δ qc : r,1 c r`δ,1 `h.c. with K r,δ " ́nr,2 `nr`δ,2 ́pc : r,2 c r`δ,2 `c: r`δ,2 c r,2 qc r,3 cr`δ,3 , A r,δ " ́nr,2 ́nr`δ,2 `pc : r,2 c r`δ,2 `c: r`δ,2 c r,2 qc r,3 cr`δ,3 . Let's apply U to the whole Hubbard model (1) The order of the application of U r in the two products above is not important, since U r commute. We further used that for any bosonic or fermionic operators X a , Y b we have " because rX a Y b , U r s " 0 as long as a ‰ r and b ‰ r. So the transformed Hamiltonian becomes K r,δ c : r,1 c : r`δ,1 `p1 `Ar,δ qc : r,1 c r`δ,1 `h.c. `ÿ r ́U 2 n r,1 `μpn r,1 `2n r,2 p1 ́nr,1 qq. Since the Hubbard interaction is mapped to just a chemical potential of the fermion species 1, the interactions in K r,δ and A r,δ now scale with t instead of U . Also notice, that, unlike the t-J model, Hamiltonian (21) describes unconstrained fermions. Therefore, in this basis, the large interaction limit U " t can be studied perturbatively at μ ‰ 0. Further, the mapping we have done is exact and works at any U, t, μ. Note that H 1 commutes with any bond operator ic r,3 cr 1 ,3 , so one could block diagonalize it in the eigenbasis of all ic r,3 cr 1 ,3 . Ultimately, we would like to compute observables in this Hamiltonian. To do so, we also need to transform those too. The transformed magnetization is U r pn r,Ò ́nr,Ó qU r " n r,1 p1 ́2n r,2 q. (22 The transformed particle density is U r pn r,Ò `nr,Ó qU r " 2n r,2 p1 ́nr,1 q `nr,1 . A two site singlet pair operator transformed into the new basis is with σ " ́σ, Ò" 0 and Ó" 1. In the groundstate and at large U and μ " 0, the fermion species 1 is, due to the ́U 2 chemical potential, fully occupied. In this limit, we can therefore perform perturbation theory around |Ψy " ś r c : r,1 |0y. The first order is zero. Second order is The factor ́1 U comes from the energy needed to excite two c 1 fermions. Consider the following composite particles We find These are the commutation relations of hardcore bosons. Eq. ( where we used c2 r,3 " 1. H 2 in hardcore bosons is Further, we can write hardcore bosons as spins This reproduces the well known U " 1 limit of the Hubbard model at half filling, that is the Heisenberg model Notice that the reverse transformation of a general spin Hamiltonian, that is first to hardcore bosons and then to the composite fermions containing cr,3 can always be done and results in a Hamiltonian with unconstrained fermions In this section, we perform perturbation theory at finite μ with the goal of calculating the expectation value of ∆. In terms of hardcore bosons, the ∆ order parameter in Eq. ( Hardcore bosons can be expressed as spin operators, which in turn reduces the singlet order parameter ∆ to a spin wave order parameter. Note, that an uneven number of hardcore boson operators are present in ∆. When the expectation value of ∆ is computed, even at first order in perturbation, an uneven number of hardcore boson operators remain. Translated into the spin picture, this means that to have a finite expectation value of ∆, that is superconductivity in any way, pseudospin U(1) symmetry must be broken. This U(1) symmetry breaking can also be seen when ∆ is multiplied with a global U(1) gauge of the original fermionic operators c r,σ Ñ exppiθ{2qc r,σ . The only place where this phase can consistently be absorbed to are the b r operators. A phase in exppiθqb r translates to rotations around the z-axis of the pseudospins cospθqS x `sinpθqS y , see Eq. ( We dropped the 1 index for the c 1 fermions. The K and A terms expressed in hardcore bosons are Fourier transforming everything, we end up with the following interaction vertices with kpδ 1 , δ 2 , δq " ˆ0 e ik4δ e ́ik1δ1`ik2δ2 e ́ik3δ e ́ik1δ2`ik2δ1 0 (46) We dropped the sum over r and k n and the momentum conserving δpk a `kb `...q in all equations above. We see, that the chemical potential term acts as a magnetic field for the pseudospins, making it possible to break U p1q symmetry of the pseudospins, as discussed before. We continue to perform second order perturbation theory on this Hamiltonian at finite μ, to derive an effective hardcore boson and therefore pseudospin Hamiltonian. We note here, that there is in general an arbitrariness in how one can perform perturbation theory. Usually, perturbations around H 0 only contain the interaction terms V of the Hamiltonian H " H 0 `V . In principle it is possible to add and subract a non-interacting term V λ like so H " H 0 ́Vλ `V `Vλ . One can define a new H 1 0 " H 0 ́Vλ and perturbation around it V 1 " V `Vλ . This way it is possible to describe symmetry broken phases using a perturbative expansion, as long as V λ is much smaller than H 0 . The right V λ is chosen variationally. A similar perturbative approach has been applied directly to the Hubbard model at weak coupling in One of the terms we vary between H 0 and V λ is the hopping term tc : r c r`δ `h.c. Without variational perturbation theory (VPT), it is unclear if one has to put this term in H 0 or V 1 , as it is of order t while still being a free particle term. Before going on to the results of VPT, we describe in the following the way VPT is implemented. We first define V λ"0 " 0, and H 1 0 " H 0 pλq such that H 0 pλ " 0q " H 0 . The zero and first order terms are where |Ψpλqy is the groundstate of H 0 pλq. In second order we must compute where V " V K `VA`μ `Vλ and where we only consider connected diagrams, such that we can drop the projection operators to excited states. Due to the structure of all of the present vertices, the computation of the second order terms reduce to the evaluation of 1 E 0 pλq ́H0 pλq pA ̈c: k qpB ̈ck 1 q |Ψpλqy " 1 E 0 pλq ́H0 pλq pAσ x ̈c ́k qpB ̈ck 1 q |Ψpλqy (51) with some vectors A and B and where we used that is the particle-hole transformation in the Nambu formalism. With the commutation relation where we can show p1 ́E0 `H0 qpAσ x ̈c ́k qpB ̈ck 1 q |Ψpλqy " pσ x H k σ x Aσ x ̈c ́k qpB ̈ck 1 q `pAσ x ̈c ́k qpσ x H ́k1 σ x B ̈ck 1 q `pAσ x ̈c ́k qpB ̈ck 1 q |Ψpλqy . We can define a two particle space Acting with 1 ́E0 `H0 on this state gives x can be seen as the free two particle Hamiltonian propagating two holes. In general, vertices have a k, k 1 dependence So in practice, to apply 1 E0 ́H0 to this vertex, ́σx H k σ x b 1 ́1 b σ x H ́k1 σ x is first diagonalized and σ x V pk, k 1 q is transformed into a basis where the two particle propagator is diagonal. Then it is straightforward to apply 1 E0 ́H0 and the transformation is reverted. Afterwards we arrive at Then we only need to contract expectation values of the following form which can be done using Wick's theorem. Leaving only connected diagrams, this results with Einstein summation in pV pk 4 , k 3 qσ x q ab pσ x Ṽ pk 3 , k 4 qq cd ρpk 4 q ad δ k1,k4 ρp ́k 3 q bc δ k2,k3 ́pV pk 3 , k 4 qσ x q ab pσ x Ṽ pk 3 , k 4 qq cd ρp ́k 3 q ac δ k1, ́k3 ρpk 4 q bd δ ́k2,k4 where ρpkq " xc : k c k y are the one particle density matrices of 1 2 H k . In the following, ρ is computed at a temperature of T " 10 ́4. Note that for interacting vertices V contains b operators, resulting in an effective hardcore boson Hamiltonian, with terms of the form and interactions Both terms are Fourier transformed back to real space, after which hardcore bosonic commutation relations are applied to result in the simplest form of a given expression. For example The resulting Hamiltonian is then transformed to a pseudospin Hamiltonian using Eq. (35). To compute the groundstate energy and expectation values, spins are replaced by classical spins of length 1{2. The spins are chosen to minimize the classical groundstate energy. This approximation is the first step of spin wave theory and is valid in an ordered phase with low densities of excitations around the classical groundstate. All of the above steps are done algorithmically. Integrations over the BZ are done on a regular grid and the minimization of the classical spins energy is implemented using the Pytorch library A. Pure Hubbard model at U " 8 We apply the above described algorithms and the local unitary transformation to study the pure Hubbard model without t 1 and investigate first the variation of t in H 0 , so such that when λ 1 " 1, H 0 contains no hopping terms and at λ 1 " 0 it does. Therefore at λ 1 " 1, the vertex V λ " H 0 pλ " 0q ́H0 pλq contains the hopping whereas at λ 1 " 0 it does not, where V λ " 0. In the following we set t " ́1. We consider the U " 8 strong interaction regime relevant to cuprates. Computing the free energy by minimizing the classical pseudospin groundstate energy we find at μ " 0 an optimum at λ 1 " 1, see Fig. field into H 0 and V λ , which at the same time breaks C 4 symmetry and is able to introduce holes into the system with Q " pπ, πq. We find that this field stabilizes d-wave superconductivity. We note that in the pure Hubbard model, we do not only expect to see superconductivity but also for example magnetic stripe orders To test the convergence, the same calculation, which was done on a 16x16 BZ grid for the integration of interaction vertices, was carried out for μ " 1.4 on a 32x32 BZ grid. The average error between the 16x16 and the 32x32 calculation is 5 ̈10 ́6, meaning that the results are well converged, even at a temperature of T " 10 ́4 for the density matrix computations. This signifies, that in all integrations carried out here, no significant singularities have been integrated over. This is the result of modes being integrated out, that are with U {2 strongly gapped. This suggests, that the perturbative series described in this paper is controlled and convergent for large U and that higher orders contribute less than the ones we accounted for here. In Fig. We have identified the most crucial terms to see the minimum in λ 2 at a non-zero value and therefore the development of superconductivity. This simplified model is described in Appendix A. A comparison of groundstate energies between the full algorithmically build model and this simple model is shown in Fig. B. Hubbard model at U " 8 with t 1 " ́0.3t We apply the same methods described in the previous sections to TBCO/YBCO hopping parameters with t 1 " ́0.3t being the next nearest neighbor hopping amplitude In this paper, we propose a new theoretical description of high temperature superconductivity, based on the application of a unitary transformation to the Hubbard model, which maps the Hubbard interaction to a single particle term. This unitary transformation can be ap- plied exactly. The resulting Hamiltonian contains, unlike the t-J model, unconstrained fermions and can be transformed into one with a single fermion species coupled to hardcore bosons/pseudospins, which suggests that this transformation implements a spin charge separation in any dimension, where the fermions carry charge and the pseudospins spin information. The Hamiltonian is solved by variational second order perturbation theory (VPT), resulting in an effective pseudospin Hamiltonian. The problem of fermions coupled to spins generating an effective spin-spin interaction is reminiscent of the RKKY mechanism replaced by classical spins and their classical energy is minimized. We find that in zero order, the introduction of a chemical potential μ acts as a magnetic field for the pseudospins, breaking U p1q symmetry. Mapping back to the original system, this U p1q symmetry breaking corresponds to the U p1q symmetry breaking found in a superconducting state, assuming the superconducting state is the one minimizing the free energy. An order parameter is proposed which at the same time fills in holes into the system and breaks C 4 symmetry. The free energy is minimized at a finite value of this order parameter, resulting in a finite expectation value of the d-wave superconductor pairing operator. This perturbative approach is possible, because the fermionic modes that are integrated out are strongly gapped with a gap of U {2. We therefore encourage further studies of Hamiltonians 