Surface and strain engineering are among the cheaper ways to modulate structure property relations in materials. Due to their compositional flexibilities, MXenes, the family of two-dimensional materials, provide enough opportunity for surface engineering. In this work, we have explored the possibility of improving thermoelectric efficiency of MXenes through these routes. The Janus MXenes obtained by modifications of the transition metal constituents and the functional groups passivating their surfaces are considered as surface engineered materials on which bi-axial strain is applied in a systematic way. We find that in the three Janus compounds Zr2COS, ZrHfO2 and ZrHfCOS, tensile strain modifies the electronic and lattice thermoelectric parameters such that the thermoelectric efficiency can be maximised. A remarkable reduction in the lattice thermal conductivity due to increased anharmonicity and elevation in Seebeck coefficient are obtained by application of moderate tensile strain. With the help of first-principles electronic structure method and semiclassical Boltzmann transport theory we analyse the interplay of structural parameters, electronic and dynamical properties to understand the effects of strain and surface modifications on thermoelectric properties of these systems. Our detailed calculations and in depth analysis lead not only to the microscopic understanding of the influences of surface and strain engineering in these three systems, but also provide enough insights for adopting this approach and improve thermoelectric efficiencies in similar systems. In the era of sustainable energy, thermoelectric (TE) material is one of the prominent candidate serving the purpose, thus inviting research focus in recent years Relative new addition to the list of 2D materi-als is MXene, the family of transition metal carbonitrides. MXenes are the 2D layered counterparts of threedimensional MAX compounds, obtained by removing the A layers inter-connecting the transition metal M and carbon/nitrogen X layers in MAX, through exfoliation. During this process, various functional groups passivate the dangling bonds on the surfaces rendering MXenes with a chemical formula of M n+1 X n T x (n=1-3), where M, X, and T are the transition metal, carbon/nitrogen, and surface functional groups, respectively. Naturally, as compared to other 2D materials, MXenes offer a greater compositional flexibility and tunability in the functional properties. Such a prospect, with regard to thermoelectric properties, has been explored aggressively for a number of MXenes, both experimentally and with first-principles simulations Strain engineering too is found to be a low-cost and feasible method to enhance the thermoelectric properties of 2D materials Motivated by these findings, in this work, we have investigated the effects of structural modifications and strain on the thermoelectric properties of MXenes. The structural modification is considered by constructing three different Janus compositions in Zr and Hf based M 2 CT 2 MXenes: (a) Zr 2 COS Janus, a derivative of Zr 2 CO 2 where one of the functional group -O is replaced with -S, (b) ZrHfCO 2 Janus, where Zr on one surface is completely replaced with Hf and (c) ZrHfCOS Janus where along with replacement of one of the transition metal surface in Zr 2 CO 2 , one functional group is also replaced that is the Janus is made with respect to both M and T of M 2 CT 2 . The reason behind choosing Zr 2 CO 2 as the base compound is the reported high (moderate) value of S (κ l ) in this compound First-principle calculations have been performed within the density functional theory (DFT) The electronic transport coefficients (Seebeck coefficient (S), electrical conductivity (σ/τ ), and electronic thermal conductivity (κ e /τ )) are evaluated by solving the Boltzmann transport equations (BTE) under constant relaxation time approximation (CRTA) and rigid band approximation (RBA), as implemented in the BoltzTrap2 package , where and Ω is the volume of the unit cell, μ is the chemical potential, and f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. N denotes the number of k points sampled, and e the electron charge. v α (i, k)(α = x, y, z) indicates the αth component of the group velocity of the carriers, corresponding to the i-th energy band. Equations ( The second-order (harmonic) interatomic force constants (IFCs) and phonon dispersions are obtained by the supercell approach in conjunction with the finite displacement method as implemented in the Phonopy package V is the volume of the unit cell, and N the number of q points sampled in the Brillouin zone. ω λ and v α λ are the angular frequency and group velocity of the phonon branch λ along the α direction, respectively. f 0 is the Bose distribution function, and is the form of linearised BTE when only two and three phonon scatterings are considered. ∆ β λ is the correction term obtained by a fully iterative solution of the BTE. v β λ is group velocity of the phonon branch λ along the β direction. τ 0 λ is the relaxation time of phonon mode λ, the inverse of which is equal to the sum of all possible transition probabilities between phonon modes λ, λ ′ and λ ′′ . The first two terms in the above equation correspond to three-phonon scattering rates. The first one describes absorption and the second term the emission processes. The third term corresponds to isotopic scattering. The expressions for absorption (+) and emission (-) processes are given as |φ ± λλ ′ λ ′′ | are the scattering matrix elements that depend on the anharmonic IFCs (Φ αβγ ijk ) as, M i is the mass of i th atom, e α λ (i) denotes the α-th component of an eigenvector of mode λ associated with the i-th atom. Here summation over i is within the unit cell, while summation over j and k span the entire system. The third-order IFCs are evaluated using a supercell of 4×4×1 with eight nearest neighbors. The harmonic and anharmonic IFCs obtained are used to compute the lattice thermal conductivity κ l and solve BTE for phonons. To evaluate accurate κ l , the harmonic IFCs are corrected by enforcing the rotational sum rule, implemented in machine learning-based hiphive package The Janus monolayers considered here are obtained from Zr 2 C pristine MXene. Figure In Table Since the Janus MXenes considered in this work are of all compounds, irrespective of the amount of strain. The stability at 800 K, the highest temperature for calculations of TE parameters, also ensure that the structures are stable at lower temperatures and under various strains. The dynamical stability of the compounds on application of strains is assessed by computing the phonon dispersion relations. The results are shown in Figure Features in the electronic structures provide clues to the expected behaviours of electronic transport parameters associated with the thermoelectric figure of merit. In Figure The atom projected densities of states for all three compounds indicate significant contributions from p orbitals of C and T and d orbitals of M in both valence and conduction bands. However, the features and contributions near the band edges vary with composition and strain. For Zr 2 COS and ZrHfCOS, sharp peak dominated by S shapes up with the increase in the tensile strain. Although no such sharp peak is observed in case of ZrHfCO 2 , the sharpness of the band edges are found to increase with tensile strain as well. This is consistent with the flatter CBM as tensile strain is increased. This may result in larger Seebeck coefficient with tensile stress. In the next sub-section we will examine this. Energy (E-EF) eV Seebeck coefficient (S) is the measure of the ability of a material to convert a temperature gradient into electrical voltage The phonon dispersion relations and densities of states shown in Figure Next we focus on the quantitative estimates of anharmonicity in the systems and the roles of surface and strain engineering. To this end, the first thing is identification of the largest contributors towards heat transport from among the phonon modes. We do this by calculating the percent contribution of each of the phonon modes to κ l (Figure As discussed earlier, the changes in the phonon dispersions with increasing strain point towards drop in phonon group velocities and consequently κ l . The variations in group velocity v g at three values of ε are shown in Figure 11. We find that for each of the three compounds v g decreases (increases) with tensile (compressive) strain. This indeed explains the variations in κ l with ε for a given compound as κ l ∝ v 2 g (Equation In order to understand the trends in the strengths of anharmonicity as seen in the variations of Γ λ in terms of phonon phonon scattering, we next look at the anharmonic scattering rates. Figure . This explains the trends in the scattering rates and thus that of κ l . However, the information obtained from WP 3 do not have the clarity to explain higher anharmonic scattering rates in Janus containing S. We, therefore, conclude that the higher anharmonic scattering rates in Janus containing S in comparison with ZrHfCO 2 for compressive and zero strains can be understood from the comparative rates of scattering between 1-4 THz. The greater proximity of the acoustic and optical branches due to overall downward shift of phonon frequencies brought about by the replacement of O with heavier S leads to higher scattering rates in these two Janus compounds. This is the important contribution of surface engineering. Apart from temperature, ZT depends on the carrier concentration n and relaxation time τ since the transport parameters are calculated under RBA and CRTA. In Figure Using first-principles DFT and semi-classical Boltzmann transport theory, the microscopic understanding of the effects of strain and surface engineering in improvement of thermoelectric efficiency in 2D MXenes has been done in this work through a rigorous analysis of their structural, electronic and dynamical properties. The surface engineering is done by creating different types of asymmetric surfaces in M 2 C MXenes. We find that while the strain is the primary factor affecting the electronic transport parameters like Seebeck coefficient S, electrical conductivity σ and electronic thermal conductivity κ e , both composition (surface manipulation) and strain substantially affect the lattice thermal conductivity κ l . As a consequence, we obtain excellent thermoelectric figure of merit ZT for all three compounds within a temperature window of 500 K. The tensile strain on one hand modifies the electronic band gap and the electronic structures of the compounds, thus improving the electronic parameters, while on the other hand it increases anharmonicity through enhancement of phonon-phonon scattering. The interplay of the electronic and lattice transport parameters in the three compounds that differ in their compositions is understood to be the reason behind higher maximum ZT obtained in ZrHfCO 2 , inspite of undergoing the least engineering of its surfaces. This work establishes that application of moderate tensile strain on Janus systems, obtained from manipulation of surfaces through the functional groups attached to the transition metal components in 2D materials like MXenes, can be an efficient way to obtain materials with potentially high thermoelectric conversion efficiencies. Lattice constant (a), band gap (E g ), and bond lengths corresponding to different pairs of atoms in the three Janus MXenes.Results are tabulated for different The Calculated Elastic Constants (C 11 , C 22 , C 12 , C 66 ) as a function of strain are shown for the three compounds. the temperature with time at 800 K, along with the the initial (T = 0 K) and final (T = 800 K) structures, are shown in Figure2(for zero strain) and figure S2, supplementary information (for different strains). The results suggest that even at this high temperature, none of the structures distort over time ensuring thermal stability Γ M K Γ 0 5 10 15 20 25