Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detector (SNSPD) emerges as a potential candidate in the multiple fields requiring sensitive and fast photodetection. While nanowires of low temperature superconducting detectors are mature with commercial solutions, other material options with higher transition temperature and faster responses are currently being explored. Towards this goal, we develop a generalized numerical model that incorporates the thermodynamic properties of the superconducting material and identifies the minimum resolvable photon count for a given bias and device parameters. A phase diagram of detection and latching phases with the minimum number of photons as a function of biasing current and biasing temperature for each material system is presented. We show using the developed model that while low temperature superconducting (LTS) nanowires are more sensitive to the incident photon at different wavelengths, the ultimate limit of a single photon can be achieved using high temperature superconducting (HTS) material such as YBa2Cu3O7-δ, albeit at stringent biasing conditions. On the contrary, ultrafast response time with three orders of magnitude smaller response times can be achieved in select HTS materials making it an appealing for several practical applications. Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detector (SNSPD) is an important device with applications in multiple disciplines such as light detection and ranging, singlemolecule detection, quantum metrology largely due to its near unity system detection efficiencies (SDEs), low dark count rates (DCRs), short timing jitters, high maximum count rates, and photon number resolution capabilities been observed Superconductors have strong-temperature dependent physical properties that controls the detector response. Different materials tend to show orders of magnitude difference in the SNSPD response times making careful choice crucial. Particularly, in recent experiments HTS show low jitter times and ultra-fast response times in the order of few 100 ps [12-15], while LTS nanowires typically show about 10 -40 ns. To understand the fundamental operating principles, numerous models, such as normal core hotspot model, diffusion-based hotspot model, photon triggered vortex entry model, diffusion-based vortex entry model, one temperature model, two temperature model etc., have been reported to describe single photon interaction with superconducting nanowires and the emergence of a potential pulse In this work we develop a generic theoretical model to illustrate the response contrasts to a single photon from two different superconductors. The model predicts the temperature evolution of the hotspot in a generic superconducting material. Taking the example of Nb for a LTS and YBCO for HTS, we illustrate the effect of material properties and the superconducting parameters on the SNSPD response when the devices is irradiated with a Gaussian photon pulse with two different wavelengths (λ = 1550 nm, 830 nm). Using an accurate description of the specific heat capacity, thermal heat capacity, order parameter values and the interfacial particle dynamic rates, we have extracted the variation of electronic temperature, the phonon effective temperatures and finally the overall external potential response for LTS and HTS biased at similar conditions for a single photon pulse. Our calculations match closely with several reported results. We compare and contrast the crucial aspects of photon detection and particle dynamics difference between the two largely different superconducting systems and determine the smallest photon detection capability for a chosen nanowire under different biasing conditions. We observe that while LTS has better photon resolution HTS based SNSPD under similar bias conditions, single photon detection is possible with HTS under slightly different biasing conditions. In contrast, under all biasing conditions, the HTS is at least three orders of magnitude faster than LTS materials. This makes the high temperature unconventional superconductors an important option for future SNSPD devices. A typical detector has a superconducting nanowire realized on a suitable substrate which is biased at an appropriate current density and temperature for maximum sensitivity and low dark count rates. To elucidate the carrier dynamics resulting in a potential signal upon photon incidence, we consider a thermal model accounting for all relevant electronphoton interactions including joule heating. A long meandering nanowire on a substrate where the photon of wavelength, λ, incidents is shown in the schematic (Fig. ∂T e ∂t -k e (T e )∇ 2 T e + C e (T e ) τ e-ph (T e -T ph ) = f(x, t) where, C e is the temperature dependent electronic specific heat, k e is the electron thermal conductivity, τ e-ph is the electron-phonon coupling constant. The heat source f(x, t) varies with time and space and accounts for heat generation from incident photon pulse and Joule heating. The electron specific heat C e of the superconductor varies strongly with the temperature. The thermal conductivity, k e depends on the specific heat capacity and is given by k e (T e ) = D e C e (T e ), where D e is the diffusion coefficient of the electron. The spatio-temporal variance of the heat injected into the nanowire by the photon source (f p (x, t)) to be 2 where n p is the number of photons at the designated wavelength λ, hc 2πλx ph wdt ph is the height of the curve peak, x 0 is the spatial position of the center of the peak, x ph is the spatial standard deviation or Gaussian root mean square width, t 0 is the temporal position of the center of the peak and t ph is the temporal standard deviation. With the onset of electrical resistance upon photon incidence, the Joule heating is included in the source term as f j (t) = J b 2 ρ(T e ), where, ρ(T e ) is the temperature dependent resistivity of the superconductor. Following the electron subsystem, the phonon subsystem equation can be written as below, Where C ph , k ph are phonon specific heat, and phonon thermal conductivity. The heat exchange with the electron sub-system is expressed via the τ e-ph and the heat loss to the substrate is expressed via phonon escape time to the substrate with a rate proportional to . The substrate temperature is taken to be T sub . The electron and phonon subsystems equations are solved simultaneously to obtain the relevant time and spatial dependence of the T e and T ph . Using the temperature evolution based on the photon incidence, we obtain the temporal characteristics of the detector electrical signals. The nanowire resistance emergence leads to potential pulses in the shunt resistor according to the electrical circuit in Fig. [ The model developed till now is generic. Custom functions for various superconducting properties such as K e , C e , C ph , K ph , τ esc and Δ(T) can be defined for specific superconductor permitting response calculations. Custom finite difference numerical codes using Crank-Nicholson scheme was employed to solve the coupled equations and obtain rise, fall and the response time of the nanowire for varying photon number and superconducting material properties. We first calculate the response from a conventional LTS. Parameters of Nb is taken here as a representative material. The superconducting thermodynamic variables of niobium for simulating the equations 1 and 4 are listed in the following TABLE [31] The prominent discontinuity for the electronic specific heat closes to T c is noted; while the phonon thermodynamic properties show conventional variation with the temperature, C ph ∝ T 3 . The detailed variations of C e (T e ), C ph (T ph ), k e = D e C e (T e ) and k ph = D ph C ph (T ph ) are given in supplementary material Section 2. The biasing conditions is defined by r and s parameters. The wire is taken to be current biased at J b = r * J c when the entire sample is set at a temperature T b = s * T sw . A Gaussian photon pulse of width 1 ps with a spatial FWHM of 2 μm is taken to be incident on nanowire such that the focal center of the light source falls at the middle of the wire. The temperature variation with space and time when the nanowire is biased at r = 0.25 and s = 0.95 is shown in Fig. We address the larger question of the fundamental limit on the sensitivity of the nanowires in terms of capability to detect a single photon at different bias points and its dependence on the thermodynamic properties of the material. Towards that, we calculate the sensitivity of the SNSPD in terms of the minimum number of photons required to produce a potential value above the thermal noise floor under different bias conditions. The thermal noise potential over the 50 Ω shunt resistor line is indicated by the dashed red line in the potential plot (Fig. The photon sensitivity is a complex interplay between the thermodynamic variables (C es , k es ), width of the resistivity transition, the electron-photon relaxation constants, and several other superconducting parameters. The spatial variation of hotspots is found to be 14.08 μm and 13.69 μm for r = 0.25 and s = 0.95 for LTS and HTS respectively. Although the special variation of hotspot remained almost same, whereas the temporal variation (Δt) of the hotspot for LTS and HTS were found to be 28.28 ns and 17.68 ps respectively. The higher k es of the LTS and poorer τ esc allows for trapping the photo generated heat inside the superconductor. and driving hotspot growth, on contrary relatively lower k es and faster τ esc and τ e-ph of HTS promotes faster growth of hotspot and dissipate the excess heat into substrate which helps the device to return to its base condition, which results the HTS SNSPD to show smaller Δt than LTS SNSPD. The spatial variation of hotspot (Δx) is a complex interplay between C es , k es , Δx, ΔT, ΔH and Δt; where ΔT = T e,max -T b and ΔH is the heat required for temperature raise, ΔT. The relationship is known to follow, k es AΔT Δx ⁄ = ΔH Δt ⁄ . The temperature differences (ΔT) for LTS and HTS SNSPD for the aforesaid conditions are found to be 0.46 K and 2.19 K respectively. As C es,LTS > C es,HTS , the heat required the temperature is higher for LTS than HTS, but the amount of heat transferred (ΔH/Δt) is higher for HTS SNSPD. Therefore, the competitions between the thermodynamic variables make the approximate hotspot size Δx to be almost same for both the materials. Lastly, we address sensitivity and the response times. To illustrate the information, we calculated the maximum sensitivity plots for an additional excitation wavelength (λ = 830 nm) for comparison. The n p (r) variation at bias temperature of (s = 0.95) for LTS and HTS is presented in Fig. The calculated kinetic inductance (from equation 4) for LTS and HTS are 0.19 pH and 0.085 pH respectively. The smaller inductance of the HTS in conjunction with the much faster thermal escape rates into the substrate plays a crucial rule in the temporal response of HTS SNSPDs. Under the excitation of different wavelengths, the HTS-SNSPD is always found to be faster than LTS-SNSPD. Therefore, the aforesaid observations support that our modified model can handle a range of diverse experimental scenarios and we believe that it can be used as a primary tool to quantify performance of basic different SNSPDs. A generalized two temperature model developed here calculates the the hotspot dynamics of different SNSPDs. We have calculated the hot-spot dynamics of both LTS and HTS SNSPD numerically and find the results to match closely with the experimental results. We show a phase-diagram like plot to estimate the minimum photon count required to observe a signal above the noise limit in Nb and YBCO as an example. Our calculations show that both LTS and HTS can resolve single photons. Even though the HTS nanowire is three orders of magnitude faster than the LTS nanowire, the LTS is more sensitive for the same nanowire dimension and bias conditions. We believe that with appropriate expressions for the various physical properties, the sensitivity and response of different superconducting nanowires can be calculated apriori using the numerical treatment mentioned here.