Spaceborne radar remote sensing of the earth system is essential to study natural and man-made changes in the ecosystem, water and energy cycles, weather and air quality, sea level, and surface dynamics. A major challenge with current approaches is the lack of broad spectrum tunability due to narrow band microwave electronics, that limit systems to specific science variable retrievals. This results in a significant limitation in studying dynamic coupled earth system processes such as surface and subsurface hydrology, where broad spectrum radar remote sensing is needed to sense multiple variables simultaneously. Rydberg atomic sensors are highly sensitive broadspectrum quantum detectors that can be dynamically tuned to cover micro-to-millimeter waves with no requirement for band-specific electronics. Rydberg atomic sensors can use existing transmitted signals such as navigation and communication satellites to enable remote sensing. We demonstrate remote sensing of soil moisture, an important earth system variable, via ground-based radar reflectometry with Rydberg atomic systems. To do this, we sensitize the atoms to XM satellite radio signals and use signal correlations to demonstrate use of these satellite signals for remote sensing of soil moisture. Our approach provides a step towards satellite-based broad-spectrum Rydberg atomic remote sensing. Remote sensing of the earth system from space relies on a vast network of technologies Radar systems have traditionally required an onboard transmitter and receiver; However, increasingly remote sensing is achieved via use of existing satellite signals referred to as signals of opportunity (SoOp) Atomic sensors use highly coherent quantum systems to probe atoms and measure weak signals with high sensitivity or precision We demonstrate use of Rydberg sensors configured with atomic super-heterodyning to remotely sense soil moisture using XM radio satellite signals (2.320-2.345 GHz). To achieve this, we utilize signal correlators with the use of a direct and reflected signal to extract signals below the atomic readout noise floor and invert the magnitude of the correlator to soil moisture. Our approach opens a pathway to enable broad-spectrum remote sensing of the earth system using thousands of navigation and communications satellite transmissions. Soil moisture retrievals with existing satellite signals are most sensitive to microwave (MW) remote sensing in the P-S band To sense and retrieve soil moisture from heavily modulated and weak satellite signals, classical SoOp systems utilize signal correlators to extract signals out of the system noise floor 9 (see Supplementary Section 1). A similar approach for signal correlation is needed for the atomic system, because the SoOP signals are expected to be buried in the atomic readout noise (see Supplementary Section 1). We investigate this by injecting a PSK (quadrature phase shift keying) modulated signal (10kHz modulation rate) into the TEM/vapor cell and correlate with a copy of the reference waveform (known random bit-stream) with Δf= 50 MHz (see Fig. Continuous X satellite spectral en elop detection Recent work has demonstrated the first detection of XM satellite signals in a discontinuous spectrum using a Rb Rydberg atomic system To study the sensitivity to soil moisture (SM), the system in Fig. Soil moisture sensing using X satellite signals SM sensing with satellite signals was achieved initially using a similar (container) concept as in Fig. The same configuration was used in an open outdoor terrain composed of predominantly compacted clay, with the same XM-3 A1 channel for remote sensing. The system was configured to use an additional classical readout as a means of comparing the SM retrievals from the Rydberg system (see Supplementary Section 5 for system details). In this measurement, rapid flow of water was added between 0.2-2 minutes (see Fig. Spaceborne radars play a key role in remote sensing of the earth system to study natural and man-made changes in the ecosystem, water and energy cycles, weather and air quality, sea level, and surface dynamics. Different variables in the earth system (such as soil moisture, precipitation, sea surface heights, etc.) respond to different radar wavelengths or bands spanning micro-to-millimeter waves. As a result, many distinct satellite radars covering different bands are needed today to study coupled variables of the earth system. Rydberg atoms can be sensitized to enable micro-to-millimeter wave detectors that could potentially revolutionize satellite-based remote sensing by enabling a dynamically tunable radar system. In this work, we demonstrated remote sensing of soil moisture, an important earth science variable, using Rydberg atoms and satellite signals of opportunity. This work opens the possibility of dynamic broad-spectrum remote sensing via Rydberg atoms by using existing signals of opportunity. The tunability (kHz to THz) of Rydberg atomic detectors will enable broad spectrum satellite-based remote sensing for radars and radiometers when effectively coupled to broadband directive elements such as reflectors/focusing dishes The 4-level super-heterodyning (super-het) is achieved by using a counter propagated probe and coupling laser (see Fig. , where Δ p , Δ c , and Δ RF are the probe, coupler, and MW detuning's, and Ω p , Ω c , and Ω RF the Rabi frequencies associated each, respectively. The setup in Fig. where L is the Lindblad operator for the atoms decay processes. When Δ RF ≈ (on-resonance MW), the probe laser light readout gives where we assume E LO ≫ E MW , and that ω MW ≫ δ. In this case, the LO field acts as a gain mechanism to the MW field and is optimized to as high a value as possible without saturating the system. In this work, we use PSK signals (emulated or satellite signals). The signal model for PSK is given by 21 s(t) E MW cos(ω MW t + θ n ) within a symbol duration, where s(t) is the PSK signal, θ n (2n -)π/ with n ,2, , . This implies a high-pass (δ > ) Rydberg readout with LO phase calibration (set φ LO ) given by: S OFF (t) ∝ E MW E LO cos(δt + θ n ), within each symbol rate. The bandwidth of S OFF (t) is limited by the instantaneous bandwidth (IB) of the Rydberg detector which is dependent on primarily the coupler Rabi frequency Cross-correlators are used in signal processing to extract the degree of similarity between two signals in reflectometry remote sensing where T is the displacement or lag between the two waveforms. The correlation gain (gain obtained by correlating R and REF) is given by: G C BW <IB × τ I , where it is implied that BW≤IB, and τ I is the integration time given simply by the duration of the reference and signal. In SoOp approaches, typical correlation gains are G c < dB (example XM-3 A1 signal with sub-channel BW ~2MHz and duration of 1ms would give log 10 BWτ I ~ dB. For remote sensing on the ground, the delays between REF and R are negligible and T~ . After applying a signal correlator, the peak defined by (f R ⋆ f REF )( ) gives a measured signal-to-noise (SNR) that is improved relative to the pre-correlation SNR (defined by spectral signal-to-noise estimation at 1Hz resolution bandwidth) is given by log 10 G c (dB). Multiple experiments were conducted to advance towards satellite based remote sensing of soil moisture. The setup for the Rydberg atomic system was identical in all cases (see Fig. The Cs vapor cell was located inside TEM cell (length: 390 mm, width: 100 mm, height: 62 mm, septum height: 28 mm). The TEM transmission loss up to 3 GHz was <3dB. Both MW signal and LO was coupled into opposite directions of the TEM cell (see Fig. For classical down-converted signals, is obtained using the same components (antenna, LNA, filter, long coax) with a RF mixer (Level 13 with <6dB conversion loss), IF (intermediate) filter and amplifier. The soil sample used in the container experiments (Fig. To enable broad-spectrum remote sensing via SoOp, it would be necessary to eliminate classical antenna systems that are generally narrow-band and low-gain. This can most directly be achieved by coupling the vapor cell to a reflector dish, which focuses the incoming signal into the vapor cell via either its' primary focus or by using a secondary focus such as in Cassegrain or offset secondary reflector The error in linearity (deviation from expected trend) of the post-correlation signal power relative to precorrelation power is shown in Extended Data Fig. Soil moisture measurement and retrie al approach I2EM simulations for smooth surfaces in the specular scattering regime where f is a function of roughness and g is a function of soil moisture. In log scale, this is given by 52 : σ soil dB log 10 f(R) + log 10 g(M v ) Measurements show that for the same terrain, surface roughness effect can be calibrated out if no significant variation is roughness exists during the experiment where α is the slope between SM and radar scattering coefficients, β a constant dependent of soil roughness, and M v the VSM), and α and β is estimated via best fit to data. Once α and β are known, a direct inversion is employed between σ soil dB and M v . A simple approach is taken to add water progressively for the experiments with sand samples in a container: Controlled amount of water added each time to a bucket with pre-drilled holes to control rate; Bucket location and height varied; Data collected about 15 seconds after water adding process completed (Fig. The percolation time constant was estimated (see Fig. The percolation time constant (see Fig. Soils store and transport water to greater depths, and the ability to store and transport is determined by the hydraulic conductivity. The hydraulic conductivity is found by solving the Richards soil dynamics equation To study the difference between a classical radar reflectometry and the atomic reflectometry system, we use an RF splitter to split (at a loss of 6dB to each) the backscatter to both the Rydberg atomic system and a classical readout system (mixer, low-pass filter baseband LNA) (see Extended Data Fig. February 28, 2024 © 2024. California Institute of Technology. Government sponsorship acknowledged. © 2024. California Institute of Technology. Government sponsorship acknowledged.