Nano-protrusion (NP) on metal surface and its inevitable contamination layer under high electric field is often considered as the primary precursor that leads to vacuum breakdown, which plays an extremely detrimental effect for high energy physics equipment and many other devices. Yet, the NP growth has never been experimentally observed. Here, we conduct field emission (FE) measurements along with insitu Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) imaging of an amorphous-carbon (a-C) coated tungsten nanotip at various nanoscale vacuum gap distances. We find that under certain conditions, the FE currentvoltage (I-V) curves switch abruptly into an enhanced-current state, implying the growth of an NP. We then run field emission simulations, demonstrating that the temporary enhanced-current I-V is perfectly consistent with the hypothesis that a NP has grown at the apex of the tip. This hypothesis is also confirmed by the repeatable in-situ observation of such a nano-protrusion and its continued growth during successive FE measurements in TEM. We tentatively attribute this phenomenon to field-induced biased diffusion of surface a-C atoms, after performing a finite element analysis that excludes the alternative possibility of field-induced plastic deformation. The application of intense electric fields on a metal surface can cause vacuum breakdown (VBD), also known as vacuum arc In terms of the exact mechanisms of the appearance of field enhancing protrusions, several processes have been proposed, including plastic deformations due to high electric field-induced stress In this letter, we study in-situ the morphological evolution of a field emitting tungsten (W) nanotip coated with an amorphous carbon (a-C) layer during the field emission process. We measure the evolution of its field emission characteristics in-situ a transmission electron microscope (TEM) and record the growth of an a-C nanoprotrusion, which is attributed to field-induced biased surface diffusion. This is the first in-situ observation of field-induced NP growth on an a-C layer coated metal surface, demonstrating the possibility of such a process leading to protrusion growth and revealing the origin of enhanced field emission before vacuum arcs. The in-situ field emission experiments and corresponding electrode morphology recordings are carried out inside a JEOL-2010F TEM, where the pressure is on the order of 10 -5 Pa, and the electrode gap is adjusted by an in-situ electrically biased TEM holder (ZepTools Technology) as shown in the schematic of Fig. We took field emission I-V measurements for various gap distances d. Unfortunately, this particular setup does not allow for an accurate estimation of d from the TEM images, due to the high sensitivity of this measurement to even minute tilting of the anode plate (see the Fig. Fig. For the d3 gap, the I-V curves have only two distinct states. One is similar to State #2, i.e., the current starts at a low level and then is enhanced up to four times at higher voltages, but in this case the I-V curve has significant fluctuations at higher voltages rather than jumping to a stable high-current state, indicating an extremely unstable a-C layer. The other is similar to the stable enhancedcurrent State #3. Then, with progressive FE measurements at a reduced nanogap d4, an NP was observed to be formed firmly near the tip apex, and only the stable high-current State #3 was obtained afterwards. To test our NP growth hypothesis as an explanation for the transitional FE behavior of Fig. For the measurements at d1,2,3, we simulated two geometries. One with the regular smooth tip and one with a small NP at the apex, as illustrated in Fig. To test the validity of the plastic deformation hypothesis, we conducted FEM simulations utilizing our previously developed electrostatic-elastoplastic model The results of our model are summarized in Fig. The surface diffusion mechanism is also compatible with the observed instability of the NP growth. The FE dynamics of Fig. Furthermore, in addition to the observation of NP under I-V conditions (ramping voltage measurement) in this paper, we have also observed the dynamic growth of NP during a constant voltage measurement in other experiments, which was accompanied by the enhanced field emission current and induced a following electrical breakdown (see the Figs. S3 to S6 in the Supplemental Material). In conclusion, we demonstrated a nano-protrusion growth on the amorphous carbon (a-C) coating layer of a tungsten nanotip during field emission, by in-situ field emission experiments and accompanying field emission simulations. We attribute the nano-protrusion growth to field-induced biased surface diffusion, after excluding the possibility of field-induced plastic deformation by FEM simulations. This letter provides the experimental confirmation of amorphous-carbon nano-protrusion growth on an electrode surface exposed to high electric field, which is a plausible explanatory mechanism of the appearance of field enhancing features necessary to initiate electrical breakdown in vacuum. As the Fig. We have conducted more experiments on other carbon-coated tungsten nanotips, and reproduced the similar behavior of NP growth under FE conditions. The morphology of this carbon-coated tungsten nanotip along with the corresponding I-V curves is shown in Figure The experimental setup is very similar to the one used at the constant voltage measurement, with the difference that we use a clean crystalline W tip. Although there are the adsorbates on the counter electrode or gas in the chamber (especially hydrocarbons), the results show that with the continuous field emission, although the morphology of pure tungsten nanoelectrode has evolved, and the internal lattice structure remained regular, no pollutants such as carbon layer appeared on its surface, as shown in Figure Repeating the simulation of plastic deformation for various gap distances, and the results are shown in Figure 