Metasurface-based nano-printing has enabled ultrahigh-resolution grayscale or color image display. However, the maximum number of independent nano-printing images allowed by one single-layer metasurface is still limited despite many multiplexing methods that have been proposed to increase the design degree of freedom. In this work, we substantially push the multiplexing limit of nano-printing by transforming images at different observation angles into mapping the corresponding images to different positions in the Fourier space, and simultaneously controlling the complex electric field across multiple polarization channels. Our proposed Polarization-Encoded Lenticular Nano-Printing (Pollen), aided by a modified evolutionary algorithm, allows the display of several images based on the viewing angle, similar to traditional lenticular printing but without requiring a lenticular layer. In addition, it extends the display capability to encompass multiple polarization states. Empowered by the ability to control the complex amplitude of three polarization channels, we numerically and experimentally demonstrate the generation of 13 distinguished gray-scale Chinese ink wash painting images, 49 binary patterns, and three sets of 3D nano-printing images, totaling 25 unique visuals. These results present the largest number of recorded images with ultra-high resolution to date. Our innovative Pollen technique is expected to benefit the development of modern optical applications, including but not limited to optical encryption, optical data storage, lightweight display, and augmented reality and virtual reality. Lenticular printing, which utilizes lenticular lenses to create printed images that can appear to change or move at different viewing angles, has been widely used in arts, marketing, and advertising in the past decades On the other hand, metasurfaces, which are artificial two-dimensional nanostructures, have emerged as a new frontier in optics and photonics because of their superior ability to control the amplitude, phase, and polarization of the scattering light with high precision. Many innovative functions using metasurfaces, such as metalens In this work, we demonstrate a novel Pollen technique, that can show up to 49 binary images and 13 grayscale Chinese ink wash painting images at different viewing angles and polarization states. our method only requires a single-layer metasurface without the need for cylindrical lenses, and all generated images are free from discontinuous stripes or crosstalk. The working wavelength is set at 1064 nm and the pixel of each image is only 600 nnnn × 600 nnnn, corresponding to a resolution of 42.3 k dots per inch (dpi). To the best of our knowledge, this marks the first demonstration of the highest multiplexing capacity on a single metasurface device for both grayscale and binary nano-printed images while maintaining ultra-high dpi. A detailed comparison of our work with published works can be found in Section 1 of the supplementary materials. The display of the nano-printing images is directly related to the amplitude information of the diffracted light reflected by the metasurface plane. To better explain the working principle of our design, we begin by describing the complex electric field of periodic structures on a certain plane under a specific polarization state and wavelength, which is given by Here AA(xx, yy) and jj(xx, yy) represent discrete arbitrary amplitude and phase distribution of the pixel at position (xx, yy). The periodicity of the structure along the xx and yy directions are PP xx and PP yy . We can always rewrite this field as a summation of multiple complex electric fields EE ii , If we assign AA ii with predefined amplitude distribution of the nano-printing images NNPP ii , and add a planar wave wavefront with the wavevector of (kk iixx , kk iiyy ) to the phase term, then the required EE(xx, yy) can be rewritten as Equation ( where M and N are the dimensions of the 2D grid. Replacing EE(xx, yy) with Equation (3), we can obtain, Equation (5) shows that after performing the Fourier transform to EE(xx, yy), for each decomposed EE ii (xx, yy), its corresponding electric field in the k-space is the Fourier transform of the amplitude distribution centered at (kk iixx , kk iiyy ). This provides us an opportunity to separate all the wave component EE ii in the k-space without crosstalk if appropriate amplitude profile NNPP ii and wavevector (kk iixx , kk iiyy ) are predefined in the design. Although the separation of the k-space is in the far field, it can affect the images collected by objective lenses at the surface of the device. In the following, we will demonstrate how the splitting of the wavevectors can help with the design of displaying multiple images via one single-layer metasurface device. As an example shown in Figure Then, the Fourier transform of those beams will be located around the four predefined wavevectors as presented in Figure As shown in Figure The experimental setup is illustrated in Figure As we further expand the viewing angles to 8 or 9, the number of allowable nano-printing images increases to 25. From the experimental results shown in Figure Moreover, as discussed in Section S6 of the supplementary materials, the major parts of the initial images are confined in the low-frequency domain of the k space, which offers us the opportunity to further increase the display channel by shrinking the NA of the objective lens and integrating more observation angles. As shown in Figure To summarize, we demonstrate polarization-encoded lenticular nano-printing (Pollen) with single-layer metasurfaces. With the help of an inverse design algorithm, we successfully realize 13 independent grayscale nano-printing images. We also demonstrate the display of 3D lenticular nano-printing images that can create the 3D effect for three objects including a cube, a chair, and a tetrahedron in all three polarization channels consisting of 25 images. When observed with a small NA lens, up to 49 independent nanoprinting images can be displayed, which is the maximum number of nano-printing images allowed by a single metasurface to the best of our knowledge. Owning to the subwavelength pixel size of 600 nnnn × 600 nnnn, the resolution of the nanoprinting image can reach 42.3k dpi. Our design also shows great robustness for stitching errors when the fabrication of large-size devices is required. With the help of other phase retrieval functionals such as the GS algorithm Fabrication: First, 50 nm-thick Au was deposited on the top of a Si wafer by an e-beam evaporation process. After cleaning the wafer with acetone and isopropanol, a layer of AAll 2 OO 3 with 30 nm thickness was deposited using the atomic layer deposition (ALD) process. Then, the 50 nm Au metasurface was fabricated by ebeam lithography, followed by the e-beam evaporation and lift-off process.