Twisted graphene based moiré heterostructures host a flat band at the magic angles where the kinetic energy of the charge carriers is quenched and interaction effects dominate. This results in emergent phases such as superconductors and correlated insulators that are electrostatically tunable. We investigate superconductivity in twisted trilayer graphene (TTG) by integrating it as the weak link in a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). The measured current phase relation (CPR) yields a large and tunable kinetic inductance, up to 150 nH per square, of the electron and hole type intrinsic superconductors. We further show that the specific kinetic inductance and the critical current density are universally related via the superconducting coherence length, and extract an upper bound of ∼ 200 nm for the coherence length. Our work opens avenues for using graphene-based superconductors as tunable elements in superconducting circuits. The discovery of novel phases, such as superconductors and correlated insulators, that emerge in a few atomic layers of twisted graphene has brought a new class of materials to the fore Currently, superconducting circuits are widely utilised to design well defined quantum states and control circuits at the mesoscopic scale to create one of the leading quantum bit (qubit) architectures In this work, we investigate superconductivity in twisted trilayer graphene (TTG), by integrating it as the weak link in a SQUID (superconducting quantum interference devices) loop of superconducting molybdenum rhenium (MoRe). We show that, in the intrinsic superconducting regimes, the phase winds like a linear inductor across the TTG weak link and contrast this with the proximity superconducting regime where TTG exhibits a sinusoidal current phase relation (CPR). For the superconducting TTG we measure a large kinetic inductance, up to 150 nH/□ which is electrostatically tunable. Moreover, by studying the kinetic inductance of the superconducting phase as a function of the critical current density we extract the upper bounds of ≈200 nm and ≈190 nm for the superconducting coherence lengths in the electron and the hole type flat bands, respectively. Finally, with a critical current density of ∼ 200 nA/μm we show that graphene-based superconductors may be promising as tunable elements in superconducting circuits. We create the TTG by twisting three layers of graphene, such that the top and the bottom layers are aligned while the middle layer is twisted at an angle ≈ 1.7 TTG is encapsulated between hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) layers with graphite underneath which functions as the backgate (BG). The schematic shown in Fig. The characteristic transport signatures of twisted trilayer graphene flat bands are shown by the differential resistance map R = dV /dI at 4 K by sweeping the backgate voltage (V BG ) and the topgate voltage (V TG2 ) on junction 2 (jn2), while V TG1 = 0, as shown in Fig. The intrinsic and proximity superconducting regions show a marked difference in the R vs. T plot shown in Fig. The differential resistance map obtained by sweeping the backgate voltage (V BG ) and the topgate voltage (V TG1 ), while V TG2 = 0, is shown in Fig. The rich phase diagram for the two TTG junctions allows us to study the SQUID oscillations and probe the current phase relation (CPR) of the weak links in various configurations. The critical current for a weak link is governed by the phase drop across the junction and is given by I ci = I 0 ci f i (θ i ), where I ci (I 0 ci ) is the (maximum) critical current, θ i is the phase difference of the superconducting order parameter across the junction i = (1, 2) and f i (θ i ) is its CPR, which is typically a 2π periodic function bound to ±1. Since the intrinsic nature of a weak link determines its CPR, measuring the CPR is a valuable probe to access fundamental material properties To measure the CPR of junction 1 (jn1), for example, the SQUID can be configured asymmetrically, I 0 c1 ≪ I 0 c2 . This fixes the phase drop across jn2 at the critical phase (phase at which I c2 is maximum) resulting in the external flux (Φ ext ) essentially tuning the phase drop across jn1. However, an accurate measurement of the CPR requires careful considerations For an accurate measurement of the CPR we keep the ratio I 0 c2 /I 0 c1 ⩾ 20 and ensure that we observe the expected oscillation amplitude by using the gate tunability of our weak links to eliminate the possibility of large inductance effects from the SQUID loop. We study the CPR of jn1 by fixing jn2 as the reference junction with I 0 c2 ≈ 1 μA, shown by the orange dot in Fig. The CPR in the proximity regime is sinusoidal (I c1 = I 0 c1 sin θ 1 , solid black curve in Fig. Fig. The inset shows the sheet kinetic inductance L □ vs the critical current I c for the hole (blue circles) and the electron (purple squares) type superconductors. The kinetic inductance of the intrinsic superconductor (jn1) can then be extracted from the slope δI c /δθ 1 (≡ δI c /δΦ ext for I 0 c1 ≪ I 0 c2 ) of the rising linear part of the measured CPR. This yields, for example, L k ≈ 16 nH for the bottom panel in Fig. Using the Ginzburg Landau (GL) theory We then define the specific kinetic inductance as λ k = L k × wt/l = m e /(2n s e 2 ). This yields )a universal relation between λ k and J c that only depends on the coherence length ξ of the superconductor. We note that the contribution of jn.1 towards the critical current of the SQUID, that we obtain from the SQUID oscillations, may be smaller than the critical current predicted from the GL theory. The former is governed by the fluxoid quantisation in the SQUID loop and the phase slip rates in the superconducting thin film, while the latter is related to the vanishing superconducting order parameter of the thin film as the velocity of superconducting charge carriers increases (see Supplementary Information, section VI). The plot of λ k vs. J c , shown in Fig. We emphasise that the coherence length we extract for the twisted trilayer graphene superconductor is larger than those previously reported In the future, it will be intriguing to investigate the kinetic impedance at high frequencies and study other crystalline van der Waals superconductors The graphene and hBN flakes are exfoliated on a doped silicon wafer with 285nm of silicon oxide on top (Si/SiO 2 ). Large monolayer graphene flakes are selected by optical contrast under a microscope. The graphene flake selected for the device (with dimensions of around 45 μm × 15 μm) is cut into three segments using a tungsten needle controlled with a micromanipulator. For picking up the flakes, we use a polydimethylsiloxane/polycarbonate (PDMS/PC) film. We assemble the stack using a dry pick-up method After the preparation of the stack, the regions where MoRe will be deposited as edge contacts are defined using e-beam lithography. We then etch through the top hBN, graphene and a small portion (20%) of the bottom hBN above these regions using reactive ion etching (RIE) (CHF3/O2), before sputtering the MoRe edge contacts (100 nm). Subsequently, the graphene junction dimensions are determined by defining an etching mask in another stage of e-beam lithography, which is then etched away with CHF 3 /O 2 RIE. For the next step, we deposit an additional insulating layer in the form of 25 nm Al 2 O 3 using atomic layer deposition (ALD). In the last stage of lithography, the individual togates are fabricated by defining and evaporating Ti/Au (10 nm/200 nm) above the junction weak links. The transport measurements are done in a 3 He -4 He dilution refrigerator, which can be cooled down to 30 mK (base temperature). We apply a voltage signal composed of a dc component generated by a voltage source to which a small ac component supplied by a lockin amplifier is added using a transformer. The signal is converted to a bias current using a 1 MΩ resistor connected in series with the voltage source. The device resistance is determined in a pseudo fourterminal configuration (where we can ignore line resistances but not contact resistances) by measuring the consequent voltage drop across the device on applying the bias current. The lock-in amplifier serves to reduce the signal noise and uses the small ac component (1 to 10 nA) of the signal to measure the differential resistance R = dV /dI. To extract the charge carrier densities n and the displacement field D from the gate voltages, we utilise a parallel plate capacitor model with For the topgates, where there are two insulating layers (hBN and Al 2 O 3 ) separating them from the graphene: Here, V T Gi is the gate voltage applied to junction i by its corresponding topgate, V CN P is the position of the charge neutrality point, and κ tophBN (κ Al2O3 ) and d tophBN (d Al2O3 ) are the dielectric constants and the heights of the corresponding layers. V CN P can be non zero due to intrinsic doping of the sample. Our SQUID can be approximated to a rectangular loop, whose geometrical inductance is given by where h is the height of the loop, w is its width, and l 1 and l 2 are lengths of the two sides of the rectangular loop. We estimate L geo ≈ 44pH. Previous studies report the sheet kinetic inductance of MoRe L M oRe sq = 4.26 pH In addition to experiments using the lock-in amplifier, we also perform measurements using a FCA3100 counter to measure the critical current. In this technique, a sawtooth current is generated by applying a sawtooth shaped ac voltage pulse V bias with frequency f (277.77 Hz), amplitude V pp and off-set voltage V of f from zero in series with a bias resistor R bias (1 MΩ). The measured voltage drop across the device is then forwarded to the counter. Till the applied bias current is lesser than the critical current, there is voltage across the device. The counter is set to trigger when the measured voltage is larger than a threshold V thresh (100-150 mV, set above the noise level of the signal), which occurs when the bias current just exceeds the critical current, owing to a corresponding sharp rise in the measured voltage. The counter measures the time between the start time t 0 taken at 50% of V bias and the end time t meas taken when the measured voltage crosses V thresh (Fig. where x denotes the ratio of the falling to the rising slope over a single period of the drive signal. Since there are large fluctuations in the switching statistics of the current, using a counter allows us to measure the current for several switching events (N = 2000), and take its mean (Fig. We note that for an accurate measurement of the critical current, there needs to be a sharp rise in the voltage (from 0 to beyond V thresh ) at I c (Fig. For regions where both junctions have proximity induced superconductivity (SNS) (indicated by the red dot in Fig. Alternatively, we model I c1 as a 2π periodic, short junction where t 1 and t 2 are the transparencies of the two junctions. We plot the CPR by maximizing I c , and find that we get the best fits to our data for t 1 = 0.54 and t 2 = 0.52 (Fig. In addition to distinguishing between the proximity induced and intrinsic superconductor on the electron side, we also study the CPR of the hole type superconducting region of junction 1. Fig. Fig. This section is adapted from Section 4.4 of Here m e and e are the mass and charge of an electron, v s is the supercurrent velocity, h is the magnetic field, and w and t are the width and thickness of the superconducting film. For a thin superconducting film, the energy due to the field term h 2 /8π is negligible compared to the kinetic energy of the charge carriers, which allows us to ignore the last term in equation 5. For a given v s , we can minimize the free energy density to get the optimal value of |ψ| 2 . This gives us where ψ 2 ∞ = n s is the superfluid density. Substituting this value of |ψ| 2 in equation 4, we obtain the current density Solving for ∂J s /∂v s = 0 gives us the maximum of J sthe critical current density As the Ginzburg Landau coherence length ξ is given by the relation Substituting the value of |α| in equation 8, we get On the other hand we can determine the kinetic inductance by equating the kinetic energy of the charge carriers to the inductive energy of the wire where l is the length of the superconducting film and I s is the supercurrent in the wire. This gives We define the sheet kinetic inductance L □ and the specific kinetic inductance λ k as Substituting the value of λ k in equation 10, we get Thus a fit to the plot of λ k vs. J c allows us to extract the coherence length ξ. As shown above, the critical current obtained from the GL theory essentially represents the maximum supercurrent (intrinsic critical current) that the thin film can sustain as the supercurrent velocity v s increases. On the other hand in the SQUID geometry the oscillation amplitude is governed by the fluxoid quantisation in the SQUID loop and the phase slip rates in the superconducting thin film and the oscillation amplitude may be smaller than the intrinsic critical current. In the main text we have used the SQUID oscillation amplitude to estimate J c . This may result in an overestimation of the coherence length. To compare the two, we first look at the electron type superconductor in jn1 where we have measured an oscillation amplitude (I c,max -I c,min )/2 ≈ 55 nA in the SQUID configuration, shown in main text in Fig. On the other hand, a better estimate to the intrinsic critical current may be obtained from the I bias value where the V-I curve deviates from its linear part (normal metal) and the vortex dynamics sets in. We estimate this intrinsic critical current by the peak in the dV /dI curve, as indicated by the dashed line, which gives us ≈ 75 nA and a coherence length of ≈ 135 nm. A similar analysis for the hole type superconductor yields a coherence length of ≈ 50 nm (intrinsic critical current of ≈ 56 nA, as opposed to SQUID oscillation amplitude of ≈ 14 nA). K Δn