The kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on the practical air cathode in a Lithium air cell, which is conventionally composed of porous carbon with or without catalysts supported on it, was investigated. The mechanism and kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) was studied on a porous carbon electrode in an oxygen saturated solution of 0.1M Lithium bistrifluoromethanesulfonimidate (LiTFSI) in Dimethoxyethane (DME) using cyclic voltammetery (CV) and the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) technique. The oxygen reduction and evolution reactions were found to occur at similar potentials to those observed on a smooth, planar glassy carbon (GC) electrode. The effect of the porosity and the resultant increase in surface area were readily observed in the increase in the transient time required for the intermediates to reach the ring and the much larger disk currents (compared to smooth, planar GC) recorded respectively. The RRDE data was analyzed using a kinetic model previously developed by us and the rate constant of the elementary reactions calculated. The rates constant for the electrochemical The mitigation of "range anxiety" hindering the adoption of electric vehicles (EV) requires that EVs on a single charge match the range of a gasoline powered car with a full tank. A range of 500 miles/charge, which would satisfy this requirement, requires the commercialization of "beyond Li-ion" battery systems. The Li-O2 cell is one of the best candidates due to its high theoretical specific energy of 3505 Wh Kg -1 which is significantly higher than current lithium-ion cells During oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), O2 or O2 -formed by outer sphere electron transfer, is adsorbed onto the cathode and reacts with Li + to form LiO2 though net one electron transfer. Li2O2 is formed from LiO2 via a subsequent electrochemical reaction or by chemical disproportionation reaction The net one electron transfer observed herein has led to the chemical disproportionation of LiO2 being considered the major reaction route It is evident from the literature that analyses of data from the same technique such as SERS previously The present study seeks to use the RRDE technique to examine the Li + ORR on practical, porous carbon electrodes. Porous carbon electrodes have been extensively used as cathodes for Li-air cells The carbon black mixture was prepared by mixing 10 mg Carbon black (CB, acetylene, 100% compressed, surface area: 80 m 2 g -1 , >99.9 %, Alfa Aesar) with 10 wt% polytetrafluorethylene solution (PTFE, 60 wt% dispersion in water, Sigma Aldrich) followed by addition of 3 ml isopropanol to the CB/PTFE mixture solution to dilute the mixture. The mixture was dispersed with a sonicator (Qsonica, frequency: 20 KHz) for 10 minutes at room temperature. The glassy carbon (GC) disk of the RRDE system was roughened using sand paper and recessed ~ 1 mm below the lip of the surrounding teflon holder. The CB film was deposited by dropping 7 μl CB/PTFE slurry onto the recessed, roughened GC disk electrode (surface area: 0.196 cm 2 ) and dried in an oven at 40 ̊C for 15 minutes. This CB coating process was repeated three times until it uniform surface coverage was achieved and the film was flush with the RRDE assembly surface. Finally, the porous CB disk electrode was dried in a vacuum oven at 40 ̊C for 12 hours to remove all water and solvent. The 0.1M solution of Lithium bis-trifluoromethanesulfonimidate (LiTFSI) (99.95%, Aldrich) in 1,2-Dimethoxyethane (DME) (Sigma-Aldrich, ReagentPlus, ≥99%) was prepared in a MBraun argon filled glove box with H2O and O2 levels <0.5ppm. The LiTFSI salt was dried in a vacuum oven for 24 hours at 40 ̊C and DME was distilled, argon purged and stored in an argon filled glove box to ensure absence of moisture before use. The water content in the "as-received" DME was measured using Karl-Fisher titration (Mettler Toledo C30 Coulometric KF Titrator) and the water content was found to be 77.6 ppm. Similarly, the water content of the electrolyte was measured after preparation and found to be 76.8 ppm. The electrochemical experiments were carried out with a multi-channel potentiostat (Solartron Analytical) with independent leads for potential and current. A 50-ml flask was used for the RRDE measurement with a custom designed Teflon top with four openings for working, reference, counter electrode and the gas purge line respectively. The three-electrode system consisted of Pt gauze (Alfa Aesar, 45 mesh, <99.9%) on a Pt wire as reference and counter electrode. The working electrode was a Pine instruments RRDE with the CB coated GC disk surrounded by a Pt ring with a rated collection efficiency (N) of 0.25 and used in conjunction with the supplied rotor shaft and gas purged bearing assembly. The entire setup was assembled in the glove box and sealed. Upon transfer out of the glovebox, the gas inlet was immediately connected to an Ar source to maintain the Ar blanket over the electrolyte surface. The gas purged bearing assembly was connected to a second Ar source to prevent ingress of atmospheric air during RRDE shaft rotation. The Pt pseudo-reference was calibrated with respect to the Li/Li + couple using a ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc + ) internal reference as recommended by IUPAC The background cyclic voltammograms (CV) were measured in Ar saturated state after a 30 min Ar purge. The CVs were then measured using different scan rates in the O2 saturated condition after O2 purge for 1 hour. For the RRDE measurements, the working electrode rotation rate was controlled by a MSRX speed control (Pine Instrument). The ring potential was held at 3.08 V which was chosen to achieve complete oxidation of reduced species produced at the disk. The linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) were measured from 2.2 to 1.0 V vs Li/Li + based on the location of the ORR peak identified from the CV. The oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution current was measured on the porous CB coated GC electrode disk. Figure The ORR and OER peak shifts were seen to be in agreement with the suggestion of a 30/α mV shift for a 10 fold increase in scan rate The electrochemical kinetic analysis for ORR was carried by combining the RRDE technique with an electro-kinetic model. A detailed discussion of the use of RRDE measurements for non-aqueous ORR reactions can be found in our recent works The Koutecky-Levich equation describes the current measured by a RRDE if the ORR kinetics is first order with respect to dissolved oxygen and the disk current and square root of rotation rate have the relation given by equation ( where ik is the kinetic current. Thus, the slope of a typical Koutecky-Levich (K-L) plot (i -1 vs. ω -1 2 ) as shown in Figure Where F is 96,485 C mol -1 , A is the geometric area of disk, D is the diffusion coefficient of O2 (2.78 x 10 -6 cm 2 s -1 in 0.1M LITFSI/DME) to have a sigmoidal profile with the current being linear below a certain critical rotation rate and increasing exponentially above this value The transport regime in the film in such cases is expected to be dominated by diffusion, with the contributions from Fickian and Knudsen diffusion depending on the pore size distribution. Apart from the convective transport to the disk surface and kinetics on the disk surface that can serve as the limiting factor (depending on the potential), in a porous electrode system we may also need to consider the diffusive transport through the film, possible reaction rate limitation at the redox centers inside the film and partitioning between the film surface and the film bulk (i.e. inside the pores) The slope of the K-L plot and hence kinetic calculations such as the number of electrons is unaffected. In the present case, for a uniform, conducting carbon film whose thickness is an order of magnitude less than its diameter, the diffusion process in the film is believed to be dominant contribution to the film current. To account for this film current, we may re-write the K-L equation as follows The depletion layer at the disk disappears at high enough rotation rate and hence we may assume that the reactant concentration exposed to the disk would be the same as the bulk concentration. Thus, the film current maybe represented as The reaction occurring on the film surface vs. the pores can be distinguished through the partition coefficient κ (assuming the same rate expression in both the pores and the surface) and the pore diffusion (possibly Fickian) can be characterized by the film diffusion coefficient D film . Interestingly, it was observed that while there is a small film current at the start of the limiting current region (1.8V), this current disappears at higher overpotentials (1.4V). This may indicate that at high enough overpotentials the reactions on the surface are so rapid as to consume all reactants reaching the surface before they have an opportunity to diffuse into the film bulk. Nevertheless, calculating the D film κ φ term using the film current at 1.8V (1.03mA), a value of 5.7 x 10 -5 m.s -1 was obtained. Since the film is ~1mm thick, this leads to a film diffusion coefficient of 5.7 x 10 -8 m 2 . s -1 . This is two orders of magnitude lower than the bulk diffusion coefficient of oxygen (2.78 x 10 -6 cm 2 s -1 in 0.1M LITFSI/DME). Alternatively, the contribution of film diffusion can be evaluated using the disk to ring transient time. The transient time is related to the reactant diffusion coefficient as follows K is a RRDE geometry dependent proportionality factor given by K = 43.12 (log ( )) 2 3 . In the present case, it is 10.1 rpm.s, leading to a calculated value of the transient time at 400 rpm of 0.3s. Whereas experimentally, we observe a transient time of ~14s. While there may be a contribution from the difference between the calculated and actual K values (due to variations in RRDE geometry) these would not be sufficient to explain the two orders of magnitude variation (the experimentally determined value of K in reference 37 was 11). But since the film and bulk diffusion coefficients vary by two orders of magnitude, the possible reason for this discrepancy is apparent. The slow product diffusion through the film on the disk, slows down its detection at the ring. Thus, analysis of both the reaction currents at the disk and product oxidation currents at the ring show that transport through the film plays a major role in the determining reaction site (film surface vs. film pores) and rate of product transport through the film (Li2O2 precipitation vs. pore clogging). This is a vital first step in understanding the Li + ORR in practical electrodes. The plots from the mixed control region between 1.5 V to 1.7 V were used to calculate the total number of electrons transferred in the reaction and this was found to equal 1.07 within 10% error. This calculation was carried out using the geometric surface area of the electrode. The actual surface area measured by techniques such as N2 adsorption (BET) is not applicable herein as the electroactive surface area is not necessarily the same as the physical surface area. The variation of ORR kinetics by adsorption site has been discussed by us elsewhere The combination of the total number of electrons with the information on the rate determining step obtained from a Tafel plot allowed us to describe the overall electrochemistry of the present system. Semilog plots of kinetic current and the disk potential (Tafel plot) are depicted in the Figure Where The kinetic current ik is determined by a rearrangement of the Koutecky-Levich equation (i k = i. i L /(i L -i)) to obtain a relationship between the disk current and the limiting current. The slope of this plot indicates the rate determining step. In the present case, a value of 390 mV.dec -1 was obtained which was found to be at odds with the theoretical value (118 mV.dec -1 with transfer coefficient (α) = 0.5) for the first electron transfer step being rate determining. This anomalous value of the Tafel slope points to deviation in the value of the transfer coefficient from the conventional value of 0.5 to 0.16 as described by us previously To calculate the individual reaction rate constants for the elementary steps multiple possible Li-O2 ORR pathways depicted in the Figure The reactions were described by typical kinetic equations along with equations for the disk and ring currents. The equations are as follows: Where Z is a mass transport relation given by: RRDE kinetics models from the literature for aqueous ORR ) + ( A k 5 ) Where A is reaction rate constant relation given by: The kinetic relations were simplified based on our experimental observations. The Koutecky-Levich plots indicated that the overall reaction involved the transfer of a single electron. Thus, the direct two-electron and series based two-electron pathway to produce Li2O2 was eliminated (k 2 = k 3 = 0). The simplified model was further analyzed to obtain individual reaction rate constants. Figure Figure ) plots. The value of k 5 was found to be smaller by three orders of magnitude as compared to the values the smooth, planar GC disk The material dependent intermediate binding energy could also play a role. The carbonaceous nature of the electrode in both the smooth and porous cases and the equal rates of rotation indicated that the variation in the desorption rates was a function of the porosity of the electrode. At the same rotation rates (i.e. equal rates of convection), the smooth electrode would display purely Fickian diffusion whereas the porous electrodes can be expected to display a mixture of Fickian and Knudsen behavior (which is typically slower) depending on pore size distribution. Further, desorption would also depend on the species concentration gradient between the surface and the near surface electrolyte environment. This gradient could be non-uniform in highly tortuous electrodes and hence lead to non-uniform mass transport driving forces leading to a net slower rate of desorption. This was reflected in the large time transient between the observation of the mass transport limited current at the disk and the appearance of the corresponding current plateau at the ring. The rate constant for the first electron transfer (k 1 ) was calculated from the rotation dependent relation between i D , i L described by equation ( Having calculated k1, k5 and k6, k4 was calculated by rearranging equations ( The potential dependence of the various rate constants is summarized in Figure Thus, the porous electrode increases the retention of the product species on the electrode and hence offers a possible avenue towards greater reversibility of Li2O2, with the trade-off being the overall slower rate of reaction due to the slowdown in the rate of the chemical disproportionation reaction on the surface. Further, the chemical disproportionation reaction is expected to dominate due to the transport properties of a porous electrode. The present study examines the effect of porosity on the individual reactions comprising the ORR in Li-O2 systems. Porous carbon was chosen as being representative of the typical electrode and catalyst support used in Li-O2 cells. The porosity of the electrode was found to have a significant impact on the desorption of reaction intermediates and their further reaction on the surface while having minimal effect on the electrochemical reaction or chemical reactions in the electrolyte bulk. Porous electrodes offer a way to increase reversibility of the Li-O2 cell by minimizing loss of the Li2O2 product by precipitation but would also be hampered by increased passivation. The present study is expected to inform the choice of porous materials as non-aqueous cathodes and possibly influence the tailoring of optimum electrode porosity and tortuosity. 