Boron nitride (BN) is today considered as one of the most promising materials for many novel applications including bright single photon emission, deep UV opto-electronics, small sized solid-state neutron detector, and high-performance two-dimensional materials, etc. Despite the recent successful fabrication of large-area BN single-crystals (typically ≤ 5 atomic layers), the scalable growth of thicker singlecrystalline BN films still constitutes a great challenge. In this work, we demonstrate an approach to grow large-area multilayer single-crystal BN films by chemical vapor deposition on face-centered cubic single crystal alloy thin films with different stoichiometric phases. We show that the BN growth is greatly tunable and improved by increasing the Fe content in single-crystal . The formation of pyramidshaped multilayer BN domains with aligned orientation enables a continuous connection following a layer-by-layer, "first-meet-firstconnect", mosaic stitching mechanism. By means of selected area electron diffraction, micro-photoluminescence spectroscopy in the deep UV and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, the layer-bylayer connection mechanism is unambiguously evidenced, and the stacking order has been verified to occur as unidirectional AB and ABC stackings, i.e., in the Bernal and rhombohedral BN phase. Two-dimensional boron nitride (BN) materials have been attracting extensive attention in recent years due to their novel properties and potential applications in many fields including bright single photon emitters in the visible Reminding the long-reported near-perfect epitaxy relationship between BN and a single crystal nickel The growth of multilayer BN based on the INMS mechanism faces several difficulties. First, successful implementation of the INMS mechanism requires that all isolated nucleated domains have the same orientation, as also demonstrated for the monolayer BN growth Second, specifically for multilayer BN, the adjacent BN domains have to connect their layers correctly, in order to achieve a single-crystal multilayer (Figs. We here demonstrate a strategy for achieving large-area multilayer BN single-crystal films. It is known that multilayer BN domains tend to grow following a "bottom nucleate" habitation/ mechanism It is then realized that a hexagram might not be a suitable shape for the formation of single-crystal BN multilayers following INMS due to the high possibility of forming anti-domain boundaries (Fig. The above strategy is then verified successfully based on our experiment observations. It is shown that a predominant alignment of multilayer BN pyramids grown on a single-crystal Fe-Ni (111) surface is appropriate for the successful connection of the BN layers. Large-area single-crystal multilayer BN thin films with AB (Bernal) and ABC (Rhombohedral) stackings were observed. The full surface coverage as well as the single-crystal structure of the BN thin films are evidenced by various techniques. Single-crystal Fe-Ni alloy (111) substrates were deposited on commercial c-plane sapphire by combining magnetron sputtering and thermal evaporation (Fig. Basically, increasing the Fe content enhances the BN growth by increasing the density of nucleation sites, the BN domain size, and the BN coverage and/or thickness, as evidenced by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and also by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy (Figs. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was also used to study the BN thin films upon increasing Fe content (Fig. We further investigated the alignment and stacking of the synthesized BN multilayers with detailed TEM and SAED measurements. An area of ~ 2 mm × 2.2 mm was used for SAED survey (Fig. SAED surveys performed at the CSM regions give also the same orientation (Fig. The existence of anti-domains naturally creates grain boundaries that then constitute weak points and induce film fractures. We thus anticipate the presence of such anti-domain boundaries in our sample, considering the non-perfect ~ 80% unidirectional orientation of the RNI. However, our detailed TEM observations did not resolve any evident crack lines in the 2 mm ⨯ 2.2 mm region. It was found that the whole film is crack-free with just some regions displaying some contrast variation (Fig. The large-area orientation and the coverage of the multilayer BN films was also verified by large scale low energy electron diffractions (LEED) survey over a region of ~3 mm × 2 mm. We observed sharp diffraction spots on the 51% Fe sample (Fig. All these diffraction patterns are completely consistent, confirming that the crystalline lattice of the BN multilayers is well aligned along the same direction. This observation intensified the observation using SAED (Fig. Theoretically, the ratio of first-and second-order diffraction peaks is calculated to be 0.3 for AB stacking, 1.1 for AA', and 0 for ABC Our typical electron diffraction intensity distribution is shown in Fig. Figs. , in a spectral domain where strictly no luminescence is detected in the case of hBN Interestingly, the PL intensity map around 6 eV (Fig. We thus conclude that, in the three investigated spectral domains of emission, our CVD-grown multilayer BN features the specific optical response of the Bernal phase of BN in the AB stacking, in agreement with the structural characterizations concluding to the presence of both AB and ABC stackings (Fig. Looking more deeply into our BN multilayers by complementary tools, conductive atomic force microscopy (cAFM) was used to map the leakage current distribution of the multilayer BN (Figs. No evident weak leakage lines were detected among the CSM regions, consistently with an effective connection of the BN layers. This property ensures excellent screening of current leakage via defects in BN layers. Considering a typical leakage current on the order of ~ 10 nA under a bias of 6 V (electrical field ~ 10 8 V/cm, assuming a ~ 60 nm BN thickness), the BN multilayer appears to be of considerably high quality. More current mapping performed in randomly chosen areas over the sample surface (Fig. The multilayer BN films were grown by CVD method using a single zone tube furnace (Fig. The temperature of ammonia borane precursor was controlled by a heating tape. The furnace was first pumped to a pressure of ~ 5 Pa, and then filled with Ar/H 2 , which were repeated three times. During the growth process, the furnace was first heated to 1000 °C (15 °C/min), then slowly raised to 1050 °C (5 °C/min), and held for about 10 minutes for annealing. After that the precursor was heated to about 120 °C to start the growth under a mixed-gas flow (Ar/H 2 = 9:1, flow rate = 500sccm) for 10 minutes. Once growth was complete, the furnace was quickly cooled down to room temperature (Fig. The synthesized multilayer BN films were transferred onto SiO 2 /Si substrates or holey-carbon TEM grids through the polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) -mediated transfer method (Fig. The synthesized multilayer BN films were transferred upside down onto a glass slide (Fig. Optical images were obtained using an Olympus BH-2 microscope emission is collected by means of an achromatic optical system comprising a pinhole for confocal filtering. It is then dispersed in a Czerny-Turner spectrometer with 500 mm focal length and a 1200 grooves/mm ruled grating and finally detected by a back-illuminated CCD camera with 13.5 μm pixel size. The corresponding spectral resolution is 0.17 