Spatially selective melting of metal materials by laser irradiation allows for the precise welding as well as the 3D printing of complex metal parts. However, the simple scanning of a conventional Gaussian beam typically results in a melt track with randomly distributed surface features due to the complex and dynamic behavior of the melt pool. In this study, the implications of utilizing a dynamically oscillating energy input on driving melt track fluctuations is investigated. Specifically, the laser intensity and/or intensity distribution is sinusoidally modulated at different scan speeds, and the effect of modulation frequency on the resulting surface features of the melt track is examined. The formation of periodically oriented surface features indicates an evident frequency coupling between the melt pool and the modulation frequency. Moreover, such a frequency coupling becomes most prominent under a specific modulation frequency, suggesting resonant behavior. The insights provided in this study will enable the development of novel methods, allowing for the control and/or mitigation of inherent fluctuations in the melt pool through laserdriven resonances. Laser material processing offers locally confined energy inputs, enabling the spatially selective heating of various materials, including ceramics, polymers, and metals. This study seeks to investigate the effects of dynamically varying both temporal and spatial intensities of the laser beam on the laser melting of metals. Specifically, how sinusoidal modulation of laser intensity and/or intensity distribution while laser scanning influences the surface features of the resulting melt track. Parameters including modulation frequency and scan speed of the laser beam were altered, and the resulting melt track were characterized via confocal microscope observations. Additionally, Fast Fourier transform (FFT) analyses were further conducted to quantitatively assess the formed surface features. Through these characterizations, it was revealed that for a dynamically modulated beam, periodic surface features with a spatial frequency corresponding to the modulation frequency arise on the melt track. Such results indicate the presence of a frequency coupling behavior between the melt pool and modulation frequency. Moreover, such surface features become most prominent under a specific modulation frequency suggesting an underlying resonance. These results provide the implications of dynamically changing both temporal and spatial intensities in driving melt pool resonances. For all experiments conducted in this study, aluminum alloy metal plates (EN AW-5083) were used as the target metal material. To probe the effects of intensity modulation, a continuous wave (CW) laser beam setups was utilized. The experiment was performed with a disk laser (TruDisk 8001, Trumpf, Germany) with an operating wavelength of 1030 nm. The integration of a beam shaping module (Canunda, Cailabs, France) into the beam path resulted in ring-core beam profile with a 50:50 power ratio, creating an inner core diameter of 100 μm and an outer ring diameter of 300 μm. The laser scanning speed was set to 1000 mm/s for all experiments using this system. The laser power was modulated sinusoidally from 2640 W to 3960 W (Medium Power: 3300 W) at different frequencies. Fig. To probe the effect of the intensity distribution and scan speed on the laser processing of metals, one YLR-100 (Maximum output: 100 W) and one YLR-400 (Maximum output: 400 W) laser systems (both IPG Photonics, USA), both generating a CW laser beam with a central wavelength of 1060 nm, were utilized simultaneously. The laser power was set to be the maximum output for the entirety of the experiments. The laser beams, both with a spot size of approximately 100 μm, were focused on the same location of a metal plate and subsequently scanned across the surface using a Focus Shifter digital galvanometer laser scanner system (Raylase GmbH, Germany) at scan speeds of 50, 100, 200, and 400 mm/s. The 400 W laser beam was scanned without oscillation, while the 100 W laser beam was oscillated perpendicular to the scan direction at different frequencies, with a standard amplitude of 30 μm. Fig. The height profiles of the melt tracks were optically obtained using confocal microscopy (VR6200 and VK-X3050, Keyence, Japan). To quantitatively characterize the height profiles, FFT analyses were conducted, and the power spectral density (|X(f)| ! ) was calculated. A CW laser beam with a sinusoidally modulated laser intensity (i.e., periodically fluctuating laser power) was scanned once across the surface of a metal AW5083 sheet to form a melt track on the surface. The frequency of laser intensity modulation (i.e., modulation frequency) was altered and the height profiles of the resulting melt track along the scan direction were analyzed through confocal microscopy (Fig. High relative max intensity High relative max intensity High relative max intensity maximum height and spatial frequency are greater for a modulation frequency of 100 Hz compared to that of 1000 Hz, suggesting that the surface features formed for a modulation frequency of 100 Hz are more pronounced and further spaced. To quantitatively characterize the periodic surface features, FFT analyses of the obtained height profiles were conducted (Fig. Furthermore, the intensities of the peaks also depend highly on the modulation frequency. With an increase in modulation frequency from 100 Hz to 250 Hz, an increase in peak intensity is observed. However, as the modulation frequency is further increased to 500 Hz and 1000 Hz, a continuous decrease in peak intensity is observed. These ordered variations in peak intensities and the dominance of the 250 Hz peak suggests the presence of an underlying frequency coupling between the material and the modulation frequency, leading to more pronounced and ordered surface features. Next, the spatial distribution of laser intensity is sinusoidally modulated by the super-positioning of a spatially oscillating and non-oscillating laser beam (Fig. differ by a factor of 20. This is attributable to the fact that the scan speed was ten times smaller and maximum intensity is reached twice per periodic modulation for the current two-laser approach (Fig. Figure To confirm the discussions regarding the FFT analyses, the surfaces of the melt tracks resulting from intensity distribution modulations were observed using SEM. Fig. In this study, we investigated a laser driven resonance induced by dynamically modulating laser beam intensities and distributions during metal processing. When the laser intensity and/or spatial distribution was sinusoidally modulated, periodic surface features visibly different from those generated without modulation emerge within the melt track. The microscopy and FFT analyses conducted on the melt tracks clearly indicates that the spatial frequency at which these surface features occur, are highly dependent on the modulation frequency and the scan speed. Additionally, it was revealed that such periodic surface features become most pronounced for a specific modulation frequency. This was consistent whether the laser intensity, laser intensity distribution, or scanning speed was altered, implying the existence of a frequency coupling resonance, specifically 250 Hz in this study. The exact underlying mechanisms of such a coupling behavior cannot be concluded at this time, but such a phenomenon can be attributed to various factors, including spatial or temporal interferences of the laser-material interactions and/or inherent material-specific melt pool resonances. By further revealing the underlying mechanisms, the idea of modulating the laser intensity and/or intensity distribution may provide an important foundation to control and/or mitigation of inherent fluctuations in the melt pool through laser-driven resonances.