Additive manufacturing of Ti-6Al-4V alloy via laser powder-bed fusion leads to non-equilibrium α ′ martensitic microstructures, with high strength but poor ductility and toughness. These properties may be modified by heat treatments, whereby the α ′ phase decomposes into equilibrium α + β structures, while possibly conserving microstructural features and length scales of the α ′ lath structure. Here, we combine experimental and computational methods to explore the kinetics of martensite decomposition. Experiments rely on in-situ characterisation (electron microscopy and diffraction) during multi-step heat treatment from 400 • C up to the alloy β-transus temperature (995 • C). Computational simulations rely on an experimentally-informed computationally-efficient phase-field model. Experiments confirmed that as-built microstructures were fully composed of martensitic α ′ laths. During martensite decomposition, nucleation of the β phase occurs primarily along α ′ lath boundaries, with traces of β nucleation along crystalline defects. Phase-field results, using electron backscatter diffraction maps of 1 Titanium (Ti) alloys, such as Ti-6Al-4V (weight %), play a central role in modern structural applications, in particular in aeronautics and biomedical applications Equilibrium phases in Ti-6Al-4V consist of a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) α phase and a body-centred cubic (bcc) β phase, both of which are common in L-PBF, with different types of microstructures, either martensitic (as built) or after heat treatment. Data compiled from Refs wrought or cast alloys (i.e. with low-to-moderate cooling rates) While minor amounts of secondary phases have been reported Martensitic microstructures offer high strength but low ductility, due to the hcp nature and slightly distorted lattice of the supersaturated α ′ phase, making it undesirable for applications requiring a high elongation to failure Heat treatments below the β-transus temperature (≈ 995 • C) and above 400 • C allow for the martensite decomposition (α ′ → α+β), while conserving the lamellar features and length scales of the α ′ lath structure Traditional heat treatments utilised on L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V were designed for significantly different thermo-mechanical processes (and hence microstructures) The rapid advance of in-situ characterisation of metals has provided key insight into microstructure formation and evolution From the modelling perspective, martensite decomposition in Ti-6Al-4V has been studied using classical mean-field Avrami-based models Here, we propose an experimentally informed phase-field model for martensite decomposition in additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V alloy. The underlying goal is to develop a digital tool to study the evolution of Ti-6Al-4V microstructure, so as to ultimately guide the design of novel heat treatments for optimal properties in additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V. The proposed PF model goes beyond existing mean-field models for martensite decomposition by predicting the coupled spatial evolution of phase and solute in the heterogeneous microstructure. The model parameters are calibrated and validated using experimental data from orig-inal in-situ annealing experiments on L-PBF manufactured Ti-6Al-4V. In order to address the computational cost of PF simulations, we solve PF equations by means of an original spectral Fourier-based method computationally parallelised on graphics processing units (GPUs), improving upon a method recently introduced in Samples used in this study were made of Ti-6Al-4V (grade 23) specimens produced by L-PBF on an EOSINT M290 printer using proprietary optimised process parameters In-situ microstructural observations were carried out on the frontal plane (xzsurface) of the specimens using a JEOL 7100F FEG-SEM equipped with a heating Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) stage (Murano in-situ stages, Gatan), using a focus distance of 10 mm, emission energy of 15 kV, probe current of 8 μA, and step size of 0.05 μm. Flat specimen of 7 mm×7 mm and 1.5 mm thick was mirror polished and then mounted on the heating stage via high-temperature carbon paste. The heating temperature was measured via a thermocouple attached to the bottom of the specimen. Such settings allow controlled heating of specimens up to 980 • C, with simultaneous imaging and EBSD. Where needed, the area fraction of the β phase was quantified either using the EBSD data using HKL-Channel 5TM, or using the SEM images using FIJI (ImageJ) via a Random Forest machine learning algorithm -as reported in detail elsewhere A multi-step thermal cycle, shown in Figure In order to simulate the microstructure evolution during the multi-step annealing process, we used a numerical model based on the phase-field method. The model considers the bcc phase β, and hcp phases α (equilibrium) and α ′ (martensite). Since the martensite (α ′ ) phase may essentially be considered as a distorted equilibrium (α) phase supersaturated in solute, both α and α ′ phases are actually represented as the same phase, and they are differentiated from each other by their solute concentration. Hence, the phase field (order parameter), η, is equal to zero in the β phase and one in α and/or α ′ phases. Different orientations (variants) of the α ′ (or α) phase are represented by different phase fields η i as commonly done in so-called multi-phase-field It is recognised that the kinetics of martensite decomposition in Ti-6Al-4V alloy is limited by the diffusion of V solute 10.2 at.%Al), as illustrated by the red line in Figure We use a standard formulation of the system free energy where c is the V concentration, f c is the chemical free energy density, η i are the phase fields, κ η = 3 √ 2σδV m is the gradient energy coefficient for η i The chemical free energy density is where f α and f β are the chemical free energy densities of α and β phases, respectively, is an interpolation function, w = 6σV m /( √ 2δ) is a parameter that controls the height of the double well barrier combines a standard double-well potential and a second term preventing the interpenetration of α grains of different orientations, with ψ = ξδ w/(2κ η ), where the coefficient ξ parametrises the free energy penalty associated with grain interpenetration (see, e.g. for both phases φ ∈ {α, β}, where μ φ T i , μ φ V , and μ φ Al are the chemical potentials of Ti, V, and Al, respectively, L φ T iV k , L φ AlT i k , and L φ AlV k are Redlich-Kister coefficients, R is the perfect gas constant, and T is the temperature in Kelvin. Note that, given the chosen pseudo-binary description of the alloy (Fig. Given the total free energy of the system, the evolution of V concentration and phase fields were computed using standard Cahn-Hilliard and Allen-Cahn equations, respectively: where M and L correspond to solute and interface mobilities (see Section 2.2.4). The simulation domain is spatially discretised in 2D and represents a point of the AM material, sufficiently small with respect to the macroscale to allow separation of scales and sufficiently large to contain a representative ensemble of grains. Even though the actual microstructures are not periodic, periodic boundary conditions (BCs) produce a faster convergence with the size of the domain to the actual response, and therefore we apply periodic BCs on both directions. Thus, the system of partial differential equations ( A rectangular domain of size l x × l y is discretised into a regular grid containing p x and p y points in x and y directions, respectively. In order to reduce the aliasing effect in the presence of non-smooth functions, the discrete Fourier frequency vector and the square of the frequency gradient are computed by replacing the definition of the derivative in the Fourier space with a fourth-order finite difference computed through the use of Fourier transform. This procedure results in the redefinition of the frequencies 8 sin(2πn y ∆y/l y ) -sin(4πn y ∆y/l y ) 6∆y ( where n x and n y are two-dimensional mesh grid matrices generated with two vectors of the form [0, ..., (p x /2), -(p x /2 -1), ..., -1] and [0, ..., (p y /2), -(p y /2 -1), ..., -1], and ∆x and ∆y are the distance between two consecutive points in the x and y directions, respectively. While, for the sake of generality, the equations above are presented for any ∆x ̸ = ∆y, here all application are with ∆x = ∆y. The computational scheme, summarised in Algorithms 1 and 2 of Appendix B.4, is implemented using the Python programming language. For each time step, the computation of discrete Fourier transform (F) and discrete inverse Fourier trans-form (F -1 ) is performed on the GPU device using Scikit-CUDA The simulations were performed using a single GPU on a computer with the following hardware features: Intel Xeon Gold 6130 microprocessor, 187 GB RAM, GeForce RTX 2080Ti GPU (4352 Cuda cores and 11 GB RAM), and software features: CentOS Linux 7.6.1810, Python 3.8, PyCUDA 2021.1, Scikit-CUDA 0.5.3, and CUDA 10.1 (Toolkit 10.1.243). The GPU block size was set to 16 × 16, which was found to result in near-optimal performance. The molar volume of the alloy was assumed to be independent of temperature and equal to that of pure Ti, i.e. V m = 1.064 × 10 -5 m 3 /mol where the individual atomic mobilities M k (with k∈{V, Al, T i}) depend upon the phase as and their dependence upon temperature and V concentration, were modelled using Redlich-Kister polynomials with coefficients extracted from Ref. Before comparing the PF results with our experiments, we validated the predictions in terms of thermodynamics (equilibrium) and transformation kinetics of the model. All validation simulations considered the initial microstructure of region 1 (see Section 2.2.6, Figure To validate the prediction of the equilibrium state, we simulated the isothermal annealing at several temperatures between 650 • C and 980 • C. The annealing time was large enough to reach equilibrium (i.e. full α ′ → α + β transformation when relevant). Then, we compared PF-predicted results (namely the volume fraction of β phase at different temperatures) with theoretical equilibrium (lever rule), with our experiments, as well as with a polynomial fit to experimental data from the literature (however, for traditionally manufactured Ti-6Al-4V) In order to validate the transformation kinetics with the identified parameters, we compared the results of the model to the martensite decomposition kinetics assessed experimentally by Gil Mur et al. Because the thermal history is not clearly specified in Ultimately, we aim to simulate the microstructural evolution of the in-situ observed microstructures during the step-wise annealing process (Figure Our model distinguishes regions of different orientations, but it does not attribute a specific given orientation to the grains. In other words, neighboring grains of different orientations result in grain boundaries (and subsequent grain boundary energies), but the behavior of the grain and grain boundaries is isotropic. We classified the different α ′ orientations into variants, for each prior-β grain. To sort the different α ′ variants, we used experimental EBSD maps to identify groups of hcp grains with respect to their c-axis orientation, using the following procedure, illustrated in Figure Here, we clearly found that 6 main clusters could be identified in each prior-β grain. For that reason, we considered that accounting for 6 variants in each prior-β grain was sufficient, assigning the same large cluster variant to the nearest small clusters. The resulting initial microstructures, composed of 6 α ′ lath orientations, are represented on the left-hand-side of Figure At the start of the simulations, the V concentration is assumed uniform in the entire domain, and equal to the nominal V concentration of the alloy. This is consistent with experimental observations showing that, under powder-bed fusion processing, only α ′ was formed at a chemical composition close to the nominal alloy concentration Both considered regions are spatially discretised with a structured grid of 256× 256 points, resulting in grid spacings ∆x = ∆y of 41.0 nm for region 1 of size (10.5 μm) 2 , or 31.3 nm for region 2 of size (8.0 μm) 2 . The microstructure in as-built L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V in the investigated area is shown in Figure Figure As expected for a nominal Ti-6Al-4V across this temperature range The microstructure in as-built L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V (Figure During the thermal treatment, the microstructure does not exhibit any visible change at 400 • C and 500 • C (Figure Visible changes can be observed at higher temperatures. Coarsening of the microstructure starts being noticeable at 600 • C (Figure Recrystallised high-angle boundary (HAB) β phase can also be observed in the orientation map, as indicated by the black arrows in Figure The microstructure at 900 • C is shown in Figure The comparison of PF-predicted, theoretical (lever rule), and experimentally assessed β volume fraction (Figure The different thermal paths (Figure The temperature plateau at 400 • C does not induce any noticeable transformation (Figure i η i remains close to 1), but the diffusion of V is now fast enough to initiate the transformation of α ′ into α (see Figure As the temperature increases further above 850 • C (Figs 10f-h and 11f-h), the remaining α progressively transforms into β, as diffusion is now sufficiently fast to reach near-equilibrium phase fractions within the isothermal plateaus. The evolution of the β fraction (Figure The V concentration along the scanning line of region 1 (Figure Finally, regarding the comparison between experimental and simulated microstructures at T = 850 • C (Figure We performed a joint experimental-computational study of martensite decomposition during post-printing heat treatment of L-PBF additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Our original experiments made use of in-situ electron microscopy and diffraction (EBSD) analysis during heat treatment up to nearly β-transus temperature. Our simulations rely on a FFT-based GPU-accelerated phase-field model of microstructure evolution, using experimental ESBD maps of as-built Ti-6Al-4V and experimental temperature history as input. Our in-situ experiments confirmed or revealed that: • The microstructure of L-PBF processed Ti-6Al-4V alloy is fully martensitic (α ′ ), with a weak texture mostly due to the several possible lath orientations emerging from prior-β grains (up to 12 variants per β grain). Possible other phases, such as small β grains • At low annealing temperature (T = 400 • C or 500 • C), while some relaxation of residual stresses or annihilation/rearrangement of dislocations might have occurred, the topology of the microstructure did not exhibit any significant change. Visible microstructure evolution occurred only at T ≥ 700 • C. • Nucleation of β phase primarily takes place along the boundaries of α ′ laths. However, traces of β phase nucleating within α/α ′ region, rather than at lath boundaries, suggests possible β nucleation sites along lattice defects (e.g. dislocations, twins, sub-grain boundaries, etc.) • While it substantially alters the α ′ lath structure within the prior-β grain, a near β-transus temperature does not seem to significantly change the topology of the β grain structure. From the modelling and simulations perspective: • We proposed a phase-field model, kept relatively simple by the adoption of experiment/evidence-motivated assumptions, in particular considering (i) a pseudo-binary alloy approximation, (ii) isotropic interfaces, and (iii) 2D simulations. Thermodynamic description of phases (free energies and mobilities) were directly taken from the literature (with almost no adjusted parameters). Simulations were accelerated by an original FFT-based resolution algorithm and GPU parallelisation. We used the model to simulate the evolution of experimentally characterised microstructures (using EBSD maps as initial conditions) and experimentally imposed/measured thermal history. • Despite its simplicity, the model captures the salient features of the α ′ → α+β transformation, such as: (i) a martensite decomposition visibly starting around 600 • C with a small amount of β phase formed along α ′ grain boundaries, (ii) a transformation kinetics leading to near-equilibrium fractions of α and β phases at the end of the isothermal plateaus at T ≥ 700 • C, (iii) a reasonable direct comparison of EBSD maps at T = 850 • C (Figure • Our simulations complemented the in-situ experimental characterisation, in particular by providing the spatiotemporal evolution of solute (V) within the inspected regions. This allowed, for instance, to ascertain that, for the considered temperature-time profile, the full decomposition of α ′ into an α + β structure was complete at T ≈ 800 • C. This work emphasizes the advantage of relatively simple phase-field models, which provide a deeper description of phase transformation kinetics than classical mean-field (e.g. Avrami-based) models commonly employed to analyse martensite decomposition in additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V Limitations of the simulations carried out here pertain most importantly to the dimensionality of the simulations (2D) and to some fairly restrictive model assumptions, in particular neglecting the effects of mechanics (e.g. strain energy contributions) and anisotropy of bulk crystalline phases and interfaces. A more advanced treatment of β nucleation Potential perspectives from this work are manifold, some of which are already the focus of work in progress. The model could be used to assess whether and how a different solute concentration across α ′ laths (as evidenced recently By including a more proper description of mechanical effects, an underlying objective is to ultimately use microstructures predicted from virtual processing into a micromechanics framework also based on FFT spectral methods Redlich-Kister coefficients of the excess term in α and β phases, extracted from Ref. Atomic mobility of alloying elements in phase φ ∈ (α, β), extracted from Ref. where: ∆G α V,T i = -262867.416 -95.5291479 T ∆G α V,V = -270101.0 -313.569 T ∆G α V,Al = 0 (36) and: ∆G B Numerical Methods After applying a backward Euler implicit time discretisation, Eq. ( For the sake of clarity, the unknown field c (t+∆t) will be referred to as c. The differential equation above is non-linear and will be solved iteratively by successive linearisations using the Newton method. To this aim, the concentration field at iteration (j + 1) is written as c (j+1) = c (j) + δc, where c (j) is the concentration at previous iteration j, and δc is the increment of the concentration in this new iteration, now used as the unknown of the problem. Evaluating Eq. ( and we obtain: Neglecting the high order terms related to δc, the following linear partial differential equation is obtained, whose solution gives δc that allows to compute c (j+1) : By definition of the Fourier transform, the gradient and Laplacian of a field f are, respectively: with i the imaginary unit, ξ the frequency vector, ∥ξ∥ 2 the square of the frequency gradient, and denotes the Fourier transform of the affected variable. The previous differential equation can be transformed to the Fourier space, resulting in: ∂c 2 F -1 δc + κ c ∥ξ∥ 2 δc + dM c (j) dc F -1 δc F -1 iξ ∂f c (j) ∂c + κ c ∥ξ∥ 2 c (j) = ( c (t) -c (j) )+ The resulting equation is linear and can be solved after discretisation using some algebraical linear solver combined with a preconditioner, as presented in Appendix B.3 Using a semi-implicit formulation, the ∂f c /∂η i terms are computed considering their value at the previous time step (explicit part) and the Laplacian of η i is computed at the current time step (implicit part). After applying time discretisation, Eq. ( For the sake of clarity, the unknown fields η (t+∆t) i will be referred to as η i . The previous differential equations can be transformed to the Fourier space, resulting in: At each time t + ∆t, the right hand side term of equation ( The discretised Eq. ( and the right-hand-side (independent term) corresponds to The linear system defined by these equations for each time step can be solved by an iterative Krylov method, e.g. the Conjugate Gradient method, thus avoiding to form and store the matrix representing the linear operator. To accelerate the convergence of the iterative solver, an approximate inverse operator is used as preconditioner in the preconditioned conjugate gradient method (PCG) where M c (j) and ∂ 2 f c (j) /∂c 2 are the average values of M c (j) and ∂ 2 f c (j) /∂c 2 over the domain. For every time step, the iterations are performed until c (j+1) is converged. Since M c (j+1) and ∂f c (j+1) /∂c were linearised in Eq. ( The absolute error for the current value of c (j+1) is then given by the norm of the residual Err (j) = V Res 2 (j) dV and the equation converges when this error becomes smaller than the tolerance. Variable time stepping is performed in the following way. When a large number of iterations is reached in the Newton method (j Newton > it max , with it max = 200) and the solution is not converged, ∆t is reduced by a factor of 2 in order to stabilise the algorithm. The time step is also reduced by a factor of 2 when the PCG exceeds a high number of iterations (j PCG > it max ). When the number of iterations is below it max , the new value of time step is computed as ∆t (t+∆t) = τ ∆t (t) , where τ is a time step factor computed as τ = min(τ algorithm ), with τ algorithm = (it target /it algorithm ) 0.3 , it target = 25 the target number of iterations to get convergence, it algorithm=Newton the number of iterations needed to get the solution in the previous time step by the Newton method, and it algorithm=PCG the maximum number of iterations needed by the PCG method to converge in the previous time step. The resolution scheme of the complete system of equations is presented in Algorithm 1 and the resolution of the concentration field in Algorithm 2. ; Err (j) ← -V Res 2 (j) dV ; j ← j + 1; end c (t+∆t) ← -c (t+∆t) (j) ;