Anderson localization is anticipated to play a pivotal role in the manifestation of the quantum anomalous Hall effect, akin to its role in conventional quantum Hall effects. The significance of Anderson localization is particularly pronounced in elucidating the reasons behind the fragility of the observed quantum anomalous Hall state in the intrinsic magnetic topological insulator MnBi2Te4 with a large predicted magnetic gap. Here, employing varying sized MnBi2Te4 micro/nano-structures fabricated from a single molecular-beam-epitaxy-grown thin film, we have carried out a systematic sizeand temperature-dependent study on the transport properties of the films regarding the quantum anomalous Hall states. The low-temperature transport properties of the finitesized MnBi2Te4 samples can be quantitatively understood through Anderson localization, which plays an indispensable role in stabilizing the ground states. At higher temperatures, the failure of electron localization induced by an excessively short electronic dephasing length is identified as the cause of deviation from quantization. The work reveals that electronic dephasing and localization are non-negligible factors in designing high-temperature quantum anomalous Hall systems. The quantum Hall (QH) effect and Anderson localization have a close relationship Anderson localization is crucial for the robust quantized plateaus of Hall resistivity characterizing the QH effect. On the other hand, QH systems provide a good platform to quantitatively study Anderson localization in the two-dimensional (2D) case. The conductivity of a 2D electron system subject to inevitable disorder, according to Anderson localization The QAH effect is a variant of QH effect contributed by magnetization-induced topologically non-trivial bands instead of Landau levels Although in both cases, the QAH phase has been achieved, the former one is more difficult, reported by only two groups so far A considerable challenge for the study is the rather low repeatability of MnBi2Te4 samples with quantized transport properties (even those only quantized at high magnetic field). In this situation, the only feasible way for a size-dependent investigation is by measuring a series of devices with different sizes fabricated from one homogeneously quantized MnBi2Te4 epitaxial film (thin flake samples are too small for the task). Homogeneous MnBi2Te4 epitaxial films exhibiting quantized anomalous Hall resistivity in the FM configuration have been achieved in our previous work Figures To assess the homogeneity of the film, we present the magnetic ordering temperature (TN), coercive field (Hc), and Hcr of the successful devices of different sizes in Fig. To understand the observation, we summarize ρyx and ρxx as functions of W at different temperatures with μ0H = -9 T (0 T) in Figs. In Fig. A similar trend shared by the W dependences of ρxx at high field (Fig. where p is the inelastic-scattering-length exponent The electronic dephasing length lφ can be obtained by analyzing the critical behaviors near the QPT between the C = 0 state at zero magnetic field and the C = -1 state at high magnetic field where l0 is a prefactor linked to lφ, and ν = p/2κ is the localization-length exponent. The first and second terms in the parentheses represent the scattering rates from inelastic processes and sample boundaries, respectively p ~ 2.49 ± 0.14 is obtained from the relation between critical exponents, and the fitting curves well capture the features as shown in Fig. As lφ decreases with increasing temperature down to below the device size, σxx should become insensitive to W. From Fig. At last, we attempt to understand the data at zero magnetic field. At 20 mK, σxx (0 T) also decreases with increasing device size, but more slowly compared to that at high field and saturates at 0.1 e 2 /h when W exceeds 10 μm. Such behavior cannot be wellfitted by the theoretical relation of Anderson localization. The observation suggests that ξ is larger at zero magnetic field, and there might exist conducting channels that cannot be localized. At higher temperatures, W dependences of σxx (0 T) are analogous to that at 20 mK (except for a slight increase in σxx in the W = 30 μm device), which implies that the system is little influenced by electron dephasing. So, the observed temperature-and size-dependent transport properties of MnBi2Te4 epitaxial films, especially in the QAH regime under high magnetic field, can be well understood through the interplay of electron localization and dephasing. The large localization length (~1 μm) allows us to vary lφ and the device size from below to above it, giving a relatively complete picture of the relationship between Anderson localization, electronic dephasing, and the QAH effect. Interestingly, in scanning microwave impedance microscopy (SMIM) studies of MnBi2Te4, the observed edge states also have a width of ~1 μm (ref. 22), in the same order of magnitude as the scale width of QAH edge states On the other hand, our results also demonstrate that electronic dephasing can be a serious obstacle to achieving a high-temperature QAH effect, a factor that has rarely been discussed before. Even for a QAH system with a large magnetic gap and a high magnetic ordering temperature, it cannot exhibit the QAH effect at a temperature at which lφ is shorter than ξ. Conventional QH systems rarely encounter the problem since ξ is typically only around several tens of nanometers, which is usually much smaller than lφ. In our epitaxial MnBi2Te4 films, ξ is similar to that in Cr-doped (Bi,Sb)2Te3. It is understandable that the temperature to observe the QAH effect in the former does not significantly exceed that in the latter. We still cannot figure out what leads to the large ξ in magnetic TIs. A recent magnetic force microscopy (MFM) study on our epitaxial MnBi2Te4 films unveils μm-scaled inhomogeneity of magnetic force signals The present size-dependent study not only unveils the important roles of electronic localization and dephasing in the QAH effect, which may inspire new insights for the exploration of high-temperature QAH effect, but also represents a progress towards the scalable fabrication of QAH micro/nano-structures based on the extremely fragile MnBi2Te4 thin films were epitaxially grown on sapphire (0001) substrates in a commercial MBE system (Omicron Lab10) with a base pressure lower than 2×10 The 2 mm × 2 mm device arrays shown in the main text (Fig. Transport measurements were conducted using a Triton 450 dilution fridge with a base temperature of 20 mK produced by Oxford Instruments. The applied magnetic field in this study was perpendicular to the film plane. In ac measurements, the current was injected by a Keithley 6221 source meter or a lock-in amplifier SR830, and the voltage was detected by a SR830. In dc measurements, the current was injected by a Keithley 6221 and the voltage was detected by a Keithley 2182 nanovoltmeter in the delta mode. The top-gate voltage was applied using a Keithley 2400 multimeter. A 5 nA ac excitation current was predominantly applied in transport measurements for a good signal-to-noise ratio, unless otherwise specified. However, for the transport measurements of the 0.3-μm device at 20 mK (Figs. 