We describe a mechanism by which both ferroelectric polarization and magnetization can be created in nonpolar, nonmagnetic materials. Using a combination of phenomenological modeling and first-principles calculations, we demonstrate that ferroelectric polarization, magnetization, or both simultaneously can be transiently induced by an ultrashort laser pulse upon linearly, circularly, or elliptically polarized excitation of phonon modes in γ-LiBO2. The direction and magnitude of the multiferroic polarization can be controlled by the chirality of the laser pulse and the phonon modes, offering a pathway for controlling multiferroicity and magnetoelectricity on ultrafast timescales. Light-induced control of magnetism and ferroelectricity promises applications in future data processing and storage devices that operate on ultrafast timescales of femto-and picoseconds, orders of magnitude faster than state-of-the-art technology Here, we theoretically demonstrate the transient generation of both ferroelectric polarization, P , and magnetization, M , in a nonpolar, nonmagnetic material through nonlinear phonon excitation by an ultrashort mid-infrared (mid-IR) pulse. We show that the chirality of the pulse and therefore the coherently excited phonon modes can be used to selectively generate each polarization individually or both simultaneously, see Fig. We model the coherent nonlinear phonon dynamics of the E and B 2 modes with the equations of motion where Q α is the amplitude of phonon mode α ∈ {a, b, c}, κ α is its linewidth, and V is the phonon potential energy. M n is the mode effective charge, where Z * n is the Born effective charge tensor, q n,α the phonon eigenvector, and M n the atomic mass of atom n, and the sum runs over all atoms in the unit cell. E is the electric field component of the laser pulse in the material. The anharmonic phonon potential can be written as where Ω a = Ω b ≡ Ω 0 is the eigenfrequency of the E mode and Ω c that of the B 2 mode. The coefficient c denotes the trilinear phonon coupling primarily of interest here. , we include single-mode anharmonicities up to sixth order and nonlinear phonon couplings up to quartic order, denoted by d α , d αβ , and g α respectively. Cubic-and fifth-order anharmonicities, Q 3 α and Q 5 α , and quadratic-linear couplings, The electric field component of the laser pulse lies in the ab-plane, E(t) = E(t)(cos(ω 0 t), cos(ω 0 t + φ), 0). is the carrier envelope, ε ∞ is the optical dielectric constant of the material, E 0 is the peak electric field in free space, τ is the full width at half maximum pulse duration, and ω 0 is the center frequency. φ is the carrier envelope phase determining the polarization (linear, elliptical, circular) of the pulse. The equations of motion then read where we set κ a = κ b ≡ κ 0 . The main driving force for the two components of the E mode is the electric field component of the pulse. For the B 2 mode, the driving force is proportional to Q a Q b . The back-action of the B 2 mode on the E modes, contained in the Q a/b Q c and in the higher-order terms in the equations of motion is much weaker than the driving force of the laser pulse itself. Solving the equations in the frequency domain yields analytical expressions to first order in the electric field for Q a and Q b and to second order for Q c Here, ∆ α (ω) = Ω 2 α -ω 2 + iωκ α and ⊛ denotes the convolution operator. Please see Appendix for details of the derivations. In the following, we will show how the nonlinear phonon dynamics lead to dynamically induced ferroelectric polarization and magnetization. The central component for light-induced ferroelectricity is the trilinear coupling term Q a Q b Q c in the phonon potential energy, Eq. ( For example, a simple linearly polarized oscillation, Q a = Q b = sin(t), yields ⟨Q a Q b ⟩ = 0.5, causing maximum rectification and therefore unidirectional displacement of the B 2 mode. Reorienting the polarization of the laser pulse by 90 • in the ab-plane (i.e. setting φ = π) changes the sign of the force and therefore reverts the direction of rectification Finally, an elliptically polarized excitation (φ = π/4) produces a reduced rectification with respect to the linear case, as The dependence of the ferroelectric polarization on the chirality of the excitation is shown in Fig. Having obtained analytical expressions for the phonon modes driven by the electric field component of the laser pulse in Eqs. ( Here, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and χ (2) is a second-order nonlinear electric susceptibility induced by the nonlinear phonon coupling, given by (2) e characterizes the static (ferroelectric) polarization generated by the B 2 mode when the two components of the E mode are driven by a laser with frequency ω 0 . For the full frequency-dependent response, see Appendix. In addition to the ferroelectricity arising from phononic rectification, an elliptically or circularly polarized mid-IR pulse can induce a magnetization through the excitation of a chiral phonon mode. The elliptical or circular superposition of the two components of the E mode in the ab-plane produces orbital motions of the ions around their equilibrium positions, generating a magnetization perpendicular to the plane If we set Q a = sin(t) and Q b = sin(t + φ), the magnetization becomes M z = sin(φ). The magnetization is therefore maximal for a circularly polarized excitation (φ = π/2), M z = 1, reduced for an elliptically polarized excitation (φ = π/4), M z = 1/ √ 2, and vanishing for a linearly polarized excitation (φ = 0), M z = 0. The dependence of the magnetization on the chirality of the excitation is illustrated in Fig. Substituting Eq. ( where χ (2) me,jiz is a second-order nonlinear magnetoelectric susceptibility induced by the phonon magnetic moment and given by where ε ijk is the Levi-Civita tensor. χ me characterizes the static magnetization generated by the E modes when driven by a laser with frequency ω 0 . For the full frequency-dependent response, see Appendix. We calculate the phonon eigenfrequencies, eigenvectors and Born effective charges of γ-LiBO 2 using the density functional theory formalism as implemented in vasp We show the calculated phonon parameters in Table 1. -0.1 1. -2.0 1. -2.0 1. -0.3 1. -0.1 Ferroelectric polarization and magnetization dynamics in response to the resonant excitation of the E mode at 26.2 THz with linearly, elliptically, and circularly polarized mid-IR pulses. (a-c) Time evolution of the phonon amplitudes, Qc, of the nonlinearly coupled B2 modes at 9.05, 19.8, and 25.7 THz for the different polarized excitations of the E mode. The different curves are offset by 0.1 Å√ u for visibility. (d-f) Time evolution of the ferroelectric polarization, ⟨Pz⟩, arising from a rectification of the three B2 modes, and magnetization, Mz, arising from the phonon magnetic moment of the E mode. We plot two different orientations and helicities of the polarization of the laser pulse that reverse the direction of the induced ferroelectric polarization (±45 • ) and magnetization (left-and right-handed helicity). We now compute the phonon-induced ferroelectric polarization and magnetization for a resonant excitation of the E mode at 26.2 THz, which has the largest mode effective charge of all E modes in the system and hence the largest coupling to the mid-IR pulse. We numerically solve the equations of motion, Eqs. (3)-( In Fig. Figs. We performed calculations for the example of γ-LiBO 2 , however the symmetry requirements for the dynamical generation of multiferroic polarization presented here are general to all semiconductors and insulators in the 4 and 42m point groups, such as BPO 4 Finally, we propose possible experiments to confirm the mechanism presented here. The induced ferroelectric polarization could be measured with time-resolved SHG, whereas the induced magnetization could be measured with time-resolved Faraday or magnetooptic Kerr effect (MOKE) experiments. Both are achievable with stateof-the-art tabletop mid-IR pump/visible probe setups. We will revisit the general theory of phononic rectification by nonlinearly driven phonon modes and how this phenomenon can induce a transient ferroelectric polarization in nonpolar materials. First, however, a comment about the piezoelectricity of γ-LiBO 2 . Ref. Since d 36 is nonzero, a ferroelectric polarization may emerge along the c-axis from a pump in the ab-plane. Our model consists of the two components of a degenerate IR-active E mode, denoted as Q a and Q b , that are driven resonantly by a mid-IR pulse in the ab-plane of the crystal, along with a third mode with B 2 symmetry, Q c , that nonlinearly couples to them through threephonon coupling. The potential energy associated with these phonon modes can be expressed as where Ω a = Ω b ≡ Ω 0 is the eigenfrequency of the E mode and Ω c that of the B 2 mode. The coefficient c denotes the trilinear, cubic-order, phonon coupling primarily of interest here. The expansion can be continued with which contains the quartic-and sixth-order single-mode anharmonicities and quartic-order nonlinear phonon coupling coefficients, denoted by d α , g α , and d αβ respectively. Cubic-order single-mode anharmonicities of the type Q 3 α , as well as quadratic-linear coupling terms of the type Q 2 a/b Q c are symmetry-forbidden. The light-matter interaction of the E modes with the ultrashort mid-IR pulse can be written as where p = Z a/b Q a/b is the electric dipole moment of the driven phonon modes. Z a/b = n Z * n q n,a/b / √ M n is the mode effective charge vector with Z * n being the Born effective charge tensor, q n,a/b the phonon eigenvector, and M n the atomic mass of atom n. The sum runs over all atoms in the unit cell. Since we consider the electric field component of light to be polarized in the ab-plane of the crystal, the light-matter coupling of the B 2 mode vanishes. The electric field component of the pulse in the material, E(t), is given by: where is the carrier envelope, ε ∞ is the optical dielectric constant of the material, E 0 is the peak electric field in free space, τ is the full width at half maximum pulse duration and ω 0 is the center frequency. φ is the carrier envelope phase that here determines the polarization (linear, elliptical, circular) of the laser pulse. The time evolution of the coupled phonon modes can be described by a phenomenological oscillator model derived from the damped Euler-Lagrange equations: Here, L = T -V is the phonon Lagrangian containing the phonon kinetic energy, T = Q2 a /2+ Q2 b /2+ Q2 c /2, and the total phonon-dependent potential, is the Rayleigh dissipation function and κ α , where α ∈ {a, b, c}, is the phonon linewidth, with κ a = κ b ≡ κ 0 . From Eq. ( These equations illustrate that the electric field component of light acts as the primary driving force for the IRactive E modes, while the E modes themselves, Q a Q b , serve as the main driving force of the coupled B 2 mode. The higher order nonlinear coupling terms contained in Ṽ are a weaker contribution to the driving force. To solve these equations analytically, we perform a Fourier transform to the frequency domain. The lowestorder results for Q a and Q b are in first order in the electric field, while the expression for Q c is in second order, where ∆ α (ω) = Ω 2 α -ω 2 + iωκ α , α ∈ {0, c}, and ⊛ is the convolution operator. We use the Einstein sum convention for indices denoting the spatial coordinates, i, j, k. We now direct our focus towards understanding the induced ferroic polarizations and derive the second-order nonlinear electric susceptibilities discussed in the main text. For the purpose of the derivation, we neglect quartic-order terms in the following, Ṽ = 0. Because the B 2 mode produces a polarization along the c-axis of the crystal, we can write where V c is the unit-cell volume. Substituting Eq. ( where χ e,ijk is the second-order nonlinear electric susceptibility induced by the nonlinear phonon coupling, This function characterizes the system's frequency response of the polarization and is particularly strong in the case of resonant driving of the IR-active E modes, where ω ′ = ω 0 = Ω 0 . The ferroelectric polarization corresponds to the static component of the full frequencydependent polarization response, P c,z (0). We now analogously derive the second-order nonlinear magnetoelectric susceptibility. A circular or elliptical superposition of the two IR-active phonon modes Q a and Q b in the ab-plane of the crystal produces orbital motions of the ions around their equilibrium positions, generating a magnetization perpendicular to the plane where μ ph is the phonon magnetic moment and L = Q × Q is the phonon angular momentum with Q = (Q x , Q y , 0). In the point-charge current picture, μ ph = ħ -1 n Z * n /(2M n )q n,a ×q n,b , where q n,a/b is the phonon eigenvector of atom n, M n its atomic mass, and the sum runs over all atoms in the unit cell. Substituting the analytical expressions for the phonon amplitudes, Q a and There is a small splitting in frequency between the two E-mode components for the elliptical excitation. Q b , derived according to Eq. ( where ε ijk is the Levi-Civita tensor. We can cast the above expression into a second-order nonlinear magnetoelectric response of the material to the electric field component of the laser pulse, given by where χ me,ijk is a second order nonlinear magnetoelectric susceptibility induced by the phonon magnetic moment and given by This function characterizes the system's frequency response of the magnetization to the excitation by the laser pulse and is particularly strong in the case of resonant driving of the IR-active E modes, where ω ′ = ω 0 = Ω 0 . In Figs. e,xyz (ω, ω0 = Ω0)||, arising from the couplings of the B2 modes to the E mode. The three peaks correspond to rectification, oscillatory excitation, and second-harmonic generation (SHG) of the B2 modes. (b) Norm of the nonlinear magnetoelectric susceptibility, ||χ (SHG) of the B 2 modes. The SHG component is generally weaker than the former two and negligible in the lattice dynamics. ||χ me,ijk (ω, ω ′ ) = ε ijk