Density wave (DW) order is believed to be correlated with superconductivity in the recently discovered high-temperature superconductor La3Ni2O7. However, experimental investigations of its evolution under high pressure are still lacking. Here, we explore the quasiparticle dynamics in bilayer nickelate La3Ni2O7 single crystals using ultrafast optical pump-probe spectroscopy under high pressures up to 34.2 GPa. At ambient pressure, the temperature-dependent relaxation dynamics demonstrate a phonon bottleneck effect due to the opening of an energy gap around 151 K. The energy scale of the DW-like gap is determined to be 66 meV by the Rothwarf-Taylor model. Combined with recent experiential results, we propose that this DW-like transition at ambient pressure and low temperature is spin density wave (SDW). With increasing pressure, this SDW order is significantly suppressed up to 13.3 GPa before it completely disappears around 26 GPa. Remarkably, at pressures above 29.4 GPa, we observe the emergence of another DW-like order with a transition temperature of approximately 135 K, which is probably related to the predicted charge density wave (CDW) order. Our study provides the experimental evidence of the evolution of the DW-like gap under high pressure, offering critical insights into the correlation between DW order and superconductivity in La3Ni2O7. Nickel-based superconductors have attracted significant attention since the first member Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 was discovered The interplay between density wave order and superconductivity is a widely investigated topic in hightemperature superconductors since they are expected to be strongly related Studies of the DW orders in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at high pressure are currently insufficient due to the limited availability of experimental tools for reliable high-pressure measurements. Currently, most of the reported experimental results of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 are focused on the transport properties. However, the signature of DW transition in the transport measurements usually becomes indistinguishable starting from 3 GPa Here, we report the evolution of DW-like orders in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure using ultrafast optical spectroscopy. Time-resolved optical pump-probe spectroscopy has been widely employed to study nonequilibrium quasiparticle dynamics in various materials exhibiting superconductivity and density wave phenomena, due to its extreme sensitivity to the presence of energy gap Figure To explain the slow relaxation process in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , we employ the RT model we obtain where the Φ is the pump fluence, ∆(T ) is the temperature dependent gap energy, k B is the Boltzmann con-stant, and γ is a fitting parameter. In the RT model, the relaxation time near transition temperature is dominated by phonons with frequency ω ≥ 2∆ transferring their energy to lower frequency phonons with ω < 2∆, so the re-excitation of the condensed quasiparticles would stop. The relaxation time τ near transition temperature is given by Assuming that ∆(T ) follows BCS temperature dependence ∆(T ) ≈ ∆(0) tanh 1.74 Tc T -1 , we fit A s and τ s using Eq.( To further investigate the evolution of DW order in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 as a function of pressure, we perform ultrafast pump-probe measurements under high pressure up to 34.2 GPa. Figure In order to obtain more detailed information on the gap evolution, the ∆R/R signals as a function of pressure at 20 K are plotted in Fig. The identical RT analysis was applied to the temperature dependence of the slow relaxation A s and τ s at high pressures (Supplementary Note 4). The extracted T DW values are summarized in the Temperature-Pressure phase diagram in Fig. The present work provides clear evidences of the presence of DW orders in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure. However, various broken-symmetry states such as superconductivity and spin/charge density wave will develop an energy gap below the phase transition temperature, resulting in a similar PB effect Recent theoretical works have indicated that electronphonon coupling alone is insufficient to trigger superconductivity, suggesting that the Cooper pairing mechanism is unconventional in pressurized La 3 Ni 2 O 7 and may originate from antiferromagnetic fluctuation First principle calculations revealed that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 favors an antiferromagnetic ground state, under which the strong Fermi surface nesting evokes the electronic instability resulting in a potential structure transition from F mmm symmetry to Cmmm or Cmcm symmetry In summary, we have presented ultrafast optical pumpprobe measurements on recently discovered nickelate superconductor La 3 Ni 2 O 7 crystal under pressure up to 34.2 GPa. By analyzing the data with RT model, the evolution of DW-like orders under high pressure is revealed and summarized in a phase diagram. With increasing pressure, the SDW order, as demonstrated at ambient pressure, is significantly suppressed up to 13.3 GPa before it completely disappears around 26 GPa. Intriguingly, at pressures above 29.4 GPa, another DW-like order with a transition temperature of approximately 135 K re-emerges, which is probably related to the predicted CDW order. Our results not only provide the experimental evidence of the DW evolution under high pressure, but also offer insight into the underlying correlation between the DW order and superconductivity in pressured La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Singlecrystalline La 3 Ni 2 O 7 samples were grown using a vertical optical-image floating-zone method at an oxygen pressure of 15 bar and a 5-kW Xenon arc lamp (100-bar Model HKZ, SciDre) Measurements under high pressure and low temperature. High pressure was generated by screwpressure-type nonmagnetic Be-Cu alloy diamond anvil cell (DAC) with a 500 μm culet. Fine KBr powders were used as the pressure transmitting medium, which has been demonstrated could offer quasi-hydrostatic pressure condition for the pump probe measurments Pump-probe measurement. An achromatic pumpprobe system based on a mode-locked Yb:KGW laser system was employed. The laser pulses with wavelength of 800 nm and repetition rate of 50 kHz was generated by the optical parametric amplifier, which was divided into two beams. One served as the probe beam, and another passed through a BBO crystal to generate a 400 nm pump pulses. The pump and probe beams were focused onto the sample surface through a 5× objective lens. The focused spot diameters of the pump and the probe pulse were 37 and 17 μm, respectively. The pulse duration, after passing through the cryostat window and diamond anvil, was measured to be 50 fs. In the temperature and pressure dependence measurements, the pump and probe fluences on the sample were kept at 45 and 9 μJ/cm -2 , respectively. The pump beam was modulated by a chopper with a frequency of 433 Hz and the reflected pump beam was filtered out. The reflected probe beams traversed through the same objective lens, received by a photo-diode detector and sampled by a lock-in amplifier to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. The relative change of reflectivity ∆R(t)/R 0 = [R(t) -R 0 ] /R 0 , where R and R 0 are the reflectivity of the probe with and without the presence of pump pulses, respectively, was recorded as a function of the time delay between the pump and probe pulses.