Recent advances unveiled physical neural networks as promising machine learning platforms, offering faster and more energy-efficient information processing. Compared with extensively-studied optical neural networks, the development of mechanical neural networks (MNNs) remains nascent and faces significant challenges, including heavy computational demands and learning with approximate gradients. Here, we introduce the mechanical analogue of in situ backpropagation to enable highly efficient training of MNNs. We demonstrate that the exact gradient can be obtained locally in MNNs, enabling learning through their immediate vicinity. With the gradient information, we showcase the successful training of MNNs for behavior learning and machine learning tasks, achieving high accuracy in regression and classification. Furthermore, we present the retrainability of MNNs involving task-switching and damage, demonstrating the resilience. Our findings, which integrate the theory for training MNNs and experimental and numerical validations, pave the way for mechanical machine learning hardware and autonomous self-learning material systems. The past decades have witnessed the development of artificial intelligence at an unprecedented pace, with machine learning emerging as one of its most transformative branches. At the core of modern machine learning lies neural networks, computational models inspired by the intricate workings of the human brain Nevertheless, the substantial computational requirements and energy consumption associated with computer-based neural networks, especially considering the energy efficiency of conventional digital processors, present significant challenges to further development Besides, the efficient and feasible training method of in situ backpropagation for optical neural networks promotes the promising physical machine learning platform and the reduction of carbon footprint Wave-matter interactions are commonly utilized to implement machine learning in optical neural networks Moreover, MNNs exhibit superiority over optical counterparts in some extreme cases, including complex electromagnetic environments, yet they remain relatively unexplored in terms of efficient training methods and experimental demonstrations. For instance, while training MNNs to learn behaviors has been experimentally demonstrated, the approach using optimization algorithms (e.g., genetic algorithms) operated on computers ultimately relies on conventional digital processors In light of this, the concept of physical learning offers a promising avenue to train MNNs only using local information of the networks without the computer aid Here, we present a highly-efficient training protocol for MNNs through mechanical analogue of in situ backpropagation, derived from the adjoint variable method, in which the learning only relies on the local information. By using 3D-printed MNNs, we demonstrate the feasibility of obtaining the exact gradient of the loss function experimentally solely from the bond elongation of MNNs in only two steps, essentially without a computer. Besides, leveraging the obtained gradient, we showcase the successful training of a mechanical network for behaviors learning and various machine learning tasks, achieving high accuracy in both regression and Iris flower classification tasks, validated both numerically and experimentally. In addition, we illustrate the retrainability of MNNs after switching tasks and damage, a feature that may inspire further inquiry into more robust and resilient design of MNNs. Beyond their applications as computational devices, these MNNs also offer unprecedented opportunities in materials science and mechanical engineering as sustainable and autonomous materials systems. In engineering, few examples exist where materials or machines possess the innate ability to exhibit desired behaviors without meticulous design and engineering. However, the design strategies need expert knowledge and experience. The MNNs as well as the efficient training protocol proposed here also pave the way for future intelligent material systems which can be repeatedly trained to adapt to different environments and tasks. We start from introducing the theoretical basis to conduct in situ backpropagation in MNNs. For a MNN without zero modes under boundary conditions, owning n nodes and m springs in d dimension, given the certain task, the task learning problem can be described as: where L is the loss function, k ∈ R m×1 ≥0 is a vector containing the spring constant of each bond, which is the trainable learning degree of freedom, D ∈ R dn×dn is the stiffness matrix, u ∈ R dn×1 is the node displacement, which is the output and F ∈ R dn×1 is the external forces applied on the nodes, which is the input. The governing equation of statics, Du = F , represents the forward problem, reflecting the response u (displacement of each node) of a MNN under input forces F . To minimize L[u(k)] using gradient descent, ∇L is derived as below: Given the form of the loss L as a function of u, Jacobian ∂L ∂u can be conveniently calculated, whereas usually du dk is a computationally-heavy term due to interactions between the nodes. We show as below that this term can be derived from the differentiation of Du = F on both sides: Plug Eq. ( Here we use u * to represent -∂L ∂u D -1 to obtain Du * T = -∂L ∂u T . Therefore, after defining u * T as adjoint displacement field u adj , the adjoint problem can be expressed as below: Then, in the linear regime, after introducing the compatibility matrix C ∈ R m×dn that maps the node displacement u to the bond elongation e, the gradient of L can be expressed as: where K is the diagonal matrix with k as the diagonal entries and • is the Hadamard product (i.e., element-wise product). dK dk is a tensor δ pql ∈ R m×m×m , where the entry is 1 when p = q = l and otherwise 0. Eq. ( Apparently, two problems only have the difference on the input force. Therefore, to implement in situ backpropagation in MNNs and obtain the gradient of the loss function L from the local information of MNNs, there are two steps: (1) Apply the input force F to the MNNs, and obtain the displacement of the nodes and forward elongation of the bonds e. (2) Calculate -∂L ∂u given the form of the loss function L(u) using the displacement in step (1) and apply the force -∂L ∂u T to the same system to obtain the adjoint elongation of the bonds e adj . The gradient is the elementwise multiplication of the forward elongation and the adjoint elongation. Note that entries in -∂L ∂u are only nonzero at the output nodes. Therefore, essentially the backward signals propagate from output nodes, similar to the backpropagation in computer-based and optical neural networks More importantly, this method for in situ backpropagation stays consistent with the local rule required in physical learning iteratively through gradient descent, minimizing the loss function subject to the physics law. Here, to demonstrate the in situ backpropagation in MNNs, we fabricate twodimensional MNNs made of flexible Agilus30 using 3D printing techniques, as shown in We observe that our measured elongation and simulated elongation have an excellent agreement, as well as the gradient. Compared with the simulated gradient, which represents the exact gradient, our experimental gradient achieves over 90% accuracy, as shown in the inset in Fig. To provide a comparison, we calculate the approximate gradient using the forward difference as follows: The error depends on the step size δk, where the smallest error occurs at around δk = 10 -6 N/m, as shown in the left panel of Fig. Besides, finite difference method is usually implemented numerically since δk needs to be considerably small (also see the experimentally feasible step size within the shaded area in Fig. In addition, another advantage of our MNNs is the potential utilization of the same node as both input and output node, owing to the noncontroversial nature of input force and output displacement. This characteristic enables more compact design of MNNs. In the Supplementary Information, we demonstrate the in situ backpropagation when the defined loss function and the input force are in the same node. Furthermore, to check if our bar model used for simulation agrees with the actual experimental samples, as part of the supplementary analysis for simulations, we use the finite element method to analyze 3D actual experimental samples, which yields results in accordance with the predominantly used bar model (see Supplementary Information for further details). As Fig. The utilization of in situ backpropagation offers a straightforward methodology for training mechanical structures to exhibit desired functionalities, thereby paving the way for future applications in the design of intricate mechanical systems, including automotive design and robotics. As outlined in the Introduction, akin to their computer-based counterparts, MNNs offer a compelling avenue for implementing machine learning tasks with enhanced speed and energy efficiency. Furthermore, the model for a machine learning task is essentially stored in a MNN by the real materials, showing interpretability. In this section, we select two representative tasks typically undertaken by computer-based neural networks to showcase the versatility and efficacy of MNNs. Regression stands as benchmark tasks in the field of machine learning, serving as a cornerstone for evaluating model performance and predictive capabilities. Here, given that the in situ backpropagation in MNNs is conducted within the linear regime, linear regression is chosen to demonstrate in our case. Considering the stiffness of our experimental MNNs, we choose four synthetic datasets to exemplify the regression task as a function of the input force F , expressed as follows: Here, u Rx , u Ry are the horizontal and vertical displacement of the bottom right node, respectively. u Lx and u Ly are those of the bottom left node. Hence, by training with such dataset, we expect these two nodes to exhibit linear displacement under applied force according to the prescribed slopes. This regression task can also be simply visualized by two straight lines as shown in Fig. This can be interpreted as relations between the horizontal and vertical displacements of two nodes, where the bottom right node does not develop horizontal displacement while the bottom left node has horizontal and vertical displacements in a certain relation under the applied force. We generate a set of 100 random data points according to Equation We randomly split the synthetic dataset into a training set (70%) and a testing set (30%). As displayed in Fig. Another benchmark task in machine learning is classification. In our study, we utilize the well-known Iris flower dataset, a real-world dataset, to exemplify the classification process In our classification process, we consider four features, each corresponding to a downward input force applied on the nodes marked by red dots in the inset of Fig. Note that these four values are appropriately scaled based on the stiffness of experimental MNNs and details can be seen in Supplementary Information. The indicator of a specific species is determined by the node with the largest horizontal displacement among the three nodes in the inset marked by the corresponding symbols. In the preceding sections, we have showcased the remarkable capability of our MNNs to implement the behaviors learning and various machine learning tasks through in situ backpropagation. Distinct from the computer-based neural networks, which exist solely in the digital realm, MNNs are physically manufactured, embedding the machine learning model within real materials. Hence, the retrainability of MNNs emerges as a pivotal attribute In the task-switching scenario, we start from the Iris flower classification task. Following training our MNN until convergence as shown in Fig. Another scenario involves the retrainability of the MNNs after damage occurs. We again begin with the Iris flower classification task shown in Fig. In conclusion, our study presents a foundational method for training MNNs through in situ backpropagation, derived from the adjoint variable method. This novel approach enables the computation of gradients of the loss function from local information within MNNs in only two steps, demonstrating remarkable efficiency. Leveraging in situ backpropagation, we have investigated the capabilities of MNNs in learning behaviors and various machine learning tasks, achieving high accuracy in both regression and Iris flower classification tasks. These physically-manufactured MNNs store machine learning models in real materials, distinguishing them from the computer-based neural networks. Moreover, our work highlights the retrainability of MNNs, a crucial attribute with profound implications for real-world applications. We have demonstrated that these networks can seamlessly switch between tasks and recover from damage, showcasing their robustness and resilience. In contrast to other physical neural networks, such as optical neural networks, our MNNs offer greater ease of operation in experiments and real-world applications across diverse environments. The utilization of static force to implement task learning addresses some challenges in physical neural networks based on wave dynamics, such as energy dissipation and loss. Also, MNNs provide fairly fast information processing at the speed of sound of materials in both in situ backpropagation at the training stage and decision-making at the prediction stage. It is important to note that the experimental feasibility of in situ backpropagation has been demonstrated as shown in Fig. The trained MNN is fabricated using a Polyjet 3D printer (J850 TM Digital Anatomy TM ) with Agilus30 (black and flexible). To align with the bar model and prevent the bond-bending force, the joints of bonds in mechanical networks are manufactured thinner (a half of the bond width), equivalent to half the width of the bonds. This design ensures that the bonds prefer to deform near the nodes in the loading condition, mitigating the risk of buckling in their middle sections. We use an assembled structure to suspend the MNN by gluing the two nodes (marked in blue triangles in figures) onto the truss. Thin strings are delicately wound around the joints of the input nodes, serving as hooks to hang weights. Following a careful and slow application of weights onto the strings, experimental procedures involve taking images using a DSLR camera. The parameters for the camera are: F5.0 and ISO800. Positioned on a tripod, the camera is remotely controlled to minimize interference, ensuring precise measurements. The lens is aligned perpendicular to and at the same height as the sample to maintain accuracy. Besides, camera calibration is performed using a standard checkerboard pattern, and images are corrected using the camera matrix. To obtain the elongation of the bonds in mechanical networks, we employ correlation-based algorithms to track the centers of the joints The simulations of the response of MNNs to applied forces are conducted using bar elements. To verify the feasibility of these simulations in experiments, the finite element analysis of the actual 3D model is also performed on Comsol Multiphysics (see Supplementary Information). Training of the MNNs is conducted by the in situ backpropagation derived from the adjoint method, as detailed in the main text. The The comparison between the finite difference method and our adjoint method. The left panel shows the numerical error as a function of step size in finite difference method. The shaded area represents the experimentally feasible region with large step sizes, below which the step size ∆k is too small for manufacturing accuracy. The inset shows the experimental error in adjoint method. The numerical error of the adjoint method is zero. The right panel shows the number of required simulations of the finite difference method and the adjoint method as a function of the number of bonds in the MNNs to obtain the gradient. 