Monoclinic β-Ga2O3 films grown on c-plane sapphire have been shown to exhibit six ( 201)-plane oriented domains, which are equally-spaced-by-rotation around the surface normal and equallysized-by-volume that render the film optical response effectively uniaxial. We derive and discuss an optical model suitable for ellipsometry data analysis of such films. We model mid-and farinfrared ellipsometry data from undoped and electrically insulating films with an effective uniaxial dielectric tensor based on projections of all phonon modes within the rotation domains parallel and perpendicular to the sample normal, i.e., to the reciprocal lattice vector g2 01 . Two effective response functions are described by model, and found sufficient to calculate ellipsometry data that best-match measured ellipsometry data from a representative film. We propose to render either effective dielectric functions, or inverse effective dielectric functions, each separately for electric field directions parallel and perpendicular to g2 01 , by sums of Lorentz oscillators, which permit to determine either sets of transverse optical phonon mode parameters, or sets of longitudinal optical phonon mode parameters, respectively. Transverse optical modes common to both dielectric functions can be traced back to single crystal modes with Bu character, while modes with Au character only appear within the dielectric function for polarization perpendicular to the sample surface. The thereby obtained parameter sets reveal all phonon modes anticipated from averaging over the six-fold rotation domains of single crystal β-Ga2O3, but with slightly shifted transverse optical, and completely different longitudinal optical phonon modes. Structural analysis of the film revealed virtually strain-free material. We suggest small crystal grains and high density of grain boundaries as a possible origin for the observed transverse optical phonon frequency shifts with respect to bulk material. The differences in longitudinal optical modes here compared to the bulk are hypothesized to be caused by averaging of the electric field induced polarization over many longrange ordered rotation domains. Our model can be useful for future analysis of free charge carrier properties using infrared ellipsometry on multiple domain films of monoclinic structure β-Ga2O3. form parameters from best-match model analysis of ellipsometry data shown in Fig. Ultra-wide band gap conductive and semiconducting metal oxides have attracted substantial interest in high power electronics and short wavelengths optoelectronics applications β-Ga 2 O 3 reveals complex interaction between the anisotropic lattice response and charge carriers For doped β-Ga 2 O 3 , it was revealed that coupling of free charge carriers with the LO modes results in coupled phonon plasmon modes with a polarization direction that shifts with carrier concentration throughout the entire monoclinic plane Of particular interest is the ability to characterize epitaxial materials since such are required for advanced electronic device structures. Depending on the substrate, epitaxial films may often be strained, which affects the material properties. Linear deformation-potential parameters have been derived from density-functional theory that can describe strain-related shift of phonon frequencies and band transitions for β-Ga 2 O 3 Many epitaxial methods are currently employed for preparation of β-Ga 2 O 3 and related materials. Homoepitaxial growth has been reported with great success for high structural quality of films. However, β-Ga 2 O 3 single-crystal substrates are still cost intensive compared to, for example, sapphire. Homoepitaxial growth so far is necessary to meet the high requirements for lateral and vertical device architectures, but alternate substrates such as sapphire are being explored as well. Sapphire has been widely used in group-III nitride heteroepitaxy and is suitable for growth of β-Ga 2 O 3 due to availability and similar template properties. Typically, β-Ga 2 O 3 epitaxial layers with ( 201) orientation grow on c-plane (0001) sapphire When β-Ga 2 O 3 is heteroepitaxially grown on c-plane sapphire, six rotational domains with crystallographic ( 201) orientation are often revealed in X-ray diffraction (XRD) Developing methodologies for analysis of physical properties such as strain, bandgap energy, free charge carrier density, etc., are highly desirable for multiple domain ( 201) β-Ga 2 O 3 films on c-plane sapphire. In this paper, we study the phonon mode properties of such films grown by MOCVD. Our specific aim is to provide an approach to correctly model the complex optical anisotropy in the infrared and far-infrared spectral regions taking into account the monoclinic structure of the individual crystal grains in the multi-domain films. The optical response of the films investigated here is best described by optically uniaxial film properties caused by the highly symmetric arrangement of the rotation domains relative to the c-axis of sapphire. Upon comparison of our effective uniaxial model with experimental data during bestmatch model calculations of the measured infrared and far-infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry data, we obtain all TO and LO phonon mode parameters which are anticipated from bulk β-Ga 2 O 3 investigations. The unit cell of β-Ga 2 O 3 is depicted in Fig. The dielectric tensor (ε) was described previously[9] using an eigendielectric displacement vector summation approach. Within (x, y, z) coordinates in Fig. Symbol ⊗ indicates the Kronecker product operation which results in a dyadic that represents the contribution of mode l in tensor form. Symbol † indicates the transpose and complex-conjugate operation such that the resulting dyadic is Hermitian or self-adjoint, and i 2 = -1. The sum is taken over l contributions from 12 infrared active optical phonon mode branches at the center of the Brillouin zone. Of these, 8 have B u character and are polarized within the (a -c) plane. Four mode pairs with A u character are polarized parallel to b. All branches are associated with a transverse-optical (TO) and a longitudinal-optical (LO) mode. In the above equation, harmonically-broadened Lorentzian oscillators are used to model the dielectric response, and A TO,l , ω TO,l , and γ TO,l then correspond to the amplitude, frequency, and broadening parameters in the so-called TO-FIG. summation form, respectively.[? ] Unit vector êTO,l represents the dielectric displacement direction of TO mode l. ε ∞ is the high-frequency dyadic contribution (see also Ref. For a given sample, Euler angle rotations are required to bring ε into the correct appearance within the ellipsometer system (x, ŷ, ẑ). Figure The full set of rotations, φ, θ, ψ indicated in Fig. where ε indicates the tensor appearance of ε in a new auxiliary system C. The six-domain ( 201) model For a sample of β-Ga 2 O 3 with the ( 201) plane as its surface, the surface normal vector is the reciprocal vector g2 01 = -2a ⋆ + c ⋆ , where a ⋆ and c ⋆ are reciprocal lattice vectors to a and c, respectively (Fig. where εxx , εxy , εyy are obtained from ε xx , ε xy , ε yy in Eq. 2 by rotation within the monoclinic plane using ψ = 130 • , and ε zz is the same as in Eq. 2. For the specific sample configuration discussed in this work, six equally weighted-by-volume domains exist within an epitaxial layer. Each domain is rotated around its surface normal, g2 01 , by φ = 0 • , 60 where the terms appear as follows ε2 01 (120 ε2 01 (300 (13) Hence, after summation where we defined effective in-plane and out-of-plane dielectric functions, ε ⊥ and ε || , respectively We obtain thereby an effective dielectric tensor which renders the optical response of an effectively optically uniaxial material, with ordinary and extraordinary opti- Instead of using the eigendielectric displacement vector summation approach, we suggest to introduce another TO form summation approach for εeff . Thereby, we introduce sums of harmonically broadened Lorentizan oscillators which permit us to quantitatively determine TO phonon mode parameters with amplitude, TO frequency, and TO broadening parameters A TO,⊥;||,l , ω TO,⊥;||,l , and γ TO,⊥;||,l , for ordinary (⊥) and extraordinary (||) components. Note that this effective uniaxial dielectric function model can also be applied for band gap modeling of such films The same summation approach can be applied to the inverse effective dielectric functions We have studied β-Ga 2 O 3 films with typical six-fold rotation domains grown by MOCVD on c-plane sapphire. No miscut was utilized in the substrates investigated here. Details on β-Ga 2 O 3 growth and properties can be found elsewhere The samples were investigated by XRD (Philips X'Pert MRD and Panalytical Empyrean) to confirm the ( 201)plane orientation by measurements in Bragg-Brentano geometry. Pole figures of various crystal planes (( 201), (001)/(002), (111), (400)) were obtained to confirm the equal distribution of rotation domains. The results for all films are very similar independent of the film thickness and specific growth conditions. A representative pole figure is presented in Fig. The lattice parameters (a, b, c) and the angle β were determined from the 2θ -ω positions of the β-Ga 2 O 3 201, 002, 400 and 111 XRD peaks for all films. The strain values along the main crystallographic directions were estimated from the measured lattice parameters and the respective lattice parameters and angle β of an undoped β-Ga 2 O 3 ( 201) oriented single crystal. All β-Ga 2 O 3 ( 201) films were found to have similar levels of strain. Mid-and far-infrared ellipsometry using a commercial (J. A. Woollam Co., Inc., IR-VASE) and a homebuilt ellipsometer The optical properties of the sapphire substrate were calculated according to Schubert, Herzinger and Tiwald. We also included an experimental-difference data best-match model approach. We calculated virtual, experimental-difference ellipsometry data, δM ij , by subtracting from the measured data the model calculated ellipsometry data for the same wavelength and incidence conditions assuming a c-plane sapphire substrate only. We assumed the same uncertainty parameters determined from the measurement also for the δM ij data. These differences data were then included into the bestmatch model calculations. We thereby matched M ij and δM ij simultaneously. The model-calculated difference data were obtained by subtracting at every iteration step model calculated data for a bare substrate from the model calculated data which included the epitaxial layer into the optical model. The results, using the TO sum forms, are shown in Fig. The lattice mismatch between β-Ga 2 O 3 and sapphire in case of pseudomorphic growth of ( 201)-oriented domains should result in compressive strain along [102] and tensile strain along [010]. The proximity of differently rotated domains may result in additional biaxial strain within the ( 201)-plane. The best-match model calculated functions ε ∥ and ε ⊥ (Eqs. 17, 18) and inverse dielectric functions ε -1 ∥ and ε -1 ⊥ (Eqs. According to the six-domain effective uniaxial dielectric function model derived in Sec. II C, we notice that TO mode frequencies with single crystal origin of B u character appear in both effective dielectric functions. This observation is important because it has been determined previously by Kasic et al. The TO mode frequencies shift from the anticipated single crystal values. This is a surprising observation since very small strain values were observed from XRD investigations. Hence, one would assume that specifically TO phonon modes would appear close to the same frequency as for the bulk case. The latter is concluded from the fact that TO modes reflect the local strength of a lattice bond, i.e., the dynamic restoring conditions for a local molecular displacement. As seen in Fig. The broadening parameters reported in Tab. I were obtained from the same best-match model calculations. Parameters for the same TO modes in both dielectric functions were coupled together, hence, no separate broadening parameters are determined for the parallel dielectric function. We observe a general increase in broadening parameter values within the TO sum forms in comparison with the TO broadening parameters reported for the bulk single crystal investigations previously. We investigated the mid-and far-infrared optical properties of six-fold rotation domain 201-oriented β-Ga 2 O 3 films grown by metal-organic vapor deposition onto cplane oriented sapphire substrates. We observed an effective optical uniaxial behavior with differing dielectric functions for electric field polarization parallel and perpendicular to the surface normal of the films. We find that all phonon modes known from bulk single crystal β-Ga 2 O 3 occur within the spectra of the two dielectric functions of the epitaxial β-Ga 2 O 3 , however, the transverse optical modes are shifted and the longitudinal modes appear in new order and at noticeably different frequencies. We also observe that transverse optical modes descending from single crystal with B u character occur in both dielectric functions, while those with A u character only occur in the in-plane dielectric function. We analyze both functions with TO and LO sum forms and report all phonon mode model parameters for a representative film. The observed shift in TO frequencies with respect to single crystalline undoped bulk material can be explained with small grain sizes and domain wall effects, while the change in phonon mode order is caused by long range order of the six-fold domain structure where the effective LO modes appear as new conditions for vanishing dielectric displacement when integrating over large areas with multiple domains. We propose nanostructured lowsymmetry films with designed texture for applications in nanophotonic and nanophononic devices. The optic axis is oriented along surface normal g2 01 . No coupling of p into s polarized wave components and vice versa upon reflection or transmission is anticipated or observed. Therefore, standard ellipsometry measurements are sufficient and measurements of multiple sample orientations is unnecessary. Note that εxx is obtained when all unit vectors êTO,l in Eq. 1 are shifted by 130 • according to the rotation within the monoclinic plane by 130 • . Then, all TO modes with B u character cause signatures in εxx . All modes with A u character cause signatures in ε zz . Hence, all TO modes are anticipated to cause signatures in ε ⊥ . However, ε || only consists of εyy , and which only contains contributions from TO modes with B u character. Hence, for ε || only signatures due to modes with B u character are anticipated. Further, the amplitudes of TO modes with B u character in ε ⊥ are expected according to their projection onto the sample surface ( 201).