For chiral liquid crystals that express topologically protected defects and thermally driven mechanical rotation, the size-and temperature-driven reversal of the rotational direction of their droplets was demonstrated even under a fixed temperature gradient. This unconventional reversal indicates the dependence of thermomechanical coupling on the molecular orientational order, this dependence is justified through an examination of the size, temperature, and molecular structure as well as by phenomenological arguments on the order parameter. Chirality is an abundant frontier for the emergence of topological structures and transport dynamics in condensed matter. In liquid crystals (LCs), chirality allows a pseudoscalar (Lifshitz invariant) n • ∇ × n = n i ε ijk ∇ j n k (i, j, k = 1, 2, 3) to be nonzero When chiral nematic (N *) LCs are confined in a spherical droplet, the periodic layers of the helical director field deform into concentric shells under degenerate planar anchoring (Fig. The chirality of LCs induces their dynamical rotation under temperature gradients Here, we investigate the role of topological defects in thermomechanical coupling by focusing on RSS. Hereinafter, we refer to the defect as a filament to remind the reader of its finite thickness. A recently developed method Experimental system.-N * LC mixtures nCB(X) were prepared by mixing nematic LCs 4 ′ -alkyl-4-cyanobiphenyls nCB (n = 5, 6, 7), with chiral dopants (X)-2-octyl 4-[4-(hexyloxy)benzoyloxy]benzoate (X = R, S) at a concentration of approximately 1.5% w/w. nCB(X) was dispersed as spherical droplets with a non-uniform radius in immiscible glycerol, where Marangoni convection and mass diffusion fluxes are effectively suppressed Reversal with radius.-Figure The reversal of the rotational direction is attributed to the reversal of torque exerting on the droplet. A droplet with RSS comprises two orientational structures (Fig. Figure The torque competition between these two types of structures in the droplets is formulated by the dimensional analysis below. A minimal expression of the dissipation function Φ up to numerical factors is a quadratic form of the variables of angular velocity ω 0 and temper- ature gradient ∇ z T , as (1) The first term represents the energy converted per unit time through thermomechanical coupling. The coefficients with dimensions of volume R 3 and q -2 0 R 1 describe the contributions of the three-dimensional shells and the quasi-one-dimensional filament, respectively. Adopting Onsager's variational principle which minimizes the dissipation function in Eq. ( Figure Reversal with temperature.-As temperature rises, S declines due to thermal fluctuation, and ν changes accordingly; thus, the reversal of the rotational direction with temperature is also expected (Fig. Figures A theoretical insight.-We recast the theory of thermomechanical coupling conventionally formulated with the director n. Omitting the contributions of the electromagnetic field, hydrodynamic flow and elastic distortion, the evolution of the director, which is purely driven by thermomechanical coupling, is where ν is the coupling constant renormalized by division by the viscosity against the background flow. The director n specifies only the mean orientation direction of the molecules, and n ignores the degree of molecular orientation, which is represented by the scalar OP S. The complete OP for describing the microscopic molecular order is a second-order symmetric traceless tensor (the Q-tensor) whose non-degenerate eigenvalue is equal to S and its eigenvector is n where L ijk is a third-order tensor coefficient being invariant with respect to i ↔ j, inheriting the symmetry of Qij . Since L has the same symmetry as the N * phase, it must be a function of Q. Since elastic distortion where ν 1 and ν 2 are pseudoscalars hardly varying with temperature. Eq. ( Conclusion.-We have found that droplets of chiral LCs with topological defects show reversal of rotational motion under a temperature gradient. This nontrivial reversal depending on size and temperature has not yet been expected but is ascribed to the dependence of thermomechanical coupling on the degree of molecular orientational order, which is justified by our phenomenological argument. In the context of topology of materials, the phase or direction components of the order parameter is usually taken up 