In superconductors that lack inversion symmetry, a supercurrent flow can lead to nondissipative magnetoelectric effects. We offer a straightforward formalism to obtain a supercurrent-induced magnetization in superconductors with broken inversion symmetry, which may have orbital, layer, sublattice, or valley degrees of freedom-multiband noncentrosymmetric superconductors. The nondissipative magnetoelectric effect may find applications in fabricating quantum computation platforms or efficient superconducting spintronic devices. We explore how the current-induced magnetization can be employed to create and manipulate Majorana zero modes in a simple hybrid structure. Introduction.-Hybrid structures involving magnetic materials and normal metals are one of the building blocks of spintronic devices. Motivated by mitigating dissipation and enhancing device performance, combining superconductivity with spintronics has led to interesting equilibrium and nonequilibrium phenomena that fuel interest in superconducting spintronics In multiband superconductors, where electrons have multiple degrees of freedom, such as orbital, layer, sublattice, or valley, a supercurrent flow may lead to a sizeable induced magnetization. The source of the induced magnetization is spin polarization In this Letter, we offer a simple formulation of superconducting magnetoelectric effects for multiband superconductors in the static regime, encompassing both orbital and spin magnetization contributions. The superconducting magnetoelectric effect has been studied in Ref. sition is discussed. As we show, our results do not match Ref. When a superconductor is in contact with a nonsuperconducting material, a weak superconductivity is induced in the normal material over mesoscopic distances (superconducting proximity effect) Magnetoelectric effect in multiband superconductors.-From the viewpoint of symmetry, a linear currentinduced magnetization can occur if inversion symmetry is broken where ξ(p) = ξ(-p) is a diagonal matrix whose entries are the Bloch band energies ξ ν (p) (measured from chemical potential), which are obtained by a unitary transformation -p is a diagonal matrix with elements ∆ ν (p), where ∆ 0 (p) is the usual pairing function written in the space of the electronic degrees of freedom such as spin and valley Under a uniform supercurrent flow, quasiparticle energies get shifted (Doppler shift Here, is the occupancy of the electronic single-particle state at band ν with momentum p in the superconducting state is the spin magnetic moment, and m ν (p) is the orbital magnetic moment A nonzero orbital magnetic moment is an intrinsic property of the band that can roughly be interpreted as a selfrotation of the electron wave function around its center of mass The terms proportional to ∂n ν /∂p j in Eqs. (2) differ from those obtained in Ref. Application to two and four-band models.-Let us first consider a two-band system described by a normal state Hamiltonian H 0 (p) = ξ p σ 0 +g p •σ, where σ is the vector of Pauli matrices acting on the spin basis, and σ 0 is a 2×2 identity matrix. As a result of broken inversion symmetry, g p = -g -p , the spin degeneracy of electrons is lifted suggesting a two-band description of the Fermi surface ξ ν (p) = ξ p + ν|g p |, with ν = ±1 labeling the bands. Finally, it can be checked that the spin magnetic moment of band ν is given by s 2 gμ B ĝp . H 0 (p) can also describe a minimal model for novel quantum systems such as Weyl semimetals, in which σ acts on orbital space (valence and conduction orbitals mixed with spin), e.g., see , where ε ijl is the rank-3 Levi-Civita tensor Next, we consider a bilayer system with a spinindependent coupling between layers, where H i is the Hamiltonian of layer i = 1, 2, and V = λσ 0 with λ being the interlayer interaction As illustrative examples, we consider each layer to be described by a 2D Rashba or Dresselhaus Hamiltonian σ, where g i p = α i (p y , -p x ) and g i p = α i (p x , -p y ) for the Rashba and Dresselhaus systems, respectively. The band dispersion relation is given by where g ± p = (g 1 p ± g 2 p )/2 and a 1 , a 2 = ±1. Here we identify indices (a 1 , a 2 ) = (1, 1), (-1, 1), (1, -1), and (-1, -1), with ν = 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. For the Rashba system, Fig. where ĝR = (p y , -p x )/p, α ± = α 1 ± α 2 , and t is the distance between the layers [39]. We note that the magnitude of the spin magnetic moment is solely determined by the g-factor, while the orbital moment is influenced by multiple parameters, offering greater tunability. Fig. where ĝD = (p x , -p y )/p. It is interesting to note that, unlike the Rashba SOC, in the Dresselhaus SOC, the magnetic moment perpendicular to the current direction is only due to the orbital one. Moreover, the orbital moment has the same direction for both systems, as it can be seen from Eqs. (8b) and (7b). In both systems, a nonzero orbital magnetic moment arises from the fact that the electron state in a band can be a superposition of two layers with different Fermi velocities. Consequently, a similar Fermi pocket shift due to Rashba or Dresselhaus SOC can lead to an equivalent orbital magnetic moment. To obtain the current-induced magnetization, we consider the induced magnetization in the y-direction by a current in the x-direction. Topological superconductivity manipulated by the magnetoelectric effect.-Consider a semiconductor wire with Rashba spin-orbit coupling (such as electron-doped InAs Additionally, as outlined in Ref. We propose an alternative approach to topological superconductivity induced and manipulated by supercurrent-induced magnetization. We consider a semiconducting wire with Rashba SOC placed on top of a superconducting TMD, as shown in Fig. W /2 ≫ ∆ 0 is the SOC energy scale in the wire and α W determines the Rashba SOC in the wire. The lower limit for the Zeeman energy, ∆ 2 0 /4E SOC , ensures that the phase transition takes place between two trivial and nontrivial gapped phases, which is essential in realizing the isolated Majorana zero modes. Specifically, considering ∆ 0 = 0.1 meV and E SOC = 0.1 eV, the induced Zeeman energy in the wire must be E Z > 10 -4 meV. As a result, the topological phase transition may occur at some momentum, denoted by |q| = q T . To enhance the effective Zeeman field on the wire and to maintain q T below the critical depairing momentum in the substrate superconductor, a semiconductor wire with a large g-factor can be employed Discussion.-For a Rashba system with SOC strength of α 1 = 2α 2 = 5 × 10 4 m/s [44], the estimated spin and orbital magnetizations are 10 -2 ξ -1 μ B /nm 2 and 10 -5 ξ -1 μ B /nm 2 , respectively, where ξ is the supercon-ducting coherence length in nanometers. For a superconductor with ξ = 90 nm, the corresponding magnetizations would be 10 -4 μ B /nm 2 for spin and 10 -7 μ B /nm 2 for orbital magnetization. We note that measuring this magnetization is feasible within current experimental capabilities, such as employing single-spin microscopy (NV center microscopy) In a superconductor-magnet hybrid structure, exchange coupling the superconductor to an adjacent magnet, the supercurrent-induced magnetization can exert the so-called reactive torque In Ref. In our treatment, we are projecting physical quantities onto a single band, and in doing so, we are neglecting interband coherent effects linked to the quantum metric of the Bloch wave function, discussed in previous works We close this Letter by noting that while we have studied the supercurrent-induced magnetization in a clean superconductor (where physically the superconducting gap is much larger than the disorder scattering rate), we expect that our results remain qualitatively valid at a low concentration of impurities. Indeed as shown in Ref. It is a pleasure to acknowledge discussions with Allan H. MacDonald. This work was supported by the NSF under Grant No. DMR-2049979.