Graphene has been widely studied for various applications due to its outstanding electrical and mechanical properties. However, its potential in thermoelectric applications has been limited by a low Seebeck coefficient and high thermal conductivity. Efforts to enhance its thermoelectric properties have involved the usage of carbon-based nanoribbons [1, 2], strain engineering [3], and heteroatom co-doping, particularly with Nitrogen and/or Boron atoms Despite the thermoelectric effect has been known for nearly two centuries, its applications continue to expand, making thermoelectric materials a crucial focus of research and development in the pursuit of sustainable and efficient energy solutions. In particular, the attractiveness of the thermoelectric effect lies in its potential to harness waste heat and convert it into valuable electrical power. This renders thermoelectric materials highly relevant in various applications, including automotive waste heat recovery Indeed, electrons mimic the electronic properties of massless Dirac fermions in the vicinity of the high-symmetry K-points of the Brillouin zone of graphene, leading to particularly high energy-independent group velocity (∼ 10 6 cm s -1 ) A two-dimensional material that bears a striking resemblance to graphene in terms of its structure and electron configuration is hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN). In fact, both materials are isostructural and isoelectronic. Similar to graphene, h-BN is characterized by a honeycomb lattice can be described in terms of two interlocking sublattices. However, the presence of two different types of atoms within the sub-lattices of pristine h-BN disrupts its inversion symmetry, which allows for lifting the degeneracy at the Dirac points within the Brillouin zone. This results in a substantial band gap of approximately 6 eV in h-BN As mentioned, one drawback of graphene-based materials in thermoelectric applications is the co-contribution of electrons and holes, leading to a weak Seebeck effect in pristine graphene materials. The above-discussed BN-ring doping could be alternatively a promising technique to improve the thermoelectric properties of graphene. In such context, the current work reports multi-scale calculations of the electronic thermoelectric properties of BN-ring doped 2D-graphene monolayers, emphasizing the influence of different doping parameters, including borazine ring concentration and orientation. First, ab-initio calculations are performed for systems obtained when BN-rings are periodically inserted into graphene. Non-periodic doped systems are then computed using a semi-empirical tight-binding model to depict more realistic scenarios and highlight the impact of the disorder on these properties. At last, to estimate the thermoelectric efficiency of the considered BNC materials, the lattice thermal conductivity and accordingly the figure of merit ZT have been calculated using semi-empirical approaches. Transport calculations have been performed on a device, as schematized in Figure As discussed, periodically doped BNC monolayer can be achieved using bottom-up techniques Functional Theory (DFT) framework and Green's function (GF) approach in the ballistic approximation, as implemented in OpenMX code where μ is the electron chemical potential and f e (E, μ, T ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The electronic conductance G, the Seebeck coefficient S and the electronic thermal conductance K e can then be calculated as The dynamical properties of these atomic models were computed utilizing the fourth nearest-neighbor force constant (4NN FC) model. To this aim, the FC parameters were taken from For the coupling of C atoms with B and N atoms, the average values of the FC parameters between graphene and h-BN have been considered where, the Bose-Einstein distribution function n(ω, T ) is now considered. To determine the efficiency of each BNC model, the thermoelectric figure of merit has been evaluated using the standard formula : Note that here, the total thermal conductance is a sum of electron contribution (K e ) and lattice thermal part (K l ). Finally, to complete the study, aperiodic systems are also investigated. As the size of computed systems is large, DFT calculations are therefore unfeasible and the electronic properties were considered using a tight-binding (TB) model In evaluating the impact of borazine-like ring concentration and orientation on the thermoelectric properties of monolayer graphene, the effect of BN concentration in monolayer graphene is first considered. To this aim, six distinct percentage concentrations (Model 1 -6%, Model 2 -12%, Model 3 -18%, Model 4 -24% and Model 5 -36%) were examined by progressively introducing an increasing number of borazine rings into the graphene supercell (two, three, four and six rings, respectively). Specifically, to highlight the effect of the concentration alone, the orientation of the BN-rings has been firstly kept fixed to the parallel orientation for each concentration (Fig. When BN doping is implemented, the Seebeck coefficient and the PF significantly increase, achieving values of more than an order of magnitude higher than that of pristine graphene. In particular, for both properties, a nearly linear trend with the BN concentration is found. Note that enhancing the PF is beneficial for improving the output power density, ω, of a thermoelectric generator Another important doping parameter that can be controlled to tune the thermoelectric properties is the orientation of the BN-rings. So far, BN-rings oriented in the same direction, establishing a parallel orientation configuration, have been considered. However, anti-parallel orientation configurations, i.e. rings having opposite orientations, can be also modelled within a periodic framework including multiple BN-rings in the unit cell. Consequently, the possibility of tuning the thermoelectric properties with the orientation of the rings has been considered here in models containing two or more BN-rings. In simple cases involving only two BN rings, the parallel scenario entails all BN-rings having the same orientation, while the anti-parallel scenario involves 50% rings oriented in each direction. Yet, when the graphene supercell in DFT calculations includes more than two BN rings, the number of rings oriented in each direction can vary. In these instances, the percentage of anti-parallel rings is introduced and defined as the ratio between the number of BN rings oriented in opposite directions. Examining models with high BN-ring concentrations enables the evaluation of a broader range of rotated ring percentage. Consequently, starting from Models 4 and 5 in Fig. In both Model 4 (Fig. The current advancements in the targeted synthesis of BN-doped 2D materials with specific and controlled properties have yet to reach the desired goal. In fact, BN-doped carbon-based materials lack periodic doping, resulting in properties that are nonreproducible These results align with previous studies Finally, these results underscore the importance of controlling the position of the BN ring to maintain the conductivity as high as possible, even if the Seebeck coefficient would not be affected by it. On the other side, the rotational disorder would be one of the key factors in tuning the thermoelectric properties of BNC materials, as already predicted in DFT calculations, due to its strong influence on the electronic properties. Upon a thorough investigation into the influence of BN-doping on electron thermoelectric properties, another crucial aspect to consider is lattice thermal conductance. In fact, pristine graphene exhibits an exceptionally high lattice thermal conductivity As expected, a trend similar to the one of the PF is found. The maximum ZT reaches ∼0.1, achieved within Model 5. Even though this is not a large value, it is a significant improvement, i.e., about ten times larger than the value in pristine graphene. The obtained results are attributed to the limitation of the considered technique in achieving a sufficiently small K l compared to alternative approaches, such as cross-plane techniques This work explores how introducing BN rings into 2D graphene impacts its thermoelectric properties. The incorporation of BN-ring is found to consistently enhance the thermoelectric properties of pristine graphene. Aligning BN-rings in a parallel orientation breaks the sublattice chiral symmetry, resulting in the formation of a band gap and a notable increase in the Seebeck coefficient, leading to the efficient separation of electrons and holes contribution in BN-doped graphene. Indeed, the incorporation of BN rings with an anti-parallel orientation offers a means to accurately adjust thermoelectric properties by concurrently manipulating both the rotational disorder and the concentration of BN rings. By precisely tuning these factors, it is possible to achieve a power factor comparable to the respective values in the parallel-oriented scenario. Moreover, weak disorder in the position and orientation of BN-rings in aperiodic cases shows a drastic decrease in the conductance, leading to a reduction in the PF. Lastly, the lattice thermal conductivity shows a reduction of up to 40% in high BN-ring concentration cases, with a qualitative insensitivity to BN-ring rotational disorder. By combining these results, a maximal ZT value of ∼0.1 is achieved. In summary, the incorporation of BN-co-doping allows for tuning of the thermoelectric properties in 2D graphene. This not only provides a means to improve the PF, paving the way for potentially increased output power density in thermoelectric devices, but also presents a pathway for precise modulation of each thermoelectric aspect by adjusting various doping parameters, including concentration and ring orientation. 