Molecular-scale diodes made from self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) could complement silicon-based technologies with smaller, cheaper, and more versatile devices. However, advancement of this emerging technology is limited by insufficient electronic performance exhibited by the molecular current rectifiers. We overcome this barrier by exploiting the charge-transfer state that results from co-assembling SAMs of molecules with strong electron donor and acceptor termini. We obtain a substantial enhancement in current rectification, which correlates with the degree of charge transfer, as confirmed by several complementary techniques. These findings provide a previously unexplored method for manipulating the properties of molecular electronic devices by exploiting donor/acceptor interactions. They also serve as a model test platform for the study of doping mechanisms in organic systems. Our devices have the potential for fast widespread adoption due to their low-cost processing and self-assembly onto silicon substrates, which could allow seamless integration with current technologies. The growing demands for smaller and faster electronics have sparked the need for new componentry technologies that could continue the astonishing pace of the technological advancement witnessed by the semiconductor industry in the past decades. New devices must be compatible with the existing infrastructure and provide functionalities at length scales currently impossible; thus, they should exhibit a reduced footprint. The emerging field of molecular electronics is seeking to address this challenge by using single molecules or selfassembled monolayers (SAMs) of organic molecules as the fundamental building blocks of electric functionality. The exceptional chemical versatility of these molecules allows for tailoring of a vast range of properties, providing opportunities for incorporation in various optoelectronic applications such as diodes, transistors, sensors, or memory switches We fabricated molecular tunnel junctions based on SAMs placed on highly doped Si substrates, which also served as bottom electrode, and a liquid metal EGaIn (eutectic alloy of gallium and indium) top electrode. The molecules in each SAM consist of two asymmetric anchoring moieties connected with an electrically decoupling sigma-bonded bridge: The head of each molecule is a triethoxysilane designed to covalently bond to the SiO2 (silicon oxide) layer natively formed at the surface of the silicon substrates via covalent Si─O bonds, while the tail consists of a substituted benzene ring that physisorbs to the Ga2O3 (gallium oxide) that instantaneously forms at the surface of the EGaIn electrode in air. The noninvasive soft top electrode ensures a near 100% yield in the device characterization. Several different substituents have been tested, as described in Materials and Methods; the chemical formula of (E)-1-(4-carbomethoxy-phenyl)-N-(3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl)methanimine (CMPTM), where the substituent is (─COOCH3), is included in Fig. First, we evaluated if the presence of the additive SAM resulted in an increase in the degree of order in the rectifying monolayer, which, in turn, would yield to higher R ( the wettability of a composite surface, quantified in the cosine of the static water contact angle, θC, is the linear superposition of the cosine of the contact angle of its components (θ1, θ2) weighted by their surface coverages (σ1, σ2) The shift in work function, Δφ, is a consequence of the fact that the intrinsic dipole of the SAM molecules changes the net surface potential, with the molecular density (N), orientation with respect to the substrate, and the strength of the dipole affecting the value and direction of the shift where e is elementary charge, Δμ⊥ is the average dipole of the absorbed molecules perpendicular to the surface, and ε is the dielectric constant Having established that CT can occur in our mixed SAMs, we now turn to a discussion on how it affects the mechanism responsible for the current rectification in the molecular diodes. The similarity in the work functions of the silicon and EGaIn electrodes (-4.65 and -4.2 eV, respectively) excludes the possibility of a Schottky mechanism In the mixed SAMs, doping of the molecular rectifier molecule adds an additional level of complexity. Adopting the vocabulary specific to conventional p-n junction diodes, Fig. Transport occurs via a combination of nonresonant tunneling (dashed yellow line) and the resonant tunneling (solid yellow line), with the second being highly efficient, and thus responsible for the high currents. The partial CT increases the conductivity (see the inset in Fig. Energy levels when a positive bias is applied. (B) Energy levels when a negative bias is applied. We further investigated the D/A CT as a strategy for enhancing the performance of molecular diodes in a series of SAMs that were designed and synthesized to contain functional groups with various electron affinities in order to tune the strength of interaction with the additive. Devices consisting of both single-component and mixed SAMs co-assembled with the same additive, i.e., APTES, at a 70: The results presented so far collectively suggest that mixing SAMs with donor termini with SAMs with acceptor termini provides a simple and reliable route to enhance the performance of molecular diodes. Next, we incorporated the rectifiers in basic electronic circuits in which we replaced the silicon diode with our high-performance molecular diodes. In addition to the low-power consumption, the small size of molecular diodes makes them ideal candidates for rectifier circuits due to their inherently low resistance. Since the distance between the two contacts is controlled by the length and orientation of the SAM molecule, the definition of a short channel necessary to increase the cutoff frequency is straightforward in these devices, without the need of complicated lithography processes. To test the compatibility of our molecular diodes with real circuits, we incorporated them into simple proof-of-concept AC/DC rectifiers that convert an alternating current (AC) input voltage Vin to a direct current (DC) output voltage Vout (Fig. We introduced a new concept for tuning the properties of molecular rectifiers, which relies on CT processes in co-assembled SAMs, where one SAM contains an electron-accepting terminal group and the other contains an electron-donor terminal group. This process grants a high level of control over the electronic properties of the monolayers and allows for an unprecedented efficiency in current rectification. We found that the device performance correlates positively with the efficiency of CT, leading to rectification ratios approaching 10 4 , on par with those obtained in SAMs deposited on metallic electrodes, but with the additional advantages of allowing a straightforward integration with current silicon technologies and cost efficiency due to reduced complexity in processing. Our results not only have implications into the technology of molecular electronic devices, but they represent the first demonstration of CT processes in SAMs. Further studies on mixtures of SAMs with predetermined offsets in their frontier orbitals so that the degree of CT is systematically modified in these simple systems could provide the much-needed understanding on donor-acceptor interactions, thus guiding the process of doping in more complex electronic materials systems used in photovoltaics, lightemitting diodes, and thermoelectrics. These systems have the potential to move the field forward in a substantial way, by opening up the prospect of the discovery of unexpected material properties arising from the intermolecular interactions between the D and A termini of the molecules within the mixed SAMs. These novel functionalities, governed by the degree of CT, are not manifested in the parent compounds, thus offering a platform for novel material discovery, with an extraordinary flexibility of combining donors and acceptors. Given the soft nature of the intermolecular interactions, the main challenge lies in maintaining the degree of order in the rectifying SAM upon co-assembly with a dopant SAM. Therefore, to access the full potential of this strategy, development of methods that could preserve the mixed SAM degree of order is imperative. The anticipated long-term impact is that molecular devices may one day be integrated with mature, conventional semiconductor technologies to enable them with complementary functionalities like chemical and biological sensing, by only adding a very small fraction of the total cost. Highly n-doped silicon wafers (resistivity of 0.001 to 0.005 ohm cm) with a native oxide layer were cut in 1 × 1 cm substrates, then cleaned for 10 min in an acetone bath at 85°C, and immediately followed by an acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) rinse. Then, the substrates were immersed in an IPA bath at 85°C for 10 min, rinsed with IPA, and dried with a stream of nitrogen. Last, the wafers were exposed to ultraviolet ozone for 10 min, thoroughly rinsed with deionized water, and dried. The substrates were then brought into a glovebox [<0.1 parts per million (ppm) H2O, <0.1 ppm O2], where each of them was placed in a jar containing a 7 mM solution of the SAM (or stoichiometric SAM mixtures) in room-temperature chloroform for 16 to 24 hours. For mixed SAMs, the molar ratio of additive to host molecules was adjusted between 0 and 100%. The D/A SAM ratio was controlled by tuning the stoichiometry of the mixed SAM solution, but small deviations from these values can occur in the absorbed monolayer due to the various processes governing the co-adsorption process The SAMs were electrically characterized in an ambient probe station in a metal/SAM/metal sandwich configuration. The EGaIn top contact was prepared by dipping a 0.5-mm-diameter tungsten tip into EGaIn, forming a malleable cone. The silicon substrates played the role of the bottom contacts and were grounded, while an external potential was applied at the top EGaIn electrode. Several molecular junctions were formed in this way on one 1 × 1 cm substrate, and each molecular junction was measured using an Agilent 4155C semiconductor parameter analyzer. At least 200 measurements, resulting from a minimum of five samples, were made for each type of sample. The rectification ratio, R, was calculated as the ratio between the current density Jat forward bias Vfwd and the current density at reverse bias Vrev. The current density was obtained by dividing the measured current by the geometrical area of the EGaIn probe tip. The voltage bias used in this report is ±2 V. Breakdown voltages of the SAMs were averaged for 20 different molecular junctions by sweeping an external potential from 0 to -8 V. Bias stress stability tests were performed by sweeping the voltage from -2 to 2 V for 100 cycles on the same junction under ambient conditions with no wait time between measurements. Single-component and mixed SAMs of CMPTM and APTES assembled onto a Si substrate terminated with a very thin native oxide layer were analyzed using a Trek model 325 electrostatic voltmeter configured for Kelvin probe measurements. The Kelvin probe was calibrated using highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). The work function, φ, of the untreated substrate and of the substrate upon each treatment was determined by the expression φ=-e(VSAM-VHOPG)+φHOPG. ( where e is elementary charge, VSAM is the signal measured on the Si or SAM/Si substrate, VHOPG is the signal from HOPG, and φHOPG is the work function of HOPG (φHOPG= 4.48 eV) Static contact angle measurements were taken in a Ram'e-Hart Model 200 Contact Angle Goniometer using 3-μl deionized water droplets placed near the center of 1 × 1 cm SAM film. At least five contact angle measurements were used for each pure and mixed SAM combination. A small shard of silicon substrate was deposited into a 2-ml nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) sample tube along with a 7 mM CDCl3 solution of CMPTM with 30% APTES, and HNMR spectra of the mixture were taken after 4 and 24 hours to screen for the presence of side reactions or reversion to starting material (fig. All aromatic-N-(3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl)methanimines used in this work were obtained from the reactions of the appropriate benzaldehydes with APTES as described previously in more detail in the Supplementary Materials The samples were transferred to an ultrahigh vacuum chamber (ESCALAB 250Xi), with a base pressure of 2 × 10 -10 mbar, for UPS measurements. UPS measurements were performed using a double-differentially pumped He gas discharge lamp emitting He I radiation (hν = 21.22 eV) with a pass energy of 2 eV and a bias of -5 V to ensure secondary electron onset detection. The UPS spectra are shown as a function of the binding energy with respect to the Fermi energy. The energy edge of the valence band features is used to determine the valence band level position with respect to the Fermi level.