Considering a spin-up and a spin-down fermion in a generic tight-binding lattice with a multi-site basis, we investigate the two-body problem using a multiband extended-Hubbard model with finiteranged hopping and interaction parameters. We derive a linear eigenvalue problem for the entire two-body spectrum, alongside a nonlinear eigenvalue problem for the bound states in the form of a self-consistency equation. Our results, based on an exact variational approach, suggest potential applications across various lattice geometries. As an illustration, we apply them to the linear-chain model and show that the resultant spin singlet and triplet bound states align well with the existing literature. Understanding the two-body problem lies at the heart of the BCS theory of superconductivity, offering key insights into the microscopic mechanisms underlying this phenomenon In our previous study on generic tight-binding lattices with a multi-site basis As an alternative to our variational approach, the density-matrix-renormalization-group is a widely used numerical method for computing low-lying states in onedimensional lattices The remaining sections of this paper are structured as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the extended-Hubbard model in real space and subsequently transform it into reciprocal space. In Sec. III, we employ an exact variational approach to derive a linear eigenvalue problem for the entire two-body spectrum and a nonlinear eigenvalue problem for its bound-state branches. In Sec. IV, we validate our approach by comparing it with the existing literature on the linear-chain model. In Sec. V, we relate our results to the recent literature on quantum-geometric effects. Finally, in Sec. VI, we provide a summary of our findings and offer some outlook for future research. For spin-1/2 fermions with σ = {↑, ↓} denoting the spin projections, the Hubbard Hamiltonian is typically written as H = σ H σ + H ↑↓ , where H σ terms describe the corresponding single-particle problem for each spin projection and H ↑↓ term describes the two-body interactions between spin-up and spin-down particles where the hopping parameters t σ Si;S ′ i ′ describe tunneling of a spin-σ particle from the sublattice site S ′ in the unit cell i ′ to the sublattice site S in the unit cell i, and the interaction parameters U Si;S ′ i ′ describe the density-density interactions between a spin-↑ particle on site S ∈ i and a spin-↓ particle on site S ′ ∈ i ′ . The range of interactions is assumed to be finite here, i.e., we are interested in studying the effects of not only the onsite but also the nearest-neighbor, next-nearest-neighbor, etc., interactions on the formation of two-body bound states in a generic lattice. It is worth emphasizing that our variational approach is exact for any set of these parameters, regardless of their signs and magnitudes. Next we reexpress H in the reciprocal space through the canonical transformation where N c is the number of unit cells in the system, k is the crystal momentum (in units of ħ → 1 the Planck constant) in the first Brillouin zone, and r Si is the position of site S ∈ i. This leads to a generic Bloch Hamiltonian of the form , where the matrix elements h σ SS ′ k are defined in the sublattice basis through the Fourier transform determines the Bloch bands ε nkσ , where n Skσ is the projection of the periodic part of the corresponding Bloch state onto sublattice S. Similarly, the interaction term takes the generic form SS ′ ) * must be satisfied by definition. Furthermore, upon transformation to the band basis through c † Skσ = n n * Skσ c † nkσ , the k-space Hamiltonians can be written as where the amplitudes 2 ,↓ creates a pair of ↑ and ↓ particles in the corresponding Bloch bands with a relative momentum k and a total momentum q. Having in mind a multiband lattice Hamiltonian that is invariant under discrete translations, the exact solutions for the two-body problem, i.e., for any given center-of-mass momentum q, can in general be obtained through the variational ansatz , where |0⟩ represents the particle vacuum. Here the variational parameters must satisfy α σσ ′ nmk (q) = -α σ ′ σ mn,-k (q) so that |Ψ(q)⟩ is anti-symmetric under fermion exchange. Furthermore, given the absence of a spin-orbit-coupling term in the single-particle Hamiltonian, they must satisfy α σσ ′ nmk (q) = ±α σσ ′ mn,-k (q) = ∓α σ ′ σ nmk (q) for the spin-singlet and spintriplet states, respectively. These conditions guarantee that the singlet states are symmetric (anti-symmetric) but the triplet states are anti-symmetric (symmetric) under spatial (spin) exchange. For the simplicity of presentation, here we choose where α q nmk ≡ α ↑↓ nmk (q) parameters satisfy α q nmk = ±α q mn,-k for the singlet and triplet states, respectively. They are in such a way that |ψ q ⟩ → ∓|ψ q ⟩ upon the transformation ↑↔↓, corresponding, respectively, to an anti-symmetric and symmetric combination, i.e., , for the singlet and triplet states under spin exchange. For any given q, the exact two-body energies E q are determined by minimizing the expectation value ⟨ψ q |H-E q |ψ q ⟩ with respect to α q nmk which are in such a way that β q SS ′ k → ±β q S ′ S,-k upon spin exchange when ↑↔↓. It turns out these dressed parameters are non-zero only for the two-body bound states, i.e., they play the role of an order parameter for pairing. See the related discussion at the end of this section. In more general terms, one may define , where is our dressed parameter. Given that they must satisfy β ↓↑ SS ′ k (q) = -β ↑↓ S ′ S,-k (q) under fermion exchange, we require β q SS ′ k = ±β q S ′ S,-k for the singlet and triplet states, respectively. Note that, in the presence of onsite interactions only from which the bound-state energies E eq can be determined through heavy numerics. Note that Eq. ( is independent of momentum, i.e., in the case of usual Hubbard model with onsite interactions In order to simplify Eq. ( where the momentum-independent coefficients C l SS ′ are determined by the interaction parameters U Si;S ′ i ′ . For a given SS ′ sector, it proves convenient to choose the symmetry functions Γ l SS ′ (k) in such a way that they satisfy , the pairing channels are linearly independent from each other. Note that the Hermiticity requirement H ↑↓ = H † ↑↓ for the Hamiltonian under adjoint operation leads to * is a real parameter. In addition, the invariance requirement H ↑↓ = H ↓↑ for the Hamiltonian under spin exchange leads to parameters can always be chosen symmetrically under sublattice exchange, the latter condition allows two distinct solutions Γ l SS ′ (k) = ±Γ l S ′ S (-k), leading to κ l SS ′ = κ l S ′ S as well. In terms of these symmetry functions, the dressed parameters can be reexpressed in general as where the k-independent prefactor can be written as Thus, for any given pairing channel l, Eq. ( * for the singlet and triplet states, respectively. By plugging Eq. ( from which the bound-state energies E eq can be determined efficiently through low-cost numerics. We note in passing that a suggestive way of expressing the interaction amplitude . Then, Eq. ( We also note that a suggestive way of expressing the dressed parameters is , where |ψ q ⟩ is the two-body ansatz given in Eq. ( , where |ψ BCS ⟩ is the coherent BCS ground state To benchmark our approach with the existing literature BB contribution for the intrasublattice interactions and for the inter-sublattice ones. The two-body spectrum that is shown in gray color in Fig. In addition to a broad region of continuum states, Fig. * for the inter-sublattice sectors, where the upper and lower signs correspond, respectively, to the singlet and triplet states. Considering the singlet states, the appropriate linearly-independent symmetry functions can be chosen as Γ a AA (k) = 1 = Γ a BB (k) with C a AA = U = C a BB for the intra-sublattice sectors, and BA for the inter-sublattice sectors. Similarly, considering the triplet states, the appropriate linearly-independent symmetry functions can be chosen as BA for the inter-sublattice sectors. FIG. Equation ( Our numerical benchmark shown in Fig. V cos 2 (q x d/2) for the triplet branch in the usual BZ -π d ≤ q x ≤ π d is in perfect agreement with our numerical results. This expression is valid only when the energy of the triplet states are outside of the two-body continuum, i.e., it is not valid in the V → 0 limit for which the triplet states are not allowed. It is possible to relate our results to the recent literature on quantum-geometric effects in the formation of Cooper pairs where N 0 = ′ SS ′ 1 is the number of nonzero Λ l0q SS ′ parameters in the system, |n k ⟩ is the state vector in the sublattice basis, and E 0q is the energy of the lowest-lying bound state. The nonzero matrix elements of L l0 k are the symmetry factors Γ l0 SS ′ (k) of those sublattice sectors whose Λ l0q SS ′ are nonzero, and T is the transpose. Equation ( Within this construction, in the case when there is an energetically-isolated flat band with energy ε f in the Bloch spectrum, its low-energy bound states simply follow from Eq. ( ⟩ in the small-q regime. For instance, in the particular case when L l0 k is a diagonal matrix with isotropic elements in all sublattice sectors, i.e., Γ l0 SS ′ (k) = Γ l0 0 (k)δ SS ′ , we find According to Eq. ( In summary, here we analyzed the two-body problem within a generic multiband extended-Hubbard model, including finite-ranged hopping and interaction parameters. In particular, we derived self-consistency relations for the two-body bound states using an exact variational approach, which can be easily applied to various lattice geometries. To validate their accuracy numerically, we compared our results to the existing literature on the linear-chain model. Our findings demonstrated perfect agreement between the spin singlet and triplet states obtained through our method and those reported in the literature. As an outlook, it would be intriguing to apply the recently proposed bulk-edge correspondence for the nonlinear eigenvalue problems to the two-body bound states by introducing their auxiliary eigenvalues 