High-entropy alloy (HEA) superconductors have attracted significant attention due to their exceptional low-temperature mechanical and superconducting properties. We report the synthesis and thorough characterization of an equiatomic HEA superconductor with the composition Sc0. 20V0.20Ti0.20Hf0.20Nb0.20, crystallizing in a body-centered cubic crystal structure (Im3 m). Our investigation, using magnetization, transport, and heat capacity measurements, reveals the presence of weakly coupled, fully gapped superconductivity with a transition temperature of 4.17(3) K and the upper critical field exceeding the Pauli paramagnetic limit. The metallic nature, combined with a high upper critical field, positions it as a promising candidate for applications in superconducting devices. High-entropy alloys (HEAs) have gained attention as unconventional multicomponent alloys that contain five or more elements in a mixture Recently, superconducting HEAs have emerged as a class of disordered alloy superconductors where the remarkable mechanical properties of HEAs are combined with the intriguing quantum phenomenon of superconductivity and superconducting properties to advance our understanding of these disordered superconductors. Currently, substantial efforts have been made to find HEA superconductors with various crystal structures to explore their superconducting pairing mechanism and exotic properties In this letter, we report the synthesis and characterization of an equiatomic bcc HEA ScVTiHfNb. Our results indicate that the alloy exhibits weakly coupled type II fully gapped superconductivity with a transition temperature of 4.17(3) K. Significantly, it demonstrates a remarkably high upper critical field that surpasses the Pauli limit, suggesting unconventional behavior. This unique feature, rarely observed in HEAs, makes it a promising candidate for applications in superconducting devices. The polycrystalline sample of ScVTiHfNb was synthesized using a standard arc-melting technique. Stoichiometric amounts of high purity Sc (99.9%), V (99.7%), Ti (99.995%), Hf (99.7%), and Nb (99.8%) pieces were melted at high currents in an argon atmosphere. The sample was flipped and remelted 5-6 times for increased phase homogeneity. Phase composition was confirmed by scanning electron microscope (SEM), while phase identification was performed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a PANalytical X ′ Pert diffractometer equipped with CuK α (λ = 1.5406Å). Magnetization measurements were performed using a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS 3) using a vibrating sample magnetometer. Electrical and thermal transport measurements were performed using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The powder XRD pattern confirms that ScVTiHfNb crystallizes in a cubic crystal structure (bcc) with the space group Im3 m (229). Le-Bail refinement was performed using FullProf Suite software Energydispersive X-ray diffraction (EDX) at various locations in the sample reveals the average phase composition as Sc 0.18 V 0.20 Ti 0.20 Hf 0.19 Nb 0.23 which is close to the nominal composition within the experimental error limit (<5%). Furthermore, the EDX elemental mapping shows the uniform distribution of the elements Sc, V, Ti, Hf, and Nb, indicating a homogeneous phase formation as shown in Fig. Electrical resistivity measurements were performed from 1.9 to 300 K in the zero field for ScVTiHfNb, as shown in Fig. Here, the first term ρ 0 is the residual resistivity, and the second is the Bloch-Grüneisen expression in the next section. Furthermore, the Hall resistivity (ρ xy (H)) is also measured to extract the carrier concentration, which is found to be n = 1.8(1) × 10 29 m -3 . The temperature variation of DC magnetization in both zero-field-cooled-warming (ZFCW) and fieldcooled-cooling (FCC) modes at a 1 mT applied magnetic field shows a transition into a diamagnetic state below 4.17(3)K, marked as T C as shown in Fig. where t = T /T C is the reduced temperature. The esti-mated values of H C2 (0) by extrapolating the GL fit up to 0 K from magnetization and resistivity measurements are 7.9(2) T and 10.3(1) T, respectively. The GL coherence length ξ GL (0) can be evaluated using the upper critical field as , where φ 0 = 2.07 × 10 -15 Tm 2 is the magnetic flux quantum The value of ξ GL (0) can further be used to calculate another characteristic length, penetration depth which is related to H C1 (0) via the expression The estimated value of λ GL (0) is 1437(62) Å. The GL parameter (κ GL ) is calculated as κ GL = λGL(0) ξGL(0) = 22(2) >> 1/ √ 2, further confirming type-II superconductivity in ScVTiHfNb. The thermodynamic critical field is determined by the values of κ GL , H C1 (0) and H C2 (0) using the expression The superconductivity can be killed by applying an external magnetic field greater than the upper critical field. In type-II superconductors, it can be done via two mechanisms: the orbital limiting effect and the Pauli paramagnetic effect. The orbital limiting field can be described by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) model in the weak coupling limit as Here α = 0.693 for BCS dirty limit superconductor. Substituting the value of 4.17(3) K, H P C2 (0) is calculated to be 7.75(5) T. The Maki parameter expressed as α M = √ 2H orb C2 (0)/H P C2 (0) is used to find the relative strength of the orbital limiting effect to the Pauli paramagnetic effect, and it is found to be 1.05 The Ginzburg number G i , expressed as the ratio of the thermal energy (k B T ) to the condensation energy, which is connected with coherence volume, is given as The anisotropic ratio τ is 1 for cubic ScVTiHfNb. By substituting the values ξ GL (0) = 64(2) Å, H C (0) = 256(2) mT and T C = 4.17(3) K, we obtained G i = 5.58(5) × 10 -8 which is comparable to that of the lowtemperature superconductors. The specific heat is also performed to characterize the thermal properties of ScVTiHfNb in zero field, shown in Fig. where R = 8.31 Jmol -1 K -1 is the universal gas constant, and N is the number of atoms per formula unit, which is 1 for ScVTiHfNb. The estimated value of θ D is 231(1) K after substituting the values of R, N , and β 3 . For a noninteractive system, the density of states at the Fermi level [D C (E F )] has a direct impact on the Sommerfeld coeffi- JK -1 is Boltzmann's constant, and substituting the value of γ n , D C (E F ) is estimated to be 3.14(3) states/eV-f.u. The electron-phonon coupling constant λ e-ph , which is related to θ D and T C , was introduced by McMillan as a way to assess the strength of the coupling between the electron and the phonon, expressed as: where μ * is the screened Coulomb potential, assumed to be 0.13 for intermetallic compounds is the energy of the normal electrons, y = ξ/∆(0), t = T /T C and ∆(t) = tanh 1.82(1.018((1/t) -1) 0.51 is the approximated BCS gap value. The electronic specific heat in the superconducting region is correlated with the normalized entropy by the relation . The value of the superconducting gap ∆(0)/k B T C = 1.76( The relationship between T C and the valence electron concentration (VEC) is illustrated in Fig. To validate the experimental findings of ScVTiHfNb, electronic properties are also extracted using experimentally evaluated parameters such as carrier concentration (n), Sommerfeld coefficient (γ n ), and residual resistivity (ρ 0 ). The Sommerfeld coefficient is directly related to . The estimated value of the mean free path is l = 2.6(3) Å, which is relatively low and agrees with other high-entropy alloy superconductors Uemura et al. classified superconductors as conventional or unconventional, depending on the ratio of T C /T F 