Spin-Orbit Torque (SOT) Magnetic Random-Access Memory (MRAM) devices offer improved power efficiency, nonvolatility, and performance compared to static RAM, making them ideal, for instance, for cache memory applications. Efficient magnetization switching, long data retention, and high-density integration in SOT MRAM require ferromagnets (FM) with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) combined with large torques enhanced by Orbital Hall Effect (OHE). We have engineered PMA [Co/Ni] 3 FM on selected OHE layers (Ru, Nb, Cr) and investigated the potential of theoretically predicted larger orbital Hall conductivity (OHC) to quantify the torque and switching current in OHE/[Co/Ni] 3 stacks. Our results demonstrate a ∼30% enhancement in damping-like torque efficiency with a positive sign for the Ru OHE layer compared to a pure Pt, accompanied by a ∼20% reduction in switching current for Ru compared to pure Pt across more than 250 devices, leading to more than a 60% reduction in switching power. These findings validate the application of Ru in devices relevant to industrial contexts, supporting theoretical predictions regarding its superior OHC. This investigation highlights the potential 1 Data centers account for a substantial portion of global energy consumption, utilizing approximately 200 terawatt-hours annually, which represents currently 1% of the world's energy use The operational principle of SOT MRAM involves current-induced magnetization switching as the write process The Orbital Hall Effect (OHE) Despite these strong experimental evidence and the notable torques achieved, harnessing the remarkable properties of OHE in industrial-scale SOT-MRAM devices poses significant challenges. Previous research has predominantly focused on oxide systems like Cu/CuO* In this article, we harness the OHE in SOT-MRAM devices at an industrially relevant scale to reduce the switching current when compared to traditional SHE-dominated SOT-MRAM devices (e.g., those employing Pt as an SOT layer). This integration includes ensuring that the stack exhibits sufficient PMA for high thermal stability, coupled with strong torques from the OHE and efficient conversion of orbital to spin, offering a promising avenue to reduce power consumption in data storage devices. Achieving PMA in combination with OHE layers is a key requirement for the architecture of with the requirements for SOT-MRAM devices, and serves as an efficient orbital-to-spin conversion layer due to its high SOC To measure torques, we employ standard harmonic Hall measurements where 2e, h, μ 0 M s , E, and t FM represent the charge of an electron, the reduced Planck constant, the saturation magnetization of the FM layer, the applied electric field, and the thickness of the FM layer, respectively. The parameter η (= ∆R PHE /∆R AHE ) denotes the ratio of the resistance due to the PHE to that of the AHE. The measured fields, H x(y) , are defined as: To evaluate the torque efficiencies, we initially measure μ 0 M s of our samples using a Quantum Design Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) (for details, see Section III, SM and the methods section). The measured μ 0 M s values range from 0.92 (0.03) to 0.97 (0.04) Tesla across all samples, consistent with previously reported findings Subsequently, we measure the PHE as a function of the applied in-plane magnetic field, AHE as a function of out-of-plane applied field, and calculated the corresponding η ratios for all samples, as described in the section II(S2,S3), SM. The resulting η values for Pt, Ru/Pt, Nb/Pt, and Cr/Pt samples are found to be 0.72, 0.65, 0.86, and 1.04, respectively. Utilizing Eqs. (1-2), we deduce the torque efficiencies ξ E DL(FL) . These efficiencies, when expressed per unit current density for DL and FL torque components, are denoted as where ρ NM represents the resistivity of the SOT layer, consisting of Ta/Ru/Pt layers. The ρ NM values were determined employing a van der Pauw geometry, as described in Ref. Figure The primary figure of merit for a device is the critical current required for magnetization switching. Therefore, to examine the impact of enhanced torques on the switching current density, we fabricated SOT channels using bare Pt(3.5), Ru(2)/Pt(1.5), Nb(2)/Pt(1.5), and Cr(2)/Pt(1.5) as OHE layers, with dimensions of 200 × 400 nm 2 . Note that the volume of the bare Pt layer is deliberately kept the same as the other SOT layers to ensure that the current density and current are considered equivalent in our work (refer to the methods section). Additionally, [Co/Ni] 3 was employed as a magnetic circular dot, with a diameter of 100 nm, for conducting switching experiments. The scanning electron microscopy image of a device, along with the circuit diagram, is depicted in Fig. Notably, the observed switching power in the Ru-based stack is reduced by 60% compared to that measured for pure Pt and even a reduction of ∼220% compared to β -W taking into account some published values of resistivity and switching current density In The samples were prepared by DC and RF magnetron sputtering using a Singulus Rotaris sputtering tool, conducted at room temperature. The deposition was performed on the Si/SiO 2 substrates under a partial Argon pressure of 3.6-4.2×10 -3 mbar, with the system maintaining a base pressure lower than 5×10 -8 mbar. To ensure uniformity of the thin films, the sample was rotated at a speed of 60 rpm throughout the deposition process. The constructed sample stack comprised a Si/SiO To fabricate the Hall bar for torque measurements, optical lithography was used to pattern the device into a Hall bar configuration, with dimensions of 30 × 45 μm 2 or 20 × 45 μm 2 . This process was followed by a second step of optical lithography, after which sputtering and a lift-off process were conducted to establish the coplanar waveguide contact pads, as depicted in Figure For the current-induced magnetization switching experiments, hard mask crosses in Ti with a dimension of 200 × 400 nm 2 were initially patterned using ebeam lithography on wafers where the SOT layers had already been deposited. This step was followed by sputtering of Ti and lift-off. Subsequently, nanopillars (magnetic dots) with a diameter of 100 nm were created through electron lithography, Ti evaporation, and another lift-off process. The final step involved patterning and depositing contact pads made of Au (130 nm) on Ti (30 nm). The sample was then etched to reveal the devices, and photoresist was spin-coated onto the sample to shield the devices from oxidation. The resistivity of the OHE assisted SOT layers was determined using the van der Pauw method. The SOT layers consisted of Ta(3)/Pt(3.5), Ta(3)/Ru(2)/Pt(1.5), Ta(3)/Nb(2)/Pt(1.5), and Ta(3)/Cr(2)/Pt(1.5). We applied a current using a Keithley 2400 source meter and measured resistances. In this procedure, four electrical contacts are placed on the sample. Current and voltage contacts are cycled through different switches. A Quantum Design Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometer was employed to measure the static magnetic moments of the samples by applying an in-plane magnetic field. To derive the magnetization, the measured moment values were normalized to the magnetic volume. This volume was determined by taking into account the film thickness-which was optimized by adjusting the deposition rate-and the precise area of the sample, which was measured using optical microscopy. For torque efficiency, we utilized the second-harmonic Hall measurement technique at room temperature in a three-dimensional vector cryostat. Standard wire bonding was used to connect the Hall bar device with the sample holder. The Hall bar is connected to a 50 Ω resistance in series to measure the input current during the measurement (see Fig. For the magnetization switching experiment, the devices were placed on an automated wafer prober outfitted with RF probes and a 3D magnet. A bias current, administered via a Keithley