Laue tomography experiments retrieve the positions and orientations of crystal grains in a polycrystalline samples from diffraction patterns recorded at multiple viewing angles. The use of a broad wavelength spectrum beam can greatly reduce the experimental time, but poses a difficult challenge for the indexing of diffraction peaks in polycrystalline samples; the information about the wavelength of these Bragg peaks is absent and the diffraction patterns from multiple grains are superimposed. To date, no algorithms exist capable of indexing samples with more than about 500 grains efficiently. To address this need we present a novel method: Laue indexing with Optimal Transport (LAUEOT). We create a probabilistic description of the multi-grain indexing problem and propose a solution based on Sinkhorn Expectation-Maximization method, which allows to efficiently find the maximum of the likelihood thanks to the assignments being calculated using Optimal Transport. This is a non-convex optimization problem, where the orientations and positions of grains are optimized simultaneously with grain-to-spot assignments, while robustly handling the outliers. The selection of initial prototype grains to consider in the optimization problem are also calculated within the Optimal Transport framework. LAUEOT can rapidly and effectively index up to 1000 grains on a single large memory GPU within less than 30 minutes. We demonstrate the performance of LAUEOT on simulations with variable numbers of grains, spot position measurement noise levels, and outlier fractions. The algorithm recovers the correct number of grains even for high noise levels and up to 70% outliers in our experiments. We compare the results of indexing with LAUEOT to existing algorithms both on synthetic and real neutron diffraction data from well-characterized samples. The code and test data are available on https://github.com/LaueOT/laueotx. L AUE and Bragg diffraction are the foundation of modern experiments in crystallography and solid state physics The process of inferring the orientation of crystal lattices from the recorded Bragg peak positions is a challenging task: multiple methods have been proposed to solve variants of this problem specific to different types of experimental setups (see From an experimental perspective, the last two decades have seen progress in three-dimensional (3D) electron- With multiple solutions proposed for solving this types of problems The problem of finding orientations and positions of the grains can be approached from the computer vision perspective; the task is in similar to the structure-from-motion Utilizing these ideas, we propose a novel technique for indexing of polycrystalline samples from white beam experiments, which we call LAUEOT (Laue indexing with Optimal Transport). We propose a joint inverse problem formulation for the assignment of spots to grains, and the determination of each grain's position and orientation. Given an assignment of spots to grains, our formulation benefits from closed-form updates for finding the orientation and grain position, and relies on optimal transport for finding the assignments of spots to grains given candidate grain orientations and positions. A critical initial step of selecting prototype grains is also handled using the OT framework The algorithm has two pre-processing steps: (i) creating a set of plausible grain candidates by performing a coarse single-gain fitting in the orientation and position space, and (ii) selecting the prototype grains using the optimal transport framework, following Multiple Bragg indexing algorithms have been proposed To address these problems and enable wide-beam analysis, a forward-fitting method LAUE3DNDT was recently proposed Recently, machine learning approaches have been proposed to tackle the problem of indexing. In There exists rich literature in computer vision (CV) and optimal transport (OT) that is relevant to this problem. The structure-from-motion (SfM) algorithms tackle the problem of reconstructing 3D scene from a series of 2D images, each taken at a different camera position. The inverse-problem formulation with Expectation-Maximization has been successful Registration of point clouds is also a classic problem in CV tackled by multiple classic approaches As the number of grains is not known a-priori, Laue reconstruction has also similarities to sparse feature selection problems in the context of optimal transport. Recently, sparse optimal transport methods have been proposed In this section we provide a pedagogical introduction to crystallogaphic lattices, Laue diffraction, and tomography experiments. In a single crystal, the atoms are arranged in a specific pattern, described by the crystallographic point group. The lattice of the crystal creates a set of Miller indices, determined by integer triples [h, k, l]. They denote a family of parallel lattice planes, sharing the distance between atoms a and normal vector u. Given three lattice vectors a 1 , a 2 , a 3 that define a unit cell, [h, k, l] denotes planes that intercept the three points [ha 1 , ka 2 , la 3 ] or their multiples (for zero indices, the intercept is at infinity and the planes do not intersect the axis). For cubic crystals with lattice constant a, the spacing d between adjacent [h, k, l] lattice planes is In this work we will use the definition of Miller indices as the inverse intercepts along the lattice vectors. It is also common to use Miller indices defined as points in the reciprocal lattice, which we do not use here. See Laue-Bragg interference describes the scattering of waves from a crystal lattice. The constructive interference of diffracted waves occurs for specific combinations of the incidence angle θ between the plane and the incoming beam, the wavelength λ, and the distance d between atoms. Bragg's law states that constructive interference occurs when where the integer n is the diffraction order. For an incoming beam with unit direction e, the wave diffracted by plane with normal unit vector u will have the unit direction r, which can be calculated using the Householder equation, and the wavelength λ at which the scattering occurs with "-" for transmission (forward-scattering) and "+" for reflection (back-scattering). The intensity of the ray r scales with wavelength λ 4 , the incoming beam intensity at λ and the volume of the crystal. See Figure where (ν ⊤ (γx))/(ν ⊤ r) is the distance from the center of the grain to the (3D) position of the spot in the detector. Laue tomography experiments aim to study the internal structure of polycrystalline samples. A polycrystalline sample is composed of multiple single crystals, or grains. Each grain is described by its position x inside the sample and orientation matrix R∈SO(3) with respect to the reference R ref =I. We consider a sample to consist of a set of grains {G n } n∈N , each characterized by its position and orientation matrix G n =(R n , x n ). Each grain will contribute a set of Miller planes, which we will consider to be located at the grain's center x, as described above. For a given experiment, we can limit the number of considered Miller planes, as higher order planes will not satisfy Bragg's condition because the associated wavelength is too short or too long. We will use a set {M m } m∈M of plausible Miller planes, each with a corresponding unit direction w and atom spacing d, creating a couple M m =(w m , d m ). This plausible set is provided as an input to the analysis. The positions and orientations of the crystal are found by recording locations of spots created by diffracted rays on the detector screen after illuminating the sample by a wide-spectrum beam. We will consider the beam to have the wavelength λ in range λ∈[λ min , λ max ]. During a tomographic experiment, the sample is illuminated multiple times after being rotated. Let T ={Γ t } t∈T be a set of rotation steps, where Γ t ∈SO(3) is the rotation matrix for step t. The formulations that we will develop are applicable to any rotation, but the experimental setup that we consider allows in practice only rotations along the (0,0,1) axis. Figure At a given sample rotation Γ t and for grain orientation R n , the vector u mnt normal to the rotated Miller plane w m will be the model ray is emitted in the direction creates a spot on the detector plane at position s mnt as follows x Fig. and at wavelength λ mnt with We assume that the center γ of a square backscatter detector lies on the x-axis of the laboratory coordinate system, with size l mm per side. We will assume that γ and l are known, as they can be characterized accurately with a proper calibration process We assume a ray noise model, where a noisy unit ray direction follows the von Mises-Fisher distribution in 3 dimensions Note that samples from this distribution can be obtained by drawing from a 3D isotropic multivariate normal distribution with covariance C=σ 2 I, where σ 2 =1/κ, and then conditioning ∥x∥ = 1. Therefore the noisy ray ri is and the detected spots will be offset from their true positions s i following the noisy ray ri In our method, we aim to fit a dataset of detected spots with a set of model spots stemming from some candidate model sample in our experimental setup. Not all of the model spots s mnt can be considered in the problem, for three reasons. Firstly, the model spot can lie outside the detector area. Secondly, the brightness of the Bragg peak will be proportional to the intensity of the beam at the corresponding wavelength λ; if the intensity is close to zero, then the spot will not be detected. Finally, the intensity of the spot will be proportional to the volume of the grain; small grains will yield low-intensity spots that will not be detectable. We therefore use a sequence of model spots S=(s j ) j∈J , that contains only those spots that simultaneously lie inside the beam wavelength range and the detector screen area We will use a sequence (r j ) j∈J to denote rays corresponding to spots in S. For clarity, we will use a sequence (t j ) j∈J of indices t j ∈T to label the step at which spot j was generated, itself labeled by index set J t . Equivalently, let sequence (n j ) j∈J of indices n j ∈N denote the index of the grain at which spot j was created, itself labeled by index set J n . Thus, |J n | and |J t |, respectively, will be the number of model spots generated by grain n or step t, meeting the criteria in Equation In this section, we propose a probabilistic model for the collection of observed spots detected given a collection of model spots produced by a set of grains N producing each a refraction for a collection of Miller planes M , with latent variables encoding which detected spot matches which model spot. We assume the experimental setup defined above with detector described by (γ, ν, l), with sample rotation step in T yielding detected spots indexed by I. First, we introduce the problem without outlier spots, followed by introduction of the outliers. Let's consider a guess grain with position x n that generates the ray j. For a detected spot s i is matched with model ray j, we define a ray estimate rij as This quantity will be useful in further calculations. We assume that there are no outliers among detected spots and no missing model spots (corresponding to unmodeled Miller planes), so that there is a one-to-one correspondence between model and observed spots. To match the detected spots with model rays, we introduce the assignment variables Z ij ∈{0, 1} : i∈I, j∈J, with Z ij =1 if the detected spot s i is associated to model ray r j , and Z ij =0 otherwise. Only matches between spots occurring at the same sample rotation t are allowed, otherwise Z ij =0. Each i is matched exactly to one j, so the joint log-likelihood l := n i=1 log p(s i | Z i• , s) for all observed spots s i given Z i• := (Z ij ) j∈J and r j as where c is the log normalizing constant. At step t, the number of models spots and detected peaks is |J t | and |I t |, respectively. Note that if we assume a uniform prior probability for the assignment of i to all js such that t i = t j , and with Z := (Z ij ) i∈I,j∈J , we have the joint log-likelihood only differs from l by t |I t | log |J t |, which just changes the normalizing constant c. For clarity, we denote the spot assignment likelihood matrix as L ∈ R |I|×|J| . It contains the cost of assigning observed spot i to model spot j Since the assignment of peaks to models spots is apriori unknown, treating the variables Z ij as latent variables and maximizing the marginal log-likelihood ) can be done with a classical EMalgorithm, which maximizes the evidence lower bound (ELBO) where is the responsibility matrix with elements Instead of the classical EM approach, we propose to use the Sinkhorn-EM (sEM) formulation where Π(a, b) is a set of all transport plans that have joint distributions with marginals a and b, respectively, and In a discrete setting applicable here, the marginal mass distributions a and b have entries uniformly equal to 1: for each detected and model spot: a i =b j =1. This formulation requires solving an optimal transport problem. This likelihood is consistent 1. Here Q refers to the transport plan, not the entropy of the distribution over permutation with mean Q. in the population limit with the classical likelihood approach while having a better geometrical properties and is proven to be less prone to getting stuck in local optima than classical EM. Using this formulation enables practical solving of the large-scale Laue problem. Note that Z ij and Q ij can only be non-zero if t i =t j ; in the rest of the paper, we will consider the set Q of matrices Q such that Q ij =0 for all (i, j) with t i ̸ = t j . In this section we consider outlier spots, both in detected and modeled sets. There are two reasons for outliers among spots detected in image data. Firstly, the outliers can be just spurious detections: noise spikes or points corresponding to detection algorithm failures. Blended overlapping spots can also have dramatically wrong position measurement, which lies outside the range allowed by the noise level. Secondly, the sample can contain very small grains that will give rise to only few detectable spots, which can be insufficient to form a diffraction pattern that can be reliably measured by the solver. The number of outliers in the data can be large and it is typically not known by the user. We also consider unmatched model rays. The area of the screen and wavelength range are limited, which leads to spots moving out and into the image as the grain is rotated. We start with a set of initial (or prototype) grains, giving rise to a set of model spots S, with spots outside the detector screen or outside the beam's wavelength range being excluded (Equation We model the outliers using a full probabilistic description of the problem. We add an extra row to Z, with index 0, reserved for the assignment of spurious detection to the outliers status, i.e. Z i0 = 1 for outlier spots. Symmetrically, we add an extra column, again with index 0, to assign unmatched model spots, i.e. Z 0j = 1 if a model spot does not match any detected peak. Note that multiple entries of the 0 th row (resp. column) can be non-zero. At the intersection of these rows the entry Z 00 is ignored. To take into account explicitly the possibility of outliers into the probabilistic model, we modify the likelihood as follows. We assume there is first a fixed probability π 0 for a detected spot to be an outlier, so that p(Z i0 =1)=π 0 and p(Z ij =1)=(1π 0 )/|J|. Given that it is an outlier, we assume that it appears uniformly over the detector so that p(s i |Z i0 = 1) = 1 S where S is the surface of the detector, if it is not an outlier, we use the same model as before. The joint likelihood of a detected spot position s i and it assignment variable Z i• can then be written as Each term of the log-likelihood can be written as Given that our likelihood is constructed per detected spot, and that we do not model their number, the probability that a model spot is unmatched is modeled implicitly, given the total number of model spots. We do not explicitly model the probability of unmatched model spots in our formulation of the problem, and set it to likelihood value of the von Mises-Fisher distribution with concentration κ=σ -2 that corresponds to the null angle difference. Note that, up to additive constants, the term for a pair (i, j) with i, j ̸ = 0 in the log-likelihood remains as before. We define the extended likelihood matrix As in practice it is difficult to estimate π 0 , in our implementation we use a fixed outlier likelihood L out , as defined in Equation , where now both L and Z have an extra row and column. With constants dropped, the Sinkhorn EM objective is where Q ∈ Π(a, b) is the entropic transport plan, a and b are marginal constraints (see Section 4.3), and ε is the entropic regularization parameter, which is set to ε=1 in standard sEM (also see Section 5.1). In literature, there are other optimal transport problem variants that allow for outlier treatment, such as unbalanced OT We compare the performance of our proposed outlier model with these other variants. See Appendix C for details. The E-step for finding the assignment Q now requires to solve which follows from Equation The transport plan matrix is updated shown in Algorithm 4, described in Appendix 4. The convergence of this algorithm is controlled by user-specified parameter ζ tol . The M-step finds the maximum likelihood orientations and positions for all grains (R n , x n ) n∈N by solving a separate problem for each grain We solve this problem by coordinate descent in x and R. We propose to find grain position x using Newton iterations. We calculate the update at step k as where H(x k ) and g(x k ) are gradient and Hessian matrices evaluated at the current position x k , and ι is a very small constant added for numerical stability. We show the calculation of these matrices in Appendix B. The update at iteration k is The iterations are repeated until convergence threshold ζ x is met: shows the details of this process. Finding the M-step update for the orientation matrix is more complicated. In Appendix B we derive a Majorization-Minimization algorithm for finding the orientation matrix R maximizing the loss L OT . This sequence starts from an initial rotation guess R 0 . We show that the maximization of the objective is equivalent to the maximization of a concave quadratic, for which a local maximum can be obtained by solving a sequence of linear optimization problems over rotation matrices that each take the form of a Wahba's problem (an alternative formulation of the Orthogonal Procrustes problem, see Appendix A for details). First, we calculate the matrix M 0 m using the current values of grain positions x n and assignments Q. We then shift it so that it becomes PSD by adding a constant diagonal ιI where w m is the direction of ray m and M m , and ι is the absolute value of the most negative eigenvalue of M 0 m or 0 if M 0 m does not have negative eigenvalues. The update at iteration k is The iterations terminate when the convergence threshold ζ R is met: Subroutine LaueRotMM (Algorithm 3, described in Appendix B) presents this method in detail. To efficiently solve the stated problem at scale, we propose the LAUEOT formulation (Laue indexing with Optimal Transport). We introduce key elements of this method below. The LAUEOT method uses iterative updates for all variables. This enables very efficient implementation of coordinate ascent steps on GPUs, as all of these operations require only simple tensorized algebra. As the number of local maxima in this problem can be large, techniques for global optimization can be employed. In this work we use a deterministic annealing scheme to control the "temperature" of the problem In a typical Laue analysis, the number of spots in the problem can be large, up to several millions. Additionally, only matches of spots at the same sample rotation t are allowed. To enable good performance of the method at scale, we work with a sparse representation of the assignment matrix (see Section 5.2). The multi-grain fitting step is initialized using a set of prototype grains, which together constitute the final sample. Therefore, finding a good set of prototype grains is a critical step. We create the set of prototype grains using two pre-processing steps: (i) single-grain fitting, where we find local minima for samples consisting only of a single grain, starting from multiple initialization points in rotation and position space, and (ii) prototype selection, where we select a small number of prototypes out of all candidates, that form the final sample. We describe the pre-processing steps in Section 6. The problem in Equation 20 is non-convex and has multiple local minima. This is a common problem for EM algorithms. Deterministic annealing variant of EM has been proposed to address this Considering only ρ nearest neighbors in the assignment scheme, which is equivalent to setting null assignment weight in the full Q matrix, has the strong advantage to decrease the complexity of Sinkhorn updates from J 2 to ρJ. In the Sinkhorn algorithm, this will be a good approximation Fig. as long as exp(L/ε) is close to zero for all points outside the neighbor set. We find this approximation to be stable enough for our implementation, although other approaches could be employed here The LAUEOT method is described in Algorithm 9 (Appendix G). Next to the detected spots and algorithm control parameters, the routine takes as input a set of prototype grains (R n , x n ) n∈N , which is calculated in the preprocessing steps. A simple visual demonstration of the algorithm is shown in Figure We perform two preprocessing steps: (i) single-grain fitting, where we fit multiple candidate single grains from different starting points in rotation and position space, (ii) selection of prototypes from the list of optimized candidate grains using the Selection of Prototypes with Optimal Transport (SPOT) framework The goal of the first step is to find single grains that fit the data well and can be included in the final grain set. The second step selects the final set of prototype grains that will be included in the sample and considered for multi-grain optimization. The first pre-processing step is a single grain search over the space of its orientations and positions. The necessity for this step stems from the fact that, even for a single grain, the problem in Equation Generally, the problem of finding orientation matrices to match point sets is multi-modal for data without correspondences From each initialization point, we run a single grain fitting using a single-grain variant of the problem, described in Appendix D. This formulation will treat most of the detected spots as outliers. The number of runs is variable, depending on the expected number of grains in the sample. For 10 and 1000 grains, we run 5k and 500k initizalizations, respectively. Once the optimization is finished, we store the converged grain orientations and positions. Subroutine SingleLaueOT (Algorithm 8, described in Appendix D) is used for this task. The goal of this step is to select the grain candidates that will compose the final sample. As no further grains will be added to the sample later, this is a critical part of the algorithm. Selecting too many or too few grain candidates can lead to errors in the multi-grain fitting solutions. We start with removing badly-fitted models by selecting grains that have the fraction of unmatched model rays grater than f out . A model ray is considered unmatched if its largest weight in Q is assigned to the outlier column. Then to create the final sample, we perform prototype selection in the framework Selection of Prototypes using Optimal Transport (SPOT) The SPOT framework casts the problem of selection prototypes as a problem of learning a sparse source probability distribution supported on k elements that has the minimum OT distance from the target distribution. It poses the prototype selection problem as a maximization version of the OT problem, where the source distribution weights are learned with a cardinality constraint. The proposed loss has a key property of submodularity, which enables the use of efficient greedy method with deterministic approximation guarantees. We use the SPOTGREEDY method from We note that this algorithm allows for assignment of a larger number of detected spots to the grain than its number of model spots. Enforcing that constraint leads to a more complicated optimization problem of support selection, recently proposed by We evaluate our proposed LAUEOT algorithm according to the following performance criteria 1) accuracy of the solution as a function of number of grains in the sample and the noise level, 2) sensitivity of the solutions to the fraction of outliers for different optimal transport formulations, and its dependence on OT outlier control parameters, 3) number of successfully indexed grains as a function of the number of initial single-grain optimizations for two types of lattice, 4) improvement of the multi-grain solver solution over the single-grain fitting solutions, 5) comparison of time-to-solution between LAUEOT and the LAUE3DNDT method from For simulated data, we use two types of lattices, FeNiMn and CoNiGa, which are metal alloys (see For synthetic data, we simulated two datasets using a F m 3m space group and a P m 3m space group with lattice parameters a=b=c=3.592 Å and a=b=c=2.872 Å, respectively. Hereafter, the simulated samples will be referred to as SynthSampleA and SynthSampleB, respectively. The choice of the above space groups and corresponding lattice parameters was made because they match recent experimental studies Use 32 nearest neighbors in the sparse formulation. The initial temperature ε init is related to the number of nearest neighbors considered in the sparse formulation: it is chosen so that the farthest neighbor has a non-negligible probability at start. The temperature is lowered by ε cool =0.97 at every iteration. For the likelihood of outliers, we use the log likelihood L out set to the likelihood corresponding to a angular difference of 3σ. To discard badly fitting grains, we require the number of rays matched to the outlier to be less than f out • |S n |, with typical value f out =0.1. For the multigrain fitting, we set the maximum number of unmatched model rays T b = ⌈0.4 • |S n |⌉ of total number of rays. To assess the quality of the LAUEOT solutions, we compare: (i) the fraction of correctly assigned spots across all grains, (ii) the median difference between true and estimated grain orientation, (iii) the median difference between true and estimated grain position. The results of these comparisons are shown in Figure For samples with up to 500 grains, the number of recovered grains was exactly correct. After that, there was at most 1 grain missing. Starting with samples with 700 grains and for higher noise levels, the method begins to Grain position error Fig. ×10 -1 500 grains 500 grains Grain position error Fig. fail. This gives an idea for the limitations of LAUEOT. The left panel shows the fraction of wrongly assigned spots as a function of the number of grains and the noise level. LAUEOT mismatches only up to 15% of spots even for the challenging scenario of 500 grains and high noise level σ=0.251 • (0.7 mm on the image plane). For the low noise level of σ=0.036 deg, LAUEOT assigns almost all spots correctly. As expected, this fraction decreases with increased noise level. Middle and left panels show the median error of the recovered grain orientation and position, respectively. Predictably, these errors increase with the noise level. They stay almost constant with increased number of grains, which is expected in case of good quality of assignments. Figure We test the sensitivity of the LAUEOT method to outliers in the detected spots. We compare the performance of our proposed LAUEOT formulation using probabilistic outlier model (see Section 4.2), as well as two other OT formulations: partial OT and unbalanced OT (see Appendix C). In this ablation study we explore how this choice affects the indexing results. In particular, we test the sensitivity of the results to the choices of outlier control parameters: likelihood associated with outliers, maximum number of unmatched rays for OT with outlier modelling, κ and λ entropic regularization parameters for the unbalanced OT, and fraction of transported mass m OT for the partial OT. Grain position error Fig. We choose simulated diffraction images of the SynthSampleA with noise level σ=0.143 • as the reference. We vary the fraction of outliers up to 70%. For LAUEOT, we use combinations of outlier cost L out and maximum number of unmatched rays T b . The outlier likelihood corresponds to vMF probability for angular difference of 2-5σ, while the fraction of unmatched rays between 1-40%. For UNBALANCEDOT, we set κ, λ∈[0.001, 1]. For PARTIALOT, the fraction of transported mass is varied between m OT ∈ [0.4, 0.95]. For each OT method, we choose the parameter configuration that yields the smallest average assignment error over all outlier fractions. Figure Figure We compare the performance between LAUEOT and the LAUE3DNDT method from We demonstrate the performance of the LAUEOT solver on spot data taken during neutron diffraction experiments. We show results on three samples: (1) a ruby single-grain calibration sample, (2) a CoNiGa alloy oligocrystal, and (3) a FeGa alloy polycrystal. The details of the experiments are described in Appendix F. Table The number of grains found by LAUEOT is 1, 13, and 251 for the ruby, CoNiGa, and FeGa, respectively. The runtime for this analysis was few minutes for the ruby, 5 min for CoNiGa and 30 min for FeGa, on a single A100 GPU. The number of matched spots is 70-80%. The orientation and position of the ruby crystal found by LAUEOT agrees well with analysis by LAUE3DNDT. The ruby crystal measurements was used to calibrate the experimental setup in terms For FeGa, we only show the matches for the first 20 grains. The black spots are detected from experimental images, while the colored spots show the spots for the fitted model grains. Only matched spots are shown; outliers are omitted for clarity. The statistics of the matched spots are described in Table Figure We presented a novel approach to indexing grains in multi-crystal samples from wide-beam diffraction experiments. Our method, called LAUEOT, poses a principled optimization problem formulation for the grain indexing. The problem is solved using a computationally efficient coordinate descent method, with assignment of grains-tospots performed in the framework of optimal transport. A crucial part of this model is the treatment of outliers in the experimental data and of redundant model spots. To treat the outliers we propose a model dedicated to the Laue indexing problem, based on a full probabilistic description of outliers. Our new probabilistic model clearly outperforms the two existing formulations in the literature, partial and unbalanced OT. We show the performance of LAUEOT using simulations for variable number of grains in the sample, as well as different noise levels and outlier fractions. For samples with < 500, the method recovers all the input grains. For larger samples, the method occasionally misses a single grain. We found the limit of the stable performance of the algorithm is reached for samples with large number of grains at high noise levels. The accuracy of the fitted grain positions and orientations is generally very good, but decreases slightly with increased noise level. The LAUEOT methods opens the possibility of analyzing samples with large number of grains with short time-tosolution. For samples with ∼500 grains, the time-to-solution LAUEOT on a Nvidia DGX node (8× A100 GPUs) is of order few minutes, compared to >24 hours taken by the original indexing method of LAUE3DNDT. This enables almost real-time sample analysis during the experiment, as well as simulation-based setup optimization before starting the measurements. For two sets of points and their correspondences, the rotation matrix can be found by solving the Orthogonal Procrustes problem. This problem is solved through the singular vector decomposition. Wahba's problem In this section we derive the M-step updates for grain position x and rotation R, as introduced in Section 4.4. For both parameters, we find the updates corresponding to the maximum of the likelihood in Equation We perform coordinate descent alternating between updates for R and x. We solve this problem for x using the Newton's method. The gradient ∇L(x) and Hessian ∇ 2 L(x) are where τ ij :=∥s i -Γ tj x nj ∥ is the length of the ray rij from the grain center to the spot position s i on the screen. The Netwon's method finds the step ∆x by solving ∆x ← [∇ 2 L(x)] -1 ∇L(x). Subroutine LauePosNewton in Algorithm 1 describes the details of this process. The iterations stop when a convergence threshold ζ tol on position is reached. As described in Section 4.4, finding R requires solving a quadratic programming problem with orthogonality constraints. In this section we derive the LaueRotMM algorithm, which finds the maximum likelihood solution. The optimization problem in Equation 20 is equivalent to such that R ⊤ R = I and where we dropped the index of the grain from the rotation matrix R. By introducing the matrix this problem can be expressed as min The matrices M 0 m are generally not positive semi-definite, which makes the problem not concave. By using a positive semi-definite matrix where |ι m | is the smallest eigenvalue or 0 in case M 0 m has no negative eigenvalue, we can write an equivalent optimization problem min This problem is the Quadratic Program with Orthogonality Constraints (QP-OC). There exist multiple solvers for this problem in literature The associated quadratic is an upper bound of its first order Taylor expansion around a rotation matrix R k and so The minimization of the upper bound is a Wahba's problem (see Appendix A) with unity weights: ⇔ min The Minimization-Majorization scheme starts with an initial guess R 0 and performs a number of iterative steps according to Equation As described in Section 4.2, our main proposed method for finding the transport plan between the model and detected spots is using a custom probabilistic model for outlier treatment. We compare the performance of this model to other OT variants that allow for outlier treatment: unbalanced and partial optimal transport. For all our Sinkhorn methods, the convergence is controlled by a maximum difference to previous iteration ζ tol . Partial optimal transport The optimization problem has a single control parameter, which is specified by the user. The objective function for finding the transportation plan Q is max where a and b are vectors corresponding to spot weights (typically equal and set to one), and m OT ≤ min{∥a∥ 1 , ∥b∥ 1 }, and ε is the temperature parameter (see Section 5.1), which should be set to ε=1 to match Equation In this formulation, the constraint that the mass distribution in Q should have marginals that are equal to a and b is relaxed, and they are only encouraged to be close to them by the means of regularization, typically a generalized KLdivergence regularizer due to availability of closed-form solution where the proximity term D(x, y) is the generalized Kullback-Leibler divergence between x and y, D(x, y) = x ⊤ log (x ⊘ y) + (y -x) ⊤ 1 , where ⊘ is the element-wise division, and ε is the entropic regularization parameter. The strength of these marginal constraint regularization terms controlled by κ and λ. In practice, due to the entropic term, a consequence of relaxing the equality to the marginal, is that, as in partial OT, the mass transported is smaller than the total mass, which motivates the possible use of this method in the presence of outliers and missing spots. Here, κ and λ influence the outliers in source and target distributions, which will be ignored if the cost of transporting them is too high. In the limiting case of of κ → ∞, λ → ∞, the solution converges to the balanced optimal transport where no outliers are allowed. The single-grain fitting is performed using the simplified version of LAUEOT. The key difference is that we remove the double-stochastic constraint, which does not make sense for a single grain. The reason for this is that the model spots from a single grain are sufficiently far from each other, that it is extremely unlikely that they would be matched to a common detected spot. Furthermore, removing this constraint enables us to perform assignment updates in a single step, without having to solving Sinkhorn. This speeds up the process significantly. We employ the deterministic annealing scheme here too to obtain better local minima. We maximize the function max where L is the likelihood matrix in Equation For grain position and rotation updates, we perform 4 steps in the Newton and MM iterations. This is done to speed up the computation, as the single-grain fitting prioritizes speed over precision. Let's consider a set of candidate grains {G c n } n∈N c , indexed by N c , which are solutions obtained by single-grain fitting, that have the number of outliers < f out |S n |. Each candidate will create model spots indexed by J c n . The goal is to find a subset of initial grains N p ⊆ N c , called the prototypes, that will constitute the final sample. We start with calculating the grain-to-spot assignment log-likelihood matrix L ∈ R |I|×|N c | . The cost of assignment of spot s i to grain G c n is calculated using the marginal probability of assignment for all model spots in the grain We then shift the cost matrix to positive values The prototype selection depends on finding a weight vector w ∈ ∆ N c corresponding to candidate grains, where simplex where P is a OT assignment matrix and f (∅) = 0. The objective function finds N * that maximizes f subject to cardinality constraint on |N * | < k, enforcing that the size of the set is smaller than k. The SPOT loss is Finding the optimum subset N * is NP complete, but can be solved approximately using greedy incremental methods, which leverage its submodular property. The algorithm proposed in We employ the SPOTGREEDY algorithm Practically, the SPOTGREEDY algorithm starts with constant outputs a sequence of indices and their corresponding objective function values (n k , f k ) k∈N * , indexed by N * . A subsequence with elements up to k corresponds to the prototypes N p ⊆ N c , for cardinality constraint |N p | ≤ k. To choose the final set of prototypes N p with size k * , we employ a criterion based on 2nd discrete difference of for k > 1. We use a fractional criterion instead of the commonly used cut-off on the objective increment ε (see Algorithm 1 in Ruby: As a first sample, a Ø 6 mm spherical single-crystal ruby, typically used for detector calibrations, was measured. For the indexing of the ruby crystal, a R 3c space group with lattice parameters of a=b=4.7606 Å, c=12.994 Å was used. CoNiGa: A cylindrical Ø 4 mm × 4 mm oligocrystalline CoNiGa sample was selected as an intermediate test case. The sample was prepared via hot-extrusion followed by post-extrusion heat treatment, resulting in millimeter-sized grains. The full details of the sample preparation are given in FeGa: As a final test case, a 3 × 3 × 3 mm cube Fe 0.9 Ga 0.1 polycrystalline sample was measured. The sample was prepared via arc-melting of 99.95% purity Fe and Ga buttons in an argon atmosphere. To obtain a homogenous distribution of elements, the sample was re-melted 4 times. After arcmelting, the sample was annealed in argon at a temperature of 1000 • C with a heating rate of about 20 • C/min and a holding time of 12 h with subsequent quenching to room temperature. The final sample shape was achieved via spark cutting and subsequent polishing with sandpaper, diamond suspension, and colloidal silica. For the indexing of the FeGa data set, a Im 3m space group with lattice parameters of a=b=c=2.917 Å were used. The noise level was set to σ=1.07 • and σ=0.27 • for CoNiGa and FeGa samples, respectively. The CoNiGa sample required higher noise level, as the uncertainty also included systematic errors in the detector setup calibration. For both CoNiGa and FeGa samples, the number of spots detected in each rotation varied by up to 40%. This is not expected, as the number of spots per projection should remain constant. This large variation can be caused by drops in beam flux for that exposure, as well as failures of the spot detection algorithm. Some rotation angles were removed from the analysis, as they had abnormally small number of detected spots compared to other angles. To address this, we set the single-grain selection threshold f out < 0.4 for CoNiGa and f out < 0.35 for FeGa. All neutron Laue diffraction tomographies were collected at the Pulse Overlap Diffractometer (POLDI) The ruby tomography was carried out with sample-todetector distances of 16.5 cm and 16.8 cm for the back-and forward-scattering detector, respectively. The sample was rotated a full 360 • in steps of 8 • , resulting in 46 projections in total. Each projection was measured with an exposure time of 90 s. The CoNiGa tomography was carried out with sampleto-detector distances of 16.5 cm and 12.5 cm for the backand forward-scattering detector, respectively. The tomography was performed by rotating the sample a full 360 • in steps of 4 • , resulting in a total of 91 projections. Each projection was measured with an exposure time of 90 s. The FeGa tomography was carried out with sample-todetector distances of 16.5 cm and 12.5 cm for the back-and forward-scattering detector, respectively. The tomography was performed over a full 360 • rotation in steps of 4 • , resulting in a total of 91 projections. Each projection was measured with an exposure time of 100 s. The symbol ⊘ stands for element-wise division. Elementwise minimum of elements between two vectors x and y is denoted as min(x, y). The diag(x) function creates a diagonal matrix from an input vector x. Vectors a and b correspond to data point weights, which in LAUEOT are set to a ← 1, b ← 1. LAUEOT employs balanced optimal transport with explicit outlier modeling, the iterative updates are shown in Algorithm 4. For UNBALANCEDOT, the iterative updates are shown in Algorithm 5. For PARTIALOT, the iterative updates are shown in Algorithm 6. These algorithms are described in Appendix C. Algorithm 1 LauePosNewton: Newton's method for finding grain positions. x k+1 ← a ⊘ (Ky k ) 6: y k+1 ← b ⊘ (K ⊤ x k+1 ) 7: ζ ← max(∥x k+1 -x k ∥, ∥y k+1 -y k ∥) 8: k ← k + 1 9: end while 10: Q ← diag(x k ) • K • diag(y k ) 11: output: Q Algorithm 5 UnbalancedOT: Sinkhorn algorithm for unbalanced optimal transport with entropic regularization. ζ ← ∥K -K prev ∥ F 12: k ← k + 1 13: end while 14: Q ← K 15: output: Q Algorithm 7 LaueSpotGreedy: Selection of grain prototypes using optimal transport in the Laue indexing problem. r ε ← ε • ε cool 27: k ← k + 1 28: end for 29: end for 30: output: (Rn, xn) N s n=1