Exposure to environmental factors is generally expected to cause degradation in perovskite films and solar cells. Herein, we show that films with certain defect profiles can display the opposite effect, healing upon exposure to oxygen under illumination. We tune the iodine content of methylammonium lead triiodide perovskite from understoichiometric to overstoichiometric and expose them to oxygen and light prior to the addition of the top layers of the device, thereby examining the defect dependence of their photooxidative response in the absence of storage-related chemical processes. The contrast between the photovoltaic properties of the cells with different defects is stark. Understoichiometric samples indeed degrade, demonstrating performance at 33% of their untreated counterparts, while stoichiometric samples maintain their performance levels. Surprisingly, overstoichiometric samples, which show low current density and strong reverse hysteresis when untreated, heal to maximum performance levels (the same as untreated, stoichiometric samples) upon the photooxidative treatment. A similar, albeit smaller-scale, effect is observed for triple cation and methylammonium-free compositions, demonstrating the general application of this treatment to state-of-the-art compositions. We examine the reasons behind this response by a suite of characterization techniques, finding that the performance changes coincide with microstructural decay at the crystal surface, reorientation of the bulk crystal structure for the understoichiometric cells, and a decrease in the iodine-to-lead ratio of all films. These results indicate that defect engineering is a powerful tool to manipulate the stability of perovskite solar cells. A commercial photovoltaic module should pay back the energy used to make it quickly and last for a long time thereafter. The high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of perovskite solar cells fulfill these requirements in part; however, their degradation under environmental operating conditionswhere the solar module is exposed to oxygen, water, and temperature fluctuationsremains a critical challenge Insight into this issue has been obtained by many avenues. Many past works examining the degradation of metal halide perovskites focused on the impact of humidity, which was identified early on to be a major source of instabilities Convoluting the experimental picture of degradation is that it is often, even necessarily, examined through the lens of the device. Not only does the perovskite degrade due to its own intrinsic chemical reactions to light, water, oxygen, and thermal stress, but so also do the extraction layers In this work, we investigate the photooxidative response of methylammonium lead iodide perovskite in isolation of the electron extraction layers. We treat understoichiometric, stoichiometric, and overstoichiometric MAPbI3 samples with oxygen and light and reveal a stark, defect-dependent contrast in perovskite behavior: samples which are understoichiometric exhibit degraded performance over time, samples which are stoichiometric show limited change in performance, and samples which are overstoichiometric show initially poor performance that recovers to maximum performance levels due to photooxidation. MAPbI3 was used as a lowcomplexity composition to examine this effect and compare our observations to existing theoretical work; however, we find that similar healing behavior is observed for MAfree and triple cation perovskites, indicating this effect is general and applicable to stateof-the-art perovskite films. We use a combination of optical and structural analytical techniques to understand the reasons behind the observed trends, concluding that effective strategies to enhance the longevity of all perovskite compositions will protect and utilize iodine-related defects. Samples were made in the p-i-n (the so-called inverted) architecture, with the device structure shown in Fig. To examine the degradation of MAPbI3 with minimal impact from the electron transport layers, we fabricated the samples with only the substrate, indium tin oxide (ITO), doped PEDOT:PSS hole extraction layer, and perovskite absorber layer. Six samplesone of each specified stoichiometrywere placed in a sealed chamber with a gas mixture of 3% ± 0.5 % O2 and 97% N2. The chamber was placed under a solar simulator set to a light intensity of 1 Sun, adjusted against a NIST-calibrated silicon reference diode to the mismatch factor of the films (1.06-1.07). In parallel, six reference samples were placed in the dark in a nitrogen glovebox. All samples were finished together with the remaining layers ( [6,6]-Phenyl C61 butyric methyl ester, bathocuprine, and silver electrodes) after 10 hours in their respective environments and measured immediately. The third current-voltage (I-V) scan was used for measurement statistics, the effects of which are shown in Fig. The photovoltaic figures of merit based on the forward voltage sweep for samples exposed to oxygen and illumination (red) and reference samples (black) are shown in Fig. To isolate and understand the physical and chemical processes leading to these effects, we examined the Glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI2.96-3.06 films by a variety of characterization techniques. Previous studies have implicated microstructural and crystallographic changes in the degradation of perovskite solar cells Further insight into this process was gained by examining the degradation of the 2.96 films as a function of time (Fig. While enlightening for the understoichiometric samples, the SEM and XRD measurements give no direct insight into the dramatic improvement observed for the overstoichiometric samples. That the current density improves as holes appear throughout the microstructure (Fig. The atomic percentage ratios or iodine, nitrogen, and oxygen relative to the Pb4f7/2 doublet for an understoichiometric and overstoichiometric sample. All ratios decrease upon photooxgen treatment. To understand the impact of the oxygen treatment on trap states, we investigated both steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and PL as dependent on pulse frequency and fluence. The PEDOT:PSS hole-extraction layer quenches PL; therefore, these experiments were performed on perovskite layers fabricated directly on glass. The grain size for these films increases relative to the films on Glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS, meaning the degradation kinetics are likely different from those of the bulk cells; however, the relative behavior is still enlightening. The steady-state PL (532 nm) is shown in the supplementary information (Fig. Expanding upon the steady-state measurement, we apply a recently introduced PLQE frequency and fluence mapping technique. This measurement gives a "fingerprint" of the sample in terms of the competition between the radiative recombination, charge trapping, trap-assisted non-radiative recombination, and the Auger processes It should be noted that the trends of the PLQE oppose those of the VOC (Fig. To summarize our experimental results, we observed that understoichiometric films exposed to light and oxygen degrade. Solar cells show reduced JSC and slightly reduced VOC, which correlates with surface roughening and reorientation of the bulk crystal. Lead iodide is not detected by XPS or XRD on films exposed to oxygen under illumination for 10 hours, but is seen by XRD at 15 hours. Stoichiometric solar cells are stable on the timescale studied, showing some surface roughening. Very overstoichiometric solar cells show initially low JSC and strong hysteresis which becomes absent upon oxygen treatment. There is no strong change in the crystal structure, and the microstructure shows the surprising appearance of holes within the film. Both under and overstoichiometric samples show similar reduction in the I/Pb ratio upon exposure to light and oxygen, and all films show a relative improvement in their PLQE values. These results can be brought together with existing literature on MAPbI3 degradation to understand the role of defects. The initial experiment exploring the change in precursor stoichiometry for the lead acetate trihydrate recipe examined shelf storage of the solar cellsthat is, the storage of fully complete cells in the dark under ambient conditions, measured over the course of several months In the case of the unprotected films in this experiment, it might seem likely that solid degradation products like PbI2 should be observed if such a mechanism were at play. For the understoichiometric cells, the degradation of the photovoltaic characteristicsmost pronounced in the form of JSC degradationoccurs before any appreciable changes to the lead chemistry detected by lab-scale XPS or XRD. Given that PbI2 is seen shortly after the timescale of this experiment, at 15 hours (Fig. In the case of stoichiometric and overstoichiometric cells, the relatively low density of iodine vacancies would protect against the infiltration of oxygen discussed above for the case of the understoichiometric cells. Relevant to the response of the overstoichiometric cells to the oxygen treatment, the formation of I2 in perovskite materials has also been reported as the result of the oxidation of I -in perovskite layers exposed to electrical bias, in the absence of elemental oxygen Taken together, we suggest the degradation of understoichiometric MAPbI3 proceeds via oxygen infiltration of the iodine vacancies and subsequent degradation, as has been reported previously. In the case of overstoichiometric MAPbI3, excess iodine in the form of iodide (I -) interstitials is eliminated during the exposure to oxygen and illumination. We speculate that this occurs by an oxidation reaction to form volatile I 2 , which leaves the surface of the perovskite layer under carrier gas flow. These results have broad implications for a variety of perovskite applications. Because such a degradation mechanism is seen in devices under bias, our observations of defect-mediated degradation are likely relevant to even anoxic device fabrication and operation. The healing of highly overstoichiometric perovskites can result in more errortolerant processing conditions. Importantly, it can be applied post-film fabrication and prior to the application of electrodes, making it compatible with multilayered device architectures. As suggested by the examination of triple-cation and MA-free films, its application to other perovskite or perovskite-additive compositions would need specific optimization. In conclusion, we demonstrate that perovskite films with overstoichiometric defect profiles can heal under exposure to environmental conditions. The behavior of the understoichiometric cells upon exposure to oxygen and light is what would be intuitively expectedthe cells degrade steadily due to extended exposure to the environment. Only somewhat surprising is that the PCE diminishes before the lead iodide is detectable by XRD or XPS. Meanwhile, overstoichiometric cells improve drastically when exposed to oxygen under illumination. XPS suggests a global reduction in the I/Pb ratio, indicating that this ratio becomes more stoichiometric. Likewise, PLQE mapping suggests similar trap profiles and recombination processes for untreated stoichiometric cells and treated, overstoichiometric cells, indicating that a reduction in a deep trap state, such as iodine interstitials, is responsible for the healing. Our results suggests that defect management and engineering can be a useful strategy toward fabricating stable, high-efficiency perovskite solar cells. MAPbI3 Sample Preparation. Glass substrates with pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO, PsiOTech Ltd., 15 Ω Sq -1 ) were cleaned by sequential sonication in soap water, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropanol, for 10 min each. The samples were rinsed with isopropanol, dried with nitrogen, and inspected to ensure a lack of visible residue. They were then treated for 10 minutes with oxygen plasma. The hole-extraction layer was prepared immediately following the substrate cleaning. Poly(sodium-4-styrene sulfonate) (PSS-Na, Sigma Aldrich) was dissolved in de-ionized water to a concentration of 15 mg mL -1 . An aqueous suspension of PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate) (Clevios P VP AI 4083, Heraeus) was added to the PSS-Na solution in a volume:volume ratio of 4:1 for PSS-Na solution:PEDOT:PSS stock suspension. This was spin-coated in air onto the cleaned substrates at 4000 RPM for 30 s, and annealed at 150 °C for 15 min. The MAPbI3 layer was prepared by the method established by Fassl et al. To prepare the perovskite films, the precursor solution was spin-coated onto the holetransport layer at 2000 RPM for 60 s in a dry-air box. During this process, the spincoater chamber was kept closed, with the hole at the top of the lid blocked. The samp le was blow-dried with compressed dry air for 20 s immediately after the spin-coater braked, and then rested at room temperature for 5 min. The films were then annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. Following either the oxygen and light treatment or storage in a dark, nitrogen atmosphere, the remaining layers were applied to all 12 solar cell samples. In a nitrogen glovebox, PCBM ( [6,6]-Phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester, Solenne) was dissolved in chlorobenzene (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich, 20 mg/mL). This was dynamically spincoated onto a substrate at 2000 RPM for 30 s. The films were annealed at 100 °C. After these were cooled, a hole-blocking layer of bathocuprine (BCP, Sigma Aldrich, 0.5 mg/mL in anhydrous isopropanol) was dynamically spin-coated at 4000 RPM for 30 s. Silver electrodes were evaporated to a thickness of 80 nm at a rate of 0.1-0.5 Å/s. The final electrode area was 1.5 mm x 3 mm. Samples for photoluminescence measurements were fabricated on glass. Microscope slides were cut into approximately 1 cm 2 and cleaned by the same method as the ITO/glass substrates. The perovskite layer was prepared in the same way as the solar cells. Triple Cation and MA-Free Perovskite Sample Preparation. To test the composition-dependence of the photooxidative response, we fabricated triple-cation perovskite solar cells and MA-free perovskite solar cells. Glass/ITO substrates were cleaned as in section SI1. PTAA (poly(triaryl amine), Sigma Aldrich) was s pin coated in a dry-air box from a 1.5 mg/mL solution in anhydrous toluene at 2000 RPM for 30 s, and subsequently annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. 30 μL of anhydrous DMF was spin coated onto the PTAA at 3000 RPM for 30 s to achieve appropriate surface wetting for the perovskite layer. The triple-cation precursor solution was prepared as previously based on the stoichiometric compound Cs 0.05 (FA 0.83 MA 0.17 ) 0.95 Pb(I 0.9 Br 0.1 ) 3 Stoichiometry was tuned by adjusting the ratio of [MAI + FAI]:Pb in the precursor solutions. Initially, a smaller than stoichiometric amount of inorganic stock solution was added to the weighed MAI and FAI to achieve the condition of overstoichiometric. Following the spin-coating of initial samples, the overstoichiometric solution was diluted with known quantities of the inorganic Cs0.05Pb(I1.75Br0.3) solution, similar to the MAPbI3 samples. Here, x was varied in the formula Cs0.05(Fa0.83Ma0.17)0.95•xPb(Br0.1I0.9+(x-1)•0.95/3)3 from the overstoichiometric 1.12 to 1.06. Films were fabricated by spin coating 30 μL of the perovskite solution of known stoichiometry at 1000 RPM for 10 s, increased to 5000 RPM for 30 s. 10 s before the end of the 5000 RPM step, 200 μL of the anti-solvent TFT (α,α,α-Trifluorotoluene) was quickly dripped onto the substrate. Devices based on this antisolvent are dripping-speed independent The MA-free perovskite solution was prepared in a similar fashion to the triple-cation perovskite solution, omitting the MAI. The 1.1 M solution of Cs0.1FAxPb2+xI2.9Br0.1 was prepared at an initial understoichiometric x = 0.87 and sequentially spin coated and diluted with known quantities of a stock solution of FAI in DMF:DMSO (4:1 v:v). Spincoated occurred by the same method as the triple cation cells, using the extrusion-speedindependent antisolvent chlorobenzene Light and Oxygen treatment. For the oxygen and light treatment, samples were placed in a stainless-steel chamber with a transparent window at the top. A constant flow of 97% nitrogen and 3% oxygen, ±0.5%, was connected to the chamber. The oxygen and water content of the atmosphere were continuously monitored using a zirconia sensor (Cambridge Sensotet, Rapidox 2100). The samples were exposed to 100 mW/cm 2 simulated AM1.5 sunlight (Abet Sun 3000, class AAA), adjusted to account for the window and the mismatch factor of the perovskite films (1.06-1.07, i.e., the exposure conditions were the same as the measurement conditions). For the triple cation and MA-free compositions, the duration of the treatment was 20 h. Films proved more resilient to the treatment than the MAPbI3 films, possibly due to the addition of Br. Current-voltage characteristics were measured for all solar cells consecutively, immediately following the final fabrication steps. A Keithley source-measure unit was used to apply voltage and measure current under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight with 100 mW/cm2 irradiation (Abet Sun 3000, class AAA). The light intensity was calibrated with a Si reference cell (NIST traceable, VLSI) and corrected using the measured spectral mismatch factor of 1.06-1.07. The cells were scanned from forward bias to short circuit and back (1.2 V-0V) with a step size of 0.025 V and a dwell time of 0.1 s at each step. The cells were measured three times consecutively; values from the third measurement are plotted in the main text, Fig. Scanning electron microscopy was measured using a Gemini 500 (Zeiss) at an accelerating voltage of 1.5 kV. Perovskite films on Glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS were measured in the θ-2θ configuration using a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer. The X-ray source was Cukα. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra were acquired by a PHOIBOS 100 analyzer system (Specs, Berlin, Germany) at a base pressure of 10 -11 mbar using an Al Kα excitation (1486.6 eV). Steady-state measurements. Steady-state photoluminescence quantum efficiencies (PLQEs) of perovskite films on glass were evaluated using the method by de Mello, et al To measure a full PLQE(f,P) map, the CCD acquires a series of PL images, one for each combination of the laser repetition rate f and the pulse fluence P. The full measurement was done in an automatic regime using a LabVIEW software which was reading and implementing the pre-prepared list of parameters designed for each individual measurements (repetition rate, excitation and emission filters, exposure time of the camera, etc.). The exposure time per data points was 0.1 s for the high excitation power and hundreds of seconds for low excitation power. The total time required to measure one map was about 2-3 h depending on the parameters.