Anion exchange membranes are used in alkaline fuel cells and offer a promising alternative to the more expensive proton exchange membrane fuel cells. However, hydroxide ion conductivity in anion exchange membranes is low, and the quest for membranes with superior ion conductivity, mechanical robustness, and chemical stability is ongoing. In this study, we use classical molecular dynamics simulations to study hydroxide ion transport and mechanical properties of eight different hydrated polyolefin-based membranes, to provide a molecular-level understanding of the structure-function relationships in these systems. We examine the microstructure of the membranes and find that polymers with narrow cavity size distribution have tighter packing of water molecules around hydroxide ions. We estimate the self-diffusion coefficient of water and hydroxide ions and find that water molecules have a higher diffusion than hydroxide ions across all systems. The trends in hydroxide diffusion align well with experimental conductivity measurements. Water facilitates hydroxide diffusion, and this is clearly observed when the hydration level is varied for the same polymer chemistry. In systems with narrow cavities and tightly bound hydroxide ions, hydroxide diffusion is the lowest, underscoring the fact that water channels facilitate hydroxide transport. Finally, we apply uniaxial deformation to calculate the mechanical properties of these systems and find that polymers with higher hydration levels show poor mechanical properties. Atomistic molecular dynamics models can accurately capture the trade-off between hydroxide transport and mechanical performance in anion exchange membranes and allow us to screen new candidates more efficiently. Polymer anion exchange membranes (AEMs) which contain a positively charged functional group and facilitate the transport of hydroxide anions are widely studied, as they are used in alkaline fuel cells. AEMs offer a less expensive alternative to proton exchange membranes (PEMs) such as Nafion which have been extensively used due to their stability, processability, and high conductivity. While AEMs demonstrate remarkable energy conversion efficiency, the quest for an AEM material with superior ion conductivity, robust mechanical properties, and high chemical stability is ongoing. Several studies have focused on modifying the side chain of quaternary ammonium functional group to improve both conductivity and chemical and mechanical stability. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can provide important insights into the molecular level interactions and the transport mechanism of hydroxide ions in AEMs. By employing detailed ab-initio calculations, Zelvich et al. demonstrated that OH -ions attract a cluster of water molecules, with the number of molecules in each cluster ranging from one to five, depending on the hydration level. Understanding how ions move in the polymer matrix and how water channels and the structure of the polymer influence ion transport is crucial for optimizing AEM design and enhancing their properties. We expect that these insights can guide the design of novel AEMs with enhanced OH - dynamics and mechanical properties. Three distinct polyolefin systems featuring similar backbone chains are selected to investigate how side chain architecture impact the performance and stability of AEMs (Figure These particular compositions are selected based on their superior performance, as documented in the study by Wang et al. Following this, the replicas continue to run in the same ensemble for 20 ns (hydroxide ions and water molecules attain diffusive behavior over this period), during which data is collected. Data shown is the average over the four replicas for each system. All simulations in this work utilized Large Scale Atomic Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS). Long ranged interactions are accounted for by employing a particle-particle/particle-mesh (PPPM) algorithm with 1.5 nm cutoff. To assess water channels across the different hydrated polymer samples, we examine the channel dimensions, or cavities within the polymer matrix. This entails removal of ions and water molecules from different samples and characterizing unoccupied regions of the polymer matrix (which would be occupied by ions and water in the hydrated polymer). To accomplish this, we take a fully saturated membrane at the end of the 20 ns run, remove all ions and water molecules from this membrane, and quantify the voids which are left behind in place of the water molecules and ions. Then, we apply Void Analysis Codes and Unix Utilities for Molecular Modeling and Simulations, or VACUUMMS. , where H* and O* are the hydroxide hydrogen and oxygen, and H and O are water hydrogen and oxygen, respectively, and N is the repeating nitrogen cation on the polymer backbone. We use the radial pair distribution function extension in VMD to compute gij(r), and we average over the 20 ns runs of all replicas to compute each RDF. To capture the dynamics of the hydroxide ions, water molecules, and polymer chains, we compute the mean squared displacement (MSD) for each species, given by: Here, r ( (0) refers to the initial frame after 1 ns, and we do not perform any block averaging. Each MSD curve is averaged over four independent replicas. For each component, (polymer chains, hydroxide ions, water), we compute MSD and plot it against time in a logarithmic scale. Polymer MSD is averaged over all atoms of the polymer. Once the MSD of OH -and water attain diffusive behavior in each system (characterized by long time MSD slope ~ 1), the diffusion coefficient can be calculated using Einstein's equation: Where D is the diffusion coefficient, and MSD is the value of the mean squared displacement at a particular time t within the diffusive regime. In the simulation times considered, both water and OH -ions reach the diffusive regime (long time MSD slope ~ 1), allowing us to calculate their diffusion coefficient from Equation To assess the mechanical properties of the hydrated polymers, each equilibrated system is subjected to a uniaxial tensile deformation along the x-axis with a constant engineering strain rate, by increasing the box dimension in finite steps. The barostat is applied in the y and z directions, to maintain an overall pressure of 1 atm. Employing the erate style in LAMMPS, we apply a strain rate of 10 -5 s -1 for a duration of 200,000 fs, reaching a strain of 2.0 (equivalent to three times the initial box length). Deformation is performed across all four replicas. We refer the reader to prior work for further details about the protocol. 44 The two primary modes of hydroxide transport in AEMs are vehicular diffusion and Grotthuss hopping. The microstructure of the polymer, which is directly responsible for the degree of water uptake, controls the ratio of vehicular vs. hopping mechanism in a given system. Thus, it is important to characterize the microstructure of the polymer and map the hydration channels. We do this by employing the cavity energetic sizing algorithm VACUUMMS, as described in the Methods section, which gives the pore size distribution (PSD) for each system. We characterize water channels qualitatively, through visual representations in the form of snapshots of onenanometer cross-section of various simulation boxes (Supplementary Information). Figure PE-A2, with the double functional TMA groups (Figure The voids in both TFP-25 and TFP-33 have a bimodal distribution, with narrow (<0.4 nm) and large (>1.2 nm) voids. There is not a significant difference in the void distribution between the two systems, which is to be expected given that the polymers have the same backbone and sidechain architecture. We do find that the cavity distribution for the 25% system shows a higher number of both narrow and broad voids. The challenge in distinguishing differences in the polymer microporosity between the two TFP polymers arises from the substantially elevated and closely matched hydration levels (l= 30, 32), along with very similar chain architecture. However, upon examining the y-axis in Figure As for the other two systems, (PE-P2 and PE-A1), their water -hydroxyl and polymer -hydroxyl peak intensities are in between these extremes. These results indicate that in polymers with narrow cavity size distribution (Figure peaks are slightly higher in PP-T compared to PP-D, especially g & * %& (r) (Figure peaks indicating that the waters and cations are not closely packed around the hydroxide ions in these polymers, compared to those with smaller cavities, which exhibit sharper g(r) peaks. In addition to the smaller cavities in PP-T, this could also be because of the smaller alkyl chain in PP-T compared to PP-D, which prevents the hydroxide ions from arranging close to the polymer cation. The first peak in g '%' (r) are similar, although PP-T shows a faintly higher first peak, and also has a shoulder at low r compared to PP-D. Overall, we observe that the polymer cavity distribution is inversely correlated with the local packing of different molecules, that is, polymers with small cavities have high g(r) peaks, across the three sets of polymers that we consider. Specifically, the close packing of atoms in PE-P1/PP-T compared to PE-A2/PP-D corresponds to a tighter packing of water molecules around OH -moieties. We computed the potential of mean force (PMF) from the polymer nitrogen -hydroxyl oxygen (g & * %' (r)) radial distribution function; this data is reported in the Supporting Information, Figure In such systems, we expect the hydroxide ion to dissociate readily from the functional group, leading to faster transport and conductivity. Of all the systems considered, we find that the well depth in PP-T to be the highest (-4.0 kJ/mol), and that in TFP-33 and PE-A2 to be the lowest (-1.7 kJ/mol). Details of the membrane microstructure and anion-cation interaction strengths are summarized in Table To explore the influence of chemistry and water channels on the transport and dynamics of hydroxide ions, we compute the MSD as described in the Methods section. To decouple the dynamics of water, polymer and anions, we calculate the MSD of hydroxide ions, water and polymer separately, the results are presented in Figures Figure and PE-P2 (Figure with the broadest cavity size distribution and the smallest g(r) peaks shows the highest hydroxide mobility. This shows that small cavities lead to tighter associations between the hydroxide ions and polymer cations, as well as restricted water motion, which contribute to an overall decrease in hydroxide dynamics. The MSD plots for the two TFP polymers are shown in Figure The minimum in the PMF is deeper for PP-T compared to PP-D as well (Supporting Information, Figure and TFP-33, and lowest for PE-P1 and PP-T. We see a strong correlation between polymer microstructure and hydroxide dynamics, where a more porous microstructure facilitates faster hydroxide transport. We also find that local packing of waters and cations around hydroxide ions is correlated to hydroxide dynamics, as this indicates how effectively the hydroxide ions can dissociate. A clear correlation emerges in Figure Lastly, we compute the mechanical properties of these systems, by applying uniaxial tensile deformation, as detailed in the Methods section. The results are presented in Figure When the membrane is dry, the mechanical response is that of a brittle polymer, with a high modulus and yield stress. As the hydration increases, the yield stress and modulus both drop, and the polymer shows decreased mechanical properties. Findings from this study are summarized in Table Overall, there is a strong correlation between the hydration number and hydroxide transport, with PP-T and PE-P1 having the lowest hydration numbers (< 10) and the lowest hydroxide diffusion coefficients. Similarly, TFP polymers with the highest hydration numbers (>30) have the highest hydroxide diffusion. A higher water uptake leads to a greater interconnected void network within the polymer matrix which facilitates the transport of hydroxide ions. The interaction between OH - and the polymer cation are also dependent on the amount of water in the system, as water can screen electrostatic interactions. The mechanical strength is negatively correlated with hydration, with systems with a high hydration number showing reduced yield strength. In this study, we use atomistic MD simulations to understand how the microstructure of polyolefin-based anion exchange membranes influences hydroxide transport, across eight distinct chemistries. We find that a broad cavity size distribution translates to large, interconnected water channels when hydrated, which facilitates faster hydroxide diffusion. Radial distribution function and potentials of mean force reveal the local environment around hydroxide ions, and we see that narrow cavities lead to tighter packing of water molecules around the hydroxide ions, from which the ions do not dissociate easily. System dynamics was investigated by computing the diffusion coefficients, and we find reasonable agreement between calculated diffusivity and experimental conductivity. Mechanical properties of the AEMs were evaluated using uniaxial deformation, and we find that the mechanical integrity of AEMs is inversely impacted by the hydration level. The simulations predict the observed patterns in both conductivity and deformation performance. While the trends in hydroxide ion transport and conductivity between simulations and experiments are consistent, the conductivity values are not reported for two reasons. The first is that classical MD models used in this work do not account for proton hopping, or Grotthuss transport. Secondly, Nernst-Einstein relation is often utilized to calculate conductivity from the diffusion coefficient, which does not include ion-ion correlations. Three figures (S1, S2, S3) are provided to show the water channels in the chemistries. Specifically, Figure Figure The conductivity and mechanical performance of the systems are intricately linked to the water uptake (hydration number). In the previous analyses, the experimental water uptake data from prior 