The combination of metallicity and ferroelectricity breaks traditional boundaries, paving new avenues for innovative electronic materials and devices. This breakthrough is particularly notable, as metallicity and ferroelectricity have traditionally been considered mutually exclusive physical properties. In this work, starting with non-polar metallic single layers, we propose a general scheme for designing 2D ferroelectric metals (FEMs) based on van der Waals interaction. By first-principles calculations, we further substantiate the feasibility of the design scheme in real materials such as FeSe and H-MnTe2. Notably, this scheme unveils unique metallic ferroelectricity, characterized by reversing polarization through interlayer sliding. Furthermore, the combination of inherent magnetism with sliding ferroelectricity leads to multiferroicity. The investigated design scheme and observed phenomena have broad applicability across 2D materials. Our results not only pave the way for research in 2D FEMs but also offer promising prospects for foundational studies of coupled physical phenomena in 2D lattices. Ferroelectric materials exhibit switchable bistable states, each characterized by an opposite spontaneous electric polarization reversible through an external electric field [1-4]. Recently, two-dimensional (2D) ferroelectric materials have garnered interest because of their novel physical properties and potential applications in non-volatile memory devices [2,5]. According to Neumann's principle, ferroelectrics typically belong to one of the 10 polar point groups, characterized by a unique rotation axis, and lacking both the inversion center and the mirror plane [6]. However, many 2D materials with triangular or hexagonal lattices cannot support spontaneous vertical polarization due to their inversion or mirror symmetries. Recently, the introduction of sliding ferroelectricity has injected new vitality into the field of 2D ferroelectric materials, significantly broadening the scope of the 2D ferroelectric family [7-10]. The van der Waals stacking typically breaks the crystal symmetry, thus ferroelectric polarization can also occur in certain non-polar point groups. This phenomenon has been theoretically and experimentally confirmed in various materials, including multi-layer h-BN and H-MoS2 [11-13]. In traditional perceptions, ferroelectricity and metallicity are considered mutually exclusive physical characteristics, as the conductive electrons in metals can effectively screen internal electric fields, thereby inhibiting the manifestation of ferroelectricity [14]. However, in 1965, Anderson and Blount posited the potential existence of ferroelectric metallic materials (FEMs) In this work, we propose a universal design scheme for 2D FEMs, starting with a metallic single-layer lattice and constructing a bilayer lattice through van der Waals stacking. This scheme exploits lattice rotation and translation to break inversion and mirror symmetries, thereby introducing sliding ferroelectricity into metallic bilayer lattice. Employing firstprinciples calculations, we verify the applicability of this design scheme in materials such as bilayer FeSe and H-MnTe2. Moreover, the integration of inherent magnetism with sliding ferroelectricity induces multiferroicity. Our investigation into this design scheme and the phenomena observed demonstrate wide applicability across 2D materials. These findings not only broaden the scope of 2D FEMs but also pave new paths for further exploration in this field. All calculations based on the Density Functional Theory (DFT) are performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) Our proposed mechanism begins with non-polar metallic single layer. We explore two distinct stacking patterns: (a) the AA' pattern and (b) the AA pattern; see Figure see Figure After investigating the structure and stability of single-layer FeSe, we further explored its magnetic properties. We observed that the ground state of single-layer FeSe exhibits FeSe exhibit FM interactions. The energy of interlayer FM coupling is 0.009 eV/f.u., lower than that of interlayer AFM coupling. Figure In the AB'1 pattern of bilayer FeSe, the Fe atoms of the lower layer align directly beneath the Se atoms of the upper layer. This distinctive non-equivalent bilayer configuration results in an interlayer imbalance, which subsequently causes electron redistribution between the two layers, thereby inducing vertical electric polarization Moreover, the differential charge density displays the asymmetry. Notably, the vertical electric polarization in bilayer FeSe is not screened due to its in-plane metallic nature and the vertical confinement of electrons By introducing reverse interlayer sliding, we obtained the AB'2 pattern, as shown in The existence of electric polarization in metallic bilayer FeSe is not sufficient to guarantee ferroelectricity unless this polarization can be switched. To this end, we investigated the feasibility of polarization switching in bilayer FeSe. Figure Therefore, based on the proposed mechanism, the AB'1 and AB'2 patterns of bilayer FeSe can be regarded as two switchable metallic ferroelectric states. Because of the presence of vertical electric polarization, the magnetic moments on the Fe atoms in the upper and lower layers are not entirely equivalent. Interlayer sliding-induced changes in the ferroelectric state also affect the distribution of magnetic moments on Fe atoms The magnetic ground state of single-layer H-MnTe2 exhibits FM coupling, with the magnetic moment primarily localized on the Mn atoms. Each Mn atom possesses the electronic configuration of 3d 5 4s 2 . Upon donating three valence electrons to the surrounding Te atoms, the oxidation state of Mn ions transitions to +3, leading to the electronic configuration of 3d 3 4s 0 . In an octahedral crystal field, the Mn d orbitals split into two sets: the higher energy doublet eg orbitals and the lower energy triplet t2g orbitals; see Figure Thus, the three valence electrons occupy the t2g orbitals, while the eg orbitals remain unoccupied. This arrangement results in a magnetic moment of 3 μB per Mn atom in singlelayer H-MnTe2. In accordance with the proposed scheme, we construct the AB1 and AB2 patterns of bilayer H-MnTe2, as shown in Figure Our results indicate that the interlayer exchange interactions in bilayer H-MnTe2 support AFM coupling. The energy of interlayer AFM coupling is 0.005 eV/f.u. lower than that of interlayer FM coupling. The band structure and density of states (DOS) are presented in MnTe2 is determined to be 0.026 eV/f.u., lower than that of In2Se3 (0.066 eV/f.u.) This barrier facilitates the possibility of ferroelectric transition between the AB1 and AB2 patterns in bilayer H-MnTe2. Additionally, interlayer sliding leads to a modification in the magnetic moment distribution on Mn atoms, indicating the presence of magneto-electric coupling In conclusion, we introduce a novel design scheme for 2D FEMs through van der Waals interactions. Our first-principles calculations validated this approach in real materials like bilayer FeSe and H-MnTe2, unveiling a unique metallic ferroelectricity with switchable vertical polarization via interlayer sliding. This method not only demonstrates a low energy barrier but also integrates inherent magnetism, leading to the emergence of multiferroicity. Applicable to a broad spectrum of 2D materials, our findings herald a new opportunity in the exploration of 2D FEMs.