Mutually coupled spin Hall nano-oscillators (SHNO) can exhibit binarized phase state, offering pathways to realize Ising machines and efficient neuromorphic hardware. Conventionally, phase binarization is achieved in coupled SHNOs via injecting an external microwave at twice of the oscillator frequency in presence of a biasing magnetic field. However, this technology poses potential challenges of higher energy consumption and complex circuit design. Moreover, fabrication-induced mismatch in SHNO dimensions may hinder mutual synchronization. Addressing these challenges, we demonstrate purely DC current-driven mutual synchronization and phase binarization of two non-identical nanoconstriction SHNOs without biasing magnetic field and microwave injection. We thoroughly investigate these phenomena and underlying mechanisms using micromagnetic simulation. We further demonstrate the bias field-free synchronized SHNO pair efficiently performing a reservoir computing benchmark learning task: sin and square wave classification, utilizing current tunable phase binarization. Our results showcase promising magnetization dynamics of coupled bias field-free SHNOs for future computing applications. Reservoir computing Recently, ferromagnet (FM)/heavy metal (HM) bilayer-based spin Hall nano-oscillators (SHNO) have emerged as one of the top-tier CMOS compatible high frequency nano-oscillators Recent studies on bias field-free single SHNO have demonstrated nontrivial autooscillation properties including in-plane to out-of-plane transition of auto-oscillation trajectory In this report we demonstrate purely DC current-driven phase binarization in a mutually synchronized NC SHNO pair without any biasing magnetic field as well as external microwave injection. The SHNO pair is designed by defining two NCs with non-identical widths, representing two different SHNOs separated by a distance (d) as shown in Fig. In our previous work, we demonstrated that an in-plane uniaxial anisotropy can induce bias field-free auto-oscillation of magnetization in a NiFe/Pt bilayer-based NC SHNO device Hence, we chose a similar NiFe/Pt bilayer-based NC pair as shown in Fig. (u ̂⋅ m)u ̂ , where K u , M s , m and u ̂ are the uniaxial anisotropy constant, saturation magnetization of NiFe, reduced magnetization vector (m = M/M s ) and the unit vector along the easy axis respectively. In the stable equilibrium, the orientation of magnetization is determined by the cumulative effect of magnetic anisotropy, magnetostatic field and exchange interaction. As we pass a charge current through the SHNO device, it induces a transverse spin current via spin Hall effect in Pt. The spin current exerts spin-orbit torque (SOT) on the magnetization in NiFe and destabilizes it from the stable equilibrium. The SOT may enhance or oppose the intrinsic damping torque in the ferromagnet based on the mutual orientation of the magnetization and the spin polarization (σ) of the injected spin current. In the latter case, a large enough SOT can completely compensate the intrinsic damping torque and lead to the limit cycle auto-oscillation of magnetization about the effective internal field (H eff ). In absence of any biasing magnetic field, H eff is given as: where H demag , H exch and H Oe denote the magnetostatic field, the exchange field and the DC current induced Oersted field respectively. The SOT driven magnetization dynamics can be quantitatively formulated in terms of the LLG equation with additional SOT term as follows In equation 2, α denotes the intrinsic damping parameter, θ SH is the spin Hall angle of Pt which is taken as 0.08 Therefore, the SOT driven magnetization dynamics in such system is efficiently modelled considering only the damping-like component of SOT. We have employed the micromagnetic modelling approach to numerically solve equation 2 (see Method) and obtained the oscillatory magnetization dynamics in bias field-free condition. We consider a NC SHNO pair consisting of a 5 nm thick NiFe layer possessing uniaxial anisotropy, interfaced with a 5 nm thick Pt layer (Fig. We numerically solved equation 2 using the GPU accelerated micromagnetic solver MuMax3 GHz. We further obtained the local auto-oscillation characteristics of individual NC SHNO within the NC pair by averaging m x (t) over 170nm × 170 nm area around the center of each NC and applying FFT. Figure This persistent mutual synchronization of both NC SHNOs for more than 1.5 mA span of I DC is comparable with the state-of-the-art in-plane field assisted SHNO pair To gain a deeper insight into the mutual synchronization phenomenon, we separately simulated and analyzed the bias field-free auto-oscillation in single NC SHNOs with 100 nm and 150 nm constriction widths. Figure resulting in a reduction of H anis ,which in turn reduces the auto-oscillation frequency. This explains the red-shift behavior of the auto-oscillation frequency in such bias field-free SHNOs. Therefore, the sudden blue-shift at I DC > 2.2 mA can be attributed to the reduction of autooscillation amplitude which is also evident from the diminishing FFT amplitude in Fig. Now we proceed to investigate the behavior of the phase difference (δ) for the 1 st harmonic between the two SHNOs in the NC pair at mutually synchronized state. Figure That indicates both the NC SHNOs exhibit (nearly) in-phase auto-oscillation at this range of I DC . In contrast, for I DC ≥ 2.25 mA current, δ becomes significant (δ~8π/9 rad) indicating (nearly) out-of-phase auto-oscillation in both NCs. Figure We observe that the NC pair exhibits two discrete auto-oscillation states in terms of phase difference (δ) between the local magnetization auto-oscillation at both NCs. In the out-of-phase auto-oscillation state, the discretization of individual phases of the two NCs to two distinctive phase states is known as the "phase binarization" of the auto-oscillation in both NCs hardly drive each other for in-phase synchronization. In contrast to the 1 st harmonic, the 2 nd harmonic is a propagating spin wave mode that creates the interferencelike pattern in the spatial profile of auto-oscillation amplitude as seen in Fig. We confirm the 2 nd harmonic mediated phase-binarization in our NC pair SHNO by analyzing the magnetization auto-oscillation obtained from a similar NC pair with d = 800 nm. Figure However, the other phase state corresponds to δ ~ 2π/5 rad is weakly binarized. The difficulty of in-phase synchronization is due to the longer separation between the NCs resulting in no overlapping of the localized edge modes as shown in Fig. Lastly, we would like to mention that the SHIL induced phase binarization strongly depends on the power of the locking signal. SHIL induced stable phase binarization in bias field assisted SHNO array is achieved above a certain threshold power of the locking signal. However, these SHNOs may switch between in-phase and out-of-phase auto-oscillation states below the threshold power of the locking microwave We now demonstrate how the phase binarization can be utilized to perform efficient binary classification task using the NC SHNO pair as a reservoir. The learning task we choose is the classification of points that belong to randomly sequenced sin and square waveforms with identical period and amplitude. This is a standard RC benchmark task that requires significant nonlinearity as well as short-term memory. Notably, the points belonging to the extrema of sin and square waves are completely identical, therefore, the classification of these points are not trivial. One must remember the previous points to classify the extrema points. It has been observed that the phase binarization in the NC pair strongly depends on the recent history of input current in a continuous sweep of I DC . This has been demonstrated in Fig. This issue could be resolved by adding two NiFe layers with uniaxial anisotropy, at both sides of the Pt layer (Fig. Hence, the bottom NiFe layer can exhibit auto-oscillation. On the other hand, in the top NiFe layer, the m and the spin polarization direction are oriented such a way that the SOT and the damping torque act parallel to each other. This leads to an enhancement of the effective damping in the FM layer and eventually relaxation of m to a stable equilibrium state. The scenario reverses for I DC < 0, where only the top NiFe layer can exhibit auto-oscillation of m. Therefore, the auto-oscillation can be obtained in such a trilayer SHNO irrespective of the polarity of input current. We now reconstruct the I DC sequence in line with the main time-series such that the amplitudes of the sin and square waves span symmetrically about I DC = 0. In addition, we modulate the I DC values through a standard time-multiplexing algorithm A few of the results have been shown in the supplementary information. Notably, in all these cases 100% accurate classification have been achieved. We have demonstrated purely DC current-tunable mutual synchronization and phase binarization in a NC SHNO pair in absence of biasing magnetic field as well as external microwave for injection locking. The coupling between the two non-identical SHNOs is mainly mediated by the magnetodipolar interaction that leads to coherent synchronization of the SHNOs (see supplementary note 6). However, the characteristic frequencies of the single NC SHNOs are tens of MHz apart at lower input current. Therefore, mutual synchronization of such non-identical SHNOs is apparently difficult to achieve at low current regime (1.5 mA ≤ I DC ≤ 1.75 mA, see Fig. This phenomenon has been utilized for performing an RC benchmark classification task as demonstrated in this paper. It should be noted that, the RC scheme demonstrated here, is not to contrast different algorithm and propose a better alternative, but to highlight the physical phenomena of DC current-driven phase binarization in realizing a simple RC network. While all the simulation results presented here are obtained without considering any thermal effect to focus more on understanding the physical origin and impact of the observed phenomena as well as to reduce simulation time, the effect of finite temperature (T = 300 K) has been presented in the supplementary information (Fig. Device design in COMSOL. The NC SHNO pair has been designed considering a bilayer stack of 5 nm thick NiFe layer interfaced with a 5 nm thick Pt layer. Both the round-edged NCs in the NC pair have been defined with 50 nm radius of curvature and 22° opening angle. The widths of the left and right NCs are defined as 100 nm and 150 nm (Fig. The SOT term has been implemented in MuMax3 using the built-in Slonczewski spin-transfer torque (STT) model and disabling the Zhang-Li torque, following the approach of Dvornik et. al The spin Hall angle of Pt has been defined as θ SH = 0.08 in the Slonczewski STT model in MuMax Micromagnetic simulation has been carried out for different values of K u to observe the dependence of phase binarization phenomena on different uniaxial anisotropy field in the NC pair with d = 200 nm. Figure Figure Here we show the spatial profiles of the spin wave modes and associated phase map of the 1 st harmonic for NC pair with d = 800 nm. As seen from the figure, the spin wave mode profile, especially for the propagating 2 nd harmonic changes with I DC in the vicinity of the NC as well as in the bridge between the NCs. This variation in the spin wave mode profile may favor strong or weak phase binarization in the mutually synchronized auto-oscillation state. For example, weak phase binarization (δ~0.4π) is observed for I DC = 2.3 mA and 2.7 mA. However, strong phase binarization (δ~π) is observed for I DC = 2.5 mA. | Spatial profile of the spin wave modes corresponding to the 1 st and 2 nd harmonic along with the associated phase at 1 st harmonic in the NC pair with d = 800 nm. The long-range magnetodipolar coupling is majorly responsible to mediate mutual synchronization of NC SHNOs in a chain or 2D pair of NCs In addition, we explicitly turned off the exchange interaction between the left and right regions using "ext_ScaleExchange()" function in MuMax 3 . We further employed absorbing boundary condition at the rectangular boundaries of both regions to stop the spin wave propagation between the two regions. Lastly, we deliberately turned off the current and SOT in the left region as shown in the inset of Fig. In both NC pairs with p = 200 nm and p = 800 nm, the magnetodipolar interaction helps to establish mutual synchronization of the two NC SHNOs. However, the overlapping of the localized edge spin wave modes corresponding to the 1 st harmonic locally modulates the anisotropy field to reinforce synchronization of the non-identical NC SHNOs. In addition, the spatial overlapping drives both the NC SHNOs towards the in-phase synchronization state. Here we use the NC SHNO pair as a single dynamical node The "Base" I DC denotes the primary I DC value corresponding to the individual points in the input data whereas, the "Modulated" I DC denote the encoding of pre-processed input. The temporal evolution of m x corresponding to this modulated input current has been shown in Fig. 