Optical responsivity grants biomedical capsules additional capabilities, promoting them towards multifunctional theragnostic nanodevices. In this endeavor, screening candidates under conditions that closely resemble in situ environments is crucial for both the initial optimization and the subsequent inspection stages of development and operation. Optical tweezers equipped with dark-field spectroscopy are among the preferable tools for nanoparticle imaging and refractometry. However, the effectiveness of conventional illumination and light collection arrangements for inspecting anisotropic complex inner composition particles is quite limited due to reduced collection angles, which can result in the omission of features in scattering diagrams. Here we introduce an endoscopic dark-field illumination scheme, where light is launched on an optically trapped particle from a singlemode fiber, immersed into a fluid cell. This arrangement disentangles illumination and collection paths, thus allowing the collection of scattered light with a very high numerical aperture. This methodology is applied to vaterite nanocapsules, which are known to possess strong anisotropic responses. Tweezer configuration allows revealing optical properties for different crystallographic orientations of vaterite, which is complex to do otherwise. Furthermore, endoscopic dark-field images reveal the emergence of polarization-dependent long-range photonic nanojets, which are capable of interacting with nearby particles, demonstrating a new pathway for nanojet image formation. Optically responsive capsules find use in various drug delivery scenarios, where a high level of targeting, in situ imaging capabilities, and controlled release alongside a remote activation are among the properties demanded for implementing frontier theranostic devices Direct imaging of particles with bright-field techniques is diffraction-limited and thus is typically restricted to investigating larger-scale entities, spanning several microns in size The most commonly used dark field arrangement, shown in Fig. Vaterite nanoparticles were selected as a case study for applying our methodology to entities relevant to the field of biomedicine. Considerable efforts are dedicated to the development of particles for drug delivery. Broadly, these approaches can be categorized as organic-based or inorganic, each with numerous subsections for classifying the carrier's designs. Inorganic approaches might be preferable for implementing optically-responsive functionalities and thus will be favored here over their counterparts. The calcium carbonate (CaCO3) nanoparticles have three crystalline forms-vaterite, calcite, and aragonite. Vaterite, a metastable polycrystal also termed spherulite, features high porosity, facilitating a high payload capacity, and is noteworthy for its practical, straightforward, and low-cost self-assembly synthesis. All of these indicate its potential as a biocompatible container for targeted delivery of therapeutic compounds into living cells and tissues. Vaterite particles also possess a moderately high optical anisotropy (Δn≈0.1 in the visible range), which promotes using them in microrheology and microfluidics. For example, micron-scale particles rotate under a circularly polarized illumination and can attain GHz angular velocity, being trapped in a vacuum The basic underpinning idea of the measurement principle appears in Fig. A vaterite particle with a diameter Dparticle=0.9 μm was trapped with the setup. The optical trap was characterized with the aid of QPD. Fig. Considering the details of the implemented optical path, 12 fN/nm is a relatively high measured stiffness, which allows a stable manipulation of particles, minimizing the escape probability. After trapping the particle, the dark-field spectra were recorded. The vaterite major axis is aligned with the trapping light polarization, thus enabling to obtain the particle orientation control. The experimental dark-field setup shown in Fig. Figure During the dark-field data acquisition for vaterite size Dparticle=3 micron, optical imaging was performed and revealed a set of peculiar phenomena. Specifically, a formation of nanojets was observed, which, in principle, are not expected to appear in the far-field image of the sample area. Photonic nanojets are intense near-fields that emerge due to the interaction between light and micron-scale particles. Electromagnetic hot spots can be controlled by a particle's refractive index and shape thus tailoring near-fields quite efficiently. The nanojet bridges the gap between small-scale plasmonic nanoparticles, which offer near-field enhancement at the expense of optical loss Nanojects, being a near-field phenomenon, require extra care in visualization. Typically, the imaging is done with either near-field (SNOM) Here, we demonstrate that using our illumination scheme, granting ultra-high incident angles of incidence, alongside high NA oil objective, enables performing the nanojets visualization from the far field. Nanojet observation will be presented first and then followed by detailed analyses of the interaction scenarios. Figure In the set of experiments, we also found that nanojets can mitigate intermediate-range photonic interactions between the particles. It was found that nanojets bend towards the secondary particle, as it is shown in Fig After observing the jets, the physical mechanism behind their direct visualization will be revealed. In this endeavor, we performed full wave finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulations of the particles, illuminating them with a plane wave at a high 80o incident angle. The schematic layout of the simulation appears in Fig. where (xn, ym) is the spatial coordinate mesh in 'Plane 1' and (kx, ky) is the mesh in reciprocal space. kz is calculated from the wave dispersion within the homogeneous material (ethanol in this case). A set of wavevectors (kx, ky, kz) after the decomposition is depicted by coloured arrows in Fig. . Note, that for the sake of visualization (kx, ky, -kz) is presented, i.e., the arrows are depicted upwards nevertheless the propagation is downwards to the objective. On this plot, red arrows denote the waves inside the microscope objective NA cone (NA=1.3, medium is ethanol), while blue arrows -outside it. Thus, only wavevectors depicted in red pass through the microscope objective and form an image on the camera. To model the camera image, the light intensity distributions E(xn, ym, zi) are reconstructed on a set of horizontal planes zi (called i-th planes in Fig. where E ̂(k x , k y , z i ) = E ̂(k x , k y , z Plane 1 ) exp([ik z (z i -z Plane 1 )]), The "-" sign in equation ( A set of horizontal zi planes is chosen in the range zparticle 1-Dparticle/2<zi<zparticle 1 +Dparticle/2 to cover Particle 1 (see Fig. To simulate the depth of field effect, a Gaussian blur filter is applied to every map, with the standard deviation σ=ω(z)/2, where ω(z) is the Gaussian beam waist To further investigate the bending effect and attribute it to the particle's refractive index, the following numerical study has been done. Two dielectric particles are located in correspondence with Fig. The illumination endoscopic dark-field spectroscopy method has been developed and demonstrated on several types of optically trapped particles. Optical tweezers enable the investigation, screening, and sorting of single particles in solutions based on their spectroscopic signatures. A special notion can be devoted to anisotropic and/or nonspherical particles, which can be rotated in the trap and thus investigated from several nontrivial directions. We have demonstrated this capability on vaterite nanoparticles, verifying its strong anisotropic response. Furthermore, the endoscopic architecture enables untying the spectra from substrate contributions, which might be important in several microfluidic arrangements. A distinctive advantage of this spectroscopic technique is the capability to collect scattered light from an optically trapped particle at an extremely broad range of angles. In typical widelyused arrangements, angular limitations come from a demand to grant high NA and light intensity for stable particle trapping. Furthermore, interpreting results from darkfield spectroscopy, especially when dealing with optically anisotropic particles like vaterite spherulites, presents its own set of challenges. These complexities are primarily due to the excitation of additional dipole components, which occur because of the nontrivial polarization state of the illumination cone, as illustrated in standard methodologies. The reported configuration is free of those limitations. The endoscopic illumination allows to excite particles at enormously large grazing angles, approaching 90 o . On top of the previously mentioned advantages, this arrangement enables the observation of photonic nanojets. Taking advantage of high-NA collection, we have demonstrated the direct observation of nanojets and inter-particle nanojet bending. In the latter case, the microscope image demonstrates the nanojet bending towards a nearby particle. The nature of this peculiar effect was revealed and is solely attributed to the image formation dynamics, as the near-field maps lack bending properties. The focus of the studies was made on vaterite nanoparticles, which are among the most promising platforms for realizing theragnostic nanodevices. In this endeavor, developing optically-responsive drug capsules can grant additional advantages. The demonstrated methodology enables fast screening of capsules, thus providing a level of determinism to colloidally fabricated nanodevices. 