There has been significant recent interest in the mechanics community to design structures that can either violate reciprocity, or exhibit elastic asymmetry or odd elasticity. While these properties are highly desirable to enable mechanical metamaterials to exhibit novel wave propagation phenomena, it remains an open question as to how to design passive structures that exhibit both significant non-reciprocity and elastic asymmetry. In this paper, we first define several design spaces for chiral metamaterials leveraging specific design parameters, including the ligament contact angles, the ligament shape, and circle radius. Having defined the design spaces, we then leverage machine learning approaches, and specifically Bayesian optimization, to determine optimally performing designs within each design space satisfying maximal non-reciprocity or stiffness asymmetry. Finally, we perform multi-objective optimization by determining the Pareto optimum and find chiral metamaterials that simultaneously exhibit high non-reciprocity and stiffness asymmetry. Our analysis of the underlying mechanisms reveals that chiral metamaterials that can display multiple different contact states under loading in different directions are able to simultaneously exhibit both high non-reciprocity and stiffness asymmetry. Overall, this work demonstrates the effectiveness of employing ML to bring insights to a novel domain with limited prior information, and more generally will pave the way for metamaterials with unique properties and functionality in directing and guiding mechanical wave energy. There has been significant recent interest in the topics of reciprocity There is significant interest in finding structures that can break reciprocity, either statically In addition to non-reciprocal elasticity, there has recently emerged significant interest in creating structures that exhibit asymmetric elasticity we expand the chiral metamaterial design space by introducing additional variations in ligament shape, contact angle, and circle radius. Here, we lay out the details of this mechanical system. Fig. We describe the material using the stiffness matrix: where the values of each element k ij can be either k - ij or k + ij . For typical materials, the relationship k - ij = k + ij and k ij = k ji holds due to the Maxwell-Betti theorem In this Section, we investigate how loads applied from various directions can induce distinct contact modes between the rigid circle and the elastic ligament. An analogy can be drawn between these diverse contact modes and varying the boundary conditions of an elastic beam where adding and removing support conditions can dramatically change the mechanical state of the structure, resulting in asymmetrical properties under different loading modes. To further elucidate this concept, Fig. Fig. x towards the left. Following the deformation, the left circle and the ligament are detached while the right circle and the ligament have a small area of contact. As the circle is frictionless, the ligament in the contact area only experiences pressure from the perpendicular direction. Consequently, the mechanics of the structure can be equivalent to a beam fixed at both ends with a frictionless roller in the middle, as illustrated in Fig. Fig. x towards the right. Following the deformation, the right circle and the ligament are detached while the left circle and the ligament establish two contact areas. Similarly, the Fig. While the ligament is linear elastic, variations in boundary conditions occur under loads from different directions, leading to varying stiffnesses in different directions. The goal of this paper is to maximize these discrepancies to achieve extreme mechanical behaviors. In the following Section, we will elaborate on the details of these objectives. In the previous Section 2.2, we provided a qualitative analysis of the contact modes of the chiral structures. Specifically, the non-reciprocity and asymmetry of chiral metamaterials are produced by the variation in contact modes leading to different boundary conditions of the equivalent beam models. In this Section, we conduct a quantitative examination of the stiffness disparities. Specifically, we delve into the mechanics of the deformation under different loading directions to understand how stiffness is either enhanced or weakened depending on the direction of applied loads. Fig. Following the finite element analysis of this structure, the strain energy is 0.007764 after compression and 0.1064 after extension, with the u x set constant as -0.08 for compression and +0.08 for extension. Through Eq. 3, we derive the stiffness k - xx = 2.42 for compression and k + xx = 33.25 for extension. It's evident that the strain energy during extension significantly surpasses that of compression, resulting in markedly higher stiffness during extension. Considering that bending and stretching energies are the primary components of strain energy for a linear elastic beam, we investigate the stiffness disparities by analyzing the stretching and bending energy distribution along the elastic ligament in Fig. Stretching Energy As briefly introduced in Section 2.1, this work aims to enhance the nonreciprocity and asymmetry of the chiral metamaterial. This section provides additional details on the formalization of these objectives. Furthermore, the scope of the investigation will be extended to multi-objective optimization, allowing for the identification of optimal designs that simultaneously exhibit both nonreciprocity and elastic asymmetry. Following the definition in Section 2.1, enhancing the non-reciprocity of metamaterials equals maximizing the variance of stiffness values along opposite directions, i.e. k - ij ̸ = k + ij . To achieve this, we aim to maximize the ratio between the absolute values of the stiffness. The optimization task includes eight objectives to be maximized, outlined below: Note that when the value of these objectives is equal to 1, i.e. the stiffness in opposite directions is the same, the corresponding structure exhibits reciprocity. Additionally, for each pair of stiffness k - ij and k + ij that we aim to maximize the difference between, we can either design a structure that k For instance, to maximize the disparity between k - xx and k + xx , objective f 1 aims to identify an optimal design where k - xx significantly exceeds k + xx , whereas objective f 2 seeks an optimal design where k + xx significantly exceeds k - xx . Consequently, when searching for optimal designs that maximize non-reciprocity objective f 1 to f 8 , only designs with objective values greater than 1 are considered. In summary, our goal can be formalized as below: Following the definition in Section 2.1, the asymmetry of chiral metamaterial is characterized by an asymmetric stiffness matrix, i.e. k ij ̸ = k ji . Similarly to the approach outlined in Section 2.4.1, we aim to maximize the ratio between the stiffness values. The eight objectives for asymmetry optimization are summarized below: A more general form of these objectives is as below: In Sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2, a single objective was employed to assess the performance of the chiral structures. However, optimizing a single objective guarantees design optimality in only one dimension. For multiple competing objectives, maximizing a single dimension may compromise the performance concerning another objective. To discover a chiral metamaterial that exhibits multiple novel functionalities, we strive to optimize the material to exhibit both non-reciprocity and elastic asymmetry. The problem of searching for optimal designs that excel in multi-objectives is broadly known as determining the Pareto front The corresponding performance of the Pareto set in a performance space is the Pareto front. To facilitate understanding these concepts in the context of our problem, Fig. As illustrated in Fig. where x is the Cartesian coordinates with the midpoint of the two circles as the origin of the coordinates, and h 0 (x), h 1 (x), . . . , h n-1 (x) are continuous and pre-selected functions. To ensure the smoothness of the ligament, we require the the zeroth, first, and second derivatives of the h(x) to be continuous at the two ends M and N. The coordinates of M are represented as (x M , y M ) and N as (x N , y N ). Consequently, we have six known constraints on h(x): N denote the zeroth, first, and second derivatives at point N. Given that the midpoint of the two circles is the origin, the center of the left circle is at (-L/2, 0), and the center of the right circle is at (L/2, 0). Thus, we have: Consider that the number of coefficients to be determined for h(x) is n and we only have 6 boundary conditions in Eq. 8. By solving Eq. 7 with Eq. 8, h(x) has a unique solution when n is equal to 6 and multiple solutions when n exceeds 6. In this work, we set n to 7 to add one more degree of freedom to the shape of the ligament by fixing a randomly selected point (x * , y * ) on the ligament, denoted as a red star point in Fig. The coefficients a 0 , a 1 , . . . , a 6 of h(x) can be identified by Eq. 8 and Eq. 10. In summary, we have 8 design parameters X = [R, θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 00 , θ 11 , R s , x * , y * ]. Notably, R s can take the value of zero, and the subfunction components h 0 (x), h 1 (x), . . . , h 6 (x) of the ligament can be either polynomial or trigonometric. To search for optimal designs for the objectives defined in Section 2.4, we explore four different design spaces, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Design Space 1 • R s = 0 for both left and right side • R s = 0 for right side and 0.1 ≤ R s ≤ R/10 for left side Design Space 1 The choice of the four design spaces shown in Fig. Machine learning (ML) methods have been extensively applied to complex engineering challenges, demonstrating their efficiency in uncovering intricate relationships within data X = [x 0 , x 1 , . . . , x 99 , y 0 , y 1 , . . . , x 99 , , x 1 , y 1 , x 0 , y 0 , x 00 , y 00 , x 11 , y 11 ] (11) The second step is to label each chiral structure with its mechanical properties by running a finite element simulation. As the goal of this study is to maximize the nonreciprocity and asymmetry defined in Section 2.4, the label of each material will be the objectives f 1:8 and g 1:8 defined in Section 2.4.1 and Section 2.4.2. To get this, it is necessary to first calculate the stiffness values for each chiral structure. Fig. Data augmentation is a technique used to increase the diversity and the size of the training dataset. New training samples are generated by applying transformations or modifications to existing data, such as flipping, rotating, and scaling Augmented Geometry 180 0 Rotation During the search for optimal chiral structures, obtaining properties such as non-reciprocity and asymmetry by FEM is a challenging and computationally expensive task. Moreover, the physics of the relationship between the design and the properties of the chiral structure is nonlinear, which makes it challenging to obtain analytic solutions for the optimization objective. To address these challenges, we propose leveraging a data-driven approach -Bayesian Optimization where X compromise all feasible designs, and f (x) represents the objective function to be maximized. For each design point x that belongs to X , the goal is to identify the optimal point x * at which the objective f (x) attains its maximum value. To achieve this, we must select a probabilistic surrogate model f (x) and an acquisition function α(x). The surrogate model f (x) evaluates the objective value of each design point, and the acquisition function α(x) determines which point to query next. The query process involves obtaining the ground truth property for the selected point through experiments or simulation tools. To conduct Bayesian Optimization, we start with an observed data collection D t = {(x i , y i )} t i=1 , where y i denotes the measured objective value corresponding to point x i . The first step is to fit the surrogate model with the dataset D t . The second step is selecting the next point x t+1 that maximizes the acquisition function, querying the value of the y t+1 , and adding (x t+1 , y t+1 ) to the observed dataset. The final solution to Eq. 12 is obtained by repeating these two steps until reaching a maximum iteration limit N . Below is a pseudo-code outlining the process of Optimization Routine using Bayesian Optimization: Algorithm 1 Optimization Routine Require: initial observations D 0 , maximum iterations N , surrogate model f (x), acquisition function α(x) 1: for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , N -1 do D t+1 ← {D t , (x t+1 , y t+1 )} 7: end for 8: return best y and the corresponding x in D N When employing Bayesian Optimization for chiral metamaterial design, we begin by conducting simulations for 5 randomly selected designs in each of the four design spaces. Thus we establish an initial dataset with a total of 20 points. We then generate a pool of 400, 000 design candidates, with 100, 000 in each design space, without conducting FEM simulation. Subsequently, we perform the Bayesian Optimization for 10 iterations. In each iteration, the top 10 points in the design pool with the highest values determined by the acquisition function are selected for running FEM simulations using Abaqus. This approach of acquiring ten points rather than one in each iteration is adopted due to our simulation setup, where multiple simulation jobs are submitted as a batch in the computing center. Therefore, querying 10 points per iteration takes the same amount of time as querying a single point. Moreover, expanding the dataset faster enables us to get a more accurate surrogate model, expediting the discovery of optimal designs. The Gaussian Process (GP) model To address this, we employ ensemble learning methods The MLP model is designed with four layers comprising 1024, 1024, 64, and 1 neurons, respectively. Following each hidden layer, Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation functions were applied to introduce non-linearity into the model. The training was performed using a batch size of 16 over 250 epochs, with a learning rate set to 0.001. We train the MLP model k = 15 times, each utilizing a different seed for training-validation dataset splitting and weight initialization. The prediction of objective values and the uncertain estimation are calculated below: where μ(x) is the averaged prediction across all MLP models, σ(x) is the standard deviation of the predictions, and ŷi is the predicted value from the ith model. In the framework of Bayesian Optimization, various acquisition functions are available for selection, such as the probability of improvement (PI) The Expected Improvement (EI) method is a versatile choice for many optimization scenarios. It is efficiently designed to trade-off between the global search (exploration) and local minimization (exploitation) where f max is the best performance observed so far. The acquisition function α EI (x) calculates the expectation of the improvement for each unseen point. In essence, the equation evaluates each point by how much performance it can enhance compared to the current best point. If the potential improvement surpasses the best point, the expected improvement is the amount of improvement. If the potential improvement cannot surpass the best point, the expected improvement is zero. Assuming the target y follows a Gaussian distribution N (μ(x), σ(x)), the formulation of EI can be written explicitly as where λ = (μ(x) -f max -ξ)/σ(x). Φ(λ) and φ(λ) are the cumulative distribution function (CDF) and probability density function (PDF) of the standard normal distribution respectively. The first term in Eq. 15 emphasizes exploitation by favoring points with higher expected objective values, while the second term promotes exploration by favoring points with greater uncertainty. Thus, Eq. 15 strikes a balance between exploitation and exploration controlled by the hyperparameter ξ, with higher ξ leading to more exploration. In our study, we set ξ to 0.002 to achieve a balanced exploration-exploitation strategy. The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) calculated the upper bound for the prediction by adding the uncertainty to the estimation, offering a straightforward approach to balancing exploration and exploitation. The acquisition function for UCB is defined as Similar to EI, the first component of the equation favors exploitation, and the second component for exploration. The hyperparameter β serves to balance the weights between exploitation and exploration, with higher values leading to more exploration. In our problem, we apply EI to single objective optimization considering that the algorithm has already proven efficient in material discovery in many other studies Although the EI acquisition function form of Eq. 15 is typically associated with the Gaussian Process Model, we adopted the acquisition function Eq. 15 to our problem with the assumption that the observed data are sampled from a Gaussian Distribution with mean and variance derived from the predictions of ensembled MLPs, i.e. y ∼ N (μ, σ), as formalized in Eq. 13. This assumption is grounded in the evidence that MLPs (or Neural Networks) are wellcalibrated models However, in the scenario of multi-objective optimization, fewer valid candidates meet the criterion due to the increased number of objectives to optimize and all objectives have to be larger than 1 (refer to Section 2.4.3). The EI method is unable to filter out invalid designs in this context. Hence, we employ the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition method to guide the multi-objective optimization. The acquisition value calculated by UCB acts as an upper bound for the objective value, enabling us to disregard candidates whose objective values fall below 1. The hyperparameter β is set to 3 to increase the upper confidence bound for potential optimal designs, thereby allowing more valid candidates to be considered. In Section 2.4.3, we outlined our approach to addressing the multi-objective optimization challenge in chiral metamaterial design by searching for the Pareto front across all designs. In this Section, we elaborate on the methodology of discovering the Pareto front and its utilization within Bayesian Optimization. During each iteration of multi-objective Bayesian optimization, we determine the acquisition value of each unseen data point using the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) method. Provided that we aim to optimize a total of m objectives simultaneously, the acquisition value of points i, calculated by Eq. 16, is denoted as , where α i j represents the acquisition value for the unseen data point i in terms of maximizing objective j. Therefore, if we have n unseen points in the pool of design candidates, we can obtain a matrix A n×m with row i representing α i , where i ∈ {1, 2, • • • , n}. The next points to be acquired will be the design points whose performances form the Pareto front of A n×m . The Pareto front is identified through an efficient algorithm available in the Python package artemis-ml (QUVA-Lab, 2017). The algorithm iteratively eliminates the points that are dominated by at least one other point until only non-dominated points remain, thus yielding the set of Pareto front. The algorithm can be summarized as follows: Algorithm 2 Find Pareto Front Require: Acquisition value A n×m for m objectives of unseen points 1, 2, • • • n 1: choose the first point i 1 = 1 2: while i 1 <= n do 3: end for 6: update n as the size of the rest points 7: re-index the rest points as 1, 2, • • • , n without changing the order 8: i 1 ← the index of the next point on the order 9: end while 10: return the rest points (i.e. nondominated points) In this Section, we present the optimal designs discovered using the Bayesian Optimization detailed in Section 3.2. In Section 4.1, we present the results and analysis for the optimal designs that exhibit extreme non-reciprocity. In Section 4.2, we present the results and analysis for the optimal designs that exhibit extreme elastic asymmetry. Finally, in Section 4.3, we present optimal designs that were discovered by maximizing both elastic asymmetry and non-reciprocity. For the eight non-reciprocity objectives defined in Section 2.4.1, we search for the optimal design that maximizes each objective by conducting the Bayesian Optimization methods detailed in Section 3.2. Each objective is maximized individually through separate Bayesian Optimization runs. The designs achieving the highest objective value after optimization are shown in Fig. It is clear that the optimal designs for objectives f 1 , f 3 , f 5 , f 7 in Fig. as an example and show its contact behavior during deformation in Fig. Essentially, higher stiffness values are typically observed during contact, as illustrated in Fig. The optimal designs for objectives f 2 , f 4 , f 6 , f 8 in Fig. Clockwise Rotation Anti-Clockwise Rotation The optimal designs we discovered for the asymmetry objectives g 1:8 defined in Section 2.4.2 are presented in Fig. In contrast to the optimal solutions for non-reciprocity, not all of the optimal designs for asymmetry achieve notably high objective values, as defined by cases where the stiffness of the numerator is larger than the denominator by at least one order of magnitude. Specifically, the optimal designs for g 2 , g 3 , g 6 , and g 7 achieve high objective values, where the stiffness values in the numerator significantly surpass those in the denominator. These optimal designs exhibit a substantial contact area for one direction but no contact for the other. As a result, the stiffness value for the loading Figure Each figure shows the optimal design for the (a) objective g 1 , (b) objective g 2 , (c) objective g 3 , (d) objective g 4 , (e) objective g 5 , (f) objective g 6 , (g) objective g 7 and (h) objective g 8 . The title above each structure indicates the corresponding stiffness values. direction where contact is established tend to be much higher, as the contact provides increased resistance to the loads. For a detailed visualization of the contact modes under different load directions, please refer to B, Fig. In contrast, the objective values for g 1 , g 5 , and g 8 are relatively small. This is primarily attributed to the challenge of finding designs capable of exhibiting large contact areas in the desired direction while maintaining no contact in the other. In design spaces 1 and 3, contact is more likely to occur during the extension and anti-clockwise rotation loads, while no contact is expected for loads from the other two directions. Conversely, in design space 2, contact is more probable during compression and clockwise rotation, with no contact expected for loads from the other two directions. In design space 4, contact is likely to occur for loads in all directions. Upon scrutinizing objectives g 1 , g 5 , and g 8 , it can be found that the required contact modes are not commonly found within these design spaces. For instance, achieving a high value of objective g 1 = |k - xy /k - yx | necessitates a large contact area for clockwise rotation loads and no contact for compression, which is not a common scenario within the four design spaces. Nevertheless, we managed to find the optimal design for objective g 1 from design space 1. While contact still occurs during compression loading and there is no contact during clockwise rotation, the contact area is very small, mitigating the stiffness value k - yx during compression. As a result, the final asymmetry results in k - xy being slightly larger than k - yx . To facilitate the visualization of contact in these optimal structures, we present two examples: the optimal designs for objectives g 1 = |k - xy /k - yx | and g 8 = |k + yx /k + xy |, in Fig. Finally, the optimal design for g 4 yields an objective value of nearly 1, indicating the absence of designs meeting the criterion where the stiffness value k + xy exceeds k + yx . To maximize objective g 4 = |k + xy /k + yx |, an ideal design should feature a substantial contact area under anti-clockwise rotation while exhibiting no contact under extension. As discussed above, such a contact mode is not prevalent within the existing design spaces. The exploration of alternative design spaces capable of accommodating optimal designs meeting the requirements of objective g 4 remains a topic for future investigation. Clockwise Rotation Anti-Clockwise Rotation In this Section, our goal is to identify optimal designs that exhibit both non-reciprocity and asymmetry, as defined in Section 2.4.3. Therefore, we aim to optimize two objectives, selecting one from f 1:8 , and another from g 1:8 . Based on the results of single objective optimization in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we observed that the optimal designs for objectives f 1 , f 3 , f 5 , f 7 , g 2 , and g 7 exhibit similarities, which we designate as Group 1 since the objectives are not contradictory. Similarly, the optimal designs for objectives f 2 , f 4 , f 6 , f 8 , g 3 , and g 6 share similarities and are classified as Group 2. It's important to note that the objectives in Group 1 and Group 2 are contradictory because their optimal designs for single objective optimization exhibit opposite characteristics. Additionally, we assign objectives g 1 , g 5 , and g 8 as Group 3 due to their relatively small optimal values discovered in Section 4.2. Objective g 4 does not have an optimal design in the single objective optimization, so it is not considered in the multi-objective optimization scenario. The three groups of objectives are summarized below. • Group 1 (non-contradictory): Based on the different groups established above for the objectives, we explore three different cases for multi-objective optimization. In the first case, we consider non-contradictory objectives in the same group, where both objectives are chosen from Group 1 or both chosen from Group 2. As a representative case, we select f 1 and g 2 from Group 1. In the second case, we choose two contradictory objectives, one from Group 1 and another from Group 2. The representative case we use is f 1 and g 3 . In the third case, we choose one challenging objective from Group 3 and one relatively feasible objective from Group 1 or Group 2. The representative case we use is f 1 and g 1 . The distribution of the objectives for the three cases can be found in Fig. • Multi-Objective 1 (non-contradictory): f 1 and g 2 • Multi-Objective 2 (contradictory): f 1 and g 3 • Multi-Objective 3 (challenging): f 1 and g 1 After 10 iterations of Bayesion Optimization, we identified three Pareto optima for Multi-Objective 1, one Pareto optimum for Multi-Objective 2 and four for Multi-Objective 3. The Pareto front of each multi-objective and its corresponding designs can be found in D. For each Multi-Objective, we selected the Pareto optima with the largest modulus (i.e. square root of the sum of all the objective values) and presented them in Fig. In this paper, we utilized machine learning (ML) techniques in conjunction with Finite Element Simulation to engineer chiral metamaterials exhibiting significant directional non-reciprocity and stiffness asymmetry. We elucidated the mechanisms underlying non-reciprocity and asymmetry by qualitatively analyzing the contact behavior under various loads through equivalent beam models. Additionally, through quantitatively analysis of strain energy changes during chiral metamaterial deformation, we uncovered that stretching deformation of the elastic ligament in the chiral structures leads to higher stiffness, while the bending structures result in lower stiffness values. This insight explains the heuristic behind programming the chiral metamaterial geometry to achieve desired non-reciprocity and asymmetry properties. Our study encompassed optimization of eight non-reciprocity objectives, eight asymmetry objectives, and three multiobjectives incorporating both non-reciprocity and asymmetry. To formalize the problem under the framework of ML, we defined the design freedom of chiral structures and characterized each structure by its geometric features. We proposed four different design spaces, with each being governed by a different contact mechanism. To reduce the computational cost, we implemented Bayesian Optimization algorithm facilitated with ensemble learning to efficiently search the optimal structures for each objective by balancing between the exploration and exploitation. Particularly, we achieve the multi-objective optimization by searching the Pareto Front of the performance spaces and obtained the corresponding optimal structures that can exhibit both non-reciprocity and asymmetry. Following the completion of the optimization, we presented the discovered optimal designs for each single objective and analyzed their similarities and disparities, highlighting the role of contact in enhancing chiral structure stiffness. Leveraging insights from single-objective optimization, we focused on three distinct types of multi-objectives, including both contradictory and non-contradictory combination of multi-objectives. Among the discovered optimal designs for multi-objectives, we found a structure that demonstrates the maximum diversity in non-reciprocity and asymmetry, which we attributed to the various contact behavior of the structure under different loads. In contrast to the majority of the current ML and mechanics literature focusing on testing the applicability of machine learning (ML) methods in solving conventional mechanics problems, where their effectiveness can be validated against known solutions A noteworthy observation from our results is the presence of extreme non-reciprocity and asymmetry in the discovered optimal designs. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. While we have optimized the chiral metamaterial to achieve various level of non-reciprocity and asymmetry, we noticed that some of the asymmetry objectives did not achieve notably high objective values, and the objective g 4 resulted in no qualified optimal design within the current scope of design spaces. Additionally, although the optimal design for the multi-objective optimization displayed diverse non-reciprocity and asymmetry characteristics, as depicted in Fig. The data supporting this study and the code to optimize chiral metamaterial designs and reproduce simulation on ABAQUS are openly available from https://github.com/lingxiaoyuan/chiral. All authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the College of Engineering and Department of Mechanical Engineering at Boston University, the Hariri Institute for Computing Junior Faculty Fellowship, the David R. Dalton Career Development Professorship, as well as the helpful discussions with Peerasait (Jeffrey) Prachaseree and Yan Yang. The properties of the chiral metamaterial were acquired through the Finite Element Method (FEM). In this section, we provide detailed information on the FEM settings. The two rigid circles are set as discrete rigid surfaces, while the elastic ligament of each chiral structure is modeled as linear elastic Bernoulli-Euler beam. The cross section of the ligament is rectangular with a fixed width of 30 and a fixed thickness 1.5. The ligament material is linear elastic with a fixed Elastic modulus E = 70 and Poisson ratio ν = 0.3. The left circle is fixed, while the right rigid circle is only allowed to move under the applied displacement load with same magnitude 0.08. Both the circle and the ligament are meshed in a graded fashion, where the area closer to the connecting region has a finer mesh compared to areas farther away. The finest mesh size is set as 0.02 and the coarsest mesh size is 20 times the finest mesh size. On average, there are approximately 270 mesh elements on each of the rigid circles and approximately 714 mesh elements on the elastic ligament, as calculated from 12 randomly generated chiral structure finite element models. Fig. In Section 4.1 and Section 4.2, we presented the optimal designs for the eight objectives of non-reciprocity and eight objectives of asymmetry. In this Section, we presented the contact status for each design under different loads. Specifically, Fig. Figure Mesh Size Mesh Size Mesh Size Mesh Size Mesh Size Mesh Size Mesh Size Figure We illustrated the trade-off between asymmetry and non-reciprocity in multi-objective optimization in Section 2.4.3, depicted in Fig. Figure Figure In Section 4.3, we investigated three Multi-Objectives and discussed about the Pareto front for each. Although there can be more than one Pareto Optimum for for each multi-objective, we specifically analyzed the optimal design with largest modulus. Here we present all the Pareto optima for multi-objectives optimization in Fig. 