We present the formalism and implementation of quasi-particle self-consistent GW (qsGW ) and eigenvalue only quasi-particle self-consistent GW (evGW ) adapted to standard quantum chemistry packages. Our implementation is benchmarked against high-level quantum chemistry computations (coupled-cluster theory) and experimental results using a representative set of molecules. Furthermore, we compare the qsGW approach for five molecules relevant for organic photovoltaics to self-consistent GW results (scGW ) and analyze the effects of the self-consistency on the ground state density by comparing calculated dipole moments to their experimental values. We show that qsGW makes a significant improvement over conventional G 0 W 0 and that partially self-consistent flavors (in particular evGW ) can be excellent alternatives. The sufficiently accurate prediction of photo-ionization processes is still a serious computational challenge. The main workhorse for medium and large sized systems is the Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KS-DFT). Since GW comes with a substantial computational effort, a great variety of simplified flavors of GW are in use, the most common being so called G 0 W 0 approximation. Our calculations suggest that the effects of orbital updates can be often neglected in comparison to the correction coming from the shifts in the pole positions of the Green's function. Therefore, we also implement and investigate a simplified version of qsGW in which the orbitals are kept fixed at the reference (DFT of HF) result and only the QPenergies are updated (eigenvalue only GW , evGW ). Also this, and similar schemes, have been successful already in implementations for solids A generally popular reference are experimental values. This commonly adopted practice can however be misleading in the case of ionization energies. One difficulty is that the experimental ionization energies are often adiabatic whereas those calculated within the GW scheme are always vertical. In addition intrinsic effects originating from zero-point vibrations and relativistic effects (beyond those that enter via the reference calculation) are usually not included, also not in our current approach. (We mention that at the G 0 W 0 level a two component extension has been implemented recently to account for spin-orbit effect for closed shell molecules. Our paper is organized as follows: In section 2.1 we present the formalism that is used within our implementation of qsGW . Section 2.2 explains the details of the implementation. The third section validates the qsGW method. First, our implementation is tested for internal consistency (Sec. 3.1), i.e. we test the convergence behavior with the basis set and the number of iteration cycles. Second, the qsGW method is assessed using first ionization potentials (IP) of a set of 29 representative molecules (section 3.2). In section 5 we investigate two different approaches of partial self-consistency. We first introduce and benchmark our implementation of the evGW method (self-consistency in the poles positions of G and the response function) versus qsGW and CCSD(T). In section 5.2 we test the G ev W 0 49 approach (self-consistent only in the poles positions of G), versus qsGW . Finally section 6 contains an analysis of the computational performance and scaling behavior of the presented methods. We are aiming at an approximate self-consistent solution of the Dyson equation Here, H[G] denotes the Hartree contribution incorporating the external potential (respectively the ions), the kinetic contribution and the Hartree potential. The latter depends on the charge density and hence is considered as a functional of G. In the GW -approximation 9 the self-energy is given in terms of the causal Green's function: and the screened Coulomb interaction W . η denotes a positive infinitesimal. W is obtained from the following equation with v(r, r ′ ) = e 2 |r -r ′ | -1 denoting the bare Coulomb kernel. Ignoring vertex corrections (consistent with the construction of Σ) the polarization P is calculated within the random phase approximation (RPA) A solution of equation 1 is constructed by introducing a quasi-spectral representation; The right and left eigenvectors, ψ r,n (r, z), ψ l,n (r, z) and eigenvalues ε n (z) represent quasiparticle/hole (QP/QH) states and energies, μ being the chemical potential. The bar in ψl,n (r ′ , z) denotes the complex conjugate. The (complex) poles z of the Green's function 5 follow from the pole condition The QP-orbitals as well as the energies are found as solutions of the QP-equations Within qsGW the self-energy 2 is approximated by an energy-independent, Hermitian matrix. In the literature different variants have been proposed for such approximate selfenergies. This approximation takes into account the quasi-particle part of the Green's function and neglects life-time effects. One of its merits is that it implies a consistent treatment of the renormalization factor Z within the calculation of many observables. and the poles are real, reflecting an effective single particle theory. Consequently, the Green's function of qsGW takes the form An iterative procedure of solving eq 10 and 11 self-consistently is typically initialized with a KS Green's function constructed from the KS orbitals ψ n : qsGW has been implemented within a local version of the TURBOMOLE package, building on the routines for the calculation of the G 0 W 0 self-energy. In the reference basis ψ (i) n (r) eq 10 takes the form of an eigenvalue problem The diagonalization of eq 14 yields updates in ε With the latter new orbitals ψ (i+1) n (r) are constructed via 13. These are orthonormal by construction due to the hermiticity of the operators in eq 14. Since hermiticity gives the present scheme a form similar to an effective single particle problem we can take advantage of established (DFT) routines to calculate the Hartree 2 employing an updated density. For the computation of the matrix elements of the self-energy we recall the expressions already derived before in the context of the G 0 W 0 implementation. p(r), q(r), etc. denoting single particle orbitals, e.g. of QP or KS type. The unscreened exchange part of qsGW is identical to the exchange contribution of HF theory, where the sum is over all occupied (QP-)orbitals. Employing the quasi-spectral representation, eq 5, the new self-energy is calculated from the updated pole positions ε and orbitals ψ (i+1) n (r). This uses the established routines from the G 0 W 0 implementation, taking into account all changes, i.e. in both G and W . After the approximation eq 9 is applied the next iteration is started by solving again eq 14. This procedure is continued until a self-consistent solution is achieved. In terminating the self-consistency cycle different convergence criteria are conceivable. An obvious choice would consider the change of the QP energies from one cycle to the next. However, motivated by earlier work, nn (E = 0) . The last step is valid when G n,n is diagonal, i.e. given in the orthonormal eigenstates of the QP-equation. Typically the iteration is stopped if ∆ < 10 -7 is achieved. This corresponds to orbital energies being converged to within 1 meV. The iterative approach introduced above does not always converge into a fixed point solution. To improve stability and also rate of convergence we introduce a linear mixing scheme that mixes into the updated Green's function a contribution of the previous one to decrease the step width between two iterations in a similar manner as done for iterative procedures for the HF or DFT ground state. Therefore, strictly speaking we do not solve eq 14, but Our tests indicate that λ = 0.3 is a reasonable choice which converges all studied molecules and, on average, speeds up the convergence by factor 4 as compared to no mixing. As an example Figure In this section we will first confirm the internal consistency of the implemented qsGW method. Second, we will benchmark, for a test set of 29 representative molecules, qsGW versus ∆CCSD(T) first IPs and experimental results of higher IPs of 5 organic molecules. Finally the results of qsGW are compared to full self-consistency GW (scGW ) literature results to validate the accuracy of qsGW and to shed light on the internal features of the quasi-static approximation. We investigate the basis set dependence of the implemented qsGW method and extract a basis set which yields a good tradeoff of computational cost and accuracy. Furthermore, we will show that the results of qsGW are independent of the chosen initial functional in the initializing calculation. We start the study of the basis set dependence of the qsGW IPs by a comparison for three small molecules, water, nitrogen and methane. The results obtained using the def2-SVP, def2-TZVP, def2-TZVPP and def2-QZVP basis set series are shown in Figure In a similar manner as shown in Figure Figure bonding situations. Therefore, the def2-SVP results have been excluded from the procedure to obtain the CBS limit. Overall we find that the def2-TZVP basis shows a maximal deviation of roughly 0.4 eV. Adding another set of polarization functions, the def2-TZVPP basis set, for most molecules the deviation drops below 0.3 eV. Previously we have shown that for larger molecules the error actually is smaller. Figure A major advantage of self-consistent GW schemes is that the fixed-point found in the iteration scheme is for the commonly used starting points (largely) independent of the initialization. As a first quantitative test we calculate the ionization energies/potentials (IP) for a test set of 29 molecules ranging from H 2 to tetrathiafulvalene. The obtained IPs are compared to results obtained by employing the coupled-cluster method in the CCSD(T) approximation, The deviations in the calculated HOMO energies using the different flavors of GW to ∆CCSD(T) IPs are displayed in Figure In this section we discuss the accuracy of qsGW for the calculation of higher IPs. The higher IPs are difficult to access via CCSD(T). For the first ionization energy the total energy difference between the neutral and cationic ground state has to be calculated. Calculating Figure In Figure Actually, we find a rigid shift of about 0.5 eV for all energy levels between qsGW and scGW for nearly all molecules investigated. A similar picture is observed for the three further molecules where we compare the higher ionization energies between qs and scGW (see Supplementary information). For these rather similar aromatic systems we observe in all cases a shift ∼ 0.5 eV. Whether this holds for a broader class of molecules needs further systematic investigation, especially since the molecules in this comparison exhibit very similar bonding. The shift can be understood by recalling the split of the Green's function into a quasiparticle part and an incoherent part In qsGW the Z-factor is unity and the incoherent part Ḡ is neglected, while in the scGW both are taken into account. We suggest that Ḡ is only weakly energy dependent, so that its contribution Σ = i ḠW to the self-energy is also a relatively flat function of energy. The current data, and the results by Koval et al., Recently Koval et al. also compared qsGW and scGW for a set of molecules. A self-consistent solution of the GW equations introduces corrections in the spatial shape of the QP-orbitals in addition to shifts of the pole positions of the Green's function. Hence, corrections to the ground state density as compared to the reference density can arise. Figure While HF typically overestimates the dipole moment of the dimers, DFT typically slightly underestimates it. In the range of hybrid functionals the best dipole moments are obtained from the PBE0 functional. scGW performs comparable to PBE0. In contrast, qsGW yields better agreement with an overall mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.03 Debye. To make a definitive statistically sound statement discriminating between the qsGW and scGW is however not possible due to the small number of systems. In conclusion, our results support the general impression that self-consistent GW , is a promising tool to investigate the chargetransfer in molecular interfaces and other (nano-scale) hetero-structures. 4 Comparison of qsGW and G 0 W 0 Given the qsGW results for the IPs from the previous sections, we next evaluate next how well the traditional G 0 W 0 (G 0 W 0 0th) is capable of reproducing them if one employs an improved DFT starting point. One can do so by using parametrized functionals derived from the PBE0 hybrid functional. In addition, the G 0 W 0 2nd order approach 49 (G 0 W 0 2nd), which takes into account off-diagonal elements of Σ in the QP-equation and hence an influence of orbital corrections, is also tested. The HOMO energies obtained from G 0 W 0 0th@PBE (traditional G 0 W 0 with a PBE starting point) have a mean absolute error 0.75 eV and show a clear correlation between the error and the actual value. With increasing energy, the error, as compared to qsGW , systematically increases. Employing a PBE0 starting point improves the overall agreement with qsGW down to a mean absolute deviation of 0.42 eV, see Figure For this starting point, the correlation between the error and ionizationenergy disappears. Our data also confirms a trend that already appeared in our earlier work: G 0 W 0 0th and G 0 W 0 2th give similar results. This suggests that off-diagonal elements of Σ give negligible contributions to the QP-energies. 49 Table Figure Furthermore, we see in the calculation initialized from PBE0(75%) no energy dependent trend in the error, while the trend persists in both G 0 W 0 0th and G 0 W 0 2nd employing a PBE or PBE0 starting point. Figure On average best agreement is achieved employing the PBE0(75%) starting point, see Table molecules. Thus motivated, in this section we test simplified flavors of qsGW . Our aim is to find an approximation scheme that captures the dominant contributions included in qsGW and hence is capable of reproducing results of qsGW , at a lower computational cost. Figure Our studies of the charge density for qsGW suggest that orbital updates tend to be small. Therefore, we next ignore orbital updates in the self-consistency cycle and take into account only the update in the pole positions: eigenvalue only GW (evGW ). 26 Within the methodology described in section 2.1 turning qsGW into evGW is straight forward, one only needs to suppress the update in the orbitals between consecutive qsGW iterations. In other words the machinery operates solely with the initial set of QP-orbitals ψ (0) (r) and the orbital update from 13 is skipped. In all equations the orbitals ψ (i) (r) are replaced with ψ (0) (r). Furthermore. our treatment of the quasiparticle equation in evGW neglects off-diagonal elements of Σ. Finally we discard the static approximation and restore in the QP-equation the energy-dependent self-energy Σ. Then, for each pole the QP-equation is solved self-consistently. Computationally this introduces the benefit that the Coulomb exchange integrals, see 18, do not need to be re-evaluated. For instance, the full exchange part of the self-energy Σ x , see 18, needs only one single evaluation. For the set of molecules specified in Table A comparison of QP-energies from evGW and qsGW is given in Figure The results confirm the findings for the first IPs. The starting point dependence is strongly reduced and we find that the trend in the energy dependence of the error, which was present in G 0 W 0 , is not present anymore for all starting points. All in all, self-consistency in the poles by it self already produces very good agreement with qsGW QP-energies for all starting points. - (qsGW) Figure To further substantiate the accuracy of evGW we present a comparison to ∆CCSD(T) Summarizing, evGW seems to be a promising alternative to qsGW leading in practice to results very close to the ∆CCSD(T) reference, with a typical deviation of a few 100 meV. Table So far, our results indicated that orbital updates have a minor effect on the pole positions of qsGW . The next question is whether the QP-energies are as sensitive to the pole positions of W as they are to the pole positions of G in Σ. To this end we recall an approximate scheme, G ev W 0 , which we introduced before. Figure The first IPs from G ev W 0 show a reduced starting point dependence in comparison to the single-shot G 0 W 0 and the G 0 W 0 2nd results. However, the starting point dependence is much stronger that in the case of evGW . Furthermore, G ev W 0 shows improved agreement with qsGW if one employs the PBE or PBE0 starting point. If one employs the optimal PBE0(75%) starting points the plain G 0 W 0 and the G ev W 0 are comparable close to the qsGW results. Comparing the optimal staring point we find for the three different approximate GW flavors, G 0 W 0 evGW and G eV W 0 there are some interesting remarks to make. In evGW the differences are rather small with a small preference of PBE0, which is in agreement with PBE0 having the best dipole moment of the various starting points. The results are comparable to those of qsGW . The exact shape of the orbitals hence does not impact the results that much. However, if W is kept fixed there is a clear preference for a PBE0(75%) starting point. This indicates that given the, relatively small, spread in orbitals obtained in the range from PBE to HF it is primarily important to have a good screening. Good orbitals is only of secondary importance. This is also reflected in the small orbital corrections obtained in qsGW . With increasing exact exchange contribution in the PBEλ starting point improves the agreement with qsGW . Nevertheless, we find for all starting points an error which increase with energy. the statistical evaluation is reported in Table In Figure The total computational effort needed for one GW iteration comprises the calculation of the response function and the self-energy part. Under the latter we understand the construction of the self-energy and the solution of the quasi-particle equation. The time needed for the construction of the response function is for all considered approximations identical. The time needed for the self-energy part varies depending on the treatment of the QP-equation. Figure The G 0 W 0 0th approach is by far the fastest and shows the best scaling with the number of basis functions of only ∼ N 3 for the self-energy part. The computational cost for G 0 W 0 0th calculations are hence dominated by the construction of the response function, which has a scaling of ∼ N 4 . However, this is only true for comparably small molecules. In the exact evaluation, one has to calculate all excitations, a matrix of range ∼ N 2 has to be diagonalized. This is a hard ∼ N 6 -step, but with a small prefactor and still less than a ∼ N 7 Similar to G 0 W 0 , evGW approach operates solely on the diagonal part of the QPequation. Hence, it has the same scaling behavior as (diagonal only) G 0 W 0 0th. But, to find a self-consistent solution, typically six iterations are necessary till convergence is achieved. Hence, the total time needed for evGW is that of G 0 W 0 plus six times that of the the response calculation. Both, G 0 W 0 2nd and the qsGW approach, which diagonalize the QP-equation 10, the self-energy part shows a scaling with the number of basis functions N of ∼ N 5 , worse by a factor of N 2 as compared to G 0 W 0 0th and evG 0 W 0 . Still we find that the computational time needed for the majority of the molecules within our test set is dominated by the construction Note that all GW -proper parts of our implementation have been designed for parallel computation. We find for all approaches a nearly perfect scaling with the number of cores, i.e. the typical setup of 8 core nodes gives a typical speedup of 7.94. Hence, due to very good parallel scaling larger scale systems are tractable. Considering the first IPs, we confirm for or a set of 29 representative molecules, that all flavors of the GW method strongly improve agreement with experiment and CCSD(T) results as compared to the underlying DFT calculation. Moreover, the self-consistent qsGW improves agreement with the CCSD(T) by an order of magnitude as compared to G 0 W 0 0th using a semi-local starting point (see Figure for G 0 W 0 and G ev W 0 and PBE0 for evGW , gives results very close to qsGW . Comparing qsGW and scGW , we observed a rigid shift towards stronger binding in qsGW , in the favor of qsGW for both dipole moments and ionization energies. The small number of molecules however prohibits to make a final claim un the ultimate accuracy difference between sc and qsGW for molecules. A study comparing the two using the GW 100 set The qsGW introduces only minor corrections on the spatial shape of the QP-orbitals and ground state density as compared to the KS-reference. Comparing calculated dipole moments to experimental results we find that the qsGW improves agreement to experiment compared to traditional method like the Density Functional Theory (DFT) using a PBE functional, and the Hartree-Fock (HF) approach (see Table Based on this result we conclude that the partially self-consistent flavor of qsGW updating only the orbitals, eigenvalue only qsGW (evGW ) is an efficient alternative. The evGW is able to reproduce the (first) IPs from qsGW very well and showed a strongly reduced dependence on the choice of the functional in comparison to G 0 W 0 . If system size is prohibiting even evGW we find the best alternative to be G 0 W 0 @PBE0(75%). The increased amount of exact exchange is reasoned to mainly be necessary to improve the screening. Since the standard PBE0 orbitals turn out to be in general closest to the qsGW results and also give best dipole moments as compared to experiment, one could even envi-sion a hybrid approach. This would use the orbitals from PBE0, but perturbatively correct the eigenvalues using 75% exact exchange before calculating the response function. The full solution of Hedin's equations gives access not only to the quasi-particle (qp) energies, but also to charge neutral, particle-hole (ph) type excitations. A characteristic feature that all variants of the GW -theory share is that the energy of a ph-excitation is estimated neglecting the interaction between the particle and the hole, so that there is a tendency to overestimate the energy cost for creating ph-pairs, i.e. excitons. the ionization potential is over estimated) as also observed in our results. There is no real consensus about the consequences of under screening for the qp-energies. A wide-spread belief is that under screening in the effective interaction W (denominator) does not affect these energies because it is fully cancelled by the explicit vertex corrections (Γ, nominator) appearing in the self-energy diagrams. Rigorous arguments in favor of the cancellation have not been given; so far, the existing evidence supporting cancellation relies on explicit calculations for a number of test systems, such as, e.g., homogeneous electron gases 98 and bulk silicon. To account for the binding-energy of excitons in the polarization function, one has to go beyond the GW -framework, i.e., include vertex corrections. A common means to this end is solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE). This is computationally challenging, however, and can be done only by employing suitable approximation schemes. 100 On the simplest level (RPA-X) one modifies the calculation of the polarization function by adding an exchange-matrix element to the Coulomb-matrix element of conventional RPA. The resulting theory would reproduce the time-dependent Hartree-Fock approximation if it were not for the correlation part of the self-energy. Following our philosophy of exploring the potential of static approximations, this step would be the most natural one to try next for us. Indeed, several groups have already employed the GW +BSE method to molecular systems in order to investigate into the effect of vertex corrections for charge-neutral excitations. We only mention two very recent works benchmarking the approach against TDDFT for small molecules. These studies also indicate, that BSE-calculations inherit the starting point dependency of the underlying G 0 W 0 -calculations. As promising as it is, the combination of GW and BSE adds vertex corrections only to the response function still neglecting them when constructing Γ for the self-energy Σ. The approximation thus obtained is not conserving. Moreover, if indeed large system classes exhibit a cancellation between vertex terms in W and Γ, then these systems cannot be treated with the present technology. Therefore, we consider it very likely that a general method to be applied successfully to molecules and metals has to treat vertex corrections in W and Σ on the same footing. In principle, also the study of strongly correlated electron liquids relies on solving Hedin's equations -at least to the extent that perturbative methods are being employed -even though the respective community does not usually think about it in this way. In this context, a new method has been devised in recent years, the functional renormalization group method (FRG ) 103,104 Unlike GW +BSE, FRG includes vertex corrections to W and Σ in a consistent way. Its success for strongly-correlated matter originates from its capability to reliably signalize the existence of new phases with a broken symmetry, such as magnetism. From a conceptual point of view, FRG is very appealing because it can predict phase transitions in an unbiased manner; in principle, an apriori guess about what phases are likely to appear is not required. Similar to qsGW , also FRG is typically formulated employing a static approximation for the self-energy and the interaction vertex. Like traditional BSE-calculations, also the FRG focuses on the simplest subset of diagrams for the vertex. However in contrast to traditional BSE, the FRG solves these (approximated) Hedin equations in a self-consistent manner. This is how FRG goes beyond the GW +BSE-scheme. The enhanced complexity requires a solution strategy that differs from the conventional iteration scheme to self-consistency still underlying, e.g., qsGW . The strategy of FRG is to reformulate the self-consistency problem in terms of a set of (non-linear) differential matrix equations. The main idea may be understood as follows: In traditional self-consistency solvers, an initial guess gradually transforms ("flows") into the fixed-point solution under the action of the iteration routine. Now, FRG replaces this "iterative flow" by another flow along an artificial coordinate, Λ, that plays the role of a cut-off energy familiar from the renormalization group. By construction, Λ connects a known trivial solution of Hedin's equations at Λ=∞ with the exact solution at Λ=0. The advantage of this formulation as compared to the traditional self-consistency routines is that it is known exactly how to initialize the flow equations; a starting guess for the Green's function, self-energy and interaction vertex is not required. If instabilities occur along solving the differential equation, then these can be interpreted as "runaway flow" indicating a nearby phase with broken symmetry. Applications of FRG to molecules do not yet exist. A first step into this direction has been made recently by two of us who formulated the FRG for systems without translational invariance. a This work. Validating Partial Self-ConsistencyEven though computationally more affordable than typical coupled cluster approaches, qsGW is still too expensive for systematic screenings over large ensembles of intermediate sized