Exploring the influence of frustration on the phases and related phase transitions in condensed matter physics is of fundamental importance in uncovering the role played by frustration. In the two-dimensional square lattice, a minimal frustration has been formulated in 1981 as the Shastry-Sutherland (SS) model described by competitions between the nearest-neighbor bond (J1) and the next-nearest-neighbor one (J2). In the two limits of α = J2/J1, i.e. α ≪ 1 and α ≫ 1, the corresponding phases are the Néel antiferromagnet (AFM) and the dimer-singlet(DS). Unfortunately, the intermediate regime remains controversial, and the nature of transition from the Néel AFM to the intermediate state is also unclear. Here we provide a pattern language to explore the SS model and take the lattice size L = 4 × 4 with periodic boundary condition. We firstly diagonalize the Hamiltonian in an operator space to obtain all fundamental spin-patterns and then analyze their energy and occupancy evolutions with the frustration parameter κ = α/(1 + α). Our results indicate that the intermediate regime is characterized by diagonal two-domain spin-pattern while the Néel AFM state has a diagonal single-domain and the DS has mixings of diagonal single-and fourdomain. While the transition from the DS to the intermediate phase occurred around αc = 1.5 is the first-order in nature, consistent with that in literature, the one from the intermediate phase to the AFM is clearly seen around αc = 1.277, where it has a reversal of the contributions from the single-and two-domain patterns to the ground state. The result indicates that the pattern language is powerful in identifying the possible phases in frustrated models. +, +, --, -, + +, +, --, -, + -, -, + +, +, --, -, + +, +, -+, +, --, -, + +, +, --, -, + -, -, + +, +, --, -, + +, +, --, +, + -, -, + +, -, + +, +, -+ Introduction.-Frustrated magnetism has become an extremely active field in condensed matter physics due to finding potentially new states or new properties of this kind of matter The SS model is in the Néel antiferromagnetic (AFM) state and the DS state at both ends of phase diagram. However, the intermediate regime with maximal frustration remains controversial. Different candidate ground states were proposed by different approaches. For examples, a direct transition from the Néel AFM phase to the DS phase was obtained by means of series expansion Here we use the pattern language to provide some insights into the above controversies. The pattern language was proposed in our previous works Model and Method.-The Hamiltonian of the SS model reads where S i are S = 1/2 operators, ⟨i, j⟩ represents the nearest-neighbor bonds in the square lattice, and ⟨⟨i, j⟩⟩ represents the next-nearest-neighbor bonds belonging to orthogonal dimer. In what follows, we take J 1 as units of energy and introduce α = J 2 /J 1 , representing a dimensionless frustration parameter. Thus Eq. ( Furthermore, Eq. ( where the superscript T denotes transpose. This matrix can be diagonalized to obtain eigenvalues and corresponding eigenfunctions {λ n , u n }(n = 1, 2, • • • , 3L), which define the patterns marked by λ n . Thus the SS model Hamiltonian is rewritten as where each pattern λ n composes of single-body operators In order to cover the whole coupling regime, we define another parameter where κ ∈ [0, 1) corresponds to α ∈ [0, +∞). In the following we take κ as the frustration parameter. Patterns' Information.-Firstly, we explore the properties of the patterns marked by relative signs of eigenfunctions (u n,3i-2 , u n,3i-1 , u n,3i ) and their eigenvalues λ n as functions of κ, shown in Fig. After identifying the characteristic features of the patterns, it is interesting to check the corresponding eigenenergies of these patterns, shown in Fig. ⟩ by inserting into the complete basis |{S z i }⟩ and then Eq. ( Figure The ground state and the first excited state energies as functions of the frustration parameter κ (thick black solid lines) and their pattern dissections (thin color solid lines). ED results (circles) are also presented. The vertical dashed-lines in the inset of (a1) marks two cross points, κc1 ≈ 0.5609 (αc1 ≈ 1.277) and κc2 ≈ 0.6 (αc2 ≈ 1.5), respectively, which divide the frustration parameter κ into three regions: I, the Néel AFM; II, the diagonal two-domain dominant; and III, the DS state. ( the Néel AFM phase, where the patterns λ 1 -λ 3 dominate over others. The patterns λ 4 -λ 15 also have a remarkable contribution. Other patterns almost have no contribution to this region. Region II is dominated by the patterns λ 4 -λ 15 . In this region, the contribution from the patterns λ 1 -λ 3 fades away and that from the patterns λ 4 -λ 15 grows up slowly. Therefore, this region is mainly characterized by the patterns λ 4 -λ 15 , which have diagonal two-domain. The cross point is about κ c1 ≈ 0.5609 (α c1 ≈ 1.277). Region III is the DS phase. The cross point is about κ c2 ≈ 0.6 (α c2 ≈ 1.5). In this region, the patterns λ 4 -λ 15 and the patterns λ 16 -λ 27 are of equal importance, as shown in Fig. Summary and Discussion.-We use the pattern language to explore the SS model with a small lattice size of L = 4 × 4. By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian in an operator space, we obtain six kinds of spin-patterns. Then we employ spin-patterns to identify the ground state phases. Our results show that the ground state could be qualitatively divided into three regions, where region I at small κ and region III at large κ are identified as the Néel AFM phase and the DS one, respectively. The intermediate regime with maximal frustration has a feature of diagonal two-domain structure. At α c1 ≈ 1.277, the SS model evolves from the the Néel AFM phase to diagonal twodomain dominated phase. At α c2 ≈ 1.5, the model occurs a first-order phase transition from diagonal two-domain dominated phase to the DS one. Increasing lattice size, the pattern will show more abundant features, such as more domain structures. However, the phenomena that the phase diagram evolves from the Néel AFM state to the intermediate state, then to the DS state with κ increasing does not change, only the phase transition points are slightly shifted. This will be testified in the future study.