We report a theoretical study of the phase diagram of a ferrimagnetic iron-garnet with uniaxial anisotropy near a magnetization compensation point in the presence of a two-component magnetic field. The study is performed based on a quasi-antiferromagnetic approximation. The number and stability of the equilibrium states of the Neel vector are analyzed using the effective energy function. It is shown that application of the small out-of-plane magnetic field in addition to the stronger inplane magnetic field significantly changes the equilibrium states of a ferrimagnet. The possibilities to control the equilibrium Neel vector position and to switch between the monostable and bistable states by tuning the value and ratio of the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic field components are demonstrated. This opens new possibilities for the utilization of ferrimagnets since the magnetic field could be changed much faster than the temperature. Ferrimagnets are of prime interest among the different magnetically ordered materials as a material platform for various optomagnetic Ferrimagnets with a compensation temperature attract much interest due to their peculiar features of static and dynamic magnetic properties. For example, strong variations of the domain structure Recent interest to ferrimagnets is due to their unusual ultrafast response to femtosecond laser pulses: unconventional dynamics across the compensation point Ultrafast response of a ferrimagnet strongly depends on its phase, i.e. the sublattice magnetization orientations and canting The present work is devoted to the study of an impact of the two-component magnetic field on the magnetization states of a ferrimagnetic iron-garnet film with high uniaxial anisotropy in the vicinity of the compensation point. We show that small out-of-plane external magnetic field can be used for the efficient control of the equilibrium orientation of the sublattice magnetizations, the stability of the states and the whole phase diagram, as well. The paper is organized as follows. Section II is devoted to the basis of the theoretical analysis of the ferrimagnet magnetization states based on the quasiantiferromagnetic approximation. Section III is devoted on the qualitative analysis of the Neel vector orientations and trajectoris for different varitations of the parameters of the system. Analysis of the energy function of a ferrimagnet placed in the incline (two-component) magnetic field in quasi-antiferromagnetic approximation in terms of the Neel vector is provided in Section IV. We study the number and depth of the energy function minima that determine the equilibrium magnetization positions. In Section V we analyze how the equilibrium positions of the Neel vector change depending on the value of the out- Thus, an ability to control the ferrimagnet phase and to switch between the monostable and bistable regimes by application of a small out-of-plane magnetic field is demonstrated. The ferrimagnets are characterized by magnetization compensation point, i.e. the temperature T M at which the sublattice magnetizations compensate each other and, therefore, the net magnetization becomes zero. In the vicinity of T M , the sublattice magnetizations are nearly opposite to each other, except for a tiny canting angle and a small difference between their magnitude Let us consider a ferrimagnetic film of a two-sublattice ferrimagnet with M 1 and M 2 sublattice magnetization vectors. The film has uniaxial magnetic anisotropy with the axis normal to the film. The sublattice M 1,2 vectors can be described by their magnitudes M 1,2 and angles θ 1,2 , φ 1,2 determined in the spherical coordinate system with z-axis oriented in the film plane and y-axis along the anisotropy axis (see Fig. where angles ±ε and ±β give the canting of the sublattice magnetizations from L vector, ε ≪ θ, β ≪ φ We consider a configuration where the magnetic field with a predominant in-plane component H along z axis and a relatively small out-of-plane component h along y axis is applied to the ferrimagnetic film. The projections of these H and h vectors on the corresponding z or y axis are denoted as H and h, so that they both can have positive and negative values. The potential energy of the two-sublattice system in this case can be described as a sum of Zeeman, exchange and uniaxial anisotropy energy: where Λ > 0 is a Weiss constant, K 1,2 are the anisotropy constants for each of the sublattices, n is anisotropy axis direction coinciding with the film normal. Using the potential energy in the form (3), and making the derivations similar to the ones preformed in where is the constant describing the exchange interaction between the sublattices and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. For a definiteness, in numerical calculations the following parameters are used: K = 300 erg/cm 3 , χ = 10 -3 and m = 2 emu/cm 3 that correspond to the sample with a composition (YBiLu) 3 (FeGa) 5 O 12 at the room temperature. Passing from the Lagrangian to the Hamiltonian function, we can obtain a relation for the potential energy of the system in the quasi-antiferromagnetic approximation: The equilibrium state of a magnetic system is determined by the angles θ, φ that provide the minimum of the potential energy U eff (θ, φ) . It allows to find a magnetic phase diagram of a sample describing angle θ 0 versus the in-plane magnetic field H and the difference in magnetic sublatticies m. For the in-plane magnetic field (h = 0) the magnetic phase diagram has a well-known form (see but different angles φ 0 = π/2, 3π/2 Fig. In the strictly in-plane external magnetic field the ferrimagnet has two degenerate equilibrium positions that are characterized by the same θ 0 and the opposite φ 0 = π/2 and φ 0 = 3π/2 values (Eq. ( Application of the out-of-plane magnetic field breaks this degeneracy between φ 0 = π/2 and φ 0 = 3π/2 states (Fig. Thus, a continuous change of the magnetization across the compensation point results in the hysteresis behaviour of the Neel vector orientation. Similar hysteresis behaviour of the Neel vector L is observed in the presence of the inclined magnetic field with both in-plane and outof-plane components simultaneously changed (Fig. For h = 0 the function U eff (θ, φ) in the non-collinear state has two symmetric minima as it was mentioned above (Fig. In the absence of the out-of-plane magnetic field h = 0 (Fig. As the presence of the small out-of-plane magnetic field h can change the number and position of the magnetization equilibrium states, it is important to analyze its impact in more detail. The minima of Eq. ( where ± signs correspond to the two minima at φ 0 = π/2, 3π/2, respectively. Numerical solution of this equation for the fixed H or h values is shown in Fig. Making the expansion of Eq. ( where ± signs correspond to the two solutions with φ 0 = π/2, 3π/2, respectively. For rather small values of h 2 ≪ 2K/χ one may simplify Eq. ( These θ 0 ± ∆θ 0 values describe analytically the bistable regime (see the central part of Fig. , mH < 0, and φ 0 = π/2 or 3π/2 for h > 0 and h < 0, correspondingly. This monostable state is realized in the region of phase diagram that correspond to a collinear state in the absence of h (see the pink curve and θ 0 = 0, π region). Figure For the strictly in-plane magnetic field (pink curve in Fig. The two equilibrium states with φ 0 = π/2, 3π/2 in the non-collinear phase of the in-plane configuration (h = 0) are degenerate and have the same θ 0 values (pink curve in Fig. As shown in Fig. Figure The direction of h is responsible for making θ 0(π/2) or θ 0(3π/2) state preferable. Figure For the strictly in-plane magnetic field the phase diagram in terms of (m, H) coordinates is well known (Fig. Application of the out-of-plane magnetic field results in the disappearance of the true collinear phase. For any finite values of (H, h) the Neel vector L is tilted with respect to the external magnetic field H + h, and, as it will be shown further, the two sublattices remain canted. However, the boundary between the bistability region where there are two equilibrium positions of antiferromagnetic vector and the region with a single equilibrium position exists. Moreover, this boundary can be shifted under application of a small out-of-plane magnetic field component h. There are two ways, how this application of the out-ofplane h field can be implemented in practice. On the one hand, one might fix the position of the sample parallel to the external in-plane magnetic field H provided by a magnet and apply the out-of-plane field h using another independent electromagnet. In this case one might tune H and h independently. Figures Thus, application of small external magnetic fields allows for the efficient control of the boarder of the bistability region, and to perform switching between the stable and quasi-stable states. It is well-known that in the non-collinear phase under the application of the in-plane magnetic field the sublat-tices are canted with respect to each other at a small angle 2ε, and this canting disappears in the collinear phase. An important question is what is the relative orientation of the magnetization sublattices if out-of-plane magnetic field is applied in addition to the in-plane one. Considering ε, β as small corrections to θ, φ one may obtain the following relations from Eq. ( (H sin θ 0 -h cos θ 0 sin φ 0 ), ( where θ 0 and φ 0 are determined by Eq. ( On the contrary, sublattice canting 2ε is quite small (∼ 10 -3 rad), but non-zero in almost all range of h and H values (Fig. For the large values of H where according to Eq. ( We report a theoretical study of the phase diagram of a ferrimagnetic iron-garnet with uniaxial anisotropy near a magnetization compensation point in the presence of the two-component magnetic field. The equilibrium state was determined using an effective energy function in the quasi-antiferromagnetic approximation. It was shown that the phase diagram and the Neel vector equilibrium positions change significantly in the presence of the two-component magnetic field, with the components aligned along and perpendicular to the easy axis. Switching between the monostable and bistable states becomes possible by tuning the ratio of two magnetic field components. This opens new possibilities for utilization of ferrimagnets, since the magnetic field could be changed much faster than the temperature.