Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire phenomenological approach we explore the strain-polarization coupling in the low-dimensional van der Waals ferrielectrics. We evolve the analytical model of the piezoelectric susceptibility of the material in response to the periodic strain modulation, such as caused by a surface acoustic wave. Numerical calculations are performed for recently discovered and poorly studied ultrathin layers of vdW ferrielectric CuInP2S6, which are very promising candidates for advanced nanoelectronics. We obtained that the temperature dependences of the dielectric and piezoelectric susceptibilities, and elastic compliance of the ultrathin CuInP2S6 layer have a sharp maximum at the temperature of CuInP2S6 paraelectric-ferrielectric phase transition near 320 K. The magnitudes of the dielectric and piezoelectric susceptibilities, and elastic compliance depend significantly on the modulation period of the surface acoustic wave. Obtained results explore the potential of ultrathin CuInP2S6 layers for application in piezoelectric and straintronic devices. Two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) materials, the first representative of which is graphene, have long been of interest to researchers A very interesting representative of vdW materials is a Copper indium thiophosphate (CIPS), with chemical formula CuInP2S6, not only because of its vdW structure, but also the presence of reliable out-of-plane ferroelectricity at temperatures close to the room Despite the fact that many works are devoted to the study of CIPS, many aspects of its piezoelectric and elastic properties are not sufficiently studied and require additional analysis. The knowledge gap motivated this study, devoted to the Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) phenomenological description of the strain-polarization coupling in the lowdimensional vdW ferrielectrics. Below we present the analytical model of the piezoelectric susceptibility of the vdW material in response to the periodic strain modulation, such as caused by a surface acoustic wave (SAW). Numerical calculations are performed for a CIPS layer. The considered structure of CIPS (a-b) and the schematic model of metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor FET (MFS-FET) (c) is shown in Fig. The bulk density of the free energy F that depends on polarization component P and strain component u, and their gradients, has the following form: According to Landau approach, the coefficient  should linearly depend on the temperature T , namely α(T) = α T (T -T C ) , where TC is the Curie temperature of a bulk ferrielectric. Other coefficients in the free energy ( E is an external electric field in the free energy (1) and corresponding electrostatic contribution is PE . We did not include another electrostatic contribution, PE d 2 ⁄ , in the free energy, because we assume that the depolarization field E d is small for the out-of-plane polarization orientation, e.g., due to the high conductivity of CIPS, or absent for the in-plane polarization orientation. One can neglect E d for the transverse fluctuations of polarization, which we consider hereinafter, and also assume that the longitudinal fluctuations of polarization are much smaller as being suppressed by the depolarization field. The explicit form of the Euler-Lagrange type equations, δF δU = N ⁄ and δF δP = 0 ⁄ , are: The integral Fourier transform for polarization is: where P S is the spontaneous polarization, and k is the wave vector of the SAW. The integral Fourier transform for elastic displacement is: where u S = Using the above Fourier transformations in the linearized Euler-Lagrange (2), we obtain the equations for the Fourier images of polarization P ̃ and displacement U ̃: The linearized solution of the linearized (3) for the polarization has the form: The linear susceptibilities, χ ̃(k) and η ̃(k), introduced in (4), are given by the expressions: Here the positive temperature-dependent dielectric stiffness is introduced: Elastic displacement acquires the explicit form: U ̃= λ ̃(k)E ̃+ θ ̃(k)N ̃. ( The linear compliances, λ ̃(k) and θ ̃(k), introduced in (5), are given by the expressions: The singularity of the generalized susceptibility corresponds to zero points of the denominator in III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Fig. Values of P ̃ and U ̃ are calculated for E ̃= 0 from ( The observed temperature dependence for all three properties (χ ̃(k), η ̃(k) and θ ̃(k)) is rather weak almost on the entire investigated temperature range. Significant changes are observed only around the critical temperature, T tr =320 K. LGD PARAMETERS FOR A BULK FERROELECTRIC CUINP2S6 AT FIXED STRAINS TAKEN FROM The temperature dependences of the imaginary part of the electromechanical coupling coefficient η ̃(k) represent a smooth rising lines, the function reaches its maximum value at temperature T = T tr , which is slightly k-dependent. The temperature dependences of the effective elastic compliance θ ̃(k) , shown in Fig. The dependences of effective dielectric susceptibility χ ̃(k), real and imaginary parts of electromechanical coupling coefficient η ̃(k), and effective elastic compliance θ ̃(k) on the temperature T and modulation period 2π/k are shown in Fig. Using the LGD phenomenological approach we studied the strain-polarization coupling in the low-dimensional van der Waals ferrielectrics. We evolve the analytical expressions of the piezoelectric susceptibility of the material in response to the periodic strain modulation, such as caused by a SAW. Numerical calculations are performed for the vdW ferrielectric CIPS, which is a very promising candidate for advanced nanoelectronics. It was found that the dielectric susceptibility, elastic compliance and the real part of piezoelectric susceptibility reach their maxima at the transition temperature T tr ≈ 320 K. Also, the simulation results indicate a significant dependence of the strain-polarization coupling parameters on the SAW modulation period. This result opens the way for CIPS layers application in piezoelectric and straintronic devices. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Numerical results presented in the work are obtained and visualized using a specialized software, Mathematica 14.0. The Mathematica notebooks, which contain the codes, are available upon reasonable request. 