Representation learning for the electronic structure problem is a major challenge of machine learning in computational condensed matter and materials physics. Within quantum mechanical first principles approaches, Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) is the preeminent tool for understanding electronic structure, and the high-dimensional wavefunctions calculated in this approach serve as the building block for downstream calculations of correlated many-body excitations and related physical observables. Here, we use variational autoencoders (VAE) for the unsupervised learning of high-dimensional DFT wavefunctions and show that these wavefunctions lie in a low-dimensional manifold within the latent space. Our model autonomously determines the optimal representation of the electronic structure, avoiding limitations due to manual feature engineering and selection in prior work. To demonstrate the utility of the latent space representation of the DFT wavefunction, we use it for the supervised training of neural networks (NN) for downstream prediction of the quasiparticle bandstructures within the GW formalism, which includes many-electron correlations beyond DFT. The GW prediction achieves a low error of 0.11 eV for a combined test set of metals and semiconductors drawn from the Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB), suggesting that latent space representation captures key physical information from the original data. Finally, we explore the interpretability of the VAE representation and show that the successful representation learning and downstream prediction by our model is derived from the smoothness of the VAE latent space, which also enables the generation of wavefunctions on arbitrary points in latent space. Our work provides a novel and general machine-learning framework for investigating electronic structure and many-body physics. Recently, machine learning (ML) has emerged as a powerful tool in condensed matter and materials physics, achieving substantial progress across areas including the identification of phase transitions Therefore, harnessing the rich information embedded in the Kohn-Sham (KS) wavefunction In contrast to the notable achievements of ML descriptors for crystal geometry and chemical composition Secondly, electronic structures are highly nonlinear and senstive to both the crystal configuration and intricate non-local correlations, making it difficult to develop a general ML model applicable across a broad spectrum of materials. Thus far, ML models for electronic structure have been mostly confined to the study of specific subsets of materials, such as molecules, In most of these approaches, the ML has focused on prediciton of single valued properties, such as band gaps, largely due to the challenges of identifying well-defined, interpretable, and efficient representations of the electronic structure Examples include the early successful use of energy decomposed operator matrix elements (ENDOME), combined with radially decomposed projected density of states (RAE-PDOS), to predict quasiparticle (QP) band structures Variational autoencoders (VAEs) Importantly, these succinct representations still retain the full physical information inherent in the initial data. To validate the efficacy of the VAE latent space in practical applications, we then build a supervised deep learning model for downstream prediction of k-resolved quasiparticle energies within the many-body GW approximation Moreover, the VAE inherently predicts a smooth, physically realistic band structure, in contrast with previous models, which required an additional manually-imposed smoothing function to remove unphysical variations As Fig. Then, since the real space KS state is essentially a spatial distribution with local pattern, convolutional neural networks (CNN) , where the first term is the mean squared error (MSE) of the reconstructed wavefunctions, and the second term is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which forces the latent space to approach a N(0, Ι) distribution. The parameter β is the weight of KL divergence, tuning the degree of regularization of the latent space. T is the total number of KS states in the training set and, and j is an index in the latent space. By feeding DFT wavefunctions to a well-trained VAE model, we can interpret the vector (σ , μ ) in latent space as a low-dimensional effective representation associated with the individual KS state. The details of the VAE model are given in the SI. Due to its ground-state nature, DFT calculations often yield inaccurate single-particle band structures and tend to underestimate the band gap of semiconductors compared to experiment Due to the challenging nature of capturing non-local frequency-dependent correlations in the electronic structure, we select the downstream prediction of GW bandstructures as a proof of principle of the effectiveness of our VAE latent vector representation of the KS wavefunctions. We develop a supervised deep NN on top of the VAE latent space to predict many-body GW corrections. The goal of this NN is to successfully learn the diagonal part GW self-energy Σ nk GW where G is a reciprocal lattice vector; q is the difference between any two k-vectors k ⃗ -k ⃗ ′ and is integrated over the Brillouin zone (BZ); ε is KS-DFT energy, and W G G ′ is the screened Colomb interaction calculated within the random phase approximation, and ω is the frequency dependence of self energy. Notably, the calculation of the GW self energy includes a sum over infinite bands, m. In practice, the sum over states is treated as a convergence parameter, and the number of bands included in the summation is of the same order as the number of reciprocal lattice vectors G included in W. The diagonal self-energy matrix element for a specific state |n, k ⃗ ⟩ shown in Eq.( However, two significant challenges prevent the application of a simple NN model such as train space. To address these challenges, we adopt the manifold assumption Here, to capture the non-local correlation, the pseudobands approximation Σ ̂nk ⃗ GW = f ̂NN (e θ (φ nk ⃗ (r )), ε nk ⃗ , e θsup (φ ⃗ sup (r )) , ε sup , e θρ (ρ) , η ) , where e θ , e θsup and e θρ are encoders exclusively trained for KS states, super states and charge density respectively. The schematic workflow of our model is shown in Fig. To benchmark the predictive power of our model, we select 302 materials from the Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB) Next, to understand the generative power of our model, we open up the black box of the VAE and explore the meaning of the latent space obtained from unsupervised learning. We utilize a 3D t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE) to visualize the VAE latent space for the electronic structure. As depicted in Fig. Additionally, to explain the success of our model in predicting GW corrections at arbitrary kpoints, we first investigate how the supervised training at certain k-points affects the GW prediction at untrained k-points in the BZ. Fig. Finally, to further verify the "manifold assumption" for electronic structures in real materials and explore how GW energies correlate to the VAE-coded representation, we apply the 3D t-SNE on top of the latent mean μ space for all 22002 states with GW labels, whose colors are coded to their calculated GW-correction labels, as Fig. More intriguingly, even though the unsupervised VAE learning procedure is entirely independent of GW labels, the magnitude of the GW corrections exhibit a distinct pattern distributed across the width of the manifold, as opposed to a random distribution. As a result, the t-SNE analysis serves as a crucial validation, demonstrating that unsupervised representation learning can effectively capture the inherent statistical correlation between GW energies and the electronic wavefunction. Therefore, the unsupervised learning VAE plays a role as pre-learning, which can significantly lower the barrier for the subsequent supervised learning of GW self energies. In power. The smooth evolution of KS states in k-space can be mapped to a smooth trajectory in the latent space, and the sampled points from this continous trajectory are physically meaningful and can also be reconstructed, enabling the generation of wavefunctions (and related physical observables) at uncalculated points at no additional cost. As a result, despite being trained solely on uniformly sampled k-points, the k-resolved GW band structures can be accurately predicted by the NN. Here, in this first demonstration, we focus on predicting GW bandstructures of 2D materials, but we expect this framework to be generalizable to other crystalline systems and downstream applications, since it does not rely on the selection of specific features. We gratefully acknowledge helpful discussions with Mr. Xingzhi Sun at Yale University. This Knøsgaard et al