Mössbauer spectroscopy is a technique employed to investigate the microscopic properties of materials using transitions between energy levels in the nuclei. Conventionally, in synchrotronradiation-based Mössbauer spectroscopy, the measurement window is decided by the researcher heuristically, although this decision has a significant impact on the shape of the measurement spectra. In this paper, we propose a method for evaluating the precision of the spectral position by introducing Bayesian estimation. The proposed method makes it possible to select the best measurement window by calculating the precision of Mössbauer spectroscopy from the data. Based on the results, the precision of the Mössbauer center shifts improved by more than three times compared with the results achieved with the conventional simple fitting method using the Lorentzian function. Mössbauer spectroscopy is an technique employed to investigate the properties of materials based on the nuclear transitions occurring between specific energy levels in the nuclei Mössbauer spectroscopy using radioactive isotopes (RI Mössbauer spectroscopy) is a conventional Mössbauer spectroscopy technique that employs radioactive isotopes (RIs) as the beam source. In RI Mössbauer spectroscopy, the sample to be measured is irradiated with gamma rays to investigate the hyperfine interactions at the probe nucleus position in the material Theoretically, the SR-based Mössbauer spectrum is determined by two factors. The first is the hyperfine interaction, which is the interaction between electrons and the nucleus. The hyperfine interaction reflects the electron density, electric field gradient, and magnetic fields created by electrons at the nucleus. The second is the resolution function of the Mössbauer spectroscopy measurement system. This is a unique property brought about by the use of pulsed SR, and it is not usually treated in RI Mössbauer spectroscopy where nuclear gamma rays are employed instead. In this study, we focus on the shape of the resolution function. The spectral resolution function in SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy is determined by two parameters: τ 1 and τ 2 (τ 1 < τ 2 ), which represent the start and end of the measurement window Recently, Bayesian estimation has found application in various areas of solid-state physics The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the resolution function and the Bayesian estima-tion framework for SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy. In Section III, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method by analyzing the generated data. In Section IV, we employ the analysis results to discuss the measurement window. Section 5 presents the conclusions. In this section, we describe the spectral resolution function of the measurement system for the SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy and a framework for introducing Bayesian estimation into the resolution function. A method for estimating the center position of the absorption peak in an SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy spectrum by Bayesian estimation is also presented. Here, we introduce the spectral resolution function of the SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy measurement system based on the information in The SR-based Mössbauer spectra are represented by I (w s , ∆w, τ 1 , τ 2 ) in Eq. ( We introduced a parameter (∆w), which indicates the center position of the absorption peak in the Mössbauer spectroscopy spectrum at the relative energy (w s ). ∆w is set to 0 when generating the data in this study, and this means that the true value of the center position of the absorption peak in the spectrum is set to 0. Theoretically, if we set τ 1 = 0 and τ 2 = ∞, then the left-hand side, I(w s , ∆w, τ 1 , τ 2 ) of Eq. ( Here, to reduce the computational cost associated with Eq. ( As shown in Eq. ( Moreover, I (w s , ∆w, τ 1 , τ 2 ) on the left-hand side of Eq. ( Next, in this study, Eq. ( dτ I(w s , ∆w, τ ), Since the observed data in a SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy experiment indicate the count of the X-rays and electrons scattered from the scatterer, we assume that they are generated using a Poisson distribution. The observed data, y, is written as follows: In this section, we describe a framework for applying Bayesian estimation in SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy. In this study, data are generated for N relative energies, w s 1 , w s 2 , • • • , w s N . The generated observed data are y 1 , y 2 , • • • , y N . The generated observed data are modeled as a Poisson distribution, as shown in Eq. Assuming that the observed dataset Data = {w s i , y i } N i=1 , follows an independent and identical distribution, the likelihood function is written as follows: The cost function E N (Θ) is defined as From Eq. ( where Z is the normalizing constant and ρ(Θ) is the prior distribution. In this study, the prior distribution is defined as ρ(Θ) = ρ(∆w). Thus, ρ(∆w) is written as where U nif orm(∆w | ∆w max , ∆w min ) represents the uniform distribution of the maximum ∆w max and minimum ∆w min . The performance of the proposed method described in Section II is evaluated through numerical experiments using the generated data. When generating the observed dataset, Data = {w s i , y i } N i=1 , in this study, the variables that need to be specified are N , w s , ∆w, τ 1 , τ 2 , and M . As described, w s is the relative energy, ∆w is the center position of the absorption peak in the spectrum, and τ 1 and τ 2 are the start and end times of the measurement window, respectively. N is the number of data, and M is the discretization size of the measurement window. The discretization size (M ) of the measurement window is a variable employed to numerically calculate the integral for τ in Eq. ( The procedure for generating the observed data, y, is shown below. First, for a given w and Θ = {∆w}, the data from the resolution function are generated using Eq. ( We describe the calculation of the posterior distribution of the peak center in the SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy spectrum by Bayesian estimation. First, the hyperparameters, ∆w max and ∆w min , of the prior distribution (ρ(Θ)) are set as ∆w max = 5 and ∆w min = -15, respectively , based on previous research on 151Eu Mössbauer spectroscopy In this section, we first describe the evaluation method for the posterior distribution obtained from the calculations in Section III B. Thereafter, we compare the results with those of the conventional method. To compare the posterior distributions of ∆w for each case, we approximate the posterior distribution by a normal distribution and compare the mean and standard deviation of those normal distributions. This study follows the above procedure to generate data for 121 cases with τ 1 given as 5.0 with 0.1 increments, and τ 2 given as 17.0. Figure In this paper, we proposed a method to evaluate the position of absorption peaks in the SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy spectra based on probability distributions by introducing Bayesian estimation to address the spectral resolution function of the measurement system considering the measurement window. The proposed method achieved the following: 1. The estimation performances of theoretical models with different time windows were compared, and a theoretical background on the selection of the measurement window for SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy was established. 2. The theoretical model for determining the measurement window for SR-based Mössbauer spectroscopy is shown to be superior to the conventional simple fitting function method (i.e., the Lorentzian function). 3. This method provides a theoretical basis for the analysis of general SR-based Mössbauer spectra in indicates the interval at which the deviation is insignificant due to the instrumental resolution of the experiment. According to (a), based on actual experimental measurements, it can be assumed that there is a deviation less than the experimental limit between the estimated position of the center of the spectrum and the true center in most cases using resolution functions. In the interval, τ1 = which a finite number of hyperfine interactions is observed using an optimized measurement window. Unlike the analysis of RI-based Mössbauer spectra in the previous study 