In this work, two different parametric hysteresis models, the Jiles-Atherton model and the Mel'gui relation, have been combined to form a more general hysteresis operator, suitable for the description of families of experimental B(H) curves obtained for low carbon (LC) steel specimens after isothermal annealing at different temperatures and times. As it has been demonstrated in a number of previous studies, characteristic values of steel hysteresis curves can be used as very efficient identifiers for the monitoring of the different metallurgical transformations that take place during the annealing, such as recovery and recrystallisation processes. It is thus important from a practical point to be able to reproduce the experimental curves obtained under different conditions, as precisely as possible, in order to proceed to the samples characterisation. Hybridisation of the two aforementioned models demonstrated satisfactory results for the reproduction of all considered curves obtained under the different considered annealing conditions. Different parametric models have been proposed in the literature for the modelling of magnetic hysteresis, yet none of the existing models proves to be, to the authors knowledge, universal. In fact, a specific model may be well adapted for the description of a material family but it can perform poorly for others. This drawback may be acceptable when one is interested in a given material. They exist, however, situations where a continuous variation of the material properties may produce hysteresis loops with broad range of features that cannot be captured by a single model. This situation seems to be the case when we examine the magnetic hysteresis loops of cold rolled extra low carbon steels which are subjected to thermal annealing treatments. It turns out that the hysteresis loops of samples subjected to isothermal annealing at different temperatures and for different holding times, span a range of loop shapes, which is consequence of the different microstructural transformations that take place during the annealing processes. Previous works have revealed that certain characteristics of the hysteresis loops, like the coercive field, the remanent magnetisation or the hysteresis losses correlate well with microstructural parameters like the grain size and the dislocation density and they can thus be used as identifiers for the evolution monitoring of transformation procedures such as the recovery and the recrystalisation Numerical experimentation with existing parametric hysteresis models like the Jiles-Atherton model To improve the precision of the representation, a mixing of the two models is proposed in this work. The main idea consists in sampling a common input space, consisting of characteristic hysteresis features like the ones mentioned above, and apply the best approach for each of the points of the input space based on a series of criteria concerning the form of the output curves. The sampling points are then used as training set for a Gaussian process regressor, which replaces the physical model thus becoming a generic hysteresis operator. In this way one can assure smooth variations across the input spaces and avoid "holes" with non-physical outputs. Although the physical parametric models considered here are the Jiles-Atherton and the Mel'gui model, the proposed approach is model independent making other combinations possible. The paper is organised as follows. In the first section the Jiles-Atherton and the Mel'gui model and some rep-resentative results of their identification for two different hysteresis loops are briefly presented. In the second section the hysteresis operator is reformulated in a more formal way, and the algorithm for the construction of the regressor model is presented. A brief presentation of the mathematical model of the Gaussian process regressor is given in the next paragraph. Details on the experimental procedure for the production of the material curves are provided in a separate section. The results of the approach for the reproduction of some representative experimental curves are presented at the last section. In the Jiles-Atherton model and where c is a proportionality coefficient with c ∈ [0, 1], μ 0 stands for the magnetic permeability of the free space, and k and α are material constants related to the domain wall pinning and the interdomain coupling, respectively. δ = ±1 is essentially a numerical flag, which distinguishes between the descending and ascending branches. The M an term stands for the anhysteretic material curve, calculated via the implicit relation with L(x) = coth(x) -1/x being the Langevin function. M s gives the magnetisation at saturation, and a is another material parameter related to the domains density. In the Mel'gui model, the magnetisation is approximated by the following closed-form relation with the coefficients H 0 and b being defined as and In the above equations, H c , M s , M r stand for the coercive field, the magnetisation at the saturation and the remanent magnetisation respectively, χ in is the initial susceptibility (susceptibility of the demagnetised state) and M c the point of the first magnetisation curve at field intensity equal to the the coercive field. The basic difference of the two models consists in the fact that whereas the magnetisation in the Jiles-Atherton model is obtained via the solution of an ordinary differential equation, in the Mel'gui model it is evaluated directly via a closed form relation, which makes the latter much faster. The domain of application is not the same either. Thus, the Jiles-Atherton model can theoretically be applied for an arbitrary excitation cycle (although the accuracy of the model for the description of minor loops is questionable), whereas the Mel'gui relation is only applicable to symmetrical periodic excitations. The input domain of the two models is also very different with four of the five parameters of the Jiles-Atherton model being internal tuning parameters that need to be determined via the so-called model identification procedure. The Mel'gui model, on the contrary, is parametrised via characteristic values of the major loop and the initial magnetisation curve, which makes the model directly applicable. Nevertheless, numerical experimentation reveals that the parameter estimation via identification (that is via the solution of an optimisation problem) yields better results for this model as well. An example of the two models identification using two different experimental curves with different coercivity is shown in Fig. The magnetisation for a scalar hysteretic magnetic material admits the general expression where H is the applied magnetic field at time t, and H -r , r = 0, 1, . . . stand for the field reversal points (i.e. the points where the time derivative of H changes sign) at previous instances t -r < t. The value of the magnetic field H together with the ensemble of reversal points H -r fully determine the state of the material taking full account of the excitation history. Let us consider the hysteresis relation ( We seek to establish the following mapping Notice that H = [H 0 , . . . , H N ] T and M = [M 0 , . . . , M N ] T stand here for column vectors comprising the values of the discretised magnetic field and magnetisation samples inside the observation window, which should not be confused with the vector counterparts of the two field variables. We assume that a parametric model is used for the numerical evaluation of where the index H is used to denote that the above mapping is valid for a given magnetic field discretisation H. For the sake of notational simplicity, the model dependence on the H vector will be implied in the rest of the paper. Our objective is to combine two (or more) different parametric models M a and M b into a common hysteresis operator, by either switching between the two models, interpolate between points calculated with the two models or by performing a weighted sum of their outputs. The three operations can be expressed in terms of a weighted sum where w a (p a ) and w b (p b ) stand for the corresponding weighting coefficients, whose value vary between 0 and 1 depending on the given parameter combination. In order to build that operator, the input vectors of the two consisting models p a and p b must be expressed in a new parametric space, meaningful for both models. The most straight-forward choice for this new space is to pick a number of hysteresis characteristic points or slopes, which are common features of all hysteresis curves and independent of the model details. A possible input set (among others) is the p c = (M s , H c , M r , W h , χ r ), where M s is the magnetisation at saturation, H c the coercive field, M r the remanent magnetisation, W h the hysteresis losses and χ r the susceptibility at the remanence. We can rewrite then For the case of the Jiles-Atherton and the Mel'gui model, which are the models of the choice in this work the two input vectors are p a ≡ p JA = (M s , k, a, α, c) and p b ≡ p M el = (M s , H c , M r , M c , χ in ). A representative sampling of a p c subspace is shown in Fig. In the previous paragraph, a strategy of replacing the physical hysteresis model by a metamodel (regressor in this case) built upon a number of pre-calculated data sets was presented. Very recently, different regression approaches based on metamodels have been studied in the literature of non destructive testing showing good accuracy in approximating unseen experimental data Let us consider the hysteresis model sampled over a set of P = [p 1 , ..., p N ] T parameters along with the respective -for sake of simplicity-scalar outputs M (p 1 ) , ..., M (p N ). Where the i-th entry p i ∈ R 1×P . Let us now consider the aforementioned outputs as a stochastic process where each entry is given by a random vector defined as M = (M (p 1 ) , ..., M (p N )), where M stands for a random vector realisation. One can express the correlation between random variables as an exponential function with power equal to 2 which corresponds to the so-called Gaussian kernel function. Therefore, the correlation function calculated on the hysteresis model turns into where θ j is a hyper-parameter to be estimated via maximum likelihood estimation or cross validation methods. Starting from the definition of the correlation function between two random variables, one can show that the covariance matrix between these variables is given as Cov (M , M ) = σ 2 M Φ (M ) where λ i are the kriging coefficients to be estimated which translates into the best linear unbiased prediction obtained by the minimisation of the mean square prediction error (i.e., the squared expectation) as (13) The kriging coefficients in (13) can be obtained by applying the method of Lagrange multipliers. The optimisation boils down to the following matrix system of equations where in (14 ] is defined as provided in (12). Moreover, U = u (p 1 ) T , ..., u (p N ) T T with u (p i ) being a lower-order monomials (typically it does not exceed the degree of two), 0 is a zeros matrix and μ represents the vector of l < N the Lagrange multipliers. Experimental magnetic measurements on cold rolled samples that had been annealed at low temperatures (300-500 • C) in order to promote recovery without interaction with recrystallisation and at 600 • C to induce recrystallisation were used in this study The external magnetic field was produced by a magnetic yoke composed of a 200-turn coil wound around a U-shaped magnetic laminated core. The excitation signal was generated by a sinusoidal magnetizing current produced by a programmable function generator connected to a power amplifier. The induced electromotive force in an encircling coil wound around the samples and the tangential magnetic field strength measured using a Hall probe placed at the surface of the samples, were acquired using a NI data acquisition system. Four major hysteresis loops were recorded for each measurement applying a sinusoidal magnetic field strength of about 4.1 kA/m at 1 Hz, which was sufficiently high to reach near saturation state of the measured samples. These were demagnetized prior to each test. The sampling frequency used was 5 kHz. Recovery involves both the annihilation of dislocations and their rearrangement into low energy configurations. Recrystallisation leads to the suppression of dislocations by the nucleation of defect free volumes and by the migration through the material of the recrystallisation front, resulting in a new grain structure with a low dislocation density. Previous studies The proposed approach has been applied for the reproduction of the experimental curves obtained from a cold-rolled (CR) low carbon (LC) steel sheets annealed at four different temperatures and for different holding times. Four temperatures are considered, namely 300 • C, 400 • C, 500 • C, and 600 • C. The annealing times for the four temperatures are given in Table The H c vs. M r and H c vs. W h correlation plots deliver important information about the metalurgical transformation, which makes them a further test for the performance of the regressor. The correlation plots for the calculated curves are shown in Fig. A regressor-based hybridisation of two parametric models has been proposed in order to describe sets of experimental curves with a broad range of features. The present work follows a procedure, where the physical hysteresis model is replaced by a generic meta-model, a similar idea to the one previously exploited in The use of the regressor presents a number of advantages, when a pragmatic approach is sought in order to reproduce experimental data with a reasonable accuracy. The computationally expensive model identification (i.e. the calculation of the model parameters via fitting to the experimental curve), is significantly accelerated since each call to the physical model is replaced by a regressor evaluation, which is carried out in nearly real time. This acceleration, also discussed in Although two particular physical models have been considered in this work, namely the Jiles-Atherton and the Mel'gui model, the approach is general and can be applied with an arbitrary combination of models. Annealing conditions H c (A/m) W h (MJ/m 