2D Ruddlesden-Popper perovskites are promising candidates for energy harvesting applications due to their tunable optical properties and excellent ambient stability. Moreover, they are solutionprocessable and compatible with upscalable manufacturing via various printing techniques. Unfortunately, such methods often induce large degrees of heterogeneity due to poorly controlled crystallization. Here, we address this issue by blending the well-known 2D perovskite (PEA)2PbBr4 with an organic small-molecule, namely C8-BTBT, employed as an additive with different blending ratios. Using terahertz (THz) absorption and temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy techniques we observe that with the C8-BTBT additive the photophysical properties are altered while the perovskite structure in the film remains unaffected. More precisely, the inclusion of trace amounts of C8-BTBT in the hybrid films results in defect passivation at perovskite platelet boundaries and at the surfaces, as indicated by increased carrier lifetimes and substantially increased photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQY). This in turn improves the responsivity of photodetectors using the 2D perovskite as active layer. Our study highlights a straightforward strategy for fabricating high-quality 2D perovskites via large-area processing techniques. Low-dimensional perovskites have attracted considerable attention in recent years owing to their versatile (opto)electronic properties and suitability for energy harvesting applications. Moreover, the PLQY is found to increase from 10% to 25% upon C8-BTBT addition. Terahertz (THz) measurements revealed the phonon modes of the 2D-PVK and the C8-BTBT, respectively. We found that the presence of C8-BTBT had no impact on the perovskite lattice, although it shifted the relative peak position of the phonon mode; an effect attributed to the increased size of the platelets-like 2D-perovskite domains. From transient absorption (TA) measurements, we observed a pronounced spectral shift of the photoinduced absorption region with time, which we assigned to bandgap renormalization. Furthermore, the carrier dynamics were significantly slowed upon the addition of C8-BTBT, which is consistent with the TR-PL transients. Finally, we establish a correlation between photophysical and optoelectronic properties by realizing photodetectors using different blend formulations. The device dynamics indicated that introducing C8-BTBT at an optimal concentration into the PVK helps boosting the responsivity of the device photocurrent. The fabrication and morphological characterization of the representative materials are described in this section. The various blend formulations are detailed in the experimental section. In brief, blends were prepared by mixing the individual precursor formulations of (PEA)2PbBr4 and C8-BTBT in three different perovskite/small-molecule volume ratios (v/v): 90/10 v/v (10% blend), 75/25 v/v (25% blend), and 50/50 v/v (50% blend). We adopted the spin-coating technique to process the thin films of all formulations at room temperature inside a nitrogen-filled glovebox followed by thermal annealing, as detailed in the experimental section. Using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, we investigated the crystallinity of the emergent layers, the corresponding diffractograms of pristine (PEA)2PbBr4 and the three representative blend thin films are presented in Figure We further performed optical characterization by UV-vis spectrophotometry on neat perovskite films, C8-BTBT films, and 10, 25 and 50% blends, results displayed in Figure The absorption spectra of the blends exhibit a negligible contribution from C8-BTBT due to its intrinsically low absorption coefficient. The absorption peak of the C8-BTBT is located around 3.4 eV as observed in Figure THz. When the volume ratio of C8-BTBT increases, the 0.73 THz peak shifts slightly towards lower energies. We further noted the absorption enhancement at both ~1.25 THz and ~1.92 THz in the blend samples, which coincides with the characteristic phonon modes of C8-BTBT. This verifies that the presence of C8-BTBT hardly affects the 2D-perovskite lattice. Furthermore, it was inferred that the C8-BTBT encapsulation is not controlling the electron-lattice coupling of the 2Dperovskite. Figure The effect of C8-BTBT encapsulation on the crystalline domains as well as on the exciton dynamics was investigated through hyperspectral PL imaging. The acquired images of the neat perovskite and the 10, 25 and 50% blends are presented in Figure To study the exciton dynamics, we performed transient absorption (TA) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) measurements following photoexcitation at 380 nm of the different samples and monitored at the peak position of 415 nm (Figure show narrow bandwidth with a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) around 12-14 nm. Upon blending, we observed that the 10% sample showed a slightly longer PL lifetime than the pristine sample, and the 25% sample exhibited the longest lifetime. In contrast, the PL lifetime was markedly reduced for the 50% sample compared to the others. The weighted-average lifetimes (τavg) were extracted by fitting the kinetics to a two-exponential function, and the values are 269, 341 and 144 ps for the respective blends (10, 25 and 50%), whereas the PL lifetime was 181 ps for the pristine sample, all parameters provided in Table We reported on the impact of a small organic molecule, namely C8-BTBT, used as additive to passivate traps in a 2D perovskite and demonstrated the use of such blends in photodetectors. The effect of C8-BTBT on the 2D perovskite phase was studied by transient optical measurements. The measurements showed that the carrier dynamics were slowed in 25% blends as compared to neat perovskite, 10%, and 50% blends. Optimal blends displayed improved morphology, reduced nonradiative recombination, and higher PLQY due to the passivation of defects in the bulk and surface of the films. Optimized PVK-C8-BTBT layers were successfully used to realize co-planar photodetectors with enhanced photoresponse and reduced hysteresis. Thorlabs M415L4 controlled with Throlabs DC2200 LED Driver. A home-built MATLAB script has been employed to probe various characteristics of the photodetectors. Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy: TA spectroscopy was carried out using a home-built pump-probe setup. The configuration of the setup was applied for the short delay, namely 100 fs to 8 ns experiments. The fundamental 800 nm output of titanium:sapphire amplifier (Coherent LEGEND DUO, 4.5 mJ, 3 kHz, 100 fs) was split into three beams (2 mJ, 1 mJ, and 1.5 mJ). The first two components were used separately to pump two optical parametric amplifiers (OPA) (Light Conversion TOPAS Prime). TOPAS 1 generates tunable pump pulses, while TOPAS 2 generates signal (1300 nm) and idler (2000 nm) only. For short delay TA measurements, TOPAS 1 was used for producing pump pulses while the probe pathway length to the sample was kept constant at approximately 5 meters between the output of the TOPAS 1 and the sample. The pump pathway length was varied between 5.12 and 2.6 m with a broadband retroreflector mounted on automated mechanical delay stage (Newport linear stage IMS600CCHA controlled by a Newport XPS motion controller), thereby generating delays between pump and probe from -400 ps to 8 ns. We used an 800 nm beam focused onto a sapphire crystal to measure TA in the completely visible range, thereby generating a white-light supercontinuum from 500 to 1300 nm. Pump and probe beams were focused on the sample, which was kept under a dynamic vacuum of <10 -5 mbar. The tranC8-BTBTitted fraction of the white light was guided to a custom-made priC8-BTBT spectrograph (Entwicklungsbüro Stresing) where a priC8-BTBT dispersed it onto a 512 pixel NMOS linear image sensor (HAMAMATSU S8381-512). The probe pulse repetition rate was 3 kHz, while the excitation pulses were mechanically chopped to 1.5 kHz (100 fs to 8 ns delays), while the detector array was read out at 3 kHz. Adjacent diode readings corresponding to the tranC8-BTBTission of the sample after excitation and in the absence of an excitation pulse were used to calculate ΔT/T. Measurements were averaged over several thousand shots to obtain a good signal-to-noise ratio. The chirp induced by the tranmissive optics was corrected with a home-built Matlab code by revaluating for each wavelength the delay at which pump and probe are simultaneously arriving on the sample as the time of the signal amplitude. Time-domain terahertz (td-THz) spectroscopy: Our td-THz setup uses the same Ti:sapphire amplifier as the TA setup. The THz emitter and detector are two 1 mm thick <110> oriented zinc telluride (ZnTe) crystals. All the THz related optics were placed in a closed chamber, which was continuously purged with pure nitrogen gas. The measurements were performed by exciting the samples with the Chameleon Ultra laser (Coherent) at 760 nm with a pulse width of 140 femtoseconds (fs) and a repetition rate of 80 MHz. The fundamental of the Chameleon is pumping a Radiantis OPO, from which the generated second harmonic 380 nm is used to excite the samples. The repetition rate of the fs pulses was adjusted by a pulse picker (APE Pulse Select), and typically the pulse energies were in the range of 400 nJcm -2 ). The PL of the samples was collected by an optical telescope (consisting of two plano-convex lenses), and focused on the slit of a spectrograph (PI Spectra Pro SP2300). Subsequently, detected with a Streak Camera (Hamamatsu C10910) system with a temporal resolution of 1.4 ps. The data was acquired in photon counting mode using the Streak Camera software (HPDTA), and exported to Origin Pro 2020 for further analysis. measurements are performed with a Thermofisher Escalab 250Xi system. All samples were measured under ultrahigh vacuum (10 -10 mbar). XPS measurements were performed using an XR6 monochromated AlKα source (hv = 1486.6 eV) and a pass energy of 20 eV. Argon cluster ion beam etching experiments were performed using a MAGCIS ion gun using a cluster energy of 4000 eV. 