Superconducting states that break space-group symmetries of the underlying crystal can exhibit nontrivial spatial modulation of the order parameter. Previously, such remarkable states were intimately associated with the breaking of translational symmetry 1,2 , giving rise to the density-wave orders 3-8 , with wavelengths spanning several unit cells Iron-based superconductors (FeSC) exhibit multiple electronic orders involving spin, orbital, and charge degrees of freedom that are, in many instances, intertwined with superconductivity 20,21 . Moreover, the electrons in FeSCs are strongly correlated shown in Fig. First, we focus on basic spectroscopic characterization. The wide-bias-range differential conductance (dI/dV) spectrum (inset of Fig. However, quasiparticle interference (QPI) reveals the striking difference in electronic structure between the flakes measured here and the bulk material. These measurements are carried out by collecting a dI/dV spatial map alongside the topography (Fig. Surprisingly, in contrast to bulk, our measurements show that the q 2 vector, connecting Γ and M pockets, disappears within ±8 meV bias voltage range (Fig. We now focus on the spatial characterization of the SC gap. In bulk FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , previous experiments observed that the gap is strongly inhomogeneous at a length scale of ξ ∆ 0 (about ten times lattice constant) Fig. The observation of the strongly modulated gap is highly unexpected, as it was not reported before either for the bulk crystal, whose surfaces are also created by the exfoliation-like cleaving process, or in the previously studied films synthesized by molecular beam epitaxy. Naively, the observed modulation resembles the well-studied density-wave orders To get further insights, we performed spectroscopic imaging (SI) STM measurements on a 5×5 nm 2 area (Fig. , where |∆ Q (r)| and φ ∆ Q (r) are PDM modulation amplitude and modulation phase at the two Bragg vectors: Q = ±P X or ±P Y . These quantities can be extracted individually by a standard 2D lock-in method The presence of domains provides further insights into the origin of the observed modulation. We first note that the crystal structure of FeSC is characterized by a nonsymmorphic space group. The up-down staggered distribution of selenium atoms enlarges the crystallographic unit cell (Fig. Having identified that the gap modulation is linked to the iron sublattices, the key question arises: why the PDM state has not been seen in the bulk FeSC or molecular beam epitaxy synthesized films. In FeSCs, when the glide-mirror symmetry, composed of z → -z reflection and a translation by the nearest neighbor Fe-Fe lattice distance, is preserved, all iron atoms are equivalent. However, in the vicinity of the surface, the chalcogenide atoms above and below iron plane can reside at a different distances from the plane (Fig. To compare directly the findings of the model and our experiments, we eliminated the influence from Se + /Se -sublattices, and directly visualized the LDOS imbalance on Fe x /Fe y . This was done in three different ways. First, we traced the dI/dV linecut along a-axis from the SI-STM data (left panel in Fig. We emphasize that the direction of the nematic distortion is crucial for the observation of the PDM state. In most bulk FeSCs, both Γ and M Fermi pockets are present In summary, we observed the PDM state in thin flakes of Fe(Te,Se), highlighting the nontrivial role of the exfoliation process. In this context, one interesting avenue of future explorations would be to study other correlated materials in this form, where the interplay between strong electronic interaction and quantum confinement could potentially modify the underlying symmetries and electronic structure, thereby giving rise to novel phenomena. Finally, we note that the observed PDM state is likely not limited to the thin flakes studied here; instead, it may occur more generally in other unconventional superconductors with sublattice degeneracy and intertwined orders. The PDM state might be resolved in some compounds of cuprates Fe y Fig. Device fabrication: High-quality single crystals of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 were synthesized using the self-flux method, and their values of T c were determined to be 14.5 K from magnetization measurements The optimized fabrication procedure is demonstrated in Supplementary Fig. The remaining contamination comprised of small, 1-2 Å high impurities that are mobile and can be removed by constant-current-mode scanning (Supplementary Fig. The locations of interest were identified using a combination of optical imaging, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and STM measurements (Extended Data Fig. There is also a 210 nm-thick flake attached to the left-bottom corner of the sample. Using precise tip navigation (Supplementary Fig. The averaged single step height was found to be 7.1 Å (Supplementary Fig. STM measurement: STM measurements were performed in a commercial Unisoku USM 1300J STM/AFM setup using a Pt/Ir tip in an ultra-high vacuum environment. All features are measured by using several different micro-tips. The differential conductance (dI/dV) spectra were acquired by a standard lock-in amplifier at a frequency of 973 Hz, under lock-in modulation voltage V mod = 0.1 -1 mV, setpoint voltage V bias = -5 mV and tunneling current I t = 100 pA. STM images were acquired in the constant-current mode under the same setpoint parameters of dI/dV spectra, except the micrometer-sized topographies (left panel of Fig. In this work, we measured five Fe(Te,Se) thin-flake devices (Supplementary Fig. The PDM state is robust against influence of magnetic field and nearby impurities. By applying a 6 T magnetic field perpendicularly to the thin flakes, a single SC vortex core was identified in Extended Data Fig. The SI-STM data shown in the main text was measured under 300 mK, with an effective electron temperature around 4 K (spectral broadening: 1.2 meV). For this electron temperature, only a single peak is observed around SC gap. The local spectral gap is defined as (∆ + -∆ -)/2, where ∆ +,-are defined as the energies at the coherence peak maxima determined by Gaussian fitting. In rare cases (less than 0.1% of data) when the fitting failed, the left and right peak energy were determined by the positions of local maximum after a slope function subtracted from the raw data (see also SI Section 3 for the discussion of low electron temperature data). FT filtering: A reciprocal-vector-locked FT filtering enhances the visualization of modulation by filtering out irrelevant signals (Fig. where F and F -1 are Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform operation respectively. σ q = 1/σ is the Gaussian cutoff in the reciprocal space, it was set to be 1/1.3 nm -1 throughout this work (see also a related method in SI Section 4). Origin of the observed PDM domains: As discussed in the main text, the PDM state is intimately related to the nematic distortion in thin flakes. In bulk, the composition studied here (FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 ) is at the boundary of the nematic phase Topological defects around the domain walls: We found that the distortions around the PDM domain walls (Fig. where two of them formed a dislocation-antidislocation pair (Supplementary Fig. Lattice-lock-in polarization of the PDM state: In order to quantitatively describe the orthogonal domains of the PDM state, we introduce the lattice-lock-in polarization (p LL ). The status of lattice lock-in can be resolved by comparing the difference of modulation phase between topography and gap map along the directions of the two modulation vectors, ±P X and ±P Y . In Supplementary Fig. It is +1 or -1 if gap maxima fully polarize at Fe x or Fe y positions (Supplementary Fig. The lattice distortion in our thin flakes was tested using a large topography image with atomic resolution, measured on a 100×100 nm 2 area (Supplementary Fig. Note that the sample fabrication process inevitably introduces strain in some areas. We show an example of a strained area in Supplementary Fig. Iron sites with gap maxima or minima: The lower panel of Fig. Σg " (q Fe , 4/8 mV) Σg " (q Se! , -8/-4 mV) Σg " (q Se! , 4/8 mV) Lingyuan Kong 1,2 * , Michał Papaj 3 , Hyunjin Kim 1,2,4 , Yiran Zhang 1,2,4 , Eli Baum 1,2 , Hui Li While in general iron-based superconductors are described by multiple orbital models constructed out of the 3d shell of iron atoms, here we will focus on a simple model that nevertheless can capture the essence of the PDM state. We base our approach on phenomenological models previously suggested for monolayer FeSe on SrTiO 3 As shown in Fig. With such a normal state Hamiltonian, we can now discuss the SC order parameter. In the simplest case, we consider on-site interaction that gives rise to two momentum-independent order parameters: where V 0 is the onsite interaction strength and c kX/Y ↑↓ are the annihilation operators for electrons on sublattice Fe x /Fe y with spin up/down, respectively. Due to the difference in normal state density of states, the self-consistent solutions of the gap equation will lead to different values of ∆ X and ∆ Y . We then obtain the density of states in the superconducting state by first constructing the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian: With such a Hamiltonian, we calculate the spectral function and, from it, the density of states on each sublattice: The difference in on-site order parameters results thus in different positions of the coherence peaks on both sublattices as presented in Fig. To make our model more realistic, we make an extension by considering two pockets at the M point. These pockets correspond to two orbital degrees of freedom and their presence is found by the first principles calculations and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. The simplest way to incorporate the presence of this second pocket is to include two copies of the single orbital model and introduce hybridization between them to lift the degeneracy between the two bands. In such a case, the normal state Hamiltonian is: where the hybridization term is given by ε H (k) = -2t 4 (cos k x + cos k y ). The inclusion of the second pocket allows us to consider different relationships between the order parameters on each pocket. Theoretical proposals include s ++ and s +-configurations with the same and opposite phases of the order parameter on the two pockets, and quasi-nodeless d-wave order parameter, which also has opposite phase on both pockets, but with additional momentum space structure as shown in Supplementary Fig. Here we decomposed ∆ X and ∆ Y into ∆ 0 and ∆ z . Additionally, we include the possibility of intersublattice intraorbital pairing ∆ T and intrasublattice interorbital pairing ∆ H . When rotated to the band basis of the normal state Hamiltonian H 0 (k), the intrapocket pairing on the two pockets will have the form: where we have suppressed the momentum dependence of the normal state Hamiltonian and order parameter components. In this basis, we can see that the order parameter in the two pockets, and in particular their relative sign can be determined by the relative sign of ∆ 0 ± ∆ H , since the ∆ T and ∆ z terms have the same sign for both pockets. We can qualitatively test the consequence of PDM state for s ++ (in our model, ∆ H < ∆ 0 ), s +-(∆ H > ∆ 0 ), and nodeless d-wave (∆ H = ∆H sin k x /2 sin k y /2, ∆ H > ∆ 0 on the Fermi surface) pairings. When the density of states on each sublattice is calculated with such ∆ parametrizations, the relative sign of the order parameters has a qualitative consequence on the spectrum. If the sign is the same on both pockets, the maxima and minima of the coherence peak positions for both pockets coincide with the same iron atoms (Supplementary Fig. Phase-referenced (PR) QPI can resolve the sign changing between two SC order parameters where | g (q, E)| and θ q,E are the FT magnitude and phase of g (r, E), respectively. The g PR (q, E) is negative, if the q connects states with the opposite sign of SC order parameters, sign but is positive if the order parameters for the initial and final states have the same sign. This method was originally proposed for a sharp spectral peak of impurity-induced bound states, but it was later extended to the case without a clear subgap peak The dI/dV measurements with lower electron temperature show fine features around the SC gap edges. We typically observe three features corresponding to energies of approximately ±1.4 meV, ±1.9 meV and ±2.4 meV with their visibility declining at higher energies (Fig. We employed two methods to extract the amplitude and phase from a modulation image, The two dimensional lock-in method where Q is the vector of modulation, and σ is the Gaussian cutoff length, which controls the lowpass frequency of the extraction. To remove the relative oscillation phase (Q • r), the Gaussian cutoff σ should be larger than 2π/Q. A too small σ introduces irrelevant distortion, while a too large σ smears out the spatial features. Considering the commensurate length scale (3.8 Å) of our PDM state, we use a reasonably large cutoff (σ = 1.3 nm) to avoid artifacts. In practice, the vector-locked complex quantity is calculated in reciprocal space, where σ q ≡ 1/σ, F and F -1 are Fourier transform operation and inverse Fourier transform operation, respectively. Then the modulation amplitude and phase can be extracted as, We checked the validity of 2D lock-in method by a less sophisticated but more direct, moving window method Atoms slightly deviating from their perfect positions induce the so-called slowly varying lattice distortion, which breaks the perfect periodicity of the lattice. This distortion can be corrected by Lawler-Fujita algorithm the measured lattice topography is always imperfect with position-dependent lattice phase, where the two wavevectors are P X = [(P X ) x , (P X ) y ] and P Y = [(P Y ) x , (P Y ) y ]. We further define the distortion field as, which is the local displacement of the real lattice from the perfect lattice. Therefore, the relationship between perfect and distorted lattice is, Since φT Q only introduces a rigid shift of the entire image, for simplicity, we set them to be zero in the following. By applying matrix inversion, u(r) can be calculated as, The slowly varying phase, φ T Q (r), can be extracted from the 2D lock-in method. Therefore a Lawler-Fujita corrected image can be obtained by making the following transform, T 0 (r 0 ) = T [r + u(r)]. Shear distortion artifact, which breaks the C 4 rotational symmetry of the lattice, appears, for example, when unidirectional drift happens during SI-STM measurement. Following the literature where, Sh is the shearing strength, R(θ) is the standard 2D rotation matrix. In reciprocal space, it shears the two adjacent Bragg vectors (we note the perfect Bragg vectors as where respectively, α lat is the lattice angle, defined as the angle between Q 0 1 and horizontal axis of the image. The Q 1 , Q 2 can be measured from the sheared image, with these inputs, another four parameters of Eq. 24 can be solved numerically by global fitting procedure. Finally, the shear corrected image can be obtained by following transform, For example, we corrected data with a severe drift by our shear correction code (Supplementary Fig. We employed the curvature method Phenomenological simulations #1: the topological defects shown in Extended Data Fig. where Q is the wavevector of the ordered state. Moreover, simple simulation of a vortex-antivortex pair is shown in Supplementary Fig. where l v is the distance between vortex and antivortex, and the shape factor is Phenomenological simulations #2: PDM linecut and induced LDOS modulation shown in Supplementary Fig. where, is the spatial-modulated SC gap. The background above the SC gap was simulated by a modified Fermi-Dirac function, and, Therefore, the simulated PDM linecut can be produced by adding the three terms, Then the induced LDOS modulation was simulated by applying Fourier transform on the PDM linecut (Supplementary Fig. In order to show that the observed LDOS imbalance at Fe x /Fe y sublattices (Fig. Phenomenological simulations (see SI Section 7) of these induced LDOS modulation in the PDM state are shown in Supplementary Fig. Note that the Fe x -Fe y sublattice LDOS imbalance (or, equivalently, the normal state nematicity, Fig. As discussed in the main text, the total gap is expressed as Thus the unidirectional gap modulation ratio is defined as the ratio between the amplitudes of modulating and non-modulating components, In Extended Data Fig. 