Heterogeneous multilayered solid-state electrolyte (HMSSE) has been widely explored for their broadened working voltage range and compatibility with electrodes. However, due to the limitations of traditional manufacturing methods such as casting, the interface between electrolyte layers in HMSSE can decrease the ionic conductivity severely. Here, a novel combinatory aerosol jet printing (CAJP) is introduced to fabricate functionally graded solid-state electrolyte (FGSSE) without sharp interface. Owing to the CAJP's unique ability (in-situ mixing and instantaneous tuning of the mixing ratio), FGSSE with smooth microscale compositional gradation is achieved. Electrochemical tests show that FGSSE has excellent oxidative stability exceeding 5.5 V and improved conductivity (>7 times of an analogous HMSSE). By decoupling the total resistance, we show that the resistance from the electrolyte/electrolyte interface of HMSSE is 5.7 times of the total resistance of FGSSE. The Li/FGSSE/NCM622 cell can be stably run for more than 200 cycles along with improved rate performance. High-voltage solid-state lithium metal batteries (SSLMBs) are advanced energy storage devices which have attracted extensive interests owing to the enhanced energy density and safety. It can meet the requirement of the electrification of transportation and the storage of intermittently produced solar and wind energy. Instead of searching for a single SSE with a chemical composition capable of handling both reduction and oxidation simultaneously, heterogeneous multilayered solid-state electrolyte (HMSSE) strategy is introduced to solve this dilemma. Additive manufacturing (AM) has arisen as a versatile method for producing complex structures employing micro-and nanoscale building blocks. Lithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (LiTFSI) salt and the nano-size Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 (LLZTO) particles as inorganic filler, which can promote the transport of Li + , are also added into both inks. To print the FGSSE with Z-axis gradient structure, 100% PAN@LLZTO ink was first deposited onto high-voltage cathode discs. As we continuously print the FGSSE with increasing thicknesses, the flow rate of PAN@LLZTO ink was gradually decreased from 100% to 0 and the flow rate of PEO@LLZTO ink was gradually increased from 0 to 100%. Finally, a gradient structure electrolyte with pure PAN@LLZTO at the bottom and pure PEO@LLZTO on the top was obtained. More details about the printing process can be found in the supporting information. As shown in Figure To characterize the compositional distribution of PAN and PEO in FGSSE. EDS and Raman measurements were conducted to reveal the element and the organic functionality distributions across the FGSSE. Figure At the bottom of the film, there is a dense layer of N signal indicating the bottom layer is composed of PAN. Right above the PAN layer, the N signal decreases, and the O signal increases gradually along the Z axis from the bottom to the top, which indicates the content of PAN decrease and the content of PEO increase gradually. This smooth compositional change can be attributed to the insitu mixing and accurate modulation of the ink mixing ratio during deposition. At the top of the film, the O signal becomes more obvious demonstrating the PEO dominates the FGSSE. Few N signals are detected, this might be the N signal from high boiling point solvent (DMF and NMP) residue. The ionic conductivity of the FGSSE and HMSSE was systematically studied by dielectric spectroscopy at different temperatures from 25 to 85°C. As shown in Figure and according to the Bruce-Vincent-Evans equation, Li metal batteries. The electrochemical window of the electrolyte was investigated by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) test in Li/electrolyte/stainless steel (SS) cells at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s -1 . Adverse reactions start to happen for the PEO electrolyte when the voltage goes above 3.8 V, indicating its poor antioxidation performance (Figure Ωcm 2 ). This reveals that the significant charge transfer resistance arising from polymer/polymer interface can be dramatically reduced via our CAJP process. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement of the cell shows a typical NCM622 oxidization peak at 3.9 V and a reduction peak at 3.58 V (Figure This demonstrates the battery with FGSSE has much better rate performance. The long-term cycling performance of the cells is presented in Figure In summary, FGSSE with expanded electrochemical window and improved ionic conductivity is successfully prepared via an innovative CAJP method for the first time. Owing to the unique capability of modulating the ink mixing ratio on the fly, FGSSE is printed with oxidation tolerant PAN deposited in contact with the cathode followed by a gradual and smooth transition to reduction-resistant PEO. In this way, the side reaction among the electrodes and electrolyte can be avoided. And the electrochemical window of the electrolyte is expanded to 0-5.5 V. Besides that, the continuous compositional gradation of the electrolyte within the FGSSE can improve the conductivity by avoiding the sharp compositional changes and the associated interfacial barrier for ion transport. Thus, the overall conductivity of FGSSE is over 7 times of that of HMSSE at 25 °C. The EIS analysis reveals the resistance from the electrolyte/electrolyte interface in the HMSSE is 5.7 times of the total resistance of FGSSE. By coupling with lithium anode and NCM622 cathode, the cell with FGSSE displays a capacity of 142 mAh g -1 at 1 C and can stably run for more than 200 cycles, along with an improved rate performance. This innovative CAJP opens new opportunities to produce functionally graded SSE with enhanced properties and facilitates the development of high-performance solid-state batteries. Figure The peak at 2244.7 cm -1 belongs to the C≡N bond. It doesn't overlap with other bonds, and therefore its intensity was used to the estimate relative content of PAN to understand the spatial distribution of PAN. The intensity at 2244.7 cm -1 of the spectrum at 30 μm is 201.9, which is similar to the base line (Figure 