We report the magnetic properties of a cobalt oxalate metal-organic-framework featuring the hyperoctagon lattice. Our thermodynamic measurements reveal the J eff = 1/2 state of the highspin Co 2+ (3d 7 ) ion and the two successive magnetic transitions at zero field with two-stage entropy release. 13 C-NMR measurements reveal the absence of an internal magnetic field in the intermediate temperature phase. Multiple field-induced phases are observed before full saturation at around 40 T. We argue the unique cobalt oxalate network gives rise to the Kitaev interaction and/or a bond frustration effect, providing an unconventional platform for frustrated magnetism on the hyperoctagon lattice. Introduction Spin frustration is a key concept in condensed matter physics Kitaev interaction is proposed to appear between magnetic ions with spin-orbital entangled total angular momentum J eff = 1/2 QSLs may emerge in the three-dimensional (3D) frustrated lattices such as pyrochlore Metal-organic-framework (MOF), an emerging class of porous material, can potentially pave the way to study the magnetism in complex 3D lattices. We focus on the 3D lattice found in [(Me In this letter, we demonstrate the first experimental realization of . We find multiple magnetic phases including an unusual intermediate temperature phase without magnetic order. Based on the structural considerations, we argue that these multiple magnetic phases are brought by the frustration arising from a Kitaev interaction in the nearest neighbor superexchange arXiv:2404.06923v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 10 Apr 2024 process via the oxalate anion and/or a bond frustration effect caused by the tilting of local trigonal axes in the Co 2 (ox) 3 network (Fig. Results Powder samples, including single crystals of ∼ 100 μm size, were prepared by a solvothermal method Magnetization of the powder sample was measured by a SQUID magnetometer at 1.8-300 K (MPMS-XL, Quantum Design). The inverse magnetic susceptibility above 200 K at 1 T follows the Curie-Weiss law of χ(T ) = C/(T + Θ) (Fig. Specific heat of the powder sample was measured by the relaxation method using a commercial apparatus (PPMS, Quantum Design). At zero magnetic field, the specific heat divided by temperature C p /T exhibits a kink at 18 K and a peak at 10 K (Fig. In the magnetic field derivative of the magnetization at 1.4 K, clear anomalies are observed at around 11, 15, and 30 T. As raising the temperature, the anomalies are weakened, but visible up to around 12 K (Fig. In order to identify the magnetic states in the phases I' and I, we conducted 13 C (I = 1/2) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements on the powder sample with 13 C-enriched oxalate at 2.619 T. The positional relationship between the C in the oxalate ion and the neighboring Co ions makes the 13 C-NMR a sensitive probe for detecting the appearance of an internal magnetic field The formation of the J eff = 1/2 state is compatible with the trigonal distortion of the CoO 6 octahedra in this compound. As shown in Fig. Having established the J eff = 1/2 state, we consider the spin model in the hyperoctagon structure. Since all Co ions are crystallographically identical, the nearest neighbor interaction is the same for all Co-Co bonds. In addition, the hyperoctagon lattice is a bipartite lattice. In the simple nearest neighbor Heisenberg model on the 3D bipartite lattice, only a conventional Néel order is expected at temperature ∼ Θ, accompanying a drop of magnetic susceptibility with full entropy release. In stark contrast, in the phase I', no internal magnetic field is observed and the release of the magnetic entropy is only partial despite the sizable decrease of χ. These features observed in phase I' indicate a development of short-range spin correlations rather than the conventional Néel order, demonstrating the insufficiency of the Heisenberg model and the presence of a frustration. Among various origins of the frustration, we first examine the possibility of competing nearest neighbor and further neighbor interactions. In the Co 2 (ox) 3 network, the second and third neighbor Co-Co distances are 9.5 and 12.2 Å, respectively. These are even longer than the 5th neighbor Co-Co distance in the typical honeycomb cobaltate As a frustration effect realizing the intriguing magnetic state in the phase I', we propose the emergence of the Kitaev interaction. Kitaev interaction between nearest neighbor ions emerges as a result of the superexchange process via ligand anions In the Kitaev model, the spin degrees of freedom is fractionalized into the two types of quasiparticles related with the itinerant Majorana fermions and Z 2 fluxes The magnetic-field-induced phases can also be explained by the presence of the Kitaev interaction. In the Kitaev-Heisenberg model on the hyperoctagon lattice at zero magnetic field, four magnetically ordered phases, i.e. Néel, zigzag, stripy antiferromagnetic, and ferromagnetic phases, may appear depending on the relative strength between the Kitaev and the Heisenberg interactions In addition, we suggest different type of frustration, that may be called as bond frustration, is brought by the tilting of the trigonal axis of each CoO 6 octahedra (Fig. We suggest that the experimental observations may be compatible with the scenario of the bond frustration. Frustrated magnetism in the cubic 3D lattice with tilted local easy planes, which is similar to the present material, is seen in the XY-pyrochlore magnet Summary and Perspective We present the first experimental realization of the J eff = 1/2 hyperoctagon lattice in [(Me 2 NH 2 ) 3 (SO 4 )] 2 [Co 2 (ox) 3 ]. We find multiple magnetic phases in the H -T phase diagram, including the intriguing phase I' without long-range magnetic order, indicating the presence of a frustration in the bipartite lattice. As a possible origin of the frustration, we propose the Kitaev interaction in the nearest neighbor superexchange process and/or a bond frustration caused by the local magnetic anisotropy. Further investigations including the first-principles calculations and neutron scattering experiments would significantly advance the understanding of the frustrated magnetism in the spin-orbital coupled system. Investigations on the relative MOFs are also of interest 