Electrokinetic force has been the major choice for driving the translocation of molecules through a nanopore. However, the use of this approach is limited by an uncontrollable translocation speed, resulting in non-uniform conductance signals with low conformational sensitivity, which hinders the accurate discrimination of the molecules. Here, we show the first use of inertial-kinetic translocation induced by spinning an in-tube micro-pyramidal silicon nanopore fabricated using photovoltaic electrochemical etch-stop technique for biomolecular sensing. By adjusting the kinetic properties of a funnel-shaped centrifugal force field while maintaining a counter-balanced state of electrophoretic and electroosmotic effect in the nanopore, we achieved regulated translocation of proteins and obtained stable signals of long and adjustable dwell times and high conformational sensitivity. Moreover, we demonstrated instantaneous sensing and discrimination of molecular conformations and longitudinal monitoring of molecular reactions and conformation changes by wirelessly measuring characteristic features in current blockade readouts using the in-tube nanopore device. Nanopore sensing is a technique that involves monitoring temporal traces of current blockades as molecules pass through a nanopore driven by a force difference imposed across the pore 1-4 . This approach can easily be integrated into portable sensing devices with electronics 5 and has contributed substantially to many branches of the life sciences over the past two decades because of its application in nanopore sequencing A nanopore with the desired shape and size and made of an appropriate material is imperative for the accurate detection and characterization of molecules in question, such as proteins than 8 nm owing to unavoidable over-etching Here, we present a new in-tube sensing device that incorporates an inertial force kinetically regulated molecular translocation method into a micro-pyramidal silicon nanopore (MPSN) to achieve precise fabrication of sub-5 nm silicon nanopores and controlled single-molecule translocation. This MPSN is fabricated using photovoltaic electrochemical etch-stop technique that leverages the local photovoltage and its counter-etching effect (i.e., photoinhibition effect) induced by near-field optical irradiation and implements a high-precision electro-optical monitoring strategy. This wet-etching technique enables a controllable, self-limited, and closed-loop chemical etching process capable of reliably and cost-effectively fabricating silicon nanopores with resolutions ranging from 65 nm to 4 nm. The resulting nanopores have a thickness of 21.25 μm, providing excellent structural strength to withstand high inertial force (see Supplementary note 1 and 2). Furthermore, an in-tube MPSN device was developed to enable inertial-kinetic translocation by decoupling molecular translocation from the electrokinetic effect and sensing proteins through the wireless measurement of current blockade signals at temporal resolution of at least 80 microseconds (see Supplementary note 3). This device offers an adjustable dwell time of up to 100 ms and high conformational sensitivity for sensing proteins by kinetically regulating a funnel-shaped centrifugal force while maintaining electrophoretic and electroosmotic forces in a counter-balanced state within the nanopore. To validate our device, we demonstrated the real-time discrimination of the mass and shape of protein molecules as well as longitudinal monitoring of molecular reactions and conformational changes by quantifying the dwell times and detecting characteristic features in current blockade traces. The reliable fabrication of sub-5-nm silicon nanopores combined with the enhanced controllability offered by the inertial-kinetic translocation technique suggests promising potential for accurate and efficient molecule fingerprinting using the 'MPSN-in-atube' scheme. , preetching process using KOH to achieve remaining thickness H, i.e., distance between tip of micro-pyramid and silicon/etchant interface, ranging from 114 nm to 19 nm (i); local etching process using photoinhibition-assisted KOH etching to regulate etching rate and final pore size, i.e., the narrowest opening diameter, of MPSN (ii and iii). b, Representative transmission spectra used to closely monitor remaining thickness during pre-etching process. Spectral peak λ ! of 520 nm corresponds to H of 1270 nm. c, The spectral peak was measured using a spectrometer, while the remaining silicon thickness was measured using a contact profilometer. The black dots represent experimental data from 4 samples, and the red line represents the fitting result. Based on four wafer tests, the standard deviation of the measured remaining silicon thickness at the tested spectral peak is approximately 8 nm. d, Current signal (IP, blue line) measured during local etching process. Depending on remaining thickness H, different irradiation times ti are needed to achieve silicon perforation, leading to over-etching stage signified by current ramp with slope tanθ " over 0.5 nA/sec. Pore size of MPSN is then precisely controlled by over-etching time to. e-g, Front-view SEM image (e) and back-view TEM image (f) of small MPSN S0 with pore size of 4.4 nm fabricated using remaining thickness of 19 nm, irradiation time of 20 seconds, and over-etching time of 0.6 seconds. Pore size is further characterized using image grayscale analysis (g) of red line in f. The fabrication of MPSNs primarily involves the preparation process and pre-etching process followed by a local etching process (see Fig. In the pre-etching process, first 80.0 °C and then the room temperature (~22.0 °C) KOH etchant was used to etch silicon from the backside to achieve a remaining thickness of 19 to 114 nm. A spectral detection system consisting of broadband blue light and a spectrometer were used to precisely track the transmission spectral characteristics of the remaining silicon (see Fig. After the injection of KOH etchant and KCl electrolyte, the etching time required for perforation (i.e., the irradiation time) depends on the remaining thickness H achieved during the pre-etching process. For example, a 120-second irradiation time is required for 114 nm of the remaining silicon thickness. Perforation leads to an over-etching stage characterized by rapid ramping in the current signal and an over-etching time that can be used to control the final pore size of MPSNs (see Fig. To validate the proposed fabrication method, MPSNs with pore sizes ranging from 4.4 to 64.2 nm were fabricated using different combinations of remaining thicknesses (or irradiation times) and over-etching times (see Fig. A correlation study was conducted to examine the relationship among the pore size, remaining thickness and over-etching time. Our results reveal that the proposed fabrication method offers three distinct working regions mainly governed by the over-etching time. These regions include a sub-10 nm nanopore region using an over-etching time of ≤0.6 seconds, an over-40-nm nanopore region using an over-etching time of ≥2 seconds and a transition region using an over-etching time between 0.6 and 2 seconds (see Fig. To achieve controllable translocation of molecules, an in-tube MPSN device was developed to implement inertial kinetically regulated molecular translocation (i.e., inertial-kinetic translocation) in a laboratory-grade centrifuge (see Fig. When an MPSN is centrifuged, its pyramid design offers a favourable funnel-shaped centrifugal force field that effectively captures and guides molecules through the nanopore by overcoming Brownian motion and a potential barrier ∆U caused by molecule-pore interactions (see Fig. To assess the stability of single-molecule translocation, we used the coefficient of variation (CV) of dwell times (see Fig. An in-tube device made of a 15-nm MPSN was validated for its ability to sense six representative macromolecules of various masses and shapes, including EpCAM ( m = 37 kDa, β = 0.72, ξ = 0.0254 kDa "# ) To verify the capability of the in-tube MPSN device for characterizing the mass (i.e., m) and shape (i.e., ξ, see Fig. These results indicate that t # linearly increases with the molecular shape-to-mass weighting factor and is adjustable using different rotation speed. For the correlation between t $ and m, the fitted curves can be described as follows (see Fig. These equations demonstrate that t $ decays exponentially with the molecular weight and a fast decay rate can be achieved with a higher rotation speed. Molecular fingerprinting of the in-tube MPSN device can help longitudinally monitor conformational changes resulting from molecular reactions and interaction processes, such as the dissociation of EpCAM IgG (antibody) and EpCAM (antigen) complex. To prepare the antibody-antigen complex, EpCAM was incubated with 1 μM EpCAM IgG in 1 M KCl (pH = 7.4) for 45 minutes. The resulting reactant was diluted to 1 nM and injected into the flow cell of the in-tube device for sensing after adjusting the pH value to a balanced state by adding HCl (see Supplementary Note 20). By comparing the characteristic current blockade traces of the antibody molecule and antibody-antigen complex, it was found that the blockade signal of the complex exhibited a larger ratio of two current amplitudes (Ip2 / Ip1 ≥ 1.5) than of the antibody (Ip2 / Ip1 ≤ 1.0) (see Fig. Furthermore, the in-tube MPSN device can be used for the longitudinal sensing of conformational changes in molecules during the aggregation and polymerization processes. In this study, we investigated the aggregation of Au@PEG nanoparticles. The initial Au@PEG solution was first subjected to ultrasonication, and the sensing experiment was repeated every 10 min and performed four times in total (see Supplementary Note 20). The current blockade signals of Au@PEG in single nanoparticle, biomolecular aggregates and trimolecular aggregates display features of a single-peak, two-peaks and three-peaks respectively (see Fig. To achieve inertial-kinetic translocation of molecules, the nanopore needs to provide enough mechanical strength to withstand high levels of inertial force in centrifuge. In addition, a funnel-shaped nanopore is preferred to enable targets distributed over a large range for better capture and sense of molecules in nanopore. A solid-state funnel-shaped nanopore of over tens micrometres thickness can meet these requirements, and such a nanopore can be fabricated by using glass pulling and silicon chemical etching techniques Additionally, the micro-pyramid structure of MPSNs facilitates the capture of nano-sized molecules and their translocation through nanopores while offering a long sensing length. We further propose a novel in-tube MPSN device for operating nanopore inside a centrifuge tube and implementing inertial-kinetic molecular translocation. This approach decouples molecular translocation from signal detection in the system and offers enhanced controllability over the translocation speed by conveniently regulating the rotation speed and centrifugal force in MPSN. While an electric field is still applied to MPSNs and used as a sensing method in our in-tube device, electrokinetic motion is effectively balanced by adjusting the pH values of the electrolyte used. Our experiments and theoretical studies confirm that the integration of centrifugation-governed inertial-kinetic translocation in MPSNs offers highly distinguishable molecular fingerprints related to the mass, shape, molecular reactions, and conformational change of proteins, with stable and adjustable dwell times and amplitudes of current blockade. This potentially allows for higher conformational sensitivity and temporal resolution than these offered by the conventional electrokinetic approaches to enable the accurate discrimination of proteins. Despite demonstrating the feasibility of MPSNs and the in-tube device for the conformational discrimination of macromolecules, the current study has some limitations. To make it practical for use, the throughput of the device should be improved through parallel fabrication and by monitoring 2D nanopore arrays. Additionally, an intelligent data-driven close-loop strategy should be used to increase the controllability and sensing capability of our in-tube MPSN device. This will enable automated and quantitative recognition of molecules and facilitate the spatiotemporally resolved sensing of molecule interactions. The preparation process in MPSN fabrication. Initially, two 200-nm-thick Si3N4 layers were deposited on both sides of a silicon sample using plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (Oxford Instruments plc). Subsequently, two square patterns were transferred to the photoresist layers on both sides of the silicon through photolithography (SUSS MicroTec SE), which included standard procedures such as soft baking, UV exposure, developing and hard baking. The square pattern on the front side had a side length of 30 μm, whereas that on the backside had a side length of 800 μm. Carbon tetrafluoride (flow rate: 100 sccm; gas generation time: 20 mins) and argon (flow rate: 5 sccm; gas generation time: 20 mins) were then introduced into a plasma chamber (Plasma Etch Inc.) at a vacuum pressure of 100 mTorr to eliminate the exposed Si3N4 into a plasma environment excited by a radiofrequency electrostatic field (frequency: 3.0 MHz; output power: 29.6 W; radiofrequency generation time: 5 mins). Finally, an inverted micro-pyramid structure was fabricated on the front side of the silicon sample by etching it with 30% (w/w) KOH in water heated to 80.0 °C on a hotplate. The proteins used in this study, including EpCAM, bovine serum albumin, streptavidin, EpCAM-antibody and amylase, were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. Fragment antigen-binding was procured from Rockland Immunochemicals, Inc. The 4.8-nm spherical Au@PEGs were synthesised using a kinetically controlled seeded growth method. Initially, 3.5-nm-sized Au seeds were synthesised by injecting tetrachloroauric acid into a mixed solution of sodium citrate and tannic acid at 70 °C. Subsequently, the size of the Au seeds was increased to 4.8 nm by diluting the seed solution and injecting aliquots of gold precursor The molecule samples, comprising proteins and gold nanoparticles, were initially dispersed in 1M KCl. The pH values of the samples were then adjusted by injecting HCl and precisely calibrated using a pH metre (PH-3C, Yk Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd) with a ±0.01 pH resolution. The pH dependence of the Zeta potential of the tested samples was measured using a light scattering analyzer (DelsaMax PRO, Beckman Coulter, Inc.). To determine the characteristic pH value of the balanced state between the electrophoretic and electroosmotic forces, nanopore sensing of the molecules at different pH values in MPSNs was performed by applying voltage only without the use of centrifugal forces. The characteristic pH value was identified as the corresponding value when the current blockade signal indicated minimal or no translocation events. This value was measured for each sample. In-tube nanopore sensing device. The in-tube device primarily comprises a centrifuge tube with a flow cell and an MPSN sample inside (see Fig. The signal was then cascaded to a differential circuit with a low circuit noise of 0.4 pA (in root mean square at a sampling rate of 50 kHz). The amplified blockade signals are then digitized using an analogue-to-digital converter (AD9410, Analog Devices, Inc.) at a sampling rate of 50 kHz before being wirelessly transmitted to an external receiver in a mobile phone through an in-tube Bluetooth module (HM-BT4501, HOPE Microelectronics Co., Ltd.) at a baud rate of 115,200 bits/second. The near-field diffraction pattern on the silicon/etchant interface was simulated using a two-dimensional axisymmetric model in COMSOL Multiphysics. Ringshaped diffraction patterns with a dark centre area around the pyramid tip were observed for different remaining silicon thicknesses ranging from 10 nm to 200 nm. The diameter of the dark centre area was found to decrease with decreasing remaining thickness. The inertial-kinetic translocation process in MPSNs was simulated using COMSOL Multiphysics to understand the sensing region of the micro-pyramidal structure and the centrifugal force exerted on the molecules. In our COMSOL model, ion diffusion in the electrolyte was calculated using the Nernst-Planck equation in the transport of diluted species module. The distribution of the electric field in the nanopore structure was calculated using the Poisson equation in an electrostatics module by setting the applied voltages U to 0.3 V or 0.6 V, pore size to 15 nm and conductivity of 1M KCl solution to 111000 μS/cm. The sensing length of the nanopore was defined as the length between two points at which the maximal electric field intensity decays to its e "# value During the molecular capturing process (see Fig. Thus, t $ can be calculated using an Eyring-like form t / e " 1(3 4 ) 78 , where h represents the forcedependent factor, t / represents the mean of the exponential distribution, k represents Boltzmann constant and T represents the environmental temperature. Consequently, the capture duration t # and translocation time t $ can be calculated using the following equations: t $ = t / e " 78'56 $ 9 :; (7) Here m is the molecular weight, ξ is the shape-to-mass weighting factors, ρ is distance between the targets and the rotating shaft of the centrifuge, and ω is the rotation speed. The fitting results of Equations ( 