In a superconductor/ferromagnet hybrid, a magnetically-controlled singlet-to-triplet Cooper pair conversion can modulate the superconducting critical temperature. In these triplet superconducting spin valves, such control usually requires inhomogeneous magnetism. However, in the presence of spin-orbit coupling from an interfacial heavy metal layer, the singlet/triplet conversion rate and thus critical temperature can be controlled via the magnetization direction of a single homogeneous ferromagnet. Here, we report significantly enhanced controllable pair conversion to a triplet state in Nb/Pt/Co/Pt superconducting spin valve in which Pt/Co/Pt is homogeneously magnetized and proximity-coupled to a superconducting layer of Nb. The Co/Pt interface furthest away from Nb is modified by a sub-nanometer-thick layer of Cu or Au. We argue that the enhancement is most likely associated from an improvement of the Co/Pt interface due to the insertion of Cu and Au layers. Additionally, the higher normalized orbital moments in Au measured using X-ray magnetic circular dichroism shows that increasing spin-orbit coupling enhances the triplet proximity effect -an observation supported by our theoretical calculations. Our results provide a pathway to enhancing triplet pair creation by interface engineering for device development in superspintronics. Conventional superconductivity arises due to the formation of Cooper pairs between electrons with opposite spins. In a superconductor/ferromagnet (S/F) bilayer, such pairs can leak from S into F, causing the so-called proximity effect. Due to the strong exchange field in the F layers, this proximity effect is short-ranged. Microscopically, the two electrons of the Cooper pair occupy two different spin bands of the spin-split bands of the F layer resulting in a finite centre-of-mass momentum However, in a S/F/F or a F/S/F trilayer the T C of the S layer is lowered for an orthogonal magnetization alignment of the two F layers due to the formation of spin-aligned triplet Cooper pairs generated from the non-collinear alignment of the F layer moments. These triplets belong to the same spin-band and are less sensitive to the pair-breaking effects of the exchange field resulting in an enhanced proximity effect i.e. triplet pairs can pass much further into F than singlet pairs. This enhancement spreads the superconductivity in a larger volume allowing a greater modulation of T C by controlling the relative F layer moments Recent theoretical and experimental work Here, the T C modulation mechanism is different from the S/F/F trilayer and results from the selective opening and closing of the triplet channel depending on the angle of the magnetic moment with the film plane (θ, Fig. Although the SOC driven SSV effect is well established Four-point resistance measurements were performed on unpatterned spin-valves in the 2 -8 K range. The T C was defined as the temperature corresponding to 50% of the resistive transition. Figure The key feature in these resistance measurements is the significantly larger T C drop for IP fields compared to those due to a weak field-dependent depairing in pure Nb or Nb/Co bilayer. Similarly, for OOP fields, the T C drops in samples containing Pt at the interface between Nb and Co is significantly smaller than is expected from orbital depairing. These observations are consistent with singlet-triplet conversion mediated by SOC We note a second feature in Fig. To estimate the SOC, we performed X-ray Magnetic Circular Dichroism (XMCD) measurements at room temperature at the magnetic spectroscopy beamline (4.6) at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories. The X-ray beam, incident perpendicular to the sample surface, was scanned across the Co L2/3 edge by varying the energy and the X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) recorded using the total electron yield method. A magnetic field of 1.8 T was applied normal to the sample surface to saturate the Co layer when recording the XAS. The XMCD is the difference of the two XAS spectra recorded at positive and negative magnetic fields corresponding to two helicities. We recorded 10 XAS scans for each sample which was averaged to get a single XAS spectrum. Applying the sum rules From Fig. We performed numerical calculations using the Usadel equation for diffusive superconductivity Figure 