Although the principal physical behaviour of a material is inherently connected to its fundamental crystal structure, the behaviours observed in the real-world are often driven by the microstructure, which for many polycrystalline materials, equates to the size and shape of the constituent crystal grains. Here we highlight a cutting edge synthesis route to the controlled engineering of grain structures in thin films and the simplification of associated 3-dimensional problems to less complex 2D ones. This has been applied to the actinide ceramic, uranium dioxide, The nature of grains and grain boundaries is crucial to our understanding of the behaviour of polycrystalline materials Uranium dioxide is the most prevalent fission fuel and is used world-wide in over 400 nuclear reactors During operation the fission process causes severe structural transformations, driven by the kinetic energy of daughter nuclei and emitted neutrons. There is an enormous amount of heat deposited in the fuel pellets, which is transported away by the coolant in the core, however, the fundamental thermal conductivity of UO 2 is particularly poor and this results in large thermal gradients across only a few mm. Centreline temperatures can reach 1500 • C with the outer edge of the fuel pellet just a 300 • C The use of thin film deposition techniques to synthesise fission fuel materials is gaining traction as a viable and, in some cases, preferred route for test and experimentation The pre-treatment of the substrate material can be used to selectively engineer desired average grain sizes (see Fig. with nucleation and growth kinetics Here we have discovered some peculiar results, which could shed light on a specific crystallographic route for this phase transition. The UO 2 /YSZ system (YSZ is yttria-stabilised zirconia) is an example of a 1:1, or so-called cube on cube matched epitaxial relationship, used to produce single crystal films to study surface and interfacial effects on pristine fuel material In a bulk material any measurement of the surface properties that is any deeper than the first few atomic layers will be affected by the grain structure along the surface normal. Our polyepitaxial growth mechanism avoids these issues, creating columnar grains matched along the underlying YSZ grain directions, where the lateral grain structure remains constant as a function of depth (see Fig. Here we focus on the effect of grain size, orientation and grain boundary volume on the oxidation of UO 2 . The lattice parameter of the as-grown samples was 5.476(2) Å, similar to values reported for the bulk material In the second stage of the experiment, the pressure of oxygen was kept constant at 200 mbar, and the temperature was increased to 300°C. The Longitudinal scans were collected every 0.5 hour for 48 hours, and a selection of these are shown in Fig. A general decrease in the intensity is observed for (111), ( The kinetics of oxidation from UO 2+x to U 3 O 8 presented in Fig. Data presented here is in contradiction to what was reported by Allen et al. where the oxidation rate of UO 2 was suggested to be highest for the To further explore the potential of a polyepitaxial system, a UO 2 sample was oxidised in-situ in a High Temperature Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (HT-ESEM). Prior to oxidation an area of sample was marked and mapped using EBSD. Selected images taken during this in-situ oxidation experiment are shown in Fig. The ignition centers, observed as cracks related to oxidation, were extracted and are indicated by red markers on the overlay of SEM and EBSD maps in Fig. In 75% of cases the oxidation-related cracking was observed at the grain boundaries, which is expected and has been previously demonstrated that oxidation preferentially occurs along the grain boundaries, and then advances from boundary to the centre of the grains The combined use of XRD, SEM and EBSD on polyepitaxial UO 2 deposited onto specially engineered YSZ substrates has demonstrated that it is possible to mimic the grain structure of the nuclear fuel. This was achieved through different heat annealing treatments of the substrate producing similar variations in the grain size morphology of the thin film to that observed in pristine and irradiated sintered pellets of UO 2 . The polycrystalline character of the system, was confirmed by XRD. EBSD results showed that the grain size could be controlled within 10-50 μm without needing to expose UO 2 to high temperatures. Althought, other have discussed grain-to-grain epitaxy Here we have used it to look at the UO 2 ⇒ U 3 O 8 oxidation transformation. Data collected using in-situ XRD and SEM approaches has shown good agreement with the characteristic kinetics of the transition Polyepitaxial thin film samples were fabricated using reactive DC magnetron sputtering system at the FaRMS (Facility for Radioactive Materials Surfaces) at the University of Bristol To grow polyepitaxial UO 2 a depleted uranium target was used, and a partial pressure of 2 x 10 -5 mbar of O 2 . Substrates were held at elevated temperature of 650°C to assist crystalline growth of UO 2 . With calibrated deposition rate, the growth time was controlled to achieve roughly a 100 nm thick layer of UO 2 To investigate the effect of grain structure on UO 2 oxidation, polyepitaxial UO 2 thin films were grown on polycrystalline ceramic of yttrium stabilized zirconia (Y 2 O 3 ) 0.08 (ZrO 3 ) 0.92 substrates obtained commercially from MTI Corporation, with dimensions 10 × 10 × 0.5 mm, polished to <100 Å root mean square (rms) roughness. The structure of uranium dioxide is cubic fluorite, with space group of UO 2 is Fm3m, No. 225, with a lattice constant at room temperature 5.47 Å In the work of Bao et al. [001] single crystal of UO 2 was reported by Strehle et al. Lateral grain sizes of the YSZ substrates was increased by annealing them in a tube furnace. This process was carried out in air atmosphere, at 1600°C. The heating ramp rate was set to 15°C/min, and the same rate was used for cooling down. During heat treatment the roughness of the material increased due to changes in the grain size and shape, to obtain a smooth and clean surface, polishing and cleaning processes were applied. To assist with the surface preparation process, annealed substrates were encapsulated in ClaroCit resin (Struers). The first stage of polishing process for one side polished YSZ was P1200, followed by P2500 and P4000 silicon carbide (SiC) abrasive papers (Buehler). Time needed for each step was between 3 minutes to 20 minutes, based on the surface quality assessment performed using an optical microscope. The polishers used during this stage were Buehler Metaserv, operated at speed of 600 rpm, with water flow. The ECOMET polishers were used in next stage. Diamond pastes with 3um, 1 um, 0.25 um and 0.1 um sizes were used, together with MetaDi fluid lubricant (Buehler). The three polishers with higher grades, use MasterTex polishing cloths fitted to a wheel, while the last one was fitted with MicroCloth. The last step of the polishing process involves use of a Vibro-Polisher (with 50 nm of Colloidal Silica), at medium vibration speed for 24 hours. The initial cleaning stage involved ultrasonicating the substrate in a 500 ml beaker filled with 250 ml acetone for 1 hour to remove larger resin contaminants from the sample. Once this step was completed, the sample was rinsed with acetone and underwent an additional 45 minutes of ultrasonication in clean acetone. Subsequently, to further eliminate organic contaminants, the substrates were immersed in ethanol and subjected to ultrasonic treatment for one hour, then rinsed with ethanol. The same procedures were then repeated using isopropanol. Following the cleaning process with these three solvents, the surface was dried using a flow of warm, clean air to prevent residue buildup. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed using a Philips X'Pert PRO MPD diffractometer with a Cu-Kα source, configured for Bragg-Brentano diffraction geometry, with specialized mirror designed to reflect Cu-Kβ away from the detector. The footprint width of the X-ray beam on the sample surface was 10 mm, and the incident programmable divergence slit, located 240 mm away from the sample, was set to 0.5°. The step size was 0.05°and counting time per step was 2s, with sample being held stationary. The in-situ oxidation experiment was performed utilizing the Anton Paar HTK 1200 high temperature environment chamber, each time at a constant oxygen pressure of 200 mbar. Lattice parameters were extracted using a least-squares fitting routine of Pseudo-Voigt peak profiles. The initial sample characterisation, including EBSD, measurement were conducted at an acceleration voltage of 30 keV and aperture of 120 μm using Zeiss Sigma High Definition Variable Pressure Field Emission SEM with EDAX Electron Backscatter Diffraction detector. To analyse the data OIM Analysis TM (EDAX) software was used. The same microscope was used to characterise sample surface post-oxidation. The in-situ SEM oxidation experiment was performed using a HT-ESEM at the Institut de Chimie Separative de Marcoule (ICSM) in Marcoule, France, model: FEI Quanta 200 FEG ESEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA. The insertion was performed in air. Samples were heated under an atmosphere of 3.5 mbar of oxygen. Once the signs of the oxidation were visible, temperature was held constant. The sample regions underwent continuous monitoring throughout the entire duration of the experiment, with images being recorded at intervals of 3 to 5 seconds. All pictures were recorded with the same magnification of x250, corresponding to an area of 512 x 470 μm 2 . Fiji ImageJ 