The generation and utilization of hot charge carriers in plasmonic materials have emerged as a topic of significant importance, with profound implications across multiple disciplines, including optoelectronics, photovoltaics, photocatalysis, and sensing. In this study, we investigate the hot electron transfer from nanoporous gold (npAu) in dependence of the structure size, utilizing both the nanoscale feature size and the interconnected nature of this material. We employ photoelectron injection from nanoporous gold into the electrolyte under UV illumination as a test electron transfer process. Nanoporous gold thin films with sub-10 nm initial ligament diameter are stepwise coarsened by potential cycles in a photoelectrochemical setup, thereby allowing us to precisely probe the influence of ligament diameter on the photocurrent response. The resulting ligament diameter variations are confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis. As the ligament diameter increased from 8 to 16 nm, there was a corresponding decrease in quantum efficiency proportional to the inverse ligament diameter squared. Such dependency is expected for electrons excited by surface collisions. For the small ligament diameter of 10 nm we estimate an emission efficiency of excited 6sp electrons as 3.14%, reaching 23% for the surface excited electrons. Metallic nanostructures have been extensively explored due to significant absorption by excitation of free electrons NpAu is typically prepared through alloy corrosion or dealloying using either free corrosion processes or electrochemical dealloying techniques. Through our study, we observed a notable trend: as the ligament diameter increased from 8 to 16 nm, the quantum efficiency exhibited a corresponding decrease, following with high precision the parabolic dependence on inverse ligament diameter. Our finding supports theoretical predictions indicating that surface and geometrical modifications significantly affect plasmon decay rates and hot carrier mobilization. Nanoporous gold thin films were obtained through electrochemical dealloying of white gold leaf precursors of 6 carat (Gerstendoerfer, Germany) and confirmed by EDS that the atomic percentage of gold is about 18%. The electrochemical dealloying was done in a three-electrode cell with a gold leaf served as a working electrode, a coiled silver wire (0.1 mm in diameter) as a counter electrode, and a pseudo-Ag/AgCl electrode (0.53 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode in 1 M HClO4) as a reference electrode. All potentials in this paper are converted to reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). The electrolyte was 1 M HClO4 (70% p.a., Merk) in ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ, Sartorius). A potentiostat (Autolab, Metrohm) was used in the electrochemical dealloying experiments. A gold leaf with 30 mm × 60 mm dimensions was placed into the electrochemical cell and connected to the potentiostat via a thin gold wire. The dealloying of the leaf used a two-step potentiostatic technique. First, we set the voltage at 1.26 V until the current fell below 2×10 For microstructural characterization, scanning electron microscopy was performed using the Zeiss Supra VP55 microscope with a 10 kV accelerating voltage in in-lens mode. The working distance was approximately 2 ± 0.5 mm, and the aperture was set to 10 μm. A npAu electrode consisting of a 140 nm-thick leaf on a quartz substrate was positioned at the backside of a photoelectrochemical cell equipped with a transparent window for illumination. The surrounding area of the npAu layer was firmly pressed against a conductive foam connected to the working electrode on the backside of the cell. A pseudo Ag/AgCl and a platinum wire were employed as reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. Before the measurement, 0.5M H2SO4 electrolyte was purged with Ar (99.999 % purity) for 30 minutes to remove any dissolved gases. To ensure consistency in potential references, the potentials were rescaled versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (0.53 vs. RHE) in 0.5M H2SO4. Photocurrent measurements were conducted with a commercially available setup from Zahner Elektrik, Zennium electrochemical workstation coupled with controlled intensity-modulated photospectroscopy (Zahner P211) in PECC-2 cell. The light source was tunable light (TLS03). For photoemission measurement the UV source with 291nm wavelength was selected. The on total power of the illumination was 0.52 mW within the illuminated area of 28.26 mm 2 , so that the intensity of light was 0.184W/cm2, determined within the equal geometric setup as used in the photoelectrochemical cell and placing the photodetector at the same position as the investigated sample. The optical absorption spectra of the samples were measured using a UV-vis spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050). In order to prevent the absorption of UV radiation by the glass substrate, the nanoporous gold samples were transferred onto fused silica substrates, which are commonly employed in photoelectrocatalytic investigations. The samples were immersed in a 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte, and any excess liquid was carefully removed before conducting spectroscopy measurements. Using integrating sphere module, the absorption spectra were determined by subtracting the contributions of the diffuse transmission and reflection from the total incident light intensity expressed as a percentage. In this study, we focus on free-standing thin films of npAu. The samples were fabricated from a thick silver-gold leaf utilizing the electrochemical dealloying method in an acid solution. Usually, the cyclic voltammetry (CV) of gold exhibits a current peak associated with a surface oxide layer formation between 1.4 and 1.6 V vs. RHE, which is followed by a minimum at approximately 1.65 V, referred to as the Burshtein minimum. As can be seen in Fig. Coarsening the npAu in an electrochemical cell with an H2SO4 electrolyte is advantageous because the same electrolyte can also be used for in-situ photocurrent measurements or other photoelectrochemical investigations simultaneously. In our case, the H3O + ions in the H2SO4 electrolyte play a crucial role as a charge carrier in capturing the emitted electrons upon illumination. Changes in the surface of flat gold during the formation of the oxide layer and a dramatic change in the surface structure after reduction were reported previously. The absorptivity of 140 nm-thick npAu layer on a quartz substrate was determined using diffuse transmission and reflection measurements in a UV-Vis spectrometer equipped with an integrated sphere module. The absorptivity of the npAu film was measured before and after subjecting the sample to various number of CV scans within the potential window of 0.53 -1.43 V vs. RHE (Fig. Consequently, we see that absorptivity is dependent on the number of CV scans (i.e., ligament diameter), with coarser structures exhibiting the slightly reduced optical absorptivity due to decreased collision frequency of electrons in larger ligaments. The photoresponse of npAu was evaluated using controlled-potential chronoamperometry with chopped illumination before and after coarsening through CV scans. The measurements were conducted at a potential of 0.33 V vs. RHE, where no gold oxide layer was present on the surface. Each interval of illumination generates a distinct current, as can be seen in Fig. The difference between the current observed under illumination (at a wavelength of 291 nm) and in the dark was identified as the photocurrent (I ph ). The injection of hot electrons into the solution induced by light leads to a cathodic photocurrent. Additionally, a transient current was observed before the current saturated following the illumination. This transient current might be of capacitive nature, arising from charges trapped in surface states induced by the incident light, The photocurrent I ph can be used to calculate the photoemission quantum efficiency. The 1/L, which is fitted with a parabolic curve b/L + c/L 2 , where we obtain b equal to 0.3% nm and c equal to 6.1% nm We assume that all emitted electrons stay in water until participation in a reaction and thus contribute to the photocurrent. First, we discuss the excitation of hot electrons. In the case of UV illumination with 4.26 eV (291 nm) photon energy, the light is absorbed by both 6sp and 5d electrons of gold. We expect that photon absorption by 5d electrons does not contribute to photocurrent as their energy is approx. 2 eV below the Fermi level where the 5d electron contribution ε 5d ′′ ≈ 6 at 4.26 eV. , where ω is the frequency of light, ω p is the plasma frequency and γ is the collision frequency of 6sp electrons. Collision frequency consists of volume γ V and surface γ S contributions, where the volume contribution is not dependent on ligament size as long as the total number of gold atoms remains constant (which is the case here) while the surface contribution scales with 1/L. It should be noted that we assume that under illumination one photon absorbed under the condition of an electron-obstacle collision creates one hot electron. a potential barrier. The relationship between the surface area to volume ratio (S/V) of npAu and the reciprocal of its ligament diameter (1/L) is linear, given by the expression S /V = m /L, where m is a proportionality constant. For cylindrical ligaments without junctions m is equal to 4. The npAu has smaller surface to volume ratio for the same L. However, the value of m seems to depend on the sample preparation process and ligament diameter determination procedure, with reported values of 1.6 By knowing the quantum efficiency from the experimental results in Fig. The correct description of the metal-semiconductor interface and contributions of possible states at the interface are discussed. Our study of photoemission employs the in-situ coarsening of the ligament structure in nanoporous gold through electrochemical cycling. Using electrochemical potential cycling with a scan rate of 10 mV/s, we successfully coarsened the ligaments and decreased the surface-tovolume ratio of the npAu in small steps. We controlled the coarsening process by the upper limit of the cycling potential window and the number of cycles while performing the photoelectrochemical measurements. This method allowed us to accurately manipulate the npAu structure without changing other experimental conditions. With that approach, we have demonstrated the dominant contribution of the excited electrons from the surface collisions in photoemission. Our results highlight the significant impact of the structure size on the internal quantum efficiency of photoemission from gold nanostructures. We observed a continuous and nonlinear decrease in the quantum efficiency for the ligament size increasing from 8 to 16 nm. Taking into account that 6sp electrons constitute only about 2.9% of all excited electrons, the obtained maximal efficiency around 0.1% is significant. Thus, double digit photoemission efficiencies can be expected from 10 nm nanostructures if excitation is performed outside of the d-band absorption range, with further improvement for smaller ligament sizes and/or using different materials. After preparation, the npAu photoelectrode was mounted in the photoelectrochemical cell. Typically, the photocurrent curve exhibits two distinct regions: a rapid response current (RRC) and a slow response current (SRC) region (usually reported on a time scale of 10 s). Comparable photocurrent responses to RRC are observed in metal-semiconductor photoelectrode and gold nanostructures due to excited carriers. Additionally, a transient current (TC) was observed at the beginning of each illumination, occurring within a short time scale of less than 0.05 seconds. The TC is attributed to the injection of photo-generated hot carriers into surface states, which is typically observed in semiconductor systems 