As an organic semiconductor and a prototypical acceptor molecule in organic photovoltaics, C 60 has broad relevance to the world of organic thin film electronics. Although highly uniform C 60 thin films are necessary to conduct spectroscopic analysis of the electronic structure of these C 60 -based materials, reported C 60 films show a relatively low degree of order beyond a monolayer. Here, we develop a generalizable two-stage growth technique that consistently produces single-domain C 60 films of controllable thicknesses, using Au(111) as an epitaxially well-matched substrate. We characterize the films using low-energy electron diffraction, low-energy electron microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy, and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). We report highly oriented epitaxial film growth of C 60 /Au(111) from 1 monolayer (ML) up to 20 ML films. The high-quality of the C 60 thin films enables the direct observation of the electronic dispersion of the HOMO and HOMO-1 bands via ARPES without need for small spot sizes. Our results indicate a path for the growth of organic films on metallic substrates with long-range ordering. Organic semiconductors (OSCs) offer intriguing alternatives to conventional semiconductor devices owing to the possibility of tuning their properties through chemical modification, their flexible and light-weight nature, and their low production cost In order to probe the electronic band structure of C 60 -based materials, high purity films with long-range order and atomically-consistent thicknesses exceeding a monolayer (ML) are required Here, we describe a two-stage growth recipe, combining hetero-epitaxial and homoepitaxial growth processes at different temperatures. • Stage 1 (Heteroepitaxial Growth): Deposit > 1 nm of C 60 at a rate between 0.01 and 0.1 nm/min, maintaining a substrate temperature of 300 • C, above the re-evaporation temperature for additional layers, promoting high mobility, and preventing growth beyond 1 ML. This two-stage growth relies on a high temperature over-deposition of 1 ML to produce a highly ordered monolayer film, similar to the distillation-like growth first shown to yield high quality ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy Using LEED, we are able to identify the orientation of the overlayer unit cell and visualize the presence of multiple domains with a spot size of 250 μm to 1 mm, this is a similar length scale to many lab based ARPES photon sources is dominant with three other domains visible. Figure To further investigate the origins of multi-domain growth, we use low-energy electron microscopy (LEEM) to visualize a 1.5 ML film grown in a single-stage at an intermediate temperature of 190 • C. Figure To study the quality and degree of order of the first-stage monolayer growth, we also employ low-temperature STM. Figure Undergrown samples are also examined by STM. These samples are grown using the same parameters as the first-stage of the growth recipe to a coverage of 80% of a ML rather than over-depositing. In these cases ordered C 60 is observed in ∼ 78% of the randomly selected scanning area as anticipated, while the other ∼ 22% is disordered (eg. momenta and the Shockley surface state at the center of the BZ, both of which cross the Fermi level. In the ML C 60 FS, the Au(111) surface-resonance s-p band is still visible, in addition to new features following the expected C 60 BZ. However, as C 60 is a semiconductor, it is not expected to contribute any bands that cross the Fermi level. Instead, these additional bands correspond to reconstructions of the surface-resonance Au(111) s-p band formed by the new periodicity imposed by the C 60 overlayer. These replica bands form quasi-linear crossings reminiscent of Dirac cones at the K points, as shown in Fig. Here we have demonstrated a two-stage recipe that exploits both homoepitaxial and heteroepitaxial growth, resulting in highly ordered films confirmed by LEED and STM compared to those grown using a more traditional, single-stage recipe. Such films enable techniques such as ARPES, that require long range orientational order, allowing us to make accurate measurements of C 60 's electronic structure. This approach exploits a strong molecule-substrate interaction and may be generalizable to other organic semiconductors which often interact strongly with metals through π-bonding. The preparation of such long-range ordered films enables the use of ARPES with lab-based, large-spot photon sources to investigate the electronic structures of organic thin films, taking a core technique for the study of electronic structure determination in single crystals over to the realm organic films. The high uniformity of films demonstrated here -lacking in grain boundaries, unintended interfaces -and other defects, is also beneficial for other spectroscopic techniques and devices, with potentially broad implications for OLEDs, OTFTs, and other organic semiconductor-based technologies. The C 60 films are grown in an MBE chamber with a base pressure of 7.4 × 10 -11 Torr. The C 60 is evaporated using a water-cooled quad cluster source from MBE Komponenten with PBN crucibles, and the growth rate is calibrated using a water-cooled quartz crystal monitor. Constant growth rate is maintained throughout each of the deposition; deposition rates ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 nm/min were used. The temperature of the first-stage ho-moepitaxial growth was held at 300 All STM measurements were taken in a ScientaOmicron low-temperature scanning probe microscope with a base chamber pressure of 6×10 -11 Torr, using a cut platinum-iridium tip. All measurements were taken at 4.6 K. Samples were transferred from the MBE chamber to the STM UHV system in a passive vacuum chamber, and were exposed to pressures between 1 × 10 -8 mbar to 4 × 10 -5 mbar. Transfers took ∼1 hour to complete. The MBE chamber is attached directly to both a LEED chamber and an ARPES system, facilitating in situ sample growth and analysis. The LEED is a BDL600IR-MCP model from OCI Vacuum Microengineering Inc., with a 7 -750 eV beam energy and a spot size of approximately 250 μm. The base chamber pressure is 1.5 × 10 -10 Torr. The ARPES system • Stage 2 (Homoepitaxial Growth): Deposit C 60 at a rate between 0.01 and 0.1 nm/min, maintaining a substrate temperature of 155 • C (below the temperature for reevaporation but still promoting mobility), until desired film thickness has been achieved. A. K. Mills, S. Zhdanovich, M. X. Na, F. Boschini, E. Razzoli, M. Michiardi, A. Sheyerman, X. Xu, K. Fukuda, A. Karki, S. Park, H. Kimura, H. Jinno, N. Watanabe, S. Yamamoto, S. Shimomura, D. Kitazawa, T. Yokota, S. Umezu, T.-Q. Nguyen, and T. Someya. Thermally