The levitation of a cylindrical permanent magnet over a high-temperature superconductor cooled by liquid nitrogen can be accompanied by spontaneous oscillations and rotation. The reason for spontaneous rotation of the magnet is magnetization inhomogeneity induced by the temperature gradient. An experiment was carried out on the levitation of Nd-Fe-B magnets over a composite high-temperature superconductor. The experimental results confirm that the rotation frequency depends on the difference in the magnetization values in the upper and lower halves of the magnet. Methods for controlling the rotation frequency of a levitating magnet are proposed. The discovery of high-T c superconductors with a critical temperature T c above the boiling point of nitrogen has led to a significant increase in the use of superconducting devices in electrical engineering and energy. One of the consequences of this discovery was the possibility of demonstrating the shielding of the magnetic field by a superconductor and magnetic levitation not only in laboratories To explain the observations, the authors of The magnetic moment of the magnet material depends on the temperature. 2) There is a temperature gradient along the vertical axis. 3) If the magnetization of the cold part of the magnet is greater than that of the warm part, then the average point of action of the electromagnetic repulsion forces becomes lower than the center of mass of the magnet. Exceeding the center of mass above the average point of action of the electromagnetic repulsion forces leads to spontaneous swinging and rotation. The rotation frequency depends on the thermal conductivity of the magnet material and the dynamic temperature difference between the upper and lower halves of the magnet. Thus, a heat engine is realized, which performs work due to the temperature difference between liquid nitrogen and the room. A detailed mathematical analysis of the rotation of the levitating magnet was carried out in Cylindrical Nd-Fe-B magnets from three different sets (designated I, II, III) were used. The dimensions and weights of the magnets are shown in Table Video recordings of the levitation and rotation were made for all magnets. After establishing a constant rotation speed, the number of revolutions of the magnet over a period of time was calculated, and the rotation frequency was determined. A heat gun was used to heat the magnets. Weak pressure was applied so as not to move the magnet. The temperature of the exhaust air jet is 150 °C. The temperature above the surface of the liquid nitrogen was measured using a Cernox RTD CX-1050 thermal sensor. The magnets levitate at a height of approximately 5 mm above a superconducting platform cooled with liquid nitrogen (Figure The measured rotation frequencies of various magnets are shown in Table The behavior of levitating magnets with increasing and decreasing levels of liquid nitrogen was considered. a) Increasing the nitrogen level. At the beginning of the measurements, the nitrogen level was slightly greater than that of the platform, and the lower point of the levitating magnet was approximately 5 mm from the nitrogen level; this is the usual mode for which the rotational speed values are obtained, as shown in Table As the nitrogen level increased, the rotation of the magnet gradually slowed. The rotation stopped when the lower part of the magnet was immersed in liquid nitrogen. With a further increase in the nitrogen level, there was no rotation or swinging of the magnet. b) Lowering the nitrogen level. The magnet was placed above the platform at a nitrogen level above the top point of the magnet. At the same time, the magnet does not start to swing, and there is no rotation. Next, we observed the behavior of the magnet during evaporation and a gradual decrease in the level of liquid nitrogen. The vibrations of the magnet did not begin even when the nitrogen was lowered to the level at which the rotation of the magnet was previously observed. To start swinging and rotating, the magnet had to warm above the nitrogen surface for several minutes. A wide jet of hot air directed to the center of the magnet (along the axis of rotation) led to an increase in the rotation frequency by more than 2 times compared to the data in Table Local heating was carried out in the upper or lower halves of the rotating magnet using a narrow nozzle on an air gun. With local heating in the upper region, the rotation frequency also increased 2-2.5 times. However, with local heating of the magnet in the lower region, the rotation frequency decreased until the rotation stopped completely. When the heating stopped, the rotation resumed, reaching the values shown in Table The rotation of the magnet is caused by the difference in magnetization between the lower and upper halves of the magnet, M down and M up . The greater this difference ΔM = M down -M up , the greater the torque. However, ΔM is not a monotonic function of the temperature gradient. The magnetization of Nd-Fe-B changes nonmonotonically with temperature (Figure For the magnets used in this work, the dependences of M(T) may have quantitative deviations from the curve shown in Figure Figure As the nitrogen level increases, the lower part of the magnet begins to cool, and M down decreases since in the range below 160 K, the magnetization of Nd-Fe-B decreases with decreasing temperature (Figure The absence of rotation during levitation of a cylindrical magnet with a diameter of 5 mm is probably caused by a small temperature gradient along the vertical diameter and rapid heat exchange in this magnet. We also observed a decrease in the rotation frequency of the magnets when their axis of rotation was tilted. This decrease can be explained by the fact that the temperature difference between the upper and lower halves of the magnet decreases when the magnet is tilted It follows from the experiments carried out that the rotation speed is related to the spatial distribution of the magnetization of a cylindrical magnet. This distribution is established due to the temperature gradient and thermal conductivity of the magnet material. One would expect that an increase in the temperature gradient along the vertical axis of the magnet would lead to an increase in the rotational speed due to an increase in ΔM. However, the rotation frequency decreased with increasing diameter of the magnets and ΔT (Figure At the same the moment of inertia increases rapidly with increasing sample diameter. Consequently, the effect of slowing rotation due to an increase in the moment of inertia is more significant than the effect of an increase in the temperature gradient. The spontaneous rotation of cylindrical Nd-Fe-B magnets during their levitation over composite superconducting tapes is investigated. This phenomenon serves as a good demonstration of the strong diamagnetism of a superconductor and the operation of a heat engine. These observations confirm that the cause of rotation is the temperature gradient and the resulting inhomogeneity of the magnetization of the magnets. It has been found that it is possible to control the rotation frequency of a magnet by changing the nitrogen level or locally heating the magnet. Heating the upper half accelerates, and heating the lower half slows the rotation of the magnets.