Small-angle scattering tensor tomography is a technique for studying anisotropic nanostructures of millimeter-sized samples in a volume-resolved manner. It requires the acquisition of data through repeated tomographic rotations about an axis which is subjected to a series of tilts. The tilt that can be achieved with a typical setup is geometrically constrained, which leads to limits in the set of directions from which the different parts of the reciprocal space map (RSM) can be probed. Here, we characterize the impact of this limitation on reconstructions in terms of the missing wedge problem of tomography, by treating the problem of tensor tomography as the reconstruction of a three-dimensional field of functions on the unit sphere, represented by a grid of Gaussian radial basis functions. We then devise an acquisition scheme to obtain arXiv: Small-angle X-ray Scattering Tensor Tomography (SAXSTT) is a promising method for probing anisotropic nanostructures of macroscopic samples in a volume-resolved manner Here, to investigate these effects under real experimental conditions we present a scheme utilizing sample remounting to yield two incomplete data sets, each measured using the 0 • -45 • tilt scheme, which when combined form a complete data set. The scheme was applied in measurements on a sample of human trabecular bone. For the reconstruction, we employed a RSM representation which uses local Gaussian radial basis functions on a spherical grid to interpolate measured data. This reconstruction is closely related to the Spherical Integral Geometric Tensor Tomography (SIGTT) approach The RSM measured by Small-angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) in a small volume may be written as rsm(q, r) = dV ρ(r ′r) exp(-iq where ρ(r ′r) is the auto-correlation function of the electron density over the small volume, r is the position of the center of the volume, r ′ is the point of integration within the volume, and q is the reciprocal space vector. For a small scattering angle, such that the scattered intensity travels approximately the same path as the transmitted intensity, and assuming that the total amount of scattering is small enough to not significantly influence the transmission, we can probe the RSM by measuring the small-angle scattering intensity with a small beam, and correcting by the transmitted intensity as where I S (q, j, k) is the measured scattering intensity at reciprocal space coordinates (q, θ, φ) and real-space coordinates (j, k). Here, (j, k) are two Cartesian coordinates which give the position of the beam relative to the sample in the plane orthogonal to the incident beam direction, and I T is the transmitted intensity The location of the RSM is given in the experimental system coordinates (j, k, p), where p is the coordinate of the direction in which the x-ray beam travels, see Fig. where φ is an angle on the detector, q 0 (α, β) and q 90 (α, β) are two unit vectors in the sample coordinate system aligned with the 0 • and 90 • direction of the detector, respectively, (α, β) are two angles which give the sample orientation as a sequence of rotations about two axes α α α and β β β orthogonal to the direction of the impinging beam, see Fig. The sample is mounted on a rotation stage such that the first rotation R β also rotates α α α, and a sequential rotation of the sample may therefore be described by the composite rotation R β R α . We choose the sample coordinate system such that it coincides with the experimental coordinate system when α, β = 0, see the initial sample mounting in Fig. Then, the coordinate system of the sample will be subject to the composite rotation R q 0 (β)R q 90 (α), and the direction of the impinging beam in the sample coordinate system thus changes according to where p(0, 0) is the direction of the beam in the sample coordinate system prior to any rotation or tilt of the sample. We can understand the values taken by p(α, β) as points on a sphere of projection, which is a unit sphere consisting of all unique measurement directions up to Friedel symmetry, see Fig. A composite rotation of the projection vector about the two axes R q 0 (β)R q 90 (α) may be described as a single rotation around a third axis î, which lies on C(φ, α, β). Consequently, this direction is a rotational invariant with respect to said composite rotation. This means that RSM (∥q∥î, r) can be regarded as a scalar quantity for the purpose of tomography, and standard tomographic analysis can therefore, in principle, be applied to the reconstruction of this component. Although carrying out the experiment in practice requires a third rotation axis when remounting, as it is not possible to tilt the sample by more than 45 • , it is possible to specify all points on the sphere of projection using rotations about only two orthogonal axes. Any component of the rotation that occurs about the axis of projection can be discounted in this analysis, since it does not change the information contained in the projection. The following line of reasoning is therefore also valid when combining data from the the two measurements. According to the projection-slice theorem, the Fourier transform of a projection along p constitutes a slice orthogonal to p in Fourier space (e.g., where I T is the transmitted intensity at each point in the raster scan, and I 0 is the incident intensity, where we use the projection-wise approximation I 0 (j, k) ≈ max I T (j, k), since each measurement includes some air, which has a very small absorbance. The absorbance is a scalar quantity and therefore very accurately reconstructed without missing wedges. Hence, it is included for comparison. This projection direction, along the y-axis, is not part of the measurement of data set 1, as seen in Fig. A set of reconstruction constraints similar to those given by the projection-slice theorem exist for the general case of three-dimensional projections in the form of John's equation (e.g., Therefore, to treat this problem more generally, and not just for discrete, precisely measured RSM components, we need to assume that the reciprocal space map does not change too quickly across real-and reciprocal space dimensions. Then, given the existence of the invariant axis î, we can define a sampling quality factor on the reciprocal space sphere based on the density of sampling on the sphere of projection. To accomplish this, we define a Friedel symmetric sampling density ρ(p(α, β)) as with p(α, β) being defined by Eq. ( where v and u are two vectors. The precise choice of the threshold parameter δ depends on assumptions about both the real and reciprocal space continuity of the sample, the size of the sample, as well as the chosen reconstruction method. We chose δ under the assumption that our sampling density in well-sampled regions was sufficient to obtain a good tomographic reconstruction. This was chosen over more quantitative thresholds such as the great-circle distance implied by the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem applied to tomographic reconstruction where (θ, φ) specifies a direction in reciprocal space, and C(τ, θ, φ) is defined as in Eq. ( In order to obtain a reconstruction suitable for the analysis of the missing wedge problem, we want to represent the RSM on the sphere using smooth local functions on the sphere which can be projected into our measurement basis. The locality of the representation is important, since non-local artefacts (such as the spherical harmonic Gibbs phenomenon) could otherwise affect the evaluation of the reconstructions in unpredictable fashion. We also want to reduce the measured data into azimuthal bins in order to keep the data size manageable, and this reduction can be represented by integrating I S (∥q∥ C(φ, α, β), j, k) (Eq. ( (2015) employed only limited reduction of the measured RSM, necessitating extensive sorting of measurements according to their nearest virtual axis, and processing of a large number of separate tomographic problems, followed by subsequent composition and analysis of the separate reconstructions. De Falco et al. (2021) also utilized rotational axis invariance, and carried out a reconstruction using the component of the SAXS measurement orthogonal to the main axis of rotation to study a subpopulation of mineral particles within a sample. These approaches utilize the separability of measurements in order to simplify the tomographic reconstruction problem. However, azimuthal binning reduces this separability, unless the bins are made very small, which would work against the purpose of reducing data size. Thus, rather than aiming to carry out reconstructions at specific points in reciprocal space and subsequently fitting a function to these points, we define a grid of Gaussian basis functions on the unit sphere. This basis set forms a local representation of spherical functions which is used to interpolate measured data into a smooth function on the sphere where N n is a normalization factor, [φ m , φ m+1 ) parameterizes the mth detector segment on the unit circle, (α i , β i ) gives the sample orientation, (1, θ n , φ n ) is a unit vector expressed in spherical coordinates giving the location of the mode of basis function n, σ parameterizes the width of each basis function, ∆(u, v) for any two vectors (u, v) is the great-circle distance defined by Eq. ( where n and n ′ both run the indices of all basis functions. In this work, the basis functions have been distributed on a modified Kurihara mesh Completing the description of the forward model requires the definition of a John transform matrix for tensor tomography, which is treated in greater detail in where D i is matrix of data measured from a single projection. In order to improve the rate of convergence of the system in Eq. ( IUCr macros version 2.1.17: 2023/05/02 where U is a matrix filled with the value 1 everywhere and A •(-1) denotes a relaxed element-wise multiplicative inverse of A, for some predefined ε > 0. Similarly, each preconditioning matrix is computed as where V is a matrix filled with the value 1 everywhere. We may now write the system to be solved for each projection i as where ⊙ denotes the Hadamard or elementwise product. This is analogous to the weights and preconditioner used in the SIRT algorithm for scalar tomography (see e.g., This normalization is done for each detector segment and each RSM basis function, accounting also for the detector-to-sphere mapping of Eq. ( The integral in Eq. ( where a is the spherical harmonic representation of a RSM, F [•] is the Funk-Radon transform, Ŷ m l is a spherical harmonic basis function, and (θ, φ) is the orientation of the RSM, as given by the minimal eigenvector of its rank-2 tensor representation. This figure of merit evaluates how similar the RSM is to an ideal ring function (which has all of its amplitude at a great circle consisting of the points orthogonal to its orientation). Consequently, it quantifies the extent to which a RSM exhibits the equatorial symmetry expected from diffuse mineral scattering in bone. The orientation error is computed as ∆(v, u) (Eq. ( The version of mumott used in this work can be found at the DOI 10.5281/zenodo.10708583 The sample chosen for this study was trabecular bone fixed and embedded in polymethyl methylacrylate (PMMA). A cube was extracted from the bulk and subsequently milled into a cylinder of diameter 1.2 mm and height 1.2 mm using a custommade lathe system The X-ray energy was set to 12.4 keV using a Si (1 1 1) double crystal monochromator, and the scattering patterns were recorded on a Pilatus 2M detector placed at a sample to detector distance of 2.17 m. A flight tube, approximately 2 m in length, was placed in between the sample and detector to place to reduce the air scattering. A 1.5 mm steel beamstop inside the flight tube blocked the directly transmitted beam. The fluorescence signal from the beamstop, proportional to the intensity of the impinging x-rays (I T in Eq. ( During the first set of SAXSTT measurements, the base of the cylinder sample was glued to the end of a PMMA needle, using a hot water-soluble glue (Norland Blocking Adhesive 107). Before the second SAXSTT experiment, the sample was glued with UV-glue (Norland Optical Adhesive 81) to a second pin, before detaching the first pin by placing the sample in hot water. The second pin was placed at approximately 90 • to the first pin, measured around the axis of the initial direction of the beam, see Fig. For the reconstruction and analysis, a q-range of 0.597 -0.607 nm -1 was used, corresponding to a d-spacing range of 10.36 -10.53 nm. This range was used due to artefacts in the second measurement at lower q-ranges, possibly due to the water-soluble glue penetrating the outer layer during the remounting of the sample; see Supplementary Note 3, as well as Supplementary Fig. Both data sets have some difficulty reconstructing amplitudes that lie along the z-axis, but the difficulty is overall greater for data set 1, as indicated by the distribution on the spherical inset d), compared to the spherical inset e), which shows the amplitude error from Fig. It is likely that the primary explanation for this larger error is that the measurements close to the x-axis on the sphere of projection which result in the large errors near the z-axis must pass through the thickest part of the sample. This means that the transmission is small, around 4 %, compared to values of 20 % -50 % for thinner parts of the sample. Consequently, noise in the transmission will have a relatively large impact on these measurements, see Eq. (2). Three scalar quantities for each of the three reconstructions can be seen in Fig. the mean RSM amplitude, the relative anisotropy (similar to quantities often referred to as degree of orientation), and a fiber symmetry factor. The fiber symmetry factor quantifies the degree to which the scattering is equatorial, see Methods and Eq. ( In this work we have devised a scheme for complete acquisition of SAXSTT data, and applied it to the analysis of a sample of trabecular bone. Reconstructing incomplete as well as complete data sets and comparing them across both real and reciprocal space, we conclude that the understanding of data incompleteness in terms of the missing-wedge problem, as indicated by the computed quality factor, is consistent with the observed errors in the reconstruction. Analyzing the orientations as well as scalar quantities, we find that the impact of the missing-wedge problem in a typical SAXSTT analysis is limited, but appreciable in edge and interface areas. In particular, the impact on mean RSM amplitude and relative anisotropy is very limited, except for apparent artefacts in the mean. Moreover, we observe that the impact of errors can be reduced by choosing the sample orientation during acquisition in a way that takes into account the missing wedge problem, i.e., by orienting the sample such that as much scattering as possible is close to the main axis of rotation. Prior understanding of the nanostructure and expected RSM of a sample, such as acquired by scanning SAXS, is crucial in this process. This understanding could also be employed in various measures to reduce the impact of the missing wedge problem, e.g., by enforcing a particular RSM symmetry. Such symmetries can be encoded in the SAXSTT basis set (as in One disadvantage of encoding symmetries in the basis set is that more complex textures (such as the multi-orientation investigated in this work) cannot be captured. However, symmetries can also be selectively enforced (based on a robust quantity, such as the relative anisotropy) in a post-processing step, or encouraged through regularization. The further exploration of these possibilities and their impact on reconstruction quality is an interesting avenue for future research. Finally, we remark that the complete acquisition scheme devised in this work is likely to be useful for specialized applications, such as the analysis of interface regions with overlapping domains of multiple orientations, or the reconstruction of especially complicated RSMs. The data used in this work, along with code demonstrating the analysis and reconstructions which can be viewed in ParaView, is available via the DOI 10.5281/zenodo.10995088. The authors declare no competing financial or non-financial interest. mesh, what a function consisting of noise looks like, and how the detector segments map to the sphere At the equator, the Kurihara mesh contains only a semicircle of basis functions, since the representation respects Friedel symmetry. The number of points in the grid is decreased in each circle with increasing radius, to maintain approximately constant density of points. The standard deviation of the kernels is set based on the approximate distance between points to be wide enough to allow for the easy representation of unimodal distributions by multiple points. In addition, as can be seen in the b) panel, the width of the kernels implicitly enforce some of the continuity which is assumed of the reciprocal space map in the reconstruction. The red outline highlights a high-q region shown in the raster scans in Supplementary Figure S-4; the q-value for these scans is 0.0845 nm -1 . The areas circled in red are the points where the scattering curves in Supplementary Figure S-3 were measured. As can be seen, the symmetric intensity is higher by an order of magnitude in data set 2, even though the views are very similar. The difference in the curves is much less around the higher q-range of 0.597 nm -1 to 0.607 nm -1 , which is used in the main work and highlighted in green in Supplementary Figure S-3, although still significant for the selected point. In Supplementary Figure S-5 we can see the differences in the mean amplitude (the reconstruction's counterpart to the normalized symmetric intensity) between the two data sets at this lower q-range in many regions, especially those close to the edges. The differences both in the raster scan and in this reconstruction is consistent with some artefact being introduced between the two measurements, with the most likely cause being the water-soluble glue mentioned in the main work. Supplementary Note 5. Optimization IUCr macros version 2.1.17: 2023/05/02