Monolayer hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has recently become the focus of intense research as a material to host quantum emitters. Although it is well known that such emission is associated with point defects, so far no conclusive correlation between the spectra and specific defects has been demonstrated. Here, we prepare atomically clean suspended hBN samples and subject them to low-energy ion irradiation. The samples are characterized before and after irradiation via automated scanning transmission electron microscopy imaging to assess the defect concentrations and distributions. We find an intrinsic defect concentration of ca. 0.03 nm -2 (with ca. 55% boron and 8% nitrogen single vacancies, 20% double vacancies and 16% more complex vacancy structures). To be able to differentiate between these and irradiation-induced defects, we create a significantly higher (but still moderate) concentration of defects with the ions (0.30 nm -2 ), and now find ca. 55% boron and 12% nitrogen single vacancies, 14% double vacancies, and 18% more complex vacancy structures. The results demonstrate that already the simplest irradiation provides selectivity for the defect types, and open the way for future experiments to explore changing the selectivity by modifying the irradiation parameters. Although mostly known as an electrically insulating structural counterpart of graphene, monolayer hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has recently itself received increasing attention as a solid state host for quantum emitters It has been already shown that different kinds of irradiation can be used to create quantum emitters in hBN, including lasers Here, we prepare atomically-clean suspended samples from commercial monolayer hBN grown via chemical vapor deposition and irradiate them with low-energy Ar + ions. The intrinsic defect density and distribution are measured using automated scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) annular dark field (ADF) imaging at 60 kV in ultra-high vacuum. We find a fairly high intrinsic defect density, which is approximately constant within each sample. There is a high prevalence of single boron vacancies V B (55%) followed by single nitrogen vacancies V N (8%). The defect concentration after irradiation is selected to be ca. ten times higher than the intrinsic one on the one hand to be high enough to clearly see the difference between intrinsic and irradiation-induced defects, but on the other hand low enough so that the vast majority of impinging ions encounter pristine non-defective hBN. Also the post-irradiation defect distribution is dominated by boron single vacancies (55%), followed by nitrogen single vacancies (12%), double vacancies (14%) and more complex vacancy defects (18%). These results show that some defectselectivity indeed can be achieved with low-energy noble gas irradiation. However, experimentally the most common defect is the boron single vacancy in contrast to the prediction from molecular dynamics. Future work should explore whether modifying irradiation parameters (ion species, kinetic energy, charge state, irradiation angle) changes the distribution either from boron to nitrogen single vacancies or more complicated defect structures. further transferred onto a Si grid with a perforated SiN membrane by mechanically delaminating it from the Au grid to create a hybrid Quantifoil SiN grid (see Methods). A light microscopy image of a transferred sample is shown in Fig. After cleaning, we carry out automated atomic-resolution STEM-MAADF imaging blurring. These values are provided to a classifier that determines whether the site contains an atom or a vacancy. The process is illustrated in a previous publication It is worth pointing out, that electron irradiation during imaging is known to introduce defects into hBN Next, the selected sample was transported in vacuum to a chamber containing a plasma generator, where low-energy Ar + ion irradiation is used to create defects (Fig. After ion irradiation, the sample was further automatically imaged to estimate the post-irradiation defect density and distribution at another sample position. A comparison between the defect concentration in non-irradiated and irradiated samples is shown in Fig. Defect distributions for the irradiated sample before and after irradiation are shown in Fig. Interestingly, the results are in a clear contradiction with theoretical studies based on analytical-potential molecular dynamics simulations, where it was found depending on the potential used that either low-energy Ar irradiation should lead to about 17% single vacancies of B and 12-17% single vacancies of N However, since we observe about three times as many defects as we estimate ions to have irradiated the sample, it seems a safe assumption that the probability must be closer to one than the simulations suggest. Additionally, carbon atoms from the ubiquitous contamination are known to migrate on the surface of 2D materials and fill vacancies In accordance with the higher likelihood for obtaining boron vacancies, also the displacement threshold as calculated with density functional theory-based molecular dynamics for a neutral hBN lattice is lower for boron than for nitrogen (19.36 eV vs. 23.06 eV, respectively) We demonstrated that low-energy Ar + irradiation is a suitable method for defect-engineering hBN with a high selec-tivity for boron single vacancies. The intrinsic defect concentration in the as-prepared and cleaned samples was found to be below 0.27 nm -2 (with 55% boron and 8% nitrogen vacancies). Additional ca. 0.003 defects per nm 2 was estimated to have been created during the automated imaging of the sample pre-irradiation. The irradiation dose was chosen high enough to separate the irradiation-induced defects from the intrinsic ones, but sufficiently low to avoid ions impinging on already defective sites. Most (ca. 55.6%) of the irradiation-induced defects were boron single vacancies, followed by nitrogen single vacancies (11.5%), double vacancies (14.4%) and more complicated vacancy structures. These results are in contrast to earlier computational work predicting either similar probabilities for B and N single vacancies or a prevalence of N vacancies as a result of Ar + irradiation at similar energies. This shows clear promise for selectively creating specific defects with low-energy ions, but also that more research is needed both experimentally and computationally to fully exploit the possibilities for defect-engineering hBN with low-energy ions. Suspended monolayer hBN samples were fabricated from commercial hBN grown via chemical vapor deposition (Graphene Supermarket). First, hBN was transferred from the Cu growth substrate onto a Au Quantifoil TEM grid (a periodicity of 2 μm and a hole size of 2 μm) following the procedure described in Refs. Upon being inserted into the vacuum system used for all experiment, the samples are baked for ca. 10 h at 150 • C in vac-uum. After precharacterization to find a suitable sample area, it is cleaned by applying a laser pulse in the column of the scanning transmission electron microscope used for imaging. Due to an incidence angle of 25 • , the laser spot has the shape of an ellipse with a main axis of 28 ± 3 μm and a minor axis of 35 ± 3 μm. The loss in the optical system is about 66%, which means that the 2 ms and 10 mW pulse of a continuous wave laser used for cleaning corresponds to ca. 6.8 μJ with an energy density of 2150±70 Jm -2 or 13400 ± 400 eVnm -2 . The samples were irradiated with an low-energy Ar + beam using a SPECS ECR-HO microwave plasma source operated in hybrid mode with an anode voltage of 0 V and extractor voltage of -60 V. The pressure of the chamber was kept approximately constant at ca. 3.5 × 10 -6 mbar, though variations from this could not be entirely avoided, and the irradiation time was ca. 150 s. The irradiation is carried out at room temperature, similar to all other the experiments except for sample cleaning. The current was measured with a Faraday cup placed in the same place as the sample with a slightly larger distance, which due to the beam divergence leads to a difference in the measured current and the current at the sample of approximately a factor of 1.4 (current at the sample being higher). To get an accurate estimate of the ion energies, the current was measured as a function of the bias voltage, where the ions appear as drops in the measured current that deviates from the quadratically decaying background current. This reveals that the ion beam consists of two distinct Gaussian distributions, one centered at 89 ± 10 eV and the other one at 228 ± 11 eV, the lower-energy peak contributing ca. 2/3 of the ions. The total current was calculated by summing up the ions contributing to each of these distributions. From the ion current and the irradiation time, we estimate a total dose at the sample to be 0.10 ± 0.04 ions per nm 2 . All electron microscopy images were recorded with the Nion UltraSTEM 100 microscope in Vienna at 60 kV in ultrahigh vacuum (10 -10 mbar) using the medium angle annular dark field (MAADF) detector with annular ranges of 60-200 mrad. The convergence semi-angle was 30 mrad, and the beam current in this mode is typically about 20 pA. For obtaining defect concentrations and distributions, we used automatic image acquisition Taking the imaging parameters, the flyback time at the end of each scan line (120 μs) and half of the time to move the stage from one position to the next (0.5×2 s), the electron dose per frame is (3.6 ± 0.14) × 10 5 electrons Å-2 using a current of 19.4 ± 0.6 pA The convolutional neural network implemented in Pytorch The neural network is strictly trained for images with a pixel size of 0.1 Å, and therefore images with different pixel sizes are resized. The scaling factor is determined by finding diffraction spots in the Fourier-transformed images. Given the density map of lattice sites, a discrete set of points representing the detected lattice is extracted. Whether a lattice site represents a vacancy is determined by looking at the local intensity at varying levels of Gaussian blurring. Given these intensity features, a small random forest classifier is trained from twenty hand-labeled experimental images. The trained classifier is then applied to the whole set of images to label every lattice site as a vacancy or a non-vacancy. In order to arrive at the final classified defects, a geometric analysis of the lattice sites is also performed. First, a geometric graph is created by connecting neighboring lattice sites. A graph coloring algorithm separates the two sublattices; each sublattice may then be assigned to boron or nitrogen based on local intensity. A local lattice segment comprised of each point and its three neighbors in the graph are matched to a template representing the expected local geometry using the quaternion characteristic polynomial method 