We investigate teleportation interference associated with the non-local character of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) as a probe of MZMs focusing on the tolerance of teleportation against disturbances, such as inhomogeneous potentials at junctions and disorder. We develop a method for calculating non-local conductance in mesoscopic topological superconductors with fixed parity. In the trivial phase, the non-local conductance exhibits the h/2e-periodicity, while in the topological phase with fixed parity, it exhibits the h/e-periodicity, indicative of Majorana teleportation. We find that the h/e-periodicity is stable against changes in inhomogeneous potential structures and disorder. These results imply that MZMs can cause teleportation interference even in the presence of disturbances, leading to a clear distinction between the trivial and topological phases. Topological superconductors host zero-energy mid-gap states called the Majorana zero modes (MZMs), which have been attracting much attention for their potential applications in fault-tolerant topological quantum computation. Teleportation interferometry associated with two MZMs is a possible alternative tool for this purpose. The setup considered in this paper is shown in Fig. where c † j,σ (c j,σ ), ψ † j,σ (ψ j,σ ) denotes a creation (annihilation) operator of electrons with spin σ = (↑, ↓) at site j in the superconductor region and the metal region, respectively, and t S,N,SN , μ S,N , h, λ are a hopping amplitude between nearestneighboring sites where the subscripts S, N and SN denote the region of superconductor, normal metal and SN junctions, a chemical potential, the Zeeman field, and the Rashba interaction strength, respectively. In Eq. ( where V L,R and dx L,R are the height and width of the quantum dot potential respectively, δx V is the length scale over which V(x) varies, and the subscripts L and R denote the respective parameters on the x = 0, x = L SN side. The pair potential is given by, where ∆ 0 is the height of the pair potential, dx SC is a parameter that controls the extension of the pair potential in the quantum dot region due to the proximity effect and δx ∆ is the length scale over which ∆(x) varies. For the calculations of non-local conductance, we consider a system of semi-infinite metal leads connected at both ends of the metal part of the SNloop system. Here, the Hamiltonian of the semi-infinite metal leads is also the same as in Eq. ( The length of the nanowire is L SC = L N = 500a unless stated otherwise, where a is the lattice constant of the tight-binding model. The Lee-Fisher formula where Gi, ) and P e is the projection operator onto a sector of the electron number parity. We obtain the parity-fixed Green's function in the following three steps. First, we diagonalize the Hamiltonian of the SN loop system (H loop ) and separate the energy spectrums into two parity sectors using the flux dependence of the eigenvalues. The eigenstates exhibit an h/e-periodicity with respect to the magnetic flux in the case with MZMs, and a phase difference of h/2e between even and odd parity sectors. where the first term in Eq. ( where g SN is the Green's functions of the SN-loop system, and g 0 , g N+1 are, respectively, the surface Green's functions of the left and right semi-infinite leads. In the calculation of nonlocal conductance, Eq. ( The total Green's function is obtained by calculating Eq. ( To investigate the effects of ps-ABSs on Majorana teleportation, we first clarify the magnetic field regime in which ps-ABSs are realized. Figures where φ ε is the eigenstate with the eigenenergy ε. We now examine the flux-dependence of the energy eigenvalues for these states. As shown in Fig. Fig. local conductance also shows h/2e-periodicity In the topological phase with fixed parity [Fig. where Φ = 2πφ/φ 0 and ω = n/2, n ∈ Z. The Fourier components, Γ 1/2 and Γ 1 , correspond to the amplitudes with h/e and h/2e-periodicity, respectively. To examine the stability of teleportation interference, in Fig. amp max = 7.79×10 of MZMs in realistic junction systems. We have also examined effects of impurity potentials, and confirmed the above results are not qualitatively affected by disorder. This work was supported by JST CREST Grant No. JP-MJCR19T5, Japan, a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas, Quantum Liquid Crystals (JP22H04480) from JSPS of Japan, and JSPS KAKENHI (Grants No. JP20K03860, No. JP20H01857, No. JP21H01039, and No. JP22H01221). Tsukasa Goto, Masayuki Sugeta, Takeshi Mizushima, and Satoshi Fujimoto Department of Materials Engineering Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka 560-8531, Japan We examine effects of disorder potentials in the nanowire system on Majorana teleportation interference. The Hamiltonian for disorder potentials is given by, where V j is a random potential at site j, which is assigned a random number within the range In (d-f ) and (j-l), the results for the topological phase with h/h c = 1.5 are shown. 2/1