We extend the scattering theory of the Josephson effect to include a coupling of the Josephson junction to a gapless electron reservoir in the normal state. By opening up the system with a quasiparticle escape rate 1/τ , the supercurrent carried at zero temperature by an Andreev level at energy εA is reduced by a factor (2/π) arctan(2εAτ /ħ) . We make contact with recent work on "non-Hermitian Josephson junctions", by comparing this result to different proposed generalizations of the Josephson effect to non-Hermitian Hamiltonians. The thermodynamic properties of a quantum dot are affected by the coupling to a superconductor. The Josephson effect is a striking example, a current will flow through the quantum dot in equilibrium if the quantum dot forms a weak link between two superconductors The reservoir is a source of dephasing because quasiparticles that enter it from the quantum dot return without any phase coherence. Such a dephasing mechanism for persistent currents was introduced by Büttiker Because the effective Hamiltonian of the quantum dot becomes non-Hermitian when we open it up to the reservoir, such a system is a simple example of a "non-Hermitian Josephson junction", a topic of current interest FIG. Closed system -In a scattering formulation with ρ 0 the φ-independent density of states of the junction when it is decoupled from the superconductors. The determinant contains the product of the Andreev reflection matrix R A from the superconductors and the scattering matrix S N of the junction in the normal state. The energy ε > 0 is the excitation energy of Bogoliubov quasiparticles (electron-hole superpositions). The pair potential in the two superconductors, to the left and to the right of the junction, has amplitude ∆ 0 and phase ±φ/2. The electron and hole degree of freedom introduces a block structure in the scattering matrices. The matrix S N is block diagonal, the electron and hole blocks are uncoupled and related by particle-hole symmetry. The Andreev reflection matrix has the block structure The Pauli matrix σ y acts on the spin degree of freedom. The blocks r * A and r A describe Andreev reflection from, respectively, electron to hole and hole to electron, in opposite spin bands. Andreev reflection happens with unit probability for energies ε < ∆ 0 ; any normal reflection at the normal-superconductor (NS) interface is incorporated into S N . Substitution of Eqs. ( arXiv:2404.13976v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 24 Apr 2024 The density of states determines the free energy F of the Josephson junction at temperature T [18] The supercurrent through the Josephson junction then follows from the relation It is convenient to extend the integration range in Eq. ( with F 0 the φ-independent contribution to the free energy. Opening up the system -We open up the Josephson junction by weakly coupling it to a gapless electron reservoir in the normal state. Quasiparticles enter the reservoir at a rate 1/τ ≡ 2γ/ħ, assumed to be spatially uniform in the junction region. This can be modeled by coupling to the reservoir via a spatially extended tunnel barrier The full scattering matrix of the normal region, including the scattering channels to the electron reservoir, is unitary, with S N (ε + iγ) a sub-unitary submatrix for the scattering channels to the superconductors. Similarly, the Andreev reflection matrix R A (ε + iγ) is now sub-unitary also for ε < ∆ 0 . Instead of Eq. ( The term ρ 0 now also contains the φ-independent contributions from the electron reservoir. The free energy then follows from We discuss three applications of this general formula. Quantum dot Josephson junction -As a first application we consider the case that the two superconductors are coupled via a quantum dot containing a single resonant level, at energy ε R relative to the Fermi level. We ignore Coulomb blockade effects, which will be less significant in the open system. The electronic scattering matrix of the quantum dot has the form with Γ 1 , Γ 2 the tunnel rates into the left and right superconductor, and Γ = Γ 1 + Γ 2 . The normal-state transmission probability through the quantum dot at the Fermi level (ε = 0) is given by the Breit-Wigner formula In the weak-coupling, near-resonant regime, when ε R , Γ ≪ ∆ 0 , the energy dependence of R A can be neglected and we may substitute α(ε) → α(0) = -i. The determinant (4) evaluates to plus φ-independent terms. The prefactor g accounts for spin and possibly other degeneracies. The energy is the energy of the Andreev level in the closed system The free energy The resulting supercurrent is with ψ(x) the digamma function and the zero-temperature supercurrent of the closed system. The T → 0 limit of Eq. ( so opening up the system to an electron reservoir at T = 0 reduces the supercurrent by a factor (2/π) arctan(2ε A τ /ħ). Point contact Josephson junction -The second application is a point contact junction of length L short compared to the superconducting coherence length ξ 0 = ħv F /∆ 0 . In this short-junction regime the energy dependence of S N can be neglected relative to the energy FIG. dependence of R A , and we may evaluate S N at the Fermi level. We assume that time reversal symmetry is preserved, hence σ y S * N σ y = S † N . The Andreev levels in the closed system then depend on the phase difference according to in terms of the mode-dependent transmission probabilities T n ∈ [0, 1] in the normal state (eigenvalues of the transmission matrix product tt † ). The number N counts the number of propagating electron modes through the point contact. Eq. ( and following the same steps as in the previous application we find the supercurrent in the open system, lim with I n = -(ge/ħ)dε n /dφ the zero-temperature supercurrent in the n-th mode of the closed system. Long SNS junction -For the third and final application we consider a superconductor-normal-metalsuperconductor (SNS) junction of length L ≫ ξ 0 . Both states above and below ∆ 0 then contribute to the supercurrent. It is convenient to transform the slowly converging integration over energies of Eq. ( We will restrict ourselves for this application to zero temperature, when the sum can be replaced by an integral, lim We consider a ballistic single-mode junction. The electronic scattering matrix is We linearize the momentum near the Fermi energy, The determinant (5) evaluates to ln det[1 -M (ε)] = = g ln 1 + α 4 e 4iεL/ħvF -2α 2 e 2iεL/ħvF cos φ . resulting in the zero-temperature free energy The function Li 2 (x) is the dilogarithm. The corresponding supercurrent is see Fig. (30) Refs. 6 and 7 have qualitatively similar plots to Fig. Connection to the non-Hermitian Josephson effect -The coupling of the Josephson junction to the electron reservoir pushes the poles of its scattering matrix into the lower half of the complex plane, down to E = ±ε A -iγ. These poles can be considered as the complex eigenvalues of an effective non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H. The open Josephson junction thus provides a physical realization of FIG. the non-Hermitian Josephson effect studied in Refs. 13-16. Different generalizations have been proposed for the relation I ∝ dE/dφ when E is complex. Let us compare these with our findings. To be specific, we consider the weakly coupled quantum dot Josephson junction, with effective Hamiltonian One checks that the eigenvalues are ±ε A -iγ, with ε A given by Eq. ( Refs. 14 and 15 argue that only the real part of E contributes to the physical supercurrent, which in this case would imply no effect from the coupling to the reservoir. Shen, Lu, Lado, and Trif which reduces precisely to our result (17) (with g = 2) Conclusion -In summary, we have calculated how the coupling to a gapless electron reservoir in the normal state reduces the supercurrent through a Josephson junction. A simple answer is obtained for the model where the escape rate 1/τ ≡ 2γ/ħ of quasiparticles into the reservoir is spatially uniform. At zero temperature the reduction factor for a given Andreev level equals (2/π) arctan(2ε A τ /ħ). This applies to a weakly coupled quantum dot Josephson junction, or to a short point contact (length L smaller than the coherence length ξ 0 ). A more complicated τ -dependence is obtained in a long junction (L ≫ ξ 0 ), when also states above the gap contribute to the supercurrent.