We consider nonreciprocal supercurrent effects in Josephson junctions based on multiband superconductors with a pairing structure that can break time-reversal symmetry. We demonstrate that a nonreciprocal supercurrent can be generally achieved by the cooperation of interband superconducting phase mismatch and interband scattering as well as by multiband phase frustration. The effect of interband impurity scattering indicates that the amplitude and sign of the nonreciprocal supercurrent are sensitive to the interband phase relation. For the case of a three-band superconductor, due to phase frustration, we show that the profile of the supercurrent rectification is marked by a hexagonal pattern of nodal lines with vanishing amplitude. Remarkably, around the nodal lines, the supercurrent rectification amplitude exhibits three-fold structures with an alternating sign. We show that the hexagonal pattern and the three-fold structure in the interband phase space turn out to be dependent on the tunneling amplitude of each band. These findings provide hallmarks of the supercurrent rectification which can be potentially employed to unveil the occurrence of spin-singlet multiband superconductivity with time-reversal symmetry breaking. Nonreciprocal effects in superconductors are generally based on phenomena where the amplitude of the supercurrent depends on the direction of its flow. The rectification of the supercurrent is then a direct result of the nonreciprocal superconducting transport. Recently, amount of works has been devoted to the achievement of supercurrent rectification Several mechanisms, either intrinsic or extrinsic in nature, have been proposed to devise a supercurrent diode with control of the rectification in sign and amplitude. In this context it is generally accepted that breaking of time-reversal and inversion symmetries are key requirements for achieving a nonreciprocal supercurrent. For instance, Cooper pair momenta In this context, the exploitation of an unconventional superconducting state with intrinsic time-reversal symmetry breaking represents a potential path to get supercurrent rectification. This is indeed an open problem which has not been fully explored yet. The role of symmetry-broken phases in the normal state and the occurrence of time-reversal broken superconducting phases have been addressed only for two-dimensional materials demonstrating that indeed they can lead to a distinct type of supercurrent rectification without the need of external magnetic fields Several superconducting materials exhibit signatures of spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) below the transition temperature In particular, for spin-singlet multiband superconductors a distinct role is played by the so-called π pairing, i.e., the antiphase relation between the order parameters in different bands, or equivalently, the sign reversal of the Josephson coupling between Cooper pairs in different bands. Apart from the connection with the time-reversal symmetry breaking, the intertwinning of π pairing and multiband electronic structure often marks the occurrence of unconventional superconducting phases, e.g. in iron-based In this paper, we consider multiband superconductors that can break the time-reversal symmetry due to nontrivial interband phase relation and we study the character of nonreciprocal supercurrents effects. We demonstrate that nonreciprocal supercurrent in Josephson junctions with multiband superconductors can be generally achieved by exploiting the combination of the interband superconducting phase mismatch and the strength of the interband scattering. In particular, we find that the effect of interband impurity scattering can help to distinguish among a dominant 0 or π pairing in the superconductor. We show that distinct variations in the amplitude and sign of the rectification amplitude can be observed as a function of the interband impurity scattering strength. In the case of three-band superconductors there is a phase frustration in the complex superposition of the order parameters that results in the formation of nodal lines or large regions in the parameters space with vanishing rectification amplitude. The nodal patterns are marked by multifold structures with sign changes of the rectification amplitude. The location and shape of these structures depend on the tunneling amplitudes. The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. II we present supercurrent nonreciprocal effects in a Josephson junction combining single-band and two-band superconductors with time-reversal symmetry-breaking pairing by focusing on the role of interband impurity scattering. Section III is devoted to a multiband phase frustrated configuration. There, we present the study of a Josephson junction hosting a three-band superconductor interfaced with a convectional single-band superconductor. The conclusions are given in Sect. IV. In this Section, we demonstrate how the interplay of interband impurity scattering and nontrivial interband phase can yield supercurrent nonreciprocal effects. This is done by considering a Josephson junction composed of a conventional single-band superconductor interfaced to a superconductor with two-bands whereas the timereversal symmetry breaking arises from the nontrivial interband superconducting phase relation. Let us start with the description of the s-wave twoband superconductor in the presence of impurity scattering and zero magnetic field. In the dirty limit the Eilenberger formalism for a two-band superconductor, as for the conventional single-band s-wave counterpart, can be reduced to the Usadel equations for quasiclassical Green's functions decomposed in spherical harmonics where f i = f i (r, ω), g i = g i (r, ω) are the r coordinatedependent anomalous and normal quasiclassical Green's functions connected by the standard normalization condition The remaining notations are: ω ≡ ω n = (2n + 1) πT is the Matsubara frequency, D i are the intraband diffusion coefficients caused by the intraband elastic scattering, ∆ i represent complex order parameters in a two-band superconductor. Finally, Γ ij denote the interband scattering coefficients, which are absent in the case of a clean multi-band superconductor. When Γ ij = 0 Eq. ( To determine the supercurrent, Eq. ( where N i corresponds to the partial contribution of each band to the density of states at the Fermi level. Now, we proceed with the study of the properties of the Josephson junction between the standard single-band superconductor (left lead) and the multi-band one (right lead). The Josephson junction is studied as a weak link connecting two superconducting leads in the form of a thin short filament of length L. Based on the condition that the length L min ξ i (0) [ξ i (T ) being the temperature-dependent coherence lengths] one can consider Josephson junction as a quasi-one-dimensional system and neglect all terms in Eq. ( Eq. ( With this parameterization the normalization conditions for the Green functions are fulfilled automatically. We notice that in the single-band superconducting lead of the Josephson junction at x = -L/2 the function Φ 0 = ∆ 0 . Here and hereafter the zero subscript is attributed to the parameters of the left-side of the Josephson junction. Furthermore, we suppose that the critical temperature T (s) c of the bulk single-band superconducting bank of the Josephson junction is at least not less than that of the bulk multi-band superconductor, i.e., it will be assumed that the . The Josephson phase φ, which we define as the difference between the phases of the order parameter ∆ 0 of the single-band superconductor (left lead) and the order parameter ∆ 1 of the multiband superconductor (right lead), determines the boundary condition Now let us determine the boundary conditions for the Green's functions in Eqs. (3) for the two-band superconducting bank (at x = L/2). They can be found in the homogeneous expressions of Eqs. and In Eqs. ( and Here φ is the intrinsic difference between the phases of the order parameters of the two-band superconductor that can attain non-zero values due to the presence of the interband scattering (Γ ij = 0) solely . In turn, the latter depends not only on the intra-and interband interactions but also on the interband scattering rate Γ = Γ 12 = Γ 21 (with the additional assumption N 1 = N 2 ), which lowers the value of T (m) c as compared to the critical temperature T c0 of a clean two-band superconductor of the dirty two-band superconductor. Eqs. (3) with boundary conditions Eqs. ( Here the Josephson phase difference φ enters implicitly via the functions where and R N i are partial contributions to the junction's resistance (also referred as Sharvin resistance for the case of point contacts For the case of Josephson junction between two different s-wave single-band superconductors, Eq. ( Using Eq. ( As one can see from Figure We start by observing that the rectification amplitude for the current-phase relation as shown in Figure We point out that, in principle, for the constructed phase diagram of the superconducting diode rectification amplitude, of course, only the states with a phase difference φ different from zero in a two-band superconductor can be realized only when Γ = 0. Therefore, the lower part of the diagram adjacent to the φ-axis are limiting cases that cannot be physically achieved when Γ is vanishing. However, as can be seen in Fig. The replacement of the two-band superconductor by a three-band counterpart in the Josephson junction leads to additional phase interference effects and, as a consequence, yields a different structure in the current-phase relation Eq. ( for the left lead (single-band superconductor) and for the right bank (three-band superconductor). The intrinsic phase differences φ and θ correspond to the pairs of order parameters ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 and ∆ 1 , ∆ 3 of a bulk threeband superconductor To avoid cumbersome expressions we further assume the coincidence of the order parameter amplitude in superconducting leads: Moreover, bearing in mind that in the case under consideration we deal with the exact solutions of the Eqs. (1) for Green's functions, we can treat the case at zero temperature by summing over Matsubara frequencies in Eq. Eq. ( Instead, for the three-band superconductor with a time reversal broken order parameter (when φ and θ are different from zero and/or π), the current phase relation exhibits a complex non-sinusoidal pattern (Figure The overall rectification amplitude of the Josephson junction with three-band superconducting lead is reported in Fig. Finally, we point out that for the diagram in Figure As a final remark, we would like to note that this model can be generalized to the case of a larger number of order parameters in a multiband superconductor. We do not present here the diagram of a superconducting diode for the case of a pure n-band superconductor because of technical difficulties in its visualization. However, it is obvious that in this case the rectification amplitude pattern becomes even more nontrivial. The effects of nonreciprocal supercurrent in Josephson junctions have been studied using multiband superconductors that can disrupt time-reversal symmetry by interband phase reconstruction. It has been shown that nonreciprocal supercurrent can be achieved through a combination of interband superconducting phase mismatch and scattering, as well as by exploiting multiband phase frustration. The presence of impurity scattering between bands affects the magnitude and direction of the nonreciprocal supercurrent, depending on the interband phase relationship. In the case of a three-band superconductor with a phase-frustrated configuration, the supercurrent rectification profile is characterized by a hexagonal pattern of nodal lines with zero amplitude. Interestingly, the amplitude of supercurrent rectification shows a three-fold pattern with alternating signs around the nodal lines. We have found that the hexagonal pattern and the three-fold structure in the interband phase space are influenced by the band dependent tunneling amplitudes. These findings applied to corresponding diodes can be used to detect a state with the time-reversal symmetry breaking in multiband superconductors due to a nontrivial interband phase relation. Finally, we point out that the behavior of the junction with three-band superconductor interfaced to a oneband superconductor can be also mimicked by designing a double loop superconducting quantum interference device. Indeed, recently a double loop interferometer based on conventional superconductor-normal-superconductor weak links has been demonstrated to yield a rectification hosting nodal lines and multifold sign tunable patterns 