A large electric field is typically present in anodic or passive oxide films. Stresses induced by such a large electric field are critical in understanding the breakdown mechanism of thin oxide films and improving their corrosion resistance. In this work, we consider electromechanical coupling through the electrostrictive effect. A continuum model incorporating lattice misfit and electric fieldinduced stresses is developed. We perform a linear stability analysis of the full coupled model and show that, for typical oxides, neglecting electrostriction underestimates the film's instability, especially in systems with a large electric field. Moreover, a region where electrostriction can potentially provide a stabilizing effect is identified, allowing electrostriction to enhance corrosion resistance. We identified an equilibrium electric field intrinsic to the system and the corresponding equilibrium film thickness. The film's stability is very sensitive to the electric field: a 40 percent deviation from the equilibrium electric field can change the maximum growth rate by nearly an order of magnitude. Moreover, our model reduces to classical morphological instability models in the limit of misfit-only, electrostatic-only, and no-electrostriction cases. Finally, the effect of various parameters on the film's stability is studied. The formation of passive oxide film provides corrosion resistance to most industrially important metals and alloys. Passive films generally are very thin (a few nanometers thick). The electric fields in the film have been observed to be on the order of 10 8 -10 9 V m -1 . Stresses induced by such a large field are expected to be important in the breakdown of the passive film Theoretical modeling of thin-film oxidation with electromechanical coupling is vital in understanding the breakdown mechanism of thin oxide films. Stresses associated with the breakdown of oxide films consist of the stress due to lattice misfit between the substrate and the film and the stress induced by the electrical field, including the Maxwell stress Many models that describe the growth of oxide films are based on the thermodynamics and kinetics of point defects, e.g. This work presents a continuum model with full electromechanical coupling to describe the growth of oxide films, considering the effect of lattice misfit, Maxwell stress, and electrostriction. The coupled mechanical and electrical equations are solved analytically, and linear morphological stability analysis is performed. The equilibrium electric field, an intrinsic system property, is identified. We show that our model reduces to previous models under certain limits. It is shown that the electric field has a large effect on the stability, and the electrostrictive effect can dominate, especially with a large electric field. Finally, we studied the impact of various parameters, including the interfacial energy, the electric field, the oxide's permittivity, the misfit strain, and the shear modulus of the oxide and the substrate. Notation. We use Einstein notation with summation from 1 to 3 over repeated indices, and the order of tensor can be determined from the number of indices. In a few cases, we use bold letters for vectors. (•) ,i denotes the partial derivative to the i-th spatial coordinate, (•) ,t denotes the time derivative, and δ ij denotes the Kronecker delta. The bar • and hat • symbols indicate the basic state (planar interface) and the perturbed quantities, respectively. In this section, we formulate our theory, which couples deformation and electric response by electromechanical coupling through electrostriction. The fundamental equations are described in Section 2.1. The basic-state (planar interface) solutions are provided in Section 2.2, and the linear stability analysis (perturbed interface) is given in Section 2.3. The problem considered in this paper is shown in Fig. Based on the description of the system given above, the system's status can be uniquely determined by the following state variables: the displacements u α i and the electrostatic potential φ α of each phase and the location of the oxide surface h(x, t). Here, α = s,o,f denotes the substrate, oxide, and fluid phases. Other field variables can then be determined from these independent state variables. The total linear elastic strain tensor is related to the displacement u i as The electric field is E i = -φ ,i . The Cauchy stress in the passive film is where C ijkl is the stiffness tensor and ε p kl is the eigenstrain Here, l ijmn is the electrostrictive tensor. Mechanical equilibrium in each phase is given by The Maxwell stress is where ε is the permittivity of the corresponding phase. Since the substrate and fluid phases are field-free, the Maxwell stress is only present in the oxide. Electrical equilibrium in the oxide phase is given by where D i is the electric displacement. Since E s i = 0 and E f i = 0, we only need to consider the electrical equilibrium in the oxide. Note here that we assume the film, substrate, and fluid are all charge neutral, and there is no body force. Boundary conditions are needed to uniquely solve the governing equations given above. We require a continuity of the normal traction on the metal-oxide and oxide-fluid interfaces: where n j is the unit normal vector of the oxide-fluid interface pointing from the oxide to the fluid (see Fig. At the metal-oxide interface, the displacements are continuous The elastic strain in the metal far from the interface decays to zero The electric potential on the fluid side of the oxide-fluid interface is chosen as the zero reference φ f (h) = 0. The electric potential in the metal substrate V M is a constant. The potential jumps across each interface are denoted as ∆φ s-o and ∆φ o-f , see Fig. The velocity of the oxide-fluid interface (defined to be positive for growing oxide) due to a reaction at the interface follows a linear reaction model where L is a kinetic parameter, F is the driving force expressed as (see Appendix A for the derivation): where γ is the interfacial energy of the oxide-fluid interface, κ = n i,i is the total curvature, and ∆g v = g o v -g f v is the difference in the electric Gibbs free energy density between the oxide and the fluid. The electric Gibbs free energy density of phase α is written as where f α chem is the chemical free energy density, and W α v is a free energy density due to stress and electric field. We have Note that F is evaluated at the oxide-fluid interface, i.e., z = h(x, t). The normal velocity and the total curvature are given by the interface profile h(x, t) as 2.1.5. Constitutive equations Finally, constitutive relations are needed to complete the equations. We first look at the constitutive equations for the oxide. The chemical free energy f o chem is assumed independent of strain and electric field. The free energy density W o v is Here, we use linear isotropic material models: where μ and λ are Lamé constants, and a 1 and a 2 are constants related to electrostriction. In this work, we use the model by Shkel and Klingenberg ( where ε r is the relative permittivity, and ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The permittivity is ε = ε r ε 0 . In the limit of no electrostriction, we have a 1 = a 2 = 0. Note that if ε r = 1, there is no electrostrictive effect from Eq. 16. The Cauchy stress in the oxide film is derived from g o v as The last term accounts for the electrostrictive effect. Eq. 17 is consistent with Eq. 2. Note that Maxwell stress in Eq. 4 can be written as part of the derivative of the electric Gibbs free energy in a large deformation formulation; see It can be seen that electrostriction acts as a modification of the equivalent permittivity. For the substrate, the Maxwell stress and the electric displacement are both zero: σ M,s ij = 0 and D s i = 0. The Cauchy stress in the substrate is For the fluid, all field quantities are zero. In summary, the displacements u o i and u s i and the electric potential φ o are solved from Eqs. 3 and 5, together with the constitutive relations in Eqs. 17-19 and the boundary conditions given by Eqs. 6-10. The evolution of the oxide-fluid interface is then determined from the interfacial boundary condition in Eq. 11. For simplicity, we neglect the superscript (•) o of quantities for oxide in the rest of the paper. Now, we proceed to solve the systems of equations given in Section 2.1. We first consider a planar interface and derive its solutions, regarded as the basic-state solution. Consider the thickness of the planar film as h. At the basic state, the metal substrate is fully relaxed: ūs i = 0. In the oxide film, the basic-state displacements and electric potential are solved as ū1 = ū2 = 0, ū3 = ε33 z, and φ = ∆φ o-f + Ē3 ( h -z), where The basic-state strain in Eq. 20 includes two contributions: one related to the misfit strain ε * and one induced by the electric field. The stresses in the oxide are then determined from the constitutive relations: The basic state stress in Eq. 22 includes three contributions: the first is related to the misfit strain, the second is related to the Maxwell stress, and the last is related to electrostriction. The electrical displacement in the oxide is Both strain ε33 and misfit strain ε * contribute to the electric displacement. The coupling between mechanical deformation and electric response is bidirectional and becomes clear from Eqs. 20 and 23: strain can be induced by the electric field, and polarization is affected by strain. Note that in the absence of electrostriction, a 1 = 0 and a 2 = 0, the strain does not contribute to the electric displacement, while the electric field still contributes to the strain through Maxwell stress, see Eq. 20. With all the field quantities, we can get the planar interface velocity where the basic-state driving force is where ∆f chem is the chemical free energy change of oxidation, Ēmisfit is the strain energy due to the misfit strain given as , and α and β are two dimensionless parameters defined as ε s is a parameter related to electrostriction where ν is Poisson's ratio of the oxide film. Equation Figure The case of a zero driving force corresponds to an equilibrium film thickness heq , which is related to an equilibrium electric field through Eq. 21. By setting F = 0 in Eq. 25, we can solve the equilibrium electrical field where α 2 = α/(2(2μ + λ)). Note that Ēeq 3 is solely determined by the materials parameters, making it an intrinsic quantity of the system. To have a real solution in Eq. 30, we require which means the magnitude of the chemical free energy drop should be larger than the free energy change due to the misfit. Otherwise, oxidation is not energetically favorable and will not occur. Note that heq is an unstable equilibrium thickness, as will be shown below. The derivative of velocity v with respect to the film thickness h is derived from Eqs. 21, 24, and 25 as This quantity describes the stability of the planar film. If dv/d h < 0, any change in film thickness leads to a velocity that brings the film back to its original thickness, indicating a stable equilibrium. Conversely, when dv/d h > 0, the film will be at an unstable equilibrium. Substituting the equilibrium electric field in Eq. 30 into Eq. 32, we find dv/d h > 0, indicating a film with an equilibrium film thickness is at an unstable equilibrium. This could be understood because thicker film reduces the electric field due to a constant voltage drop across the film (see Eq. 21). Moreover, there is no misfit strain-only term in Eq. 32 since the strain in the film due to misfit is independent of the film thickness. We now consider a perturbed interface, as shown in Fig. ( where k is the wavenumber of the perturbation, σ is the growth rate, i is the imaginary unit. The normal vector of the perturbed oxide-fluid interface is n = {-ik ĥe ikx+σt , 0, 1} T , and the total curvature is κ = κe ikx+σt with κ = k 2ĥ . The solution for the perturbed interface is assumed to be a superposition of the basic-state solution and a perturbed solution as where ūi and φ are basic-state solutions given in the previous section. Substituting the perturbation in Eqs. 33 and 34 into the governing equations in Eqs. 3 and 5, linearizing in the disturbance quantities, we obtain a system of differential equations for the perturbed displacement ûi and perturbed electric potential φ in the oxide film and in the substrate Similarly, the boundary conditions in Eqs. 6-10 are linearized as, at z = h, and at z = 0 Equations 35, 36, 37 and 38 can be solved to get the perturbed solutions ûi and φ in the oxide film and ûs i in the substrate. The closed-form analytical solutions of ûi , φ are rather long, so they are provided as a Mathematica notebook in the Supplementary Materials. The solution of ûs i is the same as in where the perturbed driving force is where the perturbed strain and electric field are calculated from ûi and As given in Eq. 33, a positive growth rate means the magnitude of the perturbation increases with time, indicating an unstable interface, while a negative growth rate indicates a stable interface. From Eq. 39, interfacial energy always gives a negative growth rate, stabilizing the interface. As shown before, for the electrostatic-only case by Table Here, we choose V M -∆φ s-o -∆φ o-f = 1 V. With the materials parameters listed in Table It can be shown that our model reduces to simpler models under certain limits. For the first limit, by neglecting the electric field Ē3 = 0, our model reduces to the instability driven solely by lattice misfit strain given by With the materials parameters listed in Table are shown in Fig. To investigate the system's stability, we vary the model parameters and study the effect on the growth rate. The materials parameters listed in Table The effect of interfacial energy on the stability of a h = heq = 2 nm thick oxide film is shown in Fig. Next, we examine the effect of the electric field. We fix the film thickness to h = 2 nm while varying the electric field by V M . The resulting electric field Ē3 deviates from the equilibrium electric field Ēeq 3 = 0.5 V nm -1 determined from Eq. 30. Therefore, the planar interface is not stationary. To account for a non-zero v, we use the relative growth rate defined by The stability dispersion curves for various electric field values are shown in Fig. We now move to study the effect of the misfit strain ε * . The sign of the misfit strain can be positive or negative, depending on the structures of the oxide and substrate. The dispersion curves for various misfit strains are shown in Fig. We now look at the effect of the relative stiffness, i.e., the ratio between the oxide's shear modulus μ and the substrate's shear modulus μ s . The dispersion curves for zero, negative, and positive misfit strains are shown in Figs. Next, we keep μ constant and vary μ s . In this case, the equilibrium electric field is unchanged. As shown by the dispersion curves in Fig. We have presented a continuum model accounting for electromechanical coupling by electrostriction to understand the critical role of electrostriction in the growth and breakdown of passivation films. The model includes a full coupling between mechanical deformation and electric polarization. More importantly, the model also considers lattice misfit, Maxwell stress, and electrostriction. We apply the model to study the stability of thin oxide films and perform morphological linear instability analysis. We find that with a large electric field, common in thin oxide films, electrostriction is critical in determining the morphological stability of the film. Neglecting the electrostrictive effects can lead to a poor estimate of when the passivation film becomes morphologically unstable. Through the analysis, we identified an equilibrium electric field, an intrinsic property of the system. The equilibrium electric field corresponds to an equilibrium film thickness at which a planar oxide interface is stationary. This equilibrium film thickness is thermodynamically unstable but can be stable if the oxidation process is limited by kinetics. The film's stability is found to be very sensitive to the electric field. A slight deviation from the equilibrium electric field leads to a significant change in the film's stability. So, one efficient way to alter the film's stability is by tuning the equilibrium electric field through materials parameters design. Unlike pure electrostatic instability, which acts only as destabilizing, our analysis identifies a parameter region (large Poisson's ratio, positive misfit, moderate to large permittivity) where electrostriction can provide a stabilizing effect like the interfacial energy. Although not applicable to typical oxides, it potentially provides a new mechanism for designing new oxides with improved corrosion resistance. Finally, through parameter study, we find that the morphological stability of the film can be improved by increasing the interfacial energy and decreasing the electric field. The substrate's shear modulus is found to have a negligible effect on the stability. The effect of oxide's permittivity, misfit strain, and oxide's stiffness on the film's stability at the equilibrium electric field is complicated by electrostriction (e.g., symmetry breaking of the misfit strain) but is generally found to have a negligible effect at the equilibrium state. The oxidation model presented here serves as a first step toward understanding the influence of electromechanical coupling on the passivation of thin oxide films. The study assumes the growth of oxide is reaction-controlled. For diffusion-controlled growth, detailed transport of defects within the oxide film should be considered. See, for example, the point-defect model for oxide film growth where δy f is the accretion to the fluid in the current state. Since accretion to the crystal varies the surface area measured in the reference state, the variation of the surface integral is calculated as w e δφ Σ dA (A.7) Substituting Eq. A.3 into Eq. A.7, and using δF ij = ∂(δu i )/∂X j , and δE ′ i = -∂(δφ)/∂X i (X i is the coordinate in the reference state), we have w e δφ Σ dA, -δy f = n o i δu i + F ij n o′ j δy o′ . (A.9) Second, we assume the electric potential jump at the interface is constant, so the variation of the electric potential at the interface is Using these two conditions, we have where J = det(F ij ). The equilibrium condition δG = 0 is, thus, For linear kinetics, we have the interfacial velocity i -J(F -1 ) ik D f k ) + w e δφ o dA, , respectively.