Understanding the origin of hot carrier relaxation in nanowires (NWs) with one-dimensional (1D) geometry is significant for designing efficient hot carrier solar cells with such nanostructures. Here, we study the influence of Auger heating and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination on hot carrier dynamics of catalyst-free InGaAs-InAlAs core-shell NWs. Using steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy the dependencies of hot carrier effects on the degree of confinement of photogenerated carriers induced by the nanowire diameter are determined at different lattice temperatures. Analysis of excitation-power dependent data and temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening reveal that at low temperatures, strong Auger recombination and phonon-bottleneck are responsible for hot carrier effects. Our analysis gives also insights into electron-phonon and ionized impurity scattering, showing opposing trends with NW diameter, and it allows to estimate the Fröhlich coupling constant for the InGaAs NWs. Conversely, with increasing lattice temperature, hot carrier relaxation rates increase due to enhanced Shockley-Read Hall and surface recombination. Time-resolved spectroscopy reveals a fourfold increase in the rate of Shockley-Read-Hall recombination from 6 ns at 10 K to 1.5 ns at 150 K. The findings suggest that minimizing defect densities in the bulk and surfaces of these NWs will be key to enhance hot carrier effects towards higher temperatures. To boost the efficiency of photovoltaic solar cells beyond their theoretical limit in single-junction solar cells, it requires to suppress one of the main energy loss mechanisms in these devices, called thermalization of hot carriers. Understanding the origin of hot carrier relaxation in solar cells and inhibiting thermalization pathways is essential to fabricate efficient hot carrier solar cells. One of the main relaxation pathways of hot carriers in polar (group III-V) semiconductors is via electron interactions with longitudinal optical (LO) phonons, known as Fröhlich interactions Nanostructures have been reported as one of the promising materials for the generation of hot carriers via phonon-bottleneck effects Another mechanism, that can lead to hot carrier generation is Auger recombination, or Auger heating Despite significant advantages of nanostructures for the generation of hot carriers, the proximity of interfaces and surfaces can affect the relaxation rates of hot carriers by surface recombination, strain, and alloy fluctuations at the interface Here, we study the properties of hot carriers in core-shell InGaAs/InAlAs NWs via steady-state and timeresolved micro-photoluminescence (μPL) spectroscopy to reveal the impact of non-radiative recombination processes. We first show from steady-state PL experiments performed at various lattice temperatures how the hot carrier properties are described by the temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening and the associated scattering mechanisms for a variety of different NW diameters. The results are further correlated by a comprehensive study of carrier recombination dynamics via time-resolved PL spectroscopy to elucidate the influence of Auger and Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination mechanisms on the dynamics of hot carriers. The NWs studied in this work consist of closely lattice-matched In0.2Ga0.8As/In0.2Al0.8As core-shell NWs, that were grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) using a catalyst-free, selective-area epitaxial growth method. Different sets of NW samples were explored with varying InGaAs core diameter (110-200 nm), under otherwise fixed InAlAs shell thickness (~10 nm). Details of their growth is presented elsewhere Here, "I PL " is the PL intensity, "A(E)" the energy-dependent absorptivity, "h" the Planck constant, "k B " the Boltzmann constant, "c" the speed of light. "T" and "∆μ" are the carrier temperature and the quasi-Fermi level splitting, respectively. The results of the hot carrier temperature (∆T: temperature difference between the hot carrier and the lattice temperature) versus the lattice temperature at 6 kW/cm 2 absorbed power density are shown in Figure In addition, it is seen that by increasing the lattice temperature, the effect of hot carriers reduces. This behavior is observed in all NWs; however, the thinner NWs lose their hot carrier effects faster than the thicker NWs. To identify the origins for this intriguing behavior, and especially the different dissipation strengths of the hot carrier effect with diameter, a closer investigation of the dominant recombination mechanism is performed. To study the dynamics of hot carriers under steady-state condition, we therefore explore the recombination mechanisms using the rate equation, as given by where "A", "B", and "C" are the coefficients attributed to Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH), radiative, and Auger recombination mechanisms, respectively. The dominant recombination mechanism in the system can be determined by finding the slope of the natural logarithm of the absorbed power density versus the natural logarithm of the integrated PL intensity where "Γ 0 " is the inhomogeneous (defect) broadening, "Γ LA " the coefficient due to longitudinal acoustic scattering, "Γ LO " the Fröhlich coupling constant, "hω LO " the energy of longitudinal optical (LO) phonons, "T" the lattice temperature, "Γ imp " the ionized impurity coefficient, and "E B " the impurity binding energy. The contribution of each scattering mechanism can be analyzed by fitting the experimental results with Equation The results of temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening are plotted in Figure Figure where "C n " and "C p " are the Auger coefficients for electrons and holes, "k rad " is the radiative recombination coefficient, "n i " the intrinsic carrier density, and "τ p " and "τ n " are the non-radiative SRH recombination lifetimes, respectively. Under the approximation of high-excitation powers and considering n = p, Equation 4 can be written as where the first term is due to the Auger recombination, the second one due to the radiative recombination and the third one due to the SRH recombination mechanism. In this relationship, under the absence of Auger and radiative recombination, a mono-exponential decay of the TRPL signal occurs under relatively low excitation power densities and the signal follows a linear dependence between the natural logarithm of the TRPL intensity and the delay time To quantitatively assess the contribution of various recombination mechanisms and Auger heating on hot carrier dynamics, one can determine the time constant of the TRPL signal by taking the derivative of the natural logarithm of the intensity (φ TRPL ) versus the delay time, as given by According to Equation The results of the power-dependent decay rate (inverse of the lifetime) versus the excitation power density for the InGaAs NWs of various diameters are plotted in Figure In this relationship, by plotting the inverse of TRPL time constant under low-excitation powers versus the inverse of the NW diameter, the slope indicates the surface recombination velocity, as shown by the inset of Figure In summary, we studied the dynamics of hot carriers in core-shell InGaAs/InAlAs NWs influenced by Auger heating and SRH recombination at various lattice temperatures and excitation power densities using steady-state and time-resolved PL spectroscopy. The results indicate that at 10 K, Auger heating in the NWs is dominant and it shows strong dependencies on the NW diameter, following a non-monotonic behavior from thick to thin NWs. Such strong Auger heating can enhance hot carrier temperature and improve the efficiency of hot carrier solar cells fabricated from such core-shell NWs. However, by increasing the lattice temperature, the contribution of SRH recombination becomes higher, resulting in increased rates of hot carrier relaxation. In addition, our results indicate that by raising the lattice temperature, the surface recombination velocity of carriers increases, which can further enhance the thermalization rates of hot carriers. As such, reduced hot carrier effects are observed at elevated lattice temperatures, and to mitigate this it will be important to optimize both the bulk and interface quality of the core-shell NWs towards minimized defect and impurity densities in the future. IV.