The exploration of two-dimensional (2D) antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials has shown great promise and interest in tuning the magnetic and electronic properties as well as studying magneto-optical effects. The current work investigates the control of magneto-optical interactions in alloyed MnxZn1-xPS3 lamellar semiconductor single crystals, with the Mn/Zn ratio regulating the coupling strength. Magnetic susceptibility results show a retention of AFM order followed by a decrease in Néel temperatures down to ~ 40% Mn concentration, below which a paramagnetic behavior is observed. Absorption measurements reveal an increase in bandgap energy with higher Zn(II) concentration, and the presence of Mn(II) d-d transition below the absorption edge. DFT+U approach qualitatively explained the origin and the position of the experimentally observed mid band-gap states in pure MnPS3, and corresponding peaks visible in the alloyed systems MnxZn1-xPS3. Accordingly, emission at 1.3 eV in all alloyed compounds results from recombination from a 4 T1g Mn(II) excited state to a hybrid p-d state at the valence band. Most significant, temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) intensity trends demonstrate strong magneto-optical coupling in compositions with x > 0.65. This study underscores the potential of tailored alloy compositions as a means to control magnetic and optical properties in 2D materials, paving the way for advances in spin-based technologies. The renewed interest in two-dimensional (2D) layered materials inspired by the discovery of graphene, In this equation, i and j represent the metal sites, while J1, J2, and J3 are the exchange coupling constants between the first, second, and third NNs, respectively, as denoted in the AFM-Néel configuration in Figure This study explores the intricate interplay between optics and magnetism in bulk 2D MnxZn1-xPS3 alloyed compounds (0.37<x1) by comparing magnetic susceptibility with absorption, variable temperature steady-state PL, and transient-PL measurements. The optical measurements uncover the role of Mn(II) d-orbitals in the optical transitions, which serve as footmarks for drastic changes upon the change in composition. These optical observations, in agreement with the magnetic susceptibility data, reveal a reduction in TN as x decreases, thus supporting a correlation between the long-range magnetic order and optical properties. Furthermore, the study shows a retention of the AFM characteristic down to a composition of x=0.4. Finally, experimental findings were corroborated by DFT+U calculations, while taking a brute force approach to consider various magnetic phases in MnxZn1-xPS3 systems. The developed magnetic model offers insights into the magnetic ground state of the alloys, exchange parameters up to third NN, and the Néel temperature for each composition, in agreement with experimental results. Synthesis and characterization of MnxZn1-xPS3 crystals. Bulk single crystals of MnxZn1-xPS3 were synthesized using a vapor-transport method, starting with stoichiometric amounts of the respective elements, as detailed in Ref. These theoretical evaluations suggest a reduced potential for aggregation, strain or vacancies in the as-grown bulk single crystals, although not entirely eliminating them. The regime between 300K to 120K corresponds to a paramagnetic phase, while the interval from 120K to TN is characterized as a frustrated magnetic stage, Although the AFM nature remains at temperatures below TN, a decline in the χ⊥ intensity is noticeable, presumably due to the canting of spins toward the a-b plane. near-infrared regime with the increase of Zn(II) content (see inset). The remarkable red shift of 30 meV is close to the energy shift observed in the absorption E1 peak upon diamagnetic doping, confirming that the emission originates from the transition between the Mn(II) This contrasts with the typical msec decay in an atomistic Mn(II) 4 T1g→ 6 A1g transition. These were calculated using the DFT+U (PBE+U) and meta-GGA (EXC=mBJ) exchange-correlation functionals as described in the Methods. Note that U=1.8 eV was applied to Mn 3d states based on previously published ARPES measurements, That is, assuming that the E1 transition occurs from VB1 to CB1 at K high symmetry point (see Figure shift in energy, followed by a decline in the intensity close to the Néel temperature (dashed line in when the latter exposed a weak AFM behavior for Mn0.50, albeit a loss of AFM order for Mn0.37 (Figure The FWHM of the PL emission's dependence on temperature is another way to follow the magnetic influence on optical events. Here, Γ 0 is the broadening at 0 K, Γ Ac represents the broadening produced by acoustic phonons and Γ LO denotes the broadening produced by optical phonons with energy E LO . The values used in the simulations were based on a recent Raman spectroscopy study on similar MnxZn1-xPS3 crystals. Nonetheless, for Mn0.65 down to Mn0.37, the best fit values of E LO were smaller, gradually shifting towards lower energies, eventually matching the P3 mode of ZnPS3 (130 cm -1 ). (ii) The LO phonon coupling term, Γ LO , decreases gradually, from the Mn-rich (115 meV) to the Zn-rich (50 meV), and (iii) the coupling of the photogenerated carriers and acoustic phonons, Γ Ac , is negligible. The high correlation observed between the P3 vibrational mode and the photogenerated carriers in samples with x > 0.65 is in agreement with the integrated PL intensity results, demonstrating a coupling to the Néel temperature for x > 0.65. Therefore, it becomes evident that the optical events are strongly influenced by the spin-phonon coupling, the Mn content, and its magnetic arrangement. while Mn0.50 shows AFM behavior, its weak magneto-optical coupling is evident, probably due to the negligible exchange interactions as well as spin-phonon coupling. The distinct behavior of the Mn0.50 sample was also distinguished while following the polarization of light in MnxZn1-xPS3 crystals. Representative polar plots of a few different crystals (recorded at 5K) are shown in Figure The magnetic state of the alloyed compounds was elucidated using DFT+U calculations. An average magnetic phase model was implemented to consider various magnetic configurations (AFM-Néel, AFM-zigzag, AFM-stripy, FM) within the MnxZn1-xPS3 alloyed compounds. While this analysis is applicable across the entire range of x, the focus was primarily on specific values (x = 1.00, 0.75, and 0.50) for efficiency. A comprehensive description of the magnetic phases and corresponding calculation details can be found in the methods section. The analysis assumed a random distribution of Zn cations within the honeycomb lattice. DFT+U calculations demonstrated that the clustering of Zn cations is not energetically favored (as illustrated in the SI, Figure As presented in Table To further validate the averaged magnetic phase model, the TN values for the various compounds were calculated using equations provided in the Methods and plotted in Figure In conclusion, this work has demonstrated the tunability of the magneto-optical coupling in single crystals with the composition MnxZn1-xPS3. A vapor transport synthesis method provides the alloyed MnxZn1-xPS3, covering compositions from 0.37 ≤ x ≤ 1, encompassing the full spectrum of magnetic characters from paramagnetic attributes (x = 0.37) to the characteristic features of magnetic AFM-Néel materials (x = 1). A careful analysis of both absorption and photoluminescence (steady state-and transient-PL) of the alloyed crystals has revealed a distinct emission mechanism stemming from the 4 T1g→ 6 A1g of the Mn(II) ion, which is partially allowed due to the hybridization of the S(p) and Mn(d) orbitals in the VB. The elucidation of the observed d-d transitions below the absorption edge relied on the assumption that the onset of the absorption edge emerging from deeper VB states in MnPS3 based on DFT+U approach and previously published ARPES measurements, with the latter providing accurate positioning of the d-states within the PDOS. An origin of these peaks, visible in the pure and alloys systems, can be understood in terms of an oversimplified atomic picture of the 3d Mn states Materials. Bulk single crystals of MnxZn1-xPS3 (0.25 ≤ x ≤ 1) were grown via the vapor sublimation synthesis. Briefly, stoichiometric amounts of Mn, red phosphorus, S8, and Zn were ground in a mortar and pestle into a homogeneous mixture. The powder was transferred to a quartz tube and sealed under vacuum. Then, the tube was calcined in a gradient two-zone furnace for a week, where the hot (substrate zone) and cold (product zone) areas were set to 650 ̊C and 600 ̊C, respectively. After a week, the bulk MnxZn1-xPS3 single crystals were collected from the cold zone. PL measurements. PL measurements were performed using a fiber-based confocal microscope embedded in a cryogenic system (attoDRY1000 closed cycle cryostat), with a heater capable of changing the temperature of the sample between 5 K -300 K. The temperature was controlled by the Lake Shore PID system. The sample was excited by a 405/450 nm laser diode, and the emission was detected by the FERGIE spectrograph. On the optical head, a 473 nm long-pass dichroic mirror was used to transmit the laser to the sample while filtering it from the emission. An additional 800 nm long-pass filter was installed on the emission path to filter the laser completely. The lifetime measurements were acquired using a 450 nm pulse laser with a pulse duration of 70 ps. The transient PL was collected by a superconducting nanowire single photon (SNSPD) detector coupled to a PicoHarp300 time-correlated single photon counter (TCSP). SQUID. SQUID measurements were performed in the Quantum Matter Research (QMR) center at the Technion Institute using a SQUID magnetometer Quantum Design MPMS3, which provides a sensitivity of ≤10 -7 emu. The magnetic susceptibilities were measured under an external magnetic field of 1000 Oe (0.1 Tesla), parallel or perpendicular to the lamellar planes of the crystals. Electron microscopy. High-resolution scanning electron microscope (HR-SEM) images were acquired with Zeiss Ultra-Plus FEG-SEM. Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra were gathered using Quanta 200 FEI E-SEM. Both measurements were conducted under an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The EDX spectra were meticulously acquired to perform a quantitative assessment of the composition and to estimate the atomic ratios of [Mn]/[Zn] in the alloyed samples of MnxZn1-xPS3. Magnetic configurations of MnxZn1-xPS3. The average magnetic phase analysis of the MnxZn1-xPS3 systems was performed to investigate the influence of Zn alloying on the template MnPS3 compound. This approach involves using the magnetic configurations of the original MnPS3 matrix with the rectangular unit cell (Figure (Eq. E1) J Where E FM , E Neél , E stripy , and E zigzag are the DFT total energies of the MnPS3 magnetic configurations, and S is the spin magnetic moment. Hence, the Néel temperature can be deduced from the magnetic configuration with the lowest energy, corresponding to the AFM-Néel arrangement, as demonstrated in Eq. E2: Where k B is the Boltzmann constant. x=0.75. As previously mentioned, Zn atoms are randomly distributed within the honeycomb matrix. However, in an AFM environment, different Zn positions within the lattice generate different exchange energies between the Mn atoms. Therefore, it is crucial to consider the average effect of all Zn displacements in the AFM crystal. To encompass all the magnetic phases with a 3:1 Mn to Zn ratio while maintaining zero net magnetization, a 2x1 rectangular unit cell template was used, where two atoms of Mn were replaced with Zn, as depicted in Figure (Eq. E3) Note that the coefficients of the DFT energies depend on the number of magnetic arrangements at each configuration (Néel, stripy, zigzag, FM). The magnetic ground state of the Mn0.75 compound was determined to be AFM-Néel. Consequently, the average Néel exchange energy was calculated according to the following equation: (Eq. E4) T N ̅ = S(S + 1) 3k B (-20 9 ⁄ J 1 + 4J 2 -7 3 ⁄ J 3 ) Where the (-20 9 ⁄ J 1 + 4J 2 -7 3 ⁄ J 3 ) term is the mean exchange energy of the Néel phases. An example of the calculation scheme for Mn0.75Zn0.25PS3 is provided in the SI section 11.3. Where E FM ̅̅̅̅̅ is the average DFT energy of the three FM arrangements. Importantly, the minor energy differences between the AFM-stripy phases result in coexisting magnetic phases at finite temperatures, making it challenging to determine which exchange energy should be considered to extract TN. Therefore, the average exchange energy of the AFM-stripy magnetic phases was utilized, 240Ry for the plane wave kinetic energy of the wavefunctions and charge density, respectively. We consider a mesh of 42 special k points in the irreducible wedge of the first Brillouin zone, corresponding to a grid of 10×8×1 in the Monkhorst Pack scheme. All calculations were spin-polarized. To account for the localization of the d orbital, we include the Hubbard potential (DFT +U), setting U to 3eV to achieve reasonable convergence of the Heisenberg parameters. 