A current flowing through a superconductor induces a spatial modulation in its superconducting order parameter, characterized by a wavevector Q related to the total momentum of a Cooper pair. Here we investigate this phenomenon in a p-wave topological superconductor, described by a onedimensional Kitaev model. We demonstrate that, by treating Q as an extra synthetic dimension, the current carrying non-equilibrium steady state can be mapped into the ground state of a half-filled two-dimensional Weyl semimetal, whose Fermi surface exhibits Lifshitz transitions when varying the model parameters. Specifically, the transition from Type-I to Type-II Weyl phases corresponds to the emergence of a gapless p-wave superconductor, where Cooper pairs coexist with unpaired electrons and holes. Such transition is signaled by the appearance of a sharp cusp in the Q-dependence of the supercurrent, at a critical value Q * that is robust to variations of the chemical potential μ. We determine the maximal current that the system can sustain in the topological phase, and discuss possible implementations. Weyl semimetals (WSMs) and Topological superconductors (TSs) might lead to an actual breakthrough in quantum science and technology. Indeed WSMs are quite promising for applications in ultra-fast electronics and photonics due to their peculiar linear band spectrum and large carrier mobility Similarly, TSs are materials with a huge potential in applications, as they combine two remarkable properties. On the one hand, they host edge modes, known as Majorana quasi-particle (MQPs) show that the nonequilibrium stationary state of the 1D superconductor with a current flow can be mapped onto the ground state of a 2D half-filled fermionic model. As a consequence, the appearance of the various phases of the 1D superconductor can be understood as the result of a Lifshitz transition The effect of a superconducting phase modulation is arXiv:2404.18131v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 15 Jul 2024 typically neglected in most models of Josephson junctions (JJs), with the argument that current conservation enables one to evaluate the current in the normal weak link, whose properties ultimately determine the critical current. This assumption has also been made in models for JJs Our analysis overcomes this limitation. Indeed we investigate the effects of the superconducting phase modulation Q on a p-wave 1D superconductor connected to reservoirs, as sketched in Fig. The article is structured as follows. In Sec.II we describe the model and its symmetries, whereas in Sec.III we derive the general expression of the current carrying state and determine in which range of parameter values it is a conventional gapped p-wave superconductor or a gapless p-wave superconductor. Then, in Sec.IV we introduce the interpretation of Q as a synthetic dimension and we show how the current carrying state of a 1D p-wave superconductor can be mapped onto the ground state of a 2D Weyl semimetal. Finally, in Sec.V we derive the current as a function of the phase modulation Q and of the model parameters, while in Sec.VI we summarize our results, and discuss possible implementations and future perspectives. Model. We consider a one-dimensional p-wave superconductor modelled as a Kitaev chain, whose Hamiltonian reads Here c j (c † j ) corresponds to the annihilation (creation) operator at the lattice site j, μ is the chemical potential, and w > 0 and ∆ 0 > 0 are the magnitudes of the hopping amplitude and of the superconducting order parameter, respectively. The wavevector Q (in units of the inverse lattice spacing) characterizing the spatial modulation of the order parameter, describes a net momentum -2Q of the Cooper pair and accounts for the presence of a current flowing through the system. Since the phenomenon we aim to describe is a bulk effect, we can safely adopt the thermodynamic limit. We assume that the number N s of lattice sites is large, N s ≫ 1, and adopt periodic boundary conditions (PBCs) for the system. Thus, the superconducting spatial modulation in Eq.(1), which is quantized as Q = 2πn/N s because of the PBCs, can effectively be treated as a continuum variable. By introducing Fourier mode operators c k = N -1/2 s j e -ikj c j and the Nambu spinors , one can rewrite the Hamiltonian (1) as where is the Bogolubov de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian matrix, σ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, σ = (σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ) are the Pauli matrices, and with Symmetries. By construction of the BdG formalism, the Hamiltonian (3) fulfills the particle-hole constraint The application of the time-reversal transformation on the Hamiltonian Eq.( showing that the presence of the spatial modulation Q breaks both such symmetries. The normal modes of the quadratic Hamiltonian (2), and therefore its ground state and excitations, are determined by diagonalizing the related BdG Hamiltonian First, we note that Q enters the BdG Hamiltonian (3) in a twofold manner. On the one hand, Q appears in the third component ξ of the h-vector in Eq.( of the bare dispersion relation ε(k) = 2w cos kμ of the tight-binding model [first line of Eq.(1)], which results in the reduction w → w cos Q of the hopping parameter encoded in Eq. between the bare energies of two electrons (k, -k) in the Cooper pair frame -Q. Such a term is odd in Q and causes the breaking of time-reversal and spatial inversion symmetries of the model [see Eqs.( The second remark is that, since in Eq.(3) the first term containing h 0 is proportional to the identity σ 0 , the set of eigenstates of Eq.( To describe in details how this occurs, it is worth recalling briefly the procedure determining the the normal modes of the Hamiltonian where the BdG Hamiltonian (3) can be brought to its diagonal form U † Q HU Q = diag(E + , E -). The upper band E + and the lower band E -of the Kitaev model with superconducting modulation are given by where The above Eq.( whereas Eq.( showing that the presence of Q makes the two bands no longer symmetric for k → -k. In Fig. While the physical consequences of this behavior will be discussed in the next subsection, here we note that the Hamiltonian (2) is straightforwardly brought into its normal modes as where we have exploited Eq.( As is well known, in view of the redundancy of the Nambu spinor degrees of freedom, only one band is physically meaningful. This is why H is expressed in Eq. From Eq.( In contrast, if k ∈ S -, the lowest energy state is realized by occupying the upper band, so that the ground state fulfills and its energy is given by as follows from Eq.( where N is a normalization constant and |R⟩ is a reference state to be determined. Equation ( Gapped superconductor regime. The first regime is characterized by a finite energy gap separation between the two bands. This occurs when In this case the S -sector in Eq.( consisting of Cooper pairs in the bulk only. It can be shown (see App.A) that this regime exists for the following three parameter ranges The case ∆ 0 > w discussed in for some values of k, i.e. when the S -sector in Eq.( Because now the S -sector is not empty, the γ † operators appearing in the general Eq.( To this purpose, we introduce one further partitioning S + = S h ∪ S p of the S + sector defined in Eq.( Note that S e is just another notation for S -. In this case, one can show (29) As compared to the gapped superconductor As a consequence of its mixed structure, |G(Q)⟩ exhibits normal and anomalous correlations depending on the k-sectors. Explicitly, one can show [see Appendix B] that the normal correlation read while the anomalous correlations are The elementary excitations above the ground state |G(Q)⟩ are given in Appendix C. Before concluding this section, a remark is in order. In partitioning the BZ, we have not mentioned the case E + (k) = 0. This corresponds to a degeneracy in the spectrum of the Hamiltonian We now want to discuss how the presence of the superconducting phase modulation Q affects the topological aspects of the Kitaev model. When the system is in the gapped regime, although Q changes quantitatively the spectrum with respect to the Q = 0 case [compare e.g. Figs.2(a) and (b)], it does not alter the occupancy of bands because |h 0 (k; Q)| < h(k; Q) ∀k. The ground state |G(Q)⟩ consists of a completely empty upper band E + or, equivalently, of a completely filled lower band E -. Then, one can characterize |G(Q)⟩ through the topological index associated to the lower band. Notice that this case, described in Ref. The situation is different in the gapless regime, where E + (k; Q) < 0, for some k's. For such k-states the presence of the h 0 -term in Eq.( However, the presence of the superconducting order parameter modulation Q offers the opportunity to adopt a different perspective. The idea is that Q can be regarded as the wavevector of an extra synthetic dimension, in addition to k. In this way we can associate a 1D superconductor with superconducting phase modulation to a 2D fermionic model. The Lifshitz transitions We start by observing that, although the envisaged system is one-dimensional, the Hamiltonian (1) is 2πperiodic in the superconducting order parameter modulation Q. As a consequence, the Bogolubov de Gennes Hamiltonian Eq.( where k = (k, Q) is the wavevector lying on a torus. In Appendix D, we provide the explicit expression of H 2D in real space. The spectrum of this fictitious 2D model is determined by H(k) and is therefore the same as the one of the Kitaev model with a superconducting phase modulation. Two remarks are in order. First, the 2D model contains twice the degrees of freedom of the Kitaev model. Indeed, while in Eq.( The second remark is related to symmetries. In such a dimensional promotion, the role of symmetries is interchanged. In particular, while for the Kitaev chain the relations ( and respectively, and yield the relation and is responsible for the mutual relation The Fermi surface F is defined in the 2D BZ as the set of k = (k, Q) such that the eigenvalues fulfill E + (k) = 0 or E -(k) = 0. In particular, we shall inspect the possibility that the Fermi surface contains nodes, where the two bands E + and E -touch, i.e. In view of Eq.( where depends on the chemical potential μ and not on the value of ∆ 0 . The WSM nature (Type-I vs Type-II) is determined by the behavior of the h 0 (k) term. In the vicinity of the Weyl node k λ,± W (with λ = 0, π), the Hamiltonian H(k) in Eq.( where q 2 = k and W , and Each Weyl node carries a vortex, as can be seen from by computing the lower band Berry phase over a contour enclosing the Weyl node in the k momentum space where A λ,± is the Berry potential and V λ,± is a diagonal matrix with components given by ( the Fermi surface consists of four isolated Weyl nodes k W , where the two bands E + and E -touch, while In this regime the h 0 -term in the Hamiltonian modifies the spectrum but not the occupancy of the bands, and the model We shall now argue that this Fermi surface of the 2D model enables us to recover the topological classification of the Kitaev model and to determine the region of parameters where MQPs appear, in the presence of the superconducting phase modulation. Indeed in this regime the lower band E -of the Hamiltonian H is completely filled, while the upper band E + is completely empty. Thus, for each cut of the band structure at a fixed Q away from the Weyl nodes (Q ̸ = ±Q 0,π,± W ), one obtains a gapped one-dimensional insulator, which can be classified in the topological class D which is quantized in integer multiples of π due to the particle-hole symmetry or, equivalently, the index Trivial phases (ν = +1) correspond to the condition |μ| > 2w| cos Q|, whereas topological phases (ν = -1) correspond to |μ| < 2w| cos Q| and, for the case μ > 0, are depicted as gray and green regions in Fig. which, for the physically realistic regime ∆ 0 ≪ w, represents a very narrow range of chemical potential value for this regime to exist. 2) Type-II WSM phase. Let us now focus on the regime which is physically most realistic, as the superconducting order parameter is typically much smaller than the bandwidth parameter w. The scenario of the Fermi surface is depicted in Fig. The fermion and hole pockets, identified by E + (k) = 0 and E -(k) = 0, respectively, cross at the Weyl nodes. As one can see from Fig. the ground state is gapless, and it exhibits Cooper pairs, unpaired fermions and holes. In contrast, in the range |Q| < Q * and π -Q * < |Q| < π, it is gapped and topological. Indeed the spectrum plotted in Fig. A striking difference emerges with respect to the regime 1) described above. In that case the range of Q-values, where the gapped topological phase exists is purely determined by the chemical potential μ and is independent of the superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 , provided the latter is large enough to fulfill the energy range The Fermi surface of the 2D fermionic model associated to the Kitaev chain, with superconducting phase modulation Q treated as a synthetic dimension. The Fermi surface consists of four Weyl nodes, highlighted with black bullets, located at positions given by Eq. a function of μ and Q, while the dashed lines represent the phase diagram for the regime 1). At each fixed value of μ, the topological region (green area) is smaller than in regime 1) because the system enters the gapless phase (violet color). 3) no Fermi surface. When |μ| → 2w, the two Weyl nodes k j,± W of each j-th pair merge. Then, in the regime the Weyl node equation h 3 = 0 cannot be fulfilled [see Eqs.( In open boundary conditions for the 2D model, both regimes 1) and 2) exhibit localized Fermi "arc" states, which form effectively one-dimensional zeroenergy bands, parametrized by the crystal momentum Q along the infinite direction. We will consider for clarity a single boundary at x = 0. Let us start from the Type-I Weyl phase, in the parameter regime where Here, ζ(Q) = arcsin (w sin Q/∆ 0 ), while represents the penetration depth. It is readily observed that this quantity diverges at the arc ends. In the Type-II Weyl phase The Fermi surface of the 2D fermionic model associated to the Kitaev chain with superconducting phase modulation Q treated as a synthetic dimension. The Fermi surface consists of four Weyl nodes (black bullets), and of electron and hole pockets. The green areas denote the gapped topological phases of the 1D Kitaev chain, while in the other the Kitaev model exhibits a gapless superconducting state, where both Cooper pairs and unpaired fermions and holes are present. The value of Q * determining the topological gapped/gapless boundaries only depends on ∆0 [see Eq.( In terms of the 1D model, these points signal the transition between the topological gapped phase and the gapless superconductor phase, see Fig. The two components of the wavefunction (50) represent in the 2D model the weights on the A and B sublattices or orbital degrees of freedom. However, they are directly interpreted as the electron (top) and hole (bottom) components in the 1D superconductor model. Therefore, the wavefunction (50) describes the Majorana edge mode of the 1D TS associated to the Fermi arc Also a conventional s-wave superconductor carrying a current exhibits a modulation Q of the superconducting order parameter, and can enter a gapless phase. Here we want to highlight the difference from the p-wave superconductor from the point of view of the mapping to a 2D model. In a s-wave superconductor the order parameter term in the presence of a spatial modulation is ), the BCS Hamiltonian appears to be the sum where h 0 is again given by Eq.( with ξ(k; Q) still given by Eq.( ). Note that these boundaries are dependent on both ∆ 0 and μ, while in the Kitaev case they are μ-independent. Importantly, the boundaries of the electron and hole pockets in the BCS case are topologically different from the ones of Fig. Let us now compare the Fermi surface closed circuits of the p-wave superconductor and s-wave superconductor. In the former case, F consists of the four curves that in Fig. (55) respectively. Note that, at the crossing at the Weyl nodes, the solid and the dashed line are uniquely identified through the continuity of the eigenvectors related to the vanishing eigenvalues E + = E -= 0. As a consequence, the Fermi surface in the Kitaev case winds around the k-direction and therefore belongs to the (1, 0) topological class. In contrast, for the s-wave superconductor described by the BCS model, the Fermi surface illustrated in Fig. Importantly, these different topological classes are closely related to the presence or absence of nodes in the 2D Fermi surface. Indeed in the Kitaev case the electron and hole pocket must necessarily go through the Weyl nodes, located at k = 0 and k = ±π, because the p-wave superconducting order parameter is odd in k. In a s-wave superconductor, instead, the absence of nodes makes the Fermi surface consist of localized curves. Thus, in terms of the associated the 2D model, a 1D s-wave superconductor corresponds to either a 2D insulator or a 2D conventional semimetal, depending on the parameter range [see Fig. We now want to analyze the behavior of the current carried by the ground state |G(Q)⟩. As is well known, the operator describing the current flowing through the site j is given by Ĵj = -iwe (c † j c j+1c † j+1 c j )/ħ, where -e = -|e| is the electron charge. The spatial conservation of the expectation values I(Q) = ⟨G(Q)| Ĵj |G(Q)⟩ ∀j follows from charge conservation, and one can show Furthermore, exploiting the expression (23) and taking the thermodynamic limit N s → ∞, one obtains the current as a function of the superconducting modulation Q is odd function of k, called spectral asymmetry Figure The golden curve illustrates the case, where the model parameters fulfill the condition which represents the current carried by Cooper pairs with momentum -2Q and charge -2e. Similarly, for ∆ 0 ≪ w, the maximal current I * reached at the cusp is For μ ̸ = 0 one obtains a maximal current lower than the one at μ = 0, as can be seen from Fig. We have also analyzed the effects of disorder on the behavior of the current. Specifically, we have considered a disordered on-site potential, which we have accounted for by replacing the constant chemical potential in the Hamiltonian (1) with μ → μ j = μ + w r ρ j , where r is the disorder strength parameter and ρ j ∈ [-1, 1] is a uniformly distributed random number. Figure In this paper we have investigated the effects of the spatial modulation Q emerging in the superconducting order parameter when a topological p-wave superconductor carries a current flow. By modelling the system with a Kitaev chain, we have analyzed the properties of the current carrying state for arbitrary values of the model parameters, including the physically realistic regime ∆ 0 < w. We have demonstrated that, by treating the Q- In particular, in the regime identified by Eq.( Furthermore, we have highlighted the difference with respect to the s-wave superconductor, where the associated 2D fermionic model can be either a trivial insulator or a conventional semimetal (see Fig. Finally, by computing the current flowing through a the Kitaev chain, we have shown in Figs. Implementations. One of the most explored implementations of 1D topological superconductors are nanowires with strong spin-orbit coupling, such as InSb and InAs, proximized by a thin conventional superconducting layer (e.g. Al or Nb) and exposed to a longitudinal magnetic field. One of the signatures that seems to be compatible with the existence of MQPs is a pronounced zerobias peak observed in the conductance in electron tunneling experiments. However, the question whether such a peak is actually due to MQPs or to other nontopological effects is still under debate. Here, from our result Eq.( By changing the k → -k in the γ's of the S h sector one can equivalently write where we have used the relation , one obtains the normalized state Eq.( Moreover, the general expression By inverting the Bogoliubov quasi-particle relations whence Eqs.( From Eq.( Using Eq.( where, as compared to the ground state ( Notably, such type of Cooper pair is orthogonal to the Cooper pair characterizing the ground state, i.e. C5) For the S e sector the excited state reads where, as compared to the ground state (29), a single fermionic state at k ∈ S e and an empty fermionic state at -k ∈ S h are replaced by a cooper pair of the same type as the ones characterizing the ground state in the S p sector. Finally for the S p sector where, as compared to the ground state (29), a Cooper pair in the S p sector has been replaced by one single fermion. , one obtains ) which contains the first term in the momentum k expansion of (33) around k = 0. The same expansion is used in the Type-II phase, but the arc joins now the electron/hole pockets enclosing the nodes. The most general boundary condition ensuring the self-adjointness of (E1) can be derived by taking two arbitrary spinors ψ and χ and imposing that ⟨Hψ, χ⟩ = ⟨ψ, Hχ⟩ in the chosen geometry provided ψ and χ are well-behaved for x → ∞. We note that, taking ψ = χ, the above equation implies that the density current J x = ħ -1 ∂ k H across the boundary vanishes. It also implies that the state on the surface must take the form where the phase ζ must be a function of Q and satisfy The latter equation directly implies the expression of ζ given in Sec. IV B and, for Q = 0, reduces to the eigenstate of σ x with positive eigenvalue. This is the familiar form describing a straight "arc" in Type-I Weyl semimetals or the Majorana end mode in the Kitaev model. Taking an Ansatz wavefunction in the form (50) with an unspecified λ Q in the exponent, it can be directly verified applying the Hamiltonian (E1) that this represents a zero-energy eigenstate only if the penetration length is a function of the momentum Q and the condition is satisfied. Finally one solves for the penetration length λ Q and the relation cos ζ = ± ∆ 2 0w 2 sin 2 Q selects the branch of the solution for ζ from the condition that λ Q > 0 along the arc. To this end, we recall that, in the Weyl-I phase, the arc connects the projection of the nodes k (0,±) W through the origin for μ > 0, i.e., cos Q > 0, while for μ < 0 the arc winds instead across the BZ and cos Q < 0. The same procedure can be readily applied to the Type-II Weyl phase, with the important difference that there appear bulk states around the Weyl nodes. Therefore, the arc support is shorter and spans the interval [-Q * , Q * ] for μ > 0, while it joins π-Q * and -π+Q * including the point Q = π for μ < 0. Similarly, one can describe the "arc" connecting the projection of the Weyl nodes k (π,±) W by considering the expansion of (33) around k = π. It is readily verified that this Hamiltonian can be formally obtained from H 0 by exchanging w → -w and ∆ 0 → -∆ 0 . By repeating the steps above, the surface state must once again reduce to (E3) on the boundary and the form (50) describes a zero-energy state under imposing Solving (E5) and (E6) for λ Q , the branch of the phase ζ is again selected by the condition λ Q > 0. To this end, it is important to notice that the Fermi arc support includes Q = π if μ > 0, while it includes the origin Q = 0 for μ < 0. Joining the above considerations, one finds the expression (51) in the main text, also represented in Fig. Appendix F: Analytical expression for the current at μ = 0 Here we show that, starting from the general expression (57) for the current, for the special case μ = 0 we can derive an analytical expression of I(Q) that holds for arbitrary values of ∆ 0 . We first observe that, for μ = 0, the function (A2) determining gapless and gapped region reduces to Φ(k Then, taking into account the sign of h 0 [see Eq.( The expression (57) of the current consists of two contributions, one proportional to η, which represents the current I U (Q) carried by unpaired fermions and holes, and a second termn proportional to 1 -|η|, that represents the supercurrent I S (Q) due to Cooper pairs. Let us start by determining the former contribution. Indentifying through Eq.(F1) the k-regions where η = ±1, one finds Recalling Eq.(F2), one obtains Let us now consider the current associated to Cooper pairs (η = 0). From the expression (57), the current associated to the Cooper pairs is By introducing the quantity and by exploiting the fact that |η(k, Q)| and ξ(k, Q) are even functions of k, some straightforward algebra leads one to write One can now identify from Eq.(F1) the regions with η = 0 and write Let us now focus on the two integrals appearing in the first term. We notice that, by changing the integration variable k = πk ′ in the second integral, the latter turns out to be equal to the first one. Similarly, the integral appearing in the second term can be written as twice the integral from 0 to π/2. This enables one to rewrite where E, F and K are incomplete elliptic functions, while E(x) ≡ E( π 2 ; x) and K(x) ≡ F ( π 2 ; x). Finally, exploiting the properties of the Elliptic integrals √ xE (1 -1/x) = E(1x) and √ xK (1 -1/x) = x K(1x) for x > 0, and combining together the contributions (F4) and (F9), one finally obtains the current at μ = 0 where δ Q is Eq.(F6), and k * Q is Eq.(F2). The current near Q = 0 and for ∆ 0 ≪ w gives and to leading order the slope dI/dQ depends only on the bandwidth parameter w. 