Thermal boundary resistance (TBR) in semiconductor-on-diamond structure bottlenecks efficient heat dissipation in electronic devices. In this study, to reduce the TBR between GaN and diamond, surface-activated bonding with a hybrid SiOx-Ar ion source was applied to achieve an ultrathin interfacial layer. The simultaneous surface activation and slow deposition of the SiOx binder layer enabled precise control over layer thickness (2.5-5.3 nm) and formation of an amorphous heterogeneous nanostructure comprising a SiOx region between two inter-diffusion regions. Crucially, the 2.5-nm-thick interfacial layer achieved a TBR of 8.3 m2⋅K/GW, a record low for direct-bonded GaN/diamond interface. A remarkable feature is that the TBR is extremely sensitive to the interfacial thickness; rapidly increasing to 34 m2⋅K/GW on doubling the thickness to 5.3 nm. Theoretical analysis revealed the origin of this increase: a diamond/SiOx interdiffusion layer extend the vibrational frequency, far exceeding that of crystalline diamond, which increases the lattice vibrational mismatch and suppresses phonon transmission. Recently, the development of electronic devices based on wide-bandgap semiconductors such as gallium nitride (GaN) and silicon carbide (SiC) has enabled the commercialization of electric vehicles, mobile devices, and 5G-and-beyond telecommunication To fabricate GaN on the diamond sample, room-temperature bonding instead of the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth was used because CVD cannot control the interfacial structure precisely and causes thermal damage and stress. Specifically, an SAB method using a hybrid Ar and SiOx ion source was developed, denoted as "hybrid SAB." Importantly, the hybrid ion source and the use of SiOx ion enabled simultaneous surface activation and binder layer deposition with slow rate, resulting in a thin binder layer and control over the interfacial structure. First, GaN and diamond wafers were surface-treated using Ar/SiOx hybrid ion sources in a high-vacuum chamber to create an activated binder layer comprising amorphous SiOx (Fig. Next, we investigated the TBR of the GaN/diamond interfaces (RGaN-Dia) using the time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) method. A schematic of the three-layer model and the TDTR measurement are shown in Fig. To investigate the impact of the low RGaN-Dia on heat dissipation, we conducted FEM analysis by solving Fourier's law of heat conduction using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3a to study the temperature of high-power GaN devices. Fig. As a results, although the literature RGaN-Dia is lower than that of the present work1, the reduced thermal conductivity of the CVD synthesized diamond layer significantly sacrifices the heat dissipation efficiency, resulting in a much higher device temperature of 157.5 °C, approximately 30 °C higher than that reported in the present study. The FEM simulations suggest that the SAB bonding method is better for achieving highly efficient heat dissipation, particularly when a low TBR is achieved. Dependence of thermal resistance on interfacial layer thickness Fig. To explore the mechanism behind the unexpected TBR variation, we conducted MD simulations. First, a heterogeneous layered amorphous nanostructure was built through step-by-step annealing (Fig. To enhance heat dissipation for semiconductor-on-diamond systems, we conducted a comprehensive study of the interfacial heat conduction in a GaN-on-diamond system. Using the hybrid SAB method with Ar/SiOx ion source, we fabricated ultrathin interfacial layers with precisely controlled nanostructures. This interfacial layer has a heterogeneous layered structure comprising a SiOx region between two diffusive regions. By reducing the total thickness of the interfacial layer, we achieved a record low TBR of 8.3 m2⋅ K/GW at the bonded GaN/diamond interface. This low TBR could enhance the performance of actual GaN devices, as shown by FEM analysis. However, small changes in the thickness of the individual layers can significantly affect the TBR. Notably, the simulations clarified the impact of the significantly extended vDOS of the interfacial layer, particularly in the SiOx/diamond region, whose cutoff frequency was nearly 1.7 times that of crystal diamond. The vDOS is also highly sensitive to the interfacial layer thickness; that is, a thinner layer can lead to an increase in the vDOS in the high-frequency regime and a decrease in the low-frequency regime. This variation can result in a large interfacial vibrational frequency mismatch and significantly impede the transmission of lowfrequency heat carriers. The findings of this study not only reveal that the hybrid SAB method using Ar and SiOx ion sources is a promising method for wafer bonding with thin and precisely controlled interfacial layers for low TBR, but also stress the importance of controlling the amorphous nanostructure of the thin interfacial layer for achieving a low TBR. The methodology established in this study can address the practical challenge in enhancing the efficiency of heat dissipation in high-performance electronic systems. Moreover, the advanced fundamental understanding on the interfacial heat conduction across amorphous interfacial layer provides crucial insight into the design of the interface in the next-generation thermal management in semiconductor devices. Single-crystal diamond (EDP Co., Ltd) was fabricated using CVD in dimensions of 10 mm × 10 mm and 500-μm thickness and bonded to a GaN (2 μm)/sapphire (430 μm) substrate (Powerdec Co., Ltd) using a modified room-temperature SAB method. Initially, chemical-mechanical polishing was performed on the GaN and diamond surfaces to reduce the root-mean-square surface roughness to less than 0.5 nm. Unlike the conventional SAB method, where the binder layer is sputtered on the surface of GaN and diamond before surface activation, we used a SiOx-Ar beam source, enabling simultaneous deposition of the SiOx binder layer and surface activation. This method enables the generation of an ultrathin binder layer with precise control over the interfacial thickness. The acceleration voltage and current of the ion-beam source were 100 mA and 1.0 kV, respectively. Details of the SAB process and the differences between standard and hybrid SAB can be found in previous studies11,36. After the SAB process, the sapphire substrate was removed via laser lift-off, followed by the evaporation of the aluminum layer, which acted as a transducer in the TDTR measurement. The TDTR method was used to investigate the TBR between GaN and diamond (RGaNdiamond). The setup details and operating principles of the TDTR were identical to those used previously A focused ion beam system (Thermo Scientific Helios G4 HX) with dual beams was used to prepare cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) samples having thicknesses of approximately 50 nm for analysis of the interface. For STEM measurements, we used a Thermo Scientific Themis Z spherical aberration-corrected transmission electron microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV in bright field (BF) and high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) modes. For TEM measurements, we used a Thermo Scientific Tecnai F20 transmission electron microscope operating at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV in bright-field (BF) TEM mode. In HR-STEM mode, the spatial distribution of elements was obtained using EDS mapping. In this study, we used the mold density signal in the EDS mapping and line-scan data. To determine the dimensions of the interfacial structures, the STEM images were used to define the total thickness of the interfacial layer. For the thickness of the SiOx region, we used EDS results. Because the spatial resolution of EDS mapping is approximately 0.5 nm, there is a small systematic error in the SiOx layer thickness, as presented in Table The TBR at the interface between GaN and diamond was investigated using nonequilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) with the LAMMPS package To generate an amorphous structure in each region (left diffusion, SiOx, and right diffusion regions), a step-by-step procedure for each separate region was followed. First, the region of interest was transitioned into an NPT ensemble for 20 ps, where it was heated to 5000 K to melt the crystal structure rapidly Effects of interfacial thermal conductance on device temperature were investigated by solving the steady-state heat conduction equation using FEM in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3a. For the boundary conditions, we set all surfaces except for the undersurface as 100 % thermal insulators. All other simulations parameters are listed in Table represents the central atom involved in the three-body interaction, element2 corresponds to the atom bonded with the central atom, and element3 denotes the atom that influences the 1-2 bonds in terms of bond order. The parameters n, beta, lambda2, B, lambda1 and A are exclusively used to describe the two-body interactions. On the other hand, the parameters m, gamma, lambda3, c, d and costheta0 specific to the three-body interactions. The variables R and D are utilized to describe both two-body and three-body interactions In the context of two-body interactions, the selection of parameters depends primarily on element 1, which represents the central atom. Consequently, based on the three established Tersoff potential fields used to describe crystalline diamond For parameters with dimensions, arithmetic mixing rules are followed. In the context of the three-body interaction, both elements 1 and 3 have a combined influence on the selection of parameters. It is worth noting that in the current implementation of the Tersoff potential in LAMMPS, the parameter 'm' is restricted to the values 3 or 1. When m is set to 3 and gamma is equal to 1, the Tersoff potential field conforms to the original Tersoff form In both the two-body and three-body interactions, the selection of the parameters R and D follows the reference For the parameter D: If element 1 and element 3 are the same type of atom, the value of D is the same as the corresponding R value. However, if element 1 and element 3 are different, a new value of D is calculated based on the R and D parameters for element 1 and element 3. The formula is as follows: R=(((R1+D1 Based on the aforementioned calculation details, we are also providing a Tersoff potential field file named "GaNSiOC.tersoff" in the attachment. This file is specifically designed for performing calculations involving the Ga, N, Si, O, and C elements using the LAMMPS software. Phonon transmission, which represents the heat flow across a cross-section (A), can be determined through molecular dynamics calculations that consider all orders of anharmonic interactions in the simulation The phonon density of states, denotes as D(ω), can be obtained using the following expression: Table In the context of two-body interactions, the selection of parameters depends primarily on element 1, which represents the central atom. Consequently, based on the three established Tersoff potential fields used to describe crystalline diamond (5, 6), GaN(4), and SiO2(3), the following judgments can be made: I. When element 2 is different from element 3, the corresponding two-body interactions parameters n, beta, lambda2, B, lambda1, and A are set to 0; II When element 2 and element 3 are the same, for dimensionless parameters, their values are equal to the parameter values of element 1. For parameters with dimensions, arithmetic mixing rules are followed. In the context of the three-body interaction, both elements 1 and 3 have a combined influence on the selection of parameters. It is worth noting that in the current implementation of the Tersoff potential in LAMMPS, the parameter 'm' is restricted to the values 3 or 1. When m is set to 3 and gamma is equal to 1, the Tersoff potential field conforms to the original Tersoff form(1, 2). Conversely, when m is set to 1, the potential formula follows the form proposed by Albe et al.( In both the two-body and three-body interactions, the selection of the parameters R and D follows the reference (2-4). The details are as follows: For the parameter R: If element 1 and element 3 are the same, the value of R for that atom is taken directly. On the other hand, if element 1 and element 3 are different, the value of R is calculated as the square root of the product of the R values for element 1 and element 3, i.e., R=(R1*R3) Based on the aforementioned calculation details, we are also providing a Tersoff potential field file named "GaNSiOC.tersoff" in the attachment. This file is specifically designed for performing calculations involving the Ga, N, Si, O, and C elements using the LAMMPS software. Phonon transmission, which represents the heat flow across a cross-section (A), can be determined through molecular dynamics calculations that consider all orders of anharmonic interactions in the simulation (7, 8), The phonon density of states, denotes as DD(ωω), can be obtained using the following expression: where vv ii represents the velocity of the ith atom, f is the frequency, n is the total number of atoms, t is the correlation time (9). Table where v i represents the velocity of the ith atom, f is the frequency, n is the total number of atoms, t is the correlation time55 .