The discovery of localized plasmon polariton resonances has been pivotal in enabling tunability of the optical resonance. Recently, extensive research efforts have aimed to expand these achievements to other polaritonic states that exhibit less loss and in other spectral regions. However, these efforts were limited to isotropic or uniaxial structures, and an eigenmode theory was derived only for isotropic particles. Here, we present a breakthrough in synthesizing biaxial nanostructures that exhibit localized hyperbolic phonon resonances with high Q-factors in the mid-infrared. Furthermore, we develop a theory that predicts high-order resonances in anisotropic particles with coupling between the axial permittivites. Finally, we confirm the theoretical predictions through near-field measurements, which demonstrate the existence of both the first and higherorder resonant modes. Our findings provide the foundation for designing a new generation of anisotropic resonators with various applications in the mid-IR range. Our analysis applies to other fields, such as quasi-magnetostatics and heat conduction. When optical phonons, the out-of-phase lattice vibrational modes in polar crystals, are coupled to photons, they give rise to quasiparticles known as phonon polaritons (PhPs). These PhPs have been heavily studied in polar dielectrics Hyperbolic PhPs (HPhPs) occur in extremely anisotropic materials when the real component of the permittivity is in opposite signs along different directions Recently, several naturally anisotropic polar materials capable of supporting HPhPs, such as hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) Here, we present the first experimental observation of LHPhR in sub-wavelength biaxial nanoparticles. The nanoparticles, made of α-MoO3, were synthesized using femtosecond pulsed laser ablation in a liquid (fs-PLAL) and characterized spatially and spectrally using a mid-IR scattering scanning near-field microscope (s-SNOM). Our findings reveal that α-MoO3 nanoparticles have a diverse optical spectrum of phononic polaritons spanning the 900-1000 cm -1 range. The wide range of possible aspect ratios for these nanoparticles allows for broad tunability of the resonances of the phononic polaritons. In addition, multiple modes, including high-order directional polaritons, are observed. We also develop a novel theoretical model describing biaxial nanoparticle modes and eigen-permittivity relations to back up our observations. In addition to numerical simulations of these nanoparticles, this model sheds light on the nature of these photonic modes, offering insights into the design of tailor-made resonances in anisotropic particles. Specifically, we predict and demonstrate that biaxial particles support three distinctly oriented LHPhR modes, with coupling between the different crystal axes in the high-order modes. Our study introduces a new class of mid-IR nanoparticle resonators exhibiting extremely large quality factors with controlled directionality, which could usher in a new era of detectors, image sensors, and highly sensitive photonic devices in the mid-IR range. α-MoO3 nanoparticles were synthesized using fs-PLAL, which enables the production of particles of varying sizes. Figure The s-SNOM measurement system used in this study is illustrated in Figure where and the ellipsoid's dimensions a, b and c denote the half length of the ellipsoid in the x, y, and z axes, respectively. These 1 st order eigenstates and eigen-permittivities are identical to the isotropic modes. In contrast, they can only be oriented along the resonant crystal direction of the α-MoO3 crystal, regardless of the direction of the polarization of the source as long as it can excite the mode (has a polarization component along the relevant axis). We analyzed dipole resonances of an anisotropic ellipsoid inclusion Next, we analyze the high-order anisotropic sphere modes and eigen-permittivities. Our goal is to express the eigenstates in Cartesian coordinates due to the crystal symmetry and obtain relations that satisfy both boundary conditions and Laplace's equation, which are relevant to an anisotropic medium i.e., ones that enable ε i ≠ ε j . Since the field outside the sphere can be expanded in spherical harmonics, the high-order spherical harmonics are suitable only for an isotropic medium, and there is a continuity of the potential on the particle envelope, we conclude that the anisotropic modes are combinations of spherical harmonics. We find the following second-order anisotropic modes for uniaxial and biaxial spheres, respectively, along with eigen-permittivity relations: where ψ denotes spherical harmonic modes, ψ ̃ denotes anisotropic modes, and the first transitions are for inside the sphere volume. Interestingly, while the eigenpermittivities are discrete for isotropic inclusions, anisotropic spheres exhibit eigenpermittivity lines for the second mode. Similarly, for the ellipsoid particle, we find the same modes inside the inclusion volume and the following mode field outside and eigen-permittivity relation: where and we have used some of the definitions from Ref. Figures The complex near-field signal that results from the interaction between the probe tip and single nano-ellipsoids resonant modes can be divided into two main components The first component is the Direct Coupling (DCo), which originates from the modes that are excited by the incident beam and then scattered to the far-field through coupling with the AFM tip. The DCo contribution image depends on the direction and polarization of the incident beam with respect to the direction of the excited mode. The second component is the Round-Trip (RTr) contribution, which involves the modes that are excited and subsequently scattered to the far-field by the AFM tip. The RTr contribution depends on the position of the tip relative to the sample during measurement. For ellipsoids-shaped nanoparticles, where the crystal axes align along the geometrical axis, the RTr contribution will exhibit an even symmetry according to the directional mode behavior. In DCo, the in-plane modes excited via the AFM tip have odd symmetry with respect to the crystal axis. The complex s-SNOM signal can thus be decomposed into these two contributions using their symmetry properties (see details in the Methods Section and Ref. Figure α-MoO3 biaxial nanoparticles were investigated for the first time, both theoretically and experimentally. These subwavelength nanoparticles, synthesized using a novel method of fs-laser pulse ablation in liquid, support two mid-IR LHPhR in the 8.5-11 μm spectral range. We develop a complete theoretical model of high-order resonances of general biaxial anisotropic nanoparticles in the quasistatic approximation. We obtained that the 1 st and 2 nd order analytical modes for biaxial anisotropic particles agree well with the experimental results. We observe 2nd order modes at frequencies even lower than the first-order mode's resonance due to the ellipsoid's geometry. Moreover, we find that in contrast to isotropic nanostructures, the resonances of high-order modes couple the permittivities in the different axes. Our α-MoO3 nano-ellipsoids exhibit sharp resonance in the MIR range, accompanied by extremely high Q factors. The high degree of confinement causes the LHPhR to undergo a blue shift of approximately 32 cm -1 , indicating the potential for broad tunability in the MIR range. Our nanorod-shaped α-MoO3 nanoparticles demonstrate the ability to tune both RB2 and RB3 LHPhR within a single particle by modifying the aspect ratio, revealing a polarization-dependent resonator. This research establishes that α-MoO3 nanoparticles can support LHPhR throughout the MIR spectral range, offering high Q factors, polarization sensitivity, and tunability. These findings open new possibilities for IR detectors, image sensors, and photonic devices, emphasizing the importance of comprehensive understanding. Our results are expected to apply to other fields of physics such as quasi magnetostatics and heat conduction MoO3 pellets were used as ablation targets in the fs-PLAL process. The pellets were made from MoO3 powder (Sigma-Aldrich) through a process of powder grinding, followed by palletization using a hard press at a pressure of 5 MPa. The resulting pellets were then sintered at a temperature of 560 ͦ C for 12 hours. XRD and Raman spectroscopy were used to analyze the pellets and confirm the formation of the α-MoO3 phase. The ablation process was carried out using a Ti: Sapphire femtosecond laser (Astrella, Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a central wavelength of 800 nm, a repetition rate of 1 kHz, a full-width at half-maximum of 500 fs, and an average power of 1.5 W. The laser beam was focused on the target using a converging lens with a focal length of 20 cm. A pre-prepared MoO3 pellet was placed at the base of a beaker filled with 30 mL of acetone (Sigma-Aldrich). Acetone was chosen as the solvent because of its inherent stability, which helps to protect the pellet in its liquid environment. The presence of a liquid layer above the MoO3 particle prevents exposure to ambient air. The Rayleigh range of the ablating femtosecond laser beam needs to be completely within the solvent layer above the sample for proper focusing of the beam. To minimize the potential impact of the laser on the targeted area, the pellet enclosed in the glass beaker was continuously moved using a translation stage. The translation stage can move in two dimensions and is operated by an automated program. The ablation procedures were conducted for 20 minutes. Afterward, the solution of nanoparticles was carefully stored in hermetically sealed containers. Subsequently, the solution was transferred to centrifuge tubes to facilitate debris separation. The centrifugation process was performed at a rotational speed of 5000 revolutions per minute (RPM) for 30 minutes. After centrifugation, unwanted debris precipitated in the lower region of the tube, while the top portion consisted exclusively of nanoparticles. A pipette was used to isolate these nanoparticles from any accompanying debris. The resulting nanoparticle/acetone solution was further diluted by the addition of acetone. The samples were made by drop-casting onto a clean Si prime wafer and allowed to dry at room temperature. Nanoparticle size and shape were measured using a combination of AFM for height measurement and Scanning electron microscopy for lateral dimensions (see SI). Near-field and AFM measurements were taken using a commercial s-SNOM (Neaspec Attocube). The system uses a Pt-coated AFM probe (PPP-NCLpt from NANOSENSORS) to scan the sample in tapping mode (160 kHz frequency 60 nm amplitude). A tunable Mid IR (910 -1205 cm -1 ) QCL (Mircat DRS daylight solutions) operating at 3 mW is used for optical near-field measurements. All results were taken from the 3 rd demodulation order of the signal to reduce far-field noise. Furthermore, a pseudo-heterodyne measurement system is used to extract the optical phase and further reduce far-field noise in the measurements. Localized spectra were taken using point spectroscopy The s-SNOM is used to measure the near-field signal of a resonating structure, it can be decomposed into four distinct scattering processes possible for a two-particle system. It is important to note that all these processes must involve coupling to the probe; otherwise, they would be filtered out during demodulation. These contributions are: 33 a) Signal arising from material contrast due to local polarizability, which is directly measured via the probe. b) Round trip signal generated by resonant modes induced in the sample by the AFM tip, which then re-interact with the probe to scatter into the far field. As the coupling is exclusively through the AFM tip, both dark and bright modes can be excited regardless of their orientation to the incident beam polarization. These contributions should exhibit symmetry along the crystal axes of the material as they depend solely on the relative position of the AFM tip on the sample. Round-trip is a good representation of the sum of the magnitude of the complex image data. c) Direct coupling is excited by the incident beam, which subsequently interacts with the probe. It is worth noting that this contribution also includes the opposite path of the tip exciting a resonant mode, which is then directly measured by the detector. This is included because, in reciprocal samples, they are identical. Direct coupling is a good representation of the z-component of the electric field of the resonant mode and as such is displayed as the real part of the complex image data. d) Modulated scattering occurs when the incident beam is directly coupled in and out of the resonant structure but is perturbed by the presence of the probe near the structure, thus modulating the signal. Generally, this contribution is negligible for single-particle samples. Using the different symmetry properties of these contributions we decompose the measured field to the RTr and DCo contributions. The RTr contribution is always positive since it is proportional to |E z | The FDTD was performed using Lumerical software from Ansys. The sphere was modeled using dielectric data taken from The α-MoO3 nano-ellipsoids were simulated as a [r x , r y , r z ] = [110,110,55] nm ellipsoids with a crystal axis aligned as such: [010] -along the z-axis, [100] and [001] -are both pointed in the x-y plane. The α-MoO3 nanorod was simulated as an ellipsoid with a major axis at 200 nm and a minor at 60 nm. The crystal axis aligned as such: [001] -along the length of the ellipsoids, which matches previously reported growth of MoO3 rod-like shaped particles 