Recent studies have attracted widespread attention on magnet-superconductor hybrid systems with emergent topological superconductivity. Here, we present the Floquet engineering of realistic two-dimensional topological nodal-point superconductors that are composed of antiferromagnetic monolayers in proximity to an s-wave superconductor. We show that Floquet chiral topological superconductivity arises naturally due to light-induced breaking of the effective time-reversal symmetry. More strikingly, we find that the Floquet chiral topological superconducting phases can be flexibly controlled by irradiating elliptically polarized light, with the photon-dressed quasienergy spectrum carrying different Chern numbers. Such optically switchable topological transition is attributed to the simultaneous creations (or annihilations) of valley pairs. Our findings provide a feasible approach for achieving the Floquet chiral topological superconductivity with flexible tunability, which would draw extensive attention in experiments. Introduction.-The exploration of topological phases of matter is one of extensive activities in the modern condensed-matter community It is worth noting that Floquet engineering with periodic diving offers a powerful tool for engineering quantum states with high tunability due its dynamic manipulation on ultrafast time scales Here, we present Floquet engineering of realistic topological nodal-point superconductors (TNPSCs) with antiferromagnetism under irradiation of elliptically polarized light (see Fig. Model and theory.-Our starting point is the 2D TNPSC with antiferromagnetism, i.e., antiferromagnetic monolayers crystallizing in a rectangular lattice on top of an s-wave superconductor (see Fig. where c † r = [c † r↑ , c † r↓ ] and c r are two component creation and annihilation operators with spin degrees of freedom (↑, ↓) at the site r, respectively. As shown in Fig. Then, we consider the system subject to a spacehomogeneous periodic-driving field characterized by the vector potential A(t) = [A x cos(ωt), A y sin(ωt)], where the frequency ω is related to one period T = 2π/ω. In the following discussion, the elliptically polarized light is described by its amplitude k A = eA 0 = e A 2 x + A 2 y and the angle θ = arctan(A y /A x ). The coupling between the system and light filed A(t) is introduced through the Peierls substitution, where the hopping amplitudes are attached to an additional phase factor e ieA•(ri-rj ) . To reveal this, we first rewrite the tight-binding Hamiltonian Eq. ( Then, the photon-dressed hopping matrices T 0 and T i in the presence of light field can be explicitly written as where we introduce The periodically driven Hamiltonian Eqs. ( In this work, we focus on the low energy regime near the nodal point, the typical energy scale is ε 0 ∼ 1meV . We consider the off-resonant regime and choose a high frequency of the light field ħω = 20meV ≫ ε 0 , and thus the process of band transitions induced by directly absorbing photons can be ignored. Light induced Floquet chiral topological superconductor.-In the presence of light field, the quasiparticle spectra are effectively renormalized by the virtual photon absorption processes. To be specific, we fist set the polar angle to θ = π 4 and this case corresponds to circularly polarized light (CPL). The quasienergies ε n (k) and the eigenstates |u n k ⟩ are obtained from the Eq. ( (5) The band topology can be characterized by the summation of Berry curvature from all the occupied quasiparticle bands Ω(k) = n∈occ Ω n (k). In Fig. By summing the contributions of Ω(k) from the occupied bands, we find that each valley contributes a half-integer Chern number. Thus, the system become a FCTSC with Chern number N = 2. According to the bulk-boundary correspondence, the topological feature of the FCTSC can also be depicted by chiral Majorana edge modes. Therefore, we further explore these phenomena by calculating the local density of states using the iterative Green's function method Flexible light control of Floquet chiral superconductivity. -As discussed above, the light-irradiated TNPSC states can be transformed into a FCTSC phase with N = 2 under a periodic driving of CPL. Moreover, as shown in Fig. Summary.-In summary, we have demonstrated that the FCTSC phases with flexible tunability can be achieved in the periodically driven magnetsuperconductor hybrid systems, which initially possess TNPSC states with antiferromagnetism. Under irradiation of elliptically polarized light, we show that manipulation of intensity and polar angle can selectively and simultaneously create (or annihilate) valley pairs, which arise from the effective time-reversal symmetry breaking induced by incident light. This results in switchable topological transition between FCTSC phases carrying different Chern numbers. Our work provides an experimentally accessible approach for manipulating and designing topological superconducting states. Considering the magnet-superconductor hybrid systems with emergent topological superconductivity 