Atomic disorder, a widespread problem in compound crystalline materials, is a imperative affecting the performance of multi-chalcogenide Cu2ZnSn(S, Se)4 (CZTSSe) photovoltaic device known for its low cost and environmental friendliness. Cu-Zn disorder is particularly abundantly present in CZTSSe due to its extraordinarily low formation energy, having induced high-concentration deep defects and severe charge loss, while its regulation remains challenging due to the contradiction between disorder-order phase transition thermodynamics and atom-interchange kinetics. Herein, through introducing more vacancies in the CZTSSe surface, we explored a vacancy-assisted strategy to reduce the atom-interchange barrier limit to facilitate the Cu-Zn ordering kinetic process. The improvement in the Cu-Zn order degree has significantly reduced the charge loss in the device and helped us realize 15.4% (certified at 14.9%) and 13.5% efficiency (certified at 13.3%) in 0.27 cm 2 and 1.1 cm 2 -area CZTSSe solar cells, respectively, thus bringing substantial advancement for emerging inorganic thinfilm photovoltaics. Entropy-driven atomic disordering is a crucial concern that impacts the precise fabrication and functional design of crystalline materials A variety of efforts have been undertaken to address the Cu-Zn disorder issue in CZTSSe. Specifically, researchers developed a range of cation substitution methods to increase the thermodynamic formation energy of Cu-Zn disorder Nevertheless, despite the challenges in experiment, recent theoretical studies have once again demonstrated a strong correlation between Cu-Zn disorder and the charge loss in CZTSSe Herein, we focus more on the surface of CZTSSe film since it is believed to have a more significant impact on the solar cell performance. Starting from the perspective of atomic ordering kinetics, we have developed a vacancy-assisted method to reduce the atom migration barrier for facilitating the Cu-Zn atomic ordering process. The vacancy on the CZTSSe film surface was artificially introduced via ion pre-doping and subsequent solution etching. The success of improving the surface Cu-Zn ordering has effectively mitigated interface defects and carrier non-radiative recombination, and also promoted charge transport. Ultimately, we achieved a record efficiency of 15.4% (certified at 14.9%) in Kesterite solar cells, as well as a certified efficiency of >13% on a 1.1 cm 2 -area cell. This result represents significant advancement for emerging inorganic thin-film solar cells and moreover furnishes opportunities for more precise disorder-order control in crystalline materials. It was predicted that under thermodynamic equilibrium, lower temperature would help the Cu-Zn binary system transform to a higher degree of order. However, from the perspective of kinetics, the system at lower temperatures does not have sufficient energy to drive the direct interchange of Cu-Zn atoms (schematically shown in Figure Generally, the atom ordering kinetic rate is proportional to exp(-EB/KBT) (EB is the energy barrier of atom interchange, KB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature) We further characterized the Mg doping and its induced VCu in the film surface. Grazing incidence X-Ray diffraction found that the Mg incorporation made the (112) peak of CZTSSe slightly shift to a higher angle (Figure The elemental characterization shown in Figure In this analysis, lower R value stands for higher VCu concentration We further demonstrated the annealing induced Cu-Zn ordering in the CZTSSe lattice. Using Intensity (arb. units) Kelvin-probe force microscopy, the surface contacting potential difference (CPD) of these films were firstly measured (Figure More characteristic evidence for the improvement in the Cu-Zn ordering in the target-E-A film came from the Raman spectra We further investigated the influence of improved Cu-Zn ordering on the defect and charge loss properties of the fabricated Kesterite solar cells. The energetic distribution and charge capturing properties of defects in the cells were firstly characterized using thermally admittance spectroscopy (TAS) (Figure N DL (6.9×10 15 cm -3 ) (G-R sh -1 )/ω (F) (Hz) We further quantified the defect density using different capacitance analysis methods. Firstly, TAS results exhibited that the total density of CuZn defect in the target sample was only 1/2 of that in the control sample, directly demonstrating the reduced Cu-Zn disordering (Figure More specific spatial distribution of the defect charge was measured by capacitance-voltage (CV) and drive-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) methods. As in Figure The aforementioned defect characterization demonstrated that the density and charge capturing velocity of defects, especially the interface defect, have been significantly suppressed through the Cu-Zn ordering process. As a result, the target cell obtained more superior open-circuit voltage (VOC) at temperatures ranging from 300 to 100 K and moreover higher recombination activation energy, EA, than that of the control cell (Figure The very small discrepancy between EA and optical bandgap indicated that the fast sub-gap relaxation of photo-generated carriers had become negligible in the target CZTSSe sample, also proving that localized electronic states caused by the Cu-Zn disordering had been significantly suppressed We also characterized the charge dynamics of the cells using modulated electrical transient methods To obtain the optimal Cu-Zn ordering result, we have systematically optimized the Mg predoping concentration and the subsequent annealing temperature. The performance parameters of the cells obtained from different nominal annealing temperatures are shown in Figure As can be seen, average PCE of the target cell was enhanced from ~13.7% to ~14.6% when the temperature increased from 180 to 220 °C . This enhancement was reflected in all three performance parameters, VOC, short circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF). Particularly, the average FF was improved from ~0.69 to ~0.72, and the average VOC reached 550 mV in the optimal group, confirming the reduced charge recombination in the cell. Comparatively, the PCE of the control cell was only enhanced by ~0.1% (from 13.1% to 13.2%). This result agrees well with the fact that the atomic ordering was limited in the control cell. The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of the champion cells are given in Figure The target cell achieved a high PCE of 15.4% with JSC of 37.4 mA cm -2 , VOC of 557.6 mV and FF of 0.737. All these performance parameters are much superior to that of the control cell which exhibited a PCE of 13.7%. One of the cells in the target group was also sent to an accredited independent laboratory (National PV Industry Measurement and Testing Center, NPVM) for certification. The certified PCE (J-V measurement, Figure We also fabricated 1.1 cm 2 -area solar cells and their certified PCE reached 13.3% (both J-V and MPPT, Figure 