We report the magnetic and magnetotransport properties and electronic band structure of the kagome Dirac semimetal HoMn6Ge6. Temperature-dependent electrical resistivity demonstrates various magnetic-transition-driven anomalies. Notably, a crossover from negative to positive magnetoresistance (MR) is observed at around 150 K. While the linear nonsaturating positive MR in the low-temperature region is mainly driven by the linear Dirac-like band dispersions as predicted by the first-principles calculations, the negative MR observed in the high-temperature region is due to the spin-flop type magnetic transition. Consistent with anisotropic Fermi surface topology, we observe anisotropic magnetoresistance at low temperatures. A significant anomalous Hall effect has been noticed at high temperatures in addition to a switching of the dominant charge carrier from electron to hole at around 215 K. The combination of frustrated magnetism, strong electronic correlations, and quantum topology in the kogome systems immensely attracts researchers from the fundamental science and potential technological applications points of view Following this discovery, several experimental reports appeared discussing the tuning of topological properties in RMn 6 Sn 6 (R = Gd-Tm, Lu) HoMn 6 Ge 6 crystallizes into HfFe 6 Ge 6 -type hexagonal structure with a space group of P 6/mmm, ordering antiferromagnetically at a Néel temperature of 466 K Further, as discussed in Ref. In this work, high-quality single crystals of HoMn 6 Ge 6 were grown using the Sn flux to study the magnetic and magnetotransport properties. Electrical resistivity demonstrates an overall metallic nature throughout the measured temperature range with a few magnetic transition-driven anomalies. A crossover from negative to positive magnetoresistance (MR) is observed at a critical temperature of 150 K. While the Dirac-like linear band dispersion mainly drives the linear nonsaturating positive MR in the low-temperature region, the negative MR observed in the higher temperature region is due to the spin-flop type magnetic transition. Most importantly, we identify a large anisotropy in the magnetore- sistance due to the anisotropic Fermi surface present in this system. Further, we observe anomalous Hall effect in addition to a switching of dominant charge carriers from electrons to holes at around 215 K, ingoing from high to low temperatures. Also, we performed density functional theory calculations on HoMn 6 Ge 6 by considering the experimentally obtained skew-spiral magnetic structure to understand our magnetotransport data better Single crystals of HoMn 6 Ge 6 were grown using Sn flux. Firstly, Holmium (Ho) chunk (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%), Manganese (Mn) powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.95%), Germanium (Ge) powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%), and Tin (Sn) shots (Alfa Aesar, 99.995%) were weighed in the ratio of 1 : 6 : 6 : 24. The mixture was kept in an alumina crucible and sealed the crucible together with the mixture inside an evacuated quartz ampoule. The mixture was heated up to 1000 o C at a rate of 50 o /hr and kept there for another 18 hrs before cooling the molten mixture down to 600 o C at a rate of 5 o C/hr. Finally, the molten is annealed for another two days at 600 o C. Then, the ampoule was quickly transferred to a centrifuge to separate the Sn flux from the samples. In this way, we obtained several hexagonal-shaped HoMn 6 Ge 6 single crystals with a typical size of 2mm × 2mm × 0.4mm as shown in the inset of Fig. To understand the magnetotransport properties, the electronic band structure of HoMn 6 Ge 6 was calculated using the density-functional theory (DFT) within the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof-type generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) Longitudinal electrical resistivity [ρ xx (T )] is plotted as a function of temperature, as shown in Fig. In line with previous studies Isothermal magnetoresistance (MR) at different sample temperatures and with the fields applied parallel to the z-axis are shown in Figs. Overall, HoMn 6 Ge 6 shows a complex temperature dependent MR. Importantly, up to 50 K it shows a positive nonsaturating MR that is linearly depending on the applied field. There exist several mechanisms explaining the linear MR, such as (i) the presence of linear dispersive Dirac-like bands with very low effective mass near the Fermi level in the case of topological materials Further, we measured the angle-dependent magnetoresistance (ADMR) with the current and field directions always kept perpendicular to each other such that only the field direction changes with the crystal axes as shown in the schematic of Fig. H which imitates a linear equation and intercept on the y-axis gives R 0 and slope gives the anomalous Hall coefficient R S . Using this formalism, we have reasonably fitted the Hall resistivity as depicted in Fig. As discussed above, a magnetic transition exists at around 215 K (T 2 ). It is possible that the change in magnetic structure influences the electronic structure near the Fermi level and thus the switching of charge carrier type at 215 K. This observation suggests a strong correlation between the magnetic and electronic structures in these systems. Moreover, the value of R S decreases rapidly with decreasing temperature and becomes negligibly small below 100 K. Whereas the S H varies between 0.05 and 0.2 like in a typical ferromagnetic metal To uncover the mechanism of unsaturated linear MR, we performed density functional theory calculations as illustrated in Fig. As for the angle-dependent magnetoresistance (a) (ADMR) measurements, the magnetic field is always perpendicular to the current direction, which does not change the Lorentz force acting on the charge carriers. The spin-charge scattering can be neglected at low temperatures as the mean free path of the charge carriers is much higher in this system at 2 K (≈ 0.67 μm) compared to the distance of M n -M n (2.62 Å) or Ho -Ho (5.24 Å) magnetic moments. This leads us to conclude that the anisotropic ADMR has an electronic band structure origin rather than a magnetism origin. The Fermi velocity can be calculated as v k = 1 ħ ∇ k ε k , which depends on the local curvature of the Fermi surface cross-section. The smaller the orbit of the Fermi surface cross-section, the greater the local curvature, leading to a higher Fermi velocity. Hence, a high microscopic Lorentz force would act on the charge carriers In summary, using the Sn flux, we have grown highquality single crystals of HoMn 6 Ge 6 . Electrical resistivity, with a few magnetic transition-driven anomalies, demonstrates an overall metallic nature throughout the measured temperature range. A crossover from negative to positive magnetoresistance (MR) is observed at a critical temperature of 150 K. While the Dirac-like linear band dispersions mainly drive the linear nonsaturating positive MR exits in the low-temperature region, the negative MR observed in the higher temperature region is due to the spin-flop type magnetic transition. We found an anomalous Hall effect in addition to a dominant charge carrier switching across 215 K. We performed electronic band structure calculations on HoMn 6 Ge 6 by considering the skew-spiral magnetic structure of the system to realize large anisotropy in the out-of-plane Fermi sheets. We suggest that the large anisotropic out-of-plane magnetoresistance observed in HoMn 6 Ge 6 originated from the anisotropic out-of-plane Fermi surfaces. The band structure calculations predict several Dirac-type band crossings at the K point near the Fermi level.