Granular L10-FePt thin films with small columnar grains are essential for heat-assisted magnetic recording media. While hexagonal boron nitride(h-BN) has proven effective for promoting columnar FePt grains, we explored multilayer graphene as an alternative grain boundary material leveraging its structural similarity to h-BN. The FePt granular thin films with carbon-based grain boundary materials(GBMs) were deposited by cosputtering on Si/SiO2 substrates with substrate bias at 650°C. The RF bias and high temperature facilitated formation of interlinked graphene nanoribbons wrapping around FePt grains, yielding 7.5 nm diameter, 8 nm height grains with an order parameter of 0.78 and a perpendicular coercivity of 40 kOe. However, the formation of graphene nanoribbons could not effectively promote columnar structures, likely due to co-existing amorphous carbon in grain boundaries. Optimizing deposition to improve graphene grain boundary quality is necessary to realize this 2D material's potential for achieving desirable microstructures for HAMR media. For the realization of next generation heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR) media, granular film structures should exhibit high grain aspect ratios (h/D > 1.5) and good thermal stability up to T ~ 600° C Without a proper substrate bias, h-BN cannot be formed; instead, only amorphous-BN (a-BN) is formed in the grain boundaries The FePt-C system is another system well known to exhibit excellent grain isolation and good thermal stability. However, introduction of amorphous carbon (a-C) at the grain boundaries has not enabled forming tall and columnar FePt grains, typically failing to achieve aspect ratios (h/D) greater than one FePt-C media deposited with RF substrate bias have been prepared and relevant magnetic, structural, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) data are presented below. A multilayer (ML) film stack of {Ta (2 nm)|Cr (30 nm)|MgO (10 nm) | FePt (0.4 nm) | [FePt-C30vol.% (0.5 nm) without RF bias] | [FePt-C30vol.% (X nm) with RF bias]}, referred to as FePt-C-ML, was deposited on the Si|SiO2 substrates using an ultra-high vacuum AJA sputtering system with 1Χ10 -8 Torr base pressure. The thickness of the top layer, X = 4~7 nm, varies from sample to sample. Consequently, total thickness of the FePt-C magnetic layers on MgO underlayer are t = 5, 6, 7, 8 nm, respectively. Ta, Cr, MgO, C, Fe55Pt45 alloy, and BN targets with 99.9% purity are used to deposit films. Ta was deposited at room temperature as an adhesion layer for SiO2 substrate. One minute of pure O2 exposure (0.1 mTorr) was adopted to modify the Ta surface to attain good Cr texture. A 30 nm thick Cr layer was deposited at 250°C to realize the good (200) texture on Ta. The substrate was then annealed at 600°C for 1 hr after the Cr deposition to attain large grain sizes in the Cr layer and to reduce the surface roughness. The MgO underlayer was deposited at room temperature with 100W RF-power, 10 mTorr, and the target to substrate distance was around 80mm. To improve the nucleation density, an ultrathin (0.4 nm) layer of pure FePt was deposited prior to the co-sputtering of FePt and carbon, as was discussed in our previous papers. Both RF bias and high-temperature deposition were found to be necessary factors for the formation of graphene layers. A low RF bias (5W, VDC≈ -55V) was applied to the substrate mainly intended to induce the formation of graphene layers. All the samples were sputtered using the same conditions, except for the deposition times of the top FePt-C (with RF bias 5W, T = 650°C) which were varied to achieve different film thicknesses. Standard X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Copper-Kα source was used to analyze the film texture and order parameter. The microstructure of the samples was evaluated by in-plane and out-of-plane transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging, using bright-field TEM (BF-TEM), high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM), and scanning TEM-high angle annular dark field (STEM-HAADF) techniques using FEI Titan Themis 200. The grain size and grain center-to-center pitch distances were analyzed using the in-plane STEM-HAADF images and the image processing software (MIPAR). The magnetic moment (M) vs. field (H) curves of the film samples were measured with a Quantum Design Superconducting quantum interference device-vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM). As mentioned above, it has been shown that h-BN is a structurally stable GBM at high temperatures which gives good L10-FePt ordering The microstructures of the 5-nm and 8-nm FePt-C-ML samples are presented in Fig. As illustrated in the in-plane HRTEM micrographs, these samples exhibit small spherical FePt grains that are well-isolated by carbon GBMs. The lattice fringes within the grain boundaries indicate the formation of the graphene layers. These graphene layers bend and surround the FePt grains, often forming a stack of 3~6 parallel layers sandwiched by two neighboring grains. Majority of the graphene layers are perpendicular to the film plane. It is also common to observe Y-shaped junctions formed by these few-layer graphene nanosheets (as shown in Fig. To gain further insights, additional investigations were conducted through fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis of the micrographs. The FFT pattern of Fig. Moreover, the contrast between Fig. As depicted in Fig. The plot of grain diameter vs. thickness for FePt-(h-BN) 20vol% samples demonstrates that the introduction of h-BN nanosheets can effectively suppress the lateral growth, whereas FePt-graphene30vol% samples exhibit a pronounced tendency for lateral grain growth The out-of-plane TEM micrographs reveal that FePt-graphene samples with thickness below 8nm are single-layered FePt grains. However, for thicker samples, aside from the large FePt grains sitting on the MgO surface, a second layer of smaller FePt grains begins to appear on the top, which are also observable as brighter spots in the in-plane STEM-HAADF images. In contrast, the cross-section HRTEM image of the 12-nm-thick FePt-(h-BN) thin film sample Fig. In the case of carbon GBM, as shown in Fig. The formation of graphene layers did not significantly differ from previously reported a-C GBMs. The FePt-graphene thin films exhibit similar spherical particle shapes of FePt as observed with a-C. In comparison to FePt-(h-BN) samples, the presence of graphene layers fails to promote the columnar growth of FePt grains or to suppress the lateral grain growth. From another perspective, the observed lateral growth and second layer formation phenomena of FePt grains could suggest that the carbon GBMs deposited in these samples consists of both a-C and graphene. Further optimization of deposition parameters, such as substrate bias voltage and temperature, may be required to improve the quality and continuity of the graphene GBMs. A higher graphene fraction in the GBM could potentially promote the columnar growth of FePt grains and suppress lateral grain coarsening, similar to the behavior observed in the FePt-h-BN system In this study, we have developed granular L10-FePt thin films with graphene-based grain boundary materials (GBMs) for potential HAMR media applications. The RF substrate bias and high deposition temperature facilitated the formation of interlinked graphene nanoribbons surrounding the FePt grains. Well-isolated L10-FePt grains with an average diameter of 7.5 nm and height of 8 nm were achieved in the FePt-graphene-ML films. These films exhibited a high order parameter of 0.78 and a perpendicular coercivity of 40 kOe. While the graphene nanoribbons formed and wrapped around the FePt grains, they were unable to effectively suppress lateral grain growth or promote columnar grain structures, in contrast to the behavior observed with h-BN nanosheets. Further optimization of the deposition conditions is necessary to improve the quality and continuity of the graphene layers within the grain boundary regions. In the case of co-sputtering a high corban deposition rates are required to match the FePt deposition. Increased C deposition rate in the deposited media leads to degraded quality of graphene in the grain boundaries, often yielding a mix of a-C and graphene. This leads to the small fraction of graphene observed at the FePt grain boundaries appearing to inhibit the formation of tall columnar grain structures in the FePt / graphene media. Low-rate sputter depositions of Corban are required to introduce a sufficient fraction of Graphene as GBM into the FePt media, which remains a significant challenge regarding FePt-graphenebased HAMR media. Achieving a higher graphene fraction in the grain boundaries could potentially enhance the grain isolation and enable the formation of taller, columnar FePt grains desirable for HAMR media applications. 