Trigonal PtBi2 is a layered semimetal without inversion symmetry, featuring 12 Weyl points in the vicinity of the Fermi energy. Its topological Fermi arcs were recently shown to superconduct at low temperatures where bulk superconductivity is absent. Here, we perform first-principles calculations to investigate in detail the bulk and surface electronic structure of PtBi2, and obtain the spin texture as well as the momentum-dependent localization of the arcs. Motivated by the experimentally observed recovery of inversion symmetry under pressure or upon doping, we interpolate between the two structures and determine the energy and momentum dependence of the Weyl nodes. For deeper insights into the surface superconductivity of PtBi2, we construct a symmetry-adapted effective fourband model that accurately reproduces the Weyl points of PtBi2. We supplement this model with an analysis of the symmetry-allowed pairings between the Fermi arcs, which naturally mix spin-singlet and spin-triplet channels. Moreover, the presence of surface-only superconductivity facilitates an intrinsic superconductor-semimetal-superconductor Josephson junction, with the semimetallic phase sandwiched between the two superconducting surfaces. For a phase difference of π, zero-energy Andreev bound states develop between the two terminations. It was recently established experimentally that trigonal PtBi 2 is a layered material that combines topological features of its electronic structure, in particular, the presence of Weyl nodes, with the occurrence of superconductivity Different pieces of experimental evidence have the com-mon denominator that the surface of PtBi 2 is superconducting in a temperature regime at which the bulk remains metallic. At the same time, a consistent and detailed interpretation of this set of observations is still lacking. Theoretically, if the surface carries a higher density of states compared to the bulk, it may also have a higher mean-field superconducting transition temperature, in spite of its lower dimensionality The experimentally observed Fermi arcs in ARPES compare well with the findings of ab initio calculations of the electronic band-structure, as does the bulk spectral function At present, the open questions on PtBi 2 not only concern the microscopic origin, homogeneity, symmetry, and mechanism of the surface superconductivity but also its relation to the topological nature of the Fermi arcs, and, by extension, to the role of bulk inversion-symmetry breaking. Indeed, when inversion symmetry is restored, for instance, through doping with a small concentration of Te or Se or by applying pressure, a robust bulk superconducting state emerges with T c ∼ 2 K Here, we focus on the electronic structure of PtBi 2 from a theoretical perspective, considering both the normal and (surface) superconducting state. We consider the spin textures of the Weyl nodes and Fermi arcs, as well as their evolution under pressure and doping. The trajectory of the Weyl nodes (both in energy and momentum space) as we turn from the inversion-symmetry broken to the centrosymmetric crystal structure is obtained. An effective model with the minimum number of four bands is proposed to describe the metallic phase, aiming at reproducing the topological features that stem from the presence of Weyl points close to the Fermi level. We also discuss the superconducting pairing state at a single surface of PtBi 2 , restricting ourselves to superconducting states that do not break crystalline symmetries. We identify the three states that span the space of the possible superconducting order parameters: s-wave spinsinglet pairing, f -wave spin-triplet pairing of Ising type, and p-wave spin-triplet pairing of Rashba type. Finally, we consider the possibility of an intrinsic superconductorsemimetal-superconductor Josephson junction, where the semimetallic phase is sandwiched between the two superconducting surfaces. We find in-gap Andreev bound states if a phase difference develops between the two terminations. This article is structured as follows. After briefly introducing Weyl semimetals (Sec. II), the crystal structure of PtBi 2 is discussed in Sec. III. Section IV is dedicated to first-principles electronic-structure calculations. In Sec. V, we present our effective model and highlight its main features, after which we analyse the superconducting pairing channels in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII, we investigate the Andreev zero modes in an intrinsic π junction between the two superconducting surfaces. Finally, we summarize our findings in Sec. VIII. To provide a general context, we conceptually introduce Weyl semimetals and their Fermi-arc surface states. This topological state of matter can be understood from slicing its three-dimensional Brillouin zone (BZ) into planes, thereby fixing one of the three components of the momentum. The resulting two-dimensional (2D) band structure will generally display a set of band gaps. For each gap, one can determine whether the corresponding 2D insulating state is topologically trivial or not by calculating the corresponding Chern number. Then, the gap characterizing the two-dimensional slice of BZ can be followed adiabatically along the third direction. Should the gap of the slice change character from trivial to topological along this path, or vice versa, there must be a nodal point in momentum space where the band gap closes. Around these nodes, which in a periodic system are forced to appear as pairs with opposite chirality A prerequisite for Weyl nodes is to break either inversion symmetry, or time-reversal symmetry, or both. The nodes are robust against perturbations: Weyl nodes can only annihilate if an external perturbation makes pairs of nodes of opposite chirality meet at the same point in the Brillouin zone so that they can gap each other out. Conceptually the simplest Weyl semimetal would be realized by a system with Weyl nodes close to the Fermi level so that each node has a spherical Fermi-surface around it, where the chirality of the node corresponds to the Chern number of its Fermi-surface ball. However, in real materials the semimetallic nature enforced by these nodes may coexist with other bands crossing the Fermi level, complicating the situation. Beyond this, superconductivity many lead to further complications, even in the presence of time-reversal symmetry. Generally speaking, it is allowed to have pairings of different symmetries between electrons on different Fermi pockets, with the same or different Chern number. In such cases, topological superconductivity can already appear in the s-wave pairing channel The crystal structure of pristine PtBi 2 is described by the noncentrosymmetric space group P 31m (157) Pressure or chemical substitution of a small fraction of Bi by Se or Te induces a transition to a centrosymmetric trigonal structure (space group P 3m1), which we discuss in more detail in Sec. IV C. To study the electronic structure of PtBi 2 , we performed full-relativistic density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the full-potential local-orbital code FPLO The GGA band structure and the corresponding density of states are shown in Fig. States around the Fermi level are mostly Bi 6p, with a minor admixture of Pt 5p. The DOS, see Fig. The Fermi surface of PtBi 2 is strongly threedimensional, and consists of several distinct sheets mostly located close to the A-L-H plane. This results agrees with ARPES The lack of inversion symmetry in PtBi 2 generally allows for linear band crossings -Weyl points. Notably, pairs of Weyl points are located 48 meV above the Fermi energy, with Fermi arcs crossing the Fermi level Weyl points are situated near the Γ-M line. One of the respective bands with pronounced Pt 5d character is remarkably flat in the corresponding part of the BZ (Fig. Inspecting the dominant 6p Bi contribution, we find that Bi atoms belonging to the kagome plane take about half of the relative 6p weight, while the other Bi atoms account for the other half almost equally. As a result, it is challenging to single out a specific set of orbitals giving rise to the Weyl crossing. Nevertheless, we observe a prevalence of in-plane orbitals p x and p y over p z orbitals. We also examined the spin texture of the bands forming the cones. It was found to smoothly evolve around the cone without any distinct correlation to the singularity in the Berry curvature. We show in Fig. In Fig. Lastly, we note that the spin structure of Weyl points can play an important role for the dielectric response The noncentrosymmetric P 31m structure of PtBi 2 is stable up to an external hydrostatic pressure of about 13 GPa, with a remarkably resilient c/a ratio of about 0.94 To investigate whether the Weyl points could be brought even closer to the Fermi level, we estimated the additional charge needed to shift the chemical potential by integrating the DOS from the Fermi energy up to the energy of the Weyl point. To avoid regions potentially affected by structural instabilities, we restrict our comparison to the values at 0 and 9 GPa: 0.013 and 0.0098 e/atom, respectively. This yields an average doping of 0.01 e/atom (or ≈ 0.1 additional unit of charge per unit cell) required to bring the Weyl point down to the Fermi level. This level of doping can be achieved by a small excess of Bi as well as doping by Se or Te. Interestingly, in Ref. 7, the authors report a transition to a centrosymmetric trigonal structure (space group P 3m1) upon minimal Se or Te doping. The phase transition is found at x = 0.024 for Te and x = 0.032 for Se, where x refers to the stoichiometry in the notation Pt(Bi 1-x Ch x ) 2 , Ch = Se, Te. Thus, the overall additional charge per atom is (x×2)/3 ≈ 0.016, 0.021 e/atom, which is very close to our estimated charge necessary to bring the Weyl points down to the Fermi level. To further explore this scenario, we performed additional total energy calculations for the noncentrosymmetric and centrosymmetric PtBi 2 phases, using the experimental lattice parameters geneous positively-charged background (jellium model). We note that in our approach the Se-and Te-doped structures differ only by their unit cell volume, following the different atomic radii of Se and Te. Results are shown in Fig. Given the structural proximity of these phases, it is of interest to look at the evolution of the Weyl points along a continuous path connecting the two crystal structures. To this end, we took the experimental noncentrosymmetric and centrosymmetric (Se-doped) structures, and relaxed the internal atomic coordinates. These are the endpoints of the path. This additional relaxation step was necessary to minimize numerical noise in the energies and momenta of the Weyl points, as previously discussed. Then, we proceeded to sample the path connecting the two relaxed structures with a linear interpolation of the atomic coordinates and lattice constants. The interpolating parameter is referred as t: for t = 0 we have the inversion-broken structure, while at t = 1 we find the centrosymmetric one. At each t, an intermediate structure is obtained for which we performed full-relativistic calculations and Wannier projection in order to locate the Weyl points. The results are summarized in Fig. We observe the WPs moving closer to the ΓM line, where they merge for t ≈ 0.26. This behavior is expected since the pair's coordinates are related to each other by time reversal and mirror symmetry, enforcing the merging to happen on this line (at k z = 0). Around t = 0.24, slightly before the annihilation process is completed, a new pair is formed, closing the inverted gap which we can see in Fig. A hallmark of Weyl semimetals are Fermi arcs -topologically protected surface states. These Fermi arcs were observed experimentally in ARPES, in excellent agreement with DFT-calculated energy distribution curves To study the localization of the states forming the Fermi arcs, we constructed a Wannier Hamiltonian on a finite slab comprising 20 PtBi 2 layers. Subsequently, we grouped the atomic contributions from each layer and projected the eigenvectors onto these states at various kpoints along the arc. The calculated localization for the decorated honeycomb surface is shown in Fig. Our numerical results on the localization are crucial for an understanding of surface superconductivity: assuming it pertains to the existence of Fermi arcs In addition, it is worth noting that the spin texture of the Fermi arcs in PtBi 2 resembles that of another Weyl semimetal with a layered crystal structure, TaAs The extensive degree of hybridization in this compound prevents us from reducing the band structure to a compact Wannier basis, even when our focus is solely on the Weyl points. To address more complex topics like superconductivity and, more generally, to satisfy the need for a theoretically simpler model, we now introduce a minimal tight-binding which encodes the topological nature of this system. This model consists of two spinful orbitals, and it has been constructed to possess all the crystal symmetries discussed in Sec. III, while reproducing the same number and distribution of Weyl points found in PtBi 2 . We base our approach on the principle that topologically protected Dirac cones can be split into pairs of Weyl points when inversion symmetry is broken. To this end, we first establish an appropriate centrosymmetric bulk Hamiltonian, denoted as H D , to which we later add a suitable inversion-breaking term, ensuring the presence of Weyl points. The construction of the "parent" Hamiltonian H D (k) starts with two uncoupled (spin degenerate) bands, intersecting at circular nodal lines. Through the introduction of additional hop-pings, these crossing are subsequently reduced to only 6 Dirac cones. The desired result is achieved using four adjustable parameters (α, β, λ, μ). Our starting point is Following Here, σ i are Pauli matrices corresponding to the spin degree of freedom, while τ i parameterize the orbital degree of freedom. The matrix C 3 represents rotations along the z-axis by 2π/3. Also, we will use the convention , where a i are the lattice vectors a 1 = (0, 1, 0), a 2 = ( √ 3/2, -1/2, 0), a 3 = (0, 0, 1). This starting Hamiltonian includes an on-site term μ and two types of nearest-neighbor hoppings: intra-orbital hoppings (terms multiplied by Γ 1 ) and inter-orbital hoppings (Γ 3 ). The magnitude of the in-plane hoppings between similar orbitals is set to 1, and the hopping between distinct orbitals is given by λ. The model possesses the desired mirror and rotation symmetries discussed in Section III, as well as time-reversal and inversion symmetry, which can be expressed through the matrices where K denotes complex conjugation. The presence of a threefold rotation symmetry gives the condition whereas mirror symmetry along the k 1 = -2k 2 plane, which is given by the matrix M 1 = iτ 0 σ x , yields The other two mirror symmetries can be obtained by subsequent applications of C 3 to M 1 . For -(1 + β) ≤ μ ≤ 3 + β the system is gapless, and for our choice of μ and β (see caption of Fig. The presence of this term also splits the redundant crossings at k 3 = π, leaving us with only 6 Dirac cones. We arrive at the Hamiltonian Up to now, both time-reversal as well as inversion symmetry are present, excluding the existence of Weyl points, and forcing bands to be doubly degenerate at any momentum. Additionally, H D is also characterized by the presence of chiral symmetry, here represented by the matrix Θ = τ x σ z , which anticommutes with the Hamiltonian, {Θ, H D (k)} = 0. We break inversion through the introduction of an additional k -independent term h 2 = γτ x σ 0 . Consequently, the 6 Dirac cones split into a total of 12 Weyl cones. Note that this last term also breaks chiral symmetry. The final Hamiltonian is The evolution of the band structure is shown schematically in Figs. In this section, we discuss the superconducting pairing state at a single surface of PtBi 2 . The discussion is based on symmetry analysis and two simplifying assumptions: First, since the Fermi arcs are small compared to the size of the surface Brillouin zone we assume that the superconducting state can be understood by considering the pairing at the midpoint of each arc. The pairing elsewhere along the arc is then determined by this point, i.e., the superconducting order parameter is stiff along each arc. Note that this does not imply that the order parameter is constant along the arc. Second, we restrict ourselves to superconducting states that do not break crystalline symmetries since there is no experimental indication for such symmetry breaking. Formally speaking, we consider superconducting pairing matrices that transform according to the trivial irreducible representation (irrep) A 1 of C 3v . At this level, the discussion pertains to both surface terminations. The absence of inversion symmetry implies that singlet and triplet pairing generically coexist where the subscript ± refers to the sign under time reversal. For the components of the two-dimensional irrep E we use the convention that (k x , k y ) are basis functions in this order. Since we do not consider variations along each arc, momentum is simply given by the index ν ∈ Z 6 = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, where the polar angle of the midpoint of each arc is νπ/3. The momentum-dependent coefficients are thus mappings from the set Z 6 into the complex numbers C. These mappings can be understood as six-component complex vectors and therefore form a sixdimensional vector space over C. One can easily obtain a basis consisting of basis functions of irreps, starting from the known basis functions in momentum space: By multiplying the coefficient functions and the basis matrices, we can obtain all possible superconducting states. The multiplication produces 6 × 4 = 24 linearly independent matrix-valued functions. Using standard rules for products of irreps, one can choose them as basis functions belonging to specific irreps. However, only products that are even under time reversal (subscript "+") satisfy fermionic antisymmetry ∆ T (-k) = -∆(k) and can be characterized as s-wave spin-singlet pairing, f -wave spin-triplet pairing of Ising type, and p-wave spintriplet pairing of Rashba type, respectively. These three pairing states generically coexist since bilinear terms coupling them in a Ginzburg-Landau functional are allowed by symmetry. As noted above, singlet and triplet pairing can mix due to the absence of inversion symmetry. The three states span a three-dimensional space over C of possible superconducting order parameters of full symmetry. Which state in this three-dimensional space is actually realized depends on microscopic details, in particular on the spin structure of the Fermi-arc states. Figure where λ xy , λ z > and λ 2 xy + λ 2 z = 1. λ xy (λ z ) describes the relative strength of the Rashba (Ising) spin-orbit coupling. The corresponding spin state is The state of opposite (time-reversed) spin at the same arc is This state is not a surface state at the same surface because there is none at the same momentum. It thus must be a linear combination of bulk states and possibly a Fermi-arc state at the opposite surface and has vanishing weight at the Fermi energy. The states at the other arcs are determined by the point-group symmetries, for example where C 3 = exp(-iπσ z /3) implements a rotation by 2π/3 about the z axis and M 1 = exp(-iπσ x /2) = -iσ x describes a rotation by π about the x axis. There is only one uniquely determined A 1 superconducting state (up to an irrelevant global phase) that involves pairing of only electrons from the Fermi arcs, i.e., at the Fermi energy. Its pairing matrix is simply It can be written as in terms of the three contributions in Eqs. ( can be constructed that corresponds to the pairing of the high-energy states with reversed spin. Finally, the state describes interband pairing between Fermi-arc surface states and high-energy states. These three states span the three-dimensional space of possible superconducting A 1 order parameters. All three respect time-reversal symmetry since all coefficients are real. However, only the state δ + (ν) opens a gap at the Fermi energy and thus has a Cooper logarithm in its free energy and a weak-coupling instability. Since there is no indication that the pairing interaction in PtBi 2 is strong (i.e., on the order of the Fermi energy) only this state can be realized. We thus find that pairing of only the spin states at the Fermi energy is possible, without any pairing at high energies. The absence of degeneracy of Fermi-arc surface states favors such superconducting states. They are enabled by the absence of inversion symmetry. To conclude this section, we briefly show that treating a local pairing interaction within BCS theory also leads to the state δ + (ν). An attractive local interaction of the form with V < 0 and the electron spinor can be rewritten in the particle-particle channel as up to bilinear terms, which can be absorbed into the noninteracting part of the Hamiltonian. The BCS mean-field decoupling of H int only permits an order parameter proportional to -V ⟨c † i U T c †T i ⟩, which is the order parameter d 0 (ν) given above. However, so far we have ignored the spin structure of the Fermi-arc states. Writing H int in momentum space and restricting the interaction to states close to the arcs, we obtain where ν denotes the time-reversal partner of arc ν. By projecting the interaction onto the arc states |↑⟩ ν , we obtain where δ + (ν) is given by Eq. ( In this section, we consider within our effective model the superconducting phase for a general mixture of swave, p-wave, and f -wave channels, as discussed in the previous section. In the case of bulk superconductivity the Weyl points as well as the Fermi arcs will gap out, while a surface-only pairing will gap out the arcs but leave the bulk metallic, as illustrated in Fig. Since in PtBi 2 superconductivity can develop independently on opposing surfaces, it is interesting to consider the scenario where the superconducting paring ∆ shows a phase difference across opposite terminations, which generates an intrinsic superconductor-metal-superconductor (SMS) Josephson junction. To this end, we solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation for a finite slab geometry along the z -axis: where H is the normal state Hamiltonian of a N -layer slab, obtained from our effective model. The pairing is a block-diagonal matrix ∆(k) = N i ∆ i (k) where ∆ i (k) is the pairing for each i-layer of the slab, and there are no inter-layer components. Furthermore, where φ i is the phase (which can change layer by layer) and d α (k) with α = 0, z, and xy corresponding to the three types of pairing: s-wave, f -wave, and p-wave, respectively. They are chosen to be consistent with Eq. ( with C 3 = exp(-iπ 3 σ z ). c α are some coefficients determining the relative weight of the types of pairing. We choose the generic values (3/5, -1/5, 1/5), where the minus sign was introduced to be consistent with Eq. We start by considering the simpler case of a finite slab split in half. Each part is a homogeneous superconductor but the pairing differs by a relative phase of exp(iπ) = -1. This phase difference guarantees zeroenergy Andreev bound states to appear at the interface between the two superconductors, which we find to be close to the position previously occupied by the Weyl points. Since the assumed superconducting order does not break the lattice symmetry, 12 of such nodes are found. The band structure in Fig. We can then assume the internal layers to be metallic and check how the Andreev bound states evolve as a function of the thickness of the metallic core, see Fig. We have used computational methods to characterize the electronic structure of the Weyl semimetal PtBi 2 , both in the bulk and at the surface, focusing on the Weyl nodes and their topologically protected surface states, the Fermi arcs, investigating their spin texture and penetration depth. We also traced the evolution of the Weyl points under externally applied pressure, observing a decrease in energy by 20 meV, as well as on a smooth path between the inversion-broken structure and the energetically close centrosymmetric phase, showing that crystal symmetries enforce the pair merging to happen on the high-symmetry line Γ-M. Furthermore, our analysis shows that the complex band structure can be accurately reproduced by a Wannier projection involving spinful Pt 6s, 5d, and Bi 6p orbitals, resulting in a 72 × 72 Hamiltonian matrix. On this basis, we propose an effective model that captures the distinctive topological features of the system using a minimal set of 4 bands (2 spinful orbitals) while maintaining the appropriate crystalline symmetries, as well as reproducing the correct number and distribution of Weyl points found in PtBi 2 . Due to its simplicity, the model may provide a versatile platform for investigating a wider range of phenomena, such as the effects of perturbations or disorder. A symmetry analysis surface superconducting pairings between the Fermi arcs shows that due to inversionbreaking, coexistence of spin singlet and triplet pairing arise. For the superconducting order parameter being stiff along each arc we identify three main channels: homogeneous s-wave, p-wave, and f -wave. Finally, we employed our effective model to consider the effect of different phases in the superconducting order parameter on opposite surfaces. We showed that, in the limit of a full π junction, zero-energy Andreev bound states appear sharply localised at the interface between the two superconducting blocks. In the presence of a metallic bulk, the states survive but their wave function rapidly broadens as the size of the metallic core increases. With this analysis of the electronic structure of PtBi 2 we aimed to set the stage to deepen the understanding of its unique superconducting properties. Further theoretical and experimental work is required to establish the microscopic origin, homogeneity, symmetry and mechanism of the surface superconductivity as well as its relation to the topological nature of the Fermi arcs, and the role of bulk inversion symmetry breaking.