Realization of noncentrosymmetric magnetic Weyl metals is expected to exhibit anomalous transport properties stemming from the interplay of unusual bulk electronic topology and magnetism. Here, we present spin-valve-like magnetoresistance at room temperature in ferrimagnetic Weyl metal Mn2PdSn that crystallizes in the inverse Heusler structure. Anomalous magnetoresistance display dominant asymmetric component attributed to domain wall electron scattering, indicative of spinvalve-like behavior. Ab initio calculations confirm the topologically non-trivial nature of the band structure, with three pairs of Weyl nodes proximate to the Fermi level, providing deeper insights into the observed intrinsic Berry curvature mediated substantial anomalous Hall conductivity. Our results underscore the inverse Heusler compounds as promising platform to realize magnetic Weyl metals/semimetals and leverage emergent transport properties for electronic functionalities. In the landscape of condensed matter physics, there has been a fervent pursuit of discovering novel quantum materials, aiming to validate topological principles and unravel their associated exotic properties In this context, 4d -transition-element-based 'inverse' Heusler alloys (iHA) present an intriguing platform with noncentrosymmetric crystal structures and multiple inequivalent magnetic sublattices Here we present Mn 2 PdSn as candidate Weyl metal demonstrating room temperature spin-valve-like magnetoresistance and substantial AHC, through combined experimental and theoretical study. Isothermal fielddependent longitudinal resistivity exhibits anomalous magnetoresistance (MR) dominated by asymmetric component indicating rare spin-valve behaviour in stoichiometric systems. Ab initio calculations confirm the presence of Weyl points close to the Fermi level offering deeper insights into the Berry curvature mediated intrinsic AHC. We present a nontrivial AHC in the compensated ferrimagnetic Mn 2 PdSn by determining the magnetic space group which contains magnetic mirror planes. These results underscores iHA as a platform for simultaneous realization of non-trivial magnetic functionalities and electronic topology. Polycrystalline ingots of Mn 2 PdSn were prepared by a conventional arc-melting technique (see supplementary information (SI) To elucidate the dominant scattering mechanism in ρ xx , we fit ρ xx (T ) between 2 and 100 K using the e-e scattering T 2 dependence. However, a more accurate lowtemperature fit incorporates the spin-fluctuating T 3/2 term, yielding ρ xx = ρ 0 +aT 3/2 +bT 2 , where ρ 0 is residual resistivity, and a and b are constants The magnetic field dependence of MR isotherms [∆ρ/ρ 0 = ρxx(H)-ρxx(H=0) ρxx(H=0) × 100%] typically exhibits symmetry concerning the applied H direction. Conversely in Fig. Fig. To understand the impact of magnetism on the electronic structure we have performed spin-polarized cal- culation in the frame work of Density functional theory (DFT) using Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) by considering the FM and FiM configuration of Mn spins. Our calculations reveal FiM configuration is energetically favourable in comparison to FM configuration. The net magnetic moment of Mn 2 PdSn in the ferrimagnetic state is claculated to be 0.48μ B . The nearly equal and opposite magnetic moment of 4.54 μ B and -4.44 μ B hosted respectively by Mn 4b and Mn 4c atoms in the primitive unit cell of Mn 2 PdSn results in a small net moment. The presence of net magnetic moment, although small, breaks the T symmetry. The spin resolved total and partial density of states for the FiM configuration depict the presence of finite states near Fermi level for both the spin channels which makes it metallic (Fig. Next, we have included SOC in our calculation. The calculated energy of Mn 2 PdSn in FiM configuration including SOC where the magnetization is along [111] di-rection is found to be the lowest. Our computational results predict that Mn 2 PdSn stabilizes in a noncollinear ferrimagnetic phase where the magnetization axis is along [111] direction. The band structure in the FiM configuration including SOC along The Weyl points in the FiM structure are expected to generate finite Berry curvature resulting in transverse anomalous velocity in the electronic motion subsequently producing a large AHC thereby modifing the transport behaviour of the compound. The intrinsic AHC (σ αβ ) is expressed as the integral of the total Berry Curvature (Ω αβ ) over the Brillouin zone of the crystal as is the sum of the Berry curvatures Ω n,αβ ( k) corresponding to the individual bands n, f n ( k) is the Fermi distribution function and indices (α, β) denote the global cartesian coordinates , where Ψ n, k is the Bloch function and v is the velocity operator. The magnetization direction along [111] alters the governing symmetry from cubic to trigonal preserves the non-collinear ferrimagnetic configuration of Mn 2 PdSn. The above three magnetic mirror planes make all three components of the Berry curvature to be non-trivial hence, the AHC takes the form, σ αβ = (σ yz , σ zx , σ xy ). Figure .4(g)-(i) shows the calculated Berry curvature along high symmetry k path. The non-vanishing nature of the three components of the Berry curvature is in agreement with the magnetic symmetry of Mn 2 PdSn compound. The peaks in the plot of Berry curvature along Γ-L direction originate due to the negligible band separation between the band crossing point. We have calculated three components of the AHC, σ yz , σ zx and σ xy where x, y and z axis are considered along [100], [010] and [001] direction of the crystallographic axis. For the magnetization along [111] direction, the AHC tensor can be calculated using another basis where x, y, and z axis are considered along [ 110], In conclusion, this comprehensive experimental and abinitio investigation highlights the broken inversion symmetry in the iHA system as a conducive environment for realizing bulk Weyl singularities and exploring their associated emergent transport properties. Detailed magnetotransport measurements unveil asymmetric magnetoresistive behavior, primarily originating from domain wall scattering at applied low magnetic fields, resulting in a persistent spin-valve-like effect up to room temperature. Moreover, MR asm exhibits similar temperature and magnetic field variations as magnetization, emphasizing the crucial role of magnetic ordering in the spin-valve effect. A quadratic scaling relation between ρ A xy and ρ xx is observed, and the calculated AHC resulting from the Berry curvature produced by the three pair of Weyl nodes adjacent to the Fermi level closely agrees with the experimentally observed σ A xy,int , confirming the k -space topology as the origin of AHE. Our results underscore the Mn-based iHA with late transition elements at the Y position as a fertile playground for exploring the intricate interplay of non-collinear magnetism and non-trivial electronic band topology. This study further merits the possibility of exploring exotic magnetic functionalities of MWSMs with broken inversion symmetry, like topological spin-valve technology, owing to the strong correlation between magnetization dynamics and electromagnetic fields mediated by Weyl fermions, through experimental and theoretical investigation for potential applications. 0.49 meV 2.33 meVWeyl points Γ Γ