The synthesis of solar methanol through direct CO2 hydrogenation using solar energy is of great importance in advancing a sustainable energy economy. In this study, non-precious NiZn intermetallic/ZnO catalyst is reported to catalyze the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol using sunlight irradiation ( 1sun). The NiZn-ZnO interface is identified as the active site to stabilize the key intermediates of HxCO*. At ambient pressure, the NiZn-ZnO catalyst demonstrates a methanol production rate of 127.5 μmol g -1 •h -1 from solar driven CO2 hydrogenation, with a remarkable 100% selectivity towards methanol in the total organic products. Notably, this production rate stands as the highest record for photothermic CO2 hydrogenation to methanol in continuous-flow reactors with sunlight as the only requisite energy input. This discovery not only paves the way for the development of novel catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol but also marks a significant stride towards a full solar-driven chemical energy storage. Methanol (CH3OH) is an essential chemical industrial feedstock and also considered as a promising candidate for clean and renewable energy carriers due to its high volume-specific energy density Therefore, the strategy of sunlight driven photo-thermal catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to produce solar methanol has garnered attention, as this approach can enable safe and efficient storage of solar energy while reducing excess greenhouse gas emissions Moreover, the photo-thermal catalytic process mentioned requires intense light irradiation (approximately 6 kW m -2 = 6 suns) to generate hot carriers and needs external thermal source for high reaction temperatures (>200 °C) In this study, we discovered a NiZn intermetallic/ZnO catalyst (referred to as NiZn-ZnO catalyst) based on non-precious metals that can effectively catalyze the hydrogenation of CO2 to solar methanol under atmospheric pressure. The formation of the NiZn(101)/ZnO(100) heterojunction in the catalyst helps reduce the activation energy and stabilize the key intermediates HxCO* during the CO2 hydrogenation process. Under ambient pressure and natural sunlight irradiation (≤1 sun) without with external electric heating, the NiZn-ZnO catalyst achieved a methanol production rate of 127.5 μmol g -1 h -1 , particularly with methanol selectivity reaching 100%. This rate sets a new record for the highest rate of CO2 hydrogenation to methanol driven by natural sunlight in a continuous flow reactor at atmospheric pressure. Additionally, the NiZn-ZnO catalyst can be synthesized through a conventional coprecipitation method, showing its potential for future large-scale applications. Further, this photo-thermal catalytic method for synthesizing methanol can conveniently integrate with photovoltaic water electrolysis, enabling the production of solar methanol from CO2 and water under full natural sunlight (≤1 sun) Herein, the absence of CH4 in the hydrogenation products is in accordance with the result of that study. Moreover, our study here further reveals that another possible strong synergistic effect between Ni and Zn atoms exists, which facilitates the formation of methanol beyond CO during CO2 hydrogenation. Notably, this specific synergistic effect occurs when the Ni/Zn ratios in the NxZy catalysts reach a certain range of values, informing us to focus on the structural differences caused by the composition variation. To gain structural information and explore the origin of the uncommon catalytic response for NxZy catalysts, a series of physicochemical analyses has been employed. The crystallinity and phase structure of the catalysts were first analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). We assumed that a new active phase was formed during the heat treatment of the catalysts because neither metallic Ni 0 nor ZnO were active in the formation of the methanol. Combining the catalytic performance of NxZy with the XRD data, it is shown that only catalysts with both the structure NiZn intermetallic and ZnO can produce methanol. We then analyzed the morphology of the best-performing catalyst N1Z2 using scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM), and the images are presented in Fig. Moreover, the edge of N3Z1 is closer to that of Zn foil compared to N1Z2. This result aligns well with the XRD data, which demonstrates that the sample N3Z1 maintains a bulk structure like that of metallic Ni 0 while sample N1Z2 preserves a composite structure of ZnO and metallic Zn 0 . Fig. In summary, we demonstrate a novel NiZn intermetallic/ZnO catalyst for excellent methanol generation from CO2 hydrogenation at ambient pressure. This NiZn-ZnO catalyst realized a solar methanol generation rate of 127.5 μmol g -1 h -1 with zero CH4 generation as a byproduct at atmospheric pressure and under sunlight irradiation without external thermal source. The conjunction of NiZn intermetallic and ZnO phases is the key for methanol production during CO2 hydrogenation. DRIFTS and semi-in-situ XPS studies identified that the reaction pathway of CO2 hydrogenation to methanol involves the initial decomposition of CO2 followed by CO hydrogenation. Potential energy diagrams obtained through DFT calculations reveal that the formation of the NiZn(101)/ZnO(100) heterojunction helps lower the activation energy in hydrogenation steps, stabilizing key intermediates of CO hydrogenation (CH3O* and HCO*), thus achieving methanol production. The methanol production rate was maintained for up to 5 days on-stream during the long-term stability test, which demonstrated the robust nature of the NiZn intermetallic/ZnO catalyst. Therefore, our study provides a rational design of Ni-based catalysts for tuning the CO2 activation and conversion pathways. Furthermore, this photothermal catalytic method for synthesizing methanol can conveniently integrate with the photovoltaic water electrolysis of green H2 production systems, realizing the production of solar methanol from CO2 and water under natural sunlight (≤1 sun). This has significant implications for future large-scale solar energy storage and reducing CO2 emissions. acknowledges the support from the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.