We demonstrate a high-NA (0.88), ultra-low-fnumber (f/0.2714), multi-wavelength (480nm, 550nm and 650nm) multilevel diffractive MicroLens Array (MLA) using inverse design. Each microlens in the array is close-packed with diameter of 70 μm and focal length of only 19 μm in air. The MLA was patterned on one surface of a polymer film via UV casting, such that the focal plane was located on the distal end of the film (n of polymer ~ 1.47, thickness = 28 μm, effective f/# (NA) inside polymer ~ 0.4 (0.78)). Each microlens focuses incident light at 3 design wavelengths into a focal spot with measured full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) < 1 μm. By placing this MLA directly on a high-resolution print, we demonstrated RGB integral imaging with applications in document security. Compared to refractive MLAs, our diffractive MLA reduces the thickness by > 3X, which is advantageous for manufacturability. Since these multi-level diffractive MLAs are fabricated using UV-casting, they have the potential for low-cost, high-volume manufacturing. N integral imaging, a microlens array (MLA) is used to capture as well as to reconstruct full light-field information Multilevel diffractive lenses (MDLs) have been demonstrated for various applications We implemented inverse design using the FDTD model in cylindrical coordinates to exploit rotational symmetry for computational efficiency. In inverse design, the desired optical function/response is first selected and an algorithm is applied to generate the optical design that can perform such function. Following this approach, the objective of inverse design, for our case (result in Fig. We first fabricated a 200×200 μ-MDL array master (size = 14 mm × 14 mm) in photoresist (Shipley 1813, Microchem) on a 50 mm-diameter sodalime glass substrate using grayscale lithography via a laser pattern generator (DWL66+, Heidelberg Instruments GmbH) The simulated wavelength-averaged axial point-spread function of the microlens is shown in Fig. Next, we placed the MLA atop offset color prints to test integral imaging (patterned side faced the observer). The prints were generated using standard banknote plate making and offset printing equipment. Original designs were generated at 10,160 dpi (pixel size 2.5 μm), resolution losses in plate making and printing limit the minimum feature size to 10 -15 μm. The feature designs incorporated both line and icon Moiré effects, which were selected for their tolerance to expected effective resolution reduction caused by the print process, and also for the simplicity of the resulting optical effects (see section 4 of Supplement and Visualizations 4 and 5). We tested the MLA with various print geometries and an example is shown in Fig. We demonstrated the inverse design of an ultra-low f/# (0.27) 3-wavelength micro-MDL array, using a rotationallysymmetric FDTD model. The extremely short focal length, while preserving a large aperture allows easy integration onto security offset prints. The measured FWHM of the PSFs were < 1 μm and readily produces high-quality integral images with print features of width 10 -15 μm. We fabricated a master pattern (min. feature = 700 nm) using grayscale lithography, which was then replicated using UV casting (a high-volume, high precision manufacturing process) into a 28 μm thick polymer film. Using simulations, we show that our design outperforms a conventional FZP. Our demonstration lays the framework for diffractive optics to attain very low f/# imaging. Thus, in summary, the key contributions of this work are: (1) inverse design of flat multi-level diffractive microlenses with diameter = 70 μm and focal length (in air) = 19 μm (f/0.2714) using FDTD and DBS optimization, (2) master fabrication using grayscale lithography and replication into flexible polymer film using UV-casting, and (3) full optical characterization including measurement of PSF and demonstration of integral-imaging under ambient white light, when coupled with an offset print. Table The dispersion of the nanoimprint polymer material is shown in Fig. The objective of the inverse design is to optimize the micro multi-level-diffractive lens (micro-MDL) geometry (with rotational symmetry) that maximizes concentration of normally incident plane wave into a desired focal volume for the 3 design wavelengths. The electromagnetic field after transmitting through the microlens is simulated using FDTD The figure of merit (FOM) was defined as the wavelength-averaged concentration factor of light, defined as the ratio of power in the desired focal volume to the total power within the concentration volume. The FOM was calculated according to Equation 1 and used during the inverse design optimization process. The optimization was performed running MEEP parallelly across four CPU cores. where N = number of design wavelengths, equal to three in our case, corresponding to 480, 550 and 650 nm. In order to incorporate fabrication constraints, we discretized the radius of the micro-MDL into rings of width, W = 700 nm as shown in Fig. The inverse design is performed using the modified direct binary search routine as described elsewhere Optimization result is shown in Fig. During optimization, in order to reduce computational time, the FDTD grid size of 76.92 nm was used. After optimization, we ran the FDTD simulation using the optimized geometry, keeping all other parameters the same, but with a finer FDTD grid size of 19.6 nm. The result of this "verification" step is shown in Fig. We fabricated a 200 by 200 micro-MDL array on a 50.8 mm diameter, 500 μm thick, glass substrate using grayscale lithography. The substrate was spin-coated with a positive-tone photoresist (S1813 G2 Photoresist, MICROPOSIT) Additionally, we used an atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker Dimension Icon) to get a more accurate metrology of the final polymer MLA device. The AFM is more accurate due to its ability of highresolution scan and revealed that the actual average difference between the measured and intended heights was 111.4 nm and the standard deviation was 94.6 nm. This data is presented in Fig. Fig. In order to characterize the focusing performance of the MLA, we recorded its point spread function (PSF) under both narrowband and broadband illumination and for various locations on the optical axis. Fig. Fig. Table