This work addresses differences in predicted elastic fields created by dislocations either by the Phase Field Crystal (PFC) model, or by static Field Dislocation Mechanics (FDM). The PFC order parameter describes the topological content of the lattice, but it fails to correctly capture the elastic distortion. In contrast, static FDM correctly captures the latter but requires input about defect cores. The case of a dislocation dipole in two dimensional, isotropic, elastic medium is studied, and a weak coupling is introduced between the two models. The PFC model produces compact and stable dislocation cores, free of any singularity, i.e., diffuse. The PFC predicted dislocation density field (a measure of the topological defect content) is used as the source (input) for the static FDM problem. This coupling allows a critical analysis of the relative role played by configurational (from PFC) and elastic (from static FDM) fields in the theory, and of the consequences of the lack of elastic relaxation in the diffusive evolution of the PFC order parameter. Research on the motion of individual or a small number of dislocations at the nanoscale is motivated by ongoing advances in diagnostic techniques, for example, high energy X-ray and Bragg coherent diffractive imaging, that have opened the door to detailed nanoscale observation of crystalline defects such as dislocations (line-type defects) Field dislocation mechanics (FDM) FDM is a continuum theory The PFC model introduces a phase field that describes the temporally coarse grained atomic density of the crystal, and a phenomenologically specified free energy functional determined by lattice symmetry. By construction, the minimizer of the free energy is a spatially periodic phase field of the required symmetry A theory that is free of the limitations described above, and that couples FDM and the PFC, was proposed in However, a computational implementation of the coupled PFC and FDM model is lacking. As a first step, in this work, we propose an algorithm for a weakly coupled version of this theory within a small deformation framework. The numerical implementation is used to determine the equilibrium configuration of a dislocation dipole in two dimensions and in an elastically isotropic system. The aim of this study is to determine to what extent the PFC and FDM predicted distortions and stresses agree in equilibrium. We focus on an analysis of the equilibrium configuration of a dislocation dipole in a two dimensional hexagonal lattice, in the small deformation approximation, starting from a weakly coupled formulation of the theory proposed in The PFC model is described by a single scalar order parameter ψ(x, t), which is a function of position x and time t. The governing phenomenological free energy functional (in dimensionless form) is given by where r is a dimensionless parameter. For r > 0, the minimizer is ψ = 0. For r < 0 there is a continuum band of periodic solutions with either uniaxial or hexagonal symmetry of characteristic wavenumber q ≈ 1. The amplitude of ψ is proportional to √ r for small r. The symmetry of the minimizer depends on the value of where Ω is the surface area of the system. We focus here on r < 0 and values of ψ 0 that correspond to a stable hexagonal phase with -ê2 2 , q 4 = -q 1 , q 5 = -q 2 , q 6 = -q 3 and [20] The vectors {ê i } are the Cartesian unit vectors. This solution is approximate up to O(r 1/2 ), with the next order being O(r 3/2 ). However, it is common practice in numerical work involving the PFC model to consider values of r that are O(1). Higher order terms in r missing in Eq. ( In order to maintain the value of ψ 0 fixed during the evolution of ψ, we explicitly impose Eq. (2) as a global constraint. This procedure differs from the more conventional approach of rewriting Eq. ( A key tenet of the theory in where it is understood that the variation of A on its arguments is slow in a multiple scale expansion sense. From a numerical perspective, the slowly varying amplitudes will be computed below by a local demodulation of the phase field as obtained through the convolution with a two-dimensional Gaussian kernel g of width on the order of the lattice parameter a 0 of the phase field, With this definition, the configurational distortion tensor of the phase field, Q, is defined as where d = 2 is the dimension of the system, Im(z) is the imaginary part of the complex number z, and N = 3 for a hexagonal lattice in two dimensions In analogy with linear elasticity, a configurational stress tensor can be defined as where C plays the role of a stiffness tensor. In the isotropic elastic case it is given as It is also possible to define a configurational stress by directly computing the variation of the phase field free energy to an affine distortion where the free energy density f is defined in Eq. ( The PFC order parameter supports not only smooth distortions but also isolated, topologically stable, dislocations. They have been extensively studied for two dimensional uniaxial and hexagonal patterns of fluid convection so that a dislocation at x 0 corresponds to vortices in the complex amplitude A n , of winding number s = 0, ±1. Note that q n = 0. Therefore, in two dimensions, a phase field dislocation comprises vortices in two of the complex amplitudes (s n = ±1), whereas the third is non singular (s n = 0). This nonzero circulation can be transformed into an area integral, leading to the definition of the phase field dislocation density tensor, Although the tensor α can be explicitly written in terms of ψ In the static setting within a small deformation framework, FDM takes as input a polar dislocation density field α, and mechanical boundary conditions, and yields the elastic distortion field U and the stress field σ. The latter is related to the former through the Hooke's law as σ = C : U In a simply connected domain with no dislocations, the elastic distortion field U is compatible, such that ∇ × U = 0 (see Appendix A for notation). If a simply connected two-dimensional domain has a distribution of 'p' point dislocations of Burgers vectors b p , the elastic distortion is related to the Burgers vector as b p = U • dx ′ ̸ = 0, where the contour over which the integral is taken encloses only the p th dislocation. The inequality holds only when the elastic distortion field U has an incompatible/transverse component i.e., a component with a non-zero curl. The static FDM model starts from a Stokes-Helmholtz type decomposition of a tensor to uniquely express the elastic distortion field U into compatible/longitudinal U ∥ (curl free) and incompatible/transverse U ⊥ (divergence free) components as U = U ∥ + U ⊥ , such that ∇ × U ∥ = 0 and ∇ • U ⊥ = 0. In small deformation, the polar dislocation density field α is defined as α := ∇ × U = ∇ × U ⊥ . Then, for a given α field, U ⊥ can be obtained by solving the following Poisson-type equation The compatible part can be obtained by using the elastic constitutive relationship (13), the Stokes-Helmholtz decomposition, U ⊥ obtained from equation ( Following the computation of U ⊥ and U ∥ , σ can be obtained by using Eq. ( An equivalent approach to obtain σ from the dislocation density tensor in an isotropic medium is where m = 2(λ+μ) λ and χ is a stress function that is related to α as where the operator "sym" extracts the symmetric part of a second order tensor. We want to examine the equilibrium configuration of a defected medium comprising a stationary dislocation dipole under periodic boundary conditions. An initial configuration comprising a dislocation dipole is considered in a climb configuration. For values of r ≈ 1, the order parameter relaxes everywhere according to Eq. ( A uniform spatial grid is introduced in a rectangular domain with N 1 points along x 1 and N 2 along x 2 . The grid spacing is ∆x 1 = a 0 /7, ∆x 2 = √ 3a 0 /12, with a 0 = 4π/ √ 3 as dictated by the hexagonal ground state of the free energy in Eq. ( The initial condition for the order parameter ψ includes p = 2 dislocations at (x 1,p , x 2,p ), with A 0 computed using Eq. (4). For the current time step t+∆t, with all the quantities known at the previous time step t, the PFC problem is iterated first according to, where L = (r + 1) + 2∇ 2 + ∇ 2 ∇ 2 is the linear operator of Eq. ( where k l = 1.4 and k h = 2 are user-defined constants. Finally, ψ t+∆t is computed as Once ψ t+∆t has been obtained, it is used to find A n,t+∆t using, which in turn is used to compute Q t+∆t using the central difference approximation to Eq. ( Next, α t+∆t is computed using Q t+∆t and Eq. ( where X is defined in Appendix A. Then where G is the fourth order modified Green's tensor with components in Fourier space given by The stress σ t+∆t is then straightforwardly obtained from (13) using U t+∆t = U ∥,t+∆t + U ⊥,t+∆t . Finally, σ ′,t+∆t is computed from ( obtained from Eq. ( The step by step algorithm is summarized in Table We have used N 1 = 602 points along x 1 and N 2 = 900 along x 2 , and the parameter values r = -1.2, ψ 0 = -0.5, well inside the hexagonal region of the phase diagram of the phase field. As initial condition, two dislocations are introduced along the line y = h /2 according to equation of equation ( With this initial configuration, the only non zero component of the polar dislocation density is α 13 . The top and bottom dislocations should respectively exhibit α 13 > 0 and α 13 < 0. Figure Even though α 13 becomes time independent as early as t = 5, there are clear qualitative and quantitative differences between the spatial distributions of the corresponding components of Q and U (Figure Next, a comparison is performed between the static FDM and PFC stress measures. Note that following Algorithm 1, and in order to facilitate comparison between the individual components of all the stress measures, their values have been normalized in such a way that their average over the computational domain is equal to zero. In other words, their zeroth wavenumber (k = 0) component in Fourier space have been set to 0. We show comparisons of elastic and configurational stresses along two orthogonal lines in the system in Figs. Figure Far field configurational and elastic stresses coincide, however, they do not coincide in the region in between the dislocations. This near-field discrepancy is to be expected for several reasons. First, the core size in dimensionless units is on the order of 7∆y (Fig. A (weakly) coupled model involving the PFC (Phase Field Crystal) and the static FDM (Field Dislocation Mechanics) approaches has been introduced to obtain the constrained equilibrium state of a prototypical configuration involving a dislocation dipole. This configuration allows a critical analysis of the relative role played by configurational (from PFC) and elastic (from static FDM) fields in the coupled theory, the study of the consequences of introducing a consistent separation between diffusive and elastic time scales, and consideration of singularity regularization at defect cores. The ulterior goal of this study is to endow the PFC model with material elasticity in a way that consistently respects the required independence between the order parameter and lattice distortion. We have adopted the view that the PFC order parameter only describes the topological content of the lattice, and that therefore, in equilibrium, it only determines the transverse/incompatible part of the distortion (as required by lattice incompatibility in the elastic problem). This choice leverages the fact that the PFC produces a compact and stable defect core, free of any singularity. We then use the resulting (diffuse) dislocation density in the core region as the source for the elastic problem. Our results show that local relaxation of the order parameter at the defect core is fast, and therefore elastic equilibrium should be established rather quickly over the entire system, as shown by the resolution of the elastostatic problem. However, the configurational stresses have not been equilibrated in the early stages of the numerical calculation. It takes a long time for them to reach equilibrium because the phase field order parameter relaxes diffusively everywhere. This diffusive relaxation is unphysical for an elastic medium, and it has hindered the applicability of the PFC model to realistic elastic materials. At much later times, the configurational stresses converge to the elasto-static solution at far field, indicating attainment of equilibrium. Any discrepancies remaining are due to the finite size of the computational domain and periodic boundary conditions. Near dislocation cores, deviations are found between the elastic and configurational stresses, which are related to the fact that the PFC model is defined by a nonlinear free energy, whereas linear elasticity has been assumed for the static FDM response. In summary, the PFC provides a consistent method to introduce lattice incompatibility into a classical elasticity calculation in a defected medium. It remains to be investigated whether the same coupled theory provides a proper and efficient description of plastic defect motion as described in 