Existence of quasi-static negative capacitance (QSNC) was proposed from an interpretation of the widely accepted Landau model of ferroelectrics. However, many works showed not to support the QSNC theory, making it controversial. In this letter we show the Landau model when used together with transition-state-theory, can connect various models including first-principles, Landau, Preisach and nucleation limited switching while it does not predict the existence of QSNC. S TEEP-subthreshold-slope in the transfer characteristics of MOSFETs is needed to keep on scaling the supply voltage (V DD ) that would in turn reduce power dissipation without sacrificing performance. In 2008 Two minimum energy configurations of orthorhombic Hf O 2 is shown in Fig. where Q n is "quantum of polarization", and n is an integer. Image-1 and 29 must give remnant polarization, -P r and +P r respectively, as they correspond to the two minimum energy atomic configurations (Fig. Fig. Here E is applied electric field, α and β are Landau parameters. Minimization of U with respect to P gives P -E relationship at steady-state as shown in Fig. Small regions of ferroelectric can switch their P independent of each others, called hysterons. Their statistical behavior is described by phenomenological models. We showed Preisach (a steady-state model) and NLS (transient model) can describe P switching of Hf O 2 at a low computational cost where E a and E are the activation field and the applied electric field, respectively, and τ 0 is the characteristic nucleation time and α is a phenomenological constant. The time dependent polarization is then given by- In the following section we show such phenomenological models come out from the double-well potential when used together with transition-state theory. In addition, that does neither predict the S-curve nor QSNC. The minima of the Landau potential profile (Fig. • Switching between the states is an Arrhenius process. • Barriers W 1 and W 2 are "kinetic barriers" for switching. Let us call the two states as state-1 and state-2 respectively. If all the hysterons were poled to state-1 or state-2 then the net polarization of the system would be -P r or +P r respectively. Merz law (eq. 3) has been shown to be equivalent to the Arrhenius process of crossing a barrier (i.e., transition-statetheory) Here A and V denotes the area and volume of the hysteron respectively, W b is the barrier height at zero field, q is the elementary charge, m is a number giving the amount of polarization charge (in the unit of q) that a hysteron contains. The time evolution of the occupation probability of states in a multi-state system is given by Pauli's master equation Here a l←m is the transition rate from state m to l, ν 0 is escape frequency, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. From the solution of eq. 6, total polarization of the FE is obtained as-P = -P r p 1 + P r p 2 Here p i (0) and p i (∞) are the fractional occupation of statei at t = 0 (initial) and t = ∞ (at steady-state) respectively, and τ = (a 1←2 + a 2←1 ) -1 is a time constant for switching. The Preisach model assigns a distribution of the coercive field to p 1 (∞) and p 2 (∞) for many hysterons. The remaining term in eq. 8 is 1 -e ( t τ ) . Comparing it against eq. 4 it is seen that the NLS model uses the very same equation with an assumption that τ is distributed over an exponentially broad spectrum. Overall response of the system is obtained by summing-up the contribution of all the τ values. In other words, equation 8 encompasses both the Preisach and the NLS models within itself, provided that statistical distributions are introduced. This way it can bridge the physics-based NEB model with the statistical models (that have accurate predictability of experimental results) while automatically absorbing Landau double-well potential in it. Next critical question to answer is, whether such interpretation predicts the existence of QSNC under CBC in a FE-DE stack. The electric field experienced by the FE in a FE-DE stack is given by Here, V stack is the voltage applied across the ferroelectricdielectric stack, P is the polarization given by equation 6 and 7, t F E ,t DE and ε F E , ε DE are thicknesses and relative permittivity of FE and DE layers respectively. Therefore, equations 5, 6, 7 and 9 are coupled. We solve the coupled equation for sinusoidal V stack . Fig. In the transition-state theory on the other hand, the depolarization field pushes the hysterons towards both minima such that they have a 50-50 occupation (Fig. 