The geometry of various plasmonic nanoantennae was numerically optimized to maximize their sensitivity to the carrier envelope phase (CEP) of the exciting ultra-short laser pulses. To verify the CEP sensitivity, the near-field response of the investigated nanoantennae was analyzed by combining frequency and time-domain numerical computations. The simulation methodology, capable of accurately calculating the time-dependent photocurrent stem from optical field emission, enabled the determination and optimization of all key parameters characterizing and governing the CEP dependence of the near-field responses. Three-types of structures were inspected, including individual triangular and teardrop-shaped nanoantennae and plasmonic lenses consisting of three hemispheres with gradually decreasing diameters. All structure types were optimized in solid and hollow compositions of gold nanoresonators as well. It was shown that hollow /solid singlets produce the largest /intermediate CEP dependent -to -CEP independent integrated current components' ratio, while their absolute CEP dependent integrated currents were the smallest /intermediate among the optimized structures. The highest /intermediate CEP sensitivity was achieved via solid plasmonic lenses due to their very large absolute CEP dependent integrated photocurrent originating from huge near-field enhancement in the nanogaps, while the integrated current components' ratio was smaller than for counterpart singlets. Metal nanoparticles support light-induced electron plasma oscillations on their surfaces, which phenomenon is known as localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) At high frequencies and sharp edges, spatially asymmetric E-field enhancement, hence photoelectron rectification is realizable that is controlled by the sub-cycle dynamics and mediately by the carrier envelope phase (CEP) of the exciting pulse In the E-field strength dependence of the integrated photocurrent vanishing points were predicted and detected, where the CEP sensitivity suddenly drops to a significantly smaller, yet configuration dependent value To determine the photocurrent response of nanoantennae that are the subjects of short-pulse excitation, a comprehensive numerical methodology combining frequency and time-domain computations was developed. The simulations were conducted using the finite element method (FEM) based RF module of COMSOL Multiphysics, that ensures the accurate, full-wave analysis of the nanoantennae's response. The geometry of the nanoantennae was optimized with an in-house developed algorithm called GLOBAL In the time-domain computations, the optimized nanoparticle structures were excited by a cos 2 -shaped pulse with a full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of 6.5 fs and a central wavelength of 795 nm. The time-dependent photocurrent was calculated using the Fowler-Nordheim equation, considering the timeevolution of the local E-field (Fig. Two relevant properties of the optimized nanoantennae are the spectrally resolved absorption crosssection (ACS) (Fig. In case of solid teardrop the generated reached Imax photocurrent is more than 2-times larger compared to the solid triangle, according to the large maximal steady-state NFE and despite the smaller maximum in NFE(t) (Imax in Table The solid compositions show larger integrated photocurrents for all nanoantenna types in all inspected E-field intervals (Q0 in Table The CEP sensitive integrated photocurrents (Q1) non-monotonously increase with the E-field amplitude (Fig. In conclusion, it is demonstrated that the plasmonic resonances on metal nanoantennae offer intriguing possibilities for achieving enhanced electromagnetic field confinement at the nanoscale and controlling the time-evolution of the few-cycle plasmonic field at fs-time-scale. Plasmonic nanoantenna singlets, as solid and hollow triangles and teardrops, are preferable from the point of view of the achievable large Q1/Q0 ratio originating from their strongly asymmetric near-field enhancement. Among them, the hollow singlet nanoantennae are the most preferable in terms of this ratio, as they show the strongest CEP dependent integrated photocurrent component, especially in the smaller E-field amplitude region. Because of the small CEP sensitive integrated photocurrent component, their smaller Q1 2 /Q0 sensitivity is comparable only in these smaller amplitude regions with their solid counterparts. Only the Q1 2 /Q0 of the hollow TR outperforms the sensitivity of the solid TR in the smallest E-field interval. The analysis of various optimized plasmonic nanoantennae has shown that solid plasmonic lenses ensure the largest CEP sensitivity. Their advantage originates from the large electron emission rate from the huge near-field enhancement in the nanogaps. Although, the Q1/Q0 ratio is relatively small compared to singlets, because of the symmetry of the nanogaps, the large CEP dependent Q1 component results in an extraordinary sensitivity. Larger Q0/Q1 ratio (except in the Interval I) and Q1 2 /Q0 sensitivity in all Intervals can be attained with a solid lens than with its hollow counterpart. Vanishing points have an impact on the CEP dependent and independent integrated photocurrent components' Q1/Q0 ratio and Q1 2 /Q0 sensitivity that can be controlled, and the smallest impact is attainable in case of plasmonic lenses, except the ratio at small E-field strength. By alternating the nanoantenna configuration, the VPs can be tuned properly, thus allowing CEP monitoring through wide E-field regions. Detailed information on the near-field response of optimized nanoantennae, validation. CEP independent and dependent integrated photocurrent components arranged in tables (PDF format). *Mária Csete, Department of Optics and Quantum Electronics, University of Szeged, Dóm tér 9, Szeged 6720, Hungary, Email: mcsete@physx.u-szeged.hu