We develop a comprehensive logical framework for effectively handling the overcomplete basis set in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation that contains two orthonormal basis sets conjugate with each other, such as particle and hole orthonormal basis sets. We highlight the significant implications of our logical framework from theoretical concepts and experimental predictions. Firstly, we rigorously derive all many-body eigenfunctions of arbitrary nonuniform superconductors and uncover that the many-body eigenstates are full of superconducting spin clouds-the electron configuration within the Cooper-like pair of an arbitrary nonuniform superconductor. Secondly, we demonstrate a conjugate loop formed by the effective vacuum states of two orthonormal basis sets conjugate with each other, such as the Fermi sea and sky-the effective vacuum states of positive and negative orthonormal basis sets, respectively. We emphasize the conceptual importance of the Fermi sky, which serves as the starting point for the filling of all negative quasiparticles within the Fermi sea. Next, we emphasize the significance of our logical framework from the experimental prediction such as superconducting tunneling spectroscopy. The existing theory of the superconducting tunneling spectroscopy, based on an excitation orthonormal basis set, necessitates the breakup and formation of the Cooper pairs that nerve was directly observed in experiments. Our conjugate loop provides insights into how to populate negative quasiparticles and achieves the one-body quasiparticle representation of the many-body superconducting state. This discovery provides a solid foundation for treating a many-body superconducting state as a one-body problem and thus proves valuable for addressing superconducting tunneling spectroscopy as simply as the standard nonsuperconducting spectroscopy theory. Thirdly, we present a gate-, field-, and phase-tunable tunnel spectroscopy asymmetry arising from the imbalanced particle-hole distribution of the subgap quasiparticles in a quantum-dot Josephson junction. These findings underscore the power of our logical framework and its implications for advancing our understanding and utilization of solid-state devices based on superconductivity. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) formalism is widely used as a fundamental tool to investigate not only standard superconducting phenomena Note that a quasiparticle energy of the BdG Hamiltonian, denoted as E m , contributes to the supercurrent with an amount, I m = 2e ħ ∂ φ E m In our work, we develop a comprehensive logical framework that effectively deals with the overcomplete basis set in the BdG equation. This framework encompasses both positive and negative energy quasiparticle states while maintaining symmetry between spin-up and spin-down quasiparticle states in scattering and tunneling theory and is applicable across a wide range of condensed matter physics. Our logical framework is crucial for both theoretical concepts and experimental predictions. We emphasize the conceptual significance of our logical framework by introducing new techniques that accurately determine all eigenfunctions of arbitrary nonuniform superconductors. Notably, superconducting eigenstates are full of superconducting spin clouds, representing the electron configuration within Cooper-like pairs in nonuniform superconductors. We elucidate how Bogoliubov excitations reconfigure these superconducting spin clouds. Additionally, we demonstrate the existence of a conjugate loop formed by the EVSs of two OBSs conjugate with each other, such as the Fermi sea and sky, representing the EVSs of positive and negative OBSs, respectively. We highlight the conceptual significance of the Fermi sky, serving as the starting point for filling all negative quasiparticles within the Fermi sea. Shifting our focus to experimental predictions, we highlight the importance of the conjugate loop in revealing the one-body quasiparticle representation of the many-body superconducting state. This discovery provides a solid foundation for treating a many-body state as a one-body problem and proves valuable in addressing superconducting tunneling spectroscopy as simply as the standard nonsuperconducting spectroscopy theory. For example, we demonstrate a gate-, field-, and phase-tunable tunnel spectroscopy asymmetry caused by the imbalanced particle-hole distribution of the subgap quasiparticles in a quantum-dot Josephson junction. Overall, our work presents a comprehensive logical framework for addressing the challenges posed by the overcomplete basis set and for providing valuable tools for studying and understanding various aspects of condensed matter physics, particularly in the context of nonuniform superconduc-tors. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we show the conjugate relation of arbitrary superconducting system. In Sec. C, we present our generic logic, including quantum dot (Sec. C 1), normal metal (Sec. C 2), superconductor (Sec. C 3), and general case (Sec. C). Section IV presents our main results including conjugate loop (Sec. IV A), Fermi sea and sky (Sec. IV B), as well as tunnel spectroscopy asymmetry (Sec. IV C). Our paper ends with conclusion and outlook. The Hamiltonian for plane-wave and tight-binding models is provided in Appendix A and Appendix B respectively. To gain an intuitive understanding of our logical framework, we provide examples starting with a simple quantum dot case (Appendix C 1), followed by normal metal (Appendix C 2) and superconductor (Appendix C 3) cases. Finally, Appendix D and Appendix E present the microscopic derivations of effective vacuum states and tunneling current, respectively. Our methodology involves a quadratic and diagonalizable Hamiltonian that describes a non-uniform superconducting system incorporating various elements such as a Zeeman magnetic field, spin-orbit coupling, spindependent tunneling, and Coulomb interaction treated in a mean-field manner. This framework allows us to investigate a wide range of superconducting systems, including superconductor-quantum dot Here, N represents the system size, and σ =⇑ / ⇓ denotes pseudospin-up and -down quasiparticles in the presence of spin-flip effects from spin-orbit coupling and spindependent tunneling. The appearance of the half prefactor arises when we mathematically rewrite the original Hamiltonian into the quadratic and diagonalizable BdG form using the overcomplete basis set The field operator c ns annihilates an electron with spin s and energy ε n + sh n , where ε n and h n are the energy spectrum and Zeeman energy. The constant energy E = E ε + E ∆ includes the contributions from energy spectrum ε n , given by E ε = n ε n , and pair potential ∆ n , given by E ∆ = n |∆ n | 2 /g, where g is attractive interaction, e.g., the Gorkov contact pairing interaction and E ∆ is the energy constant originating from the mean-field treatment of the attractive interaction The quasiparticle operators (γ lση ) for all l, σ, and η form an overcomplete basis set that consists of two mutually conjugate OBSs. The quasiparticle operators described by Eq. ( As a consequence of this conjugate relation, the electron (u η ) and hole (v η ) distributions satisfy the following relation The conjugate relation (3) offers an intuitive and comprehensive illustration of the artificial redundancy in the BdG formalism from a quasiparticle operator point of view. It is important to note that the ubiquitous conjugation relation is different from the demanding requirement of the Majorana fermion, i.e., γ † lsη = γ lsη . The conjugate relation (3) reveals that the occupancy of the E lσ+ quasiparticle is entirely determined by the occupancy of the E lσ-quasiparticle. An occupied E lση quasiparticle, i.e., ⟨γ † lση γ lση ⟩ = 1, is equivalent to an unfilled E l-σ-η quasiparticle, i.e., ⟨γ † l-σ-η γ l-σ-η ⟩ = ⟨γ lση γ † lση ⟩ = 0. However, it is important to note that both γ lση and γ l-σ-η describe the same quasiparticle and no longer satisfy the anticommutation relation {γ lση , γ l-σ-η } = {γ lση , γ † lση } ̸ = 0. From the 4N -element overcomplete basis set (γ lση ) for all l, σ, and η, we can select an OBS in which the 2N elements are independent of each other and satisfy the anticommutation relation. It is worth noting that, in principle, there are 4 N OBSs that can be constructed, as each quasiparticle has its conjugate counterpart with opposite pseudospin and energy. However, the choice of OBS is arbitrary and does not affect the behavior of superconducting materials. Thus, it is necessary to develop a general logic that is independent of the chosen OBS. We present our logic for the usage of the overcomplete basis set including two OBSs conjugate with each other • STEP I): divide the overcomplete basis set [(γ lση ) for all l, σ, and η] into two OBSs conjugate with each other; • STEP II): derive the EVSs of these two OBSs; • STEP III): ground state is a filled sea of all negative basis states in the chosen OBS from the corresponding EVS. Then we attain the following three properties • PROPERTY I): the EVSs of any two OBSs conjugate with each other form a conjugate loop; • PROPERTY II): there are 2 N possible divisions of the two OBSs conjugate with each other. When a pair of basis states is exchanged between the two OBSs, the fermionic parity (see definition in Ref. • PROPERTY III): The even-parity eigenstates are full of Bogoliubov-like singlets -a superposition of vacuum state and Cooper-like pair, while the odd-parity eigenstates contain not only plenty of Bogoliubov-like singlets but also a superconducting pseudospin cloud. To gain an intuitive understanding of this logic, we provide examples starting with a simple quantum dot case (Appendix C 1), followed by normal metal (Appendix C 2) and superconductor (Appendix C 3) cases. We here generalize the logic to arbitrary nonuniform superconductor case. STEP I): Here, we work on arbitrary nonuniform superconductor with the BdG Hamiltonian (1). The conventional superconductor theory relies on an excitation OBS, whose EVS happens to to be the ground state. However, the ground state can evolve a changeover of fermionic parity, and hence it is more convenient to start with the OBSs whose quasiparticle operators are smooth functions of all system parameters and support evenparity EVSs that is analytically solvable where the energy of the EVS for OBS (γ lση ) for all l and σ is given by STEP II): Then, we derive the even-parity EVS. The EVS of the OBSs (γ l⇑η , γ l⇓η ) for all l is defined by γ lση |V ⟩ η = 0, for all l and σ. (7) We assume a generic ansatz, which is available for the spin-flip effects from spin-orbit coupling and spindependent tunneling where |0⟩ is the vacuum of electrons defined by c b |0⟩ = 0 for all b = (n, s). The superconducting cloud matrix C η relies on the electron and hole distributions of all η quasiparticles and show that all electrons can be entangled. Though the superconducting cloud matrix ( Here, U η and V η are two unitary matrices that are not independent and satisfy U η (n, 2k -1) = e +iφ η k V + η (2k, n) for all n. A η is a diagonal matrix with doubly degenerate Bogoliubov coefficients A η kσ,kσ = A η kk , where σ =⇑, ⇓ is a pseudospin index corresponding to this double degeneracy. Then, EVSs (8) can be rewritten to the Cooper-like pair form where The superconducting pseudospin cloud operators show how the electrons in a nonuniform superconductor pair with each other The EVS , and so on, up to E L + + lσ E lσ+ , respectively, where l i , s i are required to satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle for the eigen states with many Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The ground state is the lowest energy state among these 4 N states and therefore is the Fermi sea -a filled sea of all negative Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the OBS (γ l⇑+ , γ l⇓+ ) from the EVS |V ⟩ + . The same goes for the η = -OBSs (γ l⇑-, γ l⇓-) with the EVS whose ground-state energy is given by PROPERTY I): Then, we try to find the relation between EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ -[Eq. The one-body quasiparticle representation of the manybody EVSs ( PROPERTY III): The even-parity eigenstates |e⟩ ı of these 4 N eigenstates always has Bogoliubov-like singlet form Because |e⟩ ı can be expressed by |V ⟩ + by adding even number of η = + Bogoliubons and hence is the EVS after exchange these Bogoliubons according to PROP-ERTY II), which has Cooper-like pair form. This indicates that Bogoliubov excitations reconfigure the superconducting pseudospin clouds within the superconducting condensate. The odd-parity eigen states, |o⟩ lσ ı can be always expressed from one of even-parity eigen state |e⟩ ı by adding one Bogoliubon such as γ † lσ+ . By means of Eqs. ( with Eq. ( The conceptual significance of the conjugate loop is emphasized. Note that there exists a conceptual difficulty of apparent disregard of half quasiparticles in superconducting scattering and tunneling theory , where the Bogoliubov coefficients are The conventional condensed matter theory relies on an excitation OBS, which includes only positive quasiparticles (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) for k in the whole Brillouin zone, and hence faces a conceptual challenge as it overlooks the existence of negative energy quasiparticle states. To address this limitation, S. Datta et al. introduced an OBS consisting of spin-up quasiparticles (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) for k in the whole Brillouin zone, to include the negative quasiparticles Note that the conventional superconductor theory relies on an excitation OBS that only considers positive quasiparticles. Then, we divide the overcomplete basis set into a positive OBS, given by (γ lση ) for all E lση > 0, as well as a negative OBS, given by (γ lση ) for all E lση < 0. The EVSs of the positive and negative OBSs, defined by γ lση |Fermi sea⟩ = 0 for all E lση > 0 and γ lση |Fermi sky⟩ = 0 for all E lση < 0, are dubbed as the Fermi sea and sky, respectively, because the Fermi sea and sky, in the absence of superconductivity, reduce to all negative and positive electron states being occupied, respectively. Thus, the Fermi sea is equal to the ground state, i.e., |G⟩ = |Fermi sea⟩. PROPERTY I) shows that the Fermi sea and sky should form a conjugate loop as follows [see also Fig. Notable, the Fermi sea (or ground state) is a filled sea of all negative quasiparticles from the Fermi sky which has huge energy E lsη instead of the vacuum of electrons. Fermi sky, as a complement of the Fermi sea, should be a fundamental concept in the Fermion theory. In the case of E ls+ > 0 and E ls-< 0, the Fermi sea and sky become the EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ -, respectively. Hereafter, we exclude spin-flip effects from spin-orbit coupling and spin-dependent tunneling and thus pseudospin-up and -down σ =⇑ / ⇓ become spin-up and -down s =↑ / ↓. It is important to know that employing an overcomplete basis set, where the elements are not independent of each other, can lead to an increase in the dimension of the Hilbert space if we disregard their mutual dependence. This results in an artificially enlarged Hilbert space whose axis represents eigenstates of the system and necessitate careful consideration. It should be noted that certain states within this enhanced Hilbert space lack physical meaning, while some of these states are indistinguishable. To simplify matters, let's first focus on the quantum dot case (Appendix C 1). Despite having four energy levels in the spin-Nambu space, only four distinct many-body states exist in the conjugate loop [Fig. boxes). Additionally, seven occupancy configurations do not exist (highlighted in dashed red boxes) due to the conjugate relation, for example, γ † ↓+ |V ⟩ -= γ ↑-|V ⟩ -= 0. Our results can be directly applied to low-energy subspace of the quantum-dot Josephson junction. Furthermore, the conjugate loop implies that the EVS |V ⟩ + , representing the ground state at h D = 0 (|G⟩ = |V ⟩ + ), is a filled Fermi sea consisting of all negative-energy quasiparticles in the OBS (γ ↑-, γ ↓-), starting from the EVS |V ⟩ -rather than the vacuum of electrons |0⟩ without electrons. Incorrectly using the EVS could lead to meaningless system states, such as , where we consider ε D > 0 case with γ s+ = d s and γ s-= d † -s . Next, we move on to the superconductor case (Appendix C 3). The zero magnetic field ground state, i.e., the Fermi sea, is a filled sea of all negative Bogoliubons with respect to their EVS, i.e., Fermi sky, rather than the vacuum of electrons, as shown by the conjugate loop . Note that we can express the vacuum of electrons in terms of the negative OBS and the EVS, i.e., |0⟩ = C 0 |Fermi sky⟩ + C 1 |ψ⟩ with C 0 = ⟨Fermi sky|0⟩ = k v k , where |ψ⟩ contains at least one negative quasiparticle from the EVS |V ⟩ -and hence satisfies ( k γ † k↑-γ † k↓-)|ψ⟩ = 0 due to the Pauli exclusion principle. Therefore, a filled Fermi sea of all negative quasiparticles from the vacuum of electrons is the ground state only when the |Fermi sky⟩ component of the vacuum of electrons is not zero Then, we consider the arbitrary nonuniform superconductors. Note that the fermionic parity of the ground state (or Fermi sea) switches when the pair of Andreev levels dual to each other cross zero [see Eq. ( Finally, we resolve the half prefactor in the groundstate energy. As a result of particle-hole symmetry Thus, the ground-state energy contains the half summation of all negative Bogoliubon energies and the energy constant of the BdG Hamiltonian The ground-state supercurrent, quantified by the φ-derivative of the ground state energy with I 0 = 2e/ħ, where we assumed the φ-independent magnitude of order parameter inside E for simplicity. These five expressions correspond to OBSs (γ ls+ ) for all l and s, (γ ls-) for all l and s, (γ lsη ) for all E lsη > 0, (γ l↓η ) for all l and η, and (γ l↑η ) for all l and η, respectively. The last one is originally proposed by S. Datta et al., whose EVS, involving phase-independent energy, is full of all spin-down electrons In conclusion, we have clarified two widespread misunderstanding in the superconducting theory. They are: i) the ground state is a filled Fermi sea of all negative quasiparticles from the Fermi sky rather than the vacuum of electrons; ii) the prefactor 2e in the above current-phase character does not refer to the charge of a Cooper pair and the half prefactor of the ground-state energy originates from the BdG formalism in terms of the overcomplete basis set. Consequently, understanding the correct occupancy of negative Bogoliubons is conceptually important for a deeper understanding of the superconducting ground state. The existing theory of the tunneling spectroscopy of uniform superconductors, based on an excitation OBS, requires the breakup and formation of the Cooper pairs that nerve was directly demonstrated in experiments. The tunneling Hamiltonian between superconductor and normal metal can be written as the sum of the processes u k γ † ks+ c ps and v k c † ps γ † -k-s+ , together with their conjugate processes which are negligible for low enough temperature the differential conductance at positive and negative biases are given by dI , respectively, where we have used the identities v 2 k± = u 2 k∓ . Assuming ε k -independent the density of state However, the breakup and formation of the Cooper pair is a mysterious process, even some experiments claimed they directly observed Cooper pairs from the pair correlations process can be intuitively reexplained by the annihilation of γ ks-quasiparticle by ejecting an electron into the tip. This description, without the need for the Cooper pair, allows us to intuitively explain the tunneling spectroscopy of superconductors akin to the conventional nonsuperconducting tunnel spectroscopy. To demonstrate the occupancy of negative quasiparticles based on our conjugate, we investigate the tunneling spectroscopy in a quantum-dot Josephson junction, plotted in Fig. where t d is the tunnel coupling strength between dot and tip, and c ps is the field operator of electron in the probe with momentum p, spin s, and energy E p . We have expressed the dot field operator in terms of quasiparticle operators d s = l (u * + ) ss l1 γ ls+ + s(v + ) -s-s l1 γ ls-which excludes the spin-flip effects from spin-orbit coupling and spin-dependent tunneling. Thus, the transition rate be-tween |E lsη ⟩ and |E ps ⟩ is given by T ps lsη = t d D lsη , where D ls+ = (u * + ) ss l1 and D ls-= s(v + ) -s-s l1 . Here, we have kept the negative Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators (γ ls-) in Eq. ( The first (second) term of the right-hand side of Eq. ( with , where ν t is the density of state in the probe which is assumed to be energyindependent. Interestingly, we incorporates both positive and negative quasiparticles, preserving the symmetry between spin-up and spin-down quasiparticles in the tunneling theory. Thus, the tunneling current, proportional to |D lsη | 2 , can intuitively contain the particle-hole information of the subgap quasiparticles We focus on the tunneling current assisted by the subgap energy levels by fixing our voltage biases within the superconducting gap, i.e., ∆ > V > -∆. The corresponding differential conductance is given by dI dV The first terms describes the process of creating a positive subgap quasiparticle state by adding an electron tunneling from the tip (γ † 1s+ c ps ) and its conjugate process (c † ps γ 1s+ ). The second term corresponds to the creation of a negative subgap quasiparticle state by adding an electron tunneling from the tip (γ † 1s-c ps ) and its conjugate process (c † ps γ 1s-), where the former (γ † 1s-c ps = γ 1-s+ c ps ) can be reexplained as the formation of a Cooper pair with annihilation of a subgap quasiparticle and the transfer of an electron into the superconductor and the later (c † ps γ 1s-= c † ps γ † 1-s+ ) represents the breakup of a Cooper pair with creation of a subgap quasiparticle and the transfer of an electron out of the superconductor Let us begin with zero magnetic field case [Fig. In summary, we have developed a general framework for dealing with the overcomplete basis set in the BdG formalism, that incorporates both positive and negative energy quasiparticle states and maintains the symmetry between spin-up and -down quasiparticles in scattering and tunneling theory. Here, we highlight the significant implications of our logical framework from both the theoretical concepts and the experimental predictions. Firstly, we rigorously derive alla many-body eigenfunction of arbitrary nonuniform superconductors and uncover that superconducting eigenstates are full of superconducting spin clouds-the electron configuration within the Cooper-like pair of a nonuniform superconductor. We show how Bogoliubov excitations reconfigure these superconducting spin clouds. Secondly, we demonstrate a conjugate loop formed by the effective vacuum states of two orthonormal basis sets conjugate with each other, such as the Fermi sea and sky -the effective vacuum states of positive and negative orthonormal basis sets, respectively. We emphasize the conceptual importance of the Fermi sky, which serves as the starting point for the filling of all negative quasiparticles within the Fermi sea. Importantly, our conjugate loop provides insights into how to populate negative quasiparticles and achieves the one-body quasiparticle representation of the many-body superconducting state. This discovery provides a solid foundation for treating a many-body superconducting state as a one-body problem and thus proves valuable for addressing superconducting tunneling spectroscopy as simply as the standard nonsuperconducting spectroscopy theory. Thirdly, we demonstrate a gate-, field-, and phase-tunable tunnel spectroscopy asymmetry due to the particle-hole distribution imbalance of the subgap quasiparticles in the quantum-dot Josephson junction. Notably, we also derive the various transport properties of arbitrary superposition states from the wavefunction perspective and demonstrate a novel supercurrent arising from the interference of distinct eigenstates that distinguishes with the supercurrent in the superconducting quantum interference device and exhibits oscillatory behaviour akin to the alternating current Josephson effect We sincerely thank J. Carlos Egues, Junwei Liu, Gao Min Tang, and Chuan Chang Zeng for helpful and sightful discussions. This work is supported by the NSF of China (Grants Nos. 12321004, 12234003), the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2020YFA0308800). In this section, we focus on investigating the properties of a superconducting system using a plan-wave representation, that encompasses a hybrid quantum dot tunnel coupled with two superconducting leads. Here we study a quantum dot and superconducting leads heterostructure, whoso Hamiltonian is given by The quantum dot is described by a simple Hamiltonian as follows where the field operator d † s create an electron of spin s and energy ε D + sh D with ε D and h D being the energy level and Zeeman energy, respectively. The superconducting leads are described by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer Hamiltonian The field operator c † jks is the creation operator of the electron in superconductor j = 1, 2 with spin s, wave vector k, and energy ε jks = ε jk + sh L , where ε jk and h L are the corresponding energy spectrum and Zeeman energy, respectively. The attractive interaction is treated via a mean-field way, and ∆ j = |∆ j |e -iφj is the corresponding pairing potential with superconducting phase φ j and gap |∆ j |. The quantum tunneling between superconducting leads and and the quantum dot is described as follows The tunnel coupling amplitude t j is can be controlled by the corresponding electrostatic gate between quantum dot and superconducting lead. Noting that the Hamiltonian of the hybrid system is quadratic, to numerically diagonalize the total Hamiltonian, we rewrite the total Hamiltonian (A1) in an overcomplete basis set that contains both particle and hole operators of each electron where kj X kj concatenates X kj vertically. Then, we can describe the Hamiltonian (A1) the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian as follows where the half prefactor arises when we mathematically rewrite the total Hamiltonian (A1) in terms of the overcomplete basis set (A5) H s is the corresponding Hamiltonian matrix for spin-s space The dot energy and Zeeman energy terms are described by the Pauli matrix τ z and the identity matrix in the overcomplete basis set (A5), respectively. In our analysis, we focus on a single energy level on the dot, assuming that the spacing between levels is significantly larger than all other relevant energy scales. The matrix form of the BCS Hamiltonian for the superconducting lead, given by Eq. (A3), is as follows where kjn X kjn concatenates X kjn diagonally. The matrix form of the quantum tunneling Hamitonian (A4) is given by where kjn X kjn concatenates X kjn vertically. Numerically, we can diagonalize the matrix of the total BdG Hamiltonian (A7) as follows where the transformation matrix U is diagonal in spin space akin to the matrix of the BdG Hamiltonian (A7) Here, U s is a 2N × 2N unitary matrix, with N representing half the dimension of the Hamiltonian (A8), representing the size of the hybrid system. As a result, the BdG Hamiltonian (A8) can be mathematically rewritten as: Working in the overcomplete basis set including Nambu and spin space, we are required to add an additional index η = +/-to label the high/low energy levels of each spin species (E ls+ > E ls-), satisfying E lsη = -E l-s-η . Here, the larger l corresponds to a higher energy level. The term with l = 1 corresponds to the Andreev levels, which are subgap energy levels of the hybrid quantum dot and superconductor system. All other energy levels (l > 1) are referred to as Bogoliubov levels, representing the out-of-gap energy levels of the hybrid system. The quasiparticle operator γ lsη with energy E lsη can be expressed as a unit vector in the overcomplete basis set of the hybrid system: In Eq. (A14), we define c ks such that c 1s = d s and c ks = c jks for all k > 1. The coefficients (u sη )lk and (vsη)lk, obtained from the unitary matrix U s , describe the electron and hole distributions of the quasiparticles (γlsη), respectively. The advantages to using the overcomplete basis set (A5) is the convenient description of superconductivity in quadratic Ψ † Ψ form easy for diagonalization [Eq. (A6)]. Especially, it is necessary to use an overcomplete basis set to obtain quadratic and diagnalizable Ψ † Ψ form in the presence of both superconductivity and the spinflip from the spin-orbit coupling and quantum tunneling. The penalties we pay for working with an overcomplete basis set are the additional need to keep track of the overlap matrix of the BdG Hamiltonian and the basis states of the overcompleter basis set, because the overcomplete basis set are not independent of each other anymore. For example, the electron and hole distributions of the quasiparticles always satisfy the orthogonal and normalization conditions as a result of eigen calculation but the quasiparticle operators (A14) do not always satisfy the anticommutation relations. This is because the matrix of the BdG Hamiltonian is based on an overcomplete basis set (A5), whose elements are not independent of each other. By substitution of Eq. (A14), we can calculate the following anticommutation where we use the fact that the electron and hole distributions satisfy The above identity (A17) is guaranteed by the particlehole or charge-conjugation "symmetry", which is artificially introduced by rewriting the orignal Hamiltonian into the quadratic form of the BdG Hamiltonian in terms of the overcomplete basis set Inverting Eq. ( where we have used the identity (A14) to convert (u * s-) lk into s(v -s+ ) lk . Each spinful Andreev quasiparticle always has its conjugate alternative with opposite spin and energy, as shown by the conjugate relation (A18). Thus, we can have 4 N orthonormal basis sets (OBSs). In principle, we can choose any OBS. The Datta-like OBS, (γ ls+ , γ ls-) for all l [9, 10], corresponds to the Hamiltonian 2 lη E l↑η are the energy constants generated when we rewrite the Hamiltonian (A13) into the Hamiltonian (A20) with an OBS (γ l↑+ , γ l↑-) and (γ l↓+ , γ l↓-), respectively. During the rewriting, we will use the conjugate relation (A18) and E lsη = -E l-s-η to remove the prefactor 1/2 in Eq. (A13). Therefore, quasiparticle γ † lsη always have well defined energy E † lsη rather than E † lsη /2. Alternatively, we can also choose textbook basis states (γ l↑η , γ l↓η ) for all l. Thus, the total Hamiltonian (A13) can be rewritten into where 2 ls E ls-η are the energy constants generated when we rewrite the Hamiltonian (A13) into the Hamiltonian (A21). Of course, we can also choose the excitation OBS -{γ lsη } for all E lsη > 0, where E lsη is the energy constant generated when we rewrite the Hamiltonian (A13) into the Hamiltonian (A22) and is exact ground-state energy. In the section at hand, we focus on investigating the properties of a superconducting system using a tightbinding model. The model encompasses a hybrid quantum dot coupled with superconducting leads. To simplify the analysis, we consider a one-dimensional tight-binding model that does not account for orbital effects. We use a one-dimensional tight-binding model In the system described, the field operator c jns annihilates an electron in the j-th lead with spin s and energy ε jns = ε jn + sh L . Here, ε jn represents the site energy in the lead, and h L is the Zeeman energy. The leads are labeled as L for the left lead and R for the right lead, and each lead consists of N sites. The field operator d s annihilates an electron in the quantum dot with spin s and energy ε D + sh D . ε D represents the dot energy, and h D is the Zeeman energy for the dot. The spin rotation matrix U(θ so ) = e iθsos y /2 describes the spin-orbit-induced rotation in the tunnel coupling between the dot and the last (first) site c LN s (c R1s ) of the left (right) lead. The strength of this coupling is denoted by t. The parameter t 0 represents the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude in the leads. In the left (right) lead, the Fulde-Ferrelltype order parameter is considered: ). Here, ∆ is the amplitude of the order parameter, φ is the global phase difference between the two leads, q is the momentum of the Cooper pair, and a is the lattice constant. The Fulde-Ferrell-type order parameter allows for finite-q Cooper pairs, which can be realized through direct current injection or by screening currents through the Meissner effect. We rewrite the total Hamiltonian (B1) in the Nambu space of the hybrid quantum dot and superconducting lead system, i.e., an overcomplete basis set that contains both particle and hole operators of each electron as follows This overcomplete basis set enables the diagonalizable description of the coexistence of superconductivity and spin-orbit coupling. Using the Nambu spinor Ψ, we recast the total Hamiltonian (B1) as follows where the BdG Hamiltonian matrix reads and φ-independent constant is given by The factor of 1/2 in Eq. (B3) arises from the artificial doubling in the BdG formalism where τ z and s z are Pauli matrices acting within the Nambu and spin spaces, respectively. The Hamiltonian H j describes the superconducting leads j = L, R, where T 0 is a tunnel-coupling matrix and H jn is the Hamiltonian for lead j at site n For simplicity, in the following analysis, we assume that the only distinction between the left and right superconducting leads is in the respective phases φ L and φ R . Other than that, the leads are considered identical. The tunnel-coupling matrix between the quantum dot and the left and right leads are denoted as follows The spin-orbit effect in the tunneling processes, both for the left and right leads, is accounted for by the unitary matrix where U(θ so ) represents the spin rotation caused by the spin-orbit coupling during the tunneling between the quantum dot and the superconducting leads. Specifically, U(θ so ) is defined as e iθs y /2 , where θ represents the spinorbit coupling strength and s y denotes the y-component of the spin operator. By numerically diagonalizing the BdG matrix (B4), we can construct the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators γ lση (q, φ L , φ R ) → γ lση , which depend on the Cooper pair momentum q as well as the phase differences φ L and φ R . These operators can be represented as unit vectors in the overcomplete basis set (B2) and are given by the expression i.e., Here, Ψ m denotes the m-th component of Ψ in Eq. (B2), and ] represents the l-th eigenvector that diagonalizes the BdG Hamiltonian (B4). The coefficients u l,m satisfy the normalization condition By recasting the total Hamiltonian (B3) in the form of Eq. ( In the above equation, the Bogoliubov quasiparticle energies E lση depend solely on the phase difference φ = φ R -φ L . Additionally, these eigenenergies satisfy the relationship E lση = -E l-σ-η due to particle-hole symmetry. The quasiparticle operators (γ lση ) for all l, σ, and η form an overcomplete basis set that consists of two mutually conjugate OBSs. The quasiparticle operators described by Eq. (B14) satisfy the conjugate relation As a consequence of this conjugate relation, the electron (u η ) and hole (v η ) distributions satisfy the following relation The conjugate relation (B17) offers an intuitive and comprehensive illustration of the artificial redundancy in the BdG formalism from a quasiparticle operator point of view. It is important to note that the ubiquitous conjugation relation is different from the demanding requirement of the Majorana fermion, i.e., γ † lsη = γ lsη . By inverting Eq. (B14), we can express the electron operator c ns in terms of the γ lsη operators as follows Appendix C: Logic We present our logic for the usage of the overcomplete basis set including two OBSs conjugate with each other • STEP I): divide the overcomplete basis set [(γ lση ) for all l, σ, and η] into two OBSs conjugate with each other; • STEP II): derive the EVSs of these two OBSs; • STEP III): ground state is a filled sea of all negative basis states in the chosen OBS from the corresponding EVS. Then we attain the following three properties • PROPERTY I): the EVSs of any two OBSs conjugate with each other form a conjugate loop; • PROPERTY II): there are 2 N possible divisions of the two OBSs conjugate with each other. When a pair of basis states is exchanged between the two OBSs, the fermionic parity of the EVSs switches. • PROPERTY III): The even-parity eigenstates are full of Bogoliubov-like singlets -a superposition of vacuum state and Cooper-like pair, while the odd-parity eigenstates contain not only plenty of Bogoliubov-like singlets but also a pseudospin cloud. To gain an intuitive understanding of this logic, we provide examples starting with a simple quantum dot case (Sec. C 1), followed by normal metal (Sec. C 2) and superconductor (Sec. C 3) cases. It is illustrative to start with the quantum dot without the superconducting leads. The BdG Hamiltonian can be expressed in terms of the overcomplete basis set (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ , γ ↑-, γ ↓-). The Hamiltonian takes the form with E D = ε D . Without loss of generality, let's consider the case where ε D and h D are both positive. In this case, we can identify γ s+ as the electron operator d s (γ s+ = d s ) and γ s-as the hole operator d † s (γ s-= d † -s ). The single-particle energy spectrum E sη is given by E sη = η|ε D | + sh D , and it satisfies the relation E -s-η = -E sη . The field operators γ † sη and γ -s-η are conjugates of each other according to Each spin-s electron has both particle (d s = γ s+ ) and hole (d † s = γ -s-) representations. Therefore, there are four OBSs that can be constructed: two spin OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ ) and (γ ↑-, γ ↓-), as well as two Nambu OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↑-) and (γ ↓+ , γ ↓-). However, it is important to note that (γ ↑+ , γ ↓-) and (γ ↑-, γ ↓+ ) are not valid OBSs because the operators within each pair do not satisfy the anticommutation relation ({γ ↑+ , γ ↓-} ̸ = 0 and {γ ↑-, γ ↓+ } ̸ = 0). It is important to emphasize that the choice of which OBS to use does not affect the physical properties of the quantum dot. The quantum dot itself is unaware of the specific OBS chosen, and all four OBSs will yield the same ground and excitation states. This highlights the arbitrariness in the choice of OBS and the consistency of physical results regardless of the chosen representation. a. Spin OBSs STEP I): Let's begin by considering two spin OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ ) and (γ ↑-, γ ↓-). We want to express the BdG Hamiltonian (C1) in terms of these chosen OBSs This transformation is accomplished by utilizing the conjugate relation (C2). In this case, we have E D + = 0 and E D -= 2ε D as the energy constants obtained when rewriting the BdG Hamiltonian (C1) in terms of the OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ ) and (γ ↑-, γ ↓-), respectively. STEP II): Next, we determine the EVSs of the two spin OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ ) and (γ ↑-, γ ↓-), defined by the equations By solving these equations, we can find the corresponding EVSs Here, |0⟩ represents the vacuum state with no electrons. Thus, E D + and E D -correspond to the energy of the EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ -, respectively. It is important to note that the EVSs of different OBSs may differ, and therefore, the EVS does not always represent the ground state of the system. STEP III): Now, let us consider the spin OBS (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ ) = (d ↑ , d ↓ ) with the EVS |V ⟩ + = |0⟩ (electron picture). The quantum dot has four eigenstates: . Therefore, the fermionic parity of the ground state changes when the single-particle energy level E ↓+ crosses zero. Next, let us consider another spin OBS , and E D -+ E ↑-+ E ↓-= 0, respectively. In the hole picture, similar to the electron picture, the ground state is obtained by adding all negative single particles of the chosen spin OBS (γ ↑-, γ ↓-) into the corresponding EVS |V ⟩ -, see Fig. tive while E ↓-remains negative. In this case, adding the negative quasiparticle E ↓-to the EVS |V ⟩ -is equivalent to removing a spin-up electron from |V ⟩ -. Thus, the ground state becomes an odd-parity state given by It is worth noting that the ground state undergoes a fermionic parity change when the single-particle energy level E ↑-crosses zero. Although the EVSs of the two spin OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↓+ ) and (γ ↑-, γ ↓-) differ in energy (E + ̸ = E -) and wave function (|V ⟩ + ̸ = |V ⟩ -), the quantum dot possesses the same four eigenstates, including the ground state |G⟩ and three excitation states. To obtain the ground state in each picture, one needs to add all negative single particles of the chosen spin OBS to the corresponding EVS. Fur-thermore, the same eigenstate of the quantum dot can be represented differently using different spin SBSs and EVSs. For example, |0⟩ = |V ⟩ + = γ † ↑-γ † ↓-|V ⟩ -. Additionally, the fermionic parity of the EVSs |V ⟩ η is even, while the ground state's fermionic parity becomes odd when |h D | > |ε D | [as shown in Figs. PROPERTY I): Let's analyze the relation between the two EVSs. When h D = 0, the ground state can be expressed in terms of the two spin OBSs as This implies that the EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ - form a conjugate loop, as illustrated in Fig. This relation arises due to the conjugate relation (C2). It is important to note that this relation implies that EVS |V ⟩ η is filled from another EVS |V ⟩ -η instead of the vacuum of electrons |0⟩. b. Nambu OBSs STEP I): By exchanging a pair of basis states in the spin OBSs, we arrive at the Nambu OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↑-) and (γ ↓+ , γ ↓-). These basis sets select a specific spin species and combine the electron and hole pictures. By applying the conjugate relation (C2), we can obtain the corresponding Hamiltonian from the BdG Hamiltonian (C1) as follows (C9) Here, E D ↑ = ε D -h D and E D ↓ = ε D + h D are energy constants that arise when we mathematically rewrite the BdG Hamiltonian (C1) into the Hamiltonian (C9) using the Nambu OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↑-) and (γ ↓+ , γ ↓-), respectively. STEP II): The EVSs for the Nambu OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↑-) and (γ ↓+ , γ ↓-) are, respectively, defined as follows It is straightforward to obtain the EVSs Thus, E D ↑ and E D ↓ represent the energies of the EVSs |V ⟩ ↑ and |V ⟩ ↓ , respectively. The quantum dot has four eigenstates: The corresponding energies are given by On the other hand, for the case where ε D < h D , we have E ↑+ > 0 and E ↑-> 0. In this scenario, the ground state is simply equal to the EVS Next, we consider another Nambu OBS (γ respectively. Similar to before, we find the lowest energy state among these four states to determine the ground state. This time, we add all the negative singleparticle energies of the Nambu OBS (γ ↓+ , γ ↓-) into the EVS |V ⟩ ↓ , as plotted in Fig. . Though the EVSs of the two Nambu OBSs (γ ↑+ , γ ↑-) and (γ ↓+ , γ ↓-) differ in terms of energy (E ↑ ̸ = E ↓ ) and wave function (|V ⟩ ↑ ̸ = |V ⟩ ↓ ), it is possible to have the same ground state |G⟩ and three excitation states. The ground state |G⟩ is obtained by populating all negative single-particle states of the chosen OBS within the corresponding EVS. It's important to note that the same quantum dot eigenstate can be represented differently using different OBS and EVS. For instance, This highlights that a single physical state can be described using distinct representations based on the chosen OBS and EVS. Furthermore, the fermionic parity of the EVSs |V ⟩ s is odd, while the fermionic parity of the ground state becomes even when h D < ε D [referring to Figs. PROPERTY I): Then, we try to find the relation between these two EVSs. When h D = 0, the ground state can be expressed as This implies that the EVSs |V ⟩ ↑ and |V ⟩ ↓ form a conjugate loop, as shown in Fig. In other words, the EVS |V ⟩ s is filled from another EVS |V ⟩ -s due to the conjugate relation (C2). PROPERTY II): By comparing EVSs (C6) and (C7) with EVSs (C12) and (C13), we can easily prove that This implies that when a basis state is exchanged, the fermionic parity of the EVSs changes. In this subsection, we use our logic in normal metal. The normal metal behaves as many quantum dots, which is described by the Hamiltonian Next, we work in Nambu space, which doubles the Hilbert space, and we obtain the BdG Hamiltonian in overcomplete basis set with E = k ε k . Additional index η = +/-labels the high/low energy levels of each spin species. The quasiparticle energy spectrum is given by E ksη = sh L + η|ε k | and the corresponding operators read with The quasiparticle operators satisfy a conjugate relation Each spinful quasiparticle always has its conjugate alternative with opposite spin and energy. Thus, we can have 4 N combinations of complete and orthogonal quaiparticle bases where N describes the size of the normal metal (or number of the kinetic momentum). In principle, we can choose any OBS, for instance spin-momentum OBSs (γ k↑η , γ k↓η ) for all k as well as Nambu-momentum OBSs (γ ks+ , γ ks-) for all k. We will see details in the following subsections. ks E ks+ are the energy constants generated when we rewrite the origin quantum dot Hamiltonian (C15) into the Hamiltonian (C22) with the spin-momentum OBSs (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) and (γ k↑-, γ k↓-), respectively. STEP II): The EVSs for η = ± quasiparticles, defined by γ ksη |V ⟩ η = 0 for all momentum k and spins s =↑ / ↓, respectively, are given by Thus, E L + and E L -is the energy of the EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ -, respectively. STEP III): Let us calculate the ground state in term of the spin-momentum OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ). The normal metal has and so on, up to C(2N, 2N ) 2N -quasiparticles states ( ks γ † ks+ )|V ⟩ + . The corresponding energies of these eigenstates are , and so on, up to E L + + ks E ks+ , respectively, where k i , s i are required to satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle for many quasiparticles. The ground state is the lowest energy state among these 4 N states. In this case, the ground state is the Fermi sea, which corresponds to filling all the negativeenergy quasiparticles in the OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) starting from the EVS |V ⟩ + . Similarly, for the OBS (γ k↑-, γ k↓-), the ground state is given by filling all the negative-energy quasiparticles in the OBS (γ k↑-, γ k↓-) starting from the EVS |V ⟩ -. Therefore, we obtain the ground state The EVS |V ⟩ + is a filled sea of negative quasiparticle states for the whole Brillouin zone with respect to their EVS |V ⟩ -, rather than the vacuum of electrons |0⟩. By substitution of Eqs. (C17) and (C18), we can quickly check Notable, the wrong usage of the EVS will generate meaningless system state. b. Nambu-momentum OBSs STEP I): Then, we study the Nambu-momentum OBSs (γ ks+ , γ ks-) for the whole Brillouin zone, which satisfy 2 kη E k↑η are the energy constants generated when we rewrite the origin quantum dot Hamiltonian (C15) into the Hamiltonian (C28) with the chosen OBSs (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) and (γ k↓+ , γ k↓-), respectively. STEP II): The EVSs for s =↑ / ↓ quasiparticles, defined by γ ksη |V ⟩ s = 0 for all momentum k and Nambu η, respectively, are given by Thus, E L ↑ and E L ↓ is the energy of the EVSs |V ⟩ ↑ and |V ⟩ ↓ , respectively. The EVS |V ⟩ ↑ (|V ⟩ ↓ ) contains all spin down (up) electrons. STEP III): Let us express the ground state using the Nambu-momentum OBSs -(γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) for all k. Note that there are 4 N eigenstates: and so on, up to E L ↑ + kη E k↑η , respectively. Here, k i , η i are required to satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle for many quasiparticles. The ground state is the state with the lowest energy among these 4 N eigenstates. It corresponds to filling all negative-energy quasiparticles of the Nambu-momentum OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) into the EVS |V ⟩ ↑ . The same applies to the Nambumomentum OBS (γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for all k, using the EVS (C30). Therefore, we reach When we work in the Nambu-momentum OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-), this product removes spin-down electrons with ε k > h L (γ † k↑-= c † -k↓ ) and adds spin-up electrons with energy in the interval ε k < -h L (γ † k↑-= c † k↑ ) [Fig. PROPERTY I): Then, we try to find the relation of two EVSs (C29) and (C30). For h D = 0, the ground state can be expressed in terms of two combinations of the basis states Thus, for each spin, the EVS |V ⟩ s contains all remaining quasiparticles dual to the chosen OBSs (γ ks+ , γ ks-) for all k. Let us generalize our new logic to the superconductor case. The BdG Hamiltonian, expressed in terms of an overcomplete basis set (γ k↑+ , γ k↓-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for all k, is given by with E = k ε k . Electrons (c † ks ) interact with holes (-sc -k-s ) to generate Bogoliubov quasiparticles with energy levels E ksη = sh L + η ∆ 2 + ε 2 k , as well as field operators where the Bogoliubov coefficients are given by u k = We here also show the Bogoliubov transformation It is important to note that the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators are not independent and satisfy a conjugate relation Each spinful Bogoliubov quasiparticle always has its conjugate alternative with opposite spin and energy. Therefore, we can have 4 N combinations of complete and orthogonal quasiparticle bases, where N describes the size of the normal metal or the number of kinetic momenta. In principle, we can choose any OBSs, such as spin-momentum OBSs (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) and (γ k↑-, γ k↓-), or Nambu-momentum OBSs (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) and (γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the entire Brillouin zone. Furthermore, by choosing the OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↓-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the half Brillouin zone, the semiconductor analogy of the superconductor produces dramatic features in various spectroscopies of the superconducting condensate a. Spin-momentum OBSs STEP I): Let us first study the two spin-momentum OBSs conjugate with each other (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) and (γ k↑-, γ k↓-) for k in the whole Brillouin zone, whose elements satisfy the anticommutation relation {γ ksη , γ k ′ s ′ η } = δ k,k ′ δ s,s ′ . We can derive the corresponding Hamiltonian from the BdG Hamiltonian (C33) by transforming the other quasiparticles into the chosen OBSs using the conjugate relation (C38) The energy constants E L + and E L -arise from the mathematical transformation of the BdG Hamiltonian (C33) into the Hamiltonian (C39) using the OBSs (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) and (γ k↑-, γ k↓-) Solving these equations, we obtain the corresponding EVSs + + E k1s1+ + E k2s2+ , and so on, up to E L + + ks E ks+ , respectively, where k i , s i are required to satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle for many Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The ground state is the state with the lowest energy among these 4 N states. In this case, the ground state is the Fermi sea, which corresponds to filling all the negative-energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↓+ ) starting from the EVS |V ⟩ + . Similarly, for the OBS (γ k↑-, γ k↓-), the ground state is given by filling all the negative-energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the OBS (γ k↑-, γ k↓-) starting from the EVS |V ⟩ -. Therefore, the superconducting ground state can be written as with energy When h L < ∆, we have E ks+ > 0 and E ks-< 0. In this case, the ground state can be written as the EVS |V ⟩ + with energy ks E ks-. PROPERTY I): The relation between the EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ -can be derived as follows. For h L = 0, the ground state can be expressed in terms of two spin-momentum OBSs as Again, the EVSs |V ⟩ + and |V ⟩ - form a conjugate loop where η = -of Eq. (C48) is derived from the η = + of Eq. (C48) via the conjugate relation (C38). b. Nambu-momentum OBSs STEP I): Then, we study the Nambu-momentum OBSs conjugate with each other, denoted as (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) and (γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the entire Brillouin zone, whose elements anticommutate with each other, i.e., {γ ksη , γ k ′ sη ′ } = δ k,k ′ δ η,η ′ . The corresponding Hamiltonian can be derived from the BdG Hamiltonian (C33) by transforming the remaining quasiparticles into the chosen Nambu-momentum OBSs using the conjugate relation (C38) where E L ↑ and E L ↓ are energy constants resulting from the mathematical transformation of the BdG Hamiltonian (C33) into the form (C49) using the Nambu-momentum operators (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) and (γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) We can then obtain the corresponding EVSs The EVS |V ⟩ ↑ (|V ⟩ ↓ ) contains all spin down (up) electrons. STEP III): Let us express the superconducting ground state using the Nambu-momentum OBSs -(γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) for all k. In a superconducting system, there are , and so on, up to E L ↑ + kη E k↑η , respectively. Here, k i , η i are required to satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle for many Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The ground state is the state with the lowest energy among these 4 N eigenstates. It corresponds to filling all negative-energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles of the Nambu-momentum OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-) into the EVS |V ⟩ ↑ . The same applies to the Nambu-momentum OBS (γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for all k, using the EVS (C55). Thus, the superconducting ground state is given by with energy When h L < ∆, we have E ks+ > 0 and E ks-< 0. By substituting Eqs. (C54) and (C55), the ground state (C56) can be written as , which is equivalent to Eq. (C46) after substituting the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operator (??). PROPERTY I): To establish the relation between EVSs (C54) and (C55), we consider the case when h L = 0. In this scenario, the ground state can be expressed in terms of the Nambu-momentum OBSs |G⟩ = Using the conjugate relation (C38), we find that the eigenstates |V ⟩ ↑ and |V ⟩ ↓ also form a conjugate loop: Here, the EVS |V ⟩ s contains all the Bogoliubov quasiparticles with energies E k-sη . c. Semiconductor analogy STEP I): Next, the semiconductor analogy is revisited, considering a complete basis consisting of two spins and two Nambu operators for the half Brillouin zone. Hereafter, we study two semiconductor-analogy OBSs conjugate with each other, i.e., k x > 0 OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the k x > 0 half Brillouin zone and k x < 0 OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the k x < 0 half Brillouin zone. These quasiparticle operators satisfy the anticommutation relation {γ ksη , γ k ′ s ′ η ′ } = δ k,k ′ δ η,η ′ δ s,s ′ when k is forced to be half Brillouin zone. The corresponding Hamiltonian can be derived from the BdG Hamiltonian (C33) by transforming the remaining quasiparticles into the chosen OBSs using the conjugate relation (C38). The Hamiltonian is given by where the energy constants E L > and E L < arise from the mathematical transformation of the BdG Hamiltonian (C33) into the Hamiltonian (C59) using the chosen OBSs. The specific expressions for E L > and E L < are given as STEP II): The EVSs of the two semiconductor-analogy OBSs, i.e., k x > 0 OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the k x > 0 half Brillouin zone and k x > 0 OBS(γ k↑+ , γ k↑-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the k x < 0 half Brillouin zone, are, respectively, defined by γ ksη |V ⟩ < = 0 for k x < 0 and all s, η. Then, we obtain the corresponding EVSs The EVS |V ⟩ > (|V ⟩ < ) contains all k x < 0 (k x > 0) electrons. STEP III): Let us first work on the semiconductoranalogy OBS (γ k↑+ , γ k↑-, γ k↓+ , γ k↓-) for k in the k x > 0 half Brillouin zone. The system has a total of 4 N eigenstates. These eigenstates in- with energy When h L < ∆, we have E ks+ > 0 and E ks-< 0. By substituting the EVSs (C64) and (C65), the ground state (C66) can be represented as , which is the same as Eq. (C46) after the substitution of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators (C34) and (C35). PROPERTY I): Then, we try to find the relation between EVSs (C64) and (C65). For h L < ∆, the ground state can be expressed in terms of two semiconductor-analogy OBSs By means of the conjugate relation (C38), we find EVSs |V ⟩ > and |V ⟩ < also form a conjugate loop Appendix D: Derivation of effective vacuum states In this section, we derive the EVSs (or Fermi sea and sky), the Eq. ( For briefness, we combine l (n) and s as a (b). Then, the quasiparticles [Eq. with Here, we assume the following ansatz for the Fermi sea and sky It can be rewritten into where N η is the renormalization coefficients to be given latter. We define the Bogoliubov vacuum states as i.e., with Then, we reach So far we have shown that Eq. (D13) solves Eq. (D9) for n = 0. Next we show by mathematical induction that Eq. (D13) solves Eq. (D9) also for all n > 0. Then, we derive the (n + 1)th term from the nth term of Eq. (D9). First, we derive a useful relation where we have used Eq. (D11). By means of Eq. (D16), the (n + 1)th term of the right-hand side of Eq. (D9) can be divided into two parts By substitution of Eq. (D9), Eq. (D17) becomes which is the (n + 1)th term of the left-hand side of Eq. (D9). Therefore, the superconducting cloud matrix (D13) is our solution for EVSs. In the presence of spin-flip, Eq. (D13) becomes Though C η can be non-Hermitian, we can still diagonalize it by singular value decomposition where U η and V η are unitary matrix and A η is diagonal matrix with non-negative real Bogoliubov coefficients A η ll . Note that Bogoliubov coefficients are double degenerate, which is donated by σ subscript ) for all k and σ is an overcomplete basis set and satisfy with Thus, the EVS has Cooper-like pair form with where we have used the identities Hereafter, we consider a simple case without spin-flip, and hence spin becomes a good quantum number and Eqs. (D2) and (D3) reduce to u η = (u η ) ⇑↑ 0 0 (u η ) ⇓↓ , (D35) Then, Eq. (D13) becomes Notably, the cloud matrix (D37) is off-diagonal in spin space. Thus, the Cooper-like pair consists of two superconducting clouds with different spins. By substitution of Eq. (D37), Eq. (D15) becomes with Here, we specialize the spin subscript of field operators c † ks for better description of the Cooper-like pair. Then, we obtain Alternatively, the Fermi sea and sky can be rewritten into a compact form Though Cη can be non-Hermitian, we can still diagonalize it by singular value decomposition where U sη is unitary matrix and A η is diagonal matrix with non-negative real Bogoliubov coefficients A η nn . Thus, EVS (D42) has Cooper-like pair form with The complete and orthogonal superconducting spin cloud operators are given by The superconducting spin cloud operators (D46) and (D47) show how the electrons in the nonuniform superconductor pair with each other. The superconducting spin cloud picture of the ground state describes the quantum entanglement of the hybrid system. This is a widely entangled system as shown by the superconducting cloud matrix (D40), which might be interesting for future quantum computation. In this subsection, we derive the tunneling current between tip and quantum-dot Josephson junction from a microscopic perspective, i.e., Eq. ( The tip electrons are described by the non-interacting Hamiltonian where c ps is the field operator of electron in the tip with momentum p, spin s, and energy E p . The electron tunneling Hamiltonian between the quantum dot and the tip can be expressed as follows For tip electrons, we have κ i = α i = (p i , s i ), corresponding to fκi = f αi = c p i ,si . For the quantum-dot Josephson junction, we have κ i = λ i = (l i , s i , η i ), corresponding to fκi = f λi = γ li,si,ηi . As shown in Eq. (E12), we are only interested in the time evolution of the diagonal and tip components of the one-body density matrix, i.e., ρ αα (t) = ρ α (t), given by By means of Eq. (E15), the tunneling current is given by In the presence of the applied voltage, V , we assume . Finally, we obtain the tunneling current as follows (E38) This is the tunneling current between tip and quantumdot Josephson junction from a microscopic perspective, given by Eq. ( ep = lps t d (u * + ) ss l1 c † ps γ ls+ + t d s(v + ) -s-s l1 c † ps γ ls-+ h.c. ,