Alkaline water electrolysis is considered a commercially viable option for large-scale hydrogen production. However, this process still faces challenges due to the high voltage (>1.65 V at 10 mA cm -2 ) and its limited stability at higher current densities due to the inefficient electron transport kinetics. Herein, a novel cobalt based metallic heterostructure (Co3Mo3N/Co4N/Co) is designed for application for water electrolysis. Operando Raman experiments reveal that the formation of Co3Mo3N/Co4N heterointerface boosts the free water adsorption and dissociation, resulting in a surplus of protons available for subsequent hydrogen production. Furthermore, the altered electronic structure of Co3Mo3N/Co4N heterointerface optimizes the ΔGH of nitrogen atoms at the interface. This synergistic effect between interfacial nitrogen atoms and metal phase cobalt creates highly efficient hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) active sites, thereby enhancing the overall performance. Additionally, the heterostructure exhibits a rapid OH -adsorption rate, coupled with a strong adsorption strength, leading to improved oxygen evolution reaction (OER) performance. Crucially, the metallic heterojunction facilitates fast electron transport, expediting the aforementioned reaction steps and ultimately improving the overall efficiency of water splitting. The water electrolyzer with Co3Mo3N/Co4N/Co as a catalyst exhibits outstanding performance, requiring an impressively low cell voltage of 1.58 V at 10 mA cm -2 and maintaining approximately 100% retention over a remarkable 100 h duration at 200 mA cm -2 . This performance significantly exceeds that of the commercial Pt/C || RuO2 electrolyzer. Water electrolysis is a promising technology to address the global energy crisis by providing a green and scalable strategy to convert renewable electricity into hydrogen fuel. Compared with acidic electrolyzers, alkaline electrolyzers are more popular in the industry due to their cheaper ion exchange membranes and faster oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetics In general, an ideal bifunctional non-noble metal alkaline electrocatalyst should satisfy the following conditions: 1) sufficient number of active sites for fast adsorption for H2O/OH -, and the active sites have a strong H2O dissociation ability; 2) the adsorption of H at the active sites is neither too strong nor too weak, i.e. the Gibbs free energy for Had (ΔGH) is close to zero Nevertheless, the Co atoms in Co4N have a strong adsorption of H and requires high energy to dissociate water, resulting in poor HER activity. Introducing metallic Co as HER sites is an effective method to optimal ΔGH because Co has a more suitable ability to adsorb and desorb hydrogen The incorporation of molybdenum atoms into Co4N can result in the formation of an alternative metal phase known as Co3Mo3N. The synthesis of the metallic Co3Mo3N/Co4N/Co heterostructure involves two principal stages, the ion exchange of molybdate ions (MoO4 2-) with the Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework-L (ZIF-L) and the pyrolytic process of the precursor (as shown in Figure However, the peaks at 44°, 52° and 76° are slightly shifted compared to Co4N and are between the main peaks of cubic cobalt and Co4N, indicating that Co4N and Co can be present at the same time. For Co3Mo3N/Co4N/Co, except for the graphitic carbon, Co, and Co4N phases, all of the characteristic peaks are well compatible with the FCC Co3Mo3N phase with the space group Fd3 m (PDF#89-7953). The composition of the synthesized samples was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In Figure In addition, the high-resolution C 1s spectrum exhibited three peaks at 284.30, 284.95, and 286.05 eV, demonstrating the presence of alternating C=C and C-C commensurate to graphene, C-O, and C=O, respectively. To further clarify the change of charges between Co3Mo3N and Co4N in the heterostructure, ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were performed. As shown in Figure The HER and OER performances of the various catalysts were evaluated in 1 M KOH with a standard three-electrode system. As shown in Figure To gain deeper insight into the HER and OER mechanisms, operando Raman spectroscopy was utilized at different potentials. During the HER process, the in situ electrochemistry-Raman (EC-Raman) measurements were performed at the reduction potential to achieve surface structure information of Co3Mo3N/Co4N/Co-750 and Co4N/Co. It is reported that the protons of the alkaline HER originate from the water dissociation process. water. Further analysis of the improved OER performance was done using in situ EC-Raman spectroscopy. The nitrides of the transition metals tend to form a thin layer of the corresponding (hydro)oxides at anodic currents when they get in contact with strong alkaline solutions, which means these new species are likely to play a vital role in the OER. After the OER test, the CoOOH peak in both samples still existed, indicating the formation of an active phase on the catalyst surface (Figure In order to gain more information on the OER kinetics at the electrocatalyst surface, in operando Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was performed. The equivalent circuit diagram of the two processes, i.e., the electrooxidation process (high frequency 10 5 -10 1 Hz) and the OER process (low frequency 10 1 -10 -1 Hz), is given in expected to favor of overall catalytic driving force. Moreover, the adsorbed *OH on the electrocatalysts was evaluated based on the Laviron equation. 