With the rapid development of Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S, Se)4 solar cells in the past few years, how to achieve higher cost-performance ratio has become an important topic in the future development and industrialization of this technology. Herein, we demonstrate an all-solution route for the cell fabrication, in particular targeting at the solution processed window layer comprised of ZnO nanoparticles/Ag nanowires. A multi-interface engineering strategy assisted by organic polymers and molecules is explored to synergistically improve the film deposition, passivate the surface defects and facilitate the charge transfer. These efforts help us achieve high-performance and robust Kesterite solar cells at extremely low time and energy costs, with efficiency records of 14.37% and 13.12% being realized in rigid and flexible Kesterite solar cells, respectively. Our strategy here is also promising to be transplanted into other solar cells with similar geometric and energy band structures, helping reduce production costs and shorten the production cycle (i.e. increasing production capacity) of these photovoltaic industries. Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S, Se)4 (CZTSSe) thin-film solar cells have garnered widespread attention due to their advantages such as abundant elemental reserves, environmental friendliness, and high stability. end, people have developed a variety of transparent conductive window layer materials suitable for solution preparation, such as conductive polymers (1) AgNWs are easily corroded, forming a high density of defect states, increasing the recombination of photogenerated carriers; The device structure of the Kesterite solar cell in our study is shown in Figures In order to overcome the interfacial issues of these solution-processed functional layers, interfaces in the cell were further studied and regulated. Specifically, a thin PAA layer was introduced at the CdS/ZnO-nps interface to gain a better heterogeneous coverage; AMPA molecules were utilized at the ZnO-nps/AgNWs interface to passivate the of ZnO-nps surface defects and moreover facilitate the charge transfer. With these efforts, we have realized higher photoelectric conversion performance in the all-solution processed solar cells compared to that realized by the conventional technology (Figure To address this issue, we introduced a PAA interfacial layer. The PAA is a kind of polymer binder, having rich carboxyl groups which usually have strong interactions with metal oxide nanoparticles. These effects finally helped the undulating CZTSSe/CdS surface uniformly be covered with ZnO-nps, as shown in Figure Energy band matching is also a critical requirement for the fabrication of high-efficient solar cell. Through band-edge position measurements (Figure We further used these all-solution technologies to fabricate flexible Kesterite solar cells on molybdenum foil substrate. As shown in Figure These results demonstrate that through the all-solution approach, we can create high-efficiency and robust Kesterite solar cells at extremely low time and energy costs. Due to the similarity in geometric and energy band structure between CZTSSe and Cu(In, Ga)Se (CIGS) solar cells, our strategy reported here should also be able to directly transplant into the preparation of CIGS solar cells, which can effectively reduce equipment investment and production costs in the CIGS industry and additionally help to shorten the production cycle to increase production capacity. In this study, we are committed to developing cost-effective all-solution window layer technology to achieve high performance Kesterite solar cells. Specifically, we have developed a ZnO-nps/AgNWs composite layer that realized comparable light transmission and charge conducting performance to that of the sputtered window layer. To address the issues associated with the film conformal deposition, surface defect and interfacial energy level mismatch of this all-solution window layer, we have introduced multi-interface engineering taking advantages of polymer binders and functional molecules. The polymer, PAA, modified the surface energy of the CdS layer and enhanced its interactions with the ZnO-nps, thereby realizing the conformal deposition of ZnO-nps layer. The functional molecule, AMPA, can react with the hydroxyl group in the ZnO-nps, forming a dipole, which on one hand can field-effect passivate the surface defects of ZnO-nps and on the other hand can improve the energy level alignment at the ZnO-nps/Ag NWs interface. These collective benefits of the multi-interface engineering have helped us to achieve 14.3% and 13.12% efficiency in the all-solution processed rigid and flexible Kesterite solar cells, respectively. this work not only provides an efficient and low-cost technical route for the future commercialization of CZTSSe solar cells, but also offering important implications for the solution preparation of window layers for other optoelectronic devices.