In this article, we present an interpolative separable density fitting (ISDF) based algorithm to calculate exact exchange in periodic mean field calculations. In the past, decomposing the twoelectron integrals into tensor hypercontraction (THC) form using ISDF was the most expensive step of the entire mean field calculation. Here we show that by using a multigrid-ISDF algorithm both the memory and the CPU cost of this step can be reduced. The CPU cost is brought down from cubic scaling to quadratic scaling with a low computational prefactor which reduces the cost by almost two orders of magnitude. Thus, in the new algorithm, the cost of performing ISDF is largely negligible compared to other steps. Along with the CPU cost, the memory cost of storing the factorized two-electron integrals is also reduced by a factor of up to 35. With the current algorithm, we can perform Hartree-Fock calculations on a Diamond supercell containing more than 17,000 basis functions and more than 1,500 electrons on a single node with no disk usage. For this calculation, the cost of constructing the exchange matrix is only a factor of four slower than the cost of diagonalizing the Fock matrix. Augmenting our approach with linear scaling algorithms can further speed up the calculations. Much of modern ab initio computational chemistry and materials science is based on Kohn-Sham (KS) density functional theory (DFT) 1 . The inclusion of exact Hartree-Fock (HF) exchange within this framework 2 has been instrumental to the success of DFT for molecular systems to the point that almost all modern molecular calculations rely on these "hybrid" density functionals 3 . Hybrid functionals can outperform their semi-local counterparts for some properties of periodic solids 4-9 , but, in contrast to molecular calculations, the cost of evaluating the non-local exchange contribution may be prohibitive. Methods for the efficient evaluation of exact exchange are well-developed in the context of molecular calculations. Such calculations typically use a relatively small set of small, local basis functions such that the ratio of basis functions to electrons, N/n, is often less than ten. Computing every element of the fourth-order tensor of electron repulsion integrals, which one might naively expect to be necessary for both the Coulomb and exchange contributions, would scale like O(N 4 ). However, the locality of the basis functions implies that there are asymptotically only a linear number of significant basis function pairs, which means that the Coulomb and exchange contributions can be computed in O(N 2 ) time 10 . The scaling of the Coulomb contribution can be reduced to linearithmic, O(N ln N ), using the multipole expansion and fast multipole method used in various algorithms for exact exchange On the other hand, calculations on periodic solids often use a large basis set of N g plane waves. In these calculations, the action of the Coulomb operator on just the occupied space is determined by solving n Poisson equations, which leads to quadratic scaling, O(nN g ln N g ), or linear scaling when using translational (k-point) symmetry. Unfortunately, the action of the exchange operator on the occupied space is cubic, O(n 2 N g ln N g ), or quadratic with k-point symmetry. So, in a plane-wave basis set, the exchange contribution is higher scaling than the Coulomb part, and there have been many efforts to reduce this cost. Linear scaling methods have been developed for both the Coulomb and exchange Since its introduction by Lu and Ying in 2015, In this work, we perform the interpolative decomposition on the atomic integrals, which is only done once, and simultaneously reduce the computational and memory cost of performing this step using ideas from so-called "multigrid" approaches In the rest of the paper, we will focus on periodic calculations with Gaussian basis functions in the presence of Pseudopotentials, although the ideas can be extended to mixed Gaussian/plane-wave basis and all-electron calculations. We will begin the paper by recalling how the interpolative decomposition is typically performed to obtain integrals in the THC form. This will be followed by our updated algorithm that shows how the memory and CPU cost of performing this step can be significantly reduced. We end the paper with some results and prospects for future work. Instead of calculating the entire four-index quantity one can decompose it into a product of several two-index quantities. We begin by noting that the product of the orbitals μ(R)ν(R) = (μν|R) can be viewed as a matrix with two indices, the first index being a composite index consisting of a pair of orbitals, μν, and the second being a set of suitably chosen grid points with a sufficiently high density, R. This matrix (μν|R) is low-rank and can be decomposed as, where the size of the index ξ is smaller than both the square of the number of basis functions (N ) and the number of grid points (N g ). An optimal decomposition that minimizes the Frobenius norm of the error is given by SVD. However, with SVD we lose the separability of the original matrix (note that while (μν|R One can instead perform interpolative decomposition that ensures that the indices ξ in the matrix (μν|ξ) are just a subset of grid points R. The disadvantage of interpolative decomposition is that one does not have an optimal algorithm to find it and the Frobeius norm of the error is guaranteed to be greater than that from SVD, but the separability of the resulting matrix is retained, i.e. (μν|ξ) = μ(ξ)ν(ξ), which more than makes up for the shortcomings. After having performed the interpolative decomposition of the orbital products one can then write the two-electron integrals as, where the matrix (ξ|ξ ′ ) can be evaluated numerically as, using fast Fourier transform (FFT). Typically, THC requires more fitting functions ξ(r) than RI-while the error in the two-electron integrals is quadratic in the RI fitting error, it is linear in the THC error. One can use robust tensor hypercontraction, also known as the robust pseudospectral (rPS) method, to make the error from two-electron integrals quadratic in the fitting errors (similar to RI) and use fewer functions, as in RI. rPS is known to produce non-positive definite two-electron integrals that can cause variational collapse of the SCF cycles As mentioned in the previous section, one needs to perform an interpolative decomposition of the two-electron integrals. The most common way of doing this is to perform pivoted-QR decomposition of the (μν|R) matrix. A simple algorithm would lead to a computational cost of O(N 4 ), making the entire algorithm prohibitively expensive. Lu and Ying 36 in their original paper introduced a randomized algorithm where one first obtains two random matrices G 1 and G 2 of size N × p each, with p = N ξ + δ orthogonal columns, where N ξ is the number of THC functions and δ is a small number usually around 5 One can then perform a pivoted-QR decomposition on the matrix ρ mn,R to obtain the pivots. The pivots from the randomized matrix will be of similar quality to those obtained from the full matrix (μν|R) as long as its singular values decay sufficiently quickly, as they do here. The overall cost of the randomized algorithm is O(N 3 ) which is a significant improvement over the deterministic algorithm. Matthew suggested and then perform a pivoted-Cholesky decomposition on it to obtain the pivots ξ. The methods give the same pivot points (when randomization is not introduced), and pivoted Cholesky is typically significantly faster than pivoted QR. This algorithm is extremely efficient especially if the matrix M can be stored in memory. Later we will show that for our purposes these matrices are indeed small enough to be stored in memory. It is also worth mentioning that a third approach called centroid-Voronoi-tesselation (CVT) is also widely used in this context Having obtained the pivot points ξ, a least square algorithm obtains the functions ξ(R) that minimize the error, min This can be done with an As mentioned in the introduction, this algorithm has a rather steep memory requirement because one has to store the fitting functions ξ(R) at the cost of N g × N ξ . The value of N g can become significant even if there is a single sharp function in the basis set. There are a few ways of overcoming the high cost of ISDF calculation: 1. In a previous publication, 2. The cost of doing ISDF can be eliminated by not doing ISDF but instead by solely relying on FFT and using the occ-RI (occ refers to occupied orbitals) trick of Manzer et al. where we have assumed that the orbitals are real. If all the orbitals are representable on an FFT grid of size N g then this entire matrix can be evaluated by performing n 2 Poisson solves, and matrix multiplications with the cost equal to O(n 2 N g ln(N g )) and O(nN N g ), respectively. Out of the two steps, we find that the cost of Poisson solves O(n 2 N g ln(N g )) dominates. Because the ISDF calculation is not used, the memory requirement for storing the fitting functions ξ(R) (N g × N ξ ) is eliminated. 3. Instead of performing ISDF on the products of atomic orbitals once at the start of the calculation, one can perform a new ISDF calculation on the product of molecular orbitals at each SCF iteration. The two dominant costs of this algorithm are the same as that of AO-based ISDF-O(N 2 ξ N g ) for matrix multiplications and O(N ξ N g ln(N g )) for N ξ Poisson solves. The potential advantage is that the N ξ required is independent of the basis set, it only depends on the number of electrons, and it is expected to be smaller than the N ξ from ISDF on atomic orbital pairs. The disadvantage is that one has to perform an ISDF at each SCF iteration and ISDF remains the dominant cost of the calculation. This approach, of performing ISDF on the molecular orbitals, was first pointed out by Hu et al. For Γ-point calculations we expect the CPU cost of the FFT-based approach and rPS to be lower than that of the MO-based ISDF calculations. The memory cost of the FFT-based approach is superior to the other two because one does not have to store the ISDF fitting functions. In this work, we introduce a third approach that relies on the use of multiple grids of varying resolutions. Our algorithm uses both a single-shot ISDF by using pivoted Cholesky on atomic orbitals and an iterative FFT-based Poisson solution at each SCF cycle. The ISDF is only performed for products of atomic orbitals where at least one of the orbitals is sharp and the FFT is only used to solve the Poisson equation for products where both orbitals are diffuse, as described in more detail below. In this section we describe the basic idea of our multigrid algorithm for calculating exchange and go into more technical details in the next section. We begin with an uncontracted Gaussian-type orbital (GTO) basis and partition it into two sets. The first set contains sharp Gaussian basis functions with large exponents and the second set contains diffuse basis functions with small exponents. The product of sharp-sharp and sharp-diffuse atomic orbitals are approximated using ISDF on a grid centered around the atom on which the sharp function is centered (see Figure 1. We only need to perform ISDF calculations once, before the SCF iterations, instead of at each SCF iteration. We perform n atom (the number of atoms) independent local ISDF calculations and each calculation is cheap. The cost of each local ISDF calculation scales linearly with the size of the system. After the ISDF fitting functions are obtained one has to construct the two-center Coulomb matrix (ξ|ξ ′ ) which scales quadratically with the size of the system, making the entire ISDF calculation quadratic in system size. In this algorithm, we do not need to use the randomized algorithm and the overall cost of ISDF is negligible. 2. The memory cost of our algorithm is largely independent of the size of the basis set and the overall memory requirement is quite low. This is because all of the diffuse-diffuse products, which represent the largest fraction of the non-negligible basis set pairs, are treated using an FFT grid that is independent of the basis set size. A key point is that the number of grid points needed to represent diffuse functions can be fairly small and thus the Poisson solves are cheap. Furthermore, for these pairs of basis functions, we do not store ISDF functions. Because we use multiple grids of different resolutions, we have called our method "multigrid" inspired by the approach of the same name used to speed up the Coulomb matrix formation In the next section, we describe in more detail how the various grids are formed and how the entire exchange matrix is calculated. To illustrate the algorithm let us imagine we have an atom, A, with uncontracted GTOs with exponents α 1 , α 2 , • • • in decreasing order of magnitude. A user-defined value, α min , divides the GTOs into sharp functions that have exponents larger than α min and diffuse functions with exponents smaller than α min . Although the sharp functions require a high-resolution grid, the spatial extent of this grid is relatively small because the function decays rapidly in real space. The real space and Fourier space representation of an s-type function of exponent α are exp(-αr 2 ) and exp(-G 2 /(4α)) up to a multiplicative factor. If we want to represent the functions in real space up to an accuracy of ε r then we have a local atom-centered grid of radius, A sparse universal grid (U ) spans the full supercell and supports all global GTOs (G) but is only required by exponents smaller than αmin. where ε K is a threshold that one can decrease continuously to increase the overall accuracy of the calculation. For all systems considered in this article, we have found that using ε r = 10 -5 gives an overall error that will be below 50 μ Ha per atom. The optimal value of α min from a computational cost point of view can be system-dependent. There is a trade-off between the cost of the exchange evaluation and the memory requirement for storing the functions on the dense grid. A higher α min speeds up the ISDF calculation because fewer functions are considered sharp but it also increases the memory cost for storing μ(R U ) because the universal grid U requires more points. We have found that an α min value of 2.8 Bohr -2 is a reasonable choice for the systems studied here. Now one performs a local interpolative decomposition on each atom-centered grid A such that the equality, is satisfied up to sufficient accuracy, determined by an ISDF threshold ε ISDF . In the equation, the subscripts indicate the grid centered on atom A and the superscript L stands for local, indicating all sharp functions that are atom-A centered. ν G A are all functions (superscript G stands for global) that have a non-zero value on the grid around atom A, these include both the sharp and diffuse functions on atom A and also functions on other atoms. ξ A are ISDF fitting points (functions) on the grid around A. At this point, it is also useful to define the set of functions μ N A that are present in the global list (G) but are not in the set (L), i.e. functions that have a non-zero value on at least one of the grid points R A of local grid centered on A but are not one of the sharp functions centered on atom A. For the dense atom-centered grids, the ISDF fitting is done using pivoted Cholesky without randomization because, unlike on a full grid, it is inexpensive to build the product density matrix M (R A , R ′ A ) (Eq. 2) on local grids. After selecting the points using pivoted Cholesky we use a least square minimization (Eq. 3) to obtain the fitting functions ξ A (R A ). These functions are fully supported on the local grids and are relatively inexpensive to store in memory. This local ISDF procedure is carried out for each local grid and the number of fitting functions chosen on each grid is controlled by the user-specified tolerance ε ISDF . The cost of performing the local ISDF calculation for each atom-centered grid is system size-independent. Once the fitting functions are formed we calculate the two-centered Coulomb integral (ξ A |ξ B ) for all pairs of atomcentered ISDF functions and (ξ A |R U ), between ISDF functions on atom centered grids and each grid point on the Gaussians with exponents greater than αmin are sharp and others are diffuse εr Threshold that determines the extent of the local grid (see Equation TABLE II: The accuracy of the exchange calculation is determined by four different thresholds as outlined above. For all the calculations in the paper we fix εr to be 10 -5 and αmin is chosen to be 2.8 Bohr -2 . The parameters εK and εISDF are varied to obtain the desired accuracy. universal grid. The cost of constructing these matrices is equal to O(N ξ,L N g ln(N g )) + O(N 2 ξ,L ), where N ξ,L are the total number of ISDF functions from all atom-centered grids. The first term comes from having to perform an FFT for each local ISDF fitting function and the second term comes from evaluating the matrix (ξ A |ξ B ). Notice that because each ISDF function is local the cost of this matrix evaluation is only quadratic as opposed to cubic with fully non-local ISDF functions. Finally, the calculation of the matrix (ξ A |R U ) only requires the potential due to the fitting function on the universal grids and does not require any matrix multiplications. One can readily evaluate the entire matrix (R U |R ′ U ) using a single FFT, using the fact that this is a circulant matrix. In our algorithm, we avoid storing this matrix and use FFT to calculate the exchange matrix. The analysis here shows that the entire cost of the ISDF calculation is quadratic in the system size which is lower than the cubic cost of forming the exchange matrix. Therefore, the overhead of performing these ISDF calculations is negligible. Table A. Building the exchange matrix 2: Graphical representations of the matrices (μ|ξ) G , (μ|ξ) L , and (μ|ξ) N . The colors here follow from Figure In the multigrid approach, the expressions of the two-electron integrals have the THC form, however, there are now four terms, The various matrices with superscripts L, N , and G are described in Figure It is worth pointing out that one can potentially speed up the calculations by utilizing the block structure of the various matrices. However, in our current work, the entire code is implemented in Python and we find that implementing block multiplication by using for loops incurs an overhead that nullifies any benefit of reducing the computations. In a future publication, this can be remedied by implementing some of these matrix multiplications in an optimized C-code. The algorithm described above was implemented in Python, with a small portion that allows for the direct calculation of atomic orbitals in C. The one-electron integrals comprising the core Hamiltonian are calculated using a multigrid branch of PySCF. A. Accuracy of multigrid ISDF FIG. In multigrid ISDF there are two types of fitting functions, the first set is local and is supported on a dense grid (their number is denoted by N ξ,1 ). These functions are obtained through ISDF. The memory and CPU cost of using these functions increases quadratically with N ξ,1 . The second type of ISDF functions are Sinc functions uniformly placed throughout the unit cell (their number is denoted by N ξ,2 ). The memory and CPU cost of the calculation increases only linearly with the number of these functions. In Figure The number of uniform ISDF functions (N ξ,2 ) depends on two settings: the largest GTO exponent that is less than the threshold α min and the threshold ε K . These functions constitute the majority of the ISDF fitting functions and often far exceed the number of ISDF functions on the dense grid. N ξ,2 can vary with the system and basis set. For example, in the TZ basis set lithium hydride there are no exponents between 3.1 and 1.4 (see Table FIG. Next, we show that once the various thresholds are selected for a unit cell, the error per atom does not increase with the size of the system. Figure The N ξ /N in these calculations is larger than in conventional AO-based ISDF by almost a factor of two. It is worth remembering that the ISDF functions on the sparse grid most greatly contribute to N ξ /N . For these functions, we do not store or calculate the two-center Coulomb integrals and thus, the overall CPU and memory cost is significantly lower than AO-based ISDF as we show in the next subsection. Figure The memory requirement for the largest arrays is significantly reduced in the multigrid builds. For the multigrid method, the matrix (ξ|ξ ′ ) for the 2×2×2 diamond TZ data shown here is about 1 GB, and the orbital matrices (μ|ξ) require less than 1 GB. For the LiH data shown here, the total memory required by the MG method is less than 2 GB. For diamond, the THC method requires about 53 GB and rPS 28 GB. For 1 × 2 × 2 LiH supercell , THC and rPS require about 54 and 36 GB, respectively. Compared to the single grid methods, the MG method requires up to about 35 times less memory for the data here. The smaller system is used for LiH as the 2×2×2 supercell required more than 128 GB of memory when using the THC method. Next, we calculate the scaling of the various steps with increasing system size. Figure 1. The multigrid ISDF scales quadratically N 2 , which is due to the local nature of the fitting. For errors under 50 μHa, we used an ISDF threshold ε ISDF of 10 -4 for diamond and 10 -5 for lithium hydride which corresponds to N ξ /N of 9 to 84, depending on the system and basis used. The majority of these fitting functions are Sinc FIG. functions on the sparse grid. A large value of 84 is sometimes needed for smaller basis set such as DZ because the number of Sinc functions can be quite large relative to the size of the basis set. 2. The scaling of the exchange matrix is cubic with the system size. The cost of the calculation for the largest basis set is only about a factor of 4 more expensive than the cost of performing diagonalization. 3. The cost of Coulomb is nearly linear with the size of the system. There is some deviation from linearity because in these calculations we only use 2-4 Coulomb grids. By adding more grids, linear scaling is possible; doing so comes with additional CPU cost but no additional memory requirement. 4. The cost of the exchange is cheaper than the cost of Coulomb calculations for fairly large systems containing up to 3,000 basis functions in the case of diamond with the QZ basis set and for around 1,000 basis functions in the case of lithium hydride with the QZ basis set. 5. The largest calculation, in terms of the number of basis functions, was a 3 × 3 × 4 diamond supercell with the QZ basis set containing 17,856 basis functions and 1,152 electrons. Because we use tighter thresholds, both ε ISDF and ε k , for lithium hydride the largest calculation for it was a 3 × 3 × 3 supercell containing 431 electrons and 10,584 basis functions; this was also with the QZ basis. The number of electrons per unit cell are also smaller in LiH than in Diamond. In this paper, we have shown that efficient calculations of exchange matrices can be performed using our multigrid ISDF algorithm. The multigrid ISDF is significantly more efficient than the usual ISDF algorithm both in terms of memory and CPU cost. With this algorithm, relatively large calculations (containing > 17, 000 basis functions) can be performed without running out of memory on a single node. With this technique, the exchange calculation is more efficient than Coulomb calculations for systems with up to about 1,000 basis functions for TZ and QZ basis sets in diamond and lithium hydride systems. For large basis sets, such as QZ, the cost of exchange evaluation is only a factor of 4 more expensive than the cost of diagonalization and because the scaling of the two steps is similar we expect that this result will hold for even larger systems. In our current implementation, we have not parallelized the calculations, although it should be possible to do so with high efficiency because most of the operations involve a series of FFTs that can be embarrassingly parallelized, or matrix multiplications that are also amenable to parallelization. We have also not made use of linear scaling approaches to leverage the fact that the exchange matrix is near-sighted, which can be used to further improve the efficiency of the calculations, particularly for systems with large band gaps. The approach we have outlined here has many extensions that we are actively exploring, including the ability to perform all-electron calculations, use of mixed Gaussian-plane-wave basis set, use for molecular calculations, the calculation of nuclear gradients, and also use of k-point symmetry at a nearly linear cost (O(N k log(N k ))) with the number of k-points N k . Given that the cost of the exchange evaluation is cheaper than Coulomb for systems containing up to 1,000 basis functions and around 100 electrons (these numbers are larger for diamond with the QZ basis set), one can likely perform hybrid DFT calculations with a similar cost as pure DFT calculations if the unit cells contain 100 or fewer electrons (because the scaling with N k is similar for both Coulomb and exchange). K.E.S. was supported through the National Science Foundation grant CHE-2145209 and S.S. through a grant from the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation.