In this work, we discuss the possibility of reaching the Ziman conditions for collective heat transport in cubic bulk semiconductors, such as Si, Ge, AlAs and AlP. In natural and enriched silicon and germanium, the collective heat transport limit is impossible to reach due to strong isotopic scattering. However, we show that in hyperenriched silicon and germanium, as well as in materials with one single stable isotope like AlAs and AlP, at low temperatures, normal scattering plays an important role, making the observation of the collective heat transport possible. We further discuss the effects of sample sizes, and analyse our results for cubic materials by comparing them to bulk bismuth, in which second sound has been detected at cryogenic temperatures. We find that collective heat transport in cubic semiconductors studied in this work is expected to occur at temperatures between 10 and 20 K. The study of the heat transport regimes in bulk and low dimensional materials in general, and of the phonon hydrodynamics in particular, currently attracts a renewed interest In most of the litterature until very recently, a regime in which phonons behave not as independent carriers but as a collective excitation The heat flow regimes in suspended graphene and graphene nanoribbons were studied very actively Turning back to the collective limit of heat transport, methods based on the density functional perturbation theory and on the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) were shown to accurately predict the conditions of the occurence of the collective limit in many materials In the present work we apply the approach similar to the one of Ref. To identify the conditions for the occurence of the collective limit of phonon transport, we use the solution of the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) beyond the single mode approximation (SMA), which allows to explicitly take into account the repopulation of phonon states. Thus, we use a ratio κ V AR /κ SM A between the lattice thermal conductivity obtained by the solution of BTE iobtained with the variational approach (V-BTE) and the one obtained in the single mode approximation (SMA-BTE), as the criterium a of the occurence of the collective regime. We also compare the thermodynamic average scattering rate of "normal" (momentum conserving) phononphonon scattering processes, Γ n av to resistive Umklapp phonon-phonon scattering rate, Γ U av , as well as to other resistive scattering rates due to isotopic scattering, and to boundary scattering Si, AlAs and AlP are described within density functional perturbation theory in local density approximation (DFT-LDA) with norm-conserving pseudopotentials where s run over all atoms, α is the Cartesian coordinate index, j is the phonon branch index, q is the phonon wavevector, z sα qj is the phonon eigenmode, ω qj is the phonon frequency, g s = (Ms-<Ms>) 2 <Ms> is the mass variance parameter. In panel a of figure In panel c of Fig. According to our resuls, the same conclusions are valid for germanium (results not shown): in natural and isotopically enriched samples, the possibility of the collective heat transport limit which could potentially exist in hyper-enriched or pure samples, is destroyed by isotopic scattering. In order to further investigate the possibility of the collective heat transport limit in the isotopically hyper-enriched silicon and to compare with experiments, we include boundary scattering. In panels b and d of Fig. As one can see in panel d of Fig. The possibility of the collective heat transport limit in isotopically enriched samples of 2.82 mm size was discussed in Ref. In the previous section, we have demonstrated that the isotopic stattering is the main reason why the collective limit can not be observed in Si and Ge, while it could exist in pure or hyper-enriched samples. This is the reason why we have decided to further explore cubic materials that naturally have no isotopes, such as AlP and AlAs. In panel a of Fig. The effect of boundary scattering, analysed in panel d of Fig. In Fig. To further understand why the effect of repopulation reduction by boundary scattering is stronger in Si and AlP compared to Bi, we study the average scattering rates in Fig. Coming now to boundary scattering rates, we notice that for equal sample sizes, boundary scattering rates are 4 to 5 times larger in Si and AlP, compared to Bi. This fact, which is due to larger phonon group velocities in Si and AlP as compared to those in Bi, explains why the repopulation reduction by boundary scattering is stronger in Si and AlP. In this work we have performed the theoretical analysis of the conditions necessary to reach the collective heat transport limit in silicon with various isotopic compositions, as well as in AlAs and AlP which contain naturally one single stable isotope. While the collective heat transport is impossible in natural silicon due to isotopic scattering, it can in principle be reached in hyper-enriched Si, as well as in natural AlAs and AlP. We have shown that, contrarily to common belief, the normal phonon-phonon scattering processes play an important role in cubic semiconductors below 20 K, similarly to Bi where collective heat transport phenomena have been experimentally observed. In addition, in the cubic materials studied in this work, the possibility to reach the collective heat transport limit is reduced by the large phonon group velocities that enhance the effect of boundary scattering with respect to, e.g., bismuth. Nevertheless, as we have shown in the present work, the observation of the collective heat transport limit in AlP must be possible at temperatures around 16 K for 20 mm samples.