Graphene moiré systems are ideal environments for investigating complex phase diagrams and gaining fundamental insights into the mechanisms underlying exotic states of matter, as they permit controlled manipulation of electronic properties. Magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) has emerged as a key platform to explore moiré superconductivity, owing to the robustness of its superconducting order and the displacement-field tunability of its energy bands. Recent measurements strongly suggest that superconductivity in MATTG is unconventional. Here, we report the first direct observation of double-dome superconductivity in MATTG. The temperature, magnetic field, and bias current dependence of the superconductivity of doped holes collectively show that it is significantly suppressed near moiré filling ν * = -2.6, leading to a double dome in the phase diagram within a finite window of the displacement field. The temperature dependence of the normal-state resistance and the I -V curves straddling ν * are suggestive of a phase transition and the potentially distinct nature of superconductivity in the two domes. Hartree-Fock calculations incorporating mild strain yield an incommensurate Kekulé spiral state whose effective spin polarization peaks in the regime where superconductivity is suppressed in experiments. This allows us to draw conclusions about the normal state as well as the unconventional nature of the superconducting order parameter. Double-dome superconductivity has been found in various systems such as cuprates Magic angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) comprises three layers of graphene, with the first and third layers having the same orientation and the central layer twisted by approximately 1.55 • Chern number arises solely from the topology of correlated states in the flat bands In order to understand the microscopic origin of superconductivity in MATTG, it is essential to explore the superconducting phase diagram. Since our device exhibits much stronger superconductivity on the hole side than on the electron side, we primarily focus on the former in the main text. FIG. We also perform DC current-dependent measurements to gain additional insight into the superconducting phase diagram in MATTG. FIG. Hysteresis in the I -V curves of a superconductor can arise for several different reasons. One common explanation invokes inhomogeneity within the superconducting sample, which may give rise to a network of underdamped Josephson junctions In contrast to MATBG, MATTG exhibits a Dirac band coexisting with flat bands, offering a band structure that is adjustable through the application of a displacement field In order to gain theoretical insight into the experimental observation of double-dome superconductivity, we turn to Hartree-Fock calculations on MATTG. As can be seen in FIG. In the presence of the experimentally realistic amounts of strain necessary to capture the Landau fan degeneracy at ν = -2 and the semimetallic behaviour at ν = 0, our calculations (see Methods) indicate the normal state of MATTG to be an incommensurate Kekulé spiral (IKS) FIG. Schematically, as shown in FIG. Upon doping from ν = -3 towards neutrality, there are two possibilities: (1) The upper IKS band in the "up" effective spin sector starts filling (FIG. The entire range of the phase diagram shown in FIG. 5 (main figure) exhibits superconductivity as seen in FIG. The Hartree-Fock state for -3 < ν ≲ ν * only has a single partially filled IKS band (hence a single effective spin flavor), while the state for ν * ≲ ν < -2 has two IKS Fermi surfaces (hence two effective spins flavors). Fermionic antisymmetry dictates that the superconducting order parameter for -3 < ν ≲ ν * be odd parity. On the other hand, for ν * ≲ ν < -2 we have two effective spin flavors and the order parameter can have either even or odd parity. STM measurements support nodal superconductivity for -3 < ν ≲ ν * and nodeless superconductivity for ν * ≲ ν < -2 The most striking result we report is the direct observation of double-dome superconductivity in hole-doped MATTG (-3 ≲ ν ≲ -2) under a displacement field. This adds a new entry to the list of unconventional phenomena observed in MATTG and expands the roster of superconductors known to show a double-dome feature as a function of doping. Through extensive electrical transport measurements we further distinguish several features of the two adjacent superconducting domes in MATTG. Notably, the strongly hysteretic I -V behaviour and relative robustness of superconductivity in the right dome (ν * < ν ≲ -2) contrast with the lack of hysteresis and relatively weak superconductivity in the left dome (-3 ≲ ν < ν * ). An appealing explanation for this is that there is a paucity of low-energy quasiparticles that can drive thermal equilibration in the right as compared to the left, which can in turn be rationalized in terms of a change in the nature of superconductivity from nodeless to nodal as the electron density is decreased across ν * . The latter observation would be in striking accord with STM measurements on MATTG that conjectured a transition from nodeless to nodal superconductivity on the basis of the evolution of the shape of the gap function in a similar range of doping where we find the two-dome feature at finite D. We gain further insight by tracking the appearance and subsequent disappearance of the double-dome feature with increasing displacement field. Coupled with Hartree-Fock simulations of the normal state, this provides additional clues as to the nature of superconductivity in the two domes. Our numerical studies find robust incommensurate Kekulé spiral order proximate to ν = -2, again consistent with STM experiments, which exhibits with a clear wedge of enhanced effective spin polarization in the normal state around ν * and in a window of displacement fields. We also infer a change in the possible superconducting pairing states in the two domes: whereas the right dome admits pairing between electrons with the same and opposite effective spins, only the former is possible in the left dome. In light of this and our hysteresis data it is tempting to conjecture that MATTG hosts two types of pairing, a relatively robust nodeless even-parity pairing and a weaker nodal odd-parity pairing that are associated respectively with the right and left domes. The even-parity pairing obeys a modified Anderson's theorem (see Methods), making it stable to moiré scale disorder, potentially explaining its robustness. Finally, our theoretical results indicate that in the ν -D region corresponding to either dome, doped electrons enter lower IKS bands, whereas the region of suppressed superconductivity coincides with the wedge where they enter the upper IKS band. This suggests that the latter is less susceptible to pairing, which may help identify the pairing mechanism in MATTG. Our work thus opens a significant new chapter in the phenomenology of MATTG, and motivates future work to assemble the several tantalizingly consistent pieces of evidence into a coherent picture of its superconducting phase diagram. 70 • C. We used the combined structure PDMS/PC/top graphite/top hBN to pick up the first layer of graphene at 50 • C; afterward, the micro-stage which holds the materials chip is rotated by 1.6 -1.65 • . Then, the second graphene piece is picked up. Subsequently, the microstage is rotated back to its original place, and the third graphene is picked up. Then, bottom hBN and narrow bottom graphite are picked up. The final stack is dropped down on the chip with aligned markers. The Hall bar geometry is defined by using electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching. 5nm/60nm Cr/Au is evaporated to connect the graphene to form one-dimensional contacts. The electronic transport measurements are performed in a dilution fridge with a base temperature of 100 mK. The temperature dependence measurement is done in a He-3 fridge. Resistance measurements are conducted using a standard lock-in technique employing a 10 nA AC current excitation at a frequency of 17 Hz. Two Yokogawa GS200 are used to apply top and bottom gate voltage to tune carrier density and displacement field. Voltage signals are taken before being amplified 100 times. The Hall density in FIG. The in-plane field dependence measurement is performed in an 8T-2T-2T triple-axis magnet. As the sample plane is not strictly perpendicular to the zdirection, an out-of-plane magnetic field exists when the in-plane magnetic field B x and B y are applied, and twodimensional superconductivity is very sensitive to the out-of-plane magnetic field. So B z is needed to compensate for the out-of-plane magnetic field. The calibration of the magnetic field is done in the following way: a set of (B xi , B yi ) is applied to the device, and then we tune the carrier density near the boundary of the superconducting dome and measure V xx as a function of B z . When V xx is smallest, the corresponding B zi is our needed compensating magnetic field. A set of (B xi , B yi , B zi ) can be linearly fitted and we can express B z as B z = αB x + βB y where α and β are fitting parameters. The non-interacting band structure can be captured using a three-layer generalization of the celebrated Bistritzer-MacDonald continuum model In region C of FIG. For completeness we note that our numerical simulations do find that in small portions of Region C, Tbreaking states with finite polarization can be closely competing with IKS states; however only the IKS order is robust across most of region C. 