The paramagnetic phase diagrams of the half-filled Hubbard model on a twisted bilayer square lattice are investigated using coherent potential approximation. Besides the conventional metallic, band insulating, and Mott insulating phases, we find two site-selective insulating phases where certain sites exhibit band insulating behaviors while the others display Mott insulating behaviors. These phases are identified by the band gap, the double occupancy, the density of states, as well as the imaginary part of self-energy. Furthermore, we examine the effect of on-site potential on the stability of the site-selective insulating phases. Our results indicate that fruitful site-selective phases can be engineered by twisting. Layered systems with twists have recently attracted intense attention due to the discoveries of numerous fascinating quantum phases, such as the Mott insulator 1-5 , superconductivity As we konw, even for the untwisted bilayer Hubbard model, the phase transitions at half filling are fascinating and widely investigated. Such a model can not only describe high-temperature cuprate superconductors When the twist is applied to the layered systems, the well-known moiré pattern emerges, giving rise to distinct hoppings present at the inequivalent sublattices due to different atomic environments. In fact, distinct hoppings on different sublattices may cause a site-selective phase. A typical example is that bond-length disproportionation, corresponding to inequivalent sublattices having distinct hoppings, leads to a site-selective insulating phase in RNiO 3 (R=Sm, Eu, Y, or Lu), where certain Ni atoms exhibit a magnetic Mott insulating state while the remaining Ni atoms form a singlet insulating state In this paper, we aim to point out the presence of site-selective insulating phases in the half-filled Hubbard model on a twisted bilayer square lattice. To this end, taking the case with a twisted angle of θ = 53.13 • as an example, we investigate the paramagnetic phase diagrams of this model under the combined effect of on-site Coulomb interaction and various interlayer hoppings using coherent potential approximation (CPA). Interestingly, we obtain two site-selective insulating phases, where certain sites exhibit band insulating states while the rests display Mott insulating states, when one type of the interlayer hoppings is strong while the remaining interlayer hoppings are weak if the strong on-site Coulomb interaction is involved. In addition, we also discover Mott insulating, band insulating, and metallic phases in this model, which have been observed in the untwisted bilayer Hubbard model as well. The Mott insulating phase emerges when strong on-site Coulomb interaction wins over all the weak interlayer hoppings. In contrast, strong t ⊥ , either in cooperation with strong t 1 or strong t 2 , favors the band insulating phase [the definitions of t ⊥ , t 1 , and t 2 can be found in Fig. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sec. II describes the details of the structure, the model, and the method we used. Sec. III demonstrates our primary results, including the paramagnetic phase diagrams under different parameters, the gaps and double occupancies as functions of various interlayer hoppings, the density of states (DOS), the imaginary part of self-energy, the DOS at the Fermi level varied with the Lorentzian broadening factor, as well as the effect of an on-site potential difference on the stability of the site-selective phases. Sec. IV includes a discussion of our results and Sec. V concludes with a summary. To demonstrate the presence of site-selective insulating phases in the half-filled Hubbard model on a twisted bilayer square lattice, we take the case with a twisted angle of θ = 53.13 • as an example since it is the smallest commensurate structure of twisted bilayer square lattice as presented in Fig. where We now introduce how to employ the CPA to solve this many-body Hamiltonian. Hubbard views the electron correlation problem as a disordered alloy where an electron with spin σ moving in the system encounters either a potential of U at a site with a spin σ present or 0 without where E ismσ is a disordered potential depending on the presence of a spin σ. Specifically, E ismσ = U with a probability of P U = ⟨n ismσ ⟩ or E ismσ = 0 with a probability of P 0 = 1 -⟨n ismσ ⟩. The Green's function of this disordered model necessitates the computation of an average overall possible disordered configurations. However, performing this calculation exactly is impossible, and the CPA should be employed to solve this alloy problem The detailed mapping from model (3) to model ( Now, we will demonstrate the presence of site-selective insulating phases in the paramagnetic phase diagrams of the half-filled Hubbard model on this twisted bilayer square lattice. To this end, we employ the CPA to calculate the paramagnetic phase diagrams of this model under the combined effect of on-site Coulomb interaction and various interlayer hoppings, where three interlayer 0 1 2 3 4 Figure The phase diagram in the (t 1 /t 0 = t 2 /t 0 ) -t ⊥ /t 0 plane are also investigated when U = 6t 0 as illustrated in Fig. In brief, in this twisted bilayer Hubbard model, we not only observe the Mott insulating, band insulating, and metallic phases proposed in the untwisted case but also identify two site-selective phases with the coexistence of band and Mott insulating states. These findings suggest twist as an effective approach to access a site-selective phase in strongly correlated systems. Next, we proceed to explain how the phases in the paramagnetic phase diagrams (Fig. Besides the behavior of the band gap, we further confirm the presence of four distinct insulating phases by analyzing the double occupancy. Fig. In order to clarify the natures of the aforementioned four insulating phases, we select one parameter point within each insulating phase [The parameter points are indicated above Fig. We now focus on the imaginary part of their selfenergies. It is apparent from Fig. For comparison, we also calculate the same physical quantities for a metallic phase. Apparently, the closure of the gap in the DOS [5(e)] and the finite values of both ρ O (E f ) and ρ N (E f ) as η approaches zero [5(o)] are key features of a metallic phase. It is necessary to mention that the nonzero imaginary part of the self-energy at ω = 0 [5(j)] is attributed to the failure of the CPA to reproduce a Fermi-liquid state Finally, we will examine the effect of an on-site potential difference on the stability of the site-selective insulating phases. As we know, the Mott insulating state has already been pointed out to be unstable to the ionic potential in the ionic Hubbard model ρ(ω) In this paper, we have demonstrated the presence of site-selective insulating phases in the half-filled Hubbard model on a twisted bilayer square lattice using the CPA. While the CPA provides a critical on-site Coulomb interaction of U c ≈ W/2 = 4t 0 (W is the Bloch bandwidth) for the metal-Mott insulator transition in the monolayer square lattice, which differs slightly from other methods As we know, as long as a weak on-site Coulomb interaction is present, an antiferromagnetic insulating phase emerges in the region of weak interlayer hopping within the magnetic phase diagram for the Hubbard model on untwisted bilayer square lattice, which is attributed to the perfect nesting property of the Fermi surface within the noninteracting system Twist and pressure can manipulate interlayer hoppings and thereby induce novel phases in the layered systems, for example, the interlayer ferromagnetic and interlayer antiferromagnetic states can coexist in bilayer CrI 3 when twisting two layers with an angle of θ ≤ 3 Our discovery of the site-selective insulating phases in twisted bilayer square lattice suggests twist as an effective approach to access a site-selective phase in the strongly correlated system. While our proposal remains a theoretical prediction, it may still stimulate tremendous research interest for the following reasons. Firstly, one may be interested in exploring whether a site-selective superconducting phase, where certain sites exhibit a superconducting state while the others are in a normal state, exists in twisted layered superconducting materials since there are currently mature experimental techniques for synthesizing monolayer superconducting material In conclusion, we systematically investigate the paramagnetic phase diagrams of the half-filled Hubbard model on a twisted bilayer square lattice by employing the CPA. The site-selective insulating phases are discovered, characterized by the coexistence of band insulating states at some sites while Mott insulating states at the remainings, in addition to the pure metallic, band insulating, and Mott insulating phases in the whole lattice. We attribute the appearance of site-selective insulating phases to the differentiation of interlayer hoppings in different regions with the help of strong on-site Coulomb repulsions. We find that the site-selective insulating phases are stable even in the presence of a moderate site-dependent on-site potential. Our findings not only demonstrate a fascinating phenomenon that a band insulating state can coexist with a Mott insulating state in strongly correlated systems but also suggest that varieties of site-selective phases might be realized by applying twist to layered materials. effective medium in momentum space reads where and Here, all of these self-energies Σ A1 , • • • , Σ E2 are both complex and energy-dependent. Noticeably, the Hamiltonian matrix M(k) omits the spin indices as we are interested in the paramagnetic phase. Thus, Green's function of the effective medium in momentum space can be readily calculated as where η stands for the Lorentzian broadening factor. Using Green's function in momentum space, the corresponding Green's function of the effective medium in real space reads where the integral is over the first Brillouin zone of the system. Then, the cavity Green's function G ism (ω) can be obtained through the Dyson equation for a given s sublattice at m layer of ith supercell, which describes a medium with removed self-energy at a chosen site. It is necessary to mention that the self-energies of the effective medium arise from the disordered potentials of the disordered alloy within the framework of the CPA, suggesting that the cavity Green's function for a given site of the effective medium is equal to that of the disordered alloy. Therefore, the cavity can now be filled by a real "impurity" with disorder potential, resulting in an impurity Green's function of the disordered alloy with impurity configurations of Then, the average Green's function of the disordered alloy can be calculated by summing all the impurity Green's functions with corresponding probability weights, namely Once the average Green's function of the disordered alloy and the Green's function of the effective medium satisfies ⟨G ism (ω)⟩ = G ef f ism,ism (ω), (A10) the model ( where Im G ef f ism,ism (ω) dω. (A12) These calculated average occupation number need to be applied to compute new probability of impurities (A8).