The superconducting diode effect -the dependence of critical current on its direction -can arise from the simultaneous breaking of inversion and time-reversal symmetry in a superconductor and has gained interest for its potential applications in superconducting electronics. In this letter, we study the effect in a two-dimensional topological insulator (2D TI) in both a uniform geometry as well as in a long Josephson junction. We show that in the presence of Zeeman fields, a circulating edge current enables a large non-reciprocity of the critical current. We find a maximum diode efficiency 1 for the uniform 2D TI and ( √ 2 -1) 2 ≈ 0.17 for the long Josephson junction. In a superconductor with broken inversion and timereversal symmetry, the critical current can depend on the direction of the current bias, an effect known as the superconducting diode effect (SDE) A widely studied mechanism for inversion symmetry breaking in an intrinsic SDE is strong spin-orbit coupling Two-dimensional topological insulator has an insulating bulk gap but gapless helical (spin-momentum locked) onedimensional boundary modes. The low-energy Hamiltonian for a single helical edge state is where v is the edge mode Dirac velocity, px = -ih∂ x is the momentum operator and σ x,y,z the spin Pauli matrices; we choose the helical edge spin quantization axis to be the zaxis. We also include a magnetic perturbation V i that breaks time-reversal symmetry of the edge and allows the system to present the diode effect. The term V i may arise from Zeeman coupling to magnetic field as V i = 1 2 gμ B B i or from exchange coupling to a magnetic material; for concreteness we call this a Zeeman field in the rest of the article. A perpendicu-lar Zeeman field V i (e.g., in the x-direction) opens a gap in the edge dispersion, whereas a field along the spin quantization axis, V z , merely polarizes the edge and shifts the Dirac point position, see Fig. Because the edge Hamiltonian consists of counterpropagating states with opposite spins, conventional singlet s-wave superconductivity can be induced. In the presence of a supercurrent and a Zeeman field along z, the (2nd quantized) Hamiltonian of a single proximitized 2D TI edge is given by where μ is the chemical potential, ∆ the induced gap, and q the Cooper pair momentum that models an externally applied supercurrent I w = evhq. We will consider here the zero temperature limit where many of the calculations can be done analytically. The Hamiltonian acts on the Nambu spinor T with τ x,y,z Pauli matrices acting on the particle-hole space. We note that the spatial modulation of the pairing term gives rise to an effective Zeeman term Ṽz = V z + 1 2 vhq by taking a unitary transformation into a moving frame H(x, q) = e -iqxτ z /2 H(x, q)e iqxτ z /2 . At the same time, the gap to quasiparticle excitations vanishes at a critical Zeeman energy Ṽz,c = ±∆ which also gives the critical Cooper pair momentum |q c | = ∆/( 1 2 hv) at zero magnetic field The linearized description, Eq. ( We find numerically the values of q at which the gap to quasiparticle excitation closes. The resulting critical momenta q ± c vs V z are shown in Fig. with ∆/E g = 0.0134. In case (i), the system is inversion symmetric and shows no diode effect, while in case (ii) and (iii), we observe diode effects. To identify which edge becomes normal at q = q c , we also investigate the probability densities of the zero-energy gapless quasiparticle state at the SC/N phase boundary. At boundaries with negative slopes in V z -q c plane, the lower edge of the ribbon turns normal. The upper edge becomes normal at the boundaries with positive slopes in cases (i) and (iii). These observations are expected from the low-energy model, Eq. ( Next, we study non-reciprocity in a 2D TI Josephson junction, depicted in Fig. where FIG. The dashed lines are obtained for ∆ 1 = ∆ and the solid line is for ∆ 1 = ∆/2. For ∆ 2 = 5∆ 1 , we achieve diode efficiency η = 1 at V z = ∆ 1 as q + c vanishes. Along the solid boundary, the quasiparticle gap closes on one of the edges of the system. In the case of larger gap, ∆ 1 = ∆, ∆ 2 = 5∆ 1 (the red dashed line), the size of the superconducting phase is limited by bulk states: the positive-slope boundary is due to gapless bulk states as opposed to edge states in other cases. Our numerical results indicate that |q ± c (V z = 0)| ≈ 2∆ 1 /(hv) is determined by the Dirac velocity v, thus approximately independent of μ. For each value of the Josephson phase φ , the system has a set of energy eigenvalues E(φ ). The zero-temperature Josephson current of the junction is defined as 63 Here E GS is the ground state energy of the corresponding many-body system, which can be written as the sum of all negative energy eigenvalues {E - i (φ )} of our single-electron system: We numerically study E GS (φ ) and I J (φ ) of the junction depicted in Fig. We calculated the Josephson current in various combinations of Zeeman potentials V z or V x applied to the two edges. Since L y is much larger than the edge penetration depth, the current can be understood as the sum of two contributions, from the upper and lower edge: and the effect of applying magnetic fields to the edges on I J (φ ) can be understood in terms of these single-edge contributions. We consider the limit of a long junction W ≳ ξ , where the Josephson current I J (φ ) is a piecewise linear function where I 0 is the maximum single edge Josephson current and π ± t are the φ values at which I J,single edge (φ ) reaches minimum and maximum, respectively. Matching Eq. ( Next, we describe the effects of V x and V z on a single edge Josephson current. Applying a magnetic field V x perpendicular to the spin quantization axis on an edge gaps the Dirac point (Fig. On the other hand, applying a V z field on an edge only shifts the Andreev state energies in φ and consequently the son current is shifted in φ while its maximum value does not change (Fig. where c is a unit-free constant, estimated below, see Eq. (10). Since the Josephson current of a long junction is (piecewise) linear in φ , the result Eq. ( which, upon taking the Thouless energy E T = hv/W ≈ 0.525∆ 0 and W = 1.904ξ (so that E 1 (φ = 0) = 0.541∆ 0 ) matches well with the numerically calculated result, see Fig. which is on the same order of magnitude as a numerically obtained value of 3.57 ± 0.03. Here σ = ±1 depending on the helicity of the edge. Thus the shift ∆φ , Eq. ( Next, we will investigate the effect of combined V x ,V z terms on the two edges of the junction, focusing on the Josephson diode effect. We define Josephson diode efficiency via the maximum and minimum Josephson currents (critical currents), respectively I + J,c = max φ I J and I - J,c = min φ I J , obtained from Eq. ( When the junction is inversion symmetric, such as in the case of applying a symmetric V z field on both edges, we have η J = 0. By applying a symmetric V z on both edges, the E i (φ ) curves of the upper and lower edge states and their contributions to the Josephson current are shifted by the same amount in φ , but in opposite directions, see Fig. By applying V x on one edge, we can break inversion symmetry. However, without V z , the Josephson current (6) can be again symmetrized and will have no diode effect. Diode effect requires both V x and V z in an inversion-symmetry breaking way. Such combination leads to an asymmetric Josephson potential and non-reciprocal critical currents, see Fig. For a zero-temperature long Josephson junction, where Eqs. ( In summary, we have shown that by applying Zeeman fields to the edges of a 2D TI, one can achieve a large nonreciprocal critical current. Specifically, for a uniform 2D TI edge, the maximum diode efficiency is 1. For a zero-FIG. FIG. temperature long Josephson junction, the maximum diode efficiency is ( √ 2 -1) 2 ≈ 0.17, see Fig. Upon finalizing this article, we learned of Ref. 69 where a short 2D TI Josephson junction is studied. Other than differences between short and long (our case) junctions, the results seem to agree where there is overlap. 