Zinc sulfide (ZnS) thin films with variable structural, optical, electrical, and thermoelectric properties were obtained by changing the source-to-substrate (SSD) distance in the physical-vaporthermal-coating (PVTC) system. The films crystallized into a zinc-blende cubic structure with (111) preferred orientation. The films had a wide 3.54 eV optical band gap. High-quality homogenous thin films were obtained at 60 mm SSD. The sheet resistance and resistivity of the films decreased from 10 11 to 10 10 Ω/Sq. and from 10 6 to 10 5 Ω-cm, when SSD was increased from 20 mm to 60 mm, respectively. The phase and band gap were also verified by first principles that were in agreement with the experimental results. Thermoelectric characteristics were studied by using the semi-classical Boltzmann transport theory. The high quality, wide band gap, and reduced electrical resistance make ZnS a suitable candidate for the window layer in solar cells. Serious challenges such as the energy crisis and pollution due to the huge rise in chemical exhaust as well as the burning of fossil fuels, including coal, have motivated scientists and researchers to search for better energy alternatives. Solar energy is a better alternative source of energy that is renewable as well as clean and inexhaustible Deposition of ZnS thin films for solar cell applications by using thermal evaporation is always a challenge because the growth rate of thermal evaporation is approximately 1 μm/h, which can be controlled by the deposition conditions, but for solar cells applications the window layer must be close to 100 nm to achieve optical transmittance ZnS (99.99%) in powder form was procured by Sigma Aldrich and used for the deposition on glass substrates without any further purification. The glass substrates were first treated with detergents and well-washed with running water. Ethanol was used to clean the glass substrates after they were dried in a microwave oven at 90 °C. A molybdenum boat was used to hold the ZnS powder and substrates were placed on the substrate holder. Diffusion and rotatory pumps attached to the deposition system were used to create the base vacuum level of ≤10 -5 Torr and the deposition pressure was ≤10 -4 Torr inside the working chamber. On achieving the desired vacuum, a 300 A evaporation current was applied to the source holding the boat. ZnS was evaporated on a glass substrate. The total deposition process took place in 10 min. Conventionally, the SSD is the distance between the source-holding boat and the substrate holder, which is usually a few millimeters. We varied the SSD from 20 to 80 mm and developed four samples, namely, "ZnS-A" at 20 mm, "ZnS-B" at 40 mm, "ZnS-C" at 60 mm, and "ZnS-D" at 80 mm. The structure of the films was examined by using a D8 advance Bruker, Cu-Ka (1.54 Å) X-ray diffractometer (XRD). The surface morphology was analyzed by a Hitachi SU-70 scanning electron microscope (SEM). Optical analysis was carried out by using a Lambda 25, Perkin Elmer UV-Vis dual beam spectrophotometer. Structural, morphological and optical analysis experimentally performed in Central Hi-Tech Lab (CHL), Government College University Faisalabad (GCUF), Pakistan. The electrical properties of the films were measured by the locally built four-probe-point (4PP) method at room temperature. Electrical analysis experimentally performed in Centre for Advanced Electronics and Photovoltaic Engineering (CAEPE), International Islamic University Islamabad (IIUI), Pakistan. This investigation The coefficient of electrical conductivity σ i, k e τ , υ i, k ⃗ υ i, k ⃗ where τ is the relaxation time, and υβ (i, k) is the group velocity of the parameters that were executed in the BoltzTraP code. Various comparisons ZnS thin films can be deposited in hexagonal and zinc blend (cubic) structures, depending upon the deposition technique and parameters where K is a dimensionless constant with a value that lies between 0.9 to 1.0, β in radian provides the full width half maximum (FWHM), λ represents the wavelength (Cu-Kα radiation, 1.5406 Å), and θ is the angle of diffraction. The average crystallite size of the films increased from 26 to 29 nm for 20 to 60 mm SSD and decreased to 27 nm for 80 mm SSD. Figure The lattice constant "a" of the zinc blend structure of the films was measured by the following Equation ( where "dhkl" is the interplanar spacing, measured ~0.3121 nm by using Bragg's Law The measured average value of "a" was 0.5407 nm which is in strong agreement with the literature for bulk ZnS nanostructures Surface morphology of the films was revealed by SEM micrographs. In Figure Figure αhʋ A hʋ E where R, Rm, and Vm are the optical reflectance, molar reflectivity, and molar volume, respectively. Figure ε1 ω iε2 ω The four-point-probe (4PP) technique was used to measure the sheet resistance and resistivity by using the following Equations ( R ρT where "I" and "V" represent the applied current between the outer probes and the voltage difference between inner probes, respectively. Here "ρ" represents the sheet resistance in Ω/Sq, "R" is the electrical resistivity in Ω-cm, and "T" is the thickness of the films. Figure The valance band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) in Figure ZnS thin films made by changing the SSD were successfully deposited on glass substrates by using the PVTC technique. The films showed the zinc-blende or cubic structure with preferred orientation along the (111) plane. The 186 nm thick film developed at 60 mm SSD achieved over 76% optical transmittance in the visible region. The measured Eg values of the films were in the range of 3.31 to 3.54 eV. The film deposited at 60 mm SSD had better crystallinity, void-free surface, higher optical transmittance, and low sheet resistance, and, due to this, it could be a better choice for solar cell applications such as a window or buffer layer. The absorption coefficient and complex dielectric function favor the use of ZnS in different solar applications. In our studied compounds the figure of merit was 0.77, which means that these materials have potential applications as thermoelectric materials. The simulation results propose directions toward various applications of ZnS in the optoelectronic and thermoelectric industries. Proceedings of the 2018 6th International Renewable and Sustainable Energy Conference (IRSEC), Rabat, Morocco, 5-8 December 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018. 74. Wu, A.; Qiao, Y.; Lv, F. Study on the Electronic Structures of ZnS and Ag-doped ZnS from Density Functional Theory. In Proceedings of the 2015 4th International Conference on Sensors, Measurement and Intelligent Materials, Shenzhen, China, 27-28 December 2015; Atlantis Press: Zhengzhou, China, 2016.