Computational prediction of stable crystal structures has a profound impact on the large-scale discovery of novel functional materials. However, predicting the crystal structure solely from a material's composition or formula is a promising yet challenging task, as traditional ab initio crystal structure prediction (CSP) methods rely on time-consuming global searches and first-principles free energy calculations. Inspired by the recent success of deep learning approaches in protein structure prediction, which utilize pairwise amino acid interactions to describe 3D structures, we present AlphaCrystal-II, a novel knowledge-based solution that exploits the abundant inter-atomic interaction patterns found in existing known crystal structures. AlphaCrystal-II predicts the atomic distance matrix of a target crystal material and employs this matrix to reconstruct its 3D crystal structure. By leveraging the wealth of inter-atomic relationships of known crystal structures, our approach demonstrates remarkable effectiveness and reliability in structure prediction through comprehensive experiments. This work highlights the potential of data-driven methods in accelerating the discovery and design of new materials with tailored properties. Computational discovery of novel functional materials has enormous potential in transforming a variety of industries such as mobile communication, electric vehicles, quantum computing hardware, and catalysts Crystal structure prediction (CSP) is a notoriously hard problem With the mature development of deep learning techniques, several studies have applied those novel methods in the materials science field Our work here is inspired by the great success of AlphaFold A large number of physical and chemical rules govern the interactions and bonding between atoms, leading to the predictability of the distance matrix for crystal structures from the composition. Building upon this foundation, we propose a distance matrix-based model and algorithm for CSP, the block diagram of which is illustrated in Figure Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We proposed a data-driven AlphaCrystal-II model for CSP which exploits the abundant atomic pair (bond) knowledge and utilizes the trained deep residual neural networks for distance matrix prediction and crystal structure reconstruction. • We conducted extensive experiments to demonstrate AlphaCrystal-II's competitive effectiveness and reliability in crystal structure prediction. • We compared AlphaCrystal-II with the GNOA algorithm, a modern machine learning potential based CSP method. We found that AlphaCrystal-II can achieve better performance in most cases and works not only for materials with simple compositions but also those materials with complex compositions. • We evaluated the performance of the distance matrix prediction and structure reconstruction by the distance matrix prediction network and the genetic algorithm DMCrystal, which showed a strong performance that explains the good performance of AlphaCrystal-II. 2 Methods Given a material composition, a simple yet effective approach for crystal structure prediction is to use the composition to find a possible template structure and conduct CSP using elemental substitution, which has led to powerful template based CSP algorithms such as CSPML Although there is no co-evolutionary information or ancestral relationship among the protein structures, unlike in protein structures, the distance matrix based CSP is also feasible and promising. Based on the above ideas and the great success of AlphaFold, we propose the AlphaCrystal-II model crystal structure prediction tasks. The framework of our model is shown in Figure In the sections below, we describe the details of the components of our AlphaCrystal-II modules. Representing material composition information in an appropriate format to learn their atomic interactions is an essential and crucial preparation step for the AlphaCrystal-II algorithm because atomic interactions determine its final structure. Previous research has demonstrated that many atomic characteristics are related to ionic bonds, such as ionic bonding are electronegativity difference, ionization energy, electron affinity, atom size, ionic charge, lattice energy, polarizability, coordination number, and environmental conditions like temperature, pressure, and presence of other substances In our approach, we use 11 atomic features to encode the physicochemical information of each atom in the material, serving as input for the deep neural network model utilized for distance matrix prediction. Specifically, each element/atom is represented by 11 chemical descriptors (see Table Each row of the feature matrix represents an element symbol in the unit cell, where L is the number of atoms. We set the maximum number of atoms to be 12 in this study for simplicity, and if the number of atoms is less than 12, the remaining empty positions will be padded with zeros. Hence, the dimension of each feature matrix is 12 × 11. Mendeleev number (MN) Electrons that occupy an orbital of an atom singly. The amount of energy required to remove an electron from an isolated atom or molecule. Half of the distance between two atoms bonded covalently. When one mole of a compound is produced from its basic elements, each substance is in its normal physical state, the quantity of heat received or released. Dipole polarizability The number of valence electrons of the elements in a certain group, a group is a vertical column of the periodic table. The number of rows of the element in the periodic table. The power of an atom in a molecule to attract electrons to itself. The charge number of an atomic nucleus. For distance prediction, we train a deep residual neural network to capture and exploit the intricate bonding interactions between atoms. This method leverages the vast distribution of inter-atomic interactions present in the large number of known crystal structures used as our training set, thereby enabling highly accurate pairwise distance predictions. Figure In the second part, a 2-dimensional (2D) pairwise feature matrix is derived from the output of the 1D convolutional network through an outer product operation. Subsequently, we merge the convoluted sequential features and pairwise features to serve as the input for the next module. The third part encompasses a series of 2D residual network layers, which predict the distances between pairs of atoms, ultimately generating the predicted distance matrix. In our studies, we set the maximum number of atoms in a formula to L to accommodate the variable sizes of different crystal structures. In the experiments, L is set to 12 (the same as the feature matrix dimension). For formulae with fewer atoms, we create the corresponding tensors by padding them with zeros. The Residual Neural Network (ResNet) Where N is the maximum length of the formula, which is set to 12 × 5 and 12 × 10 in our experiments; y i is the true distance matrix label at position i, and ŷi is the predicted label at position i. Once the neural network predicts the distance matrix for a given composition, the crystal structure can be reconstructed using a genetic algorithm such as DMCCrystal In this work, the reconstructed structures by the genetic algorithm are all relaxed using the Bayesian optimization algorithm with the M3GNet model In assessing the performance of our distance map based structure prediction algorithm for crystal structure prediction (CSP), we use eight different metrics, including superpose distance, energy distance, Sinkhorn distance, fingerprint distance, OFM distance The Wyckoff MSE and RMSE measure the similarity between the predicted structure and the true target structure. Distance overlap evaluates the precision of the predicted distance map compared to the target distance map. The equations for such metrics are shown in the following equations: where n is the number of independent atoms in the target crystal structure, y i and ŷi are the coordinates of the corresponding atoms in the predicted and the target crystal structures. where T argetDM is the target distance map and P redictedDM is the predicted distance matrix of a given composition, both only contain 1/0 entries. T arget atom means the total number of atoms in the target distance map. T argetDM atoms exist ∩ P redictedDM atom exist denotes the common existent atoms of T argetDM and P redictedDM . This performance metric evaluates the overlap between two distance map matrices, with values ranging from 0 to 1, where 1 indicates perfect overlap. This metric, also known as distance map accuracy, quantifies the fidelity of the predicted distance map. To obtain the predicted distance map, we use a threshold of 8 amstrong as the cutoff to convert a given distance matrix into a binary distance map. 3 Results We collected material ids, formulas, and crystal structures (cif files) from the Materials Project database where N represents the number of groups, we set it to 5, 10, or 20 in experiments. Furthermore, we use the one-hot encoding to get the expression of each value. This method turns the regression problem into a classification problem by turning continuous distances into discrete values. Therefore, the cross-entropy loss can be used as the loss function for training neural networks, which makes the prediction more accurate. For each material in our dataset, we encoded 11 atomic features to a 12*11 matrix (the maximum atomic number in the unit cell is 12). After one-hot encoding, the dimension of the distance matrix is 12*(12*N). In our experiments, the training samples are randomly selected with different sample sizes according to the needed dataset sizes, such as 1,000 or 10,000 samples; after model training, 100 or 1000 samples that are not included in the training sets are selected for CSP algorithm testing and performance analysis. We first evaluated the CSP performance of our AlphaCrystal-II and compared it with the other machine learning potential based CSP algorithm, GNOA We randomly selected 10 binary, ternary, and quaternary materials from our MP_12 dataset, respectively. For each formula, we used both GNOA and AlphaCrystal-II to predict the probable crystal structures and then calculated the superpose distance between each predicted structure and the ground truth structure. Our AlphaCrystal-II can generate many structure candidates all at once. However, GNOA can only provide one structure that has the lowest formation energy. Thus, we compare GNOA's best structure with AlphaCrystal-II's Top-10 and Top-20 structure candidates. As shown in Table In addition, formation energy serves as a crucial criterion for assessing the stability of crystal structures. Hence, we compare the lowest formation energies of existing crystal structures with those of our predicted structures generated by M3GNet, as depicted in Figure We further check three case studies for the prediction performance of these two algorithms. Three samples of predicted crystal structures by GNOA and AlphaCrystal-II and their ground truth (target) structures are shown in Figure Here we evaluate how the distance matrix based AlphaCrystal-II performs compared to the atomic map based AlphaCrystal-I For eight selected formulas, we used both AlphaCrystal-I and AlphaCrystal-II to generate a branch of probable structures and then chose the top 20 with the lowest formation energy value as final structure candidates. Then, we employed five different metrics including energy distance, Sinkhorn distance, superpose distance, fingerprint distance, and OFM distance to compare the candidate structures' similarity with the target ground truth structure. For Pb 4 O 4 and V 4 O 4 F 4 , AlphaCrystal-I could not generate any structure candidates as the predicted space group was different from the ground truth, and the suggested template for these formulas contained many special coordinates (such as 0, 0.25, 0.33, 0.5, 0.66) that AlphaCrystal-I could not further relax. For all other six formulas, AlphaCrystal-II was able to provide the structures that had the lower energy distance, fingerprint distance, and OFM distance with the ground truth structure. When considering Sinkhorn distance, AlphaCrystal-I only outperformed AlphaCrystal-II once on Fe 4 As 4 Se 4 . For V 2 Cl 10 and Mn 4 Cu 4 P 4 , the structure candidates generated by AlphaCrystal-I had lower superpose distance. In general, AlphaCrystal-II outperformed AlphaCrystal-I, especially when the predicted structure contained special coordinates. To assess the strengths and weakness of our AlphaCrystal-II model, we evaluated whether the deep neural network of our AlphaCrystal-II model can predict the distance matrix with good performance by learning the atomic pair relationships from the chemical compositions. We evaluated the performance with different experiments with varying hyper-parameters, including the type of samples, the number of discrete groups, and the sizes of training and test datasets. The distance matrix prediction performance is summarized in Table Another major module of our AlphaCrystal-II algorithm is the distance matrix based crystal structure reconstruction. For each query composition, we first predict their atomic distance matrix from their composition and then use the DMCrystal algorithm We present AlphaCrystal-II, a novel data-driven deep learning approach for crystal structure prediction that exploits the abundant inter-atomic interaction patterns present in known crystal material structures. Our method first employs a deep residual network to learn and predict the atomic distance matrix for a given material composition. It then utilizes this matrix to reconstruct the 3D crystal structures through a genetic algorithm. Subsequently, we employ the Bayesian Optimization algorithm of the M3GNET package to relax these structures and calculate their formation energies, identifying the most stable configurations. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our model effectively captures the implicit inter-atomic relationships and showcases its effectiveness and reliability in leveraging such information for crystal structure prediction. Our results indicate that AlphaCrystal-II can successfully reconstruct the crystal structures of a wide range of materials, 11 elemental features for atomic composition encoding Feature Description AlphaCrystal-II_binary and AlphaCrystal-II_ternary are trained by binary and ternary materials. As shown in Table