NASA's mandate is a human mission to Mars in the 2030s and sustained exploration of Mars requires in-situ resource utilization (ISRU). Exploiting the Martian water cycle (alongside perchlorate salts that depress water's freezing point to < 213K) and the available 95 vol.% atmospheric CO2, we detail an ultra-low temperature (255K) CO2-H2O electrolyzer to produce methane fuel and life-supporting oxygen on Mars. Our polarization model fit experimental Martian brine electrolyzer performance and predicted CO2 electrolysis occurring at comparatively lower potentials (vs. water electrolysis) on Mars. A hypothetical 10-cell, 100cm 2 electrode-area-per-cell electrolyzer produced 0.45gW -1 day -1 of CH4 and 3.55gW -1 day -1 of O2 at 2V/cell and 50% electrolyzer faradaic efficiency vs. a best-case production of 2.5gW -1 day -1 of O2 by the Mars Oxygen in-situ Resource Utilization Experiment (MOXIE) from NASA's Mars 2020 mission (MOXIE produces no fuel). Material performance requirements are presented to advance this technology as an energy-efficient complement to MOXIE. The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)'s current goal is to land humans on Mars in the 2030's. The exploration of Mars is also a priority for several national and private space entities with lander missions from the US and China and orbiters from the US, China, Europe, Russia, India, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) presently active there In addition to abundant CO2 in the Martian atmosphere, the comprehensive elucidation of Martian regolithic geochemistry by a succession of robotic landers and orbiter missions has led to the identification of deliquescent perchlorate salts as outlined in our group's previous work Mars is present in the form of polar ice caps NASA's Mars Oxygen in-situ Resource Utilization Experiment (MOXIE) on the Perseverance rover is the most advanced Martian ISRU demonstration till date. This high temperature (1073K) solid oxide electrolyzer testbed produces O2 and CO from atmospheric CO2 through the reaction shown below Presently, the 10-cell solid oxide electrolyzer (SOXE) stack (2x MOXIE has been reported to produce a maximum of 12 g/ hr of O2 ISRU systems could potentially be sent to the surface 26 months before a manned mission in order to produce the 30 metric tons of oxygen needed to support a human mission to Mars. Proposals exist for a larger 1 metric ton MOXIE-like electrolyzer to produce 25-31 metric tons of oxygen for life support and oxidant Another critical design consideration is the nature of engines powering the descent stage landing on Mars. Methalox engines, utilizing cryogenic methane as fuel and cryogenic oxygen as oxidant, are the preferred power source (a listing, representative of global efforts towards developing methalox engines, is presented in Table Sankarasubramanian and co-workers have previously demonstrated that electrolysis of Martian brines can be successfully carried out at the average Martian ambient temperature (237K) to produce H2 fuel and life-support O2 with significantly improved energy efficiencies compared to MOXIE We initially anticipated electrocatalysis being an impediment to realizing this electrolyzer. The average Martian diurnal temperature ranges between 184K to 242K. Thus, based on Arrhenius kinetics, it was anticipated that the rate of 8-electron CO2 reduction to CH4 would be significantly slower than at terrestrial conditions. Fortuitously, recent studies have demonstrated that Cu electrocatalysts exhibit anti-Arrhenius kinetics and, counterintuitively, improved CH4 selectivity going from 293K to 255K We anticipate the CH4 and (unreacted) CO2 exiting the electrolyzer being separated using cryogenic distillation and the lower Martian ambient temperature enabling down-stream cryogenic distillation (Figure Ultimately, some of the conditions that make Mars uninhabitable for humans are anticipated to be beneficial for the synthesis of methalox engine propellant using a liquid brine and CO2 electrolysis system. We evaluated the operational viability and materials requirements for the CO2-H2O electrolyzer by building thermodynamic and electrochemical polarization models of this system. The models were first validated against our experimental data for the operation of a Martian H2-O2 electrolyzer. For the proposed CO2-H2O electrolyzer, the Nernst potential, the choice of anode/cathode and overpotentials for the electrocatalyst at the anode/cathode were correspondingly calculated or parameterized from experiments in the literature to model the performance of these electrolyzers under Martian conditions. Finally, we modeled the fuel and oxidant generation capacity of a conservatively sized electrolyzer stack consisting of 10-cells of 100cm 2 active area each and show that this system is an energy-efficient method to provision long-term missions to Mars. Thermodynamic and polarization models were built for the reactions depicted below. Brine electrolysis (eqn (3)) to produce H2 and O2 served as model validation against existing experimental data 6 . The corresponding half-cell reactions (and the standard electromotive force (emf) for the reaction (E 0 rxn)) for brine electrolysis to H2 and O2 are - And the corresponding half-cell reactions for CO2-brine electrolysis to CH4 and O2 are The thermodynamic property change (dS, dH and dG) over the course of the reactions depicted in eqn (3) and eqn (4) were obtained at Martian conditions. i.e., between 230K to 255K. The change in enthalpy (dH) was calculated using the following relationship - The change in entropy (dS) was calculated using the following relation with the specific heat capacity (c p ) - Having obtained dH and dS for the given reaction, the free energy change (dG) was calculated as shown below- 11) dG was in turn used to calculate the reversible electromotive force (Eemf) i.e., the minimum thermodynamic potential required for the reactions to occur, using the following equation - where the number of electrons (n) is either 2 or 8 depending on whether brine electrolysis or CO2brine electrolysis is carried out by the electrolyzer, and F is Faraday's constant (96,485 C mol -1 ). The c p of supercooled water has been measured using various techniques like, differential scanning calorimetry These observations consistently point to an anomalous increase in c p in inverse correlation to temperature. For the case of brine electrolysis (eqn (3)), the thermodynamic properties (dS and dH) were calculated from the specific heat capacity (C p , J mol -1 K -1 ) of supercooled water measured using an adiabatic calorimeter The values of dH, dS and dG for H2O (l) can be found in Table Having obtained the thermodynamic values as detailed above, we calculated |E emf |and E thermoneutral across the temperature range of interest (230K to 500K) for brine electrolysis. The |E emf |and E thermoneutral can be found in Table The thermoneutral voltage (E thermoneutral ) was calculated from the corresponding dH values using eqn. (15). For the case of CO2-brine electrolysis, in addition to the thermodynamic properties of H2O in liquid phase, the gas phase thermodynamic properties of CO2 and CH4 were required between 230K to 270K. The specific heat capacity (C p , J mol -1 K -1 ) values for CO2 and CH4 were obtained from literature Similar to the case of the brine electrolyzer, we obtained an empirical expression correlating |E emf | vs. temperature (T) between 230K to 1300K using these dH and dS values - The thermoneutral voltage (E thermoneutral ) was calculated from the corresponding dH values using eqn. (19). The |E emf |and E thermoneutral can be found in to the temperature. The effect of these anomalous c p values at <273K was found to be more significant than any changes due to phase transitions. The Nernst equation provides information about the equilibrium potential of the electrolyzer under open circuit conditions. The equilibrium potential is the sum of contributions from reversible electromotive force (minimum thermodynamic potential) and concentration (activity) of electroactive species in a reaction. For example, in case of brine electrolyzers operating at terrestrial atmospheric pressure of 101325 Pa, the E Nernst can be defined as, where the mole fractions of H2, O2 and H2O are written as y H 2 , y O 2 and y H 2 O . Since the y H 2 O is ∼1 in liquid phase, the expression reduced to, We also corrected the Nernst potentials for brine electrolysis for Martian surface pressure (636 Pa) using the additional term, ,, as shown below, ) Similarly, the Nernst potentials for CO2 -brine electrolysis operating at terrestrial atmospheric pressure of 101325 Pa was calculated using the expression, where the mole fractions of CH4, O2 and CO2 were written as y CH 4 , y O 2 and y CO 2 . y H 2 O was ∼1 as it was in the liquid phase. The Nernst potentials of CO2-brine electrolysis was calculated after incorporating the corrections for surface pressure on Mars as The Eemf for both the brine and CO2brine electrolyzers was determined from the thermodynamic parameters as discussed in the thermodynamic model deveopment section. The contributions from concentration (activity) of electroactive species was calculated by varying the extent of the reaction (conversion) for the reactions from 5 % to 95 % as discussed below. For example, the Nernst potentials of CO2-brine electrolysis (eqn. (24)) was expressed in terms of conversion (ε) as, Where the mole fractions of y CH 4 , y O 2 and y CO 2 and y H 2 O , are ]and [ ] respectively. The Nernst potential with 50 % conversion (ε = 0.5) at 298K and 636 Pa was calculated to be ~ The polarization model is built to capture the realistic operational voltage of the electrolyzer (E cell ) working under Martian conditions combining thermodynamic (electromotive force (E emf ) and Nernst potential (E Nernst ) for electrolysis along with activation overpotential for electrodes, anode ( η act anode ) and cathode (η act cathode ) and transport losses ((Ohmic losses (E IR ) due to electronic and ionic resistances) . The polarization model is thus the sum of all these contributions as shown below- E Nernst was calculated from E emf and the reaction stoichiometry using the Nernst equation Where, j is the current density (mA cm -2 ), j0 is the exchange current density (mA cm -2 ) which is a common metric of electrocatalyst activity, n is the number of electrons, F is Faraday's constant (C mol -1 ), R is the universal gas constant (J K -1 mol -1 ), α a and α c are the dimensionless anodic and cathodic charge transfer coefficients respectively, η is the applied overpotential (E -E eq ), and T is temperature (K). Given that the faradaic current is proportional to the exponent of the overpotential, the overpotential contribution from pulling current is quite small. On the other hand, large overpotentials are needed to overcome the cell resistance (voltage and resistance are directly proportional) and hence the ohmic overpotential contributions are significantly larger. Thus, our model will accurately describe systems using most active catalysts with relatively high exchange current densities. The polarization model was applied to a well-known water electrolysis reaction (eqn. (3)) as an initial validation exercise. The corresponding Nernst equation for water electrolysis reaction is, In the case of water electrolysis, the |E emf | is 1.23V at 298K and 101325 Pa 37 based on the difference between the equilibrium potentials for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) (eqn. (5)) and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (eqn. (6)). Accounting for 90% conversion, the Having obtained the thermodynamic contributions to overall electrolyzer polarization, we turned to the Ohmic losses in the electrolyzer. The most resistive component (and hence the major contributor to Ohmic loses) is the resistance of the membrane, which was calculated using Ohm's law- where, j is the current density (mA cm -2 ) and ASR mem is the area specific resistance (ASR) of the membrane (Ω cm 2 ). The polarization model applied to both the Martian brine electrolyzer and the CO2-H2O electrolyzer and for both the cell and stack configurations has accounted for inefficiencies at several levels to provide realistic predictions of performance. First, a reactant conversion of 90% is assumed in the Nernst equation, reducing the operating potential of the electrolyzer. Secondly, the practically achievable open circuit potential (OCP) (which should ideally equal the Nernst potential) is assumed to be a mixed potential with a value equal to 70% of the calculated Nernst potential to account for potential contributions from unwanted side-reactions. These inefficiencies increase the electrolyzer power requirements for a desired production rate (which is proportional to current). Furthermore, catalyst faradaic efficiency (values assumed are a function of the catalyst and are listed for every cell configuration modeled) at each electrode reduces the desired product production rate for a given operating current. Finally, accounting for resistive losses at the electrolyzer cell and stack level, we have modeled the production rates at various electrolyzer efficiencies. Thus, the model conservatively builds in four different inefficiencies and this approach results in a very close model fit with our previously published Martian H2O electrolysis data as detailed in the next section. The polarization model expression was validated against experimental data from our earlier studies on Martian brine H2-O2 electrolyzer before applying the model to the CO2-brine electrolyzer. Some key assumptions underlying the operation of the brine electrolyzer are - • The brine solution is made up of 2.8M Mg(ClO4)2 dissolved in water and is assumed to be in liquid phase at 237K and 101325Pa • The brine solution is acidic with pH = 3 as measured at standard atmospheric conditions ) were calculated from the experimental values from our previous work • A commercial Fumasep  FAA-3-50 anion exchange membrane (AEM) separator was used in our previous work and its reported ASR was used in our electrolyzer validation calculations. To develop this polarization model, first E Nernst for brine electrolysis at various temperatures (∼ 230-500K) and pressures (636Pa and 101325Pa) was calculated using the thermodynamic data and the Nernst equation. Second, the activation overpotentials at the anode and cathode were calculated at the specific operating conditions of the brine electrolyzer. Finally, the Ohmic losses were calculated from the membrane resistance (R mem ) at varying i values. The E Nernst for a brine electrolyzer operating at 237K and 101325Pa with a conversion efficiency of 90% was calculated to be The activation losses differed based on the electrolyzer configuration (due to variations in electrocatalytic characteristics of the catalysts). The calculations are detailed below - Correcting it to electrolyzer operating conditions of 237 K, 101325 Pa with pH = 3 as, E onset Pb 2 Ru 2 O 7 and E onset Pt-C for the anode and cathode were calculated to be 1.35V and -0.55V from the experiments performed on brine at 237K and 101325Pa. The calculated activation overpotential for the electrodes were, The total activation overpotential was calculated to be The R mem for the Fumasep  FAA-3-50 membranes used were reported to vary between 0.2 -0.7 Ω cm • The activation overpotential for the OER at RuO2 anode and the HER at Pt-C cathode are calculated from half-cell Nernst potentials which have the same values presented in the previous section. The activation overpotentials were calculated as - E onset RuO 2 and E onset Pt-C for the anode and cathode were calculated to be 1.55V and -0.55V from the experiments performed with brine at 237K and 101325Pa. The calculated activation overpotential for the electrodes were, The total activation overpotential was calculated to be As the separator membrane did not change between the configurations, the Ohmic losses remained the same as in configuration 1. A model representing the operating cell potentials of the brine electrolyzer (red line) at 237K and 101325Pa with RuO2 anode and Pt-C cathode is shown in Fig. The polarization performance at 70% efficiency is depicted using a dotted red line and is expected to closely match the performance of an actual electrolyzer with this configuration. RuO2 was used in the polarization calculations for electrolyzer modeling due to its degradation resistance and compatibility under acidic conditions as discussed in our previous study The key assumptions underlying the operation of the CO2-brine electrolyzer are - • The brine solution is made up of 2.8 M Mg(ClO4)2 dissolved in water and is assumed to be in liquid phase at 255K and 101325Pa (see detailed discussions on the thermodynamic validity of this assumption in our previous work • The brine solution is acidic with pH = 3 as measured at standard atmospheric conditions. • OER is carried out at the anode by ruthenium oxide (RuO2) and carbon-dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR) is carried out at the cathode by copper (Cu(111)) and the activation overpotentials are calculated from the onset potentials of experiments with brine at 255K and 101325Pa. For CO2-brine electrolysis, 255 K and 101325 Pa is considered for model instead of 236 K and 101325 Pa because, the Cu (111) cathode (E onset cathode ) values are reported at 255 K in the literature We calculated E Nernst for the CO2-brine electrolysis at various temperatures (∼ 230 -500K) and pressures (636Pa and 101325Pa) using the thermodynamic data and the Nernst equation. The E Nernst for the CO2-brine electrolyzer operating at 255K and 101325Pa with a conversion efficiency of 90% is, The half-cell Nernst potentials at 237 K, 101325 Pa and pH = 0 are - Correcting to pH = 3, we obtained -- E onset RuO 2 and E onset The total activation overpotential is thus- The Ohmic loss contributions were parameterized in our model of a CO2-brine electrolyzer by assuming the conductivity of the separator membrane for the CO2-brine electrolyzer to be equal to the conductivity of Nafion 117 at 303K. Thus, ASR mem is estimated to be ∼ 1.22 Ω cm As shown in our model validation for the brine electrolyzer (Fig. Thus, this validated assumption was taken as the operational single-cell potential of the CO2-brine electrolyzer and appropriately scaled-up (based on the assumed series-and parallel configuration of the cells in the stack) for our stack calculations. The electrolyzer stack was assumed to contain 10 cells of 100 cm 2 electrode surface area (each cell) and its performance is shown in Fig. Our electrolyzer system operating with Estack of 20 V (2.0V applied at each cell) has a theoretical power normalized production of ~ 0.45 g W -1 day -1 of CH4 and 3.55 g W -1 day -1 of O2 (Fig. The critical next steps would be the down selection and experimental screening of efficient and selective catalysts for CO2RR under Martian conditions. The model predicts the performance of a CO2-brine electrolyzer employing well-known Cu catalyst for the cathodic CO2RR with varying faradaic efficiencies. We anticipate the greatest improvements in performance to result from the use of alternate, high activity, high selectivity catalysts. Currently, the RuO2 anode's predicted operational oxygen generation efficiency of 70% outperforms elemental copper cathode's operational methane generation efficiency of 36% A CO2-brine electrolyzer operating at Martian ambient conditions has been found to be a viable and energy efficient solution for fuel and oxygen production on Mars through ISRU. Following successful validation of the model against experimental data, our model predicts our >1000L of CH4 and O2 production using a modestly sized 10-cell stack. The further development of this system incorporating more efficient CO2RR catalysts and higher conductivity separators is expected to significantly improve performance and present a viable solution for fuel and oxygen production for sustained human exploration on Mars. 