The discovery of photonic higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) has significantly expanded our understanding of band topology and provided unprecedented lower-dimensional topological boundary states for robust photonic devices. However, due to the vectorial and leaky nature of electromagnetic waves, it is challenging to discover three-dimensional (3D) topological photonic systems and photonic HOTIs have so far still been limited to two dimensions (2D). Here, we report on the first experimental realization of a 3D Wannier-type photonic HOTI in a tight-binding-like metal-cage photonic crystal, whose band structure matches well with that of a 3D tight-binding model due to the confined Mie resonances. By microwave near-field measurements, we directly observe coexisting topological surface, hinge, and corner states in a single 3D photonic HOTI, as predicted by the tight-binding model and simulation results. Moreover, we demonstrate that all-order topological boundary states are self-guided even in the light cone continuum and can be exposed to air without ancillary cladding, making them well-suited for practical applications. Our work thus opens routes to the multi-dimensional robust manipulation of electromagnetic waves at the outer surfaces of 3D cladding-free photonic bandgap materials and may find novel applications in 3D topological integrated photonics devices. Recently, the discovery of higher-order band topology In general, from the dimensional perspective, higher-order topological phases can be classified into two major classes: 2D Here, we report on the first experimental realization of a Wannier-type 3D photonic HOTI in a tight-binding-like photonic crystal, which can be regarded as a photonic realization of the celebrated 3D SSH model. The photonic structure consists of coupled dielectric rods embedded by metallic pillars whose confined Mie resonance serves as artificial atomic orbitals, behaving much like the tight-binding models with nearestneighbor couplings and exhibiting almost the same band structures. By direct microwave real-space visualization and momentum-space spectroscopy measurements, we experimentally observe coexisting self-guided topological surface states on 2D surfaces, topological hinge states on 1D hinges, and topological corner states confined to 0D corners in a single 3D tight-binding-like photonic crystal without extra claddings, manifesting a full dimensional hierarchy of topological boundary states due to the thirdorder band topology. Our work experimentally extends photonic HOTIs from 2D to 3D for the first time and may inspire future 3D topological integrated photonic devices and chips. We begin with a 3D SSH model whose unit cell contains eight sites (blue spheres) coupled with nearest-neighbor planar intracell (intercell) couplings tw (tv) and vertical intracell (intercell) couplings tzw (tzv) (pink rods), as shown in Fig. To further unveil the third-order band topology of the 3D MCPC, we design a finite 3D MCPC with 4 × 4 × 4 unit cells and calculate its eigenstates spectrum, as shown in Fig. Experimental observation of the first-order photonic topological surface states Now we start experimentally demonstrating the first-order topological surface states in the 3D MCPC. The fabricated experimental sample is shown in Fig. To show the detailed configuration of each layer, the compositional layers are glided for clarity, as shown in Fig. We then perform experiments to measure the transmission spectra of the topological surface (orange color) and bulk (dark grey) states by placing a source antenna at the center of the front (010) surface and inserting a probe antenna into the surface or bulk, respectively, as shown in Fig. Next, we experimentally demonstrate the second-order photonic topological hinge states originating from the higher-order band topology of the 3D MCPC. Note that all twelve hinges support topological hinge states and here we only focus one hinge between (100) and (010) surfaces and simulate its eigenmode dispersion relationship along the kz direction, as shown in Fig. Experimental observation of the third-order photonic topological corner states Finally, we experimentally characterize the third-order photonic topological corner states in the 3D MCPC. Note that all eight corners of the 3D photonic HOTI can support corner states and here we only focus on one single corner. We first measure the transmission spectra of the surface (orange color), hinge (blue color), and corner (green color) states under the excitation of a point source (cyan stars in Figs. In conclusion, we have experimentally realized a Wannier-type 3D photonic HOTIs with a dimensional hierarchy of coexisting first-order 2D surface states, secondorder 1D hinge states, and third-order 0D corner states in a single 3D MCPC. Moreover, we experimentally demonstrate that all-order photonic topological boundary states are self-guided without any ancillary cladding, making them more suitable for practical applications. The ability to integrate 2D surface states, 1D hinge states, and 0D corner states in a single photonic structure may yield potential applications for multidimensional photon steering in 3D photonic devices. Since our work provides a versatile platform for implementing a 3D tight-binding model in a 3D photonic crystal, we envision more experimental studies on realizing topological lattice defects such as dislocation Along these lines, 3D photonic topological insulators and HOTIs operating at telecom or visible frequencies are on the horizon 