Ferromagnet1/Non-magnetic Metal/Ferromagnet2 (FM1/NM/FM2) trilayers have garnered considerable attention because of their potential in spintronic applications. A thorough investigation of the spin transport properties of these trilayers is therefore important. Asymmetric trilayers, particularly those including Platinum (Pt) as a spacer are less explored. Pt mediates exchange coupling between the two FM layers and thus offers a unique platform to investigate the spin-transport properties under indirect exchange coupling conditions through the spin-pumping mechanism. We study the static and dynamic magnetic properties of Ni80Fe20/Pt(t)/Co trilayer system through vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) and spin-pumping based on ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) spectroscopy by varying the Pt spacer thickness. Though a powerful method for characterizing the dynamic magnetic properties of FM layers, FMR is seldom the only technique used for investigating spin transport characteristics of asymmetric trilayers. Our analytical focus on the acoustic mode, facilitated by the distinct magnetizations of the Ni80Fe20 and Co layers, allows for the isolation of individual layer resonances. The derived spin-pumping induced damping (α sp ) of the Ni80Fe20 and Co layers reveals a direct dependence on the Pt spacer thickness. Furthermore, fitting of the weighted average of the damping parameters to the α sp of acoustic mode reveals that the observed FMR spectra is indeed a result of the in-phase precession of the magnetizations in two FM layers. The extracted effective spin-mixing conductance (g eff ↑↓ ) varies with the FM/NM interface, specifically 1.72 × 10 19 m -2 at the Ni80Fe20/Pt and 4. 07 × 10 19 m -2 at the Co/Pt interface, indicating a strong correlation with interfacial characteristics. Additionally, we deduce the spin diffusion length in Pt to be between 1.02 and 1.55 nm and calculate the interfacial spin transparency (T in ) and spin current densities, highlighting significant disparities between the Ni80Fe20/Pt and Co/Pt interfaces. This detailed analysis enhances our understanding of spin transport in Ni80Fe20/Pt/Co trilayers. It offers insights important for advancing spintronic device design and lays the groundwork for future theoretical investigations of trilayer system. I. Trilayer systems consisting of two ferromagnetic (FM) layers separated by a non-magnetic (NM) layer have attracted the interest of magnetism and spintronics research community since the discovery of the Giant Magneto-Resistance (GMR) effect in the 1990s. Traditionally, trilayers have been studied for applications in magnetic recording and random memories. In recent years, a renewed interest in these trilayers is seen in emerging areas of spintronics studies such as field-free spin-orbit torque switching In the case of a symmetric coupled trilayer, i.e. when both the FM layers are of the same material (FM/NM/FM), it is straightforward to obtain the value of spin-mixing conductance (g ↑↓ ) at the FM/NM interface by studying the collective magnetization dynamics of the coupled FMs, such as Fe/Ag/Fe To date, various approaches including non-local magnetotransport spin-valve Co/Cu/CoFeB At the FM/Pt interface a finite magnetic moment emerges due to direct exchange coupling, affecting up to few atomic layers of Pt We present a comprehensive study of the static and dynamic magnetic properties alongside the spin transport characteristics within an asymmetric trilayer Ni80Fe20/Pt(t)/Co system employing broadband FMR spectroscopy and VSM. By varying the thickness of the Pt spacer layer, we aim to modulate and examine the IEC between the FM layers and its subsequent effect on the magnetization dynamics of the two FM layers. The focal point of our investigation is the acoustic mode of the trilayer system, which due to the differing bulk magnetizations of the two FM layers, enables the deconvolution and individual resonance analysis of each FM layer through lineshape analysis. Our methodological approach is similar to that of Omelchenko et. al. Thin films were deposited at ambient temperature on thermally oxidized single-crystalline Si substrates utilizing magnetron sputtering. The deposition was carried out in Ar atmosphere at chamber base pressure better than 4 × 10 -7 Torr. The deposited multilayer sequence was as follows: Si substrate//Ta(2)/Ni80Fe20(6 nm)/Pt(tNM)/Co(6 nm)/Ta(2 nm), where the thickness of the Pt layer (tNM) was varied across samplesspecifically, 0 nm, 0.5 nm, 1.5 nm, 3.5 nm and 7 nm. To simplify discussions, samples are henceforth designated based on their Pt layer thickness as Pt(0), Pt(1.5), Pt(3.5) and Pt (7) respectively. Underlayer and capping layer of Ta were deposited to promote uniform film growth of Ni80Fe20 and prevent the oxidation of Co layer respectively. Additionally, a control sample using a spacer layer of Cu was fabricated and analysed to underscore the distinctive effects attributable to Pt. Broadband, field-swept, in-plane magnetic field, ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements were conducted using Quantum Design VersaLab system with a coplanar waveguide and NanoOsc Phase FMR lock-in detection. Experiments spanned a frequency range of 5 to 20 GHz, with an external DC magnetic field oriented parallel to the sample plane. Samples were saturated at 15 kOe, well above the magnetic field sweep used, to ensure full saturation during measurements. Static magnetic properties were characterized using Vibrating Sample Magnetometry (VSM) on the Quantum Design VersaLab system. These measurements were performed at room temperature, applying fields up to 6 kOe in an in-plane configuration. For samples comprising multiple ferromagnetic (FM) layers, such as the FM1/NM/FM2 structures discussed in this study, the observed hysteresis loops are derived from the collective magnetic responses of both the involved FM layers. Figure To elucidate the effect of interlayer coupling on the spinpumping in our trilayer system, we investigated the dynamic properties of the magnetization by measuring the derivative (dI dH ⁄ ) of the FMR spectra. Figure The fitting equation applied in our study is structured as follows. dI dH where, ∆H 1 and ∆H 2 represent the resonance linewidths and H res1 and H res2 represent the resonance magnetic fields of FM1 and FM2 layers, respectively, m is the slope and S and A are amplitudes of the Lorentzian fitting function. Figure ΔH 0 also referred to as the zero-frequency broadening is the lowest for Ni80Fe20 in Pt (7) sample at ~6 Oe. It increases with t Pt while reverse trend is seen in ΔH 0 Co peak as in trilayer with Pt(7) ~194 Oe and 30 Oe for Pt(0) sample. These values are on the higher side as compared to other report of Ni80Fe20 symmetric trilayer system with Pt spacer Further analysis of the FMR spectra concerning the effective magnetization and interfacial anisotropy is discussed in Supplementary Information Section S-III. We have thus investigated the features and origin of the obtained FMR spectra. We now discuss the main results related to the dynamic magnetic properties of each FM layer and spin transport across each FM/NM interface, starting with the relaxation dynamics at each FM/Pt interface. Spin-pumping refers to the phenomenon of the transfer of spin current by a precessing magnetization to the neighbouring NM layer because of the non-equilibrium spin accumulation in the FM layer. This process is an outcome of the dynamic and coherent precession of the magnetization around the effective magnetic field (H eff ) in a FM layer. H eff includes the external magnetic field, crystal anisotropy and demagnetizing fields. The enhancement in the damping of the amplitude of precession of magnetization in the FM layer is understood to be a direct consequence of this spin-pumping phenomenon The intrinsic spin-mixing conductance (g int ↑↓ ) of an FM/NM interface is a measure of the inherent efficiency of the FM/NM interface in facilitating the transfer of spin angular momentum from the FM to the NM layer, independent of the spin backflow. g int ↑↓ is determined from the variation of spin-pumping induced damping (α sp ) as a function of NM thickness (t NM ). Spin-mixing conductance correlates spin-pumping to the intrinsic properties of the FM and the experimentally measurable effective Gilbert damping parameter, which as outlined earlier, is directly affected by the phenomenon of spin-pumping. It is given as follows where, all symbols hold their usual meaning. In FM/NM systems the exponential term in the above equation describes the spin diffusion in NM and accounts for the attenuation of spin current as it diffuses through the NM material. To realistically model the spin transport phenomena, the exponential decay term for t NM < λ sd , is typically multiplied by a factor of 2 that signifies the distance traversed by the spins after reflection from the NM/air interface, which is assumed to be a perfect spinreflector On the other hand, when accounting for the spin backflow, the efficiency of spin-pumping across the FM/NM interface is given by the effective complex spinmixing conductance (g eff ↑↓ ) per unit area of the interface. It is expressed as, g eff ↑↓ = Re(g eff ↑↓ ) + Im(g eff ↑↓ ) . In nonmagnetic metal layer, the imaginary component of the complex effective spin-mixing conductance is significantly smaller than the real part As the effective spin mixing conductance offers valuable insights into the interfacial spin transfer characteristics it is an important parameter to consider when developing spintronic devices with one or more FM/NM layers. In equation (3), the term α sp is derived from α eff which encapsulates all the contributions to the experimentally measured damping such as the intrinsic damping (α int ) of the FM layer and the additional damping resulting from spin-pumping. α eff can be given as follows We note that in addition to the spin-pumping in Pt the seed and capping NM layers also contribute to the spinpumping. Therefore, to extract the spin-pumping damping in Pt we must separate these additional contributions. Accordingly, equation ( Where, α NiFe and α Co represent the intrinsic damping of Ni80Fe20 and Co layers respectively, α sp,seed and α sp,cap represent the damping in seed and capping layers respectively and α sp,Pt is the damping due to spinpumping in Pt. The general form can be written as follows: α ref is the reference damping due to both the intrinsic and extrinsic sources. This equation thus accounts for the diverse sources of damping. We separately found α ref for Ta(2)/Ni80Fe20(6)/Cu(3) and Co(6)/Ta(2) layers to be 8.21 × 10 -3 and 5.7 × 10 -3 respectively. The variation of α sp,Pt as a function of Pt spacer thickness for Ni80Fe20 and Co is shown in Figure Solid lines in Figure Using equation ( From the point of view of generation, manipulation and detection of spin currents for different spintronic applications, it is important to quantify the interfacial spin transparency (T FM/Pt ) for FM/Pt interface. For example, in magnetic memories, spin filter and spin valves understanding T FM/Pt can significantly enhance the efficiency, maximize the spin polarized current, etc. T FM/Pt essentially measures the impedance to spin current flow at the interface, influenced by electronic state mismatch and lattice imperfections. It is directly related to the effective spin mixing conductance (g eff ↑↓ ) as follows where, ρ (= 20 μΩ. cm) Based on phenomenological model of spin-pumping, the interfacial spin current density ( j s FM/Pt ) has been related to the effective Gilbert damping parameter, α eff , and NM material dependent spin-mixing conductance g eff ↑↓ (Pt) here, where, g eff ↑↓ is the effective spin-mixing conductance calculated using (4) and ε = (Z Pt e 2 ħc ⁄ ) The ability to modulate the spin current density by adjusting spacer thickness and material properties thus offers a dynamic control mechanism for spin interactions for an asymmetrical trilayer system. We further elucidate our understanding of the spinpumping mechanism in the trilayer by analyzing it as a composite of coupled FM layers that interact through both dynamic coupling via spin-pumping and static coupling via Pt-mediated exchange interactions. To facilitate this analysis, we compute the average spinpumping induced damping ( α ̃sp ) within the trilayer system, using the experimentally obtained saturation magnetizations (M s ) of the two FM layers as the weighting factors, as considered in equation ( with, M s,Co = 1459 emu/cc and M s,NiFe = 825 emu/cc, alongside the experimentally determined Gilbert damping parameters, α Co and α NiFe . The variation of α ̃sp as a function of t Pt is shown in Figure where, R = ρ ↑ e 2 2πħ λ sd , ρ ↑ (= 34 ± 1 μΩ. cm ) As outlined in the introduction, magnetization precession in the coupled FM layers emits spin current out of the FM layers with parallel or opposite spin polarization, contingent upon the phase of the precessing magnetization. For NM spacer thicknesses below λ sd , the emitted spin current traverses the conducting Pt spacer layer via ballistic transport and is absorbed by the other FM layer In summary, our systematic study of Ni80Fe20/Pt(t)/Co trilayer system demonstrates that variation in the Pt NM spacer thickness significantly influences the coupling of FM layers, as analyzed through VSM and macrospin simulations. An exponential decrease in the coupling strength with increasing Pt thickness is observed. Subsequently, the trilayer system with strongly coupled FM layers, with 0.5 nm and 1.5 nm Pt spacer layer, exhibits a single resonance peak whereas in the systems with decoupled FM layers, for thicker Pt spacer layer (3 nm and 7 nm), two well separated resonance peaks emerge, corresponding to decoupled resonances in Ni80Fe20 and Co respectively. Spin-pumping in Ni80Fe20/Pt(t)/Co studied by FMR reveals a nuanced dependency of spin-pumping induced damping ( α sp ) on the Pt spacer thickness, highlighting distinctive non-reciprocal behaviours at the Ni80Fe20/Pt and Co/Pt interfaces. The observed variation in the saturation levels of α sp for Ni80Fe20 and Co is indicative of the differential spin transport characteristics inherent to each FM/Pt interface. The effective α sp is found to decrease with decreasing Pt thickness, indicating a dynamic compensation of the spin current achieved through the inphase precession of magnetizations in Ni80Fe20 and Co, because of the in-phase spin current pumped by the other FM layer across the thin NM spacer layer. This observation, coupled with the different values of spin-mixing conductances at the two interfaces, underscores the substantial difference in the spin-current density present at two interfaces in the asymmetric trilayer system. The derived interfacial spin transparency, approximately ~62% for Co/Pt and ~25% for Ni80Fe20/Pt interfaces, alongside the measured spin current densities of 10.5 nJ m -2 ⁄ and 3.2 nJ m -2 ⁄ respectively, points out the differential spin transport efficacy across these interfaces. This investigation establishes the foundation for addressing the theoretical integration of coupling strength and dynamic spin-pumping between the FM layers for the analysis of α sp in an asymmetric trilayer system. By developing a fundamental understanding of spin-pumping in an asymmetric trilayer and elucidating the function of Pt in regulating the spin transfer dynamics this study provides a framework for future research into the mechanism of spin transport and targeted advancements in spintronic device design to improve the efficiency and performance of future applications. To better understand the exchange coupling of the trilayer system, macro-spin model is used to describe the magnetization rotation of the uniform individual ferromagnet layer. For thin films with inplane anisotropy, the free energy density per unit area can be expressed as 