The compositional and structural flexibility of functionalised two-dimensional metal carbonitrides or MXenes has been exploited through a combinatorial search for new materials that can act as catalysts for photo-assisted water splitting by absorbing sunlight with energy in the infra-red region. Detailed calculations on 49 Janus MXenes where two surfaces are of asymmetric nature are carried out by first-principles Density Functional Theory. A screening procedure is adopted to arrive at potential candidates. Our calculations predict four new materials whose surfaces can activate both hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions upon splitting water, two out of which are infra-red active, and the rest are visible light-active. We have performed a detailed microscopic analysis to find out the interrelations of the structural model of surface functionalisation, the chemistry of the surfaces, the electronic structure, and the alignment of bands with respect to the reaction potentials that explain our results. Apart from these four compounds, we find thirteen other compounds that are suitable for either hydrogen evolution or oxygen reduction reactions. This study lays out a guideline for the systematic discovery of potential new catalysts for water splitting under sunlight irradiation. Photocatalysis is an advanced green technique that utilises solar energy to produce Hydrogen. Upon absorbing enough energy from sunlight, electrons and holes are generated and separated on the surfaces of a photocatalyst for further consumption in water splitting reactions: the Oxygen evolution reaction (OER) ( H 2 O + 2h + -→ 1 2 O 2 + 2H + ) and the Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) ( 2H + + 2e --→ H 2 ). The minimum energy requirement for both reactions to happen simultaneously is 1.23 eV, with oxidation (reduction) potentials of O 2 (H 2 ) are -5.67 The latest addition to this group is MXenes. MXenes, with chemical formula M n+1 X n T n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, ...) where M is a transition metal element, X either Carbon or Nitrogen and T a surface passivating functional group, offers tremendous structural and compositional flexibility, ideal for tuning a number of functional properties and various applications Despite quite a few work on the prediction of new photocatalysts in the MXene family, both conventional and Janus, and with mixed success, there is no investigation that systematically explores the inter-relations of surface compositions, structural properties, electronic structure and alignments of bands with respect to characteristic potentials for water splitting reactions in MXene family of compounds such that predictors for potential photocatalyst can be formulated. Moreover, there is a void in terms of infra-red active photocatalysts in this family. In order to address both these issues, we have adopted a firstprinciples electronic structure calculations based combinatorial approach by construction of 47 Janus MXenes and putting in place a screening strategy for systematic exploration of possible new photocatalyst with emphasis on the ones active in the Infra-red region. The extensive study made predicts four new photocatalysts; among them, two are active in the Infrared part. Apart from the prediction of new materials, this study has demonstrated the potential stored in the Janus compounds of the MXene family as far as catalysts for OER and HER in the presence of sunlight are concerned. Density functional theory (DFT) based Plane-wave Pseudopotential method as implemented in Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) In the quest for new materials suitable for photocatalytic water splitting, we have considered 32 M 2 CTT ′ and 15 MM ′ CO 2 Janus MXenes and adopted the following screening procedure to pin down the promising materials. The procedure has the following steps: Pristine MXenes with chemical formula M There is more than one choice for the surface functional group with regard to the site of passivation shown in In this section, we systematically discuss the structural and electronic properties of three different sets of Janus MXenes. In each case, we analyse the results to understand the origin of these properties. In a combinatorial study, such insights are necessary for future studies on a larger scale. Structural information like the structural model, the lattice constants, bond lengths, and thickness of compounds of this series are presented in Table To fulfill the octet rule, C and O require 4 and 2 electrons, respectively, whereas the requirement of H, F, and (OH) is 1. All four transition metals have at least 3 valence electrons that can be used to form M-C, M-T, and M-T ′ bonds. Thus, the functional groups prefer to occupy hollow sites that are associated with the M sites stabilising them in Model 1. The electronic ground states of the compounds in this series are compiled in Table The origin of metallic ground states in Ti, Zr, and Hf-based Janus considered in this series can be understood in a similar way. All three transition metals have 1 electron more than Sc. In the Ti series, the compounds Ti 2 CHO, Ti 2 CFO and Ti 2 (OH)O have the O passivating the Ti (2) surface. The 4 electrons of Ti (2) are provided to C and O while 1 less electron is required to be provided by Ti (1) as its surface is passivated by H, F, or (OH). This extra electron in the system is responsible for the metallic nature of these three compounds. The electronic structure of these compounds (Figure Sc (2) 3d O (2) 2p Sc (1) 3d O2p C2p Sc (2) 3d S3p Sc (1) 3d O2p C2p Sc (2) 3d Se4p (a) Zr (1) 4d O (1) 2p C2p Zr (2) Zr 2 COS Zr (1) 4d O2p C2p Zr (2) 4d S3p Zr (1) 4d O2p C2p Zr (2) 4d Se4p (b) Atom Projected Density Of States (states/eV) Energy, E-E f (eV) Fermi energy in each case is set to 0 eV. site of C so that it can share the electrons of C. This is the reason why Sc 2 CO 2 minimise total energy in Model 3 where Sc (1) (Sc (2) ) surface is passivated by O occupying B(D) site. Consequently, Sc 2 CO 2 is a semiconductor as seen from its atom projected densities of states (Figure The series MM ′ CO 2 ; M,M ′ = Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf Janus MXenes can also be realised by replacing one of the M surfaces of M 2 C MXene with a different transition metal M ′ . Since all four M 2 CO 2 MXenes where M is Sc, Ti, Zr, and Hf, are semiconductors, in this sub-section, we look into the structural properties and electronic ground states of MM ′ CO 2 Janus where 6 different compounds are obtained from combinations of these four transition metal elements. All six compounds in this series stabilise in Model 1 structure (Table The series MM ′ CO 2 , M=Ti, Zr, Hf; M ′ = Cr, Mo, W The MM ′ CO 2 series considered in this sub-section consists of a group IV element M and a group VI element M ′ . Janus MXenes with such combinations are considered because M and M ′ elements considered here have significant differences in their electronegativity, a minimum of 7%(Ti and Cr) to a maximum of 81%(Hf and W). When M and M ′ are on two different surfaces, this difference in electronegativity can generate the internal electric field necessary for band bending. All nine Janus MXenes in this series stabilise in Model 3 configuration (Table Our calculations reveal 17 semiconductors among the 39 Janus MXene considered in this work. The next step for screening materials is to look at the band structures of these 17 to find out whether a compound is a direct or indirect band gap semiconductor and the size of its band gap. The first criterion is important to assess a compound's potential as a catalyst in the photo-splitting of water. The efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction will increase with less recombination of photo-generated electrons and holes. In the case of a semiconductor photocatalyst with an indirect band gap, the carriers cannot recombine as easily as in the case of a direct band gap semiconductor photocatalyst. The size of the band gap determines the part of the solar spectrum in which a given photocatalyst can operate. The band structures of these semiconducting Janus are shown in Figure Our results agree very well with existing results on some of these compounds where ε is the dielectric constant, A is the area of the MXene surface, t the thickness of the material and e the electronic charge. ∆Φ is calculated as the potential difference between the bottom surface (the surface at (00-1)) and the top surface (the surface at (001)). Calculated values of t for the semiconducting Janus MXenes are given in Tables E CBM and E V BM are the energies of the conduction band minima and the valence band maxima, respectively. Values of overpotentials for each compound are given in Table The results obtained through the systematic screening finally identify four compounds, Sc 2 COS, Zr 2 COS, Hf 2 COS, and ZrHfCO 2 , as compounds suitable for photocatalytic water splitting. While Sc 2 COS and ZrHfCO 2 can utilise the visible part of solar spectrum, Zr 2 COS and Hf 2 COS will be active in the Infra-red region. However, the last check for their competence as photocatalysts is done by examining their charge density isosurface distributions. Unless the VBM and the CBM states are contributed by components of two different surfaces, photocatalytic redox water-splitting cannot be feasible from the thermodynamic point of view. In Figure A number of first-principles-based computational models to predict photocatalysts for water splitting in the MXene family far outnumber the experiments. However, almost all the works have investigated systems that are active in the visible region. Moreover, there is a lack of coherence between those studies as those were not done in a systematic way. In this work, we have tried to bridge that gap by adopting a combinatorial approach to generate 47 thinnest (n = 1) MXenes with asymmetric surfaces that is Janus compounds and apply a screening criterion to systematically arrive at the ones that can host both OER and HER, preferably in the Infra-red part of the solar spectrum. Our calculations predict only 4 potential candidates, out of which 2 (Zr 2 COS and Hf 2 COS) can absorb the infra-red light while the other 2 (Sc 2 COS and ZrHfCO 2 ) will be visible-active. As a by-product of our endeavor, we found 6(7) more Janus MXenes useful for water reduction(oxidation) reactions under Z-scheme photocatalysis. We have thoroughly investigated the role of structural properties and the bonding nature of the constituents to find clues that can help figure out predictors to screen materials. Our study suggests that the location of the functional group passivating MXene surfaces is connected with the electronic configuration of the constituents and resultant sharing of electrons between cations and anions. This, in turn, decides the ground state electronic property of a given Janus MXene. We also find that the re-alignment of bands due to the internal electric field would be possible if the two surfaces have elements or functional groups that have significantly different electronegativity. The electronic structures of all 47 compounds imply that a few more Janus MXenes with the semiconducting ground state can be realised by the application of strains as they are semi-metallic in nature. Almost all such compounds are M 2 CTT ′ , which implies that asymmetry in the functional group is more useful in exploiting the flexibility in structure-property relations in this family. This study provides important insights for experimentalists looking to tap the potential of MXenes in photocatalytic water splitting. The detailed and systematic approach adopted in our work can also be used for a more elaborate investigation of Janus MXenes. cilities under Grant No. SR/FST/P-II/020/2009 and IIT Guwahati for the PARAM supercomputing facility where all computations are performed. The authors would like to thank Dr. Mukul Kabir for useful discussions. 3.2.2 ′ CO 2 (M=Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf; M ′ =Ti, Zr, Hf, Cr, Mo, W) MXenes