Inspired by the recent discovery of a new polar metal LiReO 3 by K. Murayama et al, we calculate the temperature(T)-dependent crystal structures of LiBO3 with B = Ta, W, Re, Os, using the self-consistent phonon (SCPH) theory. We have reproduced the experimentally observed polar-nonpolar structural phase transitions and the transition temperatures (T c ) of LiTaO 3 , LiReO 3 , and LiOsO 3 . From the calculation, we predict that LiWO 3 is a polar metal, which is yet to be tested experimentally. Upon doping electrons to the insulating LiTaO 3 , the predicted T c is quickly suppressed and approaches those of the polar metals. Thus, there is a continuous crossover between ferroelectric insulators and polar metals if we dope electrons to the polar metals. Investigating the detailed material dependence of the interatomic force constants (IFCs), we explicitly show that the suppression of T c in polar metals can be ascribed to the screening of the long-range Li-O interaction, which is caused by the presence of the itinerant electrons. Polar metals, metals that show ferroelectric-like phase transition in terms of crystal symmetry, have attracted considerable interest since LiOsO 3 was experimentally identified as a polar metal for the first time However, only a few materials have been discovered As the first discovered polar metal, LiOsO 3 has been extensively investigated experimentally and theoretically. LiOsO 3 shows second-order order-disorder structural phase transition between R3c and R 3c structures at 140 K In addition, doping carriers to ferroelectric insulators has been investigated as an effective way to design a polar metal Recently, LiReO 3 have been experimentally revealed to be a polar metal In this work, we focus on LiBO 3 with B = Ta, W, Re, and Os. From the basic electronic-structure calculations, we have confirmed that LiTaO 3 is a band insulator while the other three are all metals in both the polar and nonpolar phases. The harmonic phonon calculations show that the A 2u mode at Γ point has the largest instability in the nonpolar R 3c phase, which is consistent with the structural phase transitions of LiTaO 3 , LiReO 3 , LiOsO 3 . Furthermore, we calculate the T-dependence of the crystal structures of these materials based on the self-consistent phonon theory We use the structural optimization method based on selfconsistent phonon (SCPH) theory SCPH theory is based on the variational principle of the free energy where F is the true free energy, and F is the variational free energy. Ĥ is the true Hamiltonian, and Ĥ0 is the trial Hamiltonian, which we restrict to be a harmonic Hamiltonian Ĥ0 = kλ ħΩ kλ â † kλ âkλ + 1 2 in SCPH theory. The SCPH frequencies Ω kλ are considered as the variational parameters, which are adjusted to minimize F In structural optimization, we consider the minimized variational free energy (min Ω kλ F ) as the approximate free energy and minimize it with respect to the crystal structures. We start from the Taylor expansion of the potential energy surface where ûRαμ is the μ(= x, y, z) component of atomic displacement of atom α in the primitive cell at R, and are those in the normal coordinate representation. ε kλ, αμ is the polarization vector of the phonon with mode λ and crystal momentum k. M α is the mass of the atom α. We call the Taylor expansion coefficients The IFCs are the functions of atomic positions in the unit cell, which we denote as X αμ for the μ(=x, y, z) component of the atomic position of atom α The crystal structure (X αμ )-dependence of the IFCs Φ can be calculated using the IFC renormalization and perform structural optimization with finitetemperature effects. Please see Refs. We use the ALAMODE implementation of the SCPH calculation and SCPH-based structural optimization The harmonic IFCs are calculated using the small displacement method with atomic displacements of 0.01 Å. The anharmonic IFCs are obtained using the compressive sensing method We employ the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) We calculate the electronic structures of LiBO 3 with B=Ta, W, Re, Os, which are shown in Fig. In addition, we would like to add a short discussion on electronic correlations. The target materials LiBO 3 can be strongly correlated electron systems due to the 5d transition metals in the B site. In particular, electronic correlations of LiOsO 3 have been shown to be essential to precisely describe the electronic properties We calculate the harmonic phonon dispersions and atomprojected density of states of LiBO 3 . Note that we neglect SOC from this section because SOC hardly affects the lowenergy region of the potential energy surface, which we show in Sec. II in the supplementary materials Based on the above discussions, we apply the SCPH-based structural optimization at finite temperatures to LiBO 3 with B = Ta, W, Re, Os. The temperature-dependence of the atomic displacements are shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. As depicted in Fig. Because the change of T c is continuous, we consider that there is a continuous crossover between the ferroelectric insulators and the polar metals, which are connected by doped ferroelectrics. Upon doping electrons to ferroelectric insula- tors, the polar instabilities is suppressed at finite temperatures, even when the polar displacements at zero temperature remain unchanged. In this section, We discuss the origin of the dome-like structure of T c of polar metals in Fig. where we defined Φ 2 = Φ(0λ, 0λ) and Φ 4 = Φ(0λ, 0λ, 0λ, 0λ) for notational simplicity. q λ is the atomic displacement along the ferroelectric-like soft mode in normal coordinate representation. The depth of this double well potential is According to Table Lastly, we discuss the origin of the difference in the transition temperatures between the ferroelectric insulator LiTaO 3 and the polar metals LiBO 3 (B = W, Re, Os). In Fig. Furthermore, we apply cutoffs to the harmonic IFCs and investigate the change of instabilities along the ferroelectriclike soft modes. Figure q λ is the atomic displacement in normal coordinate representation along the soft mode, and the polarization vector of the soft mode ε kλ, αμ is fixed when the dynamical matrix is altered by applying the cutoff. In Fig. In Fig. The short-range part of Fig. Here, we briefly discuss our understanding on the structural phase transitions of the polar metals in comparison with the previous works on LiOsO 3 . We have clarified that the drastic suppression of T c from the ferroelectric insulator LiTaO 3 to the polar metals are caused by the screening of the long-range IFCs, which is ascribed to the itinerant electrons. The polar instability of the polar metals originate from the short-range IFCs, which show linear-like dependence on B-site atomic numbers through LiTaO 3 to LiWO 3 . These results support that the polar metals LiReO 3 and LiOsO 3 have short-range origins as suggested in Ref. The soft modes in these polar metals are dominated by the Li ions, while the electronic structures near the Fermi level consist of the O and B-site orbitals, which seems consistent with the decoupling electron mechanism. However, the weak coupling between the soft mode and the low-energy electronic structure does not prevent the screening of the long-range interactions, as suggested by Anderson and Blount We perform a systematic analysis on LiBO 3 with B = Ta, W, Re, Os. LiTaO 3 is a ferroelectric insulator, while LiReO 3 and LiOsO 3 are polar metals. The DFT calculations show that LiTaO 3 is a band insulator while the other three are metals, consistent with the experiments. The phonon calculations show that the ferroelectric-like A 2u mode has the largest instability in the high-temperature R 3c phase, consistent with the structural phase transitions. We then apply the SCPH-based structural optimization to LiBO 3 and accurately reproduce the chemical trend of the transition temperatures. From these calculations, we predict that LiWO 3 is another polar metal yet to be tested experimentally. In the end, we perform a detailed analysis on the interatomic force constants and explicitly show that the suppression of T c in polar metals can be ascribed to the screening of the long-range IFCs caused by the itinerant electrons. Φ μμ 1 (0α, R 1 α 1 )., where ′ is the sum restricted to the IFCs with atomic distance smaller than the cutoff radius. q λ is the atomic displacement along the ferroelectric-like soft mode in normal-coordinate representation. The calculation is performed on the nonpolar R 3c phase without SOC. and The non-dispersive nature of the soft modes suggests that the transition is caused by the on-site instability of the loosely bonded small Li ions, as suggested for LiOsO 3