Transition metal dichalcogenides with superperiodic lattice distortions have been widely investigated as the platform of ultrafast structural phase manipulations. Here we performed ultrafast electron diffraction on room-temperature TaTe2, which exhibits peculiar double zigzag chain pattern of Ta atoms. From the time-dependent electron diffraction pattern, we revealed a photoinduced change in the crystal structure occurring within <0.5 ps, though there is no corresponding high-temperature equilibrium phase. We further clarified the slower response (~1.5 ps) reflecting the lattice thermalization. Our result suggests the unusual ultrafast crystal structure dynamics specific to the nonequilibrium transient process in TaTe2. Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) MX2 (M: transition metal, X: chalcogen) has been extensively studied from the viewpoint of fascinating photoinduced responses in ultrafast timescale. TMD consists of layered structures with weak stacking interaction. One well-known polytype is so-called 1T structure of P3 ̅ m1 space group Depending on M and X, 1T-MX2 shows various physical properties Among TMD, TaX2 are representative systems that show characteristic superstructures and related photoinduced dynamics. It is known that TaS2 shows multiple CDW states accompanying the so-called Stars of David type lattice distortions, as shown in Fig. Nonetheless, TaTe2 shows a structural phase transition to the low-temperature (LT) phase at 170 K where further clustering of Ta atoms into heptamer-pattern emerges These indicate a characteristic structural instability inherent in 1T"-TaTe2, and unique photoinduced crystal structure dynamics can be expected. Although photoinduced dynamics in the LT phase has been reported recently In this study, we perform ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) We successfully observed the ultrafast increase of some diffraction peak intensities, which indicates the change of crystal structure occurring within < 0.5 ps, though there are no corresponding higher temperature phases in equilibrium. We further investigate the transient structural dynamics in 1T"-TaTe2 by focusing on the time dependence profile. Our UED system consists of a femtosecond pulsed laser (Light Conversion PHAROS) and an ultra-high-vacuum electron diffraction system with a photocathode (APCO ARH-30), as described in Ref. High-quality 1T''-TaTe2 single-crystals were grown by the chemical vapor transport method Diffraction simulation of 1T''-TaTe2 was performed based on kinematic diffraction theory, by using the crystal structure in literature Miller indices decrease as compared to t < 0. At the same time, we observe the increase in the background intensity at 3.6 ps. Thus, we can find at least two different t-dependent behaviors in those diffraction patterns. In the kinematic diffraction theory, a change in the diffraction intensity can be described either by the change of (1) lattice constants through the shape factor, (2) atomic coordinates through the structure factor, or (3) lattice temperature (Debye-Waller factor). Heating of the lattice temperature always decreases the Bragg diffraction intensities and increases the background intensity as the counterpart. Hence, the increase (decrease) of the background (diffraction) intensity observed at 3.6 ps can be interpreted as a consequence of the optically induced lattice thermalization. On the other hand, the increase of the diffraction peaks at t = 0.3 ~ 0.6 ps cannot be explained by the photothermalization of lattice, thus raising the possibilities of the change in the shape factor and/or structure factor. In the present case of the 60 nm-thick flake sample, the characteristic time scale of the whole lattice constant modification (i.e. global lattice deformation) can be estimated by the sound velocity and the thickness, which should be in the order of tens of picoseconds We further discuss the origin of the photoinduced change in the crystal structure based on the temporal profile of diffraction intensities. Figure where A and τ are the fitting parameters corresponding to the amplitude of photoinduced change and its time constant, respectively, and θ(t) is the Heaviside step function. To consider the 1 ps time resolution, we used f(t) convolved with the Gaussian of 1 ps for the fitting. We determined the time constant for the lattice thermalization τ th ~ 1.5 ps by fitting the background intensity in Fig. In addition, we investigate the fluence dependence of the photoinduced dynamics. Figures To estimate the fluence dependent A th and A st , we performed the abovementioned fitting procedures in 9 1 3 diffraction peak with fixed τ th (= 1.5 ps) and τ st (= 0.1 ps). Figures Similarly, A st also shows a monotonic increase as a function of the fluence in this range. Generally in photoinduced phase transitions, it is commonly reported that threshold behavior and/or strong nonlinearity appear in the fluence dependence For the room temperature 1T''-TaTe2, we can hypothetically consider the structural change from 1T'' to 1T-phase, which is realized in the case of VTe2 Nevertheless, we should note that in VTe2, much lower fluence of 0.2 mJ/cm 2 can induce the structural change as large as > 10 % in diffraction intensity, whereas A st < 2% at 2.4 mJ/cm 2 for the present case. We can also consider the possibility of yet unknown hidden states other than 1T-phase. In a recent high-pressure x-ray study for TaTe2, appearance of a superconductivity phase following a change in monoclinic angle was reported at low temperature (< 4 K) In conclusion, we performed UED measurements for 1T''-TaTe2 to investigate photoinduced structural dynamics. From the observed increase in the diffraction intensity, we elucidated the ultrafast crystal structural change occurring within 0.5 ps. By closely analyzing the time profile of the diffraction intensity, we found that the timescale of the lattice photo-thermalization was 1.5 ps, and could be safely ruled out as the origin of the structural change. To discuss the possibility of the hidden phase, quantitative crystal structure determination of ultrafast nonequilibrium state should be required for further investigation. 