The cubic β-Mn-type alloy Co8Zn8Mn4 is a chiral helimagnet that exhibits a peculiar temperature-dependent behavior in the spiral pitch, which decreases from 130 nm at room temperature to 70 nm below 20 K. Notably, this shortening is also accompanied by a structural transition of the metastable skyrmion texture, transforming from a hexagonal lattice to a square lattice of elongated skyrmions. The underlying mechanism of these transformations remain unknown, with interactions potentially involved including temperature-dependent Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, magnetocrystalline anisotropy, and exchange anisotropy. Here, x-ray resonant magnetic small-angle scattering in vectorial magnetic fields was employed to investigate the temperature dependence of the anisotropic properties of the helical phase in Co8Zn8Mn4. Our results reveal quantitatively that the magnitude of the anisotropic exchange interaction increases by a factor of 4 on cooling from room temperature to 20 K, leading to a 5% variation in the helical pitch within the (001) plane at 20 K. While anisotropic exchange interaction contributes to the shortening of the spiral pitch, its magnitude is insufficient to explain the variation in the spiral periodicity from room to low temperatures. Finally, we demonstrate that magnetocrystalline and exchange anisotropies compete, favoring different orientations of the helical vector in the ground state. In recent years, there has been significant interest in the investigation of particle-like magnetic solitons, primarily due to their potential use as fundamental building blocks for spintronic devices In cubic chiral magnets, a rich variety of modulated magnetic states arises from the competition between several fundamental interactions, such as the Heisenberg exchange interaction, the antisymmetric Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), the anisotropic exchange in- * victor.ukleev@helmholtz-berlin.de teraction (AEI), and cubic anisotropy Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 sustains particular attention because it hosts an equilibrium skyrmion lattice phase at room temperature under moderate magnetic fields The role of anisotropic interactions, including cubic and exchange anisotropies, has been extensively studied in the context of how they determine the properties of chiral magnets To gain a deeper understanding of the microscopic magnetic interactions in Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 , it is essential to probe them independently, without relying on indirectly related parameters. Recently, the temperature dependence of both the magnetocrystalline anisotropies In this study, we report direct measurements of the anisotropic exchange interaction (AEI) in Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 using resonant elastic small-angle x-ray scattering The single crystal of Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 used for resonant elastic soft x-ray scattering (REXS) experiments was grown using the Bridgman method, as described in Ref. From the oriented bulk specimen, a Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 lamella with a thickness of approximately 190 nm and an area of approximately 10 × 10 μm 2 was cut parallel to the (100) plane and subsequently thinned using a focused ion beam system (FIB). To facilitate the experiments, the lamella was attached to a gold-coated Si 3 N 4 membrane (Silson Ltd, UK) using four Pt contacts deposited by FIB. Before attaching the lamella, a circular aperture with a 8 μm diameter was milled through the membrane and the gold layer to allow x-ray transmission through the sample. A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the sample is shown in Fig. The Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 sample, mounted on the membrane, was placed onto a Cu sample holder and loaded into the vector-field cryomagnet VEKMAG at the PM-2 beamline [37] at BESSY II, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, Germany. Note that the in-plane orientation of the sample with respect to the laboratory frame of reference was chosen arbitrarily. Circularly polarized soft x-ray beams were utilized at an energy tuned to the Co L 3 edge (E = 775.8 eV), where the intensity of magnetic satellites reached its maximum. The sample was then cooled down in absence of a magnetic field to a temperature of 20 K, which is a few degrees above the spin-glass transition After zero-field cooling the helical propagation vector in the (001) plane of the Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 crystal was determined using a vector magnetic field training procedure. This procedure involves saturating the sample with a vectorial magnetic field of 150 mT applied at an angle θ in the sample plane. Here, θ = 0 • corresponds to the vertical direction z in the laboratory frame of reference. Subsequently, the magnetic field was gradually reduced to zero. Similar to the case of FeGe As a demonstration of the field training procedure, we show a reciprocal (Fig. The REXS patterns obtained for each temperature and azimuthal magnetic field training angle θ show a pair of Bragg peaks corresponding to the helical texture aligned in the corresponding in-plane direction. In Figs. The spiral wavevector Q in the (001) plane reaches a local maximum (corresponding to a minimum real-FIG. Upon elevating the temperature above 20 K, the Q(θ) dependence becomes more isotropic (Fig. Here Z represents the uniaxial strain-induced anisotropy constant, and φ indicates the corresponding strain-axis direction. The model is similar to the one used for Cu 2 OSeO 3 The solid lines in Figure The temperature dependence of Q 0 obtained from the fitting results shown in Figure Our findings provide valuable microscopic insights into the competition between anisotropies in Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 and shed light on their role in determining the magnetic properties, including the unusual temperature variation of the helical wavevector and the transformation of the metastable skyrmion lattice state. Notably, |F | increases by a factor of four on cooling from 275 K to 20 K, yet this variation alone cannot explain the dramatic change of Q 0 length on cooling, nor the persistent helical wavevector alignment with the cubic 100 directions. Instead, the significant temperature dependences of J and D In Fig. The microscopic parameters derived in the present study, along with previous works on the cubic anisotropy erning the magnetic properties over multiple magnetic length-scales in this class of chiral skyrmion hosts. In summary, resonant x-ray scattering techniques have been employed to provide new microscopic measurements of the anisotropic exchange interaction (AEI) in the chiral cubic magnet Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 . Applying a theoretical model that incorporates both the AEI and uniaxial strain-induced anisotropy contributions to the data allows for the quantitative extraction of the AEI parameter F . The observation of a negative value for F over the entire temperature range below T C is at odds with the positive value expected according to the known preferred alignment of the helical wavevector, which itself indicates the existence of an underlying competition between the AEI and a more dominant magnetocrystalline anisotropy on the properties of the helical order Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 . Interestingly, despite the comparable magnitude of F to that of Cu 2 OSeO 3 , the AEI does not seem to en-rich the magnetic phase diagram of Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 with tilted conical and disordered skyrmion phases. Additionally, short-range magnetic order and magnetic fluctuations, which drive the disordered skyrmion phase in the highly frustrated Co 7 Zn 7 Mn 6 , do not stabilize lowtemperature skyrmions in Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 either Overall, this study contributes to the deeper quantitative understanding of the magnetic interactions in Co 8 Zn 8 Mn 4 , paving the way for future research in this area and opening up possibilities for exploring new magnetic phases and functionalities in chiral cubic magnets through controlled manipulation of their magnetic anisotropy. FIG.