The probabilistic cellular automaton (PCA) method is highlighted for its relatively simple numerical algorithm and low computational cost in the simulation of microstructural evolution. In this method, probabilistic state change rules are implemented to compute the evolution of cell states at each time step. The stochastic nature of this simulation method leads to nonrepeatable simulation results, introducing inherent uncertainty. In this study, the uncertainty and dispersion in PCA simulations of microstructural evolution were investigated. Hence, the probabilistic transformations of cell states were meticulously considered at each time step, and discrete probability distribution functions (dPDF) were introduced to analyze the frequency distribution of simulation outcomes. To evaluate the performance of the proposed dPDFs, cellular automaton models were developed with various numbers of cells and distribution of transformation probabilities. Multiple iterations of these simulations were conducted, and the validity of the presented distribution functions was assessed through statistical analysis of the simulations' outcomes. Comparisons between PCA simulation results and distribution functions demonstrate consistency, emphasizing the predictive capability of the proposed models. Also, the effects of modeling parameters on the uncertainty of simulation results in two and three-dimensional PCA modeling were studied, introducing the coefficient of variation as a measure of dispersion. Results indicate that increasing the number of boundary cells, cellular resolution, and model size reduces uncertainty, enhancing the repeatability of PCA simulation outcomes. Various numerical methods, including Monte Carlo, cellular automaton (CA), phase field, level-set, and vertex method, have been employed to simulate microstructural evolution. Cellular automation has gained significant interest due to its low computational cost, relatively simple numerical algorithm, and satisfactory computational accuracy In material science, the PCA is used in simulating various phenomena, such as solidification, Grain growth, and static and dynamic recrystallization. This method has been widely used for simulation of microstructural evolution during recrystallization. In the late 1990s, Raabe In the PCA method, the transformation probability is computed as the ratio of the local boundary velocity to the maximum boundary velocity in the domain (or the ratio of the local boundary movement to the maximum admissible boundary movement). Thus, the probabilistic state change rule, determining the new state of the cell i in the k+1 time step (ξ i k+1 ), is defined based on the state of this cell and its neighbors in the k th time step as below where ω i and v i are the switching probability and boundary velocity of cell i, and v max is the maximum switching probability in domain Ω. Here r is a random number (r ∈ R | 0 ≤ r ≤ 1). This rule has been applied, either in the same manner or with minor modifications in numerous studies employing probabilistic cellular automaton Generally, numerical simulation involves four main steps i.e., developing a conceptual model and proposing mathematical governing equations, developing numerical algorithms to solve the governing equations, implementing the computer program, and finally, validation and verification of model and simulation However, in these researches, it is assumed that the mathematical model and numerical algorithms are already confirmed, and no uncertainty is attributed to models and algorithms. So, in most microstructural simulation studies, the focus lies on assessing the accuracy of the simulation by comparing the obtained results with experimental observations. Similar to other simulation methods, the solution uncertainties and simulation verification in CA simulations have not received significant attention despite the extensive research conducted in the field. Only a few studies have focused briefly on the uncertainties associated with CA Yeh et al. In this study, the uncertainty in PCA simulations of microstructural evolution has been investigated. So, the stochastic behavior of microstructure changes in each PCA time step is studied, and discrete probability distribution functions (dPDF) are introduced to analyze the frequency distribution of simulation outcomes. These dPDFs are employed to predict the most probable outcome and the dispersion of simulation results. Also, the effects of modeling parameters, including the size and resolution of the model, as well as the probability distribution of state changes on The precision and reliability of simulation results, are studied. To assess the effectiveness of the suggested dPDFs, different cellular automaton models with various modeling specifications were created, and the results were statistically analyzed. In the CA method, the spatial domain is divided into a finite number of cells with specific states ξ i (k) and neighborhood η i (k) at discrete time step k. Also, a state transformation function f i (k) is defined to compute the new states based on their previous states and neighborhoods. PCA is a type of CA that uses probabilistic rules for state transitions instead of deterministic rules. In this method, the new state of each cell is determined by a Monte Carlo sampling based on the transition probability of the cell and the states of its neighboring cells (it is mathematically expressed in eq. 1). For a cell "i" with a transformation probability "ω i ", the cell's state at time step "k + 1" can be determined by rewriting eq. 1 as follows. In this equation, the transformation decision "ζ i k " is evaluated using a Monte Carlo sampling, where 1 represents a "success", and 0 means a "failure". As it is clear in eq. 2, there are just two possible outcomes ("success" or "failure") in which ζ i k = 1 ("success") occurs with probability ω i and ζ i k = 0 ("failure") occurs with probability 1 -ω i , where 0 ≤ ω i ≤ 1. Thus, the Bernoulli probability function p i over possible outcomes ζ i ∈ {1, 0} can be expressed to determine the probability of possible outcome ζ i as follows It may be simply rewritten as follows Fig. It should be noted that the number of possible scenarios with n successes among N cells is J = ( N n ) (combinatorial number N in n). Hence, the probability of occurring j th scenario with n successes is As the finite set of events in each scenario is mutually independent, by using the multiplication rule for independent events, yielding As mentioned earlier, there are J different scenarios for n successes. Considering all these scenarios, the probability of n successes can be calculated as follows So it can be expanded as below In this problem, different scenarios are mutually exclusive which means the occurrence of any one of them implies the non-occurrence of the remaining scenarios. As the mutually exclusive scenarios cannot occur at the same time, so so, eq. 9 can be simplified to ) J i=1 Also, the squared deviation from the mean (variance) of Φ(n) can be defined as follows This parameter is employed to quantify the dispersion of simulation results, explicitly indicating the level of uncertainty in the obtained outcomes. As a simple case study, it can be assumed that the transformation probabilities of all boundary cells are the same, where ω j = ω for every j ∈ {1, ... , N}, so eq. 7 can be rewritten as Consequently, the probability distribution of n successes derived as It can be observed that the distribution of successful transformations in a given time step follows a binomial distribution. The binomial distribution is a dPDF that models the number of successes in a fixed number of independent Bernoulli trials with the same success probability. This problem is similar to tossing a coin N times, where the probability of getting a "heads" in each toss is ω. In this case, it can be shown that the mean of the distribution is equal to Nω. Also, the distribution mode, which represents the most probable number of successful transformations among N boundary cells, is an integer number that satisfies the following statement. Furthermore, the variance of the results distribution can be expressed using the following equation. At the end of the previous section, the simplest case of the uncertainty analysis of PCA simulation results is proposed. In this case, it's assumed that within a cellular model consisting of N cells, there are N boundary cells with a transformation probability of ω. In this condition, the distribution of simulation results can be predicted using the binomial distribution function, as described by Eq. 15. For instance, Fig. 16. Furthermore, it is observed that the highest dispersion of results occurs at ω = 0.5. In contrast, when ω = 0 or ω = 1, no dispersion is observed in the results, representing 0% and 100% transformation success, respectively. To evaluate the ability of the binomial distribution function, numerous PCA models were created and employed to achieve the distribution of simulation results. The model consisted of a specific number of boundary cells with a uniform distribution of transformation probability. Also, the probabilistic state change rule described in Eq. 1 was applied to determine cell transformations. To obtain the distribution of the PCA results, the PCA simulation was repeated several times with the same inputs. The average and the standard deviation of the simulation results can be computed by repeating the PCA simulations with different ω and obtaining the distribution of the results. Comparisons between the mean value and standard deviation of the simulation results and the binomial distribution are presented in Fig. Furthermore, the standard deviation values of the PCA simulations (Fig. The frequency distribution of the results of repeated PCA simulations is presented in Fig These simulations were conducted with non-uniform cell transformation probabilities with a predetermined ω ̅ value of 0.5. Additionally, the probability distribution based on Eq. 11 is compared with the binomial distribution function, and the histogram of PCA simulation results is obtained using a constant transformation probability. The histograms demonstrate a notable agreement among the different distributions, indicating similar patterns in the simulation outcomes. However, it seems that the results obtained under non-uniform transformation probabilities exhibit a narrower distribution than those under uniform conditions. In other words, the modeling and simulation outcomes under non-uniform transformation probabilities show smaller dispersion compared to the uniform condition. Further statistical analysis can provide additional insights into the degree of agreement among the distributions. In other words, the mean of the distribution function in Eq. 12 is equivalent to the sum of the transformation probabilities of boundary cells. The standard deviation of the results from repeated PCA simulations and the distribution function presented in Eq. 13 are displayed in Fig. As discussed in section 2, the number of possible events in each time step follows an exponential relation (number of events equal 2 N ) with the number of boundary cells (N) and leads to a substantial increase in computational demands with larger N. Consequently, using eq. 13 to calculate the standard deviation becomes less feasible in cases with a large number of boundary cells. Therefore, an alternative solution is needed to resolve this limitation. In the previous sections, it was observed that when the transformation probability of boundary cells is uniform, the binomial distribution function can effectively predict the distribution of the results. However, to provide an alternative solution, ω ̅ (the mean of the transformation probability of boundary cells) was inserted into the binomial distribution function (equations As depicted in this figure, the standard deviation obtained from the binomial function provides a reasonable approximation of the standard deviation derived from PCA simulations and the distribution function of Eq. 13. Notably, the predicted standard deviation using the binomial distribution function is higher than standard deviations of almost all PCA simulations and all results of the distribution function of Eq. 13. In other words, the upper limit of the standard deviation and the maximum uncertainty in the results can be estimated using the binomial distribution function, therefore The above equation is one of the key findings of this research, offering a simple and computationally efficient method to forecast the uncertainty of PCA simulation results at each time step. In this section, Eq. 20 is employed to investigate the effects of various modeling parameters, including the number of spatial dimensions, cellular resolution, and model size, as well as the average transformation probability of boundaries on uncertainty in simulation results. In this section, to assess the dispersion of results compared to the best estimate of PCA simulation outcomes, the coefficient of variation is used. This dimensionless factor is obtained by calculating the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean value of the results (C v = σ μ ⁄ ) and provides insight into the precision and reliability of the simulation results. This factor quantifies the relative variability in the simulation results and allows meaningful comparisons of different simulations. Using eq. 18-20, the coefficient of variation "C v " can be derived as follows The right-hand term of this equation represents the upper bound of C v . The dependency of the upper limit of C v on ω ̅ and the number of boundary cells is illustrated in Fig. In 2D cellular automaton modeling, adjusting the model's size with a specific ratio statistically leads to a proportional change in the length of the grain boundaries. In other words, if the boundary length of a microstructure with a specific model's size is denoted as L 0 , by changing the model's size with a ratio of "α", the boundary length of the new model can be estimated as αL 0 . Additionally, the number of boundary cells can be estimated as ρL (where L represents the length of the grain boundaries and ρ is cell resolution). Thus, the eq. 21 can be rewritten as follows. Fig. PCA simulation results in various cell resolutions and model sizes. Throughout this analysis, it is assumed that ω ̅ remains constant regardless of changes in model size and cell resolution. Under this assumption, C v can be derived as the following relationship. As demonstrated in For instance, C v can be halved by doubling each dimension of the model (resulting in four times the area of the 2D model) or quadrupling the cell resolution. In 3D PCA modeling, a similar analysis to that presented in the previous section allows us to explore the relationship between PCA simulation uncertainty and model size, as well as cell resolution. In 3D modeling, the area of the grain boundaries also changes proportionally by changing the size of the model. Furthermore, as the grain boundaries in 3D modeling are spatial surfaces with a specific area, the number of boundary cells is related to the square of the cell resolution. Consequently, the upper bound of C v follows the relationship presented below where Ω represents the volume ratio of the adjusted model compared to the original model. Fig. PCA simulation results in various cell resolutions and model sizes. As a result, the value of C v can be expressed as a function of cell resolution and model size as follows For instance, doubling the cell resolution leads to halving the value of C v . Similarly, multiplying each dimension of the model by 4 1 3 ⁄ yields a similar outcome. In this study, the uncertainty analysis and verification of Probabilistic Cellular Automata (PCA) simulations in microstructural evolution is investigated. The findings offer practical tools and equations to assess the reliability and precision of the microstructure modeling. The key findings of the investigation can be summarized as follows:  The dPDF predictions and PCA simulation results showed that the maximum dispersion of results was observed in PCA models with an average transformation probability of 0.5.  the coefficient of variation was introduced as a measure of precision and reliability, its dependence on the average transformation probability and the number of boundary cells. This observation highlights the influence of the number of boundary cells on the stability and reliability of simulation results, indicating that an increase in boundary cells led to more precise outcomes.  As cellular resolution and model size increase, representing the microstructure with more cells results in a reduction of uncertainty and dispersion in simulation results.  In 2D PCA models, the relative uncertainty of simulation results was found to be inversely proportional to the square root of cellular resolution and model size. Also, in 3D models, the relative uncertainty of simulation results is inversely proportional to the cellular resolution and square root of model size.