A remarkable feature of topological superconductors is the emergence of Majorana fermions in electron systems. Whereas the emergent Majorana fermions share the self-anti-particle property with Majorana fermions in particle physics, they may have essentially different electromagnetic properties. In this paper, we argue the electromagnetic response of spinful Majorana fermions in topological superconductors. We present a general theory of the electromagnetic response of spinful Majorana fermions in topological superconductors and clarify how the pairing symmetry is encoded in the electromagnetic response. As an application, we predict the sublattice-dependent dipole (Ising)-type magnetic response of corner Majorana fermions in iron-based superconductors. Topological superconductivity sheds new light on the investigation of superconductors Nodal structures in unconventional superconductors are also known to be topologically protected and result in topological surface bands. For instance, line nodes in high-T c cuprate are protected by the winding number, giving surface flat bands As we mentioned above, the most distinct feature of TSCs is the possible realization of emergent MFs in various superconductors. However, we should note that there are two different types of MFs. One is spinless MFs, and another is spinful MFs. As we argue immediately, they have different properties, so they have different roles in studies of superconductors. Let us first consider spinless MFs. Remarkably, spinless MFs do not require any particular pairing symmetry except for the superconducting gap. Indeed, for weak Cooper pairing, only the Fermi surface topology in the normal state determines the presence or absence of a spinless MF. More precisely, we have the following criterion for spinless MFs (See Appendix A for the proof): • A spinless MF is realized if and only if the corresponding superconductor has an odd number of non-spindegenerate Fermi surfaces. Actually, this simple criterion explains spinless MFs in various systems. For instance, a two-dimensional Dirac fermion with s-wave condensate supports a spinless Majorana zero mode in a vortex In this article, we examine electromagnetic responses of spinful MFs as a probe to identify pairing symmetries of the underlying unconventional superconductors. We present a general theory of quantum responses for spinful MFs and point out that the information of pairing symmetries is compactly encoded in the quantum responses. In particular, there exists a direct relation between pairing symmetries and electromagnetic responses for a particular class of spinful arXiv:2404.19269v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 10 Jul 2024 MFs. As an application, we consider corner spinful MFs in iron-based superconductors and show that they show a sublattice-dependent dipole (Ising) spin behavior in accordance with the pairing symmetry. First, we argue the electromagnetic response for the original spinful MFs in particle physics. Whereas elementary MFs in particle physics and emergent MFs in TCSs share the self-anti-particle nature, they show very different electromagnetic responses. This difference comes from the fundamental theorem in quantum field theory, that is, the CP T theorem We start with a state vector |f (p, J, s)⟩ describing elementary MFs with momentum p, spin J, and where we may have a phase factor η(s) on the right-hand side because of the phase ambiguity of states. Here, we allow the possible dependence of s in η. Then, for p = 0, considering a new operator b ≡ ζe iπJy , we also have with a phase factor μ(s). Since ζ, hence, b is anti-unitary[25], the above equation leads to Therefore, using the relations [ζ, e iπJy ] = 0 and e i2πJy = (-1) 2J , we have From Eq. ( Thus, Eq. ( For J = 1/2, we have η(-1/2) = -η(1/2), hence (η(s)) * η(s ′ ) = (-1) s-s ′ . We now examine CP T constraints on matrix elements of ⟨f |J μ |f ⟩, where J μ is the electromagnetic current. Since the electromagnetic interaction is J μ A μ and A μ (x = 0) is CP T -odd, J μ (x = 0) must be CP T -odd too. Thus, one satisfies where we have used ⟨a|b⟩ = ⟨ζb|ζa⟩. For spin-1/2 relativistic fermions, the Lorentz invariance and the current conservation lead to the following general form of one-particle electromagnetic coupling where u is a Dirac spinor, and q ≡ p f -p i is the energy-momentum four-vector. The Dirac gamma matrices γ μ (μ = 0, 1, 2, 3) are given by where σ = (σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ) are the Pauli matrices and 1 2 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, and ū is defined as ū = u † γ 0 . The form factors F , M , E, and G are functions of q 2 , and these terms correspond to the electric charge, magnetic dipole moment, electric dipole moment, and toroidal moment, respectively. Using the relation the right-hand side of Eq. ( where we have used the properties of the Dirac gamma matrices: Since (η(s i )) * η(s f ) = (-1) si-s f , as mentioned above, Eq. ( In other words, spin-1/2 elementary MFs have neither electric charges, magnetic dipole moments, nor electric dipole moments. They only have toroidal moments. Whereas the vanishing of electric charge directly follows from the self-anti-particle nature of MFs, the vanishing of magnetic and electric dipole moments is a consequence of the CP T theorem. As shown immediately, this strong constraint can be derived in a more intuitive manner. To see the strong constraint, let us suppose the elementary MF has a magnetic dipole moment μ. Then, the MF gets the energy under a magnetic field B. We now take into account the CP T theorem. The magnetic field is invariant under C and P but its sign flips under T like B → -B, so B is CP T -odd. Then, from the CP T theorem requireing the CP T -invariance of Eq.( under an electric field E. Since E change to -E under CP T , p must be CP T -odd from the CP T theorem. Then, the self-conjugate nature of an elementary MF under CP T leads to p = 0. Note that the above argument does not apply to emergent MFs in TSCs: Superconductors break the Lorentz invariance, and thus, they do not obey the CP T theorem. As we discuss below, this difference enables rich structures of the electromagnetic response of emergent MFs. We now turn to electromagnetic response for MFs of TSCs. In contrast to elementary MFs, spinful MFs of TSCs are not subject to the constraint of the CP T theorem. Instead of the Lorentz invariance, spinful MFs respect the crystalline symmetry of the underlying materials. In addition, they are self-conjugated just under C, not CP T , where C is particle-hole symmetry (PHS) in the context of superconductivity. (See below.) From these differences, spinful MFs may have a variety of electromagnetic responses, such as a magnetic dipole. In the following, we will show that their electromagnetic responses are closely related to the pairing symmetry of Cooper pairs, which offer valuable information about pairing mechanisms of superconductivity. First, let us see how the pairing symmetry is encoded in the topological classification. In the topological classification where U g (k) is the unitary operator of symmetry operation g and H(k) is the Hamiltonian in the momentum space: (i) The first equation specifies the type of symmetry. For c(g) = +1, U g is ordinary symmetry, and for c(g) = -1, U g is anti-symmetry like chiral symmetry. (ii) The second equation specifies unitarity or anti-unitarity of symmetry g. For φ(g) = +1, the symmetry operator U g commutes with the imaginary unit i, so U is unitary, and for φ(g) = -1, U g anti-commute with i, so U is anti-unitary. (iii) The last relation determines the commutation relation between symmetry operators, and the phase factor e iτ g,g ′ (gg ′ k) is called twist between g and g ′ . Most cases show the trivial twist determined by the commutation relations between point groups, but some may have a non-trivial twist. Representative examples are unconventional superconductors and nonsymmorphic crystals. In particular, as we show immediately, the twist between PHS and crystalline symmetry encodes the information on the pairing symmetry of superconductors. Consider the Hamiltonian of a superconductor with the Nambu spinor The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian H(k) consists of the normal-state Hamiltonian E(k) and the gap function ∆(k), represented as Here, ĉk,α (ĉ † k,α ) is an annihilation (a creation) operator of electron with momentum k and internal degrees of freedom of electron α such as spin, orbital, and sublattice. δ αβ is the Kronecker delta. From the Fermi statistics, the gap function satisfies ∆ T (k) = -∆(-k). Because the Nambu spinor Ψα (k) satisfies the self-conjugate relation, HBdG (k) automatically has the following symmetry where K is the complex conjugate operator. This particular symmetry in superconductors is called PHS and enables TSCs to support MFs. Conventionally, the transformation law of ∆(k) under crystalline symmetry specifies the pairing symmetry. However, the information on pairing symmetry can also be encoded in twists between PHS and crystalline symmetry operators. For instance, let us consider odd-parity SCs (e.g., p-wave pairing). In this case, the gap function satisfies under inversion P . Because of the additional minus sign on the right-hand side of Eq. ( which gives inversion symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian, P H(k) P † = H(-k). This equation implies that the electron and hole states in odd-parity superconductors behave in a different manner under inversion, and thus, inversion and PHS do not commute with each other. Thus, we have the non-trivial twist, In a similar manner, we can encode the information of pairing symmetry in the twists when the gap function does not spontaneously break the corresponding crystalline symmetry. Namely, if the gap function obeys with a phase factor η g under crystalline symmetry operation U g (k), the BdG Hamiltonian retains the crystalline symmetry, where the crystalline symmetry operator in the Nambu basis is given by Then, we have an additional factor in the commutation relation between PHS and crystalline symmetry operators: We now consider the electromagnetic responses of MFs. To evaluate the possible response of MFs, we consider a general local operator of the electrons. In the Nambu basis defined by Eq. ( where O is an arbitrary Hermitian operator O and O is its representation in the Nambu basis, Here, we have neglected an irrelevant constant term. We also note that the Hermiticity of O implies {O, C} = 0. To extract the contribution of MFs, we first use the self-conjugate nature in Eq.( in the real space, so the local operator is recast into Then, we perform the mode expansion of the Nambu spinor as where γ(a) is a Majorana operator, |u 0 ⟩ represents a wave function of ath zero energy state, and • • • implies states with finite energy. In the low-energy limit, the finite energy states can be neglected. Thus, we obtain the local operator in terms of MFs with where we have used |Cu ⟩. This equation implies that the local operator has a nonzero coupling to MFs only when the trace part in Eq. ( Interestingly, ρ (ab) transforms as a bi-product of electrons like Cooper pairs under the crystalline symmetry: When applying a crystalline symmetry operation to the MF state |u Therefore, MFs are a (projective) representation of crystalline symmetry in a manner similar to electrons. Similarly, for the PHS partner state |Cu where we have used Eq.( which means that ρ (ab) transforms like a bi-product of electrons. Note that non-trivial factor η g in pairing symmetry appears in Eq. ( where T is a time-reversal operator with T 2 = -1, and α is a real constant. Thus, ρ (12) for the MKP is recast into ρ MKP = e iα (|u This equation implies that ρ (12) behave like a "spin-singlet" state under g since |u 0 ⟩ corresponds to spin-up and spin-down states and ρ (12) is their antisymmetric product. (Note that C does not affect the spin.) In particular, for g preserving the position of MFs, which is a necessary condition for symmetry protection by g, U ca (g)U db (g) represents a rotation in the spin space. Thus, this factor becomes trivial for the MKP since the spinsinglet state is invariant under any spin rotation. Consequently, we have Ũg ρ which is essentially the same as the transformation law of the gap function in Eq.( MKP is odd under T operation which means that ρ MKP has a non-zero trace only with a magnetic operator (=a time-reversal odd operator) When we apply a magnetic field B to the MKP, the above coupling generally induces the magnetic multipole term, where g m (B) is a function of B. From Eqs.( under g and T . Then, because the system is invariant under these symmetries once we transform the applied magnetic field at the same time, g m (B) must transform as which determines possible forms of g m (B) in the induced multipole term. The magnetic multipole term is bi-linear in the Majorana operator γ(a) , and thus, it gives finite energy to the Majorana zero modes. In Table For systems with double or more MKPs, Eq. ( with Then, the character of Ω g determines the representation of ρ (ab) . Taking the trace of Ω g , the character reads By decomposing U(g) into ⊕ α U α (g) with α being the label of irreducible representations of crystalline symmetry, we eventually have Then, one can calculate the right-hand side of Eq. ( a For pairing symmeteries of UBe 13 , there are two scenarios: the degenerate Eu scenario Finally, we argue the application of our theory to candidate materials of TSCs. In the previous studies Our theory is also applicable to MKPs in higher-order TSCs Recently, an extended s-wave superconducting state in iron-based materials has been proposed as a member of higher-order TSCs To examine the magnetic response in detail, we consider a 2D tight-binding model proposed in Ref. with where s i and σ i (i = 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital spaces, respectively, and η 0 , s 0 , σ 0 are the 2 × 2 identity matrices in the sublattice, spin, and orbital spaces. In Eq. ( where K is the complex conjugation operation and η i (i=0,1,2,3) are the identity matrix and Pauli matrices in the sublattice space. The Hamiltonian is also invariant under the space group symmetry P 4/nmm. where x ( ŷ) is the unit vector in the x (y) direction. For the normal state Hamiltonian, they are represented as Here, the mirror and rotation operators have non-trivial k-dependence since P 4/nmm is nonsymmorphic. The band structure of E is shown in Fig. We consider an extended s-wave superconducting state of the system. The superconducting state is described by the BdG Hamiltonian where ∆ 0 is the on-site intraorbital pairing and ∆ 1 is the nearest neighbor intrasublattice intraorbital pairing. The second term in Eq. ( where τ i represents the Pauli matrix in the Nambu space. The combination of the PHS and T operators defines the chiral operator Γ, which satisfies where T = diag[T, T * ] = iτ 0 η 0 s 2 σ 0 K. In addition, the symmetry properties of the normal-state Hamiltonian in Eqs. ( where k y = 0, π and Γ my is the chiral operator in the mirror eigenspace of m y . Using the formula in Ref. where v my (k F ) and ∆ my (k F ) are the Fermi velocity and the gap function at the Fermi point k F . Here the Fermi point k F is given by det[E(k F ) -μ] = 0 in the mirror eigenspace of m y with the fixed momenta k y = 0, π. Let us evaluate w my (k y ) for the extended s-wave superconducting state. For k y = 0, we have [ P , Mxz ] = 0, so the mirror eigenspace keeps inversion symmetry. Thus, the Fermi points on the right-hand side of Eq.( These helical Majorana edge states give a corner MKP where v is the Fermi velocity of the edge mode, μ μ the the Pauli matrix in the mirror subspaces, i.e. μ 3 = ±1 corresponds to the mirror subspaces Mxz = ±i, and κ μ the Pauli matrix labeling the two helical Majorana states. Here, y is a real space parameter along the boundary near the corner, where y < 0, y = 0, and y > 0 correspond to the (1 1) edge, the top-left corner, and the (11) edge respectively. The mass term m(y) appears because Mxz exchanges the ( Note that M eff commutes with C eff , which is consistent with the fact that the extended s-wave pairing is mirror-even. For simplicity, we assume v > 0 and m(y > 0) > 0 below. We obtain a corner MKP by solving the BdG equation for zero modes: Multiplying iμ 1 κ 0 to the above from the left, we have which leads to two zero-mode solutions, with Here, C is a real constant, and we have used the standard definition of the Kronecker product μ μ κ ν . Since |u , and (i) show the energy spectra of corner modes when the Zeeman magnetic field is applied only to the corner in the Mxz symmetric line. Using the above corner MKP, we can confirm the validity of our theory for the electromagnetic response: First, the zero modes satisfy the following relation in the form of Eq. which obeys the same transformation law as an s-wave pairing under the mirror reflection, MKP (y). One can also check the relation in Eq.( MKP (y). According to our theory, an operator O satisfying Tr[ρ MKP (x)O] ̸ = 0 must be odd under time-reversal and share the same irreducible representation of ρ Then, we find that only μ 0 κ 1 and μ 3 κ 0 satisfy Tr[ρ (12) (x)O] ̸ = 0. Thus, the MKP can couple only to O eff = Aμ 0 κ 1 + Bμ 3 κ 0 , where A and B are real coefficients. Since we have [O eff , M eff ] = {O eff , T eff } = 0, O eff is a mirroreven magnetic operator like ρ MKP . As shown in Appendix B, the operators η 1 s 3 and η 3 s 2 in the normal state Hamiltonian of the simplified extended s-wave superconductor give these μ 0 κ 1 and μ 3 κ 0 terms in the effective model, Therefore, the Majorana corner modes can couple only to the following sub-lattice-dependent Zeeman magnetic fields, Among them, one can easily obtain the latter type of the Zeeman field in experiments: A local magnetic field B y on, say, the A-site induces the latter type of the sub-lattice-dependent Zeeman magnetic term. Note that it also induces the term B y η 0 s 2 , but the sub-lattice-independent Zeemam term does not couple to the Majorana corner modes. As shown in Appendix B, the operator η 0 s 2 gives μ 3 κ 3 in the effective Hamiltonian, which obeys Tr[ρ MKP (y)μ 3 κ 3 ] = 0. Finally, we come back to the original model with orbital degrees of freedom and discuss the magnetic response of the corner MKP in the BdG Hamiltonian with Eqs. ( which are feasible in experiments. As mentioned above, the corner MKP protected by the mirror reflection symmetry M xz can couple only to mirror-even operators, and thus, it can respond only to B y η 0 s 2 σ 0 and B y η 3 s 2 σ 0 . Furthermore, the analysis of the simplified model implies that the sublattice-independent Zeeman term B y η 0 s 2 σ 0 rarely couples to the corner MKP: As the original model consists of a pair of simplified models with couplings between them, we can construct the corner MKP in the original model from the corner MKPs of the paired simplified models. Since the latter MKPs do not couple to B y η 0 s 2 , we do not have a direct coupling between the former MKP and B y η 0 s 2 σ 0 . We also have a similar argument for a corner MKP protected by M yz . In summary, we can expect that the corner MKP protected by M xz (M yz ) responds only to the sublattice-dependent Zeeman magnetic field B y η 3 s 2 σ 0 (B x η 3 s 1 σ 0 ). We confirm this property numerically. We diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian under the open boundary conditions with to the normal state Hamiltonian in Eq.( We have discussed the electromagnetic response of spinful MFs. Whereas the CP T theorem gives a strong constraint on the electromagnetic coupling and forbids electric and magnetic dipole momenta for elementary MFs in high-energy physics, MFs in TSCs do not suffer such a strong constraint. The associated electromagnetic responses are determined by underlying TSCs, which provide information on the pairing mechanism. In particular, a magnetic operator of a MKP (spinful MF of TSCs) and the Cooper pairs share the same property for crystalline symmetry. Therefore, we can identify the pairing symmetry of TSCs by measuring a magnetic response of a single MKP through spin-sensitive measurements such as spin-resolved tunneling spectroscopy In addition to surface or edge MFs, our theory is applicable to spatially localized MFs, such as corner MFs or hinge MFs. As a concrete example, we have studied the magnetic response of corner MFs in iron-based SCs Another possible direction is to study the magnetic response of Majorana zero modes localized at the vortex in the interface of s-wave superconductor/topological crystalline insulator hybrid systems. Recent theoretical works We note that the k x k y η 1 s 0 term breaks C 4z symmetry, but this simplification does not affect the stability of corner MFs because the corner configuration is not invariant under C 4z . As a gap function, we consider which represents an s +--wave pairing symmetry in a manner similar to Eq.( and even under the above crystalline symmetries, Then, the BdG Hamiltonian keeps these symmetries, together with particle-hole symmetry, Remarkably, this Hamiltonian may effectively realize a p-wave superconducting state: On the mirror invariant line at k y = 0, the BdG Hamiltonian becomes Then, in the Mxz = i ( Mxz = -i) sector, we have η 3 = s 2 = ±1 (η 3 = -s 2 = ±1), and thus, the BdG Hamiltonian H± (k x , 0) in the mirror subsector Mxz = ±i reads As shown in Fig. For k y = 0, the Majorana edge states become zero energy states |ψ 0 ⟩, so they obey the BdG equation Then, by multiplying τ 2 η 0 s 2 from the left, we have In the Mxz = i sector, it holds that η 3 s 2 = 1 hence η 0 s 2 = η 3 s 0 , so the above equation is simplified as Then, we have a nontrivial zero mode |ψ 0 ⟩ when k Therefore, for δ = -1, Im(k x ) becomes positive, so we have a zero mode which satisfies the semi-infinite boundary condition x > 0. Here | ψ0 ⟩ in Eq. ( In a similar manner, we also have zero modes in the Mxz = -i sector, where | ψ0 ⟩ are given by Below, we represent these zero modes as |ψ ⟩, and |ψ where the ± in the surfix specifies the mirror eigenvalue Mxz = ±i, and N = 3/8 is the normalization constant. From the zero modes, we can derive the effective Hamiltonian for the helical Majorana edge states. First, we approximate the helical Majorana edge states as where u (μκ) (μ = ±, κ = 1, 2) is a function of k y . Then, the BdG equation Now, we argue how to gap out the Majorana corner modes by perturbing the normal state Hamiltonian. First, the perturbation must break time-reversal symmetry; otherwise, the mixing of the Majorana Kramers pair is prohibited. Second, the perturbation should make the topological number for Majorana modes ill-defined. In the present case, we use the one-dimensional winding number w my in Eq.( it is evident that the mirror chiral symmetry is necessary to define the winding number. Thus, the time-reversal breaking perturbation should break the chiral symmetry at the same time. Since one cannot break particle-hole symmetry intrinsic to superconductors, we find that the perturbation must be even under M xz . From these two conditions, we have four possible perturbation terms in the normal state Hamiltonian which give the following terms in the BdG Hamiltonian, Note that the above argument is consistent with our response theory. According to our theory, only a magnetic operator breaking time-reversal symmetry can coupled to a Majorana Kramers pair. Moreover, it must share the same representation of crystalline symmetry as the gap function. In the present simplified model, the relevant crystalline symmetry consists of which preserve a corner between the ( (B38) We confirm this result by checking the coupling of these terms to the ρ MKP operator. The ρ MKP operator of these Majorana corner modes is given by ρ (B42) Therefore, as expected from our theory, only O 13 and O 32 in Eq.(B38) are coupled to the Majorana corner modes. We can numerically obtain the same magnetic response of Majorana corner modes for the simplified s +--wave superconductor in Eq. (B1). We redefine the model on the square lattice by replacing k 2 i → cos(k i ) and k i → sin(k i ). The tight-binding Hamiltonian is given by E(k) =[t(cos(k x ) + cos(k y )) -μ]η 0 s 0 + λ R η 3 [sin(k x )s 2 -sin(k y )s 1 ] + v sin(k x ) sin(k y )η 1 s 0 , (B43) which preserves the symmetries in Eq.(B2). For the superconducting state, we consider the BdG Hamiltonian with an s +--wave pairing symmetry given by H(k) = [t(cos(k x ) + cos(k y )) -μ]τ 3 η 0 s 0 + λ R [sin(k x )τ 3 η 3 s 2 -sin(k y )τ 0 η 3 s 1 ] + v sin(k x ) sin(k y )τ 3 η 1 s 0 -[∆ 0 + ∆ 1 (cos(k x ) + cos(k y ))]τ 2 η 0 s 2 , (B44) which is invariant under the symmetries in Eq.(B7) and particle-hole symmetry. It is verified that the corner MKP appears when imposing the open boundary conditions with To check the magnetic response of the corner MKP, we add two types of the Zeeman term: a sublattice-independent Zeeman term η 0 B 0 • s and a sublattice-dependent Zeeman term η 3 B 3 • s to the normal-state Hamiltonian. As we discussed above, the corner MKP has a nonzero expectation value only for the sublattice-dependent Zeeman term. Thus, only the sublattice-dependent Zeeman term generates an energy gap at the corner MKP. To verify this, we examine the energy spectrum of the corner MKP in four different cases: (i) B 0 at the corners preserving M yz , (ii) B 0 at the corners preserving M xz , (iii) B 3 at the corners preserving M yz , (iv) B 3 at the corners preserving M xz . Figure 