Liquid metal catalysts (LMCats), primarily molten copper, have demonstrated their efficiency in the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) approach for synthesising high-quality, large-area graphene. However, their high melting temperatures limit broader applications. Reducing the temperature of graphene production on LMCats would lead to a more efficient and cost-effective process. Here, we investigated the effects of alloying copper with a low-melting temperature metal on graphene growth in real-time. We examined a set of liquid copper-gallium alloy systems using two complementary in situ techniques: radiation-mode optical microscopy and synchrotron X-ray reflectivity (XRR). Microscopy observations revealed reduced catalytic activity and graphene quality degradation in compositions with gallium domination. The XRR confirmed the formation of single-layer graphene on alloys with up to 60 wt% of gallium. Additionally, we detected a systematic increase in adsorption height on the alloys' surface, suggesting a weaker graphene adhesion on gallium. These findings propose a trade-off between layer quality and production cost reduction is feasible. Our results offer insights into the CVD synthesis of graphene on bimetallic liquid surfaces and underscore the potential of gallium-copper alloys for enabling the direct transfer of graphene from a liquid substrate, thereby addressing the limitations imposed by high melting temperatures of conventional LMCats. The unique properties and versatility of two-dimensional materials (2DMs) such as graphene, germanene, h-BN, transition metal dichalcogenides, and others, along with their potential for industrial production, make them an exciting area of research with significant options for technological advancement Over the years, the development of methods to elaborate high-quality graphene on a large scale has been an active area of research. The standard method for synthesising large-area graphene is chemical vapour deposition (CVD), which is commonly based on the catalytic decomposition of a hydrocarbon precursor gas on a solid metal substrate The groundbreaking idea to replace solid metal catalysts with their liquid counterparts (LMCats) was first proposed by Wu et al. Recently, we developed a customised CVD reactor, adapted to harsh conditions of CVD on LMCats, e.g. liquid Cu: a temperature of ~1400 K, a pressure of 200 mbar including CVD gas precursors, and intense metal evaporation. The reactor allows for X-ray reflectivity (XRR) and other X-ray scattering techniques, Raman spectroscopy, and radiation-mode optical microscopy to be combined for in situ characterisation in real-time during the growth Solidification of the liquid substrate would result in the deterioration of the as-grown graphene quality. Therefore, the ultimate goal is a direct separation of continuously produced graphene from the hot liquid substrate and then its seamless transfer to target support. The successful development of such direct separation method will substantially depend on the physical and chemical interactions between the graphene and the LMCat, such as adsorption energy, catalytic activity, and wettability, as well as the mechanical stability of the layer. The crucial parameter here is metal-graphene interactions, which allow for applying the most feasible transfer method to separate graphene from the substrate In addition, using lower temperatures during graphene growth will reduce energy consumption. Besides the obvious economic benefits, it will simplify designing and operating the reactor for 2DM synthesis and separation. However, synthesising graphene at lower temperatures may also impede its growth rate and increase the number of defects. Hence, the conditions for graphene growth on Ga, which would allow a reasonable compromise between the quality and the gain in process temperature reduction, should be investigated. For this purpose, we explored in situ the growth of graphene on liquid Ga and CuGa alloys of different compositions and, thus, melting points. A series of CuGa samples with varying compositions ensures a gradual transition from the well-studied copper system to the new one of gallium. Comparing the results with those from Cu is essential in defining the most efficient growth process. The results obtained and the acquired technical experience will help investigate the direct separation process using low-melting-point LMCats. We used the LMCat reactor Our recent work explored graphene's growth behaviour on liquid Cu To investigate whether and how Ga modifies the growth mechanism(s) of graphene and the catalytic activity of the liquid substrate, we prepared a series of Cu(1-x)Gax alloy samples with varying Ga weight composition x from 10 to 100%. The microscopy images are obtained through the quartz window port above the sample thanks to the difference in the thermal emissivity between the graphene layer and the liquid metal. However, the measured emissivity of CuGa alloys is higher than those of the pure metals separately, as illustrated in the Supporting Information (SI), Fig. In general, the formation of carbon structures was observed for the entire concentration range of CuGa alloys. Fig. In the samples with a higher percentage of Ga, it is impossible to distinguish single-crystal flakes anymore. However, in the early stages, we can sometimes observe flakes of irregular shapes that seem to be clusters of graphene domains (Fig. Next, we collected flakes' size and number statistics for the growth stage preceding the coalescence, presented in the SI, Fig. Using the synchrotron XRR, we performed an in situ study of graphene layers grown via CVD on liquid CuGa alloys. We recorded XRR curves on the clean liquid alloy surfaces before and after the graphene growth. The reflectivity data from the curved liquid surfaces were treated according to the procedure described in Ref. As shown in the previous section, adding a small amount of Ga does not drastically change the growth mechanism. The XRR curves from graphene layers on alloys up to 60 wt% of Ga resemble that of graphene on pure Cu (the upper curve). The presence of only two Kiessig oscillations in the measured range, with a pronounced minimum for the scattering vector qz in the range of 0.7-0.9 Å -1 and the absence of a Bragg peak are the clear signatures of single-layer graphene Note that these multilayers could not be etched at variance with single-layer graphene by increasing the H2/CH4 partial pressure ratio. The difficulty in achieving single-layer graphene on pristine Ga does not come as a surprise and could be attributed to variations in experimental conditions compared to previous attempts reported in the literature. On the one hand, gallium's ability to promote the formation of multilayer graphene and graphitic structures was observed previously Consequently, recent theoretical work Another interesting observation in the XRR curves is the gradual shift of the first Kiessig minimum toward low qz with increasing Ga content. We used the Refl1d software to fit the XRR curves Qualitatively, the value of the adsorption height allows for estimating the strength of the graphenemetal bonding and the work needed to separate the graphene from its substrate, e.g., to transfer it to another substrate. This trend is now well-documented for solid, crystalline, and transition metal substrates. Strong bonding, e.g., with Co, Ni, Ru, Rh, and Re, typically corresponds to graphene-metal distances of ~2.1 Å. In contrast, weak bonding (e.g., with Cu, Ag, Al, Ir, Pt, and Au) corresponds to more than 1 Å larger distances of ~3-3.4 Å, typical of weak van der Waals bonding (close to the interlayer distance of 3.35 Å in bulk graphite) In summary, this study investigates the effect of copper-gallium alloying on the growth kinetics of graphene and assesses the potential of CuGa alloys as a liquid catalyst for cost-effective graphene synthesis by CVD. It is done by combining in situ radiation-mode optical microscopy and XRR to track the growth mode of graphene on the liquid substrate in real time. We find that adding Ga to Cu drastically alters the growth mechanism of graphene: the growth evolves from fast to slow, and the grown material undergoes a transition from large separate flakes to continuous growth, which then evolves into slow branched 3D growth as Ga dominates. Furthermore, the XRR data shows the formation of single-layer graphene up to 60 wt% of Ga (with the melting point around 873 K vs 1358 K of Cu) and a gradual shift of the first Kiessig minimum in the direction of low qz with increasing Ga content, which points toward a somewhat weaker van der Waals interaction between graphene and gallium in comparison to copper. The findings of this study provide insight into the synthesis of graphene and highlight the potential of CuGa alloys to serve as liquid metal catalysts with a weaker adhesion to graphene and a melting temperature reduced by a few hundred degrees as a replacement for high-melting temperature copper. Furthermore, this is achieved while maintaining a decent catalytic activity and the quality of the grown graphene in the case of the alloys with medium Ga content. The reported observations are expected to facilitate the development of technologies for the direct separation of graphene from the liquid substrate without solidification and degradation of the quality of the grown layer. Therefore, our research has significant potential for implications in the production technologies and commercialisation of graphene and other 2DMs. The experimentally obtained parameters are also of high interest for theoretical studies that often lack the experimental input in the domain of molecular simulations. In order to investigate the catalytic activity of liquid Ga for CVD graphene growth compared to liquid Cu, we prepared a series of CuGa alloys with varying content of Ga from 10 wt% to pure Ga. The Cu foils of 99.9976% purity were purchased from Advent Research Materials (Eynsham, The United Kingdom), and the Ga lump of 99.9999% purity was purchased from Goodfellow (Lille, France), respectively. The alloy samples were prepared by melting Cu and Ga pieces on a tungsten disk as a sample holder inside the reactor prior to the experiments. The tungsten disks with a diameter of 25 mm were purchased from Metel BV (Waalwijk, The Netherlands). The percentage of Ga was controlled by the change of the melting point Tm according to the known phase diagram The experimental conditions for the growths shown in * at the moment of scanning