Intensities in high-resolution phase-contrast images from electron microscopes build up discretely in time by detecting single electrons. A wave description of pulse-like coherentinelastic interaction of an electron with matter implies a time-dependent coexistence of coherent partial waves. Their superposition forms a wave package by phase decoherence of 0.5 -1 radian with Heisenbergs energy uncertainty ΔEH = ħ/2 Δt -1 matching the energy loss ΔE of a coherentinelastic interaction and setting the interaction time Δt. In these circumstances, the product of Planck's constant and the speed of light hc is given by the product of the expression for temporal coherence λ 2 /Δλ and the energy loss ΔE. Experimentally, the self-coherence length was measured by detecting the energy dependent localization of scattered, plane matter waves in surface proximity exploiting the Goos-Hänchen shift. Chromatic-aberration Cc-corrected electron microscopy on boron nitride (BN) proves that the coherent crystal illumination and phase contrast are lost if the self-coherence length shrinks below the size of the crystal unit cell at ΔE > 200 eV. In perspective, the interaction time of any matter wave compares with the lifetime of a virtual particle of any elemental interaction, suggesting the present concept of coherent-inelastic interactions of matter waves might be generalizable. The year 2024 marks the 100th anniversary of L. de Broglie's dissertation For decades, Dirk Van Dyck helped guiding the development and applications of the tool by establishing suitable theories to understand the contrast formation in the recorded HRTEM images Specifically, work at the National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM) in Berkeley, USA, benefitted from procedures to reconstruct electron exit wave functions Today there are many opportunities for advancements, particularly in the context of quantum electron microscopy Fortunately, technologies have evolved to the point where electron emissions can be manipulated one electron at a time and registered one by one to study single electron scattering events in electron microscopes with spherical and chromatic aberration correction Hence, the build-up of image intensity by wave interferences in HRTEM images or diffraction patterns can be routinely studied in ultra-low dose rate conditions reaching 0.01 eÅ -2 s -1 Here, we discuss how the self-coherence length ls can be accessed experimentally and that it shrinks dramatically with increasing energy loss ΔE (Table where h is Planck's constant and c is the speed of light. Equation ( g are spatial frequency vectors, Cs is the spherical aberration coefficient, f is the defocus and O(λ) are higher order contributions. Thus, it is established knowledge that the coherence of the entire electron ensemble used for imaging (ensemble-coherence) limits the spatial resolution of HRTEM and considerable efforts are made to improve on the coherence of electron optics However, there is no exclusivity to set ΔEH = ΔEgun in equation (3) because electron optical considerations for electron ensembles are not the only source of uncertainty. For example, in high energy physics interactions are explained in particle descriptions by exchanging a "virtual particle" of energy uncertainty ΔE and lifetime Δt = ħ/2 ΔE -1 in the Heisenberg limit (e.g. In Figure Substituting ls = ħc / 2ΔE in equation ( Experimentally, values for the self-coherence length ls (blue squares in Figure Here, we present the verification that ls determines the ability to form the interference pattern of HRTEM images. Our experiments used the Cc-corrected TEAM I microscope We acquired focus series of 10 -30 images in EF-HRTEM mode at 80 keV from free-standing hexagonal boron nitride (BN) along the c-axis (space group #186, a = 0.25 nm, c = 0.67 nm) Specific energy losses ΔE were selected from the energy loss range 0 eV ≤ ΔE ≤ 410 eV for recording the EF-HRTEM image series. To recover exit wave functions, equidistant defocus steps fs = -2.18 + 0.04 nm generated the required phase relation between successive images of a recorded image series (equation 5) to apply the Gershberg & Saxton (1972) algorithm. All computation and analysis were performed by the Tempas software package The BN sample itself was a few monolayers thick < 7 nm, which ensures that multiple scattering is absent. Moreover, the choice of the specific energy losses ΔE marked by triangles in Figure Figure When visually inspecting the images in Figures Simulating the image contrast in the images recorded at the nitrogen K-edge (N-core loss: ΔE = 410±12 eV, Figure In general, the match of experiment with simulation in Figure Further support for our argument that the phase contrast depends on the self-coherence length is obtained by reconstructing the phase of the electron exit wave function from EF-HRTEM focal series that were recorded at the various energy losses (Figure The result also supports our empirical finding that the use of a ~ 10 5 nm 2 small area for sample irradiation in the Nelsonian illumination scheme with ΔEgun = 0.1 eV produces best results for phase contrast imaging Surely, material sciences benefit from a better understanding of wave function localization in pulse-like energy exchanges during interactions with samples. For example, a structured temporal illumination with picosecond time resolution impacts beam-sample interactions in electron microscopy Here, however, we focus on the relevance of our measurements to quantum mechanical aspects. Specifically, we address the wave/particle duality of matter waves, using electron waves as our model system. Principally, both particle and wave descriptions provide excellent explanations for physical processes in nature, while contradicting conclusions only arise when both pictures are mixed. Undoubtedly, the great success of field theories rests on the use of wave descriptions In standard applications of electron microscopy, it often suffices to only consider the ensemble coherence of electron optics: For example, in multi-slice calculation an electron wave of 2 pm wavelength oscillates 10 000 times before exciting a 20 nm thick crystal and a decoherence phase of φ = 0.5 rad produces an equivalent wave package width of 20 nm at an energy loss of 5 eV (Figures The restricted validity of this reasonable approximation, however, becomes obvious in experiments that explore the time domain Our approach (Figure The apparent validity of equation ( Remarkably, ultrafast measurements open up the possibility of independently measure energy uncertainty and lifetime, even in conditions that approach or even exceed the Heisenberg limit gravitational and strong interactions is tiny (10 -39 ). Currently, the graviton is a theoretical construct of energy that is estimated to be smaller than 6 10 -32 eV Figure In addition to being an indispensable tool in material sciences, electron microscopy is uniquely suited to study fundamental quantum mechanical aspects including a pulse-like description of energy exchange in the Heisenberg limit ΔE = ħ/2 Δt -1 that forms wave packages by decoherence and yield equation (1). Self-coherence is the connection between the time-dependent Schrödingers equation For Coulomb interactions, ls explains the vanishing phase contrast from EF-HRTEM images when the energy loss exceeds values of ΔE > 200 eV. A procedure to experimentally determine the self-coherence length was established earlier by measuring the energy dependent localization of scattered matter waves in surface proximity. Therefore, electron microscopy can be used as a general tool to measure the self-coherence length in real space images. Importantly, our interpretation is consistent with the established praxis that the formation of intensities in high-resolution images can be approximated by multi-simulations assuming coherent-elastic scattering of electron ensembles because in the case of zero-loss images (ΔE = 0 eV) ensemble coherence and self-coherence coexist. Technologically, the integration of a monochromator, chromatic aberration-corrector, and a direct electron detector into one instrument, provided by the TEAM project The impact of energy loss on non-relativistic wavelength and self-coherence length for an electron acceleration by 300 kV. 