Plasma technology has undeniably revolutionized industrial processes in recent decades. Atmospheric pressure plasma (APP) has emerged as a prominent and widely applicable tool in various scientific disciplines. Notably, plasma-assisted flow control has become a subject of intense interest, particularly applying surface dielectric barrier discharge (SDBD) plasma actuators for aerodynamic flow control. In this study, a two-dimensional model of the SDBD plasma actuator is developed using the COMSOL Multiphysics program, incorporating air gas discharge reactions with N 2 /O 2 /Ar gases in specific ratios (0.78, 0.21, 0.01). The investigation focuses on the impact of dielectric materials (mica, silica glass, quartz, and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)) on plasma characteristics and body force within the plasma actuator under constant input parameters. Moreover, the study explores how variable pressure (760, 660, and 560 torr) in different applications influences plasma properties, ultimately affecting the magnitude of the body force in the plasma actuator. These findings contribute to optimizing plasma technology for flow control applications and enhance industrial efficiency and performance. Since nonthermal plasma first attracted scientific and technical attention 70 years ago, plasma technology has taken center stage in industrial processes both now and in the future. Over time, plasma technology developed and is today employed in everything from everyday items to cutting-edge applications This study describes a two-dimensional model of the SDBD plasma actuator. The COMSOL Multiphysics program is used in the development of the model. Air gas discharge reactions with the combination of nitrogen, oxygen, and argon gas with a ratio of 0.78, 0.21, and 0.01, respectively, are considered for this simulation. With constant input parameters, we investigate the effect of dielectric material on the plasma characteristics and body force in the plasma actuator. Besides that, the pressure can be variable in many of the mentioned applications, which can change many parameters of the plasma, which, as a result, changes the magnitude of the body force in the plasma actuator. In this investigation, the fluid model was employed. The electron density and energy can be calculated by resolving the drift-diffusion formulas. To formulate the governing equations of electric discharge, the drift-diffusion approximation was adopted (1) (2) . ( . ) . ( The value of .  is the amount of energy that can be extracted from an electron by applying an electric field. The following equation may be used to compute the energy gained by non-elastic collisions, which is denoted by the variable R  : (4) is the power dissipation, gen Q is the heat source, and q is the electron charge. The Townsend coefficients of the electron source, which are determined by the following equation, were used: Where M is the total number of reactions, j x the molar fraction of the target species for reaction j, j a the Townsend coefficient, and n N the total number of neutral particles are present. Considering the number p of non-elastic electron collisions, we will have: is the energy dissipation of the j reaction. For non-electron-induced species, the below equation is used for mass fraction calculation: (8) In which, The body force generated by plasma is: In this equation, v  is the density of electrons and positive/negative ions, normE is the normalized electric field in the x-y direction. In this simulation, the value of charge density is equal to: An asymmetric pair of copper electrodes separated by a dielectric substance from the actuator. While the other electrode is connected to the ground and encased by the dielectric material, the first electrode is placed on the dielectric surface and in contact with the gas flow at atmospheric pressure. A Gaussian voltage power supply drives the discharge at 1.5 kV. The electron density is first estimated to be 10 8 m -3 . The gas is at a temperature of 293.15 K and a pressure of 760 torr. In the simulation, the material components are defined as a model of the air, considering the related reactions of the species. Rate coefficients were obtained by solving Boltzmann's equation with BOLSIG+ ). We employ five boundary layers and a 1.4 stretching factor for the system's whole boundary while meshing this structure. A free triangular mesh with a maximum element size of 0.4 is employed for the entire geometry (Figure Sticking Coefficient An SDBD plasma actuator's body force magnitude has been obtained from the simulations. The rate of species generation is significantly influenced by the dielectric substance. Dielectric materials are electrically insulating substances with low electrical conductivity. Numerous processes that alter the behavior of the plasma and the emergence of species may take place when it comes into contact with a dielectric substance In this study, we investigated how four different dielectric materials affected plasma properties that change the magnitude of body force in the plasma actuator. Figure As the figure shows, the temperature changes for each dielectric material were almost in the same range. Changing materials does not make a significant difference in electron temperature. The temperature of the electron is directly influenced by the electric field due to the implementation of a constant potential function, resulting in minimal fluctuations in temperature. Changes in electron density are influenced by many causes, including surface charge accumulation and the photoionization effect. Among these factors, the alteration of the dielectric coefficient is particularly significant in determining the changes in surface charge accumulation. Indeed, the density rises in proportion to the increase in the dielectric coefficient. O n -are the main species measured in this simulation in the presence of different dielectric materials. As Figure Active current control is one of the areas where plasma is used. Additionally, modeling these systems before construction may save time and money and ensure the creation of an efficient system. From the outcome of our investigation, it is possible to conclude that without changing the main parameters and only by changing the type of dielectric material, the magnitude of the body force can be increased. Among the selected materials, using mica, we have the most body force. Furthermore, it is worth noting that pressure, being a crucial factor in plasma production, has shown that even the slightest alteration may lead to substantial variations in the body's force. Moreover, due to the significant change in body force, pressure is one of the parameters that should be considered in the actuator design. The simulation findings, performed with consideration of air gas discharge, can be valuable in the design of plasma drive systems for many applications, enabling the attainment of optimum outcomes via the selection of appropriate materials.