Understanding the structural and magnetic properties in layered hybrid organic-inorganic metal halide perovskites (HOIPs) is key for their design and integration in spin-electronic devices. Here, we have conducted a systematic study on ten compounds to understand the effect of the transition metal (Cu 2+ , Mn 2+ , Co 2+ ), organic spacer (alkyl-and arylammonium) and perovskite phase (Ruddlesden-Popper and Dion-Jacobson) on the properties of these materials. Temperature-dependent Raman measurements show that the crystals' structural phase transitions are triggered by the motional freedom of the organic cations as well as by the flexibility of the inorganic metal-halide lattice. In the case of Cu 2+ HOIPs, an increase of the in-plane anisotropy and a reduction of the octahedra interlayer distance is found to change the behavior of the HOIP from that of a 2D ferromagnet to that of a quasi-3D antiferromagnet. Mn 2+ HOIPs show inherent antiferromagnetic octahedra intralayer interactions and a phenomenologically rich magnetism, presenting spin-canting, spin-flop transitions and metamagnetism controlled by the crystal anisotropy. Co 2+ crystals with non-linked tetrahedra show a dominant paramagnetic behavior irrespective of the organic spacer and the perovskite phase. This work demonstrates that the chemical flexibility of HOIPs can be exploited to develop novel layered magnetic materials with tailored magnetic properties. A growing number of magnetic layered (2D) materials are being studied since the recent isolation of intrinsically magnetic monolayers. Today the list includes transition metal chalcogenides (e.g. Cr2Ge2Te6 and Fe3GeTe2), metal halides (e.g. CrI3), and metal phosphorus trichalcogenides (MPS3, M = Fe 2+ , Co 2+ , Ni 2+ , Mn 2+ ) Because of their variety, these materials are promising candidates for on-demand magnetism by chemical design. Indeed, a library of layered HOIPs and their magnetic properties would provide an invaluable tool to explore their use in optoelectronic and spintronic devices, but this is not yet available. In this work, we take a step in this direction and provide a systematic and comprehensive study of the influence of the metal, the organic spacer and the perovskite phase on the magnetic properties of layered transition metal HOIPs. We use temperature-dependent micro-Raman spectroscopy to determine the materials' structural phase transitions, and, importantly, we show that the number and nature of the detected phase transitions varies with the composition of the organic moiety and the metal halide. We also report on the temperaturedependent photoluminescence properties of the Mn 2+ compounds under study. Furthermore, we report for the first time on the magnetic behavior of five compounds: p-PEAACuCl4 ((NH3C6H4NH3) 2+ referred to as PEAA), EA2MnCl4, ((C2H5NH3) + referred to as EA), EDAMnCl4 ((NH3C2H2NH3) 2+ referred to as EDA), PEA2CoCl4 ((C6H5CH2CH2NH3) + referred to as PEA) and EDACoCl4. We show that Cu 2+ , Mn 2+ and Co 2+ crystals have very different magnetic behavior. In the case of Cu 2+ HOIPs, modulating the in-plane anisotropy and the interlayer distance changes the HOIP's behavior from that of a 2D ferromagnet to that of a 3D antiferromagnet. In contrast, for the Mn 2+ HOIPs, it is the anisotropy of the octahedral lattice, caused by the organic cation conformational rearrangement associated with the perovskite phase and the moiety-halide hydrogen bonding, which impacts the magnetic properties, keeping an AFM behavior and leading to the appearance of spin-canting, spin-flop or even metamagnetic phenomena. In Co 2+ hybrid materials, with a non-perovskite structure, a paramagnetic behaviour is observed, while the magnitude of the magnetization can be modulated by properly choosing the perovskite phase and the interlayer distance. We synthesized layered crystals using as inorganic precursors metal (II) chlorides (CuCl2, MnCl2 and CoCl2) mixed with the corresponding mono-or di-ammonium cations in polar solvents or an acid medium to obtain the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) or Dion-Jacobson (DJ) perovskite phases, respectively (see procedures in the Experimental section). To evaluate the effect of the organic moieties, we selected alkyl and phenyl cations. Specifically, we used: phenylethylammonium (PEA) and ethylammonium (EA) for the RP crystals and pphenylenediammonium (PEAA) and ethylenediammonium (EDA) for the DJ compounds. While the alkylammonium chains provide flexibility due to their higher conformational and motional freedom, the phenyl rings offer more rigidity due to π-π stacking in the organic layer and their larger volume. Therefore, each of these molecules will cause a different distortion of the inorganic lattice. All but two of the twelve compounds were successfully synthesized, the exceptions being PEAAMnCl4 and PEAACoCl4. These crystals did not crystallize due to the rigidity of the MnCl6 4-octahedra and CoCl4 2-tetrahedra framework in comparison with the distorted and flexible Jahn-Teller structure of CuCl6 4-octahedra sheets. PEA2CuCl4, In accordance with XRD measurements, For the Co 2+ HOIMs, the EA2CoCl4 crystal showed a structural phase transition at ~240K, evidenced by slight changes in the C-C stretching of the EA + molecules Regarding the Mn 2+ HOIPs, these present the characteristic red photoluminescence (PL) emission associated with octahedrally coordinated Mn 2+ compounds resulting from the 4 T1g(G) → 6 A1g (S) electronic transition between the triple-degenerate (T) and nondegenerate (A) levels (Figure Composition and perovskite phase should play a role not only in the structural phase transitions but also in the resulting magnetic properties. The key element for the appearance of magnetic properties in these layered HOIMs is the transition metal incorporated in the crystal structure. Therefore, in the discussion below we compare systems with the same metal and different organic cation and perovskite phase. In the case of the Cu 2+ HOIPs, we present the temperature-dependent magnetization curves, M(T), for the PEA2CuCl4 RP crystal (Figure In the case of the PEAACuCl4 DJ HOIP, the changes in the magnetic behavior begin to be more marked. The in-and out-of-plane M(T) curves display a sharp increase up to a broad maximum at TC ~ 13K, with magnetizations one order of magnitude lower than in the previously shown Cu 2+ RP HOIPs (Figure and a shorter interlayer distance (~9.5 Å), with the J'/kB two or one order of magnitude larger compared to the PEA2CuCl4 and EA2CuCl4 crystals, respectively. Therefore, the FM interactions in the [CuCl4] 2-octahedra plane still stand out, maintaining a 2D ferromagnetic behavior (J'/J ~ 10 -3 ) The short interlayer distance (~8 Å) combined with a higher in-plane anisotropy from Cu•••X•••Cu angles (~160 deg) and more pronounced octahedral tilting favor the AFM contributions from the interlayer interaction, resulting in J'/J ~ 10 -1 , closer to a 3D antiferromagnet rather than a 2D ferromagnet (J'/J < 10 -3 ) Since the magnetization tends to drop toward zero in the out-of-plane direction, the easy axis for the AFM alignment is the perpendicular direction to the [MnCl6] 4-octahedra plane. The change in the slope in the in-plane M(T) curve is ascribed to the appearance of a weak FM component arising due to spin-canting occurring at the plane from antisymmetric Dzyaloshinski-Moriya interactions related to the tilting of the [MnCl6] 4-octahedra in the crystal structure (see Figure In the case of the EA2MnCl4 RP crystal, the in-plane M(T) curve shows a similar behavior to that of the PEA2MnCl4 crystal (a broad maximum at ~80K and TN~45K), while the out-of-plane curve does not (Figure When passing from the Mn 2+ RP structures to the EDAMnCl4 DJ crystal (Figure Therefore, the absence of spin-canting and a subtle spin-flop transition indicate that this DJ crystal presents a smaller anisotropy than the RP structures, while a large anisotropy is present in the phenomenologically rich EA2MnCl4 crystal. When comparing the Mn 2+ RP and DJ structures (Table In the case of the Co 2+ HOIMs, the M(T) curves show a paramagnetic behavior regardless of the organic cation and the perovskite phase (Figure To sum up, we carried out a detailed study on ten hybrid metal-halide crystals grown by solution-based methods using a series of transition metals (Cu 2+ , Mn 2+ , Co 2+ ), while varying both the organic cation nature (alkyl and aryl) and the perovskite phase (RP and DJ). We confirmed their successful synthesis and layered nature by XRD analysis. The study of the vibrational dynamics of these compounds by temperature-dependent Raman spectroscopy revealed that only the samples containing EA + as organic cation show structural phase transitions below 300K. Moreover, while in the EA2CuCl4 and EA2CoCl4 crystals the structural phase transitions involve the rearrangement of both the inorganic lattice and organic moieties, in the EA2MnCl4 these transitions are governed only by changes in the conformation of the organic moieties. Therefore, in addition to the order-disorder motional freedom of the organic cations, another key factor controlling the structural phase transitions in layered HOIMs is the flexibility of the inorganic metal-halide lattice. Regarding the temperature-dependent photoluminescence on the Mn 2+ HOIPs, we found that their characteristic photoluminescence emission ~ 600 nm is not significantly affected by the organic cation and perovskite phase, showing that these factors almost do not alter the band structure. Evaluating their magnetic properties, we observed that in the Cu 2+ HOIPs, a high in-plane anisotropy translated into a deviation of the Cu•••X•••Cu angles from 180 deg and to a short interlayer distance. This in turn leads to strong AFM contributions from the interlayer interaction and changes from a 2D ferromagnet (PEA2CuCl4) to a 3D antiferromagnet (EDACuCl4). In contrast, the magnetic behavior of the Mn 2+ HOIPs is intrinsically characterized by AFM intralayer interactions. However, the appearance and magnitude of the spin-canting, spin-flop transitions and metamagnetic phenomena are also controlled by the anisotropy generated in the crystal structure. A particular case is that of EA2MnCl4, which shows all the mentioned magnetic phenomena. Finally, Co 2+ HOIMs constituted by unconnected tetrahedra show a paramagnetic behavior, favored in the RP-like perovskite structures due to the large Co•••Co distances. To conclude, our comprehensive study demonstrates that the composition and structural flexibility of hybrid organic-inorganic metal-halides can offer valuable and interesting magnetic properties, opening new pathways towards the design and pursuit of novel layered magnetic materials for optoelectronic and spintronic applications. Synthesis of the layered HOIMs. The different crystals used in this work were synthesized solubilizing the corresponding precursors at high temperature and then cooling down to promote the precipitation but in different solvent media depending on the organic cation and perovskite phase, Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) or Dion-Jacobson (DJ). The RP (C2H5NH3)2CuCl4 crystals were grown in a similar way but using as precursor the organic salt instead of the amine, a more polar medium Then, the temperature was progressively decreased up to 50°C to allow the growth of the crystals for 1 day. The (C6H5CH2CH2NH3)2MnCl4 crystals were synthesized in a similar way than the Cu counterpart using polar solvents in the medium used for growing this material as reported in literature to allow the growth of the crystals. After 1h the first pale pink crystals were formed, but we left growing 1 day. The RP (C2H5NH3)2MnCl4 crystals were grown in a similar way but using as precursor the organic salt instead of the amine and without adding HCl. We mixed MnCl2 (63 mg) and EACl (81.5 mg) in 1 mL of ethanol. Then, the solution was stirred at 120°C up to dissolution and quickly transferred to another hot plate set at 35°C to allow the growth of the crystals for 2 days. Similarly to the Cu counterpart, the DJ (NH3C2H2NH3)MnCl4 crystals were using acid medium The (C6H5CH2CH2NH3)2CoCl4 crystals were synthesized in a similar way to the Cu and Mn counterparts, but changing the mixture of solvents. Briefly, we mixed CoCl2 (64.9 mg, 99.995% trace metal basis, anhydrous beads, ~10 mesh, Sigma Aldrich), and PEA (126 μL) in 82 μL of HCl in 1.5 mL of methanol (≥99.9%, HPLC quality, Sigma Aldrich) and 1.5 mL of ethanol were added. We passed a N2 flow during 2 min. Subsequently, the solution was stirred at 120°C up to dissolution. Then, the vial was quickly transferred to another hot plate set at 35°C to allow the growth of the crystals. After 7 days growth covering the vial with holey-parchment paper, we obtained blue crystals. The RP-like (C2H5NH3)2CoCl4 crystals were grown in a similar way as the Cu and Mn counterparts but adding HCl to favor the dissolution of the precursors. We mixed CoCl2 (64.9 mg), EACl (81.5 mg) and 650 μL HCl in 1 mL of methanol and 1 mL of ethanol. Then, the solution was stirred at 120°C up to dissolution and quickly transferred to another hot plate set at 35°C to allow the growth of the crystals for 2 weeks leaving the vial covered with holey-parchment paper. As for the Cu and Mn counterpart, ) to a 3D antiferromagnet in EDACuCl4 (J'/J ~ 10 -1 ).