In orthoferrites the rare-earth (R) ion has a big impact on structural and magnetic properties in particular the ionic size influences the octahedral tilt and the R 3+ -Fe 3+ interaction modifies properties like the spin reorientation. Growth induced strain in thin films is another means to modify materials properties since the sign of strain affects the bond length and therefore directly the orbital interaction. Our study focuses on epitaxially grown (010) oriented DyFeO3 and LuFeO3 thin films, thereby investigating the impact of compressive lattice strain on the magnetically active Dy 3+ and magnetically inactive Lu 3+ compared to uniaxially strained single crystal DyFeO3. The DyFeO3 films exhibits a shift of more than 20K in spin-reorientation temperatures, maintain the antiferromagnetic Γ4 phase of the Fe-lattice below the spin reorientation, and show double step hysteresis loops for both in-plane directions between 5 K and 390 K. This is the signature of an Fe-spin induced ferromagnetic Dy 3+ lattice above the Néel temperature of the Dy. The observed shift in the film spin reorientation temperatures vs lattice strain is in good agreement with isostatic single crystal neutron diffraction experiments with a rate of 2 K/ kbar bar. The orthorhombic perovskite RFeO3 (orthoferrites; R: rare earth) is an interesting and technically relevant class of materials for spintronic applications, and has been investigated extensively since the 1960s Strain or externally applied pressure can alter mechanical, chemical, electrical, and magnetic properties of a material DyFeO3 is one member of the RFeO3 family with the space group Pbnm and known to show magnetic ordering-driven multiferroic properties below 4 K In this paper, we study the effect of growth induced strain on the magnetic properties of the nominally multiferroic material DyFeO3 and LuFeO3 as thin films by growing them epitaxially strained on (010)-oriented YAlO3 substrates with a compressive in-plane strain. For the magnetic characterization, the temperature dependence of the magnetic moment (M) was measured for all three main crystallographic axes as well as the moment vs magnetic field up to 7 T between 1.8 K and 390 K. To compare the effect of compressive strain and pressure on the magnetic thin film properties neutron diffraction measurements were performed to probe the temperature dependence of the SR of a DyFeO3 single crystals in a He gas pressure cell with an isostatic pressure up to 5kbar (0.5 GPa). Due to the experimental set-up, the single crystal data are equivalent to thin film experiments. Epitaxial thin films of DyFeO3 (a=5.302 Å, b=5.598 Å and c=7.623 Å) and LuFeO3 (a=5.2176 Å, b=5.5556 Å and c=7.5749 Å) are grown on (010) oriented YAlO3 single crystalline substrates (a=5.18 Å, b=5.330 Å, and c=7.375 Å) by pulsed laser deposition using a KrF excimer laser ( = 248nm, 3 Hz) with an in-plane lattice mismatch between (010) DyFeO3 and a (010) YAlO3 substrate of -2.36% along the a-and -3.36 % along the c-axis, -5.03 % along the b-axis The structural quality of the powder and single crystal, and the thickness of the films after the deposition has been monitored by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and -reflection (XRR) respectively using a Seifert 3003 PTS and a Bruker D8 Advance four-circle x-ray diffractometer with a Cu Ka1 monochromatic x-ray source. -2 scans have been used to monitor the crystalline quality of all samples, reciprocal space maps to determine in-plane lattice constants and to evaluate qualitatively strain in these films, XRR to determine the thickness of the films after the deposition. The temperature dependent magnetization was investigated by a commercially available SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS ® 3). It enables temperature sweeps between 1.8 -400 K with a magnetic field of up to 7 T parallel to the measurement direction. The evolution of the magnetic moment (M) with temperature has been analysed by the following measurement protocol. First, the sample is cooled down without applied field to 3 K. The zerofield cooling (ZFC) M(T) measurement is taken during heating between 3K and 300 K in the presence of a small field applied along the measurement direction. After each measurement cycle, the film was kept at 390 K for 5 minutes to erase as much as possible trapped fields. Normally, the annealing temperature should be higher than TN,bulk ∼ 645 K. Due to instrumental limitations, the maximum temperature which can be reached inside the SQUID is ∼400 K. Although, this temperature is not enough to remove the trapped stray fields inside the film completely, increasing the temperature up to ∼400 K will certainly increase thermal fluctuations of the magnetic spin and minimize trapped field since TN for strained films is expected to be considerably lower than TN,bulk Neutron diffraction studies were performed at the spallation neutron source SINQ, Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland). Single crystal neutron diffraction experiments were conducted at the thermal triple-axis spectrometer EIGER with kf = 2.66 Å -1 (λ = 2.36 Å) The crystalline quality of the DyFeO3 films with five different thicknesses was studied using XRD. All films are (010)-oriented and show a good crystalline quality with the FWHM for the -scans of ~0.02°. The strain for the (010) out-of-plane direction is tensile for all film thicknesses measured (Fig. The Fe lattice in bulk DyFeO3 orders antiferromagnetically with the spin pointing along the a-axis. At ∼50 K The magnetic properties of DyFeO3 are known to be very sensitive to external stimuli due to the very small interaction energies involved The temperature dependence of the (100), ( To characterize the temperature dependence of the SR, the maximum peak intensity of the magnetic (031) Bragg peak was measured between 5 K and 100 K at ambient pressure We first present zero field cooled M(T) measurements for the 115 nm thick film between 300 K and 2 K for the c-direction (Fig. Trapped fields in single crystals can have a pronounced influence on M(T) resulting in additional steps and humps at temperatures typically above TSR The ZFC and FC (heating or cooling) curves along [001] show a divergence at low temperature and they converge near room temperature (∼250 K). Besides, the net moment during any field cooled measurement shows a higher value at a fixed temperature than the moment measured during ZFC for the temperature range below 250 K. The evolution of the interaction between the Dy and Fe lattice with applied magnetic field is a possible reason for this behaviour. The magnetic interaction between Dy 3+ and Fe 3+ has been reported to induce ordering of the Dy lattice for SC DyFeO3 at ~210 K along the c-axis and the direction of the Dy 3+ spins depends on the direction of the applied magnetic field Near room temperature, the Dy 3+ spin system is the paramagnet and thermal energy prevents the ordering of the Dy lattice Isothermal field-dependent magnetic measurements, M(H), along all three major axes have been performed on these films to study the spin interaction of Fe 3+ -Fe 3+ , Dy 3+ -Fe 3+ or Dy 3+ -Dy 3+ between 1.8 K and 390 K. For single crystal DyFeO3, M(H)-loops along [001] show a small magnetic hysteresis at low fields and a saturation moment of 0.15 μB at 50 K with the hysteresis closing at TSR. No hysteresis is observed for the other directions For M(H)-loops measured along the in-plane [100] and [001] directions, double step hysteresis (DS) loops are observed as shown in Fig. The applied magnetic field can change the spin alignment in the Dy spin lattice above TSR from an AFM to a FM configuration. It is therefore expected to measure an exchange bias effect, in particular at low temperatures since a DyFeO3 films seems to be a natural FM-AFM spin multilayer where a pinning of the FM with the AFM spin lattice can occur. In Fig. To evaluate the ordering of the spin systems, the saturation moment for the 13nm film at 50 K for both spin system (hard and soft) is measured, which are ∼1.445 μB and ∼9.875 μB respectively and the maximum moments Fe 3+ and Dy 3+ can reach are 5.91 μB and 10.6 μB, respectively (Fig From the presented data on magnetic properties of thin orthoferrite films and single crystal, it is evident that the thin film properties are highly affected by the epitaxial lattice strain and hence very different compared to single crystal data. Most noticeable is the significant shift in TSR, the very broad SR, or its complete suppression during FC measurements. The latter observation is an indication, that Γ4 is the preferred magnetic space group also supported by a FM hysteresis measured between 1.6 K and 390 K. When comparing the changes in film lattice parameter for all three directions with the pressure induced changes for a single crystal, the observed maximum changes for the lattice parameters would correspond to 12kbar for [100], 15kbar for [010] and 16.7kbar for the [001] direction. This is clearly more than expected for the two short axes, and considerably less for the long axis if applying the rule of a thumb criteria of 1% lattice mismatch corresponding to 10kbar (1GPa) epitaxial strain. Overall, these nominal pressure values are closer to a more uniform pressure distribution in the unit cell justifying the comparative approach studying magnetic properties of a single crystal under hydrostatic, uniform He-pressure. How a small perturbation in the lattice parameters of the DyFeO3 unit cell can lead to noticeable changes in its magnetic properties has already reported for single crystal and powder samples Comparing the observed values of TSR with the changes in lattice parameters, we would expect to observe a minimum change on TSR of +20K and up to 40K based on the nominal pressure values. The observed window for TSR for the different films fits well to the expected temperature interval. Whereas the Morin transition along [001] remains sharp with increasing pressure for a single crystal SR, for films along [001] it is relatively broad (Fig. Another obvious difference between single crystal and thin film properties is the presence of a FM hysteresis loop in M(H) measurements between 1.6K and 390K along [001]. For a single crystal, the FM hysteresis closes at TSR signalling the change from Γ4 to Γ1. This does not happen in films and confirms that a Γ4 to Γ1 transition does not occur in our films. In addition, a double hysteresis loop originated by the coupling between the Fe and Dy spins has been observed along [100] and [001], the probable origin of the DS in LuFeO3 thin films as a single spin system is biaxial magnetic anisotropic strain in a unit cell The presence of the DS in DyFeO3 also reveals a large coercive field HC2 of up to 1T. It is, however, smaller than the critical field of 2.3 T needed to induce FE in bulk. The combination of growth induced "pressure" and HC2 is sufficient to drive a polar state in DyFeO3 We have studied structural and magnetic properties of compressively strained orthorhombic (010)-oriented DyFeO3 and LuFeO3 thin films grown on (010)-oriented YAlO3 and compared the results to the pressure dependence of the (031) magnetic Bragg peak for a DyFeO3 single crystal under uniaxial strain. (010)-DyFeO3 thin films grow coherent up to 40nm, with some lattice relaxation and a smaller unit cell volume than unstrained DyFeO3. Thicker films relax towards bulk lattice values with the net unit cell volume larger than bulk. For those films strain is mostly tensile for all directions, for films thinner than 40nm compressive along [100] and [001] and tensile along [010]. For LuFeO3, strain states are similar to DyFeO3 for very thin films. For both materials, this is indicative of a Poisson ratio < 0.5 when grown as a thin film. Shifting TSR for DyFeO3 films by more than 20 K to higher temperatures or even completely suppressing the spin reorientation for thinner films (<40nm) with an applied magnetic field shows the presence of the 4 phase. This is substantiated by measuring double-step hysteresis loops in the whole measured temperature range above TN,Dy and the presence of an induced magnetically ordered Dy lattice. As Dy orders antiferromagnetically, the DS hysteresis disappear and an exchange bias effect has been observed instead. The magnetic field at which the DS occurs is of the order of 1T and could be large enough to drive the unit cell polar. Dy 3+ is magnetically active along [100] and [001] with the preference on the [100] direction. Since an ordering of the Fe lattice induces ordering in the Dy lattice and ferroelectricity in bulk is linked with a ferromagnetically ordered Dy lattice in the 4 phase, it is expected to observe ferroelectricity along the [100] direction in DyFeO3 thin films between TN,Dy and 390 K. For LuFeO3 we also observe DS hysteresis loops along [100] due to a strain induced magnetic anisotropy. It is therefore likely to measure a polar response at room temperature and above along the a-direction as predicted by theory. Polarization measurements are required to show if magnetic anisotropy for both materials is the mechanism to induce FE, which would then be a generic mechanism for this class of materials.