Grain boundaries (GBs) in polycrystalline materials are powerful sinks for irradiation defects. While standard theories assume that a GB's efficiency as a sink is defined solely by its character before irradiation, recent evidence conclusively shows that the irradiation sink efficiency is a highly dynamic property controlled by the intrinsic metastability of GBs under far-from-equilibrium irradiation conditions. In this paper, we reveal that the denuded (i.e., defect-free) zone, typically the signature of a strong sink, can collapse as irradiation damage accumulates. We propose a radiation damage evolution model that captures this behavior based on the emergence of a series of irradiation defect-enabled metastable GB microstate changes that dynamically alter the ability of the GB to absorb further damage. We show that these microstate changes control further defect absorption and give rise to the formation of a defect network that manifests itself as a net Nye-tensor signal detectable via lattice curvature experiments. Experimental and simulation results elucidate outstanding questions on how nanocrystalline materials respond to irradiation extremes. Controlling microstructural evolution to tailor properties, such as radiation damage tolerance , is a key goal of materials design To date, no material is known to be fully immune to radiation damage, especially beyond a dose level of several hundred displacements per atom GBs act as sinks for point defects during irradiation and hence modify the distribution of point and other defects (dislocations, stacking fault tetrahedra, etc.) within the grains. If the rate of defect annihilation at the boundary is high relative to the defect generation rate, then a (relatively) defect-free, or denuded, zone can form adjacent to the boundary. This phenomenon has been thoroughly studied in literature where λv,i is the width of the denuded zone, Ksv,i is the defect-sink reaction rate coefficient, K0 is the defect production rate, Dv,i is the defect diffusivity within the grain, c v,i * is the critical defect concentration to nucleate loops or voids, and ηv,i is the sink efficiency describing the ability of the sink to absorb point defects; the subscript "v" denotes vacancies and "i" denotes interstitials. η may be between 0 (no defect absorption) and 1 (perfect sink) and is an overall GB sink figure of merit. In general, no solid/solid interfaces exist which are perfect sinks. Although earlier studies treated GBs as perfect sinks, recent works Most GBs exhibit multiple metastable structural states (even in pure materials). While the number of such states tends to be small in systems with high-symmetry GBs (i.e., coherent twins), the number may be large for most other GBs Through a combination of quantitative in situ electron microscopy and atomistic modeling, we define a relationship between GB sink efficiency limits and the local defect landscape created by the irradiation dose. GBs are revealed to "shut down" as sinks at particular doses of irradiation, as evidenced by denuded zone collapse and a related mesoscale "signature" of dislocation density within the GB. Interestingly, the change in sink efficiency, and increased dislocation density in the GB region due to denuded zone collapse, contributes to a complex defect network adjacent to the GB. While we connect the change in sink efficiency to microstate changes in the GB, we note that denuded zone collapse may, of course, be enhanced by local defect bias, accelerating changes in the GB state (supporting simulations added in the Supplementary Information). Critically, this finding reveals an ability to tune GB response not only by their innate structure or state, but also by external factors that control local defect environments. We begin with a series of striking experimental observations that emanate from our in situ 10 keV-He + irradiation TEM experiments of polycrystalline Fe films (see Methods for experimental details). While denuded zone evolution was found to be GB-dependent, with denuded zones developed at different He + doses around different GBs, a particularly remarkable observation was that the denuded zone width evolves with time (dose) (in agreement with the observations by Yang et al. in a different material system While bi-crystallography depends on the five macroscopic DOF that define a GB, these do not constrain GBs microscopic DOFs. Figure To reflect a realistic scenario in irradiated metals, where an unbalanced flux of SIA and SIA clusters arrive to the GB, in the simulations we load the grain boundary with single-interstitials at different prescribed rates at a fixed temperature. Figures The oscillations seen in the curves for the lower defect injection rates (125 and 250) in Figs. Figure The results presented here provide a global picture for the interaction between GBs and irradiation defects under irradiation. In particular, point defect absorption modifies the structure of the boundary, that is, it affects GB microstates and thus likely the ability of the GB to absorb additional point defects. Without necessarily excluding other potential mechanisms, our work is general enough to explain the relationship between GB structure, irradiation conditions, material microstructure, and evolution of the denuded zone. In the following, we discuss the most salient features of our results and their connection to experimentally observable features of the microstructure. A unified picture of denuded zone onset and collapse: Our analysis shows that the interplay between defects and GBs is governed by a relaxation time that reflects the instantaneous metastable structure of the grain boundary. In reality, this relaxation time is one of several time constants characterizing transitions between different microstates upon the absorption of point defects and defect clusters by the GB. Within this picture, when the characteristic times describing the irradiation process, e.g., the damage production rate and the GB absorption rate, are shorter than the corresponding GB relaxation times, the GB cannot adjust its structure (i.e., transition to a different metastable microstate) sufficiently fast to accommodate the damage internally. The implications of this picture as it relates to irradiation processes are: In general, each GB displays a specific τ R -spectrum representing the different relaxation times required to (meta) stabilize different microstates throughout its internal evolution with irradiation. (ii) Zero microstates implies no defect absorption, i.e., zero sink strength, and thus the impossibility of denuded zone onset. An infinite number of microstates means that the GB behaves as a perfect absorber, which precludes the possibility of denuded zone collapse. Real boundaries fall between these two limits, dynamically shifting from one metastable state to another as dictated by transitions induced by irradiation. (iii) When the irradiation process exhausts the short time region of the τ R -spectrum, the longer relaxation times reduce the admissible (absorbable) defect flux, gradually transitioning the system towards DZ collapse. (iv) Because each GB type (defined by its macro-DOFs) displays its own set of characteristic relaxation times, they will respond differently to the same irradiation conditions. This explains why under identical irradiation conditions, e.g., particle type, dose rate, irradiation temperature, etc., denuded zone onset and collapse occur at different doses for different boundaries. (v) Finally, an alternative scenario can be contemplated whereby -even if the GB can dynamically absorb defects-the resulting microstates may be too high in energy to be favored thermodynamically. This is further discussed below. We find all of these points to be qualitatively consistent with our experimental observations. As discussed, once a given GB can no longer absorb arriving irradiation defects, the DZ begins to shrink until its eventual collapse. At that point, defects cannot be absorbed at a pace sufficiently fast to allow the GB to switch to other metastable microstates. This leads to two potentially distinct scenarios: 1. The first scenario directly comes from consideration of the different intrinsic relaxation times in the corresponding GB structure. Once the relaxation time is no longer short enough to evolve microstates before the next defect arrival time, defects will start to pile up against the GB and form clusters (when defect concentration is above the critical concentration for dislocation loop formation). As advanced in point (v) above, the second scenario is one where the denuded zone can be interpreted as a thermodynamic structure where the free energy of the combined (GB + defect cluster) system is higher than the free energy of the GB in a different microstate that results from the prior microstate plus the absorption of the defect. Within this picture, the next absorption of an irradiation defect may result in a microstate that has a higher energy than the energies of the separate GB and defect structures. This crossover signals the transition towards the collapse of the DZ by accumulation of defects in the region adjacent to the GB. The common consequence of these two scenarios is that the accumulation of defect clusters near the GB will inevitably result in reactions among these defects, giving rise to a stable 'network' of defects that contributes a measurable GND signal that can be observed experimentally. An example of the equivalence between dislocation segments and GND fingerprints is provided in Figure . 5 (see Methods for details). In this fashion, the existence of a Nye tensor signal is directly and intimately linked to fundamental GB properties and the kinetics of defect absorption by the GB in the context of the existing irradiation conditions. In other words, detection of a Nye-tensor signal next to a GB is unequivocally indicative of the collapse of the DZ. Role of 'bulk' bias and other in-grain irradiation processes: The difference between the arrival rates of SIAs and vacancies to the GB may be associated with bulk bias, i.e., a differential feature in how SIAs and vacancies behave. The MD simulations have been carried out only with SIAs but no vacancies, which represents the ideal case of an infinite bias. However, in metallic materials the realistiuc bias emerges due to a number of different processes, whether working in isolation or in conjunction with one another, such as: The intrinsic defect diffusion dimensionality: SIAs and SIA clusters in BCC transition metals are known to move almost athermally (stages I and II in isochronal annealing) in one dimension. This allows them to rapidly move away from the cascade region (where they are produced in equal numbers to vacancies). By itself, this intrinsic bias is weak, and leads to small values of c. (ii) Helium (or, more generally, 'noble gas atom') bias: This effect is caused by the presence of insoluble noble gas atoms (e.g., from direct ion implantation or neutron transmutation), which quickly segregate to vacancy-type defects, creating very stable immobile vacancy-He complexes that trap vacancies in the cascade region, limiting recombination and favoring SIA-defect escape from the cascade region towards sinks. This represents a very strong bias, and would naturally lead to a relatively high excess concentration c. In the Supplementary Information we provide additional simulations in support of this mechanism (Supplementary Fig. (iii) Solute atom bias: substitutional solute atoms can be mobilized by coupling to point defect fluxes in what is known as radiation enhanced diffusion (RED). This coupling can be direct (point defects and solutes moving in the same direction) or inverse (opposite direction). This bias is behind radiation enhanced segregation; as non-equilibrium vacancy fluxes march towards sinks, depositing solute atoms in enhanced concentrations there. The coupling of vacancies and solutes can 'free' self-interstitials from recombination, contributing positively to the bias. All of these potential biases, however, do not physically dictate, to first order, GB properties and how they contribute to sink efficiency. Using GB engineering to increase irradiation resistance: Although the majority of the considerations are qualitative in nature, they provide both understanding and design guidelines for the development of materials with enhanced radiation tolerance. For example, a precharacterization using atomistic models of the catalog of available microstates for a given set of (five-dimensional) macro DOFs can provide relative relaxation time spectra to gain an understanding what GBs are desirable and under what conditions to prevent DZ collapse. Conversely, one may design a thermomechanical process that favors the formation of microstructures with GBs known to bolster the GB sink efficiency. This can conceivably be achieved by directional solidification, rolling or extrusion of pre-formed internal microstructures (e.g., after achieving a target nanocrystalline structure). Ultimately, while some microstructures containing GBs with line defect (disconnection) content structures can alter sink efficiency, to some extent; these are unlikely to be the controlling factors for establishing materials design protocols. The present study helps clarify the principles under which materials can be actively designed for radiation tolerance. This work defines a relationship between GB sink efficiency limits and the local defect landscape created by the irradiation dose. The combined quantitative in situ electron microscopy and atomistic simulations reveals a picture in which GBs negotiate a metastable energy landscape under irradiation, transitioning through a set of quantized structural microstates characterized by a spectrum of internal relaxation times. When the defect arrival rate is slower that the intrinsic relaxation time, the GB acts as an efficient absorber, whereas in the opposite scenario it behaves as if having zero sink efficiency. Our atomistic simulations, consistent with our experimental observations, conclusively show that when the defect flux overwhelms the internal relaxation dynamics, the GB acts as a saturated absorber, rejecting defects back into the bulk and signaling the collapse of the denuded zone. The proposed picture based on GB microstate changes controlling further defect absorption, extends our understanding of the principles under which materials can be actively designed with radiation tolerance as a design criterion. Polycrystalline iron films with a target thickness of 100 nm were deposited using magnetron sputtering onto sodium chloride substrates to create nanocrystalline iron specimens suitable for transmission electron microscopy (see Ref. We have used the Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) In all MD simulations, we used the interatomic potential for bcc Fe developed by Dudarev and Derlet We also have used atomistic simulations to provide insight into how changing microstates impact the interaction of defects with grain boundaries, essentially to address the assumptions made in the kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) modeling. Specifically, two effects were probed for one specific grain boundary (Σ13 [111](134) symmetric tilt). First, the highest and lowest energy structures found by mapping the gamma surface were examined, representing different translational relationships between the two grains. Second, the lowest energy structure was modified ("loaded") by adding 10 SIAs, one at a time, with 2.0 picosecond anneals at 750 K and minimizations between each insertion. In all three resulting structures, the segregation energy of vacancies was calculated by removing atoms, one-by-one, and minimizing the energy of the structure. The results shown in Fig. Vacancies were eliminated at a rate of k 2 DvNv, with k 2 = 10 12 cm -2 , Nv the number of vacancies in the system, mimicking the Heint + Vacancy → Hesub reaction. We used a dose rate of 10 -2 dpa/s for the generation of Frenkel pairs and a temperature of 500 K. One of the principal signatures of denuded zone collapse is the emergence of a nonzero GND signal. Experimentally, GNDs are detected by mapping the gradient in lattice curvature to Nye's definition of the GND tensor (i) First, we look at atomistic configurations of bulk, partially absorbed, and fullyabsorbed loops, and obtain their corresponding Nye tensor signals. For consistency with the structure of irradiation defect clusters in bcc metals, we consider 1/2 〈111〉 loops arriving at a virgin grain boundary (full defect absorbance) via diffusion from the grain's interior. Our main observation is that indeed partially absorbed loops do yield a nonzero GND signal, regardless of the discretization resolution (ii) Second, we analyzed full closed prismatic loops with various degrees of resolution. The conclusion is that nonzero GND signals can indeed be produced for sufficiently fine discretizations. This requires a careful evaluation of the expected or measured loop size vis-à-vis the microscopy pixelation resolution, to ensure that nonzero signals are properly interpreted. This also suggests that a scalar metric representing the Nye tensor (such as the L1 norm) may not be suitable for identifying GNDs We employ models to distinguish between these two possibilities, to construe Nye tensor information and to analyze Nye tensor data Automated Crystallographic Orientation Mapping (ACOM) was performed via NanoMEGAS ASTAR precession diffraction , where ∂φ i is the three-dimensional rotation vector and ∂x i is the displacement vector. These are generated using ACOM-TEM. First, the axis-angle pair for the disorientation between each point and its neighbors is calculated. The rotation vector ∂φ i is approximated as the product of the axis and angle according to infinitesimal rotation theory Equivalent to ~100 years in existing light water reactors, but only 10-20 in Generation IV designs, and 1-2 in fusion reactor designs.