Identifying the key factors controlling the magnitude of T c is of critical importance in the pursuit of high-temperature superconductivity. In cuprates, T c reaches its maximal value in trilayer structure, leading to the belief that interlayer coupling may help promote the pairing. In contrast, for the recently discovered nickelate superconductors under high pressure, the maximum T c is reduced from about 80 K in the bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 to 30 K in the trilayer La 4 Ni 3 O 10 . Motivated by this opposite trend, we propose an interlayer pairing 1 The recent discoveries of superconductivity in bilayer In this work, we point out that the different variation of the maximum T c in multilayer cuprate and nickelate superconductors might be an indicator of their possibly distinct pairing mechanisms. In cuprates, the maximum T c is the highest in trilayer systems. At ambient pres-sure, it rises from 97 K (single layer) to 135 K (trilayer) in Hg-based cuprates and from 30 K to 115 K in Bi-based cuprates 74, 75 . In contrast, the maximum T c is reduced from about 80 K in the bilayer nickelate La 3 Ni 2 O 7 to about 30 K in the trilayer nickelate La 4 Ni 3 O 10 . To understand this difference, we propose an interlayer pairing scenario and perform numerical simulations on an effective low-energy model of the trilayer nickelate. Our calculations yield a maximum ratio T c /J ≈ 0.02 -0.03, which is reduced by nearly a half compared to that of 0.04 -0.05 in the bilayer model We start with the following low-energy effective two-orbital trilayer model based on experimental and first-principles considerations 10, 72, 76 , where d lis (c lis ) is the annihilation operator of d z 2 (d x 2 -y 2 ) electrons with spin s on site i of the inner (l = 0) or two outer (l = ±) layers, spin density operator with σ being the Pauli matrices, the subscript a = ± denotes two outer layers, t ij and μ are the in-plane nearest-neighbor hopping and the chemical potential of d x 2 -y 2 , V ij is the renormalized in-plane hybridization between nearest-neighbor d z 2 and d x 2 -y 2 orbitals satisfying V i,i+x = -V i,i+ŷ = V , t ⊥ is the renormalized interlayer hopping of d z 2 quasiparticles, and J is the d z 2 interlayer superexchange interaction mediated by apical oxygens. Other small parameters are ignored for simplicity. The effect of the Hund's rule coupling is incorporated into the renormalized hybridization V which is set as a free tuning parameter 32, 40 . The intralayer superexchange interaction is small as reported in latest RIXS and inelastic neutron scattering (INS) measurements 16, 17 , and thus ignored to focus on interlayer pairing only. We employ the static auxiliary field Monte Carlo approach, which has been widely applied to strongly correlated electron studies where denotes the local interlayer d z 2 spin singlet at site i between the inner and a-th outer layers, and ∆ a i is its corresponding pairing field. The static approximation ignores the imaginary time dependence of the auxiliary fields, to avoid the severe sign problem, while the full thermodynamic fluctuations are retained beyond the uniform mean-field approximation. Hence, it is particularly suitable for studying the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition in two-dimensional superconductivity at finite temperatures We first integrate out all fermionic degrees of freedom to derive an effective action that solely depends on the pairing fields: where Λi and Λ i are the eigenvalues of two matrices determined by the tight-binding parameters and the pairing configuration {∆ a i } (see supplemental information). Monte Carlo simulations are then performed to sample the probability distribution p({∆ a i }) = Z -1 e -S eff ({∆ a i }) , where Z is the partition function serving as a normalization factor. Hereafter, we will set t to unity as the energy unit and fix the chemical potential μ = -1.3 to ensure that the total electron density varies only slightly around its nominal value 2.67. Due to computational limitations, all results presented are obtained on a 10 × 10 trilayer lattice but the conclusions have been examined to be robust across other lattice sizes. Theoretically, the BKT transition is characterized by a rapid increase of the vortex number n v Figure In reality, the magnitude of the trilayer T c may be further reduced by other factors. Firstprinciples calculations have revealed a subtle imbalance in La 4 Ni 3 O 10 , with somewhat different hybridization V and chemical potential μ between the inner and outer layers 66, 72 . Our calculations show that both tend to suppress T c (see supplemental information). A small interlayer hopping may also influence T c but acts similarly on both models. We therefore conclude that the reduction of T c from bilayer to trilayer nickelates may be a genuine intrinsic property reflecting their interlayer pairing mechanism, different from the cuprates. To clarify the origin of the T c reduction, we present a comparative analysis of the probability To clarify the origin of the frustration, we expand the effective action up to fourth order by assuming uniform pairing fields for simplicity. This gives a Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy for the trilayer model: where Ψ = (∆ + , ∆ -) T is a Higgs-like complex doublet order parameter, T ∆ = 1 2 Ψ † σΨ is its pseudospin, c 1/2 are two GL parameters determined by model details, and h ∝ t 2 ⊥ plays the role of an effective transverse field. Detailed derivations can be found in the supplemental information. We first consider t ⊥ = 0 since it is strongly renormalized and proportional to the density of self-doped holes on d z 2 (δ h ∼ 0.01). This gives h = 0 and we immediately see that the GL free energy has a global SU(2)×U(1) symmetry associated with the rotation of the pseudospin and an overall phase rotation. Both symmetries can be well understood from the original Hamiltonian (1), where the SU(2) corresponds to the basis transformation of (d +is , d -is ) T and (c +is , c -is ) T between two outer layers, and the U(1) reflects their phase change relative to the inner layer (charge conservation). For c 1 < 0 and c 2 > 0, For the same reason, there is no phase coherence between two superconducting layers, since x ⟩ + i⟨T ∆ y ⟩ = 0, which is also observed in our simulations. The free energy has the same form for the bilayer |∆|, explaining their almost identical distributions. A nonzero interlayer hopping introduces a small but finite h ∝ t 2 ⊥ ∝ δ 2 h , which plays the role of a transverse field in the GL free energy and breaks the global SU(2) symmetry. For h > 0 (< 0), the GL free energy is minimized at h , as derived in the supplemental information. Thus, the fluctuations remain strong for small δ h . This is confirmed in Figures 3A and 3B from our numerical calculations of the joint distribution of |∆ ± | and θ ± for t ⊥ = 0.05 and V = 0.15. Indeed, while the data get more clustered around the GL solution with lowering temperature, strong fluctuations persist even at T = 0.0016 well below the BKT transition, indicating the lack of coherence along the c-axis. By rewriting T ∆ x = |∆ + ∆ -| cos(θ +θ -), we find an intrinsic Josephson coupling within the trilayer structure, which predicts a Josephson frequency (if exist) only half that for intralayer pairing but is absent in the bilayer model (see supplemental information). We suggest future experiments to examine to what extent these features may be realized in real materials. The mean-field gap structures in momentum space may be tentatively obtained by constructing a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) Hamiltonian with the static pairing fields ∆ a and realistic tight-binding parameters Such bonding/antibonding characters determine most of their gap properties except for some narrow regions. The BCS Hamiltonian can be diagonalized to project out the gaps on each Fermi pocket. Figures We have proposed an interlayer pairing scenario for La 4 Ni 3 O 10 and derived a reduced maximum ratio T c /J ≈ 0.02 -0.03 in the trilayer model from 0.04 -0.05 in the bilayer model. We show that this reduction may be a natural consequence of interlayer pairing due to the competition of two outer layers to form spin-singlet pairs with the inner layer respectively. This induces some kind of frustration and enhances the superconducting fluctuations between layers. Similar simulations for intralayer pairing have been performed for cuprates, but the maximum ratio T c /J seems robust except for some very special situations Lately, it has been reported that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 may also adopt a single layer-trilayer alternate (1313) structure Our numerical simulations of the current trilayer model always find the solution ∆θ = 0 (h > 0) at low temperatures. Expanding Eq. (S22) around |∆ + | = |∆ -| = ∆ 0 and ∆θ = 0 yields To study the Josephson effect, we introduce a scalar potential φ a (τ ) for two outer layers relative to the inner layer and take into consideration the imaginary time dependence of the global θ a (τ ) inside the BKT phase. For simplicity, we ignore their spatial dependence on each layer. These yield additional dynamics of θ a (τ ) with the effective action: where we have defined N = a N a , θ = a θ a , φ = a φ a , and ∆N = N + -N -, ∆θ = θ +θ -, ∆φ = φ +φ -. Obviously, S 0 is not relevant, while S J describes the dynamics of the phase difference and is responsible for the Josephson effect. Minimizing S J with respect to ∆N and ∆θ yields the equations of motion: where α is a constant offset. We have therefore a characteristic oscillation frequency ω J = e∆φ/ħ, half that of the usual ac Josephson effect for intralayer pairing. This can be easily understood, because for interlayer pairing, a phase change d ais → d ais e iθ a yields ∆ a i → ∆ a i e iθ a , while for intralayer pairing, it yields ∆ a i → ∆ a i e 2iθ a .