We report the superconducting properties of the Co/Pb/Co heterostructures with thin insulating interlayers. The main specific feature of these structures is the intentional oxidation of both superconductor/ferromagnet (S/F) interfaces. We study variation of the critical temperature of our systems due to switching between parallel and antiparallel configurations of the magnetizations of the two magnetic layers. Common wisdom suggests that this spin valve effect, which is due to the S/F proximity effect, is most pronounced in the case of perfect metallic contact at the interfaces. Nevertheless, in our structures with intentionally deteriorated interfaces, we observed a significant full spin valve effect. A shift of the superconducting transition temperature Tc by switching the mutual orientation of the magnetizations of the two ferromagnetic Co layers from antiparallel to parallel amounted to ∆Tc = 0.2 K at the optimal thickness of the superconducting Pb layer. Our finding verifies the so far unconfirmed earlier results by Deutscher and Meunier on an F1/S/F2 heterostructure with oxidized interlayers [G. Deutscher and F. Meunier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 395 (1969)] and suggests an alternative route to optimize the performance of the superconducting spin valves. Models and specific realizations of the superconducting spin valve (SSV) have been the subject of intensive research over the past 25 years (see, e.g., Theories (see, e.g., By now, many such SSVs using various elemental metals and alloys have been studied in sufficient detail and recent results indicate that significant values of the SSV effect have already been achieved in the F1/F2/S structures (see, e.g., The paradoxical fact that "worsening" of the S/F interface in a metallic system The work by Deutscher and Meunier In the present work, in order to verify the SSV effect reported by Deutscher and Meunier for the heterostructure where the superconducting layer was contacted to the ferromagnets through thin insulating interlayers and to prove the validity of this concept to other types of the SSV structures, we investigated the superconducting properties of the SSV made of completely different F and S materials as compared to those in Ref. For our investigation CoO x (3.5nm)/Co1(3nm)/I1/Pb(d Pb )/I2/Co2(3nm)/Si 3 N 4 (85nm) heterostructures with the variable Pb-layer thickness d Pb in the range from 60 to 120 nm were fabricated on the high quality single crystalline substrate MgO (001). Here, Co1 and Co2 are ferromagnetic F1 and F2 layers, I1 and I2 are thin oxide insulating interlayers, Pb is the superconducting layer, Si 3 N 4 is a protective layer, and CoO x is the antiferromagnetic (AF) bias layer that fixes the direction of the magnetization of the Co1 layer. The layers were deposited using an electron beam evaporation (Co, Pb) and AC sputtering (Si 3 N 4 ) techniques. The deposition setup had a load-lock station with vacuum shutters, allowing to transfer the sample holder without breaking the ultra-high vacuum in the deposition chambers. The load-lock station provides possibility to oxidize the prepared layers in a controlled atmosphere. This allows to prepare the AF CoO x layer and fabricate the thin oxide interlayers (I1 and I2) at the Co1/I1/Pb and Pb/I2/Co2 interfaces. CoO x was prepared by exposing the metallic Co layer to oxygen atmosphere at 100 mbar during two hours. Next, Co1 was deposited in the main deposition chamber at the vacuum of order 10 -9 mbar on top of the CoO x layer. The I1 layer was formed on the surface of Co1 in the similar way as described above in the oxygen atmosphere of about ∼ 10 -2 mbar during 60 sec. It was shown in Ref. According to Refs. Based on our previous studies in Refs. In addition, a control set of the samples with similar thicknesses of the S and F layers but without insulating interlayers at the Co1/Pb/Co2 interfaces was prepared for comparison. The list of the studied samples CoO x (3.5nm)/Co1(3nm)/I1/Pb(d Pb )/I2/Co2(3nm)/Si 3 N 4 (85nm) with the variable Pb layer thickness d Pb is presented in Table Electrical resistivity measurements were carried out with a standard four-point method in the DC mode. For changing the mutual direction of the magnetization of the F layers between the P and AP orientations an external magnetic field of the order ∼ 1 kOe < H max 0 was always applied in the plane of the sample in all measurements. The strength of the magnetic field was measured by a Hall probe with an accuracy of ±0.3 Oe. The sample temperature was monitored by the highly sensitive in the temperature range of interest carbon Allen-Bradley thermometer. The temperature measurement error was ± (5-6) mK below 3 K. The superconducting critical temperature T c was defined as the midpoint of the transition curve. To study the SSV effect the samples were cooled down from room to low temperatures in a magnetic field of the order 5 kOe (field cooling procedure) applied in the sample plane. This field aligns magnetization of both F layers and the magnetization vector of the Co1 layer is getting fixed in the direction of the applied field and remains biased by the AF CoO x layer after the reduction of the field strength to its operational value of H 0 = 1 kOe independent of the subsequent direction of the field vector Our results demonstrate a significant SSV effect in the heterostructures with insulating interlayers at the F1/S/F2 interfaces and finally verify the earlier observation by Deutscher and Meunier At the same time, the nontrivial S/F proximity effect in our system originates from metallic F layers. This is evidenced by the fact that similar control structures with reduced thickness of the Co layers (2 nm instead of 3 nm) did not show any spin-valve effect. Note that the switching on/off superconductivity in the trilayer EuS/Al/EuS where EuS is a ferromagnetic insulator has been demonstrated by The modeling of the observed significant SSV effect in heterostructures with intentionally deteriorated S/F interfaces is rather challenging due to an increased complexity of these interfaces as compared to the ideal metallic contacts between the layers. Though experimentally the formation of an insulating interlayer by oxidation appears to be a doable task, their characteristics, such as thickness, exact composition and physical properties, cannot be sufficiently well controlled at present. Therefore, in the following we will discuss if the main tendencies of the SSV effect with regard to the thickness of the superconducting Pb layer (Fig. The proximity-effect theory suitable for the description of T c in symmetric F1/S/F2 structures was formulated in Ref. The fitting parameters given in the caption to Fig. What is unexpected in the above fitting parameters, is a rather small value of the interface resistance parameter γ b = 0.48. In the tunneling limit, one can estimate γ b ∼ t -1 b l F /ξ F in terms of the effective interface transparency t b ≪ 1 (while l F is the mean free path in the F material). The transparency values are not directly measurable. At the same time, it is known that in the case of conventional tunnel junctions with insulating interfaces of thickness from 10 to 30 atomic layers, the order of magnitude of t b varies between 10 -3 and 10 -5 While the theory A possible reason for not too small transparencies following from the fitting is that the insulating layers in our samples are actually very thin (a few atomic layers). Another possibility is that the resulting oxides are not good insulators but possess finite conductivity or that metallic shortcuts are present inside the insulating layers. Finally, in contrast to our theory In summary, we have investigated superconducting properties of the Co1/Pb/Co2 SSV heterostructures with thin oxide insulating interlayers formed at the Co1/Pb and Pb/Co2 interfaces. We found the optimal thickness of the superconducting Pb layer for the realization of the full superconducting spin valve effect with the magnitude ∆T c = 0.2 K. Our finding finally substantiates the results of the earlier work by Deutscher and Meunier At the same time, for the spin valve effect, the key role is played not by the strength of proximity effect but rather by sensitivity of the system to the variation of the relative magnetizations. Our strategy was to achieve a "fragile" superconductivity which is sensitive to this kind of control. To this end, we have realized systems with such parameters that superconductivity is completely suppressed in the limit of perfect metallic interfaces. The role of the insulating interface layers is then to restore superconductivity in the system. This fragile "restored" superconductivity turns out to be indeed very sensitive to the configuration of the F part of the structure. Our findings thus call for further exploration of this promising route to improve the operational parameters of the superconducting spin valves by advancing the preparation technologies and developing of underlying theories. of the studied samples CoOx(3.5nm)/Co1(3nm)/I1/Pb(d Pb )/I2/Co2(3nm)/Si3N4(85nm) with the variable Pb layer thickness d Pb .