In metals, low-energy effective theories are characterized by a set of coupling functions. Among them, the angle-dependent Fermi momentum specifies the size and shape of Fermi surface. Since the size of Fermi momentum grows incessantly relative to an energy scale that is lowered under the renormalization group (RG) flow, a metallic fixed point is defined only modulo a rescaling of Fermi momentum. In this paper, we discuss the physical consequences of this projective nature of fixed points for non-Fermi liquids with hot Fermi surfaces. The first is the absence of a unique dynamical critical exponent that dictates the relative scaling between energy and momentum across all low-energy observables. The second is mismatches between the scaling dimensions of couplings and their relevancy. Nonetheless, each projective fixed point is characterized by a few marginal and relevant coupling functions, and the notion of universality survives. We illustrate our findings by charting the space of projective fixed points and extracting their universal properties for the Isingnematic quantum critical metal beyond the patch theory. To approach the interacting theory in two space dimensions from a controlled limit, we use the dimensional regularization scheme that tunes the co-dimension of Fermi surface as a control parameter. Near the upper critical dimension, two exactly marginal coupling functions span the space of stable projective fixed points: one specifies the shape of the Fermi surface and the other sets the angle-dependent Fermi velocity. All other coupling functions, including the Landau functions and the universal pairing interaction, are fixed by those two marginal functions. As the space dimension is lowered, vertex corrections alter the fate of the four-fermion coupling in a channel-dependent way. To the leading order, the forward scattering remains irrelevant while the pairing interaction becomes relevant near two dimensions. In two dimensions, it is expected that the universal superconducting fluctuations lower the symmetry of the non-Fermi liquid realized above the superconducting transition temperatures from the loop U(1) group to a proper subgroup. 1. Boson Self-Energy 2. Fermion Self-energy and the Cubic vertex correction 3. Four-fermion coupling in group 1 and group 2 a. λ 2 order b. λ 1 order c. λ 0 order E. Derivation of the fixed point profile of the four-fermion coupling 1. l * θ1, θ2 , l * θ1,⃗ q , l * θ2,⃗ q ≫ l : Eq. (97) 2. l * θ1, θ2 ≫ l ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q : Eq. (99) 3. l * θ1,⃗ q , l * θ2,⃗ q ≫ l ≫ l * θ1, θ2 : Eq. (100) 4. l * θ2,⃗ q ≫ l ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1, θ2 : Eq. (101) 5. l ≫ l * θ2,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1, θ2 : Eq. ( • ⃗ q = q(cos φ, sin φ) : two-dimensional momentum of boson ), Q = (q 0 , .., q d-2 ) : Matsubara frequency combined with (d -2) components of spatial momentum in general d • k = (K, ⃗ k), q = (Q, ⃗ q) : (d + 1)-dimensional frequency-momentum vector c) 'coupling' functions • κ F,θ = K F,θ /k F : the normalized Fermi surface shape function • v F,θ : the angle-dependent Fermi velocity in the radial direction • e θ1,θ2 : the angle-dependent fermion-boson coupling function : the general four-fermion coupling written as a function of angles of the two incoming and two outgoing fermions θ ′ ,θ (⃗ q) for ν = F ± : the four-fermion coupling in the forward scattering channel written as a function of the angles of two fermions and the momentum transfer ⃗ q -λ (ν,s) θ ′ ,θ (⃗ q) for ν = P : the four-fermion coupling in the pairing channel written as a function of the angles and the total center of mass momentum ⃗ q of Cooper pairs Universal low-energy physics of condensed matter systems is encoded in infrared fixed points of the renormalization group flow The space of non-Fermi liquids is less well charted . This is partly because the strong coupling, which is usually what makes non-Fermi liquids what they are, makes it difficult to access the low-energy physics in a controlled way Being a large momentum scale that controls the low-energy physics, Fermi momentum renders the notion of scale invariance and fixed point far from being trivial. Since the large momentum scale can singularly affect the lowenergy physics, the low-energy limit does not generally commute with the large Fermi momentum limit The best way to study the entirety of metals is to include all low-energy degrees of freedom within an effective theory. In such frameworks, momentum-dependent interactions of fermions are captured through couplings that are functions of angles around the Fermi surface. Naturally, universality classes are encoded in the functional renormalization group (RG) flow of those coupling functions. One can in principle use the exact RG equation A recent application of the formalism to the antiferromagnetic quantum critical metal liquids with hot Fermi surfaces are expected to exhibit qualitatively different structures of infrared fixed points. The goal of this paper is to chart the space of non-Fermi liquids and characterize their universal low-energy physics in a quantum critical with hot Fermi surface. A prototypical example of non-Fermi liquids with hot Fermi surface is the Ising-nematic quantum critical metal in which the majority of Fermi surface remains strongly coupled with critical nematic fluctuations The low-energy theory is characterized by the Fermi momentum K F,θ that specifies the size and shape of the Fermi surface, the Fermi velocity v F,θ , the Yukawa coupling function e θ1,θ2 and the four-fermion coupling functions λ θ1 θ2 θ4 θ3 . They are functions of angles around the Fermi surface. The Yukawa and four-fermion coupling functions generally depend on multiple angles for the in and out electrons involved in scatterings. Among all 'coupling' functions, the most prominent one is the Fermi momentum. Under the RG flow, its size grows indefinitely because the Fermi momentum keep increasing relative to the RG energy scale that is sent to zero in the low-energy limit. Because of the non-stop flow of the Fermi momentum, metals can not have fixed points in the usual sense For the purpose of charting the set of distinct metallic universality classes, it is convenient to decompose K F,θ into a b FIG. one scale that represents the overall size of Fermi surface and a dimensionless function that captures its shape as where k F denotes the Fermi momentum averaged over the Fermi surface and κ F,θ is an angle-dependent function with normalization 1 2π dθ κ F,θ = 1. The full functional RG takes place in the space of k F , κ F,θ , v F,θ , e θ1,θ2 , λ θ1 θ2 θ4 θ3 . As the RG energy scale μ is lowered, the size of Fermi surface measured in the unit of μ, k F ≡ k F /μ, keeps increasing because the manifold of gapless modes does not shrink under the coarse graining. The RG flow can be still attracted toward a universal profile within the subspace of κ F,θ , v F,θ , e θ1,θ2 , λ θ1 θ2 θ4 θ3 . However, the profile of κ F,θ , v F,θ , e θ1,θ2 , λ θ1 θ2 θ4 θ3 that emerges in the low-energy limit continues to depend on k F , which makes it impossible to take the k F → ∞ limit up front. This is illustrated in Fig. Charting the universality classes of non-Fermi liquids amounts to identifying projective fixed points of the functional RG flow for the coupling functions. The anisotropic bare coupling makes electrons move faster near the nodal directions compared to those in the anti-nodal directions. Remarkably, electrons near (but not exactly at) the nodal directions end up being subject to a stronger renormalized Yukawa coupling at low energies due to a weakened screening effect. The angular profiles of the Fermi velocity and the renormalized Yukawa coupling conspire to generate the angle-independent anomalous dimension except at the cold spots. drawn in the plane of space dimension d and temperature T . Between the upper critical dimension d c = 2.5 and another critical dimension d SC , the theories flow to stable projective non-Fermi liquid fixed points in the low-energy limit. The space of stable non-Fermi liquids are spanned by two marginal coupling functions, κ F,θ and v F,θ . At the fixed points, e θ1,θ2 and λ θ1 θ2 θ4 θ3 are completely fixed by those marginal couplings and k F . Accordingly, deformations made in the Yukawa coupling and the four-fermion coupling functions away from the fixed points are irrelevant. The schematic functional renormalization group flow and the space of infrared fixed points are illustrated in Fig. The nature of the stable projective fixed points is encoded in the momentum-dependent coupling functions that emerge in the low-energy limit. At the low-energy fixed points, the Yukawa coupling function acquires a momentum profile in such a way that the anomalous dimension of electron, which measures the degree of incoherence, becomes independent of angle around the Fermi surface everywhere except for the exact cold spots. While this emergent sliding symmetry is expected from the patch theory For the four-fermion coupling function, its scaling dimension controls the functional RG flow of the coupling function both in energy and momentum. The former determines how the coupling function evolves (vertically) under the renormalization group flow while the latter determines the profile of the fixed-point coupling (horizontally) as a function of the angle around the Fermi surface. Near the upper critical dimension, both the Landau function and the pairing interaction are irrelevant. We emphasize that this does not mean that the four-fermion couplings are zero at the fixed point. The four-fermion interaction is non-vanishing in both channels but they are fixed by the Fermi momentum and Fermi velocity. Therefore, small perturbations added to the UV coupling decay out under the renormalization group flow: the four-fermion coupling is irrelevant 'vertically'. Furthermore, the universal coupling function that arises in the IR decays quickly as a function of the angular separation between the fermions so that the large-angle scatterings are also irrelevant 'horizontally'. With the negligible inter-patch coupling, the patch theory is sufficient for describing low-energy observables that are local in momentum space such as the single-particle spectral function. However, the patch theory is not the full description even in this case because there exist low-energy observables that are not local in momentum space. Examples include the thermodynamic observables that probe the entire low-energy modes and multi-point vertex functions where low-energy fermions are probed at different locations on the Fermi surface. Those 'non-local' observables generally depend on k F differently than 'local' observables do. As a result, there exists no single power-law scaling under which all low-energy observables are scale invariant. For example, the momentum of particle-hole and particle-particle pairs in the four-fermion vertex acquire different scaling dimensions depending on whether the momentum is tangential or perpendicular to the Fermi surface. Consequently, the fixed point lacks a universal dynamical critical exponent. Another peculiar aspect of metallic fixed points is that scaling dimensions alone do not determine the relevancy of couplings. A coupling can become relevant with the help of k F even if it has a negative scaling dimension. This k F -assisted infrared singularities is a crucial ingredient for understanding the physics that emerges as the dimension is lowered toward the target dimension d = 2. With decreasing d, the four-fermion coupling is renormalized by the vertex correction more strongly. To the leading order, the Landau functions remain irrelevant down to two space dimensions due to a kinematic constraint that limits the phase space for the forward scatterings. On the other hand, the pairing interaction becomes relevant below a critical dimension d SC which is between d = 2 and the upper critical dimension d c = 2.5. Interestingly, it turns relevant while the scaling dimension of the coupling remains strictly negative: the scaling dimension of the four-fermion coupling becomes -1/2 at that critical dimension. Despite its negative scaling dimension, which would naively imply that the coupling is irrelevant at low energies, the pairing interaction becomes relevant due to an enhancement by the Fermi momentum that provides an extensive phase space for Cooper pairs. Consequently, the normal state becomes unstable against superconductivity in d < d SC . Although the ground state is likely to be a superconducting state in d < d SC , there exists a window of energy scale above the superconducting transition temperature in which the physics is controlled by the non-Fermi liquid scaling. Below but near d SC , the size of the energy window for the non-Fermi liquid normal state is large due to a separation between the scale below which the non-Fermi liquid physics sets in and the superconducting transition temperature. The non-Fermi liquid state realized in d < d SC is characterized by strong inter-patch superconducting fluctuations. In particular, the critical superconducting fluctuations generate large-angle scatterings that violate the conservation of the number of low-energy electrons within each patch. Such scatterings lower the emergent symmetry of the normal state from the loop U(1) group of Fermi liquids Here is the outline of the rest of this paper. In Sec. II, we begin with the low-energy effective field theory that includes the entire Fermi surface beyond the patch theory for the Ising-nematic quantum critical metal in two space dimensions. The theory is then extended to general space dimensions between 2 and 3 through the dimensional regularization scheme that tunes the co-dimension of the Fermi surface. In Sec. III, the functional renormalization group formalism is discussed. While this is a standard material for relativistic field theories, here we emphasize the difference that arises from the additional scale, k F . In Sec. IV, we derive the beta functionals for all coupling functions to the leading order in ε = 5/2d. In Sec. V, we solve the beta functionals to identify the low-energy fixed points. The solution allows us to chart the space of projective fixed points parameterized by the marginal couplings. In Sec. VI, we extract the universal profiles of the four-fermion coupling functions that are fixed by the marginal coupling functions near the upper critical dimension. In Sec. VII, we discuss how the Landau function and the pairing interaction evolve as the dimension is lowered toward the physical dimension. In particular, we discuss the role of large-angle scatterings that are enhanced by vertex corrections, and its implications on the symmetry and instability of the normal state. In Sec. VIII, we conclude with a summary and open questions. Low-energy effective field theories for hot Fermi surfaces We consider a Fermi surface that undergoes the Ising-nematic quantum phase transition associated with a spontaneous symmetry breaking of the four-fold rotational symmetry to the two-fold subgroup in (2+1)-dimensions. At the FIG. where θ is the polar angle and δ is the radial displacement of fermion away from the angle-dependent Fermi momentum K F,θ at angle θ. For momentum of boson ⃗ q, we use the usual polar coordinate. A fermion at angle θ and radial displacement δ absorbs a boson with momentum ⃗ q = q(cos φ, sin φ) to change its angle and radial displacement to θ ′ = Θ(θ, ⃗ q) and δ ′ = ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q). quantum critical point, a real scalar mode that captures nematic fluctuations becomes gapless. The effective theory for the nematic collective mode and low-energy fermions can be written as )φ(q 2 )φ(q 3 )φ(-q 1q 2q 3 ). (2) Here, ψ j (k 0 , δ, θ) represents the fermionic field with frequency k 0 and spatial momentum ⃗ k = (K F,θ + δ) (cos θ, sin θ), where K F,θ is the magnitude of Fermi momentum at angle θ, and δ is the radial displacement away from the Fermi surface as is illustrated in Fig. represent the Cartesian measure of fermionic and bosonic three-momenta, respectively 2 . v F,θ is the radial component of the Fermi velocity. The size and shape of the Fermi surface, and the dispersion of low-energy fermions are completely specified by two functions K F,θ and v F,θ . Θ(θ, ⃗ q) and ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q) denote the angle and the radial displacement of ⃗ k + ⃗ q. For q, δ ≪ K F,θ , they are given by (see Appendix A for derivation), where 2 The exact Cartesian measure for fermion is dk 0 2π dδ 2π π -π dθ 2π (K F,θ + δ), but (K F,θ + δ) can be replaced with K F,θ at low energies. with K ′ F,θ and K ′′ F,θ representing the first and second derivatives of K F,θ with respect to θ. For low-energy bosons with q/K F,θ ≪ 1, we only need the diagonal coupling function e e e θ,θ . At a UV scale, it takes the form of e e e θ,θ ∼ cos(2θ), denotes the four-fermion coupling that scatters low-energy fermions from angles θ 4 and θ 3 to θ 1 and θ 2 . In the four-fermion coupling, θ i are not necessarily close to each other, and λ λ λ include both the forward and pairing interactions as is shown in Fig. FIG. In two space dimensions, the theory becomes strongly coupled at low energies. In order to access the interacting low-energy theory in a controlled manner, we extend the spatial dimension by embedding the one-dimensional Fermi surface in a d-dimensional momentum space. To understand the construction, it is instructive to first consider the case in three space dimensions in which the usual Fermi surface is two-dimensional. One can gap out the electronic mode except for the ring located at k z = 0 by turning on a p z -wave pairing amplitude, and consider the Ising-nematic quantum phase transition for the nodal line. In general 2 ≤ d ≤ 3, one adds (d -2) extra spatial dimensions (k 1 , .., k d-2 ), which provides one-parameter family of theories that interpolates between the original theory in d = 2 and the p z -wave superconducting state with a nodal ring in d = 3 . The theory in spatial dimensions d is written as q e e e Θ(θ,⃗ q),θ φ(q) Ψj (K + Q, ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q), Θ(θ, ⃗ q)) γ d-1 Ψ j (K, δ, θ) The Fermi surface is folded into the half as one spinor covers a pair of anti-podal points. The measure of the fermionic (d+1)-momentum integration becomes Γ's are the gamma matrices associated with K. Similarly, the (d + 1)-dimensional boson frequency-momentum vector is written as q = (Q, ⃗ q) with ⃗ q = q(cos φ, sin φ) and θ ′ ,θ (⃗ q) denotes the coupling function in channel (ν, s). ν = F + , F -represent the forward scattering in the even and odd angular momentum channels, respectively, and ν = P denotes the pairing channel. In the pairing channel, one does not need to consider even and odd angular momentum channels separately because the anti-symmetric nature of fermion pair wavefunction fixes the parity of orbital angular momentum in terms of the flavour (spin) wavefunction that is to be specified below. s = d, e denote the direct and exchange channels for the flavour quantum number, respectively. In each channel, the four-fermion operator is written as For each ν = F + , F -, P , m is summed over 1, (d -1), (4d) matrices, respectively, where their elements are given by {1, γ 0 , .., γ 2 } form the complete set of 2 × 2 matrices. It is noted that Γ used in the kinetic term is nothing but -) . From now on, all repeated indices are assumed to be summed over. In general d, we choose γ 0 = σ y and γ d-1 = σ x . The fermion bi-linear Ψ(k + q)I (ν) m Ψ(k) represents a particle-hole pair with momentum q for ν = F ± and a particle-particle pair with the center of mass momentum q for ν = P One advantage of the spinor representation lies in the fact that the forward scattering and the pairing interaction are kinematically 'unified'. Since a particle-hole pair and a Cooper pair are both represented by Ψ(k + q)I m Ψ(k) for some I m , the same kinematic constraints enter into quantum corrections in both channels. Since we include the direct and exchange channels separately, we only need to consider fermion bi-linears with small q in the four-fermion operators at low energies. In particular, we don't need to separately include four-fermion operators that involve bi-linears with large momenta such as because it can be cast into the form of Eq. ( The full low-energy theory is specified by v F,θ , K F,θ , e e e θ,θ ′ , λ λ λ (ν,s) θ,θ ′ (⃗ q), u u u . In relativistic field theories, it is sufficient to expand momentum-dependent coupling functions near the origin and keep a few coupling constants associated with low powers of momentum. In metals, one has to consider general coupling functions of the angle around the Fermi surface because gapless degrees of freedom are parameterized by the angle. The UV symmetry of the theory. (b)-i. The IR symmetry that emerges if the inter-patch four-fermion couplings outside the pairs of anti-podal patches are irrelevant. (b)-ii. The IR symmetry that emerges if general inter-patch couplings are relevant. Under each group, fermion angle at θ is transformed as follows. U(1) : For the loop groups, group elements are smooth functions of angle. In this section, we discuss the symmetry of the theory. First, we consider the SO(3) group under which Ψ forms the spinor representation. Here, it is simpler to consider Ψ and Ψ as independent fields which are tranformed as Ψ → e - Ψ is a scalar. In d = 2, the non-trivial SO(2) corresponds to the global U(1) symmetry. In d = 3, the non-trivial SO(2) is a spacetime symmetry acting on time and the extra co-dimension. As d decreases from 3 to 2, the unbroken symmetry evolves from one SO(2) to the other. Next, we consider the internal symmetry. In d = 2, the UV theory has the SU (N ) flavour symmetry as well as the U (1) charge symmetry. In d > 2, U (1) × SU (N ) is broken to its real subgroup, Z 2 × SO(N ) due to the pairing term that is introduced to keep the dimension of Fermi surface fixed. In the kinetic term, These symmetry breaking effects are artifacts of the dimensional regularization scheme which go away in the d → 2 limit. In the low-energy limit, the energetic constraint that restricts fermions to be on the Fermi surface enlarges the symmetries. At low energies, momentum carried by particle-hole or particle-particle pairs becomes small. Accordingly, the four-fermion coupling function with non-zero q is suppressed 5 . The IR symmetry is then determined by the coupling functions in the small q limit. To understand possible emergent low-energy symmetries, we begin by considering the limit in which the couplings between different patches of Fermi surface are negligible except for those between anti-podal patches. In this case, the global symmetry is enlarged to a loop group as the symmetry rotation can depend on angle around the Fermi surface for q that is much larger than a characteristic momentum scale q * (θ ′ , θ, μ) that goes to zero in the small μ limit, where ∆q is a positive exponent. the particle number remains conserved within each patch due to the Abelian nature for the U(1) group. In d > 2, the pairing term lowers this loop group to OLU (1) × ELSO(N ), where under the odd loop U(1) [OLU In the presence of general inter-patch couplings, the non-Abelian loop group is broken down to the global subgroup. On the other hand, the Abelian loop group is less fragile. In d > 2, the OLU(1) remains intact because general inter-patch couplings still preserve the number of fermions in the odd angular momentum channels. What is less clear is the fate of LU(1) in d = 2. To figure out the emergent symmetry in d = 2, it is useful to understand how the LU(1) symmetry breaking terms evolve as a function of d. In d > 2, there are two sources that break LU(1) to OLU Field-theoretic functional renormalization group A. Tree-level scaling We begin our renormalization group analysis by setting a tree-level scale transformation. For a patch theory that only considers a small portion of Fermi surface, one can employ an anisotropic scale transformation that assigns different scaling dimensions to the momentum components perpendicular and tangential to the patch. Under the patch scaling, a small patch of the full Fermi surface is 'magnified' into a scale-invariant parabola The fact that the patch scaling does not leave the whole Fermi surface invariant is due to a general property of metals: there exists no scale transformation that keeps the local action of a compact Fermi surface invariant. This is because (1) in local theories, particle-hole or particle-particle pairs are allowed to carry small but non-zero momenta, and (2) the Fermi momentum measured in the unit of the typical momentum of the bosonic modes grows as the low-energy limit is taken. Given that there exists no scale transformation that leaves the theory invariant even at the tree-level, we choose the simplest scale transformation in which angles are dimensionless while frequency and all components of momentum have scaling dimension 1. Under the scale transformation, with b > 1, the coupling functions are transformed into With increasing b, the momentum of fermion is sent toward the Fermi surface. One may think that the Fermi momentum should be left intact under such scale transformation. However, this is not the case. In Eq. ( q q l + q l a b FIG. The quartic boson coupling becomes irrelevant because the boson kinetic energy is non-perturbatively dressed by the Landau damping. The one-loop boson self-energy in Fig. Here, e e e θ = e e e θ,θ and . L θ (⃗ q) is the energy of the a particle-hole pair with momentum ⃗ q created near the Fermi surface at angle θ, 8 One can in principle choose a scale transformation in which the Fermi momentum is kept invariant at the expense of endowing the angle around the Fermi surface a positive scaling dimension. Under such a scale transformation, however, the kinematic constraints that govern the momentum-conservation in the fermion-boson interaction 'run'. In the end, the physics does not depend on how we choose our tree-level scale transformation. Depending on the value of |Q| q , the self-energy takes different forms, where is the angular position at which ⃗ q = q(cos φ, sin φ) is tangential to the Fermi surface. In this paper, we focus on the case in which the Fermi surface has no inflection points and θ(φ) is single-valued within K F,θ(φ) . The self-energy is proportional to K F,θ because the phase space for particle-hole excitations increases with increasing Fermi momentum. For q ≫ |Q|, the boson self-energy at ⃗ q is determined by the Yukawa coupling at angle θ(φ) because particle-hole excitations with momentum ⃗ q but with energies much smaller than q can be created only near that angle at which the Fermi surface is tangential to ⃗ q. The curvature radius of the local patch of the Fermi surface, which is proportional to K F,θ(φ) , controls the phase space of the particle-hole excitations and the Landau damping. In the other limit of q ≪ |Q|, the entire Fermi surface contributes to the self-energy. The Landau damping, which is proportional to the Fermi momentum, is strongly relevant compared to the bare kinetic term of the boson. This allows us to simplify the effective action in two ways. First, |Q| 2 term in the boson kinetic energy is strictly sub-leading compared to the self-energy in d ≤ 3. This allows us to drop |Q| 2 in the boson kinetic energy |q| 2 = |Q| 2 + q 2 . The flip side of this is that the self-energy of the boson should be included up front in loops that include internal bosons. Second, the quartic interaction of boson can be dropped because the Landau damping suppresses the infrared singularity associated with the coupling. For example, the one-loop quantum correction to u u u given by is IR finite in d > 1 because the boson self-energy cuts off the IR singularity. It is noted that the typical magnitude of the boson momentum is which is much bigger than |Q| in the loop. Therefore, the first expression in Eq. ( Dropping the K F -rendered irrelevant terms but keeping terms that have potential to become relevant from an enhancement by K F , we write down the low-energy action as Here, μ is a floating energy scale. The coupling functions will be fixed in terms of physical observables evaluated at frequency μ. In the action, powers of μ have been factored out to make the couplings dimensionless. It is noted that the low-energy theory is fully specified once the set of dimensionless coupling functions v F,θ , K F,θ , e θ,θ ′ , λ denotes the dimensionless Fermi momentum measured in the unit of μ 10 . 9 For Fermi surfaces with inflection points, θ(φ) is multi-valued. 10 It is noted that K F,θ can be decomposed as where k F and κ F,θ are defined in Eq. Functional renormalization group equation In order to extract the dynamical information of the theory, we compute the quantum effective action as a functional of v F,θ , K F,θ , e θ,θ ′ , λ (ν,s) θ,θ ′ (⃗ q) . Counter terms are added to Eq. The full one-particle irreducible (1PI) vertex function is a functional of the coupling functions. Let Γ (2m,n) (k i ) denote the 1PI vertex function with 2m external fermions and n external bosons. The complete low-energy observables are comprised of the vertex functions evaluated at frequency μ ≪ Λ (Λ is a UV cutoff) and momenta chosen anywhere close to the Fermi surface for fermions and near the origin for bosons. The coupling functions at energy scale μ are defined through the following renormalization conditions, Here, Γ (2,0) ab is the electron-boson vertex function. The traces in Eqs. ( θ,θ ′ (⃗ q), u u u is more than what is strictly needed to specify the low-energy physics. Some information included in these coupling functions are not low-energy data. For example, e e e θ,θ ′ and λ λ λ This amounts to setting the unit of frequency/time such that the Fermi velocity at θ = 0 to be 1 at all energy scales where k A 1 and k A 3 are on the Fermi surface at angle θ 1 and θ 2 , respectively, and k A 2 and k A 4 are displaced from the Fermi surface by momentum ⃗ q (see Appendix D 3 for details). μ is a (d -1)-dimensional vector with magnitude μ. At energy scale μ, |⃗ q| is at most order of √ K F μ. Frequencies are chosen such that the net frequency is non-vanishing in all s, t, u channels to avoid infrared divergences. F i;{θ} 's denote discrepancies between the vertex functions and the coupling functions, which depend on renormalization group scheme. In order to guarantee that the coupling functions represent the actual physical observables up to corrections that are non-divergent at low energies, the discrepancies need to satisfy certain regularity conditions For ν = F ± , it represents the correction to the energy of electron at angle θ, measured in the unit of μ, which arises from the forward scattering with all other electrons of energy less than μ around the Fermi surface. In Fermi liquids, this corresponds to the change of the quasiparticle energy generated from the Landau interaction with increasing chemical potential. For ν = P , it represents the pairing field that an s-wave pair condensate generates for a Cooper pair located at angle θ through the momentum-space Josephson coupling. It is noted that K F,θ must appear in the measure of the angular integration in Eq. ( To enforce the renormalization conditions in Eqs. ( Electronic quantum corrections in general depend on angles around the Fermi surface. At any non-zero energy scale μ, the angle-dependent counter terms must be smooth functions of angles to make sure that the theory maintains its locality in real space. The counter term for the electronic kinetic energy is separated into a piece (A 2 (θ)) that renormalize the Fermi velocity and an angle-dependent shift (c(θ)μ) of the Fermi momentum where the bare quantities and the renormalized quantities are related through with and Here, Z τ is a factor with which the renormalized frequency is dilated relative to the bare frequency. Because the frequency is dilated so that v F,θ=0 = 1, Z v F (0) = 1 and Z τ is determined from Z 1 (0) and Z 2 (0). The bare Fermi momentum is determined from The bare vertex function and the renormalized one are related to each other through (37) Taking the derivative on the logarithm of Eq. ( where are the dynamical critical exponent, the anomalous dimensions of the fermion and boson, respectively. The anomalous dimension of fermion is a function of angle. The following beta functionals describe the flow of the coupling functions at fixed angles with increasing energy scale, FIG. Through the tree-level scale transformation in Eq. ( where is the tree-level scaling dimension of the vertex function, and k and {ẽ, ṽF , KF , λ} denote the dilated momentum and coupling functions defined in Eqs. ( ) Combining Eqs. θi is the full scaling dimension. In Eq. ( Here, l is a scale factor with which the frequencies and momenta are dilated as , and the scale-dependent coupling functions satisfy The beta functional for K F,θ in Eq. ( where dθK F,θ and κ F,θ ≡ K F,θ /k F . Eq. ( While the notion of universality is intact, the presence of relevant scale k F has non-trivial consequences. Here, we discuss one of them on the general ground -a lack of unique scaling dimensions that can be endowed to energy and momentum for scale invariance of physical observables. For simplicity, let us first suppose that there is no marginal or relevant parameter so that all coupling functions are entirely fixed by k F (l) in the large l limit. In this case, all physical observables are uniquely fixed at low energies. This would correspond to an isolated 'fixed' point. However, it is not a fixed point in the usual sense because k F keeps growing. Since the low-energy theory exhibits scale invariance only modulo a rescaling of k F , one can have a sense of fixed point only after theories with different k F are 'identified' where we suppress the channel index because the specifics of the channel does not matter for the current general discussion. The presence of a scale such as K F can lead to a correction to the exponent with which the observables depend on energy and momentum. If the crossover function scales as lim y→∞ f (4,0) (x; θ 1 , θ 2 , φ; y) ∼ y τ in the large y limit, ω -( D4,0-τ )/z Γ (4,0) (ω, q; θ 1 , θ 2 , φ; K F ; Λ) would be scale invariant in the low-energy limit taken with ω 1/z /q fixed for a theory with a fixed K F . However, a complication arises because τ is not a smooth function of angle as will be shown later. This can be understood from the fact that K F controls physical observables differently depending on whether ⃗ q is tangential to the Fermi surface or not. For example, the energy of a fermion at angle θ changes by L θ (⃗ q) in Eq. ( Here, η d is a channel-dependent exponent whose precise value is not important for the present discussion. The crossover function at small ω 1/z /L θ (⃗ q) behaves differently, depending on whether ⃗ q is tangential to the Fermi surface or not: for cos(φθ 1 ) ̸ = 0, cos(φθ 2 ) ̸ = 0, for cos(φθ 1 ) = 0, cos(φθ 2 ) ̸ = 0, for cos(φ In these three different cases, f (4,0) becomes scale invariant if q and ω are sent to zero with ω 1/z /q, ω 1/z /q 3/2 and ω 1/z /q 2 fixed, respectively, because K F,θ is fixed in a given system. The patch theory captures the scaling of the third kinematic region where θ 1 ≈ θ 2 and ⃗ q is tangential to the Fermi surface at that angle. However, the vertex functions in other kinematic regions are also low-energy observables, which is captured within the full low-energy theory. This angle-dependent scaling arises because the local curvature of Fermi surface set by K F,θ controls the low-energy physics in an angle-dependent manner. Therefore, there exists no single scaling dimension that can be assigned to q and ω such that the vertex function is scale invariant at all angles. Above, we assumed that all coupling functions are uniquely fixed by k F . In general, there can be a set of marginal parameters that need to be specified along with k F to fix low-energy observables. Each choice of those marginal parameters corresponds to a distinct projective fixed point. The set of those projective fixed points forms the space of metallic universality classes. Furthermore, there can be also relevant parameters (besides k F ) that require a fine tuning to stay within the space of projective fixed points In this section, the critical exponents and the beta functionals are computed to the leading order in ε = 5/2-d. The details of the derivation can be found in Appendices C and D. Here, we summarize the main results with emphasis on their physical implications. The leading order quantum corrections are generated by diagrams shown in Fig. The lowest order graphs that contribute to the fermion self-energy and the vertex corrections. The dashed line represents the short-range four-fermion interaction. The wiggly line denotes the dressed boson propagator that includes the one-loop self-energy in Fig. All quantum corrections are functionals of the coupling functions, v F,θ , K F,θ , e e e θ,θ ′ , λ λ λ (ν,s) θ,θ ′ (⃗ q) . The angular dependence of the coupling functions are not in priori known because they are subject to renormalization. Therefore, the critical exponents and the beta functionals are expressed as integrations of the coupling functions ωθ is the quantum correction that renormalizes the fermion at angle θ (see Appendix D 2 for details), where K F,θ = K F,θ /μ is the dimensionless Fermi momentum and denotes the renormalization that the fermion at θ receives from virtual particle-hole excitations created at angle θ ′ . is the contribution of the critical boson, where θ 12 = θ1+θ2 2 is the average angle between θ 1 and θ 2 The net quantum correction in Eq. ( The beta functionals for the Fermi momentum, Fermi velocity and the Yukawa coupling function read They describe the flow of coupling functions with increasing length scale at fixed angles with l = ln Λ μ being the logarithmic length scale. To the leading order, the beta functional for the Fermi momentum is completely fixed by its tree-level scaling as is shown in Eq. ( The beta functional for the four-fermion coupling function is where λ (ν,s) represents the matrix defined in the space of angles with its matrix elements given by λ (ν,s) θ1,θ2 and the matrix multiplication defined as Since the beta functional for the four-fermion coupling is of our central interest, we dissect each term one by one. ] is the tree-level scaling dimension of the four-fermion coupling corrected by the dynamical critical exponent. ) is a diagonal matrix that represents the shift in the dimension of the four-fermion coupling generated by the anomalous dimension of the fermion field. For small |⃗ q|, U θ1,θ2 ) is the Fermi liquid contribution to the beta functional of the four-fermion coupling function (Fig. -;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) represents a matrix whose diagonal element captures the angle-dependent contribution of virtual fermion pairs within the loop 21 (see Appendix D 3 a), Here, the kinematically determined channel-dependent prefactors are given by and are constants that are O(1). L μ,θ ≡ L θ (⃗ q)/μ, where L θ (⃗ q) denotes the energy of a particle-hole or a particle-particle pair with net momentum ⃗ q created at angle θ (see Eq. ( -;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) has been separated into K (ν) i;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) with i = ± depending on its dependence on L μ,θ . In two dimensions, K (ν) +;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) ∼ A (ν) + and K (ν) -;d;θ1,θ2 (0; μ) ∼ 21 Here, we keep the most general expression that is valid for any ⃗ q and θ while in Fermi liquids one can ignore the measure zero set in which ⃗ q becomes tangential to the Fermi surface. -L 2 μ,θ in the small ⃗ q (L μ,θ → 0) limit. In the forward scattering channel, A (F±) + = 0 and the only contribution is from K (F±) -;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ), which becomes vanishingly small in the small L μ,θ limit. This reflects the fact that the phase space for virtual particle-hole excitation is severely limited in the forward scattering channel due to the chiral nature of low-energy fermions in metals with co-dimension one. Consequently, the non-trivial renormalization arises mainly from L μ,θ ∼ 1 • The second last term in Eq. ( which are proportional to -, respectively. Formally, those mixing matrices can be written as (see Appendix D 3 b), captures the contribution of virtual fermion pairs located at angle θ. The mixing matrices satisfy h † i;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) = h i;d;θ2,θ1 (-⃗ q; μ). While the full expressions of h +;d;θ1,θ (⃗ q; μ) and h -;d;θ1,θ (⃗ q; μ) are complicated, they become proportional to the boson propagator at large angles. In the limit with F,θ and L μ,θ (⃗ q) ≤ 1, the matrices become The mixing between four-fermion couplings with a large angular difference |θ 1θ 2 | is suppressed as 1/q(θ 1 , θ 2 ) 2 because the critical boson has to carry the correspondingly large momentum to scatter fermions with widely different Fermi momenta. Even if the boson-mediated mixing of the four-fermion vertices arises mainly from small-angle scatterings, it does not imply that large-angle scatterings are negligible for the four-fermion coupling itself. Small-angle scatterings can enhance large-angle scatterings by generating an anomalous dimension for the large-angle four-fermion coupling. This is illustrated in Fig. It turns out that Eq. ( • S (ν,s) d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) is the source for the four-fermion coupling generated from the critical boson (Fig. where s F± = e and s P = d (see Appendix D 3 c for details). The delta function δ s,sν shows the fact that the interaction is generated in the (F ± , e) and (P, d) channels only. This channel-dependence is due to the following facts. First, the ladder diagram that generates the four-fermion coupling at generic p and k in Fig. For the four-fermion coupling, the counter terms are chosen to cancel the average of the quantum corrections evaluated at two sets of external momenta with different frequencies but with same two-dimensional spatial momenta. This is responsible for the two terms with different factors of μ within the square brackets of Eqs. ( In the previous section, the critical exponents and the beta functionals are expressed as integrals over the angle around the Fermi surface. Those integrations can not be done without the knowledge of the angular profiles of the coupling functions. However, a simplification arises for quantum corrections in which infrared singularities arise from virtual fermions that are confined within a small angular region. If a loop integration exhibits an infrared singularity at an isolated point in the space of loop momenta, one can ignore the variation of the coupling functions around that point in the momentum space to the leading order in the infrared singularity First, let us consider the quantum correction that arises from the fermion self-energy in Eq. ( Here, g θ is the effective Yukawa coupling given by the ratio between the diagonal Yukawa coupling and the Fermi velocity at angle θ, where X θ = sin θ -1 (θ)θ . g θ controls the physical observables such as the anomalous dimensions. Henceforth, we will use this effective coupling in place of the original Yukawa coupling. is O(1) number. Because the typical momentum carried by the critical boson is much smaller than the Fermi momentum at low energies, the quantum correction for electron at an angle is controlled by the diagonal Yukawa coupling and the 22 One can expand the coupling function in powers of (θ -θ 1 ), where θ is the loop variable and θ 1 is the angle of the external fermion. Those with positive powers of (θ -θ 1 ) are not infrared singular near d = 5/2. Fermi velocity at that angle. To the leading order, the quantum corrections to the Fermi momentum, Fermi velocity and the Yukawa coupling function are all governed by the small-angle scatterings, and their beta functionals become where g θ1,θ2 = e 2 θ1,θ2 is the effective off-diagonal Yukawa coupling. According to Eq. ( in Eq. ( where represents the net anomalous dimension of the four-fermion coupling that arises from the anomalous dimension of the field (η ψ,θ ) and the vertex correction. μ that describes the crossover caused by the non-zero momentum ⃗ q carried by the external fermion pairs. The full expression of the crossover function can be found in Eq. (D93). What is important for us is the fact that C (ν) d (L μ,θ ) approaches a non-zero constant in the small L μ,θ limit while it vanishes in the large L μ,θ limit. The asymptotic limits of the crossover function is summarized as (see Appendix D 3 b for details) where ρ and Υ (ν) d are d-dependent constants plotted in Fig. -;d (⃗ q; μ) can be written as Finally, the source for the four-fermion coupling generated from the critical boson becomes (see Appendix D 3 c for details), Here, θ 12 = θ1+θ2 2 . Since L θ (⃗ q) sets the IR cutoff for quantum corrections generated from fermion pairs with momentum ⃗ q, both Eq. ( The source in Eq. ( . It corresponds to the typical momentum that a boson carries at energy scale μ defines the notion of patch as is shown in Fig. separated by a larger angle can not be connected through the interaction mediated by low-energy bosons. Those points are in distinct patches. It is noted that whether two points are within one patch or not depends on energy scale μ because the width of a patch decreases as ∼ μ/K F,θ with decreasing energy. Two points that are separated by a fixed angle are within one patch at high energies but move outside one patch at lower energies While the inter-patch coupling is weaker than the intra-patch one at each angle, inter-patch scatterings are not necessarily negligible because the number of patches increases with decreasing energy. The abundant phase space for inter-patch scatterings can overweight the weakness of its magnitude if the inter-patch scattering amplitude decays slower than the rate at which the number of patches increases. Therefore, the relevance of the inter-patch scattering is a dynamical issue, which is to be determined from the angular profile of the coupling functions. Inter-patch couplings arise both from the interaction mediated by the critical boson and the four-fermion coupling. The former decays as 1/|θ 1θ 2 | 2 at large angular separations to the leading order in the ε expansion. Due to the fast decay of the boson propagator, this alone does not create a strong inter-patch coupling. However, an anomalous dimension of the boson, which may arise at higher orders In this section, we analyze the functional RG flow of each coupling function. According to Eq. ( We can view Eq. ( While the beta functions for the Fermi velocity and the Yukawa coupling are coupled, the beta function for the effective coupling g θ only depends on itself. In particular, the beta function for g 0 depends only on g 0 because the clock has been chosen with the reference to the Fermi velocity at θ = 0. This leads us to first consider the beta function for g 0 , dg0 dl = g 0 5-2d 3 where g U V θ ≡ g θ (l = 0) denotes the UV value of the effective coupling at θ. On the other hand, the beta function of g θ for general θ depends on both g 0 and g θ due to the contribution from the dynamical critical exponent determined from g 0 , dg θ dl = g θ 5-2d 3 + 5-2d 3 u 1 (d)g 0u 1 (d)g θ . Using g 0 (l), we readily obtain its solution to be 25 , Now, we can solve the beta functional for the Fermi velocity. The interaction between the critical boson and electron enhances the effective mass of electrons, which gives rise to a momentum-dependent Fermi velocity. Since v F,θ represents the Fermi velocity at angle θ measured in the unit of v F,0 , Eq. ( dl , one readily obtains v F,θ (l) in terms of the scale dependent effective coupling, From the solutions for the diagonal Yukawa coupling and the Fermi velocity, we can write the beta functional for the off-diagonal Yukawa coupling as 1 5-2d 3 By rewriting the beta function for the effective off-diagonal coupling as 1 , g θ1,θ2 (l) can be expressed in terms of the scale dependent diagonal effective coupling, g θ1,θ2 (l) = g θ1 (l)g θ2 (l). In Fig. except at the cold spots. It is noted that θ → π/4 limit and the low-energy limit do not commute. Since our main interest lies in the majority of the 'hot' Fermi surface, we will focus on the region away from the cold spots which form a set of measure zero. As the effective coupling becomes angle-independent, so does the anomalous dimensions of electrons. In the low-energy limit, the dynamical critical exponent and the anomalous dimensions become 25 It is convenient to consider the ratio between the effective coupling at angle θ and 0, g r θ = g θ /g 0 . Its beta function reads The straightforward integration leads to the solution. FIG. to the leading order in ε. It is noted that the κ F,θ and v F,θ are marginal coupling functions. This can be understood from the fact that the profiles of κ F,θ and v F,θ that emerge in the low-energy limit depend on their profiles at the UV energy scale. Namely, distinct low-energy fixed points have distinct κ F,θ and v F,θ . On the contrary, the Yukawa coupling function is not marginal as its profile is tied to κ F,θ and v F,θ through the effective coupling that attains the universal value at low energies. Let us turn to the beta-functionals for the four fermion coupling functions. In the flavour space, the beta functionals take the diagonal form in the following basis, θ1,θ2 (⃗ q), λ In two dimensions, λ (F±),t θ1,θ2 (⃗ q) describes the forward scatterings for particle-hole pairs in the trivial (t) representation of the SU (N ) flavour group. F ± denotes the even (+) and odd (-) angular momentum channels, respectively. Similarly, λ (F±),a θ1,θ2 (⃗ q) represents forward scattering for particle-hole pairs in the adjoint (a) representation. λ (P ),± θ1,θ2 (⃗ q) denotes the pairing interaction for particle-particle pairs in the symmetric (+) and anti-symmetric (-) representations, respectively. Since the beta functional does not depend on the representation of the flavour group, we will henceforth drop the superscript that specifies the representation in the coupling function. Just as the effective cubic coupling is given by the ratio between the Yukawa coupling and the Fermi velocity, a ratio between the four-fermion coupling and the Fermi velocity plays the role of an effective quartic fermion coupling. It is also convenient to absorb factors of K F,θ to simplify the angular measure. For the effective coupling defined by the beta functional becomes Here, denotes the channel-independent part of the scaling dimension for the four-fermion coupling that includes the tree-level scaling dimension, the dynamical critical exponent, the anomalous dimensions of the fields and the extra contributions from the beta functions of K F,θ and v F,θ . The second term on the right hand side is the contribution of the vertex correction generated by the critical boson. The third term represents the source for the four-fermion coupling generated from the critical boson, The channel-dependent sign s (ν) is defined in Eq. ( In solving the beta function of the four-fermion coupling, we suppose that the energy scale is sufficiently low that v F,θ and g θ are already close to their fixed point profiles. In this case, we can ignore the flow of v F,θ and g θ because their beta functions do not depend on K F,θ that keeps growing. In the low-energy limit, g * θ in Eq. ( . Away from the cold spots, the variations of v F,θ and κ F,θ are negligible within ∆θ in the small μ limit. Namely, one can regard v F,θ and κ F,θ constants within the range of angles in which the source is non-negligible. This allows one to remove the angular dependence in the source by 'stretching' the angular space in a θ dependent manner. To implement this, we introduce a new angular coordinate θ related to the original one through a non-linear transformation, with a ′ ( θ) 2 and a(0) = 0. Under this transformation, θ acquires scaling dimension 1/2. Physically, this captures the fact that the number of patches increases as (k F /μ) 1/2 with decreasing energy scale as is shown in Fig. and , we can write the boson propagator in the source term as . The remaining angle-dependent factor and μ 1/2 can be absorbed to the four-fermion coupling functions through λ(ν) θ1, θ2 along with a trivial relabeling of other coupling functions, To the leading order in ∂ θ v F,θ and ∂ θ K F,θ , the beta functional for λ in the the rescaled angular space becomes Here H d = Hd; θ1, θ2 (⃗ q) + 1 2 is independent of angle in the low-energy limit. The new source term is written as where Lμ, θ (⃗ q) = L μ,θ (⃗ q) ( Lθ(⃗ q) = L θ (⃗ q) ), Fφ, θ = F φ,θ , Ḡφ, θ = G φ,θ , θmax = a -1 (π/2) ∼ √ K F . In this rescaled coordinate, the intra-patch to inter-patch crossover occurs at ∆ θ ∼ √ μ. The beta functional for λ(ν) θ1, θ2 (⃗ q = 0) is manifestly invariant under θ → θ + ∆ θ. It is noted that the rigid translation in θ corresponds to a non-linear diffeomorphism in θ. This diffeomorphism appears as a sliding transformation within the patch theory Near d c , we drop the term that is quadratic in λ in Eq. ( where λUV (ν) θ1, θ2 (⃗ q) represents the UV four-fermion coupling function at l = 0 and describes the contribution of the anomalous dimension and the ⃗ q-dependent vertex correction. The beta functional exhibit three crossovers at logarithmic length scales l * θ1, θ2 , l * θ1,⃗ q and l * θ2,⃗ q , where l * θ1, θ2 represents the logarithmic length scale above which two points at angle θ 1 and θ 2 move outside one patch. l * θ1,⃗ q and l * θ2,⃗ q represent the length scales above which the vertex corrections to the four-fermion coupling at angle θ 1 and θ 2 are turned off, respectively. In general, C turn off at different length scales: if ⃗ q is tangential to θ 1 but not to θ 2 , fermion pairs with momentum ⃗ q has much lower energy near θ 1 than those near θ 2 , which leads to l * θ1,⃗ q ≫ l * θ2,⃗ q . These scales create a rich crossover behaviours for the universal four-fermion coupling function. In particular, the relative magnitudes among l * θ1, θ2 , l * θ1,⃗ q and l * θ2,⃗ q determine a series of crossovers the four-fermion coupling undergoes with decreasing energy. If l * θ1, θ2 ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q ∼ l * θ2,⃗ q , fermions at angles θ 1 and θ 2 are close to each other so that they stay within a patch until quantum corrections are cut off by non-zero q at low energies. At short distance scale with l ≪ l * θ1,⃗ q , l * θ2,⃗ q , the four-fermion coupling becomes (see Appendix E 1) where At long distance scales with l ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q , l * θ2,⃗ q , the interaction is suppressed as the energy of virtual fermions carrying momentum ⃗ q in the loop becomes greater than the energy scale Λe -l (see Appendix E 2) Interestingly, there is no single power of q with which the coupling decays as q becomes larger relative to μ for a given K F,θ . If ⃗ q is tangential to the patch, the coupling function is proportional to and it takes a scale invariant form when √ μ q is fixed in the low-energy limit. This patch scaling is valid within |φ -θ-1 ( θ1 )| < μ/K F . On the other hand, the coupling function scales as μ q for ⃗ q that is not tangential to the patch at angle θ 1 ≈ θ 2 . In this case, the coupling takes a scale invariant form when the low-energy limit is taken with μ q fixed. This forces us to introduce different dynamical critical exponents for different observables. We emphasize that this is different from the cases in which the dynamical critical exponent runs under the renormalization group flow. In the present case, different low-energy observables exhibit different dynamical critical exponents at one infrared fixed point. This lack of a unique dynamical critical exponent is a manifestation of the extra relevant scale in the problem, the Fermi momentum. If l * θ1, θ2 ≪ l * θ1,⃗ q , l * θ2,⃗ q , two fermions that are engaged in the interactions are far from each other that as the energy scale is lowered they first move outside the common patch before the vertex correction due to the Yukawa coupling is turned off at each angle. Below, we consider the case with l * θ1,⃗ q ≫ l * θ2,⃗ q . At distance scales shorter than any of the crossover length scales, the four-fermion coupling takes the same form as Eq. where being the polygamma function of order m. The angle-dependent coupling functions become scale invariant when the low-energy limit is taken with θe l/2 fixed : d , where θ ≡ θe l/2 . For q = 0, Eq. ( For ⃗ q ̸ = 0, there are additional crossovers. In the second intermediate length scale with l * θ2,⃗ q ≫ l ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1, θ2 , the vertex correction at angle θ 1 is turned off and the four-fermion coupling is further suppressed by μ/ Lθ 1 (⃗ q) (see Appendix E 4), λ(ν) θ1, θ2 In the low-energy limit with l ≫ l * θ2,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1, θ2 , there is an additional suppression due to the decoupling of the vertex correction at both angles (see Appendix E 5), λ * (ν) θ1, θ2 Like Eq. ( The crossovers discussed in the previous two subsections can be summarized as where 2 . The first term in Eq. ( at energy scale μ = Λe -l . The additional suppression of (⃗ q) in the second case of Eq. ( (⃗ q) in Eq. ( Due to the nonstop growth of the Fermi momentum under the RG flow, a metallic fixed point is defined only modulo a rescaling of the Fermi momentum. In this section, we discuss consequences of the projective nature of the fixed points for physical observables in more details. Although the tree-level scaling dimension of the four-fermion coupling is 1d, it does not mean that it is irrelevant in d > 1. For one thing, interactions introduce anomalous dimensions. More importantly, the Fermi momentum that runs to infinity in the IR can modify the actual degree of relevance from the scaling dimension. A foolproof way to determine the relevancy of the four-fermion coupling is to examine its contribution to physical observables such as the anomalous dimension of an operator. Any operator would suit for this purpose, but it is convenient for us to use the four-fermion operator itself. In the beta functional computed in Eq. ( where δ λ(ν) (0) and λ(ν) (0) are viewed as matrices of θ1 and θ2 with the contraction of the angular matrix index given by (A To extract the eigenmodes of the linearized beta functional, it is convenient to use the singular value decomposition to write the four-fermion coupling function as where λ(ν) m denotes the eigenvalue associated with the m-th eigenvector f with the normalization f In general, both eigenvectors and eigenvalues are l-dependent. Eigenmodes of the linearized beta functional at scale l are then labeled by a pair of indices (m, n), with eigenvalue This is the scaling dimension of the four-fermion coupling in the channel (ν, m, n). -∆ (ν) d is the scaling dimension evaluated to the zeroth order in the four-fermion coupling, and -R is the anomalous dimension that arises at the linear order of the four-fermion coupling. Here, our main concern is to understand how the latter depends on the former. If the four-fermion coupling is irrelevant (relevant), the contribution of the UV four-fermion coupling to the scaling dimension would be negligible (significant) in the low-energy limit. One may naively expect that the four-fermion coupling is relevant (irrelevant) for -∆ d < 0). However, this is not the case because of the running Fermi momentum, as will be shown below. A lower bound for the largest λ(ν) m can be obtained from a trial function f as λ(ν) , the lower bound becomes Regarding Eq. ( (0) = λUV (ν)27 . From Eq. ( 27 Generic angle dependence that arises from short-range interactions do not change the following conclusion. Here, a change of integration variable is made : θ = θe l/2 . We also used the fact that θmax ∼ √ K F and μ = Λe -l . The additional factors of e l/2 in the first term and the upper bound of the integral in the second term arise from the measure of θ integration. It reflects the fact that the number of patches increases as e l/2 as the length scale increases. Interestingly, both terms in Eq. ( In this case, the first term in Eq. ( The UV contribution in Eq. ( , which diverges in the lowenergy limit. Due to the strong inter-patch coupling, the momentum-space locality and the patch description break down. The contribution of the UV coupling barely survives in the IR and the four-fermion coupling is marginal. Furthermore, the contribution of the large-angle scatterings generated from the critical mode exhibits a logarithmic divergence, signifying a marginal breakdown of the momentum-space locality. In this case, one has to include sub-leading corrections in the analysis. It is interesting to note that the four-fermion coupling turns relevant as its scaling dimension -∆ (ν) d rises above -1/2 not 0. This happens because the angular variable θ acquires an anomalous dimension 1/2 through Eq. ( Near the upper critical dimension, ∆ d ≈ 1 and the theory belongs to the first category. In the low-energy limit, the theory flows to one of the stable projective fixed points spanned by two marginal coupling functions, κ F,θ = K F,θ /k F and v F,θ . Nonetheless, the four-fermion coupling function singularly depends on k F that runs to infinity. This singular dependence on the Fermi momentum causes a lack of simple power-law scaling of physical observables. To see this explicitly through the four-point function, we note that the dimensionless coupling function we computed by integrating the beta functional corresponds to the dimensionless crossover function in Eq. ( where with a -1 (θ) being the inverse of Eq. (89) 28 . The vertex function in the low frequency limit is fully determined by two marginal coupling functions κ F,θ and v F,θ and one relevant scale k F ω 1/z . The former determines the shape of the Fermi surface and angle-dependent Fermi velocity, and the latter sets the overall size of Fermi surface in the unit of the external frequency. The space of projective fixed points is spanned by the two marginal coupling functions. Interestingly, the critical exponents exhibit a super-universality in that they do not depend on the marginal parameters. In Eq. ( and θ (⃗ q) defined in Eq. ( for cos(φθ) ≫ q/K F,θ and for cos(φθ) ≪ q/K F,θ . In the angular region with cos(φθ) ≫ q/K F,θ , ⃗ q is not sufficiently tangential to the Fermi surface that the curvature of the Fermi surface does not enter, and the crossover function is independent of Fermi momentum. In this kinematic region, the vertex function is scale invariant in the limit in which ω and q are sent to zero with ω 1/z /q fixed. In the narrow region of cos(φθ) ≪ q/K F,θ , on the other hand, ⃗ q is sufficiently tangential to the Fermi surface so that the curvature becomes important. The vertex function in this region becomes scale invariant in the low-energy limit where ω 1/z /q 2 is fixed. Therefore, there is no single dynamical critical exponent that sets the relative scaling between ω and q for all low-energy observables. With decreasing energy scale, the range of the second region becomes narrower, and the crossover function becomes non-analytic in θ i and φ in the low-energy limit. The rise of momentum-space non-locality The question of ultimate physical interest is the fate of the theory at d = 2. Since we don't have a non-perturbative access to the theory in d = 2, the next best thing we can do is to examine the trend the perturbation theory points to as d is lowered toward the physical dimension. The scaling dimension of the four-fermion coupling (-∆ > 1/2 in all dimensions, which suggests that the forward scattering remains irrelevant even at d = 2. This is because the vertex correction is highly suppressed in the forward scattering channels. In diagrams that do not involve interaction in the pairing channel, quantum corrections to the forward scattering vertex at general angles θ ′ and θ arise from small-angle scatterings within each patch around those two angles. Each of those vertex corrections is then controlled by the single-patch theory. However, the single-patch theory does not have any singular vertex correction due to the kinematic constraint associated with the chiral nature (29), ( , where the first argument in the vertex function represents frequencies of the external fermions set by Eq. ( is not what can be readily measured experimentally. The quantity that is directly relevant in experiments is the vertex function evaluated with respect to the bare field as a function of the bare frequency. Eq. ( , where the bare frequency ω and the renormalized frequency μ are related to each other through ω = μ z /Λ z-1 , and the multiplicative renormalization factors are given by Zτ;μ = μ Λ z-1 , Z ψ;μ = μ Λ 2η ψ through Eq. ( Here, let us focus on the physics within the window of intermediate energy scales where the quadratic term in the four-fermion coupling is still negligible. The size of this window is parametrically large near d (0) SC . This is because the energy scale below which the non-Fermi liquid physics sets in is determined by the interaction which is strictly relevant at the Gaussian fixed point while the superconducting transition temperature approaches zero as the critical dimension is approached (see Fig. In the non-Fermi liquid state realized in the intermediate energy scales, there exist intrinsic superconducting fluctuations which are captured by the four-fermion coupling generated from the quantum critical mode as is shown in Eq. The strong UV/IR mixing has experimental consequences. First, the relevant large-angle scatterings generate a fast relaxation of neutral collective excitations. In particular, there will be a universal component in the decay rate of deformations of Fermi surface in the even angular momentum channels at low temperatures. This is in contrast to Fermi liquids in which the relaxation of excitations in even angular momentum channels is mainly created by the head-on collisions which is marginally irrelevant for repulsive interactions Low-energy effective theories of metals are characterized by a set of 'coupling functions' that determine the size and shape of the Fermi surface, the angle-dependent Fermi velocity and interactions. The functional renormalization group flow defined in the space of these functions does not exhibit a fixed point in the strict sense because the size of the Fermi surface continues to grow under the renormalization group flow. Therefore, a notion of fixed point can be defined only modulo rescaling of the Fermi momentum. Due to this projective nature of fixed points, there is no unique way of scaling frequency and momentum such that the entire low-energy observables exhibit a scale invariance. Furthermore, even couplings with negative scaling dimensions can give rise to infrared singularity through non-perturbative enhancement from the running Fermi momentum. In this paper, we illustrate these points by charting out the space of projective fixed points and characterizing their universal low-energy physics for the Ising-nematic quantum critical metal. Near the upper critical dimension, the theory flows to stable projective fixed points whose space is spanned by two exactly marginal coupling functions. The marginal parameters are the angle-dependent functions that specify the shape of the Fermi surface and the Fermi velocity. Compared to Fermi liquids, the non-Fermi liquid fixed points exhibit two salient universal features. First, the Landau function is no longer tunable at low energies as it is completely fixed by the shape of the Fermi surface and the Fermi velocity. Second, there exist universal superconducting fluctuations intrinsic to the non-Fermi liquid state. As the space dimension is lowered, the vertex corrections enhance the critical superconducting fluctuations. Below a critical space dimension, which is estimated to be around 2.37, the patch theory breaks down due to strong inter-patch coupling mediated by large-angle scatterings of Cooper pairs. Consequently, the number of fermions in each patch is no longer conserved, and the emergent symmetry of the normal state becomes a proper subgroup of that of Fermi liquids. In the low-energy limit, the theory is expected to become unstable toward superconducting states near two dimensions. The details on the superconducting instability will be discussed in a separate paper. We conclude with some remarks and open questions. • Quasi-fixed point In d close to 2, the large-angle scatterings generated in the pairing channel become important. At the same time, the non-Fermi liquid state becomes unstable against superconducting states. Nonetheless, there exists a finite window of energy scales in which the renormalization group flow is stalled due to the proximity to the non-Hermitian fixed points To the leading order in the ε expansion, the feedback of the universal four-fermion coupling to the electron selfenergy and the Yukawa coupling can be ignored. However, the feedback effect is expected to become important near d = 2. It will be of great interest to understand the effect of the critical superconducting fluctuations to the electron spectral function, the collective modes and transport phenomena in view of the possibility that the large-angle scatterings can give rise to a pseudogap behaviour of normal electrons and open up new channels for dissipating collective modes of Fermi surface and the electric current combined with the Umklapp scatterings In the Ising-nematic quantum critical metal, the superconducting instability arises below the critical dimension in which the UV/IR mixing sets in. This is because the superconducting instability is driven by the large-angle scatterings. How general is this as the mechanism to drive non-Fermi liquids into superconductivity • Non-Fermi liquids with LU(1) symmetry A system that is closely related to the Ising-nematic quantum critical metal is the critical Fermi surface coupled with an emergent U(1) gauge field. It, for instances, arises as the low-energy description of the half-filled Landau level In the presence of disorder that breaks the translational invariance, large-angle scatterings become more important. Even at the upper critical dimension d = 5/2, the disorder is expected to generate non-perturbative effects beyond logarithmic corrections to the quadratic order in q and ∆θ, where Alternatively, one can also expand Eq. (A7) in powers of ∆φ = φθ -1 (θ) when the angle of boson φ deviates away from θ -1 (θ) for a fixed θ. To the leading order in ∆φ, Eq. (A7) becomes where The four-fermion operator in Eq. ( , where m is summed over 1, (d -1) and (4d) components for each ν = F + , F -, P , respectively, Since {O (ν) } forms a complete basis of the four-fermion operators that respect the SO(d -1) × SO(4d) symmetry (see Sec. II B for discussion on symmetry), one can express operators of the form O where the negative sign is due to the anti-commuting nature of the fermionic fields. We can calculate matrix C by considering rank-4 orthogonal basis tensors, T where a, b, c and d are the spinor indices. Here, m is summed over (but not ν). The inner product of the basis tensors is defined as abcd , we readily obtain In this section, we derive the formal expressions for the critical exponents and the beta functionals in terms of the counter terms. These expressions combined with the counter terms derived in the next appendix give rise to Eqs. ( From Eq. ( . We can proceed to calculate the beta functional of the Fermi momentum starting from the multiplicative relationship as K F B,θ B = μ K F,θ -c(θ) Z2(θ) . At the one-loop order, c(θ) = 0, and the beta functional for K F,θ is given in Eq. ( Taking the derivative on the logarithm of this expression with respect to ln μ for fixed bare Fermi-velocity we obtain d ln μ . To the leading order in ε, the IR beta functional dv F,θ dl with l = log Λ μ is given in Eq. ( . At one loop order, Z 3 = 1 and From this, we obtain 1 To the leading order, the beta-functional of the Yukawa coupling is given in Eq. ( Here, we have used the fact that the ln μ derivative of X θ and χ θ -1 (θ) is 0 as these functions depend only on ratio of K F,θ and its derivatives. From Eqs. ( In general, one can also define the effective coupling at general angles as g θ1,θ2 = e 2 θ1,θ2 d ln μ , the beta functional of g θ1,θ2 is given in Eq. ( ). To the leading order, the beta functional can be calculated by taking the derivative on the logarithm of the expression for the bare coupling with respect to ln μ for a fixed λ where we have used the definitions of dynamical critical exponent z and anomalous dimension of fermionic field η ψ (θ) given in Eq. ( d ln μ Plugging Eqs. (D64), (D75) , (D76) and (D110) to Eq. (C2) leads to the beta functional given by Eq. ( In this appendix, we compute the quantum corrections that determine the beta functionals to the leading order in the ε expansion. We first compile a list of formulae used later in this appendix. 1. Boson Self-Energy One loop boson energy shown in Fig. where l = (L, δ, θ), q = (Q, ⃗ q), l + q = (L + Q, ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q), Θ(θ, ⃗ q)). Here, ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q) and Θ(θ, ⃗ q) are given in Eq. (A7). We write the trace inside Eq. (D10) as With Tr {γ i , γ j } = 2δ ij , the trace becomes For q ≪ K F,θ , we can use e Θ(θ,⃗ q),θ ≈ e θ,θ and v F,Θ(θ,⃗ q) ≈ v F,θ to rewrite Eq. (D10) as Here, we use the Feynmann parametrization, and e e e θ ≡ e e e θ,θ denotes the dimensionful diagonal Yukawa coupling. Shifting L → L -xQ and dropping terms that are odd in L, we write the self-energy as Completing the square in numerator and denominator to perform integration over δ, we obtain where K F,θ . The integrations of L and x give where Γ( and is the solid angle in d dimensions. The result of the θ integration depends on the relative magnitude between Q and q. Let us first consider the limit in which q ≫ Q. This is the limit that is relevant for the processes where the boson scatters fermions almost tangentially with momentum transfer q much larger than the energy transfer. In this case, the largest contribution arises from angle around θ(φ) where particle-hole excitations with momentum ⃗ q is almost tangential to the Fermi surface. Let us perform gradient expansion of θ around θ(φ), e e e 2 θ (φ where is the ratio of n th derivative and zeroth order term in the gradient expansion. For instance, F e e e θ(φ) v F,θ(φ) . Similarly, L θ (⃗ q) can be approximated in the tangential direction as where χ φ and Bφ are given in Eq. (A10), respectively. Using Eqs. (D16), (D17) and (D18), and shifting θ → θ + θ(φ) followed by a variable change θ = K F,θ(φ) θ, we write the boson self-energy as where θmax ∼ K F,θ(φ) . Shifting θ → θ -Bφ χφ q, we obtain The term which are most singular in Q and q, can be identified from Eq. (D20) 30 , where χφ . Every term in δΠ 1 (q) is subleading compared to Eq. (D21) in the limit Q ≪ q ≪ K F,θ . Therefore, the most singular correction is given by where . In the Q ≫ q limit, Eq. (D16) becomes (D23) 30 The integral in Eq. (D20) can be performed using the binomial expansion of the numerator ∼ q m θm ′ , with m + m ′ = n. The integral is non-vanishing only for even m ′ . In 2 ≤ d < 3, the integral is UV convergent (divergent) for m ′ = 0 (m ′ ≥ 2). For m ′ = 0, the contribution to Π 1 (q) goes as The most singular correction arises at n = 0 which is given by first term in Eq. (D21). The terms from n > 0 are suppressed by q/K F,θ . The contribution to Π 1 (q) from the terms with m ′ ≥ 2 is order of , all of which are suppressed by either positive powers of q/K F,θ or Q/q. The one-loop fermion self-energy (Fig. where k = (K, δ 1 , θ 1 ) is the external momentum, l = (L, δ, θ) is the loop momentum and is the one-loop dressed boson propagator. In Eq. (D25), we use the boson self-energy that is valid in the q ≫ |Q| limit because the typical loop momentum is much larger than the frequency. Eq. (D24) now reads The counter term A 1 (θ 1 ) that is analytic in momentum space for μ ̸ = 0 and cancels the IR divergence of the quantum correction can be expressed as K=μ . Here, corresponds to the regularized boson propagator with denoting the momentum that connects the Fermi surface at angles θ 1 and θ 2 . To make sure that the counter term is analytic in momentum, the boson propagator has been regularized with energy μ for small momentum q(θ 1 , θ 2 ). This infrared cutoff arises naturally from the full boson propagator. We also have used the fact that the boson propagator is strongly suppressed as (∆θ) -2 at large ∆θ, so f d,φ is evaluated at the angle which is tangential to the average of the angles, θ 12 = θ1+θ2 2 . This does not affect the singular part of the self-energy. The log μ derivative of Eq. (D27) can be formally written as where Since the boson propagator is sharply peaked at θ 1 (as it is suppressed as 1 (∆θ) 2 at large ∆θ), we can extract the singular part of the self-energy using the adiabatic approximation , and q(θ, θ 1 ) |X θ | and X θ = sin θ -1 (θ)θ to perform integration over θ where . Finally, integration over L through Feynman integration gives ωθ1 = g θ1 u 1 (d), (D31) to the leading order in ε = 5 2d. Here, is an O(1) dimension dependent number which is shown in Fig. is the dimensionless effective Yukawa coupling with K F,θ = K F,θ /μ. At one loop order, the fermion self-energy is independent of spatial momentum : A 2 (θ) = c(θ) = 0. Due to Ward's identity, Γ(k, 0) = ∂G -1 (k) ∂δ , the vertex correction in Fig. The quantum corrections to the four-fermion vertex can be written as The counter term is to be added to cancel the quantum correction evaluated at a set of external momenta as is shown in Eq. ( where μ is a (d -1)-dimensional vector with magnitude μ. The external frequencies are chosen so that the frequency running in the s, t and u channels are all non-zero, which guarantees that all IR divergence is cut off by μ ̸ = 0. The resulting angle-dependent vertex function is written as μ A;B (θ 1 , θ 2 , ⃗ q; μ) I are defined in Eqs. ( With this choice, the renormalization condition in Eq. ( a. λ 2 order In this section, we derive the counter term for the quantum correction that arises from Fig. where l = (L, δ, θ) is the loop momentum and l + q = (L -2μ, ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q), Θ(θ, ⃗ q)). For ν 1 ̸ = ν 2 , Eq. (D37) is non-singular in the small μ limit. To show this, we write where the denominator is For the numerator, we consider the off-diagonal and diagonal elements in ν 1 and ν 2 separately. For ν 1 ̸ = ν 2 , the numerator becomes The second and third terms are odd in L in the μ → 0 limit, and don't generate a singular contribution. For the first and the fourth terms, we can make the following replacement, This shows that they vanish for ν 1 ̸ = ν 2 . Using Eq. ( + regular terms, (D41) where the matrix that determines the mixing between different flavour channels is obtained to be Let us now evaluate the the diagonal elements one by one. • ν 1 = ν 2 = F + In the forward scattering channel with even angular momentum, the numerator becomes In the forward scattering channel with odd angular momentum, we obtain In the pairing channel, we have N (2);(P,P ) abcd D (2) = (1) ab Tr {1G 0 (l)1G 0 (l + q)} (1 where Γ ′ ≡ (γ d , ..., γ 2 ) and non-singular terms are dropped. The numerator of the first term on the right hand side of Eq. (D47) can be explicitly written as Eq. (D48) then gives (1) ab Tr{1G 0 (l)1G 0 (l + q)} (1 The numerator of the second term on the right hand side of Eq. (D47) can be expanded as m ab Completing the square in numerator and denominator to perform integration over δ, we obtain (D59) where L θ (⃗ q) is given by Eq. ( Finally, the integrations of L and x gives D60) where (D63) The contribution of the counter term to the beta function is given by the derivative of the counter term with respect to log μ with the bare coupling fixed. To the leading order, the bare coupling is λ (ν,s) θ1,θ2 , and the derivative is given by where L μ,θ (⃗ q) = L θ (⃗ q) μ . b. λ 1 order Now, we derive the counter term to the four-fermion coupling that is linear in the four-fermion coupling. The quantum correction from Fig. θ1,θ (⃗ q) -ie e e Θ(θ2,⃗ q),Θ(θ,⃗ q) (-ie e e θ,θ2 (D65) Here, momenta k A i 's are defined in Eq. (D34), l = (L, δ, θ) and l + q = (L -2μ, ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q), Θ(θ, ⃗ q)). We single out the integrand that comes from the fermion propagators as where We can isolate the singular part of the quantum correction using Eq. (D40). The singular part of Eq. (D66) becomes (1);(F-) abcd (1);(P ) abcd m ab From Eqs. (D68)-(D70), the quantum correction is written as θ1,θ (⃗ q) e e e Θ(θ2,⃗ q),Θ(θ,⃗ q) e e e θ,θ2 where d (L, μ, δ, θ, ⃗ q) is defined in Eq. (D54) and Like the fermion self-energy, an IR singularity arises below d c . In the low energy limit, the momentum transfer q is at most K F,θ μ. If the couplings vary slowly within an angular width of μ K F,θ , which will turn out to be the case, we can use the adiabatic approximation In the following, we first obtain the formal expression for the counter term written as an angular integration, which enters in the beta functional in Eq. ) The derivative of this counter term with respect to log μ, which determines the beta functional, becomes Here, a power of μ is multiplied to make expression dimensionless. Similarly, the contribution of Fig. The expressions for h +;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) and h -;d;θ1,θ2 (⃗ q; μ) are shown in Eqs. ( In this subsection, we employ the adiabatic procedure to evaluate the vertex correction explicitly. The singular part of Eq. (D74) can be evaluated through e θ2,θ → e θ2,θ2 , λ for the loop variable θ because the integrand exhibits an IR singularity only at θ = θ 2 . This allows us write the singular part of the counter term as where Here, the integration over θ has been performed and E = v F,θ2 δ. Using the Feynman parametrization, we rewrite Eq. (D78) as The integral over E leads to With another Feynman parameterization, Eq. (D80) can be written as where x,y ≡ 1 0 1 0 dx dy y d-7 6 (1y) Shifting L → L -(y + 2x(1y) -2)μ and L → L + (y -2x(1y))μ for the first and second terms in brackets, respectively, followed by the integration over L gives where , From Eqs. (D77), (D81) and (D83), the counter term is obtained to be Γ where (D87) The derivative of the counter term with respect to log μ becomes where . Finally, Eq. (D88) can be written as Here, C d (L μ,θ (⃗ q)) is the crossover function given by Dropping terms that are sub-leading in ε, we obain D93) to the leading order in ε. In the small L μ,θ limit, C (ν) d approaches a non-zero constant. In the large L μ,θ limit, . This shows that the low energy limit and d → d c limit do not commute with each other. The asymptotic limits of where x,y a 2 (x, y) 1 → a (ν) 3 . (D96) Finally, the contribution to the beta functional reads The quantum correction that arises from Fig. where k A i is defined in Eq. (D34). Proceeding in the same way, we obtain where s (ν) is defined in Eq. (D72). The counter term reads where μ,θ is defined in Eq. (D87), and the contribution to the beta functional becomes It is noted that the weight from the convolution integration in Eqs. (D75) and (D76) corresponds to Eqs. (D97) and (D102), respectively. In the L μ,θ (⃗ q) ≪ 1 limit, the weight of Eq. ( c. λ 0 order Here, we derive the counter term that is independent of the four-fermion coupling (Fig. l (-ie e e θ1,θ )(-ie e e θ,θ2 )(-ie e e Θ(θ2,⃗ q),Θ(θ,⃗ q) )(-ie e e Θ(θ,⃗ q),Θ(θ1,⃗ q) )D 1 (lp 2 ) D103) where l = (L, δ, θ) is the loop momentum and l + q = (L + Q, ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q), Θ(θ, ⃗ q)). We single out the part of the integrand that depends on the fermion propagator as where From Eq. (D40), the singular contribution in Eq. (D105) arises from Using the Fierz transformation (see Appendix B), we turn Eq. (D103) into l e e e θ1,θ e e e θ,θ2 e e e Θ(θ2,⃗ q),Θ(θ,⃗ q) e e e Θ(θ,⃗ q),Θ(θ1,⃗ q) K (ν) D107) 34 Notice that there will be an interchange of H ↔ H and J ↔ J for μ A and μ B contributions of the counter term as compared to counter term for quantum correction shown in Fig. over θ, we obtain the quantum correction to be Γ , integrating over δ and shifting L → L + μ, we obtain where For |L| >> 2|μ|, Eq. (D115) becomes 2 and its contribution becomes For |L| << 2|μ|, Eq. (D115) becomes Finally, the quantum correction in Eq. (D112) can be written as 2 + 4μ 2 , (D120) and its derivative with respect to log μ, (D121) 35 After integration over θ and δ, we can shift L → Lμ to get same equation as Eq. (D115). Finally, the contribution to the beta functional reads In this region, fermions at angle θ 1 and θ 2 lie outside one patch. In Eq. (D108), we note that the integrand is peaked at θ ∼ θ 1 or θ 2 . For θ ∼ θ 1 (θ ∼ θ 2 ), and the rest of the loop integration can be done by following the steps involved in the computation of Γ (1 ′ );(ν,s) (θ 1 , θ 2 , ⃗ q; μ) (θ 1 , θ 2 , ⃗ q; μ) . Summing up both the contributions, we can extract the infrared divergent contribution of the quantum correction by using the adiabatic approximation as Hμ,θ1,⃗ q (x, y, d) + J (ν) μ,θ1,⃗ q (x, y, d) + g θ2 q(θ 1 , θ 2 ) 2 H μ,θ2,⃗ q (x, y, d) + J (ν) μ,θ2,⃗ q (x, y, d) . (D123) Here H (ν) μ,θ,⃗ q (x, y, d), J (ν) μ,θ,⃗ q (x, y, d), H (ν) μ,θ,⃗ q (x, y, d) and J (ν) μ,θ,⃗ q (x, y, d) are defined in Eqs. (D84). Similarly, the quantum correction evaluated at μ B becomes Γ (0);(ν,s) μ B (θ 1 , θ 2 , ⃗ q; μ) = Γ (0);(ν,s) μ A (θ 1 , θ 2 , ⃗ q; μ) (D124) The counter term that satisfies the RG conditions can be written as μ,θ (⃗ q) are defined in Eqs. (D72) and (D87), respectively, and θ 12 = θ1+θ2 2 . α d is a positive definite constant that is is scheme-dependent. It is noted that the smoothening by μ to ensure analyticity in q(θ 1 , θ 2 ) does not play an important role in the inter-patch limit because √ K F μ ≫ μ. Taking the derivative of Eq. (D125) with respect to log μ, we obtain q(θ 1 , θ 2 ) 2 + μ 2 q(θ 1 , θ 2 ) 2 q(θ 1 , θ 2 F,θ . Therefore, we set α d to be 1. In this appendix, we derive the fixed point profile of four-fermion coupling in different kinematic regions controlled by three characteristic length scales l * θ1, θ2 , l * θ1,⃗ q and l * θ2,⃗ q case by case. 1. l * θ1 , θ2 , l * θ1 ,⃗ q , l * θ2 ,⃗ q ≫ l : Eq. ( If the RG scale is smaller than all three characteristic length scales, the full source in Eq. ( l * θ1 , θ2 ≫ l ≫ l * θ1 ,⃗ q : Eq. ( When the RG scale is smaller than l * θ1, θ2 but greater than l * θ1,⃗ q ∼ l * θ2,⃗ q , the source is suppressed at sufficiently low energies due to the cross-over defined in Eq. (D93). This leads to λ(ν) (E3) We don't expect Eq. (E3) to be scale invariant because it depends on l explicitly. In order to see a scale invariance, one has to take the large l limit while fixing the rescaled fermionic angle θ, momentum transfer (or center of mass momentum of cooper pair) q and Fermi momentum KF, θ , where θ = θe l 2 , q = qe l , KF, θ = KF, θe -l 2 e l . (E4) Accordingly, we define the coupling function in the rescaled space as λ(ν) θ1, θ2 (q, φ) = λ(ν) In the low-energy limit, the range of θ is stretched out (q, φ; l) = e -∆ (ν) d l λUV (ν) θ1, θ1 where Lθ (q, φ) = vF, θ Fφ, θ q + Ĝφ, 3. l * θ1 ,⃗ q , l * θ2 ,⃗ q ≫ l ≫ l * θ1 , θ2 : Eq. ( In this region, Eq. ( Here, ψ (m) (z) is the polygamma function of order m. 4. l * θ2 ,⃗ q ≫ l ≫ l * θ1 ,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1 , θ2 : Eq. ( When the RG length scale is much smaller than the crossover scale at θ 2 and much bigger than the crossover length scale at θ 1 , the solution to Eq. ( In the θ1 -θ2 ≫ Lθ 1 (q, φ) ≫ √ Λ limit, Eq. (E13) can be written in a compact form as λ(ν) (q, φ) + g * 2 ς where Y . (E15) l ≫ l * θ2 ,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1 ,⃗ q ≫ l * θ1 , θ2 : Eq. ( When the RG scale is much bigger than the crossover scale at θ 1 and θ 2 , and the characteristic length scale that controls inter-patch scatterings, the solution to Eq. (94) becomes λ(ν) θ1, θ2 l * θ1 ,⃗ q +l * θ2 ,⃗ q λUV (ν) θ1, θ2 l * θ1 , q,φ + l * θ2 , q,φ + s (ν) g * 2 ρ (ν) ; - In the θ1 -θ2 ≫ Max Lθ 1 (q, φ), Lθ 2 (q, φ) ≫ √ Λ limit, Eq. (E17) can be written as λ(ν) (q, φ) + g * 2 ς where Y Lθ 1 (q, φ) Lθ 2 (q, φ) . (E19) This is a hallmark of ultraviolet/infrared (UV/IR) mixing. However, there is an important difference from the UV/IR mixing that arises from a non-commutative structure of space or an extended nature of physical objects such as strings, where high-energy scales is intertwined with low-energy physics Fluctuations of Fermi surface can be described in terms of these bosonic variables For simplicity, Eq. (11) is written for ⃗ q = 0 with the dependence on frequency and δ suppressed. However, it is crucial to allow small but non-zero ⃗ q in the full action for locality. Even if the inter-patch coupling is weak, a global description of Fermi surface is needed for observables that are non-local in momentum space. One can in principle sense the size of the earth by observing how far our feet go above the ground under a linear displacement tangential to the surface of the earth. One could have chosen any point on the Fermi surface as a reference point to set a global clock. While the total volume encoded by the Fermi surface is protected from quantum correction, the Fermi momentum can in principle be renormalized in an angle-dependent manner. Similarly, the bare four-fermion operator is given by replacing the fermion fields with the bare fields in Eq. If one uses the momentum as a label for the Fermi surface instead of angle, the beta functionals include terms that dilate the momentum along the Fermi surface If such fine tuning requires a breaking of unitarity, Hermitian theories exhibit a run-away flow It is noted that non-1PI diagrams do not generate a counter term For |θ 1 -θ 2 | ≪ 1, one can replace θ 12 with any angle between θ 1 and θ 2 . However, the Fermi momentum can be in principle renormalized by higher order quantum corrections. For example, the four-fermion coupling, which is of the higher order than the Yukawa coupling, can create large-angle scatterings and renormalize the angle-dependent Fermi momentum. It is noted that the low energy limit and d → dc limit do not commute The momentum of boson can be much greater than μ because the particle-hole pairs with which the boson mixes have energy L θ (⃗ q) ∼ q 2 /K F near angle θ where ⃗ q is tangential to the Fermi surface. q 2 /K F ∼ μ gives the momentum scale q ∼ √ μK F . This can be seen from Eq. (108) where the four-fermion coupling enhances the dimension of the four-fermion coupling in the channel with λ(ν) m < 0. In performing the θ integration, we use the fact the q (θ, θ 1 ) ≫ μ as the dominant contribution arises from virtual bosons whose momenta are almost tangential to the Fermi surface at angle θ 1 . (d)v 2 F,θ δ∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q)) (|L| 2 + x(1x)|2μ| 2 + v 2 F,θ (xδ 2 + (1x)∆(δ, θ, ⃗ q) 2 )) 2 . This can be realized by replacing μ → -μ in Eq. (D57) and shifting L → L -2(1 -x)μ to get an equation same as Eq. (D58). In the large L μ,θ (⃗ q) limit, it is tempting to drop a 2 (x, y) or a 4 (x, y) in the denominator. However, it gives rise to divergences at x = 0 and x = 1. The leading contribution can be extracted from those two regions by expanding a 2 (x, y) and a 4 (x, y) in the denominator near x = 0 and x = 1 to the linear order and performing the integration over δx and y. The following discussion applies to ⃗ q at sufficiently low energies unless ⃗ q is tangential to the cold spots.