Superconductivity and long-range ferromagnetism hardly coexist in a uniform manner. The counter-example has been observed, in uranium-based superconductors for instance, with a coexisting temperature limited to about 1 K. Here, we report the coexistence of high temperature superconductivity and itinerant ferromagnetism in lithium intercalated FeSe flakes. In superconducting samples with transition temperature around 40 K, we observe the anomalous Hall effect with a hysteresis loop in transverse resistivity and a butterfly-like pattern of magneto-resistance. Intriguingly, such ferromagnetism persists down to a temperature at which the zero-field resistance fully vanishes. Furthermore, the superconductivity is enhanced under an in-plane magnetic field, suggestive of the participation of spin-polarized Cooper pairs. The surprising finding underscores a uniform coexistence of the two antagonistic phenomena on a record-high energy scale. Combining superconductivity and long-range ferromagnetism is not only of fundamental interest in extending our understanding on distinct pairing mechanisms but also promises groundbreaking applications by interfacing dissipationless electronics with spintronics [1-3]. However, superconductivity occurs predominantly with singlet Cooper pairing and is incompatible with ferromagnetism that requires spins to be polarized to the same direction. Harmonizing superconductivity and ferromagnetism in the same material therefore requires ingenuity and serendipity. Several U-based superconductors-UGe2 [4], URhGe [5], UCoGe [6] and lately UTe2 [7,8]-have been reported to show strong and uniform interaction between Cooper pairing and ferromagnetism. These superconducting ferromagnets are considered as candidates for the long sought-after triplet pairing. In these systems, the superconducting transition temperature T sc only lingers around 1 K and the Curie temperature T m stays below 30 K. One possible route to boost T sc and T m is by stacking cuprate or iron-based superconductors with ferromagnetic layers Here, we report uniform coexistence of superconductivity and itinerant ferromagnetism at high T sc of 40 K and T m > 200 K in lithium intercalated FeSe flakes. The coexistence is further supported by enhanced superconductivity under an in-plane magnetic field. Our results have profound implications on the pairing mechanism of iron-based superconductors and establish a distinct route that combines high-T sc superconducting electronics and high-T m spintronics. We carry out lithium intercalation into FeSe via a solid-state ion backgate. This technique has been intensively employed in tuning FeSe before An exfoliated flake of FeSe capped by the hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is positioned on the solid ion conductors (SIC) and contacted by the bottom electrodes (details in Methods). We apply a positive backgate voltage at room temperature (300 K) to intercalate lithium ions into FeSe and terminate the ion motion by cooling to low temperatures (typically below 200 K). The uniformity of lithium distribution in the caxis is guaranteed by the relatively small thickness of the flakes, as confirmed in previous studies A similar observation of AHE in Li-intercalated FeSe at 50 K was speculated to arise from locally concentrated intercalates of lithium, which induce non-superconducting ferromagnetic puddles inside the high-T sc matrix of FeSe Figure At temperatures below 40 K (Fig. However, such a peak-dip is absent in the other pair of the Hall probes (contacts 1 and 4 in inset of Fig. Accompanied with the transverse resistance, the longitudinal resistance R xx shows the typical butterfly pattern by sweeping the magnetic field back and forth (Fig. We further rotate the sample such that the orientation of the magnetic field changes from the out-of-plane direction (θ = 90 ∘ ) to the in-plane case (θ = 0 ∘ ) (inset of Fig. With decreasing θ, the hysteresis loop in R xy (B) gets squeezed along the vertical axis and stretched in the horizontal axis. It indicates that the AHE becomes suppressed with the magnetic field tilting to the in-plane direction and the coercive field becomes larger. The latter feature is also confirmed by the magneto-resistance data in Fig. We now unveil evidence of unconventional superconductivity due to the presence of ferromagnetism. Figure shows the conventional negative slope at the tilting angles of 90 ∘ and 5 ∘ , it changes to a positive slope when the angle is close to 0 ∘ . This behavior is distinctly different from the well-documented magnetic field responses of iron-based superconductors with comparable T sc The sensitivity of the enhanced superconductivity to the tilting can be appreciated by measuring the temperature dependent resistance at various θ but a fixed magnetic field. Figure Enhanced/re-entrant superconductivity under an in-plane magnetic field was previously reported in Pb films Single crystals of FeSe were grown by a temperature-gradient assisted flux method After rinsing multiple times with distilled water and ethanol, FeSe crystals were dried in an oven at 100°C for a few minutes and stored in a glovebox with Ar atmosphere. The pristine FeSe crystals exhibited an onset superconducting transition temperature of 8 K. The Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy indicated a Fe:Se ratio of 0.92:1, suggesting a slight deficiency of iron. The crystals were mechanically exfoliated in an argon-glovebox (H2O<0.1 ppm and O2<0.1 ppm) Former studies estimated the Li:Fe ratio based on the charging current during the lithium intercalation process. They further obtained T sc for samples with different Li:Fe ratios. From these studies, T sc ∼ 40 K, as measured from our samples, corresponds to the Li:Fe ratio of 0.2 The electrical transport measurements were carried out by using two closed-cycle cryogenic systems equipped with superconducting magnets. We employed the standard low-frequency lock-in technique with an excitation current of 5 μA (13.33 Hz). A DC source-meter was used to apply the back-gate voltage at 300 K. The resistance of sample S1 dropped quickly when the gate voltage was ramped to 3.2 V. We cooled down the sample when resistance decreased to about 40% of its initial value. For the sample rotation, we employed a home-built insert with a piezo-driven rotator (angular precision: 0.006°). The rotation axis is perpendicular to the axis of the solenoid magnet. For obtaining the data in Fig. The magnetic field sweep rate was 0.02 T/min for the data presented in Fig. 