The kagome metal CsV3Sb5 is an ideal platform to study the interplay between topology and electron correlation. To understand the fermiology of CsV3Sb5, intensive quantum oscillation (QO) studies at ambient pressure have been conducted. However, due to the Fermi surface reconstruction by the complicated charge density wave (CDW) order, the QO spectrum is exceedingly complex, hindering a complete understanding of the fermiology. Here, we directly map the Fermi surface of the pristine CsV3Sb5 by measuring Shubnikov-de Haas QOs up to 29 T under pressure, where the CDW order is completely suppressed. The QO spectrum of the pristine CsV3Sb5 is significantly simpler than the one in the CDW phase, and the detected oscillation frequencies agree well with our density functional theory calculations. In particular, a frequency as large as 8,200 T is detected. Pressuredependent QO studies further reveal a weak but noticeable enhancement of the quasiparticle effective masses on approaching the critical pressure where the CDW order disappears, hinting at the presence of quantum fluctuations. Our high-pressure QO results reveal the large, unreconstructed Fermi surface of CsV3Sb5, paving the way to understanding the parent state of this intriguing metal in which the electrons can be organized into different ordered states. Kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Rb, Cs), whose electronic band structure naturally hosts van Hove singularities, Dirac points and flat bands, serve as an ideal platform to investigate the interplay between topologically nontrivial states and the electronic correlation. Due to the correlation effects, an abundance of instabilities, including charge density wave (CDW), nematicity and superconductivity (SC), have been realized in AV 3 Sb 5 . Hence, AV 3 Sb 5 metals exhibit various quantum states that are actively explored in modern condensed matter research. Among the three members of AV 3 Sb 5 , CsV 3 Sb 5 possesses the highest superconducting transition temperature (T c ∼ 2.7 K) with a CDW transition at T CDW ∼ 90 K The emergence of the new periodicity associated with the CDW order introduces a smaller Brillouin zone (BZ). Thus, the pristine Fermi surface is reconstructed because of the band folding, and an additional energy gap develops which can affect the band structure. Due to the BZ folding and Fermi surface reconstruction, many small Fermi pockets can be expected. The CDW-induced energy gap has been detected by scanning tunneling microscopy and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy To make progress towards understanding the fermiology of CsV 3 Sb 5 , a natural strategy is to first remove the complicated CDW order, and then probe the pristine metallic phase by QOs. This can be accomplished by turning to the well-known temperature-pressure (T -p) phase diagram, which shows that T CDW decreases monotonically with increasing pressure and extrapolates to 0 K at p c ∼ 20 kbar In this study, we measure Shubnikov-de Haas QOs of CsV 3 Sb 5 under pressure up to 29 T. We investigate the Fermi surface of the pristine phase, and explore the pressure dependence of the fermiology. In the pristine CsV 3 Sb 5 with the magnetic field (B) along the c-axis, a QO frequency as high as ∼8,250 T is resolved in our study. Indeed, the entire fast Fourier transform (FFT) spectrum of the pristine phase is significantly simpler, and it shows a much-improved agreement with DFT calculations. Finally, we uncover a weak but discernible enhancement of the quasiparticle effective masses upon approaching p c on the pristine side. Thus, a near-complete determination of the Fermi surface sets the scene for understanding the parent metallic state which is susceptible to various instabilities, and the pressure-dependent fermiology parameters shed light on the effect of fluctuations associated with these instabilities on conduction electrons. Large Fermi surface in the pristine phase For the bulk sample, the CDW order can be totally suppressed at 20 kbar and for the thin flakes, the CDW order disappears at a slightly higher pressure of 24 kbar The FFT spectrum at 24.5 kbar is much simpler compared with the spectrum at ambient pressure Next, we move further away from the CDW phase by increasing the applied pressure. The FFT spectra at 27.0 kbar and 33.8 kbar are displayed in Figs. Oscillation peaks with frequencies larger than the in-plane area of the reconstructed BZ have been reported in Ref. The temperature dependencies of the QO amplitudes at 24.5 kbar are shown in Figs. The observation of QO frequencies over a wide pressure range offers an ideal backdrop to discuss the evolution of m * . Figure The effective masses presented in Fig. In heavy fermion CeRhIn 5 and iron-based superconductor BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 , quantum oscillation data showed the enhancement of m * when they are tuned towards the magnetic quantum critical point To understand the fermiology of CsV 3 Sb 5 in the pristine phase, we perform DFT calculations. Both lattice parameters and atomic positions are fixed to experimental values at 30 kbar provided by Ref. To further compare the calculated Fermi surface with our QO data, we add the calculated frequencies on the frequency-pressure diagram (Fig. The closed extremal orbits on the Fermi surface, which contribute to the QO signals, can be visualized. When the magnetic field is along the c-axis, the warped cylindrical Fermi sheet of Band 67 around A-Γ-A contributes two extremal orbits: a neck orbit (γ) at the zone centre k z = 0, and a belly orbit (δ) around the A point located at the zone boundary k z = 0.5 (see orange and yellow orbits in Fig. After establishing the correspondence between the detected QO frequencies and the calculated results, we further compare the effective masses. The experimentally determined quasiparticle effective masses at both 27.0 kbar and 33.8 kbar are all larger than the calculated band masses at 30 kbar, as tabulated in Table Despite the modest (m * /m * cal ), the ratio appears to appreciate on approaching p c ∼ 20 kbar, where T CDW → 0, indicating that the phenomenon can be tied to the destabilization of the CDW phase and thus the fluctuations as-sociated with the ordered phase. The fact that T c is also maximized near p c , i.e. the presence of the second dome around p c , suggests that superconducting pairings can take advantage of enhanced fluctuations. This scenario is in stark contrast to cases in which T c does not show a dome-like pressure dependence when the CDW phase is suppressed, see for instance the T -p phase diagram of 1T-TaS 2 The warped cylinder of Band 67 is known to be robust against the formation of the CDW order Crystal growths High-quality single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 were synthesized from Cs (ingot, 99.95 %), V (powder, 99.9 %) and Sb (shot, 99.9999 %) using self-flux method High-pressure quantum oscillation measurements Magnetotransport properties were measured by a standard four-terminal configuration in a Physical Property Measurement System by Quantum Design. The high field transport properties were measured at LNCMI Grenoble using a 3 He cryostat up to 29 T. The high-pressure environment was achieved by diamond anvil cell (DAC) with patterned electrodes on top of the anvil. A thin flake exfoliated from the bulk CsV 3 Sb 5 was transferred onto the patterned electrodes. A layer of h-BN was added above the thin flake for encapsulation and the thickness of the thin flakes was determined by a dual-beam focused ion beam system (Scios 2 DualBeam by Thermo Scientific) Band structure calculations The WIEN2k package 