Van der Waals (vdW) assembly allows for the creation of Josephson junctions in an atomically sharp interface between two exfoliated Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212) flakes that are twisted relative to each other. In a narrow range of angles close to 45 • , the junction exhibits a regime where time-reversal symmetry can be spontaneously broken and it can be used to encode an inherently protected qubit called flowermon. In this work we investigate the physics emerging when two such junctions are integrated in a SQuID circuit threaded by a magnetic flux. We show that the flowermon qubit regime is maintained up to a finite critical value of the magnetic field and, under appropriate conditions, it is protected against both charge and flux noise. For larger external fluxes, the interplay between the inherent twisted d-wave nature of the order parameter and the external magnetic flux enables the implementation of different artificial atoms, including a flux-biased protected qubit and a supersymmetric quantum circuit. Van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures, realized through the exfoliation and assembly of single atomic layers, are artificial quantum materials having widely tunable electronic and optical properties. Within these structures, the interplay of topological effects, strong correlation, and confinement can be precisely controlled by adjusting the interlayer twist angle yielding a wealth of interesting phenomena including unconventional superconductivity, 1 topological ferromagnetic order, Recently, the development of innovative fabrication techniques allowed the isolation of atomically thin Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212) crystals Capacitive fluctuations, arising from charge noise or stray electric fields, stand out as one of the most critical sources of noise limiting the coherence of many currently used superconducting qubits such as the transmon. In this Letter, we present a novel quantum device illustrated in Fig. To derive the circuit's Hamiltonian, we begin by expressing the Josephson potential of a single vdW cuprate Josephson junction with an interlayer twist angle θ as the sum of the first and second harmonic Josephson tunneling as follows Here, φ indicates the superconducting phase difference across the junction and higher-order harmonics are neglected assuming a weak tunnel coupling between the two flakes. In the above equation, E Jθ quantifies the energy associated with the tunneling of one Cooper pair across the junction. As discussed in Refs. 14 and 48 and confirmed experimentally in Ref. 7, E Jθ exhibits a strong dependence on θ : Additionally, E κ quantifies the energy associated with two Cooper pair tunneling. This term does not vanish at θ = 45 • and is predicted to have a weaker dependence on the twist angle, where E J i θ i and E κ i with i = 1, 2 quantifying the tunnelling amplitudes of junctions 1 and 2, respectively, and φ x = πΦ x /Φ 0 denotes the normalized flux with Φ 0 = h/2e indicating the flux quantum. Note that E J 1 θ 1 and E J 2 θ 2 depend on the corresponding twist angles as dictated by Eq. (2), i.e. In Eq. ( Recasting the Josephson potential accordingly yields: valid up to second-order corrections in the twist angle asymmetry d θ = (θ 2 -θ 1 )/2. In the above equation we introduced the effective tunneling energies, and where we denoted the asymmetry between the junctions as and assuming φ x ∈ [0, π/2], we obtain that 49 (i) for Y > 1, the potential exhibits a symmetric double-well structure with minima at φ = ± arccos(1/Y ) as displayed in Fig. where hω 01 is the qubit energy splitting and S n g (ω) the spectral density of the capacitive noise. Furthermore, since the flux does not substantially affect the quasi-degeneracy of the levels, flux-noise induced dephasing, where S Φ x (ω) is the spectral density of the flux-noise, is also exponentially suppressed in this region, 49 as illustrated by the plot of |∂ Φ x ω 01 | shown in Fig. As the external flux increases above a threshold value corresponding to Y = 1, indicated by the green curve in Fig. The important change in the dynamics of the system happens when the external flux crosses a threshold value in which the second minimum at φ = π begins to significantly affect the lowest excitation of the qubit (see Fig. is of special significance as it corresponds to a supersymmetry point of the Hamiltonian. At this point, the spectrum decomposes into two decoupled subspaces having opposite symmetries under the parity operator K which satisfies K φ K = -φ and implements the time-reversal symmetry for Φ x = 0. The ground-state is K-symmetric and non-degenerate while all excited levels feature a pair of degenerate states with opposite symmetry. Specifically, the two lowest excited states, with wavefunctions corresponding to a plasmonic first excited state centered in the φ = 0 well, and a Gaussian-like state centered at the φ = π well, are exactly degenerate at this point. For flux values above the supersymmetry point, Φ x > Φ SUSY x , the ground state remains a Guassian around the φ = 0 well while the first excited state becomes a Gaussian centered at the φ = π well. This marks the flux-biased region, in which the ground and first excited states are both symmetric under the parity operator K and the matrix element n 01 vanishes exactly. For similar reasons, however, the flux-derivative of the qubit frequency becomes finite, yielding a finite Γ φ,Φ x as shown in Fig. It is worth noticing that in all regimes, the dephasing induced by charge noise and the relaxation induced by fluxnoise are suppressed by the large shunt capacitance and symmetry considerations, We now consider the role of the asymmetries between the junctions described by the parameters d, d κ and d θ according to Eq. ( We therefore introduce the critical flux values φ ± x such that Y (φ ± x ) = ∓1 given by satisfying φ - x < π/4 < φ + x and we distinguish three cases, as depicted in Fig. For this reason we refer to this regime as twist-based. FIG. The circuit Hamiltonian can be cast as where E C is the charging energy, n indicates the charge conjugate to φ and δ n g (t) accounts for charge fluctuations due to external electric fields. In this section we set the average ⟨δ n g ⟩ at zero. In order to discuss the relaxation and dephasing rates induced by charge and flux-noise, we focus on the first two energy levels hω 0 and hω 1 and the corresponding wavefunctions |Ψ 0 ⟩ and |Ψ 1 ⟩ shown in Fig. As the flux overcomes the threshold value φ SUSY x the system enters the flux-biased regime and the spectrum undergoes significant changes. Namely, the lowest excited state becomes K-symmetric and its center moves from φ = 0 to φ = π. As stated in the main text, and demonstrated in Sec. IV, φ SUSY x is a supersymmetry point. As shown in Fig. . ω 01 scales linearly with φ x . The relaxation and the dephasing rates Γ 1 and Γ φ induced by charge and flux-noise can be estimated within Fermi's golden rule as and with S n g (ω) and S Φ x (ω) denoting the noise spectral densities and The behavior of the rates in the different regimes is therefore strongly influenced by the matrix elements f i j and n i j that in turn depend on the symmetry and shape of the wavefunctions. ∼ π/2. The behavior seems essentially the same also for ⟨n g ⟩ ̸ = 0 as shown Fig. Being ∂ Φ x Û ∼ (cos φ + cos 2 φ) a K-symmetric operator, the matrix element f 01 vanishes in the twist-based regime and in the plasmonic one for ⟨n g ⟩ = 0. In the flux-biased regime, for E C ≪ E J , it is also suppressed due to the localization of the wavefunctions around φ = 0 and φ = π as shown in Fig. Following the route outlined in Refs. [1, 2] it is possible to show that this Hamiltonian can be written as Ĥ ∼ Q2 , defining Q as and fixing the flux so that the following condition is satisfied It is important to note that the operator Q is Hermitian only if -E κ cos(2φ x ) is real, therefore, independently on the value of E C and E κ , for Eq. 15 to hold we must have π/4 < φ x < π/2. It then follows that In particular for θ = 43 • , α = 0.1 and E J /E C = 2000 as in the main text, φ SUSY x ∼ 0.414 π in accordance with Fig. V. ±π/2 QUBIT AND 0 -π QUBIT Here we consider the structure of the spectrum and the symmetry of the eigenstates at θ ∼ 45 • , φ x = 0 and at φ x = π/2. In both these situations the first harmonic Josephson tunneling vanishes while the second remains finite and dominates over the charging energy so that the circuit implements, respectively, a ±π/2 and a 0 -π qubit. The ±π/2 Hamiltonian can be cast as while the 0 -π Hamiltonian reads Ĥ0-π = 4E C n2 -E κ cos(2 φ) . The π-periodicity of the potential implies that the Hamiltonian commutes with the Hermitian operator Π = (-1) n = e iπ n. This property yields a separation of the Hilbert space in eigenstates that are composed by superposition of even charge states, symmetric under Π, and eigenstates featuring only odd charge states, antisymmetric under Π. In addition, the invariance of the potential under K forces the eigenstates to have a definite K-parity. Summarizing for both Hamiltonians we have the following symmetries: Π = (-1) n = e iπ n and K such that K φ K = -φ . In both cases we can therefore label every eigenstate by a principal quantum number m, the parity s p under Π, and the parity s k under K, so that 