Topological superconductivity has attracted significant attention due to its potential applications in quantum computation, but its experimental realization remains challenging. Recently, monolayer T d -MoTe2 was observed to exhibit gate tunable superconductivity, and its in-plane upper critical field exceeds the Pauli limit. Here, we show that an in-plane magnetic field beyond the Pauli limit can drive the superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe2 into a topological superconductor. The topological superconductivity arises from the interplay between the in-plane Zeeman coupling and the unique Ising plus in-plane SOC in the monolayer T d -MoTe2. The Ising plus in-plane SOC plays the essential role to enable the effective px + ipy pairing. Importantly, as the essential Ising plus in-plane SOC in the monolayer T d -MoTe2 is generated by an in-plane polar field, our proposal demonstrates that applying an in-plane magnetic field to a gate tunable 2D superconductor with an in-plane polar axis is a feasible way to realize topological superconductivity. Topological superconductors hosting unpaired Majorana zero modes are known as a potential platform for topological quantum computation MoTe 2 is a layered transition metal dichaocogenide that exhibits rich topological and superconductivity properties The monolayer T d -MoTe 2 involves a special type of SOC that is a mixture of the Ising SOC and in-plane SOC Here, we propose that the gate tunable superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 can be driven into a topological superconductor by applying an in-plane magnetic field. We show that the unique Ising plus in-plane SOC in the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 is essential to the in-plane magnetic field induced TSC phase. For the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 with a polar axis tilted to its atomic layer To illustrate the essential role of the Ising plus in-plane SOC in our TSC realization in the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , we first start with reviewing the seminal scheme of effective p x + ip y pairing in the Rashba superconductor with ε k being the band energy in terms of the Bloch wave vector k, μ being the chemical potential, g k denoting the SOC, and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) being the Pauli matrices in the spin space. The last term in Eq. 1 represents the magnetic field induced Zeeman coupling, where g = 2 is the Landé g factor and μ B is the Bohr magneton. For a 2D electron gas with a z-directional polar axis, an electric field along the polar axis generates the Rashba SOC g k = α (k y , -k x , 0). The Rashba SOC pins the electrons' spins to the in-plane direction and gives a helical spin texture as shown in Fig. One long standing challenge for the TSC realization in the Rashba superconductor is known to be the orbital de- pairing effects introduced by the z-directional magnetic field with R being the orthogonal matrix that represents the point group transformation. In the quasi-2D case of atomic thickness, it has been pointed out that only C magnetic field driven TSC phase focuses on the intrinsic 2D superconductivity with the C 1 , C 1v or C 2 symmetry. Importantly, the Ising plus in-plane SOC in the quasi-2D system with the C 1v symmetry, as can be seen from the spin texture of g k = (λ x k y , λ y k x , λ z k y ) in Fig. The crystal structure of the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 hosts only one in-plane mirror symmetry along x as is shown in Fig. Since the TSC phase arises from the effective p x + ip y pairing in the Fermi surface that encloses the time reversal invariant momenta with m x = 0.75m e , m y = 1.07m e being the effective mass (here m e is the electron mass), and λ x = 2.94×10 The monolayer T d -MoTe 2 is found to enter the superconductivity phase with the transition temperature being 5K∼8K where τ z is the Pauli matrix in the particle-hole space and ∆ denotes the pairing order parameter. Similar to the Rashba superconductor, the superconducting state in Eq. 4 undergoes the topological phase transition and enters the TSC phase for 1 2 gμ B |B| > ∆ 2 + μ 2 . Specifically, at μ = 0, the topological phase transition is estimated to occur around B = √ 2B P The above analysis of the in-plane magnetic field driven TSC phase based on the effective Hamiltonian of the Γ pocket gets further supported by the mean field phase diagram calculation. At a given temperature T , the evolution of the superconducting pairing order parameter ∆ with an applied in-plane magnetic field can be determined by minimizing the free energy density (see the methods section) with U , β = 1/ (k B T ) and Ω denoting the intra-band attractive interaction, the thermodynamic beta and the volume of the system respectively. Here ξ ν,k are the eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian that is derived from a twelve-band tight binding model of the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 (see the methods section). In the calculation, the intra-band attractive interaction U is determined by fitting the superconducting critical temperature at zero magnetic field to be 7.6K. The chemical potential μ is fixed to be at the energy of Γ that locates at the top of the hole bands. The resulting B-T phase diagram of the superconducting state is shown in Fig. In reality, the gate tunability in the superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 facilitates our proposal of the inplane magnetic field driven TSC. First, the gate tunability enables the conversion of the superconducting state between the electron type and the hole type Given a 2D TSC phase in the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , one can further cut it into a quasi-1D wire with its width smaller than the decay length of the Majorana edge state. The decay length of the Majorana edge state is estimated to be about 300 nm for the pristine topological superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 at B = 2.1∆/ (gμ B ). In such a quasi-1D superconducting wire, a pair of robust Majorana zero modes live in the ends of the wire For our proposed in-plane magnetic field driven TSC phase in the superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , we show that one can measure the evolution of DOS with B to identify the topological phase transition. It is known that the topological phase transition must undergo the gap close and reopen in the BdG quasiparticle energy spectrum. Given a small B, the gap in the BdG energy spectrum is not closed yet, so the electronic DOS exhibits a U-shape with zero DOS in the gap. At the critical value of B that enables the topological phase transition, the BdG quasiparticle has the Dirac cone like dispersion with the gap closing at k = 0, so the resulting DOS becomes the V-shape. After the topological phase transition, the gap reopens so the electronic DOS turns back to the U-shape. In Fig. After the topological phase transition, the key feature In the magnetic field driven topological phase transition, the electronic DOS shows the gap closing and reopening. At the topological phase transition with the gap closing at k = 0, the DOS exhibits the V-shape (red colored) as shown in the inset. During the topological phase transition, the electronic DOS change from the U-shape to the V-shape and then back to the U-shape. (b) The surface electronic DOS calculated at the edge along x direction. After the topological phase transition, a plateau centered at the zero energy emerges, which corresponds to the chiral Majorana edge states with the linear energy dispersion in the topological superconductivity. The surface electronic DOS after the topological phase transition are colored in red. of the TSC phase is known to be the chiral Majorana edge state that appears within the gap. At the edges of the sample, the local electronic DOS in the gap is expected to get strongly enhanced by the chiral Majorana edge states. By calculating the local electronic DOS at the edge of the supeconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 (see the Supplementary Note 3), we find that after the topological phase transition, a plateau in the DOS emerges within the gap of the BdG quasiparticle energy spectrum as shown in Fig. In the above sections, we have proposed that applying an in-plane magnetic field to the superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 is promising to achieve the TSC phase. In the proposal, the Ising plus in-plane SOC plays the crucial role in the TSC realization. The Ising SOC component is responsible for the enhancement of the in-plane B c2 to guarantee the finite superconducting pairing after the magnetic field driven topological phase transition. It is evident that a larger Ising SOC component is more favorable for the TSC realization. For the moderate Ising SOC component in the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , one can consider to put it in contact with another 2D material with strong Ising SOC so that the Ising SOC component in the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 can get proximityenhanced In our proposal, for the Ising plus in-plane SOC g k = (λ x k y , λ y k x , λ z k y ) in the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , we suggest to apply the in-plane magnetic field along the inplane mirror axis, namely the x direction, to realize the TSC phase. In the case of applying an in-plane magnetic field along the y direction, the whole system respects the in-plane mirror symmetry, so the y-directional magnetic field can only lead to the mirror symmetry protected nodal point degeneracies at k y = 0 plane. It indicates that the fully gapped TSC phase requires the applied inplane magnetic field to have a nonzero x-directional component. For the applied in-plane magnetic field slightly deviating from the x direction, the magnetic field can still induce the topological phase transition, but the resulting topological BdG energy spectrum is a bit tilted in the k x direction (see the Supplementary Note 3 and Supplementary Fig. The crucial element in our proposal is the Ising plus inplane SOC in a gate tunable 2D superconductor. For the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , its Ising plus in-plane SOC arises from the C 1v symmetry. Apart from the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 , the bilayer T d -MoTe 2 also belongs to the C 1v point group and exhibits gate tunable superconductivity In a brief summary, we propose that for the gate tunable superconducting monolayer T d -MoTe 2 with the C 1v symmetry, the TSC phase can be realized by applying an in-plane magnetic field. Based on the symmetry analysis, we point out that 2D superconductors with an in-plane polar axis are good platforms to host the TSC driven by an in-plane magnetic field. The band structure of monolayer T d -MoTe 2 is calculated by first-principle DFT as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) using the projected-augmented wave method (PAW) After the first principle DFT calculation is done, a twelve-band tight binding model of monolayer T d -MoTe 2 is built through Wannier function construction by using the Wannier 90 package Given the twelve-band tight binding model of monolayer T d -MoTe 2 in the Wannier basis, the Hamiltonian in the presence of an effective pairing attractive interaction can be written as where c † k,o,σ is the creation operator and h os,o ′ s ′ (k) denotes the hopping matrix. Here o is the orbital index, s =↑ / ↓ represents the spin index, and i = x, y, z denotes the spatial components of magnetic field. In the mean field approximation, the partition function for the superconducting pairing state can be obtained through the path integral formalism 81 where is the Matsubara Green's function with the BdG Hamitonian taking the form Here h (k) = h (k) + 1 2 gμ B B • σ is the twelve-band tight binding Hamiltonian matrix that takes into account the Zeeman coupling. The free energy density F = -1 βΩ log Z gives Eq. 5 with ξ ν,k being the eigenvalues of h BdG (k) in Eq. 8. The self-consistent mean field equation of the pairing order parameter is given by ∂F ∂∆ = 0. In the calculation, at B = 0T, we set T c = 7.6K and then the effective attraction U can be determined by solving ∂F ∂∆ = 0. By minimizing the free energy density at given T and in-plane magnetic field, the phase diagram of the superconducting pairing state can be obtained. In the presence of an out of plane electric field at E z =0.05, 0.1, and 0.15 V/ Å , we perform the first principle DFT calculations and use the Wannier 90 package to obtain the band structures as depicted in Supplementary Fig. where ε b/t denotes the relative perimitivity in the bottom/top region, and the distances d b/t are denoted in Fig. We know that the chemical potential of a two-dimensional electronic system is determined by the electron density. We also know that a D z field creates an electric field E z = D z /ε 0 . As a result, the dual-gate setup can tune the chemical potential and E z field individually by tuning the top and bottom gate voltage. Given E z = 0.1 V/ Å, the in-plane magnetic field induced Zeeman coupling opens a Zeeman gap at Γ as shown in Supplementary Fig. In the experimental accessible range of E z ∈ [-0.1, 0.1] V/ Å, we calculate the band structures of the monolayer T d -MoTe 2 and fit them by the effective hole pocket Hamiltonian around the Γ in Eq. 3. The strength of the Ising plus in-plane SOC as a function of the applied E z field is plotted in Supplementary Fig. 