The observance of vortex and anti-vortex effects in bulk crystals can prove the existence of phase-disordered superconductivity in the bulk. To gain insights into the mechanisms that govern superconducting transition in copper oxide high-transition temperature (T c ) superconductors, this study investigated the transport properties of underdoped Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 10+δ (Bi-2223) bulk single crystals. The I-V characteristics results and the typical tailing behavior owing to the temperature dependence of in-plane resistivity (ρ ab ) were consistent with the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) transition characteristics. Thus, with increasing temperature, copper oxide high-T c superconductors transitioned to their normal state owing to destruction of their phase correlations, although a finite Cooper pair density was prevalent at T c . Further, magnetization measurements were performed to determine the temperature dependence of the irreversible magnetic field B irr . Consequently, the mechanism governing the KT transition-like superconducting transition in this bulk system was elucidated. These results support the extreme strong-coupling models for high-T c superconductivity in cuprates. In conventional Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors, the amplitude of the order parameter disappears as the temperature increases till the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) is reached. However, in copperoxide high-T c superconductors, the order parameter phase is destroyed despite its finite amplitude, which resuls in a transition to a normal state In two-dimensional (2D) superconductors, at high temperatures approaching T c , the free vortices (circulating supercurrents are counterclockwise) and anti-vortices (circulating super-currents are clockwise) are thermally excited in equal numbers. Cosequently, the long-range phase ordering of superconductivity is disrupted. However, below a certain temperature (T KT ), vortex-anti-vortex pairs are formed individually, which undergo a phase transition to a substantial superconducting state. This is referred to as the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) transition Several studies have focused on the KT transition in cuprate high-T c superconductors, on 1-unit-cell-thick YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) ultra-thin films Multilayered high-T c cuprates are suitable for exploring the KT transition in bulk because the inner CuO 2 planes are ideally flat and underdoped compared to the outer CuO 2 planes High-quality Bi-2223 single crystals were grown employing the traveling solvent floating zone (TSFZ) method To obtain the I-V characteristics, pulse measurements were performed to minimize heat generation under a high current bias. A pulse period and width of 50 and 1 ms (thus, a duty ratio of 2 %), respectively, were used (Appendix A). The in-plane resistivity ρ ab (T ) was measured using the DC 4-terminal method. Further, the magnetic susceptibility was measured using a superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System). Irreversible magnetic fields (B irr ) were obtained through measurements of the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility under various magnetic fields (B ∥ c) up to 7 T for both zero-field cooling (ZFC) and cooling in a magnetic field (FC). All the temperature sweep rates were set as 1 K/min. Figure The excited free vortex and anti-vortex were all paired at the transition temperature of the KT transition, T KT , such that the electrical resistance was zero at the limit of the zero bias current. However, under a finite bias current, the vortex and the antivortex were pulled apart in opposite directions by the Lorentz force. Consequently, the number n f ree of free vortices and anti-vortices became finite and resistance was generated. In this case, the relationship between n f ree ∝ I πK was derived Figure The KT theory predicts the existence of free vortices and antivortices at T > T KT , which facilitates the associated vortex flow resistance. Owing to the vortex flow resistance being proportional to the density of free vortices and anti-vortices, Halperin and Nelson To generate the vortex/anti-vortex states, the electronic system must be extremely 2D in nature. To confirm this, this study investigated the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility (χ) of underdoped single crystals (UD Bi-2223) annealed under conditions similar to UD2 Bi-2223 under various magnetic fields (B ∥ c) (Fig. The temperature dependence of B irr is plotted in Fig. The anisotropy of cuprate superconductors is generally dependent on doping. The primary reason for this is believed to be the inhomogeneity of the superconducting order parameter in k-space As mentioned above, in the 2D vortex state on the lowtemperature, high-field side, B irr exhibits the following relationship: over a wide temperature range in a material-independent manner, where B 0 and T 0 are constants. However, on the lowesttemperature side, B irr rapidly increases toward the upper critical magnetic field (B c2 (0)). The parameter values were obtained by fitting Eq. ( Here, we discuss the origin of the KT transition-like phenomena. Bulk cuprate high-T c superconductors can be considered as a system of stacked single films with Josephson coupling. Thus, the system can be described by the 3D-XY model Therefore, a model beyond the simple 3D-XY model is required. Two sources of force exist between vortices in adjacent planes: Josephson coupling and electromagnetic coupling of the current loops that form the vortices. The 3D-XY model only considers the former. In cases wherein the former is extremely small, the latter becomes dominant. A study Alternatively, we considered the in-plane inhomogeneity proposed by Geshkenbein Geshkenbein et al. assumed that a high T c ( > T c0 ) grain of size R, spacing d, and therefore, areal density x G = R 2 /d 2 exists in the normal conducting matrix. When high T c grains are diluted (d ≫ R) and placed in a zero magnetic field, the Josephson binding energy (E J ) can be expressed as E J (T, φ) = E 0 J e -d/ξ n F d (φ) where N c is the number of conduction planes over which the grains are extended. In Bi-2223, three CuO 2 planes form one conduction plane. In contrast, in Bi-2212, two CuO 2 planes form one conduction plane. N c is assumed to be ≈ 1. Considering that the Fermi velocity (v F ) is universal in cuprates Because the Josephson coupling between grains is significantly suppressed in a magnetic field, a formula equivalent to Eq. ( In fact, nanometer-sized inhomogeneities in the electronic state within the CuO 2 plane have been reported in recent years using scanning tunneling microscopy In the previous reports, T KT was much lower (30 and 16 K, in ref. Here, we exploited the temperature dependence of B irr to estimate B cr , and numerically analyzed B irr for OPT Bi-2212 and UD Bi-2223. We assumed a value close to the vortex-glass transition field B g of ref. We considered the in-plane inhomogeneity as a possible cause of the observed KT transition-like behavior. However, we do not rule out other possibilities such as the Korshunov's model The KT transition is a topological phase transition specific to a 2D system, and is considered to not occur in bulk (3D) systems. In this study, we revealed a KT transition-like superconducting transition in underdoped Bi-2223 bulk single crystals. The mechanisms governing this phenomena were discussed in terms of extreme 2D nature and/or in-plane inhomogeneity specific to this system. Consequently, the results provided new and compelling evidence that, in copper-oxide high-T c superconductors, a phase-disordered superconductivity, wherein Cooper pairs exist but their phases do not settle, exists at temperatures higher than T c . This result constrains the theoretical model on high-T c superconductivity. Measurements of the current(I)-voltage(V) characteristics of a bulk sample and the determination of the power exponent α (V ∝ I α ) necessitate a current of several tens of mA. Such a large current may cause Joule heating within the sample, even in the case of pulse measurements Figure However, as shown in Fig. Figure Appendix C: Information on the quality of the samples Figure Figure Figure Appendix D: Why we attribute the change of α from 1 to 3 to the KT transition We have observed the change of α from one to three in Fig. Similar I-V characteristics have been reported in cuprate superconductors For superconducting practical wires, the power exponent nvalue of the I-V characteristic (V ∝ I n ) indicates how rapidly the I-V curve increases after exceeding the critical current value (I c ≈ 50-100 A) at temperatures below T c . However, under normal conditions (in the absence of serious damage owing to bending stress, tensile strain, etc.), n ≈ 10 -60 Therefore, in this study, the change in α from one to three near T c under zero magnetic field is sufficient evidence for the occurrence of KT transition without any other interpretation. For convenience, we estimated α via power law fitting for the I-V characteristics (V ∝ I α ) below T c in the same manner as above T c (see, Fig. Figure 