We study the Josephson effect in a superconductor/altermagnet/superconductor (S/AM/S) junction. We find anomalous phenomena including 0-π transition as well as multi-nodal current-phase relations. Similar to d-wave superconductor, d-wave altermagnet can support φ junction where free energy minima locate neither φ = 0 nor ±π with double degeneracy. These properties can be tunable by parameters, e.g., the exchange energy, the orientation of crystal axis, the length, and the chemical doping of altermagnet. These rich features lead to accessible functionality of S/AM/S junction. Introduction.-Recently, altermagnet (AM) Due to the vanishing net macroscopic magnetization, AM provides a new benefit in combing with superconductors and may have intriguing implications. Now, research on the transport properties in junctions consisting of AM and superconductors become a hot topic It can be shown that in a S/AM/S junction, the current-phase relation (CPR) has symmetry I(φ) = -I(-φ), which excludes the possibility of φ 0 junction. However, to the best of our knowledge, studies so far reveal only two types of CPR in the S/AM/S junction: 0-and π-junctions. Whether the altermagnetic ordering can generate more exotic CPR, like φ junction In this letter, we study the Josephson effect of a twodimensional clean S/AM/S junction, as depicted in Fig. Model and Formalism.-Our model consists of a dwave altermagnet between two semi-infinite superconductors as shown in Fig. Here, μ(x) = μ + δμΘ(x)Θ(Lx) is the chemical potential. δμ is a difference of chemical potential between S and AM which can be changeable by chemical doping. ŝi (τ i ) is the Pauli matrix in spin (Nambu) space. M k denotes the altermagnetism and without loss of generality, the Neel vector of AM is along z-axis with J = JΘ(x)Θ(Lx) and J the strength of the exchange energy of AM. α is the angle between the lobe of the direction of AM and normal to the interface, see Fig. where φ is the macroscopic superconducting phase difference. We further adopt the BCS relation for its temperature dependence: ∆ (T ) = ∆ 0 tanh(1.74 T c /T -1) with ∆ 0 = 1.76k B T c , T c the critical temperature, and temperature T = k B -1 β -1 . We have the barrier potential U = U I [δ (x) + δ (x -L)], where U I is the fixed barrier strength at the interface between S and AM and we define Z = mU I /( 2 k F ). The equilibrium Josephson current can be calculated by Furusaki-Tsukada formula Due to the translational invariance along y-axis, the y-component of the wave vector k y = 2mμ/ 2 sin θ = k F sin θ is preserved, where θ is the injection angle from -π/2 to π/2. Thus the system can be regarded as multiple transverse transport channels. We consider a very wide sample W ≫ L where W is the junction width. So the summation over transverse momenta k y can be replaced by an integration over θ. For a fixed θ, we consider the four types of local Andreev reflection coefficients by quasiparticle injections from the left S: a spin-↑(↓) electron to a spin-↓(↑) hole: a e,↑(↓) and a spin-↑(↓) hole to a spin-↓(↑) electron: a h,↑(↓) . The coefficients a e,↑(↓) , a h,↑(↓) are obtained by boundary conditions Here, into Matsubara frequencies ω n = πk B T (2n + 1), (n = 0, ±1, ±2....). We consider the short junction L ≪ ξ where ξ = v F /∆ 0 is the coherence length and choose ∆ 0 /μ = 0.01. The Fermi wavevector can be estimated as k F ≈ 10 10 m -1 so that the typical junction length would be several nm in our model. We finally normalize I to 2eR N I/(π∆ 0 ) where R N is the resistance of the junction in normal state, i.e., of the normal metal (N)/AM/N junction. Symmetry analysis-Before showing the numerical results, we analyze the general characteristic of CPR from the symmetry point of view. We can decompose the Josephson current into a series of different orders of Josephson coupling We consider the fourfold rotation operator C 4 corresponding to a rotation angle π/2 with respect to z-axis which makes k x → k y , k y → -k x , ŝz → ŝz . The altermagnetism flip its sign under C 4 . Using the time reversal operation T = -iŝ y K with K the complex conjugation operator, we can make k x → -k x , k y → -k y , ŝz → -ŝ z and φ → -φ. Thus a combined operation with T i.e., M = T C 4 will give rise to Thus, the energy spectrum E and the free energy F is an even function of φ: F (φ) = F (-φ) while the Josephson current I (φ) ∝ ∂ φ F (φ) has the property I (φ) = -I (-φ) for arbitrary α. It prohibits the term J n cos(nφ) in the CPR of our system in the absence of spin-orbit couplings Anomalous CPR-We calculate the current-phase relation of the Josephson junction in Fig. To see the feasibility that φ junction can be widely formed and tuned in this setup, we consider the chemical potential difference between S and AM which can be controlled by chemical doping in AM, like copper oxides In Fig. In Fig. Conclusions.-To summarize, we have studied the Josephson effect in a superconductor/altermagnet/superconductor junction. It is found that anomalous phenomena including 0-π transition as well as multi-nodal current-phase relations appear. We can design φ junction by tuning the exchange coupling, the orientation of crystal axis, the length, and the chemical doping of altermagnet. These rich features serve as a guide to designing quantum two-level systems with large tunability in Josephson systems 