We study quasi-one dimensional wires of two-band superconductors driven by an electrical current. We find that the onset of dissipation can occur with the nucleation of time-connected phase slips (t-PS). The topological structure of the t-PS consists of two phase slips (one in each order parameter) separated in time and connected via an interband vortex string along the time direction. This shows as a two-peak structure in voltage vs. time. We discuss the conditions for observing t-PS, depending on the interband coupling strength and the relaxation time scales for each order parameter. Abrikosov vortices In the last two decades, the discovery of multiband superconductivity in MgB 2 In one-dimensional two-band superconducting wires the existence of phase textures and topological solitons of the interband phase difference θ 2 -θ 1 has been extensively studied In this work we address the dynamics of two-band superconducting wires at the onset of dissipation, above their critical current. We analyze the topological nature of the induced phase slips and their dependence on interband coupling strength by solving numerically a time dependent two-band Ginzburg-Landau equation. We find that the induced PS in the two bands nucleate at the same place but are separated in time. They are connected through a topological singularity in the interband phase difference that is oriented along the time direction, and we name these nontrivial topological objects as "timeconnected phase slips" (t-PS). The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equations to be solved, boundary conditions and parameters to be considered. In Section III we report our results for the current-voltage curves and characterize the space and time dependence of the induced PS. In Section IV the topological nature of the t-PS is described in detail and in Section V we report their dependence on interband coupling and relaxation parameters. Finally, in Section VI we summarize and discuss our findings. For a two-component superconductor, the free energy is F = d 3 rf (r) where α 1 , α 2 , β 1 , β 2 , m 1 , m 2 are the Ginzburg-Landau expansion coefficients, A is the vector potential, B is the magnetic field, and γ is the interband Josephson coupling parameter. We study the dynamics near the critical temperature T ≲ T c using the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equations generalized to a two-band superconductor where Γ i = ħ 2 2miDi with D i the diffusion coefficients, σ is the normal conductivity, φ is the electric potential, and J the electric current density. We will take A = 0, since there is no applied external magnetic fields and the effect of the self-induced magnetic field in the one-dimensional wire is negligible. We normalize Ψ i by Ψ 10 = -α 1 /β 1 , length scale by ξ 1 = ħ 2 /2m 1 (-α 1 ), time by t 0 = 4πσλ 2 1 /c 2 = σm 1 β 1 /2e 2 (-α 1 ), electric potential φ by v 0 = ħ/2et 0 and current density J by J 0 = ħσ/2et 0 ξ 1 . With this normalization the TDGL equations in a one-dimensional wire are: and We use the convention that Ψ 1 corresponds to the 'strong' band and Ψ 2 to the 'weak' band and consider the case that both bands are superconducting, meaning that α 1 (T ) < α 2 (T ) < 0, and thus 0 < a < 1. Also, for consistency with the 'weak' band choice, we consider parameters such that the second band has smaller equilibrium gap, (Ψ 20 /Ψ 10 ) 2 = a/b < 1 and larger coherence length, ξ 2 2 /ξ 2 1 = k/a > 1. Furthermore, weak interband coupling means γ < |α 2 | < |α 1 |, i.e. g < a < 1. In contrast to single-band superconductors for which the relaxation constant is η ≈ 5.79 We integrate numerically Eq.( where ∆ j = Ψ eq j is the equilibrium order parameter of the j-band at zero current, obtained numerically by solving the equilibrium homogeneous equations, For fixed current density J, φ(x, t) is found by direct integration of Eq. ( We have calculated numerically the time-averaged voltage per unit length V = ⟨v(t)⟩ [shown in Fig. We focus in the range j c < J < j 2d , where there is a finite voltage while both bands are superconducting. In order to understand the nucleation of PS near the onset of dissipation, J ≳ j c , we study the order parameters |Ψ 1 (x, t)| 2 and |Ψ 2 (x, t)| 2 as functions of x and t. We find that PS nucleate at the center of the wire, where each order parameter vanishes periodically in time. In Fig. Since superconductivity vanishes at different times in the two bands, we expect that the phases θ i of the two order parameters will be different. To quantify the occurrence of interband phase textures we evaluate the interband "Josephson current": The total integrated interband current should be zero, L 0 G(x, t)dx = 0, since there is no net current applied between bands We also plot in Fig. At larger currents (but for J < j 2d ), more PS centers can nucleate. In Fig. Space-time loop for the calculation of the phaseslip vorticities νi(x, t), as defined in Eq.( Following Ivlev and Kopin with the space-time coordinate ⃗ ρ = (x, t). We can calculate local vorticities ν i (x, t) considering infinitesimal loops along closed paths corresponding to the discretization distances dx, dt. In this case, the closed space-time line integral is obtained as a oriented sum along the four segments of the loop shown in Fig. where the link integers are m i,μ = -nint( δμθi 2π ), with nint(u) the nearest integer of u. We then obtain, where the point (x, t) is located in the interior of the considered rectangle. The integers m i,x (x, t) are defined in the directed link between (x, t) and (x+dx, t), meaning that when the summation path goes from (x + dx, t) to (x, t) they are added as -m i,x (x, t); similar convention is taken for the m i,t (x, t) integers. In the two-band superconductor one can also define a vortex string (i.e. a "Josephson" vortex In this way, it is possible to quantify [56] an interband vorticity taking a closed loop that goes from a point x a to x b in the 1-band and returns from x b to x a in the 2-band, as We can then calculate a local vorticity in a closed small path that goes from x to x + dx and back, see Fig. where we have also restricted to the (-π, π) interval the interband phase differences ∆θ, redefined as ∆θ → [∆θ] = ∆θ + 2πm ∆ , with the link integers m ∆ = -nint( ∆θ 2π ). We also define the total vorticities along the wire at a given time, both the phase-slip vorticities n i (t) = x ν i (x, t) and the interband vorticities n γ (t) = x ν γ (x, t). From Eq. ( where the sums are taken over the L/dx segments in the grid. The second line in Eq. ( where the second line vanishes since θ 2 = θ 1 at x = 0 and x = L due to Eq.( We plot in Fig. The t-PS are characterized by a two-peak structure in the time dependence of the voltage v(t), as can be seen in Fig. There is first a shallow peak that corresponds to the PS in the weak band, and after the time t γ there is a sharp peak that corresponds to the PS in the strong band. This agrees with the electric field dependence shown in Fig. In Fig. More interestingly, we can quantify the average time length of the t-PS. We estimate numerically the average time-length of time-vortices as tγ = δt⟨n γ ⟩/⟨n i ⟩. (δt⟨n t ⟩ is total time-length of time-vortices, and tγ is the timelength per t-PS). When there is only one PS center in the sample, with vorticity 1, tγ is the time-length of the t-PS. We plot in Fig. To study the dependence of the t-PS on the interband coupling g, it is more convenient to work at a fixed voltage V than at fixed current J. The current j c for the onset of voltage changes when changing the system parameters. If J is fixed and g is varied, the voltage will change with g due to the dependence of j c with g. On the other hand, by fixing the voltage V , we are guaranteed to work at a fixed time-scale, given by the expected time period for phase slips, τ V ∝ 1/V . Numerically, we impose the fixed voltage V by solving the second order equation for φ(x, t): with the boundary condition φ(0, t) = 0, φ(L, t) = -V L. In this case the current depends on time, and it can be calculated as Simultaneously, the TDGL equations for Ψ i (x, t) are solved with the superconducting bank boundary conditions, as in the previous sections. We fix a low voltage, near the onset of dissipation, and plot in Fig. ] for the case of low current, J ≪ j c (no dissipation, v = 0), in the limit of small coupling, g ≪ a; ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are the equilibrium order parameters. Fig. We find that the t-PS can occur in an interval g 1 < g < g 2 . Below a coupling g 1 the value of tγ saturates to a constant, while at g 2 the time tγ vanishes. The lower limit g 1 corresponds to the condition that t γ has to be smaller than the period of the PS (the t-PS do not overlap), t γ < τ V . The value of g 1 is reached when t γ ≈ τ V ≈ 2π/V . Indeed, we find that the saturation value of tγ grows as 1/V . The upper limit g 2 stems from requirement that t γ has to be larger than the smallest relaxation time of the order parameters, in this case t γ > t 1 = η 1 . If this condition is not fulfilled, the PS of the two order parameters are effectively synchronized. Fenchenko and Yerin We can also see in Fig. We have found a new topological object in driven onedimensional two-band superconductors. Above the critical current we find that there are separate nucleations of PS in each band that are displaced in time and topologically connected through a vortex string oriented along the time direction. It is interesting to note that the t-PS are analogous to kinked vortices in layered superconductors In single-band one dimensional superconductors, the possible solutions depend on one free parameter of the TDGL equation (the relaxation rate η), plus the length of the wire L, the boundary conditions, and the driving current J We have found that the nucleation of t-PS occurs for most of the parameters explored, always within some range g 1 < g < g 2 , and in a narrow range of currents near a critical current j c . The range in g depends on the parameters a, b, k, η 1 , η 2 and the voltage V , as shown in Fig. When decreasing the current, approaching the critical current from above, the time length t γ increases. One could think that when J → j + c , t γ → ∞. Even though we do not discard this scenario, we do not find such a divergence for the range of currents explored. Another related question is if there is a relationship between the existence of the t-PS for J > j c and the existence of phase solitons for J < j c . In principle, a t-PS with t γ = ∞ is a phase soliton, i.e., there is a phase texture with θ 1 ̸ = θ 2 at a given point in space for all times For increasing current, there are jumps to different dynamical regimes in the current-voltage curve, as seen for instance in Fig. A possible experimental evidence of t-PS would be the measurement of a two-peak structure in the time dependence of the voltage near the critical current. This requires a resolution in the time scale of t γ ∼ 10 -100t 0 . Since t 0 ∼ 10 -11 -10 -10 s in conventional superconductors DD acknowledges support from CNEA, CONICET , ANPCyT ( PICT2019-0654) and UNCuyo (06/C026-T1). To solve the TDGL equations we adapt to the onedimensional two-component superconductor the semiimplicit Cranck-Nicholson algorithm described in In the x coordinate we use the discretization, For a one-component superconductor, the Crank-Nicholson method discretizes the time dependence of the equation and dt is the time step discretization. In the nonlinear term of D(x, t + dt) we approximate |Ψ(x, t + dt)| 2 ≈ |Ψ(x, t)| 2 . In this way, it is possible to rewrite the equations to obtain Ψ(x, t + dt) as a function Ψ(x, t) solving the tridiagonal form, . The subindex n indicates the discretized spatial coordinate, Ψ n (t) = Ψ(ndx, t). For a systen of length L, we define N as dxN = L. We solve the tridiagonal equation with the recurrence: In the case of Dirichlet boundary conditions that fix Ψ(x = 0) = Ψ 0 and Ψ(x = L) = Ψ N , the recurrence equations for α n and β n are started with α 1 = 0, β 1 = Ψ 0 . Once obtained α n and β n , the recurrence equation for Ψ n is started from n = N with the boundary value Ψ N . In the two-band case, the Crank-Nicholson method leads to two coupled tridiagonal equations [65], For the boundary conditions that fix Ψ i (x = 0) = Ψ i,0 and Ψ i (x = L) = Ψ i,N , the recurrence equations for the α's, β's and δ's are started with Once obtained the α's, β's and δ's, the recurrence equations for Ψ i,n are started from n = N with the boundary values Ψ i,N . Standard Euler and Runge-Kutta algorithms require small dt integration steps for stability, since the TDGL equations are of diffusion type. In our case, we need a dt ∼ 0.001 to achieve stability in an Euler algorithm. The advantage of the Crank-Nicholson algorithm is its stability for large time steps The Eq.( we obtain the Ivlev and Kopnin result where E is the electric field and the integral S is in the space-time surface enclosed by the loop, with dσ = dxdt. This is valid for any space-time loop. For a large loop that extends of for a long total time T and along the whole length L of the wire we can consider that the left-hand side vanishes, and we obtain the quantization condition where N i is the total number of PS in the i-band in the time interval T , and ⟨E⟩ is the space-time averaged electric field. Therefore, the average electric field is proportional to the average number of PS per unit time, ⟨n i ⟩ = N i /T . Since the expression at the right of equality is the same for both bands, we deduce that there must be the same total number of PS in the two bands, i .e., N 1 = N 2 . For an infinitesimal loop along the discretization distances dx, dt [as shown in Fig. Then, to calculate numerically the local vorticities in the standard way [δ x θ i (x, t + dt)] -[δ t θ i (x, t)] + (φ(x, t) -φ(x + dx, t)) dt where, for a phase α, [α] is taken in the interval (-π, π), numerically calculated as [α] = α -2πnint( α 2π ), with nint(u) the nearest integer of u. The last term corresponds to the local electric field φ(x, t) -φ(x + dx, t) = E(x, t)dx, and the point (x, t) is located in the interior of the considered plaquete. In terms of the link integers, the expression (7) stays the same ν i (x, t) = m i,x (x, t) + m i,t (x + dx, t) -m i,x (x, t + dt) -m i,t (x, t) . The link integers in their gauge invariant form are m i,x (x, t) = -nint θ i (x + dx, t) -θ i (x, t) -A x (x, t) 2π m i,t (x, t) = -nint θ i (x, t + dt) -θ i (x, t) + φ(x, t)dt 2π In this work, we have calculated numerically the vorticities using the above expressions in the gauge with A x = 0. [65] P. Casali, Licenciado Thesis, Instituto Balseiro (2013).