The perfect linear-in-T dc resistivity in the strange metal phase of the high-Tc cuprate superconductors is probably the most prominent manifestation of their non-Fermi liquid nature. A major puzzle about the strange metal behavior is that there is no discernible change in the trend of the dc resistivity at a temperature when we expect the electron-phonon coupling to play an essential role. The empirical Matthiessen's rule of summation of the resistivity from different scattering channels seems to be simply violated. On the other hand, the electron-phonon coupling has long been proposed to be responsible for the various spectral anomalies observed in the cuprate superconductors. In particular, the B1g buckling mode of the oxygen ion in the CuO2 plane is proposed to be responsible for the peak-dip-hump spectral shape around the anti-nodal point. Here we show that the coupling to the B1g buckling mode is strongly suppressed by the vertex correction from the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation in the system as a result of the destructive interference between electron-phonon matrix element at momentum differ by the antiferromagnetic wave vector. In the real space scenario, such a destructive interference effect simply amounts to the fact that the electron hopping between nearest-neighboring sites is suppressed by the antiferromagnetic spin correlation between the electrons. More generally, we argue that the electron-phonon coupling strength in the cuprate superconductors should diminish with the proximity of the Mott insulating phase as a result of similar vertex correction from the electron correlation effect. We think that this offers an interpretation for the violation of the Matthiessen's rule in the dc resistivity of the strange metal phase of the cuprate superconductors. The dc resistivity of the high-T c cuprate superconductors is found to exhibit perfect linear-in-T behavior from very high temperature all the way down to zero temperature around the pseudogap endpoint It is widely speculated that some kind of quantum critical fluctuation is at the origin of such a strange metal behavior. However, it is still not generally accepted if there is indeed such a genuine quantum critical point(QCP) in the phase diagram of the cuprate superconductors that is responsible for the strange metal behavior. Even if we admit such a QCP scenario, it is still puzzling why the slope of the dc resistivity remains its low temperature value at a temperature when we expect the electron-phonon scattering to play an essential role. In fermi liquid metals, the quasiparticle scattering rate contributed by different scattering channels usually add up to determine the dc resistivity. More specifically, we usually expect that in which 1/τ is the total scattering rate of the electron, 1/τ imp , 1/τ e-e and 1/τ e-p denote respectively the scattering rate contributed by impurity, electron-electron and electron-phonon scattering. According to the Drude model, this leads to the addition of the dc resistivity from different scattering channels. This is the so-called Matthiessen's rule. Clearly, such a rule is violated in the strange metal phase of the cuprate superconductors. While such a violation may simply imply the failure of the quasiparticle transport picture The phonon modes and their coupling to the electron have been extensively studied in the cuprate superconductors However, the actual role of the electron-phonon coupling in the cuprate superconductors is still under debate. On the theoretical side, first principle calculation indicates that the electron-phonon coupling strength in the cuprate superconductors is order of magnitude smaller than needed to interpret the observed spectral anomalies in ARPES measurements Beside the phonon scenario, the spectral anomalies observed in the ARPES measurements have also been interpreted in terms of quasiparticle scattering from the neutron resonance mode. The problem with such a scenario is that the spectral weight of the neutron resonance mode is not only very small 24 , but also strongly temperature and doping dependent. More generally, no matter what kind of mode is assumed, a common problem with the mode coupling scenario is that the observed spectral anomalies are always accompanied by rather broad spectral continuum at higher energy. This would imply the importance of higher order scattering processes in the mode coupling picture, which has never been seriously considered. In a recent investigation of this issue, we point out that the peak-dip-hump structure around the anti-nodal region should be interpreted in terms of the coupling between the BCS quasiparticle and the ubiquitous diffusive antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation in the system, whose existence has been extensively verified by RIXS measurement on the cuprate superconductors The strong non-BCS character of the anti-nodal quasiparticle excitation indicates that it would also experience phonon scattering in a way very different from that for the bare BCS Bogliubov quasiparticle. Such a difference is caused by the vertex correction of the electron-phonon coupling from the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation, as is required by the Ward identity. In this paper, we show that the coupling to the B 1g buckling mode suffers from a destructive interference effect from such a vertex correction. In the real space scenario, it simply amounts to the fact that the electron hopping between nearest neighboring sites is suppressed by the antiferromagnetic spin correlation between the electrons. Thus, unlike weakly correlated system in which the quasiparticle scattering rate from different scattering channels simply add up, strong vertex correction from the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation tends to suppress the coupling between the electron and the B 1g phonon in the cuprate superconductors. Such an effect is expected to be enhanced as we move closer to the Mott insulating phase with underdoping. More generally, we argue that with the proximity of the Mott insulating limit, the electron-phonon coupling in both the diagonal and the off-diagonal channel should diminish as a result of electron correlation effect. We thus believe that the absence of the phonon signature in the dc resistivity should be attributed to the vertex correction effect from electron correlation effect. We assume that the electron dispersion of the system is given by the following tight binding model Here δ = x, y denotes the lattice vector connecting the nearest-neighboring(NN) sites on the square lattice, δ ′ = x ± y denotes the lattice vector connecting the next-nearest-neighboring(NNN) sites on the square lattice, t and t ′ are the NN and NNN hopping integral, μ is the chemical potential. To simulate the electron correlation effect, we assume that the electron is coupled to a fluctuating background of antiferromagnetic correlated local moments as in the spin-fermion model in which ⃗ S i denotes the fluctuating local moment at site i and is the electron spin density at site i. We assume that the fluctuation of the local moment is described by a Gaussian action of the form in which χ(q, iω n ) denotes the generalized susceptibility of the local moment. Here we adopt the widely used Millis-Monien-Pines(MMP) form for χ(q, iω n ), which reads 30 Here ω sf denotes the characteristic frequency of the Landau damped local moment fluctuation, ξ denotes the correlation length of the local moment, χ 0 is the static spin susceptibility of the local moment at the antiferromagnetic wave vector. As will be clear below, the overall scale for the coupling between the electron and the local moment is set by the product g 2 χ 0 . We assume that the electron-phonon coupling with the B 1g buckling mode take the linear Su-Schrieffer-Hegger(SSH) form here u i,δ is the phonon coordinate of the B 1g mode on the bond connecting site i and i + δ. λ is the bare electronphonon coupling strength. Note that such a linear coupling is only permitted when the position of the oxygen ion is away from the inversion center and is thus not universally applicable for the cuprate superconductors. For systems that lack such a linear coupling we expect the electron-phonon coupling effect to be more strongly reduced. For simplicity, we neglect the dispersion of the B 1g buckling mode and assume it to fluctuate locally with a frequency of Ω. A crucial feature of the SSH coupling can be seen more clearly if we go to the Fourier space, in which H SSH takes the form of here N denotes the number of lattice site. u δ (q) and c k,σ are the Fourier component of the phonon operator and the electron operator and are given by F δ (k, q) is the bare electron-phonon vertex in the momentum space and is given by Since δ connects sites in different sublattice of the square lattice, we have for any k and q. Here Q = (π, π) is the antiferromagnetic wave vector. As we will see below, it is this feature of the electron-phonon coupling that is responsible for the destructive interference effect in the vertex correction by the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation. In this study, we set t = 250 meV and use it as the unit of energy. This is also the most commonly adopted value in the literature for the cuprate superconductors. We will set t ′ = -0.3t and μ = -t. This corresponds to a system with hole doping level of about x = 15% and a fermi surface as depicted in Fig. in which is the spectral weight of the local moment fluctuation. Here ω c is the high energy cutoff of the spin fluctuation spectrum and we set it to be ω c = 2t = 500 meV 26 . Completing the above integration we find that χ 0 = 400 eV -1 = 100/t. Such a value is very consistent with that estimated from NMR data Here AFBZ denotes the antiferromagnetic Brillouin zone(whose boundary is depicted as the orange line in Fig. We are now interested in how the electron-phonon scattering matrix element is renormalized in the antiferromagnetic ordered background. For this purpose, we diagonalize Eq.14 by the unitary transformation in which γ k,±,σ denotes the operator for the quasiparticle in the upper and the lower SDW band whose energy is given by The electron-phonon coupling Hamiltonian Eq.8 can be rewritten in terms of the γ operators as follows in which τ 3 = 1 0 0 -1 and M k,q = U † k+q τ 3 U k . We note that to obtain the second and the third line, we have used the property F δ (k, q) = -F δ (k + Q, q). We have also extended the definition of Ψ k , γ k and U k from the AFBZ to the full Brillouin zone of the square lattice in such a way as in which τ 1 = 0 1 1 0 . The matrix elements of M k,q are given as follows. For k, k + q ∈ AFBZ, we have in which While for k ∈ AFBZ and k + q / ∈ AFBZ, we have in which Note that if k + q / ∈ AFBZ, then k + q + Q ∈ AFBZ. Let us focus on the intra-band matrix element of the electronphonon coupling. From Eq.21 and Eq.23, it is clear that both M 11 and M11 are suppressed in the antiferromagnetic ordered background. In particular, the intra-band matrix element of the electron-phonon coupling becomes exactly zero at the hot spots. Such a suppression is easy to understand from the real space perspective, since the nearest neighboring hopping of the electron that the B 1g mode couple to is suppressed by the antiferromagnetic order. We now perform the full perturbative analysis of the electron self energy with more realistic parameters. The self energy caused by the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation as shown in Fig. Here the prefactor 3 is due to the fact that there are three independent components in the local moment fluctuation. Introducing the spectral representation of χ(q, iω n ) and completing the frequency sum we have Similarly, the self energy caused by electron-phonon coupling as shown in Fig. The phonon propagator is given by The phonon part of the electron self energy is then given by The intertwined terms between the B 1g phonon and the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation has a more complicated form. In Fig. Here q and q ′ denote the wave vector of the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation and the B 1g phonon. iω n and iω n ′ denote their respective Mastubara frequencies. We note that such an intertwining term can be interpreted either as the vertex correction to the electron-phonon coupling by the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation, or, as the vertex correction to the spin-fermion coupling by the B 1g phonon. Here we will focus on the former aspect of the intertwining term since what concerns us here is the electron scattering at a temperature scale of the order of the phonon frequency which is substantially higher than ω sf . Inserting the spectral representation of χ(q, iω n ) and completing the sum over the Mastubara frequency iω n and iω n ′ , we arrive at the following expression for the intertwining term in which A has the lengthy expression of Here We now derive the retarded self energy of electron by performing the analytic continuation iν n → ν + i0 + in Σ(k, iν n ). The imaginary part of the retarded self energy due to the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation alone is given by Similarly, the self energy due to the B 1g phonon is given by The intertwining term is much more complicated and is given by Here The electron scattering rate at the fermi energy contributed by the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation. 1/τ AF is seen to be strongly anisotropic on the fermi surface. As its name would suggest, the scattering rate at the hot spot is much larger than that at the nodal point(also called the cold spot in the literature). The scattering rate exhibits quadratic temperature dependence for T ≤ ω sf (k), with ω sf (k) a momentum dependent characteristic temperature scale. 1/τ AF crossovers slowly to linear temperature dependence at higher temperature. Perfect linear-in-T behavior is only realized at a temperature significantly higher than ω sf (k). The coupling strength is set to be g = t in the calculation. We now calculate the quasiparticle scattering rate at the fermi energy as a function of temperature, which is given by Here k F denotes the fermi momentum. The scattering rate 1/τ ph caused by the electron-phonon coupling is shown in Fig. The quadratic temperature dependence of the electron scattering rate 1/τ AF contributed by the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation at low temperature. Perfect quadratic temperature dependence of 1/τ AF is seen below some momentum dependent characteristic frequency ω sf (k) at both the nodal point and the hot spot. The blue and the green solid lines with slope 2 are guide to the eyes. However, the value of ω sf (k) at the nodal point is clearly much larger than that at the hot spot. Correspondingly, the magnitude of 1/τ AF at the hot spot is much larger than that at the nodal point. The coupling strength is set to be g = t in the calculation. FIG. Fig. Since the reported ω sf in the superconducting cuprates never reach below 4 meV 32 , it seems unlikely that the AF scattering scenario alone to be able to explain the linear-in-T resistivity below 300 K in the cuprate superconductors in the perturbative scheme. We now turn to 1/τ ver = -ImΣ ver , the contribution to the electron scattering rate from the intertwining term Σ ver . We note that such a contribution can be interpreted either as the vertex correction to Σ ph from the antiferromagnetic The intertwined contribution to the electron scattering rate from both the B1g phonon and the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation at the hot spot. A positive contribution with an approximate linear temperature dependence is observed below T = 0.5Ω. This is followed by another linear regime with a reduced slope through a kink structure around T = 0.5Ω. As is discussed in the main text, the origin of the kink structure can also be related to the destructive interference effect of the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation on the electron-phonon vertex. The coupling strength is set to be g = t in the calculation. spin fluctuation, or, as the vertex correction to Σ AF from the B 1g phonon. The electron scattering rate contributed by the intertwining term at the nodal point is shown in Fig. From these discussions, we see that the coupling to the B 1g oxygen buckling mode is strongly suppressed by the antiferromagnetic spin correlation in the cuprate superconductors. To fully address the puzzle concerning the violation of the Matthiessen's rule in the strange metal phase, we should also take into account the contribution to the electron scattering rate from other phonon modes. As we discussed in the introduction, the electron-phonon coupling in the cuprate superconductors can be roughly classified into two categories, namely, the diagonal coupling to the local electron density and the off-diagonal coupling to electron hopping terms. What we have shown here is that the off-diagonal coupling to nearest-neighboring hopping term for the B 1g oxygen buckling mode is suppressed in an antiferromagnetic correlated background. Since the diagonal coupling to the local electron density is believed to be suppressed by the Mott physics 11 , the electron-phonon coupling effect in the cuprate superconductors is expected to be suppressed in the underdoped regime as a result of the proximity to the Mott insulating phase and the strong antiferromagnetic correlation in the system. This may provide a phenomenological understanding on why the Matthiessen's rule is violated in the strange metal phase of the cuprate superconductors. We note that a full account of the strange metal behavior is surely beyond the reach of the perturbative scheme adopted in this paper. According to our calculation, the electron scattering rate will eventually approach the fermi liquid regime at sufficient low temperature. Nevertheless, the intertwining between the electron-phonon coupling and the antiferromagnetic correlation between the electrons discussed in this work must be an integrated part of the full story of the strange metal physics. A non-perturbative account of the electron-phonon coupling and the strong correlation effect on the equal footing is a challenging task. However, we note that a recent development in the effective field theory of the Hubbard model may shade new light on the solution of such a hard problem Beside the electron scattering rate discussed in this work, the full frequency dependence of the electron self energy we obtained here can be exploited to analyze the spectral anomalies observed in the cuprate superconductors, for example, the dispersion kink in the nodal direction and the peak-dip-hump structure in the anti-nodal region. Historically, it had been strongly debated if we should attribute these spectral anomalies to the electron-phonon coupling or the coupling to some mode of electronic origin, in particular, the neutron resonance mode In summary, we have shown that the strong vertex correction from the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation tends to suppress the coupling between the electron and the B 1g buckling phonon mode in the cuprate superconductors. According to our scenario, the effective electron-phonon coupling strength should decrease with the proximity of the Mott insulating phase and the resultant enhancement of the antiferromagnetic correlation in the underdoped cuprate superconductors. We argue that the spectral anomalies observed in the underdoped cuprates, especially the peakdip-hump structure observed in the anti-nodal region, should not be attributed to the electron-phonon coupling. We propose that the absence of phonon signature in the dc resistivity of the strange metal phase, namely, the violation of the Matthiessen's rule, should be attributed to the destructive interference effect in the vertex correction to the electron-phonon coupling by the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation in the system. R. A. Cooper, Y. Wang, B. Vignolle, O. J. Lipscombe, S. M. Hayden, Y. Tanabe, T. Adachi, Y. Koike, M. Nohara, H. Takagi, C. Proust, and N. E. Hussey, "Anomalous criticality in the electrical resistivity of La2-xSrxCuO4", Science 323, 603(2009).