There is considerable evidence that the superconductivity of Sr2RuO4 has two components. Among this evidence is a jump in the shear elastic modulus c66 at the critical temperature Tc, observed in ultrasound measurements. Such a jump is forbidden for homogeneous single-component order parameters, and implies that Tc should develop as a cusp under the application of shear strain with ⟨110⟩ principal axes. This shear strain should split the onset temperatures of the two components, if they coexist, or select one component if they do not. Here, we report measurements of Tc and the elastocaloric effect of Sr2RuO4 under uniaxial stress applied along the [110] lattice direction. Within experimental resolution, we resolve neither a cusp in the stress dependence of Tc, nor any second transition in the elastocaloric effect data. We show that reconciling these null results with the observed jumps in c66 requires extraordinarily fine tuning to a triple point of the Ginzburg-Landau parameter space. In addition, our results are inconsistent with homogeneous time reversal symmetry breaking at a temperature T2 ≤ Tc as identified in muon spin relaxation experiments. Although it has a critical temperature T c of only 1.5 K, Sr 2 RuO 4 has become one of the most-studied unconventional superconductors. This is in part because even though the normal state of Sr 2 RuO 4 is extraordinarily well-characterised, the pairing mechanism and superconducting order parameter remain unclear As often happens when a large number of experiments are performed on a single material, the results and/or interpretations of some experiments disagree. While it is appropriate for theory to attempt to reconcile apparently contradictory results, the possibility of experimental error must also be kept in mind. It can be subtle. In the history of Sr 2 RuO 4 , a conflict existed for nearly two decades between two different probes of the competition between superconducting condensation energy and magnetic polarisation energy. Pauli critical field limiting This experience provides strong motivation to check other apparently settled experimental facts about the superconductivity of Sr 2 RuO 4 . A major question is whether the superconducting order parameter breaks time reversal symmetry. It has long been widely accepted as fact that it does, on the basis of muon spin rotation (μSR), Kerr rotation, and Josephson junction data Recently, it has become possible to test for two expected consequences of time reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) in Sr 2 RuO 4 under uniaxial pressure. The uniaxial pressure should break the degeneracy of the order parameter components required to produce a TRSB state, yielding, firstly, a cusp in the stress dependence of T c centered on zero pressure There is therefore a premium on extending thermodynamic studies to a situation in which there is more guidance on expected thermodynamic quantities. Recent observations of a jump in the elastic modulus c 66 at T c , determined via ultrasound measurements We report results of high-resolution studies of both the magnetic susceptibility and elastocaloric effect under [110] uniaxial pressure. Within tight limits, we resolve neither a cusp nor transition splitting. We show that our results cannot be plausibly reconciled with the observed jumps in c 66 under assumption of a homogeneous superconducting state-the level of tuning implied is implausibly fine. Combining our results with those from previous work on [001] uniaxial pressure allows a prediction for the dependence of T c on hydrostatic pressure. We find good agreement with measurements of T c under hydrostatic pressure While presenting negative results is infrequently done, two reasons motivated our efforts for doing so. In the context of Sr 2 RuO 4 , we believe that our findings make a bulk, thermodynamic superconducting state that breaks time reversal symmetry exceedingly unlikely. They also call into question the existence of any two-component order parameter in Sr 2 RuO 4 . The robustness of our conclusion stems from the special place held by thermodynamics in understanding the physics of many-body systems. Our results therefore narrow down the search for the symmetry of the pairing state of a material that has been emblematic to the field of unconventional superconductivity. To frame the discussion in the paper, we introduce a notation for strains. We will use the symbols ε 110 and σ 110 to denote the strain and stress along the [110] lattice direction, under conditions of uniaxial stress. When these symbols are used, it is assumed that there are also transverse strains due to the Poisson effect. Based on the elastic moduli at 4 K reported in Ref. The strain can be resolved into components. We choose here to resolve it into shear strain ε 6 , c-axis strain ε 3 , and in-plane dilatation ε d ≡ ε 1 +ε 2 , where ε 1 through ε 6 are the strain components expressed in the standard Voigt notation. While ε d and ε 3 transform under the trivial representation A 1g of the point group, ε 6 transforms under B 2g . These three strain components are illustrated in the inset of Fig. with α d = 0.00307 GPa -1 , α 3 = -0.00102 GPa -1 , and α 6 = 0.00765 GPa -1 . For all possible order parameters, nonzero ε d and ε 3 result in a smooth variation of T c which is linear in strain to leading order. We label this line as T c0 in Fig. where the ellipsis denotes higher-order terms and will be suppressed from now on. Below, we show that, for even- (3) This behavior is illustrated in Fig. In some cases one expects a second transition at a temperature T 2 < T c where a composite of the two order parameter components breaks an additional symmetry. If this happens, one expects behavior similar to Eq. ( Schematic dependence of the phase transition temperatures on strain ε110. Orange line: for single-component and some two-component order parameters, the onset temperature of superconductivity derives only from the A1gsymmetric strain components, ε d and ε3, and so varies smoothly across ε110 = 0. Dark blue: For (dxz, dyz) pairing and accidentally degenerate (s, dxy) and (d x 2 -y 2 , g xy(x 2 -y 2 ) ) pairing a cusp, i.e., a sudden change of slope in Tc(ε110), occurs, due to coupling to the shear strain component ε6. Light blue: in some cases (see Fig. as sketched in Fig. In order to probe the dependence of T c on σ 110 , we studied the magnetic susceptibility of single crystals of Sr 2 RuO 4 . Stress was applied using piezoelectric-based apparatus that incorporated both force and displacement sensors Three samples were measured. Samples 1 and 2 were taken from the same original crystal, in which the growth direction was almost exactly along [110], while sample 3 was taken from a crystal where the growth direction was about 15 • away from [110]. In all cases the samples were cut from the original crystal such that the pressure was applied along [110] within ≲ 3 • . Samples 1 and 2 both withstood tensile stresses of up to σ 110 ≈ +0.2 GPa, while sample 3 broke under very low tensile stress. Samples 1 and 3 were compressed to σ 110 < -2 GPa. For sample 1, there was some hysteresis in T c (σ 110 ). The most likely origin was a hysteretic component of the applied stress that had ⟨100⟩ principal axes: T c of Sr 2 RuO 4 responds much more sensitively to ⟨100⟩ than ⟨110⟩ shear stress Fig. Linear fits over the range -0.2 < σ 110 < 0.2 GPa give dT c /dσ 110 = 68.3, 65.8, and 58.5 mK/GPa for samples 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Including uncertainty on the force sensor calibration, we take dT c /dσ 110 | σ110=0 = 64± 7 mK/GPa. For none of the samples is there an obvious cusp at σ 110 = 0. To look more closely, we determine the slopes dT c /dσ 110 from piecewise linear fits, choosing windows small enough that for samples 1 and 2 there are windows at σ 110 > 0. Results from this fitting are shown in Fig. A cusp could be broadened by internal strain. In Fig. It is clear from the T c (σ 110 ) data that the superconductivity couples much more weakly to shear strain with ⟨110⟩ than ⟨100⟩ principal axes; data under ⟨100⟩ uniaxial stress are published in, for example, Refs. where C is the heat capacity, S the entropy, and the direction of strain ε is fixed by the conditions of the experiment. Suppose, for a moment, single-component superconductivity. The Ginzburg-Landau free energy of the single-component superconducting state is then given by Here, a(T, ε) = a 0 (T -T c0 (ε)), and F n is the free energy in the normal state. The entropy below T c0 is given by where S n = -∂F n /∂T is the normal state entropy. It follows from Eq. 6 that the change in η at T c , ∆η, equals where η n is the normal-state elastocaloric coefficient, C n is the normal-state heat capacity, and ∆C is the heat capacity jump at T c . In the case of two-component order and near zero stress, Eq. 9 applies for strains ε that transform under the trivial representation: ε d or ε 3 . For twocomponent order and under non-zero stress that splits the transitions, Eq. 9 applies for strains ε d , ε 3 , and ε 6 . Eq. ( It has been demonstrated that for Sr 2 RuO 4 under uniaxial stress at low temperatures, η can be measured with a higher signal-to-noise ratio than heat capacity Elastocaloric effect data from two samples under [110] uniaxial pressure are shown in Fig. The small size of the signal makes data analysis more challenging than for [100] uniaxial stress which yields The elastocaloric effect is a recently-introduced technique The qualitative finding from these ⟨110⟩ uniaxial pressure experiments on Sr 2 RuO 4 is that we do not observe either of two key predicted features of two-component superconducting states: neither a cusp in T c , nor splitting of the superconducting transition into two transitions at T c and T 2 . In this discussion, we review the consistency of these findings with those of other experiments, and the implications for theories of the superconducting order parameter of Sr 2 RuO 4 . In both sections, we frame the discussion with the quantitative bounds that we have placed on the putative existence of a cusp or of transition splitting, rather than on categorical statements that neither exist. In this work we have determined that dT c /dσ 110 = 64 ± 7 mK/GPa. As shown in Appendix D, combining this result with previous measurement under pressure applied along the c-axis that dT c /dσ 001 = 76±5 mK/GPa 40 enables a prediction for the dependence of T c on hydrostatic pressure σ hyd : dT c /dσ hyd = 204 ± 12 mK/GPa. This allows a useful cross-check on the accuracy of our uniaxial pressure data, because the dependence of T c on hydrostatic pressure has been measured in four indepen-dent experiments Recently, a μSR study under ⟨110⟩ uniaxial pressure inferred transition splitting, with a TRSB transition at One of the motivations for the current experiments was to perform a careful comparison with the results of ultrasound experiments, which have resolved jumps in the elastic constant c 66 at the superconducting transition. The observation of a jump in this elastic constant is particularly significant because it implies the existence of some kind of two-component superconducting order parameter; a single-component order parameter gives a jump in other elastic constants, but not in c 66 . Jumps of 0.03 MPa and 0.15 MPa were reported on the basis of separate pulse-echo measurements at 169 MHz and 201 MHz respectively singlecomponent FIG. the experiments are giving information on bulk, homogeneous thermodynamic phases. To frame our thermodynamic analysis, we first give some important results about Ehrenfest relations, giving the full derivation in Appendix E. Broadly speaking, there are two possibilities for two-component order parameters that give a jump in c 66 in Sr 2 RuO 4 . One is that degeneracy of the components is symmetry-protected, i.e., the components are equivalent on a tetragonal lattice. Given the strong evidence for even-parity, spinsinglet superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 Consider first the symmetry-protected possibility, (d xz , d yz ). If, at temperatures well below T c , the components combine to break time reversal symmetry, then under shear strain with ⟨110⟩ principal axes the transition would split into a transition at T c into d xz ±d yz order, followed by a transition at order. This possibility is illustrated in Fig. The accidentally-degenerate pairs (s, d xy ) and (d x 2 -y 2 , g xy(x 2 -y 2 ) ) could also combine to yield TRSB or B 2g -nematic orders -for example, s ± id xy or s ± d xy . The T -ε 6 phase diagrams would be qualitatively the same as for the (d xz , d yz ) pair; see Figs. Analysis of each situation yields the following Ehrenfest relations [Appendix E 3]. For B 2g -nematic order constructed from (d xz , d yz ) components, where ∆C 0 is the jump in heat capacity at the superconducting transition in the unstressed system, and T c0 is T c in the unstressed system. On the other hand, for both This equation is obtained from Eq. (E41) in Appendix E, with α in that equation set to zero. Here, we label as ∆C 0 the heat capacity jump without splitting-anywhere along the transition line when splitting does not occur, and at ε 6 = 0 when it does. T c0 is the critical temperature in the absence of splitting. We begin with the simpler of the above Ehrenfest relations, Eq. ( In the case of d xz ± id yz or B 1g -nematic d xz or d yz order, where it is Eq. ( A difference of this magnitude between |dT 2 /dε 6 | and |dT c /dε 6 | would require a very high degree of tuning. To quantify this fine-tuning, let us parameterize the free energy of (d xz , d yz ) order in the following way [Eq. (E13)]: ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are, respectively, the amplitudes of the d xz and d yz components. γ ′ > 0 favors combining them with a π/2 phase shift, yielding d xz ± id yz TRSB order, while γ ′ < 0 favors d xz ±d yz B 2g -nematic order. γ > 0 disfavors coexistence of the two components; B 1g -nematic order is obtained when γ > |γ ′ |. For a generic microscopic theory, the three quartic coefficients are expected to be comparable in magnitude, giving γ, γ ′ on the order of 1. The γ-γ ′ phase diagram is shown in Fig. As discussed above, our data are not consistent with B 2g -nematic order, but TRSB and B 1g -nematic orders are in principle possible. By exploiting the Ehrenfest relation (13), one may bound the ratio from above to obtain r < (1.3 K)/(51 K) = 0.026. Here we have used the smallest reported ∆c 66 > 0.03 MPa, to obtain a conservative estimate. One may show that in the B 1g -nematic region r = γ + γ ′ , and that in the TRSB region r = 2γ ′ /(1 + γ -γ ′ ) [Eq. (E46)]. Therefore, the regions of the phase diagram in Fig. measurements under ⟨100⟩ uniaxial stress. The analogous ratio (16) is inversely related to the ratio of the heat capacity jumps at the upper and lower transitions [Eq. (E62)]. In Ref. So far, there are no data ruling out B 1g nematicity at the same level that B 2g nematicity is excluded here. The upper limit on |dT c /d(ε 1 -ε 2 )| is In case of TRSB order constructed from accidentallydegenerate components, the Ehrenfest relation Eq. (13) becomes an inequality: and we still obtain an upper bound on ∆c 66 derivable from the strain variations of the transition temperatures. This equation is Eq. (E41) from Appendix E 3, with α ̸ = 0. As under the d xz ± id yz hypothesis, reconciling our data with the observed ∆c 66 would still require fine tuning, with |dT 2 /dε 6 | vastly larger than |dT c /dε 6 |. In the absence of co-existence -the case illustrated in Fig. The lower limit |dT 2 /dε 6 | > 51 K established above for d xz ± id yz and B 1g -nematic (d xz , d yz ) order is made even more stringent by analysis of our elastocaloric effect data. For small splitting, i.e. T c -T 2 ≪ T c0 , we require where ∆C c and ∆C 2 are respectively the jumps in heat capacity at T c and T 2 . The condition that degeneracy of the two components is symmetry-protected imposes the additional condition that Making use of these conditions, it is straightforward to derive the ECE. The derivation is shown in Appendix C. In Fig. The lower limit corresponds to a change of 0.1 K at the largest strain applied to sample B, -0.45 GPa/187 GPa = -2.4 • 10 -3 . At this strain, T 2 would be ≈ 0.07 K less than T c , which we estimate as the minimum separation at which a second transition would become distinct from the main transition. The upper bound corresponds to a requirement that T 2 not drop below our lowest measurement temperature, 1 K, at the smallest applied strain, ≈ 0.10 GPa/187 GPa = 5.3 • 10 -4 . The |dT 2 /dε 6 |-|dT c /dε 6 | curve that would yield ∆c 66 = 1.05 MPa lies entirely above the observable region in Fig. The above analysis, combined with the fact that the literature values of ∆c 66 have a large variation, causes us to speculate that all the reported ultrasound measurements of ∆c 66 substantially exceed the value (which may well be zero) that can be attributed to a homogeneous, two-component order parameter alone. We propose as subjects for future study the effects on the ultrasound measurements of quenched disorder, particularly extended defects, in the crystals. Possible inhomogeneities of the superconducting state itself should also be carefully considered. For example, there is evidence for domain walls in the superconducting state We have measured T c and the elastocaloric effect in Sr 2 RuO 4 under uniaxial stress applied along the crystalline [110] direction, and found no sign of a twocomponent superconducting state. Namely, we found neither a cusp in the strain dependence of T c around zero strain, nor a second transition in elastocaloric effect data under nonzero applied strain. To reconcile our data with even the smallest reported jump in c 66 under a hypothesis of homogeneous two-component superconductivity requires an extreme level of tuning for all proposed order parameters, while some are effectively ruled out. The difficulty in obtaining clear thermodynamic evidence for two-component superconductivity, both in the results reported here and in previous measurements under [100] uniaxial stress, means that the possibility that the superconducting order parameter of Sr 2 RuO 4 is singlecomponent, without breaking time reversal symmetry, must be seriously considered. The true experimental conditions and/or the interpretations of the measurement results, both thermodynamic and non-thermodynamic, that have shown evidence for time reversal symmetry breaking should be re-investigated. However, it is a fact that a large number of experimental probes have found unusual behavior in Sr 2 RuO 4 , such as the jump in c 66 , increased ultrasound dissipation below T c 51 , nonzero Kerr rotation The data that support the findings of this study are openly available from the Max Planck Digital Library 53 . To cancel differential thermal contraction between the piezoelectric actuators and the body of the uniaxial stress cell, there are three actuators. The outer two are joined electrically, and ideally move identically. If they do not, a torque is generated within the cell that deforms the cell body and can yield a transverse displacement applied across the sample. That is a problem for measurement of Sr 2 RuO 4 under ⟨110⟩ uniaxial stress: a transverse displacement across the sample generates shear strain with ⟨100⟩ principal axes within the sample, and T c of Sr 2 RuO 4 responds very sensitively to ⟨100⟩ shear strain. Hysteresis in this torque, from hysteresis in the actuator motion, resulted for sample 1 in hysteresis in T c that was large compared with the signal we aimed to measure. To reduce this hysteresis, the sample carrier photographed in Fig. In Section III of the main text we showed how the elastocaloric coefficient for a single-component order parameter is derived from a Ginzburg-Landau ansatz. In this appendix we derive the elastocaloric coefficient of two component order. Eq. 9 can be rewritten to In the case of strain-split transitions,Eq. C1 still applies at the first transition, at T c . We have only a relabelling of quantities, following above-described notation for split transitions. Let η 1 be the elastocaloric coefficient for the temperature range T 2 < T < T c . We have: Let η 2 be the elastocaloric coefficient at T < T 2 . To obtain η 2 , we take Eq. C2 and replace η n with η 1 , ∆C c with ∆C 2 , and T c with T 2 . We assume that T c and T 2 are both in the strain-linear regime, and apply the condition Eq. 19. After simplification, the result is: If ε is ε 6 , then Eq. C3 simplifies to Eq. C3 is precisely the same as Eq. C1, though with a slight difference in interpretation: in Eqs. C3 and C4, T c0 is the transition temperature that would be obtained in the absence of splitting. To evaluate the above expressions and obtain the lefthand bounding line in Fig. As a cross-check we can calculate from the stress dependence of T c under [110] pressure, dT c /dσ 110 = -64 ± 7 mK/GPa, and the stress dependence of T c under [001] pressure, dT c /dσ 001 = -76 ± 5 mK/GPa 40 , the stress dependence of T c under hydrostatic pressure and compare this to the experimental results. Based on the 4 K elastic moduli reported in In these expressions, Solving these equations yields: Using the third line of Eq. (D1) yields dT c /dσ hyd = 0.204 ± 0.012 K/GPa. Here we analyze the response of a two-component order parameter ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ) ⊺ to σ 6 shear stress within the Ginzburg-Landau framework, under the assumptions of homogeneous strain and superconductivity. While the analysis of a symmetry-protected two-component order parameter had already been done for the D 4h point group where τ 0 is the 2 × 2 unit matrix and τ x,y,z are Pauli matrices. The transformation properties of φ μ are summarized in Table The Ginzburg-Landau expansion of the free energy in the absence of stress is given by From Table there is a redundancy between the v μ φ 2 μ terms that we eliminate by setting In the case of a symmetry-protected degeneracy, φ z transforms under B 1g and therefore ã = ṽ = 0. Below the transition temperature T c0 , the quadratic coefficient changes sign. To leading order in temperature, a(T ) is thus linear in T with a positive slope ȧ > 0: whereas the quartic coefficients are T -independent. When ∆ 1,2 belong to two 1D irreps, φ z transforms trivially and both ã and ṽ are allowed to be finite. However, since ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are unrelated by symmetry, we may rescale them (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ) → (s∆ 1 , s -1 ∆ 2 ) by a factor s = u+ṽ u-ṽ 1/8 so that after the rescaling ṽ = 0, (E6) which we assume henceforth. Regarding ã, in the expansion • the fine-tuning of the two transition temperatures corresponds to the requirement that T c0,1 = T c0,2 ≡ T c0 . Hence a(T ) is given by Eq. (E5) with ȧ = ȧ1 + ȧ2 , while for a T -independent coefficient α = ȧ1-ȧ2 ȧ1+ ȧ2 . α can take any value in between -1 and 1 and reflects the absence of a symmetry transformation connecting ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 . Thus in the symmetry-protected case the only formal difference is that α = 0, given that ṽ = 0 in both cases. Let us now include elasticity. When strains ε i are present in the system, they couple to the superconductivity via where λ iab are the coupling constants. As it turn out, when the elastic free energy is quadratic in ε i , one may decouple the elastic and superconducting parts of the free energy, greatly simplifying the free energy minimization problem. Here c ij,0 is the elastic tensor in the absence of superconductivity. This decoupling is accomplished by introducing the "external" strain which is decoupled from ∆ and directly related to the external stress: ε i,0 = 6 j=1 c -1 ij,0 σ j . It is the strain that would be obtained under a given set of stresses in the absence of superconductivity. In practice, the difference between ε i,0 and the total strain ε i is negligible for Sr 2 RuO 4 : the larger of the two reported values of ∆c 66 is ∼ 10 -5 c 66,0 In the presence of σ 6 external shear stress, the total free energy after decoupling therefore equals where the elastic part is and the superconducting part is (E13) Here we have explicitly written out F ∆0 in terms of ∆ instead of φ μ . The form of the coupling to σ 6 ∈ B + 2g follows from Table The free energy is bounded from below when u > 0 and γ -|γ ′ | > -1; these constraints define the physical part of the parameter space. To find the minimum of F ∆0 , we use the spherical parameterization in terms of which where Here we have introduced the shorthand: The saddle point equations for the nontrivial solution whose ∆ 2 0 = -aA/(uU ) > 0 are: (E21) 1. Solutions for σ6 = 0 In the absence of applied stress (β = 0), these saddle point equations are easily solved. They give three classes of solutions. • ∆ 1 or ∆ 2 only: θ = 0 or π/2, ∆ ∼ (1, 0) or (0, 1). • B 2g -nematic: θ = 1 2 arccos(-αx + ), φ = 0 or π, ∆ ∼ (1, ±1). • TRSB: θ = 1 2 arccos(-αx -), φ = ± π 2 , ∆ ∼ (1, ±i). In these expressions In the case of symmetry-protected degeneracy (α = 0), the ∆ 1 only and ∆ 2 only ground states are degenerate and may be identified with B 1g -nematic order. The free energy values for these solutions are: The preferred global minimum is: For the α = 0 case, the corresponding phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2. Solutions for σ6 ̸ = 0 First consider T > T c0 . In this case, F ∆0 < 0 is only obtained when A(θ, φ) < 0. By minimizing Eq. (E16), we see that the minimum of A(θ, φ) is 1 -α 2 + β 2 and has φ = 0 or π with θ ̸ = 0, which corresponds to B 2g -nematic order. Hence and the symmetry is B 2g -nematic. Now consider reducing T below T c . As illustrated in Fig. To determine the lower transition temperature T 2 , we need to solve the saddle point equations (E20,E21) and figure out which solution yields the smallest free energy. For the nematic case, φ = 0 or π and θ is determined by the transcendental equation When the σ 6 = β = 0 ground state is B 2g -nematic, θ of the global minimum changes smoothly with σ 6 and there is no second transition. The same happens when ∆ 1 or ∆ 2 are the ground states and α ̸ = 0: we have a smooth crossover, as one can show by analyzing the bifurcation of the solutions. When the ground state is B 1g -nematic and α = 0, B 1gnematic solutions overtake the B 2g -nematic solutions below |β| = γ + γ ′ , yielding When the ground state is TRSB with symmetryprotected degeneracy: Along the line γ = γ ′ that is the boundary between the B 1g and TRSB regions of the α = 0 parameter space [Eq. (E24)], these two expressions for T 2 agree. When the ground state is TRSB with accidental degeneracy: In the TRSB case, one may solve the saddle point equations in closed-form: The jump in the heat capacity across the superconducting transition is given by: ∆C From the free energy expressions of Eq. (E23): The shear elastic modulus c 66 below T c is given by The jump ∆c 66 = c 66,0 -c 66 | T =Tc0 is the difference between c 66 just above T c0 and that just below it. When the ground state is ∆ 1 or ∆ 2 only, This is derived by solving Eq. (E26) for small β. In the case of symmetry-enforced degeneracy (α = 0), that is, B 1g -nematic ground states, one obtains the following Ehrenfest relation: dT c dε 6,0 dT 2 dε 6,0 . (E37) In the general α ̸ = 0 case, we could try using T c instead of T 2 above, but the corresponding dimenionless ratio can be any positive real number, depending on the values of α and γ + γ ′ which we do not know. When the ground state is B 2g -nematic, by solving Eq. (E26) one finds that ∆c 66 = 2λ (E41) In the -1/|α| < x -< 0 region where TRSB is the ground state [Eq. (E24)], the right-hand side takes values in between 0 and 1, and for α = 0 equals 1. Here we show that the ratios of the jumps at the upper and lower transitions are related. These relations hold only for the symmetry-protected case (α = 0). Denote ∆C c and ∆c 66,c the jumps at the upper transition (T = T c ), and ∆C 2 and ∆c 66,2 the jumps at the lower transition (T = T 2 ). The jumps at the upper transition are (α = 0, σ 6 ̸ = 0): The jumps at the lower transition are (α = 0, σ 6 ̸ = 0): To find these expressions, we had to solve Eq. (E26) around the β at which the solutions bifurcate. Note that ∆C c /T c + ∆C 2 /T 2 and ∆c 66,c + ∆c 66,2 reproduce the previous ∆C 0 /T c0 and ∆c 66 with α = 0. Combining, we obtain the ratio relations: The second term in Eq. (E10) defines the "internal" strain, which is the strain generated by the superconducting order parameter: c 66 ∆ 2 0 sin(2θ) cos φ. Due to the proportionality to cos φ, when σ 6 = 0 only the B 2g -nematic states generate a non-zero ε 6 . Its value is bounded from above through (E48) where the right-hand side is in between 0 and 1 in the range -1/|α| < x + < 0 where B 2g -nematic order is preferred [Eq. (E24)], and for α = 0 equals 1. As discussed in the main text, if one combines the measurements of the current paper with those performed under ⟨100⟩ uniaxial stress To make contact with the measurements under ⟨100⟩ uniaxial stress, here we briefly summarize the results of the Ginzburg-Landau analysis for B 1g stress, σ B1g = 1 2 (σ 1 -σ 2 ) = σ 100 /2. Superconductivity couples linearly to B 1g stress only in the case of symmetry-protected degeneracy (α = 0), which we henceforth consider. The coupling to B 1g stress takes the form where c B1g = 1 2 (c 11 -c 12 ). By a rotation and reparameterization ũ = (1 + γ + γ ′ )u, (E51) one obtains a free energy identical in form to Eq. (E13). Hence all the previous formulas carry over if we replace u, γ, γ ′ , λ 6 with ũ, γ, γ′ , λ B1g , and exchanges what one identifies as B 1g with B 2g , and vice versa. The upper transition temperature is given by: At finite B 1g stress, the superconductivity is B 1g -nematic slightly below T c . When B 1g -nematic pairing is the ground state, there is no second transition. For the other two cases: The heat capacity jumps: = -x + , B 2g -nem. -x -, TRSB