The physics of superconductivity in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) is a topic of keen interest in moiré systems research, and it may provide insight into the pairing mechanism of other strongly correlated materials such as high-T c superconductors. Here, we use DC-transport and microwave circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) to measure directly the superfluid stiffness of superconducting MATBG via its kinetic inductance. We find the superfluid stiffness to be much larger than expected from conventional Fermi liquid theory; rather, it is comparable to theoretical predictions involving quantum geometric effects that are dominant at the magic angle. 1 The temperature dependence of the superfluid stiffness follows a power-law, which contraindicates an isotropic BCS model; instead, the extracted power-law exponents indicate an anisotropic superconducting gap, whether interpreted within the Fermi liquid framework or by considering quantum geometry of flat-band superconductivity. Moreover, a quadratic dependence of the superfluid stiffness on both DC and microwave current is observed, which is consistent with Ginzburg-Landau theory. Taken together, our findings indicate that MATBG is an unconventional superconductor with an anisotropic gap and strongly suggest a connection between quantum geometry, superfluid stiffness, and unconventional superconductivity in MATBG. The combined DC-microwave measurement platform used here is applicable to the investigation of other atomically thin superconductors. Stacking two graphene sheets with a finite twist angle between individual crystallographic axes forms a moiré superlattice. In the special case known as magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG), a twist angle of approximately 1.05°(the first magic angle) results in flat energy bands, which facilitate strong electron-electron interactions. Multiple phases of matter have been observed in MATBG, including correlated insulators, superconductors, strange-metal phases, and topological insulating states, all accessible via an applied gate-voltage that controls the carrier density. where D s is the superfluid stiffness, j is the 2D current density (current per unit width), and A is the vector potential. Moreover, the temperature dependence of n s is characteristic of the pairing symmetry and gap structure of a superconductor due to its quasiparticle spectrum at finite temperature. Characterizing the kinetic inductance is hence a promising method to study the nature of superconductivity in unconventional bulk superconductors We use a superconducting quarter-wavelength (λ/4) waveguide resonator to characterize the kinetic inductance of MATBG (Fig. , where L eff and C eff are the effective inductance and capacitance of the resonator, respectively. In contrast, when the resonator is terminated to ground through a MATBG sample, the resonance frequency shifts to a new frequency f , due to the appreciable kinetic inductance of the MATBG that is added to the resonator intrinsic inductance, where Leff includes the additional gate-dependent effective inductance of the MATBG-terminated resonator. As we describe below, the added inductance of the MATBG sample can be extracted from shifts in the resonance frequency (Fig. The device is measured in a dilution refrigerator with a 20 mK base temperature (T base ), and the effective temperature of the device with wiring connected is approximately 40 mK (see Methods and Supplementary Information for details). Figure We use a vector network analyzer (VNA) with ports 1 and 2 connected to the through-line to measure the microwave transmission coefficient S 21 as a function of frequency, from which the resonance frequency of the resonator is extracted. The presence and absence of resonator gate-dependence are modeled by the lumped-element circuits GHz. In contrast, when the MATBG enters the superconducting phase, the resistance R TBG vanishes and is replaced by a kinetic inductance L TBG that arises from the superfluid condensate, resulting in a second parallel inductor that terminates the CPW and is V BG -dependent (Fig. We vary the refrigerator temperature to determine the MATBG critical temperature in the hole-doped and electron-doped regimes (Figs. The kinetic inductance of MATBG enables us to directly measure the superfluid stiffness and its trends with physical parameters. Assuming the active MATBG region has the same aspect ratio as the device itself, given by length l and width w, the total measured superfluid stiffness D s = l/(wL TBG ) at the base temperature T base is plotted versus the effective carrier density in Fig. In 2D superconductors exhibiting a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition, D s and T C are related by the expression πħ 2 Ds(0) The conventional superfluid stiffness D (conv) s is proportional to the Fermi velocity, which becomes exceedingly small for a nearly flat energy band, resulting in a diminishing D (conv) s in the flat-band limit and no superconductivity. It is proposed, however, that superfluidity and supercurrent can occur in a flat-band system if the band exhibits nontrivial quantum geometry. Since MATBG exhibits nearly flat bands at its Fermi level, the conventional contribution D (conv) s is suppressed due to the corresponding small Fermi velocity. In this flat-band limit, the overall superfluid stiffness D s is predominantly set by the quantum geometric contribution D (QG) s , which arises from delocalized Wannier functions influenced by the presence of higher energy bands. The temperature dependence of the superfluid stiffness and the associated quasiparticle spectrum has been widely used to probe the gap anisotropy in unconventional superconductors. kBT ), where δD (T ) is the change in stiffness with temperature T , and ∆ 0 is the superconducting gap at zero temperature. where T BKT is the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless temperature (see Supplementary Information for the determination of T BKT ) in the hole-doped (V BG = -6.9 V) and electron-doped (V BG = 3.16 V) regimes. The trends clearly deviate from the exponential dependence expected for a BCS isotropic model, indicating unconventional superconductivity in MATBG. Furthermore, they fit well to a power-law function with exponent n= 2.08 and n= 2.44, respectively. The power-law dependence is also confirmed in the logarithmic plot of ∆f r (T base ) -∆f r (T ) ∝ δD s (T ) depicted in Figures . Notably, this power-law behavior with n ranging from 2 to 3 also align with theoretical predictions for D (QG) s in a superconductor with an anisotropic gap. We now explore the dependence of the superfluid stiffness on DC bias current. We apply a DC bias current I DC through terminal I + (Fig. In addition, the resonant frequency f r decreases linearly with the microwave power P MW applied to the feedline (Fig. , this similarly indicates that the reduction of f r depends quadratically on microwave current. Note that the power dependence of the MATBG-terminated resonator is driven primarily by the intrinsic MATBG response, as the contribution to the frequency shift from the Al resonator and the proximitized edges of the MATBG is negligibly small (see Methods and Extended figures 3 and 4). If spatial inversion symmetry is preserved in this system, second-order nonlinearity is forbidden, so the leading correction to the inductive response occurs at third order, resulting in a second-order modification of the inductance and superfluid stiffness with respect to the current amplitude. This behavior is described by Ginzburg-Landau theory and by BCS theory when considering pair-breaking by the finite momentum of the Cooper pairs. It is expressed as , where I * is on the order of the depairing current, , has not yet been discussed theoretically. If the superconducting gap is nodal, the quadratic dependence may be replaced by a linear dependence above a current threshold set by the disorder, We develop and demonstrate a measurement platform comprising a microwave resonator terminated by a sample of interest -in this work, MATBG -that is contacted to enable both DC and microwave measurements. The resonator with MATBG termination features a quality factor exceeding 1000 at 20 mK (see Supplementary Imformation), capable of discerning changes in the superfluid stiffness at the 1% level. We use this platform to measure the MATBG kinetic inductance -a direct measurement of the superfluid stiffness -as a function of parameters that lead to pair-breaking, including thermal excitation, bias current, and microwave drive power. The directly measured MATBG superfluid stiffness is an order-of-magnitude larger than the conventional contribution predicted by the band dispersion within a Fermi liquid framework. Instead, this value aligns well with a theoretical model that incorporates quantum geometry, where a D s of this magnitude for MATBG is expected. The temperature dependence of the MATBG superfluid stiffness follows a power-law dependence in both the hole-doped and electron-doped regimes. This behavior deviates from the exponential dependence observed in superconductors with isotropic s-wave pairing as well as the linear dependence observed in clean nodal superconductors. Our data generally falls within the range of power-law exponents n = 2 . . . 3. Within the conventional Fermi liquid framework, the measured exponents indicate the presence of an anisotropic gap in MATBG. However, the contribution of quantum geometry to the low-energy quasiparticle spectrum remains an open question, so it is not guaranteed that the conventional analysis based on power-law exponents would apply precisely. Within a quantum-geometry framework, recent theoretical calculations for anisotropic gaps that include a quantum geometric contribution predict an exponent of 3, 40 which is consistent with our measured exponents. In summary, we develop and demonstrate a platform that directly measures the superfluid stiffness of superconducting systems. Our experimental measurements of the superfluid stiffness in MATBG reveal phenomena that apparently go beyond the conventional Fermi-liquid theory and strongly suggest a connection to multiband quantum geometry in a flat-band superconductor. While it is beyond the scope of this experiment to distinguish the relative contributions of the Fermi-liquid and quantum geometry frameworks to the superfluid stiffness, our results indicate anisotropic pairing in MATBG within both frameworks. These findings lay the groundwork for future theoretical studies to deepen our understanding of the underlying physics. During the preparation of our manuscript, we became aware of a complementary work by Banerjee and Hao et al., from Philip Kim's team at Harvard. We begin with a 250 nm aluminum film deposited on high-resistivity Si wafers. The circuit elements, including a transmission line, resonators, LC filters, and DC probe lines (Fig. The incorporation of vdW heterostructures onto the patterned chips employs standard mechanical exfoliation and dry polymer-based techniques. After transferring the heterostructures, the hBN/MATBG/hBN stack is patterned into a Hall bar geometry using E-beam lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE). Superconducting contacts are made to the MATBG edge using RIE followed by thermal evaporation of Ti/Al. The superconducting bridging between the contacts and the aluminum resonator and the ground plane is made using E-beam lithography and in-situ ion-milling followed by aluminum deposition. The experiment is performed in a Bluefors XLD-1000 dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of approximately 20 mK. Attenuation at several cryogenic stages is used to reduce the number of thermal photons at higher-temperature stages from reaching the device. We use a -20 dB directional coupler to pump a Josephson travelling wave parametric amplifier (TWPA) mounted at base temperature to pre-amplify the resonator probe tone. To reduce the impact of reflections of the TWPA pump on the device, we add a circulator between the device and the TWPA. Following the TWPA, there are additional isolators, filters, and a high-electron mobility transistor (HEMT) amplifier (LNF) thermally anchored to the 3K stage. At room temperature (300K), we further amplify (MITEQ) the output signal. Each DC line connected to the device is lowpass filtered with a π-filter at 3 K, and a QFilter (Quantum Machines) at the mixing chamber stage. See Extended Figure We use the SONNET finite-element solver to determine the relationship between the resonant frequency shift and the kinetic inductance. We model the Al film as a two-dimensional perfect electrical conductor on a 350 μm Silicon (Si) substrate , with 500 um vacuum above the film, and calculate the S-parameters at the microwave ports. Our device model comprises an inductor -representing the always-superconducting proximitized edge of the graphene near the Ti/Al contacts -in parallel with the gate-voltage-dependent resistive or inductive impedance of the MATBG (see main text). The proximitized edge accounts for the fact that changing the MATBG from superconducting to insulating does not change the nature of the resonator from lambda/4 to lambda/2, as might be naively expected. We test the validity of this model with two additional experiments. First, we fabricate a Bernal (AB)-stacked bilayer graphene device that nominally has the same geomtery and metalization as the MATBG device. The Bernal device exhibits a resonance around 4 GHz when biased near the CNP to be highly insulating (Extended Figure Second, we verify this model by applying a perpendicular magnetic field to the Bernal (AB)-stacked bilayer graphene device. Extended Figure To analyze the lumped-element model, we set the resistance R TBG =100 kΩ to represent the insulating regime and sweep L prx to reproduce the observed base frequency of 3.8 GHz (Extended Figure Throughout this simulation, the capacitance between the MATBG and the back gate is fixed at 3 fF, a value estimated based on the dimension and dielectric properties of the bottom hBN. We find that the resonance frequency is insensitive to this capacitance (Extended Figure To illustrate the impact of possible normal regions caused by contact resistance, disorder, and twist-angle inhomogeneity in the MATBG device, we perform simulations incorporating a finite resistance in parallel and series configurations. As shown in Extended Figures We characterize the aluminum control-resonator in the absence of MATBG to test our protocol for measuring the superfluid stiffness and to confirm that the MATBG-terminated resonator temperature and power dependence is dominated by the MATBG. Extended Figure , where L G ≫ L K is geometric inductance, the relation f r (T base ) / f r (T ) -1 is proportional to L K . The behavior is well fitted by the conventional isotropic BCS Fermi liquid model, consistent with the conventional superconductivity present in aluminum (see Extended Figure Extended Figures Here, the termination is shunted by the the Al-prozimitized graphene edge. The temperature dependence remains flat below 0.5 K, in contrast to the resonance when the MATBG is biased in the superconducting phase, and is fitted by the isotropic BCS model using the T C =1.2 K. Here also, the power-law exponent n=5.405 is consistent with an isotropic gap in the proximitized region. The microwave power dependence of f r is negligible in the insulating region compared with that in the superconducting region (Extended Figure The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request and with the cognizance of our US Government sponsors who funded the work. In systems with a low inelastic scattering rate, the velocity of electron flow can reach the Fermi velocity, leading to non-equilibrium carrier generation, known as the Schwinger mechanism. Since MATBG has a Dirac cone with a much lower Fermi velocity than monolayer graphene, this effect occurs at relatively small currents, resulting in a critical-current-like behavior in the normal state [33, 34, 69]. Here, the critical current in the normal state, I cn , is determined by the Fermi velocity as v n = Jcn ñe , where J cn is the critical current density and ñ is the effective carrier density measured relative to | ν |=2, providing an estimate of the Fermi velocity. In a previous study under a finite magnetic field, which was used to suppress superconductivity, it was reported that I cn has a 'bell-like' feature in vicinity of ν=2. The superconducting critical current I C coincident with I cn at the underdoped region but split in the overdoped region [34]. We observe a similar behavior in the peak of dV dI (Fig. The critical temperatures in Figure 1. Linear fits are performed for the normal region and the region where the resistance drops (gray dashed lines in Fig. is determined by the intersection of line 1 and line 2. is determined by the point where line 2 crosses half the value of the intercept of line 1. is determined by the point where line 2 crosses zero resistance. The temperature dependence of ∆f r (T )/∆f r (T base ) for T < T BKT in the hole-doped (a-g) and electron-doped (h-k) regimes. Blue dots represent the experimental data, black dashed lines depict the power-law fits, and green dashed lines represent the exponential function in the BCS isotropic model. The temperature dependence of the superfluid stiffness within single-band Fermi liquid theory D (conv) s (T ) is formulated using the Mattis-Bardeen equation as: where f is Fermi distribution function and φ is the argument in momentum space. To model a superconducting gap with a continuous degree of anisotropy, we assume the following angledependent superconducting gap: where α = 0 corresponds to an isotropic gap, and α = 1 is a nodal gap. The factor 2 in cos (2φ), which represents two-fold rotational symmetry of the superconducting gap, is chosen without loss of generality of the rotational symmetry, because the resulting temperature dependence D (conv) s (T ) does not depend on this factor. Within a weak-coupling BCS theory, ∆ 0 (T ) in Eq.5 is determined from the following self-consistent equation: ) Fig. with two free parameters, a and ∆ 0 (0) (Fig. (solid lines in Fig. (dashed lines in Fig. Using this procedure for both the weak-and strong-coupling cases, we fit ∆f r (T ) / ∆f r (T base ) over a temperature range from the refrigerator base temperature to the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition temperature T BKT , determined by 8e 2 k B T BKT /πħ 2 = D s (T BKT ) (see section 6), up to which this formulation is valid. The Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) theory of thermally excited vortex-antivortex pairs in 2D superconductors predicts a super-to-normal phase transition marked by a discontinuous drop in superfluid stiffness at a temperature T BKT determined by the formula 8e 2 k B T BKT /πħ 2 = D s (T BKT ). The temperature dependence of the conventional superfluid stiffness below T BKT follows the Mattis-Bardeen formula within the framework of Fermi liquid theory, and it exhibits an abrupt reduction at T BKT , which is called a "universal jump". In the intermediate region (I DC = 50∼100 nA), dV/dI is finite while quadratic behavior of f r persist. We can think of two possible reasons: 1. The superfluid density is suppressed for various reasons, such as Cooper pair depairing or unbound vortex-antivortex pairs in a 2D superconductor. As a result, the current path is no longer uniformly superconducting, with some normal regions contributing to finite series resistance, evident in the increasing dV/dI and decreasing Qi. The quadratic behavior in this regime can be attributed to the remaining superfluid, which is expected to exhibit similar behavior to that in the low-bias regime (I DC ≤ 45 nA). 2. Our device could have different path for DC and microwave current, therefore DC path might be partially normal while MW path remains superconducting in this regime. However, this is unlikely a dominating factor as the the consistency between dV/dI and Q i suggest otherwise. Additionally, the small finite differential resistance at zero bias current could be attributed to 1) one or more small non-superconducting regions along the DC current path between the superconducting electrodes. These regions may result from twist-angle inhomogeneity, impurities, or other forms of disorder, leading to enhanced resistance at zero bias; Figure In the electron-doped regime, the critical current is much smaller, likely due to a smaller spatial extent of the superconducting state (a larger effective aspect ratio leads to a larger effective current density in the superconducting region), see Fig. The nonlinear Meissner effect (NLME) has been discussed as an origin of the linear reduction in superfluid stiffness as a function of magnetic field or bias current in nodal superconductors. In another device with the same design and fabrication process, we observed qualitatively similar results, although it exhibited more spatial inhomogeneity, which results in multiple T C and I C values. Fig. The DC bias dependence below the smallest I C showed quadratic behavior and is also consistent with the first device (Fig. We measure the effective temperature of superconducting qubits that share the same mixing chamber of the dilution refrigerator and similar driving lines. Here the single-qubit Hamiltonian is Ĥ = 1 2 δσ z + 1 2 Ω p σx , where γ φ is the pure dephasing rate of the qubit,