Josephson scanning tunneling microscopy (JSTM) is a powerful probe of the local superconducting order parameter, but studies have been largely limited to cases where superconducting sample and superconducting tip both have the same gap symmetry-either s-wave or d-wave. It has been generally assumed that in an ideal s-to-d JSTM experiment the critical current would vanish everywhere, as expected for ideal c-axis planar junctions. We show here that this is not the case. Employing first-principles Wannier functions for Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ , we develop a scheme to compute Josephson critical current (Ic) and quasiparticle tunneling current measured by JSTM with sub-angstrom resolution. We demonstrate that the critical current for tunneling between an s-wave tip and a superconducting cuprate sample has largest magnitude above O sites and it vanishes above Cu sites. Ic changes sign under π/2-rotation and its average over a unit cell vanishes, as a direct consequence of the d-wave gap symmetry in cuprates. Further, we show that Ic is strongly suppressed in the close vicinity of a Zn-like impurity owing to suppression of the superconducting order parameter. More interestingly, Ic acquires nonvanishing values above the Cu sites near the impurity.The critical current modulations produced by the impurity occur at characteristic wavevectors distinct from the quasiparticle interference (QPI) analogue. Furthermore, the quasiparticle tunneling spectra in the JSTM set-up shows coherence peaks and impurity-induced resonances shifted by the s-wave tip gap. We discuss similarities and differences in JSTM observables and conventional STM observables, making specific predictions that can be tested in future JSTM experiments. The electron pair amplitude in a superconductor is the ultimate quantum mechanical fingerprint for the many body state. Its symmetry and structure give clues to the physical origin of the processes that bind the pair together. One great goal of superconductivity research is to probe the nature of the superconducting state by imaging this pair condensate directly. Recent technical advances have resulted in dramatic improvement in JSTM, allowing for high-resolution maps of the critical current. The technique has recently been applied to the underdoped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (BSCCO) to study a putative pair density wave (PDW) The Pb and Fe(Se,Te) measurements used Pb tips, such that the tunneling in both these cases was expected to be between an s-wave tip and sample surface. The simplest theory of JSTM By contrast, the BSCCO JSTM experiment Josephson tunneling between a pure s-wave tip made of conventional superconductor and a d-wave cuprate (or other unconventional) superconducting sample could potentially provide a much simpler probe of the unconventional pair wave function. However, the symmetry mismatch dictates a vanishing critical current in both the momentum space-based theory of Ref. In this work, we re-examine the problem of JSTM of a dwave superconductor using an s-wave tip, accounting for the details of the tunneling process using a Wannier-based framework developed for conventional quasiparticle STM Finally, we study tunneling obtained from the dispersing branch of the quasiparticle spectrum in the same SIS set-up and show that the tunneling conductance spectrum has coherence peaks at ±(∆ s + ∆ t ), as expected, and a full gap spanning -∆ t < ω < ∆ t . Moreover, non-magnetic impurityinduced resonance peaks are also shifted by ∆ t ; however, real-space patterns of tunneling conductance at the shifted energies turn out to be almost identical to the corresponding conventional STM result. We consider a JSTM set-up with pointlike s-wave tip and superconducting BSCCO sample. The d-wave superconducting state of the sample is described by the following meanfield Hamiltonian H. Here, H 0 describes a tight-binding model of the normal state of BSCCO obtained by Wannier downfolding of density functional theory (DFT) results as obtained in Ref. H imp models a pointlike substitutional non-magnetic impurity, with potential V imp , located at site i * . The Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 is solved within the self-consistent Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) framework described in the Supplemental Material Josephson tunneling current between an s-wave tip and the lattice site R of the sample is given by I J (R) = I c (R) sin ∆φ, where ∆φ is the phase difference between superconducting order parameters of the tip and the sample, and I c is the critical Josephson tunneling current, which, to the lowest order in the tunneling amplitude t 0 , can be expressed as where is the anomalous lattice Green's function of the tip (sample). We can generalize Eq. 5 to continuum space discretized into a fine mesh with several intra-unit cell grid points r by replacing the anomalous lattice Green's function with its continuum analog, where, F s (r, r; ω) is the anomalous local Greens function in continuum space, which can be obtained employing a Wannier basis transformation as Here, w R is the Wannier function centered at lattice site R. We have used a DFT-derived Cu-d x 2 -y 2 surface Wannier function as obtained in Ref. where the continuum Greens function G s (r, r; ω) can be expressed as Here, G s (R, R ′ ; ω) is the lattice electron Greens function, calculational details of which we provide in the Supplemental Material We consider a BSCCO sample with 15% hole-doping and model its superconducting state through an attractive interaction on NN bonds with amplitude V sc = 0.164 eV, resulting in a d-wave superconducting gap ∆ s (k) = ∆ 0 (cos k x -cos k y ), which yields coherence peaks at ±∆ s ≈ 33 meV in the density of states plot (blue curve) shown in Fig. QPI studies have proven instrumental in confirming the dwave symmetry of the superconducting gap in BSCCO To predict quasiparticle tunneling observables in an JSTM set-up with Nb tip and BSCCO sample, we first compute the sample's continuum LDOS ρ(r, ω) using the T -matrix formalism (see Supplemental Material In this work, we have addressed the question whether an s-wave superconducting tip can be used to probe a BSCCO sample with d-wave gap symmetry in the JSTM set-up. Using first-principles Wannier function, we extended the formalism for computing Josephson critical current in lattice space 