We show that spin-singlet s-wave multi-band superconductors have a topological phase protected by rotation symmetry and time-reversal symmetry without spin-orbit coupling in two and three dimensions. This topological phase, an example of a representation-protected topological phase, has a Z2 topological index and is stable as long as the bands at the Fermi energy are formed by a doublet of orbital states with finite angular momenta. In the limit of weak superconducting pair potential, the Z2 index gives a Fermi-surface formula and is related to the winding number of threedimensional strong topological superconductors of class CI. We present a model of a topological s±-wave superconductor that has gapless surface states with a quadratic dispersion and suggest a connection with iron-based superconductors. Introduction. The search for topological superconductors is one of the central challenges in the field of superconductivity The K-theoretical classification based on stable equivalence fails to capture some topological phases. The topological phases that fall outside the K-theoretical classification are called unstable topological phases and can become topologically nontrivial only if certain conditions are met regarding the number of occupied (or total) bands or band representations. The search for unstable topological phases is vigorously underway and has revealed a variety of unstable topological phases such as fragile Another subtle class of topological insulators that are outside of standard classification are so-called representation-protected topological phases 61] that can be realized when the band representation is fixed to two-dimensional (2D) representations formed by non-s orbital states. Interestingly, the stability of the representation-protected topological phases does not depend on the number of bands The study of unstable topological phases has largely focused on insulators, and little is known about unstable topological phases of superconductors. A rare known example is the Hopf superconductor In this paper, we propose a theoretical model of twodimensional (2D) topological superconductors of class CI that are categorized as a representation-protected topological phase. Specifically, we consider superconductors satisfying the following two prerequisites. (i) They have SU(2) spin rotation symmetry, time-reversal (T ) symmetry, and n-fold rotation (C n ) symmetry with n = 4, 6. That is, the superconductors of our interest belong to class CI with additional C n symmetry. (ii) The Fermi surfaces relevant to superconductivity are formed from a pair of non-s orbital states with orbital angular momentum 2l ̸ = 0 mod n, which we call an orbital doublet. For instance, orbital doublets with l = 1 correspond to (p x , p y ) or (d xz , d yz ) orbitals and those with l = 2 to (d x 2 -y 2 , d xy ) orbitals. The condition (ii) is crucial for defining the representation-protected topological indices, since the orbital doublets behave like S = 1 2 spin and exhibit two-fold degeneracy at C n T -invariant points in the Brillouin zone. Under the conditions (i) and (ii), a Z 2 topological index for 2D spin-singlet superconductors is defined in terms of orbital doublets. In the limit of weak pair potential, the Z 2 index is directly related to the topology of the Fermi surfaces as dictated by the following Fermi surface criterion: the Z 2 index is nonzero if the two Fermi surfaces of the orbital doublets, each enclosing one of the C n T -invariant momenta, have s-wave pair potentials with opposite signs, i.e., s ± -wave pairing. Furthermore, extending the definition of the Z 2 index to three-dimensional (3D) superconductors, we obtain a relationship between the Fermi surface topology of a 3D s ± -wave superconductor and a 3D winding number (w 3d ∈ 2Z; see Eq. ( Finally, we apply our theory to iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) and propose strongly hole-doped FeSC, e.g., KFe 2 As 2 under pressure, to be a candidate of a topological superconductor of class CI. Spin-singlet superconductors. We start from a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian with a spinsinglet pair potential for spin-orbit free superconductors. With the SU(2) spin rotation symmetry, the BdG Hamiltonian is reduced to the form in the basis of Ψ k,σ = (c k,↑,σ , c † -k,↓,σ ) t , where c k,s,σ is the annihilation operator of electron with momentum k, spin s, and orbital σ, E(k) is the normal-state Hamiltonian, and ∆(k) is the spin-singlet pair potential with ∆(k) = ∆ t (-k). The BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) has the particle-hole (PH) symmetry, CH(k)C -1 = -H(-k) with C = iτ y K, where τ α (α = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the Nambu space, and K is the complex conju-gation. The PH operator satisfies C 2 = -1. We assume that the superconducting state has time-reversal and nfold rotation symmetries in addition to the PH symmetry. This means that E(k) and ∆(k) satisfy the symmetry relations where U T and C n are unitary matrices satisfying U T U * T = 1, (C n ) n = 1, and U T C * n = C n U T . The 3 × 3 matrix R n represents n-fold rotation in the k space, e.g., R 4 (k x , k y , k z ) = (-k y , k x , k z ). The second equation in Then the n-fold rotation operator can be written as C n,l = exp i 2πl n σ y , where σ α (α = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices acting on the orbital doublet and l is its orbital angular momentum. Hereafter, we adopt this representation unless otherwise specified. Since T 2 = 1 and C 2 = -1 (where T ≡ U T K is the TR operator), the BdG Hamiltonian (1) belongs to class CI, which has stable topological phases only in three spatial dimensions, characterized by a 3D winding number (w 3d ∈ 2Z). In the following, we will present 2D representation-protected and 3D stable topological superconductors of class CI when the conditions (i) and (ii) are fulfilled. 2D systems. We consider the BdG Hamiltonian of a 2D C 4 symmetric model of the orbital doublets (p x , p y ) with l = 1, for which we can explicitly define a Z 2 topological index. The four-fold rotation operator for the doublet is given by C 4,1 = iσ y , satisfying (C 4,1 T ) 2 = -1. The Kramers' theorem for the C 4,1 T operation indicates that the orbital doublets must be degenerate at the C 4 T invariant momenta k inv , Γ = (0, 0) and M = (π, π), in the 2D Brillouin zone; see Fig. The expression ( where δ s ≡ δ s,k ∥ is the pair potential on the sth Fermi surface. Here, the Pfaffian factors in Eq. ( where α, β, γ = x, y, z and ε αβγ is the Levi-Civita symbol. The winding number w 3d takes even-integer values in class CI. In the weak-coupling limit, it is reduced to the form w 3d = 1 2 s sgn(δ k F ,s )C s The derivation of Eq. ( A tight-binding model of a 3D s ± -wave superconductor from (p x , p y ) or (d xz , d yz ) orbital pairs is given by Equation ( for orbital doublets l = 1 and 2 of 2D representations of the six-fold rotation operators. We have defined C a 6,l ≡ C 6,l -C t 6,l to extract the skew-symmetric part of C 6,l . The Z 2 index for the k z = π plane ν 6,l (π) is obtained by replacing Γ and K with Z and H. Using Eq. ( In the weak-coupling limit, Eq. ( Discussion. Finally, we discuss an application to s ±wave paring states in FeSCs. After the discovery of the superconductivity of F-doped LaFeAsO in 2008 An example of the materials with only hole pockets is KFe 2 As 2 We expect from the Fermi surface criterion that materials with only electron pockets, such as KFe 2 Se 2 Summary. We have shown that the representationprotected Z 2 topological invariants [Eqs. ( where c k,s,σ is the annihilation operator of electron with momentum k, spin s, orbital σ, the normal-state Hamiltonian Ẽ(k) is a Hermitian matrix , and the gap function ∆(k) satisfies ∆(k) = -∆t (-k) due to the Fermi-Dirac statistics. The subscript τ of the matrix implies that the matrix is represented in the Nambu basis. We suppose that the BdG Hamiltonian satisfies the particle-hole (PH), time-reversal (TR), and SR symmetries as follows. PH symmetry : where s i and τ i are the Pauli matrices in the spin and Numbu spaces and K is the complex conjugation. θ = (θ x , θ y , θ z ) represent the rotation angle around the x, y, z axes in the spin space. Taking the derivative of Eq. (S.4) with respect to θ yields the commutation relations with the generator J i (i = x, y, z) Thus, the BdG Hamiltonian is block-diagonalized in the basis diagonalizing one of J i 's, say J z . Each block matrix has the eigenvalue J z = ±1. In addition, using the other generators J x and J y , we find that the block matrix with J z = 1 is related to that with J z = -1 since {J i , J j } = 0 (i ̸ = j). Thus, the BdG Hamiltonian (S.1) is reduced to the block matrix with J z = 1, whose basis is given by Ψ k,σ = (c k,↑,σ , c † -k,↓,σ ) t . The reduced BdG Hamiltonian is given by where we choose the representations of Ẽσ;σ ′ and ∆σ;σ ′ as so as to satisfy the SR symmetry (S.4). Equations (S.7) and (S.8) represent a spin-orbit free normal-state Hamiltonian and a spin-singlet pair potential, respectively. Here, the subscript s of the matrix implies the matrix representation in the spin space, and the pair potential satisfies (S.9) arXiv:2406.07939v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 7 Oct 2024 and we have used the relation ∆(k x , k y )U † T = U T ∆ † (k x , k y ) that follows from Eqs. (S.9) and (S.14). The C 4 T symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian is also rewritten, using Eqs. (S.12), (S.13), (S. At the C 4 T invariant momenta k inv , i.e., Γ = (0, 0) and M = (π, π) in the 2D Brillouin zone, we obtain where we have used ) in the second line. Therefore, A(k inv )C 4 U T is a skew-symmetric matrix. Using this property, the Z 2 invariant is defined by where the integral is calculated along the straight path connecting the Γ and M points. Furthermore, the chiral component A(k x , k y ) can be decomposed by singular value decomposition as where U (k x , k y ) and V (k x , k y ) are unitary matrices and D(k x , k y ) is a diagonal matrix with non-negative elements. For a fully-gapped superconductor, we can adiabatically deform D(k x , k y ) to the identity matrix without closing the superconducting gap since it is positive definite. After the deformation, A(k x , k y ) is given by a unitary matrix Since the topological number remains unchanged under the deformation, Eq. (S.25) is recast into The refined formulation is useful to check some basic properties of the Z 2 invariant. First, we show that ν 4 only takes 0 or 1 mod 2. Since Thus, the square of the exponential factor of Eq. (S.26) is calculated as where we have used the identity det . Therefore, we obtain which leads to 2ν 4 = 0 mod 2. Next, we show that the formula is gauge invariant. We consider an infinitesimal deformation Similarly, the change in the Pfaffian is given by where we multiply Eq. (S.29) by det[C 4 U T ], take the square root of it, and use the fact that det[Q ′ (k inv )] is continuously deformed to det[Q(k inv )], i.e., they have the same sign of the square root. As a result, Eq. (S.26) is invariant under an infinitesimal deformation. Now we study the Z 2 invariant in the weak-coupling limit. We follow the procedure of Ref. 2. In the following, we assume that the Fermi surfaces are all non-degenerate and there is no superconducting nodes. Note that our discussion is generalized to the case of degenerate Fermi surfaces as we will discuss later. When the Fermi surfaces are non-degenerate and the pair potential is finite only around the Fermi surfaces, the matrix elements of U T ∆ † (k x , k y ) between different bands are negligible. Thus, we have where and |n, (k x , k y )⟩ are the eigenstates of E(k x , k y ). Since U T ∆ † (k x , k y ) is a Hermitian matrix, δ n (k x , k y ) takes a real value. In this approximation, Q(k x , k y ) becomes where e iθn(kx,ky) = [ε n (k x , k y )iδ n (k x , k y )]/|ε n (k x , k y )iδ n (k x , k y )|. In the weak-coupling limit, we take δ n (k x , k y ) to be nonzero only in the small neighborhood of the Fermi level. Hence, e iθn(kx,ky) = ±1 at momenta away from the Fermi surfaces. Since ε n (k x , k y ) < 0 (> 0) when it is below (above) the Fermi level, the phase θ n (k x , k y ) changes from 0 to ±π across the Fermi level, where the sign of π is determined from the sign of δ n (k x , k y ); for instance, when evaluating it along the one-dimensional line parameterized by k, θ n (k) changes from π (-π) to 0 across the Fermi point k F when δ n (k F ) < 0 (> 0) and , where the sign of δ n (k F ) is opposite to our case. On the other hand, when ∂ k ε n (k F ) < 0, θ n (k) changes from 0 to π (-π) for δ n (k F ) < 0 (> 0). We focus on the Fermi points on the Γ-M line, which are denoted by k F,s (s = 1, 2, • • • , M ). In the following, we assume that the Fermi points are not located at k inv . In the weak-coupling limit, the change in where k is the momentum along the Γ-M line. Since det[Q(k x , k y )] = exp [i n θ n (k x , k y )], the exponential factor of Eq. (S.26) is calculated as sgn(v F,s δ F,s ), (S. When there are m (n) Fermi points with v F,s > 0 (< 0), the number of bands which are above the Fermi level at Γ and below the Fermi level at M is given by nm. When n(k inv ) is the number of bands occupied at k inv , nm = n(M )n(Γ). Here, n(k inv ) must be an even integer due to the degeneracy of the orbital doublet. As a result, we find Provided that there is no Fermi point at k inv , we have ∆(k inv ) = 0 in the weak coupling limit. That is, A(k inv ) = E(k inv ), so that Q(k inv ) can be given by where k As discussed in Sec. S2, the BdG Hamiltonian can be continuously deformed to , the 3D winding number is defined by where α, β, γ = x, y, z and ε αβγ is the Levi-Civita symbol. The winding number w 3d takes even-integer values in class CI, but w 3d = 0 in conventional s-wave superconductors where s is summed over all disconnected Fermi surfaces and sgn(δ s ) describes the sign of δ n (k) on the sth Fermi surface (FS s ). The Chern number C s of the FS s is defined by In the following, we address C 4 symmetric systems with orbital doublets, i.e., the C 4 rotation operator satisfies (C 4 T ) 2 = -1 at the C 4 T invariant momenta. In the presence of T and C 4 , there appears the double degeneracy of the orbital doublets at the C 4 T invariant momenta k inv : Γ = (0, 0, 0), M = (π, π, 0), Z = (0, 0, π), and A = (π, π, π). Other accidental band degeneracies can be removed by symmetry-preserving perturbations. Thus, provided that the Fermi surface does not intersect with the C 4 T invariant momenta, every Fermi surface is non-degenerate (we neglect the spin degeneracy). Moreover, we can deform the Fermi surfaces into a set of spheres without changing the Chern numbers if the Fermi surfaces respect the C 4 rotation and time-reversal (TR) symmetries. After the deformation, there are two types of the spherical Fermi surfaces: ones enclosing a C 4 T invariant momentum (FS C4T ) and the others enclosing no C 4 T invariant momenta (FS 0 ), respectively. The Chern number of the Fermi surface FS s ∈ FS C4T is evaluated, as in Ref. where ẑ is the unit vector along the z axis (C 4 rotation axis), k inv,s is the C 4 T invariant momentum enclosed by the FS s , and k F is a radius of the spherical Fermi surface. Since λ 4 ∈ {±1, ±3} for orbital doublets and the TR symmetry imposes λ On the other hand, the Chern number for FS s ∈ FS 0 is evaluated as due to the TR and C 4 rotation symmetry. We note that, for a Fermi surface enclosing a TR-invariant momentum, say, X=(π, 0, 0), the TR symmetry T 2 = 1 imposes C s = 0 mod 2 In a similar manner, we try to relate w 3d to ν6 for C 6 symmetric systems, in which the double degeneracy of orbital doublets arises at C 6 T invariant momenta: Γ = (0, 0, 0), K=(4π/3, 0, 0), K'=(2π/3, 2π/ √ 3, 0) A=(0, 0, π), H=(4π/3, 0, π), and H'=(2π/3, 2π/ √ 3, π). Here we assume that the electronic bands relevant to superconductivity are formed by the orbital doublets with l = 1. After the deformation of the Fermi surfaces, we label the Fermi surfaces enclosing the C 6 T invariant momenta as FS C6T,1 and FS C6T,2 and the other Fermi surfaces as FS 0 , where FS C6T,1 (FS C6T,2 ) denotes the set of spherical Fermi surfaces enclosing Γ and A (K, K', H, and H'). First, we consider FS s ∈ FS C6T,1 . The Fermi surfaces are invariant under the TR and C 6 rotation symmetries. Thus, after the same procedures, the Chern number of the Fermi surface is evaluated as C s = λ 6 (k inv,s + k F ẑ)λ 6 (k inv,sk F ẑ) mod 6 = 2λ 6 (k inv,s + k F ẑ) mod 6, (S.76) where the C 6 rotation eigenvalue at momentum k is defined as exp[ i 3 πλ 6 (k)] and the second line is due to the TR symmetry. As we have assumed, the orbital doublets with l = 1 take λ 6 ∈ {±1}, so that Eq. (S.76) is reduced to C s = 2 mod 6 λ 6 (k inv,s + k F ẑ) = 1, -2 mod 6 λ 6 (k inv,s + k F ẑ) = -1. (S.77) Second, the Fermi surfaces FS s ∈ FS C6T,2 are invariant under the C 2 T and C 3 rotation symmetries. Thus, the Chern number is evaluated using the eigenvalues of the C 3 rotation symmetry exp[ where λ 3 and λ 6 are related as 2λ 6 = λ 3 mod 3. In addition, there is another Fermi surface with the same Chern number related by the C 2 rotation symmetry. Thus, the total Chern number of the Fermi surfaces belonging to FS C6T,2 is ±1 × 2. Finally, when FS s ∈ FS 0 , it is evaluated as FSs∈FS0 C s = 0 mod 6, (S.80) due to the TR and C 6 rotation symmetries. As a result, w 3d mod 6 is calculated as (-1) w 3d /3 = (-1) where the products are taken for the Fermi surfaces crossing either Γ-K line or A-H line, and C s in Eq. (S.82) is either +2 or -2. The formula cannot be further simplified due to the two possible values of C s = +2 and -2.