Pair density waves (PDWs) are a inhomogeneous superconducting states whose Cooper pairs possess a finite momentum resulting in a oscillatory gap in space, even in the absence of an external magnetic field. There is growing evidence for the existence of PDW superconducting order in many strongly correlated materials, particularly in the cuprate superconductors and in several other different types of systems. A feature of the PDW state is that inherently it has a CDW as a composite order associated with it. Here we study the structure of the electronic topological defects of the PDW, paying special attention to the half-vortex and its electronic structure that can be detected in STM experiments. We discuss tell-tale signatures of the defects in violations of inversion symmetry, in the excitation spectrum and their spectral functions in the presence of topological defects. We discuss the "Fermi surface" topology of Bogoliubov quasiparticle of the PDW phases, and we briefly discuss the role of quasiparticle interference. One of the central problems in condensed matter physics is understanding the phases of strongly correlated systems such as high-T c superconductors. Experimental and theoretical research during the past decade has clearly shown that a characteristic feature of these systems is that their complex phase diagrams have phases with different types of charge, spin and, superconducting orders which are intertwined rather than competing with each other Of particular interest is the cuprate material La 2-x Ba x CuO 2 (LBCO). This cuprate superconductor, the original high T c material, has the interesting phase diagram provided in Fig. The remarkable dynamical layer decoupling observed at the 1/8 anomaly of La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 implies that the interlayer Josephson effect is suppressed in this regime. Berg and coworkers Evidence for PDW order also exists in cuprate superconductors that do not have the LTT crystal structure such as Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ . In this case much of the evidence was found in STM experiments The PDW is a superconducting state in which Cooper pairs with finite center of mass momentum Q condense. In such a state the local pairing amplitude ∆(r) is periodic function of position whose period is 2π/|Q|. The order parameter of the PDW has the same symmetry as the Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) state In the cuprates, and in other candidate materials for PDW superconductors, the periodicity is a few lattice spacings. For all these reasons the "classic" FF and LO states are not suitable to explain the observed phenomenology of the cuprates and other materials. Various orders exist simultaneously under the superconducting dome, which may indicate the onset of the PDW phase. Data from Ref. The phenomenology of the PDW state The purpose of this paper is to investigate physics of the PDW state by studying the electronic structure of the topological defects of this state: the half-vortex, the double dislocation and the Abrikosov vortex. The study that we undertake here is relevant to the understanding of the features of these defects revealed by STM experiments. Here we adopt a phenomenological description of the PDW and we will not concern ourselves with the possible physical mechanism(s) associated with this superconducting state. For concreteness we will consider a system with a square lattice (kagome and honeycomb lattices have also been considered). On a square lattice the PDW state may be unidirectional, which breaks spontaneously both translation symmetry and the point group symmetry of the square lattice, or bidirectional, which is invariant under the point group symmetry but breaks translation symmetry along two directions. Let ∆(r) be the local amplitude for a spin singlet superconductor (where r is a lattice site; in the case of a local d-wave state r is the superconducting amplitude on a bond between two nearest-neighbor sites r and r ′ ). We will consider the simpler case of an unidirectional spinsinglet PDW with a period close to 8a 0 , which is appropriate for the lanthanum cuprates where ∆ 0 (r) is the uniform component. Here we denoted by ∆ ±Q (r) the two PDW components with wave vectors ±Q. We will not include higher harmonics in the order parameter occurring at nQ since in the ordered state these orders are slaved to the fundamental and hence are not independent dynamical degrees of freedom The PDW equilibrium state is a phase in which the uniform component vanishes, ⟨∆ 0 ⟩ = 0, and the two Fourier components have the same expectation value, = 0 and ∆ PDW ̸ = 0 the resulting state is a striped superconductor. Most proposed PDW states (outside the lanthanum cuprates) are actually striped superconductors. Finally, in the FF state ⟨∆ Q ⟩ or (exclusive) ⟨∆ -Q ⟩ are not zero. In this paper we will consider only a unidirectional PDW state and hence assume that ⟨∆ 0 ⟩ = 0. The central results of this paper are concerned with experimental signatures associated with the induced CDW "daughter" states of the PDW parent state -Q [and similarly for ρ -2Q (r)] is described in more detail in Sec. 2, including the topological defects of the PDW state we are interested in. The unidirectional PDW has two complex order parameters, ∆ ±Q (r), which means two amplitude fields and two phase fields. This means that the order parameter of the PDW transforms under a U (1) × U (1) global symmetry, where the first factor is the conventional global U (1) gauge invariance of a superconductor and the second factor represents the invariance under continuous translations of the incommensurate PDW state. In Refs. The electronic structure of the PDW has Bogoliubov quasiparticle with (Bogoliubov) Fermi surfaces which define pockets of quasiparticle states In this work we describe the half-vortex as a state in which one of the two order parameters of the PDW, say ∆ Q (r), has a vortex while the other order parameter, ∆ -Q (r), does not. Since one of the SC order parameters vanishes at the defect location while the other does not, at the defect core we have an FF type state which breaks inversion symmetry. In this sense, the half-vortex has an FF halo. This behavior is analogous to the halo associated with the Abrikosov vortex in a system in which uniform SC and PDW orders compete We then investigate the electronic structure of the PDW in the presence of topological defects by embedding the resulting configuration into the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian. Here we use a non-interacting band structure suitable for a superconductor in a copper oxide plane. Using this effective Hamiltonian with the defect background we calculated the local density of states and a function of bias for a model of an STM measurement at a point contact with a normal metal. We also compare the results on the half-vortex with the same calculation done for a full Abrikosov vortex and for a double dislocation of the CDW. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we introduce the Landau-Ginzburg equations to be used in our analysis. In this section the notion of intertwined order is reviewed and we discuss the composite order parameters of interest in Sec. 2 B. An overview of the relationship between experiment and induced order is briefly discussed there as well. In Sec. 2 C we review the topological defects of the PDW superconducting state. Section 3 is devoted to the construction of a static halfvortex. Here we discuss how the profiles of the components of the PDW order parameters are modeled in the case of a half-vortex. In Sec. 4 the effective mean field Hamiltonian for the PDW with static topological defects used in our simulation is introduced as well as the Green functions and the related spectral function. Here we present results for the local density of states (LDOS), used to acquire plots for the numerical solutions. In Sec. 4 the numerical parameters and the explicit form of the order parameters used in the simulation are discussed. In Sec. 4 B the plots of the charge density wave order of the PDW in the presence of defects are shown, and various other aspects of the vortex cores are explored and discussed. In Sec. 4 E we discuss the spectral functions of the PDW order and display the dispersion relation for a PDW with a half-vortex. Finally, in Sec. 5 we discuss some implications of our results and summarize the most salient results. Several appendixes are devoted to technical details. Details of the Bogoliubov transformation are given in Appendix A and the setup for the numerical diagonalization of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian is sketched in Appendix B. In Appendix C, we give details of the retarded Green function at zero temperature. In Appendix E we compare the tunneling DOS for a PDW, an FF state and for the half-vortex of the PDW. In Appendix F we present data on spectral functions for PDW states with s-and d-wave form factors. In this section we review the Landau-Ginzburg (LG) theory for a unidirectional PDW state The free energy of the LG theory is chosen to have the form: (2.1) The first term in Eq. (2.1) describes uniform superconductivity, which takes the familiar form In this paper our main results correspond to a defectfree PDW in the absence of an uniform component: ∆ 0 = 0. We will mention the effects of a non-zero uniform component when relevant, but in the majority of this paper we neglect it. Furthermore, we will assume that the PDW is unidirectional, characterized by a single ordering wave vector Q. We will also ignore the effects of disorder. This is important since, unlike a conventional uniform superconductor, a PDW can couple to local charge disorder through the interaction of the induced CDW associated with the PDW. In fact, in the presence of disorder the distinction between unidirectional and bidirectional orders is lost as these PDW components get mixed with each other The second term in Eq. (2.1) describes the free energy of the unidirectional PDW. In Eq. (1.1) we presented the expansion of the local pairing amplitude ∆(r) in its Fourier components ∆ ±Q (r), where ∆ ±Q (r) are the order parameters of the unidirectional PDW state with ordering wave vector Q. Since the local pairing amplitude ∆(r) is a complex field, the two PDW components ∆ ±Q are not the complex conjugate of each other (as they would have been for a CDW) but are two independent complex fields. The PDW free energy has the form is the (mean-field) critical temperature for the PDW superconductor. We will assume that the coupling constant γ < 0 as needed for an attractive interaction needed for a PDW, an LO-type state. Instead, a repulsive value of the coupling constant, γ > 0, favors an FF type state. The PDW state is described by two independent complex order parameters fields ∆ ±Q (r). Since they are complex fields they can be decomposed into amplitude and phase fields, ∆ ±Q (r) = |∆ ±Q (r)| exp(iθ ±Q (r)), respectively. For general values of the coupling constants u and γ the free energy for the PDW order parameters, Eq. (2.3), is invariant under the U (1)×U (1) global symmetries θ ±Q (r) → θ ±Q (r) + θ ±Q , where θ ±Q are two independent transformations of the phases of the complex fields ∆ ±Q (r). In the special case in which γ = 0 this global symmetry is enhanced from U (1) × U (1) to U (2). In many superconductors of interest, such as cuprates Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ and La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 in the Meissner state, a uniform superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 is present. This results in the following additional "lockin" terms that couple the three superconducting order parameters and it must be added to the free energy of Eq. (2.1): 4) The first term is the usual biquadratic term which is attractive (repulsive) for α < 0 (α > 0). The second term breaks the U (1) × U (1) global symmetry down to the global U (1) symmetry of the uni-form superconductor and locks (mod π) the phase fields of the PDW order parameters ∆ ±Q (r) to the phase field of the uniform superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 (r) ≡ |∆ 0 (r)| exp(iθ 0 (r)), which transforms under global gauge transformations in the usual way, θ 0 (r) → θ 0 (r) + θ 0 . With the above SC orders we can construct the following set of composite order parameters The two order parameters of Eqs.(2.5) and (2.6) are interpreted as the Q and 2Q components of a CDW associated with the PDW SC order. The order parameter of Eq.(2.7) represents an uniform charge 4e superconductor. Following the analysis of Berg et al. (2.8) Under the global U (1) × U (1) gauge transformations de-fined above the order parameters transform as follows (2.12) ∆ 4e (r) → exp(i2θ + )∆ 4e (r), Under a global electromagnetic gauge transformation all three superconducting order parameters must transform as charge 2e complex fields and, consequently, θ 0 = θ + . With this identification the CDW order parameter ρ Q is manifestly invariant under global gauge transformations. Similarly, the order parameter ∆ 4e transforms under global gauge transformations as a charge 4e field. On the other hand, the composite order parameter field ρ ±2Q (r) has the same transformation as that of the order parameter for an incommensurate CDW under an arbitrary global translation. The slowly varying relative phase of the two PDW order parameters is identified with the Goldstone mode of the spontaneously broken translation invariance of the PDW state. In an incommensurate (unidirectional) CDW state with wave vector K, the local charge density ρ(r) has the Fourier expansion where ρ K = ρ * -K since ρ(r) is real and invariant under global gauge transformation, and where the ellipsis denotes higher harmonics of the density wave. Thus, the PDW has an associated charge density modulation with wave vector K = 2Q Alternatively, the incommensurate CDW may be a present as a preexisting order with wave vector K. Such a CDW cannot couple to an (also incommensurate) PDW unless the CDW ordering wave vector K and the PDW ordering wave vector Q satisfy the mutual commensurabilty condition K = 2Q. This interaction is described by an additional trilinear term in the free energy of the form where g is a coupling constant C. Topological defects of the PDW state We will now discuss the topological defects of the PDW phase. For now we will set ∆ 0 = 0, and we will be brief as many details exist in the literature We will label the topological defects by the combinations (q v , q d ), the vorticity and dislocation charges, or equivalently, (m Q , m -Q ). In the simplest cases they are (1) the superconducting (Abrikosov) vortex with topological charges (q v , q d ) = (±1, 0) [or, equivalently, These identifications imply that a conventional superconducting vortex is equivalent to both PDW order parameters ∆ ±Q having a vortex. The half-vortex is equivalent to a vortex in ∆ Q but not in ∆ -Q (and vice versa), and it has a single-dislocation, as required by Eq.(2.6). Finally, a double dislocation is a vortex in ∆ Q and an anti-vortex in ∆ -Q (and vice versa). In the PDW state the energy of all three types of topological defects is logarithmically divergent, leading to the rich phase diagram of Ref. In this paper we will focus primarily on the properties of the half-vortex which we will regard as a static topo-logical defect of an ordered PDW state which we will take to be of the Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) type However, at the core of the half-vortex one of these two amplitudes, say ∆ Q , must vanish while the other amplitude does not. As a result, the core of the halfvortex is in a Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state On the other hand, none of these considerations apply to either the Abrikosov vortex or to the double dislocation. As in all superconductors, the Abrikosov vortex of the PDW arises in the presence of a magnetic field. On the other hand, the half-vortex and the double dislocation can appear due to the interaction of the PDW state with sufficiently strong charged impurities. This is possible since the CDW order parameter ρ 2Q (r) of the PDW has a linear coupling to charged impurities potentials, whereas gauge invariance requires that the superconducting order parameters interact only quadratically through The properties of all three topological defects will be discussed in Sec. An extremely useful experimental technique for detecting and visualizing CDW patterns is scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) The basic setup for an STM consists of an atomically sharp metallic tip, with a featureless Fermi surface, biased at some voltage V relative to the sample. The voltage difference induces a tunneling current, I T (V ), which is used to map out the electronic structure at the surface of a material. In the regime in which the STM operates, the differential conductance g(V ) = dI T /dV is proportional to the one-particle density of states (DOS) ρ(ε = eV ) at an energy ε = eV . In this section we will model the profile of our halfvortex of an unidirectional PDW and we will assume that there is no uniform SC order. In Sec. 4 we will embed the configuration of the half-vortex in a Bogoliubovde Gennes Hamiltonian for the d-wave superconducting state of a CuO 2 plane and investigate its effects on the electronic structure. The Abrikosov vortex and the double dislocation will also be considered in later sections, so we mention their solutions here as well. We should note that the associated CDW dislocation was given in Ref. We will seek an extremal solution of the Landau-Ginzburg free energy density F pdw (∆ Q (r), ∆ -Q (r)) for the PDW order given in Eq.(2.3). In Sec. 2 we showed that a vortex with half magnetic flux quanta can be realized by putting a 2π phase winding in one of the two superconducting components ∆ ±Q of the unidirectional PDW order parameter. Thus, we will require the order parameter ∆ Q (r) to have a unit vortex and set the other component to be real ∆ -Q (r) = |∆ -Q (r)|, and we set its phase θ -Q = 0 A half-vortex is an extremal solution of the PDW free energy F pdw which at long distances behaves as a vortex in ∆ Q : where tan φ = y/x, where r = (x, y). Notice that we require the amplitude ∆ pdw asymptotically to be the same for both ∆ ±Q so that at long distances we have a PDW (LO) state. On the other hand, since ∆ Q has a vortex, its amplitude must vanish at the origin. Instead, ∆ -Q does not have to vanish at the origin, and it will take some finite value, which we denote as ∆ f f . In other words, in the presence of a half-vortex the superconducting order has an FF component. Hence, at short distances the half-vortex must have the behavior The precise profile of the configuration of the half-vortex depends on the parameters of the PDW free energy F pdw of Eq. (2.3): the stiffness κ, the PDW critical temperature T pdw c , and the coupling constants u and γ < 0. The way the asymptotic values, ∆ pdw and ∆ f f , are attained depends on all the parameters of the free energy. There are two significant length scales (which also depend on these parameters): the scale over which the amplitude of ∆ Q (r) decreases from ∆ pdw to zero (the "core" of the half-vortex), and the scale over which ∆ -Q (r) interpolates between ∆ pdw and ∆ f f (the FF "halo" of the half-vortex). In order to obtain an explicit expression for the field configuration of the half-vortex we will use a non-linear sigma model approximation similar to the one used by Wang and coworkers in their study of the PDW halo of a superconducting vortex with n 2 (r) = 1 everywhere, and where ∆ will be determined below. Here we used that ∆ -Q is a real field. With these assumptions the free energy density of the PDW, Eq. ( We will set ∆ to be the value ∆ that minimizes the free energy in the uniform PDW phase; that is, using The free energy density F nlsm of the unit vector field n(r) becomes where we used the definitions κ ≡ κ ∆2 and v ≡ |γ| ∆4 , with ∆ given in Eq. (3.6). We will now construct the half-vortex of the PDW using the non-linear sigma model (NLSM) of Eq.(3.7). We assume that the ordering wave vector of the PDW is oriented along the x axis and write Q ≡ Qe x . We will also assume that the phase field φ(r) winds by 2π, and we define its branch cut along the positive x axis. With these assumptions we define the unit vector and write the O(3) NLSM field n(r) in the form In Sec. 2 we defined the half-vortex as a configuration in which the phase field of ∆ Q winds by 2π at infinity while the order parameter field ∆ -Q does not wind and is defined to be real. The order parameters of the PDW in the half-vortex state are required to obey the boundary conditions of Eq. (3.1) (at long distances) and Eq. (3.2) (at short distances). As a result, the half-vortex has an FF type order within the core and asymptotically far from the core is of LO-type. Such a state breaks inversion symmetry in the core of the half-vortex. In terms of the NLSM field n(r) the boundary conditions of Eqs. where, as before, we defined the phase φ(r), to be the azimuthal angle measured from the positive x axis, with tan φ(r) = y/x, which winds by 2π on a large circle. To satisfy these boundary conditions we will require the field α(r) to be isotropic, α(r) ≡ α(r), and to satisfy the boundary conditions lim After performing some algebra, we can recast the total free energy of the NLSM, Eq.(3.7) into the following form: where in line we defined r 2 0 = κ/v, and made the change of variables t = ln(r/r 0 ), where t ∈ (-∞, ∞), for r ∈ [0, ∞). In our numerics the half-vortex radius will be set to to be r 0 /a 0 = 8n where a 0 is the lattice spacing and n is an integer, which we vary. Upon extremizing the free energy F (n) of Eq.(3.14) we find that α(t) must obey the "equation of motion": such that the boundary conditions of Eq. (3.12) now become A numerical solution of the equation of motion (3.15) yields the optimal solution for the half-vortex. Plots of the magnitudes of the PDW components (in units of ∆) as a function of distance from the vortex core are provided in Fig. The profiles of the Abrikosov vortex and the double dislocation are obtained using a similar approach. In the cases of these topological defects both components of the PDW order parameter fields ∆ ±Q (r) have vorticity. In the case of the Abrikosov vortex we consider solutions of the Landau-Ginzburg equations with the the same vorticity and set ∆ -Q (r) = ∆ Q (r) ≡ ∆(r), where ∆(r) is a conventional Abrikosov vortex. Instead, in the case of the double dislocation we consider solutions in which the two PDW order parameters have equal and opposite vorticity, ∆ Q (r) = ∆(r) and ∆ -Q (r) = ∆ * (r), where again ∆(r) is a conventional vortex solution. The vortex solution has the form ∆(r) = ∆f (r/r 0 ) exp(iφ(r)), In this section we describe the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian on the square lattice with a cuprate electronic structure with the configurations of the PDW order parameter in the background of the topological defects introduced in Secs. 2 and 3. We will focus on the effects on the electronic states. In order to study the effects of the different topological defects of the PDW state in the associated CDW order and in the electronic structure we consider a model which couples our electronic degrees of freedom to the local amplitude of the superconducting order parameter in the background of each defect, denoted by the pair field ∆(r, r ′ ) in the bonds (r, r ′ ) of the square lattice. In what follows we will define ∆(r, r ′ ) as the embedding to the square lattice of the solutions of the Landau-Ginzburg equations for the pair field of a PDW in the background of the different topological defects. We consider four configurations of the PDW order parameter, (1) the uniform PDW state, (2) the half-vortex, (3) the Abrikosov vortex and (4) the double dislocation. Defined relative to the origin of the r plane, the configurations of the PDW order parameter take the following generic form Here ∆ is the amplitude of the SC gap given in Eq. (3.6), F (r, r ′ ) is the SC form factor, and f i (r) are the profiles and winding numbers of the four configurations of the PDW order parameters listed above. On a square lattice the form factor F (r, r ′ ) = 1 for an s-wave SC state. In a d-wave SC state, which is our focus, the form factor is F (r, r ′ ) = 1(-1) for a bond (r, r ′ ) on the x axis (y axis) of the square lattice, and changes sign under a π/2 rotation. Using the results of section 3 the explicit forms of the functions f i (r)'s are Here α(r) is the angle we used to parametrize the NLSM in Eq.(3.9), whose numerical solution was found in Sec. 3. The vortex profile function f (r/r 0 ) is defined in Eq. (3.17). Finally, the complex phase, φ(r), is the azimuthal angle on the plane, and it winds by 2π in all the expressions in which it appears. In Figs. 3a-3c we show the profile of the composite order parameters ρ 2Q (r) (that is, we take the real part of this expression) in the presence of the three topological defects of our PDW order. The Burgers vector associated with a given charge dislocation can be found by simply counting the difference in the CDW peaks found above and below the vortex cores. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for the lattice model is The details of the diagonalization procedure can be found in Appendixes A and B. In short, we define a Nambu spinor, , which helps us perform the exact diagonalization (see Appendix B). These define our quasiparticle operators, bl and b † l , which annihilate the BCS ground state and create single particle excitations with energy E l , respectively As in the case of a uniform superconductor, the excited states are an admixture of electrons and holes. We find our electron creation/annihilation operators are related to linear combinations of our quasiparticle operators: ĉiσ = v * il b † l + σu il bl . Here repeated indices are summed over, and the coefficients are the real space coherence factors. In order to compare the spectroscopic properties of our system obtained from the states of the BdG Hamiltonian to experiment we use the zero temperature retarded Green functions and their Fourier transforms (see Ap-pendix C). We will focus on two quantities of experimental interest, the LDOS L(r, ω) and the spectral function A(k, ω). In Appendix C we show that these quantities are given by where ũl (k) and ṽl (k) are the eigenvectors of the BdG equations in momentum space and the energy resolution will be taken to be ε = 2.5 meV. Our simulations were also conducted on a 400 × 400 lattice to achieve the desired resolution for our spectral functions and Fourier transforms of the LDOS. We leave the consideration of the anomalous Green functions and its relations to Cooper pair tunneling for a future study. In this subsection we analyze our numerical results for the LDOS, computed using Eq. (4.4), for the con- figurations of the PDW order parameter with the three topological defects defined in Eq. (4.2). The intertwining of the PDW defects with the induced CDW order will be discussed in detail, as well as the structure of the charge distribution induced by these defects. The main focus will be on experimental signatures associated with the CDW pattern induced by the half-vortex and the double dislocation. The superconducting properties of the PDW half-vortex will be discussed in Sec. 4 D. In Fig. In Fig. The charge density profiles associated with each of these defects reveals some of the most salient signatures of the PDW order. First and foremost, Fig. In Fig. Next we notice the additional patterns seen within the core of the defects in Figs. On the other hand, the half-vortex in Fig. We now analyze in detail the effects that the halfvortex and the double dislocation have on the induced CDW order. Recall that inside the core of the half-vortex the SC order parameter is mostly FF type, since the amplitude of one of the two PDW order parameters must vanish at the location of the half-vortex, i.e., the origin (see Sec. 3). Since the FF state breaks inversion symmetry in the x-direction, the corresponding CDW pattern inherits this broken symmetry. Also, the edge dislocations of the CDW order parameter break inversion symmetry in the y-direction. Note that, the parity operator, in the x-direction, changes the location of the branch cuts and the signs of the winding numbers when it acts on the order parameters, which changes the sign of the dislocation charge. As a result, the corresponding charge density patterns are flipped on their head under this operation. Since the location of the branch cuts have no physically significant effects on the charge density, the full vortex is invariant under this operation. The ordering wave vector 2Q has many features made more apparent in the Fourier transforms of the LDOS, which are shown in Figs. The split peaks are signature of the defects of the PDW phase associated with jumps in the phase θ -, defined in Eq. (2.8), across the core of the topological defect. For example, across the half-vortex the phase jumps by ±π/2 since it winds by π around the halfvortex. This implies that the 2Q Fourier component is equal to itself times i across the core of the defect, suggesting that this Fourier component must be zero. We can explicitly verify this prediction by examining the FT of ρ 2Q (r). It is apparent that a nonzero CDW winding number is responsible for the vanishing of ρ 2Q (r) at the center of the defect. In other words, the phase shift that causes this destructive interference is a measurement of the Burgers vector, which is the topological charge of the dislocation. Similar interference patterns are well known to exist in electron diffraction in crystals of semiconductors with dislocations. Similar split peaks in the Fourier transform of the tunneling LDOS were also predicted to exist at the PDW halo of an Abrikosov vortex of a superconductor in Refs. Alternatively, when there is a winding number in both PDW components, we can picture the phase jump as occurring in both winding numbers independently. Recalling the form of the induced 2Q-CDW from Eq. (2.6), we see that complex conjugation flips the phase-winding of one of the PDW components. Thus, when we have a vortex in both components ∆ ±Q with the same winding, i.e., the Abrikosov vortex, the phase differences cancel each other, and there is no net phase jump across the core of the vortex. Hence, in the case of the Abrikosov vortex there is not a split peak. Equivalently, the Abrikosov vortex does not have any dislocation charge associated with it to cause a split peak to exist. We can contrast this with the double dislocation where the phase jump adds up to π, and the amplitude at the CDW ordering wave vector should vanish by an identical argument to that of the half-vortex. We could again perform the FT to verify these results explicitly or, alternatively, argue that it should hold by way of the amount of dislocation charge associated with a given defect. We finish this section by analyzing cuts of the real space patterns of the double dislocation and the halfvortex across the vortex cores, seen in Fig. Starting with the double dislocation we can see the π phase shift which occurs across the vortex core. The associated CDW pattern of the double dislocation has a "sawtooth" pattern, seen in Fig. Instead, for the half-vortex [Fig. We now compare and contrast experimental signatures associated with dI/dV curves belonging to various superconducting order parameters. These curves illustrate that the half-vortex can be thought of as an interpolation between an FF-like state (in the core) to a LO-like state (at infinity). Also, evidence of inversion symmetry breaking in the tunneling data for the half-vortex state is discussed. We also changed the energy resolution in this section to 0.01 eV to smooth out the curves and make the low bias particle-hole symmetry more apparent. We begin with a comparison plot between the inequiv-alent sites for a defect-free LO state shown in Fig. Clearly then the FF state possesses data which are rotationally invariant (by π/2 in the CuO 2 planes) unlike the above LO state. We now compare the LO states to a set of curves corresponding to the half-vortex (Fig. The presence of a half-flux quanta will further distinguish the half-vortex from the defect-free PDW far outside the vortex core. In Appendix E we provide sup- plementary dI/dV plots taken outside the core of the vortex, which indicated there is a relative shift in the tunneling DOS curves. Indeed, Fig. The half-vortex becomes more LO-like outside the core of the half-vortex, but since this topological defect breaks inversion symmetry, its tunneling DOS must reflect this, unlike the LO state. A smoking gun signature of inversion symmetry breaking is present by comparing the dI/dV curves to the left and to the right of the vortex core [figures 14a and 14b, respectively]. It is apparent the data on the left are two lattice spacings behind the right (or vice versa), which we attribute to the jump in θ + by π/2 across the vortex core. Indeed, the accumulated phase belonging to a Cooper pair with nonzero COM momentum: Q • r = π/2 if r = 2a 0 e x . We will see another example of inversion symmetry breaking in the next section when we discuss the spectral functions for the half-vortex. This jump in phase distinguishes the half-vortex from a defect-free LO state, even outside the half-vortex core. Note the full vortex also possesses a phase jump of ∆θ + = π across the vortex core, but this gives a relative shift of four lattice spacings when comparing electron tunneling DOS on the left and right hand sides of the full vortex. This means there is no analogous signature belonging to the full vortex as there was for the halfvortex when using a normal metal tip. This is simply because the LO state has the same periodicity as this shift. On the other hand, in the case of a superconducting tip there will be a difference in the pair tunneling DOS on the right-and left-hand sides of the full vortex. Finally, we note that the presence of a gap in the core of the half-vortex distinguishes it from the other two topological defects since the latter two have a vanishing gap here. This results in a free particle tunneling DOS in the core of the defect for the double dislocation and the full vortex opposed to a squeezed in FF state seen in the core of the half-vortex [see Fig. we can see in Fig. In this section we analyze the spectral functions of the PDW state in the presence of topological defects, again, paying special attention to the half-vortex. We will also be particularly interested in the plots of the spectral function A(k, ω = 0), defined in Eq. (4.5), which counts how many quasiparticle states are connected to the ground state within our energy resolution, ε. In a metal the spectral function at zero frequency yields the locus of points corresponding to the Fermi surface in the Brillouin zone. In the case of a PDW the spectral function at zero frequency reveals the locus of the Fermi surface of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle. Here we will use the term Bogoliubov Fermi surface to represent the locus of points on the Brillouin zone where there are pockets of Bogoliubov quasiparticle. Since the Bogoliubov quasiparticles are admixtures of electrons and holes different portions of the Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces have electron or holelike character. Still we expect some resemblance between the Fermi surface of the normal state and the Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces of the PDW states; we give more on this below. The Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces of the PDW state have been examined in Refs. In this subsection we are interested in the effects of the topological defects on the spectral functions of a PDW. A plot of a few Fermi surfaces of Bogoliubov quasiparticle of the PDW in the presence of a half-vortex can be found in Fig. We first observe that the normal state dispersion is partially retained for the presence of the half-vortex. This also holds true for the other defects and is illustrated in Appendix F, Fig. The most striking feature of the spectral function in a PDW with a half-vortex is the redistribution of spectral weight to regions above the arcs forming discernible loops seen in Fig. A point worth mentioning at this stage is the apparent coexistence of the "Fermi-Arcs", just mentioned, and electron/hole pockets We can further examine the holelike and particlelike character of certain regions of the Bogoliubov Fermi surface in the presence of the half-vortex by looking at the spectral function for various probing voltages [Figs. Evidence for the existence of pair density wave superconducting phases (or, at least a PDW component) has continued to grow. In addition to the panoply of evidence in the cuprate superconductors In this paper we investigated the electronic structure of the BdG Hamiltonian of a unidirectional PDW in two dimensions in the presence of its three topological defects: the half-vortex, the Abrikosov vortex, and the double dislocation. In essence we showed that the topological defects of a PDW generically have "halos" which provide evidence for the nature of this superconducting state. However, it is important to distinguish the halos of the PDW topological defects, which occur in the absence of a magnetic field, to the PDW halo of a superconducting vortex which requires the presence of a magnetic field This work was partly motivated by evidence for half vortices found by Du and collaborators For practical reasons the PDW was taken to be commensurate with the lattice spacing of the CuO 2 planes with a periodicity of 8a 0 . The restriction to a commen-surate PDW was needed for our numerics. However, in a truly commensurate PDW topological defects such as the half-vortex and the double dislocation have a linearly divergent energy instead of a logarithmic divergent energy for an incommensurate PDW. Also, in the presence of a uniform component of the d-wave superconducting order the half-vortex also has a linearly divergent energy. We have not discussed this case here. Nevertheless, in both cases half vortices can appear in the vicinity of static impurities. At any rate, a nearly commensurate PDW looks like a locally commensurate state with discommensurations to account for the incommensurate character. The same physics is know to occur in conventional CDW states The PDW state and its topological defects was treated using the Landau-Ginzburg theory of the Refs. The half-vortex of the PDW is particularly interesting as it is essentially a dislocation of the CDW order parameter pinned to a half-flux quantum of the superconductor We analyzed in detail the quasiparticle spectral function of a PDW with a half-vortex defect. In addition to the "arc-like" structure at the Fermi surface of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle states which are seen in the defect-free PDW state Since this is not a self-consistent theory, both the spectral functions and the differential tunneling conductance results should be reliable at low energies but cannot be trusted at energies (voltages) substantially higher than the superconducting gap. As a matter of principle we expect that at energies well above the gap the superconducting order parameter should be progressively suppressed and the Bogoliubov quasiparticle effectively should become "normal" electrons. This also implies that the composite order parameters such as the CDW should also be progressively suppressed well above the gap. This is not what happens in our numerics which computed the BdG spectrum in a fixed background of the superconducting order. To have a fully self-consistent theory requires a viable physical mechanism for a PDW which cannot be obtained by a weak coupling BCS-type theory. This is an open problem and a matter of current research. In most systems in which PDW has been observed it happens in, at best, coexistence with a uniform su-perconducting state. This happens even in the case of La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 , which has, so far, provided the best evidence for PDW order (see Refs. Contrary to the case of vortices in a superconductor, whose number and separation are controlled by an external magnetic field, impurities are needed to create the half-vortices and double dislocations of a PDW. Here we considered the problem of single isolated topological defects. In practice this will require very clean systems so that the impurities are separated over large distances, larger than the size of the halos. On the other hand, a finite density of disorder has large qualitative effects in states such as the PDW, including the destruction of long-range CDW order The orthogonal transformation in question takes the following simple form and gives an explicit relation between the similarity transforms in question: Defining the following matrices: we find that our transformed Hamiltonian takes the following form [ψ ± are defined inline according to Eq. (B.2)]: The matrix is block diagonal, meaning we can diagonalize the two sub-Hamiltonians independently. The eigenvectors of the lower block are related to those of the upper via the same transformation shown in Eq. (A.5). In addition to this, the energies of each block come in ± pairs. This can be seen by complex conjugating the eigenvalue equations defined by Eq. (B.4), then applying the following orthogonal matrix: O ′ = 0 I -I 0 . Solving one of these sub-blocks is enough. After doing so, and organizing our eigenvectors from least to greatest (in energy), we arrive at the following similarity transforms: Thus, we can simply diagonalize H + , then use our above string of relations to find the coherence factors given in the previous appendix if needed. We work with these coherence factors defined above in the following appendix. Note that the core of the vortex is noticeably different in Fig. Note these quasiparticles do not reside solely in the vortex core and are thus not bound states. We can illustrate this by taking a FT of the LDOS and plotting cuts in momentum space over a range of energies to observe a dispersion relation. The nonzero Fourier harmonics at each energy, ω, corresponds to the scattering wave vectors connecting different regions of the surface determined by the spectral function evaluated at the same ω. The regions of large joint DOS on this surface provides us with the dominate Fourier harmonics, and if these regions disperse, we see it in the FT of the LDOS. In Fig. The Fourier transform of the LDOS for an Abrikosov vortex of the PDW state for a range of probing voltages. We take cuts along the line ky = 0 and plot the absolute value of the FT vs probing voltage. This figure showcases the QPI for the Abrikosov vortex, for which we note the dispersing quasiparticles; hence, these patterns do not represent a bound state. We suppressed the intensity around the Γ-point in this plot. A similar pattern of the QPI is present in the case of the double dislocation, suggesting it too does not possess bound quasiparticles. Here we compare the plots corresponding to the tunneling DOS for the half-vortex outside the vortex core on its l.h.s. and r.h.s. [Figs. 14a and 14b respectively]. The tunneling DOS are labeled with only x coordinates to indicate how far we are in respect to the half-vortex core (x being measured relative to its center). This indicates we are looking at consecutive x positions in a given sub figures as well as we are comparing curves to the left (negative sign) and right (positive sign) of the vortex. The particular positions used for the representative curves are somewhat arbitrary in the sense we want only positions outside the core. Also, note that the defect is placed on the CuO bonds here opposed to the center of the plaquette as was done in the main text for the LDOS. The spectral functions corresponding to these two situations are equivalent, meaning the energetics are very similar, but the shape of the dI/dV curves will certainly change character since the gap amplitude takes on different values on the lattice sites. Both sets of curves, to the right and to the left of the vortex core, have a periodicity of four lattice spacings, just like that of the pure PDW in the text (the same conclusion holds for the placement of the defect at the center of the plaquette). However, unlike a pure LO state the data appears to have a relative shift of two lattice spacings when comparing the curves from the right to the left (again this holds true for the half-vortex placed at the center of the plaquette). As was discussed in the text, this is due to the jump in θ + by π/2 across the halfvortex's core and can be explained as an accumulation in phase due to the non-zero COM-momentum of our Cooper pairs; that is, Q • r = π/2 if r = 2a 0 e x . This is a smoking gun signature of the half-vortex since a bonafide LO state would not break inversion symmetry like so. Now we compare the tunneling DOS of our topological defects inside and outside the core of the vortex [Figs. Outside the core the double dislocation and the Abrikosov vortex look almost identical to one another and also the pure PDW (LO state). This is because the topological defect has less of an influence on the electronic states far away from the core. The half-vortex has additional wiggles in its tunneling DOS corresponding to satellite peaks. These additional peaks arise here and not for the other two defects because of the halfvortex's inequivalent Fourier components. .3) for each configuration of the SC amplitudes ∆ i (r, r ′ ) [see Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2)]. The normal state band structure