Superconducting qubits are based on collective excitations in Josephson junctions. Their sufficiently high controllability and low-noise interaction with one another make them a viable candidate for implementing large-scale quantum computation. Although there are great improvements in the coherence of these qubits, the progression towards building a fault-tolerant quantum computer is still a major mission. This issue can be reflected in the imperfect gate fidelity. A source of such infidelity is the fundamental parasitic interaction between coupled qubits. This thesis deals with such spurious interaction in two-and three-qubit circuits. The parasitic interaction reflects a bending between computational and noncomputational levels. This bending creates a parasitic ZZ interaction. We first study the possibility of zeroing the ZZ interaction in two qubit combinations: a pair of interacting transmons, as well as a hybrid pair of transmon coupled to capacitively shunted flux qubit (CSFQ). We utilize our theory to accurately simulate experimental results taken by our collaborators from measuring a CSFQ-transmon pair in the absence and presence of cross-resonance (CR) gate. The impressive agreements between our theory and experiment motivated us to study the characteristics of a CR gate that performs with 99.9% fidelity in the absence of static ZZ interaction. Since the CR pulse produces an additional ZZ component on top of the static part, we propose a new strategy for zeroing total ZZ interaction, and name it dynamical ZZ freedom. This freedom can exist in all-transmon circuits and allow to make perfect entanglement. Based on our findings, we propose a new two-qubit gate, namely the parasitic-free (PF) gate. Moreover, we show that we can take advantage of the ZZ interaction and make it stronger in order to perform a controlled-Z gate. Finally, we study the impact of a third qubit on the two-qubit gate performance and discuss several examples to illustrate the properties of two-body ZZ and three-body ZZZ interactions in circuits with more than two qubits. iii Zusammenfassung Supraleitende Qubits basieren auf kollektiven Anregungen in Josephson-Kontakten. Ihre ausreichend hohe Kontrollierbarkeit und rauscharme Wechselwirkung untereinander machen sie zu einem praktikablen Kandidaten für die Implementierung von Quantencomputern in großem Maßstab. Obwohl es große Verbesserungen in der Kohärenz dieser Qubits gibt, ist der Weg zum Bau eines fehlertoleranten Quantencomputers noch eine große Aufgabe. Dieses Problem kann sich in der unvollkommenen Gattertreue widerspiegeln. Eine Quelle solcher Untreue ist die fundamentale parasitäre Wechselwirkung zwischen wechselwirkenden Qubits. Diese Arbeit befasst sich mit dieser parasitären Wechselwirkung in Zwei-und Drei-Qubit-Schaltungen. Die parasitäre Wechselwirkung spiegelt Quantum computers develop computation technology based on quantum mechanical phenomena, e.g. superposition, entanglement and interference. The field of quantum computing can be traced back to 1980's. Paul Benioff first put forward a theoretical demonstration of a quantum mechanical prototype of the Turing machine The laws of quantum mechanics enable to do more than encoding what can be done with bit. They help to solve problems which no classical computer can solve in any feasible amount of time. This ability is known as quantum supremacy or quantum advantage In contrast to classical computers which use bits, quantum computing merges two great scientific revolutions of the 20th century: computer science and quantum physics, and uses the quantum states of an object to produce what's called "quantum bit", namely qubit. A well-characterized qubit should have a distinguished two-level system from higher energy levels. The two energy levels of a physical qubit are often defined as ground state |0⟩ and excited state |1⟩, which are two orthogonal vectors in a two-dimensional vector space. The energy difference between the two states is referred to as the qubit frequency by assuming the reduced Planck constant ̵ h ≡ 1. Similar to classical computers, physical qubits should have the ability to be scaled up to any numbers. A logical qubit used for programming, consisting of one or more physical qubits, can be in a superposition, partly in |0⟩ and partly in |1⟩ state. There are hundreds of physical systems which have well-defined two level system, and are easily scalable. These quantum systems can be classified in terms of the qubit characteristics. For instance, qubits can be based on atomic physics such as trapped ions and neutral atoms. Trapped ions are confined and suspended in free space using electromagnetic fields Other popular qubits are based on solid-state systems that are integrated into a solid material with the nanofabrication techniques. Qubits in solid state systems take advantage of spin states or charge states such as semiconductor qubits Registers in classical computers should be initialized to a known value before starting computation. Equivalently in quantum computers qubit states should be initialized usually to ground state. During quantum operations qubits heat up. Therefore in order to be able to run quantum algorithms several times one after the other, one needs a quick cooling method, i.e. resetting. This can be realized by natural cooling, also called passive cooling, with the residual coupling to the environment. Although passive cooling benefits in the energy efficiency and lower financial cost, this protocol is inherently time consuming. The reason is that passive cooling transfers heat from qubit systems to the environment at the speed of relaxation rate, which is always minimized to lower the probability of errors in a coherent quantum computation. Another approach is active cooling which becomes attractive by relying on an external approach to enhance the heat flow. For example, by applying laser-based Doppler-cooling the effective temperature of trapped ions was rapidly reduced Quantum systems cannot live long due to irreversible heat and quasiparticle exchange with environment, which is characterized by coherence time The two relaxations characterize coherence times T 1 and T 2 as T 1 is the time required by a qubit to relax from the first excited state to the ground state. T 2 is the average time in which the energy-level splitting remains unchanged. To perform high-fidelity quantum computing, coherence times of logical qubits must be longer than the operation time. Among physical qubits, trapped ions can last longer, e.g. up to a few hundred seconds or even a couple of minutes, by suppressing the limiting factors such as critical current noise Quantum gates are basic operations on a small number of qubits. They are the building blocks of quantum circuits, like XOR gates for conventional digital counterpart. Unlike many classical logic gates, quantum gates are reversible. Such reversible implementations can be expressed using a special class of logic gates, known as universal sets. In order to perform arbitrary unitary operations, it is sufficient to have the ability of performing all members of a universal gate set. The Solovay-Kitaev theorem In reality, most of the physical systems proposed so far consider only two-qubit unitary transformations. Therefore realizing high-performance single qubit gates and CNOT gate is crucially important for quantum algorithms. Single qubit gates correspond to rotations of a spin about the Cartesian axis, and can be implemented directly with external driving pulses. Usually quantum gates are written as Pauli matrices, e.g. several commonly used quantum gates are which change the amplitudes or phase of the states |0⟩ and |1⟩. Any single qubit operation can be decomposed into three Bloch sphere rotations and a global phase factor, so it is easy to perform in experiments. To date single-qubit gate can be realized accurately enough for fault-tolerant quantum computing A CNOT gate is the controlled version of the X gate and performs a selective negation of the target qubit as 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 Construction of CNOT gates varies in gate decomposition and qubits of physical properties. For instance, in trapped ions the CNOT gate can be realized by using a linear trap and laser beams Measuring quantum states determines computational results projected on the "classical" world. There are three required subsystems for such measurement: (1) Quantum system whose properties are remaining unknown; (2) Measurement apparatus, behaves as a classical system that can interact with qubits; (3) Environment surrounding the apparatus whose presence supplies the decoherence. One way to describe quantum measurements is to project the eigenstates of measurable quantities. A Hermitian measurement operator carries eigenvalues corresponding to the outcomes of measurement. For a mixed state, the unconditioned final state of the system is a classical mixture of the output states of all possible measurement outcomes. However, such projective measurements are too restrictive and can change or destroy the characteristics of quantum systems. More generalized quantum measurements are so called Positive Operator-Valued Measure (POVM), which can be viewed as a collection of positive Hermitian operators. The POVM process is a statistical measurement since each operator corresponds to an outcome of the measurement with a real and non-negative probability. This measurement is not repeatable, meaning that one can find different results when repeating the measurement which is independent of a particular realization. These properties make POVM the most general measurement one can perform on a quantum system. For instance, it can be used to measure phonon fluctuation in the ground state Superconducting qubits have become one of most promising candidates that satisfy DiVincenzo's criteria and can implement large-scale quantum computing. This type of qubits is macroscopic in size and lithographically defined with microfabrication technology, making it easy to build and capacitively or inductively coupling to the others. Frequency domain of the superconducting qubits allows that the state of a qubit can be changed by existing commercial microwave devices and equipment. Superconducting quantum computing is an implementation of quantum computers based on superconducting circuits. Here an arbitrary single qubit gate is achievable by external microwave drive. Two-qubit gates such as CNOT gates are realized by combining cross-resonance gate However, there are yet outstanding challenges against high-performance quantum computing Particularly, the parasitic ZZ interaction between a pair of superconducting qubits is a limiting factor for two-qubit gates and quantum error correction. Although the ZZ interaction is always one or two orders of magnitude weaker than the coupling strength, it obviously degrades the performance of many quantum gates The main goal of this book is to improve two-qubit gate performance by either mitigating unwanted parasitic ZZ interaction, or improving wanted ZZ interaction, whenever the qubits are idle or driven by external pulses. We aim to develop a theory that can describe the characteristics of ZZ interaction in different circuits. Beyond that, we will also generalize our theory of parasitic interaction to a multiqubit scheme, and find out the difference from the two-body interaction. In chapter 2 we present generalized formalism of circuit quantization from corresponding Lagrangian and Hamiltonian. In particular, we introduce the basic elements of the superconducting circuit, e.g. the LC resonator and Josephson junctions, and describe several types of qubits in details such as transmon and capacitively shunted flux qubit (CSFQ), as well as their variations. After highlighting the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation, we move to the core part of the Hamiltonian model -circuit quantum electrodynamics (circuit QED) by taking several examples. In chapter 3, we theoretically analyze the origin of static ZZ interaction using different theory models. We explore the possibility of static ZZ freedom in two types of devices: CSFQ-transmon pair and transmon-transmon pair coupled via a harmonic bus resonator, and derive the condition of zeroing static ZZ interaction for both pairs. We apply our theory to simulate the experimental hybrid CSFQtransmon circuit, which is fabricated at IBM and measured at Syracuse university by our collaborators. We calculate qubit and resonator frequencies and extract their coupling strengths as well as static ZZ interaction versus flux threading the CSFQ. Following the experiment, in chapter Chapter 5 introduces some novel gates based on the study of the tunable coupler. We first propose a parasitic free (PF) gate by cancelling unwanted ZZ interaction and suppressing external flux noise. Beyond that, we take advantage of the wanted ZZ interaction to perform a CZ gate, and propose a scheme where the CZ gate can be fully turned off by tuning qubit frequency. Chapter 6 presents preliminary results of three-qubit interaction in two setups: triangle geometry and qubit chain. By calculating Pauli coefficients in the threequbit computational subspace, we study characteristics of two-body ZZ and threebody ZZZ interactions, and take several examples to illustrate them. Superconducting Qubits and Circuit QED Superconducting qubits have been proved to be versatile on a macroscopic scale for the study of quantum technology, such as quantum computing Generally speaking, there are three classes of superconducting qubits based on the relevant degrees of freedom: charge qubit This chapter starts with introduction of the basic concepts of superconducting qubits and circuit QED, including circuit quantization, Josephson effect and several types of superconducting qubits mainly focusing on transmon and CSFQ. By means of the perturbative approach, we move to the regime where the qubitresonator detuning is larger than coupling strength, namely dispersive regime, and study the models of one qubit coupled to a harmonic oscillator, and two qubits coupled via a bus resonator. In this section we briefly introduce how to quantize a non-dissipative electrical circuit, most of the discussion below is from Ref. A dispersive element for which the voltage v(t) is only a function of the charge Q(t) and not directly of the time t or any other variables, is said to be a capacitive element. Similarly, a dispersive element for which the current i(t) is only a function of the flux Φ(t) is said to be an inductive element. For linear capacitance and inductance, the relation is given by v(t) = Q(t)/C and i(t) = Φ(t)/L, and energy stored in these basic elements can also be calculated as Q 2 (t)/2C and Φ 2 (t)/2L, respectively. Before finding the degrees of freedom of an arbitrary conservative circuit, one should take into account the build-in constitutive relations at each node and loop which is the famous Kirchhoff's law. The two equations above correspond to two standard methods to write the classical Hamiltonian: the node method and the loop method. In the next, we only show the node method which is applicable for most practical problems. With the above background, we summarize the following steps to write a Hamiltonian from the electrical circuit: 1. Separate the circuit into capacitive sub-network and inductive sub-network. Inductances and capacitances meet at active nodes, while only capacitances or only inductances converge at passive nodes. 2. Name a particular active node "ground", and choose the set of branches that connect the ground via capacitances to every other active or passive node without forming any loops, this is so called spanning tree method. 3. Classify inductive energy into potential energy U and capacitive energy into kinetic energy T , here one can rewrite the kinetic energy in terms of flux by noticing that v = φ with φ being the node flux. 4. Write the Lagrangian of the network as a function of fluxes at nodes in the form of L(⋯, φ i , φi , ⋯) = T -U , one can check that by applying Lagrange's equations. 5. Find the generalized momentum (node charge) which is canonical conjugate of node fluxes, defined as q i = ∂L/∂ φi ; 6. Express the Hamiltonian in terms of the conjugate pair q i and φ i by performing Legendre transform H = ∑ i q i φi -L. Replace the variables with corresponding operators by straightforward adding a hat φ → φ and q → q which satisfies the commutator relation [ φ, q] = i ̵ h, description of electrical circuit is changed from classical to quantum regime. For simplicity, the hats on operators can be dropped. The transmission line resonator (TLR) with φ being flux threading the inductor. Conjugate term charge q can be derived from q = ∂L/∂ φ. By using Legendre transformation, the Hamiltonian of a LC resonator is written as Let us introduce standard creation and annihilation operators r and r † satisfying the commutation relation [r, r † ] = 1, and express them in the form of where zero point fluctuation is expressed as being the characteristic impedance. The zero point energy is the lowest possible energy described by Heisenberg uncertainty principle such that φ ZPF q ZPF = ̵ h/2. Hamiltonian then is quantized as a harmonic oscillator whose eigenstates are the Fock states |n⟩, satisfying r In the rest of this manuscript, 1/2 corresponding to zero-point energy is dropped. A Josephson junction (JJ) is a quantum mechanical device which consists of two narrow superconductors separated by a thin insulator as shown in Fig. Cooper pair Cooper pair Based on Ginzburg-Landau theory, in the superconducting state the wave function Ψ L is the amplitude to find all electrons on the left side, and Ψ R is the corresponding function to find it on the right side. By substituting two eigenvectors where φ L and φ R are the phases on the two sides of the junction and n L , n R are the density of electrons at those two points. K is a coupling constant for the wave functions across the barrier. If K were zero, these two equations would describe the lowest energy state with energy U of each superconductor. The two equations can also be simplified as ) where I s is the supercurrent, I c proportional to n is the critical current. Magnetic flux quantum is defined as Φ 0 = h/2e, therefore the voltage across the junction can be defined as V = dΦ/dt which is analogous to Faraday's law with Φ = (Φ 0 /2π)φ being the flux. The energy stored in the JJ is with E J = I c Φ 0 /2π being called the Josephson energy. Connecting the JJ in series with a capacitor and a voltage source constitutes an artificial two-level electronic system: a single Cooper-pair box (CPB) also called charge qubit with which conjugate variable of the flux is (2.17) In this case the Hamiltonian of the system is given by where Q = 2en is the charge with n being the Cooper pair numbers and C Σ = C J +C g . The Hamiltonian can also be rewritten in terms of dimensionless canonical variables n = Q/2e and φ = Φ/Φ 0 with φ ∈ [0, 2π] where E C = e 2 /2C Σ is the charging energy and n g = C g V g /2e is the normalized gate induced charge. The most popular evolution of the charge qubit is transmon in which CPB is shunted by an additional large capacitance as shown in Fig. where ψ k (φ) is the eigenstate which satisfies the periodic condition ψ k (φ) = ψ k (φ+ 2π). By multiplying both sides of Eq. (2.20) with exp (-in g φ) and assuming that Ψ k (φ) = exp (-in g φ)ψ k (φ), n g is absorbed into the new eigenstate, the equation above then is simplified to This equation can be simply recast to the standard Mathieu equation, with the following solutions where M A is Mathieu's characteristic value, int(x) rounds to the integer closest to x, a mod b denotes the usual modulo operation, and a div b gives the integer quotient of a and b. Note that eigenvalues only depend on the normalized gate charge n g and the ratio of E J and E C . The lowest three eigenvalues as a function of n g for several E J /E C are shown in Fig. Both anharmonicity and charge dispersion are plotted in Fig. Due to charge-insensitive property, transmon has been employed as a central component of several scalable platforms Circuit Hamiltonian with more than one junction cannot be directly recast 0.1 -0.95 to the Mathieu equation. Therefore it is useful to learn how to approximately simplify it. In phase basis, potential of the asymmetric transmon is written as U = -E J1 cos φ 1 -E J2 cos φ 2 with φ 1 and φ 2 being the phases across two junctions. The change in macroscopic phase around a closed loop must be zero modulo 2π, so we have From the definition of the gauge invariant phase, the phase difference is given by with ⃗ A being the magnetic vector potential. In superconductors the supercurrent equation gives where ⃗ J is the supercurrent density and Λ depends on the number of Cooper pairs. Often the contour can be deep within the superconductor where J = 0, in this case flux quantization condition is This equation reduces to The potential of the asymmetric transmon can be rewritten by defining (2.30) with E JΣ = E J1 +E J2 and d = (a-1)/(a+1), indicating that the effective Josephson energy can be tuned by threading a magnetic flux through the loop. Therefore the Hamiltonian of the asymmetric transmon is similar to Eq. Usually the asymmetric transmon have large enough E J /E C such that n g can be safely dropped as shown in Fig. ) . (2.32) Similar to LC resonator, a transmon canonical operators are defined as with the zero-point fluctuations φ zpf and n zpf , satisfying the minimum uncertainty φ zpf n zpf = 1/2. The fluctuations can be determined by the characteristic impedance . A transmon's small anharmonicity allows to approximate the periodic potential energy in the vicinity of minimum with a 4th degree polynomial, making a Duffing oscillator ( ̵ h ≡ 1) with ω 0 = √ 8E C E J being the plasma frequency and δ = -E C being anharmonicity. Higher order corrections are known in Ref. with ω = ω 0 + δ. Another type of superconducting qubit is the persistent current qubit, namely flux qubit with φ i being the phase across junction i (i = 1, 2, 3). Similarly, integrating ∇φ around the loop gives the flux quantization condition φ 1 -φ 2 + φ 3 = 2πf . To investigate how the flux influences the Josephson energy, we can take the flux derivative and get (2.37) One can see flux-noise-insensitive configurations take place at f = n/2 with n being an integer. These points are referred to as "sweet spots" (SS). At the first nontrivial SS f = 1/2, we plot the potential for different α in Fig. To find the minimum points of the potential, one can calculate stable solutions of the following system of equations: (2.38) The solutions (φ * 1 , φ * 2 ) is given by combining the two equations sin φ * = -α sin(2πf + 2φ * ). (2.40) At sweet spot when α < 1/2 there is only one minimum of the potential at (0, 0), while α ≥ 1/2 there are two pairs of solutions (φ * , -φ * ) and (-φ * , φ * ), this is consistent with the trend of potential as shown in Fig. In the last decade, a variation of flux qubit capacitively shunted flux qubit (CSFQ) has been developed by shunting a capacitance to the smaller JJ, and beneficial for the improvement in the coherence time to the microsecond magnitude ) where β = α+C s /C J with C s ≫ C J . Hamiltonian can be derived following Legendre transformation where E Cm = e 2 /2C J (1 + 2β) and E Cp = e 2 /2C J . The larger shunting capacitance permits the φ p direction to behave as a fast free oscillation and can be ignored, also confirmed using the Born-Oppenheimer analysis with potential reduced to U = -2E J cos φ-αE J cos(2πf -2φ). Similar to the threejunction flux qubit, corresponding minimum phase satisfies the relation sin φ min = -α sin 2φ min . At α > 1/2 the potential has two minima while at α ≤ 1/2 it conveys one minimum. Due to the only one degree of freedom, the potential at SS is one-dimensional and plotted in Fig 2 .12 for different α. In the following we only study the case that α < 1/2 in which the potential can be used as a qubit because each period conveys one minimum, not more. In this case energy barrier from the minimum in one unit cell to the neighboring unit cell is α=0.4 α=0.8 -1. -0.5 0. 0.5 1. -1.5 -1. -0.5 .12: Potential of CSFQ as a function of phase at α = 0.4 and α = 0.8 large enough to guarantee a discrete energy levels. If the external flux f = 1/2 + δf is away from SS with δf ≪ 1/2 -α, the minimum point, denoted by φ 0 , can be found by setting the derivative of potential to zero. Since φ 0 and δf are very small, we assume sin φ 0 ≈ φ 0 and sin(2πδf -2φ 0 ) ≈ sin (2πδf ) -2 cos (2πδf ) φ 0 , these assumptions yield Similarly, Hamiltonian of CSFQ can also be rewritten as Eq. In contrast to a transmon, a CSFQ with 1/8 < α < 1/2 has positive anharmonicity. When f is away from SS the less symmetric potential can be approximated to (2.47) with ∆φ = φφ 0 . However higher order terms cannot be simply ignored due to nonzero flux shift. More accurate calculation can be found in Appendix A. An open question in dealing with quantum many-body systems is how to decouple lower-energy dynamics from higher-energy degrees of freedom. The Schrieffer-Wolff (SW) transformation has been proved to effective and consistent to address this problem In general, qubit-resonator interacting Hamiltonian can be decomposed into with H 0 being the unperturbed component and H ′ being the perturbation part. Unperturbed H 0 can be divided into two subspace A and B with assumption that A is separated from B of the spectrum by a gap ∆. Let us consider sufficiently small ε so that weak perturbations are not strong enough to cover the gap, in other words the following limitation should be satisfied By translating the Hamiltonian into operator language, H 0 is diagonal while H ′ = H 1 + H 2 is off-diagonal with H 1 being block diagonal and H 2 being block off-diagonal. The unitary operator U = e -S with anti-Hermitian S is defined to diagonal or block-diagonal the Hamiltonian, therefore the choice of S is critical to this transformation. Effective Hamiltonian is given by here Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula is applied and The commutation relation between block diagonal and block off-diagonal operators gives rise to a block off-diagonal matrix and the commutator of two block offdiagonal results in a block diagonal matrix, therefore the following relation is obtained ) Effective Hamiltonian is expressed as where , j, n) with F being the function that takes all n-fold commutation relations between A and S. For instance, we list the several orders of expansion as Up to second order the effective Hamiltonian reduces to (2.58) Next we take two examples to present how to utilize the SW transformation in the form of matrix calculation where includes all other commutations. The diagonalized effective Hamiltonian requires non-diagonal elements must be zero, namely with p ≠ q and H 0 |p⟩ = E (0) p |p⟩. S (m) then is solved as (2.61) Each order of S can be calculated in this way and then higher order corrections are obtained. The second example is to block diagonalize a Hamiltonian, similar approach is applied. Considering H (0) = H 0 is block diagonal, higher order terms can be expressed as with ⊕ being the direct matrix sum. Since S is block off-diagonal, similarly An alternative approach is black box quantization in which the circuit is more complex and might even be a 'black box' whose properties are unknown. One can first consider the black box as a linearized problem with respect to the coupling between qubit and resonators, and then account for the weak anharmonicity of the Josephson effect. This method can determine the qubit parameters numerically much easier and more accurately compared to perturbation theory Now let us discuss the circuit QED. Analog to cavity QED which describes the interaction between light and matter at the quantum level, Circuit QED can describe the interaction between superconducting circuits behaving as artificial atoms and resonators. This section will build up the general model of qubit-resonator interaction based on circuit quantization, and revisit some ideas borrowed from cavity QED. First we consider the interaction between a harmonic oscillator and one transmon as shown in Fig. with φ and φ r being the phase difference across the junction and the harmonic resonator, respectively. In the case that C ≫ C g , the corresponding conjugate terms n and n r can be approximated as ) . (2.65) with where E C = e 2 /2C Σ and E r = e 2 /2C. By expanding Josephson energy to the 4th order and utilizing the creation and annihilation operators defined in Eq. (2.7) and Eq. (2.33), the Hamiltonian can be quantized as where ω r = 1/ √ LC is the resonator frequency, ω q ≈ √ 8E C E J + δ is the qubit frequency with anharmonicity δ ≈ -E C and coupling strength is Fast oscillation terms, also called counter-rotating terms can be ignored based on the rotating-wave approximation (RWA), then the Hamiltonian simplifies to By restricting the transmon to the first two levels and replacing creation and annihilation operators with Pauli matrix such that a † → σ + = |e⟩ ⟨g| and a → σ -= |g⟩ ⟨e|, the famous Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian is obtained with the convention σ z = |e⟩ ⟨e| -|g⟩ ⟨g|. Previously, we perturbatively expand the cosine potential to fourth order to quantize the qubit Hamiltonian. However, to proceed accurate calculation, multilevel form of transmon Hamiltonian is needed, Eq. (2.69) is thus rewritten as where |j⟩ is the bare eigenvector of the transmon and g j is the coupling strength, and ω j is the corresponding bare energy by assuming ̵ h ≡ 1. With respect to the dispersive regime |g j /(ω r -ω j )| ≪ 1, the Hamiltonian can be full-diagonalized using SW transformation. Given that the first order in S has the form of Substituting this ansatz into Eq. (2.53) yields Calculating the first order correction and ignoring the two-photon processes leaves where μ j = j/(ω r -ω j + ω j-1 ). Summing it together with the unperturbed part H 0 gives the effective Hamiltonian with χ j = g 2 j+1 μ j+1 -g 2 j μ j and ωj = ω j -g 2 j μ j . The shift in resonator frequency is called AC Stark shift, as the nonlinear shift is qubit-state dependent, it is also known as cross-Kerr effect; While the shift in qubit frequency is called Lamb shift, as it arises from nonlinearity of JJ's, it is also known as self-Kerr effect Generally speaking, the coupling strength g j cannot be readout and measured directly, but it is worth noting that dressed resonator frequency in the dispersive regime relies on the state of transmon. Therefore if the resonator is measured with a swapping frequency, there should be two peaks in the spectrum, with which the coupling strength can be estimated. More accurate derivation can be found in Ref. A more complicated example is that two transmons are coupled to each other via a bus resonator as shown in Fig. where φ i = (Φ 0 /2π)φ i with i = 1, 2, r is the flux across each island node. The kinetic part can also be expressed in matrix form as with ⃗ φ = (φ 1 , φ r , φ 2 ) being the phase at each node and capacitance matrix given by One can rewrite the Hamiltonian in terms of the conjugate term of phase φ as with Cooper pair number operator r , the inverse of the matrix can be simplified to C1r C1Cr 1 Cr C1rC2r C1C2Cr C2r C2Cr Expanding the Hamiltonian in Eq. (2.79) to the general form gives where E Ci = e 2 /2C i with i = 1, 2, r. Second quantization of the Hamiltonian by introducing creation and annihilation operators yields where the a q (a † q ) and r (r † ) are annihilation (creation) operators of qubits and the resonator, respectively. Frequency, anharmonicity and coupling strength are given by ) ) ) ) (2.87) To decouple the resonator from the system, the SW transformation should be applied. Unitary operator can be solved using Eq. (2.53) as with ∆ q = ω r -ω q and ∑ q = ω r + ω q . Effective Hamiltonian then can be written as where parameters in the dressed frame are ωq = ω q -g 2 qr ( ) . (2.92) Note that the above expression for J is only valid for single-mode oscillators In the following chapters, we turn to applications of the circuit QED on two-and three-qubit interactions. An arbitrary unitary operation can be decomposed into a set of single-qubit and two-qubit gates. In today's quantum processors made up of superconducting qubits, high-performance two-qubit gates are challenging to realize compared to fast single qubit rotations In this chapter we propose several strategies for freeing two idle qubits from the ZZ interaction, more distinctly, static ZZ without driving. We demonstrate that in a circuit consisting of the same-sign-anharmonicity superconducting qubits, e.g. transmon qubits, the static ZZ interaction vanishes only by switching off qubitqubit coupling strength. However applying two-qubit gates on such a noninteracting pair does not let them entangle, therefore static ZZ freedom in transmontransmon pair is not applicable. We also present a more interesting case, in which we let qubits eliminate their static ZZ in the presence of qubit-qubit coupling, therefore can produce parasitic free entanglement. For this aim, We combine qubits with different-sign anharmonicity, and show that ZZ freedom can take place under certain circumstance. This chapter is based on some parts of our two publications Ref. Two qubits can interact with each other in two ways: (i) direct capacitive coupling, (ii) indirect coupling via a coupler. Figure By considering both qubits and the coupler as multilevel systems, the circuit Hamiltonian can be quantized as where i = 1, 2 is the qubit labels and i = c the coupler label, ) and E 2 (n 2 ) for qubits and E c (n c ) for the coupler. ω i (n i ) is the energy gap between the two energy levels E i (n i + 1) and E i (n i ) of subsystem i. A qubit bare frequency is the difference between the lowest two levels i.e. ω 1/2 (0) or simply ω 1/2 . The full Hamiltonian of the circuit contains all possible interactions even the fast oscillating terms, also called co-rotating terms between levels in the bare basis of all circuit elements. In the presence of the non-zero coupling strength, bare energy levels will be shifted up or down, and this causes modification of qubit frequencies and interaction strengths, sometime appearance of new unwanted interactions. The new values for such quantities are labeled as "dressed" values to make them distinct from bare ones. Once these dressed states are found, and their energies are known, the dynamics of the system is simple: the eigenstate is a superposition of these bare states with the amplitudes being constant. To understand how the coupling terms change the bare basis, let us apply the full Hamiltonian in Eq. (3.1) on the bare states |n 1 , n c , n 2 ⟩ for Q1, coupler and Q2, respectively. It is worth noticing that in Eq. (3.1) only one excitation is allowed in each qubit, but in some cases multiphoton processes can also take place. Generally speaking, one can consider the first order of g ij with i ≠ j and i, j = 1, 2, c, and expand Eq. (3.1) in terms of single particle exchange terms: The equation above shows different ways of energy transfer between two circuit elements. We can show energy level-crossing diagram as a function of qubit-qubit detuning, see Fig. Let us assume a fixed frequency Q2 is detuned from Q1 by ∆, i.e. ω 1 = ω 2 -∆. Now we consider more than one particle exchange cases. Given that an eigenstate of unperturbed Hamiltonian is |n 1 , n c , n 2 ⟩, interacting Hamiltonian provides transition to via counter rotating terms with the strength g 1c , to |n 1 , n c ± 1, n 2 ± 1⟩ via counter rotating terms with the strength g 2c , to |n 1 ± 1, n c , n 2 ± 1⟩ via counter rotating terms with the strength g 12 , and so on. Figure The full Hamiltonian model is complicated and usually performed numerically. By writing the Hamiltonian in the bare basis, namely the matrix form, and fully diagonalizing it, one can find all dressed energies. In this way, the parasitic ZZ interaction is defined as with Ẽn1ncn2 being the dressed energy and subscripts indicating the state of . This is the original definition of static ZZ interaction without any approximation. The coupler frequency ω c is usually assumed to be far detuned from qubits in order to warrant no backaction from itself. Therefore one can treat the Hamiltonian perturbatively in the dispersive regime if g ij ≪ ∆ ij with ∆ ij ≡ ω i -ω j being frequency detuning where dressed frequency ωq (n q ) is the difference between Ēq (n q + 1) and Ēq (n q ) in dressed basis associated to interacting Hamiltonian, and expressed as ωq with g qc being the coupling strength between qubit q and the coupler c, ∆ q (n q ) = ω c -ω q (n q ) being the qubit-coupler frequency detuning. We can generalize the definition of anharmonicity to and the qubit-qubit coupling strength within two photons limit is with Σ q (n q ) ≡ ω c +ω q (n q ). For simplicity, n q = 1 will be dropped from all notations, e.g. ωq (n q = 1) = ωq , ∆ q (n q = 1) = ∆ q and Σ q (n q = 1) = Σ q . Second round of SW diagonalization can separate the computational subspace from higher levels. Within the dispersive regime qubit-qubit Hamiltonian in the the computational form turns out to have the following operator structure: where static ZZ interaction in Eq. ( Let us emphasize that Eq. (3.9) is a variant definition of static ZZ interaction in two-qubit basis compared to Eq. ω1 = ω1 -J 2 00 / ∆, and ω2 = ω2 + J 2 00 / ∆, ( with ∆ ≡ ω2 -ω1 . One should notice that perturbation theory predicts there are a number of divergences in Eq. (3.10) and Eq. (3.11) at ∆ = -δ2 , 0, δ1 , ⋯. However the original definition Eq. (3.9) is free of such divergence due to finiteness of energy levels and the divergences are mathematical artefacts of perturbation theory. Therefore ZZ interaction from such theory in the vicinity of these divergences is inaccurate. To illustrate the absence of these fake divergences, let us numerically evaluate the first five nontrivial eigenvalues of free and interacting Hamiltonian by diagonalizing Eq. (3.4). Figure Perturbation theory shows that parasitic ZZ interaction relies on the effective J coupling defined in Eq. (3.7). In particular, the frequency shifts depend on the effective coupling strength J 00 , which causes |01⟩ ↔ ⟨10| transition with excitation from |0⟩ to |1⟩ in one qubit and absorption in the other qubit from |1⟩ to |0⟩. As one can see in Eq. Now let us explore the evolution of the computational basis |00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩ and |11⟩ by applying time-evolution operator in the form of U = e -iH eff t . In contrast to the free Hamiltonian, static ZZ interaction can accumulate additional phase error relying on the states. Evolving the idle quantum states |00⟩ and |11⟩ after time t results in the phase error exp(+iζt/4), while the states |01⟩ and |10⟩ return a opposite-sign phase exp(-iζt/4). This error will be transmitted across a circuit and finally lower the two-qubit gate fidelity. Based on the expression of ZZ in Eq. (3.10), we can search for the possibility of eliminating the phase error for interacting qubits. One easy solution is to set J 01 ≈ J 10 ≈ 0. A more interesting solution, as discussed before, is to enable the elimination by finding ways to cancel level repulsions between computational and noncomputational levels while keeping two qubits coupled. To find out such a nontrivial solution, we solve the equation ζ = 0 and obtain the following condition: where γ ≡ J 10 /J 01 with J 01 and J 10 defined in Eq. (3.7). Counter-rotating terms and direct coupling are one order smaller than the co-rotating terms and indirect coupling, separately, therefore can be ignored. This simplifies γ to the following expression with ∆ 2 = ω c -ω 2 being the frequency difference between qubit 2 and coupler. The condition of the static ZZ freedom in Eq. (3.12) makes it possible to explore such a possibility for certain circuit parameters. Now we study the elimination of ZZ interaction in two types of circuits: (a) a CSFQ-transmon pair with the opposite-sign anharmonicity coupled via a coupler; (b) a transmon-transmon pair with same-sign anharmonicity coupled via a coupler. This is an example of opposite-sign anharmonicity pair. Combining a positive and a negative anharmonic qubits makes it possible to realize static ZZ freedom. This freedom can take place in the presence of finite J interaction between qubits that let them entangle once they are driven by gates. Here we search for circuit characteristics to achieve static ZZ freedom. Let us consider Q2 in Fig. with a ≡ δ/∆ 2 . In the absence of a, static ZZ cancellation condition in Eq. (3.12) then reduces to i.e. zeroth order solution. This result gives similar trend as the other two numerical methods, but the precision is quite low. Adding the first order of a increases the solution accuracy. One can see for increasing absolute ratio of CSFQ and transmon anharmonicity the analytical approximation is more trustable. This is an example of same-sign anharmonicity pair. Typically there are many choices of pairs of qubits coupled to each other, but here we only study the most popular one, transmon. In such a pair both anharmonicities are negative. Let us start with the trivial solution that J 01 ≈ J 10 ≈ 0, and revisit the definition of J coupling in Eq. (3.7). One can find that zeroing it requires that direct coupling g 12 cancels out the indirect couplings. This freedom has been realized recently in several experiments We simulate this device and extract static ZZ and J coupling by diagonalizing the full Hamiltonian. Figure Interestingly the weaker g 12 = 2.5 MHz case shows that suppression of ZZ interaction can be achieved within a rather large domain of detuning frequency ∆, making it possible to design a transmon-transmon circuit with suppressed ZZ interaction within the dispersive regime ∆ ≫ J. Figure A few months after we post this work on arXiv Searching for other possibilities of ZZ freedom in the presence of J coupling gives that qubit-coupler coupling g qc is equal or larger than the qubit-resonator frequency detuning ∆ q , and this goes beyond the dispersive regime and therefore perturbation theory fails. Exact numerical result from full Hamiltonian presents consistent non-divergent solution and does not show any possibility for ZZ freedom in the transmon-transmon pair within the domain of quantum computation. Another approach is to replace frequency-fixed harmonic resonator with a tunable coupler i.e. an asymmetric transmon, making it possible to vary static ZZ interaction close to zero In this section, we present the detailed theoretical model of the first experimented hybrid CSFQ-transmon device. The device was fabricated at IBM, and consists of one fixed-frequency transmon, one bus resonator, one CSFQ, and readout resonators for each qubit. The measurement was taken by our collaborators at Syracuse University. More details can be found in our publication Ref. Let us briefly discuss the impact of measurement of qubits. Readout measurement usually takes place by means of weakly coupling a qubit to a resonator with the interaction In a circuit where qubits are both coupled to the coupler and readout resonator, the process of eliminating the readout resonator can take place before or after eliminating the coupler. Since both of the couplings are within the dispersive regime, SW are insensitive to the decoupling orders. However in reality the two orders sometime show inconsistent results (3.17) Similarly, first decoupling bus and then readout gives By assuming zero direct coupling g 12 = 0 and universal indirect coupling g qR = g qr = g, we derive the inconsistency in dressed qubit frequency đω ≡ ω1 -ω′ 1 = ω2 -ω′ and anharmonicity đδ as with universal qubit-resonator detuning In the dispersive regime, the difference is in the order of g 6 /∆ 4 2 ∆ and can be ignored. In the following discussion, we decouple readout resonator first then bus resonator to reduce the Hamiltonian. First we build a full-circuit Hamiltonian from a lumped-element circuit model for our CSFQ-transmon device in Fig. where f = Φ/Φ 0 is the normalized magnetic flux, The Hamiltonian is calculated from the Legendre transformation of the Lagrangian where the phase vector in the circuit is defined as ⃗ φ T = (φ b , φ e , φ a , φ T , φ d , φ m , φ p , φ h ), and the energies stored in the readout resonators for the transmon, the CSFQ, and the bus resonator are , and We can decouple the first two redundant phase degrees of freedom since they are not included in the potential, and ignore the phase sum of CSFQ as discussed in section 2.5.1. More details can be found in Appendix B. Now let us rewrite the Hamiltonian in terms of canonical conjugate n and φ as This Hamiltonian can be decomposed into two parts: free part including readout resonators, qubits and bus cavity; interacting parts containing all the interaction. As discussed before, accurate frequency and anharmonicity of transmon and CSFQ can be derived from Ref. where a and h represent the readout resonators, r is the bus resonator, ω j T is the transmon bare energy at level j, and ω k m is the transmon bare energy at level k. Corresponding annihilation operators are defined as m = ∑ k √ k + 1 |k⟩ ⟨k + 1| for CSFQ and T = ∑ j √ j + 1 |j⟩ ⟨j + 1| for transmon. We use the notation ω b 1 (j) to denote the bare transition frequency between the energy levels, j + 1 and j in the transmon; similarly, ω b 2 (k), the bare transition frequency between the energy levels, k + 1 and k in the CSFQ. Figure In the dispersive regime we first eliminate the readout resonators and then the bus, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3.27) reduces to qubit-qubit Hamiltonian. For simplicity, we replace the labels j, k with n 1 for transmon and n 2 for CSFQ. The Hamiltonian in the form of multilevel systems is then written as where the dressed bus frequency is ωr = ω r + Σ q χ q nq |n q ⟩ ⟨n q | with χ being the dispersive AC-Stark shift of the resonator frequency. ω q (n q ) is the energy difference between levels n q + 1 and n q for qubit q. J n1,n2 is the virtual photon exchange rate calculated from J n1,n2 = J dir + J indir n1,n2 with the direct coupling being J dir = g mT , and the indirect coupling J indir n1,n2 being ) where counter-rotating terms have already been included in the indirect coupling. In the dispersive regime that |∆| ≫ J, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3.28) can be fully diagonalized via SW transformation using a unitary operator U as: where U can be derived from Eq. (2.53). The dressed qubit frequencies, anharmonicity, bare bus frequency, coupling strength, and two-photon exchange rate are presented in Tab. 3.3. Note that we define ωq ≡ ωq (0). To illustrate two-qubit levels in the computational subspace, we plot the frequency diagram in Fig. Please note that this truncation does not influence the eigenvalues of |01⟩ and |10⟩ since all interaction has been considered. In the dressed basis eigenvalues can easily be found as When ω 1 = ω 2 the difference between the two levels is 2J 00 . We fit the anti-crossing between CSFQ and transmon in 3.10(b) (inset) to obtain the zeroth-order exchange coupling strength J 00 = 6.3 MHz. In a CSFQ-transmon circuit the second term of static ZZ interaction in Eq. (3.10) can be negative, due to the large and positive anharmonicity of the CSFQ. Note that for a hybrid CSFQ-transmon device, J 01 is quite different from J 10 , in contrast to a transmon-transmon pair where they are almost the same. This allows the hybrid CSFQ-transmon pair to be free of ZZ interaction. This interaction is measured using a Joint Amplification of ZZ (JAZZ) experiment In the JAZZ experiment, this sequence is performed twice, for each initial state of the control qubit Based on the measured and estimated parameters, static ZZ interaction has been extracted and fitted in Fig. Static ZZ interaction is one of the major problems to prevent fast and highperformance two-qubit entanglement such as MAP gate A cross-resonance (CR) gate is enabled by driving the control qubit at the frequency of the target qubit, and this CR drive causes the target qubit state to rotate in a direction depending on the control qubit state, and thus corresponds to a ZX gate where U is a unitary operator that diagonalizes the circuit Hamiltonian to Eq. (3.30), Ω is the driving amplitude at driving frequency ω d . Now let us move into the rotating frame at the frequency ω d on both qubits and ignore the counter rotating terms, total Hamiltonian then becomes where W = ∑ n exp(-iω d tn) |n⟩ ⟨n| with ω d = ω2 . External pulses sometime are strong enough such that 0.1 < Ω/∆ < 1 or even Ω/∆ > 1 with ∆ being the qubitqubit detuning. Since effective Hamiltonian approach is valid only in the dispersive regime, as shown in Ref. One approach to explore strong driving impacts is the so called "least action method" described in Ref. The least action unitary operator T that satisfies H BD = T † H r T is given by where S is the nonsingular eigenvector matrix of H r , S BD is the block-diagonal matrix of S, and S P = S BD S † BD . However, only part of the full matrix is required when block diagonalizing a Hamiltonian, and T can be simplified as follows: given a general d × d Hermitian Hamiltonian, it can be transformed into a block diagonal matrix H using Eq. (4.3) with two blocks H nn and H mm , where n and m are the dimensions of the blocks and satisfy d = n + m and n ≤ m. The corresponding matrix of all eigenvectors S can also be divided into 4 blocks, namely S = ( S nn S nm S mn S mm ) . (4.4) As described in Ref. with X = -(S mn S -1 nn ) † = S nm S -1 mm . Therefore, only part of the eigenvector matrix S is needed, for example, the first n eigenvectors. To study the impact of the driving pulse on the ZX gate, we block-diagonalize the total Hamiltonian in the rotating frame into two individual qubit blocks within the computational subspace and one block for all higher excited levels to decouple them. In the case that driving amplitude is large enough to go beyond the dispersive regime, the block diagonalization should be applied under the principle of least action: First two blocks 4×4 and 11×11, and then repeat this approach in the 4 × 4 matrix to divide it into two 2×2 blocks, each associated to a qubit. Finally, the effective CR Hamiltonian in the computational subspace can be written as For a CR gate, only ZX term in the Hamiltonian is desired, the others such as ZZ, IX, and ZI are unwanted interactions. ZI and IX can be cancelled out by echoed CR sequences where ηΩ 2 is what we refer to as the dynamical ZZ interaction. When applying microwave on one qubit, some additional classical changes happen to another qubit, which is undesirable and should be cancelled, this is called classical crosstalk. In a CR gate, classical crosstalk is assumed to produce new unwanted interactions due to targeted drives on non-local elements. The new unwanted terms have been demonstrated to be existing in experiments where R is a scaling factor for classical crosstalk amplitude, and depends on both two-qubit gate length and flux. φ 0 is the new phase of the CR drive to the control qubit and φ R is the phase to the target qubit. When the Hamiltonian with classical crosstalk is taken to the dressed frame and block diagonalized, one can find the new terms IY and ZY in the effective CR Hamiltonian: Our collaborators also applied CR drive on the CSFQ to perform the CR gate and investigate the characteristic behavior of the CR effect. Here we present the theory analysis of the same chip under CR drive: CSFQ is the control qubit while transmon is the target qubit. On the experimental chip, an external flux threads CSFQ and sometime is tuned away from the SS. By ignoring higher order perturbative results in Ω, e.g. O(Ω 4 ), Pauli coefficients can be approximated as where B f , C f , D f , E f are flux-dependent quantities that can be evaluated numerically. The phase shift can be extracted using quantum state tomography. One intermediate result during the experiment is shown in Fig. Active cancellation is accomplished by introducing a second microwave drive tone on the target qubit. The new pulse has the similar form as classical crosstalk, i.e. A cos(ω d t + φ) ∑ n2 (|n 2 ⟩ ⟨n 2 + 1| + |n 2 + 1⟩ ⟨n 2 |), and also adds new components on top of Pauli coefficients. By assuming φ 0 is calibrated to π, then ZY term vanishes and ZX is maximum negative. The additional pulse on the target qubit is required to cancel the existing IX and IY terms, namely the following conditions should be satisfied The next step is to set proper amplitude of the cancellation pulse to remove both IX and IY simultaneously. In experiment, this is realized by sweeping the cancellation pulse amplitude. If IX and IY are not zero at the same cancellation amplitude then the cancellation phase is incorrect and has to be calibrated again In brief, the active cancellation process includes two parts: phase calibration can effectively eliminate ZY term, while active cancellation pulse applied on the target qubit can totally remove both IX and IY terms, leaving the effective CR Hamiltonian only with Pauli components ZX and ZZ. Although active cancellation can remove ZY, IX and IY terms, ZI remains large in the Hamiltonian (4.9). The standard way to eliminate such a term is to use echoed CR pulse .12) By choosing θ = π/2 together with single qubit rotations, the CNOT gate can be realized. However in reality the ZZ interaction is always on, the frequency of the echoed CR oscillation, i.e. f ECR , thus can be determined from the following relation: linearity due to the off-resonant drive on CSFQ where τ is the total time length of the square echoed CR pulse. In experiment, one can use Gaussian flat-top CR pulses with rising and falling edges, where τ 0 is defined to be the length of the flat-top part of each CR pulse. This π rotation includes 20 ns derivative removal via adiabatic gate (DRAG) pulse, and is buffered by two 10-ns delays. The CR pulses are rounded square with equivalent rise and fall times of 20 ns. Thus we define the two-qubit gate length to be t g = 2τ 0 +160 ns, where τ 0 is the average flat-top length of each CR pulse. Due to the finite rise and fall time, we have τ > τ 0 , e.g., for τ 0 = 0, τ is non-zero. In the weak driving regime, the linear oscillation frequency can be expressed as with a flux-dependent coefficient γ(f ), e.g., γ(0.5) ≈ 0.1. The exact flux-dependent γ(f ) can be found from Eq. (4.13). By substituting this approximation into Eq. (4.14), we obtain the following expression for the CR amplitude to make a ZX 90 gate: To qualify the gate performance, we compute two-qubit error per gate in an echoed CR pulse sequence for implementing a ZX 90 gate by considering the density matrix starting in the ground state in the Pauli basis. CR gate errors can come from several aspects: (1) Limited coherence times compared to operation time. (2) Classical crosstalk. (3) Parasitic ZZ interaction. Here, ZZ interaction is assumed to be a global error, and for each time step we apply actual gate unitary transformation as well as decoherence terms. The total map following the gate sequences is and each map is defined by where the unitary operators U ZZ and U CR± are defined as U ZZ = e -i2πα ZZ tgZZ/4 and U CR± = e -i2πτ H ct CR (±Ω) with α ZZ defined in Eq. (4.7) and H ct CR defined in Eq. (4.9). To calculate the CR gate fidelity, we can use a different but efficient visual representation of process maps, the Pauli transfer matrix R with E ij being a matrix with 1 in the ij th entry and 0's elsewhere. Now the density matrix is changed to the space d . In the following, we assume A = B. In case of the Pauli transfer matrix, the qubit state basis is fixed to Pauli matrices P i ∈ {I, X, Y, Z}, and then R matrix elements are defined as Combining with Eq. (4.19) changes the expression to The average gate fidelity thus can be found as Since no active cancellation is performed on the final experiment, we need to model the classical crosstalk with amplitude R(f, τ )Ω(f, τ ), where R(f, τ ) is a flux and gate-length dependent scaling factor. The experimental data on the CSFQ-transmon device revealed that the classical crosstalk on the target qubit is much more significant with increasing gate length. This implies that R(f, τ ) is an increasing function of the gate time length, which is consistent with the assumption that more power is pumped in the system if the gate length is longer. For simplicity, we consider that flux and gate-length dependence are separable, and fit R(f, τ ) ≈ α(f )τ 2/3 which agrees well with the experimental data. The nonlinearity with respect to τ was introduced otherwise the IY Pauli coefficient is consistently larger than the result from measured CR tomography, for example, in Fig. The flux-dependence of α(f ) was extracted by performing separate CR tomography measurements Figure One of the most prominent advantages of a CSFQ-transmon pair over a transmontransmon pair is that the static ZZ interaction can be cancelled by carefully choos- ing qubit parameters. To make a comparison between hybrid CSFQ-transmon circuits and transmon-transmon circuits, we calculate the gate error in three samples: current CSFQ-transmon device (1), a state-of-the-art tested transmon-transmon device (2) Corresponding device parameters are listed in Tab. 4.1. By varying the gate length, we plot the gate error in Fig. In previous section we study the CR gate error and predict that at larger driving amplitude, the dynamical ZZ induced by CR drive leads to a dramatic decrease in the gate fidelity. In this section, we take several samples of CSFQ-transmon and transmon-transmon pairs by varying the two-qubit detuning as well as anharmonicity of the two qubits to explore the possibility of zeroing total ZZ interaction at a large domain of CR pulse amplitudes. The general idea is to tune the circuit parameters and driving amplitude to make the dynamical part cancel out the static part, meaning that dynamical ZZ should at least has opposite sign with static part. We find that CR amplitude can control the magnitude of dynamic part and allows for vanishing total ZZ strength. Moreover the freedom is persistent as long as CR gate is active and then improves the CR gate fidelity. As discussed, when qubits are driven, an additional component is added on top of the static ZZ interaction described in Eq. (4.7) with η being the dynamical quadratic factor. To achieve dynamical ZZ freedom, the minimum requirement is that dynamical part should have opposite sign with static part. Static ZZ interaction can be easily calculated from either full Hamiltonian or effective Hamiltonian in the dispersive regime in chapter 3. In order to evaluate η, we first derive it from perturbation theory. Although perturbation theory is not a proper approximation for such a driving Hamiltonian, especially at strong driving amplitude, it enables us to find the relation between the dynamical factor and circuit parameters. By block diagonalizing the Hamiltonian in Eq. (4.2) using SW transformation, dynamical quadratic factor η is given by with γ being the ratio of J 10 and J 01 in Eq. (3.7) and r ≡ δ 1 /δ 2 . Detailed A i (r, γ) can be found in Appendix D. To see how accurate the perturbative result is, we make a comparison between perturbative approach SW transformation and non-perturbative approach least action (LA) principle in terms of Pauli coefficients of ZZ and ZX. Given that the other unwanted terms IX, IY and ZY in the CR Hamiltonian Eq. (4.9) are eliminated by applying active cancellation pulse on the target qubit and calibrating the global phase of CR pulse to π, the Hamiltonian is only left with ZX and ZZ terms. Here we take an example of CSFQ-transmon circuit and plot the corresponding Pauli coefficients in Fig. The opposite sign of dynamical part and static part makes it possible to realize ZZ freedom when the two-qubit are driven. To further explore the possibility, we study five CSFQ-transmon samples labeled from 1 to 5, and five transmon-transmon samples labeled from 6 to 10, the relative relations of the energy diagrams among the samples are plotted in Fig. Let us first talk about CSFQ-transmon devices. In Fig. with Let us further study the needed cancellation CR amplitudes at which dynamic freedom is achieved. In what comes next we work with the parameters from CSFQ-transmons devices 2-5 and transmon-transmons devices 6-9. We plot the numerical result of dynamic ZZ freedom condition within a large range of qubitqubit detuning ∆ in Fig. To quantify the performance of echoed-CR gate with respect to the total ZZ interaction, we numerically simulate the CR gate for several CSFQ-transmon and transmon-transmon devices in Fig. Figure The worst scenario can be seen in device 6 where the gate error increases with gate time as total ZZ cannot be eliminated. Following the experiment, we study what the CR gate is and how to constitute such a gate. We evaluate the gate performance with respect to ZZ interaction and classical crosstalk. Our theory also predicts that the CR gate with 99.9% fidelity is achievable in the absence of static ZZ interaction with longer coherence times. The CR pulse produces new ZZ component adds on top of the static part, thus leading to a new strategy to cancel the total ZZ interaction, namely dynamical ZZ freedom. We show that this freedom is applicable in both transmon-transmon circuits and CSFQ-transmon circuits. In the next chapter, we will continue the discussion of parasitic ZZ interaction and propose a new gate at which both static and dynamical ZZ freedom is realized throughout the operation. In chapter 4 we presented that static ZZ freedom is achievable experimentally on a superconducting circuit consisting of a pair of opposite sign anharmonicity at certain parameters. These parameters in the case of our experimental device Alternatively, there are several types of tunable couplers which have previously been both designed in theory and tested in experiment In this chapter we first introduce the properties of asymmetric transmons including frequency tunability and flux noise sensitivity. By including the fluxcontrolled tunable coupler with a continuous tunability in superconducting circuits, we take advantage of the cancellation for unwanted both static and dynamical ZZ interaction as described in chapter 3 and chapter 4, then propose a new gate. Later we show how to take advantage of wanted ZZ and make it stronger to constitute a novel CZ gate. Let us revisit the discussion in chapter 2, the asymmetric transmon consists of two Josephson junctions with external flux threading the loop, plasma frequency is then changed to where E JΣ = E J1 + E J2 and d = (a -1)/(a + 1) with a being the ratio of Josephson energy E J1 and E J2 . Equation (5.1) is a periodic function in terms of flux, meaning that plasma frequency oscillates with f . Here we consider external flux is limited to half a period such that f ∈ [0, 0.5] as it has covered the whole tunable window with two boundary frequencies calculated by ) and ω(f = 0) > ω(f = 0.5) since 0 < d < 1. Such two boundaries of the frequency window indicate that larger ratio a leads to a narrow tunable domain. In the next we take an example to illustrate how the frequency is tuned. Given that the asymmetric transmon has E C = 0.337 GHz and E JΣ = 17.5 GHz, external flux f is tuned between 0 and 0.5, we first plot the bare frequency f 01 as a function of the ratio a = 1, 5, 9, 13 in Fig. Dephasing rate of a qubit is proportional to the frequency gradient as a function of flux D Φ = |∂f 01 /∂Φ|, details can be found in Appendix C. This means that tuning the flux away from the sweet spot leads to decrease in coherence time. In other words, large tunability causes more loss. To assess the effect of flux noise on dephasing, we assume the flux noise power spectrum is identical for all different ratios, which allows background dephasing to be the same for each ratio. Another assumption is that the asymmetric transmon has the same modified expression of dephasing rate as the CSFQ with Γ Φ = (0.00288mΦ 0 )D Φ + 0.039μs -1 . By calculating D Φ using data in Fig. In chapter 4 we introduce the dynamical ZZ freedom in driven circuits with a fixed-frequency bus resonator, which requires non-zero static ZZ interaction when qubits are idle. However, qubits are not always active or driven in a large quantum processor, therefore the crosstalk from surrounding qubits does affect the working qubits. One way to deal with this problem is replacing the harmonic bus cavity with a tunable coupler such as the asymmetric transmon. One can first tune the coupler frequency to turn off static parasitic interaction in idle status, and turn it on accordingly when qubits are driven to dynamically cancel out ZZ interaction. In this way we make a gate where ZZ freedom is achieved throughout the gate length, namely parasitic free (PF) gate The circuit scheme is shown in Fig. The system Hamiltonian is written in the form of multilevel systems as where being the bare energy for subsystem i (i = 1, 2, c). There are two ways to describe this Hamiltonian: one is the sum of difference photon number blocks with interaction terms in the off-block part, the other is the sum of the same excitation number blocks with no interaction in between if counter-rotating terms are ignored where i p is the block containing i photons and G ij includes all interaction between block i and block j. To simplify the Hamiltonian, we can apply SW transformation to decouple 0 p block from higher photon excitation numbers, the system thus reduces to the two-qubit basis. As the coupler is an asymmetric transmon and the levels are anharmonic, so at least 2 p should be included in the full Hamiltonian before decoupling. After block diagonalizing Eq. (5.5), the computational subspace can be fully diagonalized and then has the same form as Eq. (3.8). In the dispersive regime that g ij /∆ ij ≪ 1 with ∆ ij = ω i -ω j , we can calculate the eigenvalues of each level using perturbation theory up to fourth order correction, and then derive static ZZ interaction as ) ) , (5.7) ] , (5.8) -( ] . (5.9) It is worth noting that higher excitation number in the coupler i.e. the second excited level with respect to the anharmonicity δ c has already been included in the fourth order correction. Circuit parameters are assumed as follows: the frequency and anharmonicity of qubit 1 and 2 are fixed at ω 1 = 5.12 GHz, δ 1 = -0.322 GHz, and ω 2 = 5.0 GHz, δ 2 = -0.322 GHz, separately, the tunable coupler frequency domain is ω c = 5.8 -6.8 GHz, qubit-coupler coupling strength g 1c = g 2c = 120 MHz and direct coupling strength g 12 = 8 MHz by considering a small direct capacitance. By substituting all parameters into Eqs (5.6)-(5.9), static ZZ interaction for three coupler anharmonicity is evaluated and plotted in Fig. One can see that the two approaches are consistent when coupler frequency is large while anharmonicity is small, but deviate from each other at lower coupler frequency with larger anharmonicity. This disagreement is due to the inaccuracy of perturbation theory on the edge of the dispersive limit, which is most evident at lower coupler frequency with anharmonicity δ c = -350 MHz. For instance, at ω c = 5.8 GHz, |020⟩ with bare energy 11.25 GHz, interacts with |110⟩ with bare energy 10.92 GHz and |011⟩ with bare energy 10.8 GHz, via the coupling strength √ 2g 1 = √ 2g 2 ≈ 170 MHz, leading to g/∆ ∼ 0.35, which falls outside of the consistency domain OFF status: Figure ON status: Now let us move to driven regime. Based on the discussion in CR gates we know that fast ZX rate takes place at stronger driving amplitude, at which dynamical ZZ interaction is also larger. In such a device static ZZ should be designed large so that required cancellation driving amplitude is also strong. In the next we will focus on the device with anharmonicity δ c = -150 MHz as the static ZZ is the largest compared to the other two curves. The off frequency is about 6.345 GHz read from Fig. Another feature of the PF gate is that flux noise can be suppressed throughout the operation. As mentioned before, the asymmetric transmon suffers from 1/f noise when tuning the flux away from sweet spot. In order to reduce the error caused by flux noise, the circuit design and qubit control are needed to be optimized. As described in Fig. In previous discussion we always aim to suppress or eliminate this parasitic ZZ interaction. In fact, without any control the free evolution of a system in presence of ZZ coupling can be used to constitute a controlled-Z (CZ) gate Here we introduce a device on which an asymmetric transmon coupled to a CSFQ via a harmonic bus resonator. As discussed, CSFQ-transmon pair is a good device where static ZZ freedom can be achieved without driving meanwhile entangling two qubits, although CSFQ suffers from shorter decoherence time as flux is away from sweet spot. One way to deal with flux noise is fixing CSFQ at the sweet spot, and utilizing the asymmetric transmon instead to tune ZZ interaction. Thus we can totally turn off ZZ interaction in idle status, and turn it on to realize the CZ gate. The circuit is designed as follows: an asymmetric transmon couples to a CSFQ mediated by a bus resonator, each qubit is measured by a readout cavity. The frequency is arranged that bus resonator is in between two qubits. Detailed circuit scheme is shown in Fig. Figure (5.11) Let us consider C 24 ≪ C 34 and C 47 ≪ C C45 , thus contribution from the two additional capacitors will not affect the expression in Eq. To easily illustrate how the CZ gate is operated, we use its energy-eigenstates |Q1, R, Q2⟩ to describe the system. Figure In our device, the minimum gap occurs between |101⟩ and |020⟩ states, and can be evaluated through near-degenerate perturbation theory when the two states are near resonance where H 0 is the unperturbed Hamiltonian, V is the interaction Hamiltonian and E k is the eigenvalues. By substituting all parameters into the equation above, we find the minimum gap between two states is ∼ 20 MHz, corresponding to 2g 101↔020 , similar to what we found in Eq. with α ZZ being plotted as a function of transmon frequency in Fig. One can see that under current parameters ZZ coupling can be completely turned off at ω 1 = 6.257 GHz. Corresponding fitting function marked by dashed line is To speed up CZ gate while maintaining no leakage to higher levels, we choose a relatively large ZZ coupling strength to be 2 MHz as the working point at ω 1 = 5.981 GHz. Corresponding flux can be evaluated from fitting functions Eq. (5.10) as f = 0.214 OFF and f = 0.338 ON, separately. To further suppress the leakage to noncomputational levels, an optimized control pulse is needed to be implemented such as flat-top Gaussian pulse and a CZ gate is realized when φ ZZ = π. In the following we will take an example 5.8 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 of tanh-shaped pulse to estimate the gate length. The pulse is expressed as where s = 1/2t g with t g being the gate length, f 0 = 0.214, f end = 0.338 and x determines the flat-top length. In arbitrary unit this pulse shape is plotted in Fig. Compared to other schemes to perform CZ gates, this system can completely turn off parasitic ZZ interaction although the gate length is longer. Different from other protocols in which the asymmetric transmon serves as a coupler We have studied two novel gates based on the asymmetric transmon. The first one, PF gate, is realized in a circuit where two fixed-frequency transmons couple to each other via the asymmetric transmon. On such a gate we take advantage of the cancellation for unwanted ZZ interaction throughout the operation, namely static ZZ freedom in idle status and dynamical ZZ freedom in driven qubits. The second one, the tunable CZ gate, is performed in a circuit where the asymmetric transmon serves as a qubit, and couples to a CSFQ via a harmonic bus resonator. In this device wanted ZZ can be completely switched off when the gate is inactive, but wanted ZZ should be further strengthened to make the gate length shorter when it is active. In previous chapters we have analyzed the characteristics of wanted & unwanted two-qubit interaction in superconducting qubits. However, as quantum processors with many qubits are developed, each qubit is inevitably exposed to interacting neighbors. Interaction with nearby idle qubits will undoubtedly cause unwanted entanglement and accumulate errors across the system in the presence or absence of a two-qubit gate. Such interactions do not obviously affect the resting qubits, but can give rise to gate parameters change and lower gate performance. For instance, errors arising from coupling between control/target qubit of a CR gate and their surrounding idle qubits lead to reduction in the gate fidelity For a larger quantum processor, i.e. Sycamore This chapter we study the characteristics of such three-body interaction in two complicated circuit schemes: triangle and planar geometries of three qubits First, let us consider a triangle circuit which consists of three superconducting qubits and three couplers as shown in Fig. Following the convention used in chapter 3, bare qubit q frequency is ω q (n q ) = E q (n q +1)-E q (n q ) with bare energy E q (n q ) at Fock state |n q ⟩ by setting ̵ h ≡ 1, and coupler c i frequency is ω ci . We can ignore the weak interaction between different resonators, and then write the circuit Hamiltonian H in the basis of multilevels following the strategy used in the two-qubit model as The first line in Eq. (6.1) is the unperturbed Hamiltonian of qubits and resonators, second line is qubit-coupler interacting Hamiltonian, and the rest is direct capacitive coupling part. In the case that coupler frequencies are far detuned from qubits, higher or lower, we can decouple all couplers from the circuit using SW transformation, then the qubit Hamiltonian H Q in the dispersive regime is reduced to where dressed frequency and effective virtual photon exchange rate are ωq (n q ) =ω q (n q ) -∑ i n q g 2 qci ω ci -ω q (n q ) , (6.3) ] , (6.4) with ∆ qci = ω ci -ω q (n q ) and Σ qci = ω ci + ω q (n q ). One can see that effective J coupling depends on the transition states n and m of pairwise interacting qubits q and q ′ . To illustrate how strong the two-and three-qubit interactions are, we calculate them using the following six approaches. The first approach is perturbation theory (PT) with RWA by ignoring fast-rotating terms. If the three qubits are the same species with same sign anharmonicity, i.e. all transmons, the coupling strength J nqm q ′ ciqq ′ can be approximately state-independent for a pair of interaction as shown in Fig. where ωq = ωq (0), δq = ωq (1) -ωq (0) ≈ δ q and J qq ′ ≈ J 01 riqq ′ . Note that here we drop all counter-rotating terms. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (6.5) describes an interacting three-body problem, but we can treat it as three pairs of two-body interaction, and tackle them using similar methods as introduced in previous chapters. The most straightforward way is the perturbation theory which gives the dressed energy of each level, then all Pauli coefficients can be derived. The Hamiltonian in the computational subspace can thus be rewritten in terms of Pauli matrices as and Pauli coefficients from perturbation theory up to third order are ) ) ) , (6.10) , (6.11) , (6.12) where E ijk is the eigenvalues of state |ijk⟩, parameters A, B and C are defined as with qubit-qubit detuning ∆ ij = ωiωj (i, j = 1, 2, 3). In contrast with two-qubit architecture, one can see that another term proportional to all three couplings is subtracted from two-qubit ZZ interaction in Eq. (3.10). Now the single-qubit flipping frequency is the combination of dressed qubit frequency with corresponding two-and three-qubit interactions. The new three-body interaction term is created in the form of ZZZ, corresponding coefficient is obviously smaller than two-body interaction as it is proportional to J 3 /∆ 2 . In other words, the nonzero value first shows up in the third order correction. It is worth mentioning that near-degenerate case, in which noncomputational levels could be in the vicinity of computational levels, is excluded in the calculation. But if conditions of detrimental multi-qubit frequency collisions are satisfied, e.g. ω q (n) = ω q ′ (m), we can still deal with the problem using similar method in Eq. (5.12). The second approach is simplified SW (SSW) transformation by considering the Hamiltonian in Eq. (6.5), together with RWA by ignoring fastrotating terms. Since the Hamiltonian in matrix form is not in the ascending order of energies, so we need to reorder it as The upper block contains all eight computational levels which only allow transition from 0 to 1, the other higher levels are in the lower block with J representing all couplings between the two blocks. To decouple higher levels, a second SW transformation is applied, therefore the Hamiltonian is reduced to a 8 × 8 matrix. By fully diagonalizing this matrix, all Pauli coefficients can be obtained. The third approach is SW transformation by considering the Hamiltonian in Eq.(6.2), together with RWA by ignoring fast-rotating terms. Compared to RWA-SSW, here effective coupling discrepancy is included, the other diagonalization processes are the same. The fourth approach is perturbation theory with NONRWA by including all counter-rotating terms in the calculation. Detailed formula of fast oscillation contribution can be found in Appendix E. The fifth approach is simplified SW by assuming effective J couplings are only qubit-dependent, and all counter-rotating terms are included in the calculation. Numerical simulation is the same as RWA-SSW. The last approach is SW by including the state-dependent J discrepancy, and all counter-rotating terms in the calculation. Numerical simulation is the same as RWA-SW. Note that NRWA-SW gives the most accurate Pauli coefficients among the six results since it includes both coupling discrepancy and counter-rotating terms. In Device 1, all coupler frequencies are way larger than qubits. With these numbers we evaluate Pauli coefficients both analytically and numerically using the six approaches. Figure Another scenario we explore is that one coupler frequency is below the qubit while keeping the other parameters of Device 1 unchanged. Frequency, anharmonicity and coupling strength of each subsystem are listed in Tab. Here the third coupler frequency is changed from 6.6 GHz to 3.4 GHz, and corresponding Pauli coefficients are shown in Fig. A simpler version of three-qubit coupling scheme is a qubit chain, as shown in Fig. Note that in the discussion above we assume direct coupling g 13 to be zero. But in reality the two qubits can also capacitively interact with each other, leading to a nonzero direct coupling. In this case we explore the Device 4 in which direct coupling g 13 = 2 MHz, other parameters are the same as Device 3. Accordingly, Pauli coefficients are plotted in Fig. One can see that both two-body interaction ZIZ and three-body interaction ZZZ are nonzero. This is because nonzero direct coupling g 13 leads to the total effective coupling J 13 = 2 MHz as shown in Eq. (6.4). It is clear that direct coupling plays an important role in the two-and three-body interaction although it is small. ZIZ component increases from zero to 60 kHz while ZZZ is about -50 kHz. The sign of ZZZ interaction is changed to negative since now only g 13 is positive. By comparing the triangle geometry and planar geometry of three-qubit interaction, we show that the sign of three-body ZZZ interaction can be changed to the opposite by either changing coupler frequency in triangle geometry or increasing direct coupling in planar geometry. This provides two potential ways to eliminate ZZZ interaction. In other words, it is possible to find out a boundary between the positive region and negative region by changing device parameters, on which ZZZ interaction is always zero, like what we can see in Fig. In a chain with more than three qubits, there are only 2 non-pairwise threebody interactions changing the state of a particular qubit. As shown Fig 6 .7, in the presence of nonzero direct coupling between the two ends of a three-qubit chain, the total three-body interaction is much weaker than two-body interaction, which can be safely ignored when performing quantum gates in this processor. In brief, we explore three-qubit interaction in two setups: triangle geometry and a qubit chain. We derive the Pauli coefficients using both analytical and numerical approaches, and present several examples to illustrate how the two-and three-qubit interactions are affected by the circuit geometry and parameters. We show that the sign of ZZZ interaction can be changed to the opposite by either changing coupler frequency in triangle geometry or increasing direct coupling in the three-qubit chain. This provides two potential ways to eliminate ZZZ interaction. Superconducting qubits have become one of the most prominent candidates for the realization of scalable quantum computing. However, the performance of quantum logic gates still needs to be improved. One limiting factor for the two-qubit gate errors is parasitic interaction between qubits. In this book we mainly focus on ZZ interaction between pairwise coupled qubits, and develop several protocols to either eliminate or utilize it to perform high-fidelity quantum gates. In chapter 3, we show the static ZZ interaction is originated from transitions between computational and noncomputational levels. We characterize such interaction in two circuits of qubit pairs: a hybrid CSFQ-transmon pair and a pair of interacting transmons. The hybrid pair with opposite anharmonicity between the qubits allows for the elimination of static ZZ interaction meanwhile keeps two qubits entangled. The same-specie pair can only achieve static ZZ freedom by almost decoupling two qubits. We also derive the condition of static ZZ freedom from perturbation theory, and use this model to simulate the first hybrid CSFQ-transmon experiment performed by our collaborators, in which zero static ZZ interaction was observed. Our theoretical results are consistent with the experimental data. In chapter 4, we follow the experiment and study the performance of a crossresonance (CR) gate in the hybrid system. The CR gate is realized by driving the control qubit CSFQ with the frequency of target qubit transmon. Our analysis shows that zeroing static ZZ interaction can effectively improve the CR gate fidelity, although the CR pulse produces additional dynamical component on top of it. We predict that two-qubit gate error rate of the order of 0.001 is feasible if the coherence times can be prolonged to 200 μs and static ZZ freedom is realized. Inspired by the experiment, we notice that static and dynamical ZZ interaction can cancel each other. Therefore we derive the condition of dynamical ZZ freedom for CSFQ-transmon pair as well as transmon-transmon pair, and show that this type of freedom can lead to a large increase in the CR gate fidelity. Chapter 5 describes our proposal for two novel two-qubit gates by including a tunable coupler: the parasitic free (PF) gate and the tunable controlled-Z (CZ) gate. We first study the parasitic free (PF) gate in a circuit of two fixed-frequency transmons coupled via a frequency-tunable coupler. In the circuit both static ZZ and dynamical ZZ freedom can be realized by tuning the flux threading the frequency-tunable coupler. By fine designing the pulse we achieved ZZ freedom at two sweet spots with extremely reduced flux noise. The second gate we propose is a tunable CZ gate in a circuit of a CSFQ coupled to a frequency-tunable transmon threading by external flux via a bus resonator. In this circuit ZZ interaction can be totally turned off at one flux point, and dramatically increased to several MHz at another flux point. In last chapter, we study three-qubit circuits in triangle and chain geometry. In each setup we study and evaluate the two-body ZZ and three-body ZZZ interaction between qubits. We show that the sign of ZZZ interaction can be changed to the opposite by either changing coupler frequency in triangle circuit or increasing direct coupling in the chain. This provides two potential ways to eliminate such ZZZ interaction. three order corrections are given by (n -k)! E (1) n = 0 Sum up unperturbed energy and all three orders corrections, one can obtain the analytical formula of CSFQ eigenvalues, then frequency ω 01 = (E 1 -E 0 )/ ̵ h and anharmonicity δ = (E 2 -2E 1 + E 0 )/ ̵ h can be evaluated. Here is an example to illustrate how to find these parameters. Consider a CSFQ with E C = 0.292 GHz, E J = 108.9 GHz, α = 0.43 and f = 0.5. Firstly, expand the potential to 20th order (L=10) at the sweet spot and plot the frequency f 01 as a function of ξ. Determine ξ by finding the minimum as shown in It is worth noting that we put the two redundant phase degrees of freedom in the first place, which will be removed next. In Fig. Since φ b and φ e are not included in the potential, and φ p can also be neglected as discussed in the section of CFSQ, we can use Cholesky decomposition where → n = (n a , n T , n d , n m , n h ) is the canonical term of → φ , and where the new notations are defined from existing ones in Fig. 3) The relationships between the various coupling strengths g ij and the relevant capacitances are given by the following expressions: For understanding the map of coherence, we must know the coherence times T 1 and T 2 of each qubit. Transmon frequency is fixed, therefore its T what is measured with the standard protocol. This behavior may be due to the depolarizing effect from twirling the 1/f noise, which is typically the dominant contribution to dephasing in flux tunable CSFQ for bias points away from a sweet spot 2: Junction parameters and charging energy of the CSFQ and transmon. CSFQ Josephson energy is for the larger junctions. The two transmon parameters were calculated using the measured dressed qubit frequency. Meanwhile, the three CSFQ parameters were obtained by fitting spectroscopy data of the dressed qubit frequencies, ω1(0)/2π and ω1(1)/2π vs. flux with 1D potential approximation * is determined using three different methods: In the row labeled by LA we use non-perturbative least action method to determine total ZZ and find where it is zero; In O(n) row we use the SW-evaluated static ZZ coupling ζ of Eq. (3.10) and the SW-evaluated η in Eq. (4.24) and substitute them in Eq. (4.7) to find the solution at which amplitude ZZ becomes zero; Below it we present the results from Eq. (4.25) and in the last row we evaluate the ratio of ∆/δ 2 in each device. One can see the results are better consistent in the limit of ∆/δ 2 ≪ 1. : Ω * from different methods in devices 1-10 in unit of MHz. 'No' indicates devices with no dynamic ZZ freedom. 6: Pauli coefficients of planar geometry three qubit interaction in Device 3. Perturbation theory (PT) and simplified SW (SSW) results are obtained by assuming effective qubit-qubit coupling J is state-independent, while SW takes into account J discrepancy. The most accurate result is from NRWA-SW, marked by black box. , (B.4)