Superconducting quantum processors are one of the leading platforms for realizing scalable fault-tolerant quantum computation (FTQC). The recent demonstration of post-fabrication tuning of Josephson junctions using alternating-bias assisted annealing (ABAA) technique and a reduction in junction loss after ABAA illuminates a promising path towards precision tuning of qubit frequency while maintaining high coherence. Here, we demonstrate precision tuning of the maximum |0⟩ → |1⟩ transition frequency ( f max 01 ) of tunable transmon qubits by performing ABAA at room temperature using commercially available test equipment. We characterize the impact of junction relaxation and aging on resistance spread after tuning, and demonstrate a frequency equivalent tuning precision of 7.7 MHz (0.17%) based on targeted resistance tuning on hundreds of qubits, with a resistance tuning range up to 18.5%. Cryogenic measurements on tuned and untuned qubits show evidence of improved coherence after ABAA with no significant impact on tunability. Despite a small global offset, we show an empirical f max 01 tuning precision of 18.4 MHz by tuning a set of multi-qubit processors targeting their designed Hamiltonians. We experimentally characterize high-fidelity parametric resonance iSWAP gates on two ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with fidelity as high as 99.51 ± 0.20%. On the best-performing device, we measured across the device a median fidelity of 99.22% and an average fidelity of 99.13 ± 0.12%. Yield modeling analysis predicts high detuning-edge-yield using ABAA beyond the 1000-qubit scale. These results demonstrate the cutting-edge capability of frequency targeting using ABAA and open up a new avenue to systematically improving Hamiltonian targeting and optimization for scaling high-performance superconducting quantum processors. Scaling of fault-tolerant quantum computing using superconducting quantum information processors requires twoqubit gates with fidelities 99% or better across the device In this paper, we adapt the ABAA technique for postfabrication trimming of f max 01 to the desired Hamiltonian patterns and demonstrate high-fidelity two-qubit gates on ABAAtuned multi-qubit quantum processors. We characterize the impact of junction relaxation and aging on resistance spread following ABAA tuning for resistance targeting calibration. Combining baseline statistics of targeted resistance tuning on hundreds of qubits and cryogenic frequency prediction characterization, we demonstrate a frequency-equivalent resistance tuning precision of 7.7 MHz, which corresponds to a frequency spread of 0.17% around the predicted average qubit frequency. On cooling down both ABAA-tuned and untuned tunable transmon qubits, we observe evidence of improved coherence after ABAA frequency trimming with no measurable impact on tunability. We tune a set of multi-qubit processors targeting their designed Hamiltonians and show an empirical frequency tuning precision of 18.4 MHz in f max 01 , including additional deviations from pre-cooldown processes, frequency prediction, and f max 01 measurement conditions. We experimentally demonstrate high-fidelity parametric resonance two-qubit iSWAP gates on two ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with fidelity as high as 99.51 ± 0.20%. We calibrated iSWAP gates on all edges of both devices achieving a median fidelity (gate time) of 99.00% (68 ns) and 99.22% (80 ns), respectively. We discuss the implications of the improved f max 01 targeting precision to detuning edge yield and scaling. We envision that the ABAA technique will be broadly applied as an easyto-implement, high-precision frequency tuning approach for scaling high-performance superconducting quantum processors. In this work, we perform ABAA adaptively to incrementally adjust the qubit resistance. An ABAA pulse sequence FIG. To assess the impact of junction relaxation and aging behavior on resistance tuning, as shown in Fig. A subset of ABAA-tuned qubits (28 in total) from Fig. We examined the temporal behavior of resistance relaxation following the ABAA pulse sequence to probe the inherent uncertainty associated with targeting precision and to identify potential factors contributing to variability in tuned resistance levels. Figure To evaluate the resistance tuning precision for targeting the resistance values assigned based on design Hamiltonians, as shown in Fig. When performing targeted ABAA tuning at each qubit, we reserve a pre-calibrated percentage for junction relaxation and determine the threshold resistance upon which to stop the ABAA pulse sequence at each component. The inset in Fig. To correlate the resistance tuning precision characterized at room temperature to its equivalent frequency tuning precision of f max 01 at cryogenic temperatures, we experimentally measure the f max 01 of a set of tuned and untuned tunable transmon qubits and extract the frequency prediction relation using an empirical power law fit, as shown in Fig. To demonstrate ABAA's frequency tuning capability in an integrated workflow for improving detuning edge yield and achieving high two-qubit gate fidelity on full lattices, we trim the tunable qubits on a set of 9-qubit processors targeting the designed Hamiltonian frequency. Qubits on each 9-qubit processor are arranged in a 3 × 3 square lattice with a tunable coupler between each pair of neighboring qubits. Figure We characterized two-qubit gate fidelity on ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with design Hamiltonians optimized for iSWAP gates. To minimize the impact of flux noise on the dephasing time of the modulated qubit, qubit frequencies are designed such that the nearest neighbor qubit-qubit detuning is centered around ∼ 50 MHz. This ensures the modulated qubit will have less frequency excursion from its maximum frequency to bring it into resonance with its neighbors. In addition, the Hamiltonian is designed to make the qubit-qubit detunings large enough that the residual ZZ interaction is minimal at zero-coupling bias. Figure We also characterized a second ABAA-tuned 9-qubit device where we moved two qubits off of f max 01 to avoid frequency collisions and measured qubit-qubit detunings with a median of 48 MHz, which is very close to the design qubit-qubit detuning. On this device, we characterized parametric resonance iSWAP gates on each edge and benchmarked their performance with iRB, getting a median fidelity of 99.22% and mean fidelity of 99.13 ± 0.12%. To illustrate the impact of ABAA frequency tuning on yielding tunable qubit lattices at scale, we perform statistical yield modeling analysis as a function of qubit number and frequency tuning precision. We apply the simulation to a scalable Hamiltonian with edge (qubit-qubit) f max 01 detunings designed in the 40 -110 MHz range and define yield as the probability of all nearest neighbor 2-qubit edges at f max 01 falling in the 20 -130 MHz detuning range (i.e., desired for high-fidelity iSWAP gates). Here the Hamiltonian is constructed by tiling a 9-qubit (3×3 lattice) unit-cell design that ensures detunings fall within the 40 -110 MHz range within the 9-qubit lattice as well as along stitching edges, allowing 20 MHz buffer zones from the yield boundaries on both ends. This Hamiltonian is scalable because it enables up-scaling quantum processors by stitching yielded 9-qubit chips via inter-module couplers (3) With the frequency-equivalent resistance tuning precision of 7.7 MHz of ABAA, a 9-qubit chip yield of 86% can be achieved, which corresponds to yielding 182 tileable 9-qubit chips per 6" wafer, sufficient for tiling into a scaled-up quantum processor of over 1500 qubits. We also note that the chip yield at 7.7 MHz frequency spread [green curve in Fig. In this work, we characterized the qubit relaxation behavior during ABAA and demonstrated the cutting-edge frequency tuning capability using ABAA. Baseline statistics of hundreds of ABAA-tuned tunable transmon qubits yield a frequencyequivalent resistance tuning precision of 7.7 MHz in f max 01 , sufficient for achieving high detuning-edge-yield beyond the 1000-qubit scale. Cryogenic cooldown measurements of tuned and untuned qubits showed evidence of improved qubit coherence after ABAA with no measurable impact on tunability. Despite a global shift due to calibration offset and aging, we experimentally demonstrated an empirical frequency tuning precision of 18.4 MHz when targeting the designed Hamiltonians on multi-qubit quantum processors. We demonstrated high-fidelity parametric resonance two-qubit iSWAP gates on two ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with a median two-qubit fidelity of 99.00% and 99.22%, respectively. The results demonstrated in this study prove that the ABAA technique is an easy-to-implement and efficient method for precision frequency tuning and Hamiltonian targeting on scaled-up superconducting quantum processors. Future work includes improving frequency prediction precision and a better understanding of the junction relaxation and aging mechanism to explore the ultimate tuning precision using ABAA, improving control of the global frequency offset at the chip level for improving scaling yield in a modular quantum processor architecture 