In a recent publication by Li et al. Electronic, vibrational and structural properties of the beryllenes were calculated with density functional (perturbation) theory as implemented in Quantum Espresso (QE) version 7.2 [2, 3], using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional and norm-conserving pseudopotentials from the PseudoDojo project Wannier90 (W90) package [5] was used to compute maximally-localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) for the beryllenes. We used 500 hundred steps for both disentanglement and minimization procedures. The initial projections were chosen to be s and p orbitals. The resulting spreads of the MLWFs were below 2 Å2 . Band structures obtained in W90 were ensured to match those obtained in QE. Based on the obtained Wannier functions, topological properties were determined by computing the Z 2 invariant via evolution of Wannier charge centers (WCC) [6], as implemented in the WannierTools package Superconducting properties of the beryllenes were determined by solving fully anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations, as implemented in the Electron-Phonon Wannier (EPW) package version 5.7 ) electronic band structures of α and β-beryllenes respectively. The inset of (c) shows the zoom-in on the electronic dispersion in the vicinity of the Dirac cone, computed with and without spin-orbit coupling. With spin-orbit coupling, a gap of ∆ = 1 meV opens in the cone. The corresponding structures of the two beryllene phases are shown in Fig. In terms of electronic properties, the two beryllene phases are rather similar. There are two types of states crossing the Fermi level [cf. Fig. α-Beryllene phase possesses a type-I Dirac band crossing located around 2.5 eV above the Fermi level [zoomed on within Fig. Both beryllene phases are dynamically stable as can be seen from the absence of negative frequencies in their phonon dispersions [Fig. In order to find the critical temperature, we solved the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations for a range of temperatures, where the critical temperature is determined as the lowest temperature for which there were no solutions of the equations for the superconducting gap. As shown in Fig. Even though β-beryllene does not exhibit significantly stronger EPC, its critical temperature obtained from the anisotropic Migdal -Eliashberg calculations reaches significantly higher -around 8.5 K [Fig. Our results concerning the structural and electronic properties of beryllenes are in good agreement with Li et al. For vibrational properties, we observed high sensitivity of the lowest acoustic phonon mode dispersion in the close proximity of the Γ point to the electronic smearing. In order to obtain convincingly stable phonon dispersion, we had to increase the smearing values to 0.03 and 0.04 Ry for α and β beryllenes respectively. Ref. Despite the differences in vibrational dispersion, we observed near perfect agreement of the EPC in our calculations and in Ref. However, the most striking difference arose in the anisotropic calculations. As expected, we found a monotonic decrease of the superconducting gap energy with temperature for both beryllene phases, with the critical temperature roughly corresponding the BCS relation to the gap at zero temperature. Surprisingly, Ref. This comment was sent to authors and the journal in question in an effort to make a correction in the public record, without any malicious intent. The authors did not opt to respond in any way or make the correction accordingly, and the journal does not publish corrections or comments. The Editorial Board of the journal was in contact with the authors and has decided that correction is not warranted. TABLE I.