Being a long-standing problem yet to be resolved, high-temperature superconductivity (HTSC) exhibits important scientific significance and application prospects while Fe-SCs are usually bad metals in the normal state. To understand the importance of these similarities and differences in unconventional superconductivity, it is highly desired to explore new materials with HTSC. Infinite-layer nickel oxides are considered to exhibit unconventional superconductivity despite their relatively low critical temperature Recently, HTSC with T c up to 80 K was discovered in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 bulk compound under pressure between 14.0 GPa and 43.5 GPa In this work, by combining ARPES and ab-initio calculation, we systematically investigate the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient pressure. The band structure shows a multi-band and multi-orbital nature with Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and 3d z 2 orbitals dominating the electronic states near E F After being renormalized by 2.7 and 5.0 for the d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 bands respectively Within each Ni-O bilayer, the corner-sharing of NiO 6 octahedrons through the apical oxygen atoms provides the structural basis for the interlayer  bonds between Ni 3d z 2 and O p orbitals Our sample shows clear Laue peaks in Fig. We note slight kink-like features in the resistance curve, which were previously associated to a possible charge-density-wave (CDW) transition Figures There are three sets of FS sheets in the conventional BZ: a cylindrical electron pocket around the Γ ̅ point, a cylindrical hole pocket around the X ̅ /Y ̅ point, and a flat FS sheet near the S ̅ point (Figs. The electron pocket around Γ ̅ is better visualized using laser-ARPES, consistent with the previous report Figure The calculated band structure with U = 4 eV is renormalized by a factor of about 5 and overlaid on the ARPES spectra in Figs. The nice agreement between the experiments and calculations confirms the validity of our ab-initio calculations in the investigation of the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . We further calculated the band structure at high pressure that flattens the Ni-O layer and aligns NiO 6 octahedrons along c. As shown in Fig. Figure The temperature dependence of the d x 2 -y 2 band is reminiscent of the pseudogap in cuprate superconductors In conclusion, we have comprehensively studied the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient pressure. The nice agreement between experiment and calculation with onsite Coulomb interaction and band renormalization suggests an important role of electronic correlation in the system. The d z 2 band is flattened by the strong correlation, while the less-correlated d x 2 -y 2 band shows a pseudogap-like behavior, which are reminiscent of the orbital-selective band renormalization in Fe-SCs and pseudogap in cuprates. At high pressure, the flat band is predicted to locate right at E F and is believed to be crucial for the HTSC. Our systematic experiments provide an electronic basis for exploring the Ni-based unconventional HTSC. Single crystals of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 were grown by the high-pressure optical floating zone technique Raw materials of La 2 O 3 were dried at 900 o C overnight prior to the reaction to avoid moisture contamination. Subsequently, La 2 O 3 and NiO powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio with 1% ~2% excess of NiO and then ground thoroughly. The mixture was then pressed into pellets and sintered at 1100 °C for 2 days with several intermediate grindings. The reactant was pressed into seed and feed rods with a diameter of about 6 mm under hydrostatic pressure and then sintered at 1300 °C for 2 hours. The single-crystal growth was performed in a high-pressure optical floating zone furnace (HKZ-300) with an oxygen pressure of 15 bar. The growth rate was 2 mm/h and the feed and seed rods were rotated in opposite directions with speeds of 20 and 25 rpm, respectively. High-pressure in-situ electrical transport property was performed in Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-9T) as described elsewhere Synchrotron-based ARPES measurements were conducted at beamline 03U in Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). The samples were cleaved in-situ under ultra-high vacuum below 7× 10 -11 mbar. Data were collected with a Scienta DA30 electron analyzer. The total energy and angular resolutions were set to 20 meV and 0.2°, respectively. Laser-based ARPES measurements were conducted at Tsinghua University. The 7-eV laser was generated by frequency doubling in a KBBF crystal and focused on the sample by an optical lens. Samples were cleaved in-situ under ultra-high vacuum below 6× 10 -11 mbar. Data were collected with a Scienta DA30L electron analyzer. The total energy and angular resolutions were set to 3 meV and 0.2°, respectively. First-principles band structure calculations were performed using Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) 