We study two aspects of the superconductivity in a cuprate model system, its doping dependence and the influence of competing pairing mediators. We first include electron-phonon interactions beyond Migdal's approximation and solve selfconsistently, as a function of doping and for an isotropic electron-phonon coupling, the full-bandwidth, anisotropic vertex-corrected Eliashberg equations under a noninteracting state approximation for the vertex correction. Our results show that such pairing interaction supports the experimentally observed d x 2 -y 2 -wave symmetry of the superconducting gap, but only in a narrow doping interval of the hole-doped system. Depending on the coupling strength, we obtain realistic values for the gap magnitude and superconducting critical temperature T c close to optimal doping, rendering the electron-phonon mechanism an important candidate for mediating superconductivity in this model system. Second, for a doping near optimal hole doping, we study multichannel superconductivity, by including both vertex-corrected electron-phonon interaction and spin and charge fluctuations as pairing mechanisms. We find that both mechanisms cooperate to support an unconventional d-wave symmetry of the order parameter, yet the electron-phonon interaction is mainly responsible for the Cooper pairing and high critical temperature T c . Spin fluctuations are found to have a suppressing effect on the gap magnitude and critical temperature due to their repulsive interaction at small coupling wave vectors. Superconductivity in the cuprate family was discovered more than 35 years ago There are several disputed aspects in the cuprate superconductivity. One of these is the Cooper pairing mechanism, with the electron-phonon interaction (EPI) and an electronic mechanism, spin fluctuations (SFs), being the most likely candidates. Cooper pair formation is often associated with electronic mechanisms for various reasons Although ARPES measurements have shown that phonons heavily influence the electron dynamics A further intriguing aspect of high-temperature cuprate superconductivity is the origin of its strong doping dependence It needs to be stressed that the above conclusions regarding the EPI rely on adiabatic Eliashberg theory To shed light on aspects of superconductivity, self-consistent calculations of the superconducting state are desirable, as these can provide microscopic understanding In the current work we follow this route, but we employ non-adiabatic Eliashberg theory, since it has been shown recently that including vertex corrections beyond Migdal's approximation can lead to negative contributions to the electron-phonon coupling In the following, we solve the vertex-corrected, full-bandwidth Eliashberg equations for isotropic electron-phonon coupling in a cuprate model system, as function of doping, temperature, and scattering strength. As it is not unlikely that both phonons and spin fluctuations contribute in mediating the record critical temperatures, we employ in a second step a multichannel Eliashberg formalism, i.e., we consider both EPI and SFs Our calculations show that vertex corrections support a d-wave symmetric superconducting gap only in a restricted doping regime, on the hole-doped side, bearing strong similarities to the dome-like superconducting phase commonly observed in holedoped cuprate systems. We further identify the electron-phonon scattering strength as important factor when it comes to finding a self-consistent d-wave solution from electron-phonon interactions only. This is due to the interplay between the first-and second-order contributions to the overall interaction, which is required to change sign in momentum space to support an unconventional gap. Since our calculations show that vertex-corrected EPI can provide the d-wave gap symmetry and a dome-like superconducting phase, explicit calculations with both mediators of superconductivity on equal footing are required to determine how their roles are distributed. Our self-consistent, anisotropic full-bandwith calculations reveal that SFs and charge fluctuations (CFs) alone do not lead to a stable superconducting solution except at very low temperatures. This stems from the small wave-vector contributions to the SF interaction, which support a different gap symmetry than the dominant coupling around the nesting wave vector, an effect that has been observed, too, in Fe-based superconductors We start our theoretical framework to describe electron-phonon mediated superconductivity similar to Ref. The effects due to direct Coulomb repulsion are assumed to be included in our square lattice tight-binding description of the electron energies ξ k , and its influence on the interaction is neglected for simplicity. Electrons are created and annihilated via c † k,σ and c k,σ , with σ a spin index, which are contained in Nambu ) spanning a 2 × 2 pseudovector space, and the ρi are the Pauli matrices. We model the phonon spectrum via a single Einstein phonon energy Ω (using ħ = 1), with associated creation and annihilation operators b † q and b q . The EPI in Eq. ( The interacting state of the system is characterized by the electronic self-energy Σk and electron Green's function Ĝk , where we use the four-momentum notation k = (k, iω m ), q = (q, iq l ), with fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω m = πT (2m + 1) and bosonic Matsubara frequencies q l = 2πT l (m, l ∈ Z), at temperature T . As the Nambu space is spanned by the Pauli matrices ρi , the electron self-energy can be written as a matrix decomposition Here, Z k is the mass renormalization, χ k the chemical potential renormalization, and φ k the superconductivity order parameter that we aim to computed self-consistently. Note that the decomposition (2) is generally valid for different interactions contributing to the self-energy. In the non-interacting state the electron Green's function has the well-known form Ĝ(0) k = [iω k ρ0 -ξ k ρ3 ] -1 , which, together with Eq. ( the above expressions lead to Ĝk = iγ As mentioned in the Introduction, we take the electron-phonon interaction into account beyond Migdal's approximation. Specifically, this is the lowest order electron-phonon interaction customarily used in Migdal's approximation and its vertex correction. The corresponding Feynman diagrams are shown in Fig. where the fully self-consistent vertex function is given by Here, we denote V (ep) k-k 1 = 2g 2 0 Ω/(Ω 2 + q 2 m-m 1 ) as the electron-phonon interaction kernel. To reduce the numerical workload we introduce here a non-interacting state approximation for the vertex, or more specifically, for the electron Green's functions Ĝk in Eq. so that with definitions γ Note, that Γ(0) k,k 1 can be pre-computed and hence, this approach offers a significant numerical advantage. The here-made truncation of the infinite series of Feynman diagrams for the electron-phonon interaction after the second-order scattering terms is valid for weakly non-adiabatic systems and when we are in the non-strong coupling regime. This is when the non-adiabaticity ratio From the above definitions and relations we can derive a set of three self-consistent, non-adiabatic Eliashberg To take SFs and CFs into account we can write the electronic self-energy as Σk = Σ(ep) with labels (s) and (c) for SFs, and CFs, respectively. Assuming spin-singlet Cooper pairs, we treat here the purely electronic parts of the electron self-energy similarly to Ref. where the interactions are defined in terms of the single-orbital, on-site U parameter: For details of the derivation we refer to Refs. The electron spin and charge susceptibilities in the interacting state are calculated from the random-phase-approximation-like expressions while the non-renormalized functions are given in terms of the system's Green's function, In the above equations we use the fully interacting Green's function, hence the SF and CF spectra are iteratively updated making our calculations fully self-consistent. The U parameter can be varied to approach the spin-fluctuation instability, marked by the condition 1 -U X (s,0) q → 0. By using the standard procedure we derive the Eliashberg equations from the two expressions for the self-energy Eqs. ( Herein, the first-order interaction kernels containing EPI, SFs, and CFs are defined as while the second-order EPI kernels due to the vertex correction within the noninteracting state approximation are given by When solving Eqs. ( are generally an order of magnitude smaller than those of V (ep,1) k,k 1 . Moreover, the superconducting order parameter φ k depends primarily on V (ep,1) k,k 1 , see Eq. The here-presented formalism is a step forward to combining SFs and CFs with phonons in vertex-corrected Eliashberg theory, yet it is appropriate to briefly recall the assumptions made in the formalism. The SFs and CFs are included on the level of the FLEX approach, while EPI is included up to all second-order processes within the non-interacting state approximation for two of the three electron Green's functions appearing in the vertex correction of Eq. ( The numerical calculations in this work have been carried out with the Uppsala Superconductivity Code (uppsc) Our aim is to describe the cuprate family of superconductors, which have a quasi twodimensional structure. In this work, we focus on the typical class of hole-doped cuprates. The electron energies are given by a next-nearest neighbor tight-binding model where the hopping energies are chosen as t = -0.25 eV and t ′ = 0.1 eV and μ is a parameter determining the initial chemical potential. To simulate the effect of doping, we will vary μ and treat it as a free parameter. We analyze below that this is a suitable approximation. We further choose the Einstein phonon frequency Ω as 50 meV, which is in accordance with experiments performed on representative examples of the cuprate family Varying the U parameter can be used to strengthen the influence of SFs and CFs on the superconductivity To start with, we consider only the EPI and solve self-consistently the full-bandwidth anisotropic Eliashberg equations with vertex corrections. We choose g 0 = 170 meV and μ = -0.07 eV, and compute the EPI kernel q,m,m ′ , which enters each of Eqs. ( In Fig. At T = 120 K (above T c ) we find λ m = 1.5, which is a significant reduction compared to the input coupling. Note, that even more realistic values for the electron-phonon coupling strength (λ < 1) as compared to experiments Next, we want to study the influence of doping dependence on the superconductivity. To make the computational effort manageable, we make two approximations. First, we introduce the non-interacting state approximation for the electron-phonon vertex, by replacing the electron Green's functions Ĝk by Ĝ(0) k in Eq. ( The second approximation is the treatment of the doping. In Eliashberg calculations involving doping, it is common practice to employ the expression for the electron filling, see Refs. The results for the Fermi surface in the interacting state for both choices of g 0 , shown in Fig. Having verified the reliability of our approximations, we study the influence of doping dependence on the superconductivity, by solving the vertex-corrected Eliashberg equations in the superconducting state for different values of μ and g 0 . Due to the non-interacting state approximation for the vertex function we can pre-calculate the interaction kernels of Eqs. ( In Fig. To understand the results presented so far it is instructive to analyze the structure of the EPI. We consider the kernel function V (ep,1) q,m,m 1 in more detail since its contribution is responsible for the unconventional gap symmetry in Eq. Matsubara frequency indices (m, m 1 ) = (0, 0) (blue) and (m, m 1 ) = (0, 1) (red) in the second and fourth rows, for different Fermi surface topologies as presented in the first and third rows. Note that the doping dependent Fermi surfaces are defined here with respect to μ, relative to our chosen reference point μ = 0 eV, which corresponds to the case of a typical hole-doped cuprate Fermi surface. The latter is hole doped compared to the insulating copper oxide compound. Notably, in our case, negative μ corresponds thus to more hole doping and positive μ to less hole doping, or electron doping, relative to our reference point μ = 0. We further observe that we obtain a steep decay of the superconducting gap for temperatures approaching T c which is possibly steeper than found in experiments From Fig. At this point it is important to stress that the curves shown in Fig. For an explicit proof that, for various doping levels, the experimentally observed d-wave symmetry of the superconducting gap is supported by the vertex-corrected electron-phonon coupling, we consider the purely momentum dependent interaction V (ep,1) which appears in Eq. ( where v k = |∇ k ξ k | is the electron velocity, and δ(ξ k ) restricts the electronic degrees of freedom to the Fermi surface. The normalization is given by and is, for simplicity, set to unity here, as we only want to analyze the doping dependence of λ j . Also, in this work we are only interested in the d-wave symmetry channel of the superconducting gap, which is the only experimentally relevant gap symmetry. It is characterized by the form factor f . Hence, we compute the corresponding λ d for different choices of g 0 at T = 60 K; the results are shown in Fig. From Fig. Summarizing, our investigation of the doping dependence of the superconductivity reveals that there is a realistic parameter regime (μ, g 0 ) where the vertexcorrected interaction mediates or supports an unconventional d-wave symmetry of the superconducting gap, which is the gap symmetry observed in experiments As a next step, we investigate the influence of spin and charge fluctuations in comparison to the electron-phonon coupling. To do so, we treat the electron-phonon scattering strength g 0 and the on-site U are free parameters in the following and compute their influence on the self-consistent superconductivity. We keep the Einstein phonon frequency fixed at 50 meV and use for the chemical potential parameter μ = -0.07 eV. An extreme case would be to only consider spin and charge fluctuations, and no influence of EPI, i.e. choosing g 0 = 0 meV. For this setting it was not possible to stabilize a self-consistent solution for the temperatures considered here, T ≥ 30 K, regardless of the choice of U and T (minimum temperature tested was T = 30 K). This result qualitatively agrees with recent studies on Fe-based superconductors To check the consistency of the current approach with earlier work To explore the influence of the U parameter on the superconducting properties we show in Fig. To understand these findings we need to examine the self-consistently calculated spin and charge interactions. In Fig. It is important to note that the spin-fluctuations kernel enters repulsively in the equation for the superconducting order parameter, compare Eq. Conversely, in the presence of EPI (g 0 = 180 meV) we find a stable superconducting solution to the Eliashberg equations, which reduces the spin and charge kernels slightly throughout the entire BZ [see Figs. To summarize this part, we found for the considered model cuprate system that the EPI is responsible for the gap magnitude and the high critical temperature, while the SF part of the electronic interaction, in particular at small wave vectors, is anti-pairing and acts to reduce the superconductivity. At large wave vectors, on the other hand, both EPI and SF interactions cooperatively support the d-wave symmetry order parameter via repulsive coupling. In this work we studied the effects of vertex-corrected electron-phonon interaction as well as of SFs and CFs on the superconductivity in a cuprate model system. We first investigated the influence of EPI scattering strength and doping level and then studied self-consistently the appearance of multichannel superconductivity, by treating vertexcorrected EPI, SFs and CFs together in one computational formalism. Our methodology opens a route for computationally studying anomalous non-adiabatic multichannel superconductors in a systematic way, which can be achieved via materials' specific choices of the phonon frequency, electron energy dispersion, and coupling strengths for both mediators of superconductivity. Our model system has roughly the correct characteristics of the family of compounds that we want to investigate, i.e., the hole-doped cuprates with their prototypical Fermi surface. In addition, the phonon frequency, EPI coupling strength λ m , and electron-phonon scattering strength g 0 are in realistic ranges At this point it is appropriate to discuss the limitations of the here-developed computational approach. First, for numerical accessibility we neglected the effects of direct Coulomb repulsion and finite phonon self-energy. The former is assumed here to be included in the electron energies ξ k . We expect that our results qualitatively hold even if both effects are explicitly included, yet a step toward a more complete picture would be the inclusion of phonon renormalization effects and the Coulomb repulsion. Second, we applied a non-interacting state approximation to the electronphonon vertex correction, an approximation which we have shown to produce very accurate results compared to the full renormalized interaction for the here-studied cuprate system (see Fig. Our study of the doping dependence reveals that there is a realistic parameter regime with respect to the electron-phonon scattering strength, where the vertexcorrected interaction gives rise to an unconventional d-wave symmetry of the superconducting gap, compatible with experiments Our results from Fig. Applying our computational methodology to include both EPI and SFs/CFs as possible mediators of multichannel superconductivity Lastly, we stress that out focus is not to fully explain high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates, but rather to clarify the competition between pairing mediators and the origin of its remarkable doping dependence on the basis of selfconsistent vertex-corrected Eliashberg theory. We cannot exclude the possibility that our results might change when a more complete theory of self-consistent calculations of the superconducting state will be employed. Within the current approach, we find that vertex-corrected electron-phonon coupling supports superconductivity with an unconventional gap symmetry only in a relatively small doping interval, consistent with the superconductivity dome in the hole-doped cuprate phase diagram. We further find that both electron-phonon and spin-fluctuation mechanisms support unconventional d-wave symmetry, yet the EPI mainly mediates the pairing and is responsible for the high T c , whereas SFs are found to have a suppressing influence on both the gap and T c .