The simplified scaling of the orbital upper critical field, Hc2(T ), for the isotropic case is discussed. To facilitate the analysis of the experimental data, we suggest a simple but accurate approximation in the entire temperature range of the scaled upper critical field valid for any transport scattering rate Hc2/Hc2(0) ≈ (1 -t 2 )/(1 + 0.42 t 1.47 ). The upper critical field, H c2 , is one of the fundamental parameters characterizing a superconductor. Its temperature dependence is linked to the anisotropies of the Fermi surface and the order parameter. It is also sensitive to magnetic (spin-flip) and non-magnetic (potential or transport) scattering as well as paramagnetic enhancement of the internal magnetic field and spin-orbit scattering. Analysis of H c2 (T ) can provide important information about these parameters. The evaluation of H c2 (T, ρ) for isotropic s-wave superconductor with arbitrary transport (non-magnetic) scattering rate, where τ is the mean scattering time, was derived by E. Helfand and N. R. Werthamer (HW) In their seminal work only weakly depends on the scattering rate, ρ, as shown in Fig. The "near universality" of h * is a useful property commonly used in data analysis. In this note, we point out that a different normalization, namely u(t) = H c2 (T, ρ)/H c2 (0, ρ), practically collapses the upper critical field curves onto one, much closer to a truly universal curve, compared to the original HW normalization. Such a degree of scaling behavior is sufficient to provide a simple formula for this practically universal curve, FIG. The HW scaling function h * (t) = -Hc2(t)/(dHc2/dt)t→1 for the clean limit, h * cl and the dirty limit, h * d , vs. the reduced temperature t = T /Tc. Inset: the relative difference between these two curves, (h * cl -h * d )/h * cl , showing a difference close to 5% in most of the temperature range, t < 0.7. which may help the researchers to analyze the experimental data without worrying about the level of disorder always present in real samples. The practical usefulness of this scaling representation of the upper critical field was recognized before. For example, Sun and Maki used it to compare theoretical H c2 (T ) in different directions in p-wave superconductors Consider the quantity, where the reduced field Clearly, u(0) = 1 is independent of the scattering rate. To see how this quantity behaves with temperature, let us consider separately the clean and dirty limits near T c . We denote the clean limit by a "cl" subscript, and the dirty limit by "d" subscript. The general expression for the slope (dh/dt) at T c is given by HW . (5) In the clean case this gives According to Eq. ( (see e.g. Hence, we obtain Note that this number is just the inverse of the HW cleanlimit number h * cl (0) = 0.727, because in the h * normalization, the slope at T c is 1. In the dirty limit, Eq. ( The dirty limit self-consistency equation Thus, we have, The scaled function u(t) = h(t)/h(0) for different types of scattering. The wide solid green line shows the numerical result in the clean case; the blue dash-dotted line is the transport dirty limit; the red x-marks show the finite transport scattering rate case, ρ = 1, ρm = 01. These three curves are practically collapsed on a single universal curve. In stark contrast, magnetic scattering results in a more concave curve, shown for pure magnetic scattering, ρm = 1 and ρ = 0 (violet solid line), and for a more realistic mixed case, ρm = 1 and ρ = 1 (blue dotted line). Inset: the relative difference, (u cl -u d )/u cl , between the two limiting cases showing about 0.5% difference level for most of the temperature interval. Note that this number is just the inverse of the HW number h * d (0) = 0.693. Numerically, one can evaluate H c2 (t, ρ) at any temperature using either the original HW equations or a revised theory relative difference in most of the temperature range. Thus, u(t) is a nearly universal function of t. Inspired by the Casimir and Gorter theory, see Eq.( The fitting yields a = 0.423, b = 1.468 in the clean case and a = 0.416, b = 1.472 in the dirty limit. The results are so close, that we converged on a single function that describes the scaled u(t) curve for any transport scattering rate with a good accuracy, It is worth noting again that, as shown in the inset to Fig. To investigate the source of some non-universality of u close to T c , we numerically calculated the slopes du/dt. Figure FIG. To illustrate the practical usability of our results, Fig. The proposed scaling approach is naturally justified considering that the error bar in the experimental determination of H c2 is usually not small, so the precision of the proposed scaling function, Eq.( In conclusion, we show that the analysis of the upper critical field in scaled form u(t) = H c2 (T /T c )/H c2 (0) provides a simple way to check the compliance of the experimental results with the HW orbital critical field. One has to use Eq. ( 