We searched for violations of the weak equivalence principle using a cryogenic torsion balance with a pendulum comprised of superconducting niobium and copper. We constrain the Eötvös parameter with 95%-confidence to η Nb*-Cu ≤ 2.0 × 10 -9 and ηCP-ee ≤ 9.2 × 10 -4 for superconducting niobium and Cooper pairs, respectively. The weak equivalence principle (WEP) underpins our geometric description of gravity (i.e. general relativity). Possible violations of the WEP are traditionally parameterized by the Eötvös parameter where a 1,2 are the gravitational accelerations for two test bodies made from different materials. The WEP states that this parameter vanishes for all choices of material. This has been precisely tested for a variety of materials. It has been argued To our knowledge, only two previous experiments Here, we describe a sensitive test of the WEP comparing superconducting niobium with normally-conducting copper. The experiment was made possible by the development of a unique cryogenic, torsion balance apparatus. Apparatus -Very few torsion balances have operated at cryogenic temperatures by a two-stage helium pulse-tube cooler. An outer shield was cooled to ∼ 50 K. The exterior of the inner shield was wrapped in a cylindrical layer of lead to provide superconducting magnetic shielding when at cryogenic temper- atures. Additionally, a traditional magnetic shield (Co-NETIC AA) surrounded the outer thermal shield. The pendulum had eight test bodies each with a mass of 9.5 g, four made of OFHC copper and four of niobium (99.9% purity), in a dipole arrangement. The parameters that describe the torsion balance are displayed in Table Environmental sensors were placed throughout the instrument. These included an orthogonal set of tiltmeters attached to the top flange of the vacuum chamber, a pair of external magnetometers, and an array of temperature sensors placed on the top flange, first and second stage of the cold head, and inner and outer thermal shields. FIG. Superconductivity of Niobium Test Bodies -A direct measurement of the pendulum temperature was not practical without spoiling the performance of the torsion balance. Although the inner shield is at ∼ 5 K, the equilibrium temperature of the pendulum at low pressures (<0.1 mPa) is above the critical temperature of niobium. This is due to the heat loads from the autocollimator light and residual thermal radiation from room temperature surfaces visible to the pendulum through the optical access window. We achieved superconductivity by injecting helium exchange gas into the chamber to a final pressure of 0.4 mPa. This pressure allowed sufficient thermal coupling between the pendulum and the inner shield to bring the pendulum below the critical temperature of niobium. We verified that the test bodies were superconducting by observing the pendulum's response to an injected sinusoidal magnetic field with coils placed inside and outside the chamber. The torque acting on the pendulum due to an external magnetic field, ⃗ B, has three terms: one due to the intrinsic magnetic moment of the pendulum, ⃗ m 0 , a second due to an effective magnetic moment induced by pinned flux, ⃗ m flux , and a third due to the expulsion of the magnetic field. These are described by: An applied sinusoidal magnetic field, ⃗ B = ⃗ B 0 sin ωt, produces three distinct ω-dependent torques: + ⃗ τ Meissner (cos 2ωt) where ⃗ τ 0 , ⃗ τ flux , ⃗ τ Meissner are the torque amplitudes due to the magnetic moment of the pendulum, the pinned flux, and the Meissner effect, respectively. A response at the drive frequency, ω, is expected when the test bodies are not superconducting as both the pinned flux and Meissner terms do not contribute. However, when the test bodies are superconducting, an increase in the response at the drive frequency and a large response at twice the drive frequency, 2ω, are expected. Figure The raw torque showed a clear correlation with the temperature of the inner shield. We interpret this coupling as thermally induced torques of the pendulum's suspension point. This correlation was removed by subtracting the inner shield temperature scaled by a constant coupling factor. This coupling factor was determined to be 4.6 × 10 -11 N m/K by correlating the raw torque and inner shield temperature across the entire data run. Additionally, coupling to the tilt of the apparatus was subtracted from the measured torque. This subtraction did not significantly change the observed torque. The tilt coupling was determined by deliberately tilting the chamber to be -5.5 × 10 -8 N m/rad and 3.5 × 10 -8 N m/rad respectively for the two horizontal directions. An upper limit of 10 -11 N m/Gauss was placed on coupling to external magnetic fields during the magnetic injections. This indicates a negligible influence (< 0.1 fN m) of external magnetic fields on the observed torque. None of the environmental couplings changed appreciably throughout the data run. We periodically rotated the pendulum by 180 • , effectively exchanging the copper and niobium test bodies, to minimize the environmental effects that could mimic an EP violation. An EP-violating torque would have the opposite sign when the pendulum is flipped whereas many environmental signals (daily tilts, etc.) would not change. This allows EP-violation-mimicking environmental effects to be subtracted from the results. The pendulum requires damping and a thermalization period after each rotation. As such, the data was recorded in roughly week-long sets. A third-order polynomial was fit and subtracted from each set to account for long term drifts. A series of day-long cuts of the corrected torque were extracted and analyzed independently. Each cut was linear least-squares fitted to the sum of two functions of the sun's location and an offset term: where τ corresponds to the observed torque, a in is the "in-phase" horizontal projection of the sun's location perpendicular to the pendulum's composition dipole, a out is the "out-of-phase" orthogonally-oriented horizontal projection, t is time, τ in and τ out are the respective torque fit coefficients, and C of f set is the fit offset. The sun's location was obtained using the Astropy Figure We also measured no significant out-of-phase component, τ out = -2.1 ± 5.2 fN m. We extract limits on the Eötvös parameter from our torque measurements via: where a g is the gravitational acceleration towards the sun. Our results yield a 95%-confidence limit on the Eötvös parameter for superconducting niobium versus copper of It has been suggested that the material of interest is not the bulk superconductor but only the Cooper pairs The total mass of Cooper pairs within a test body is: where m e and m p are respectively the mass of the electron and proton, N e , N n , N v , and N CP are the number of electrons, nucleons, valence electrons, and electrons in Cooper pairs, respectively. The ratio N CP /N v was estimated with the two fluid model where T is the temperature and T c is the critical temperature. We use a conservative upper limit of the temperature of the pendulum of 8 K which corresponds to a Cooper pair fraction of N CP /N v = 0.38. Using Equation (10) Conclusion -We used a cryogenic torsion pendulum with superconducting-niobium and copper test bodies to constrain deviations from the WEP for superconducting niobium and Cooper pairs with 95%-confidence to η Nb*-Cu ≤ 2.0 × 10 -9 and η CP-ee ≤ 9.2 × 10 -4 , respectively. This improves upon the result reported by Tajmar et al. 