We theoretically discuss the emergence of fractional Shapiro steps in a Josephson junction created by confining a two-dimensional electron gas at an oxide interface. This phenomenon is induced by an alternating current of proper amplitude and frequency and can be tuned by a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the Rashba spin-orbit axis. The presence of fractional Shapiro steps can be associated with the creation of Majorana bound states at the boundaries of the superconducting leads. Our findings represent a route for the identification of topological superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials and confined systems in the presence of spin-orbit interaction, offering also new insights into recently explored frameworks. The AC Josephson effect has proven to be an efficient and sensitive probe for investigating exotic superconductors, offering valuable insights into their properties and aiding in understanding the underlying physics. In particular, in order to explore the anharmonic content of the current-phase relation (CPR) in unconventional systems, recent proposals have pursued tracking of phase-locked behavior in a Josephson junction (JJ) under high-frequency AC drives Here, we show that fractional AC Josephson effect can also emerge in an oxide-based JJ made by constraining a two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs), which can form, e.g., at the interface between transition-metal oxides like LaAlO 3 and SrTiO 3 (LAO/STO), to get a quasi-1D system. Recently, taking a clue from some experimental evidences The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2, we introduce the microscopic model to obtain the CPRs at different applied magnetic fields; in Sec. 3, we numerically study the response of our device to an AC drive, i.e., we incorporate the previously obtained CPRs into the so-called resistively shunted junction model, which is commonly used to characterize the time-averaged voltage measured in a currentbiased JJ; in Sec. 4, conclusions are drawn. Here, we consider the microscopic theoretical framework treatment presented in Ref. using t 2g orbitals (d xy , d yz , and d zx ) basis. Here, represents the electron annihilation operators for spin, orbital, and position. The terms H 0 , H P , H SO , H Z , H M correspond to kinetic energy, mean-field pairing, spin-orbit coupling (SOC), inversion-symmetry breaking, and Zeeman interaction, respectively where E n are the subgap energies of the BdG spectrum. The finite-lead approach is valid in the short-junction limit, i.e., L N ≪ ξ, with ξ the BCS coherence length. Thus, the total system size is set as L = 2L S + L N , with L S ≫ ξ and L N ≪ L S the sizes of the superconducting lead and the normal region, respectively. The maximum (absolute value of minimum) of I(φ) yields the critical current, I c , in the positive (negative) direction. The tight-binding Hamiltonian is numerically treated using KWANT Our baseline is the recent experimental evidence of unconventional magnetic-field dependence of the Josephson current discussed in Ref. Instead, in this paper we adhere to a different, and at the same time complementary line of thinking, i.e., we demonstrate that even the system's AC response can exhibit nontrivial peculiarities, still assuming working conditions such as those imposed in Ref. In general, the appearance of HISSs is a quite intriguing phenomenon: in the presence of a microwave excitation, the VICs exhibit periodic modulations, known as Shapiro steps We first focus on two specific cases, i.e., when the mag-netic field is such that: i) a topological phase emerges and the critical current was demonstrated to approach a maximum (i.e., we fix M x = -0.35) and ii) there are no MBSs and the magnetic field is far from the values that maximize the critical current (i.e., we fix M x = 0.85) Through the CPRs resulting from our microscopic analysis (see Fig. As already mentioned, the VICs of a JJ can exhibit Shapiro steps, which result from the interaction between external microwave radiation and the intrinsic dynamics of the superconducting phase difference across the junction. To understand why this phenomenon occurs, according to the RSJ model, we can look at the JJ as a "phase particle" in a tilted washboard potential, U . Under an external microwave drive with frequency ν ac , the motion of this phase particle synchronizes with the drive. In each excitation period T ac , the phase across the junction changes by 2πn, where n is an integer. The velocity, φ, of this synchronized motion is given by 2πnν ac . Remarkably, this synchronization is stable within certain intervals of the applied dc-current, I dc , i.e., small exists, i.e., β c < 1∕4, below which the inertial contributions to phase dynamics can be safely ignored In Fig. Step formation can be appreciated not only directly in the VIC, but also by binning the measurement data according to voltage, i.e., through a histogram such the one placed vertically to the right of Fig. The width ΔI n dc of the ISSs, n = {1, 2, 3, 4, and 5}, and HISSs, n = {1∕2, 3∕2, 5∕2, and 7∕2}, by changing I ac is reported in Fig. To get an overall insight into the effects induced by the external magnetic field on the Shapiro response, we collect in Fig. In this paper, we extended the theoretical findings in Ref. Finally, we conclude with a word of caution, since the point of the experimental feasibility is indeed delicate and we stress a constraint of our proposal: in fact, the structure of half-integer steps can also be affected by non-adiabatic effects 