Niobium films are a key component in modern two-dimensional superconducting qubits, yet their contribution to the total qubit decay rate is not fully understood. The presence of different layers of materials and interfaces makes it difficult to identify the dominant loss channels in present two-dimensional qubit designs. In this paper we present the first study which directly correlates measurements of RF losses in such films to material parameters by investigating a high-power impulse magnetron sputtered (HiPIMS) film atop a three-dimensional niobium superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) resonator. By using a 3D SRF structure, we are able to isolate the niobium film loss from other contributions. Our findings indicate that microwave dissipation in the HiPIMS-prepared niobium films, within the quantum regime, resembles that of record-high intrinsic quality factor of bulk niobium SRF cavities, with lifetimes extending into seconds. Microstructure and impurity level of the niobium film do not significantly affect the losses. These results set the scale of microwave losses in niobium films and show that niobium losses do not dominate the observed coherence times in present two-dimensional superconducting qubit designs, instead highlighting the dominant role of the dielectric oxide in limiting the performance. We can also set a bound for when niobium film losses will become a limitation for qubit lifetimes. Superconducting qubits represent one of the leading technologies for quantum computing. The two-dimensional (2D) architecture typically includes superconducting resonators, feedlines, and Josephson junction-based structures patterned on a silicon or sapphire substrate Improving the coherence time of the 2D superconducting qubits is essential for enabling the practical implementation of quantum processors. Since the patterned structures include several materials, surfaces, and interfaces, all subjected to electromagnetic fields during operation, it is important to understand the contributions from various microwave loss channels Furthermore, the structure and chemistry associated with a given thin film can be tuned significantly through annealing, which may result in reduced surface losses In this work, we isolate the Nb film from other qubit components and measure directly the conductive loss associated with the film and the TLS loss at the niobium-air interface. We perform this study by depositing a Nb film directly on the inner surface of a 3D Nb cavity. As such, we confine the microwave fields to the Nb film without concurrent contributions associated with components such as substrates or junctions. This Nb film has nanometer scale grains and residual resistivity ratio (RRR ~ 20) value comparable to Nb films deposited on substrates for qubits We find that the Nb film exhibits similar losses compared to bulk Nb. Moreover, we find that varying film material properties such as impurity concentration, macrostructure, RRR, crystallite size, and microstrain, does not impact microwave losses significantly. However, we find that the dissolution of the native oxide via in-situ vacuum annealing reduces the loss ten-fold. Our findings further highlight the deleterious impact of niobium oxides on qubit performance. Nb films were grown on the inner surface of a 1.3 GHz elliptical single-cell, fine-grain (~50 μm), high RRR (~300) bulk Nb superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) cavity and on representative 10 × 10 × 3 mm Nb substrates. Film growth was achieved using a DC-biased HiPIMS film deposition system. Detailed information regarding the deposition conditions and parameters can be found in Following the Nb film coating, the cavity underwent preparation for cryogenic testing. To mitigate the risk of stripping the Nb film from the substrate, ultrasonic cleaning was avoided, and instead, the cavity was rinsed with ultra-high purity water under a lower pressure of 50 bar. Subsequently, the cavity was assembled in an ISO4 clean room environment for cryogenic testing. The characterization of the Nb films deposited on the substrates involved the utilization of TEM, time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques. Detailed methodologies are provided in the supplementary information. The cryogenic testing initially utilized in Vertical Cavity Test Stand (VCTS), where the cavity was submerged in a bath of liquid helium and cooled to temperatures of 2.0 and 1.5 K. Measurements were conducted by employing a phase-lock loop to lock the cavity onto its resonance frequency, enabling the derivation of the intrinsic quality factor (Q0) and field through power balance and decay analysis To investigate the influence of microstructure of the film and impurities on losses in the quantum regime, we implemented various annealing procedures on both the coated cavity and the samples. Initially, an in-situ annealing was conducted at 340 °C for 1 hour, maintaining the vacuum inside the cavity. This was followed by subsequent vacuum furnace heat treatments at 600 °C and 800 °C for 3 hours. Following these latter heat treatments, the Nb film was exposed to air, thus reforming the native niobium oxide. Subsequently, the cavity underwent testing in the liquid helium dewar at 1.5 K while the annealed samples were subjected to comprehensive analysis using a range of material characterization tools. Figure where F is the filling factor obtained from simulation Weak links between grains, defects on the surface and trapped residual magnetic field are potential sources for this additional residual resistance After interrogating the as received cavity performance at low fields in the mK range, we studied how cavity performance evolves with material properties at higher fields and temperatures. Figure However, in the region where TLS loss dominates (Eacc < 1 MV/m) During annealing between 100 and 400 °C, oxygen atoms diffuse within the Nb material, following the dissolution of oxide layer near the surface The Q0 as a function of the Eacc after vacuum furnace annealing is shown in Figure Annealing caused changes in impurity levels and microstructure of the film, leading to significant changes in the Q0 and field dependency of the Nb film cavity for Eacc > 1 MV/m. However, these changes did not notably affect the losses in the TLS loss dominated region. High temperature vacuum furnace annealing at 600 °C and 800 °C for 3 hours after in-situ annealing modified both the microstructure and impurity contents of the Nb film cavity. The ToF-SIMS depth profiling results (shown in Figure Expulsion of hydrogen atoms from Nb was observed following each annealing at 600 °C and 800 °C, with no subsequent increase observed after a week of air exposure (Figure Furthermore, nitrogen levels exhibited an increase after annealing at 340 °C, followed by a small decrease with higher temperature annealing (Figure The investigation into the loss mechanisms in the Nb film at the quantum regime involved manipulating microstructure, surface oxide layer and impurity levels of the film. It was found that the small grains and low RRR characteristic of Nb films do not significantly impact losses at the low fields and temperatures relevant for the quantum regime. This observation is supported by comparable Q0 observed in both low temperature DR measurements and high field VCTS measurements between fine grain bulk Nb (50 m) and small grain Nb film (400-600 nm) Moreover, the TLS loss model fits yielded similar values, with a slightly higher Q0 observed in the Nb film cavity, potentially attributable to a slightly thinner oxide layer compared to that observed for a bulk Nb cavity. Specifically, the loss tangents were found to be almost identical, with measurements yielding values of approximately 0.17±0.02 for bulk Nb and 0.12±0.01 for Nb film at weak fields. Additionally, TLS loss saturation levels were nearly identical for large grain bulk Nb cavity and small grain Nb film cavity before and after annealing procedures, except from in-situ annealing. This suggests that despite significant changes in crystallite size, microstrain, and dislocation density due to annealing procedures, losses in the TLS dominated region remained consistent. Notably, the annealing procedures decreased surface resistance in the non-TLS dominated region (Eacc > 1 MV/m) but did not affect it at TLS-dominated fields. The oxide layer emerged as a significant factor in driving TLS loss in the Nb films. Pentoxide dissolution after in-situ annealing at 340 °C for 1 hour resulted in no observed TLS loss (Figure A substantial decrease in hydrogen levels was observed after high-temperature annealing. However, this did not correlate with changes in the loss tangent or the saturation level of Q0 in the quantum regime. Even with the lowest hydrogen level (Figure While annealing procedures altered impurity levels, the mean free path and RRR increased significantly. However, the TLS loss increased, and Q0 saturation level decreased after annealing at 800 °C for 3 hours in a vacuum furnace, which increased RRR, compared to the as-deposited condition. This underscores that lower RRR of sputtered films does not result in higher microwave losses in the quantum regime. An important finding of our study is that the regrowth process and thickness of the oxide layer significantly constrain coherence time in superconducting quantum devices. Specifically, we observed that variations in the surface oxide layer of niobium films primarily dictate the extent of TLS losses. Lastly, the contribution of different oxide phases, such as NbO2 and NbO, to TLS loss warrants further analysis, especially considering field dependent loss measurements conducted at 1.5 K, which is slightly above the superconducting critical temperature of NbO (1.38 K). The role of these phases could provide deeper insights into the observed temperature dependent TLS losses. In our investigation of the microwave loss characteristics of Nb films within the quantum regime, several pivotal findings have emerged. Despite the small grain size and relatively low RRR of HiPIMS-prepared Nb films, our observations indicate a remarkable similarity in microwave dissipation to that of large grain and high RRR bulk Nb SRF. Notably, the grain size and RRR appears to have minimal impact on losses, as evidenced by the comparable Q0 observed for large-grain, high RRR bulk Nb and small-grain, low RRR Nb films. Moreover, variations in crystallite size, macrostrain, and dislocation densities exhibit negligible effects on microwave losses at low field and temperatures. Furthermore, our investigation into hydrogen, nitrogen, and carbon levels revealed no significant influence on TLS loss, underscoring the robust nature of Nb films. However, we highlight the key role played by the oxide layer in TLS loss and saturation levels, with dynamics associated with pentoxide dissolution and regrowth notably impacting TLS loss characteristics. Further studies of the oxide phases, such as NbO2 and NbO, are needed to improve our understanding of the effect of surface oxides on Nb thin film SRF cavity operation in the quantum regime. Present findings contribute to the understanding of microwave dissipation in Nb films and offer avenues for future research aimed at enhancing performance and reliability for quantum applications. aberration-corrected Grand ARM-200 microscope. TEM specimens were prepared using a Thermo Scientific Helios 5 DualBeam SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope), following a standard protocol for TEM specimen preparation. Measurements were performed on three different samples at randomly selected sites using a 5 kV accelerating voltage. Moreover, TEM images were used to measure the thickness of the oxide layer on the surface of the Nb film. The High-resolution TEM images were analyzed and processed using the Gatan Micrograph Suite version 3.0. The high-resolution TEM analysis reveals columnar growth grains within the film, with an average grain size ranging from 400 to 600 nm and occasional grains exceeding 1 μm, as shown in Figure Analysis was performed at a pressure of approximately 2 × 10 -10 mbar. Before we analyzed the depth profile obtained from SIMS measurement, we used special feature of the software used to analyze the data. A crucial feature of this TOF-SIMS systems is the ability to utilize full 3D imaging information to ensure that the obtained depth profiles are not affected by any artifacts, such as particles of carbon and oxides. on the surface. The software can exclude the particles on the surface before the integration. In one of the measurements an unexpected artifacts and particles appeared like a bright spotlight. Our SIMS analysis showed that they are carbon particles. These appeared as three bright areas which were removed to obtain more homogeneous surface as shown in Figure Low field performance of the cavity was tested in DR. The electrical field within the cavity was determined using the equation: where E represents the electrical field in V/m, k value is the specific value for SRF cavity which 