Strategies to achieve higher upper-critical-field superconductors (μ0Hc2(0)) are of great interest for both fundamental science and practical applications. While reducing the thickness of two-dimensional (2D) materials to a few layers significantly enhances μ0Hc2(0) with accompanied potential unconventional pairing mechanisms, further dimensional reduction to 1D compounds rarely exceeds the expected Pauli limit. Here, we report the discovery of a 1D granular Ta-Te nanowire that becomes superconducting under high pressure, with a maximum critical temperature (Tc) of 5.1 K. Remarkably, the μ0Hc2(0) reaches 16 T, which is twice the Pauli limit, setting a record of μ0Hc2 (0) in all the reported 1D superconductors. Our work demonstrates that the Ta-Te nanowire not only is a potential candidate for applications in high magnetic fields, but also provides an ideal platform for further investigations of the mechanisms between nanowires and large μ0Hc2(0). Since the discovery of the Meissner effect, efforts for pursuing superconductors with higher upper critical fields (μ0Hc2(0)) have never been paused. In recent years, the success in mechanical exfoliation of 2D van der Waals materials has unveiled many new superconductors with large upper critical fields, especially in nano-films of transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs). Few-layer NbSe2 is reported to be an Ising superconductor and exhibits orbital Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) states under large magnetic fields The discovery of large upper critical fields in 2D materials inspires the exploration of further reducing their dimensions, which may lead to higher μ0Hp and possibly unconventional superconductivity. However, reports of superconductivity in 1D nanowires violating the Pauli limit are extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, Bi nanowires are reported to show complex superconducting properties, depending on the morphology of the nanowires In this work, we synthesized a novel TMC nanowire composed of Ta3Te4 granules. The nanowires show semi-metal behavior at ambient pressure and superconductivity under high pressure. The upper critical field reaches about 16 T at 21 GPa, which is about 4 times Tc and much larger than the value of Pauli limit. The μ0Hc2(0) -Tc ratio is the highest among all the reported superconducting nanowires. We have successfully combined the advantages of TMC compounds, nanowires and high-pressure modulations, realizing a large upper critical field in compressed Ta-Te nanowires. Ta-Te nanowires are synthesized by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method To further investigate the appearance and morphology of the nanowires, we have performed high magnification SEM and TEM observations. From Figure The samples for TEM are prepared by dispersion of nanowires into ethanol using ultrasonic methods. The dispersed nanowires are transferred to copper grids with carbon membranes. As shown in the low magnification image in Figure High-resolution TEM image of a single nanowire is shown in Figure The electronic structure of the sample is quite important, given that the nanowires show semi-metal type transport properties. We have performed IR transmission spectrum on Ta-Te nanowires to deduce the band gap, shown in Figure Since the samples are insulating at ambient pressure, we attempted utilizing highpressure to induce superconductivity in Ta-Te nanowires. We have measured the temperature dependence of resistivity from 1.8 K to 300 K under high pressure, as shown in Figure The Pauli limit violating behavior indicates that the pressure-induced superconductivity in Ta-Te nanowires possibly originates from a complex mechanism. According to literature, the μ0Hc2(0) of most superconducting nanowires are near or below the Pauli limit, regardless of the Tc (Figure In summary, we propose a granular strategy for Ta-Te nanowires that successfully realizes superconductivity under high pressure and achieves a record-high upper critical field. Superconductivity emerges at 10.6 GPa, with a Tc of about 3.5 K. Tc exhibits a slight dome-like behavior during compression. Ta-Te nanowire is a possible candidate for applications in high magnetic field, and provides an ideal platform for investigating the exotic mechanisms of large upper critical fields. 