Motivated by the recent experimental realization of a minimal Kitaev chain in quantum dot systems, we present our theoretical findings on the dynamics and fusion of MZMs at or near the "sweet spot" t h = ∆ (where the fermionic hopping t h and superconducting coupling ∆ are equal). We investigated the dynamics and fusion of MZMs using time-dependent real-space local density-of-states methods. The movement of Majoranas and the detection of fusion channels are crucial for topological quantum computations. Additionally, we discuss our recent discovery of exotic "multi-site" MZMs in Y -shaped Kitaev wires, which is important for the potential braiding of Majoranas in Y -junctions formed from arrays of quantum dots. Finally, we present results on "non-trivial" fusion using canonical Kitaev wires at the sweet spot. Topological superconductors (TSC) offer an ideal platform to realize exotic Majorana zero modes. These Majorana zero modes (MZMs) follow non-Abelian exchange statistics and have potential applications to realize fault-tolerant quantum computing. The organization of the manuscript is as follows. First, we will discuss the one-dimensional quantum dot system with the same p-wave pairing phases. Then, we will describe the exact form of Majorana wavefunctions near the junction of Y -shaped geometry quantum dots. Next, we will address the time-dependent trivial fusion of MZMs in a one-dimensional geometry using a time-dependent moving wall. Finally, we will present the non-trivial fusion of MZMs using two pairs of MZMs, where the two pairs have predefined parities. The recent advancements in quantum-dot systems lead to the experimental realization of two-and three-sites Kitaev chains. where c j is a spinless fermionic annihilation operator at site j and φ k is the pairing phase on bond k. Using the relation c j = 1 √ 2 e -iφ k /2 γ I A,j + iγ I B,j , at the sweet-spot (t = ∆) and at φ k = 0 the Kitaev chain Hamiltonian in terms of Majorana operators can be written as: Interestingly, the Majorana operators γ The Y -shaped geometry plays a crucial role in facilitating the potential braiding of Majorana Zero Modes (MZMs) in quantum-dot experiments. For the phases φ 1 = π, φ 2 = 0, and φ 3 = 0, we identify a total of six MZMs. Specifically: (a) three single-site MZMs are located at the edge sites, (b) one single-site MZM is found at the central site, and (c) two multi-site MZMs are present near the central region. In contrast, when the phases are equal (φ 1 = 0, φ 2 = 0, and φ 3 = 0), we observe a total of four MZMs: (a) similar to the previous scenario, three single-site MZMs are localized at the edge sites, but (b) only one multi-site MZM is found near the central region. We further analyzed the stability of single-and multi-site MZMs against the repulsive interaction (V ) by separately calculating the electron and hole components of (LDOS(ω, j)) using by the density-matrix renormalization group method (DMRG). For moderate values of repulsive interaction (V ), our DMRG results show that the single-site edge MZMs and multi-site MZMs exhibit nearly equivalent stability. Recent advancements in quantum-dot systems have created a promising platform for testing the non-Abelian statistics of MZMs. To perform a trivial fusion of MZMs, one can utilize a single pair in a chain by moving one edge MZM towards the other using a moving potential wall (or well), as illustrated in Fig. To perform the non-trivial fusion one needs to fuse the Majoranas belonging to different pairs of MZMs each with pre-defined parities. Interestingly, in the non-trivial case, the fusion outcomes are probabilistic, not deterministic. Quantum-dot systems provide an adaptable platform for investigating the dynamics, fusion, and braiding of Majorana zero modes (MZMs). At the sweet-spot where (t h = ∆), we obtain an exact solution for a Y -shaped quantum-dot configuration. This study marks the first observation of multi-site Majorana zero modes within a Y -shaped quantum wire. Our findings suggest that both single-site edge MZMs and multi-site MZMs exhibit similar stability against Coulomb repulsion. Through time-dependent local density-of-states analysis, we track the movement and fusion of Majoranas. In cases of trivial fusion, determined by the initial state parity, the outcome is either a complete electron or a complete hole. Conversely, non-trivial fusion results in a probabilistic outcome, with equal likelihoods of forming electrons or holes. The recent experimental progress in quantum-dot systems paves the way for future braiding experiments using a minimal number of quantum dots arranged in a Y -shaped geometry.