These lectures present the Fermi-liquid theory of superconductivity, which is applicable to a broad range of systems that are candidates for non-s wave pairing, e.g. the heavy fermions, organic metals and the CuO superconductors. Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory provides an important link between experimental properties of non-s wave superconductors and the more general Fermi-liquid theory. The multiple superconducting phases of UPt3 provide an ideal example of the role that is played by the GL theory for non-s wave superconductors. The difference between non-s wave superconductivity and conventional anisotropic superconductivity is illustrated here by the unique effects that impurities are predicted to have on the properties of non-s wave superconductors. Historically, "non-s-wave pairing" began with the publication "Generalized Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer States and the Proposed Low-Temperature Phase of The search for "non-s-wave superconductivity", the metallic analog to superfluidity in For metals, the popular notion of "non-s-wave superconductivity" should not be taken literally. A rigorous classification of superconductors by the angular momentum of the Cooper pairs (e.g. s-wave, p-wave, d-wave pairing, etc.) fails in crystalline materials because angular momentum is not a good quantum number. There is no ideally isotropic superconductor in nature, and any superconductor is, in this sense, "non-s-wave". However, we will use the term "non-s-wave pairing" interchangeably with "unconventional pairing" or "reduced symmetry superconductivity" for superconductors in which the superconducting state spontaneously breaks one or more symmetries of the crystalline phase. Liquid One of the most important phenomenological theories available for investigating the properties of superconductors is the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory. This theory is applicable to a wide class of materials and superconducting phenomena, but is limited to temperatures near T c where the order parameter is small. Here we introduce the order parameter for non-s-wave superconductors, develop the GL theory from symmetry considerations and apply the GL theory to UPt 3 . The basic quantity that describes all BCS-type superconductors is the equal-time pair amplitude, where ⃗ k f is the momentum of a quasiparticle on the Fermi surface and α, β are the spin labels of the quasiparticles. 11 Fermion statistics requires that the pair amplitude obey the anti-symmetry condition, Thus, the most general pairing amplitude can be written in terms of a sum of spin-singlet and spin-triplet amplitudes, where has even (odd) parity. The actual realization of superconductivity in a given material will be described by a pair amplitude of this general form which minimizes the free energy. The GL theory is formulated in terms of a stationary free energy functional of the pair amplitude, or order parameter, of eq.( Essentially all of the candidates for non-s-wave superconductivity, including the heavy-fermion and cuprate superconductors, have inversion symmetry. This has an important consequence; the pairing interaction that drives the superconducting transition decomposes into even-and odd-parity sectors. There is a single quadratic invariant for each irreducible representation, so the leading terms in the GL free energy are of the form, The coefficients α Γ (T ) are material parameters that depend on temperature and pressure. Above T c all the coefficients α Γ (T ) > 0. The instability to the superconducting state is then the point at which one of the coefficients vanishes, i.e. α Γ * (T c ) = 0. Thus, near the system is unstable to the development of all the amplitudes {η (Γ * ) i }, however, the higher order terms in the GL functional which stabilize the system, also select the ground state order parameter from the manifold of degenerate states at T c . In most superconductors the instability is in the even-parity, A 1g channel. This is the crystalline analog of 's-wave superconductivity' in which only gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken. An instability in any other channel is a particular realization of non-s-wave superconductivity. Considerable evidence in support of non-s-wave superconductivity state in the heavy-fermion materials has accumulated from specific heat, upper critical field and various transport measurements, all of which show anomalous properties compared to those of conventional superconductors (see Refs. (4-6) for original references). However, the strongest evidence for unconventional superconductivity comes from the multiple superconducting phases of UPt 3 . Consider one of the 2D representations, e.g. the E 2u representation of Table The equilibrium order parameter and current distribution are determined by the stationarity conditions for variations of F with respect to ⃗ η and the vector potential, ⃗ A. This functional provides an important connection between experiment and the Fermi-liquid theory of superconductivity because the material parameters, [α(T ), β 1 , β 2 , κ 1 , κ 2 , κ 3 , κ 4 ], can be determined from comparison of GL theory with experiment, and calculated from Fermi-liquid theory (see below). There are two possible homogeneous equilibrium states of this GL theory. For -β 1 < β 2 < 0 the equilibrium order parameter, ⃗ η = η 0 x (or any of the six degenerate states obtained by rotation), breaks rotational symmetry in the basal plane, but preserves time-reversal symmetry. However, for β 2 > 0 the order parameter retains the full rotational symmetry (provided each rotation is combined with an appropriately chosen gauge transformation), but spontaneously breaks time-reversal symmetry. The equilibrium state is doubly-degenerate with an order parameter of the form , where η 0 = (|α|/2β 1 ) 1/2 . The broken time-reversal symmetry of the two solutions, ⃗ η ± , is exhibited by the two possible orientations of the internal orbital angular momentum, ⃗ l ∼ i (⃗ η × ⃗ η * ) ∼ ± ẑ, or spontaneous magnetic moment of the Cooper pairs. The case β 2 > 0 is relevant for the 2D models of the double transition of UPt 3 . However, the 2D theory has only one phase transition in zero field, and by itself cannot explain the double transition. The small splitting of the double transition in UPt 3 (∆T c /T c ≃ 0.1) suggests the presence of a small symmetry breaking energy scale and an associated lifting of the degeneracy of the possible superconducting states belonging to the 2D representation. The second zero-field transition just below T c in UPt 3 , as well as the anomalies observed in the upper and lower critical fields, have been explained in terms of a weak symmetry breaking field (SBF) that lowers the crystal symmetry from hexagonal to orthorhombic, and consequently reduces the 2D E 2 (or E 1 ) representation to two 1D representations with slightly different transition temperatures. In UPt 3 there appears to be a natural candidate for a SBF, , where ⃗ M s is the AFM order parameter and the coupling parameter εM 2 s determines the magnitude of the splitting of the superconducting transition. The analysis of this GL theory, including the SBF, is given in Ref. (20); the main results are: 2. The relative magnitudes of the two heat capacity anomalies, ∆C * /T c * > ∆C/T c , are consistent with the stability condition β 2 > 0 required by the double transition in the 2D model. 3. The low temperature phase (T < T c * ) has broken time-reversal symmetry, and is doubly degenerate: ⃗ η ± ∼ (a(T ), ±i b(T )), reflecting the two orientations of the internal angular momentum of the ground state. 4. The upper critical field exhibits a change in slope, a 'kink' at high temperature for ⃗ H ⊥ ĉ, but not for ⃗ H||ĉ. The kink in H ⊥ c2 is isotropic in the basal plane provided the in-plane magnetic anisotropy energy is weak compared to the Zeeman energy acting on ⃗ M s , in which case ⃗ M s rotates to maintain ⃗ M s ⊥ ⃗ H. Recent magnetoresistance experiments support this interpretation of weak magnetic anisotropy energy in the basal plane. 6. Additional evidence for a SBF model of the double transition comes from pressure studies of the superconducting and AFM phase transitions. Heat capacity measurements by Trappmann, et al. The phase diagram determined by ultrasound velocity measurements indicates that the phase boundary lines meet at a tetracritical point for both ⃗ H||ĉ and ⃗ H ⊥ ĉ. This has been argued to contradict the GL theory based on a 2D order parameter. , that couple the two components of the order parameter. These terms lead to 'level repulsion' effects in the linearized GL differential equations which prevent the crossing of two H c2 (T ) curves, corresponding to different superconducting phases. This feature of the 2D model has spawned alternative theories, designed specifically to eliminate the 'level repulsion' effect, Although the GL functionals are formally the same for any of the 2D orbital representations, the predictions for the material parameters from Fermi-liquid theory differ substantially depending on the symmetry properties of the Cooper pair basis functions. For example, the interpretation of the unusual anisotropy of H c2 in UPt 3 in terms of anisotropic Pauli limiting requires an odd-parity, spin-triplet representation with the ⃗ d-vector parallel to the ĉ direction. where N f , and N f is the density of states at the Fermi level. There are important differences between the E 1 and E 2 representations when we evaluate these averages. Using the basis functions in Table In fact, the three in-plane coefficients are identical for E 1u in the limit where the in-plane hexagonal anisotropy of the Fermi surface vanishes. In contrast, the coefficients κ 2 and κ 3 for the E 2u model both vanish when the hexagonal anisotropy of the Fermi surface is neglected. This latter result follows directly from the approximation of a cylindrically symmetric Fermi surface and Fermi velocity, || f kz ⃗ z, and the higher angular momentum components of the E 2 basis functions, If we have weak hexagonal anisotropy of the Fermi surface then κ 23 ≪ κ 1 only for E 2 . Thus, there is a natural explanation for the absence (or at least the smallness) of the 'level repulsion' terms in the orbital 2D model if there is weak hexagonal anisotropy in the basal plane, but we are required to select the E 2 representation. There is support for the assumption of weak hexagonal anisotropy; if the hexagonal anisotropy of ⃗ v f were significant it should be observable at low temperature as an in-plane anisotropy of H ⊥ c2 (T ). The angular dependence of H ⊥ c2 was investigated, but no in-plane anisotropy was observed. Because both order parameter components appear with the same coefficients there is no crossing of different H c2 (T ) curves corresponding to different eigenfunctions, and therefore no tetracritical point. However, the slopes of the transition lines near the tetracritical point suggest that the difference in the gradient energies associated with the two components of the order parameter are finite, but small, i.e. |∆κ/2κ 1 | ≲ 0.2. This suggests that the SBF may be responsible for a splitting in the gradient coefficients as well as the transition temperature. In the model of Hess, et al. , and lead to a gradient energy where . Dimensional analysis implies that the coupling coefficients, ε, ε ⊥ , ε || , for the homogeneous term, the in-plane gradient energies and the ĉ-axis gradient energies are formally the same order of magnitude, in which case we conclude that the splittings in the gradient coefficients are relatively small, Thus, in this GL theory the SBF is essential for producing an apparent tetracritical point, and at this semiquantitative level, can account for the magnitudes of the slopes near the tetracritical point. Conduction electrons in metals interact strongly with each other and with the lattice. These interactions lead to correlations among the electrons, and we have to view conduction electrons, in general, as a system of correlated Fermions. On the other hand, the model of non-correlated electrons occupying single-particle states in conduction bands describes most properties of traditional metals very well. This simple behaviour of an intrinsically complicated system was explained by Landau in a series of papers in which he established his "Fermi-liquid theory." Landau argued that interacting Fermions can form a "Fermi-liquid state," which for many properties has the appearance of a non-correlated state. The reason, according to Landau, is that the physical properties of a Fermi liquid at low temperatures are dominated by low-lying excitations (quasiparticles) which are complex objects but have basic features (e.g. charge, spin, fermion number) in common with noninteracting electrons. Landau showed that an ensemble of quasiparticles is described by a classical distribution ( small ) 0 : ( small ) 1 : ( small ) 2 : 1. Leading order self-energy diagrams of Fermi-liquid theory. The vertices (shaded circles) represent the sum of all high-energy processes and give rise to interactions between the quasiparticles (smooth propagator lines), phonons (wiggly propagator lines) and impurities (dashed lines). The order in the parameter 'small' is indicated for each diagram. function g( ⃗ k f , ⃗ R; ε, t), Derivations of the Boltzmann-Landau transport equation from first principles 39,40 use many-body Green's function techniques, and lead to explicit expressions for the various terms of the transport equation in terms of self-energies. The self-energies describe the effects of electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions as well as impurity scattering. The complete set of diagrams for the leading order self-energies are shown in Fig. The present notion of a normal Fermi liquid is somewhat more general than standard definitions. For the conduction electrons of a metal to form a Fermi liquid we require that • the dominant charge-carrying excitations have the signatures of electrons or holes; they are fermions with charge ±e, spin 1/2, large velocities ⃗ v f and large momenta ⃗ k f near a Fermi surface. In the following we call the electronic quasiparticles simply "electrons", but emphasize that the physical properties of such an electron are, in general, significantly affected by many-body effects. Landau's Fermi-liquid model predicts a number of universal results for temperature and magnetic field dependences of thermodynamic and transport properties at very low temperatures. The universal laws can be used as experimental signatures for Fermi-liquid behaviour, provided the low-temperature limit is reached before the superconducting transition. A detailed discussion of these normal-state properties can be found in various textbooks and review articles. It took more than 10 years after the breakthrough in the theory of superconductivity by BCS to establish a complete Fermi-liquid theory of superconductivity. Earlier theories of superconductivity were formulated in terms of Bogolyubov's equations, Gorkov's equations, or other fully quantum mechanical schemes. They lacked the quasiclassical aspects of Landau's Fermi-liquid theory. The first complete quasiclassical theory of superconductivity was formulated in a series of publications by Eilenberger, Retarded and advanced quasiclassical propagators, ĝR,A ( ⃗ k f , ⃗ R, ; ε, t), are defined analogously by ξ-integration of the retarded and advanced microscopic Green's functions. Similarly, ⃗ g K and ⃗ g K are related to spin-distribution functions. The off-diagonal components Measurable quantities such as the charge density n( ⃗ R, t), current density ⃗ j( ⃗ R, t), etc. can be calculated from the diagonal components of the quasiclassical propagator, ĝK , or, equivalently, from the distribution functions n p and n h . If we ignore the Landau parameters (contained in diagram Ib), then In eq. ( The central equation of the quasiclassical theory is the quasiclassical transport equation for ĝK , and is the generalization of the Landau-Boltzmann equation to the superconducting state. It is a set of coupled partial differential equations of first order in the spatial derivatives and, in general, of infinite order in the time derivative. In a compact notation, the quasiclassical transport equation reads where the ⊗-product stands for the usual 4×4-matrix product and a product in the energy-time variables defined by â ⊗ b(...; ε, t) The superscripts a (b) on the partial derivatives indicate derivatives with respect to the arguments of â ( b). A determination of ĝK from the transport eq. ( Finally, in equilibrium ĝK is given in terms of ĝR,A by ĝK = ĝR -ĝA tanh(ε/2T ). The solutions to the quasiclassical equations for ĝR,A , are necessary inputs to the transport eq. ( The quasiclassical equations (14, 15) need to be complemented by self-consistency equations for the the quasiclassical self-energies σR,A,K . They give σR,A in terms of ĝR,A , and σK in terms of ĝR , ĝA and ĝK . The self-consistency equations are shown, in a diagrammatic notation, in Fig. The quasiclassical theory is especially well suited for studying non-s-wave superconductors. Many calculational steps of the theory are identical for s-wave and non-s-wave superconductors, and many s-wave results can be simply generalized to anisotropic, non-s-wave wave superconductors. The reason is that a quasiparticle at point ⃗ R moving with momentum ⃗ k f senses only the gap function ∆( ⃗ k f , ⃗ R). Since it does not sample the full momentum dependence of the gap function it cannot distinguish an anisotropic gap from an isotropic one. For example, the density of states N ( ⃗ k f ; ε) of a homogeneous superconductor in equilibrium has the traditional BCS form, for unitary triplet pairing. Several measurable properties of a non-s-wave superconductor can be calculated in a rather simple way by using standard s-wave formulas locally at any point ⃗ k f on the Fermi surface, and then averaging over the Fermi surface. Typical examples for such averaged quantities are the free energy of a superconductor (and related quantities such as the critical field H c (T ) and the specific heat c s (T )), the stripped penetration depth tensor, λ ij , 53 where ε n = (2n + 1)πT are the Matsubara energies and the Fermi surface average is, Eq. ( Scattering by ordinary, nonmagnetic impurities is expected to have many dramatic effects on the properties of unconventional superconductors. In unconventional superconductors, it is useful to distinguish two types of effects. Impurities affect global properties of superconductors, such as thermodynamic properties (T c , critical fields, heat capacity,...) and long wavelength response coefficients (conductivity, sound absorption,...). Measurements of these macroscopic quantities average over the positions of the impurities and give coarse-grained, "impurity averaged" information. Impurities also cause strong local changes in their environment, out to distances of order ξ(T ). Such local effects might be measured by probes such as NMR and high resolution STM. These two different effects require different types of calculations: • Calculations which average over the positions of the impurities, and so produce coarse-grained, "impurity averaged" quantities such as the transition temperature and density of states. • Calculations which focus on the local environment of a single impurity, and compute position-dependent quantities such as the current or order parameter. To start, we note that many of the properties of conventional superconductors are very little affected by the presence of nonmagnetic impurities. For example, quantities such as the transition temperature, specific heat, and density of states are quite insensitive to such scattering. On the other hand, transport response functions such as the superfluid density are affected rather strongly. In contrast, in unconventional superconductors, all of the quantities mentioned in the preceding paragraph are strongly affected by nonmagnetic impurities. This opens up interesting areas of research in two ways-novel effects in superconductivity can be studied, and conversely, superconductivity can be used as a probe of the properties of such impurities. We give some illustrative examples: 1. Transition Temperature-The value of T c is strongly reduced by impurity scattering. The precise value of the reduction depends on the angular dependence, in ⃗ k space, of both the order parameter and the scattering matrix. 2. Density of States-N (ω) can be strongly affected. For example, if the energy gap vanishes on a line of nodes on the Fermi surface, for a pure superconductor we have N (ω) ∼ ω for small energies. The addition of an arbitrarily small concentration of impurities makes the superconductor gapless; 3. Order Parameter-The question here is: how is the order parameter ∆( ⃗ k f , ⃗ R) affected in the vicinity of a nonmagnetic impurity? In general ∆( ⃗ k f , ⃗ R) is distorted away from its pure state value ∆ 0 ( ⃗ k f ). However, in a conventional superconductor this distortion is important only out to distances of order 1/k f from the impurity. 4. Superfluid Density Tensor-In general, impurity scattering reduces the elements of ρs . One surprising effect can occur in unconventional superconductors: impurity scattering can increase the anisotropy in the ρ s tensor. To illustrate the use of the impurity-averaged quasiclassical equation, we review one particular calculation, a calculation which is perhaps somewhat novel. The general question to be addressed is: if the magnitude of the energy gap varies through space, do supercurrents arise? Note that if the gap is a complex function of ⃗ k, and so breaks time reversal symmetry, a term in the supercurrent proportional to the gradient of the magnitude of the gap is allowed by symmetry. Gorkov 9 first pointed out that impurity scattering could give such a term a nonzero coefficient, even in the context of a weak-coupling calculation. For definiteness, we consider a singlet gap transforming according to the E 1g representation of the hexagonal group D 6h . This particular case has been discussed as a possible model for the heavy-fermion superconductor U P t 3 . 80 Thus we write the gap as ∆( Here, the Y i ( ⃗ k f ) are the basis functions, and the coefficient ⃗ η = (η 1 , η 2 ) transforms as a vector in the xy plane. In the Ginzburg-Landau region, the supercurrent is given, in terms of the gauge invariant derivative ⃗ This expression is obtained as the stationarity condition of the GL functional of eq. ( where ⃗ φ is a fixed two dimensional vector and η 0 ( ⃗ R) is a spatially varying, real amplitude. If we make the choice ⃗ φ = (x + iŷ)/ √ 2 we then have ⃗ J = (eκ a /ħ)ẑ × ⃗ ∇η 2 0 . To calculate κ a we use the following strategy. We assume the order parameter has the form given above, with an η 0 ( ⃗ R) which varies slowly in space. We then compute the Matsubara propagator 48 ĝ in a gradient expansion(ĝ = ĝ(0) + ĝ(1) ), use this ĝ to compute the current, and then read off κ a from our answer. For simplicity we take our Fermi surface to be spherical ( ⃗ k f = k f k), and choose the following basis functions: ky kz . We evaluate the impurity self energy in the Born approximation, and consider spherically symmetric impurities. This gives σ Here, c is the concentration of impurities. We can expand W in spherical harmonics as follows: Note that we are keeping all terms in the spherical harmonic expansion of W ; very often, calculations make the so-called s-wave approximation, and keep only the W 0 term. As we shall shortly see, the s-wave approximation is not good enough for our purposes. If we solve for ĝ(1) , and then compute the current, we find the following formula for κ a 77,78 Here, n + = n + 1/2 + α 0 , the pair breaking parameters α l are defined by α l = cN f W l /2T c , and the correlation length is given by ξ 0 = v f /πT c . There are several noteworthy features about this result for κ a . First, we see that it vanishes in the absence of impurity scattering. In fact, if we had only kept the s-wave piece of W , we would still have found that κ a was zero. Second, we can see that κ a depends on the details of the impurity scattering in a quite intricate fashion. The l = 0, 1, 2, 3 pieces of W all enter into the answer. Finally, the sign of κ a can go either way. Note that α 0 must be positive, but the other α l 's can be either positive or negative. We also remark that the coefficient κ a plays a role in the discussion of whether or not Cooper pairs have angular momentum. For a discussion of this point we refer to the literature. In an unconventional superconductor, much interesting structure develops in the neighborhood of a nonmagnetic impurity. In contrast to the conventional case, this structure is significant out to quite long distances from the impurity, distances of order ξ(T ). Here, the intermediate propagator ĝimt satisfies the following equation: [iε n τ 3 -∆, ĝimt ] + i⃗ v f • ⃗ ∇ĝ imt = 0 , ĝimt ĝimt = -π 2 1. Note that the equations for both ĝ and ĝimt involve the order parameter ∆( ⃗ k f , ⃗ R), which must be found from the gap equation; this gap equation needs ĝ as input. The final ingredient is an equation for the t-matrix: So in general we face the difficult task of solving self-consistently for all of the involved quantities. However, for a small impurity, a certain simplification is possible. Here, ĝ0 and ∆0 are the spatially uniform, unperturbed propagator and order parameter, and we work to first order in the small quantities δĝ and δ ∆. We may then take ĝ0 = ĝimt = -π(iε n τ3 -∆0 )/(ε 2 n + |∆ 0 | 2 ) 1/2 . The leading order answer for the Fourier transform δĝ( ⃗ k f , ⃗ q; ε n ) is then 85 Here, Q = We can now discuss the magnetic field, B( ⃗ R), and the total magnetic moment ⃗ M , produced by these currents. We stress that these currents vanish unless the unperturbed order parameter breaks time reversal symmetry. We ignore the Meissner screening current; this is a good approximation for extreme type-II superconductors, since the magnetic screening length is then much longer than the spatial extent of the currents. • Magnetic Field B-To estimate the overall size of the effect, we consider the magnetic field produced at the impurity site, ⃗ R = 0. This is given by To make further progress in our estimates, we need the expression for δ∆( ⃗ k f , ⃗ q). As mentioned above, this is obtained by substituting δĝ into the gap equation. We refer to the literature for these details, In this formula, β(T ) is a temperature dependent function, which vanishes at T c , and is of order unity at lower temperatures. The quantity ek 2 f is a magnetic field, and can be quite large, of order 10 6 G; however, it is reduced by the small factors (T c /T f ) 2 and (v f /c). • Total Magnetic Moment ⃗ M -The magnetic moment of the currents around the impurity is given by The above formula for ⃗ J(⃗ q) then allows us to deduce a surprisingly general result: We hope that the preceding discussion gives a good idea of the interesting spatial structure which should develop in the neighborhood of an impurity in an unconventional superconductor. It should be stressed that the length scale of this structure, of order ξ(T ), is quite long by microscopic standards. P. W. Anderson and P. Morel, Generalized Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer States and the Proposed Low-Temperature Phase of 3 He, Phys. Rev. 123, 1911 (1961).