The lifetime of superconducting qubits is limited by dielectric loss, and a major source of dielectric loss is the native oxide present at the surface of the superconducting metal. Specifically, tantalumbased superconducting qubits have been demonstrated with record lifetimes, but a major source of loss is the presence of two-level systems (TLSs) in the surface tantalum oxide. Here, we demonstrate a strategy for avoiding oxide formation by encapsulating the tantalum with noble metals that do not form native oxide. By depositing a few nanometers of Au or AuPd alloy before breaking vacuum, we completely suppress tantalum oxide formation. Microwave loss measurements of superconducting resonators reveal that the noble metal is proximitized, with a superconducting gap over 80% of the bare tantalum at thicknesses where the oxide is fully suppressed. We find that losses in resonators fabricated by subtractive etching are dominated by oxides on the sidewalls, suggesting total surface encapsulation by additive fabrication as a promising strategy for eliminating surface oxide TLS loss in superconducting qubits. Superconducting qubits are the basis of many large scale quantum processors, enabling demonstrations of quantum error correction Here we encapsulate Ta superconducting resonators by depositing a noble metal (gold or gold-palladium) after the Ta deposition, before breaking vacuum. We characterize the film using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to show that the tantalum oxide is completely suppressed with only a few nanometers of noble metal encapsulation. The noble metal encapsulation layer is a normal (non-superconducting) metal, so it may contribute to additional loss if the normal metal is not fully proximitized by the underlying superconducting film We deposit gold (Au) or gold palladium alloy (AuPd) on top of 200 nm thick α-Ta films grown on 550 μm thick c-plane sapphire substrates with dc magnetron sputtering In order to quantify the degree of surface oxidation, We systematically investigate the encapsulation conditions needed to fully suppress the tantalum oxide by measuring Ta4f XPS spectra for various thicknesses of Au or AuPd encapsulation layers and extracting the intensity of the Ta 2 O 5 peaks. Note that for very thin encapsulation layers, we report an effective thickness based on deposition rates, see We measure the degree of proximitization of the noble metal encapsulation by fabricating coplanar waveguide (CPW) quarter-wave resonators on various encapsulated Ta films with designs that were used in our prior work We quantitatively investigate the superconducting nature of encapsulated Ta films by extracting the effective gap of films undergoing additional iterative sputtering of Au to vary the encapsulation layer thickness from 5 to 323 nm [Fig. To understand the evolution of minigap size with increasing thicknesses of encapsulating Au, we fit our data to numerically calculated minigaps using the Usadel equations [Fig. For Au encapsulation thicknesses of around 3 nm where the tantalum oxide is completely suppressed [Fig. To characterize the surface and interface losses of en- capsulated resonators, we vary their geometry to change the surface participation ratio (SPR) of the electric field energy Despite the suppression of surface oxides, we do not observe an improvement in the surface TLS loss, and we observe slightly higher surface loss tangents with encapsulated films compared to bare Ta devices. Because our resonators are patterned by a subtractive etch process, the fabrication-exposed sidewalls are not encapsulated and thus grow surface oxide, which can be observed in TEM images [Fig. Beyond the sidewall oxide, the slightly higher measured surface loss tangents of encapsulated devices may arise from increased sidewall roughness. The multilayer structure requires multiple etching steps in the resonator fabrication process, and the additional etching step causes rougher sidewall profiles compared to bare Ta devices Here we have demonstrated complete suppression of the native surface oxide of Ta using noble metal encapsulation, and we find that these films remain superconducting because of proximitization of the encapsulation layer by the underlying Ta. These encapsulated resonators exhibit performance that is similar to state-of-the-art Ta circuits at mK temperatures. Our ongoing work includes developing fabrication strategies that can achieve total Ta encapsulation to avoid the formation of oxides on the device sidewalls, for example by additive fabrication For fabricated resonators, we used films deposited by Star Cryoelectronics. The films were deposited on c-plane HEMEX grade sapphire wafers, which are first cleaned by a 20 minute piranha acid (2:1 ratio of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide) treatment and an oxygen plasma treatment before deposition. 200 nm of α-Ta is deposited on the substrate at 500 • C with a dc magnetron sputtering process. The encapsulating Au and AuPd is then sputtered in situ following the Ta deposition without breaking vacuum. The encapsulation layer is around 4-5 nm in thickness. To fabricate resonators with Au encapsulation layers with thicknesses up to 323 nm, we sputtered additional Au on top of the Star Cryoelectronics Au encapsulated films (after a piranha solution clean of the surface) in an AJA ATC Orion sputtering system, using an rf power supply at 250W with a deposition rate of around 2 Å/s. After deposition, the encapsulated films are primed with hexamethyldisilane (HMDS) in a YES vapor prime oven at 148 • C to promote resist adhesion to the noble metal surface. Then, AZ1518 is spun on the film at 4000 rpm for 45 s and soft baked at 95 • C for 1 minute. The photoresist is then patterned using a Heidelberg DL66+ laser writer, using a 10 mm write head, with a 50% attenuator, intensity setting of 30%, and a focus offset setting of 10%. Following patterning, the photoresist is then baked at 110 • C for 2 minutes and then cooled on a metal plate for 1 minute. The photoresist is then developed in AZ300MIF solution for 90 s and rinsed in deionized (DI) water for 30 s. The patterned photoresist is then used as a mask for subsequent etch steps. Next, the Au or AuPd layer is etched in a dilute aqua regia solution. Dilute aqua regia is mixed in a 2:3:1 ratio of DI water:HCl:HNO 3 , and the Au and AuPd films are etched at approximately 8 Å/s. We note that the encapsulated devices show more sidewall roughness than bare Ta films when undergoing identical fabrication steps except for the added aqua regia etch on encapsulated devices [Fig. The underlying tantalum is then etched with one of three etch types (these etch steps were used in our previous work After both etch steps are complete, the photoresist mask is stripped in a Remover PG bath at 80 • C for at least 1 hour, followed by a 2 minute each sonication in toluene, acetone, and 2-propanol. The chips are then further cleaned with a 20 minute piranha solution dip. Finally, the devices are wirebonded and packaged in a commercial microwave package (QDevil QCage.24). All devices were measured in a BlueFors XLD dilution refrigerator with a base mixing chamber temperature of approximately 10 mK. Our measurement setup is described in detail in We use X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a Bruker D8 Discover Diffractometer with a K-α X-ray source to study the crystal structure of Ta in our encapsulated films. For Au and AuPd encapsulated films used for resonator fabrication, the XRD spectra contain clear peaks corresponding to α-Ta ⟨110⟩ and ⟨220⟩ [Fig. We studied the surface morphology of Ta films encapsulated with Au or AuPd using AFM, taken on a Bruker Dimension ICON3 AFM. On bare Ta, the facets of the ⟨110⟩ surface are clearly visible, whereas they become less visible in scans on films with progressively increasing amounts of Au or AuPd [Fig. All XPS measurements are taken on a ThermoFisher K-Alpha XPS spectrometer with an aluminum Kα X-ray source. We take XPS scans of the Ta4f and Au4f binding energy spectra with an energy step size of 0.1 eV, a dwell time of 100 ms, and averaged the spectra over 20 sweeps. To calculate the Ta 2 O 5 fraction, a Shirley background is first subtracted from the Ta4f peaks, which are then fit to a multi-component model for all of the observed peaks We observe an increase in the tantalum oxide intensity when we deposit less than 2.5 (1) nm, nominally, of Au (AuPd) on the Ta surface [Fig. We used a Quantum Design PPMS Dyna Cool instrument to measure the dc resistance as a function of temperature for bare Ta and Nb-seeded Ta films. We used the four-point probe resistance method with a current of 100 μA. The FIG. We follow the methodology of where ω is the center angular frequency of the resonator; T is the temperature; n is the intracavity photon number; ħ is the reduced Plank's constant; k B is the Boltzmann constant; and D, β 1 , β 2 are additional fit parameters characterizing TLS saturation. Equivalently, the frequency shift due to TLSs is modeled as where Ψ is the complex digamma function. To isolate the contribution of surface TLSs to dielectric loss, we tune the SPR of our devices by tuning the gap spacing between the center pin conductor and the ground plane in our CPW resonators. The extracted Q TLS,0 scales with SPR [Fig. The effective superconducting energy gap of the films that our resonators are fabricated from can also be extracted via an internal quality factor measurement or by a frequency shift measurement. The effects of thermal quasiparticles on the internal quality factor of our resonators is modeled as where A QP is an overall amplitude proportional to the kinetic inductance ratio; ∆ is the effective superconducting energy gap; K 0 is the zeroth order modified Bessel function of the second kind; k B is the Boltzmann constant. Equivalently, the frequency shift induced by thermal quasiparticles is modeled as where α is the kinetic inductance fraction; σ is the superconductor complex conductivity; and φ is the phase of the superconductor complex conductivity. Our quality factor and frequency shift measurements are simultaneously fit to both the TLS and quasiparticle components, allowing for the extraction of both the TLS contribution to dielectric loss and the effective superconducting energy gap. The Usadel equation is the standard formalism for describing superconductor-normal metal heterostructures The Usadel equation is a nonlinear diffusion equation of θ(x, E) in the normal metal with thickness d N and in the superconductor with thickness d S (See Fig. where D is the diffusion coefficient and ∆(x) is the local order parameter. ∆(x) = 0 in the normal metal, while ∆(x) is related to θ(x, E) in the superconductor via the following self-consistent equation. Where N S is the normal-state DOS at the Fermi surface of the superconductor, V is the pairing strength, ħω D is the Debye energy, and T is the temperature. The Usadel equation admits the following boundary condition at the metal-superconductor interface. As our convention, we set the metal-superconductor interface as x = 0. Where σ N,S and θ N,S denote the conductivity and the pairing angle in the normal metal and the superconductor. G int /A denotes the interface conductance per unit area. Similarly, the metal-air and the superconductor-air boundaries have the following boundary condition where G int = 0. Finally, the local spectral density N (x, E) can be computed from θ(x, E) once it is known. where N N,S is the normal-state DOS at the Fermi surface of the normal metal or the superconductor. Because of the proximity effect, N (x, E) becomes suppressed below an energy called the minigap (See Fig. The above set of equations can be solved self-consistently to find the minigap. In practice, the Usadel equation in the current form is highly numerically unstable. Therefore, following In the imaginary-time formalism, we solve a real pairing angle θ(x, E). θ = 0 in the normal metal while θ = arctanh(∆ 0 /E) in the bulk of the superconductor. The Usadel equation under the imaginary-time formalism now reads as And the order parameter ∆(x) is related to θ via where ω n = πk B T (2n + 1)/ħ denotes the Matsubara frequencies. We solve the Usadel equation self-consistently and numerically as previously described. We then then fit to the experimentally measured minigap at various Au thickness d N [Fig. We then relate the conductivity σ N,S to D N,S under the free electron approximation Where G q = q 2 /h denotes the conductance quantum and λ S denotes the Fermi wavelength of the superconductor. We summarize the model parameters in Table To estimate an uncertainty range for the fitted transparency value, we sweep t around the optimal fitted value and plot χ 2 values at different t values in Fig. FIG. S2.