Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors are widely used in various fields of physics and technology, due to their high efficiency and timing precision. Although, in principle, their detection mechanism offers broadband operation, their wavelength range has to be optimized by the optical cavity parameters for a specific task. We present a study of the optical absorption of a superconducting nanowire single photon detector (SNSPD) with an optical cavity. The optical properties of the niobium nitride films, measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry, were modelled using the Drude-Lorentz model with quantum corrections. The numerical simulations of the optical response of the detectors show that the wavelength range of the detector is not solely determined by its geometry, but the optical conductivity of the disordered thin metallic films contributes considerably. This contribution can be conveniently expressed by the ratio of imaginary and real parts of the optical conductivity. This knowledge can be utilized in detector design. Strengthening the security of digital communication channels by building Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) infrastructure is an ongoing effort worldwide The working principle of SNSPD is straightforward: a nanowire in the superconducting state is currentbiased close to the edge of the normal metal transition. The absorption of a single photon results in the destruction of superconductivity at some place along the nanowire. Due to the current bias, the normal state region expands, which results in a voltage pulse across the nanowire. These nanowires are fabricated on 6-15 nm thick, highly disordered superconductors, such as Niobium Nitride The overall system detection efficiency (SDE) of detectors is determined by the efficiency of the photon coupling to the active area of the detector η coupling , the photon absorption efficiency of the superconductor η abs , and by the above-described efficiency of transformation of the absorbed photon to electric signal η intrinsic and is given as The absorption of a nanowire (thin film) η abs on bare substrate is insufficient (below 30%, Fig. This resonator consists of a thin dielectric layer with thickness d 1 , matching its optical length Λ with λ/4 of the desired light's wavelength. The nanowire is fabricated on one side of the dielectric and the other side is covered with a low-loss mirror metallic layer (as shown in Fig. To properly model the optical properties of this structure, and thus to maximize the absorption η abs in the nanowire, not only has the dielectric thickness d 1 to be optimized, but the precise optical properties of the disordered metal have to be considered. However, their optical properties in the metallic state are not trivial due to the presence of quantum corrections, which the standard Drude model fails to describe In this paper, we investigate the dependence of the optical absorption of NbN nanowires in λ/4 resonant cavity on film thickness and nanowire design. The optical conductivity of a set of NbN films was determined from spectroscopic ellipsometry in the visible range, and they were fitted by the modified Drude-Lorentz model, which takes the quantum corrections into account Niobium nitride samples were deposited by means of Pulsed Laser Deposition In Ref. respectively. Here, σ D is the Drude conductivity, Γ is the electron relaxation rate and Q is the strength of the quantum corrections, also referred to as quantumness. The second term in eq. 2 describes the transition peak at Ω L , with strength σ L , and width Γ L . This formula describes the anomalous suppression in the IR range and below, which is characteristic of these films. The optical conductivity for films with different thicknesses is shown in Fig. As can be seen in Fig. for various film thicknesses is plotted in Fig. It is important to note, that not just the magnitude of the conductivity changes with the thickness, but the ratio of real to imaginary parts changes as well. This is easily visible by the change of the angle of the arrow pointing to the conductivity at λ 0 =1550 nm in Fig. The optical absorption of the SNSPD can be described by the effective impedance model where σ(t) is the optical conductivity (in units of S/m) of the NbN film with thickness t, and the ratio f = w/(w + s) is the fill factor. This approximation is valid for the width and the thickness of the nanowires w, t ≪ λ. As these parameters are usually w ∼ 30-200 nm, t ∼ 5-22 nm, and s ∼ 50-300 nm, this approximation holds well for λ > 1μm. The validity of this approximation is demonstrated by numerical modeling of the absorption spectra of a detector with different nanowire widths and constant fill factor f = 0.5, shown in Fig. The absorption spectra for varying G 1 and constant G 2 = 0 reveal that the real part of the effective sheet conductance G 1 (σ 1 , respectively) mainly affects the value of the absorption maxima, but not their position λ max , shown in Fig. The dependence of 1/λ max on the conductivity of the NbN films, represented by tan θ, is linear for a broad range of tan θ, as is visible in Fig. where λ c is a fitting parameter. The value λ c is governed by the optical properties of the dielectric layer and its thickness. For the studied geometry of the detector on SiO 2 , λ c ∼ 4.2 μm. Here, we assumed tan θ to be constant and equal to tan θ 0 , which is a feasible approximation in the vicinity of λ 0 , as is shown in Fig. Since tan θ increases with decreasing wavelength, the positive feedback further lowers the resonance wavelength. This simple relation can be directly implemented in the detector design. The absorption maximum shift due to the part of the conductivity (contribution of the thin film), for a given dielectric layer, limits the possible range of film thicknesses. However, using e.g. a commercially available 200 nm thick Si 3 N 4 membrane, the resonance wavelength determined by the membrane is 4Λ ≈ 1800 nm and the corresponding absorption at λ 0 is thus lower, as can be seen in Fig. In similar studies, the properties of a single deposited film are often measured (for example by spectroscopic ellipsometry), and the determined specific conductivity is considered to be thickness-independent in the simulations. Consequently, the nanowire's thickness and width are then tuned to maximize the optical absorption in the nanowire at the aimed wavelength λ 0 . For example, in Ref. To illustrate the error arising from this approximation, we simulated the optical absorption in the above-described nanowire for the respective conductivity σ(t), and the corresponding optical indices, given by eq. 5. For example, using the conductivity of the film with t meas =14 nm and simply rescaling it to t = 9 nm for the simulation would result in a decrease of the simulated absorption maxima by approximately 200 nm, as can be seen in Fig. We modelled the absorption spectra of NbN nanowires in a λ/4 resonator for different film thicknesses and showed that the optical conductivity of thin films significantly affects the absorption spectra. The optical conductivity of disordered metallic films is strongly affected by the presence of quantum corrections, resulting in nontrivial wavelength and thickness dependence of the optical conductivity. The real part of the conductivity determines the amplitude of absorption of the nanowire in the λ/4 optical resonator, whereas the imaginary part contributes to the wavelength shift of the maxima. The wavelength shift of the absorption maxima can be expressed in terms of the ratio of imaginary and real parts of the optical conductivity, which is a characteristic of a film with a particular thickness. This knowledge can be utilized in detector design and optimization of its optical properties. Thus, to properly simulate and optimize the absorption of the detectors at a required wavelength, it is necessary to work with the precise optical conductivity of the particular layers. These can be obtained by direct measurements of the samples in the required range, or by utilizing a model that describes the optical conductivity of the disordered samples well, as presented in Ref. 