Tracking the time evolution of a quantum state allows one to verify the thermalization rate or the propagation speed of correlations in generic quantum systems. Inspired by the energy-time uncertainty principle, bounds have been demonstrated on the maximal speed at which a quantum state can change, resulting in immediate and practical tasks. Based on a programmable superconducting quantum processor, we test the dynamics of various emulated quantum mechanical systems encompassing single-and many-body states. We show that one can test the known quantum speed limits and that modifying a single Hamiltonian parameter allows the observation of the crossover of the different bounds on the dynamics. We also unveil the observation of minimal quantum speed limits in addition to more common maximal ones, i.e., the lowest rate of change of a unitarily evolved quantum state. Our results establish a comprehensive experimental characterization of quantum speed limits and pave the way for their subsequent study in engineered non-unitary conditions. The central question of quantum non-equilibrium dynamics revolves around exploring how quickly a quantum state can be modified Such bound constrains the unitary process of a (pure or mixed) initial state to its orthogonal counterpart, defining a minimal evolution time t ⊥ obeying t ⊥ ≥ t MT ≡ πħ/(2∆E), where ∆E = ⟨ Ĥ2 ⟩ -⟨ Ĥ⟩ 2 1/2 is the energy spread of the time-independent Hamiltonian Ĥ governing the system and ⟨ Ĥ⟩ ≡ E is the mean energy. Building on that, Margolus and Levitin (ML) Their combination, results in a tight Experimental observation of these bounds has been put forward in single-particle systems, including a single atom on an optical trap progress in simulating many-body Hamiltonians using superconducting quantum circuits Here, we further leverage the tunability of the quantum circuits to examine the crossover among different bounds. Crucially, our investigation relies on noticing that a single Hamiltonian parameter can effectively govern which bound provides the tighter dynamics, even if fixing the initial state. Using this rationale, our study spans small (e.g., one qubit or one qutrit, Figs. For a general time-independent Hamiltonian with a bounded energy spectrum, E min ≤ {E n } ≤ E max , the QSL is bounded by a unified limit t U = max πħ 2∆E , πħ 2(E-Emin) , πħ 2(Emax-E) , emerges in which t ML (t ML * ) limits the shortest orthogonalization time scale (see Supplementary Section 2 for further discussion). To experimentally observe three dynamical regimes and the possible crossover between different bounds during the dynamics, we consider a qubit (qutrit) system under a microwave drive Ĥd = Ω cos(ω d t), where Ω is the drive amplitude and ω d is the drive frequency. In this scenario, we can conveniently select which bound limits the speed of the system's dynamics by tuning a single Hamiltonian parameter Ω (see Supplementary Section 5 for experimental calibrations of Ω), even if the initial state remains unchanged. In the rotating frame of drive frequency ω d , the Hamiltonian of a driven qubit is gener- See Supplementary Section 7 for experimental data of longer time dynamics and Supplementary Section 11 for the effects of imperfect pulse. with ∆ = ω 10ω d being the detuning between the qubit transition frequency ω 10 and the drive frequency ω d (Fig. By setting Ω/2π = -2.5 MHz, 0 MHz, and 2.5 MHz, we show in Fig. In particular, the perfect orthogonalization for Ω = 0 MHz can be understood via the expectation values of the corresponding spin-1/2 Pauli matrices {σ α } (α = x, y, z). In this case, Ĥqubit is diagonal and thus proportional to σz ; the initial state |ψ(0)⟩ = |+⟩, an eigenstate of σx , evolves as described by the precession in the Bloch sphere around the z quantization axis (inset in Fig. The next level of complexity one can perform a similar analysis is on a three-level Hamiltonian, a qutrit. A transmon-type qubit is a multi-level system with a weak anharmonicity, and thus, a higher-energy state |2⟩ will be involved in the system dynamics under the large microwave drive, which yields a driven qutrit Hamiltonian, where η = ω 10ω 21 , is the nonlinearity -for our device, η/2π ≈ -212 MHz. Similarly, adjusting the drive amplitude allows the exploration of regimes in which the time evolution falls into the different QSL regions (Fig. (see Supplementary Section 6 for details of qutrit gate calibrations). Albeit remarkably restricting, the bounds in Eq. ( where the prefactor π sin θ ′′ ). θ ′ = θ + E min t and θ ′′ = -θ -E max t are defined by the time-dependent phase that accumulates in the overlap: ⟨ψ(0)|ψ(t)⟩ = Fe iθ . Similar to the more known bounds [Eq. ( where B ′,α low ≡ max[0, Similarly, based on the sign of d ′′ α one can have another set of bounds: where B ′′,α low ≡ max[0, Combining Eq. ( In Fig. Nothing so far is unique to simple quantum mechanical systems. The only constraint is that the Hamiltonian governing the dynamics has a bounded spectrum so that ML, ML * bounds and their generalizations are welldefined. As a result, the constraints we derive should also apply to inherently many-body Hamiltonians, which can similarly be emulated using a network of superconducting qubits but have not been experimentally explored on what concerns the speed of evolution of its many-body states in the Hilbert space. To that end, leveraging the inter-qubit coupling tunability, their onsite energies, and the flexibility in preparing multi-qubit entangled states (see Supplementary Section 4 for more device information), we emulate the quantum XY-model in a one dimensional (1d) chain of six qubits: where gives the hopping energy scale for excitations of nearestneighbor qubits; W i is the on-site potential of the ith qubit. In this case, we take W i = (-1) i W , forming a staggered potential pattern (Fig. ) (see Supplementary Section 9 for the state preparation circuit). The single Hamiltonian parameter controlling the restriction on the dynamics given by different bounds is the amplitude W . In Fig. We make a closer inspection by selecting three representative values, W/2π = 0 MHz, 1.8 MHz, and 8 MHz, regimes into which the most restrictive bound changes from MT to the ML one (see Fig. Additionally, this type of integrable Hamiltonian has been extensively investigated Departing from integrability, we next emulate a similar Hamiltonian, using a two-dimensional (2d) structure featuring nine qubits. The Hamiltonian, schematically represented in Fig. where ⟨•⟩ and ⟨⟨•⟩⟩ denote the nearest and next-nearest neighbor hopping qubit excitations with amplitudes J 1 and J 2 , respectively; W i = (-1) ix+iy W is the checkerboard on-site potential of the qubit i. This is a typical nonintegrable Hamiltonian, where thermalization takes place We show results for five excitations, described as an initial product state where the excitations are initialized in the qubits with onsite energy +W . As before, W is the tuning parameter that, if increased, leads to a regime whose dynamics, constrained initially by the MT bound, become limited by the ML * one at a value W/2π = 3.4 MHz (Fig. The overlap dynamics for representative values of W (Fig. For finite system sizes, the crossover of the bounds can be characterized by inspecting how the contribution of the different Fock states |s⟩ to |ψ(t)⟩ evolves with time and with the amplitude of the checkerboard potential W . The latter renders that the Fock state energies turn stratified, counting the number of excitations in the ±W qubits, At W/2π = 0 MHz, all product states are degenerate with E s = 0 MHz (Fig. , where s i ≡ ⟨s|σ + i σi |s⟩ = 0 or 1, denotes the presence or absence of an excitation in qubit i. The many-body Fock space dynamics are identified by the probability of finding an excitation at a distance This is shown in Fig. DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK Quantum speed limits have been long introduced Our systematic experimental characterization in structured single or many-body problems establishes the stage for future analysis under dissipation, whether it is engineered or not In the main text, we argue that the minimum orthogonalization time can be easily adjusted by modifying a Hamiltonian parameter, thereby changing the relative amplitude of the mean energy E and variance ∆E. However, the overlap F = |⟨ψ(0)|ψ(t)⟩| remains bounded even before orthogonalization occurs at time t = t U . Specifically, we demonstrate below that F is initially governed by the Mandelstam-Tamm (MT) bound, which is related to ∆E. To see this, we first check the difference between the MT and ML bounds at short times [see Eq. (2) in the main text], Making use of a simple trigonometric identity, we see that at t ≪ 1, where we used that √ t ≫ t for t ≪ 1. This shows that the MT bound is tighter, always dominating at short times. Consequently, this also explains the crossover between the MT and ML bounds when E -E min < ∆E (ML-bounded dynamics) -see, for example, Fig. A second significant theoretical result that we revise here is that a special class of states can prevent the MT bound from being the tighter one at later times. For instance, given the normalized initial state |ψ(0)⟩ = i c i |E i ⟩, in which {|E i ⟩} is the energy eigenbasis of the Hamiltonian with the corresponding coefficient c i , the mean energy and variance are (S4) If one further defines the difference D = (E max -E)(E -E min ) -∆E 2 , intuited by Bathia-Davis inequality on variances, ∆E ≤ (E max -E)(E -E min ), which sets the upper boundary of the phase diagram, one has When D = 0, the Bathia-Davis' inequality is fulfilled. Thus leads to where Equation (S6) can only be satisfied when r m and r n are either 0 or 1, which implies that |E m ⟩ and |E n ⟩ are either |E min ⟩ or |E max ⟩. As a pedagogical case, one can easily check the position of every pure initial state of a two-level system (Fig. Ref. Based on this, we can derive another bound similar to Eq. (S7) except that there is an additional prefactor valid for all t. Given the Hamiltonian Ĥ and its eigenstates |E n ⟩, initial and time-evolved states are expanded as |ψ(0)⟩ = n c n |E n ⟩ and |ψ(t)⟩ = n c n e -iEnt |E n ⟩ (ħ = 1). Following a similar procedure as in the Appendix of Ref. where F = |⟨ψ(0)|ψ(t)⟩| is the overlap defined in the main text. For simplicity, we can promote an energy shift, such that one defines a semi-positive definite Hamiltonian Ĥ′ = Ĥ -E min (E min is the ground state energy of Ĥ) and the corresponding overlap where |ψ ′ (t)⟩ = n c n e -i(En-Emin)t |E n ⟩ -we can see that θ ′ = θ + E min t. Additionally, we can further have Now, borrowing the trigonometric inequality which is valid for x ≥ 0, α > 0, we replace x with (E n -E min )t to obtain Combining Eqs. (S10) and (S12), we obtain leading to As a result, any time t satisfies, where In particular, these equations lead to (generalized) overlap bounds even before orthogonalization occurs. When cos θ ′ -2α π sin θ ′ > 0, we can have, based on Eq. (S13), a lower bound for the overlap and when cos θ ′ -2α π sin θ ′ < 0 we can have an upper bound Similarly, we can also extract the dual generalized ML bound as below when cos θ ′′ -2α π sin θ ′′ > 0 and when cos θ ′′ -2α π sin θ ′′ < 0. Here we define |ψ ′′ (t)⟩ = e -i(Emax-Ĥ)t |ψ(0)⟩ and ⟨ψ(0)|ψ ′′ (t)⟩ = Fe -i(Emax-Ĥ)t = Fe iθ ′′ . Thus θ ′′ = -(θ + E max t). Combining Eqs. (S16) and (S19) gives the generalized ML bound in the main text. We perform the experiments on a superconducting quantum processor, the same as that in Ref. To map the microwave drive amplitude Ω in the Hamiltonian to experimental control parameter, we vary the control parameter to drive the qubit for a duration t d and then measure its population dynamics (Fig. we apply the quantum gates y (π/2) R 01 y (2.5). In order to obtain the overlap |⟨ψ(0)|ψ(t)⟩|, we need to implement quantum tomography for qutrit x (π). The superscript '01' ('12') denotes the microwave frequency of the gate is ω 10 (ω 21 ). The density matrix can be reconstructed by solving an over-determined equation using the measurement results. A crucial point for accurately manipulating a qutrit is to cancel the effect of AC Stark shift caused by the driving pulse Observation of quantum speed limits requires to control and measure the coupling strengths between qubits precisely. Our chip is a rectangular lattice, on which we only consider the actively controllable nearest-neighbor coupling and uncontrollable cross-coupling. We can individually control nearest-neighbor coupling strengths for different qubit pairs by utilizing tunable couplers where g i is the coupling strength between coupler and the qubit i and g 12 the capacitive coupling strength of the two qubits. ∆ i = ω iω c is the detuning of the qubit i from the coupler. By adjusting ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , the effective coupling strength g/2π can be dynamically tuned up to about -20 MHz. As for measuring coupling strengths, we follow the procedure described in Ref. The quantum circuit for generating 6-qubit superposition state √ 3/2 |010101⟩+(1/2) |101010⟩ is similar to Ref. . Quantum circuit for preparing superposition state. The circuit consists of 7 layers, including 3 layers of two-qubit CZ gates and 4 layers of single-qubit gates. Single-qubit gates or two-qubit CZ gates are applied simultaneously to the corresponding qubits in each layer. Global entanglement is constructed gradually by applying CZ gates layer by layer. The overlap between a state |ψ(t)⟩ at time t and the initial superposition state the density matrix. The former can be measured directly while obtaining the latter needs to measure parity oscillations. Parity oscillations where N is the number of qubits, and γ is a variable parameter. For any N -qubit superposition state where θ ∈ [0, π] and φ ∈ [0, 2π], parity has the form . θ and φ can be determined by fitting parity oscillations as a function of γ. Then, the off-diagonal elements can be known. Since we need to measure the overlap between |ψ cat ⟩ and other quantum states (i.e., |ψ(t)⟩), not only the prepared initial state, it is insufficient to fit the parity curve using Eq. (S23). The fitting formula can be generalized to where c n and ξ n are the amplitude and the phase, respectively. Then, the off-diagonal elements can be extracted similarly: By fitting the experimentally measured parity oscillations, as illustrated in Fig. For qubit or qutrit Hamiltonian described by Eq. ( ,PSXOVHUHVSRQVHRI,DX . Impulse response and the rectangular pulse with rising and falling edge for qutrit simulation. a and c show the impulse response of two channels I and Q of AWG, respectively. We use a sampling oscilloscope to probe the response of an 0.5 ns impulse (single point of AWG). Here, the frequency of carrier wave is 4.8 GHz. Hilbert transform is implemented to extract the envelope of the output signal (gray lines). To obtain a smooth impulse response, Savitzky-Golay filter With the measured impulse response, we can calculate the distorted pulse and then use it to perform the numerical simulations to explain the difference between experimental and ideal simulation results. Figs. In the main text, we argue that in the case of many-body quantum Hamiltonians, the unified orthogonality time t ⊥ ≥ t U = max (t MT , t ML , t ML ⋆ ) is guaranteed to be reduced once one takes the thermodynamic limit while preserving the ratio of the number of excitations to the number of qubits. Behind this is that the physical quantities that determine this minimal time for orthogonalization, ∆E and E, are extensive in the system size; consequently, the bounds ought to become less restrictive. For instance, in Fig. Second, finite-size effects can result in qualitative different effects: While W/2π = 3.4 MHz leads to time bounds t MT = t ML * on a 3 × 3 qubit network (Fig. Integrable systems like the one given by Eq. ( relations typical of fermions on the same site. Now, making use of the Jordan-Wigner transformation, the original Hamiltonian is recast in terms of non-interacting spinless fermions: With that, the dynamics of large system sizes can be easily computed based on the evolution of Slater determinants Our goals here are to (i) check the tightness of the QSL bounds in large system sizes and (ii) verify if physical quantities can capture the orthogonalization time t ⊥ . Figure In Fig. For our initial Fock state and Hamiltonian of 1d and 2d systems, Ĥlocal does not change the state, merely counting the energies according to the excitations, leading to ⟨ Ĥ2 local ⟩ = ⟨ Ĥlocal ⟩ 2 . In turn, ⟨ Ĥhopping ⟩ = 0 as well is ⟨ Ĥhopping Ĥlocal ⟩ = 0. Thus Eq. (S30) results in where J 1 (J 2 ) is the nearest (next-nearest) neighboring coupling and N 1 (N 2 ) is the corresponding number of hopping pairs. For our 1d case, N 1 = N -1, where N is the total number of qubits, and ∆E = |J 1 | √ N 1 -1 (see Fig. Next, we will check if there is a connection between ∆E and the difference of the Fock energy with the crossover of MT and ML (ML ⋆ ) bounds. Here, we assume the total number of qubits N is twice the number of excitations n, N = 2n, and W is negative. The boundary between MT and ML regimes is identified by E -E min = ∆E. Combining this with ∆E = 2W * , which means that the variance is exactly equal to the difference of consecutive Fock energies, one has that E min = (n -2)W * . When the system is sufficiently large such that n ≫ 2, E min ≃ nW * . The last paragraph shows that ∆E is proportional to the system size, and so is W * . On the other hand, while the magnitude of the on-site potential is large, the hopping part of the Hamiltonian is comparably small to the local one, at which E min ≃ nW . This implies that when increasing the system size W * ≃ W and the crossover of MT and ML bounds occurs when the variance is equal to the difference of Fock energies, i.e., ∆E = 2W * under our setup of the configurations of the Hamiltonian (see Fig. s ( PLQ ( PD[ ( PLQ ( s ( PLQ ( PD[ ( PLQ ( s W ( PLQ ( PD[ ( PLQ