Recent Angle-Resolved Photo-emission Spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments [Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 046402 (2023)] on PdTe, a 3D-Dirac semimetal and a superconductor with the transition temperature Tc ∼ 4.3 K, have revealed compelling evidence of the presence of bulk nodes in the superconducting order parameter. To investigate the validity of this proposition, here we present a detailed investigation of the magnetic field dependence of the specific heat of PdTe down to temperatures ∼ 58 mK. We observed that the low temperature specific heat of PdTe with an externally applied magnetic field exhibits a power-law field dependence, a characteristic of unconventional superconductivity. Furthermore, the zero-field low-temperature electronic specific heat follows a cubic temperature dependence, which is a signature of the presence of bulk point nodes in PdTe. These intriguing observations suggest that PdTe is a rare and fascinating topological material that exhibits both Dirac semimetallic properties and superconductivity with point nodal gap symmetry. Topological semimetals represent a fascinating class of materials characterized by topologically nontrivial bulk band crossings and robust surface states that exhibit unique electronic properties, making them highly desirable for practical applications Among the transition metal chalcogenides, FeSe shows unconventional superconductivity below ∼ 8.2 K. The Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) experiments on FeSe crystalline films suggested the existence of nodal superconductivity in stoichiometric FeSe PdTe is a hexagonal superconductor with T c ∼ 4.3 K [ In recent ARPES measurements on PdTe PdTe samples were prepared by solid-state reaction method using high purity (≥ 99.9%) Pd and Te powders inside an evacuated quartz tubes at 1080 0 C for 24 hours. The ingot were found to consist of large crystallites of 1-2 mm size as shown in Fig. The electrical characterizations (under an ac current 10 mA at frequency 79 Hz) and the heat capacity measurements were performed using a Physical Properties measurement System (PPMS), and the magnetic measurements were performed using a Magnetic property measurement system (SQUID-MPMS). The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ(T ) of PdTe is shown in Fig. Oe, which is slightly lower than the reported value (≈ 200 Oe) The AC susceptibility data measured at different externally applied hydrostatic pressures (p) = 0, 4, 6 and 8 kbar are shown in Fig. The variation of the total heat capacity (C) in zero magnetic field with temperature for PdTe is shown in shown in the Fig. where y = Θ D ⁄T and Θ D is the Debye Temperature. The best possible fit gives the Sommerfeld coefficient γ ∼ 6.32 mJ/mole-K 2 and Θ D ∼ 200 K. The values of γ in normal state, obtained from the low Temperature linear fit of C/T vs T 2 data is also ∼ 6.30 mJ/mole-K 2 . The DOS at Fermi energy N(E F ) obtained using the relation γ = 67 states/eV-f.u. This DOS N(E F ) contains the enhancement factor due to electronphonon coupling constant λ el-ph , and can be related to the bare-band DOS at the Fermi level N 0 (E F ) by the expression N(E F ) = N 0 (E F )(1 + λ el-ph ). The calculated value of the λ el-ph using the MacMillan's theory, corresponding to Θ D = 200 K is λ el-ph ∼ 0.7, which is similar to that of a weak coupling BCS superconductor Further, we estimate the Fermi velocity v F in PdTe from the N(E F ) using a single band free electron gas model as , where V f.u. = V cell /2 We have extracted the relative electronic specific heat defined as: from the low temperature specific heat data (shown in Fig. The low temperature total specific heat data C total (T ) in the zero field of PdTe in the normal state (T c ≤ T ≤ 10K) is fitted with the form C n (T ) = γ N T + C ph , where the first term is the electronic contribution to the specific heat in the normal state and the second term is the phononic contribution to the specific heat C ph = βT 3 + δT 5 . The fitting shown in the inset of Fig. where E k = ε 2 + ∆ 2 k (T ) and ⟨⟩ F S represents an average over the Fermi surface (assumed to be spherical). The gap function (∆ k (T )) defined as ∆ k (T ) = ∆ ′ (T )g(k) has a universal temperature dependence ∆ ′ (T ) = ∆ 0 tanh 1.82 1.018 (T c /T -1) 0.51 and all the information about its symmetry is contained in the function g(k) = g(θ, φ) with θ and φ being azimuthal and polar angles respectively We have fitted the experimental data of C el for PdTe by the form given in Eq. ( Here, the values of the constant parameters used in the fitting are: a = 15.49 and b = 6.51. the nodal order parameters as shown in the Fig. PdTe is a multiband superconductor with the point group D 6h which has both non-degenerate and degen-erate irreducible representations. As a result, several symmetry allowed single-and multi-component superconducting order parameters are allowed in PdTe and in general it is difficult to clearly identify which superconducting instability channel is realized in PdTe. However, mean-field calculations using a Slater-Koster type tightbinding model for PdTe, considering only the p x and p y orbitals of Te and the effect of spin-orbit coupling such that the Type-I Dirac crossing observed in ARPES along the Γ -A direction is qualitatively captured, also suggest that a superconducting gap function with a bulk point node is indeed possible in PdTe even in the most symmetric superconducting instability channel The jump in the electronic specific heat (∆C) at T c in zero field (H = 0) for PdTe shown in the Fig. Nodal superconducting materials In our field dependent specific heat data, we have observed a power-law field dependence in the specific heat that deviates from the usual linear behavior expected for an isotropic fully gapped order parameter PdTe stands out as a unique 3D Dirac semimetal material CSY acknowledges SERB-DST (India) for the CRG grant (CRG/2021/002743). Advanced Material Research Center (AMRC), IIT Mandi is acknowledged for the experimental facility. SKG gratefully acknowledges financial support from SERB, Government of India via the Startup Research Grant: SRG/2023/000934, as well as from IIT Kanpur through the Initiation Grant (IITK/PHY/2022116). The authors also acknowledge Dibyendu Samanta for discussions.