Bounded by the size, weight, and power consumption (SWaP) of conventional superconducting single photon detectors (SSPD), applications of SSPDs were commonly confined in the laboratory. However, booming demands for high efficiency single photon detector incorporated with avionic platforms arise with the development of remote imaging and sensing or long-haul quantum communication without topographical constraints. We herein designed and manufactured the first drone based SSPD system with a SDE as high as 91.8%. This drone based SSPD system is established with high performance NbTiN SSPDs, self-developed miniature liquid helium dewar, and homemade integrated electric setups, which is able to be launched in complex topographical conditions. Such a drone based SSPD system may open the use of SSPDs for applications that demand high-SDE in complex environments. Superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SSPDs), constituted by meander nanowires with dimensions of sub-100 nm in width and a few nanometers in thickness, have been widely applied in various fields due to their superior detection performance Recently, there are booming demands for high SSPDs that can be operated with mobile systems A feasible way to realize these avionic applications is to apply miniature liquid dewar to provide the necessary low temperature operation environment, which is able to get rid of the SWaP limitations. Therefore, high efficiency SSPDs that can be operated at liquid helium temperature become the keystone for drone-based applications In this letter, we successfully demonstrated the fabrications of high efficiency SSPDs based on highly disordered NbTiN films. The NbTiN-SSPD shows a SDE more than 90% operated at liquid helium temperature. To get rid of the conventional cryocoolers and build a lightweight detection system, we also designed and manufactured a miniature liquid helium dewar, which is compatible with commercial drones and other airborne platforms. Incorporating with home-made electric setup for biasing and data storage, we successfully constructed a high efficiency drone-based SSPD system, which is applicable for remote imaging and sensing, or long-distance quantum communications. Based on the recently reported disorder-tuning method To characterize the detection performance of the fabricated SSPDs at liquid helium temperature, we here firstly measured the SDE as a function of temperature in a Gifford-McMahon (GM) cryocooler. Figure Fig. To realize a drone-based superconducting single photon detection system that can be launched readily, a commercial drone with finite size and power consumption was adopted as the airborne platform. Due to the finite space for mounting the whole SSPD system, the size, weight, and power consumption (SWaP) of the cryostat that supporting the necessitated low temperature working environment for SSPDs must be low enough. To this end, a miniaturized liquid helium Dewar was designed and manufactured based on our previously developed mobile SSPD system For the installation of SSPDs, we designed a dipstick made from a glass fiber reinforced plastic tube with baffles and polyurethane foam, which is able to install two SSPDs simultaneously. It is noteworthy that the baffles and polyurethane foam were strategically positioned at a height that aligns with the neck of the inner vessel. This arrangement helps to effectively distribute the helium vapor and minimize radiation and convection heat loss. To reduce the heat load from the room temperature end and maintain constant pressure inside the inner vessel, a leakage capillary tube for the evaporated helium gas was welded onto the dipstick. With respect to the bias and readout circuit of the SSPD system, we here designed and manufactured an integrated electrical setup, which combines the bias circuit, amplification module, pulse-counting module, and the data storage module. Figure Based on the manufactured miniature liquid helium dewar, we here constructed the drone-based SSPD system based on the T40 drone (AGRAS T40, DJI agricultural drone), as it is shown in Fig. The most significant challenge for the operation of the drone-based SSPD system is the relatively high dark counts. Figure Finally, to further improve the detection performance of a drone-based SSPD system, one possible way is to continuously optimize the nanowire geometrics, where the superconducting properties can be optionally tunned. By slightly varying the film thickness, nanowire width, and the filling factor of SSPDs, the detection efficiency and the optimal operation temperature can be further enhanced. With respect to the relatively high dark counts, a narrow-band pass filter can be applied to filter out the stray photons and the blackbody radiations outside the targeted wavelength In summary, we successfully constructed a commercial drone-based superconducting nanowire single photon detection system. By optimizing the deposition condition and nano-fabrication process, we have fabricated NbTiN-SSPDs with near-saturated system detection efficiency. At liquid helium temperature, the system detection efficiency is as high as 91.8%. Furthermore, a specially designed miniature liquid dewar is manufactured, which can be directly incorporated in the T40 drone. To resolve the readout and data-storage of SSPDs, we also designed and manufactured special electrical setups. The whole system except the drone is merely power-supplied by two lithium batteries. Such a high efficiency drone-based SSPD system is promising for applications of three-dimensional high-resolution imaging and sensing, or avionic quantum communications. Moreover, such lightweight and low power systems are even able to be installed on spaceborne platforms, further facilitating the deep space optical communications and space explorations.