We have investigated the surface and bulk electronic structures of the superconducting type-II Dirac semimetal 1T-PdSeTe. The superconducting transition temperature Tc = 3.2 K was almost twice as high as Tc = 1.6 K in 1T-PdTe2. Scanning transmission electron microscopy measurements showed homogeneously mixed Se and Te atoms in the chalcogen layers, consistent with the CdI2-type crystal structure. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements and density functional theory calculations indicated the existence of the topological surface states, and the overall band structures were similar to those of 1T-PdTe2. These results suggest that CdI2-type lattice symmetry dictates the band dispersion, regardless of atomic disorder in the chalcogen layers. As the electronic band dispersion and the local structures were persistent upon substitution, the enhancement of Tc is likely associated with the chemical pressure. Our results provide insight into the effects of the solid solution on the surface and bulk electronic states as well as the superconducting transition temperature. Topological semimetals have been the focus of recent theoretical and experimental studies 1,2 . Dirac semimetals, Weyl semimetals, and topological nodal-line semimetals are the three major categories characterized by the form and degeneracy of the band crossings as well as spin texture near the Fermi level (E F ) 3, Weyl semimetals can be realized by breaking either the spatial inversion symmetry or the time-reversal symmetry of Dirac semimetals There are two types of Weyl semimetals: type I with Lorentz symmetry such as TaAs, and type II without Lorentz symmetry such as WTe 2 and MoTe 2 In the search for type-II Weyl semimetals, 1T-PdTe 2 has attracted much attention because it is a type-II Dirac semimetal and exhibits superconductivity As concerns superconducting property, 1T-PdTe 2 was reported to be a type-II superconductor with T c = 1.64 K To realize the Weyl semimetal starting from 1T-PdTe 2 , one can break time-reversal symmetry by introducing magnetic elements or break the inversion symmetry by modifying the lattice Recently, the superconducting transition temperature of 1T-PdSeTe was reported to be T c = 2.74 K In this study, we investigate the atomic arrangement, topological surface, and bulk electronic states in the 1T-PdSeTe solid solution system and explore their relationship to superconducting properties. An important advantage of solid solution systems is the tunability of the atomic composition: Se and Te belong to the same family and have the same number of valence electrons, but different atomic radii. Therefore, the lattice parameters can be tuned without changing the total valence electron numbers, which is practically the same as applying chemical pressure. If the lattice symmetry of the solid solution is preserved, the topological properties are likely to remain unchanged, as they are intrinsically tied to the symmetry of the system. This allows us to study how the lattice parameter affects the electronic parameters related to the superconducting properties as well as the topological surface states. On the other hand, since the disorder is inevitably introduced in solid solution systems, it is crucial to experimentally verify to what extent both bulk electronic states and topological surface states can be preserved. We have revealed that the superconducting transition temperature enhances up to T c = 3.2 K, which is almost twice as high as T c = 1.6 K in 1T-PdTe 2 . By scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), we have confirmed that the Se and Te atoms are homogeneously distributed in the chalcogen layers, but the lattice is compatible with the CdI 2 -type, consistent with X-ray diffraction. Our super-cell calculation indicated preserved band degeneracy regardless of the loss of the centrosymmetric point due to the disorders in the chalcogen layers. Based on energy-band mapping in three-dimensional momen-tum space by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) using tunable synchrotron radiation, we confirmed the existence of TSSs and the overall band dispersions are similar to those in 1T-PdTe 2 High-quality PdSeTe single crystals were synthesized by a two-step melting method. A stoichiometric amount of high-purity Pd wire (99.999%), Se shots (99.999%), and Te shots (99.999%) were loaded inside a double quartz ampoule and sealed at a pressure of 4 × 10 -5 torr. The sealed quartz ampoule was slowly (50 • C/hr) heated to 700 • C, kept there for 72 hrs, and cooled to room temperature at 25 • C/hr. This process was repeated three times with grounding the sample after each heat treatment to ensure homogeneous mixing. In the final step, the sample was pressed into pellets and sealed in a double quartz ampule at a pressure of 2 × 10 -5 Torr. The ampule was slowly heated up to 950 • C and kept there for 24 hrs, then slowly cooled to 550 • C at 3 • C/hr, annealed for 72 hrs at 550 • C, and then cooled to room temperature at 30 • C/hr. Powder and single crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on the as-grown PdSeTe sample using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on both as-grown PdSeTe single crystal and powdered samples. The lattice parameters were evaluated by the Rietveld refinement of the XRD patterns using FullProf software. Laue diffraction measurements further confirmed the quality of the PdSeTe single crystal. The elemental composition of freshly cleaved samples was studied using an electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA) (Model no: JEOL JXA-iSP100). The temperature-dependent resistivity measurement was carried out using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design Inc., USA) in the temperature range of 0.5 -300 K with the standard fourprobe contact configuration. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning TEM (STEM) measurements were done by Eurofins, EAG Laboratories. The STEM lamella with the face of (100) of PdSeTe was prepared using a focused ion beam on an FEI Helios Dual Beam system and was subsequently thinned to ∼ 50 nm to achieve electron transparency. Imaging of the sample was performed using an FEI Titan S/TEM system operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV with ∼ 1 Å resolution. Two STEM imaging modes were employed: annular darkfield STEM (ADF STEM) and bright-field STEM (BF-STEM). These modes provided complementary information on the sample's structure and composition. Additionally, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) data were acquired using Velox software, offering elemental composition information correlated with the highresolution imaging data. The ARPES measurement using synchrotron radiation (SR) was carried out at BL-1 at the Research Institute for Synchrotron Radiation Science (HiSOR), Hiroshima University where E k is the kinetic energy of the emitted photoelectrons. A. XRD and EPMA shows Laue diffraction patterns obtained from a (001) cleaving plane (c-plane) exhibiting hexagonal symmetry. In the previous studies, the CdI 2 -type crystal structure, namely the space group of P3m1 (No. 164), was assumed to analyze the XRD data The obtained lattice parameters were a = b = 3.901 Å and c = 4.978 Å, and the cell volume was 65.605 Å. The calculated α, β, and γ angles were 90 • , 90 • , and 120 • , which were consistent with previous studies The EPMA measurements were done on three single crystal samples (cut from different positions of the ingot) and we obtained compositions from thirteen different positions on each sample. On average, we obtained Pd ≈ 33.56%, Se ≈ 31.48%, and Te ≈ 34.96%, and then the composition of the sample can be written as PdSe 1-δ Te 1+δ (δ ≈ 0.05). To visualize the real space crystal structure and identify atom species, we have measured STEM imaging with atomic resolution for the (100) plane of PdSeTe. Fig. To understand the electronic structure of PdSeTe, we have performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We used the FLEUR DFT package The lattice parameters used in the calculations, a = b = 3.901 Å, and c = 4.978 Å were taken from our Rietveld refinement analyses of the powder X-ray diffraction patterns. Spin-orbit coupling was included as a second variational procedure. Irreducible representations were determined using the built-in irrep tool in FLEUR To understand the disorder effect in the chalcogen layers as revealed by STEM measurements, we have calculated the band structure for a 2 × 2 × 2 super-cell where the same number of Se and Te atoms occupy the chalcogen layer, breaking the symmetry of P3m1 (No. 156) in Fig. We investigated the electronic band structure of PdSeTe via ARPES measurements. Fig. Fig. 8(d) shows the theoretical band dispersion along the L-A-L high symmetry line for a super-cell with disordered Se and Te atoms in the chalcogen layer. The electron-like band near the E F centered at the A point in Fig. It should be noted that the bulk Dirac point is slightly away from the A point, so the degeneracy was lifted just at the A point [see the dashed circle region in Fig. Figs. 9(a)-9(j) show constant energy contours from the E F down to -2.25 eV. Here, the k x and k y directions are parallel to the Γ-M direction and the Γ-K direction, respectively. While the Fermi surface intensity distribution in Fig. Taken at hν = 25 eV, the Γ point of the surface Brillouin zone is close to the A point of the bulk Brillouin zone. The circular Fermi surface around the Γ point matches the bulk derived electron-like band as shown in Fig. To investigate details of the band crossing, we examined the k x -k z map at the energy of -1.3 eV [Fig. In this study, the TEM/STEM image exhibited the local lattice structure compatible with the CdI 2 -type with homogeneously mixed Se and Te atoms in the chalcogen layers, which is consistent with the XRD analyses. In addition, we have revealed that the bulk and surfacederived energy-band structures in the momentum space are similar to 1T-PdTe 2 , regardless of the disorder in Se and Te atoms in the chalcogen layers. These results may allow us to discuss the increase of the superconducting transition temperature from the viewpoint of the chemical pressure effect. C. Soulard et al. examined the lattice parameter and unit cell volume of 1T-PdTe 2 as a function of external pressure We have grown single crystals of 1T-PdSeTe and investigated their crystal structure, electronic structure, and superconducting properties. To the best of our knowledge, for the first time, we have shown that the PdSeTe superconductor possesses topological surface states. The resistivity measurements indicated the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of 3.2 K, which was approximately twice as high as that of 1T-PdTe 2 (T c = 1.64 K). Our magnetic susceptibility measurements revealed a small fraction of surface superconductivity. The scanning transmission electron microscopy showed that Se and Te atoms were homogeneously mixed in the chalcogen layers and that the local symmetry was consistent with the CdI 2 -type crystal structure. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy results and density functional theory calculations indicated the presence of topological surface states (TSSs) and overall similarity to the bulk-band dispersion of 1T-PdTe 2 . These results suggest that the TSSs remain robust despite atomic disorder in the chalcogen layers. As the electronic band dispersion and local structures are well-characterized, the enhancement in T c is likely associated with the chemical pressure. Our findings provide insight into how solid solution influences on surface and bulk electronic states, as well as the superconducting transition temperature. YK acknowledges Hiroshima University for providing the Graduate School Research Fellowship. YK also thanks Prof. Akio Kimura, Prof. Taichi Okuda, and Prof. Takeshi Matsumura for their valuable discussions and suggestions. YK and KS acknowledge the experimental facilities (XRD and EPMA) at N-BARD, Hiroshima University. The ARPES measurements were performed with the approval of the Proposal Assessing Committee of the Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center (Proposal Number: 22AU002). We thank N-BARD, Hiroshima University, for supplying the liquid helium. This work is partially supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (22K03495).