The polarizability of nearby ions may have a significant impact on electron interactions in solids, but only limited experimental data are available to support this picture. In this work, using a highly simplified description of the prototypical FeAs superconducting layer, we show how external optical excitation of the As 4p-5s splitting can lead to a significant modulation of the polarization-mediated effective interactions between carriers. Our results suggest that even perturbative external fields, approximately two orders of magnitude smaller than the internal field generated by charge carriers, might enable the exploration of the role of the anion's polarizability in determining the correlated physics, although more detailed modeling is needed to decide optimal ways to achieve this. There are many proposed theories of superconductivity (SC), ranging from the well established Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory for phonon-mediated low-T c superconductors, In this work, we focus on a less studied 'glue', which could arise from the polarizability of nearby ions and acts analogously to more established 'glues' (e.g. phonons) as a source of screening. For specificity, we focus on its role in Fe-based superconductors, where this mechanism was first proposed The main idea behind our work can be explained in terms of basic electromagnetism. Consider a FeAs layer, which has Fe on a square lattice and As occupying alternating corners of the cubes that have Fe at their centers, such that half of the As are above, and half are below the Fe layer, see Fig. The electronic levels with As character are far from the Fermi energy, hence the As anions are seemingly not relevant to the electronic properties. However, these large anions have significant polarizability α p and develop dipole moments ⟨p⟩ = α p E when subject to the electric field E created by additional carriers located on Fe orbitals. For a single carrier, this implies a lowering of its on-site energy by -α p |E| 2 /2 (at a semi-classical level) for each polarized As, where the field |E| depends on the Fe-As distance. This energy lowering results in the formation of a quasiparticle dressed by this polarization cloud -the so-called electronic polaron -with a renormalized band-structure and an enhancement in the effective mass (by about a factor of 2 in FeAs As typical in polaronic physics, the clouds affect not only the quasiparticle dispersion but also the effective interactions between quasiparticles: if two carriers are sufficiently close to one another, they interact with each other's clouds, thereby changing the total polarization energy. Specifically, an As that experiences electric fields to the total energy. Of these three terms, and -α p |E 2 | 2 /2 are associated with the individual electronic polarons, while -α p E 1 • E 2 is an effective interaction between the two polarons, with a sign and magnitude that depend on the relative distances between carriers and between carriers and the As ion involved. In particular, if both carriers are on the same Fe then E 1 = E 2 and the effective on-site interaction -α p |E 1 | 2 is attractive, resulting in a substantial screening of the on-site Hubbard repulsion by up to 5-10 eV (see below). For carriers further apart, the magnitude of this effective interaction is smaller but may still contribute significantly to screening and thus influence the appearance of SC. Here we investigate whether it is possible to quantify the relevance of this screening mechanism in Fe-based superconductors via tailored light excitation. At a microscopic level, an external field E can induce a dipole moment by exciting electrons from the full 4p shell primarily into the empty 5s shell of As 3-. A sufficiently intense external electric field with a frequency close to the 4p -5s resonance can partially saturate these transitions, thus interfering with the polarization induced by carriers, altering the strength of their effective interactions, and ultimately affecting the electronic properties of the system. The main goal of this article is to understand whether the modulations due to an external pump could be significant enough to make such investigations feasible. As discussed below, we believe that our results are encouraging, motivating the study of much more detailed models in future work. The article is organized as follows: Section II introduces the model and its parameters, Section III presents our results in the absence of the pump, Section IV presents results in the presence of the pump, and Section V contains our discussion of the results. As a first step in answering the question stated above, we strip down the model used in Ref. 16 to keep only the terms most relevant to the As polarization (the approximations are listed in this section and further discussed in the last section), allowing us to carry out simulations relatively easily in order to get rough estimates for the magnitudes of various energy modulations. First, we assume that there is a single valence orbital per Fe site and ignore its band dispersion so that charges placed on Fe ions remain fixed in space. As a result, these charges are described by: where njσ counts the number of charges with spin σ at site j of the Fe square lattice. U H is the on-site Hubbard repulsion between these charges. It includes screening from all other mechanisms apart from As polarizability (the latter effect is considered explicitly below), meaning that here U H is significantly larger than in models where the As have already been integrated out. The other screening mechanisms are assumed to make longer-range interactions vanishingly small, although finite longerrange repulsion can be introduced in the model trivially. Second, we follow the model in Ref. 16 and describe the As not in terms of electrons excited from 4p into 5s, but in terms of holes excited from 5s into 4p orbitals. Thus, for each As ion we introduce the hole annihilation operators s σ , p λ,σ , where λ = x, y, z indicates the direction of the p orbitals. In hole language, the ground state of an isolated As 3-ion has the 5s orbital completely occupied with holes (empty of electrons) while 4p is completely empty of holes (fully occupied by electrons), therefore: where Ω > 0 is the energy spliting between the 4p and 5s shells (we set ħ = 1). The finite bandwidth of these bands is also ignored as in Ref. 16. The polarization of the As ions due to charges located on the Fe ions is described by: Here, nj = nj↑ + nj↓ counts the number of carriers on the Fe site j. The coupling g ij = α p ΩE j (i)/2 is controlled by the magnitude of the electric field E j (i) created by one carrier located on Fe j at As i , at a relative distance r ij in the direction of the unit vector rij . In the absence of screening E j (i) = rij e/r 2 ij ; screening (from other sources) decreases the magnitude and range of E j (i). Finally, the annihilation operator pi,j,σ = λ (r ij • êλ )p i,λ,σ removes a hole from the 4p orbital parallel to rij . The occupation of the two 4p orbitals perpendicular to rij is not affected by the electric field. To model the interaction with the external electric field E a (e.g. produced by a continuous wave laser), we use a similar term: We assume a monochromatic laser instead of an ultrashort pulse; the implications are discussed in the last section. The laser electric field E a (t) = εa E a cos(ω a t) is polarized parallel to the unit vector εa and oscillating with a frequency ω a . The coupling constant to the laser electric field is g a = α p ΩE a /2 and the 4p orbital into which the laser can excite holes is pia,σ = λ (ε a • êλ )p i,λ,σ . Therefore, the total Hamiltonian we consider is: Even after all these simplifications, the model is characterized by seven parameters: Ω, α p , g 1 , g 2 , U H , ω a , g a . Following Ref. 16, the 5s -4p energy difference is taken to be Ω = 6eV and the As polarizability is estimated to be α p = 10 -12 Å3 . The couplings g 1 and g 2 are for the nearest-neighbor (nn) and second nearest-neighbor (nnn) As ions, respectively, located at a distance r 1 = a √ 3/2 and r 2 = a √ 11/2. In the absence of any screening, g 2 /g 1 = E 2 /E 1 = 3/11. Screening will further reduce this ratio, thus supporting our approximation of ignoring coupling between As and Fe that are at a distance r > r 2 . In the absence of any screening and for Ω, α p values cited above, g 1 ∼ 2.5eV. The value of U H is irrelevant at this level of modeling, as discussed below. Finally, the frequency of the laser will be tuned across the resonance ω a = Ω, while the field strength is typically chosen as 1 -10MV/cm leading to a typical g a ≈ 0.05eV. To set the stage, we first briefly review the results in the static case (no external perturbation, g a = 0). Given any distribution of Fe charges, we calculate the resulting electric field E at any given As site, and its corresponding coupling g = √ α p ωE/2. The Hamiltonian for this As is then trivial to diagonalize and, as sketched in Fig. We now assume that there is a single carrier doped into the otherwise charge-neutral system. This carrier is located on a Fe ion, and g 1 (g 2 ) is the coupling to each of its 4 nn (8 nnn) As. The couplings are identical for all As at the same distance from the Fe because the electric fields have the same magnitudes, although they are pointing in different directions. Because the magnitude of the electric field decreases like 1/r 2 (or faster, if there is screening) one can safely set to zero the coupling for As placed further than a cutoff distance. In Ref. 16, the cutoff was chosen such that only g 1 ̸ = 0, here we instead set g 1 , g 2 ̸ = 0 and show that the contribution from the 2nd coordination ring of As can be considerable if screening is completely ignored. Since screening is always present to some extent, we anticipate that the cutoff falls between the two extreme cases analyzed previously. We ignore the small dipole-dipole interactions, hence the total energy of the polaron is the sum of energy contributions from each polarized As ion: We plot this energy as a function of Ω for two values α p = 10, 12 Å3 in Fig. Next, we consider the case with two charge carriers present in the Fe sublattice of the otherwise chargeneutral system. E n is the contribution from their polarization clouds when the two carriers are n th nearest neighbours. In the limit n → ∞, each carrier polarizes independently the As ions surrounding it, hence: When the carriers are close to each other, some As ions experience the combined electric field of both charges. This modifies their respective coupling g accordingly, and thus their contribution to the total energy. Specifically, if the two carriers are on the same Fe (n = 0), this corresponds to doubling the field experienced by each As polarization cloud, see Eq. ( The difference ∆U 0 = E 0 -E ∞ < 0 defines an effective on-site attraction mediated by the polarization clouds. We plot ∆U 0 for various parameters in Fig. The effective polarization-mediated interaction is calculated similarly for all other configurations, with ∆U n = E n -E ∞ . The range of this effective interaction depends sensitively on the distance cutoff for the included couplings. If this cutoff is set to only include nn As, then ∆U n = 0 for all n ≥ 3. If the cutoff includes also nnn As, then ∆U n = 0 only for n ≥ 8. Representative results for ∆U 0 , ∆U 1 and ∆U 2 are shown in Fig. We note that we have also done these calculations including contributions from the third coordination ring of As ions. The variations in the effective attractions are less than 0.2eV for our typical parameters even when the electric fields are assumed to be completely unscreened. Since screening would reduce these contributions further, we ignore them throughout. To conclude this section, in the static case we find a polarization mediated effective interaction, strongly attractive at short ranges, described by: Our results show that this attraction is even stronger than estimated in Ref. 16, because of the non-negligible contributions of the As ions from second coordination rings. As such, this (over)screening mechanism is even more likely to play a role in the appearance of superconductivity and other correlated orders. To better visualize the momentum (q) dependence of ∆U n , we inspect its Fourier transform where If only the contribution of the nn As is included, then ∆U (q) = ∆U 0 + 2∆U 1 [cos(q x a) + cos(q y a)] + 4∆U 2 cos(q x a) cos(q y a). If the nnn As are also included, then ∆U contains contributions for up to the 7 th nearest Fe-Fe neighbors. Fig. Now we discuss how an external electric field may affect the polarization of the As ions, thus modulating the effective interactions between carriers (polarons). Consider any of the As polarized by the static electric field E created by the charge carrier (we continue to include in the calculation only nn and nnn As). Generically, the laser field E a will have a component parallel to E and a component perpendicular to it. Indeed, as a direct consequence of the geometrical arrangement of As around the Fe which hosts the charge, it is not possible to choose a laser field polarization εa so that it is simultaneously parallel (or perpendicular) to all E at all polarized As sites. If E a is parallel to E, it excites holes from their static ground-state E 0 (g) into the highest eigenstate E 1 (g). Instead, if E a ⊥ E, it excites holes from E 0 (g) into a p ⊥ orbital with energy Ω. Thus, even though the resonance is at Ω for the unpolarized As, the resonant frequencies for a polarized As are at ω res,1 (g) = E 1 (g) -E 0 (g) = Ω 2 + 4g 2 and ω res,2 (g) = Ω -E 0 (g) = [Ω + Ω 2 + 4g 2 ]/2. If we include both coordination rings with their corresponding couplings g 1 and g 2 , we expect to observe a rich beating pattern in the presence of a laser field with ω a ≈ Ω. We define the time-dependent average polaron energy E P (t) as the change in the average energy of the system due to the presence of a carrier on an Fe. As such, to find E P (t) in the presence of the laser field, we need to sum up contributions from the various As polarized by this charge, and subtract the energy of the same As sites in the absence of the charge carrier (the latter is no longer zero, unlike in the static case). This requires us to solve the time-dependent Schrödinger's equation for each As; the details are discussed in Appendix A. Typical results for E P (t) in the presence of a laser with polarization εa ∥ ê1 = (x + ŷ)/ √ 2 are shown in Fig. To calculate the light-induced transient evolution of the effective interaction ∆U n (t) = E n (t) -E ∞ (t) for two carriers that are n th nearest neighbors, we mirror the static calculation and calculate E ∞ (t) = 2E P (t) of two polarons located very far apart. The calculation of E n (t) is similar to that of E P (t) displayed in Fig. Figure The variations of the various ∆U n (t) combine into an overall variation of their Fourier transform ∆U (q, t). The differences ∆U (q, t) -∆U (q, 0) are displayed in Figure Figure The bottom panel of Fig. All the results discussed so far are for a laser frequency ω a < Ω, meaning that the (otherwise) unpolarized As orbitals are closest to resonance with the laser and determine the period of the beats. Figure Of course, in a more realistic description of the system these resonances would be tempered by a variety of ways in which the polarized As ions could dissipate their energy into other subsystems, like the lattice and other FIG. In this study, we investigated whether an external field resonant to the As 5s-4p transition, with a coupling magnitude nearly two orders of magnitude lower than the coupling of the As to the field caused by a nearby charge, can be an effective means to drive a sizable modulation of the effective polarization-mediated interaction between carriers in FeAs. Our simulations suggest that the effect can be very considerable, especially if the external field happens to be close to resonant with some of the many possible resonances of the polarized As ions. The observed modulation of the effective carrier-carrier interactions by a few eV, and the change of some terms from attractive into repulsive, should have a very considerable effect on the electronic properties of FeAs. This extends beyond superconductivity, and include all other possible ordered states (magnetic, charge order, etc). The significant modulation of the effective interactions driven by the external electric field could either switch the system between different ordered states or between an ordered state and a disordered one. Even if the system is deep inside an ordered state and the modulation is not sufficiently strong to drive a phase transition, the characteristic energy scales associated with the collective excitations of that ordered state should change in response to the applied external electric field. While here we focused on the simplest scenario of applying a continuous-wave excitation, pump-probe spectroscopic approaches may also provide direct experimental evidence of light-induced modulation of the electronic polarizability in FeAs and related compounds. Our simulations predict a significant modification of the interactions within a few tens of optical cycles, corresponding to approximately 20 fs for photon energies in the 6 eV range. Pump-probe table-top all-optical spectroscopies 24 or free-electron-laser-based X-ray scattering approaches However, in order to make more quantitative predictions, it is imperative to first relax the many approximations we made in this model. In particular, the Fesuperconductors are multi-band systems Another very necessary improvement is to allow the As s and p levels to also broaden into bands. Our simple calculation presented here assumes that each As is instantaneously polarized by the various fields (from charges or from the laser), and these polarization clouds do not have any dynamics of their own. In reality, the finite bandwidth of these bands means that the electron-hole excitation created by the electric fields can hop onto neighboring As sites, thus affecting the nature of the polarization clouds and, therefore, their overall effect on both quasiparticles' dispersion and their effective interactions. Potentially more damaging for the proposal made here is the fact that a finite bandwidth of the As levels may turn the discrete eigenstates sketched in Fig. for the typical values we used here. This level will be located below the 5s band (and thus remain discrete and exhibit a resonant effect) if the bandwidth of the latter is less that ≈ 5.6eV, which seems likely considering the large distance between neighbor As given their alternations above/below the Fe plane. Finally, our model also ignores the effects of the doping ions that donated the charge carriers to the FeAs layer. This is a reasonable approximation if these ions are located sufficiently far enough so that their electric fields within the FeAs layer are much smaller than those of the carriers, but this assumption needs to be tested. This is why we believe that before we can proceed to suggest the most promising experimental approaches to observe and untangle the effects of the As polarization on the behavior of the Fe superconductors, all these above mentioned approximations need to be relaxed. Understanding the details of all this phenomenology is not a trivial exercise and we leave it to future work, which might use methods like those employed in Ref. 30 for a somewhat related but still very different problem. Nevertheless, we believe that the work presented here provides a strong motivation for engaging in these much more complicated calculations: the effects we find are so significant that it seems very likely that they will persist in more detailed models, albeit with quantitative and perhaps even qualitative changes.