A localized Zeeman field, intensified at heterostructure interfaces, could play a crucial role in a broad area including spintronics and unconventional superconductors. Conventionally, the generation of a local Zeeman field is achieved through magnetic exchange coupling with a magnetic material. However, magnetic elements often introduce defects, which could weaken or destroy superconductivity. Alternatively, the coupling between a superconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling and a non-magnetic chiral material could serve as a promising approach to generate a spin active interface. In this study, we leverage an interface superconductor, namely induced superconductivity in noble metal surface states, to probe the spin active interface. Our results unveil an enhanced interface Zeeman field, which selectively closes the surface superconducting gap while preserving the bulk superconducting pairing. The chiral material, i.e. trigonal tellurium, also induces Andreev bound states (ABS) exhibiting spin polarization. The field dependence of ABS manifests a substantially enhanced interface Landé g-factor (g eff ~ 12), thereby corroborating the enhanced interface Zeeman energy. A spin-active interface between a chiral material and a superconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling has been demonstrated. Heterostructures combining a structurally chiral material with a superconductor have recently unveiled unique features of induced spin polarization at the superconductor interface(1) and quasiparticle states of magnetic origin Such an interface may substantially enhance the Zeeman energy at the surface of a superconductor, which could serve as a candidate for creating unconventional quasiparticles such as Majorana bound states By leveraging proximity effect, we induce superconductivity into a (111)-oriented Au layer, i.e. Here α is the pair-breaker strength (or pair breaking energy) defined as 2α = with ∆ SO ~ 1.4 meV. Because the heterostructure is consist of both Au(111) and Nb and the SOC of Nb is small, the fitted value of ∆ SO may depend on Nb thickness. We expect larger ∆ SO when Nb is thinner. We would also like to note that breaking the Pauli paramagnetic limit would otherwise not be possible if the thin (4 nm) Nb layer were not protected by the air inert Au(111) layer from oxidization. To create an interface between a chiral material and Au(111), we explore low gap semiconductors, such as selenium (Se) or tellurium (Te), as a tunnel barrier. These materials, i.e. Se and Te, are known to have a trigonal phase, which is structurally chiral with EuS islands To answer this question, we study the crystal structure of the epitaxially grown Te layer that is used When 〈n〉 is reduced towards the single photon limit (Fig In conclusion, we have demonstrated an enhanced Zeeman field at Te(trigonal)/Au(111) interface giving rise to g eff S ~ 12. Such an enhanced interface Zeeman field closes the surface superconducting gap of Au(111) while maintaining the bulk superconductivity, thereby providing an alternative route to creating a unique surface/interface superconductor. One may exploit such locally enhanced Zeeman field to construct a nanostructured topological superconductor (TSC) by patterning, for example, nanowires of trigonal Te over Au(111) The Au(111)/Nb bilayers are grown using molecular bean epitaxy (MBE). The Nb layer thickness Each resonator is measured using a vector network analyzer, and the Lorentzian spectra are fit using the established diameter correction method (DCM) to extract internal and coupling quality factors (Q i andQ e ) as a function of photon number For sample structure characterizations, ex-situ X-ray based analyses are performed using Rigaku GIXRD system. In situ reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) is carried out using a 7.5 mW electron beam. Ex-situ Raman spectroscopy is carried out using a Horiba LabRam system, in which a 532 nm unpolarized excitation laser with a 100μm spot size was used to scan the films. The dI/dV spectrum measured using tellurium (Te) (7 nm) as a barrier on a Au(111)( 15 nm)/Nb sample. The data is fitted (dotted line) using a two-gap BTK approach (SM section-II and -III). Right: Adjusting the barrier height on Au(111)/Nb using a similar low-gap semiconductor, i.e. selenium (Se), with a varying Se thickness: 2nm (top), 3nm (middle) and 5nm (bottom). The dotted line is the fit to the BTK theory with fitting results given in Table indicating an enhanced barrier strength (Table To account for a BTK process involving a normal metal lead and a superconductor with two gaps, we take a two-gap approach by modifying Eq S1. Similar two-gap approach has been used previously to address the quasiparticle tunneling process 13 . Here, we expand it to the BTK process increases, for example in Se barrier in Fig 1d (right). The BTK fitting results are given in Table S1 and discussed in SM section-II. However, because of the amorphous growth of the Se barrier, the quasiparticle lifetime broadening (Γ) is large (SM section-II), which obscures any subtle tunneling features that are narrow in energy. Using an epitaxially grown Te barrier (Fig 1d left), we obtain tunneling spectra with a dramatically reduced Γ, which is limited by temperature k B T (SM section-II). Because Γ is reduced, sharp tunneling features reminiscent of two superconducting gaps are observed in a thick Au(111) layer (15 nm) (Fig 1d left). The energy of the larger gap agrees with the bulk superconducting gap estimated from Δ ~ 1.76k B T C according to BCS model(15) and the measured T C = 6.3 K. We fit Fig 1d (left) using a sum of two BTK dI/dV conductance, namely a two-gap approach (SM section-III), to include both the bulk (Δ B ) and surface (Δ S ) gaps. The fit reproduces the data over a wide range of Vbias, yielding Δ B ~ 0.85 meV and Δ S ~ 0.33 meV, which exactly match the locations of the dI/dV peaks in Fig 1d (left). Although signatures of Δ S has been observed in Au(111) before(13), here Δ S stands out much more pronounced. In fact, Fig 1d (left) precisely reproduces B (ΔH). The fitting in Fig 4a Γ, we replace Se with Te. We find that Te grows epitaxially on Au(111) down to 1nm (SM section-IV). The dI/dV measurements in Fig