electrons, the oxygen nucleus still strongly binds eight electrons: 1s 2 2s 2 p 4 . Moreover, it can accept two additional electrons to make its 2p orbital fully occupied, forming a closed electron shell of Since the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates by They share a common feature: rich oxygen elements. However, the microscopic mechanism for their unconventional high-temperature superconductivity remains unclear, making it one of the wellknown and the most challenging problems in physics. This has also been identified as one of the "125 QUESTIONS: what is the microscopic mechanism for high-temperature superconductivity?", selected by Science in 2021 (3). In order to make a breakthrough in seeking the microscopic superconducting electron pairing mechanism in cuprates and nickelates, such as YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , T c ~90-100 K (4) and La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , T c ~80 K at 14.0~43.5 GPa (2), let us first analyze their chemical compositions. Obviously, oxygen is the only nonmetallic element in these oxide high temperature superconductors. If oxygen atoms are removed totally, they will contain only metallic elements and become simple metal alloys, in which all metal cations, i.e., the ionized metal atoms due to the weak binding of the metal nucleus to the electrons outside it, will be completely immersed in a sea of conducting electrons. If these metal alloys are assumed to be superconductors, it is clear that the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) electron pairing mechanism mediated by phonons applies As we all know, as the eighth element in the periodic table of elements, oxygen nucleus has a strong binding ability on electrons outside it. Although there is a strong Coulomb repulsion between 1s 2 2s 2 p 6 (O 2-). However, in the case of isolated atoms, this process is completely forbidden. On the contrary, in ionic cuprates and nickelates, although the O -ion is easily formed to repel electrons, the strong ionic bonding and strong attraction of oxygen nucleus to electrons will force the O -ion to accept 0-1 extra electron to form higher valence anion O x-(1<x≤2). Please refer to the following for details. Isolated oxygen atom: O -repelling electrons, and O 2-unstable. If using e -to represent an electron, for an isolated oxygen atom O, we know O + e ⟶ O + (-8.08) eV ( Equation 1 shows that due to the strong attraction of atomic nucleus to electrons, neutral oxygen atom is extremely prone to gain an additional electron and release Oxygen atoms tend to form O 2-anions with a valence close to -2 in oxide ionic crystals. It is well known that, in ionic crystals, the strength of ionic bonds depends on the distance between ions and the amount of charge carried by them. Take copper oxides as an example, we know that, during the process of combining neutral atoms that are initially far away from each other into an ionic crystal, the energy released by the system will cause the outermost s electrons of the neutral metal atoms to ionize first. Then, the neutral oxygen atoms capture these electrons to form negative ions O -in order to further reduce the energy of the system, resulting in a large amount of low-valent metal cations and O -anions being present in the system. In order to further reduce the total energy of the system, the system will automatically force the d electrons of the low-valent cations to ionize in order to raise their valence state. These ionized d electrons are "forced" to gather around O -ions to increase their valence states while continuing to decrease the distance between ions, ultimately achieving a stable crystal structure with the lowest possible total energy (see the figure). It is the strong ionic bond of crystal that requires oxygen atoms to exist as O 2-ions as much as possible. Therefore, the repulsive effect of anion O -on electrons is ultimately suppressed by the strong ionic bonding and strong attraction of oxygen nucleus to electrons in crystals, resulting in a "net attractive" effect of anion O - on electrons, which induces a concentration of d-electrons around it (4). It is precisely the result of competition between the strong ionic bonding and attraction of oxygen nucleus to electrons in crystals and the repulsive effect of anion O -on electrons that leads to a balanced valence state of O x- (1<x≤2). This is indeed the case. In YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , the average valence state of oxygen anions is -1.69 (4). The results show that in oxide ionic crystals, although electrons are negatively charged, as long as the negative valence state x of oxygen ions is less than 2, they will always attract and not repel electrons. This "net attraction" is entirely due to the combination of the crystal's ionic bonds pushing electrons towards the oxygen atoms and the strong attraction of the oxygen nuclei to electrons. Therefore, in cuprates and nickelates, as natural electron accumulation centers and potential electron pairing media, both neutral O atoms and O -anions strongly attract rather than repel electrons. Based on the "net attraction" effect of neutral O atoms and O -anions to electrons as analyzed above, we know that oxide high-temperature superconductors with strong ionic bonding have a d-wave symmetric electron pairing image due to the accumulation of delectrons around oxygen atoms ( In summary, we know that in cuprate and nickelate high-temperature superconductors dominated by oxygen atoms, besides the basic weak coupling BCS electron pairing mechanism mediated by phonons, there is also a new dominant strong coupling pairing mechanism based on the inherent oxygen atoms of the material as a bridge, which is named as d-wave symmetric e --O-e -pair. It is this strong coupling pairing picture mediated by the oxygen atom that dominates the unconventional high superconducting transition temperature of oxide ceramics. We firmly believe that our new idea of electron pairing using the oxygen atom as a bridge can arouse the widespread interest of superconductivity scientists, especially theoretical physicists who are committed to developing hightemperature superconducting theory. We hope to use our electron pairing image to develop new theories for high-temperature superconductivity and discover new materials with higher superconducting transition temperatures and excellent superconducting properties, so as to further promote superconductivity research and benefit all mankind. Equation 3 clearly shows that the energy required to go from a neutral O atom to O 2-anion is 6.62 eV, which is endothermic. In summary, in the case of isolated atom, due to the strong attraction of oxygen nucleus to electrons, neutral O atom is extremely easy to capture an additional electron and form a stable -1 valence anion O -. The repulsion of O -to electrons will outweigh the nuclear attraction to electrons, resulting in instability of O 2-anion (see the figure).