Most quantum algorithms designed to generate or probe properties of the ground state of a quantum many-body system require as input an initial state with a large overlap with the desired ground state. One approach for preparing such a ground state is Imaginary Time Evolution (ITE). Recent work by [Motta, M., Sun, C., Tan, A.T.K. et al. (2020)] introduced an algorithm-which we will refer to as Quantum Imaginary Time Evolution (QITE)-that shows how ITE can be approximated by a sequence of unitary operators, making QITE potentially implementable on early fault-tolerant quantum computers. In this work, we provide a heuristic study of the capabilities of the QITE algorithm in approximating the ITE of lattice and molecular electronic structure Hamiltonians. We numerically study the performance of the QITE algorithm when provided with a good classical initial state for a large class of systems, some of which are of interest to industrial applications, and check if QITE is able to qualitatively replicate the ITE behavior and improve over a classical meanfield solution. The systems we consider in this work range from one-and two-dimensional lattice systems of various lattice geometries displaying short-and long-range interactions, to active spaces of molecular electronic structure Hamiltonians. In addition to the comparison of QITE and ITE, we explicitly show how imaginary time evolved fermionic Gaussian states can serve as initial states which can be efficiently computed on classical computers and efficiently implemented on quantum computers for generic spin Hamiltonians in arbitrary lattice geometries and dimensions, which can be of independent interest. Finding the ground state of a strongly correlated quantum many body system is one of the most fundamental problems in physics and related fields, such as quantum chemistry. Many approaches exist to tackle the ground state problem for strongly correlated quantum manybody systems on classical computers. However, in many instances of strong correlation, the computational cost becomes too demanding. This can be traced back to the fact that state-of-the art classical methods for tackling quantum chemistry or ground states of lattice systems such as coupled cluster The computational cost of the currently most advanced quantum algorithms to probe ground state properties depend inversely on powers of the ground state overlap of the initial state being used In this work, we put a lot of emphasis on providing a classical initial state |Ψ init ⟩ (i.e. a solution from a classical algorithm that can be translated into a wave function) for the QITE and ITE simulations. We show how to obtain an initial state |Ψ init ⟩ from the family of Fermionic Gaussian States (FGS) In order to be able to study systems where classical methods become unreliable, too expensive and slow, or inaccurate, much effort has been put in finding superior algorithms that can be executed on quantum computers. Various approaches for approximating the ground state have been suggested, such as quantum adiabatic state preparation In this work, we numerically investigate the capability of QITE to replicate the trotterized ITE algorithm. To this end, we apply QITE and ITE to initial states for various lattice and molecular systems and compare the resulting evolved states. We call this procedure algorithmic benchmark. We add to the body of QITE literature by formulating a fermionic version of QITE and study if it could serve as a way of generating improved initial states |Ψ⟩ when applied to a fermionic lattice model, as well as the Active Space (AS) of molecular electronic structure Hamiltonians. Our focus on obtaining proper initial states for the system Hamiltonians we study helps to be able get a more objective algorithmic performance evaluation of (Q)ITE. More precisely, the choice of a poor initial state will generally lead to a large improvement in the quality of the produced state, but often times the majority of this improvement can be traced back to a non-optimized initial state choice. Therefore, we initialize our systems in an optimized fermionic Gaussian state (which, among others, includes the Hartree-Fock state), that treats the interactions of the system in a mean-field approximation and use this state as a benchmark to see how much QITE can improve over a mean-field solution. The paper is structured as follows. In Section II we cover the main aspects of the ITE and QITE algorithms. Section III introduces the details of the studied lattice and quantum chemistry systems. Section IV describes how we obtain the initial states for the various systems, which is followed by the discussion of our numerical results in Section V, and a summary and outlook in Section VI. This section introduces the QITE algorithm. After establishing the required structure of the Hamiltonian in Section II A, we discuss the ITE algorithm in Section II B, followed by a detailed introduction to the QITE algorithm in Section II C. The section concludes with an introduction of the mutual information in Section II D, which is used within a subroutine of QITE applied to molecular electronic structure systems. In this work, we consider Hamiltonians which can describe either interacting spins or fermions and can be written as where 1 denotes the identity operator, ĥ[j] is a Hermitian operator which acts non-trivially (i.e. not as the identity) on at most k ≤ L spins or fermionic sites, and α ∈ R is a constant, while L describes the total number of spins or fermionic sites/orbitals. Examples of physical systems that are modelled by the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The solution of the imaginary time Schrödinger equation d dτ |Ψ(τ )⟩ = -( Ĥ -⟨Ψ(τ )| Ĥ|Ψ(τ )⟩) |Ψ(τ )⟩ with the initial condition |Ψ(0)⟩ = |Ψ init ⟩ for time-independent Hamiltonians is given by by Provided an initial state |Ψ init ⟩ with overlap γ init = | ⟨Ψ init |Ψ gs ⟩ | ̸ = 0, ITE will lead to the ground state in the infinite time limit, |Ψ gs ⟩ = lim τ →∞ |Ψ(τ )⟩. Since in practice an approximation to the ground state suffices, we only have to evolve up to a finite value in order to assure that the overlap γ of the evolved state is bounded by 1 -γ < η 2 2 for a desired precision η We can divide the total ITE propagator into n-many small time steps ∆τ = τ /n, such that the imaginary time propagator can be expressed as We can split the ITE propagator e -∆τ Ĥ of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where m denotes the number of Hamiltonian terms which arise from the Trotterization of the m terms from the untrotterized Hamiltonian of Eq. We define the trotterized ITE as Since in general the individual terms ĥ[j] do not commute with each other, the Trotterization of Eq. ( where either smaller step sizes, or a larger Trotter order at fixed step size will lead to E ITE getting closer to E 0 . C. The QITE algorithm We present an overview of the QITE workflow in FIG. Code details We implemented this workflow (see Fig. The main idea of the QITE algorithm is to approximate the trotterized imaginary time propagator e -∆τ ĥ[f (l)] by a unitary operator Ûl at each iteration step, without the need of auxiliary qubits. More specifically, Mutual information Figure for a fixed discretization step size ∆τ and step l ∈ [mn], the QITE algorithm tries to find the unitary Ûl which approximates by minimizing the distance where ∥|φ⟩∥ = ⟨φ|φ⟩ is the Euclidean norm of a vector |φ⟩ and is a normalization constant. The algorithm is initialized in the state |Ψ l=0 ⟩ = |Ψ init ⟩ which must have non-zero support on the desired ground state, γ init > 0. In the following, we will describe how the unitary U l can be found at each iteration step l, following Ref. Any unitary operator can be written as where Â[l] is a Hermitian operator. Therefore, the task of finding Ûl is equivalent to that of finding Â[l]. We will assume sufficiently small time steps, such that Ûl = 1 -i∆τ Â[l] + O(∆τ 2 ). While the computational cost of finding a general unitary operator acting on L qubits or fermionic modes will scale as O(exp(L)), the central finding of Ref. In Fig. Fig. In Fig. In general, the size of the support can vary and is bounded by the locality of the Hamiltonian. For systems with long-range (or also just beyond nearest-neighbor-) interactions, the size of the domain D j of a given term ĥ[j] will be larger than for systems restricted to only nearest-neighbor interactions. As we will see in the following, the computational cost of QITE will scale exponentially in the size of the domain D j , and is the main limiting factor for the simulations we were able to run (and not the system size L). b. Exact QITE It was shown in Ref. one requires the Manhattan distance to be at least The proof of the above is based on Uhlmann's theorem Since Â[l] is unknown, one has to expand it in a basis of operators and determine its components. While in general such a basis would contain a number O(exp(L)) of basis operators, a direct consequence of Eq. ( running time T of the corresponding QITE algorithm for an imaginary time τ = n∆τ is then roughly given by The above results provide the mathematical basis that legitimizes the Ansatz to approximate the non-unitary QITE by a sequence of unitary operators for lattice spin systems with a finite correlation length. It is then conjectured in Ref. d. Inexact QITE It is also possible to use the QITE algorithm as a heuristic algorithm to find an approximate ground state |Ψ⟩ using a very small domain size, i.e. ν = 1, 2, . . . , which in many instances will be much smaller than the true correlation length C of the studied system. In this case, QITE loses its rigorous performance guarantees from Eqs. ( If the Hermitian Hamiltonian term ĥ[f (l)] describes a spin operator, the Hermitian operator Â[l] can be determined from an expansion in a spin operator basis, as we explain in the following and refer to as spin-QITE. Let D l denote the domain of ĥ[l] which we assume to be a tensor product of spin operators σx i , σy i , and σz i , and we define σ0 i = 1 as the identity on spin index i ∈ [L]. We write {σ 0 , σx , σy , σz } ⊗D l in order to denote all possible 4 |D l | Pauli strings (including the identity) on the indices contained in D l . A single element of {0, x, y, z} ⊗D l is given by σI = σα1 |<L and α k ∈ {0, x, y, z}. We then define the expansion of an Hermitian operator Â[l] in the spin basis as where a[l] I ∈ R are real-valued coefficients and σI are Hermitian operators. Note, that in principle not all possible Pauli operator strings will contribute to the solution, and their number can be reduced by symmetry considerations and properties of the desired wave function As shown in Appendix B, the coefficients a[l] I (and therefore also Â[l] and Ûl ), condensed in the vector a[l], can be obtained from a classical solution of the following system of linear equations, where we defined the Gram matrix S[l] and vector b[l] with real-valued entries as which correspond to the real-and imaginary parts of the expectation values of 2σ I σJ and 2σ I ĥ[l], respectively. When considering the Gram matrix S[l], we observe that σI σJ = α(I, J)σ K , where α(I, J) ∈ {±1, ±i} is a phase factor that depends on the Pauli strings described by the index vectors I, J. Thus, even though the Gram matrix is a 4 If the Hermitian Hamiltonian term ĥ[f (l)] describes a fermionic operator, the Hermitian operator Â[l] can be determined from an expansion in a fermionic operator basis, as we explain in the following and refer to as fermionic-QITE. We expand the Hermitian operator Â[l] in terms of products of Majorana operators γμ with μ ∈ [2L ′ ], where L ′ denotes the actual number of fermionic modes (for instance, for a Fermi-Hubbard lattice with L sites or a molecular electronic structure Hamiltonian described by a basis of L orbitals, L ′ = 2L). Majorana operators are Hermitian operators that fulfill the anticommutator relation {γ μ , γν } = 2δ μν and can be expressed in terms of fermionic creation and annihilation operators through γ2j-1 = ĉj + ĉ † j and γ2j = -i(ĉ j -ĉ † j ) for j ∈ [L ′ ]. We further define an ordered set of in- Since we will only consider systems that conserve parity, we restrict the number of elements in our sets to be even, |μ| = 2m, where m ⊆ [L ′ ]. We introduce the following short-hand notation for an ordered product of Majorana operators where the prefactor ensures that γμ is hermitian. Similar to Eq. ( Here, the sum goes over various sets μ which have yet not been specified (except for them being ordered and containing an even number of elements from [2L ′ ]). By choosing a[l] μ ∈ R, the operator Â[l] will be hermitian, and we can use the same linear equation that we derived for the Spin-QITE, Eq. (B9), or equivalently where the minus sign is convention and we defined the following real-valued entries Since in QITE we expand the operator Â[l] in the domain of the current Hermitian Hamiltonian term ĥ[l], we will define a corresponding set of indices D Therefore, the sum in Eq. ( Ansatz Since for many fermionic systems, the particle number operator N = L p=1 ĉ † p,α ĉp,α + ĉ † p,β ĉp,β and other operators, such as the spin projection operator commute with the system Hamiltonian, one can reduce the number of terms in Eq. ( This allows us to define the single orbital excitation operator and double excitation operator where we assume p < r and q < s. Eqs. ( Note, that while fermionic-QITE can be formulated in the fermionic picture and then transformed into Pauli operators by means of e.g. the Jordan-Wigner transformation, one could directly implement it on a fermionic quantum processing unit We summarize the main steps of the trotterized ITE (steps 1+4a), exact ITE (steps 1+4b), spin-QITE (steps 1+2+3+5a) and fermionic-QITE (steps 1+2+3+5b), as well as the main sources of approximation errors (highlighted by red boxes) in Fig. For quantum chemistry systems, the concept of a correlation length that determines how to choose the orbitals for the domain D j is less natural and needs to be replaced by an appropriate selection criterion. Typically, correlations of two observables MA , MB of two subsystems A and B are measured by connected correlation functions, C( MA , MB ) = ⟨ MA ⊗ MB ⟩ -⟨ MA ⟩ ⟨ MB ⟩ (where the tensor product is here included for clarity). Other measures of correlation exist and might be advantageous in certain cases. One such alternative measure is the mutual information I A,B , which is defined as where is the reduced von Neumann entropy and ρC = tr L\C (ρ) is the reduced density matrix of a sub-system C. The mutual information is a measure of the total amount of correlation present in a quantum state ρ. At zero temperature it coincides with the entanglement entropy, and it is a measure of the total amount of information that system A possesses about system B. Whether the correlations are due to quantum entanglement or whether they are a result of classical correlations, can however not simply be deduced from Eq. ( . It follows that a finite correlation length in a lattice system, i.e. exponentially decaying correlation functions, also display an exponential decay in the mutual information as the distance between the two subsystems is increased. In the context of quantum chemistry, the mutual information has been used as a means to reintroduce locality in the second quantized Hamiltonian, a prerequisite for MPS optimized through DMRG approaches to be successful when applied to molecular Hamiltonians Naturally, the mutual information can also be used in order to identify the amount of correlation within an AS, i.e. which AS orbital pairs are strongly correlated. In here, each ĥ[j] is a single tensor product |Ψj ∝ e -∆τ 2 ĥ[j] |Ψj-1 non-unitary operation Expansion error O(∆τ 2 ) Truncation error for operator expansion in γμ both persists even at ν * Trotterized ITE is given by steps 1+4a and takes a given system Hamiltonian that can be written as a sum of individual tensor products and realized the non-unitary ITE propagation. Exact ITE is described by steps 1+4b and differs from trotterized ITE in that omits the trotterization all together. QITE on the other hand approximates the ITE propagator of Hamiltonian terms for a given ν as explained below step 2, and approximates the second-order Trotterized ITE by a sequence of unitary operators. For spin-QITE, the operator expansion is given by Eq. ( the context of QITE, this represents a physically motivated criterion for picking a suitable domain D j for the support S j of a given second quantized fermionic Hamiltonian term ĥ[j]. In all our simulations, for a given ĥ[j] and corresponding S j , we let ν denote the number of additional orbitals we want to include in the domain D j . Which orbitals are included is decided based on which orbitals have the largest mutual information w.r.t. the or-bitals contained in the support, max p∈Sj ,q∈[L]\Sj I(p, q). In Fig. was generated by a fictitious 6-orbital system, but would in general be obtained from the mutual information as shown in Fig. A fact that we have so far neglected is that in order to use the mutual information as a selection criterion, one needs to have access to the density matrix ρgs = |Ψ gs ⟩ ⟨Ψ gs |. Clearly one faces a dilemma here, since it is the ground state which we want to approximate in QITE. However, we propose to use an approximate MPS state obtained from a DMRG simulation of the molecular Hamiltonian ground state problem in order to compute the mutual information. However, using the mutual information obtained from an approximate solution could lead in some instances to domains that differ from domains chosen by means of the exact solution, which in turn could lead to a different performance of QITE. A study of this effect is however not part of this work. We consider a variety of lattice and molecular electronic structure Hamiltonians. In particular, we study the Heisenberg Model (HM), the Transverse-Field Ising Model (TFIM), the Fermi-Hubbard Model (FHM), and the molecular electronic structure Hamiltonian AS of Ne, two forms of the Fe(III) -NTA molecule and three forms of molecular oxygen. For the lattice geometries, we consider a one-dimensional ring, a two-dimensional triangular ladder, and a two-dimensional hexagonal lattice with periodic boundary conditions in one direction, see Fig. Two of the systems we study, a J 1 J 2 model of CrI 3 and the AS of Fe(III) -NTA, represent prototypical candidates of systems that could originate from such industrial workflows. For instance, when deriving a simplified single-layer model of CrI 3 using the respective interaction terms from density functional theory calculations of J 1 = 3.29 meV and J 2 = -0.07 meV The Hamiltonians defined in the two subsections below, together with the lattice geometries depicted in Fig. A. Lattice Hamiltonians The Heisenberg model describes an effective model for Mott insulators, and follows as a special case of the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian-described below in Section III A 3-in the large U/t limit. The Heisenberg Hamiltonian is given by Here, J ij > 0 describes antiferromagnetic (AFM) coupling and B the strength of the external magnetic field. We implicitly assume an enumeration i = 1, 2, . . . , L of the underlying lattice. Eq. ( The Hamiltonian which describes a Heisenberg model restricted to J 1 = J ⟨ij⟩ and J 2 = J ⟨⟨ij⟩⟩ interactions will also be studied, and is known as the J 1 J 2 -model where α is a free parameter which allows one to tune the system from a uniform (α = 0) to a NN (α → ∞) interaction. The range 0 < α < 1 in one dimensional systems is considered as the strong-long-range regime. Here, as well as in the TFIM below, we assume that |i-j| denotes the Manhattan distance of the sites i and j in the lattice (thus the minimal amount of nearest-neighbor hops in the lattice connecting two sites rather than the actual physical distance). Chromium Triiodide While ferromagnetism in twodimensional van der Waals (vdW) materials has been known for decades From a theoretical perspective, while the Mermin-Wagner theorem excludes order in two dimensions at finite temperatures, the introduction of any anisotropy can lead to a gapping of the low-energy modes and allows the formation of long-range ordering. In practice, the source of such anisotropies can stem, e.g., from spin-orbit coupling or lattice distortions, leading to persistent magnetism with finite critical temperatures In addition to empirically fitting the effective model parameters to experimental measurements, electronic structure methods have been employed to extract them from first principles calculation, in particular by computing the exchange coupling J ij that describe the interactions between the spins on site i and j of the lattice (see III A 2). Depending on the specific method employed and whether bulk or monolayer CrI 3 is considered, the exact values of J ij may somewhat differ We consider the Transverse-Field Ising Model (TFIM), which is a paradigmatic model for the appearance of quantum phase transition at a critical point at zero temperature for short-and long-range interactions where B sets the strength of the transverse magnetic field. The TFIM is an extension of the classical Ising model (that does not include a transversal field) and, unlike its classical version, displays a quantum phase transition at criticality even in one dimension. For weak long-range interactions in Eq. ( The Hubbard model was introduced to describe the Mott transition from a conductor to an insulator and is one of the simplest many-particle theories that cannot be reduced to a single particle theory without resorting to some sort of approximation. We consider a minimal one-dimensional Hubbard model with L sites for a band structure in the atomic limit at half filling, n el = L, whose Hamiltonian is given by with periodic boundary conditions, where t describes the hopping and U the onsite interaction parameter, and we introduced the fermionic orbital excitation operators as defined in Eq. ( As a rather simple atomic many-body system, that is well described by a single Slater determinant, i.e., a single-reference case, we investigate the neon atom. The selected We furthermore investigate three molecular forms of oxygen, namely singlet and triplet molecular oxygen as well as ozone. Singlet oxygen, abbreviated as O 2 (0) in this work, is a highly reactive molecule formed by electronic excitation of triplet oxygen, O 2 (2). Another reactive form of oxygen is ozone, O 3 , which is typically formed by a photochemical reaction in the atmosphere and is responsible for significant material damage worldwide We consider the electronic structure Hamiltonian of the systems described above in a single particle basis of size n orb,full containing n el, full electrons. As single particle basis, we decided to use the orbitals obtained from a complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF) calculation employing PySCF. Using the AS characterized by the tuple (n el , n orb ), one can rewrite the original second quantized Hamiltonian as a Hamiltonian containing only n orb ≤ n orb,full orbitals and n el ≤ n el, full electrons gpqrs Êpq Êrs -Êps δ qr The influence of the frozen core orbitals and its electrons is implicitly contained in the corresponding active-space one-and two-electron integrals hpq and gpqrs , as well as a modified constant hnuc . In order to get a good initial state for solving for the ground state of the AS Hamiltonian, we perform a Restricted Open-shell Hartree-Fock (ROHF) calculation of Eq. (33) using PySCF. An internal stability analysis of the ROHF solution is performed. Note, that we are here searching for a Slater determinant of given spin which minimizes the energy expectation value of the AS Hamiltonian in Eq. A prerequisite of QITE and ITE is the ability to provide an initial state |Ψ init ⟩ that has a non-zero overlap with the desired ground state, γ init > 0. In this section, we detail how we provide the initial state for the systems introduced in Section III. Hartree-Fock (HF) theory provides a good starting point for many molecules, especially those which are well described by a single Slater determinant We use ROHF in order to obtain our initial states |Ψ init ⟩ for the AS Hamiltonian in Eq. The solutions of a HF calculation can be expressed as a Slater determinant, where |vac⟩ denotes the fermionic vacuum state (i.e. the zero eigenstate of the fermionic annihilation operator) and d † k denotes fermionic creation operators which are rotated into the obtained HF orbitals. Slater determinants in an arbitrary orbital basis can be generated efficiently on a quantum computer by means of Givens rotations Assessing the quality of the initial state for larger molecules Since we require that the initial state possesses a non-vanishing overlap γ init , it is desirable to have a diagnostic tool at hand that allows one to get a feeling of whether or not a HF solution would be a good starting point for the QITE or ITE evolution. In the context of molecular electronic structure theory, a good indicator is given by the amount of static correlation within a system. A large degree of static correlation indicates that more than one electronic configuration will have a large amplitude in the electronic wave function representing the ground state of the molecule, i.e. the electronic wave function cannot be reliably described by a single Slater determinant. Naturally, since one does not have access to the true ground state, heuristic methods based on approximate solutions have to be considered. Common diagnostic tools for estimating the amount of static correlation are the so-called T 1 and D 1 diagnostics, which rely on a coupled cluster wave function where ω κ,i are the eigenvalues of the one-orbital reduced density matrix of orbital i and κ denotes all four possible spin configurations of the orbital. The entanglement based multi-configurational diagnostic we use is then given by where L = n orb . Since the maximal amount of entanglement a single orbital can have is upper bounded by ln(4), the diagnostic in Eq. In order to be able to evaluate Eq. ( Note, that like most diagnostics, also Eq. ( In our simulations of the FHM, we use an initial state |Ψ init ⟩ which is the result of a ROHF calculation carried out with PySCF, and is thus of the form of Eq. (34). In the limit of U/t ⪅ 1, a mean-field solution will provide a reasonably large overlap with the true ground state for system sizes which are still amenable to exact diagonalization We introduce the classical mean-field method which we use to produce a classical initial state for both, fermionic and spin Hamiltonians in Section IV C 1 and then describe how this can be applied to a general spin Hamiltonian in Section IV C 2. A detailed description is provided in Appendix A. Section IV A describes a special cases of Generalized Hartree-Fock theory (GHF) where Q ∈ O(2L) is a matrix that fully characterizes the FGS, and ÛQ is the generator of the FGS which can be written as the exponential of a quadratic polynomial of Majorana operators whose coefficients depend on Q, as detailed in Appendix A 3. An FGS is fully described by its respective (2L × 2L) covariance matrix Γ which is related to Eq. where μ, ν ∈ [2L] and Â = ( Â1 , . . . , Â2L ) T = (â 1 , â3 , . . . , â2L-1 , â2 , â4 , . . . , â2L ) T is a vector of Majorana operators that are defined as â2p-1 = ĉ † p + ĉp and As shown in Ref. In order to apply the GHF to a general spin Hamiltonian, one has to first map the spin Hamiltonian to a fermionic Hamiltonian through e.g. the Jordan-Wigner transformation All lattice and molecular electronic structure systems we consider are described in Tables I and II, respectively. All systems considered in this work are initialized in a proper state |Ψ init ⟩ following the procedures outlined in Section IV. This allows us to compare QITE with a classical mean-field approach (i.e. GHF). For every system we perform a trotterized ITE as described in Section II B, whose evolution QITE is supposed to replicate. In all plots that display the energy and fidelity, the trotterized ITE (Section II B) is shown as a gray line, while a red horizontal dashed line corresponds to the exact ground state energy of the studied Hamiltonian, as well as to a fidelity of 1. All other colored lines with markers display the results obtained with the QITE algorithm (Section II C). The number of markers varies and is not representative of the number of QITE steps, which in turn is given by τ /∆τ . Different colors indicate different domain sizes which are characterized by ν, while different line styles correspond to different discretization step sizes ∆τ for fixed ν. In all plots, the left-most energy (fidelity) value corresponds to the energy (fidelity) of the initial state |Ψ init ⟩ of the GHF or ROHF solutions described in Section IV. All relevant ITE, GHF and ROHF energy and fidelity results for the lattice and molecular electronic structure systems are summarized in Tables III and IV, respectively. We are only interested in the ability of spin-QITE and fermionic-QITE to follow the trotterized ITE, and not in a quantitative comparison, which is why we do not include specific energy and fidelity values obtained for the QITE simulations in these tables. a. Expansion operators Lattice spin systems are studied using the spin-QITE algorithm II C 3 and an operator basis σI ∈ {1, σx , σy , σz } ⊗D l is used for a spin Hamiltonian term ĥ[l] in the expansion of Eq. ( b. Exact QITE For spin lattice systems the symbol ν is identical to the Manhattan distance in the lattice, while for FHM and molecular electronic structure models it is identical to the number of additional sites and orbitals, respectively. For all models we will use ν * to denote the regime where ν is large enough to cover the entire system L for every Hamiltonian term ĥ[l]. In principle it should then reproduce the trotterized ITE, and only deviate from the latter in the limit ∆τ → 0 in case the operator basis is truncated. In fact, if all Hamiltonian term domains are of the same size L as the system, due to the approximation we make by uniting common domain terms mentioned in Section II C 2, there is effectively no trotterization error anymore since there is only a single Hamiltonian term ĥ[l] to consider, i.e. m = 1. However, the set of linear equations Eqs. ( c. Finite operator expansion effects While the operator basis we use for spin-QITE is complete (within D l ), the operator expansion basis for fermionic-QITE introduces an additional approximation which will result in exact-QITE results monotonically converging to energies above the trotterized ITE energy, even for very small step sizes ∆τ . d. Long time behavior For readability, we often only include the short-time behavior in the main text and move the plots that show the continued behavior at longer times τ to Appendices D and E. A. Lattice systems 1. Heisenberg model a. HM I The first system we consider is identical to a system studied in Ref. b. HM II In Fig. domain sizes are larger than for NN Hamiltonians for the same value ν. Our numerical simulations were limited to ν = 1 not just for this model, but also for all lattice models that either included beyond-NN interactions or a lattice dimension larger than one, due to the large computational demands that the scaling 4 |D l | leads to. We probe the QITE evolution for discretization step sizes ∆τ = 0.1 and ∆τ = 0.01, respectively. We find that for both realizations, QITE almost immediately deviates strongly from the trotterized ITE, indicating that, just as with the HM I model, ν = 1 is not sufficient. A QITE simulation with ν = 2 would here lead to max(|D l |) = 10, thus a 256-fold increase in computational cost (both on the classical side, and regarding the number of operators that need to be measured by the quantum computer). The long-term behavior shows an oscillatory behavior with a fidelity that quickly drops off to zero, see Fig. c. HM III In Fig. a. TFIM I In Fig. b. TFIM II System TFIM II using the same lattice geometry as TFIM I considers the even stronger longrange regime α = 0.1, reflected in the lower initial state overlap. The step sizes we consider here are ∆τ = 0.01 for the trotterized ITE and ∆τ =∈ {0.01, 0.001} for QITE. The smaller step sizes are chosen in order to be able to resolve if an improvement over the initial state overlap can be achieved in the first part of the evolution. The results display in Fig. The last spin system we consider is the twodimensional J 1 J 2 -model on a hexagonal lattice as depicted in Fig. the smallest Manhattan distance ν = 1. We also note that this presents heuristic evidence, that the behavior of the energy might not be a reliable tool for determining the performance of QITE, whose main purpose is to amplify the overlap γ, and not necessarily the improvement of the energy. Note, that this is only considering a simplified model of the CrI 3 description introduced in Section III A 1 with periodic boundary in one direction. In order to be able to simulate the larger lattice 5(d) of CrI 3 with periodic boundary conditions in both directions and include a study of Manhattan distance of ν = 2, the code base would have to be improved significantly since this would lead to domain sizes of max(|D l |) = 14. As a proof of principle, we study the one-dimensional FHM system described in Table For ν = 1, we observe an early deviation of QITE from ITE similar to the HM I system in Fig. We now turn to study the behavior of fermionic-QITE II C 4 applied to the AS of the molecular electronic structure Hamiltonians defined in Eq. Each molecular electronic structure Hamiltonian is characterized by the size of the AS L = n orb and the number of electrons n el within the AS. A molecular electronic structure Hamiltonian of an atom/molecule in a basis of L orbitals contains L ′ = 2L spin-orbitals. The details of the configurations of the molecules we consider can be found in Section III B and Appendix F. The mutual information of the ground state of the respective systems, used in order to pick the orbitals in the fermionic-QITE Table The first electronic structure system we study is the Neon atom described in Section III B. The AS is characterized by (n el , n orb ) = We now consider the fermionic-QITE results for the (5, 5) AS of the Fe(III) -NTA (0) system described in Table In Fig. We now consider the three molecular forms of oxygen introduced in Section III B. Fig. Fig. The last system we consider is singlet molecular ozone in a (12, 9) AS in Fig. We then move on and introduce a fermionic formulation of QITE-fermionic-QITE-which we apply to the one-dimensional Fermi-Hubbard model as a proofof-principle system. For this model, ν describes the number of additional fermionic sites included in the domain. Here, the case ν = 2 corresponds to including the left-and right-hand side neighbors of a nearest-neighbor fermionic lattice site pair into the domain (comparable to a Manhattan distance 1), and leads to a stable QITE closely following the ITE. A natural question is whether such a behavior can also be seen for more complicated Fermi-Hubbard models, and especially two-dimensional formulations thereof. Another research question is whether applying the Verstraete-Cirac mapping The numerical studies conclude with applying the fermionic formulation of QITE to the AS of the Ne atom, as well as two different spin states of the molecule Fe(III) -NTA, and three molecular forms of oxygen. The Fe(III) -NTA molecule is of particular interest to the chemical industry. Overall, three of the five chemical systems display a strong multi-reference character. The latter is analyzed in terms of the Z s(1) -diagnostic, while the orbitals to be included are picked based on the mutual information. One of the central observations we make is that a large overall amount of mutual information paired with a large Z s(1) value indicative of a strong multi-configurational character requires long ITE evolution times to achieve significant improvements in the evolved quantum state. While systems displaying a rather small multi-reference character (here the systems Ne (0), Fe(III) -NTA (3), O 2 (2)) allow for notable improvements in the state fidelity for small evolution times τ ∼ 0.2 -2, the ITE of molecular systems with strong multi-reference character shows that long evolution times τ ∼ 10 -100 are required to observe notable improvements in fidelity. However, the fermionic-QITE simulation become unstable well before these time scales are reached, except when all AS orbitals are included (i.e. at ν * ). While the truncation of the fermionic operator expansion of our QITE simulation leads to a low-order polynomial scaling (in the number of orbitals L of the AS) of the number of terms that have to be measured on the quantum device to determine Â[j] in Eq. ( Clearly, a handful of numerical experiments do not allow for general statements of the practicality of fermionic-QITE applied to quantum chemistry systems. In fact, a future research direction for fermionic-QITE applied to molecules could be the choice of molecular orbital basis in which the second quantized Hamiltonian is represented. As we discuss in Section II D, the success of MPS paired with DMRG to describe strongly correlated molecular electronic structure Hamiltonians is partly due to finding a suitable basis where the second quantized Hamiltonian becomes quasi one-dimensional. In fermionic-QITE, we rotate the AS Hamiltonian into the molecular orbitals corresponding to its AS ROHF solution. It would be interesting to see if strategies similar to those which lead to a successfull formulation of DMRG in quantum chemistry could lead to a stable evolution of fermionic-QITE for the small values of ν ≪ ν * . Another topic of future research is to consider how both spin-and fermionic-QITE perform when we lift one of our major approximations, by no longer condensing Hamiltonian terms of identical domains into one single expression ĥ[j]. This would be a major step towards a more realistic assessment of the algorithmic performance of QITE when applied in an actual experiment. In the same direction, the inclusion of the error due to the approximation of the unitary operators Ûl into basic quantum operations, as well as the impact of measurement errors in the central quantities b[j] and S[j] would be important. First steps regarding the latter and its close connection to the correlation length C of the studied system have recently been made Our spin-QITE algorithm uses an operator basis σI which takes into account all possible 4 |Dj | Pauli-strings for a given domain D j . It has been shown in Ref. We conclude with a few final remarks. In all studied systems we were able to study the performance of QITE since the systems were small enough to be solved by means of exact diagonalization. The fidelity is the central quantity that tells us how close a quantum state is to the desired state, but in a real experiment or a large numerical simulation, the fidelity will not be accessible. Therefore, we use the energy of the state |Ψ⟩ as a diagnostic for the performance of QITE, since we observe that an in energy in most cases leads to a worsening of the fidelity at roughly the same time τ (with the exception of the J 1 J 2 system), which is in agreement with the behavior observed in literature an initial state for the ITE through Eq. (A7) which then runs until some convergence criteria is met. In order to compute Eq. (A8), we will make extensive use of the following identity for integers p ≥ 2, ∂Pf Γ| i1,...,i2p Since the operator Â[l] is determined by the real-valued coefficients a[l] I , we can reformulate the above condition for a minimum in terms of the real-valued coefficients a where we neglected terms that are independent of a[l] K . Carrying out the derivative leads to which leads to Eq. ( Figs. Fig. We execute the vQITE algorithm with a time step ∆τ = 0.1 and include three types of noise: shot noise, readout-, and gate errors. The circuits for a vQITE step and energy evaluation are executed with M evol = 8192 and M H = 10 6 shots respectively. For the readout error, we introduce a parameter p 0|1 , for the probability that a single qubit is falsely measured to be 0, instead of the correct value 1. The parameter for falsely measuring a 1, given the correct value 0, is fixed for simplicity to p 1|0 = p 0|1 2 . The gate error is simulated as a depolarization channel with parameter p depol and p depol 100 for the twoqubit and single-qubit gates respectively. In order to mitigate the readout and gate errors we use Twirled Readout Error Extinction (TREX) In Fig. We conclude that even for this simple case with only 4 qubits, vQITE with HVA struggles to beat the GHF solution. A slight improvement on GHF for this model may be expected, for hardware errors of p 0|1 , p depol ∼ 0.001, which is however at the extreme limit of today's best QC hardwares. Larger system sizes will further increase the noise, making vQITE with the HVA struggle disproportionately more. The QITE algorithm, having vastly deeper circuits, will therefore likely not be applicable to large system sizes without some level of error correction. 