Superconductivity in infinite layer nickelates Nd1-xSrxNiO2 has so far been achieved only in thin films raising questions on the role of substrates and interfaces. Given the challenges associated with their synthesis it is imperative to identify their intrinsic properties. We use Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (RIXS) to investigate the influence of the SrTiO3 capping layer on the excitations of Nd1-xSrxNiO2 (x = 0 and 0.2). Spin excitations are observed in parent and 20% doped Nd1-xSrxNiO2 regardless of capping, proving that magnetism is intrinsic to infinite-layer nickelates and appears in a significant fraction of their phase diagram. In parent and superconducting Nd1-xSrxNiO2, the spin excitations are slightly hardened in capped samples compared to the non-capped ones. Additionally, a weaker Ni -Nd charge transfer peak at ∼ 0.6 eV suggests that the hybridization between Ni 3d and Nd 5d orbitals is reduced in capped samples. From our data, capping induces only minimal differences in Nd1-xSrxNiO2 and we phenomenologically discuss these differences based on the reconstruction of the SrTiO3 -NdNiO2 interface and other mechanisms such as crystalline disorder. The search for cuprate analog materials has led to the discovery of superconductivity in infinite layer (RNiO 2 ), quintuple-layer (Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 ), and bilayer (La 3 Ni 2 O 7 ) nickelates In the past, multiple phenomena have been observed at the interface of oxide thin films as due to the combination of polar/non-polar surfaces, charge transfer, phonon coupling, confinement and strain, among others Here we combine X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS) and high-resolution RIXS to investigate the electronic excitations of Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 (x = 0, 0.2) as a qi and ⃗ q f represent the wave-vectors of incident and scattered X-rays. The grazing angle θ is defined as the angle between the incident x-ray and the sample surface. The 2Θ scattering angle (angle between ⃗ qi and ⃗ q f ) is fixed at 150 degrees to maximize the momentum transfer. ⃗ q ∥ and ⃗ q ⊥ refer to that the momentum transfer direction is parallel or perpendicular to the function of Sr doping and in the presence/absence of the SrTiO 3 capping layer. High quality Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 display strong orbital polarization and spin excitations are detected regardless of capping. Strontium doping softens the spin excitations due to magnetic dilution achieved through hole doping on the nickel site We studied: (i) NdNiO 2 with and without capping (NdNiO 2 -cap/uncap, 10 nm thick) and (ii) Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 with and without capping (Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 -cap/uncap). The thickness of the SrTiO 3 capping layer is 3 nm for both parent and doped films. All films are grown on SrTiO 3 Figure Figure Figure where S i , S j , and S ′ i are spins at site i, nearest-neighbor sites j, and the next nearest-neighbor sites i ′ , respectively. J 1 and J 2 are the nearest and second-nearest exchange constants [Fig. Our data highlights that magnetism is intrinsic to Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 and that the SrTiO 3 capping layer has overall minor effects on the spin and charge excitations. Importantly, the strong XAS dichroism, absence of any pre-edge peak at the O-K edge (see End Matter), lack of the resonant q = (1/3, 0, L) peak (see End Matter), and presence of similar spin excitations in our capped and uncapped films demonstrate that the quality of our capped and uncapped samples is comparable. Therefore, we tend to interpret the slightly renormalized spin excitation energy and weakening of the Nd -Ni hybridization upon capping as a combination of effects such as interfacial reconstruction, crystalline defects, or lattice disorder One of the important aspects is the atomic and electronic reconstruction at the SrTiO 3 -NdNiO 2 interface due to polar discontinuity To better understand how the interface renormalization affects the electronic properties of the bulk-like NiO 2 layers, we compute the atom-and layer-resolved density of states (DOS) of NdNiO 2 -cap and NdNiO 2uncap. We calculate the most thermodynamically stable SrO-type of the interface (Supplementary Fig. The magnetic behavior could also be rationalized by the interface effects. As the Ni-Nd and Ni-O orbital hybridization decreases upon "capping", less Ni 2+ states are present. This reduces the effective self-hole doping in the nickel site which hardens the spin excitations for the NdNiO 2 -cap. However, although the electronic renormalization can propagate to 5-6 NiO 2 layers into the film, the difference of the Ni-Nd hybridization between the NdNiO 2 -cap and NdNiO 2 -uncap is overall small since our film thickness is 10 nm which is larger than the length scale of the interface propagation effects. This is consistent with a minor renormalization of the spin excitation energy due to capping [Fig. Although the physical picture of the electronic renormalization induced by the interface is phenomenologically consistent with our data, we cannot fully disregard the effects from lattice or crystalline disorder (not the impurity phases like Nd 3 Ni 3 O 7 or Nd 3 Ni 3 O 8 ) due to the common challenges of synthesizing infinite-layer nickelate films In summary, we investigated the capping effects on the electronic spectra of infinite-layer nickelates. In Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 (x = 0, 0.2), strong orbital polarization and spin excitations are present regardless of capping. We specifically identified that capping slightly hardens the spin excitation and weakens the Ni -Nd orbital hybridization. While our results can be phenomenologically rationalized by a combination of effects such as interface renormalization, crystal defects and lattice disorder, the x-ray data proves the intrinsic robustness of spin excitations in the phase diagram of infinite layer nickelates similarly to cuprates. High-quality of NdNiO2 -uncap films XAS at the O-K edge is sensitive to the Nd 3 Ni 3 O 7 or Nd 3 Ni 3 O 8 impurity phases and we therefore use it to establish the quality of our samples The resonant q = (1/3, 0, L) peak detected in other work The exchange constants in the different nickelates are determined by calculating the smallest χ 2 from different combination of J 1 and J 2 values using linear spin-wave theory. The χ 2 is directly related to the variance between the theory and the experimental spin excitation dispersion: where q i and q f refer to the transferred momenta near the antiferromagnetic zone center and zone boundary, respectively. ε exp qi and ε cal qi are the experimental and calculated spin excitations energies at a specific momentum point. We keep the same ratio of J 1 /J 2 for both NdNiO 2 -cap and NdNiO 2 -uncap to further constrain the fitting. Furthermore, due to the large uncertainties caused by the overlap between phonon and spin excitations at q ∥ < 0.2 r. l. u., we remove the last two q points. Using this method, we obtain J 1 = 72.8 ± 4.3 meV and J 2 = -5.8 ± 2.0 meV for the 10 nm NdNiO 2 -cap, and J 1 = 67.0 ± 4.0 meV and J 2 = -5.2 ± 2.0 meV for the 10 nm NdNiO 2 -uncap. Considering the overall error bars, it is difficult to visualize the precise change of J 1 and J 2 due to capping. However, in Fig. Figure 