Hidden singularities in correlated electron systems, which are caused by pair fluctuations of electron-electron or electron-hole bubbles obeying Bose-Einstein statistics, are clarified theoretically. The correlation function of each pair fluctuation is shown to have a bound in the zero Matsubara frequency branch, similarly to the chemical potential of ideal Bose gases. Once the bound is reached, the self-energy starts to acquire a component proportional to Green's function itself, i.e., the structure called one-particle reducible, to keep the correlation function within the bound. The singularities are closely related to, but distinct from, phase transitions with broken symmetries. Passing down through them is necessarily accompanied by a change in the single-particle density of states around the excitation threshold, such as the pseudogap behavior found here for the negative-U Hubbard model above the superconducting transition temperature. Systems of identical particles with integer spins undergo a unique phase transition called Bose-Einstein condensation characterized by the emergence of macroscopic quantum coherence The singularities are relevant to logarithmic contributions to the grand thermodynamic potential given diagrammatically in terms of closed electron-electron or electron-hole bubbles (see Fig. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we elaborate the hidden singularities and introduce a procedure to handle them theoretically. In Sect. 3, we present numerical results for the negative-U Hubbard model. In Sect. 4, we provide concluding remarks. We use the units of h = k B = 1. One of the theoretical frameworks suitable for the present purposes is the Luttinger-Ward expression of the grand thermodynamic potential Ω given as a functional of Green's function Ĝ11-15 . The stationarity condition of Ω in terms of Ĝ yields a self-consistent equation for Ĝ, which has been known, for example, as the Dyson, the Schwinger-Dyson, or Dyson-Gor'kov equation. Being nonlinear in Ĝ, it can describe ordered phases with spontaneous broken symmetries continuously from the normal state on the same footing. Indeed, the ordered phases are characterized by the emergence of some novel component in the matrix Ĝ with particle-hole and spin degrees of freedom, such as the anomalous Green's function for superconductivity and spin polarization in Ĝ for ferromagnetism. This Luttinger-Ward functional with full particle-hole and spin degrees of freedom can be written as 15 FIG. where β is the inverse temperature, Ĝ0 is the noninteracting Green's function, Σ is the self-energy, and Tr denotes the trace over the arguments of Ĝ. The stationarity condition of Eq. ( These are formally the exact expressions, and practical calculations can be performed on the basis of some approximate expression for Φ = Φ[ Ĝ], obeying Eq. ( To elucidate the hidden singularities that lie near phase transitions with broken symmetries, we specifically consider the negative-U Hubbard model at a low electron density n = N/V , which has negligible lattice anisotropy and definitely exhibit s-wave superconductivity at low temperatures. We study this system on the basis of the fluctuation-exchange approximation for superconductivity (FLEX-S approximation), whose Φ is given diagrammatically in Fig. Here, q ≡ (q, iω l ) indicates the four-momentum consisting of the wavevector q and boson Matsubara frequency ω l . The functions χ GG ( q ) and χ G Ḡ( q ) are defined in terms of the normal-state Green's function G( k) and its time-reversed partner Ḡ( k) ≡ G(-k) generally by where k ≡ (k, iε n ) with ε n denoting the fermion Matsubara frequency; this function satisfies as can be shown by a change in the summation variable k. The first term in Eq. ( in terms of Eq. ( Now, we are ready to discuss the hidden singularities in full detail. With G replaced by G 0 in Eq. ( has the non-trivial anomalous self-energy ∆( k) due to the emergence of a zero eigenvalue, where U s k k ′ is the pairing interaction with correlations given explicitly by Eq. (91) in Ref. 15, i.e., This condition for T c , which is also identical with the one that the superconducting correlation function diverges, is manifestly different from U χ G Ḡ( 0) = 1. The same statement holds true in the case of ferromagnetism with U > 0, as can be examined easily on the basis of the consideration of incorporating the spin polarization in Green's function. Hence, we should allow for the possibility that U χ G Ḡ( 0) = 1 and U χ GG ( 0) = 1 are reached independently of the phase transitions with broken symmetries. The fact that U χ G0 Ḡ0 ( 0) = 1 and U χ G0G0 ( 0) = 1 specify the mean-field T c suggests that the renormalized ones are realized near the phase transition points with broken symmetries. Another key observation here is that the values of U χ G Ḡ( 0) and U χ GG ( 0) cannot exceed 1 physically. This can be seen as follows. The zero Matsubara frequency contribution to the second term of Eq. ( where U χ G Ḡ(q, 0) is real, as can be shown from Eq. ( However, the inequalities U χ G Ḡ( 0) ≤ 1 and U χ GG ( 0) ≤ 1 cannot be satisfied automatically by the standard Luttinger-Ward formalism based on Eqs. ( We propose a resolution to this issue within the variational framework of Eqs. ( where the number of particles, N , is incorporated in the prefactor to make the Lagrange multiplier λ n intensive; note that λ n has the dimension of energy. Performing the differentiation of Eq. ( with n ≡ N/V . The additional second term stemming from Eq. ( This completes the formulation for the normal state. The parameter λ n is finite only for the pinned phase of U χ G Ḡ( 0) = 1 and is expected to grow almost linearly as a function of temperature initially. This linear change in the structure of the self-energy need not be considered in performing the first derivatives of Ω because of stationarity condition (2). However, it does bring singularities in the second derivatives of Ω such as specific heat, similarly to those caused by the emergences of ∆( k) for superconductivity and the spin-polarized self-energy for ferromagnetism near T c . Thus, the point U χ G Ḡ( 0) = 1 may be regarded as specifying a kind of transition without apparent broken symmetries. In this respect, note that Green's function with the self-energy of Eq. ( Several comments are in order on the hidden singularities and also on Eq. ( The above consideration for the normal state can be extended directly and continuously to the s-wave superconducting state characterized by the emergence of the anomalous Green's function F ( k) = F (-k). Specifically, we can construct the Φ functional in the FLEX-S approximation so as to incorporate all the anomalous processes derivable from those of Eq. ( Here 1 is the 3×3 unit matrix, χ (c) ( q ) is defined in terms of Eq. ( and χ ± ( q ) denote The matrix χ (c) ( q ) represents the mixing of superconducting and charge fluctuations due to the emergence of F . Equation ( where λ is determined by the condition that the smallest eigenvalue of the matrix 1+ U χ (c) ( q ) stays zero once this has been reached. Although it should be removed when all the eigenvalues are positive, our numerical study given below in Sect. III presents an example that incorporating ∆Φ λ is indispensable to obtaining physical (i.e., finite) solutions throughout the superconducting phase. The contributions of Eq. ( Here, U eff + ( q ) is defined by and U eff ij ( q ) denotes the ij element of the matrix After adding Eq. ( with The Dyson-Gor'kov equation can be written in terms of these self-energies as with It has turned out numerically that λ Ḡ = λF > 0 and λ G = λ F = λG = 0 hold for λ that meets det[1 + U χ (c) ( q )] = 0. Note that λ Ḡ should reach λ n of Eq. ( Self-consistent calculations of the Dyson and Dyson-Gor'kov equations have been performed numerically on the negative-U Hubbard model at a low electron density under the constant density where 0 + denotes an infinitesimal positive constant; the technical details are given in AppendixB. We have adopted the units of 2m = h = k F = 1, where m is the electron mass and k F is the Fermi momentum. The momentum cutoff k c = 10 has been introduced to describe a finite band width. Specifically, our G -1 0 ( k) can be written as G -1 0 ( k) = iε n -k 2 + μ with 0 ≤ k ≤ 10, where μ is the chemical potential determined by Eq. (19). We have chosen the parameter U as U N (0) = -0.09 in terms of the density of states per spin and the volume at the Fermi energy N (0) = 1 4π 2 ; note also that N V = 1 3π 2 in the present units. The corresponding mean-field superconducting transition temperature T c0 , which is evaluated by using only the first terms on the right-hand sides of Eqs. (15a) and (15b), is 0.1767 that is one order of magnitude smaller than the noninteracting Fermi energy ε 0 F = 1. Thus, our system lies in the intermediate coupling regime. Figure One of the key features of Fig. The 1PR structure is found to persist below T 1PR into the superconducting phase and emerges also in the anomalous self-energy ∆ λ . As seen in Fig. Figure We have clarified existence of hidden singularities in correlated electron systems and developed a definite procedure to handle them. It is thereby shown that reaching the singularities is characterized by the emergence of a novel structure in the self-energy called 1PR, which is necessarily accompanied by a change in the singleparticle density of states around the excitation threshold. The temperature at which it starts to develop can be regarded as a transition with no apparent broken symmetries. They singularities are inherent in the interaction channel and should also present in Bose systems. They may have stood as a key untold difficulty in performing theoretical studies on correlated normal and ordered phases based on the quantum field theory, as may be seen in the negligible number of theoretical studies on them compared with those on the normal state where G 0 (k, τ ) is the noninteracting Green's function and δG(k, τ ) denotes the correlation part updated iteratively starting from δG(k, τ ) = 0. The variable k is expressed as and discretized with an equal interval in x over 0 ≤ k ≤ k c = 10; the number of points is N k = 50-200. Similarly, τ is expressed as and discretized with an equal interval in x over τ c ≤ τ ≤ β-τ c with τ c = 10 -8 ; the number of points is N τ = 50-400. The correlation functions of Eq. ( The angular integrals of s ≡ k • q/kq in Eq. (B4) are performed over max -1, by dividing the interval at (k 2 +q 2 -1)/2kq when the value lies in the interval. The integration over each interval s 0 ≤ s ≤ s 1 is performed by expressing and discretizing x at an equal interval over -2.5 ≤ x ≤ 2.5; the number of integration points is N s = 20-30. The radial integrals of k in Eq. (B4) are performed similarly over by dividing the interval at the singular points |1-q|, 1, 1+ q when they lie in the interval, and changing variables similarly to Eq. (B6) for each interval. The variable q of Eq. (B4) runs over [0, 2k c ], which is divided at q = 2, k c into three regions. Each region is then discretized by Eq. (B6) with s → q with the relative number of points 4 : 3 : 3; the total number of points is N q = 50-200. The functions of Eq. (B4) are then transformed into the ω l space on the basis of the method developed by Haussmann et al. with ∆τ j ≡ τ j+1 -τ j . For |ω l ∆τ j | < 0.1, this function is evaluated by expanding the formula in the Taylor series of ω l ∆τ j . The boson Matsubara frequencies ω l = 2πlT (l = 0, 1, 2, • • • ) for l > l c ∼ 10 are chosen so that they are described approximately by ω l ≈ sinh x j in terms of equally spaced points x j (j = l c +2, • • • , N τ ) up to ω l ≈ 10 7 ; the number of points is N ω = 50-200. The function χ(ω) with ω ∈ [ω lj , ω lj+1 ) is then approximated by the cubic spline as The accuracy of Eq. (B9) can be examined by the inverse transform where Īj,n (τ ) is defined by with ∆ω j ≡ 2π(l j+1 -l j )T ; the upper limit l j+1 -1 of Eq. (B13a) for j = N ω -1 should be replaced by l j+1 . When ∆ω j τ < 0.1, we expand the last formula in ∆ω j τ as Īj,n (τ ) = e with L ≡ l j+1 -l j -1 and and replace the upper limit ∞ in Eq. (B13b) by k c ∼ 10 to obtain sufficient accuracy. The sum of Eq. (B14) for ν < ∼ 10 can be evaluated using Faulhaber's formula. Equation (B12) after the double Fourier transforms thereby obtained has been confirmed to reproduce Eq. (B8) excellently. The functions χ GG ( q ) and χ G Ḡ( q ) calculated from Eq. (B4) using Eq. (B9) are then substituted in Eq. ( as where the subscript of Σ c denotes the correlation part. On the other hand, the angular and radial integrals of q in Eq. (B16) are carried out in the same way as those of k in Eq. (B4). Possible singular points in the radial integral of q ∈ [0, k+k c ] are |1-k|, 1+k, and k c -k. Equation (B16) thereby obtained is transformed into the ε n space in the same way as described for Eqs. (B12)-(B14). The fermion Matsubara frequencies ε n = (2n + 1)πT (n = 0, 1, 2, • • • ) for n > n c ∼ 10 are chosen so that they are described approximately by ε n ≈ sinh x j in terms of equally spaced points x j (j = n c + 2, • • • , N τ ) up to ε n ≈ 10 7 ; the number of points is N ε = 50-200. The selfenergy Σ( k) thereby obtained is used to calculate δG( k) ≡ G( k)-G 0 ( k), i.e., the correlation part of Green's function. This δG( k) is then transformed into the τ space by the procedure for Eqs. (B8)-(B10) to obtain δG(k, τ ) of the next iteration. Below T = T 1PR , we need to incorporate the second term of Eq. ( Similar calculations have been performed for the superconducting state iteratively starting from the mean-field solutions. The convergences are good at low temperatures of T < ∼ 0.2T c0 even for the calculations using Eq. ( 