The Majorana fermion offers fascinating possibilities such as non-Abelian statistics and non-local robust qubits, and hunting it is one of the most important topics in current condensed matter physics. Most of the efforts have been focused on the Majorana bound state at zero energy in terms of scanning tunneling spectroscopy searching for the quantized conductance. On the other hand, a chiral Majorana edge channel appears at the surface of a three-dimensional topological insulator when engineering an interface between proximityinduced superconductivity and ferromagnetism. Recent advances in microwave spectroscopy of topological edge states open a new avenue for observing signatures of such Majorana edge states through the local optical conductivity. As a guide to future experiments, we show how the local optical conductivity and density of states present distinct qualitative features depending on the symmetry of the superconductivity, that can be tuned via the magnetization and temperature. In particular, the presence of the Majorana edge state leads to a characteristic non-monotonic temperature dependence achieved by tuning the magnetization. Chiral Majorana edge mode | Topological superconductors | Local optical conductivity S tudy of Majorana fermions in topological superconductors is an important topic from the viewpoints of fundamental physics and applications to quantum computing In the present paper, we study theoretically the local density of states (LDOS) and local optical conductivity near the interface between proximity-induced ferromagnetism and s-wave or d-wave superconductivity at the surface of a 3D topological insulator. They show a variety of behavior as a function of energy depending on the strength of the magnetic exchange coupling and temperature. Especially the contribution of the nodes in the d-wave superconductors makes the behavior qualitatively distinct from the s-wave case with a full gap. While previous scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) experiments relied on quantitative measures, e.g. a quantized conductance Model. We consider the surface of a 3D topological insulator (TI) with spin-orbit parameter A and chemical potential μ ≥ 0 lying in the xy plane. The TI surface can Recent years have seen considerable progress towards realizing nonabelian particles, fueled by their promised applications to topological quantum devices. A prominent example is the one-dimensional chiral Majorana mode. It opens the possibility of using wave packets propagating at high speed as an alternative to the braiding of zero-dimensional Majorana fermions. While signatures of the latter have been established, a weak spot in detecting chiral Majorana modes lies in reliably capturing quantitative measures such as a quantized conductivity. We here propose using microwave spectroscopy to instead reveal distinct qualitative signatures emerging due to the unique dispersion of the Majorana mode that allows photons to break up Cooper pairs into Majorana fermions propagating along a topological superconductor edge. be separated into three regions: For x > 0, the TI surface is in contact with a superconductor (SC) and hosts proximityinduced superconductivity as long as we consider positions far away from the interfaces at x = 0 and x = -d where kx is still a good quantum number. Above, ψ ( †) σ (k) annihilates (creates) an electron of momentum k and spin σ, and (σx, σy, σz) are the Pauli matrices. To study the edge state at the QAHI/TSC interface, we construct the wave function in all three regions by taking into account all possible scattering processes of electron-like and hole-like particles from the superconducting region (x > 0) to the non-superconducting non-magnetic region (x < -d), and vice versa (see Materials and Methods) for s-and d x 2 -y 2 -wave, for dxy-wave. [5] The above dispersion describes the topologically non-trivial Majorana edge state. While the interface between a ferromagnet and a dxy-wave superconductor holds two spin-degenerate zero energy modes that form Andreev bound states, the TI surface lifts the spin degeneracy leaving a single topologically non-trivial Majorana mode From the wave function of the TSC, we construct the McMillan Green's function Magnetization dependence of the optical conductivity. We use the Kubo formula To understand the results for the optical conductivity, we first consider how the LDOS depends on the magnetization in the QAHI. As already hinted by the angle resolved LDOS in Fig. We now consider how the optical conductivity varies away from the interface at a fixed magnetization [see Fig. Temperature dependence of the optical conductivity. We finally consider how the optical conductivity behaves as the temperature increases (see Fig. and a product of Green's functions. Above, f FD (ε) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution and k B is the Boltzmann constant. The product of Green's functions can be assumed temperature independent when the maximum value of the superconducting gap ∆0 proximity-induced onto the TI surface is much smaller than in the parent SC. In this case, the parent SC, and thus the proximity-induced ∆0, are nearly unaffected by the k B T /∆0 considered. The Green's function products are symmetric in the energy ε and have coherence peaks at ε = ±∆0. At the QAHI/TSC interface, they contain additional features for energies 0 < ε < ∆0 similar to the peaks in the zero-temperature optical conductivity for 0 < ω < 2∆0 resulting from the edge state [see Fig. The temperature dependent factor in Eq. ( In Fig. The recent advances in microwave impedance microscopy of topological edge states While the Majorana edge mode is topologically protected from backward-scattering due to its chiral nature In addition to the position averaging of the optical signal over the spot size, contributions to the optical signal can be picked up from the superconductor deposited on top of the TI surface due to its finite skin depth, and in the d-wave case, due to nodal states and disorder. However, d-wave superconductivity in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8-δ has been measured down to the monolayer limit with an approximate thickness of 2 nm (63), well below the zero-frequency zerotemperature skin depth which is of the order of 100 nm. Moreover, taking into account contributions from a disordered d-wave superconductor on top of the TI, the conductance peak resulting from the edge states give the dominating contribution to the total signal for a superconducting film up to the order of hundred atomic layers, and a measurable signal up to the order of 10 4 atomic layers relevant to, e.g., the experiments in Ref. Wave functions. To construct the McMillan Green's function Ψ SC eR e ik SCe+(-) Ψ SC hR e -ik SCh-(+) x x , Ψ SC hL e ik SCh+(-) x x , Ψ SC hL(R) = [Γ-(+) -(+) Γ-(+)e +(-)iθ +(-) e +(-)iθ 1] T , The momenta k SCe(h)± x of electron-like (hole-like) particles are given by Ak [15] In this region, we have assumed 0 < (ε, ∆ 0 ) ≪ μ. In the ferromagnetic region (-d < x < 0), the wave functions are given by ( ) Ψ FI hL e -κ FI x x , with γ = -A(κ FI x -ky)/mz, and the momentum is given by Aκ FI x = m 2 z + (Aky) 2 . In this region, we have assumed μ = 0 and 0 < ε ≪ |mz|. In the non-superconducting non-magnetic region (x < -d), the wave functions are given by ( ) with incoming wave functions where g j and h j are coefficients, and the wave vectors are obtained by setting Γ+(-) = 0 in Eq. ( The coefficients are evaluated by imposing continuity of the ordinary and conjugated wave function at x = -d and x = 0. From the ordinary and conjugated wave functions, we can construct the retarded McMillan Green's function The coefficients α j and β j are obtained from the boundary condition where τ 0 is the unit matrix in Nambu space. The resulting retarded Green's function is a 4 × 4 matrix written in terms of 2 × 2 ordinary and anomalous retarded Green's functions (see Supplemental Information for analytic expressions). The incidence angle θ and energy ε + iδ, where δ > 0 is a small parameter, was left out until now for simplicity of notation. We neglect terms that oscillates over a length scale much smaller than the superconducting coherence length. Since we assumed ε > 0 when constructing the wave functions, negative energies are accessed from the lower elements via the relation To find the advanced Green's function, we similarly evaluate The local density of states and optical conductivity. The LDOS is given by dθ cos(θ)Im{Tr[g R (x, x, θ, ε)]}. , 