We examine various possibilities for the pairing mechanisms in the recently discovered bilayer-nickelate superconductor within the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer framework. Unlike earlier studies, where only a pure d-wave or sign-changing s-wave superconductivity instability was investigated, our study explores the possibilities of mixed-state superconducting instability such as the one involving both dand sign-changing s-waves. While assuming that the superconductivity arises because of the magnetic correlations, we examine the nature of the superconducting gap function associated density of states with various possible magnetic correlation wavevectors arising out as a result of multiple pockets owing to the multiple orbitals and bilayer splitting. We also explore the effect of differences in the nature of Fermi surfaces suggested by various studies. The discovery of unconventional superconductivity in the high-T c cuprates has ever since stimulated a continuous search to seek similar systems that can exhibit a relatively enhanced superconducting-transition temperature Unlike cuprates and infinite layer nickelate, Ni has a fractional oxidation state corresponding to 3d +7. 5 as the outermost shell configuration in the bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Therefore, La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is unlikely to be found in the Mott insulating state A relatively high transition temperature in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 indicates a critical role of electronic correlations as also revealed in several theoretical works Several approaches have been adopted to study the nature of pairing symmetry. These approaches include functionalrenormalization group studies In addition to the ambiguity prevailing with regard to the nature of superconducting gap function, there is no agreement between different studies with regard to the spin-fluctuation momenta playing a critical role in the pairing mechanism if the superconductivity is mediated by spin fluctuations In this paper, we examine the nature of superconducting gap parameter within the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) framework for a variety of possible paring wavevectors associated with magnetic fluctuations, which have been widely discussed for the recently discovered bilayer superconductors. Instead of comparing the free energies for different supercon-ducting gap parameter for different pairing wavevectors, we focus on the properties of the superconducting gap resulting from the geometrical shape of the Fermi surface by using an effective three-band model, which reproduces the essential features of the Fermi surfaces as revealed by the bandstructure calculations. It may be noted that the free energy associated with different types of superconducting gap parameters may differ only slightly because of the absence of a robust commensurate nesting vector as indicated in various studies and the interplay of multiple degrees of freedom including the electron-lattice coupling. The latter can arise due to the presence of more than one orbital and multiplicity of bands multiplied further by the interlayer coupling. In our approach, a relatively large value of gap obtained self-consistently for a given set of parameters does indicate a more stable superconducting state. We consider a minimal phenomenological three-band model for the bilayer nickelate in accordance with the fact that there are effectively three pockets in the Brillouin zone. The band-structure calculations for bilayer nickelate at high pressure, when the superconductivity appears, find that the Fermi surface (FS) consists of two hole pockets around M, one larger and another smaller. In addition, there is also one electron pocket around Γ. However, a recent calculation suggests the absence of smaller pocket around M, which can easily be handled in our calculation by simple removing the band responsible for the pocket. The non-interacting part of the Hamiltonian is given by h † ikσ and e † kσ are electron creation operators in the i-th hole band and the electron band, respectively. i, j = 1 and 2, for the larger and smaller hole pockets, respectively. The band dispersions are Here, we have defined the followings: ε 1 (k) = cos k x + cos k y , ε 2 (k) = cos k x cos k y , and ε 3 (k) = cos 2k x + cos 2k y . The dispersion is defined in a way to keep the number of independent hopping parameters as minimal as possible without compromising with the salient features of the bands found through the band-structure calculations. In this paper, band parameters are set to be t 1 = -1.0, t 2 = 0.65, t 3 = -0.14, ǫ 1 = 0.6, ǫ 2 = -1.3, and ǫ 3 = -1.2 in the unit of eV. We assume a phenomenological form of the pairing interaction as (2) The pairing interaction is repulsive in the momentum space and represents a short-range spin fluctuations. The interaction has a peak when the difference between the momenta k and k ′ is equal to Q. Information about the pairing momentum Q is often inferred from nature of symmetry breaking in immediate vicinity of the superconducting state when the concentration of charge carrier is modified just like in the high-T c cuprates or in the iron-based superconductors. For the bilayer nickelate, any concrete evidence for such a symmetry breaking in the so-called weakly insulating state is still awaited. However, according to the different band-structure calculations, several pairing momenta Qs are under consideration. Below, we examine various possible scenario and supported pairing. Another parameter κ is associated with the correlation length with the short-range magnetic fluctuations with wavevector Q where ξ Q = 2πa/κ, where a is the lattice parameter. Using the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) approximation, the superconducting (SC) order parameters (OP) along the two hole pockets and one electron pocket are given by The subscript i = 1, 2 for the two hole bands. After meanfield decoupling of the interaction terms in Eq. ( , etc. are the interaction as defined by Eq. ( ), etc. k hi and k e are the momenta located along different hole and electron pockets, respectively. The pair susceptibilities χ hi/e (k) are given by tanh( E hi/e (k) = ξ 2 + ∆ 2 hi/e (k) is the quasiparticle dispersion and N (0) hi/e is the density of states (DOS) along different hole and electron pockets at the Fermi level, respectively. ω c is the cutoff energy of the pairing potential V (q). Unlike the iron-based superconductors, where the interpocket pairing process was particularly dominant because the size of Fermi pockets was much smaller than the magnitude of Q, the situation is entirely different for the bilayer nickelate largely due to the presence of multiple Fermi pockets with one of them being significantly large. For this reason, we incorporate both the interband and intraband processes in our calculations. However, we also present the results when only the interband pairing is considered, in order to highlight the role of intraband pairing. This is particularly important as the larger hole pocket is of similar shape and size as the one and only one found in the single-layer cuprates. Throughout the paper, we fix the parameters κ = 0.1π (ξ Q ∼ 20a), ω AF M = 20 meV, and V M = 10 eV. The choice of the band parameters mentioned earlier yields N h1 (0) = 0.43/eV, N h2 (0) = 0.18/eV, N e (0) = 0.22/eV so that N h1 (0)/N e (0) ≈ N h2 (0)/N e (0) ≈ 2.0. An important difference from the iron-based superconductor is that the argument if N h (0) > N e (0) then |∆ h (k)| < |∆ e (k)| is not applicable as we shall see below. It is only for the purpose of demonstration that we have chosen an arbitrary value of the pairing strength V M = 10eV, which affects the magnitude of SC OPs and not their nature such as symmetry etc. Figure One of the nesting vectors is Q ∼(0.5π, 0) in between the nearly straight and vertical sections of the larger and smaller hole pockets (Fig. The contribution for nesting along the horizontal or vertical direction with Q ∼ (0.5π, 0) wavevector comes only from two nearly straight sections of the hole pockets. On the other hand, the nesting is expected to be improved in the diagonal direction with the wavevector Q ∼ (0.5π, 0.5π) as all the nearly straight sections can contribute (Fig. As soon as the intrapocket pairing is also incorporated, the SC gap starts to oscillate around zero along all the pockets (Fig. The next larger and possible pairing wavevector in magnitude is Q ∼ (0.75π, 0.75π) as suggested by the first-principle band structure calculation As expected, the DOS along the remaining pockets show swave character. Upon inclusion of the intraband pairing, the d-wave like SC gap is found along all the pockets (Fig. In particular, the amplitude of oscillation is now the largest along the larger hole pocket. In fact, the amplitude of the SC gap oscillation is largest of all the cases considered till now. Secondly, the gap along smaller hole pocket becomes nearly flat in smaller sections. The consequence of these gap features can be clearly seen in the DOS. Almost a V-shape gap in the DOS exists for all the pockets (Fig. Upon incorporating the intraband pairing, which may be mostly contributed by the largest hole pocket as in the case of high T c cuprates, we find that a mixed state consisting of s-wave along the electron and smaller hole pockets whereas a d-wave like gap along the larger hole pocket is stabilized (Fig. To conclude, we have examined the stability of pure and mixed superconducting state within an effective three-band model with a focus on dependence of stability on different types of pairing wavevectors associated with the magnetic correlations. Our findings suggest that a mixed superconducting state for the pairing momenta Q ∼(π, π), consisting of sign changing s-wave like gap across the electron and smaller hole pockets while a d-wave like gap along the larger hole pocket, is likely to be more stable in comparison to a pure sign-changing s-wave or d-wave. In all the cases of possible pairing wavevectors explored here, we find that there is signif-icant oscillation in the amplitude of oscillation for the s-wave gap functions originating from the presence of multiple Fermi pockets which are large in size. One important consequence of such large oscillations in the amplitude is a d-wave like behavior in the high-energy region of density of states and s-wave like character in the low-energy region. Our approach focused largely on the role of geometrical shape of the Fermi pockets on pairing mechanism and ignored the details of orbital content of these pockets. However, we do partially incorporate the effect of orbital degree of freedom, for instance, important details such as bilayer splitting of bands is incorporated into our effective band model. The role of orbital-weight distribution along the Fermi surface could be taken into account, which is unlikely to modify our main conclusions, particularly when the bands have nearly equal contribution from both the orbitals.