We investigate the magnetic characteristics and tunnelling signatures of a planar Josephson junction with Rashba spin-orbit coupling during the fusion of two Majorana vortices. By employing the topological phase diagram and conducting tight-binding simulations of the proposed device, we demonstrate that this fusion process induces a parity-dependent magnetic moment aligned with the junction axis. We further propose a method to probe the spin properties of the fusing Majorana zero modes through spin-resolved Andreev conductance measurements at the junction endpoints. To support our findings, we derive a low-energy effective Hamiltonian that provides a detailed microscopic description of the numerically observed phenomena. Our analysis enables the detection of Majorana fusion outcome from accessible spin current measurements, thus paving the way for future experimental verification and potential applications in topological quantum computation. One of the defining features of non-Abelian anyons is their ability to fuse into different particle types. For example, Majorana zero modes (MZMs), denoted as γ, can fuse to form either the vacuum state, denoted as 1, or a fermionic quasiparticle, denoted as ψ. This fusion process is mathematically captured by the fusion rule ( Over the past decade, MZMs have gained significant interest since they have been theoretically predicted to emerge in topological superconductors (TSCs) The fusion of two MZMs can result in either a fully paired state with an even number of particles, thus corresponding to the vacuum 1, or a state with an unpaired quasiparticle, ψ. Distinguishing between these two fusion outcomes will enable the demonstration of non-Abelian statistics in topological superconductors and thus open the way for realising topological qubits. Numerous proposals for realising topological superconductors have concentrated on nanowires with strong spin-orbit coupling, which are proximitized to s-wave superconductors In this letter, we focus on a recent proposal to realise topological superconductivity within a planar Josephson junction In particular, we investigate the spin properties and tunable coupling of Majorana zero modes in a planar Josephson junction with strong Rashba spinorbit coupling. We show that the in-plane Zeeman field enables control over the separation and coupling of Majorana modes, influencing their energy splitting. By deriving an effective Hamiltonian, we describe their localization near topological domain walls and analyze how spin-dependent Andreev conductance can be used to experimentally detect the spin characteristics of the fusing Majorana zero modes. To investigate the behaviour of the planar Josephson junction depicted in Fig. where θ(y) is the Heaviside step function. We also assume the system is in the quasi-2D electron gas regime, so orbital effects of the in-plane magnetic field are negligible. The Hamiltonian written in the Nambu basis The Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian for the system reads (ħ = 1): where m is the effective electron mass, μ is the chemical potential, α is the Rashba spin-orbit coupling energy and ∆(y) is the superconducting pair potential, which is approximated by The Pauli matrices σ i and τ i act on spin and particle-hole space respectively, so the notation σ i τ j is shorthand for the Kronecker product σ i ⊗ τ j . We have also defined the raising and lowering operators τ ± = (τ x ± iτ y )/2. The Hamiltonian H anticommutes with the particle-hole symmetry operator, which is P = σ y τ y K, in the Nambu basis where K stands for complex conjugation. We perform our numerical investigation on a square lattice with lattice constant a, hopping parameter t = 1/2ma 2 and the tight-binding Hamiltonian given in Equation A. As described in Ref. where v F is the Fermi velocity. As shown in Figure Let us now consider the presence of a small outof-plane field, the Josephson phase difference winds linearly in the x-direction [29] where Φ = B z LW is the flux through the junction, Φ S = h/2e and θ is a global phase shift, which generates topological domain walls at positions where φ(x) = φ ± , each binding a single Majorana zero mode. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " j z s w U l j 0 m L i i e w S g x 6 J X j x i I h 8 R V t I t X W j o t p u 2 a 0 I W / o U X D x r j 1 X / j z X 9 j g T 0 o + J J J X t 6 b y c y 8 I O Z M G 9 f 9 d n J r 6 x u b W / n t w s 7 u 3 The in-plane Zeeman coupling provides a useful experimental control for fusing topological domain walls. As illustrated in the top panel of Figure For Φ = Φ S , close to the coordinates of the topological domain wall the Majorana zero mode wavefunctions can be approximated by where x ± = Lφ ± /2π and ξ is the localisation length, which is related to the bulk topological gap. Therefore, the tunnel splitting between the zero modes can be estimated to be The coupling between Majorana zero modes γ1 and γ2 introduces the term in the Hamiltonian. Given that δE has an exponential dependence on the in-plane field B x , a clear physical observable that depends on the joint parity of two Majorana zero modes is the magnetisation of the Andreev bound states, which we may define as where |Ω⟩ is a many-body ground state of the superconductor. Since the total Hamiltonian commutes with the parity operator P = iγ 1 γ2 , |Ω⟩ must be an eigenstate of P with eigenvalue +1 or -1. Using the Feynman-Hellmann theorem, the magnetisation can be expressed as where ± is the parity eigenvalue. Since the out-of-plane magnetic field in our model is very small, the magnetisation should predominantly point in the ±x directions depending on the parity of the Majorana zero modes. Furthermore, we numerically calculate the spin of the many-body state as a function of the in-plane Zeeman coupling E Z . The spin-operator in second quantised form is given by where μ ∈ {x, y, z}, i is a site index and σ ∈ ↑, ↓. We calculate the expectation value of this operator in the even and odd parity ground states |Ω + ⟩ and |Ω -⟩, respectively. The diagonalised many-body Hamiltonian reads where ε n > 0 and N is the number of lattice sites in the system. The even-parity ground state |Ω + ⟩ is annihilated by all the Bogoliubov destruction operators bn . At zero temperature, the odd-parity state will have the lowest energy quasiparticle occupied: The expectation values + l q 0 5 J 5 s 5 h T 9 w P n 8 A i O i N S g = = < / l a t e x i t > (a) < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " where the eigenvector corresponding to the n th positive energy state is given by u . Using the property bn |Ω + ⟩ = 0 ∀n, the expectation values are The expectation values in the state |Ω -⟩ are given by In Figure The spin characteristics of the Josephson vortex energy levels can be effectively probed by coupling a lead to one side of the junction and measuring the Andreev conductance. However, when this measurement is performed in the presence of an out-of-plane flux Φ S , it fails to provide information about the sub-gap modes, as these modes are exponentially localised near the centre of the junction, as shown in Figure Figure The spin-split metallic lead is modelled by the Hamiltonian where E Z,L is the Zeeman splitting in the lead. A potential barrier of height V B is included at the interface between the semi-infinite lead and the Josephson junction. We use the Kwant toolbox to evaluate the scattering matrix of the lead-junction system at energy eV L where the diagonal blocks correspond to normal reflection amplitudes for electrons and holes of the potential barrier, and the off-diagonal blocks correspond to Andreev reflection amplitudes. The Andreev conductance G A (eV L ) is computed using the trace formula As shown in Figure where Γ is the tunnel coupling between the lead and the junction, and δ is the tunnel coupling between the Majorana zero modes within the junction. the coupling Γ is expected to decrease as the potential barrier V B is increased, while δ is expected to scale as exp(-E Z /ξ) as discussed in Section IV. In the limit of E Z ≫ ξ we can take δ → 0, resulting in a conductance resonance at eV L = 0 with peak height of 2e 2 /h, as observed in both Figures In this paper, we explored the spin properties and tunable coupling of Majorana zero modes in a planar Josephson junction with strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling. Our aim was to find experimentally measurable quantities that can conclusively determine the non-Abelian fusion outcome of Majorana zero modes. Our analysis reveals that the in-plane Zeeman coupling serves as a powerful tool to control the separation between Majorana zero modes, which in turn affects their coupling and the resulting energy splitting. We demonstrated that the magnetisation of the Andreev bound states, which depends on the parity of the Majorana zero modes, offers a concrete physical observable to probe these spin-dependent properties. In principle, the magnetisation may be probed by coupling the Josephson junction to a quantum dot with spin-polarised levels or an STM tip We derived an effective Hamiltonian that accurately describes the localisation of Majorana zero modes near the center of topological domain walls. The wavefunction overlap between these modes leads to an exponentially small energy splitting, which is strongly dependent on the in-plane Zeeman field. This tunable splitting allows for a precise control of the hybridisation between Majorana modes, and thus their fusion process, thereby enabling potential applications in topological quantum computation. Furthermore, we investigated the spin-dependent Andreev conductance as a method to probe the spin states of the sub-gap Majorana modes in the Josephson junction. By coupling a spin-polarised metallic lead to the junction, we showed that the Andreev conductance is highly sensitive to the spin polarisation of the incident electrons, especially at low in-plane Zeeman fields. This spin dependence provides a viable approach for experimentally detecting the spin characteristics of Majorana modes and their associated parity states resulting from their fusion. In summary, our work provides a detailed understanding of the interplay between spin, parity, and coupling of Majorana zero modes in a planar Josephson junction. The insights gained from our theoretical analysis offer promising avenues for the design of spinsensitive devices that can detect the fusion outcome of Majorana zero modes, which are critical for advancing the field of topological quantum computing. For our numerical simulations we use the following tight-binding Hamiltonian: where r labels lattice sites, t = 1/2ma 2 and a is the lattice constant of the simulation. The tight-binding calculations were performed using the Kwant library In this Appendix we outline the derivation of the low-energy effective model for the Andreev bound states in the junction, and the various approximations used to get there. This gives us access to the explicit form of the Majorana zero mode spinors localised to the topological domain walls. In what follows, we work in the short junction regime where the width of the junction W is much smaller than the superconducting coherence length ξ = v F /∆ 0 . We will also work in the limit where the spin-orbit momentum shift is much smaller than the Fermi momentum: mα ≪ k F . As it stands, the Bogoliubov de Gennes Hamiltonian in Equation 4 is a complicated differential operator to solve in all generality. To make progress, we will work in the Andreev approximation, which assumes that the coherence length ξ is much larger than the Fermi wavelength k -1 F . In this limit, eigenspinors will generally have a rapid oscillatory factor e ik F •r , with smooth envelope functions ⃗ u(r), ⃗ v(r) which we wish to calculate. We will also assume the magnetic length l B ≫ k -1 F . One can obtain an 'Andreev Hamiltonian' for the envelope functions ⃗ u(r) and ⃗ v(r) by Taylor expanding the Hamiltonian around the Fermi points (0, ±k F ) T , whilst dropping all terms O(∂ 2 y ), O(k 2 x ) and higher. This gives us H ±k F (k x ) ≈ -i (±v F σ 0ασ x ) τ z ∂ y ∓ αk F σ x τ z + ασ y τ z k x + E Z (y)σ x τ 0 + ∆(y)σ 0 τ + + ∆ * (y)σ 0 τ -, (A. In the continuum, the Z 2 topological index can only change when there are gap-closings at k x = 0 We begin by noticing the spin conservation law at k x = 0 [H k F (k x = 0), σ x τ 0 ] = 0, (A.33) which allows us to label wave-functions with their σ x τ 0 eigenvalues σ = ±1. Up to a normalization constant and overall phases, we obtain the following piece-wise spinor for the sub-gap states where A σ , B σ are complex amplitudes to be determined by wave-function matching and κ = √ is an energydependent decay constant for the quasiparticle wavefunction in the superconducting region. Matching wavefunctions at y = 0, W determines the relative phase between electrons and holes, A σ /B σ , which results in the following transcendental equation for the Andreev bound state energies In the short junction limit, v F /W ≫ ∆ 0 , we obtain the Andreev spectrum 