Quasiparticle relaxation in pure superconductors is thought to be determined by the intrinsic inelastic scattering rate in the material. In certain applications, i.e. superconducting qubits and circuits, excess quasiparticles exist at densities far beyond the thermal equilibrium level, potentially leading to dephasing and energy loss. In order to engineer superconductors with shorter overall quasiparticle lifetimes, we consider the impact of a proximity layer on the transport of quasiparticles in a superconductor. We find that a normal metal layer can be used to significantly increase the relaxation rate of quasiparticles in a superconductor, as seen by a large reduction in the quasiparticle charge imbalance in a fully proximitized Cu/Al bilayer wire. The mechanism for this effect may be useful for preventing quasiparticle poisoning of qubits using carefully chosen proximity bilayers consisting of clean superconductors and disordered normal metals. Quasiparticle excitations are a persistent issue in the development of several superconducting technologies The study of how quasiparticles diffuse and relax within superconductors is an old one, dating back to original works by Clark and Tinkham Instead, much work currently focuses on a variety of quasiparticle trapping schemes intended to divert quasiparticles within qubits using normal metals. Such experiments typically focus on extracting quasiparticles into discrete reservoirs which are only weakly attached to the superconductor Charge and energy imbalance, being the first observed signatures of non-equilibrium superconductivity, can provide direct access to inelastic scattering rates/lifetimes for quasiparticles in a given system. In most studies, charge imbalance is generated via injection of quasiparticles of charge q k (being always less than or equal to the ordinary electron/hole charge) through normalmetal/insulator/superconductor (NIS) tunnel junctions. In Clark's original experiment This total charge is compensated by a change in the chemical potential for quasiparticles in the superconductor where N (0) is the normal-metal density of states at the Fermi energy, which can be independently detected and compared to the chemical potential for Cooper pairs. This is often done by observing the current across a second NIS junction, which is given by where G N is the normal state conductance of the junction. From Eq. 1, this will contain contributions from all energies, being non-zero only in the presence of charge imbalance. In 2010 Hübler et al. where D(ε k ) is the diffusion constant for quasiparticles and D N is diffusion constant for electrons in the normal state In order to compare the charge imbalance relaxation both with and without the influence of the inverse proximity effect, a pair of devices consisting of 6 junctions spaced between 2 and 6 μm apart with a maximum separation of 20 μm were fabricated using a conventional PMGI/PMMA bilayer e-beam lithography process on 1um SiO x substrates. A false color SEM micrograph of the Al/Cu bilayer device is shown as part of Fig. Measurements were performed using a 3 He/ 4 He dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of approximately 19 mK. Each measurement line has 20 Ω of series lead resistance at base temperature, and is filtered with an 800 kHz low-pass π-filter. All pre-amplifiers were battery powered and housed in a μ-metal enclosure immediately beside the dilution refrigerator and connected to it via a μ-metal shielded cable. Both grounding and vibration isolation were carefully considered and were essential to obtaining low electronic temperatures given the large number of connections for each device. Both single and dual-junction conductance measurements were performed using custom voltage biased transimpedance amplifiers based on AD549 electrometer opamps with an input impedance of 10 13 Ω and a gain of 10 7 V/A. To improve the signal to noise, a combined ac+dc bias was produced via a lock-in amplifier and function generator, with ac excitation of 1 to 5 μV depending on the full scale sensitivity for a given measurement. A schematic of the dual-conductance measurement used is shown in Fig. To characterize the quality of the NIS junctions, we fit their local conductance G = dI/dV as a function of junction bias V to the conventional theory with a broadened density of states characterized by Dyne's parameter Γ, with G N , ∆, Γ and the effective electron temperature T e as fitting parameters Along with suppression of the gap, the inverse proximity effect causes a corresponding decrease in T c , shown in Fig. Next we consider the signatures of charge imbalance in dual junction experiments that measure the nonlo- cal conductance G BA = dI B /dV A for both devices. As both the injected and extracted quasiparticle currents scale in magnitude with the intrinsic conductance of the junction, we must account for differences between chosen junctions in addition to their separation to fully describe the charge imbalance effect. To do so, we employ the model of Hübler et al. or equivalently: where A and l are the cross sectional area and length of the central wire, G N A and G N B are the normal state local conductances of junctions A and B, L is the distance between the junctions, ρ N and R N are the normal state resistivity and resistance of the wire and g * is a dimensionless shape function on the order of unity associated with the BCS density of states and thermal broadening, being approximately zero for eV A < ∆ when no quasiparticle current is injected The normalization performed in Eq. 5 is convenient as it accounts for differences in the resistance of the wires, and eliminates the cross sectional area A which is harder to determine than the wire length of l = 22 μm for both devices. These normalized data are shown in Figs. In the control device we can observe a nonlocal conductance over L ≤ 15 μm. In the bilayer device, the signal is drastically reduced, being clearly discernible only for L < 4 μm. A similar suppression was observed in a second device measured at 300 mK. To extract the length dependence of the charge imbalance signal, we can perform cuts of the data at specific injector voltages and plot them logarithmically as a function of L as shown in Figs. 5a. and 5b. Plotted in this manner, the exponential relaxation over an energy dependent length λ Q * is clearly seen in the Al control device in agreement with previous reports For the control device, we can fit the data in Fig. In an ordinary superconductor near T c , the charge imbalance relaxation time scales with the superconductor's intrinsic inelastic scattering time τ E for electrons This diverges near T c at the gap closes, which in turn yields a maximum in the charge imbalance length just below the transition. For T ≪ T c , it has been argued that this expression still holds to within a good approximation due to simultaneous energy relaxation and conversion between electron and hole-like quasiparticles To understand this further, the effective inelastic rates τ -1 E for our control device were calculated from λ Q * and are also shown in Fig. where d S is the thickness of the superconductor with higher T c and L ef f /L ′ ef f are effective thicknesses and A/A ′ the area of the S and S ′ layers respectively. For a clean interface, they argue that the effective quasipar-ticle relaxation time is almost exclusively determined by the smaller of the two intrinsic relaxation times of the layers. Importantly, the basis of this quasiclassical theory should also be valid in the limit that that T c of the S' layer vanishes, i.e., the case relevant here when S' is a normal metal. We believe that this effect explains the short λ Q * seen in the bilayer device, and that the effective inelastic time for the bilayer (and consequently τ Q * ) is determined by the intrinsic inelastic time τ E of the thin Cu layer alone, which is likely highly disordered and hence has a short τ E . In this scenario, it should be possible to tune τ Q * using a extremely thin NS bilayers so as to engineer faster quasiparticle relaxation while the entire device remains robustly superconducting. This is distinct from quasiparticle trapping, and relies only on enhancing the inelastic relaxation rate in one part of the bilayer. As this yields an observable decrease in an detected charge imbalance, this may also be a promising avenue for reducing the density of the bulk non-equilibrium quasiparticles responsible for quasiparticle poisoning without substantially reducing T c or generating large normal-metal regions across a qubit. This mechanism may be especially useful in the construction of Josephson junctions within qubits, as these are typically constructed from Al and could readily be adjusted to include a normal metal layer in their design. While in this work Cu was chosen primarily for its compatibility with Al, we also note that Cu is relatively easy to deposit via electron-beam evaporation, which may overcome some technical challenges related to heating during deposition reported previously for the fabrication of Ti/Al quasiparticle traps on Josephson junctions In conclusion, we have observed a significant modification of the quasiparticle conductance within a superconducting Al wire via addition of a fully proximitized Cu underlayer. In both samples we find that the superconducting density of states seen via tunneling can be explained via a simple Dynes-type fit, albeit with some apparent broadening due to an inhomogeneous gap. Using a dual-junction conductance measurement we find the absence of significant charge imbalance in the bilayer device compared to the control device. This effect can not be explained by pure T c suppression due to the inverse proximity effect, but by quasiclassical predictions indicating a strong tunability of the quasiparticle relaxation rate in a proximity effect bilayer. Given these findings, we predict that, for a sufficiently diffusive normal metal, the proximity effect could be used to artificially enhance the relaxation rate of quasiparticles in a superconductor without significantly reducing ∆. Such enhancement may permit engineering of superconductors with lower quasiparticle populations at mK temperatures to help address quasiparticle poisoning in superconducting qubits. Appendix A: Dual Bias Measurements-In addition to the charge imbalance measurements of the main text, measurements were performed on both the control and bilayer devices as a function of simultaneous dc biases of G BA (V A , V B ). These data were taken using a circuit configuration identical to the one shown in Fig. In the control device, G BA has a positive symmetric background as a function of both V A and V B . This is consistent with charge imbalance, being enhanced somewhat in the normal state of the detector junction in the control device. In the bilayer device, the predominant behavior is anti-symmetric in both V A and V B at all bias ranges, with extrema near |eV A | or |eV B | ≈ ∆. This is also seen at the detector junction gap edges when |eV B | ≈ ∆. We do not expect this to be the result of quasiparticle charge transport, as the behavior matches well with reports by S. Kolenda et al., which they explain via the propagation of heat (generated in the normal-metal leads) across the device that in turn effects the temperature dependent tunneling across the detector Appendix B: Fabrication Details-All metalization was performed using a multi-pocket e-beam evaporator with a tilting sample stage and a base pressure of 1.8 × 10 -7 Torr or lower at ambient temperatures, with film thicknesses monitored via crystal monitor during deposition. The Cu, Ti and Al sources have purities of 4N, 4N5 and 5N respectively. To form the control device, deposition was performed of the Al at a 0 • incidence, followed immediately by dynamic oxidation in 130 mTorr of flowing 99.994% O 2 gas for 15 minutes. Subsequently, 80 nm of Cu was deposited upwards over the Al, followed by 3 nm of Ti which was found to prevent oxidation of the Cu electrodes during liftoff and storage. To form the bilayer device, an identical procedure is followed except that 3 nm of Cu was deposited before the Al at a small forward angle to prevent short circuiting to the normal metal leads. Care was taken to match deposition rates and oxidation conditions between the two devices, and the system was extensively pre-pumped to minimize active pressure during evaporation. These parameters are included in table I. Appendix C: Scattering Rate Calculations-To calculate the scattering rates obtained in Fig. to which we apply Eq. 6 using the measured ∆ and T c values reported in Figs. ħ/e 2 D wL T , (A.9) written in terms of the Thouless length L T = ħD/k B T , we find a rate τ -1 ee for our control device of only 3.0 × 10 5 s -1 . Thus, inelastic electron-electron scattering is insufficient to explain the relaxation of quasiparticles in our control device by almost three orders of magnitude. We can instead consider the Nyquist electron-electron scattering rate In light of the theory of Golubov and Houwman . Deposition conditions during device fabrication. d is the thickness determined during deposition, and P is the recorded peak pressure during evaporation.