Superconducting Microstrip Single Photon Detectors (SMSPDs) are increasingly attracting the interest of the scientific community as a new platform for large area detectors with unprecedented advantaged in terms of fabrication. However, while their operativity at the telecommunication wavelength was achieved, working beyond 1.55 μm is challenging. Here, we experimentally demonstrate single-photon operation of NbRe microstrips at wavelengths of 1.55 and 2 μm. The devices are structured as pairs of parallel microstrips with widths ranging from 1.4 to 2.2 μm and lengths from 5 to 10 μm. This innovative design may assure large sensitive areas, without affecting the kinetic inductance, namely the time performance of the detectors. The results are discussed in the framework of the hot-spot two-temperature model. Twenty years after their introduction However, this frequency range requires the use of low-gap superconductors such as amorphous ones In this work, we show that NbRe-based superconducting detectors The superconducting single photon detector (SSPD) is inserted into a bias and readout circuit with a load resistance RL placed in parallel to the device. The electrical equivalent of the SSPD is an inductor with kinetic inductance Lk, in series with a parallel block made of a resistor, Rn, the resistance of the normal domain and a switch. When the strip is in the superconducting state, the switch is closed and shunts the resistor; after the arrival of a particle, the switch opens and adds the resistance Rn in series to the kinetic inductance. Lk depends on the geometry of the device, namely width (w), length (l) and thickness (d), and on the material parameter through the London penetration depth: Moreover, the rise time, τrise, and the decay time, τdecay, of the output voltage pulse are both proportional to the kinetic inductance of the strip . A decrease of LK, produces a reduction of the recovery time and an increase of the maximum count rate of the detector. The dark count rates and mechanisms involved in the detection process in this kind of structures were preliminarily studied in a previous work The superconducting critical temperature, Tc, was resistively measured and defined at the midpoint of the resistive transition. For all devices, we estimated Tc =5.15 K, in agreement with the results reported on unstructured films For all the investigated devices the values the critical current density, Jc=Ic/wd= Ic/A at T=4.2 K are in the range 0.1-0.4 MA/cm 2 . The behaviour of II dd as a function of the temperature for the device D1 is reported in the inset of Figure In the following we focus on the device showing the larger critical current values, namely D1 (see Table The devices were illuminated through a multimode fiber that couples light from room temperature to the refrigerated part where it ends 52 mm above the SMSPDs and emits a cone of light to ensure uniform illumination. The stripes are electrically connected through a small printed circuit to a coaxial cable that goes up to room temperature where a bias-tee (Mini-circuits ZFBT-6GWþ) allows to apply a noise filtered DC bias from custom low-noise electronics. It also amplifies the SMSPD signal pulses using an RF amplifier (Mini-circuits ZFL-1000LN) before registering them on an oscilloscope or counting them. In order to avoid latching, which could affect our microstrips due to their short length, we inserted a 470 nH series inductance and a 333 Ω parallel resistor in the measurement circuit Two diode lasers at different wavelengths, λ, were used. The light emitted from the first laser has λ=1550 nm and a continuous power of 1 mW. In this case, to obtain a pulsed beam, the pulse/pattern generator mod.81104A by Hewlett-Packard has been used. The laser is fiber coupled and attenuated in two stages, the first one using an electronic variable optical attenuator by Thorlabs and the second stage of attenuation is done using a section of free space beam propagation where we can insert neutral density filters in the beam path. The other laser (FPL2000S by Thorlabs) with λ=2 μm has a control unit which allows the setting of the operation current flowing through it, and then of the output power. However, these values are an overestimation of the power that actually reaches the sample, since losses take place at the FC/PC connectors between the fiber and the insert. nearly saturated PCR is obtained at both wavelengths, probably due to the geometry of the samples, since the region sensitive to light can expand into the tapered edges at higher bias current. Better performances in this sense could in principle be achieved by reducing the operation temperature, since working below 1 K can assure higher Ic values (see inset of Fig. By assuming that the photon statistics has a Poissonian distribution, for a mean number of m photons per pulse, the probability P(n) of detecting n photons from a given pulse is proportional to P(n)≅e - m (m) n /n! By attenuating the radiation fluence to reduce the total number of incident photons on the detector the condition m « 1 (corresponding to having on average much less than one photon per pulse) is achieved. In this case it is: P(n)≅mn/n! Since the energy of the pulse is proportional to m, the photon count rate in the detection regime of n-photons exhibits a power-law dependence on the mean pulse energy where the exponent is n. Therefore, if the detection process is of the single-photon type, the photon count rate is linearly proportional to the photon flux Before commenting on the results obtained for device D1 under illumination, it is worth to review a representative of the data on SMSPDs available in the literature. Table However, to date, a saturated single photon response in microstrips at 1.55 μm above 1 K was reported only for NbN Notably, He-irradiated NbN devices, shunted with a proper resistance, demonstrated saturated internal detection efficiency at λ=2 μm Here, we demonstrated single photon sensitivity at λ=1.5 and 2 μm in pairs of short parallel microstrips made of NbRe films at about 1.6 K. We believe that our findings are, on one hand, a consequence of the properties of the electronic system, and, in particular, its higher capability of retaining the photon energy compared to the phonon system, which makes NbRe competitive with amorphous superconductors in the detection at high wavelengths. This occurrence is measured by the parameter γ, as extensively explained in Finally, our efforts are now towards a saturated photo response regime and the extension of the detection wavelength. Both these targets can be in principle achieved by reducing the film thickness and the operation temperature. In conclusion, this work demonstrates the suitability of NbRe for the realization of SMSPDs working beyond 1.55 μm at a relatively high temperature. Single-photon regime operation was clearly demonstrated up to 2 μm on a pair of parallel strips, a geometry never explored before. This innovative layout can be considered the building block of more complex designs which may result in large detection area and low kinetic inductance. Future experiments aim at optimizing the detectors for specific applications and to extend the detection capability even further into longer wavelengths. The SMSPDs were optically patterned by direct writing using a smart print (Microlight3D) starting from the as-deposited NbRe films. The AZ1505 positive resist has been spanned at 4000 rpm for 60 s on the films, to obtain a resist layer with a nominal thickness of 600 nm. This guarantees the realization of strips of reduced widths with a high degree of resolution and reproducibility. Subsequently, the samples have been illuminated by blue (430 nm) light for an exposure time of 0.3 s and then developed for 30 s in AZ351B, which has been diluted in distilled water according to a 1:4 ratio. Great care has been paid to the films exposure due to the reduced working area of the microprinter. In fact, the system can exposure areas of 1920 pixels × 1080 pixels, where one pixel corresponds to 704 nm. Therefore, the realization of large patterns requires the consecutive exposure of the different areas in which the main geometry can be divided. During this process, the movement of the projector from one point of the surface to the other is automatically implemented by a micromanipulator, allowing a shift along the horizontal direction, x, and the vertical direction, y, by following a path that includes all the dowels. In order to overcome any problems in the connection between the different parts of the drawing, the stitching technique (i.e., the partial overlapping of the adjacent pieces) is used. In the case of series of pairs of parallel microstrips the stitching used introduces a proximity effect with regions which are more exposed with respect to others. Finally, a purely physical process based on Ar ion etching has been used to remove the NbRe film not exposed. The process is realized at an Ar ion pressure of 5.1x10 -4 kPa, at a power of 4.5 W, and with a cathode current of about 2.2 A. With these parameters the etching rate is of 1nm/min. The poor selectivity of the process is overcome by the large thickness of the resist layer, which is much thicker than the one of the material to be removed. By using this technique, strips with well-defined profiles can be obtained. 