The stable Bardeen-Schrieffer-Cooper (BCS) pairing state of a bosonic system has long been sought theoretically and experimentally. Here we study the BCS state of a binary Bose gas with s-wave intra-species repulsions and an inter-species attraction in the mean-field-stable region. We find that above the Bose-Einstein-Condensation (BEC) transtion temperature, there is a phase transtion from the normal state to the BCS state due to inter-species pairing. When the temperature decreases, another phase transtion from the BCS state to the mixture state with both atomic BEC and inter-species pairs occurs. As the temperature is further lowered, the mixuture state is taken over by the BEC state. The phase diagram of this system is presented and experimental implications are discussed. Introduction-The study of superfludity and superconductivity has been a cornerstone of modern condensed matter physics. Ever since the experimental realization of BEC In recent years, the binary Bose gas has attracted a lot of attention, due to the successful experimental realization of quantum droplets In this work, we theoretically investigate a dilute binary Bose gas with an inter-species attraction and symmetric intraspecies repulsions in the mean-field stable region where the overall mean-field energy is repulsive and dominant over the LHY energy, different from the quantum-droplet case where the mean-field energy is attractive and of the same order of the LHY energy. We obtain the phase diagram of this system as shown in Fig. The gap in the excitation spectrum of the BCS state closes as the temperature decreases to a critical temperature where the phase transition from the BCS state to a mixture state of atomic BEC and inter-species pairs takes place. The mixture state is taken over by the BEC state at another smaller critical temperature below. We also discuss how to observe the BCS and mixture states in experiments near the end. 0.400 0.500 0.600 0.700 0.800 0.900 0.8 0.9 ) -1 3 = 10, where the horizontal axis is the negative of the ratio of the interto intra-species scattering lengths, n is the density of one species, and 2 )] is the ideal BEC temperature. Critical temperatures of Normal-BCS, BCS-Mixture and Mixture-BEC transitions are marked by the red, blue and green lines. General Model-We consider an uniform binary Bose gas with the Hamiltonian given by H = H 0 + H I . The singleparticle part is given by and the s-wave interaction term is given by where V is the volume, ε k = h2 k 2 /2m, c ik is the boson an- nihilation operator of the i-th component, i = 1, 2, g i j = 4π h2 a i j /m is the coupling constant between i-and j-th components, and a i j is the scattering length. In the following, we focus on the case with the inter-species attraction a 12 < 0 and symmetric intra-species repulsions a 11 = a 22 > 0 in the meanfield stable region |a 12 | < a 11 . BCS pairing state-We consider pairing due to the attractive inter-species interaction and define the pairing order parameter as where the term with k = 0 is negligible in the thermodynamical limit in the absence of a BEC and should be treated separately in the presence of a BEC. We first study the pure BCS state and set ∆ to be a negative real number without losing generality. In the mean-field approximation which include the pairing and Hartree-Fock energies, the Hamiltionian in the grand-canonical ensemble is given by n is the shifted chemical potential excluding the Hartree-Fock energy, and N is the total number operator. This mean-field Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by the Bogoliubov transformation with the quasi-particle excitation energy given by showing that the minimum excitation energy has a gap given by E 0 = μ ′2 -∆ 2 . The shifted chemical potential μ ′ and the pairing order parameter ∆ can be self-consistently solved from the following number and gap equations, where we have used the renormalization relation of the s-wave coupling constant The above equations are numerically solved, and the BCS state generally exists between two critical temperatures, T C2 ≤ T ≤ T C1 , as shown in Fig. The r.h.s. of Eq. ( showing that Eq. ( In this BCS paring state, as the temperature further decreases, both |μ ′ | and |∆| increase, but the energy gap E 0 drecreases, as shown in Fig. where the two characteristic lengths are given by ξ = (2m|μ ′ -∆|/h 2 ) -1/2 and ξ ′ = (2m|μ ′ + ∆|/h 2 ) -1/2 . In the dilute region the pair size ξ is much larger than the interparticle distance, ξ ≫ n -1/3 , indicating that there are big spatial overlaps of the pairs. The pairing state is clearly in the BCS limit, opposite to the molcular BEC limit. Mixture state-At the lower critical temperature T C2 , the energy gap preventing the BEC formation vanishes, E 0 = 0. Here we explore the possibility of the mixture state with atom BEC and phase-coherent inter-species pairs below T C2 . In the mixture state, two order parameters coexist, the BEC wavefunctions ψ 0 = c i0 / √ V and the pairing order parameter ∆ = g 12 ∑ k =0 c 1k c 2-k /V . We consider the case that the BEC and pairs are phase coherent, and assume ψ 0 > 0 and ∆ < 0 without losing generality. By including the Hartree-Fock and pairing energies, we obtain the mean-field Hamiltonian in the grand-canonical ensemble given by where ] -2μn 0 , n 0 = ψ 2 0 is the condensate density of one species, ñ = nn 0 is the atom density outside the condensate of one species, and μ ′ = μ -(2g 11 + g 12 )n as defined before. There are important differences between Eq. ( After the canonical transformation α , Eq. ( The mean-field Hamiltonian in Eq. ( From the mean-field thermodynamical potential the chemical potential μ can be obtained by the minimization condition The excitation energies are thus given by showing that the density excitation is gapped as in BCS state while the spin excitation is now gappless as found in Ref The condensation density n 0 and the pairing order parameter ∆ can be further obtained from the self-consistent condition where ∑ ± stands for summation over two spectrums, f k± = (e β E k± -1) -1 are Bose distribution functions of quasi-particles. The numerical solutions of these two equations at (na 3 11 ) -1 3 = 10 and (na 3 12 ) -1 3 = -11 are shown in Fig. The BEC, BCS, and mixture states can be distinguished in their excitation spectrum. In the BEC state, both spin and density excitations are gapless; in the BCS state, both excitations are gapful; in the mixture state, the spin excitation is gapless, while the density excitation is gapped. These three states also have differences in their topological excitations. In a vortex of the BEC state, the angular momentum per atom in the condensate is h; in a vortex of the BCS state, the angular momentum per pairing atom is reduced to half. The mixture state in the mean-field stable region is rather similar to the pairing state in the mean-field unstable region proposed for the quantum droplet In conclusion, we obtain the phase diagram of a symmet-ric Bose gas with the attractive inter-species interaction in the mean-field stable region and three pairing-related phase transitions are identified. As the temperature decreases, the system first turns from the normal state to the BCS pairing state. As the temperature continues to decrease, a phase transition from the BCS state to a mixture of BEC and pairs takes place. At a temperature further below, a first-order phase transition from the mixture state to the BEC state occurs. Our results may be tested in current experimental setups.