Topological crystalline insulators are known to support multiple Majorana zero modes (MZMs) at a single vortex, their hybridization is forbidden by a magnetic mirror symmetry MT . Due to the limited energy resolution of scanning tunneling microscopes and the very small energy spacing of trivial bound states, it remains challenging to directly probe and demonstrate the existence of multiple MZMs. In this work, we propose to demonstrate the existence of MZMs by studying the hybridization of multiple MZMs in a symmetry breaking field. The different responses of trivial bound states and MZMs can be inferred from their spatial distribution in the vortex. However, the theoretical simulations are very demanding since it requires an extremely large system in real space. By utilizing the kernel polynomial method, we can efficiently simulate large lattices with over 10 8 orbitals to compute the local density of states which bridges the gap between theoretical studies based on minimal models and experimental measurements. We show that the spatial distribution of MZMs and trivial vortex bound states 1 Coupling MZMs in a controllable way is necessary for realizing fusion or braiding operations in topological quantum computation However, the existence of crystal-symmetry-protected MZMs cannot be directly probed in experiments, the MZMs are obscured by low-lying vortex bound states We also study how the crystal-symmetry-protected MZMs in the SnTe material class are affected by the bulk states in vortex phase transitions. Previous theories conclude the existence of two MZMs in a vortex in SnTe mainly by analysing the topological surface states with small external fields In this paper, we study response of the crystal-symmetry-protected MZMs in SnTe class materials in tilted magnetic fields, we simulate the LDOS and study the competition between MZMs and bulk states using kernel polynomial methods (KPM) And we study the vortex phase transitions and evaluate the number of MZMs in tilted magnetic fields. We confirm that in an out-of-plane magnetic field, the number of MZMs changes as 0 → 2 as the chemical potential increases, in agreement with ref. Previous studies simulate the LDOS of vortex states by expanding the radial part of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle amplitudes in Bessel series The retarded Green's function is given by [81] which can also be represented by the eigenenergies E k and the eigenstates |k⟩, The LDOS for the i th basis is defined as in the following sections the LDOS is summed over different spins and orbitals, we omit the summation below to simplify the notations. Comparing with eq. 2 we have where the Dirac delta function is replaced by a Lorentz function. And the imaginary part of the energy η determines the spectral width of the LDOS. In KPM, the Green's functions are expanded in terms of Chebyshev moments, in this paper we focus on the diagonal parts which are the LDOS. First, since Chebyshev polynomials are defined in the range [-1, 1], the Hamiltonian and the energy are rescaled by the maximum energy E max , H = H/E max and Ẽ = E/E max . We want to expand the LDOS in terms of Chebyshev moments, which are defined as where T n ( Ẽ) is the n th Chebyshev polynomial. Using eq. 1, we have This moment is calculated recursively using Finally, the LDOS is reconstructed using the moments μ i n and the kernel polynomials g n which dampens the Gibbs oscillations of the partial sum. And we use the Jackson kernels the spectral density has a Gaussian widening with width σ ≈ πEmax N In experiments the resolution is lower than the energy spacing between the vortex bound states, which means a smaller number of moments N and reduces the computation time. Although KPM has been used to study vortex bound states Here we adopt a tight-binding model consisting of 3 p-orbitals for Sn (or Pb) and Te atoms respectively where j = a, c represents the anion (Te) and the cation (Sn or Pb) respectively. The creation and annihilation operators c † js (r), c js (r) compose of the orbitals p x , p y and p z . d r,r ′ represents a unit vector between nearest neighbors (r, r ′ ). λ j is the atomic spin-orbit coupling strength. σ σ σ are the Pauli matrices for the spin basis. μ represents the chemical potential. We choose the parameters m c = -m a = 1.65, t ac = t ca = 1.2 and l a = l c = 0.5. The band structure for the (001) surface is plotted in Fig. We consider an additional in-plane magnetic field B / / in the form of a uniform Zeeman term (eq. 12) and keep the vortex profile unchanged to retain the translational symmetry in the z direction, this simplifies the calculations for the vortex phase transitions in Sec. 5. In experiments, the Zeeman term is mainly contributed by the orbital effect which has the same form as the spin effect for topological surface states where E Z is the Zeeman energy and σ σ σ are the Pauli matrices. In this paper we mainly consider the in-plane component of the magnetic field to be along [110] or [100] direction. In experiments, identification of vortex MZMs is difficult because the energy levels are too closely packed. In the simulations this can be quantified by ∆ 0 /δ, where δ is the energy of the lowest vortex bound states other than the MZMs. Conventional superconductors have ∆ 0 /δ ≫ 1, then the energy spacing is approximately equal where k F is the Fermi wavevector. Since the vortex core size is proportional to the BCS coherence length in most superconductors, δ ∼ ∆ 2 0 /E F We choose lattices with 300 × 300 × 50 atoms and ξ 0 = 40, the Hamiltonian has dimension D ∼ 10 8 which is difficult to be diagonalized. The time complexity of KPM scales as O(DN ) The quality of the simulations can be checked by examining the ratio ∆ 0 /δ which can be approximated by k F ξ 0 . For μ -E D = -0.1, we have ∆ 0 /δ = 8.22 [Fig. For closely packed energy levels with ∆ 0 /δ ≫ 1, the splitting of the ZBP strongly depends on the direction of B / / and whether it preserves M T , we call this the anisotropic magnetic response of the vortex bound states. For E Z = 0.4∆ 0 , the anisotropic magnetic response is apparent even at N = 2000. For B / / along [100] which destroys M T that protects the MZMs, the ZBP moves towards the opposite direction of B / / , the splitting enlarges and the LDOS resembles a V shape [Fig. Using N = 20000, we can resolve the energy spacing between some vortex bound states [Fig. As studied in Sec. 5, the MZMs can be hybridized at low chemical potential μ < μ c in vortex phase transitions without breaking any symmetry, and we find that the magnetic response becomes isotropic at lower μ when the LDOS is dominated by bulk states. For SnTe at μ -E D = -0.10, the anisotropic magnetic response [Fig. We further confirm the isotropic magnetic response arises from the bulk states by comparing with PbTe which does not feature topological surface states. The ZBP splits for either directions of B / / [Fig. We construct the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for the vortex line (eq. 14) which is periodic in the z direction, and we define the symmetry operators in Appendix B. where ∆(ρ, θ) = ∆ 0 tanh(ρ/ξ 0 )e iθ . We clarify the number of MZMs in SnTe which features four Dirac cones protected by M 110 and M 1 10 . Since a superconducting vortex breaks mirror symmetries, the system preserves magnetic mirror symmetries M T instead. Although either magnetic mirror symmetry M T = M 110 T or M 1 10 T can protect two MZMs, in an out-of-plane magnetic field when the system preserves both, it still hosts only two MZMs. As the system respects a screw symmetry S 4z , the Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized by S 4z with eigenvalues {1, i, -1, -i} A vortex phase transition is signaled by (1) a crossing of the bulk energy, (2) appearance or disappearance of boundary states and (3) a change in the topological invariant. In Fig. Although ref. For B / / along [110], the system can still host two MZMs as T M 1 10 is preserved. We determine the phase diagram for different μ and E Z . Since both T G x and T G y are broken, the degeneracy at k z = π/a is lifted and the system can host a single MZM in between vortex phase transitions. Without S 4z , the number of MZMs ν changes at each crossing point. For E Z > 0.006, all crossing points occur at k z = π/a with ν changes by 1 [Fig. Even when M T is preserved, the MZMs can be hybridized if μ < μ c . From the vortex line energy and the winding number we conclude the number of MZMs to be ν ∈ {0, 1, 2} for B / / along [110], and ν = 0 for B / / along [100]. The conditions for the ν = 2 phase we determined may allow schemes to braid the two MZMs in a single vortex by changing the direction of the magnetic field or other symmetry-breaking fields Although we evaluated the number of MZMs in SnTe using a small lattice model, the LDOS in the last section is calculated using the same lattice model with larger N x , N y and ξ 0 , the conclusions for topology of the vortex still applies but the phase transition points (μ c , E Zc ) may vary. We have studied the topological vortex phases of topological crystalline insulator SnTe in tilted magnetic fields. We verified that two MZMs can coexist in a vortex protected by a magnetic mirror symmetry, and we pointed out that a single MZM in between vortex phase transitions is prohibited if a magnetic glide symmetry is preserved. By extending the calculations to larger lattice models, we found that the LDOS displays an anisotropic magnetic response when the vortex features MZMs. It is due to the drastic difference between the spatial distribution of MZMs and trivial vortex bound states. This anisotropic magnetic response remains robust for a range of μ below the valence band maximum and gradually disappears when MZMs diffuse into the bulk. The elongated ZBP in a tilted magnetic field that preserves M T is a distinct experimental signature of the crystal-symmetry-protected MZMs in a vortex in a topological crystalline insulator. Fig. The symmetry operators for the BdG Hamiltonian for a vortex line (eq. 2 in the main text) can be decomposed into 5 parts O ph is in the Nambu basis. O xy and O z are for the sites in the supercell for the vortex line, z = 0, 1 since there are 2 sublattices. O orb is for orbitals p x , p y and p z . O spin is for the spin basis. The particle-hole symmetry operator is where K is the complex conjugation operator. The Hamiltonian satisfies The magnetic mirror symmetry M T = T M 1 10 is written as where σ y is a Pauli matrix in the spin basis. The phase factors e ±iπ/4 are introduced to cancel the phases generated when rotating the vortex where m (xy) 1 10 transforms (x, y) to (y, x) and I 2 is an identity in the z basis. And the origin (0, 0) is the center of the lattice. The Hamiltonian satisfies , it acts as an effective time-reversal symmetry. A chiral symmetry operator can be defined by Γ = M T C, The Hamiltonian satisfies ΓH BdG (k z )Γ -1 = -H BdG (k z ) with Γ 2 = +1 For even N x and N y , the system preserves nonsymmorphic symmetries that interchanges the sublattices ) and g (xy) y transforms (x, y) to (x, -y). And G 2 T = -1 at k z = -π/a guarantees a Kramers degeneracy for the vortex line. And the screw symmetry operator S 4z is written as ) and s (xy) 4z transforms (x, y) to (-y, x). We use recursive Green's functions (C9) The energy integration can be replaced by πηd i (E = 0). Since the Hamiltonian has no z dependence, the surface Green's functions can be obtained recursively 