We numerically investigate the noise scaling in high-Tc commensurate 1D and 2D SQUID arrays. We show that the voltage noise spectral density in 1D arrays violates the scaling rule of ∼ 1/Np for the number Np of Josephson junctions in parallel. In contrast, in 2D arrays with Ns 1D arrays in series, the voltage noise spectral density follows more closely the expected scaling behaviour of ∼ Ns/Np. Additionally, we reveal how the flux and magnetic field rms noise spectral densities deviate from their expected ∼ (NsNp) -1/2 scaling and discuss their implications for designing low noise magnetometers. Superconducting quantum interference devices, better known as SQUIDs; are used extensively in magnetic sensing applications A commonly used characteristic of operation is the voltage-flux response. The SQUID array is current biased and any small applied magnetic flux δφ per loop is converted into voltage δv across the array. The conversion efficiency is given by the transfer function vφ = ∂v/∂φ. The electrical normal resistance of Josephson junctions (JJs) generates Johnson white noise, which causes the appearance of voltage and flux noise in SQUID arrays. Both the transfer function and the noise spectral densities depend on many device parameters. The problem of optimising the common dc SQUID has long been solved The current paper is organised as follows. In Sec. II we investigate the maximum transfer function of commensurate SQUID arrays with N p = 2-20 JJs in parallel and N s = 1-20 JJ rows in series for the case where temperature, critical current, normal resistance and partial inductances are kept constant. In Sec. III we explore the low-frequency voltage noise spectral density and the rms flux and magnetic field noise spectral densities, and their deviation from the expected scaling. Finally, we discuss some of the implications this has for the design of high-T c SQUID arrays. We start by discussing the transfer function of 1D and 2D SQUID arrays, since the transfer function is needed to calculate the flux noise and magnetic field noise spectral densities. We assume that the JJs of the SQUID arrays are over-damped, a valid assumption for YBCO thin film arrays at 77 K, and all arrays have the same normal resistances R and critical currents I c , that is: there is no statistical variation in the junction parameters. The time-averaged voltage, appearing between the top and bottom bias current leads (Fig. (1) Here, I c is the only intrinsic parameter as R has been absorbed by normalisation. The three external parameters are the applied temperature T , the applied total bias current I b and the flux Φ a applied per SQUID cell. The geometrical parameters are the inductance matrix L of the commensurate array, the number N s of JJ rows in series and the number N p of JJs in parallel in each row. We fix T at 77 K which is common for YBCO devices. To obtain optimal flux-to-voltage transduction, the transfer function of the SQUID array can be maximised by adjusting the external bias current I b and the external applied flux Φ a such that the transfer function is at its maximum. We denote the maximum transfer function at i b = i * b and φ a = φ * a by vmax φ . The theoretical model used here to calculate the maximum transfer functions vmax φ and the spectral noise densities is simlar to the RSJ simulation model used by Cybart et al. In the following simulations, we keep I c and L fixed while varying the array geometric parameters N s and N p . We use I c = 20 μA, which is a typical value for YBCO step edge JJs As an example, Fig. The voltage noise spectral density can be obtained from the Fourier transform of v(τ ). The one-sided voltage noise spectral density S v (f ) in dimensionless units (normalised by RI c Φ 0 /(2π)) is given by where i is the unit imaginary number. Here, v(τ ) is the time-dependent total voltage between the bias leads of the array, f is the spectral frequency in dimensionless units, normalised by 2πRI c /Φ 0 , and τ the time in dimensionless units, normalised by Φ 0 /(2πRI c ). The low-frequency voltage-noise spectral density S v (0) can be calculated from a low frequency analysis as detailed in Tesche & Clarke over time intervals ∆τ = 400∆τ and obtaining a set of N = 512 averaged voltages As the Johnson noise voltages of the JJ's are uncorrelated and their mean square deviations are identical, one would simplistically expect to obtain the scaling behaviour This is evident from Eq. 2 and 3: v(τ ) is calculated by taking the arithmetic mean of the junction voltages in parallel, and then summing up the voltage in series for N s rows. Similar to S v (0), the voltage to voltage-noise ratio SNR v is expected to follow the scaling behaviour Using our above mentioned 2D SQUID array model, we have calculated the normalised lowfrequency voltage-noise spectral density S v (0) from Eq.2 for 1D parallel arrays and 2D arrays. Figure It is also useful to plot S v (0) relative to the normalised Johnson white noise voltage spectral density S R v (0) for a purely resistive array with resistance N s R/N p . Since the de-normalised whitenoise voltage spectral density of a resistor R is 4k B T R Kornev et al. In practice, the rms flux noise S 1/2 φ (f ) is used as a measure of the device's performance. It is given by the expression Since vφ approximately scales with N s , one expects for S 1/2 φ (0) the scaling behaviour and for the flux to flux-noise ratio, SNR φ , which is the same scaling as for SNR v in Eq. 5. were obtained from Eq. 6 at φ * a and i * b . As can be seen, for the three different N s the deviations from the S 1/2 φ ∝ (N s N p ) -1/2 scaling (dashed straight lines) are similar. This is due to the v -1 φ factor in Eq. 6. A revealing measure for the rms flux noise of a SQUID array is the dimensionless quantity ξ 1/2 Φ defined as defined by Eq. 9 versus N p for N s = 1 (1D parallel arrays) and N s = 10 and 20 (2D arrays). The dashed green curve shows the scaling (N s N p ) -1/2 of Eq. 7. The result for Eq. 9, evaluated at φ * a and i * b , is displayed in Fig. It is important to note that the values (i * b , φ * a ) which maximise vφ do not minimise the voltage noise S v (0). Figure show that S 1/2 φ (0) is approximately minimised in the neighbourhood where vφ is a for the (1,2) and (1,20)-arrays. However, this is not the case for the (20,20)-array, which indicates that one cannot optimise both the transfer function and noise of the array with the same (i * b , φ * a ) values for arrays of arbitrary size. We now proceed to de-normalise the normalised voltage noise spectral density S v . This is done by multiplying S v by RI c Φ 0 /2π. Using R = 10Ω In a similar manner, one can de-normalise the normalised transfer function vφ to obtain V B = ∂V /∂B a . This is achieved by multiplying vφ by RI c A eff /Φ 0 where A eff is the effective area of the In contrast, the rms flux noise of the (1, 20)-array is 10 times higher, while according to the scaling behaviour in Eq. ( The rms magnetic field noise spectral density S Hz using pick-up coils (see for instance Drung et al. Lastly, we must discuss the case in which (i b , φ a ) are selected to minimize S 1/2 φ (0) instead of maximizing v φ . Fig. In this paper, we have shown through numerical simulations how the noise scales in 1D and 2D SQUID arrays with respect to the number of junctions. In 1D SQUID arrays we observed a ∼ N s /N 0.3 p voltage noise spectral density scaling. In contrast, the voltage noise spectral density of 2D arrays follows the ∼ N s /N p scaling closely. Though increasing N p beyond a certain value will not further increase the maximum transfer function, it further reduces the voltage noise spectral density. The rms flux noise, which is inversely proportional to the transfer function; deviates from the expected ∼ (N s N p ) -1/2 scaling for both the 1D parallel arrays and the 2D arrays when vφ is optimised. Furthermore, we have shown that one cannot optimise the transfer function as well as the flux noise of the array using the same bias current and flux values unless N s = 1. By varying the cell size for a given array (N s , N p ), one can further reduce the magnetic field noise spectral density without compromising the maximum transfer function. This indicates that there is still room for exploration in the improvement of high-T c SQUID arrays for sensing applications.