RhBi2 is a polymorphic system that exhibits two distinct phases. RhBi2 in the triclinic phase has been identified as a weak topological insulator with a van Hove singularity point close to the Fermi energy. Thus, triclinic RhBi2 is expected to exhibit exotic quantum properties under strain or pressure. In this study, we report on the emergence of superconductivity in the monoclinic RhBi2 under external pressures. The electrical resistivity behavior of the monoclinic RhBi2 single crystal is studied at a wide range of applied external pressures up to 40 GPa. We observe a pressureinduced superconductivity with a dome-shaped dependence of the critical temperature on pressure at pressures above 10 GPa. A maximum critical temperature (Tc) value of Tc = 5.1 K is reached at the pressure of 16.1 GPa. Furthermore, we performed detailed ab initio calculations to understand the electronic band structures of monoclinic RhBi2 under varying pressures. The combination of topology and pressure-induced superconductivity in the RhBi2 polymorphic system may provide us with a new promising material platform to investigate topological superconductivity. Superconductivity and topology are two intriguing phenomena of quantum condensed phases in which the former arises due to the electron pairing, and the latter emerges from crystal symmetry and atomic orbital symmetry. These symmetries enrich the characteristics of bands, either as bandgaps or as degeneracies between two or more bands that are protected. Consequently, a fundamental attribute of topological phases is the presence of a gapless state at the boundary. This is related to the topology of the bulk electronic structure and its projection onto the boundary, for example, the surface or the edge The Bi-rich part of the binary Rh-Bi system has recently attracted research interest due to the superconductivity phenomenon In this work, we present the results of a study on the electronic transport properties of monoclinic RhBi 2 single crystal under high pressures, up to 40 GPa. We show that monoclinic RhBi 2 undergoes a pressure-induced superconductivity with a dome-shaped dependence of the critical temperature on pressure at pressures above 10 GPa. Meanwhile, the experimental studies are accompanied by ab initio calculations of the phonon dispersion and the electronic band structure under pressures. Single crystals of RhBi 2 sample were synthesized via a Bi flux procedure as reported in previous work As-purchased high-purity elemental rhodium (99.9%, ChemPur) and bismuth (99.997%, Alfa Aesar) were mixed in the molar ratio of Rh:Bi in 1:4. All of the elements were loaded into an alumina crucible which was subsequently vacuum-sealed in a quartz tube under a pressure of 10 -5 mbar. The tube was heated to 1173 K for 12 h, then held for 12 h at this temperature before being progressively cooled to 753 K during 200 h. After centrifuging at 753 K to remove excess Bi, the crystals were recovered. The resulting single crystal has typical dimensions of 4 × 2 × 2 mm 3 . Scanning electron microscopy coupled with an energydispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to evaluate the composition of the RhBi 2 crystal. The single crystallinity of the as-grown crystal was determined by white-beam backscattering Laue X-ray diffraction. For high-pressure electronic transport studies, a diamond anvil cell equipped with diamond anvils of 500 μm cutlets was used. For the purpose of electrical resistivity measurements, the tungsten gasket was insulated against the electrical leads with a cubic BN/epoxy mixture. A single crystalline sample of a near-square shape with ∼ 120 μm size and ∼ 10 μm thickness was loaded into the sample chamber (diameter 200 μm and height 40 μm) filled with NaCl as the pressure transmitting medium. Four electrical leads, fabricated from 5-μmthick Pt foil, were contacted to the surface of the sample in the van der Pauw configuration. The electrical resistivity was measured at different pressures on a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) using low-frequency ac excitation at temperatures down to 1.8 K. The pressure was determined using the ruby luminescence method. In order to perform the ab-initio calculations of the electronic structure, we employ the density-functional theory, which is implemented in the VASP software Single crystal X-ray diffraction oscillation patterns confirm the high-quality of the obtained single crystal of RhBi 2 . The stoichiometry of the crystals was found to be close to the nominal composition and uniform across the sample, as revealed by an EDX analysis (Fig. As pressure is increased up to 10.6 GPa, the abrupt drop in the resistivity at temperature below 2 K indicates the possible onset of a superconducting transition (Fig. where t = T /T c is the reduced temperature and T c is the transition temperature at zero magnetic field, yields the upper critical field value μ 0 H c2 (0) = 0.71 T for the monoclinic RhBi 2 at 16.1 GPa (Fig. ( where Φ 0 = h/(2e) ≈ 2.0678 × 10 -15 Wb is the quantum flux) a Ginzburg-Landau coherence length of ξ GL = 21.5 Å. The obtained value of the upper critical field μ 0 H c2 (0) is significantly below the Pauli limit. In the absence of the experimental data on the pressure evolution of the structure of RhBi 2 , the dynamical stability of monoclinic RhBi 2 under compression was carefully examined by calculating the phonon spectrum of the monoclinic RhBi 2 structure at different pressures up to 40 GPa (Fig. To get further insight into the pressure effect on the electronic properties of monoclinic RhBi 2 , its electronic band structure was calculated at different pressures. In Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated a high-pressure study of the electrical resistivity behavior of the monoclinic RhBi 2 accompanied by theoretical calculations of the electronic band structures. The monoclinic RhBi 2 is non-superconducting under ambient pressure, however, it shows superconductivity under external pressures at above 10 GPa. At the measured pressure range up to 40 GPa, the critical temperature (T c ) of superconductivity demonstrates a dome-shaped dependence on pressures. The maximum critical temperature value of T c = 5.1 K is observed at the pressure of 16.1 GPa. The theoretical calculations of the phonon spectrum at different pressures indicate the dynamical stability of the monoclinic RhBi 2 structure over the whole studied pressure range. The observed pressure induced superconductivity in the monoclinic RhBi 2 may provide a new promising platform to study topological superconductivity.