Josephson junction field-effect transistors (JJFETs) have recently re-emerged as promising candidates for superconducting computing. For JJFETs to perform Boolean logic operations, the so-called gain factor αR must be larger than 1. In a conventional JJFET made with a classical channel material, due to a gradual dependence of superconducting critical current on the gate bias, αR is much smaller than 1. In this Letter, we propose a new device structure of quantum enhanced JJFETs in a zero-energy-gap InAs/GaSb heterostructure. We demonstrate that, due to an excitonic insulator quantum phase transition in this zero-gap heterostructure, the superconducting critical current displays a sharp transition as a function of gate bias, and the deduced gain factor αR ~ 0.06 is more than 50 times that (~ 0.001) reported in a classical JJFET. Further optimization may allow achieving a gain factor larger than 1 for logic applications. In order to meet the enormous power-consumption demand for computation, information, and communication, the microelectronics industry has embarked on a long and extremely fruitful journey in aggressively shrinking the size of logic and memory transistors. As shown in a past study However, the scaling is fast approaching atomic-scale, materials-derived limits, which will present tremendous challenges in transistor operation. Thus, exploration of novel materials and device architectures to meet future power demand is warranted. Superconducting computing is promising for low-energy, power efficient circuit applications. It has been estimated that its power consumption could be at least 10 times lower than the most efficient exascale conventional silicon computing for the same performance Moreover, RSFQ circuits cannot take advantage of vast digital logic design software currently available. Josephson junction field-effect transistors (JJFETs) have recently re-emerged as promising candidates for superconducting computing Additionally, unlike RSFQ, JJFET circuits are compatible with existing logic design software for conventional silicon CMOS. A JJFET (Fig. Consequently, the voltage-drop between the source and drain Vdc = 0; this can be viewed as the "0" state. When Vg approaches Vt, n, ξc, and Ic all approach zero. There is no supercurrent in the channel and the device is in a resistive state. Under a finite bias current Ibias, Vdc is non-zero; this can be viewed as the "1" state. For JJFETs to perform Boolean logic operations, the so-called gain factor αR = dIc/dVg × π∆/Ic must be larger than 1 Here, we propose a new scheme that can enable realization of a large gain factor αR > 1, thus making JJFETs a prime candidate for a lab-to-fab transition. In order to achieve αR > 1 with practically realizable moderate Tc superconductors, we need significantly larger γ in the channel material, for example ξc ∝ (Vg-Vt) 5 (Fig. Due to the nature of collective phenomena in a quantum phase transition, ξc can display a strong n or Vg-Vt dependence. In the following, we will demonstrate that the excitonic insulator (EI) phase transition, which was recently reported in type-II InAs/GaSb heterostructures The concept of the EI transition was proposed more than 60 years ago Recently, we reported the observation of an EI phase in a zero-gap InAs/GaSb heterostructure Below, we present results in a JJFET made of this zero-gap InAs/GaSb heterostructure with tantalum (Ta) as the source and drain electrodes. We show that the superconducting critical current in the JJFET is zero when Vg-Vt ≤ 0.23V, but sharply jumps to a finite value at Vg-Vt = 0.24V and then increases slowly as Vg-Vt continues to increase. The gain factor is calculated to be ~ 0.06. Though still less than 1, it is more than 50 times that recently reported in a conventional JJFET made of InAs quantum wells The growth structure of the zero-gap InAs/GaSb heterostructure is the same as sample B in Ref. The main results of this work are displayed in Fig. Beyond -0.47 V (or Vg-Vt = 0.23 V), the I-V curve is linear, and no knee-like behavior is observed. In other words, the critical current is zero. In Fig. Though still less than 1, the gain factor obtained is over 50 times that (~ 0.001) recently obtained in a conventional JJFET made of InAs quantum wells We add in passing that InAs/GaSb heterostructure is an ideal material system for achieving quantum enhanced JJFETs due to its high mobility, band-engineering tunability and compatibility with current microelectronics processing technologies. Moreover, its Fermi level pinning occurs above the InAs conduction band edge. Consequently, an electronically transparent interface can be easily achieved between a superconductor and InAs/GaSb. This is not the case in GaAs and Si, in which the known issue of a finite depletion length makes a transparent interface difficult Finally, we point out that the sharp excitonic insulator transition observed in other material systems, such as transition metal dichalcogenide semiconductor WSe2/MoSe2 double layers In summary, we have fabricated a Josephson junction field-effect transistor (JJFET) in a zeroenergy-gap InAs/GaSb heterostructure where the excitonic insulator transition was observed. In this JJFET the superconducting critical current jumps sharply from zero to a finite value as the gate bias is varied. A gain factor of ~ 0.06 is measured, which is more than 50 times that recently reported in a conventional JJFET made of InAs quantum wells. Further optimization may allow achieving a gain factor larger than 1, needed for logic applications. 