Two-dimensional Janus transition-metal chalcogenide -hydrides (2D-JTMCs) feature a three layered structure, with a central layer of transition metal atoms, with chalcogenides below and hydogens above. This asymmetry endows 2D-JTMCs with unique and tunable electronic, optical, and mechanical properties. In this paper, we systematically investigate two-dimensional hexagonal 2H and 1T Janus transition metal chalcogenide (JTMC) hydrides (MXH), with M = Ti, Zr, Hf, and X = S, Se, Te. These JTMCs exhibit metallic behavior with single band crossings at the Fermi level, primarily dominated by transition metal d orbitals and phonon stability, evidenced by DFPT calculations. We estimate Tc using the Allen-Dynes formula and the closing superconducting gap by solving anisotropic gap equations of the Migdal-Eliashberg equations. Calculated Tc values for these materials range from 10 K to 35 K. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have garnered significant interest due to their diverse physical properties and potential applications in nanomaterials and condensed matter physics since the groundbreaking discovery of graphene in 2004 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (2D-TMDs) comprise a close-packed monolayer of transition metal atoms sandwiched between layers of chalcogenide atoms. The positions of the chalcogenides give rise to so-called 1T and 2H structures (Fig. These materials have been intensely studied due to their flat electronic band structures Moreover, there have been many investigations of physical properties of group IV transition-metal dichalcogenides (MX 2 , M = Ti,Zr,Hf; X = S,Se,Te), for incomplete list Fig. The periodically repeated 2H and 1T phase of structure of our 2D JTMCs M XH (M = Ti, Zr, Hf, and X = S, Se, Te) belongs to the 3D trigonal space group P3m1 (No.156) as shown in Fig. The general trends are as follows; • For fixed X, a increases as M = Ti → Zr → Hf. • For fixed M, h H decreases and h H increases as X = S → Se → Te. A high density of states near the Fermi surface is often associated with an instability in the metallic state The Kohn-Sham electronic properties, including the orbital-resolved electronic band structures, the electronic density of states, the orbital projected density of states and the Fermi surface in the Brillouin zone are shown in Fig. The electronic structure of ZrSH and ZrSeH is shown in Fig. Finally, the electronic structures of HfSH and HfSeH (Figs. 2 (i)-(l)) are similar to those of TiSH, ZrSH, and ZrSeH. A very interesting behavior is observed in HfSeH, where a flattened electron band along the K to M direction results in a van Hove singularity (vHS) of high electronic density of states near the Fermi level. This is associated with the vHS, as shown in Fig. The electronic dispersion has significantly lower energy around the M-point of the 1T structure, compared with that of 2H. This indicates that the H atom might form a stronger bonding in the 1T-structure than in 2H. This should explain why h H of the same compound decreases as 2H → 1T. Also, we will see later that the in-plane hydrogen phonon mode has significantly higher frequencies in the 1T-structure than in 2H. Figures JTMCs have the P3m1 trigonal space group, and three-atoms primitive units cell. Therefore, the phonons have symmetry modes of the C 3v (3m) point group at the Γ point, and consist of three acoustic branches and six optical branches. The three acoustic branches include an in-plane longitudinal mode (LA), an in-plane transverse mode (TA), and an out-of-plane flexural mode (ZA). These are labeled as band 1-3. There are 6 optical bands, labeled as band 4-9. Their corresponding eigenvectors at Γ point are shown in Figures 4: the low mass of hydrogen means that three bands can readily be identified with high frequency hydrogen motion. The phonon spectra for the dynamically stable materials, are shown in Fig. The vibrational frequencies of the hydrogen-based modes 7, 8, and 9 are similar across our JTMCs. However, in the vibrational frequencies of modes 4, 5, and 6, there is a difference between the transition metal sulfur and selenium hydrides. If this were just a mass effect, the harmonic approximation, suggests that a factor is of the square root of the mass ratio between the two, √ 2.46 ≈ 1.57. Due to the coupled vibration of hydrogen, the actual ratio could be slightly different from this number, depending on the bonding among transition metals, chalcogenides, and hydrogen, which appears to be about 1.3-1.4. This closely aligns with the predictions from lattice dynamics theory within the harmonic approximation. Phonon spectra for stable 1T structure are shown in Figures For the unstable phonons of JTMCs, as listed in Table Thus the general trends of the Γ point phonons, ignoring the unstable compounds, are as follows; • For fixed M, the frequencies of bands 4-6 decrease as X = S → Se → Te. • For a fixed X, the frequencies of bands 4-6 decrease as M = Ti → Zr → Hf. • For a fixed M, the frequencies of bands 7-9 decrease as X = S → Se → Te. • For a fixed X, the frequencies of the band 7, 8 are highest for Zr, while band 9 is lowest for Zr. 2.4 Thermal stability of hexagonal 2H Janus phase. It has recently been shown that the 1T phase of some JTMCs is not dynamically stable without biaxial strain The MD behavior is similar in sulfur compounds, but higher temperature was require to initiate the transition. This is expected because the energy barrier is higher for than the selenium counterparts (Figures The MD demonstrates that, transformation between 2H and 1T is not instantaneous, but can occur on a picosecond timescale. We would therefore expect the 1T phase to be observed at low temperature, except when 2H can stabilized by substrates. Moreover, disorder and partial occupation of the 2H and 1T may be favoured at elevated temperatures because of the small energy difference between the two phases. Experimentally, the very first observation of a transition metal chalcogenide hydride was shown to be the hexagonal 2H phase of MoSH We investigated the phonon-mediated superconductivity of our JTMCs. The calculated characteristics of electron-phonon coupling, required to parameterize the isotropic Eliashberg spectral function (α 2 F (ω)) and the frequency-dependent electronphonon coupling (λ(ω)), are shown in Fig. By contrast, for the 1T phase, the main contribution of electron-phonon coupling results from the softening of the acoustic flexural phonon mode between the Γ and K points as shown in Figures At this stage, we summarize the trends of λ and ω log , as follows; • For fixed M, λ decreases as X = S → Se → Te. • For fixed X, λ increases as M = Ti → Zr → Hf, except for HfSH. • λ of the same compound is higher in 1T than in 2H. • For fixed X, ω log decreases as M = Ti → Zr → Hf, except for ZrSH. • For fixed M, in the 1T phase, ω log decreases as X = S → Se → Te. • Conversely, for a fixed M in the 2H phase, ω log increases as X = S → Se. From these electron-phonon couplings, we estimate the critical superconducting temperature (T c ) using the Allen-Dynes semi-empirical formula. Additionally, we also compute T c from the superconducting gap, which is obtained from numerical simulations of the anisotropic gap equations using the Migdal-Eliashberg equations. We report the critical temperature obtained from two methods: the value given by the Allen-Dynes formula (AD) and the value for closing superconducting gap. These can be taken as upper and lower bounds and give some indication for the uncertainty in our estimation of T c . We summarize the trends of T c , as follows; • In the 2H phase, for a fixed M, T c decreases as X = S → Se. • For X = S, T c decreases as M = Ti → Zr → Hf. • For X = Se, T c increases as M = Ti → Zr → Hf. • In the 1T phase, for a fixed M, T c decreases as X = S → Se → Te. • For a fixed X, T c increases as M = Ti → Zr. • T c of the same compound is higher in the 1T phase than in the 2H phase. We also computed the superconducting gap ∆ k on the Fermi surface by solving the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations. The temperature-dependent energy distribution of the gap is illustrated in Figures 5. At the low-temperature limit (T ≈ 0 K). For 2H phase, the superconducting gap values for TiSH and TiSeH are approximately ∆ 0 ≈ 4.9 meV and ∆ 0 ≈ 3.9 meV, respectively. For ZrSH and ZrSeH, the superconducting gap values are ∆ 0 ≈ 5.2 meV and ∆ 0 ≈ 3.9 meV, respectively. For HfSH and HfSeH, the superconducting gap values are ∆ 0 ≈ 4.9 meV and ∆ 0 ≈ 3.8 meV, respectively. For 1T-phase, the superconducting gap values for TiSH, TiSeH, and TiTeH are ∆ 0 ≈ 7.3 meV, ∆ 0 ≈ 3.7 meV, and ∆ 0 ≈ 2.6 meV, respectively. For ZrSeH, and ZrTeH, ∆ 0 ≈ 5.0 meV and ∆ 0 ≈ 2.1 meV, respectively. From the superconducting temperature where the superconducting gaps vanish, we also determine the corresponding ratios 2∆ 0 /k B T c . As shown in Table The computation was performed based on the density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE) We utilize the electron-phonon Wannier-Fourier interpolation method self-consistently along the imaginary axis at the fermion Matsubara frequencies ω j = (2j + 1)πT . For these computations, we employ the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package with the same computational setting as mentioned above followed by the Wannier-Fourier interpolation to k-and q-point grids of 120×120×1 and 60×60×1, respectively. The use of dense grids ensures the convergence of λ values, as evidenced by the stability of the corresponding α 2 F (ω) and λ(ω) even with increasing k-and q-point grid densities. The Fermi surface thickness was set to 0.55 eV, with the Matsubara frequency cutoff at 1.0 eV. The Dirac δ functions were broadened using a Gaussian function with widths of 0.1 eV for electrons and 0.5 meV for phonons. Finally, the Morel-Anderson pseudopotential was set to μ * = 0.1 for practical purposes. The superconducting transition temperature (T C ) was calculated using the semiempirical Allen-Dynes formula where the electron-phonon coupling constant λ can be calculated from the Eliashberg spectral function by using and the logarithmic average phonon energy can be computed by using with This f 1 f 2 correction factor will be used when the electron-phonon coupling is typically larger than 1.0. The mean-square frequency (ω 2 ) is given by 4 Discussion and Conclusions We have systematically investigated 2D Janus IV-B TMDs hydrides (2H-MXH), with M = Ti, Zr, Hf and X = S, Se, Te in both 1T and 2H forms. The electronic structures of the exhibit many similarities in their electronic band structures and Fermi Surface. These JTMCs display metallic behavior due to a single band crossing the Fermi level. The electronic states at the Fermi level are dominated by the d orbitals of transition metal. A high density of states at the Fermi Energy is observed. This is often indicative of low temperature instability to open a pseudogap, which manifests itself as superconductivity or phonon instability: both are observed for different materials in the JTMC-hydride family. Our investigation into the magnetic phases of JTMCs reveals that the ferromagnetic phase is energetically favorable for the 2H phases of TiSH, TiSeH, ZrSH, and ZrSeH, while the non-magnetic phase is most favorable for the 2H phases of HfSH and HfSeH. For the 1T phases, TiSH, TiSeH, TiTeH, ZrSeH, and ZrTeH also favor a ferromagnetic phase. These findings suggest that the predicted T c would be suppressed for those that favor a ferromagnetic phase in this study and other studies For electron-phonon coupling, the most important phonon modes are in the region near the Γ point and are related to flexural acoustic modes. These same modes are implicated in the phonon instability of some compounds. We estimate the critical superconducting temperature (T c ) using the Allen-Dynes semi-empirical formula. Additionally, we compute T c from the superconducting gap obtained from numerical simulations of the anisotropic gap equations of the Migdal-Eliashberg equations. We report the critical temperature as a range between the Allen-Dynes result and the closing superconducting gap result, representing the lower and upper limits, respectively. We also determine the superconducting gap to the temperature ratio 2∆ 0 /k B T c . These 2∆ 0 /k B T c values are systematically higher than the ideal weak-coupling (BCS) value of 3.53. This is due to the significant electron-phonon coupling (λ), indicative of strong phonon coupling in these JTMC hydrides. Typical T c for these 2D JTMC hydrides lies in the range 10-30K, an order of magnitude higher than graphene and MoS 2 . Their 2D character suggests that superconductivity could be further enhanced by twisted multilayers. The existence of two stable sites for hydrogen opens the possibility that surface may become site disordered. We can estimate this from a simple model where the energy of the lattice depends on the on-site atoms and the nearest neighbor bondings only. In our system, there are 2 different sites, i.e. H (for 2H) and T (for 1T) sites. If a hydrogen atom occupies the H site, it contributes the on-site energy E H = A. If a hydrogen atom occupies the T site, it contributes the on-site energy E T . If we set the 1T phase as a reference, then E T = 0. This can be written as where S H i is the occupancy of the site H index i, which can be 1 if it is occupied or 0 otherwise, and S T j is the occupancy of site T index j, which can be 1 if it is occupied or 0 otherwise. However, we set the energy of the 1T phase as reference. Thus, the second term vanishes. For the nearest neighbor bonding at the site H index i, we can model it as where B is the repulsive energy from having two adjacent hydrogens. We define S H i = 1 if the H site occupies by a hydrogen atom, or 0 otherwise, and S T j = 1 if the nearest neighboring T site occupies by a hydrogen atom, or 0 otherwise. In the P3m1 structure, there are precisely 3 nearest neighbors (nns). Then the total energy can be written as In order to gain further understanding of this model, and estimate the parameters from DFT data, let us give some special examples as follows; 1. The supercell of the 1T phase is shown in Figures 9. It can be readily seen that all T sites are occupied, but all H sites are empty, hence this configuration is denoted as 0H4T. This means that S H i = 0 for all i. Therefore, the total energy is equal to zero. Fig. 2. The 2H phase is shown in Figures 10. It can be readily seen that all T sites are empty. This means that S T j = 0 for all j. In contrast, all H sites are occupied. This means that S H i = 1 for all i. As a consequence, the cross terms S H i S T j are all zero. In the 2×2 supercell, there are 4 of the H sites. Hence we denote this configuration as 4H0T. Therefore, the total energy is equal to 4A. From the DFT, the energy of this supercell is equal to 0.132 eV, relative to the 1T phase. Equation 10 then gives A = 0.033 eV. Fig. 3. In the 2x2 supercell, there are 4 H sites and 4 T sites, but we have only 4 hydrogen atoms. If we put 2 hydrogen atoms into the 4H sites, there will be 36 possible configurations. However, some of these configurations are symmetry-equivalent. Thus, we study a few special examples. Let us choose a special example as shown in Figure all sites i all nns j BS H i S T j = 2A + 2B Deviations in energy from equation 10 could come from the contribution of the next nearest neighbors, three body terms or also some elastic energy due to supercell relaxation. However, the accurate reproduction of the configurations not used in fitting show that these effects are negligible. Finally, we can estimate temperature effect on ordering by considering entropy in the mean-field approximation by comparing the fully ordered 1T phase (the reference state) with the fully disordered phase If we assume that the vibration and electronic entropy would nearly cancel between the 1T and 2H phases, the remaining entropy is the configurational entropy, i.e. where c is the concentration of the H sites relative to the number of hydrogen atoms in the supercell. The fully disordered state has c=0.5, or S disorder = 0.693k B per site, or twice that per hydrogen atom. In the mean field case the relative free energy of the disordered phase is: 0.5A + 1.5B = 0.0525eV/H atom, because each atom has a 50% chance of being on an H site, and each of its three neighbouring sites has a 50% chance to be occupied. This is already a relative energy with respect to the 1T phase, so We can estimate the disordering temperature as the zero of relative free energy for the disordered phase, i.e. F = 0 = 0.05255 -2 × 0.693k B T which yields 440K. This appendix only outlines the simplest theory of the configuration entropy and for one material only. Nevertheless, it is clear that the disordering temperature is above room temperature, and at least an order of magnitude higher than the superconducting T c . It means that ordered JTMCs could be grown at room temperature and cooled to their superconducting state. • In a given compound, h H is larger in 1T than 2H.