Delamination strength of REBCO is very important for its applications in large magnet projects. This work presented the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) investigation of the microstructures of the REBCO coated conductor to understand its delamination property. We found that the low delamination strength is associated with nano-voids formed at the IBAD MgO/Y2O3 interface. He second generation high temperature superconductor (HTS) rare-earth-barium-copper-oxide REBCO tapes are excellent conductor for building ultrahigh field superconducting magnets Understanding why the delamination occurs at particular interfaces and identifying the underlying cause of a weak interface is essential to improve the transverse mechanical strength. There have been very few high resolution microstructures characterization to study the cause of delamination, and identify the delaminating interface. Therefore, in this work, we study the interfaces of REBCO multilayered structure using various transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques, with specifical focus on the possible delaminating interfaces. With the detailed The tape is 4 mm wide with 20 μm electroplated copper. As part of the incoming material quality assurance for the 40 T allsuperconducting magnet project at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, the delamination strength of REBCO are tested for every 100 -200 m piece length by 90 degree peel strength at room temperature The cross-sectional TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) on a Helios G4 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microstructures of the tapes were studied by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) using the probe-aberration-corrected JEOL JEM-ARM200cF at 200 kV. High-angle annular scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging and the annual-bright-field STEM (ABF-STEM) imaging were the two major imaging techniques used. Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectrum imaging (SI) were used in STEM mode with a probe size of 0.11 nm using Gatan GIF and Oxford Aztec EDS detector. division at National High Magnetic Laboratory, Tallahassee, FL 32310 USA (e-mail: xin@magnet.fsu.edu; junlu@magnet.fsu.edu; han@magnet.fsu.edu ). Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org After the 90 degree peel test, it was observed that both sides of the delaminated strong tape showed black color. This indicates that delamination occurred within the REBCO layer which is black. In contrast, the weak tape delaminated within the buffer stack manifested by the yellowish color on the substrate side of the delaminated tape. The yellowish color comes from the interference of the lights reflected from different interfaces of the buffer stack which is transparent. As shown in Fig. The results shown in Fig. It is important to verify whether the interfacial voids are results of contamination in the deposition process. The elemental EDS maps of the weak tape are shown in Fig. MgO 1J-ML-Or1A-05 Our microscopy analysis clearly shows that the high density nano-voids at the MgO/Y2O3 interface is responsible for the low delamination strength of the weak sample. We have noticed that these nano-voids are present in samples, and not uniformly distributed. The higher fraction of nano-voids at the interface, the weaker delamination strength of the tape. We speculate that these nano-voids originated during the IBAD MgO growth. In the IBAD process, Ar ion beam bombards the Y2O3 surface while the MgO is growing by magnetron sputtering or by thermal evaporation. When the parameters of the Ar ion beam deviates from its optimal conditions, it might result in a relatively rough MgO/Y2O3 interface. During the subsequent REBCO growth at higher temperature, the amorphous Y2O3 layer turns into crystalline, turning the rough interface into nano-voids at the interface. Our investigation (not presented here) also shows that the crystal quality of the superconductor layer of both strong and weak tapes are similar. Consequently, their superconducting properties are similar, as confirmed by their critical current (Ic) measured at 77 K self-field. Therefore, it seems that nano-voids at the MgO/Y2O3 interface of the weak sample do not compromise the crystal quality and the electrical performance of REBCO. Delamination strength of REBCO is very important for its applications in large magnet projects. To identify the layer location of the delamination, we studied the interfaces of SuperPower REBCO tapes that show strong and weak peel strength by transmission electron microscopy techniques. We found nano-voids at the IBAD MgO/Y2O3 interface which is likely the cause of the weak peel strength. Dislocations at the REBCO/LaMnO3 interface added unwanted stress and might have contributed to weakening REBCO/LMO interface.