We consider the effect of the nematic order on the formation of the superconducting state in iron pnictides and chalcogenides. Nematic order with the B2g symmetry is modelled as the d-type Pomeranchuk instability and treated within the mean-field approach. Calculated nematic order parameter depends on the nematic interaction coefficient and abruptly changes with the coefficient's increase. The superconducting solution is obtained within the spin-fluctuation pairing theory. We show that the leading solution in the nematic phase has a sπ± structure. From the critical temperature Tc estimations, we conclude that the nematic superconducting state of the sπ± type is more favorable than the usual s± and d x 2 -y 2 type states appearing in the absence of the nematicity. 1. Introduction. Complicated systems are often possess several concurrent or coexisting long range orders of different nature. Iron pnictides and chalcogenides, quasi-two-dimensional systems, are an example. Multiorbital effects there lead to the appearance of an unconventional superconductivity with the order parameter structure of the s ± type that has the opposite signs at different Fermi surface sheets, still belonging to the A 1g representation and being the extended s-wave symmetry Experimentally discovered disparity in the resistance along the orthogonal a and b directions in the iron plane in the tetragonal phase of the iron pnictides Since with the lowering temperature nematic transition precedes the magnetic or superconducting transitions 2. Model. We start with the Hamiltonian of the five-orbital model for iron pnictides H 5-orb where d † klσ (d klσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for the electron with the momentum k, spin σ, and orbital index l, ε ll ′ k is the matrix of the single-electron energies with the chemical potential being subtracted (diagonal terms) and hopping integrals (off-diagonal elements), which values are presented in Ref. To describe the nematic state, we follow the meanfield approach from Refs. where n klσ = d † klσ d klσ is the number of particle operator, V nem ll ′ are the matrix elements of the interaction, f kl is the form factor. Following Refs. To proceed with the mean-filed theory, we write the expression n klσ = ⟨n klσ ⟩ + δn klσ with ⟨n klσ ⟩ being the average of the occupation number and the deviation from the average δn klσ considered to be small. Inserting the expression into the Hamiltonian H nem , discarding the second order terms by the deviation from the average, and omitting a constant energy shift that would be absorbed into the chemical potential, we derive Here we introduced the nematic phase order parameter Note that due to the formulation of the two-particle nematic Hamiltonian H nem as the density-density interaction, the mean-field Hamiltonian H M F nem does not contain the interorbital hoppings and describes the changes of the particle density at an orbital l. 3. Nematic order parameter. As the first step, we find the solution for the nematic order parameter Φ l . To do this, we self-consistently calculate both Φ l from Eq. ( Fermi surface and energy dispersion in two different regions are shown in Fig. Fig. where Ω is the Matsubara frequency, β = 1/T is the inverse temperature, T τ is the time ordering operator with respect to the Matsubara time τ , S + and S -are the spin operators. Averaging is done over the interacting ensemble. In the zeroth order we have Here ω n is the Matsubara frequency, μ and ν are the band indices, φ μ km are the coefficients of the band to orbital transformation, that is , where b kμσ is the electron annihilation operator in the band basis where the Green's function is diagonal, (q, Ω) with the Hamiltonian H 0 = H 5-orb +H M F nem and than we get χ ll ′ mm ′ (q, Ω) within the random phase approximation (RPA). Ladder approximation, RPA, is constructed with the onsite Coulomb interaction, namely, intraorbital Hubbard U , interorbital U ′ , Hund's exchange J, and the pair hopping J ′ where is the number of particles operator on the lattice site f . Sum of the ladder diagrams that include the electron-hole bubble in the matrix form χ(0) (q, Ω) gives the following expression for the spin susceptibility matrix in the RPA where Î and Ûs are the unity matrix and the interaction matrix in the orbital basis given in Ref. Later we present results for the physical susceptibility U=1.3 eV U'=0.9 eV J=J'=0.2 eV χ(q,ω=0), states/eV q Reχ +-, V nem =2.8 eV Reχ +-, V nem =0 0 5 10 15 20 Fig. χ(q, Ω) = l,m χ llmm (q, Ω) analytically continued to the real frequency axis ω (iΩ → ω + iδ, δ → 0+). Breaking of the Fermi surface symmetry leads to the lowering of the symmetry to C 2 in the dependence of the spin susceptibility on the wave vector q. This is shown in Fig. 4. Superconducting state. On the background of the nematic state, we seek for a superconducting state by solving a linearized equation for the order parameter ∆ k = ∆ 0 g k written as an equation on the eigenvalues λ and eigenvectors g k where v F k ′ is the Fermi velocity, the contour integral is taken over the parallel to the ν-th Fermi surface sheet component of momentum k ′ || , and the band μ is unambiguously determined by the location of the momentum k. Positive λ's correspond to attraction and the maximal one of them represents the state with the highest critical temperature T c , i.e., the most favorable superconducting state with the corresponding gap function determined by g k . Cooper vertex Γμν (k, k ′ ) depends on the Coulomb parameters U , U ′ , J, J ′ and on Reχ(q, ω = 0), see Ref. For the set #16 (U = 1.3, J = 0.2) in Figs. For the current set of interaction parameters, d x 2 -y 2 and s ± type solutions compete in the region I (i.e., they have close values of λ), however, d x 2 -y 2 type is winning. In the nematic phase, region II, we can not use the classification of the gaps according to the irreducible representations of the tetragonal phase. Still, we call the state with the larger value of λ in Fig. We considered the emergence of the superconductivity on the background of the nematic order in the five-orbital model for iron pnictides and chalcogenides. Nematic order is treated within the mean-field theory with the nematic interaction coef-ficient V nem . Self-consistently calculated nematic order parameter Φ l is zero (region I) for values of V nem from zero to some critical value, after which the Φ l component corresponding to the orbital l = d xy unevenly becomes finite (region II). Superconducting solution within the spin-fluctuation paring theory is found in both regions, I and II. In the absence of the nematic order (region I), the superconducting order parameter has the s ± and d x 2 -y 2 type structures for the two leading competing solutions. In the nematic phase (region II), two leading solutions are of s π± and d xy types, moreover, first one always wins. Estimation of the corresponding critical temperatures T c leads to the conclusion that the nematic superconducting state with the s π± structure will have the higher T c than the usual s ± and d x 2 -y 2 states with the unbroken C 4 symmetry. Funding. This work was supported within the state assignment of Kirensky Institute of Physics. Conflict of interest. The authors declare no conflict of interest. Pis'ma v ZhETF