Developing strategies to systematically increase the critical current, the threshold current below which the superconductivity exists, is an important goal of materials science. Here, the concept of quantum phase transition is employed to enhance the critical current of a kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5, which exhibits a charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity that are both affected by hydrostatic pressure. As the CDW phase is rapidly suppressed under pressure, a large enhancement in the self-field critical current (I c,sf ) is recorded. The observation of a peak-like enhancement of I c,sf at the zero-temperature limit (I c,sf (0)) centred at p * ≈ 20 kbar, the same pressure where the CDW phase transition vanishes, further provides strong evidence of a zero-temperature quantum anomaly in this class of pressure-tuned superconductor. Such a peak in I c,sf (0) resembles the findings in other well-established quantum-critical superconductors, hinting at the presence of enhanced quantum fluctuations associated with the CDW phase in CsV3Sb5. Quantum phase transition, a phase transition at absolute zero temperature triggered by a non-thermal tuning parameter, can stabilize exotic phases such as superconductivity The recently discovered family of kagome superconductors AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) undergoes a charge density wave (CDW) transition at around 100 K, and a superconducting transition below 10 K . Particularly in CsV 3 Sb 5 , it has been pointed out that the hybridization between V and Sb orbitals plays a critical role in mediating the CDW phase transition In this work, we measure the self-field transport critical current (I c,sf ), i.e. transport critical current without applying an external magnetic field, over a wide pressure range straddling across p * . We observe a drastic enhancement of the critical current when the same set of samples was tuned by pressure. The use of the same samples eliminates extrinsic factors such as the uncertainty in the geometric factor or random potentials due to impurities. In particular, the zero temperature limit of I c,sf , denoted as I c,sf (0), of CsV 3 Sb 5 peaks sharply at p * . This observation further confirms the occurrence of a quantum phase transition beneath the superconducting dome. Together with existing experimental data from other probes, our work establishes access to a quantum phase transition as a promising route to optimize I c . Finally, we show that the measurement of I c,sf provides a systematic means to extract key superconducting parameters of CsV 3 Sb 5 under pressure. tance for CsV 3 Sb 5 (S1), which has a thickness of 225 nm, at various pressures. At ambient pressure, a kink is visible at T CDW = 80 K, corresponding to the CDW transition well-documented in the literature for thin CsV 3 Sb 5 flakes Under pressure, the anomaly associated with the CDW transition is weakened. To track T CDW , we follow the peak in dρ/dT . At 12.1 kbar, T CDW decreases to 34 K. Concomitantly, T c first decreases under pressure then begins to increase. The data for another flake (CsV 3 Sb 5 (S2)) show a similar pressure dependence. Combining all data from S1 and S2, a T -p phase diagram can be constructed (Figure Based on the T -p phase diagram constructed, we measure a series of voltage-current (V -I) curves in the superconducting state at various pressures. Representative data are shown in Figure Following the same practice as our earlier work To have a detailed examination of the pressure dependence of I c,sf (T ), the extracted I c,sf (T ) from rapidly and then saturates when the temperature is sufficiently low. I c,sf (T ) curves at all pressures are qualitatively similar. Quantitative information can be obtained by noting the physical significance of I c,sf . A series of studies The thickness 2b of S1 and S2 are 225 nm and 180 nm, respectively. Furthermore, the penetration depth at the 0 K limit, λ(0), is approximately 450 nm As shown in Figure The peaking of the critical current has been observed and discussed alongside quantum criticality in diverse systems. In heavy fermion CeRhIn 5 , a peak shows up in the pressure dependence of zero-field I c (0) at a hidden quantum critical point (QCP), where a continuous antiferromagnetic transition is suppressed Recently, quantum oscillation studies straddling p * have detected an enhancement of the quasiparticle effective masses (m * ) near p * , highlighting the presence of fluctuations associated with the destabilization of the charge-ordered phase. Because λ -2 = ρ s μ 0 e 2 /m * , the enhancement of m * near p * implies a smaller λ -2 and a suppressed I c,sf . To reconcile with our data, the superfluid density ρ s must also increase near p * , and significantly more rapidly than m * . Therefore, it is the increase of the ratio (ρ s /m * ) that contributes to the peak in critical current. Indeed, the enhancement of (ρ s /m * ) at the critical hole concentration 0.19 has long been recognized in cuprates In summary, we have explored the possibility of enhancing the critical current of CsV 3 Sb 5 by driving the system through a quantum phase transition. We have investigated two CsV 3 Sb 5 thin flakes with thicknesses of 225 nm and 180 nm via electrical transport measurements, and our temperature-pressure phase diagram reveals the rapid suppression of the CDW phase under pressure with T c peaking near the CDW suppression pressure p * ≈ 20 kbar. Based on the temperature-pressure phase diagram, we have performed the self-field critical current measurements spanning a wide pressure range that includes p * . The superconducting gap ∆ 0 , extracted from a single s-wave gap fit, exhibits non-monotonic behaviour but closely tracks the pressure dependence of T c . Notably, the critical current exhibits a substantial enhancement of at least 10-fold near p * compared with that at ambient pressure. The fact that the critical current at the zero-temperature limit shows a peak at p * implies the presence of a quantum phase transition associated with the fading CDW phase in CsV 3 Sb 5 , which is consistent with other experimental data based on normal state properties High-quality single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 were synthesized from Cs (ingot, 99.95 %), V (powder, 99.9 %) and Sb (shot, 99.9999 %) using self-flux method similar to Refs. We employed the "device-integrated diamond anvil cell" (DIDAC) technique We used the photolithography technique and physical vapour deposition (PVD) coating to attach a pattern of the six-probe Au microelectrodes on the culet of a diamond anvil. The alumina/Stycast-1266 mixture was placed between the stainless steel gasket and the microelectrodes as the insulating layer. The exfoliated CsV 3 Sb 5 thin flake was then transferred onto the center of the culet. After that, the CsV 3 Sb 5 thin flake was encapsulated by a h-BN thin film to protect the sample from oxidization. A top view of S1 positioned on the anvil culet can be seen in Figure The electrical resistance and self-field critical current measurements were performed by a standard four-terminal configuration in the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) by Quantum Design and a dilution refrigerator by Bluefors. We used the six-probe Au microelectrodes mentioned above to build a robust electrical contact with the CsV 3 Sb 5 thin flake. The voltage-current (V -I) curves were measured using a Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter in conjunction with a Keithley 6221 current source operating in the pulsed delta mode. The pulsed current had a duration of 11 ms, with a pulse repetition time of 1 s.