The inner and outer cores of neutron stars are believed to contain type-I and -II proton superconductors, respectively. The type-I superconductor exists in an intermediate state, comprising macroscopic flux-free and flux-containing regions, while the type-II superconductor is flux-free, except for microscopic, quantized flux tubes. Here, we show that the inner and outer cores are coupled magnetically, when the macroscopic flux tubes subdivide dendritically into quantized flux tubes, a phenomenon called flux branching. An important implication is that up to ∼ 10 12 (r 1 /10 6 cm) erg of energy are required to separate a quantized flux tube from its progenitor macroscopic flux tube, where r 1 is the length of the macroscopic flux tube. Approximating the normal-superconducting boundary as sharp, we calculate the magnetic coupling energy between a quantized and macroscopic flux tube due to flux branching as a function of, f 1 , the radius of the type-I inner core divided by the radius of the type-II outer core. Strong coupling delays magnetic field decay in the type-II superconductor. For an idealised inner core containing only a type-I proton superconductor and poloidal flux, and in the absence of ambipolar diffusion and diamagnetic screening, the low magnetic moments (≲ 10 27 G cm 3 ) of recycled pulsars imply f 1 ≲ 10 -1.5 . Neutron stars are believed to contain a type-II proton superconductor, located mainly in the outer core, and a type-I proton superconductor, located mainly in the inner core ★ E-mail: kokhongt@student.unimelb.edu.au † E-mail: amelatos@unimelb.edu.au Magnetic field lines cannot terminate at the type-I-II interface because of Gauss' law for magnetism. Hence it is natural to ask how the poloidal fluxes in the type-I and -II superconductors are connected. Recent studies have shown that type-1.5 proton superconductivity is expected at the type-I-II interface due to the interpenetrating and strongly interacting neutron superfluid; the neutrons establish a second attractive length-scale for the quantized flux tubes Flux branching has been observed terrestrially near the surface of type-I superconductors with γ > 0 in a uniform, applied magnetic field A striking similarity exists between the boundary of a type-I superconductor in a uniform, applied magnetic field and the type-I-II interface. Bunched-up field lines are preferred inside the type-I superconductor, while more uniform field lines are preferred outside the type-I superconductor and inside the type-II superconductor. Drawing intuition from flux branching in type-I superconductors immersed in a uniform, applied field, one expects flux branching to occur also at the interface of a type-I and -II superconductor. Conversely, if flux branching does not occur, are the macroscopic normal regions and quantized flux tubes separately closed, so that the type-I and -II superconductors are magnetically disconnected The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the canonical flux branching formalism introduced by In this section, we apply the sharp-interface model introduced by The sharp-interface model can be derived from the Ginzburg-Landau model in the limit that the coherence length, ξ, and the London penetration depth, λ, are much less than the size of the normal and superconducting regions in cgs units, where V is the volume of the normal region and S and δ are the surface area and the scaled surface energy of the normalsuperconducting boundary, with δ = 8πH c -2 γ ≈ ξ -λ We follow where a 1 and a 2 denote the cylindrical radius of the trunk and any of the four branches, respectively. (Recall that we have B = H c uniformly in a normal region.) Assuming that the branches extend nearly parallel to the symmetry axis of the trunk (i.e. θ 1 ≪ 1, where θ 1 is the branch half-opening angle labelled in Figure and respectively, where l 1 is the vertical height of the whole cell, x 1 is the vertical height of the branches, and we have d 1 = x 1 tan θ 1 (half the horizontal distance between the axis of the trunk and a branch), as in Figure where δ 1 refers to δ in the specific cell. What is the total surplus free energy of a flux tree with an arbitrary number of branching cells? By way of illustration, consider (4 N -1 -1)/3 copies of the arrangement in Figure To find the total surplus free energy of a flux tree, we must first find δ(z). We have δ(z) ≈ ξ -λ qualitatively where -δ 0 ∼ 10 -12 cm is the scaled surface energy at z = L 2 /2. We make a further approximation, and discretise δ(z) according to where δ n is the uniform value of δ(z) in the n-th branching cell, and z n is the z-coordinate of the base of the n-th branching cell. Flux conservation implies where a n is the cross-sectional area of a branch at the n-th level, and n = 1 is the bottom level. Applying (1), the total surplus free energy of the flux tree (summed over N -1 branching levels) is Figure as seen in Figure (10) Before calculating F, we discuss the expected size of the macroscopic normal regions in a neutron star, i.e. the trunks in Figures In this paper, we study the conditions under which flux branching occurs in the type-I superconductor in a neutron star. Specifically, we seek to identify the conditions under which the free energy turns negative. From ( with N n=1 l n = L 1 /2 and x n ≤ l n . From (1), the surplus free energy, F II , of the 4 N -1 terminating rectilinear microscopic normal regions (i.e. quantized flux tubes) in the type-II region is given by The total surplus free energy, F b , of the flux tree in the type-I region concatenated with the 4 N -1 branches in the type-II region is We can minimize equation ( which complicates the minimization. As a first pass, we do not minimize (13). Instead, we guess a particular choice of l n and x n and calculate F b . We then compare F b with the free energy without flux branching, F nb , which we specify below. We expect branching to be more energetically favorable in regions with lower δ(z), so we choose to ensure that most branching occurs near the type-I-II interface. For simplicity, we choose x n = l n /2. In the regime 4 N -1 ≫ 1, as in neutron stars, equation ( In this paper, we assume that the flux trees are as wide as they can be without overlapping, yielding where N ft is the number of flux trees implied by flux conservation, given by Equations ( Is flux branching favored over other plausible configurations? Suppose the magnetic topology between the type-I and -II superconductors is open, i.e. every field line in the type-I region also threads the type-II region. In that case, one plausible alternative without flux branching is where the entire type-I and -II superconductors are filled with m rectilinear normal regions 1 of a fixed radius, a 1 / √ m (from flux conservation), and length (L 1 + L 2 )/2, with 1 ≤ m ≤ 4 N -1 . From (1), the free energy without flux branching, F nb , is given by which evaluates to We seek to compare F b with F nb for anything between m = 1 macroscopic flux tube to m = 4 N -1 quantized flux tubes. Comparing ( If, instead, the magnetic topologies of the type-I and -II superconductors are separately closed, the situation is more complicated. One must study ring-shaped macroscopic regions and quantized flux tubes and their stabilities To gain some intuition from (21), we first consider a special case where the type-I and -II superconductors fill the entire core, with L 1 = L 2 ∼ 10 6 cm. In this example, (21) simplifies to For the three representative examples (N, a 1 ) = (28, 10 -3 cm), (38, 1 cm), (48, 10 3 cm), d 1 = 19a 1 and δ 0 = -10 -12 cm, we obtain ΔF < 0, such that branching is favored. We find that the magnitude of the first term greatly exceeds the magnitude of the second term in (22). More generally, for all m and (L 1 + L 2 )/2 ∼ 10 6 cm, we obtain ΔF < 0 for 8.6 × 10 -5 ≲ L 2 /L 1 ≲ 1.4 × 10 4 , 2.7 × 10 -6 ≲ L 2 /L 1 ≲ 1.4 × 10 In this section, we explore one important consequence of flux branching, namely the coupling of quantized flux tubes in the type-II superconductor with macroscopic flux tubes in the type-I superconductor. Such coupling affects the magnetic evolution of the star. Flux branching couples quantized flux tubes (in the type-II superconductor) with a macroscopic flux tube (in the type-I superconductor) of the same flux tree. For a quantized flux tube to move freely in the type-II superconductor, the flux tube has to either (i) separate from the flux tree, or (ii) drag the entire flux tree with 4 N -1 -1 other flux tubes along with it. Option (i) increases S in the type-I superconductor and costs energy, because type-I superconductors have δ > 0. We define the coupling energy, E c , as the energy required to separate a quantized flux tube from the flux tree, as in option (i). Option (ii), on the other hand, is less probable than option (i). A quantized flux tube is unlikely to drag 4 N -1 -1 ≫ 1 other flux tubes along with it, as other flux tubes may be pinned to inhomogeneities such as neutron superfluid vortices Let us calculate the energy, E c , required to separate a quantized flux tube from the flux tree in the type-I superconductor, as in option (i). Specifically, let us calculate E c as a function of the flux tree's location and the type-I superconductor's size. Suppose the inner core of the star is a type-I superconductor containing flux trees, and the outer core is a type-II superconductor containing quantized flux tubes concatenated with the flux trees, as in Section 2. Define spherical (r, θ, φ) and cylindrical (ρ, φ, z) coordinates, where the unit vector ì e z is parallel to the branching axis and the magnetic dipole moment, ì μ, of the star, and ì e r is the radial unit vector along which δ(r) = 2δ 0 (r -r 1 )/r 2 varies 2 . Here 0 ≤ r ≤ r 1 and r 1 ≤ r ≤ r 2 are the inner (type-I) and outer (type-II) cores of the star, respectively. Consider the following separation scenario: the macroscopic flux tube (trunk) of a flux tree at ρ = ρ t , which we illustrate in Figure and V remains unchanged. The change in S per unit length of the flux tree is given by implying Δs > 0. Applying (1) to the separation scenario, we obtain where we write f 1 = r 1 /r 2 , f ρ = ρ t /r 1 , ρ t ì e ρ points from the centre of the star to the centre of the intersection between the flux tree and the equatorial plane, and we define with 0 ≤ Λ( f ρ ) < 1. The coupling energy spans the range 0 ≲ E c /(1 erg) ≲ 10 13 for typical neutron star parameters, depending on the geometry and relative size of the type-I and -II regions. For example, if the type-I and -II regions are of the same size (i.e., f 1 = 1/2) and one has f ρ ≪ 1, equation ( (28) If the type-I region is small (i.e., f 1 → 0), then one has If the flux tree is near the edge of the type-I region (i.e., f ρ → 1), one has The magnetic dipole moment, ì μ, can be inferred from the spin-down rate (magnitude of ì μ) and polarization swing (direction of ì μ) of a rotation-powered pulsar. In principle, it can be related to the magnetic field inside the star, although the relation is somewhat uncertain in the presence of a toroidal field component In the outer core of a neutron star, the pinning of quantized proton flux tubes to the neutron superfluid vortices (and vice-versa) has been studied extensively in the literature How does E c in Section 3 compare to the vortex-flux-tube pinning strength, E pin ? The neutron superfluid and proton superconductor interact strongly via density and gradient (entrainment) coupling Quantized flux tubes in the outer core of a neutron star fall into three categories: (i) isolated, i.e. they thread the type-II superconductor only and are not part of a flux tree; (ii) weakly coupled to a flux tree, i.e. E c < E pin ; and (iii) strongly coupled to a flux tree, i.e. E c > E pin . Only categories (i) and (ii) can be pushed around by moving vortices; category (iii) is unaffected. Without a mechanism for moving an entire flux tree to the crust, where Ohmic decay occurs faster, the flux remains frozen within the inner core The frozen magnetic field in the core may be the source of magnetic moments measured in recycled pulsars with a history of accretion from a binary companion. Suppose first that all quantized flux tubes with E c ( f 1 , f ρ ) < E pin are dragged out by vortices during the spindown phase before accretion begins. The remaining flux trees make up the residual magnetic field. Figure Then, for μ recyc ≲ 10 27 G cm 3 and μ new ∼ 10 30 G cm 3 , equations ( μ recyc 10 27 G cm 3 1/2 μ new 10 30 G cm 3 -1/2 r 2 10 6 cm cm. (33) At ρ t = r f , we have E c = E pin ; flux trees with ρ t > r f are weakly coupled to their quantized flux tubes. Hence, we can substitute (33) into (30) to calculate r 1 > r f . We find That is, most non-isolated quantized flux tubes are strongly coupled to flux trees, and r 1 ≈ r f . The above calculations regarding flux expulsion from the core are, of course, highly idealised. In this section, we discuss some of the idealisations. Chief among them are the assumptions made about the macroscopic evolution and structure of the magnetic field. We neglect expulsion of the magnetic field from the proton superconductor in the inner core by ambipolar diffusion Additionally, the tangled poloidal and toroidal flux tubes may allow for easier expulsion of vortices through the multi-site unpinning mechanism termed "slithering" A vortex can also pin to larger flux tubes near the type-I-II interface or in the type-I region. For a flux tube with radius equal to a 1 /2 M -1 to break off the trunk, where M is some integer with 1 ≤ M ≤ N, equation ( Larger flux tubes (with smaller M) separating from the trunk have larger Δs, i.e. larger flux tubes require more energy to separate from their trunks. A vortex can also pin to the trunk itself (largest flux tube in a flux tree), whereupon no flux tube separation needs to occur, for the flux tree to be expelled. However, a vortex is unlikely to drag out an entire flux tree with 4 N -1 -1 quantized flux tubes, as the quantized flux tubes are pinned to other vortices in the outer core The analysis of the collective interaction between vortex avalanches and flux trees for ì μ ∦ ì Ω is a challenging problem which should be studied with the help of numerical simulations and lies outside the scope of this paper. In this paper, we calculate the free energy of macroscopic flux tubes branching into quantized flux tubes, as an idealised description of the magnetic coupling between the adjacent type-I and -II proton superconductors in the core of a neutron star. The study introduces a spatially varying normal-superconducting surface energy, γ, to model the type-I-II superconducting interface, extending previous studies where γ is constant for a type-I superconductor in an externally applied and uniform magnetic field In Section 3, we calculate E c , the energy required to separate a quantized flux tube from its flux tree. The result is 0 ≲ E c /(1 erg) ≲ 10 13 . As a result, the magnetic coupling between most quantized and macroscopic flux tubes of the same flux tree greatly exceeds the strength of vortex-flux-tube pinning (i.e. E c ≫ E pin ), impeding magnetic decay and freezing flux trees in the core. If this phenomenon causes the observed magnetic moments of recycled pulsars, one can infer the radius of the type-I superconductor within which frozen flux trees are found to be r 1 ∼ 10 4.5 μ recyc 10 27 G cm 3 1/2 μ new 10 30 G cm 3 -1/2 r 2 10 6 cm cm, (36) subject to the approximations discussed in Section 4.3 and elsewhere. Strongly coupled (E c ≫ E pin ) quantized flux tubes are unaffected by vortices during spin down, resulting in μ(t) ̸ ∝ Ω(t). That is, a neutron star can spin down without significant magnetic decay; only isolated and weakly coupled (E c ≪ E pin ) quantized flux tubes can be dragged by vortices to the crust for Ohmic decay. In reality, of course, outwardly moving vortices may not remove all isolated and weakly coupled quantized flux tubes from the outer core during spin down. If some isolated quantized flux tubes fail to be removed by vortices during spin down, the region 0 ≤ r ≤ r f defined by (33) contains isolated quantized flux tubes, and r 1 from (36) represents an upper limit. There is a complex interplay between vortex and flux tube dynamics, influenced by factors such as interaction strength and tangled geometries We emphasize that the treatment in this paper is highly idealized and relies on the following assumptions: (i) the normalsuperconducting boundary is sharp, and flux-containing normal regions (flux tubes) do not interact MNRAS 000, 1-10 (2024) Recall that the flux expulsion time-scale is greater than the nucleation time-scale and the age of the star In Section 2, the branching axis and the axis along which δ varies are the same. Here, we consider a more general scenario where the two axes are not necessarily the same, using spherical and cylindrical coordinates. In these coordinates, we see that the analysis performed in Section 2 is a special case where the flux tree axis is located at ρ = 0.MNRAS 000,1-10 (2024) 