We report a significant enhancement of superconducting transition temperature (Tc) of transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductor NbTe2 from 0.56 K to 2.8 K. Detailed x-ray structure analysis reveals that our Tc-enhanced sample has an anisotropic lattice distortion inducing ~1% expansion of the unit cell volume and multi-domain formation in the ab planes. Despite the unit cell expansion, the distorted 1T structure, closely related to the charge density wave (CDW) order in this material, persists. Hall measurements show almost identical behaviors for both samples indicating that electronic structure does not change much due to the unit cell expansion. These results suggest that the CDW still coexists with the enhanced superconductivity unlike the other TMD superconductors. Superconductivity and charge density wave (CDW) orders often coexist in transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) twodimensional (2D) superconductors. Opening an energy gap due to CDW formation removes parts of the Fermi surface in 2D systems, lowering the possibility of electron pair formations. This is one of the reasons that TMD superconductors have relatively low superconducting transition temperatures (Tc) which are normally below 10 K. By using external tuning parameters like pressure Here, we report a large enhancement of Tc from 0.56 K to 2.8 K in NbTe2 coexisting with CDW. X-ray structure analyses show ~ 1% of the unit cell volume expansion in our Tc-enhanced sample due to anisotropic distortion of the lattice while maintaining the 1T" structure. We find no significant variation in Hall coefficient RH, also supporting that CDW still coexists with the enhanced superconductivity. Our results suggest that the large enhancement of Tc in NbTe2 differs in the mechanism compared with similar Tc enhancements in other TMD superconductors. We grew standard (Tc = 0.56 K) and Tc-enhanced (Tc = 2.8 K) NbTe2 single crystals by chemical vapor transport (CVT) method. For standard samples, we first prepared NbTe2 polycrystals with a simple solid-state reaction method by heating as follows. Mixtures of niobium (Nb) powder (99.99 %) and tellurium (Te) powder (99.99 %) were sealed inside a vacuumed (5.0×10 -4 Pa) quartz ample (16 mm in inner diameter). And then we heated the ample in a muffle furnace at a temperature of 520 °C for 92 h and quenched by furnace cooling to obtain a polycrystalline powder. We heated the polycrystalline powder and iodine (I2) (2 mg/cm 3 ) in a simple tube furnace at reaction end temperature of 920 °C and growth end temperature of 850 °C for 9 days and quenched by furnace cooling. For Tc-enhanced samples, we skipped the process of growing polycrystals and grew NbTe2 single crystals by CVT with mixtures of niobium powder, Te powder and I2. Single crystals of standard and Tc-enhanced samples were mainly flaky, with a maximum size of about 1 cm. We also used NbTe2 purchased from HQ-graphene as a standard sample. All results of the HQ-graphene sample agree with those of the standard sample we grew. We characterized crystal structures with out-of-plane Xray diffraction (XRD) patterns and single-crystal XRD patterns using a Rigaku MiniFlex II equipped with Cu Kα, and Rigaku VariMax RAPID-DW equipped with Mo Kα, respectively. We carried out transport measurements and magnetization measurements with Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design), and Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS, Quantum Design), respectively. We measured resistivity and Hall resistivity using a standard four-probe technique and a sixprobe technique, respectively, in magnetic fields applied normal to the 2D layers. The first-principles electronic structure calculation package, Ecalj Fig. The Tc-enhanced sample shows a vast enhancement of Hc2 (0) ~ 2.5 T compared to that of 0.04 T of the standard one. We also estimate the residual resistance ratio (RRR) of the samples based on the higher temperature resistivities shown in the inset of Fig. To confirm the superconductivity of the Tc-enhanced sample, we performed magnetization measurements. Figure To understand the difference in Tc between the samples, we first performed out-of-plane XRD measurements. Figure To better understand the differences in the electronic structures of the two samples, we performed Hall resistivity measurements. The Hall coefficient RH is defined as the magnetic field derivative of hall resistivity. As shown in Fig. To investigate possible origins for the Tc-enhancement, we performed first principles calculations for both samples based on the lattice parameters determined experimentally in Table In the monolayer limit of NbTe2 In conclusion, we find that NbTe2 with the unit cell expansion (~ 1%) has 5 times higher Tc compared to that of the standard sample. We conclude that the enhanced superconductivity and CDW order coexist in the Tcenhanced sample based on the results of the structure analysis and transport and magnetic measurements unlike the Tc enhancements observed in other TMD superconductors. The first principles calculations show that the unit cell volume expansion does not give the enhancement of DOS at EF, excluding that as a possible origin of the observed Tc enhancement. For a deeper understanding, direct observation of the CDW and superconducting gap using STM is essential. 