The rapid cooling of the neutron star in Cassiopeia A is speculated to arise from an enhanced neutrino emission caused by the onset of 3 P2-wave neutron superfluidity in the core. However, the neutrino emissivity due to Cooper-pair breaking and formation is too small to yield the observed cooling rate. Here, we show that such a rapid cooling can be explained once the non-Fermi liquid behavior of the non-superfluid neutron liquid induced by superfluid quantum criticality is included into the theoretical description of neutron star cooling, without assuming the existence of additional energy loss processes. Our results indicate that the neutron star in Cassiopeia A remains in the thermal relaxation stage, which is greatly prolonged by the non-Fermi liquid behavior. The good agreement between our theoretical results and recent observational cooling data points to the pivotal role played by superfluid quantum criticality in neutron stars. Exploring the thermal evolution of neutron stars (NSs) A variety of non-standard scenarios A key assumption of this paradigm is the recent onset of spin-triplet 3 P 2 -wave neutron superfluidity in the core However, the minimal cooling paradigm encounters a severe challenge In this paper, we propose that the non-Fermi liquid (NFL) behavior of the dense neutron matter induced by the superfluid quantum criticality (QC) plays a unique role in the thermal evolution of NSs QC is one of the central concepts of condensed matter physics The minimal cooling scenario In the absence of superfluid QC, the specific heat of neutron FL is given by where k F is the Fermi momentum of neutrons and M * n is the effective neutron mass. Such a linear-in-T expression is used in all previous studies of NS cooling. Superfluid QC generates significant NFL corrections The dimensionless parameter h represents the effective strength of the coupling between the gapless neutrons and the gapless superfluid quantum fluctuations. Its magnitude relies on many ingredients, including but not restricted to the nuclear force We use the publicly available NSCool code package developed by Page where dV is the neutrino luminosity and L γ is the surface photon luminosity. The heat capacity of the NS core is NS gets colder and older, the thickness of each NFL layer is reduced, but the intensity of logarithmic correction ln (T 0 /T ) per unit volume is amplified. The NFL and superfluid layers are separated by intermediate normal FL layers, where C FL n (T ) ∼ T . In the superfluid layer, the specific heat is strongly suppressed by the pairing gap, whereas the neutrino emission is enhanced by PBF processes According to the above results, the roles of proton superconductivity are different in the minimal cooling paradigm where ∆R is the thickness of the NS crust and κ is the thermal conductivity. an early time of the thermal evolution. As a consequence, the value of t w is substantially prolonged to roughly 400 yr. The rapid cooling caused by this internal thermal non-equilibrium cooperates with the PBF processes to produce the steep slope of the cooling data shown in Fig. Our cooling scenario provides a microscopic mechanism for this hypothesis. It turns out that the influence of superfluid QC on the internal thermal equilibrium process is nontrivial and deserves further investigations. The tension between the large q (q ≥ 0.4) demanded by minimal cooling paradigm Within our cooling scenario, the rapid cooling of Cas A NS can be explained for any q greater than q = 0.19 once the NFL corrections induced by superfluid QC are considered. This is the most prominent advantage of our cooling scenario. We do not require the presence of DU processes Figure One can see from Fig. The applicability of the generalized cooling scenario proposed in this work could be testified by keeping monitoring the cooling trajectory of Cas A NS. As depicted by Fig. 