Single photon detectors (SPDs) Photons are the quantum particles of electromagnetic field, each carrying a small amount of energy. This makes their detection, particularly at lower energies, challenging. Many conventional single-photon detectors (SPDs) operate by a photo-excitation across an energy gap. In semiconductor-based avalanche photodiodes Graphene presents a promising material for a calorimetric SPDs Fig. (E) Junction switching probability vs. laser power at Vgate = 2 V and I b /⟨Is⟩ ≃ 0.87. The junction switching probability is linearly proportional to the laser power, confirming a single photon can switch the Josephson junction from superconducting to resistive. Deviation from the linear trend at lower powers is due to dark counts. Inset: Histogram of switching events with 60 aW (blue) and 500 aW (red) of laser powers adhere to Poissonian statistics. cal set-up is affixed on top of a three-axis piezoelectric stage which can steer the highly attenuated laser source from room temperature to the graphene absorber of area 4 μm × 25 μm (Fig. We can use the Resistively and Capacitively Shunted Junction (RCSJ) model Fig. With 1-fW illumination, Γ meas is considerably higher than in the dark. At a constant photon flux, Γ meas increases monotonically with I b . The absorbed photons can switch the GJJ more readily at a higher I b because the phase particle can escape over a lower ∆U . Below ∼2.7 μA, the junction may retrap before detection. This leads to false negative counts resulting in a reduction of quantum efficiency, η, defined as the number of measured single photons over the total number of photons absorbed into the detector. At ∼2.7 μA, Γ meas starts to saturate, signifying that η is approaching near unity, similar to superconducting nanowire detectors We can prove that each of the GJJ switching events is triggered by a single photon To demonstrate the calorimetric effect, we study the photon absorption by measuring Γ meas as the laser scans across the graphene. Fig. Fig. To investigate the heat propagation in the calorimetric SPD, we measured Γ meas in the longitudinal (x-) direction of the device (Fig. Fig. The performance of the graphene calorimetric SPD depends on the electron density, n e . Fig. As V gate increases from 0.25 to ∼4 V, Γ meas develops a plateau region near 45 Hz, regardless of V gate but corresponding to η ≥ 0.8 over I b ranges ∼15% of ⟨I s ⟩, before the steep rise at the high I b . This Γ meas plateau is the saturation of photon counting with a high η shown in Fig. Better filtering and GJJ sensor design will prevent extra noise from eroding η at high V gate . We can benchmark our calorimetric SPD by exploring the competing tradespace between η and Γ dark We can approximate the temperature rise of graphene electrons by a single photon through the η dependence on I b . Since the thermal energy from a single photon needs to overcome ∆U to induce the escape of the phase particle, we obtain ∆U/k B as a function of I b /⟨I s ⟩ and replot cuts from Fig. To gain more insight into the calorimetric effect, we study η versus ∆U/k B at various T 0 and V gate = 2 V. As shown in Fig. The single-photon enhanced escape probability of the phase particle out of ∆U can be approximated as η(T 0 ) = 1 -exp (-Γ 1p τ ep ) where Γ 1p is the enhanced escape rate induced by a single photon that is proportional to exp (-∆U/k B T 1p ) based on the activation theory of a thermal excitation k B T 1p . Fig. Fabrication. Fabrication of our graphene calorimetric SPD begins with a high-resistivity silicon chip sputtered with 200 nm of niobium (Nb). Using photolithography and plasma etching, DC electrodes and a gate line are patterned from the Nb film. At the center of the prepatterned Nb chip, a 200 μm-by-200 μm area of bare Si remains exposed for the placement of the graphene heterostructure. The hBN/graphene/hBN/graphite heterostructures are prepared and placed using standard exfoliation and stacking techniques We use electron-beam lithography and plasma etching to define the heterostructure. The bottom graphite flake in the heterostructure serves as a gate to control the carrier density in the graphene, separated by the bottom hBN layer. This graphite layer also screens the graphene from charge inhomogeneities that may exist at the surface of the silicon. The graphite is connected using a MoRe electrode (75 nm thick), whose connection is severed from the graphene by plasma etching the top hBN and graphene. In order to prevent short-circuiting between the graphene and graphite on either side of the heterostructure during the sputtering of the Josephson junction electrodes, both sides are insulated with a 120-nm poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) layer. This layer is overdosed forming a cross-linked insulator. Afterward, the Josephson junction electrodes, made of MoRe Lastly, electron-beam lithography is utilized to define the galvanic connection between the MoRe to the prepatterned Nb film. To eliminate any oxide layer on the Nb and ensure superconducting contact, we employ insitu argon ion milling before deposition. Without breaking vacuum, an adhesion layer of Ti (5 nm) is evaporated, followed by sputtering of MoRe (250 nm) on the freshly exposed surfaces. The process concludes with a lift-off in acetone to remove the excess metal. Laser reflectometry. We use laser reflectometry measurements (Fig. Switching from laser reflectometry to single-photon measurements does not require any addition or removal of components in the optical path. We simply turn off the sinusoidal voltage bias to the diode, apply a small DC voltage bias to set the laser power output at 1 μW, and tune an in-line variable attenuator. Γ meas through sweeping and counting techniques. We measure Γ meas through two different, but equivalent, measurement protocols Complimentary to this approach is the counting method. Here, we set a constant I b below ⟨I s ⟩ while monitoring the voltage across the junction. When a switching event occurs, a voltage 'click' is recorded and a self-resetting circuit will bring the junction back to the superconducting state. We confirm that these two measurement techniques yield the same results Fig. The optical properties of a material depends on its dielectric environment. Similar to superconducting nanowire detectors and transition edge sensors [S50, S51, S52, S53, S54, S55], we can improve the efficiency of our calorimetric SPD in the future by optimizing the absorption coefficient of incident photons of the graphene In the wave-transfer matrix method, M i and M i,j are the matrices describing, respectively, the phase accumulation of light when traverses through the i-th optical layer, and the transmission and reflection at the interface when the light traversing from the j-th to the i-th optical layer with λ ≃ 1550 nm being the wavelength of light, n i the index of refraction, and d i thicknesses of the i-th layer. Fig. The overall matrix, M , of the hBN/graphene/hBN/graphite heterostructure on a semiinfinite substrate denoted with the subscript "sub" is given by: From top to bottom, the heterostructure consists of alternating h-BN and graphene/graphite layers terminating with a semi-infinite layer of Si. In our calculations, P0 is the optical power incident from vacuum onto the heterostructure. The power that is transmitted through the heterostructure is n sub T hs Po whereas the power that is reflected from the heterostructure is R hs Po. The red arrows denote the Poynting vector associated with incident, reflected, and transmitted light. Device d1 (nm) d2 (nm) d3 (nm) d4 (nm) αgr (%) α0 (%) For light of an electric field amplitude in the i-th layer, E β i , with β = +(-) denoting the light propagation from vacuum to substrate (substrate to vacuum), we have: Now we calculate the reflectivity of the heterostructure, R hs . The flow of optical power is determined by Poynting vectors, S β i : where H β i is the magnetic field amplitude of light traveling in the i-th optical layer in the β direction. The electric and magnetic fields are related by H β i = n i E β i /Z 0 , with Z 0 = μ 0 /ε 0 being the free-space impedance, ε 0 Material R Si 0.31 Device A 0.21 Device B 0.21 TABLE the vacuum permittivity, and μ 0 the vacuum permeability. Hence, S + 0 , S - 0 and S + sub are given by: We can calculate R hs using: and the absorption coefficient, α l , of the l-th layer using Using the partial wave-transfer matrix, X: where we have: Using the measured thickness listed in Table We use the laser reflectometry setup (Fig. Experimentally, we determine the beam spot size, 2w o , from V refl in Fig. where R is the reflectance, and with I 0 = 8P laser /π(2w o ) 2 being the intensity at the center of the beam spot, and P laser being the laser power through the optical fiber. Using the values of R for hBNencapsulated graphene and silicon calculated in Table The best fitted values of 2w o are given in Table where NA is the numerical aperture of the focusing lens. We can reconcile the discrepancy by considering the underfilling of light through the focusing lens where f # is the f-number, defined as the ratio between the focal length and diameter, φ lens , of the focusing lens. The beam spot constant, K, is given by where φ ≡ φ coll /φ lens is the truncation ratio, with φ coll being the diameter of collimated light entering the focusing lens. For both GJJ calorimetric SPD devices, φ coll = 3.6 mm. The agreement between the extracted beam spot size and our calculation of 2w ′ o for both devices suggests that the underfilling of the lens causes the beam spot size in our experiment larger than the diffraction limit. Experimentally, we infer η in Fig. where G(x, y) = 1 on the graphene heterostructure, and 0, otherwise. When the beam spot is centered on the middle of the graphene heterostructure, with P laser = 1 fW, Ṅ ≃ 7.3 kHz (Device B) and Ṅabs ≃ 45 Hz based on the value of α gr in Table Previous work on GJJ SPDs relied on the presence of a plasmon mode at the NbN-graphene interface to enhance the photon absorption efficiency with Ṅ being the photon rate in the Gaussian beam and πw 2 o the beam spot area. We find J photon = 581 photons per second per μm 2 per 1 fW of laser power. If a similar plasmonic mode exists, based on Ref. We find that Ṅ (plasmon) abs would be 371 Hz. This value is ∼8 times more efficient than direct absorption by the graphene layer (Table F. Single-Photon Detection in a Second Device (Single-photon sensitivity.) In addition to the device which was studied in the main text, we have also confirmed single-photon detection in a second device (Device A). Parameters for both devices are listed in Table (Gate dependence.) In order to compare the two devices, we explore the performance of Device A on electron density. As V gate increases from the charge neutrality point (≃0.0 V), Γ meas becomes considerably larger than Γ dark (Fig. Up to the highest attainable V gate in Device A (the bottom hBN layer is 20 nm thicker than Device B), Γ meas does not fully saturate. This is despite the n e explored for Device A falling within the range of n e that provided robust bias saturation in Device B. Moreover, η for Device A is considerably less than that of Device B. The correlation between of the non-saturating Γ meas (I b ) and a lower η is consistent with previous studies Similar to Fig. (Spatial scanning.) To further explore this difference in single-photon detection between the devices, we study the spatial dependence of Device A. As in the main text, we position the center of our beam spot ∼5 μm below the edge of the superconducting contact and scan the laser along the y-direction of the graphene heterostructure. The incident laser power is fixed at 200 aW. As we traverse the graphene target, the reflectance signal decreases (S10A) and Γ meas increases (Fig. We now turn to scanning the laser across the longitudinal extent of the device. The beam is centered along the horizontal extent of the graphene target and scanned along the x-direction of S9. We measure the reflectance signal (Fig. As mentioned in the main text, the time-binned switching events measured at various laser powers adhere to Poissonian statistics. This indicates that our devices are shot-noise limited. In Fig. In order to verify SPD at elevated temperatures, we repeat the procedure described in the main text. At T 0 = 1.2 K, we again apply a fixed I b to the junction at roughly 90% of I c and measure Γ meas . As with low temperature, we find that Γ meas adheres to Poissonian statistics (Fig. To show that in the absence of illumination our device is nominally operated in the MQT regime, we fit Γ meas as a function of I b to the MQT model. Specifically, our switching rate is described as Γ meas = A exp(-∆U /k B T eff ), where, in the MQT regime and where 1 4 is the junction plasma frequency, ω p0 = (2eI c /ħC JJ ) 1 2 is the zero bias plasma frequency, C JJ = ħ/R n E Th is the junction shunting capacitance In Fig. In addition to the MQT regime, at higher temperatures the device can enter the thermally activated (TA) regime whereby the thermal fluctuations cause the phase particle to excite over ∆U. In the TA regime, T eff = T e and Fig. Increasing T 0 can degrade calorimetric SPD in two ways. First, increasing ambient thermal fluctuations raises the dark Γ TA and reduces I c of the GJJ. However, the ⟨I s ⟩ changes only by ∼ 30% over the temperature range studied (a similar change in ⟨I s ⟩ is observed when reducing V gate from 2 V 1 V). We shall neglect the change of the GJJ's ability to detect a single photon in our model, i.e. the T 0 dependence of A and ∆U , as temperature rises. The second effect, the calorimetric response of the graphene electrons, can dominate the suppression of η when T 0 rises. Since T 1p = 2hν/γ s A + T 2 0 To calculate η, we simplify Eqn. 31 by assuming that the device stays at Γ 1p for τ ep : where we set A in Γ 1p such that A = A TA (T 0 = 20 mK). Using Eqn. 32, we vary ∆U and T 0 to calculate η (Fig. The characteristic length scale of heat diffusion determines the reduction of η at a distance away from the Josephson junction. In the main text we estimate that this length scale to be ∼230 μm. For this we take electrical conductivity σ = 0.02 S (inferred from the resistance measurement listed in Table The persistence of a high quantum efficiency η even when the beam spot is far away from GJJ can be understood through simple modeling of electron heat diffusion in graphene. In our device, electronic heat simultaneously diffuses out through electron-electron interactions and dissipates via collision with the lattice vice is in (especially when accounting for the possibility of local differences in scattering across the length of the device), modeling the thermal behavior of a device with our graphene calorimeter's dimensions and parameters in both the diffusive (δ = 4 clean limit) and dissipative (δ = 3 resonant scattering) cases can help us understand the range of possibilities we can expect to see for the distance dependence of η. First, we determine our initial condition for solving Eqn. 1. The absorption of a single near-infrared photon by graphene causes an inter-band electronic excitation, which then results in an initial cascade of hot electronelectron interactions T e (t = 0) = T hot e -(x-x0) 2 /ξ 2 + T 0 Aγ S T e dT e (34) assuming 100% integrated electron-electron scattering efficiency We then choose insulating boundary conditions at x = 0 and x = 25 μm in accordance with the dimensions of device B, solving Eqn. 1 numerically We can take the results of these simulations evaluated at one end of a 25 μm graphene heterostructure and in- tegrate the time-dependent T e to calculate the simulated detection efficiency η using Eqn. 32. Using an I c of 3.38 μA and an I b of 2.8 μA to simulate the conditions seen in Fig. 1-D thermal modeling is not sufficient to definitively show that the devices measured in this paper follow the E-Ph coupling characteristic of the clean regime (δ = 4) -the presence of multiple different E-Ph coupling mechanisms affecting the graphene cannot be ruled out. However, these calculations demonstrate that the independence of η as a function of distance from the JJ as seen in our device is consistent with a realistic model of heat propagation in graphene. l = n l m 11 -m 12 m 21 /m 22 x 12 -x 11 x 22 /x 21 l m 11 -m 12 m 21 /m 22 x 11 -x 12 x 21 /x 22 2 -m 11 -m 12 m 21 /m 22 x 12 -x 11 x 22 /x 21 2 plasmon) abs : Ṅ (plasmon) abs = J photon A eff ⟨α⟩ plasmon P laser