Recent refinements on a semiclassical approach are reviewed, aiming at describing the inhomogeneous local gap parameter in the presence of non-trivial spatial geometries and at taking into account at the same time pairing fluctuations beyond mean field. The method is applied to describe the Josephson effect over the wide range of physical conditions related to recent experiments on this topic performed with ultra-cold Fermi gases. Professor Peter Schuck has long been interested in deriving from first principles semiclassical differential equations for the inhomogeneous local gap parameter ∆(r) in terms of an expansion in the reduced Planck constant of the generalized density matrix for superfluid inhomogeneous Fermi systems. His first pioneering article along these lines goes back to 1992 Specifically, the senior author of the present article regrets that he did not have the opportunity for updating Peter Schuck about the progresses that were just beginning to develop at the time of their last meeting, concerning the inclusion of pairing fluctuation corrections on top of the mean-field LPDA approach of Ref. Before deepening in these late results, it is first worth recalling the motivations behind the semiclassical approach by Peter Schuck Notwithstanding these important achievements, the LPDA approach, being based on an approximation to the BdG equations which are themselves based on a meanfield decoupling of the Hamiltonian, misses the beyondmean-field effects of pairing fluctuations which are known to be relevant when departing from the BCS limit In addition, what complicates the picture is that to go beyond the LPDA approach, these beyond-mean-field effects of pairing fluctuations have to be included over and above an inhomogeneous geometrical environment. This problem was recently addressed in Ref. The present article is organized as follows. Section II briefly recalls the LPDA and mLPDA approaches, having in mind their application to the Josephson effect where a supercurrent flowing through non-trivial geometrical constraints (typically, a barrier). In this context, numerical results for the ensuing critical current are presented in Sec. III when the barrier has a rather simple form, and in Sec. IV when the barrier has the complex shape utilized in the experiments with ultra-cold Fermi gases. Section V delves specifically into the potential relation between the Josephson effect and the superfluid density. Section VI gives our conclusions. Throughout we shall consider balanced spin populations and set = 1 for simplicity. In this Section, we briefly recall the LPDA approach introduced in Ref. In the following, the BCS-BEC crossover will be spanned in terms of the dimensionless parameter (k F a F ) -1 , where a F is the scattering length for the twofermion problem in vacuum and k F = (3π 2 n) 1/3 is the Fermi wave vector with (uniform) particle density n. This parameter ranges from (k F a F ) -1 ≤ -1 in the weakcoupling (BCS) regime when a F < 0 to (k F a F ) -1 ≥ +1 in the strong-coupling (BEC) regime when a F > 0 across the unitary limit when |a F | diverges We initially consider the Josephson effect with a slab geometry, where a supercurrent flows through a barrier of limited spatial width in the flow direction (say, x) and is homogeneous in the orthogonal y and z directions. In this case, it is convenient to write the local gap parameter ∆(x) in the form where q = qx. Note that the phase of the gap parameter is the sum of two terms, namely, 2q • x associated with the superfluid flow even in the absence of the barrier with the coefficients I 0 and I 1 given by where In addition, in Ref. where is the corresponding local number density. In the expressions (4) entering Eqs. ( B. The mLPDA approach for the Josephson effect with a simple slab geometry It is known that a consistent description of the BCS-BEC crossover cannot proceed without a proper inclusion of pairing fluctuations over and above mean field. This is because, when approaching the BEC limit where truly bosonic pairs are formed out of opposite-spin fermions, while the mean field can describe only the "internal" degrees of freedom of these bosons, pairing fluctuations are required to account for their "translational" (center-of-mass) degrees of freedom and thus for their dynamics Accordingly, we recall that, when dealing with homogeneous Fermi superfluids in the absence of a superfluid flow, in Ref. Quite generally, the required expressions of the particle and current densities can be written as follows in terms of the diagonal (normal) single-particle Green's function: where the single-particle Green's function depends also on the wave vector q of Eq. ( where is a short-hand notation, and the diagonal and offdiagonal single-particle Green's function at the meanfield (mf) level are given by: Here, with the notation In addition, the elements of the particle-particle ladder Γ ii ′ (Q; q) in the broken-symmetry phase are given by where Entering the expressions for the reduced self-energies When considering the case of interest here of an inhomogeneous superfluid, in analogy to what was done in Ref. where V ext (x) is the external potential associated with the spatial constraints in which the Fermi superfluid is embedded, as it is done in the original LPDA approach in the place of Eq. (15a), where V eff (x) is constructed to ensure the gapless condition to be locally satisfied These expressions correctly reduce to Eqs. ( In this Section, we present numerical results obtained by solving the LPDA equation and its mLPDA variant, in the presence of a barrier with a Gaussian profile along the direction x of the supercurrent while the superfluid system is homogeneous in the orthogonal (y and z directions). Accordingly, the barrier has the form with V 0 = 0.1E F and σ L = 2.5k -1 F for definiteness. The results presented in this Section are meant to be preliminary to those presented later in Sec. IV, where a more realistic spatial environment will have to be considered to account for the experiments on the Josephson effects with ultra-cold Fermi gases reported in Refs. Figure Note from Fig. The LPDA and mLPDA approaches, however, give different values for | ∆(x = 0)|/∆ 0 deep inside the barrier. This can be seen from Fig In addition, in Ref. All these features will conspire against each other when considering more complex spatial geometries, like those utilized in the experiments with ultra-cold Fermi gases as discussed in the next Section. A good benchmark of our numerical calculations for the Josephson critical current in complex spatial geometries are the recent experimental measurements in ultracold atomic Fermi gases, both at low temperature as a function of coupling In both experiments, 6 Li atoms are confined by a potential of the form where m is the atomic mass and ω x,y,z = 2π(12, 165, 140) Hz in Ref. Ref. where with V 0 /E F = (0.38, 0.455, 0.52) and k t F z R = 14.24 in Ref. Additional details can be found in Ref. Further neglect of the trapping frequency ω x allows us to assimilate the truncated ellipsoid to a cylinder and associate to each pair of coordinates (y, z) a uniform current density. Accordingly, we divide the cylinder into a bundle of (at most 441) tubular filaments and solve the mLPDA equation for each of these filaments, similarly to and phase | ∆(x, yi, zi)| of the gap parameter and of the density n(x, yi, zi), for each of the three chosen filaments with i = (1, 2, 3). Lower panels: Corresponding Josephson characteristics J(δφ) (in units of JF = kF n/m with n the asymptotic density at the edges ±xw of the cylinder) for the current vs the asymptotic phase difference δφ across the cylinder, where the dashed lines represent a fitting procedure to the filled dots (with the same notation as in Fig. what we did in Sec. III. Finally, by adding up the contributions from all filaments, we draw the "global" Josephson characteristic I(δφ) for the cylinder as a whole and identify the critical current I c from its maximum. As an example of this procedure, we have selected three tubular filaments with i = (1, 2, 3) identified by their transverse coordinates k t F (y 1 , z 1 ) = (2.35, 8.01), k t F (y 2 , z 2 ) = (25.1, 19.9), and k t F (y 3 , z 3 ) = (9.77, 39.6). For each of these filaments, Fig. Once the contributions j(δφ) from each filament are added together, the value of the critical current I c can be extracted from the maximum of the characteristics I(δφ) of the total current (and conveniently normalized in terms of the quantity I t F = k t F dydz n(x w , y, z)/m). Figure Reported in Fig. But there is also another issue for which the predictions of the mLPDA approach of Ref. For the sake of comparison, the inset of Fig. A key property of a superfluid is the superfluid density ρ s To this end, we recall that in Ref. In this context, a key argument was pointed out in Ref. In particular, for the Gaussian barrier considered in Sec. III (of height V 0 /E F = 0.1 and width σ L = 2.5k -1 F ), at unitarity and for T /T c = 0.08 we obtain n 0 (x = 0) = 25% (with respect to half the bulk density n) and ρ s (x = 0) = 70% (with respect to the full bulk density). By increasing the barrier height to V 0 /E F = 0.3, we obtain instead n 0 (x = 0) = 10% and ρ s (x = 0) = n(x = 0) = 25%. (In both cases, we find that ρ s (x = 0) coincides with the local value n(x = 0) of the density as expected.) These numerical results signal that n 0 (x = 0) and ρ s (x = 0) tend to approach each other percentage wise as the barrier height is increased. Extrapolating this trend to the limit when the barrier height V 0 approaches E F , we are led to the conclusion that in this "tunneling" limit the physics of the Josephson effect can be directly related to the condensate density. This is in line with what was assumed by the tunneling approach of Ref. Further support to our argument, about the relevance for the Josephson effect of the out-of-condensate density (and not only of n 0 ), comes from 4 He (cf. the inset of Fig. In this work, we have reviewed the mLPDA approach developed in Ref. 