Coupled quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) electron systems host rich emergent physics that cannot be accounted for by understanding isolated 1D electron systems alone. Open questions remain about how transport in these arrays can be manipulated by the application of external electric and magnetic fields. In this theoretical study, we consider a pair of coupled nanowires with non-interacting electrons. We find that a metal-insulator transition is induced by an out-of-plane magnetic field and a transverse potential bias on an array of such coupled wires. We demonstrate the existence of distinct conductance features and highlight the crucial role played by the field dependence of the interwire potential barrier on transport properties. These predictions agree well with transport experiments performed on coupled nanowires sketched on an LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface. Since our model makes minimal assumptions, we expect our predictions to hold for a wide class of coupled 1D systems. Many exotic quantum phases can arise from quasione-dimensional electronic systems (1DES). For instance, quantum Hall phases have been predicted to exist for arrays of quantum wires in a magnetic field Engineered arrays of coupled nanowires offer an important testing ground for quantum simulation of such emergent phenomena. For example, LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 (LAO/STO) nanowires have been shown to have remarkably long mean-free paths, and regimes of metallic and superconducting pairing behavior In this paper, we explore the effects of a magnetic and electric field-dependent interwire potential barrier on the transverse differential conductance (henceforth referred to as "conductance") of coupled nanowires and discuss the physics behind the distinctive features that arise. The following features arise in our model: We consider two identical coupled electron waveguides, each in the regime of Landauer quantized ballistic transport for z ≤ 0 and V (z) = ∞ for z > 0. Thus, for z ≤ 0, the Hamiltonian for a single wire in Landau gauge is written as: where p i is the canonical momentum operator along the ith axis, g is the Landé g-factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and s = ±1/2 is the spin of the electron. The angular frequency of the harmonic potentials is ω i = ħ/m * i l 2 i , where l i characterizes the confinement length of the electron along the ith axis. The eigenenergies of a single wire are The in-plane frequency is shifted by the application of an out of plane magnetic field, and is given by . The wire's transverse subbands are indexed by n y ∈ N. Annadi et al. have shown that this model accounts well for the observed transport behavior of single nanowires drawn on the LAO/STO platform We consider a pair of such coupled nanowires in the presence of a constant transverse bias V T and an out of plane magnetic field B (as shown in Fig. where d is the interwire spacing, and V T is the transverse voltage applied between the wires. The boundary of the first wire is at a distance y 0 from the center of the first wire. It marks the beginning of the interwire potential. The shift in guiding center of the electrons with the application of a magnetic field is accounted for by y → y , and E 0 is the height of the potential barrier at B = 0. The interwire Hamiltonian H inter is discussed further in Section B of the Appendix. We assume that the electron's energy and canonical momentum along the wire are conserved. We choose parameters such that the system is maintained in a regime of tunneling from a bound state in the first wire into the continuum of the next wire. In the reminder of this work, we set g = 0.62 and m * = 1.9m e , following Ref. where T (ε) is the transmission probability through a single barrier. In the semi-classical picture, Ω B is the fre-quency of electrons colliding against the walls of the wire. The effective potential V (y) consists of two pieces, V wire and V inter , both of which can be derived from In the limit that E 0 → ∞, T (ε) is independent of applied fields. However, we are specifically interested in the case where the chemical potential is near the top of the potential barrier. While the increase in electric field thins the barrier and increases tunneling current, the magnetic field plays a more complex role in the calculation. Increasing the magnetic field increases the tunneling attempt frequency of electrons within the wires, which sets the energy scale for the tunneling matrix element. At the same time, the walls become more steep and the effective tunneling barrier for the electrons becomes larger (see Fig. The quantum number k x relates to the canonical xmomentum of a specific eigenstate. For our choice of gauge, k x is conserved. Turning on a magnetic field, the potential minimum shifts according to Eq. 2. Also, the barrier slope changes in a manner that is momentum dependent in such a way that it breaks ±k x symmetry (see Eq. 3). Once the WKB integral is calculated for a single tunneling process, the total tunneling current is found by evaluating individual current contributions for each eigenstate and adding up contributions of all occupied energy states in the first wire. The tunneling conductance is then found by taking the derivative of the total current with respect to V T . For certain ranges of fields, a quasi-bound state appears in between the wires (see purple curve in panel (b) of Fig. where G 1 is the tunneling conductance between the first wire and the potential minimum and G 2 is the tunneling conductance between the potential minimum and the second wire. Such processes, however, significantly diminish tunneling rate. Less energetic electronic states must tunnel through the entire interwire potential which also significantly suppresses their probability for tunneling. In contrast, states that obey the following inequality (see yellow curve in panel (a) of Fig. experience only a single barrier which is made skinnier by V T and thus have a larger propensity to tunnel. It follows that the minumum voltage required for significant tunneling is given by where ω c = eB/m * is the cyclotron frequency and E ny (B, k x ) is the energy of the state occupied by the electron within the wire as defined in Eq. 2. Eq. 9 gives the critical voltage V * T at which states with canonical x-momentum ħk x first experience significant tunneling. We calculate the number of states that are above V * T ( and hence satisfy Eq. 8) using From Eq.10, we can calculate the density of states available for tunneling. This allows us to identify the number of states that become accessible for tunneling at specific values of V T and B. This in turn facilitates a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms governing the field-dependence of transverse conductance. While the two-wire system cannot support a true metal-insulator phase transition, an array of wires can. Because the metal-insulator transition is characterized by a scalar order parameter with short-range interactions, leading to an Ising character to its phase transitions, Significant tunneling is only possible for a given state if it obeys the inequality in Eq. 9. Using this equation, we find the distribution of states available for tunneling in a small neighbourhood around eV * T (k x ) as a function of B as shown in Fig. (1/e)dN/dV T denotes the density of states that cross the threshold for tunneling at V T , B. The orange and red dashed lines represent the critical potential difference for the Fermi momenta k x = ±k F , s =↑, ↓ as in Eq.9. For B > 0, it is seen that eV * T (+k F , ↓) is a lower bound for the minimum voltage needed for tunneling. Also, the eV * T (-k F ) curves roughly demarcate the region where the density of states drops to zero. The same description holds for B<0 but with the momentum and spin signs reversed. At B = 0, we see that the eV * T (±k F , s =↑ / ↓) curves meet at the point that corresponds to the smallest voltage needed for tunneling. The largest electric field is required by the least energetic state, namely k x = 0 (denoted by the pink curve in Fig. The transverse conductance is plotted as a function of electric and magnetic fields in Fig. The vertical linecuts in panel (d) of Fig. In Finally, in Fig 5 , we examine the effects of increasing the potential barrier E 0 without changing the chemical potential. An insulating region opens up at the center of the conductance maps as electrons need a stronger bias V T to overcome the barrier. This is also seen in Fig. We have considered a minimal model to describe tunneling between a pair of coupled nanowires that takes into account the effects of an electric and magnetic fielddependent potential barrier. We predict a magnetic field-dependent critical voltage above which significant tunneling of electrons begins. The application of an out of plane magnetic field to the coupled nanowires in combination with an applied transverse voltage sculpts and changes the potential barrier so as to create characteristic peaks and valleys in the transverse differential conductance maps. One prominent consequence of this is the existence of a local minimum in conductance at zero field consistent with recent experiments on LAO/STO nanowire arrays The predictions of our model are also displayed for wires with different potential barriers and chemical potentials. We discuss the effects of multiple occupied subbands within the wire and demonstrate that a sharp change in conductance is expected at the magnetic field for which a subband is entirely depopulated. We also demonstrate the emergence of an insulating region in the conductance map for small electric fields when the potential barrier is increased. While a two wire system cannot support a true phase transition (being effectively one-dimensional), we argue that the metal-to-insulator crossover becomes a true phase transition in the limit of an array of wires. The fact that we make minimal assumptions about the nature of interactions or material properties of the systems implies that the underlying mechanisms discussed are relevant to a larger class of coupled 1D systems. The results discussed here will be important to consider when one implements these structures in performing quantum simulation experiments. First, we model the transport properties of a single nanowire with a voltage bias applied along the wire and a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the wire. Just as in electron waveguides, the movement of electrons through the wire is ballistic. We treat the direction along a given wire (x) as translationally invariant while the transverse (ŷ and ẑ) directions posses convex potentials that can be approximated as parabolic wells. The sim-ple harmonic approximation for the potential written in the Landau gauge is specifically chosen as it offers analytically solvable solutions to Schrodinger's equation. Applying a magnetic field along the ẑ direction allows us to adjust the steepness of the parabolic wells while also breaking time translational invariance. As seen in Ref. where p x is the canonical momentum operator along the x axis, p y is the canonical momentum operator along the y axis, g is the Landè g-factor, and s is the spin of the electron. The angular frequency of the harmonic potential is ω y = ħ/m * l 2 y , where l y characterizes the transverse width of the wire. The effective frequency Ω B is given by Ω B = (ħ/m * l 2 y ) 2 + (eB/m * ) 2 . Completing the square gives rise to a shift in the minimum of the wire's potential that couples with the magnetic field and the momentum of the wire. The extent of the shift is given by (p x ω c /m * Ω 2 B ). The momentum dependent term can be thought of as altering the effective mass of the electron moving along the x direction. . The corresponding eigenvalues are and the corresponding wave functions are given by It has been shown in Landauer's formula where t encompasses any tunneling resonances or backscattering processes. Here, we set t = 1 for ballistic dissipationless transport within the nanowires. F T (E) is the thermal broadening function of the Fermi distribution We can use this expression along with our Hamiltonian for the nanowire to calculate G || vs B in isolated nanowires. We use Landauer's formula for calculating conductance of isolated nanowires which is given by: The step-like drops in G || seen in Fig. 