The discovery of superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O system (the cuprate) at the 30 K range in 1986 marked a significant breakthrough, as it far exceeded the highest known critical temperature (Tc) at the time and surpassed the predicted 30 K limit, which was thought to be the maximum before phonon-mediated electron pairing would break down due to thermal excitation. Despite recent successful observations of superconductivity in nickel-oxide-based compounds (the nickelate), superconductivity above 30 K at ambient pressure in a system that is isostructural and isoelectronic to the cuprate but without copper has remained elusive. Here, we report a superconducting T c above 35 K under ambient pressure in hole-doped, late rare-earth infinite-layer nickel oxide (Sm-Eu-Ca-Sr)NiO2 thin films. Electron microscopy reveals a small thickness of ~ 2 nm of infinite-layer phase stabilised at present, which indicates a higher temperature superconductivity should be observable in clean bulk crystals. A longstanding question in condensed matter is whether high-temperature (high-T " ) superconductivity above 30 K at ambient pressure is unique to quasi-two-dimensional copper oxide (cuprate) or ubiquitous among transition metal oxides in the periodic table of elements For example, high-field transport studies on the hole-doped (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 show a drastic difference in the scale of upper critical fields between various rare-earth nickelates, where a large Pauli-limit violation in all directions is observed in the Ca/Sr-doped LaNiO2 In the high-T ( cuprates, the largest rare-earth ion La )$* Ce * CuO +', has T " ~ 30 K but Eu )$* Ce * CuO +', has a lower T " ~ 10 K Considering Sr-doped (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 are all superconducting at 20% Sr doping, 0.2 Sr-doped SmNiO2 is expectedly superconducting as well. We observed a metallic behaviour (with small resistivity upturn below 50 K) and low resistivity (~1 m Ω • cm ) comparable to the superconducting hole-doped (Nd/Pr/La)NiO2 Fig. The c-axis lattice constant of the infinite-layer phase is calculated to be ~ 3.29 Å, which agrees well with the theoretical values for P4/mmm space group Figs. [41], supporting the observation of superconductivity in the hole-doped SmNiO2. We extract the upper critical fields along the perpendicular to ab plane (c-axis) direction using 50% transition criteria, μ 5 H "),95% (Fig. J where Φ 5 is the flux quantum and ξ @A (0) is the zero-temperature Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξ @A (0) = 2.78 nm for this sample. A shorter coherence length is expected for the higher T " sample FIG. In terms of nickel-based superconductivity, the present discovery of superconductivity above 30 K in SECS marks not only a new record in T " under ambient pressure but also the first successful demonstration of superconductivity in the late rare-earth nickel oxides. This step of material expansion is critical for the further understanding of the rare-earth dependence correlated orderings and pairing mechanism, which its uniqueness or universality would be the next to answer Intriguingly, the trend in T " from the earlier rare-earth (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 to SECS is uniquely different from the expected rare earth dependence in other systems. The largest difference is typically between La 3+ and Pr 3+ , Nd 3+ , while the variation beyond Nd 3+ is smaller or negligible, in consistent with their ionic size variation. Using the iron pnictides as an example, the maximum bulk while T " of Pr[O1-xFx]FeAs is ~ 52 K Nevertheless, the discovery of superconducting SECS should ignite momentum for theoretical and experimental investigations on the origin and pairing mechanism of this newfound high-T " superconductivity without copper. In principle, this report marks the first step towards direct evidence for a broad family of high-temperature unconventional superconducting oxides beyond copper. the few nm thin films). The onset of superconductivity is defined as the temperature where 2 ! 3 24 ! drops below zero The thin film samples were first capped with gold prior the lamella preparation. A focused ion beam (FIB) instrument (FEI Versa 3D) operated at 30 kV was used to prepare cross-sectional lamellas of the nickelate thin films. Subsequently, cleaning at 2 kV was performed to remove the amorphous surface layer. The scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) characterization was conducted on a JEMARM200F (JEOL) microscope operated at 200 kV and equipped with a cold field emission gun and a Cs-probe aberration corrector. High angle annular dark-field (HAADF) images were acquired using inner and outer collection semi-angles of about 70 and 280 mrad, respectively, with a convergence semi-angle of about 30 mrad. Mild oxidation to the lamellas could occur during the FIB process, and over time. The imaging was done around 6 months after film reduction. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) θ -2θ symmetric scan was done in the X-ray Diffraction and Development (XDD) beamline at the Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS) with an X-ray wavelength of λ = 1.5404 Å. Resistivity vs temperature ρ(T) curves of Sm1-x-y-zEuxCaySrzNiO2 thin films with only Sr 2+ doping, x = 0, y = 0, z = 0.2, Sm0.8Sr0.2NiO2. Metallic behaviour and low resistivity were observed, with a small resistivity upturn below 50 K. We emphasize that the absence of superconductivity in these samples should not be considered definitive. Considering the highly challenging synthesis, further optimisation on the growth and reduction conditions should be performed to accommodate the varied growth conditions for the different dopants. 