We compute the energy spectrum of a nearest-neighbor electron hopping model for bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles. Specifically, we focus on the simplest bi-layer lattices, with moiré patterns that have no subcells. The electron hopping hamiltonian is analyzed in momentum space, both by degenerate perturbation theory and by exact numerical calculation. We find that the degeneracy in energy along the edge of the moiré Brillouin zone due to the two valley quantum numbers is noticeably broken in the flat central bands at the magic twist angle. A mechanism for the appearance of flat central bands themselves at the magic twist angle is also revealed. It is due to maximal level repulsion. The mechanism relies on the assumption that the phase factor for the AA hamiltonian matrix element for inter-graphene-sheet hopping at the middle of the edge of the moiré Brillouin zone has a phase equal to half the twist angle. This assumption is confirmed in the case of uniform AA hopping in between the two sheets of graphene, in the limit of large moiré unit cells. It is well known that electron-electron correlations can lead to insulating behavior in systems with unfilled bands. This is the case, for example, in copper-oxides, where hightemperature superconductivity emerges after doping the correlated (Mott) insulator state with holes. Similar behavior has been observed recently in bi-layer graphene at a magic twist angle of θ " 1.08 ̋. Superconductivity has been observed at a hole doping just beyond ν " ́2 electrons per moiré unit cell That flat electron bands in twisted bi-layer graphene exist at the magic angle was predicted theoretically a decade before the experimental discovery noted above In this paper, we study the electronic properties of bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles on the basis of a nearest-neighbor electron hopping model. We primarily focus on commensurate twists that produce periodic moiré patterns with no subcells. These result in the smallest number of carbon atoms per true moiré unit cell. Degenerate perturbation theory reveals inter-valley mixing at the corners of the moiré Brillouin zone. Direct calculation finds, however, that the corresponding matrix element is small by a factor of one-over a quarter of the number of carbon atoms per true moiré unit cell. Importantly, this result agrees with the popular twist construction of the reciprocal lattice introduced by Bistritzer and MacDonald Following the Bistritzer-MacDonald twist construction The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the nature of the lattice of bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles, while the nature of the corresponding reciprocal lattice, which is dual to former, is described in section 3. The nearest-neighbor hopping hamiltonian is analyzed in section 4, where the flat-band effect is revealed. Last, exact dispersions of the flat bands at the magic twist angle are computed numerically in section 5. Consider bi-layer graphene with no twist. It exhibits Bernal stacking, with A sites on top of B sites, and vice versa. Figure 2 ŷq, and a 3 " a △ p ? 3 2 x ́1 2 ŷq. Here, a △ " ? 3a is the lattice constant, where a is the carbon-carbon separation in graphene. Now let m and n be positive integers that are relatively prime, with m ą n, and consider the following pair of displacements from a Bernal stacking where is the number of A(B) sites per true moiré unit cell, per sheet of graphene. Upon such an equal and opposite twist, a triangular lattice of Bernal stacks is achieved, with (redundant) moiré primitive vectors Repeating the previous, but swapping the A and B sites of the Bernal stacks, results in another moiré triangular lattice. We will show below that the two sets of Bernal stacks form a honeycomb lattice if m ́n is not a multiple of 3. Again consider untwisted bi-layer graphene, but with the less common AA stacking instead. Designate a center of one honeycomb cell as a new twist center. From that center, the A sites of the honeycomb lattice have (redundant) basis vectors: c 1 " a x, c 2 " ap ́1 2 x `?3 2 ŷq, and c 3 " ap ́1 2 x ́?3 2 ŷq. Consider next an A(B) site in one sheet of graphene that is displaced from the designated twist center by C 1 p`q " mc 2 ́nc 3 , and a B(A) site in the other sheet of graphene that is displaced from the designated twist center by C 1 p ́q " nc 2 ́mc 3 . The magnitude of each displacement vector is |C 1 p ̆q| " pm 2 `mn `n2 q 1{2 a. Recall now that given a general displacement from the center pc 2 `qc 3 , where p and q are integers, then it is an A site for pp `qq mod 3 " 1, a B site for pp `qq mod 3 " 2, and a center of a honeycomb cell for pp `qq mod 3 " 0. Yet the difference of the two displacements above is C 1 p ́q ́C1 p`q " pm ́nqc 1 . We then conclude that twisting the graphene sheet with the A(B) displacement C 1 p`q clockwise by the angle (1) α, and twisting the graphene sheet with the B(A) displacement C 1 p ́q counterclockwise by the angle α results in a Bernal stack if m ́n is not a multiple of 3. Such a twist applied to the displacements ́C1 p ̆q results in another Bernal stack, but with the A site and B site swapped. The twist of each graphene sheet clockwise and counterclockwise by the angle α thereby results in a moiré honeycomb of Bernal stacks when m ́n is not a multiple of 3. The displacement vectors of the Bernal stacks of the resulting twisted bi-layer graphene lattice from the twisted AA stacking center above are They are shown in Fig. Nearest neighbor links within a moiré unit cell between A sites in clockwiserotated sheet of graphene (black dot) and B sites in counterclockwise-rotated sheet of graphene (red circle) for the case of n " 4 consecutive hexagonal shells, plus the twist center (m " 5). It corresponds to l " 61 A(B) sites in each moiré unit cell per sheet of graphene. The commensurate twist angle is equal to θ " 7.3 sheet rotated counterclockwise over B site of graphene sheet rotated clockwise, or vice versa. We shall next determine the nearest-neighbors between two sheets of graphene upon a commensurate twist, as just described. Let us confine ourselves hearafter to the case where m " n`1, which we name the Periodic Moiré Pattern line. The true Wigner-Seitz unit cell has no moiré subcells in such case. (Cf. Fig. Nearest-neighbor A sites between graphene sheets are shown in Fig. Below, we shall construct the hamiltonian for an electron hopping in between nearest neighbors in twisted bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles, e.g. Fig. The (redundant) primitive vectors of the moiré reciprocal lattice can be obtained from the primitive vectors of the moiré lattice (3), and they are where d " ? 3 2 a △ " 3 2 a is the shortest distance in between Bragg planes of A(B) sites in graphene. Figure Likewise, by comparison with the displacement vectors C 1 , C 2 , and C 3 , in twisted bi-layer graphene (Fig. Here, are moiré Dirac nodes that are closest to the zero reciprocal lattice vector, as shown in Fig. are the Dirac nodes of an un-rotated sheet of graphene. Above, K " 4π{3a △ is the lattice constant of the honeycomb of such Dirac nodes. Now notice by ( The resulting moiré pattern is thereby periodic Last, let us discuss the periodic boundary conditions, to be assumed hereafter. The spatial periods shall be L 1 " N 1 A 1 and L 2 " N 2 A 2 , where N 1 and N 2 are positive integers. Recall the identities B i ̈Aj " p ́1q i ́1 2πδ i,j , where 1 " 2 and 2 " 1. An allowed wavenumber k must satisfy e ik ̈L 1 " 1 " e ik ̈L 2 . This yields that the allowed wave numbers are where n 1 and n 2 are any integers. We shall model the electronic structure of twisted bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles by electron hopping within ( ) and in between (K) the twisted sheets of graphene. The nearest neighbors within each sheet of graphene are consecutive A and B sites on the honeycomb, while nearest neighbors in between twisted sheets of graphene are achieved by twisting A/B and A/A stacked bi-layer graphene. Figures The intra-graphene-sheet contribution to the hamiltonian of an electron with crystal momentum k is H ``pkq `H ́ ́p kq, where Here, the quantum numbers `and ́denote the `α-rotated and ́α-rotated sheets of graphene, respectively, while G 0 , G 1 , ..., G l ́1 are the moiré reciprocal lattice vectors that lie inside the first Brillouin zone of a twisted sheet of graphene in isolation. Figure is the standard phase factor of the A-to-B site matrix element in graphene. The hamiltonian ( where N " l ̈NM is the total number of A(B) sites, r ApBq ̆, in the ̆α-rotated sheet of graphene, with N M " N 1 N 2 true moiré unit cells. Above, |r ApBq ̆, ApBq, ̆y is a site state in twisted bi-layer graphene. In real space, the inter-graphene-sheet contribution to the hamiltonian of an electron has the form H ́``H ` ́, where H ́`has four components: Above, R denote the twist centers for A-A and B-B nearest-neighbor links in between sheets of graphene per true moiré unit cell, which are shown by Fig. To determine inter-graphene-sheet matrix elements of the hopping hamiltonian of the electron with crystal momentum k, H ́`pkq, we substitute the inversion formula |r ApBq ̆, ApBq, ̆y " for the plane-wave states (15) into ( where k i " k ́Gi and k j " k ́Gj . Notice that k i ́kj is a moiré reciprocal lattice vector, G j ́Gi . Also, the matrix elements that correspond to H ` ́pkq are the hermitian conjugates of the above. This can be seen explicitly by swapping the ́and `twist-layer quantum numbers in The phase factors appearing in the off-diagonal A/B and B/A matrix elements (18) are easily calculated. Let G " n 1 B 1 `n2 B 2 be a moiré reciprocal lattice vector, where n 1 and n 2 are integers. A direct calculation using expressions (4) and ( We thereby conclude the construction of the electron hopping hamiltonian in momentum space. It has the form The intra-graphene-sheet parts ( Flat Electron Bands with Bad Valley Quantum Numbers in Twisted Bi-Layer Graphene11 matrices, while the inter-graphene-sheet parts Figure The valley quantum numbers mix in twisted bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles. Figure ́. In the limit of weak hopping in between the sheets of graphene, we can apply degenerate perturbation theory at momenta near the point `K Ď M x identified above. (See Fig. Here, we express the momentum as k ́G " K Ď M x `δk. Above, we have intragraphene matrix elements z ̆" ́t ζ ̆pk ́Gq at momenta k ́G in the vicinity of K Ď M x. It is convenient to re-write the phase factor (14) as ζ ̆pkq " e ik ̈c 1 p ̆q ζ 1 ̆pkq, where ζ 1 ̆pkq " 1`e ik ̈rc 2 p ̆q ́c 1 p ̆qs `eik ̈rc 3 p ̆q ́c 1 p ̆qs , or equivalently by the identities a 1 " c 2 ́c3 , a 2 " c 3 ́c1 , and a 3 " c 1 ́c2 , Because expression (21) is manifestly periodic over the reciprocal lattice of the ̆rotated sheet of graphene, Fig. z ́" ́vD e ipα ́δq i ̊pδk x `iδk y q, z `" ́vD e ́ipα ́δq ipδk x `iδk y q. (22 Flat Electron Bands with Bad Valley Quantum Numbers in Twisted Bi-Layer Graphene13 Here, v D " 3 2 a t is the velocity of a Dirac cone, and δ " 2πpm `nq{3 is a 3-fold symmetric phase angle. Along the Periodic Moiré Pattern line, m " n `1, the latter is equal to δ " 2πp2n `1q{3, which implies e iδ " e ́i2πpn ́1q{3 . Next, we shall compute the inter-graphene-sheet matrix element w 1 1 of the truncated hamiltonian for inter-graphene-sheet matrix elements (18) at momenta k i " k ́G near K Ď M x. Henceforth, we shall confine the integer parameters to the Periodic Moiré Pattern line, m " n `1, in which case the A-B links form n consecutive hexagonal shells within the Wigner-Seitz unit cell centered at the A-B Bernal stack. (See Fig. x ́?3 2 ŷ ̇, δa 3 " a 3 p`q ́a3 p ́q " a △ p2 sin αq ˆ1 2 x `?3 2 ŷ ̇. (24) Recall, now, that K Ď M " ? l K and K " 4π{3a △ . Three-fold symmetric terms are grouped together by adding such oscillatory exponential terms with arguments proportional to n 1 δa 1 `n2 δa 2 , n 1 δa 2 `n2 δa 3 , and n 1 δa 3 `n2 δa 1 . After applying 6-fold rotation symmetry of the right-hand side of (23), and using the following results for the dot products, we obtain the result for (23) at `K Ď M x in the simple case where t p1q K is a constant over the Wigner-Seitz unit cell. Above, in (25), we have used the result ? lp2 sin αq " 1 at m " n `1, by ( for inter-graphene-sheet matrix elements (18) at momenta k i " k ́G near K Ď M x. The displacements of the links in between the sheets of graphene from the center of the Wigner-Seitz unit cell are given by δr A{A p ̆q " m 1 c 1 p ̆q `m2 c 2 p ̆q , where m 1 and m 2 are integers that satisfy the condition m 1 `m2 mod 3 " 1. Figure pkq " e ik ̈δc 0 pm 1 ,m 2 q `eik ̈δc `pm 1 ,m 2 q `eik ̈δc ́pm 1 ,m 2 q , with and where δc 1 " c 1 p`q ́c1 p ́q " ap2 sin αq ŷ, δc 2 " c 2 p`q ́c2 p ́q " ap2 sin αq ˆ ́? 3 2 x ́1 2 ŷ ̇, δc 3 " c 3 p`q ́c3 p ́q " ap2 sin αq ˆ?3 Using the following results for the dot products at m ́n " 1, direct calculation then yields pK Ď M xq " pe i2π{3 q m 1 `pe i2π{3 q m 2 ́m1 `pe i2π{3 q ́m2 " pe i2π{3 q m 2 ́m1 rpe i2π{3 q 2m 1 ́m2 `1 `pe i2π{3 q m 1 ́2m 2 s " pe i2π{3 q m 2 ́m1 rpe i2π{3 q ́pm 1 `m2 q `1 `pe i2π{3 q pm 1 `m2 q s. (32) It is equal to zero in the present case, where pm 1 `m2 q mod 3 " 1. Similar threefold rotation-symmetric calculation yields that the first non-trivial order of this matrix element with δk has the form w 1 0w 1p1q 0 pδk x ́iδk y q. In the simple case where t p0q K is constant over the Wigner-Seitz unit cell, direct summation of the resulting geometric series at m ́n " 1 yields lim nÑ8 w 1p1q 0 " ́pa t p0q K {lq sinr2πpn ́1q{3s. (See Appendix C.) Notice, importantly, that this group velocity of the matrix element is small, and of order at p0q K {l, or zero. It is also thereby consistent with the Bistritzer-MacDonald method We shall now show that inter-valley mixing results in a small band gap for twisted bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles along the Periodic Moiré Pattern line. The characteristic equation associated with the truncated 4 ˆ4 hamiltonian (20) is with coefficients Above, w 1 1 is assumed to be real, and |z `| " |z| " |z ́|. Plugging in expressions (22) and w 1 0 " w 1p1q 0 pδk x ́iδk y q yields the following expressions for the above coefficients: At |w 1p1q 0 | ! v D , the first-order term a 1 ε in (33) can be neglected at large enough momentum |δk|. This yields the dispersions in energy: Flat Electron Bands with Bad Valley Quantum Numbers in Twisted Bi-Layer Graphene16 It reveals that such twisted bi-layer graphene is an insulator at charge neutrality, with a small gap in the energy bands: 2∆ 0 " 2|rcospα ́δqsw 1 1 |. Notice that the above approximation for the low-energy spectrum (36) shows particle-hole symmetry. This is an artifact. Treating the former first-order term in the characteristic equation (33) as a perturbation results in a first-order correction (49) to ε p0q ̆that breaks particle-hole symmetry. Figure Last, what is the nature of inter-valley mixing at the opposing point in momentum, K Ď M x Ñ ́K Ď M x ? It can easily be shown that the graphene matrix elements in the corresponding truncated 4 ˆ4 hamiltonian (22) are negative complex conjugates of each other: z ̆Ñ ́z ̊. Furthermore, the inter-graphene sheet matrix elements We shall now reveal the origin of the band-flattening effect in twisted bi-layer graphene by analyzing the hopping hamiltonian at momenta in the vicinity of M M within degenerate perturbation theory. We shall, in particular, follow the idea proposed by Bistritzer and MacDonald direct calculation then yields In the simple case where t p0q K is uniform over the Wigner-Seitz unit cell, numerical evaluation of the resulting closed-form expressions for the geometric series sums yields the form w 0 " w p0q 0 e iα for the matrix element at momentum `MM ŷ, where w p0q 0 is real at large integer parameter n. This is demonstrated by Fig. We shall now show how energy-level repulsion at the point M M on the edge of the first moiré Brillouin zone can result in flat energy bands near zero energy. The characteristic equation associated with the truncated 4 ˆ4 hamiltonian (37) again has the fourth-order polynomial form (33), but with coefficients Above, w 1 is assumed to be real. The wavenumbers in the forms (38) for the intragraphene matrix elements z `and z ́follow k `,x " `kx , k ́,x " ́kx , k `,y " δk y " k ́,y along the y axis that bisects the two Dirac nodes at d 1 p`q and d 1 p ́q. (See Fig. At the point M M in momentum space, we have δk y " 0. This yields the coefficients a 1 " 0 and a 0 " rw 2 1 ́wp0q2 0 ́pv D k x q 2 s 2 . The energy eigenvalues are then easily obtained, and they are given by Above, ε p0q ́pM M q and ε p0q `pM M q are closer and farther away from zero energy, respectively. Because a 1 " 0, the condition ε ́pM M q " 0 suggests that a flattest energy band occurs at a 0 " 0. Hence, by the previous result for a 0 at δk y " 0, degenerate perturbation theory at M M predicts a flat energy band when The magic twist angle is thereby obtained from the relation k x " Kpsin αq. It yields the formula for the magic twist angle. And what is the dispersion of the energy bands closest to zero energy along the bisecting y axis? Inspection of the coefficients (45) yields that a 1 is linear order in δk y , while the remaining coefficients are quadratic in it. The characteristic equation (33) can be solved to first order in a 1 (δk y ): ε " ε p0q `εp1q . This yields the following expression for the first-order correction: Substituting in the result (46) for ε p0q2 ̆yields the result for the first-order correction: In turn, to lowest order in δk y , substituting in the coefficients (45) a n of the characteristic equation above yields the final result: The dispersion of the energy along the bisecting y axis is then linear in k y near the high-symmetry point M M . And as predicted by degenerate perturbation theory, what is the nature of the energy spectrum near the opposing point in momentum, ́MM ŷ, which bisects the pair of Dirac nodes at ́d1 p ́q and ́d1 p`q ? These are depicted in Fig. and with w 0 replaced by w 0 . The matrix element w 1 is real, and it therefore remains unchanged. Inspection of the characteristic equation ( We can now answer the following question. What is the energy dispersion as δk y gets farther away from the high-symmetry point M M ? Consider w p0q 0 as a perturbation instead of δk y . It is straight-forward to show that the energy eigenvalues (46) at w p0q 0 " 0 are plus or minus x `pδk y q 2 ̆w1 . As expected, the degenerate energy from the Dirac cones is split by hopping in between the graphene sheets. Further calculation yields the perturbation (49) x `pδk y q 2 s. To second order in δk y , this yields approximate energy dispersions near the M M `point in momentum space: Likewise, the M M ́point in momentum space yields minus the above dispersions: Above, ε ̆,ą in (53) and ́ε ̆,ă in (54) are both positive, and they "cross" at M M , while ε ̆,ă in (53) and ́ε ̆,ą in (54) are both negative, and they also "cross" at M M . Notice that the "cross" dispersion at M M eventually turns away from zero energy as δk y gets large enough. This is confirmed by Fig. Below, we find the energy eigenvalues of the nearest-neighbor electron hopping model for twisted bi-layer graphene that was introduced in subsection 3.2. Commensurate twist angles near 1.1 ̋shall be studied. (See Table The nearest neighbor electron hopping hamiltonian for bi-layer graphene at commensurate twist angles was constructed in section 3.2 in momentum space. It has the form Figure The bi-layer graphene crystals at commensurate twist angles considered in this paper have honeycomb moiré unit cells with Bernal stacks at the vertices. Figure Figure By formula (47), degenerate perturbation theory predicts that flat electron bands emerge when the energy at M M predicted by zone folding in the first positive-energy band is equal to a w 2 1 ́w2 0 . In the limit of large integer parameters along the Periodic Moiré Pattern line, m " n`1, degenerate perturbation theory also predicts that w 1 " ́0.5 t p1q K and w 0 " ́0.5 t p0q K . Recall that the "relaxed" flat bands depicted by Fig. Below, we compare the bi-layer graphene lattice at commensurate twist angles studied here to the Bistritzer-MacDonald twist construction of the reciprocal lattice The bi-layer graphene lattices studied above in section 2 have commensurate twist angles characterized by relatively prime integer parameters by The truncated hamiltonian where n 1 a 1 `n2 a 2 lie inside the moiré Wigner-Seitz unit cell (mWSuc). The matrix element w 1 1 is thereby small and of order t p1q K {l due to the summation of phase factors that are cube roots of unity. The field of cube roots of unity pe i2π{3 q n 1 `n2 in formula (56) for the inter-valley matrix element w 1 A ́,B`d escribes a Kekulé spiral over the honeycomb cells of a sheet of graphene. Recent theoretical work predicts incommensurate Kekulé spiral order in magic-angle twisted bi-layer graphene at a filling of ν " 2 electrons or holes per moiré unit cell We have studied a nearest-neighbor electron hopping model for twisted bi-layer graphene. A commensurate twist about a Bernal stack is made, resulting in a superhoneycomb of Bernal stacks. (See Fig. The nearest-neighbor electron hopping model also shows appreciable breaking of valley degeneracy of the flat bands near the magic twist angle. In particular, Fig. The phase factors and minus signs in Figure i ̈δr B{A p ́q`k j ̈δr B{A p`qs xxk i , B, ́|H|k j , A, `yy " ́e ́ipG i ́Gj q ̈C 2 ÿ i ̈δr A{B p ́q`k j ̈δr A{B p`qs xxk i , B, ́|H|k j , B, `yy " ́ÿ δr B{B t p0q K l e ir ́k i ̈δr B{B p ́q`k j ̈δr B{B p`qs ,