Solution-based soft matter self-assembly (SA) promises unique materials properties from approaches including additive manufacturing/three-dimensional (3D) printing. We report direct ink writing derived, hierarchically porous transition metal nitride superconductors (SCs) and precursor oxides, structure-directed by Pluronics-family block copolymer (BCP) SA and heat treated in various environments. SCs with periodic lattices on three length scales show record nanoconfinement-induced upper critical field enhancements correlated with BCP molar mass, attaining values of 50 T for NbN and 8.1 T for non-optimized TiN samples, the first mapping of a tailorable SC property onto a macromolecular parameter. They reach surface areas above 120 m 2 /g, the highest reported for compound SCs to date. Embedded printing enables the first BCP directed mesoporous non-self-supporting helical SCs. Results suggest that additive manufacturing may open pathways to mesoporous SCs with not only a variety of macroscopic form factors but enhanced properties from intrinsic, SA-derived mesostructures with substantial academic and technological promise. Additive manufacturing / three-dimensional (3D) printing dramatically expands the accessible range of form factors and has been extensively used in the field of soft matter Here, we report transition metal compounds accessible through sol-gel chemistry The ink is composed of Pluronics-family BCPs mixed with transition metal sols hydrolyzed from metal alkoxides in acidic ethanol solutions. The syringe pump-type print head extrudes the ink into a dish containing either hexane for periodic cubic woodpile structures or gel-like 25 % Pluronic F127 by mass in water for periodic helical structures. After drying and annealing, (b) 3D printed Pluronics-sol hybrid woodpiles with self-assembled periodic hexagonal mesostructures and helices are calcined in air to yield (c) mesoporous transition metal oxides. After further heat treatments in ammonia and carburizing gas (mixture of methane, hydrogen, and nitrogen) at higher temperatures up to 950 °C, oxides are converted to (d) mesoporous superconducting transition metal nitride helices and hexagonally ordered woodpiles with cubic rocksalt atomic lattices. We first selected amphiphilic Pluronics-family PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO ABA-type BCP F127 as the structure-directing agent for an inorganic niobia sol (Fig. properties of 3D printed structures. (a) Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and (b) wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) profiles for 3D printed Pluronic F127-niobia sol hybrid and resulting oxide and nitride-type structures. Ticks in (a) denote relative scattering vector (q) positions (1: 3:2) of Bragg reflections for hexagonal structures (symmetry group P6mm). Dark red and magenta ticks in (b) represent relative intensities and q positions of peaks of rocksalt δ-NbN (PDF #01-089-5007) and NbC (PDF #03-065-8781), respectively. They superimpose so closely that they are difficult to distinguish in (b). (c) Nitrogen adsorption (solid line) and desorption (dashed line) curves of mesoporous oxide and nitride. (d) Corresponding pore size distributions derived from the Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) model. V0 is the volume of adsorbed nitrogen gas at standard temperature and pressure p °. p/p °, gas pressure p divided by p °, is the relative pressure. V is the pore volume and W is the pore width. (e) Plot of magnetic moments normalized by sample mass (μ) and (f) plot of electrical resistance (R) of nitride samples as a function of temperature (T). FC, field cooling; ZFC, zero-field cooling. Color codes in (c-f) are the same as in (a, b). After thermal treatments at lower temperatures (40 to 60 °C) to remove residual solvents and further the condensation of the niobia sol, calcination in air at 450 °C decomposed the Pluronics BCP and resulted in white niobium oxide woodpiles with each dimension isotropically shrinking by about 30% relative to the hybrids (Fig. The conversion of low molar mass Pluronics BCP SA-directed amorphous oxide materials with periodic mesoscale lattices to crystalline nitrides in general, and superconducting nitrides in particular, has remained a major challenge After treating the white amorphous oxides in ammonia at 550 °C and in carburizing gas at 750 °C, woodpile structures turned reflective black (Fig. After establishing access to 3D printed and BCP SA directed porous SCs, we explored the ability to control SC properties using the Pluronic-niobia sol system. Heat treatments of oxide samples to 750 °C in the second step were at the lower end of temperatures necessary for achieving superconductivity, consistent with material heterogeneities as suggested, e.g., by kinks in the resistance curves (Fig. To that end, we varied the first (under NH3) and second (under carburizing gas) heating step temperatures from 500 °C to 600 °C and 750 °C to 950 °C, respectively. For these ranges, we did not observe structure collapse, presumably because once nitrides are formed via the first-step treatment under ammonia, the temperature in the second-step treatment remains far below the nitride melting point (Tm(NbN) > 2,500 °C), minimizing Ostwald ripening In contrast to typical metallic behavior, the resistance, R, of a 3D printed NbN-type material treated first to 500 °C and then to 950 °C increased upon cooling before reaching a Tc above 15 K (Fig. For type-II SCs the upper critical magnetic field, Bc2, defined as Bc2 = Φ0 2πξ To demonstrate that BCP SA based wall thickness induced confinement effects contribute to observed Bc2(0) enhancements, we performed two control experiments. The first was to leave samples in the ambient air for extended periods of time allowing for surface oxide layer formation These estimates are all consistent with stronger mesostructural confinement associated with smaller physical nitride dimensions after oxidation leading to the observed increases in Bc2(0). Diffuse electron scattering at wall surfaces will decrease the mean free path, ltr of electrons; in the dirty limit [ltr ≪ 0(T)], Ginzburg-Landau theory predicts (T) = 0.855 [0(T) ltr] 1/2 . Assuming ltr is comparable to the wall width (4.6 nm) we would expect (0) no smaller than roughly 0.855 × (6 nm × 4.6 nm) 1/2 = 4 ~ 5 nm, i.e., a value much greater than observed. We conclude that confinement introduces nontrivial effects on superconductivity in this system. The second set of experiments to demonstrate BCP SA-based wall thickness-induced confinement effects was tuning mesostructure-associated wall thickness by varying BCP molar mass. To that end, in addition to F127 (≈ 12.6 kg/mol), alternative Pluronics-family BCPs F108 (≈ 14.6 kg/mol) and P123 (≈ 5.8 kg/mol) with larger and smaller molar mass, respectively, than F127 were chosen for the preparation of mesoporous NbN-type SCs (Figs. Similar confinement effects were demonstrated for TiN. Direct nitridation of as-made hybrids in ammonia mitigated crystal coarsening and better retained the mesostructure directed by F127 compared with a two-step treatment via the oxide (Fig. Results in Fig. One important application of high-Bc2 SCs is as coils in superconducting nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) magnets. Brittle SCs are often challenging to bend into the coil-type shapes of electromagnets. What if in the future one could directly 3D print such complex non-self-supporting shapes? Compared with woodpiles, where printed layers underneath act as a support for building an overhanging feature above, non-self-supporting structures such as helices are challenging to form via DIW. Towards this goal and taking inspiration from embedded printing and other variants After cooling below the gel-to-fluid transition temperature (≈ 10 °C) for the F127 gel-like support, 3D printed periodic helices of various radii ranging from 2 mm to 4 mm and a pitch of 1.5 mm were removed and transferred to ethanol for rinsing (Fig. Resulting 3D printing derived and Pluronics BCP SA directed oxide and nitride-type periodic helical materials treated first to 550 °C under ammonia and then to 750 °C in carburizing gas were highly porous, reaching BET specific surface areas of 298 m 2 /g and 129 m 2 /g, respectively (Fig. Mesoporous SCs and precursor oxides with Pluronics BCP SA-directed mesostructures were fabricated by direct ink writing and subsequent thermal treatments in various gas environments. Either a hydrophobic precipitation bath or a gel-like support matrix helped maintain the integrity of complex 3D printed structures, including non-self-supporting helices. The work combined the freedom to choose various macroscopic periodic form factors by additive manufacturing with the periodic mesostructural control of BCP SA directed highly functional inorganic materials with periodic atomic lattices. Results suggest that solution-based 3D printing approaches enable generation of hierarchically ordered porous SCs with properties substantially enhanced over bulk behavior by nanoconfinement, and variable form factors for a range of applications including sensing and energy. Furthermore, such SCs accessible from commercially available chemicals, polymers, and 3D printing equipment should enable a plethora of advanced studies in various scientific communities, e.g., linking the hitherto largely disconnected fields of additive manufacturing, mesoporous materials, and interfacial properties of correlated electron systems, and facilitate bridging fundamental studies with application-oriented "proof-ofprinciple" device developments. 1.1 Ink preparation 0.40 g Pluronic F127 (Sigma-Aldrich) was mixed with 0.40 g anhydrous ethanol (C2H5OH, Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99.5 %), 0.185 mL 37 % hydrochloric acid (EMD Millipore), and 0.285 mL glacial acetic acid (CH3COOH, Macron), and stirred until fully dissolved. For printing structures directed by other Pluronic block copolymers (BCPs), the F127 was replaced by the same amount of F108 (Alrich Chemistry) or P123 (BASF). For P123, F127, and F108, (x, y) subscripts in the formula PEOx-PPOy-PEOx are (20, 70), (100, 65), and (133, 50), respectively, i.e., the PEO block size hybridizing with niobia sol nanoparticles decreases in the sequence F108, F127, and P123, while the PPO block size responsible for the pore size in the mesoporous materials decreases in the reverse sequence. While stirring vigorously, 0.625 mL niobium(V) ethoxide (Nb(OC2H5)5, Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %, metal basis) was quickly injected into the F127 solution. For inks made with P123, up to 0.675 mL niobium ethoxide was added. The clear F127-niobia sol solution was left stirring for 3 days before being loaded into a 30 mL syringe (BD) with a tapered dispensing tip (Nordson, 27 gauge), or a blunt needle (CML Supply, 25 gauge, up to one and half inches long) for embedded printing. 50 μL of ethanol solutions of methylene blue (1 mg/mL) or Sudan I (saturated) could be added to generate a colored ink. For inks containing titania sol, the materials and procedures were the same except that the 0.625 mL niobium(V) ethoxide was substituted with 0.74 mL titanium(IV) tetraisopropoxide (Ti(OCH(CH3)2)4, 99.995 %, Thermo Scientific Chemicals). The ink containing syringe was mounted on an SDS30 print head connected to a Hyrel SR 3D printer (Fig. For woodpile structures, the print head would move at a speed of 100 to 300 mm/min relative to the platform along the same path 8 times consecutively before switching directions to build enough thickness for each strut while allowing thin layers of ink to precipitate thoroughly in hexane. A slower speed of 100 mm/min was used for F127-titania sol inks, and the woodpile top during printing was kept just below the hexane surface so as to reliably produce high-quality printed structures. A typical cubic woodpile measured 7 × 7 × 7 mm 3 , with 1 mm between adjacent in-plane struts and a total of 240 layers. After printing was accomplished, hexane was poured out and a cover dish was put on the printing dish with the printed part still wet. In this configuration printed parts were aged in two steps before further heat treatments at higher temperatures to generate oxides and nitrides. In the first step, samples were brought to a slightly elevated temperature of 40 °C for one day. Samples were subsequently heat treated at 60 degrees in a second step for another day. After aging, residual solvents had evaporated and the BCP hybrid sol-gel materials consolidated. For embedded printing, the printing dish was filled with a gel-like support matrix made from 25 % F127 by mass in water. On top of this gel-like matrix was deposited via pipette a ≈ 2 mm thick liquid layer of 21 % F127 by mass in water. This layer allowed backfilling of the crevices formed by the needle traversing through the support matrix during printing with F127 in water. In contrast to the multilayer approach used during printing of woodpile structures in hexane, there was no such multilayer approach taken for printing helices, i.e., there was no repetition along the same path during the embedded printing. The radii of the helices as set in the G-codes varied from 2 to 4 mm and the pitch was 1.5 mm (Movie S2). The print head speed was 100 mm/min to 150 mm/min. After the printing process concluded, like for the DIW into hexane, samples were aged in two steps. In the first step, a cover dish was sealed by parafilm with the printing dish containing the matrix and the printed part, which was then kept at room temperature for 1 day. In the second step, the sealed dishes with the printed samples were heated at 60 °C for another day to further consolidate printed hybrid materials. After these two aging steps and before further heat treatments of the printed parts, the support matrix and the fluid filler were separated from the printed parts by cooling below the gel-to-fluid transition temperature (≈ 10 °C) so that the printed parts could be picked out and rinsed with ethanol (EMD Millipore, 96%) (Movie S5). Once residual ethanol had evaporated, parts were ready for further heat treatments at higher temperatures. The BCP-niobia hybrid printed parts were first heated at a ramp rate of 1 °C/min to 450 °C with a dwell time of 3 h in air in a tube furnace with an alumina tube of 1 inch diameter and ≈ 1 m length. To further improve structural integrity, a preceding heating step in nitrogen gas with the same ramp rate, dwell time, and dwell temperature could be used. The resulting niobium oxide parts were then heated in another tube furnace with a quartz tube of 1 inch diameter and ≈ 60 cm length under ammonia from room temperature (≈ 20 °C) to 500 °C to 600 °C in 100 min with a dwell time of 210 min, and subsequently followed by heating to the final highest temperature of 750 °C to 950 °C at a ramp rate of 20 °C/min with a dwell time of 90 min. Ammonia gas (NH3, Phoenix Electronics, electronic grade) flowed through the tube furnace at a flow rate of 20 L/h until it was switched (after being held for 180 min at the intermediate, e.g., 550 °C, temperature) to carburizing gas (methane, CH4, hydrogen, H2, and nitrogen, N2, mixed in a molar ratio of 16:4:80, Airgas) at a flow rate of 15 L/h. The NbN-type samples were left to cool to room temperature while nitrogen gas flowed for 2 h to purge the tube. The nitrogen gas flow rate was lowered to 10 L/h at temperatures below 450 °C. The BCP-titania hybrid printed parts were heated at a ramp rate of 1 °C/min to either 300 °C or to 400 °C with a dwell time of 3 h in air in the tube furnace with the alumina tube. 300 °C treated samples would result in amorphous titania while 400 °C treated samples would show the formation of crystalline anatase. The nitridation step took place all in ammonia using the same heating protocol as for niobia, using the amorphous oxide calcined in air at 300 °C . Superconducting TiN in Fig. 1.4 NbN-type samples prepared from poly(isoprene-b-styrene-b-ethylene oxide) Procedures described in prior publications 1.5 Characterization Optical images were captured by a Samsung Galaxy S8 phone, a Huawei P40 pro+ phone or an Andonstar microscope. Fig. Pieces broken from printed parts (oxide or nitride) were imaged using a Zeiss Gemini500 scanning electron microscope with an in-lens EsB detector. The accelerating voltage was 2 kV and the working distance was around 4 mm. No conductive coating needed to be sputtered onto samples prior to imaging. SEM-based pore size and wall thickness estimates were obtained using the ImageJ software. Results were averaged over at least 10 measurements per estimate. Pulverized NbN-type samples from printed parts were suspended in absolute methanol and vortex mixed. 5 μL of the suspension was placed on a lacey carbon supported copper TEM grid (size 200 mesh) and left to evaporate. Samples were imaged in a Spectra 300 TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a cold field emission gun at 300 kV. Small-angle and wide-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS and WAXS) were performed on pieces broken from printed parts at the Soft Matter Interfaces (SMI, 12-ID) beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II) or the Functional Materials Beamline (FMB, ID3B) and BioSAXS Beamline at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). At SMI, the X-ray energy was 16.1 keV. The SAXS detector was a Pilatus 1M pixel array detector at a distance of 5.00 m from the sample. The WAXS detector was a Pilatus 900KW pixel array detector. Two-dimensional (2D) scattering signals collected at various detector positions were stitched together to construct the WAXS scattering profiles over the entire q (scattering vector) range. At FMB, the X-ray energy was 9.79 keV. The SAXS detector was a Pilatus 300K pixel array detector at a distance of 1.43 m from the sample. The WAXS detectors were two Pilatus 200K pixel array detectors. At BioSAXS, the X-ray energy was 11.24 keV. The SAXS detector was an Eiger 4M detector at a distance of 1.78 m from the sample. All the 2D raw scattering data were processed and azimuthally integrated using custom-generated software packages at the respective beamlines. Crystal unit cell size and the coherently scattering domain size were obtained by performing whole pattern fitting (Rietveld refinement) against NbN (PDF #01-089-5007) using the JADE software (Fig. Nitrogen sorption was conducted on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 Accelerated Surface Area and Porosimetry System at 77 K. Printed and heat treated parts were degassed overnight at 120 °C prior to measurement. The surface area was obtained based on the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) theory. Pore size distributions were calculated using the non-local density functional theory (NLDFT) model or the Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) model provided by the associated instrument software. The NLDFT model assumed nitrogen in cylindrical pores with oxide surface. The adsorption curve was used for BJH model analysis with Faass correction. All nitrogen sorption data shown in this paper for NbN-type materials were obtained from samples heat treated to 750 °C in carburizing gas. Rheological ink sample characterization was performed on a DHR3 rheometer by TA Instruments using a cone-and-plate geometry at 25 °C. The diameter for both cone and plate was 40 mm. The cone angle was 2 ° and the truncation on the cone was 63 μm. A solvent trap enclosed the geometry during measurements to minimize effects from solvent evaporation. Apart from being directly measured, the ink was also separately coated on cone and plate parts and then immersed in hexane for various times (Fig. Samples were first pulverized and then analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Nexsa G2 Spectrometer with an operating pressure of approximately 1×10 Thermogravimetric analysis was performed on 3D printed F127-niobia hybrid by heating at a rate of 4 °C/min in air in a TA Instruments 5500 thermogravimetric analyzer. A Quantum Design Dynacool Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) was used to collect VSM data. The sample mass was determined on a Cahn 28 automatic electrobalance. A printed sample piece was loaded into a pair of plastic holders that were then pressed into brass holders. Samples were cooled down to 1.8 K under zero external field (zero-field cooling, or ZFC) or 100 or 1000 Oe external field (field cooling, or FC). The sample's magnetic moment was measured as the temperature was ramped to 20 K at a rate of 1 K/min. For field dependent magnetization measurements, the external field was ramped to 50 kOe, then to -50 kOe, and back to 0 at a rate of 100 Oe/s. Sample magnetic moments were measured with an averaging time of 1 s per measurement. For flux exclusion calculations, it was assumed that the mass of a 3D printed structure was proportional to the volume enclosed by the sample's outer surface. For example, the woodpile nitride shown in Fig. Field-dependent electrical resistance was measured on a Quantum Design PPMS equipped with either a 9 T or 14 T magnet. A sample piece broken from a printed part was fixed using cryogenic varnish on a silicon substrate with a 100 nm wet thermal oxide finish. The substrate's four corners were pre-patterned with four 40 nm gold contact pads with 20 nm chromium as the adhesion layer. 503 silver conductive paint (Electron Microscopy Sciences) was used to make four contacts between the sample and the gold contact pads (Fig. The silicon substrate carrying the sample was mounted and bonded through aluminum wires onto a Quantum Design resistivity puck using a West Bond 747630E wire bonder. After loading the puck into the PPMS, low-temperature resistance values were collected from 2.5 K up to 25 K at a direct current of 100 μA for each magnetic field from 0 up to 14 T at an increment of 2 T. For TiN samples, the magnetic field ranged from 0 to 2 T in increments of 0.2 T. A full temperature range up to 305 K of resistance was also measured as the sample warmed up to room temperature. Each data point was averaged from 5 or 25 measurements. Tc was determined as the midpoint of the resistance curve. The extrapolation error derived from the plots of Bc2 versus T is the standard error of the yintercept, expressed as 0.69 structures of both NbC and NbN that are difficult to distinguish due to the very close lattice parameters (4.39 Å for NbN versus 4.43 Å NbC) 2.2 Bc2(0) of NbN-type materials heat treated at 750 °C and structure-directed by ISO Since the high critical field values of our NbN-type SCs exceeded the capability of the magnet inside the PPMS (limited to 14 T, vide supra), Bc2(0) values were extrapolated from the slope of the linear regression curve, dBc2 dT , near Tc through Bc2(0) = 0.69Tc dBc2 dT T=T c , according to the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory In Fig. The thickness could be alternatively obtained by subtracting the pore size, W, determined by gas sorption from the correlation length between adjacent pore centers, d0, determined by SAXS. d0 can be calculated from q * of the primary peak position via d0 = 4π 3q * . Note that d calculated in this way represents the thinnest part in a perfect hexagonal structure with cylindrical pores. However, the choice of different models used for generating pore size distributions resulted in large variations of W. Using the nitride sample treated to 750 °C under carburizing gas as an example, W was found to be 9.0 nm from the NLDFT model (Fig. During DIW, a slower printing speed of 100 mm/min was used, likely due to the slower coagulation kinetics of the F127-titania ink in hexane. Calcination in air and subsequent heat treatment in ammonia yielded cubic oxide and nitride woodpiles, respectively (Fig. Compared with its niobium counterpart, TiN had a greater propensity for crystal coarsening, as reflected by the diminished SAXS peak signal (Fig. *