Jorge Hirsch drew attention to the contradiction of the Meissner effect with Faraday's law and the law of angular momentum conservation. This article draws attention to the fact that the angular momentum can change without any force only due to quantization in both microscopic and macroscopic quantum phenomena. But if in the first case this change cannot exceed the Planck constant, then in the second case this change is macroscopic due to a violation of the correspondence principle. To explain the violation of the correspondence principle, Lev Landau postulated in 1941 that microscopic particles in superfluid helium and superconductor cannot move separately. Quantization can change not only the angular momentum, but also the kinetic energy of a superconducting condensate on a macroscopic amount. For this reason, the Meissner effect and other macroscopic quantum phenomena contradict the second law of thermodynamics. The reluctance of physicists to admit the violation of the second law of thermodynamics provoked a false understanding of the phenomenon of superconductivity and obvious contradictions in books on superconductivity. The theory of superconductivity, proposed in 1957 by J. Bardeen, L.N. Cooper and J.R. Schrieffer (BCS), is considered an outstanding achievement of theoretical physics of the 20th century. But Jorge Hirsch tries to convince the community of superconductivity researchers in his numerous articles and in the book One of Hirsch's main arguments against the BCS theory is the inability of this theory to solve the puzzle The essence of the Meissner effect puzzle is that the shielding superconducting currents (which by W. H. Keesom called persistent currents In the article The puzzle of the conservation laws noticed by Hirsch and the smart students in the Meissner effect is not new in quantum mechanics. Bohr and his co-authors expressed doubts about the conservation laws in elementary quantum processes in an article Quantum phenomena were first observed at the atomic, microscopic level, and quantum theory was created on the basis of the correspondence principle, according to which quantum-theoretic conclusions converge to classical results at the macroscopic level, at which the quantum of action, i.e. Planck's constant h, can be considered an infinitesimal value h → 0. A quantum theory that does not violate the correspondence principle may be called a microscopic quantum theory. A theory must violate the correspondence principle in order to describe macroscopic quantum phenomena. Such a theory may be called a macroscopic quantum theory. The angular momentum can change without any known force, only by quantization in accordance with both microscopic and macroscopic quantum theory. But according to the microscopic quantum theory, i.e. Bohr's quantization and Schrodinger's wave mechanics, this change cannot exceed the reduced Planck constant = h/2π due to the correspondence principle, while according to the macroscopic quantum theory, i.e. the conventional theory of superconductivity The next section reminds readers about the sense and history of the correspondence principle. The persistent current of electrons observed in normal metal rings Hirsch draws the reader's attention in the articles Hirsch is one of the few superconductivity experts who have noticed the discrepancy between the observation of macroscopic quantum phenomena and the Bohr correspondence principle. He writes about the electric current in a superconducting ring, which persists for years without fading, like electron orbits in atoms: "It also has important consequences due to what is known as 'Bohr's correspondence principle'. In 1913, Niels Bohr relied on the principle that microscopic physics should smoothly evolve into macroscopic physics as the dimensions of the system grow in order to deduce the laws that govern the behavior of the hydrogen atom. Surprisingly, however, this principle is not taken into account in the contemporary science of superconductivity. It relies on microscopic physics and disregards Bohr's correspondence principle" Max Jammer wrote about the correspondence principle in his book about the history of quantum mechanics: "The conceptual foundation of the correspondence principle was based on the assumption that quantum theory or at least its formalism contains classical mechanics as a limiting case. This idea was expressed by Planck as early as 1906, when he showed that in the limit h → 0 quantum-theoretic conclusions converge toward classical results, or, as he said: 'The classical theory can simply be characterized by the fact that the quantum of action becomes infinitesimally small'" The discreteness of the spectrum of permitted states is one of the main differences between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics. The discreteness of the spectrum cannot be noticeable when the energy difference between the permitted states is much less than the thermal energy per particle ∆E ≪ k B T . The correspondence principle implies that there should be a transition from a discrete spectrum ∆E ≫ k B T to a continuous one ∆E ≪ k B T with an increase in the size, for example, of the orbit, since the discreteness of the spectrum is proportional to the square of the Planck constant ∆E ∝ 2 . An experimental example of the intermediate discreteness ∆E ≈ k B T , when the magnitude of the quantum effect depends exponentially on size and temperature, will be considered in the next section. It is believed generalized this postulate to electron orbits of any shape. According to the de Broglie relation p = h/λ between wavelength of an electron λ and its momentum p = mv, stationary orbits must correspond to an integer number of the wavelengths: l dlp = h l dl1/λ = hl/λ = hn. According to the Schrodinger wave mechanics l dlp = l dl∇φ = 2π n since the momentum of a quantum particle p = ∇φ when the value |Ψ( r)| does not depend on the coordinate r. This requirement can be applied to both atomic orbits and a ring with a radius r. The differences in velocity v = p/m = n/rm and kinetic energy between adjacent permitted states n + 1 and n decrease with an increase in the mass m of a particle and the ring radius r. Relation (2) proves that Bohr quantization satisfies the correspondence principle: the spectrum (2) is discrete ∆E ≫ k B T at a microscopic radius r and mass m, and is continuous ∆E ≪ k B T at a macroscopic radius r or mass m. The Schrodinger wave mechanics also satisfies the correspondence principle. The Schrodinger equation converges toward the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation for the action S of a particle in the Planck limit h → 0, more exactly when the action of the particle has a macroscopic magnitude S ≫ According to the correspondence principle, the quantum effects associated with Bohr's quantization Quantization effects can be observed and depends on the temperature only at an intermediate discreteness ∆E ≈ k B T . The measurement results of a such quantum phenomenon as the persistent current of electrons observed in normal metal nano-rings with radius r ≈ 300 ÷ 800 nm of a particle with a charge q cannot be equal to zero in this case, when the magnetic flux Φ = l dlA inside the ring is not divisible Φ = nΦ 0 by the flux quantum Φ 0 = 2π /q. The persistent current of electrons The persistent current observed in The persistent current observed in superconducting rings Strong discreteness occurs in atoms due to the small radius of electron orbits r B ≈ 0.05 nm = 5 10 -11 m. But how can be observed strong discreteness in rings with a large radius r ≈ 2 μm = 2 10 -6 m of particles with a charge q, a mass m and a density n s makes it possible to describe macroscopic quantum phenomena observed in superconductors. The relationship between the current density j along any closed path l, the magnetic flux l dlA = Φ inside this path and the quantum number n can be deduced from (4) using the requirement l dl∇φ = n2π that the GL wave function Ψ GL = |Ψ GL | exp iφ must be single-valued at any point in the superconductor. Here λ L = (m/μ 0 q 2 n s ) 0.5 is a value commonly referred to as the London penetration depth. The persistent current in a superconducting ring with a small cross section s ≪ λ 2 L used in since the current density j does not change along s in this case. L k = (λ 2 L /s)μ 0 2πr = m2πr/sq 2 n s is the kinetic inductance of a ring with radius r, cross-section s and density n s of superconducting particles with charge q. The spectrum of permitted values of the kinetic energy of the persistent current is strongly discrete at the values of the amplitude I p,A = Φ 0 /2L k of the oscillation of the persistent current experimentally observed I p,A (T ) ≈ 200 μA(1 -T /T c ) in rings with a radius r ≈ 2 μm and a cross-section s ≈ 0.01 ÷ 0.02 μm 2 The strong discreteness ∆E ≫ k B T of the energy spectrum ( The strong discreteness ∆E ≫ k B T is also confirmed by the absence of an exponential decrease of the persistent current with increasing temperature. The amplitude I p,A = Φ 0 /2L k = (q s/mr)n s of the persistent current of Cooper pairs depends on temperature Expression (5) of the GL theory The GL theory According to the GL theory Hirsch believes that the contradiction with the conservation law is the puzzle of the theory of superconductivity. But a comparison of the persistent current of electrons and Cooper pairs reveals that this contradiction is a problem of quantum theory and a violation of the correspondence principle rather than the theory of supercon-ductivity. The electric current I = sen e v decays during a short relaxation time τ RL = L/R in a normal metal ring with the resistance R = 2πrρ/s and the inductance L without an electric field 2πrE = -dΦ/dt = 0. The resistance is not zero in a normal metal because of electron scattering which, reduces the average electron velocity v to zero in the absence of an electromotive force F e = eE = 0. The average velocity can be non-zero v = 0 during a long time t ≫ τ RL due to the force balance F e + F dis = 0, when the dissipation force F dis = 0, which is non-zero due to electron scattering, is balanced by the electromotive force F e = eE = 0. But in the rings with non-zero resistivity ρ ≈ 10 -8 Ωm and with an elastic electron scattering length l sc ≈ 40 nm that is much smaller than the circumference of the ring 2πr ≥ 1800 nm Thus, the angular momentum of the electron should change from pr = n to pr = Φ/Φ 0 due to scattering and from pr = Φ/Φ 0 to pr = n due to quantization Quantum mechanics does not claim to be an accurate space-time description of quantum phenomena. Therefore, the persistent current of electrons, which was first reliably observed in 2009 This explanation According to GL theory The observations Thus, the microscopic quantum theory, that is, the Bohr quantization and the Schrodinger wave mechanics, does not contradict the conservation law due to the correspondence principle, according to which the change in angular momentum due to the quantization (1) cannot exceed Planck's constant ∆p r ≤ . The creators of the conventional theory of superconductivity From the very beginning, it was assumed that the Meissner effect is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon since it contradicts the laws of classical physics. Lev Landau was the first to propose in 1941 the theory of the Meissner effect as a quantum phenomenon in an article In fact, L.D. Landau explained in the beginning of his 1941 paper why microscopic quantum theory, such as Schrodinger's wave mechanics, cannot describe macroscopic quantum phenomena: "Tisza Schrodinger's wave mechanics considers a degenerate ideal Bose gas in a box with macroscopic sizes L x , L y , L z as the states of atoms with a mass m. The kinetic energy of the atom z is determined by its mass m, by the macroscopic sizes L x , L y , L z of the box and by the integer numbers n x , n y , n z . Even if all the atoms of the Bose-Einstein condensate are at the lowest level n x = 0, n y = 0, n z = 0, they require negligible energy h 2 /2mL 2 x , or h 2 /2mL 2 y , or h 2 /2mL 2 z to move to the next level n x = 1, or n y = 1, or n z = 1. Consequently, L.D. Landau The energy difference between adjacent permitted states n x , n y , n z in a box with macroscopic sizes L x , L y , L z should be negligible and correspond to a continuous spectrum z ≪ k B T when microscopic particles can move separately, as microscopic quantum mechanics assumes. Landau considered the motion of helium II liquid, rather than of individual helium II atoms, to create his theory of superfluidity of 4 He liquid Landau used this postulate at the end of the article Richard Feynman drew attention to this fundamental difference between microscopic quantum mechanics and the theory of superconductivity in the Section "The Schrodinger Equation in a Classical Context: A Seminar on Superconductivity" of his Lectures on Physics This fundamental difference is especially evident when comparing the theory of the persistent current of electrons is more by a multiplier equal to the total number of Cooper pairs N s . This number is very large N s = 2πrsn s ≫ 1 in a real ring with a cross section s ≪ λ 2 L and a circumference l = 2πr. The discreteness L " p /2 generated by the persistent current I p at s ≪ λ 2 L , since the kinetic inductance L k ≈ (λ 2 L /s)μ 0 2πr exceeds the magnetic inductance L f ≈ μ 0 2πr in this case of weak screening We cannot doubt that the persistent current (6) appears in the ring during its transition to the superconducting state due to quantization (1), since this is not only a result of the GL theory Before the discovery of the Meissner effect in 1933, W.H. Keesom and other physicists thought that the transition of a bulk superconductor to the normal state in a magnetic field is irreversible. A well-known expert on superconductivity, D. Shoenberg, wrote in 1952: "At that time it was assumed that the transition in a magnetic field is substantially irreversible, since the superconductor was considered to be a perfect conductor (in the sense discussed in Chapter II), in which, when the superconductivity is destroyed, the surface currents associated with the field are damped with the generation of Joule heat" W.H. Keesom actually set the task This contradiction, as and the contradiction with the law of angular momentum conservation and Faraday's law, is a consequence of a violation of the correspondence principle: the macroscopic persistent current For many years, no one noticed that the conventional theory of superconductivity Although no centuries-old faith can have a scientific basis, if only because our ideas about the laws of physics have changed fundamentally several times over the past centuries. M. Smoluchowski wrote in 1914: "We call the Carnot principle, intuitively realized by him, the second law of thermodynamics since Clausius's time" which he postulated. In Carnot's time, heat was considered a liquid, phlogiston. But the relationship between the maximum efficiency of any heat engine and the impossibility of a perpetual motion machine is valid in various concepts of heat. Thus, we must use fuels to create a temperature difference T he -T co between the heater T he and the cooler T co in order to get useful energy from heat due to the faith in the impossibility of a perpetual motion machine. When, starting from Clausius's time, heat began to consider to be a form of energy, it became clear that the possibility of a perpetual motion machine would be inevitable in accordance with the law of energy conservation if all physical processes could be reversible. Carnot, in fact, postulated that the conversion of any energy into heat is an irreversible process. The contradiction between the irreversibility postulated by the second law of thermodynamics and the reversibility of physical laws provoked a struggle between thermodynamic-energy and atomistic-kinetic worldviews in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, see Ludwig Boltzmann died in 1906 as an unrecognized scientist. But already in 1914 M. Smoluchowski wrote: "Thus, today the issue is viewed in a completely different way than twenty years ago. Atomistics is recognized as the foundation of modern physics in general; the second law of thermodynamics has once and for all lost its significance as an unshakable dogma, as one of the basic principles of physics" M. Smoluchowski wrote about what processes were considered irreversible in the 19th century: "In the phenomena of fluctuation experimentally observed in recent years, it seems extremely strange to a proponent of classical thermodynamics that he sees with his own eyes the reverse course of processes that are usually regarded as irreversible. Because, according to the classical theory, the second law of thermodynamics should disappear if at least one process, regarded as irreversible, admits reversibility" The kinetic energy of the surface persistent currents pushing the magnetic flux out of the bulk superconductor due to the Meissner effect is much higher than the energy of thermal fluctuations k B T . Therefore, the Meissner effect contradicts the second law of thermodynamics, if we think "that the transition in a magnetic field is substantially irreversible, since • • •, when the superconductivity destroyed, the surface currents associated with the field are damped with the generation of Joule heat" 1) Because of the work which is performed by an electromotive force U = dΦ/dt on the solenoid, which maintains the magnetic field H = H c and the solenoid current I = LH when the magnetic flux in a superconducting cylinder radius R, length L and volume V = LπR 2 increases from Φ = BπR 2 = 0 in the superconducting state to Φ = μ 0 H c πR 2 in the normal state; 2) Because half of the work A sn = V μ 0 H 2 c creates the energy of the magnetic field E m = V μ 0 H 2 c /2 in the volume of the superconductor V in the normal state and increases the free energy during the transition; 3) Due to the generation of Joule heat at the dissipation of the Foucault currents induced by the second half of the work A sn -E m = V μ 0 H 2 c /2; 4) The magnetic flux cannot be pushed out of a perfect conductor, and therefore the superconductor cannot return to its original state in a time-constant external magnetic field H = H c in accordance with physics known in 1933, Faraday's law and the law of angular momentum conservation. H c (T ) is the critical magnetic field of a bulk superconductor at a temperature below the critical temperature T 1 < T c . F nH and F sH are the free energy in the normal state and superconducting state in an external magnetic field H = H c (T ). The Meissner effect eliminated only the fourth cause and could not logically eliminate the other causes, since the effect observed during the transition from the normal state to the superconducting state could not change the transition from the superconducting state to the normal state. Although the Meissner effect contradicts Faraday's law, it cannot completely cancel this law according to which the work (10) must be performed when the magnetic flux changes from Φ = 0 to Φ = μ 0 H c πR 2 . Despite the obvious falsity of the conclusion made after the discovery of the Meissner effect, after 1933 all physicists were convinced that the superconducting transition in a magnetic field H = H c (T ) is the first-order phase transition. In order to eliminate the contradiction with the second law of thermodynamics, in addition to this confidence, it was necessary to solve the task set by W.H. Keesom W.H. Keesom, at least, set the task of eliminating the third reason, according to which the superconducting transition in the critical magnetic field H = H c (T ) cannot be considered a phase transition. The first and second reasons were ignored, although W.H. Keesom wrote about the work (10) A sn = V μ 0 H 2 c in 1934: "Suppose we are realizing a cycle as considered by Gorter, 1) Cooling from just above the normal transition point T 0 > T c to a temperature T 1 < T c , with external field H = 0, 2) applying a magnetic field H, just below the threshold value at T 1 < T c , 3) increasing the temperature to T 0 > T c , the field H being kept constant, and 4) switching off the magnetic field H = 0. In passing (at the beginning of process 3) the threshold value curve H c (T ), the electromotive force on the solenoid that maintains the magnetic field must do an amount of work equal to twice the energy of the field that comes into existence in the metal" W.H. Keesom understood that the energy of the magnetic field E m = V μ 0 H 2 c /2 arises only in the normal state and is zero V BH c /2 = 0 in the superconducting state when the magnetic flux density B = 0 in the volume V of a superconductor. He knew that the magnetic field should increase the free energy of the normal state and should not influence on the free energy of the superconducting state W.H. Keesom also knew that only half of the work A sn = V μ 0 H 2 c is spent on creating the energy of the magnetic field E m = V μ 0 H 2 c /2 in the normal state, and called the other half of the work as 'surplus work'. The opinion of W.H. Keesom and other physicists about the surplus work changed after the discovery of the Meissner effect. W.H. Keesom wrote in 1934: "Till now we imagined that the surplus work served to deliver the Joule-heat developed by the persistent currents the metal getting resistance while passing to the nonsupraconductive condition. As, however, the conception of Joule-heat can rather difficult be reconciled with reversibility we think now that there must be going on another process that absorbs energy" The illusion that the Meissner effect was able to make the irreversible transition reversible arose because the bulk superconductor returns to its initial state at the transition to the superconducting state in the magnetic field H = H c (T ). But this return is observed not because the electromotive force has ceased to perform the work at the phase transition, and the work A sn = V μ 0 H 2 c performed on the system must increase its free energy F = Ω -ST , according to the law of energy conservation A sn = ∆Ω, if not all the work generates heat A sn > ∆ST . Ω is the sum of the system's internal energy. Nevertheless, after 1933, all physicists believed that superconducting transition of a bulk superconductor at H = H c (T ) is the first-order phase transition. But in order to be able to think this way, it was necessary to forget either that the free energies should be equal The equality of the free energies ( but in the superconducting state A.A. Abrikosov . This statement by Abrikosov contradicts the law of energy conservation. We have to do the work to create the energy of the magnetic field E m = V μ 0 H 2 /2. This work done on the system should increase its free energy, and A.A. Abrikosov argued that the work E m = V μ 0 H 2 /2 reduces the free energy The authors V.L. Ginzburg wrote an equation for the change of free energy during the transition from the normal to the superconducting one for the transition from the superconducting state to the normal one generates Joule heat. The surplus work allowed the authors which the authors and according to It is amazing that famous physicists The finite jump (20) cannot be deduced from ( But the equation ( The authors c during this transition in accordance with The work, calculated by C.J. Gorter and H. Casimer, has the same amount, but the opposite sign, compared to the work calculated by the authors This absurd claim that the second law of thermodynamics can be violated even without the Meissner effect is a consequence of the desire of C.J. Gorter and H. Casimer This story with the Meissner effect shows that not only superstition, but also chance can play a decisive role in science. C.J. Gorter and H. Casimer, in order to derive the basic equation of their thermodynamics of superconductors Thus, the heat should increase by the amount of the surplus work A surp = V μ 0 H 2 /2 in each Gorter cycle, contrary to the assumption of C.J. Gorter and H. Casimer The contradictions between the authors of the books, which are highlighted in the previous section, are surprising. How could it happen that for many years no one paid attention to this contradiction? V.L. Ginzburg wrote in 1946 the expression It should be said that A.A. Abrikosov used a trick to substantiate his statement. The difference in free energies after the transition and before it should be equal to the work A sn = V μ 0 H 2 c done on the superconductor, according to the expression (P.3.5) dF = dF 0 + HdB in Appendix 3 to Abrikosov's book The trick with the Gibbs free energy cannot eliminate the work A sn = V μ 0 H 2 c done during the superconducting transition at H = H c . This trick can only justify the illusion that this transition is a phase transition. The authors Hirsch drew attention to the Meissner effect puzzle because of the confidence that his theory of hole superconductivity could solve this puzzle But Hirsch is right in the sense that quantization and violation of the correspondence principle can explain the macroscopic change in the angular momentum of mobile charge carriers, but not of the crystalline lattice of superconductor ions. This is not the only puzzle that seems unsolvable. Another such puzzle is discussed in publications Hirsch has drawn attention It should be emphasized that not only this explanation, but also observations the persistent currents I p = 0 at non-zero resistance R > 0 