Symmetry plays an important role in determining the physical properties in condensed matter physics, as the symmetry operations of any physical property must include the symmetry operations of the point group of the crystal. As a consequence, crystallographic polarity and chirality are expected to have an impact on the Cooper pairing in a superconductor. While superconductivity with crystallographic polarity and chirality have both been found in a few crystalline phases separately; however, their coexistence and material realizations have not been studied. Here, by utilizing transport, Raman scattering, and transmission electron microscopy, we unveil a unique realization of superconductivity in single-crystalline Mo 3 Al 2 C (superconducting T c =8 K) with a polar charge-density-wave phase and well-defined crystallographic chirality. We show that the intriguing charge density wave order leads to a noncentrosymmetricnonpolar to polar transition below T * =155K via breaking both the translational and rotational symmetries. Superconductivity emerges in this polar and chiral crystal structure below T c =8 K. Our results establish that Mo 3 Al 2 C is a superconductor with crystallographic polarity and chirality simultaneously, and motivate future studies of unconventional superconductivity in this category. The concept of 'ferroelectric metals' was first proposed by Anderson and Blount more than half a century ago Despite these challenges, LiOsO 3 and WTe 2 /MoTe 2 are two unambiguous examples of experimentally verified polar metals, driven by polar instability which is decoupled with itinerant electrons at the Fermi level [8-10] and in-plane interlayer sliding mechanisms Since superconductivity (SC) tends to arise from itinerant electrons in a metallic system, the coexistence of ferroelectricity/polarity and superconductivity is unusual and is a topic of active discussions Among them, Li 2 Pt 3 B has been proposed to be a candidate for chiral superconductivity Superconductors with a polar and chiral crystal structure are expected to have unconventional Cooper paring, as the superconducting order parameter must respect the symmetry of the underlying crystal lattice according to the Neumann's principle. However, such type of superconductors is rare. Identifying superconductors in this category are important not only for fundamental science in the multiferroic and superconductivity community, but also for technological applications In this work, we present evidence for a new category of superconductor, Mo 3 Al 2 C, which exhibits superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of 8 K and possesses both structural polarity and chirality. The polarization is induced by a CDW order that appears below T * = 155 K, characterized by a cubic-nonpolar to rhombohedral-polar phase transition. Superconductivity emerges deep within this polar and chiral crystal structure below T c , establishing Mo 3 Al 2 C as a unique superconductor with both structural polarity and chirality. Crystal structure. Mo 3 Al 2 C has a cubic structure with space group P 4 1 32 or its enantiomorphic space group P 4 3 32 (point group O) at room temperature (Supplementary Note I). The crystal structure lacks inversion and mirror symmetries. There are four three-fold axes along the body-diagonal directions and three C 2 axes perpendicular to a fixed three-fold axis as shown in Fig. To understand the resistivity anomaly at T * , we perform Raman scattering measurement from a polished (1 0 0) surface of Mo 3 Al 2 C in the XX, X ′ Y ′ , and XY scattering geometries at 312 K and 26 K. For the XX scattering geometry shown in Fig. The peak at 129 cm -1 at 312 K in the XX scattering geometry is a leakage of the T 2 phonon from the XY scattering geometry due to imperfect cutting or sample polishing of the single crystal. In the X ′ Y ′ scattering geometry, we detect three sharp phonon modes at 164, 245, and 285 cm -1 and a broad mode at 75 cm -1 at 312 K shown in Fig. In the XY scattering geometry, we detect two T 2 -symmetry phonons at 129 and 190 cm which is known for its high spatial resolution and ability to isolate distinct types of domains using a specific diffraction spots In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. The HWHM for the A 1 mode decreases by a factor of three, while A 2 and A 3 modes barely change upon cooling. The integrated area for the A 1 mode increases gradually below T * , reaching four times of its value at T * when cooled to the lowest temperature, while the A 2 and A 3 modes' integrated area increase moderately below T * . The differences in the temperature dependence between A 1 , A 2 , and A 3 peaks suggest that the A 1 peak represents the CDW amplitude mode while A 2 and A 3 peaks correspond to the folded phonon modes Upon cooling below T c , the phononic features barely change, namely, the amplitude mode A 1 and folded phonon modes A 2 and A 3 remain the same (Supplementary Note V). This indicates that the CDW order coexists with superconductivity. Furthermore, since Raman scattering is exceptionally sensitive to the subtle breaking of crystalline symmetry Origin of the CDW transition. We now discuss the origin of the CDW transition at T * in Mo 3 Al 2 C. Based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Supplementary Note VI), there are three unstable modes in the phonon dispersion for the cubic phase of Mo 3 Al 2 C: Γ 4 (0, 0, 0), M 5 (0.5, 0.5, 0), and X 2 (0.5, 0.5, 0), consistent with Ref. Origin of the polarization. The origin of the polarization in Mo 3 Al 2 C poses new questions. Since the crystal structure is already noncentrosymmetric above T * , the transition to the polar structure is not a simple off-centering of atoms, but rather roots in the breaking of the two-fold rotational symmetries perpendicular to the polar axis in the symmetry group of the re-arranged atoms below T * [Fig. The order-disorder mechanism was discussed for the case of LiOsO 3 Our DFT lattice dynamics calculations, as well as earlier report It is infrared-active and a polar instability. Thus, the zone-center Γ 4 mode leading to the polarization while a zone-boundary M 5 mode leading to the CDW order is seemingly possible. However, this scenario is inconsistent with the observation that there is only a single transition at T * . It is also not possible for the CDW order being a secondary and improper order parameter that condenses only due to the nonzero amplitude of the polar mode, because the CDW order breaks the translational symmetry, which by definition cannot be broken by a zone-center Γ polar mode. This may lead us to conclude that the polarization is induced by an improper mechanism, where a zone-boundary M 5 mode couples with a zone-center Γ 4 polar mode, and leads to a nonzero magnitude of the polarization below T * . The details of this coupling can be understood by building a Landau free-energy expansion for the high-temperature cubic structure via the trilinear coupling between the M 5 and the polarization P along the [1 We note that the density of states at the Fermi level are dominated by Mo 4d electronic states from the DFT band structure calculations Furthermore, from the DFT phonon calculations In summary, we identify Mo 3 Al 2 C as a new category of superconductor with structural polarity and chirality. Our results open up an avenue to discover more CDW-driven polarization in noncentrosymmetric metals as well as polar superconductors. Materials in this category could have new physical properties and applications, motivating future studies of switchable ferroelectric superconductivity The polished crystals with (1 0 0) plane used for the Raman scattering study were positioned in a continuous helium flow optical cryostat. The Raman measurements were mainly performed using the Kr + laser line at 647.1 nm (1.92 eV) in a quasibackscattering geometry along the crystallographic c axis. The excitation laser beam was focused into a 50 × 100 μm 2 spot on the ab plane, with the incident power around 12 mW. For the measurement below T c , an elongated laser spot (50 × 600 μm 2 ) and a weak laser power 1-2 mW is used to reduce laser heating. The scattered light was collected and analyzed by a triple-stage Raman spectrometer and recorded using a liquid nitrogen-cooled charge-coupled detector. Linear and circular polarizations are used in this study to decompose the Raman data into different irreducible representations. The instrumental resolution was maintained better than 1.5 cm -1 . All linewidth data presented in this paper have been corrected for the instrumental resolution by fitting the Raman peaks using a Voigt profile. The temperature shown in this paper has been corrected for laser heating (Supplementary Sec. XI). All spectra shown were corrected for the spectral response of the spectrometer and chargecoupled detector. The obtained Raman intensity I μv , which is related to the Raman response Here μ(v) denotes the polarization of the incident (scattered) photon, ω is energy, T is temperature, and n(ω, T ) is the Bose factor. The Raman spectra have been recorded from the ab (1 0 0) surface for scattering geometries denoted as μv = XX, XY, X ′ X ′ , X ′ Y ′ , RR, RL, which is short for Z(μv)Z in Porto's notation, where X and Y denotes linear polarization parallel to the crystallographic axis [1 0 0] and [0 1 0], respectively; X ′ and Y ′ denotes linear polarization parallel to [1 1 0] and [1 1 0], respectively; R = X + iY and L = X -iY denote the right-and left-circular polarizations, respectively; The Z direction corresponds to the c axis perpendicular to the (1 0 0) plane. Transmission electron microscopy measurement. Single crystal of Mo 3 Al 2 C were polished, followed by Ar-ion milling and studied using a JEOL-2010F field-emission transmission electron microscopy equipped cryogenic sample stage. Group-theoretical analysis. Group theoretical predictions were performed using the tool provided in the Isotropy Software Suite and the Bilbao Crystallographic Server associated with the tetragonal subsymmetry, while the other combines symmetry elements from both classes. Additionally, the table includes a redundant D * 4 group, which, although identical to the standard-oriented D 4 , is constructed from different generators; the only difference between the two entries lies in the B 1 and B 2 labels. Based on Table First-principles calculations. First-principles calculations were performed using the vasp code which uses projector-augmented wave formalism The transport and Raman data generated in this study have been deposited in the figshare database under accession code https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27192603. More data are available from the corresponding authors upon request. * 