We perform first-principles electron-phonon calculations to evaluate the superconducting transition temperature Tc for ternary superhard metals B2C3N and B4C5N3. These materials are predicted to exhibit a wide distribution of electron-phonon coupling parameters on their multiple Fermi surface sheets, which necessitates solving the anisotropic Eliashberg equations for accurate determination of Tc. An ambient-pressure Tc of ∼ 40 K and ∼ 20 K is obtained respectively for B2C3N and B4C5N3 from the anisotropic gap equations. The relatively high Tc of these compounds is due in part to their high Debye temperatures associated with superhardness. The materials under study are potentially synthesizable, as their formation energies are comparable to those of other recently synthesized superhard B-C-N compounds. Therefore, studying superhard metals could hold the promise of realizing new higher-Tc superconductors at ambient pressure. Introduction -A recent resurgence of interests in studying phonon-mediated Bardeen-Coopper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors has largely resulted from the successful prediction and realization of superconducting high-pressure hydrides H 3 S and LaH 10 Generally, the T c of phonon-mediated (BCS) superconductors increases in materials with a large electronphonon coupling strength λ, and/or a high Debye temperature Θ D In this work, we perform first-principles electronphonon calculations to study the superconducting T c of B 2 C 3 N and B 4 C 5 N 3 , which were recently predicted to be superhard metals (with H V ≥ 40 GPa) by machine learning and evolutionary structure searches Methods -First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations are based on the Quantum ESPRESSO software (version 7.2) The EPW calculations use Wannier interpolation on uniform Γ-centered k-grids with the Wannier90 code Results and Discussion -Figure There is a notable difference in the band topology between MgB 2 and the other compounds under study. MgB 2 is known to exhibit a complex mixture of σ and π orbitals, which manifest as both 2D and 3D Fermi surface sheets Figure There is also a major difference in the distribution of the mode-resolved electron-phonon coupling λ qν where W k is a weight factor equivalent to the reciprocal number of k points on the Fermi surface; ω qν is the phonon energy of mode ν at phonon wavevector q; g mn,ν is the electron-phonon coupling matrix element between electron bands m and n with phonon mode index ν; ε nk and ε mk+q are the electron eigen-energies with band indices n and m at momenta k and k + q, respectively. As seen in the purple shaded areas of Figs. Here, N q is the total number of points in the fine q grid. α 2 F (ω) is the Eliashberg spectral function defined as: The phonon density of states (PHDOS), α 2 F (ω), and λ are plotted respectively as blue, green, and purple curves in the right panels of Fig. The lattice stiffness and superhardness of the B-C and B-C-N compounds play crucial roles in sustaining strong electron-phonon coupling at these higher phonon energies. On the other hand, B 4 C 5 N 3 exhibits a slightly smaller λ ∼ 0.6, likely due to an even smaller N F . Often times, it suffices to estimate the T c of phononmediated superconductors by Allen-Dynes equation The logarithmic average frequency ω log is defined as: The Coulomb pseudopotential μ * entering the Allen-Dynes equation is an effective parameter describing the effects of Coulomb repulsion on superconductivity. μ * is found to range between 0.1 and 0.2 for many BCS superconductors. We use μ * = 0.1 for all the systems under study. As shown later, solutions of the anisotropic Eliashberg gap equations for MgB 2 using μ * = 0.1 lead to a T c ∼ 40 K in good agreement with the experiments. Table The fitted superconducting transition temperatures T c,aM E are summarized in Table Finally, the anisotropic nature of the materials under study also can be seen from the distribution ρ(λ) of the momentum-resolved electron-phonon coupling on the Fermi surface λ k , as shown in the right panels of Fig. Conclusion -We have performed detailed firstprinciples electron-phonon calculations to study superhard metals BC 5 , B 2 C 3 N, and B 4 C 5 N 3 . Their superconducting transition temperatures computed using anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg theory were found comparable to that of MgB 2 , which, two decades after its discovery, remains the T c record holder among ambient- pressure BCS superconductors. The B-C-N materials under study have relatively low formation energies and can potentially be made by high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) synthesis or microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition (MPCVD). Further theoretical explorations of T c in different superhard metals via the anisotropic Eliashberg gap equations, alongside experimental investigations of their synthesizability and superconducting properties, are important future research areas for discovering new higher-T c phonon-mediated superconductors. * = 0.1.