In iron-based superconductors (FeSCs), the interplay between electronic nematicity and superconductivity is essential for understanding the exotic superconducting ground state. In the nematic regime, uniaxial-strain (ε) tuning of the superconducting transition temperature Tc [∆Tc(ε) = αε + βε 2 ] offers a unique approach to investigating the evolution of pairing symmetry if both s and d wave pairing instabilities are relevant. Here, we employ uniaxial strain to tune the Tc of FeSe1-xSx, in which both nematicity and superconductivity undergo significant changes with doping. While Tc is usually suppressed quadratically with ε in optimally doped BaFe2As2, ∆Tc(ε) in FeSe1-xSx dominated by ∆Tc(ε) = βε 2 changes its sign from β < 0 in FeSe to β > 0 in FeSe1-xSx (x ≳ 0.10), indicating an evolution of the pairing symmetry from an s± state towards an s + d wave state. These findings highlight the ∆Tc(ε) as a powerful probe for elucidating the superconducting pairing symmetry in the nematic regime of FeSCs and provide new insights into the evolution of pairing symmetry in FeSCs. The electronic nematic state is one of the most important emergent orders in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) FeSe 1-x S x is a unique system where magnetic order is absent, allowing nematic order and fluctuations to interact directly with superconductivity The Fermi surface of FeSe 1-x S x consists of two nested hole pockets at the Γ point, along with electron pockets at the X and Y points In FeSe 1-x S x , both thermal conductivity and specific heat measurements have revealed a pronounced change in the superconducting gap structure near the NQCP While directly obtaining evidence for the doping evolution of gap symmetry in FeSe 1-x S x remains highly challenging, the interplay between electronic nematicity and superconductivity offers an alternative approach to address this issue. Theoretically, Fernandes et al. proposed that electronic nematicity could be used to probe superconducting pairing in FeSCs, as a d-wave instability may compete with the dominant s-wave instability, given that their free energies could be comparable Multicomponent superconductivity, involving a mixture of sand d-wave pairing symmetries, has recently been observed in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 through elastocaloric measurements under uniaxial strain, confirming the competition between sand d-wave pairing in iron-pnictide superconductors It is well established that uniaxial strain along the tetragonal [110] direction (ε The extracted nematic susceptibilities measured along tetragonal [100] and [110] directions of x = 0, 0.10, and 0.21 are displayed in Figs. Ref. agreement with previous findings reported in Ref. Uniaxial strain tuning of phase transition temperatures (such as T s and T c ) in the study of FeSCs is a well-established experimental method In the small range of ε B2g , where the symmetric ε A1g contributes only to the linear term, while the an-tisymmetric ε B2g dominates the biquadratic term The dR/dT color map Figs. 4(e)-4(h) reveal a pure linear ∆T c (ε) (ε = -0.25% to +0.25%) in FeSe [Fig. Figures The normalized quadratic coefficient β derived from our fitting represents the ε B2g sensitivity of T c . In FeSe, the combined fitting of our data and that from prior study in Ref. The ∆T c (ε) in FeSe 1-x S x and optimally doped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 and BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 can be unified within the aforementioned theoretical framework incorporating in the free energy the interplay between electronic nematicity, and s and d wave pairing instabilities -φ∆ s ∆ d cos θ. In the presence of nematic order and fluctuations, it is found that the electronic nematicity leads to deviations of T c [solid lines in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated that uniaxial strain serves as an effective probe to elucidate the evolution of pairing symmetry in FeSe 1-x S x across its nematic regime. Our measurements of strain-induced changes in T c reveal a transition from an s ± -wave pairing state in undoped FeSe towards a mixed s + d-wave pairing state at higher sulfur doping. This evolution underscores the intricate interplay between nematicity and superconductivity. These findings not only establish uniaxial strain as a valuable tool for exploring superconducting pairing mechanisms but also suggest that competing electronic instabilities significantly influence the superconducting ground state in this class of materials. Further spectroscopic investigations under strain are essential to fully uncover the nature of the pairing symmetry near the nematic quantum critical point and beyond.