With the evolution of numerical methods, we are now aiming at not only qualitative understanding but also quantitative prediction and design of quantum many-body phenomena. As a novel numerical approach, machine learning techniques have been introduced in 2017 to analyze quantum many-body problems. Since then, proposed various novel approaches have opened a new era, in which challenging and fundamental problems in physics can be solved by machine learning methods. Especially, quantitative and accurate estimates of material-dependent physical properties of strongly correlated matter have now become realized by combining first-principles calculations with highly accurate quantum many-body solvers developed with the help of machine learning methods. Thus developed quantitative description of electron correlations will constitute a key element of materials science in the next generation. Machine learning has been applied to physics in various contexts. Among them, this review focuses on the advances in the application of machine learning techniques to the field of quantum many-body physics. Understanding quantum many-body systems is a challenge common to many fields, such as electrons in condensed matter physics, nucleons in nuclear physics, and quantum chromodynamics of quarks in particle physics. Emergent properties arising from the interplay between quantum nature and many-body nature are at the basis of mechanisms of various intriguing phenomena in the macroscopic world. In particular, a grand challenge lies in the strongly correlated systems defined by those where the effects of mutual interaction of particles are essential in the sense that the conventional perturbation expansions from the corresponding noninteracting systems do not work and emergent phenomena show up beyond straightforward mean-field analyses. Since analytical exact solutions to the quantum many-body problems are not known in most cases of interacting systems, numerical simulations are indispensable for their analyses. Remarkable advances in computational science have made it possible to analyze quantum many-body problems with higher precision and on a larger scale than was possible a few decades ago. This has not only greatly advanced our understanding of quantum many-body phenomena but also made quantitative predictions possible in some cases. In other words, progress in advanced numerical methods can act as an impetus to quantum many-body research. In this regard, it is crucially important to develop "quantum many-body solvers" that enable us to obtain accurate solutions such as the ground and excited states wave functions as well as thermodynamic and dynamical properties. In this review, we focus on artificial neural networks developed to variationally obtain accurate ground states and excited states of strongly correlated quantum systems and implemented as tools of quantum many-body solvers. Such a new trend began in 2017 to analyze strong correlation effects of in-* yusuke.nomura@tohoku.ac.jp teracting electrons, This review is organized as follows: In Sec. 2, we introduce a nonempirical framework for strongly correlated materials, consisting of the derivation of low-energy Hamiltonians by first-principles calculations and the analysis of the derived Hamiltonians using low-energy solvers. Sec. 3 describes recent progress in the development of a variational low-energy solver employing machine learning techniques. Several successful applications of neural-network-based variational methods are discussed in Sec. 4. Finally, we leave several concluding remarks in Sec. 5. 2.1 Introduction to many-electron systems and strong correlations The motion of electrons in materials is described by the many-body Schrödinger equation with the Hamiltonian of Here, r i (R I ) denotes the position of the ith electron (Ith nucleus) with the charge of -e (Z I e) and the mass of m (M I ). ħ is the reduced Planck constant. In crystalline solids, the lattice potential forms a periodic potential. In this case, Bloch's theorem holds, and the energy levels of Bloch states form so-called electronic band structure. This gives a foundation for understanding the electronic properties of crystalline solids. The most famous method for calculating band structures is density-functional theory (DFT). However, there exist certain classes of materials where the single-particle band picture breaks down. Most representative example would be a Mott insulator, where the system becomes insulating because of electron localization due to strong Coulomb repulsion. The Mott insulator can be realized even with an odd number of electrons in the unit cell. However, in this situation, single-particle band theory predicts metallic behavior with partially filled band and can never explain insulating behavior unless spontaneous symmetry breaking such as the antiferromagnetic (AF) order makes the folding of the Brillouin zone leading to the full filling of the split band as in the case of the Slater insulator. The genuine Mott insulator emerges even without such symmetry breaking as in the case of QSL. The description of such strongly correlated materials is a challenge, but at the same time it is a fascinating subject, where strong quantum fluctuations and quantum entanglement may reveal unexplored basic concepts and principles of the quantum world. They may also lead to novel functional materials. The machine learning and neural network are expected to help accurate description of such strongly correlated materials and this review focuses on this direction of research. In particular, we review recent progress that achieved quantitative understanding of real correlated materials by first principles calculations with the help of machine learning. many-body phenomena Strong correlation effects usually occur when materials have partially filled bands with narrow bandwidth and have strong local Coulomb interaction. Such situation is satisfied when materials have localized atomic orbitals such as d and f orbitals and these orbitals are not closed shell. Indeed, various fascinating phenomena arising from strong correlations have been observed in, e.g., transition-metal oxides and heavyfermion materials, each of which have partially filled d and f orbitals. Another example is found in molecular solids, where molecular orbitals extending in a unit cell consist of mainly p character near the Fermi level. Large inter-molecular distance makes small inter-molecular hopping of the p molecular orbitals, resulting in narrow bandwidth and the strong correlation. In these strongly correlated materials, partially filled correlated bands emerge on the main stage for low-energy phenomena. On the other hand, completely occupied/unoccupied bands do not play an essential role. In addition, although the bands are dense away from the Fermi level, the bands near the Fermi level is sparse as is required for the strong correlation enabled by poor mutual screening. Such an energy hierarchical structure in the band structure makes "multi-energy-scale ab initio scheme for correlated materials" (MACE) appropriate. The basic framework of MACE is illustrated in Fig. (1) Perform DFT band structure calculations and obtain global energy-scale band structure. (2) Derive effective low-energy Hamiltonians for correlated subspace including partially filled bands by tracing out high-energy electronic degrees of freedom. This procedure is called "downfolding". ( In the downfolding, high-energy degrees of freedom play a role in renormalizing one-body hopping parameters and twobody interaction parameters. In particular, primary effect of the high-energy band is to screen Coulomb interactions by virtual particle-hole excitations, whose effect can be incorporated within the framework of constrained random phase approximation (cRPA). Recently, using an idea similar to the cRPA, a scheme for deriving electron-phonon coupling in low-energy Hamiltonians has also been developed. with the hopping parameter t i j , onsite Hubbard interaction U, and offsite Coulomb interaction V i j . c † iσ (c iσ ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator at i-th site with spin σ =↑ or ↓, then n iσ and n i are given by n iσ = c † iσ c iσ and n i = n i↑ + n i↓ , respectively. When the Hubbard U is strong, we get a Mott insulating solution for a half-filled band. In this case, an effective model becomes the quantum spin model so-called Heisenberg model strictly speaking, in the strong coupling limit U/|t i j | → ∞. Here, S α i = 1 2 σ α i is the spin-1/2 operator defined at i-th site. Therefore, Heisenberg models can be regarded as specific cases of effective low-energy Hamiltonians. An important point that we would like to emphasize here is that in these low-energy Hamiltonians, hopping and interaction parameters are no longer tunable or empirical parameters. Rather, realistic values can be derived only from knowledge about the crystal structure. In the sense that we do not employ adjustable or empirical parameters, we call these calculations ab initio or first-principles calculations. Once the effective low-energy Hamiltonians are constructed, its accurate analysis using quantum many-body solvers such as variational Monte Carlo (VMC) method Since there is no complete and universal numerical method for the analysis of many-body Hamiltonians and each method has pros and cons, it is highly important to make continu-ous efforts to improve existing methods and develop new lowenergy solvers. Among various types of quantum many-body solvers, VMC is one of the most useful method in analyzing groundstate properties of effective low-energy Hamiltonians. In this review, we focus on this VMC-type approach combined with machine learning techniques. We consider the problem of calculating the ground state |ψ GS ⟩ of effective low-energy Hamiltonian H: where E GS is the ground-state energy. We can expand |ψ GS ⟩ using a certain basis {x} with the ground-state wave function ψ GS (x) = ⟨x|ψ GS ⟩ . Then, the most straightforward way is to store all the amplitudes ψ GS (x) ∀x and compute exactly or approximate ψ GS (x). Exact diagonalization and Lanczos method fall under this type of approach. However, since the dimension of the Hilbert space grows exponentially with respect to the system size, such an approach is limited to small system sizes (several tens sites). Instead, VMC approximates the ground state by some parameterized function ψ θ (x) (variational wave function) with the set of variational parameters θ. We only store variational parameters whose number grows algebraically with respect to the system size, and the wave function amplitude is computed by taking a certain x as input. This leads to an exponential reduction of required memory size. One can show that the energy expectation value E θ of the variational state |ψ θ ⟩ cannot be lower than the true ground-state energy This variational principle gives a guide for the optimization of the variational state; we usually optimize variational parameters θ to minimize E θ . Therefore, in the VMC calculation, one has to estimate E θ and the gradient of the energy with respect to variational parameters ∂E θ ∂θ k to find the direction to lower E θ in the θ space. For this purpose, we employ Monte Carlo method. To see how it works, we recast the energy expectation value as with As for the gradient vector g θ whose element is given by ∂θ k , we can derive the following formula Keeping in mind x P θ (x) = 1, we see that E θ and g θ can be computed from the information of Monte Carlo averages of E loc θ (x), O loc θ (x), and , where the sampling is performed using the weight proportional to |ψ θ (x)| An important point here is that because the weight |ψ θ (x)| 2 is nonnegative, the VMC method has the advantage of avoiding the sign problem in Monte Carlo sampling. Also, when the Hamiltonian matrix is sparse (i.e., for a given x, H x,x ′ = ⟨x|H|x ′ ⟩ becomes nonzero only for the number of x ′ linearly scaled with the system size), E loc θ (x) can be efficiently computed. Since this condition is usually satisfied for low-energy Hamiltonians in condensed-matter physics, the total computational cost of the VMC is reduced to a polynomial time with respect to the system size. The minimization of the parameters is performed until the gradient ∂E θ ∂θ k becomes negligibly small. At this point, we notice a striking similarity between the VMC task and the machine learning task. If we consider the variational energy E θ as a cost function and construct ψ θ (x) by artificial neural networks, then the task of finding ground state can be considered as a kind of machine learning task in which we optimize nonlinear function (artificial neural networks) using the cost function (energy) in a high-dimensional parameter space. Because both VMC and machine learning have the task of optimizing parameters using gradient, they share some common optimization methods. The simplest optimization method is called stochastic gradient descent (SGD) at t-th step optimization. η is a small positive number (called the learning rate in the machine learning community). Nowadays, there exist various types of extensions of SGD such as Adam (adaptive moment estimation). In VMC, the accuracy of the ground-state approximation highly depends on the form of the variational wave function. Therefore, it is very important to construct a good variational ansatz. In the conventional VMC method, the variational wave function is constructed based on some physical insight. The variational ansätze based on brilliant intuitions have led to a revolution in our understanding of quantum phenomena, for example, Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) wave function for conventional SC, Given this situation, it is beneficial to introduce a data science approach and construct a variational wave function by means of an artificial neural network (Fig. (1) It helps to mitigate unnecessary biases in searching the true solution. (2) Artificial neural networks are known as universal approximators and can approximate any function with arbitrary precision in the limit of increasing network size. In the approach using artificial neural networks, the num-Conventional approach Approach using neural networks Hilbert space Hilbert space restricted subspace systematically expandable subspace Fig. ber of variational parameters can be much larger than that of the conventional approach. Therefore, recent advances in numerical techniques and computational resources have made such an approach possible. A common trend toward less biased variational calculations can be seen, e.g., the extension of VMC method to many-variable variational Monte Carlo (mVMC) Artificial neural networks generate output y from input x by performing a series of linear and nonlinear operations (L and N, respectively): In the context of VMC, the input x is usually a real-space configuration of particles, and the output y is the wave function amplitude ψ θ (x) (Fig. In 2017, Carleo and Troyer pioneered such a VMC-type application using the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) and applied it to spin-1/2 quantum spin Hamiltonians. where b k and W ik are the variational parameters to be optimized and we omit the normalization factor for simplicity. The quantum wave function can take complex amplitude; in such cases, we need to employ complex variational parameters (or represent the phase and absolute value of the wave function separately). It allows an important flexibility, where the nodes of the wave function can be tuned and optimized to mimic the nodal structure of the exact ground state. In the RBM ansatz, the number of hidden units M is the control parameter for the representability. When introducing a novel variational ansatz, it is important to perform benchmark calculations to check the reliabil-ity. For this reason, benchmarking for accuracy validation is a main result in Ref. 1, and it has been demonstrated that the RBM can represent ground states of frustration-free quantum spin Hamiltonians with high accuracy. Although Ref. 1 shows a striking result that even one of the simplest artificial neural networks (RBM) can be a powerful variational ansatz, its application is limited to frustrationfree quantum spin systems having no competing interactions (frustration effect in quantum spin systems will be discussed in detail in Sec. 4.1.1). However, for frustration-free quantum spin systems, the quantum Monte Carlo method based on, e.g., path-integral formalism can be applied without negative sign problems and can give more reliable results than variational approaches. However, in general quantum many-body systems, the quantum Monte Carlo method suffers from the negative sign problem, originating from negative wave function amplitude or, more generally, complex amplitude. Even in such cases, the variational methods do not suffer from the sign problem in the Monte Carlo sampling part (see Sec. 3.1). Thus, the main target of variational methods should be such challenging systems like frustrated quantum spin systems and itinerant strongly correlated electron systems. In fact, there has been extensive effort to extend the VMC approach using artificial neural networks to challenging quantum many-body systems such as frustrated quantum spin systems, The RBM+PP wave function is defined as a product of the RBM part and PP part. The RBM part is given by The pair-product (PP) part is given by where N e is the number of electrons, f σσ ′ i j are variational parameters. The value of φ PP (x) = ⟨x|φ PP ⟩ is expressed as the Pfaffian of a skew-symmetric matrix whose elements depend on x and f σσ ′ i j . (1) Although the RBM part is symmetric with respect to the exchange of particles, because the PP wave function is anti-symmetric, the total RBM+PP wave function becomes anti-symmetric. Then, the RBM+PP wave function can be applied to electron (fermion) systems. (2) The PP part takes into account important correlations and helps the RBM part in learning the ground state. This is helpful to reduce the number of variational parameters and helps alleviate the difficulty of optimizing a huge number of parameters. Especially, the wave function nodes and quantum-entanglement structure can be preconditioned. Otherwise, a complicated RBM complex parameter set has to be prepared (Fig. In Ref. 75, benchmark calculations of the RBM+PP wave function are performed using the Hubbard model on an 8 × 8 square lattice at half filling. Half filling is a special filling where the quantum Monte Carlo method can avoid the sign problem; therefore, the reference data for the ground state energy is obtained from the quantum Monte Carlo method. Figure So far, we have focused on describing the progress in the ground-state calculations. However, the variational method based on artificial neural networks can be extended to a wide variety of other applications such as • excited-state calculations As discussed in Sec. 3.2, since the introduction of RBM variational ansatz in 2017, where J 1 (J 2 ) is the nearest neighbor (next nearest neighbor) spin-spin interaction [Fig. Numerical analysis of this model is quite hard because the negative sign problem prevents the application of unbiased quantum Monte Carlo methods and the quantum correlations in the possible QSL phase are highly nontrivial. Due to this difficulty, the ground-state phase diagram had not been settled, despite extensive numerical effort. Figure Recently, the existence of the QSL on the 3D Heisenberg model on the pyrochlore structure was reported by using the RBM+PP variational wave function. The QSL is stabilized after the emergent dimensional reduction to 2D caused by the spontaneous symmetry breaking. The nature of QSL shares common properties with the QSL in J 1 -J 2 model reviewed in Sec. 4.1.1 in the sense that the excitation has gapless points and the fractionalization into spinons is representable by the quasiparticle in a projected nodal superconductor. Readers are referred to Ref. 114 for details (see also a study So far, applications of the machine learning as the quantum many-body solver are mostly limited to simplified theoretical toy models such as the Heisenberg and models. On the other hand, utilizing RBM to understand materials properties quantitatively on the first principles level, for instance, by using MACE, has also started generating fruitful results and has shown the power of the neural network even when the Hamiltonians get complicated. In this subsection, we review such achievements in the two examples, first the studies on the QSLs in molecular solids, called dmit salts, and next, studies on SC in copper-oxide high-T c superconductors. Both of them have succeeded in reproducing the material dependence quantitatively and in extracting the universal properties with insights into the mechanism common in different compounds. Molecular solids (organic conductors) host various electronic phases such as SC and AF Mott insulating states. Especially, β ′ -X[Pd(dmit) 2 ] 2 with X=EtMe 3 Sb has quasi-2D anisotropic triangular lattice structure under large geometrical frustration effects and shows QSL properties in the Mott insulator phase. However, the nature of the QSL was largely unknown. Recent ab initio work Despite a large number of atoms in the unit cell of such molecular-solid compounds, the band structure near the Fermi level is surprisingly simple, consisting of only LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) and HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital). The sparse bands near the Fermi level assure the strong correlation ascribed to the poor mutual screening. In addition, large inter-molecular distance leads to narrow bandwidths. Both cooperatively lead to strongly correlated electron systems with various types of Mott insulators. Ab initio electronic Hamiltonians without any adjustable parameters were derived for the half-filled HOMO band of five dmit compounds by using MACE based on the experimental structure without optimizing lattice structures except for positions of hydrogen atoms. 8 . Dispersion of excitation inferred from the optimized variational wave function. f (k) shown in a is obtained from the Fourier transform of the optimized f i j which clearly shows sign change with two nodal lines. This structure is nearly perfectly fit by that of the d-wave BCS mean-field wave function given by Eq. ( The gapless nature of the spin excitations is clear from the power law decay of the spin correlation and is consistent with the structure of the RBM+PP wave function for the PP part. Figure where ε(k) and ∆(k) are the bare dispersion and the gap function of the BCS Hamiltonian, respectively. This implies that the Dirac-like spinon excitation is equivalent to the nodal quasiparticle excitation of a d-wave superconductor. The gapless nature is retained even after the projection to the Mott insulator because the two-spinon composite excitation (corresponding to a hidden gapless particle-hole pair excitation of the quasiparticles at the nodal momenta in the d-wave SC wave function projected to the insulator) generates one observable spin excitation, which does not destroy the Mott insulating nature. The cuprate superconductors have commonly layered perovskite structure and belong to typical strongly correlated quantum materials, where the conventional DFT fails in reproducing the Mott insulating phase in the undoped parent compounds. The SC emerges upon carrier doping into AF Mott insulators. In the cuprates, the d-wave SC state is severely competing with other orders, such as spin and charge stripes (periodic alignment of spin and charge in stripe configurations in real space) or AF states, and the observed superconducting transition temperature T c sensitively depends on the materials widely ranging from above 130 K to below 10 K. Understanding and reproducing these diverse phenomena without relying on adjustable parameters as well as identifying the universal parameter to control the strength of the SC in the cuprates are the major challenges in condensed matter physics since the discovery in 1986, 119) while the ab initio calculations had been faced with many difficulties. When ab initio calculations are able to reproduce systematic materials dependence quantitatively by solely relying on their crystal structures, they provide us with valuable insights into the universal mechanism behind and into the principal components for the enhancement of SC beyond existing materials. The effective Hamiltonians were derived in the form of Eq. ( The Hamiltonians were solved by using the VMC using the RBM+PP type wave function, where the interaction and hopping were considered up to the 9th neighbor on the square lattice in the calculations. The VMC combined with the RBM first confirmed the dominance of the d-wave SC over severely competing AF and the charge/spin stripe states in all the materials studied, where the SC states have around ten meV lower energy. The dominance of the SC consistently with the experiments is noticeable because the simple Hubbard model with only U and t 1 is governed by the stripe phase and the charge uniform SC state is an excited state. The material dependence of the SC order parameter F SC plotted in Fig. The present method can also monitor the effect of interaction by the parameter search beyond the ab initio Hamiltonian to gain insights into the strategy for the materials design. Beyond the available materials, the SC order parameter can be optimized by tuning the onsite interaction to the peak in Fig. In this review, we have seen that machine learning methods can be a powerful tool for analyzing quantum many-body problems. As concluding remarks, we raise several points towards further growth of the field. • Further methodological development: Productive applications using artificial neural networks to date have often employed the combination with physics-inspired ansatz such as the PP state (see Sec. 4). One of the reasons for this is to avoid introducing a huge number of variational parameters and to avoid optimization troubles. Without the combination, artificial neural networks would require a huge amount of variational parameters to reach state-of-the-art accuracy. For example, ten times more parameters than the RBM+PP case are needed for the transformer-based 