The quantum Josephson voltage standard is well established across the metrology community for many years. It relies on the synchronisation of the flux tunneling in the S/I/S Josepson junctions (JJ) with the microwave radiation (MW) of frequency f such that V = Φ 0 f m where m= 0, 1, 2, • • • . The phenomenon is called the Shapiro steps. Together with the Quantum Hall resistance standard, the voltage standard forms the foundation of electrostatic metrology. The current is then defined as the ratio of the voltage and resistance. Realisation of the quantum current standard, would close the electrostatic metrological triangle of voltage-resistance-current. The current quantisation I = 2e f m, the inverse Shapiro steps, was recently shown using the superconducting nanowires and small JJ. The effect is a synchronization of the MW with the Cooper pair tunnelling. This paves the way to combine the JJ voltage and current standards on the same chip and demonstrate feasibility of the multi-standard operation. We show the voltage and current quantization on the same chip up to frequency of 10 GHz, corresponding to the amplitudes ∼20.67 μV and ∼3.23 nA respectively. The accuracy of the voltage and current quantisation, however, is relatively low, 35 ppk and 100 ppk respectively. We discuss measures to optimise the JJs, circuit and environment to boost the amplitude and accuracy of the standards. The electricity has a metrological triangle: the voltage, resistance and current. Two of them, the voltage and resistance, are defined with high accuracy, down to a few parts per billion. The current is determined in practice as the ratio of standard voltage to standard resistance. However, there is a need to close the metrological triangle with a quantum current standard with the same accuracy as the first two. The current standard can be realised using the periodic current transfer device I = e f m, with the frequency of charge transfer f and m= 0, 1, 2, • • • . There are a few types of devices that can meet the current standard. A charge transfer through the semiconductor quantun dot (QD) and single electron transistor (SET) turnstile with the drive frequency f are among them There are few types of the JJs useful for different applications. They can be distinguished by the state of the conjugated variables of the JJ, the charge q at the junction capacitor and the superconducting phase φ across the junction. When the Josephson energy of the JJs, E J = I c Φ 0 /π, is much larger than the charging energy, E C = e 2 /2C (I C and C are the critical current and capacitance of the JJ), the phase φ is well defined. The voltage steps, Shapiro steps (SS), V m = Φ 0 f m (m=1, 2..., Φ 0 = h/2e) are developed under the MW of frequency f at the I -V curve where E p = √ 8E J E C is the plasma energy of the JJ and η = E p /E C = 8E J /E C . The charge tunneling is promoted when the Bloch oscillations are synchronized with the MW. Then the quantized current steps, or the inverse Shapiro steps, are developed at the I -V curve. The differential equations describing evolution of the phase and charge in two cases are: In these equations R N is the normal resistance of the JJ, V C = πE S /e is the critical voltage for the CQPS, ξ (t) is the noise current, and I ac and V ac are the amplitudes of the MW. The noise current is important for (3) as it is comparable with V c /R N in our experiment. Equations ( One can notice that that the current steps are modulated with the square of Bessel function in (5) compared to the plain Bessel function in SS. The effect is a consequence of accounting of the thermal noise as we are working in the regime of E S < k B T 6 . It is intriguing to combine the circuits for the two effects, the SS and ISS, on one chip by designing JJs of different parameters. This would simplify the metrological calibration and may offer a new functionality for the quantum technology platform. In this work we demonstrate feasibility of the chip combining the voltage and current standards. The top and bottom circuit in Fig. The normal resistance for the SS and ISS JJs are 5.9 kΩ and 1.9 kΩ (41.3 kΩ and 0.6 kΩ per area of 100×100 nm 2 ). Different resistance per square reflects different oxidation parameters during fabrication of the JJs. The I -V curves of the SS and ISS are shown in Fig. One gets I Z = 23 nA when parameters of the ISS are plugged into (6), which is fairly close to the experimental value. The McCumber parameters β of the JJs are 20 and 0.29 respectively. The McCumber parameter is used to characterize the JJ suitable for the voltage standard. To have accurate voltage steps, the β should be much larger than one, which is fully satisfied in our experiment. The relevant parameter for the observation of the ISS is E J /E C , which should be around one. The ISS shown here satisfies this criteria, E J /E C = 0.7. One can find a discussion of the optimisation of the ISS parameters in a recent publication The MW is applied to the devices by the co-planar waveguide terminating with the 10 μm wide lead capacitively coupled to the ISS through the C k ≈0.1 fF, see the right insert in Fig. The ISS circuit develops the current steps when the MW is applied, Fig. In our experiments the voltage and current step have accu- racy well below the metrological needs. The way to improve SS, is straightforward. Currently the voltage standard uses the Nb technology instead of Al one. Nb has the superconducting gap, δ , of 1.4 meV, which is about seven time larger than that of Al. As a result, Nb SS has larger critical current, and it is less acceptable to the environmental noise: the arbitrary flux tunnelling across the JJ is strongly suppressed. The circuitry, electronics and screening environment of the voltage standard is also well elaborated, which can be invoked for the metrological chip. ISS operation and its technology are less developed. They are currently under an intensive development. One of the issues is the relatively low value of the CQPS energy E S compared to the temperature of the electron bath. We can esti-mate the energy from the apparent critical voltage as E S ∼ eV * C /πh= 50 MHz, which corresponds to temperature of 3 mK. It is smaller than the base temperature of the experiment. The quantized current plateaus are still present, but their accuracy concedes substantially to that of SS. The estimation of the E S from (1) using parameters of the JJ gives 65.7 GHz, which is three orders of magnitude higher. The nature of such a strong suppression is not fully understood at the moment. It can be attributed to the leak of electro-magnetic noise to the JJ from the environment There is a room also in the material research. The prime candidate material for the ISS is Nb. Nb has higher E J , and, correspondingly E S , because of a larger superconducting gap. This, however, should be done in pair with reducing the size of the JJ to keep ratio E J /E C close to one. The latter may encounter difficulty in nanofabrication, as the Nb technology is less prone for small JJ. Finally, one must utilise a pure voltage bias scheme for the ISS. Currently there are two symmetric 100 kΩ bias resistors in the differential amplifier, which somewhat limit the current and have an adverse effect on the flatness of the plateau (ISS resistance at the plateau when using the mixed bias scheme is ∼ 3 kΩ. One would expect substantial improvement of the quantization with the pure voltage bias scheme.