We analyze the optical pump-probe reflection and transmission coefficients when the photoinduced response depends nonlinearly on the incident pump intensity. Under these conditions, we expect the photoconductivity depth profile to change shape as a function of the incident fluence, unlike the case when the photoinduced response is linear in the incident intensity. We consider common optical nonlinearities, including photoconductivity saturation and two-photon absorption, and we derive analytic expressions for the photoconductivity depth profile when one or more is present. We review the theory of the electromagnetic transmission and reflection coefficients in a stratified medium, and we derive general expressions for these coefficients for a medium with an arbitrary photoconductivity depth profile. For several photoconductivity profiles of importance in pumpprobe spectroscopy, we show that the wave equation can be transformed into one of three standard differential equations-the Bessel equation, the hypergeometric equation, and the Heun equationwith analytic solutions in terms of their associated special functions. From these solutions, we derive exact analytic expressions for the optical coefficients in terms of the photoconductivity at the optical interface, and we discuss their limiting forms in various physical limits. Our results provide a systematic guide for analyzing pump-probe measurements over a wide range of pump intensities, and establishes a framework for constraining the systematic uncertainty associated with nonlinear photoconductivity profile distortion. Optical pump-probe spectroscopy uses ultrafast light pulses to investigate how solids evolve in response to optical excitation, enabling the study of dynamics associated with electronic, magnetic, and lattice degrees of freedom at their fundamental time scales A common approach to this problem is to assume that the pump excitation produces a local response that decays exponentially with depth, as it would in the linear response regime. While we can justify this assumption when the incident intensity is sufficiently low, it fails as the intensity increases because optical nonlinearity becomes important. (Since photoconductivity is itself a nonlinear optical phenomenon, unless otherwise indicated we use the terms nonlinear and nonlinearity here to refer to the relationship between the local photoconductivity at any point in the medium and the incident pump power or fluence.) Ignoring this nonlinearity * jsdodge@sfu.ca can lead to systematic errors in the inferred photoconductivity that can be as large as the response itself To address this problem, we have developed an analysis framework that can account for both low-intensity excitation conditions and the nonlinear effects that emerge at higher pump intensity. It is based on a family of photoexcitation profiles that depend on the incident fluence, with two additional parameters that define characteristic scales for saturable and two-photon nonlinearities. A notable feature of this family of profiles is that it supports analytic solutions to the wave equation in terms of known special functions. We derive these solutions and analyze them in detail here. In subsequent work, we will describe how to use this family of profiles to improve the systematic uncertainty in pump-probe measurements in the high-intensity limit. To motivate our discussion, we note that our interest in this topic emerged from earlier efforts to determine the photoinduced conductivity from pump-probe measurements at high pump fluence We discuss how the photoconductivity depends on depth in the presence of common optical nonlinearities in Sec. II. This section elaborates on our previously published work on saturation and two-photon absorption (TPA) nonlinearities Photoexcitation changes the local conductivity of the medium by depositing energy, which is then redistributed across various degrees of freedom within the material. At low pump intensity, we expect the absorbed energy density at every location in the sample to be proportional to the incident pump fluence, and the change in local conductivity to scale with the absorbed energy density. However, as the pump intensity increases, nonlinear effects are likely to emerge in the pump absorption process, the medium response, or both. In this work, we focus on two common nonlinearities: one where the pump absorption is nonlinear due to TPA or excited-state absorption (ESA), and another where the local conductivity becomes nonlinear as it saturates with the absorbed energy density. We consider these two cases individually and we also consider a third case where we combine these two nonlinearities. We start with two important simplifying assumptions. First, we treat the photoexcited medium as if it were in a quasiequilibrium steady state, where the photoinduced changes occur on a timescale longer than the pulse duration of the probe By focusing on these two nonlinearities, TPA and saturation, our framework extends the more restrictive conventional analysis to include two of the most common nonlinearities, while keeping the analysis procedure tractable. As we show later, these nonlinearities exhibit contrasting dependencies on fluence, and by combining them, we develop a model that can describe a wider range of nonlinearities in the experimental regime. Moreover, these models can be adapted to account for other types of nonlinearities, which we will discuss in later sections. A key advantage of our approach is that the wave equation corresponding to these nonlinearities, as well as their combined form, have analytic solutions in terms of known special functions. As discussed in Sec. III, the standard approach to determine the optical coefficients of a stratified medium requires the solution for the wave that propagates into the medium. In general, this must be done numerically, which can require some care if the medium is absorbing and the forward-propagating wave decays exponentially into it. However, when exact analytic solutions are available for the medium, we can relate the optical coefficients directly to the response functions at the surface, avoiding the need to compute the fields at any other location. In the following subsections, we introduce the photoconductivity depth profile models that we study in this paper. For completeness and to establish notation, we begin our discussion by introducing the linear photoconductivity depth profile in Sec. II A. In Sec. II B, we introduce the saturable photoconductivity depth profile, where we assume that the pump absorption remains linear with the pump fluence, but the photoconductivity saturates with the absorbed energy density. Section II C focuses on the TPA profile, where the pump absorption process is nonlinear due to two photon absorption while the photoconductivity is linear with the absorbed energy density. In Sec. II D, we introduce the combined profile, where both the pump absorption and the response are nonlinear due to TPA and saturation. Finally, in subsection Sec. II E, we discuss other common nonlinearities and relate their behavior to the depth profiles we developed in earlier sections. As noted earlier, at sufficiently low pump intensity we can assume that the local conductivity depends linearly on the local energy density, E. We express this mathematically as σ(z, E) = σ + χ E E(z), where z is the depth from the surface, σ is the equilibrium conductivity, χ E = dσ/dE| z=0 is the complex susceptibility of the conductivity to the absorbed energy density at the surface, and σ, σ, and χ E all have implicit frequency dependence. If the nonlinear absorption of the pump beam is weak, we may assume further that E = E 0 e -αz , where α is the pump attenuation coefficient. We may then write σ as a function of both z and the incident fluence, F , where χ F = lim F →0 dσ/dF , which we call the surface photosusceptibility. Setting z = 0 in Eq. ( It is important to recognize that σ(z, F ) and ∆σ s (F ) are not a true linear response coefficients, in the sense that they describe a third-order optical nonlinearity that relates the current density at the surface to both the probe field amplitude and the pump fluence As the pump fluence increases, we expect the energy distribution to change among the different degrees of freedom in the system. To estimate of the energy deposited in the system in a typical experiment, consider a medium with a 50% absorptance and the pump attenuation length is 100 nm that is that is photoexcited with an incident pump fluence of 1 mJ/cm 2 . The absorbed energy density is then approximately 0.3 eV/nm 3 , which is large enough to expect internal degrees of freedom to saturate. For example, in the Heisenberg model of a magnetic system, the energy absorption is limited by E max ∝ JS 2 , where J is the exchange energy and S is the total spin. In cuprates, the magnetic degrees of freedom can store a maximum of about 0.5 eV/nm 3 per unit cell, which is comparable to the 0.3 eV/nm 3 in our example. While phonons are not constrained in the same way, we may expect that anharmonic coupling will allow a phonon to redistribute its energy to other degrees of freedom more rapidly as its energy increases. If a saturating degree of freedom makes the dominant contribution to the photoconductivity, we expect the photoconductivity to saturate as the fluence increases. This is observed in a variety of experiments We model this behavior by first expressing the photoconductivity as a function of the energy density, where E sat is the energy density at which ∆σ saturates and χ E = lim E→0 dσ s /dE, the susceptibility of the surface photoconductivity to the absorbed energy density. Assuming that the pump absorption remains linear with fluence, E ∝ F exp(-αz), and the saturable conductivity depth profile is Here, where R p is the pump reflection coefficient, is a parameter that sets the fluence scale of saturation. As F/F sat → 0, we recover the exponential model that describes the local photoconductivity in the linear regime. As F/F sat → ∞, the surface photoconductivity approaches the limiting value ∆σ sat = χ F F sat . Setting z = 0, the surface photoconductivity for a saturable depth profile has the form which exhibits a sublinear relationship with the pump fluence. The orange curves in Fig. Unlike the saturable profile, the TPA profile becomes shallower with increasing fluence, as shown in Fig. To derive the TPA photoconductivity depth profile, we begin by calculating the absorbed energy density in a TPA process. During a TPA process, an electron is excited from the ground state via the simultaneous absorption of two pump photons where β is the TPA coefficient. The resulting solution for the pump intensity is where I s (t) = I(z = 0 + , t). Assuming a constant pump illumination across the probe surface and a rectangular temporal profile with pulse width τ p , the absorbed energy density is where represents the characteristic fluence scale for the onset of the TPA process. Assuming that the photoconductivity is linear in the absorbed energy density, ∆σ ∝ E(z), we obtain Setting z = 0 in Eq. ( As with the saturable profile, we can define a characteristic photoconductivity scale in Eq. In many practical situations, we expect both of the nonlinearities described in Sec. II B and Sec. II C to be relevant. To describe this, we substitute E in Eq. ( which is now described by the two free parameters F sat and F TPA . Note that this profile has the same characteristic scale for the photoconductivity, ∆σ sat = χ F F sat , as the saturable profile in Eq. ( Equation ( As we have described previously To derive Eq. ( where ω p is the plasma frequency of the mobile carriers, σ b (ω) is the conductivity associated with bound charge, and the momentum relaxation rate γ saturates with fluence at the characteristic scale F γ , Here, γ is the equilibrium relaxation rate and the saturated change in this rate is ∆γ = γ sat -γ, where γ sat is the saturated rate. Substituting Eq. ( where With the substitutions we recover Eq. ( Heating is one of the most commonly considered nonlinearities in pump-probe spectroscopy. In this case, the energy deposited via photoexcitation raises the local temperature of the medium, which will typically cause the photoconductivity to show a sublinear dependence on fluence Finally, we consider the nonlinearities due to ESA and saturable absorption (SA). Both nonlinearities are described by the differential equation where γ represents the ESA coefficient when γ > 0 and the SA coefficient when γ < 0. The form of this equation is identical to Eq. ( To derive the optical reflection and transmission coefficients for the photoconductivity profiles in Sec. II, we turn to the theory of electromagnetic waves in stratified media A. The Maxwell equations in a stratified medium Following Born and Wolf where k 0 = ω/c, Z 0 is the impedance of free space, E is a characteristic field scale, and β is a constant that determines the propagation direction. For a wave traveling in a medium with a local refractive index n = √ ε r μ r at an angle θ with respect to the z-axis, β = n sin θ. Substituting Eq. ( d dz In the limit as z → ∞, where the perturbation vanishes, these ODEs yield the harmonic solutions where η 2 = ε r μ r -β 2 and A + and A -are the complex amplitudes for waves travelling in the forward and backward directions, respectively. The first-order ODEs in Eqs ( Now consider a stratified half-space, z ≥ 0, with light incident at an angle θ 1 from a homogeneous medium with permittivity ε 1 , permeability μ 1 , refractive index n 1 = c √ ε 1 μ 1 , and characteristic impedance Z 1 = μ 1 /ε 1 . Phase continuity requires that β = n 1 sin θ 1 remains constant across the boundary, so if we define θ 2 to be the angle that the transmitted wave makes with the z-axis at z = 0, β = ε r (0)μ r (0) sin θ 2 . It is also useful to define the complex field ratios Applying the boundary condition that the tangential components of the electric field and magnetic field remain continuous across the interface, we can express the reflection and transmission coefficients at the boundary, z = 0, as and Using Eqs. ( where r and t are the reflection and transmission amplitudes of an unperturbed homogeneous medium with permittivity ε 2 We can now write Σ for both polarizations in terms of the complex field ratios in Eq. ( where Z2 and θ2 are the equilibrium impedance and transmission angle, respectively. These expressions enable us to compute the perturbation parameter if we know the fields at the surface. In Sec. III C, below, we discuss methods for determining these fields. For an arbitrary ε r (z), one typically uses numerical methods to solve Eqs. ( Alternatively, in Sec. IV we will show that Eq. ( Here we derive analytic solutions to the wave equation for the photoconductivity depth profiles introduced in Sec. II, derive expressions for the optical coefficients, and discuss various limiting forms of these coefficients. We treat the exponential model in Sec. IV A, the saturable profile and the TPA profile in Sec. IV B, and the combined TPA-saturable profile in Sec. IV C. As we noted in Sec. I, the exponential profile is the default assumption for analyzing pump-probe spectroscopy measurements. Multiple authors have discussed the solutions to the wave equation for this profile and applied it in different contexts When expressed in terms of the relative permittivity, the exponential profile has the form where n is the equilibrium refractive index and ρ 2 = iχ F F/(ωε 0 ) is the photoinduced permittivity change at the surface. Letting η 2 = n2 -β 2 , the wave equation for an s-polarized probe is Substituting , we can transform Eq. ( where Ũs [(2k 0 ρ/α)exp(-αz/2)] = U s (z). The two linearly independent solutions to the above equation are which can be expressed in terms of the variables in Eq. We can associate these solutions with waves traveling forward and backward through the medium. In the limit that the perturbation has fully decayed, αz → ∞, we can use lim ξ→0 J ν (ξ) ∼ (ξ/2) ν /Γ (ν + 1) to recover the conventional harmonic solutions to the wave equation for the equilibrium response Note that the positive root in the harmonic solution is associated with the negative order of the Bessel function in Eq. ( As we discussed in Sec. III B, we may write both r and t for a perturbed medium in terms of the perturbation parameter Σ, given in Eq. where ξ 0 = 2k 0 ρ/α. Applying the recurrence relation [32, Eq. 10.6.2] and substituting the result into Eq. ( We can associate the quantities ν = 2ik 0 ηΛ and ξ 0 = 2k 0 ρΛ with dimensionless ratios of the relevant length scales of the problem. First, we can write ν ∝ Λ/δ η , where Λ is the pump attenuation length and δ η = 2/μ 0 σω has the form of the skin depth for the probe in the equilibrium medium, with conductivity σ. Second, we can write ξ 0 ∝ Λ/δ ρ , where δ ρ = 2/μ 0 ∆σ s ω has the form of the skin depth for the probe in a fictitious medium with conductivity ∆σ s . We note here that as defined, both δ η and δ ρ are complex, so they are not skin depths, in the strict sense. Nonetheless, the association provides useful intuition about the physical behavior in different regimes of ν and ρ, so we adopt it with this caveat. In Table While Eq. ( Weak perturbation limit. We associate this limit with ∆σ s → 0, which implies δ ρ = 2/(μ 0 ∆σ s ω) → ∞. For constant k 0 Λ, we also have ξ 0 ∝ Λ/δ ρ → 0. To calculate the limiting form of Σ in this case, consider the Taylor expansion of the Bessel function around ξ = 0, Retaining only the zeroth-order term in the series and using the recurrence relation for the Γ-function, we can write the ratio of the Bessel functions in Eq. ( Substituting Eq. (48) in Eq. ( where we assume θ 1 = θ 2 = 0 and use ρ 2 = i∆σ s /ωε 0 . Substituting Eq. (49) in Eq. ( and Long-wavelength limit. We associate this limit with k 0 Λ → 0, which implies both δ η → ∞ and In these limits, we can neglect the term ν = 2ik 0 nΛ ∝ Λ/δ η in Eq (49) to obtain The reflection and transmission coefficients are then and Equation ( Substituting this expression in Eq. ( which includes a correction of order (Λ/δ ρ ) 2 to the phase shift. High-photoconductivity limit. We associate this limit with ∆σ s → ∞, which implies δ ρ → 0 and, in turn, Λ/δ ρ → ∞. We can deriive the limiting form of Eq. (45) for this case cby considering the asymptotic limit of the Bessel function, In this limit, Substituting Eq. (58) in Eq. ( The expressions for r and t are and Short-wavelength or bulk limit. We associate this limit with k 0 Λ → ∞, which implies the divergence of both the order of the Bessel function, ν ∝ Λ/δ η , and its argument, ξ 0 ∝ Λ/δ ρ . To simplify Eq. (45) in this limit, it is convenient to use the following identity [32, Eq. 10.10.1], which yields a quadratic for f with roots The negative root of this expression is unphysical, as it corresponds to choosing the negative root of the photoexcited permittivity to obtain its refractive index. Choosing the positive root and substituting into Eq. ( where n ex = n2 + i∆σ s /(ωε 0 ) is the refractive index of the photoexcited medium at the surface. Substituting Eq. (66) into Eqs. ( Having thoroughly studied the properties of the optical coefficients for the exponential photoconductivity profile, we are now in a position to examine the nonlinear profiles that we introduced in Sec. II. We will start with the saturable profile from Sec. II B and the TPA profile from Sec. II C, then turn to the combined saturation-TPA profile from Sec. II D. We show that the saturation profile and the TPA profile are special cases of a more general profile, introduced by Epstein nearly 100 years ago, which yields wave solutions that are described by hypergeometric functions 1. General solutions for the saturable and TPA profiles With some changes in notation to adapt it to our context, we write the Epstein profile as ε r = n2 + ς 2 e -α(z-z0) 1 + e -α(z-z0) + θ 2 e -α(z-z0) [1 + e -α(z-z0) ] 2 . (69) We obtain the profile, Eq. ( and we obtain the TPA profile, Eq. ( We may now solve the wave equation for both Eq. 4 and Eq. ( To proceed with the solution, we substitute Eq. ( This has the form of Riemann's differential equation with thee regular singularities at u = 0, -1, ∞ [32, Eq. 15.11.1]. For the singularity at u = 0, the two independent solutions for U s are where and F is the hypergeometric function. To identify the forward-travelling solution, we evaluate the limit z → ∞, which corresponds to u → 0. Choosing the root a = iκη, the asymptotic solutions are then and we see that Eq. ( To determine the perturbation parameter Σ, we substitute Eq. (74) in Eq. where This enables us to write To obtain the optical coefficients for the saturable and TPA profiles, we can substitute Eqs. ( 2. Long-wavelength approximations for the saturable and TPA profiles The expression for Σ in Eq. ( To proceed, we note that for κ → 0, the parameters of Eq. ( and [32, Eq. 15.4.1] Substituting in Eq. (80), we get which we can use to determine Σ for both the saturable profile and the TPA profile. Substituting Eq. ( At normal incidence, this yields and Alternativelly, substituting Eq. ( which for normal incidence gives and As we discussed in Ref. In this section, we derive the solutions to the wave equation in the presence of both TPA/ESA and saturation. The wave equation is where ∆σ(z, F ; F sat , F TPA ) is given in Eq. where κ = k 0 Λ, and u ± correspond to the solutions of with γ = 1 -2iκη, δ = 0, ε = 0, and q = Q(F )/u + . To specify α and β, we solve the incidial equation for the singularity at 0 to get ρ = {0, 2iκη} and for the singularity at ∞ to get ρ = {0, -2iκη}. The constraint in Eq. (96) then requires that α = 0 and β = -2iκη. With the parameters of the standard form established, we may write the solution to Eq. (91) in terms of the local Heun function (100) We can confirm that this is the forward-traveling solution by evaluating the limit z → ∞, equivalent to ζ → 0 [32, Eq. 31. In principle, we may now obtain the optical coefficients for the combined saturation-TPA profile in the same way that we have for the exponential, saturable, and TPA profiles. In practice, this is much more challenging in this case than it is with the others. Substituting Eq. (100) into Eq. ( V. CONCLUSION We have described a general framework for determining the optical coefficients of a photoexcited medium, and we applied it to specific examples of photoconductivity depth profiles that are likely to occur in experiments. We discussed several different profiles, including ones that show a nonlinear dependence on incident fluence. In addition to profiles that have been discussed previously, we developed a new, two-parameter family that describes how a medium will respond when saturation and TPA nonlinearities are present simultaneously. We showed that the wave equation for s-polarized probe waves has analytic solutions for many of the profiles that we discussed, one of which appears to have not been discussed previously. We derived approximations to these solutions and analyzed their limits of validity in terms of the natural length scales involved in pump-probe experiments. In subsequent work, we will discuss how one may use the results presented here to improve the uncertainty in pump-probe measurements of the surface conductivity. a Liu et al.