Two thermodynamic relations are proposed for the exact measurement of the center-of-mass (COM) momentum of the Cooper pairs in helical superconductors. The first relation concerns the constraint on the change in the COM momentum in response to the variation in the magnetic field, which is linked to the superconducting Edelstein effect. The second relation is related to a first-order phase transition, showing that the jump of the COM momentum can be measured from the slope of the transition line on the phase diagram, where the supercurrent is used as a control parameter. These relations solve the difficulty of detecting the momentum, enabling broader and more precise exploration of noncentrosymmetric superconductors. Introduction.-The emergence of novel superconducting phases is becoming increasingly diverse, and there is growing experimental and theoretical interest in superconductivity that extends beyond the framework of BCS theory. The diversification of superconducting gap symmetries beyond the s-wave is not the only focus; recently, attention has also been drawn to the finite center-of-mass (COM) momentum of Cooper pairs, which accompanies the spatial modulation of the superconducting gap in what is known as the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state Despite the growing number of candidate materials for helical superconductivity, research on its detection remains in its infancy. In these systems, the robustness against in-plane magnetic fields has been observed, and the consistency of their phase diagrams with theoretical predictions provides indirect evidence of a helical superconductor In this letter, to overcome the difficulties of its detection, we propose two thermodynamic relations to exactly measure the COM momentum in all helical superconductors. Furthermore, these relations are specifically studied in a two-dimensional Rashba superconductors. Model.-The normal Hamiltonian used in this letter is Here, H k is a two-dimensional one-band tight-binding model Hamiltonian including the spin-independent energy dispersion ξ k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) -μ with the chemical potential μ, the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) g k = α(-sin k y , sin k x , 0), and the Zeeman coupling at a finite magnetic filed h ≡ -g S μ B B/2 (μ B is the Bohr magneton and g S ≈ 2 is the spin g-factor). σ are the Pauli matrices on the spin degrees of freedom. c sk is the annihilation (creation) operator with the spin s =↑, ↓ and the wavenumber k. H int is the interaction Hamiltonian with the attractive interaction strength U , and V is the volume of the system. We use the abbreviation k ± = k ± q/2. Furthermore, we assume that the superconducting state is the spin-singlet pairing state with a finite COM momentum q, and the order parameter is defined by The COM momentum can become finite when a supercurrent is finite in the equilibrium state or spontaneously becomes finite even in the absence of a supercurrent. Particularly with regard to the latter, when applying an in-plane magnetic field (in our model, h is oriented in the y-direction), the COM of the Cooper pairs is finite and shifts along the perpendicular in-plane direction (xdirection in this model) due to the deformation of the Fermi surface, even without a supercurrent Here, we define O T as the transpose of a matrix O. H BdG k, q is called the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, and the second term in Eq. (3a) is a constant energy including the condensation energy by ∆ is the Nambu spinor. Using this mean-field Hamiltonian, we solve the gap equation (2) at each q and denote the solution by ∆ q . This solution provides the free energy density F [ q, h, T ] = F ( ∆ q , q, h, T ) at each q, fully describing the thermodynamic property of the equilibrium state (see supplemental materials for the detailed form F (• • • ) [27]). Especially, in the following, we denote the COM momentum under no supercurrent flow by q0 , i.e., this momentum minimizes the free energy density: j(q 0 , h, T ) = ∂F [ q0 , h, T ]/∂ q0 = 0. Superfluid weight. -The superfluid weight is encoded in the Meissner Kernel K αβ (q)(= Φ αβ (q) -D αβ ), where Φ αβ (q) is the static current-current correlation function and D αβ is the Drude weight. Here, we consider the limitation to small q and expand the Meissner Kernel K αβ (q) by q. The zeroth-order term K αβ = -K αβ (0) = 4e 2 ∂ 2 F [ q, h, T ]/∂ qα ∂ qβ is the usual superfluid weight, which is finite only in the superconducting state. The first-order term K αβγ = -i∂ qγ K αβ (0) represents the spatially dispersive effect of the superfluid weight. It also vanishes in the normal states K αβ and K αβγ are real, and they are symmetric and antisymmetric for the interchange of indices α and β, respectively thus K αβγ is experimentally detectable by e.g. the measurement of the supercurrentinduced magnetization and the missing area measurement of the optical activity proposed recently Here, we will evaluate K αβγ to reveal how it characterizes the noncentrosymmetric superconductor. In this letter, we will study the helical superconductor with a spontaneously finite momentum of the Cooper pairs. In our model given above, the magnetic point group of the system is m ′ m2 ′ . Under this symmetry, the permitted components of the superfluid weights are K xx , K yy , K zxx = K xy , and K zyy = -K yx . In the following, we will focus on K xx and K zxx . Although the superfluid weights can be derived from the second derivative of the free energy density by q or h discussed above, we will approximate them using a linear response formula without collective mode effects instead Phase diagram.-We show the dependence of the COM momentum q0 on the magnetic filed h and the temperature T in Fig. This formation of the BFS largely affects the superfluid weights. In Fig. We can generalize this argument. Under the constraint that no supercurrent flows, when the magnetic field varies, the change of the momentum q0 is determined accordingly. Therefore, we obtain one exact thermodynamic relation valid in the entire regime of the phase diagram as [27] This relation is the first main result of this letter. The quantity on the right-hand side can be experimentally measured, thus the COM momentum in the phase diagram can be precisely obtained. We note that the momentum q0 is zero at zero magnetic field due to the timereversal symmetry. Here, we focus on our model case (the two-dimensional Rashba system), however, similar relations hold for all other helical superconductors This equation means that the slope of the transition line is determined by the ratio of the jumps of the magnetization ∆m and the momentum ∆q. This slope and the magnetization are observable, thus, we can experimentally determine the jump of the momentum using this relation, providing strong evidence of the spontaneously finite COM momentum using data in the vicinity of j * = 0. Instead of considering the magnetic field, we can also consider the temperature T . In this case, ∆m is replaced by the jump of the entropy ∆s. In Fig. In Fig. Temperature dependence.-In Fig. This linear behavior of K xx and K zxx can be explained using Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory at low magnetic fields. The GL free energy density for the order parameter ∆ (assumed real) with the dispersion along the xdirection q under magnetic field reads where a = a 0 + a 1 qh + a 2 q2 . a 0 is assumed to be proportional to (T c -T ) 1 , and a 1 is unique for systems without an inversion center. It corresponds to the electromagnetic coupling in our model, where we apply the in-plane magnetic field h along the y-direction. In addition, we assume that the magnetic effect only induces the Zeeman effect because of the suppression of the orbital effect in two-dimensional systems. The order parameter minimizing the GL free energy density ∆ satisfies ∂f /∂ ∆ = 0, and we get ∆2 = a(q)/b. Then, the free energy density of this solution is f [q, h] = f ( ∆, q, h) = -a(q) 2 /2b. Furthermore, the COM momentum is determined by the no current condition ∂f [q 0 , h]/∂ q0 = 0, and we obtain the solution q0 = -a 1 h/2a 2 , demonstrating that the helical phase originates in the electromagnetic coupling a 1 under a magnetic field except for an universal constant. These equations show that the superfluid weights have a linear dependence on the temperature, resulting in the temperature independence of q0 for low magnetic fields. Summary and Discussion.-We have proposed two general thermodynamic relations applicable to all helical superconductors for detecting the COM momentum. The first relation determines the derivative of the COM momentum by the magnetic field as the ratio of the superfluid weight and the superconducting Edelstein coefficient. The ratio is experimentally measured by the superconducting Edelstein effect and it provides the COM momentum in the entire region of the phase diagram. The other is related to the first-order transition, where the jump of the momentum is determined by the slope of the transition line generalized from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. This relation alone provides strong evidence for the finite COM momentum, and its verification seems relatively easy because it only requires obtaining the phase diagram under a supercurrent. Finally, we evaluate the order of the magnitude of the induced spin moment for future experiments. The supercurrent-induced spin moment is δs y /μ B = K zxx /K xx J sc x . The coefficient is K zxx /K xx = 0.029ħ/eta at T = 10 -3 for zero magnetic field. For instance, when we set t = 1 eV and a = 1 Å, we obtain K zxx /K xx = 0.12×10 13 A -1 m -1 . This ratio is hardly scaled by the superconducting gap and is not so different from the value in the normal phase. In addition, when we apply a supercurrent J sc x = 10 -3 -10 0 Am -1 , the induced spin moment is 0.12 × 10 -8 -10 -5 nm -2 . Above the magnetic field where the COM momentum q jumps, the induced moment is ten times larger. This spin moment can be observed by e.g. the spin-polarised positron beam W αβ nmk, q (q) = ⟨u nk-, q | jα k, q,q |u mk+, q ⟩ ⟨u mk+, q | jβ k, q,-q |u nk-, q ⟩ . (S1b) Here, we use the eigenstate |u mk, q ⟩ of the BdG Hamiltonian H BdG k, q with the eigenenergy E mk, q , and the Fermi distribution function f (x) = 1/(e βx + 1) at the temperature β -1 . We define k ± = k ± q/2. We note that we have two kinds of momenta. One is the momentum of the Cooper pairs q and the other is the momentum representing the spatial dispersion of the superfluid density q. We use the abbreviation ± for q by the superscript and q by the subscript. jk, q,q is the current density operator extended to the particle-hole space and is defined as jk, q,q = j k + ,q 0 0 -j T -k -,q , (S2) using the normal current density operator j k,q = -ev k -g S μ B 2 iq × σ, where v k = ∂H k /∂k. The diamagnetic term extended to the particle-hole space is Here, v αβ k = ∂ 2 H k /∂k α ∂k β . Taking the limit of q → 0, we obtain the superfluid weight. We can derive the direct relation with the free energy density as seen in the following. The static correlation function is divided into the intraband term and interband term, Here, we define the velocity operator extended to the particle-hole space by The intraband term originates from only the Bogoliubov Fermi surface. Thus, for usual superconductors, this term becomes zero at low temperatures because of the superconducting gap. Using the relation ⟨u nk, q | ṽα k, q |u mk, q ⟩ = (E nk, q -E mk, q ) ⟨∂ qα/2 u nk, q |u mk, q ⟩ for n ̸ = m, we can rewrite the interband term as The last term cancels out the diamagnetic term D αβ . Therefore, the total superfluid weight Here, we define the free energy density by Now, we note that the actual superfluid weight is expressed by the second derivative of F [ q] = F (∆ q , q) with respect to q, as K αβ = 4e 2 ∂ 2 F [ q]/∂ qα ∂ qβ . Thus, the above linear response formula is an approximation of the superfluid weight neglecting the q dependence of the gap parameter, which is expected to be restored by incorporating interaction effects through vertex corrections. Here, this correction is neglected, and the slight difference from the momentum q0 in Fig. Next, we will derive the spatially dispersive superfluid weight K αβγ . Then, we need the derivative of Meissner Kernel K αβ (q) by q. Two possible contributions can be considered. One is the spin part originating from the Zeeman term, and the other is the orbital part. In our model, the orbital part does not contribute because of the two-dimensional system, thus we will discuss only the spin part in the following. The spin part reads Here, the spin operator extended to the particle-hole space is defined by Dividing K αβγ into the intraband and interband parts as 2f (E nk, q )Re[ε αγδ ⟨u nk, q | σδ |u mk, q ⟩ ⟨u mk, q |∂ qβ /2 u nk, q ⟩ -(α ↔ β)] Let us consider a point (j * , h * ) in the first-order transition line on the j-h plane, as shown by the dashed line in Fig. This relation is the extension of the Clausius-Clapeyron equation known in the first-order transition in the liquid-gas transition. S4. NUMERICAL CALCULATION OF EQ. 6 The free energy density F [q, h, T ] in our model at T = 10 -3 is plotted in Fig. 