High critical current density JJ cc is generally the most important property of any superconductor used for applications. The critical current II cc is most frequently measured by transport 4 probe V-I techniques and the measured II cc is then divided by the cross-sectional area to give the critical current density JJ cc . This method is normally error-free. Occasionally however, II cc and JJ cc are computed from measurements of the magnetic moment and two recent papers (Goyal et al. 2024 Nat. Commun. 15, 6523 and Polichetti et al. 2024 arXiv:2410.09197) illustrate some of the perils of reporting properties of REBa2Cu3O7-δ (REBCO) films grown on a coated conductor substrate using only magnetic evaluations. Correct data analysis is made difficult by the persistent use of cgs units in commercial instrument outputs and by misapplication of handbook Bean model formulae, which in this case led to an order of magnitude JJ cc overestimate, which of course renders the original world record claim invalid. The laudable attempt of the authors to explain their original mistake has unfortunately its own errors. Here we explain explicitly how errors are still present in the second paper and provide correct expressions for the conversion of magnetic moments to JJ cc values using Bean model expressions. An important conclusion is that record JJ cc values ought always to be validated by real transport measurements and by cross-reference to similar samples and their reported JJ cc values. Recently an article by Goyal et al. In their follow up paper, Polichetti et al. (4)" from ref. Because of our own experience in the difficulties of changing units and to avoid further proliferation of incorrect formulae, we decided to test the agreement of Polichetti's eqs. ( An important point of ref. In SI units the moment generated by a current circulating in a loop is given by mm = IIAA llllllll , where II is the current in [A] and AA llllllll is the area of the loop in [m 2 ] (notice that this equation is not valid in Gaussian units where mm = IIAA llllllll /cc; in fact Gaussian and cgs-emu units are the same only for magnetic properties as stated clearly in Since the sample volume is VV = 4aabbtt, and the magnetization is by definition MM = mm VV ⁄ , we obtain: The amplitude of the hysteresis loop is ΔMM = 2MM, so: Substituting aa = ww/2 and bb = ll/2, we obtain the SI formula for JJ cc,mmmmmm : We notice that the SI formula in eq.( As verified above, Polichetti et al.'s eq.( The best approach to calculate JJ cc,mmmmmm from magnetic measurements is by using SI units and formulae throughout, making the cgs-emu to SI conversion of magnetic moment mm right at the start. The present case shows that if a converted equation is desirable, its validity must be verified against a known valid equation to avoid the conversion error seen in ref. In general, results reporting exceptional JJ cc values should be independently verified and assessed, preferably by transport measurements. If, as in Converted hybrid cgs/SI formula, eq.( Incorrect Polichetti et al.'s ww and ll (being the full cross-section dimensions with ww < ll) in [m], and VV in [m 3 ].