Ternary hydrides are considered as the idea candidates with high critical temperature (Tc) stabilized at submegabar pressure, evidenced by the recent discoveries in LaBeH8 (110 K at 80 GPa ) and LaB2H8 (106 K at 90 GPa). Here, we investigate the crystal structures and superconductivity of Ac-B-H system under pressures of 100 and 200 GPa by using an advanced structure method combined with first-principles calculations. As a result, nine stable compounds were identified, where B atoms are bonded with H atoms in formation with diverse BHx motifs, e.g., methanelike (BH4), polythenelike, (BH2)n, and BH6 octahedron. Among them, seven Ac-B-H compounds were found to become superconductive. In particular, AcBH7 was estimated to have a Tc of 122 K at 70 GPa. Our in-depth analysis reveals that the B-H interactions in the BH6 units play a key role in its high superconductivity and stability at submegar pressure. Our current results provide a guidance for future experiments to synthesize ternary hydride superconductors with high-Tc at moderate pressure. Hydrogen is considered as the promising candidate for high-temperature superconductor, due to small atomic mass and strong phonon vibration frequency Almost all possibilities have been theoretically explored for binary hydrides The p 0 and d 1 metals with low-lying empty orbitals tend to form phonon-mediated high-T c superconducting (HTSC) metal polyhydrides. Among them, actinium, which is similar to lanthanum in chemical properties, atomic size, electronegativity, and electronic configuration, forms many actinium hydrides with good superconducting properties: R 3m AcH 10 (251 K at 200 GPa), I4/mmm AcH 12 (173 K at 150 GPa) and P 6m2 AcH 16 (241 K at 150 GPa) The candidate structures of Ac-B and Ac-B-H systems are predicted using the CALYPSO code where ω log is the logarithmic average frequency, λ is the electron phonon coupling parameter and μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, often assumed to be between 0.1-0.13. In order to acquire the phase diagram of ternary Ac-B-H system, we need to first determine the structures of associated binary system. The B-H system AcB 2 H 8 exhibits good superconductivity with T c above 70 K at 200 GPa (Fig. By further inspection, they have the close DOS at E f and H-DOS contribution at 200 GPa for AcBH 8 (0.030 eV -1 per valence electron, 53% from H-DOS) [Fig. As compared with AcBH 7 , isostructural LaBH 7 is calculated to remain dynamical stable at higher pressure (85 GPa), due to the smaller atomic mass of La atoms, which reduces the chemical pre-compression on BH 6 units. This is evidenced by comparing the lattice constant and B-H bond length in LaBH 7 and AcBH 7 (Fig. The effect of metal atoms on the superconductivity of this structure is further investigated by substituting the Ac atoms with its neighbouring metal atoms Th and Ce. Note that the space group P 3m1 evolves to P 6 3 /mmc after full optimization. The superconducting parameters of CeBH 7 and ThBH 7 at their lowest dynamically stable pressures were summarized in Table In summary, the crystal structure and superconductivity of the Ac-B-H system at 100 GPa and 200 GPa are explored by a combination of structure prediction methods and first principles calculations. We uncover nine thermodynamically stable structures, namely: AcBH, AcBH Seven of them exhibit metallic nature. Electron-phonon cou-pling calculations show that AcBH 7 is a potential superconductor with T c of 43 K at 200 GPa. Interestingly, it remains dynamically stable down to 70 GPa with an increased T c of 122 K. The enhanced superconductivity is mainly attributed to the softened phonon vibrations originating from Ac atoms at low frequency, as well as B-H interactions in BH 6 units at mid-frequency. Our work is expected to stimulate more research on ternary superconducting hydrides in the hope to uncover more compounds with high critical temperature and stability at low pressure.