CuO atomic thin monolayer (mlCuO) was synthesized recently. Interest in the mlCuO is based on its close relation to CuO 2 layers in typical high temperature cuprate superconductors. Here, we present the calculation of the band structure, the density of states and the Fermi surface of the flat mlCuO as well as the corrugated mlCuO within the density functional theory (DFT) in the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). In the flat mlCuO, the Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 band crosses the Fermi level, while the Cu-3d xz,yz hybridized band is located just below it. The corrugation leads to a significant shift of the Cu-3d xz,yz hybridized band down in energy and a degeneracy lifting for the Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 bands. Corrugated mlCuO is more energetically favorable than the flat one. In addition, we compared the electronic structure of the considered CuO monolayers with bulk CuO systems. We also investigated the influence of a crystal lattice strain (which might occur on some interfaces) on the electronic structure of both mlCuO and determined the critical strains of topological Lifshitz transitions. Finally, we proposed a number of different minimal models for the flat and the corrugated mlCuO using projections onto different Wannier functions basis sets and obtained the corresponding Hamiltonian matrix elements in a real space. Copper oxides stand apart from other transition metal compounds. First of all, they attract much attention because of their high temperature superconductivity (HTSC) and already existing applications The relatively recent interest in the CuO monolayer arose in part because one would expect a superconducting phase to occur here by analogy with the typical representative of HTSC cuprates La 2 CuO 4 . There, the superconductivity occurs in two-dimensional layers formed by CuO 2 plaquettes. The CuO monolayer consists of the same plaquettes. However, the plaquettes in the cuprates are connected by vertices, whereas in the monolayer they are connected by faces. This fact leads to a difference in the chemical composition-the number of copper and oxygen atoms is identical in the monolayer (CuO), while there are two oxygen atoms per copper atom in the cuprates (CuO 2 ). In general, the electronic properties of the copper oxides are thoroughly studied. As everyone knows, La 2 CuO 4 has the Cu-d x 2 -y 2 orbital at the Fermi level Moreover, a number of experiments and theoretical studies were carried out on various structural modifications of the CuO monolayer: CuO monolayer in a graphene pores and freestanding CuO monolayer In this work, we solve a task of proposing and comparing different minimal models for the CuO monolayer systems as a necessary first step of any further theoretical investigations. To calculate the band structure, the density of states (DOS) and the Fermi surface, we used the density functional theory with the full-potential linear augmented planewave framework, as implemented in WIEN2k Figure Figure The third row (g-i) of Figure Seeing such a significant shift of the Cu-3d xz,yz bands of the corrugated mlCuO, we wondered if it was possible to raise these states to the Fermi level only via the lattice strain. Significant lattice strain is observed at all sorts of interfaces where there is a mismatch between the lattice parameters. Besides, as we already mention, the corrugated state appears to be more energetically favorable. To clarify this issue, we carried out a series of calculations where we varied the lattice parameter a from 0% to 10% for the flat mlCuO and from 0% to 35% for the corrugated mlCuO. The corresponding results can be observed in Figure The next step in our study is to reveal a good minimal model for both flat and corrugated mlCuO. In order to do that, we constructed a set of models using the maximally localised Wannier functions (MLWF) within wannier90 package We used hoppings up to the second coordination sphere for the flat mlCuO and up to the fifth coordination sphere for the corrugated one. These numbers of neighbors are the minimum required to obtain good agreement between the model Hamiltonian band structure and the initial one. We also attach the values of the Hamiltonian matrix elements in a real space for all the models (Figure We investigated the electronic properties of the flat and the corrugated CuO monolayers-DOS, the band structures and the Fermi surfaces. The flat mlCuO is similar to the bulk CuO with the monoclinic crystal structure and typical Cu-based HTSC, e.g., La 2 CuO 4 and has the Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 states at the Fermi level (with a small addition of the hybrid O-2p states). There is a second band just below the Fermi level-that it is only 0.02 eV lower. It includes the Cu-3d xz,yz states hybridized with O-2p z . The corrugation effect leads to a significant shift of the Cu-3d xz,yz bands to -0.7 eV and a degeneracy lifting for the Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 bands. The corrugated mlCuO is energetically more favorable than the flat one by 0.07 eV and is more likely formed as a topmost layer on some surfaces. It is possible to create a topological Lifshitz transition via lattice strain: for the flat mlCuO, a slight stretching of the lattice parameter ∆a = 0.7% already leads to the appearance of a hole pocket around the X point; this effect for the corrugated mlCuO occurs at ∆a = 35%. It is interesting to note the presence of what seems to be a rather flat band in the Γ -X direction near the Fermi level. Probably, it will be possible to create it using a reasonable strain and a hole doping. There is a significant mismatch in the lattice parameters of the considered CuO monolayers and the known bulk CuO systems (with the cubic and the monoclinic crystal structures). We conclude that CuO layers in the bulk CuO are stretched relative to the monolayer systems-by about 11.5% (cubic bulk vs. flat monolayer) and by 5.1% (monoclinic bulk vs. corrugated monolayer). The monolayer made from experimental bulk CuO with the monoclinic crystal structure turns out to have the band gap in our DFT calculation without using DFT+U or hybrid potentials. Clearly, the reason for this is the more complex corrugation patterns of its crystal structure. We also suggested a set of minimal models for the flat and the corrugated CuO monolayers. The simplest model includes only the Cu-d x 2 -y 2 states and agrees well with the GGA calculated band structure at the Fermi level (the latter is also correct for the other models). For the one-and three-band models, we obtained the values of the corresponding Hamiltonian matrix elements in a real space; therefore, depending on the needs, the Hamiltonian of the appropriate complexity can be used. Before proceeding to more complex systems, such as a CuO monolayer on a substrate or a CuO monolayer as an interface, it was necessary to perform calculations for the original system and understand the features of its electronic structure. So, the next step might be the investigation of such complex systems or using more advanced methods such as DFT+DMFT. Table Supplementary Materials:The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https: //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/1010000/s1.