Starting from a microscopic model for the particle-particle interactions in a Weyl semimetal, we analyzed the possibility for conventional as well as monopole Cooper pairing between quasiparticle excitations at the same (intra-nodal) or opposite (inter-nodal) Weyl nodes. We derived a coupled system of self-consistent BCS-like equations, where the angular dependence of the pairings is directly determined from the microscopic interaction symmetries. We studied the competition between conventional and monopole superconducting phases, thus obtaining explicitly the phase diagrams from the microscopic interaction model parameters. We determined the critical temperatures for both phases, and the low temperature critical behavior, including the specific heat, that we suggest as possible experimental probe for topological quantum criticality in Weyl semimetals. Topological semimetals are characterized by the presence of nodal points connecting the valence and conduction bands, thus leading to a variety of emerging low-energy quasiparticle excitations The unique features of the band structure and its corresponding quasiparticle excitations in WSMs suggest the potential existence of diverse pairing states In this work, we expanded the analysis in Ref. Let us start from the general form of the Hamiltonian representing a Weyl semimetal in the presence of particle-particle arXiv:2411.07338v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 Nov 2024 Here, the non-interacting contribution is defined by for fermion operators The matrix in Eq. ( with σ(x,y,z) the usual Pauli matrices. This model involves two Weyl points located at momenta K ± = (0, 0, ±Q), respectively. In addition, we shall assume a short-range interaction, which includes a nearest-neighbors Coulomb repulsion V 1 > 0 and a contact, phonon-mediated effective attractive interaction V 0 < 0. When both terms combined we have Here is the occupation number operator at the site R i on the lattice in the local Wannier basis. By the appropriate Fourier transformation ĉσ (R i ) = √ N e ik•Ri ĉσ (k), the interaction term is expressed in the Bloch-momentum basis by with a matrix element given by In order to capture the topological features of the Weyl semimetal band structure, we define operators in the nodal Fermi surface representation, by expanding the momenta in the vicinity of each Weyl point as follows ψ±,σ (k) = ĉσ (k + K ± ) for |k| ≪ |K ± |. By further assuming isotropy of the Fermi velocity around each of the Weyl points, such that t = t z sin(Q) ≡ v F , we obtain the effective low-energy Hamiltonian where a = ± represents the nodal topological charge (chirality). For the interaction operator, we take a similar approach, starting from the Bloch-momentum representation Then, we turn to the nodal Fermi surface representation by expanding the two momenta in terms of K ± as k = k ′ + K a and q = q ′ + K b , with a, b = ± respectively. After this substitution, we obtain and by assigning each possible value of the nodal indexes a and b, we finally obtain where we identify the coefficients corresponding to all the non-vanishing elements of the internode interaction. Now, to take care of the intra-node interactions, which possess a center of momentum at 2K ± , we choose the configuration k+p = 2K a , such that the potential term, in analogy with the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) phase in conventional superconductors, reduces in this case to ĉ † τ,-k+2Ka ĉτ,-q+2Ka ĉσ,q . where we identify the remaining non-zero potential coefficients as Finally, adding up both terms we obtain the total interaction potential where now we include all the interaction coefficients obtained for both channels in a single matrix element V ab,cd q . Explicitly, expanding up to second order in the momenta, we obtain with k ⊥ = (k x , k y , 0). The proper treatment of these coefficients in the low-energy regime leads to the emergence of different possible superconducting phases of the model, according to its intra-or inter-node pairing structure. This analysis will be presented in Section V, but first we shall establish the nature of the possible pairings. In a standard BCS-like mean-field approximation, we write the interaction as where the pairing function is defined via the self-consistent relation Following the method presented in , where the spinor ξ a (k) is the positive energy eigenvector of Ĥ0 at each Weyl node a = ±. In spherical coordinates, we thus have (see Appendix A for details) (18) In this basis, the Hamiltonian is then reduced to where the single-particle contribution was diagonalized as h k = v F |k| -μ, and the projected gap equation in the new basis becomes with matrix elements V ab,cd k,q given by the corresponding transformation from the originals to this new basis. Let us further define the Nambu spinor , in order to arrange the Hamiltonian in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes notation as a bilinear form where we defined the matrix For subsequent computations, it is convenient to express this matrix in a SU(2) ⊗ SU(2) basis composed by {τ α ⊗ ηβ }, where τα represents the two Weyl nodes subspace, while ηβ represent the particle-hole degree of freedom. Here, α, β = 1, 2, 3 represent the Pauli matrix indexes, while α, β = 0 indexes the two-dimensional representation of the identity. With this notation, we obtain Let us now consider the functional integral representation of the partition function at finite temperature where the action in the Euclidean time τ ∈ [0, β] is given by and the integration is performed over the Grassmann fields . Therefore, the Green's function of the system is obtained as the resolvent It is more convenient to solve this equation in the Matsubara frequency space, where ∂ τ → -iω n (for Therefore, the Green's function corresponds to the blockmatrix form The explicit expressions for each of the four matrix components are where we defined the variables With this result, we can now complete the self-consistent equation for both pairing gaps as follows and Here, we identify each of the correlators with a matrix element of the corresponding nodal Green function, as follows After computing the Matsubara sums by standard methods, we obtain the coupled system of BCS gap equations where we defined the excitation energies E 2 ± = a 2 k ± 2B k . Notice that these equations involve the presence of two order parameters, i.e. ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 . Moreover, if we take the limit , and we recover the usual BCS equation. We shall consider the continuum limit k → V (2π) 3 d 3 k, and hence it is convenient to introduce the density of states in momentum integrals such as where f (E q , Ω q ) is any function that only depends on |q| through E q , ω D is the Debye frequency, and the density of states is defined by In the last step of Eq. ( We further expand the interaction potential matrix elements according to their angular dependence, as follows where the explicit coefficients V intra lm and V inter q,l,m in Eq. ( Finally, since the self-consistent Eq. ( ,m (θ q , φ q ) ≡ ∆ q,l,m 1 g q,l,m (θ q )e i(m+q)φq . ( Implementing all these structures in the BCS equations, we obtain the coupled integral equation system and where we defined the function , the effective coupling constants λ 0 = ρ(μ)V intra lm and λ 1 = ρ(μ)V inter qlm , and the parameter u = ∆ q ′ l ′ m ′ 1 /∆ lm 0 . Notice that the angular dependence is still present in the energy dispersion relations since and A. Critical Behavior Along this section, we shall analyze the possible solutions to the coupled system of BCS equations Eq. (41) and Eq. (40), that determine the possible existence of the superconducting phases in the WSM. Moreover, she shall determine the mag-nitude of the critical temperatures associated to each of those SC phases. For notational convenience, along this section we will write the gap equations as for η = 0, 1 and η = 1 -η. Here we also defined the integrals Let us start by assuming the existence of two critical temperatures, corresponding to the vanishing point of each of the gap functions, i.e. ∆ η (T ) = 0 for T > T η c . Without loss of generality, we denote by η the higher critical temperature, so that the condition T η c > T η c applies. First, we take the limit T → T η+ c (the higher critical temperature), in which case B η = B η (0, 0) = 0 and the energy dispersion in Eq. (42) reduces to E ± → E. Therefore, in this limit we obtain where γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant and in the last step we applied the weak coupling approximation ω D ≫ ∆ η . Then, we solve for the higher critical temperature to obtain Let us now approach the same critical temperature from below, i.e. the limit T → T η- c , by expanding the A η (∆ η , 0) in terms of ∆ η ≪ 1 as where we defined the auxiliary function Then, by this substitution and after a careful evaluation of the corresponding integrals, we obtain where we defined the constant α = 7ζ(3)/8π 2 , with ζ(s) the Riemann's Zeta function, as well as the angular integral Here and from now on, when any of the upper-index values equals zero, we shall omit the corresponding sub-index to alleviate notation. Finally, comparing with the expression for the critical temperature in Eq. (47), we can write from where we obtain a critical exponent β = 1/2. These results are not surprising, since in this limit we just recover the usual behavior of BCS theory. Now, at the lower critical temperature T η c , we have ∆ η ̸ = 0, and in order to obtain a non-trivial equation from Eq. ( where ψ(β, x) was defined in Eq. ( (54) Now, taking the limit T → T η+ c in the first term in Eq. (44), we obtain (55) We shall further assume that both critical temperatures are close enough to each other in order to use the critical behavior of ∆ η (T ) in the vicinity of T η c as defined in Eq. ( Thereby, replacing the argument in the logarithm in terms of T η c in Eq. (47), and using again the critical behavior of ∆ η from Eq. (52), we obtain the expression where we defined the parameters From Eq. (57), after elementary algebra, we conclude that the relation among both critical temperatures as a function of the corresponding couplings is given by Finally, in order to obtain the critical behavior of both order parameters in the neighborhood of the second critical temperature, we expand every term of the gap equations up to second order in the pairings, as follows Then, replacing the coupling constants in terms of the critical temperatures, we finally solve the system of equations in favour of the pairing gaps, leading to the explicit expressions and where we defined the parameters in terms of the angular integrals in Eq. ( Notice that the first term in Eq. ( (64) We can analyze the combination of signs that determines the behavior of ∆ η in terms of ν η , by combining Eqs. (58), (63) to obtain the identity All the conditions that we find necessary to produce the coexistence of both SC phases are summarized in Table A thermal property that may provide a signature for the experimental characterization of the phase transitions discussed in our theory is the specific heat. Since the internal energy of the system is given by (β = 1/T ) the specific heat is obtained as The Grand Canonical partition function is obtained, upon functional integration over the Fermion fields, in terms of the Matsubara Green's function Eq. ( with the dispersion relations E ± as defined in Eq. ( where the derivative of the energy dispersion with respect to the temperature is given in terms of the pairing gaps, as follows as well as for the second derivatives In the vicinity of each of the critical points, since the corresponding pairing suddenly becomes non-zero, the specific heat exhibits a discontinuity proportional to terms of the form due to the critical behavior of the pairing gaps. In contrast, the metallic component of the specific heat (per unit volume) arising from the normal phase is given by the expression, 1 + e -β(ħv F k-μ) 2 (73) that in the limit of zero chemical potential μ → 0 reduces to The total specific heat involving the metallic and superconducting contributions from Eq. ( To study the possible coexistence between different phases, in this section we shall focus on the zero temperature limit. Then, in Eq. (40) and Eq. ( where we defined ∆ 2 ± = |∆ 0 (q)| 2 + |∆ 1 (q)| 2 ± 2B q . Then, from the mathematical identity sinh -1 (x) = ln(x + √ x 2 + 1), and taking into account that in the weak coupling regime |∆ 0,1 (q)| ≪ ω D , we obtain In addition, the coefficients ∆ lm 0 and ∆ q ′ l ′ m ′ 1 defined in Eq. (39) will be determined by the symmetry of the interaction potential, as we shall illustrate in some specific examples in Section VI. Making all these substitutions, we obtain the pair of coupled equations and with u = ∆ q ′ l ′ m ′ 1 /∆ lm 0 . We further integrate in the azimuthal angle φ, thus reducing the gap equations to the expressions and where we defined the integrals and for simplicity in the notation we introduced the auxiliary variables After a straightforward calculation, we obtain the explicit results and As we can see, the gap equations adopt a different structure according to the value of the parameter s = m ′ + q ′ -m. For that reason, we analyze each case separately. and Here, for notational simplicity we dropped all the indices associated with the spherical or monopole harmonics, respectively, since all the information related to them is codified in the parameter s and the angular functions f (θ) and g(θ), respectively. Furthermore, we defined the auxiliary functions whose explicit value depends on the particular form of the angular functions within the integration domain, in addition to the value of the ratio u = ∆ 1 /∆ 0 . To obtain the possible pairing channels admitted by our model, we take the matrix elements of the interaction in the original basis and expand them for small momenta near each Weyl node K ± = (0, 0, ±Q), as shown in Eq. and where for the inter-node case we add up all the contributions with different configurations of nodal indices. By the same procedure, identifying the first spherical harmonics as components of the product k ⊥ , we recognize the correspondign coefficients as and The next step is to project onto the Bogoliubov basis, which diagonalizes the one-particle Hamiltonian, in order to obtain the corresponding effective pairing for each projection. For instance, the original s-channel projected over the Bogoliubov basis for the intra-node pair becomes where the s-channel and the p z -channel naturally appear, up to an exponential that can be removed by a suitable gauge choice. In the same manner, the projection over the inter-node pair gives where the first monopole Y -1,1,0 is present, as a signature of the non-trivial topology of the Cooper pair for this case. Also, notice that all the possible competition between these states is determined by the condition s = m ′ + q ′ -m ̸ = 0. We can then proceed with the same reasoning for the three possible p-channels: 1. The p z -channel produces a d-wave pairing with couplings V intra 2,±1 = 1 10 V intra 1,0 , and when projected onto the inter-node pair, we obtain an infinite series in terms of monopole harmonics of the form Y -1,l,1 , for all l ≥ 1, and Y -1,l,3 , for l ≥ 3. Notice that in this case, again the SC states compete according to the equations with s ̸ = 0, since the quantum numbers of the special functions can't satisfy s = 0. 2. The p x ± ip y channel transforms into the d-wave pairing with coupling V intra 2,±2 = 1 5 V intra 1,±1 , as much as the monopole-like pairing V inter -1,2,±2 = 3 10 V inter 1,±1 . When analyzing the competition, we have to choose all the upper(lower) signs. Then, the parameter s = -1±2∓2 ̸ = 0 again. The absence of competing pairings with s = 0 can be interpreted as a manifestation of the topological repulsion mechanism proposed in To illustrate the phenomenology emerging from our model, as expressed by the coupled system of BCS equations ( In this case we have to apply the condition s ̸ = 0, with the angular functions f (θ) = 1 and g(θ) = sin θ. Therefore, we obtain which depends upon the value of the ratio u = ∆ 1 /∆ 0 . For instance, in the regime u < 1 (or, equivalently, ∆ 1 < ∆ 0 ) we can evaluate directly the gap equations as follows From these equations, we obtain the condition for the phase boundary: For the opposite regime, u > 1, we define the parameter θ 0 such as sin θ 0 ≡ u -1 , so the functions in Eq. ( After a straightforward calculation, we obtain the gap equa-tions for this regime: Combining them, we obtain the condition for the phase boundary, as given by the curve: This equation can be written in the general simpler form where f (u) has to be chosen in the two regimes according to equations ( where the right-hand side of the equation above must be evaluated in the limits u → 0 for the transition from the mixed state to the ∆ 0 phase, and u → ∞ for the transition to the ∆ 1 phase, respectively. The corresponding phase diagram for this case is presented in Fig. In this case s ̸ = 0 again, but the corresponding angular functions are f (θ) = cos(θ) and g(θ) = sin(θ), respectively. Therefore, it is convenient to make the change of variables x = -cos(θ) in the gap equations ( Then, the turning points for the polynomial in the absolute value are given by the solutions to the quadratic equation which are given by These solutions satisfy the condition |x ± | ≤ 1, where the equality holds only in the limit u → ∞. Also, since the quadratic polynomial has positive concavity, we conclude that it takes negative values within the interval x ∈ (x -, x + ), and positive values elsewhere. In summary, we obtained Finally, since the integration domain is symmetric, and the dependence is only via the even function x 2 , we can write the integrals as two times just the positive part of the domain. In this case, there is no distinction (from the computational point of view) between the regimes u < 1 and u > 1, so we can compute directly the integrals, and study the corresponding boundaries in the final result. After computing the integrals involved, we obtain the gap equations which are combined in order to obtain the phase boundary condition, as defined by the curve The critical behaviour predicted by this equation is depicted in figure Now we focus on the topological repulsion mechanism proposed in where η = 0, 1 and η = 1 -η. Notice that the first term is identical to the result obtained in This equation indicates that the coexistence of both phases ( u ̸ = 0 and u < ∞) is allowed in a continuous zone of the parameter space, since f (u) is a continuous and bounded function in the whole domain 0 ≤ u < ∞. Therefore, we conclude that the topological repulsion mechanism does not occur in our present model. We attribute this different behaviour to the fact that our present model does not possess the asymmetry in the chemical potential considered in In this work, we investigated the existence of topologically non-trivial superconducting phases in a Weyl semimetal. For this purpose, we proposed a microscopic model for the interaction potential, involving a short-range Coulomb repulsion as well as an effective phonon-mediated attractive term. We further developed a self-consistent BCS-like theory for the possible pairing gaps, whose angular dependence is determined explicitly from the interactions. From this microscopic, selfconsistent theory, we studied the competition between a conventional spherical harmonic (SHSC) and a monopole (MSC) superconducting phase, as a consequence of intra-and internodal Cooper pairs, respectively. We expressed our results in terms of a pair of coupled BCS equations for the pairings. In the zero temperature limit, we solved explicitly for the phase diagram and phase boundaries for different pairing channels, as directly obtained from the microscopic potential model. We found the possibility for coexistence in a Mixed SC phase, both in the s-wave and p-wave channels, respectively. We reexamined the conditions leading to the topological repulsion mechanism proposed by us in We determined the critical temperatures for both possible superconducting phases, and the critical behavior that determines the competition between the MSC and SHSC at very low temperatures. Moreover, from these finite temperature expressions, we calculated the specific heat, and showed that it exhibits discontinuities at each critical temperature, thus providing a possible experimental probe to detect the fingerprints of topological quantum criticality in Weyl semimetals. Since the existence of multiple critical temperatures is also predicted in certain conventional superconductors with broken time-reversal invariance, in order to experimentally detect the non-trivial topological effects arising from the vorticity of the resulting pairing states, magneto-transport measurements can be applied to discriminate chiral versus non-chiral pairing states. As a final remark, current ARPES measurements are very accurate at identifying the individual Weyl nodes in actual topological materials. Therefore, even though the Weyl semimetals experimentally discovered so far display several pairs of Weyl nodes at different energies in the global Fermi surface, it is in principle possible, after an ARPES characterization, to choose an appropriate gate voltage in order to set the chemical potential in close resonance with a single pair of nodes, thus fulfilling the conditions proposed in our theoretical model. ues and eigenvectors of the 2x2 matrix for each possible value of a = ±1. Notice that the characteristic polynomial of M a actually does not depend on a, since where we used that a 2 = 1. Then, the spectrum is given by the eigenvalues λ a ± ≡ λ ± = ±v F k -μ for each node. Since our interest is in the particle states, we just need to find the eigen-spinor associated with the eigenvalue λ + for each node. This is, we are looking for the kernel [M a -λ + ]ξ a (k) = 0, (A4) which leads to 