density waves and superconductivity in the electron-positive fermion gas using a simple intuitive model. Superconductivity and the normal state electrical resistivity which varies as T 2 are strongly enhanced near the compressibility and charge density wave instabilities in the electron-positive fermion gas. The additional screening from the positive fermions introduces an attractive term in the effective electron-electron interaction that is the basis for superconductivity. Electron-positive fermion scattering is the source of the T 2 term in the electrical resistivity. At an instability, both interactions are divergent. The previous paper Part I The superconducting transition temperature is estimated using the McMillan formula. The electron-positive fermion gas conducts electricity and heat. Because electron-electron and positive fermion-positive fermion scattering conserve momentum, they do not contribute to the electrical resistivity, but electron-positive fermion scattering does. All three scattering mechanisms contribute to the thermal resistivity. The simple model for the electron-positive fermion gas is physically intuitive and naturally introduces instabilities at q = 0 when the bulk modulus becomes zero and charge density waves at finite q under some circumstances. For each mass ratio M/m, there is a unique density rs where the energy is a minimum. For different mass ratios, the interactions are investigated at several values of rs ranging from below the energy minimum to that of the instability. How to potentially map the simple model onto real materials, the nature of the new phases, and several missing elements and contradictions are beyond the talents of the author, and invite future work. This paper is a direct follow-on to the previous paper by the same author I use the simple model with these local field factors to calculate the collective modes, the electron-positive fermion effective interaction and the effective interactions between two electrons and between two positive fermions. The results show the impact of the compressibility instability at q = 0 and the charge density waves. The additional screening from the positive fermions yields an attractive effective interaction term between two electrons * kukkonen@cox.net and leads to BCS like superconductivity. This electronpositive fermion interaction term leads to a T 2 temperature dependence in the normal state electrical resistivity. Both diverge at the instabilities and can lead to predictions of high temperature superconductivity as well as large normal state resistivity. The basic physics concepts were understood in the 1970s. Vashishta, Bhattacharyya and Singwi The best available local field factors The simple model assumes that the positive fermions form a uniform background for the electrons and vice versa. Thus the considerable body of work on the electron gas in a uniform background can be directly applied. In calculating the total energy of the electron-positive fermion gas, it is assumed that the total energy is simply the sum of the energy of the electron gas uniform background and a positive fermion gas in a uniform background. Exchange and correlation within each species is accounted for, but the electron-positive fermion correlation energy is not included. I argued in the previous paper The collective modes called acoustic plasmons are calculated in Section II, and compared to previous work. The charge density waves terminate the dispersion relation of the acoustic plasmons. The electron-positive fermion interaction is addressed in Section III. Electronelectron and positive fermion-positive fermion scattering do not contribute to the electrical resistivity because their contribution to the current is proportional to their total momentum that is conserved in scattering. The total current in electron-positive fermion gas is not proportional to momentum and is degraded by electron-positive fermion scattering which transfers momentum from one species to the other. The electron-positive fermion interaction also plays the role of the electron-phonon interaction in BCS superconductivity. Section IV addresses the effective electron-electron interaction and the positive fermion-positive fermion interaction is considered in Section V. Previous results are rederived and the current local field factors are used to produce quantitative results. The effective electron-electron interaction is the sum of two terms. The first term is the effective electron-electron interaction in a uniform background. The second attractive term is proportional to the electron-positive fermion interaction which becomes very large in the density region close to compressibility and charge density wave instabilities. The electrons and positive fermions have no magnetic/spin coupling and the induced magnetization is just the sum of the magnetization of the fermions considered separately as discussed in Section VI. Superconductivity is considered in Section VII. In BCS superconductivity, the repulsive portion of the effective electron-electron interaction inhibits superconductivity and is often represented by the superconducting parameter μ. The attractive portion of the interaction provided by the effective electron-positive fermion interaction is used to calculate the attractive superconducting parameter λ. At densities near an instability, λ becomes large. The McMillan formula is used to estimate the superconducting transition temperature. The transport properties of the normal state are discussed in Section VIII. The electrical resistivity of the normal state is proportional to the scattering rate of electrons by positive fermions. This is an angular average of the effective electron-positive fermion interaction squared. The resistivity is proportional to T 2 and can become very large if the density is close to an instability. The overall results of this investigation of the electronpositive fermion gas are summarized in Section IX and some suggestions for future work to validate, disprove or improve the simple model are made. The limitations of the simple model and speculations about potential applicability are discussed in Appendix A. Vignale and Singwi The expression for the dispersion relation ω q of the collective modes was given in Eq. (C10) of paper I The subscript 1 refers to the positive fermions and 2 to the electrons. G is the local field factor, v = 4πe 2 /q 2 is the coulomb interaction, Π 0 2 is the Lindhard function for electrons and ε et is the electron test charge dielectric function. The plasma frequency for the positive fermions ω 2 p1 can be written in several different equivalent ways: where n is the electron and positive fermion density, m is the electron mass, M is the positive fermion mass, v F 2 is the electron Fermi velocity, q T F is the Thomas-Fermi wave vector of the electrons, and c BS is the Bohm-Staver speed of sound The superscript b refers to the bare interaction which allows for a pseudopotential. Specializing to the simple case where all interactions are coulomb interactions v, and ignoring the electron-positive fermion correlation by setting G 12 = 0, Eq. (1) becomes Using the equality for the test charge-test charge dielectric function in the electron gas, 1 -1/ε tt = vΠ 0e /ε et , the dispersion relation can be rewritten as The first term in this equation is simply the dispersion relation in the electron gas which includes exchange and correlation of the electrons, but simply treats the positive fermions as classical charged point masses. The second term reflects that the positive fermions are indeed fermions and have exchange and correlation interactions with each other. In the random phase approximation RPA, all of the local field factors equal zero and the simple textbook definition of the dispersion relation is obtained Including exchange and correlation, the speed of sound is reduced substantially below the Bohm-Staver value and becomes imaginary for r s greater than approximately 2.5. The precise value varies slightly with the mass ratio. This result depends only on the compressibility sum rule and was previously obtained in Ref. The collective mode is very sensitive to the local field factor at finite wave vector. Any local field factor that satisfies the compressibility sum rule will give the same speed of sound at small q. Reference [4] used the Hubbard approximation where G + = q 2 /(2(q 2 + C)) where the constant is chosen to satisfy the compressibility sum rule and goes to a constant 1/2 at large q. The Hubbard approximation begins to fall significantly below q 2 for q > 0.7 k F . Quantum Monte Carlo calculations have shown that G + remains closely proportional to q 2 up to nearly q = 2 k F . The Hubbard approximation is compared to the quadratic Quantum Monte Carlo result in Fig. Including exchange and correlation in the electron gas, reduces 1/ε tt slightly, and exchange and correlation in the positive fermion gas means that G 1+ increases as q 2 . The result is that at a certain wave vector ω 2 q in Eq. ( Using the simple model and the known local field factors, it is trivial to plot ω q for different mass ratios M/m and densities r s . An illustrative example is given in Fig. The difference between collective mode dispersion relation ω q calculated using the Quantum Monte Carlo local field factor and that of the Hubbard approximation in FIG. The collective mode is well-defined until the frequency crosses the particle-hole continuum. At that point, damping begins and the collective mode loses clear definition. Figure The collective mode predicted by using the current local field factor is shown by the curve ω q in Fig. The same trend is true for acoustic plasmons in a system with two different mass electrons. When Pines Near the minimum mass ratio M/m = 3.5 for a collective mode at the r s corresponding to the energy minimum of the electron-positive fermion gas, the collective mode dispersion relation ω q is extremely sensitive to r s . At the energy minimum r s = 2.6165, there is no collective mode. However a well-defined collective mode develops quickly as density increases and is well developed at r s = 2.61 as shown in Fig. The calculation of the equilibrium density The simple model predicts collective modes at the equilibrium density for all mass ratios M/m > 3.5. The collective modes all terminate at wave vectors below the wave vector of the charge density wave. I see no direct influence of the charge density wave on the collective mode. This may be obvious, but not to me. Although with a charge density wave, the background is no longer uniform and the model assumption is violated, Vignale and Singwi Figure There is a well-defined collective mode at the energy minimum r s for M/m > 3.5. These collective modes cross the edge of the particle-hole continuum of the positive fermions at wave vectors q/k F < 0.95, and completely terminate at wave vectors q/k F < 1.1. The general equations defining the effective interactions were derived in Appendix C of Paper I The response of spin up and spin down fermions are different when the external potential is spin dependent. As shown in Paper I, it is natural to add and subtract the responses of spin up and spin down fermions, because the density response only depends on the sum, and the magnetic response on the difference of the induced densities. The subscript 1+ indicates the sum of the external and effective potentials of positive fermions with spin up and spin down. The subscript 2 refers to the electrons. V b 12 is the bare interaction between the electrons and positive fermions. In general, it can be a pseudopotential, but for the calculations below, it taken as simply the coulomb interaction. G 12 = G 21 is the unknown electron-positive fermion correlation local field factor. Linear response from the electron gas yields the relationship between the induced density and the effective potential, ∆n 2+ = -Π 0 2 V eff 2+ and , with analogous definitions for the positive fermions with dielectric function ε ht . The Fourier transform of the coulomb interaction is v = 4πe 2 /q 2 . The key to using Eqs. The external disturbance of a positive fermion with spin up and written as ρ 1↑ . See the discussion of G ↑↑ the spin dependent local field factors in Appendix C of Ref. . The external potential felt by a positive fermion with spin down is Similarly the external potential by the electrons with spin up and spin down are equal and V ext 2+ = -vρ 1↑ (1-2G 12 ), assuming G 12 = G 21 but attractive rather than repulsive. With these external potentials and the linear response relationship between the effective potential and the induced density, Eqs. (5-6) become two equations with two unknowns, and are solved to yield The effective potential felt by positive fermion due to an electron disturbance is the same because ∆ is symmetric with respect to interchange of electrons and positive fermions. The quantity ∆ * (q/k F ) 2 was extensively examined in Paper I For each mass ratio, the simple model predicts a unique r s where the energy of electron-positive fermion gas is a minimum and the gas is in equilibrium. Compression would be needed to get to a smaller r s and a pseudopotential to get to a larger r s . The electron-positive fermion gas has two parameters r s and the mass ratio M/m. Since this simple model gives formulas for all of the interactions, it is easy to investigate the dependence on these parameters. In the past, various approximations have been made for the electron-positive fermion interaction. One option that ignores the additional screening by the positive fermions is the electron-test charge interaction in the electron gas with a uniform background v/ε et . This is equal to the Thomas-Fermi interaction at q = 0. Another option is to include both electron and positive fermion screening in the random phase approximation v/ε RP A , where ε RP A = 1 + vΠ 0 1 + vΠ 0 2 . A third option is to use the Hubbard approximation which satisfies the compressibility sum rule at q = 0, but does not agree with the quantum Monte Carlo results at larger q. These three alternatives are compared at three different densities in Fig. Figure For M/m = 1, the strength of the interaction V eff 21 increases with r s and diverges at the compressibility instability. The equilibrium r s is 80% of the r s at the compressibility instability at q = 0, as was shown in Paper I At all mass ratios, there is an instability at q = 0 at different r s for each mass ratio. This indicates a condensation or phase separation and is referred to as the compressibility instability because the bulk modulus goes to zero. For mass ratios greater or equal to 4.97, there is an additional instability at finite q (charge density wave) at a different r s which smaller than the r s of the q = 0 instability. However r s of the charge density wave is higher than the equilibrium r s for mass ratios less than 9. The simple model predicts that the electron-positive fermion gas at the equilibrium r s is stable for mass ratios less than 9. Although the model breaks down when the charge density wave occurs, it may continue to be accurate if the amplitude of the charge density wave is small. See the discussion in Appendix A. Figure wave. This effect is even more pronounced at M/m = 6. At M/m = 9, the equilibrium r s is quite close to the critical r s for the charge density wave and the enhancement of the interaction is dramatic. In all cases, V eff 21 is substantially more attractive than the Hubbard approximation at intermediate and large wave vector. This means that there will be more large q scattering of electrons from the positive fermions (and vice versa) which will affect the superconducting and transport properties which are discussed in Sections VII and VIII. The objective is to calculate the electron-electron interaction needed for superconductivity and for normal state electron-electron scattering that contributes to transport properties. Consider two particular electrons that are interacting via the screened effective potential generated by the other electrons and positive fermions in the gas. The exchange and correlation interactions amongst electrons and positive fermions in the gas are treated in a mean field approximation and these particles are called average to distinguish them from the two particular electrons that are scattering. The two particular electrons must have a two-electron state that is antisymmetric with respect to their interchange, and correlation is taken into account by calculating multiple scattering beyond the Born approximation. One particular electron in the Fermi sea is considered the perturbation that induces the screened response of the average electrons-and average positive fermions in the gas wich results in the effective potential that the other particular electron feels. The interactions between parallel and antiparallel electrons are different. This is the basic physics of the intuitive Kukkonen-Overhauser I follow the derivation for the electron-electron interaction in the uniform electron gas described in detail in Appendix B of Paper I, and partially repeated here. The first issue is to understand what the disturbance or "external potential" seen by the average electrons and positive fermions in their Fermi seas in order to calculate the induced densities. When we consider a test charge as the external potential, it is viewed as an infinitesimal charge at a fixed position that interacts with the Fermi sea only through the coulomb potential. The fixed position implies that the test charge has infinite mass and does not react in any way to the electrons in the Fermi sea. The infinitesimal charge justifies linear response theory. An electron has the same coulomb interaction as a test charge but has unit charge. However, this electron is also identical to other electrons with the same spin and has finite mass. This leads to exchange and corre-lation interactions with electrons of the same spin, and a correlation interaction with electrons of opposite spin, and a correlation interaction with the positive fermions. Although the charge of the electron is not infinitesimal, linear response theory is still used. The relative spin of the perturbing electron and an average electron in the Fermi sea must now both be specified. The effective fields felt by average electrons and the average positive fermions are used to calculate the induced densities in the electrons and positive fermions. Lastly, the wave function of the two particular interacting electrons must be antisymmetric, and cannot be treated in the same way as an average electron. The general equations defining the effective interactions are derived in Appendices B & C of Paper I. It is instructive to start with the following two equations that describe the effective interaction of an average electron to the disturbance of a particular electron with spin up. Note that Eq. ( Although it is often convenient to consider the sum and differences, the effective interactions we are looking for are the spin dependent versions, If the disturbance is an electron with spin-up, the external potential seen by an average electron with spinup is vρ 2↑ (1 -2G 2↑↑ ) and vρ 2↑ (1 -2G 2↓↑ ) is the external potential felt by an average electron with spindown. The disturbance seen by the positive fermions is vρ 2↑ (1 -2G 12 ). The resulting external potentials are In order to calculate electron-electron matrix elements that are needed for superconductivity and the electronelectron scattering contribution to the electrical and thermal resistivities, another step is needed. The total wave function for two electrons must be antisymmetric. This incorporates exchange in the correct way. The average effective potential between two parallel electrons in the Fermi sea already includes exchange and correlation in an average (local mean field) sense. Similarly the effective potential between two opposite spin electrons includes correlation. Using these potentials for matrix elements will double count exchange and correlation between these two particular electrons. The effective potentials needed for matrix elements and scattering amplitudes are obtained by removing the average direct exchange and correlation between parallel spin electrons, and removing the average direct correlation between opposite spin electrons. The term -vρ 2↑ 2G 2↑↑ is subtracted from V eff 2↑↑ and -vρ 2↑ 2G 2↓↑ from V eff 2↓↑ . The effective potential for matrix elements or scattering of parallel and antiparallel electrons are denoted by V scat 2↑↑ and V scat 2↓↑ . These scattering potentials are exactly the same as the scattering potentials for the previously known electronelectron electron scattering in a uniform background Eqs. (B15-16) of Ref. )/∆ in analogy to Eq. ( A brief discussion of these effective potentials is in order. The Kukkonen Overhauser mean local field approach is simple and intuitive, but is an approximation. Kukkonen and Wilkins Also fortunately, Quantum Monte Carlo calculations have advanced significantly and have been used to calculate the response functions of the electron gas and extract the wave vector dependence of the local field factors that is required by the theoretical dielectric linear response formulation of the electron gas problem. These calculations verify the compressibility sum rule and show that the density and spin local field factors rise as q 2 from q = 0 up to nearly q = 2k F . The underlying theory of the local field factor at intermediate wave vector is not known and the behavior is empirically taken from connection with the Quantum Monte Carlo calculations. See Refs. Superconductivity and electron-electron scattering calculations in the many body electron gas require a distinction between two particular electrons that are interacting and the rest of the average electrons in the Fermi sea that provide the vertex functions and screening of the effective interaction. The two particular electrons must be treated in a two-particle wave function that is antisymmetric under exchange of the two electrons. In the effective interaction, the electron-electron interactions in the Fermi sea are treated in the local approximation using the local field factors. The antisymmetric two-electron wave functions are a product of a two-particle spatial wave function and a twoparticle spin wave function. Two initial state electrons represented by ψ 1 (r 1 , p 1 ) with spin s 1 and ψ 2 (r 2 , p 2 ) with spin s 2 interact through the effective interaction to become final states with momenta p 1 -q and p 2 +q. The two spins can have four orientations ⟨↑↑⟩, ⟨↓↓⟩, ⟨↑↓⟩ and ⟨↓↑⟩. If the spin part of the wave function is antisymmetric, then the spatial part must be symmetric and vice versa. This leads to four possibilities for the two electron states. Three possibilities called triplet states have an antisymmetric spatial part 1/2 1/2 (ψ 1 (r 1 , p 1 )ψ 2 (r 2 , p 2 )-ψ 2 (r 1 , p 1 )ψ 1 (r 2 , p 2 )) multiplied by one of the symmetric spin wave functions, ⟨↑↑⟩, 1/2 1/2 (⟨↑↓⟩ + ⟨↓↑⟩) or ⟨↓↓⟩. These have total spin = 1 with z component +1, 0 and -1. The remaining two state wave function is the singlet state that has a symmetric spatial part 1/2 1/2 (ψ 1 (r 1 , p 1 )ψ 2 (r 2 , p 2 ) + ψ 2 (r 1 , p 1 )ψ 1 (r 2 , p 2 ) and antisymmetric spin wave function 1/2 1/2 (⟨↑↓⟩ -⟨↓↑⟩) or ⟨↓↓⟩. The triplet state has total spin S = 0 and z component 0. Electron-electron scattering includes all of the two electron states. Ordinary BCS superconductivity is in the singlet state, but p-wave superconductivity is in the triplet state. The simplest approximation is that the electrons are plane waves that are used to calculate matrix elements with the effective interaction. This is equivalent to the first Born approximation which is known to overestimate the effective scattering In order to use the mechanics of spin manipulation based on the Pauli matrices, it is convenient to write the effective interaction in a spin invariant form. where the spin matrix element of σ 1 • σ 2 = -3 in the singlet state and +1 in the triplet state. From equations (13-15), V 0 , J and U 21 are given by The first two terms in Eq. ( Equations None of the physics reproduced above is new, but is included so that the reader can understand the effects of using current local field factors that predict charge density waves in these general equations, compared to the Hubbard approximation that was used previously. The new and old results are compared in the figures below. The positive fermion-positive fermion interactions are the same as Eqs. The different contributions to the effective electronelectron potential V eff ee given in Eqs. The first observation from Fig. The second observation is simply the obvious fact that the effective repulsive interaction for the triplet state is always smaller than that of the singlet state. The difference is relatively small. Superconductivity calculations have different weighted averages of V eff ee in the singlet FIG. state which favors small wave vector compared to the triplet state. For equal masses M/m = 1, the effective singlet interaction is purely repulsive which would not predict superconductivity. The triplet state is slightly attractive. For mass ratios below 4.97, the only instability is the compressibility instability at q = 0 and V eff ee becomes attractive with a minimum at q = 0 which should predict singlet superconductivity. At the density of the energy minimum r s is 80% of the r s of the compressibility instability. The depth of the attractive effective interaction increases with r s and gets very large near the instability, but there is no obvious way beyond a pseudo-potential to increase r s . Pressure could be used to decrease r s . At the mass ratio M/m = 4.97, a critical point is reached at r s = 3.036 where the compressibility instability at q = 0, and a charge density wave at q/k F = 0.83 coexist As shown in Ref. The effective interactions V eff ee for mass ratios M/m = 6 7 & 9 are also shown in Fig. The calculation of the effective interaction between positive fermions is exactly the same as for electrons. The physical equations only depend on charge squared so that they may be used directly. The only difference is the mass of the positive fermions compared to the electrons M/m. Equations The repulsive portion of the positive fermion-positive fermion interaction is modestly dependent on mass and becomes less repulsive than the electron-electron interaction as M/m increases. However the attractive term is much more sensitive and gets weaker for the holes by the ratio (m/M ) 2 at q = 0. The two interactions are directly compared in Fig. Using Eq. ( At q = 0, this ratio becomes (Π 0 1 /Π 0 2 ) 2 = (M/m) 2 . The Lindhard polarizability at q = 0 is the density of states at the Fermi surface N (0) = mk F /π 2 ħ 2 = q 2 T F /4πe 2 , which shows the scaling with mass and the relationship between the density of states and the Thomas Fermi screening wave vector. Figure For M/m > 1.5, there is no net attraction for the positive fermions. Note that I have defined the positive fermions as the heavier particle. If the positive fermions had a lower mass than the electrons, the results would be the same, but the roles of the electrons and positive fermions are reversed. Applying an external magnetic field H (in the z direction) to a paramagnet induces a magnetization M in the same direction of the external field that adds to produce a local field that is larger than the applied field. where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. For a two component system M = M 1 + M 2 . Linear response theory connects the magnetization to the local field. In the simple model of this paper, the electrons and positive fermions do not have a magnetic interaction. In this case, the electrons and positive fermions respond independently, M 1 = χ 1 B and M 2 = χ 2 B. This yields If (χ 1 + χ 2 ) ≥ 1, the system will be unstable. If the instability occurs at q = 0, it could be a ferromagnetic transition. At finite q, it signals a spin density wave. The q dependent Pauli susceptibility is given by χ 0 = μ 2 B Π 0 2 (q), where the Bohr magneton is given by μ B = eħ/2m and the Lindhard free electron polarizability is Π 0 2 (q) = (mk F /π 2 ħ 2 )L(q). L(q) is the dimensionless Lindhard function Quantum Monte Carlo calculations of χ 2 have confirmed that the enhancement factor and therefore the local field factor is precisely consistent with the susceptibility sum rule derived by differentiating the energy. Quantum Monte Carlo calculations have also shown that the initial q 2 wave vector dependence of the spin local field factor G -continues until nearly q = 2k F , as it does for the density local field factor G + , however there is nothing equivalent to the additional screening by the positive fermions, so no spin density waves occur. Other Quantum Monte Carlo calculations at large r s = 120 indicate that there is no magnetic phase transition at q=0. See Ref. Figure However an extension of the simple model that allows another type of electrons that can exchange with the first type would result in a susceptibility enhancement factor of the form ). This system would have a ferromagnetic divergence at q=0 or a FIG. spin density wave at finite q, if the sum G 2-vΠ 0 2 +G 3-vΠ 0 3 became greater than 1. This system could exhibit both charge and spin instabilities, which influence both superconductivity and itinerant magnetism. The possibility of superconductivity in the electronhole liquid was investigated in Refs. The main difference between this work and Ref. The effective electron-electron interaction is given in Eqs. These equations are given in Eqs. where the pre-factor is proportional to the density of states at the Fermi surface. The first two terms produce μ and the last term λ. The weighting factor of q in the average over the Fermi surface greater emphasis to large wave vectors and this is where the difference between the Hubbard approximation and the current local field factors is greatest. For each mass ratio M/m the electron-positive fermion gas has a unique r s of the energy minimum (see Fig. The main observation is that attractive superconducting parameter λ is large and becomes very large near the charge density wave. The repulsive parameter μ is also large. The only difference in Fig. The situation is more complicated for the attractive superconducting parameter λ that is an average of the effective electron-positive fermion interaction, which becomes large and then diverges at the presence of the charge density wave. The effective interaction treats electrons and positive fermions in exactly the same way. There is not an independent calculation of the effect of phonons as in BCS theory. The additional screening from the positive fermions has contributions from both single particle excitations and collective modes. This is the interaction that should be used in ab initio calculations of superconductivity for the electron-positive fermion gas. Reference Where T F 1 = 58200K/(M/m • (r s ε B ) 2 is the Fermi temperature of the positive fermions in a background dielectric constant, and μ * = μ/(1 + μ log(T F 2 /T F 1 ) = μ/(1 + μ log(M/m) is the renormalization used in Ref. The Fermi temperature of the positive fermions, which is the pre-factor in Eq. ( Figure VIII. TRANSPORT. Both the electrons and positive fermions contribute to the transport of electricity and heat. The electrical and thermal resistivities are calculated using coupled Boltzmann equations. Simple kinetic equations using relaxation times for the different scattering mechanisms are adequate for some conditions. See for example Refs. The electron-positive fermion gas considered in this paper is analogous to compensated semimetal. Uncompensated systems are discussed in the references. In the electron-positive fermion gas, the only scattering can be between two electrons, two positive fermions, or an electron with the positive fermion. In a real material, there will be other scattering mechanisms including impurity scattering. The electrical resistivity is easiest to understand. The electric current carried by the electrons is the electron charge divided by the electron mass times the total momentum of the electron. (the sum of the momentum of the individual electrons). Electron-electron scattering conserves momentum and therefore cannot degrade the electrical current. This is true unless there is another mechanism to conserve momentum such as a reciprocal lattice vector. The same argument applies to scattering of two positive fermions. This mechanism also does not contribute to the electrical resistivity. The total current of the electron-positive fermion gas is the sum of the current carried by the electrons and the positive fermions. Because the positive fermions have the opposite charge and a different mass, the total current is not proportional to the total momentum of the system. Therefore electron-positive fermion scattering does contribute to the electrical resistivity. (There is also a contribution to the resistivity if the second species is also negatively charged but with a different mass such as in s-d scattering). When this system is compensated and the number of electrons equals the number of positive fermions the overall system is neutral and an electric field does not change the total momentum. The field however induces relative momentum between the electrons and positive fermions which results in an electrical current. Electron-positive fermion scattering relaxes the relative momentum to zero and thus contributes to the resistivity. The simple kinetic arguments are presented in Refs. The thermal resistivity is not as easy to understand intuitively. Both the electrons and positive fermions carry heat from the high-temperature side to the lowtemperature side. Electron-electron, positive fermionpositive fermion, and electron-positive fermion scattering all contribute to the thermal resistivity. Energy is carried from the hot side to the cold side and there are both inelastic and inelastic collisions. The theoretical approach again involves two coupled Boltzmann equations and the results are expressed in terms of averages of the scattering transition rates. References The scattering rates define the relaxation times in the kinetic theory model. The calculation of the scattering rates is an average of the effective potential, and multiple scattering must be taken into account for quantitative calculations. Most previous work used a version of the Thomas Fermi potential with different screening lengths. For electron-electron and positive fermion-positive fermion scattering, the two particles are identical. If they have the same spin, there is a direct and exchange contribution. In most previous papers, the exchange contribution was ignored. In addition, the first Born approximation was generally used. The Weidemann-Franz postulates that the ratio of the thermal conductivity to the electrical conductivity is the Lorentz constant times temperature The effect of electron-positive fermion scattering on the electrical resistivity depends on the angle of scattering. Forward scattering (small q) will only have a small impact on the electric current. The electrons will largely continue in the same direction. However large angle scattering (large q) has a much larger effect. For the thermal resistivity, the situation is not as clear because of the role of inelastic scattering in transmitting the energy from the hot side to the cold side. I do not attempt to make an accurate calculation of the scattering rates or resistivities. My goal is to show the effect of using the many body effective potentials of this paper compared to the results using the electrontest charge interaction (which is similar to the Thomas Fermi approximation). Furthermore, I use the Born approximation which is known to overestimate the scattering cross-section The relevant scattering rates in the Born approximation are given in Appendix B of Ref. where the averages of the effective interaction are given by and These quantities are calculated and shown in Fig. Figure Figure 13. Angular averages of the effective interactions in the electron-positive fermion gas that contribute to the electrical and thermal resistivities. For each mass ratio M/m, the calculations are made at the unique density rs where the energy is a minimum. Fig. 14 which plots the angular average of the scattering rate at different mass ratios for densities that are between 0.8 times the r s of the energy minimum to lower densities (larger r s ) near the instability. Figure The steep slope of the T 2 resistivity with r s near an instability has the same behavior as in a calculation of the superconducting transition temperature. Although there is no mapping of the electron-positive fermion gas onto any real system. This result suggests that a system with a T 2 and a high superconducting transition temperature would be very sensitive to pressure which decreases r s and therefore the resistivity and transition temperature. The electron-positive fermion gas is a simple to state intuitive model of that, in the approximations of this paper, exhibits both q = 0 (compressibility) and finite q (charge density wave) instabilities. The additional screening from the positive fermions predicts superconductivity and a T 2 electrical resistivity. Both are strongly enhanced at densities near the instabilities. In the simple model of this paper, the positive fermions are assumed to provide a uniform background for the FIG. The positive fermion in a uniform background is the same problem as an electron in a uniform background, but with a different mass M. The energy of the electron gas in a uniform background is well known and no new calculations are required for the electron-positive fermion gas. For every mass ratio M/m, the system has a unique density r s where the energy is a minimum. The bulk modulus becomes zero at closely 1.25 times the r s of the energy minimum. When the total bulk modulus equals zero, the system is truly unstable. Linear response theory relates the response functions to unknown local field factors and explicitly includes the coulomb interaction between electrons and positive fermions. A further assumption is that the local field factor is simply that of the electron gas in a uniform background. In principle, there is an additional local field factor due to electron-positive fermion correlation, but that is also ignored in the simple model. With these assumptions, everything is known and there are explicit formulas for all of the interactions as a function of mass ratio M/m and density r s . All calculations can be done in Excel on a laptop. The problem of two opposite charged fermions was also addressed using density functional theory Ref. The fact that the positive fermions provide additional screening in addition to screening by the electrons is the crucial new physics element. This additional screening allows superconductivity. More importantly, the local field factor at intermediate wave vectors 1 -2 k F determined by Quantum Monte Carlo calculations The simple model predicts the q = 0 and charge density waves instabilities at finite q. It says nothing about the new phases on the other side of the instabilities. The discussion in Ref. I use the Kukkonen Overhauser approach The simple model predicts that if r s is near that of a charge density wave, the superconducting transition temperature and the coefficient of the T 2 normal state electrical resistivity can become very large. However there is no mechanism to change r s without an energy cost. The system is thermodynamically stable or metastable with a minimum energy at a specific r s for every mass ratio M/m. The simple model uses point positive fermions and coulomb interactions. However the formalism allows for a pseudopotential which could represent core electrons in a real material. Going beyond the simple model could be difficult. A calculation of the ground state energy including the electron-positive fermion correlation energy would put the q = 0 instability on firmer grounds. Quantum Monte Carlo calculations of the response functions of the uniform electron gas are already near the limits of numerical capability and tend not to converge when the density approaches the compressibility instability. The local field factors are extracted from these response functions. The response function and thus the local field factors of the two component Fermi gas may be beyond current capabilities. Near the phase transitions, the response becomes large and there may be opportunities to go beyond linear response or to consider a renormalization approach. The simple theory seems consistent for mass ratios M/m < 9. At these small ratios the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is questionable. Most calculations of superconductivity treat the deformable background separately as phonons. In the present case, the positive fermions need to be treated the same way as the electrons for ab initio calculations. If the mass ratio is modest, the Fermi temperature of the positive fermions is small and the positive fermions could be considered warm dense matter in a background of fully degenerate electrons. This may yield some interesting new physics. At high temperatures, the positive fermions could be metal ions which would be classical particles immersed in a degenerate electron gas. The ions would still be mobile and provide some additional screening. This might apply to liquid metals. In Appendix A, I discuss some of the limitations of the simple model and make several speculations. A basic prediction from the simple model is that if the mass ratio and density are near an instability, as the electron-positive fermion gas is cooled, the normal state electrical resistivity is large and varies as T 2 until the system becomes superconducting at a high temperature. Application of pressure to a system near an instability would strongly reduce the T 2 resistivity and the superconducting transition temperature. FIG. It seems to me that a small amplitude charge density wave should not change the ground state energy substantially. That means it would have little effect on the equilibrium density and compressibility instability, and I speculate that the system could be stable with an r s close to the predicted energy minimum and also have a charge density wave. Superconductivity can coexist with charge density waves. See Another assumption of the simple model is that the electron-positive fermion correlation contribution to the local field factor G 12 can be ignored. The q 2 dependence of the local field factor near q = 1 -2 k F is the crucial to the existence of the charge density wave. The Hubbard model for the local field factor does not have charge density waves at all. The q 2 dependence at intermediate q is predicted by Quantum Monte Carlo calculations. The local field factor is a result of a local approximation to the many body problem and I do not have a feeling for the underlying microscopic physics. It could be that the missing correlation contribution, or the charge density wave strongly affects the local field factor at intermediate q. Can the simple model be mapped onto real materials? Or can the predictions of the simple models elucidate the behavior of charge density systems? A prediction of the simple model is that near the charge density wave, the system can be very sensitive to r s . This would imply sensitivity to pressure. A system with a charge density wave should find that the charge density wave vector increases with pressure and finally charge density wave disappears entirely. This behavior is illus-trated in Fig. The discussion in Section VIII, also shows that near the instability, the predicted T 2 electrical resistivity and the superconducting transition temperature are very sensitive to r s which implies sensitivity to pressure. I speculate that the compressibility instability at q = 0 could be a metal-insulator transition. This instability occurs as r s increases or density decreases. In the opposite case, an insulator near the metal insulator transition could become a metal under pressure which increases density. An interesting experimental fact is that silicon, a semiconductor, becomes a metal upon melting Can the results of the simple model for a uniform background be used somehow as the basis for calculations for nonuniform systems? This would be in analogy to using the uniform electron gas results for calculations of nonuniform systems in density functional theory. For example, at a surface, edge or some internal structure, the density may vary between a high density and zero or a low density, and pass through the critical density for localized instabilities. Of course, this may require the straightforward extension of the simple model to two or one dimension. A localized proximity to a charge density wave might also enhance the possibility of superconductivity in that region.