The microwave-driven dynamics of the superconducting phase difference across a Josephson junction is now widely employed in superconducting qubits and quantum circuits. With the typical energy level separation frequency of several GHz, cooling these quantum devices to the ground state requires temperatures below 100 mK. Pushing the operation frequency of superconducting qubits up may allow for operation of superconducting qubits at 1 K and even higher temperatures. Here we present measurements of the switching currents of niobium/aluminum-aluminum oxide/niobium Josephson junctions in the presence of millimeter-wave radiation at frequencies above 100 GHz. The observed switching current distributions display clear double-peak structures, which result from the resonant escape of the Josephson phase from a stationary state. We show that the data can be well explained by the strong-driving model including the irradiation-induced suppression of the potential barrier. While still being measured in the quasi-classical regime, our results point towards a feasibility of operating phase qubits around 100 GHz. Quantum circuits employing superconducting qubits have seen a lot of progress over the past two decades Increasing the qubit operation frequency beyond 20 -30 GHz is hardly possible when using aluminum, which is currently the standard material for most modern quantum circuits. Aluminum has the superconducting gap energy on the order of 0.18 meV In this work, we report millimeter(mm)-wave spectroscopy of the potential well profile for a current-biased Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb junction. Similarly to the previously studied in the microwave range superconducting phase qubit A description of the Josephson phase dynamics including the behavior at finite voltage is provided by the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model where I is the total current flowing through the junction, I c denotes the critical current of the junction, Φ 0 represents the flux quantum and δ is the Josephson phase, i.e., the phase difference across the junction. Eq. ( where the phase δ is interpreted as the position and E J = I c Φ 0 /(2π) denotes the Josephson energy. The curvature at the potential minima δ m of (2) defines the frequency of small oscillations with ω p = (2eI c /ħC) 1/2 the plasma frequency of the junction. The quality factor Q = ω 0 RC describes the damping of the classical oscillatory behavior of the phase at the small oscillation frequency ω 0 For bias currents close to the critical current (1 -I/I c ) ≪ 1, the wells of the tilted-washboard potential are well approximated by a cubic potential with barrier height ∆U = (4 In underdamped junctions, defined in terms of the Mc-Cumber parameter β C = (ω p RC) 2 as junctions with β C ≫ 1, thermal noise enables switching of the junction from the superconducting to the voltage state for bias currents I sw < I c where ∆U denotes the barrier height and ω 0 plays the role of an attempt frequency. The damping-dependent transmission-factor a t in the regime of weak to moderate damping and in cubic approximation is given by The crossover temperature, given by T cr = ħω 0 /(2πk B ) in the weak-damping limit, separates the thermal regime T ≫ T cr from the quantum regime T ≪ T cr , where the escape is dominated by macroscopic quantum tunneling The escape temperature T esc is related to the escape rate Γ via To a good approximation, T esc is independent of the bias current and provides a measure for the escape process in addition to the bias-current dependent Γ. In the thermal regime, the escape temperature is derived from Eq. ( which is expected to be close to the actual temperature Therefore, the escape rate calculated from the measured switching current statistics in the thermal regime depends on three parameters: I c , T esc and ω p . The irradiation of microwaves onto a Josephson junction causes a resonant enhancement of the escape rate A quantum model for the escape in the strong-driving limit is the separation of the resonantly interacting energy levels and f nm = ⟨n| δ|m⟩ denotes the matrix elements of the phase operator. The damping parameter α does not only depend on the quasiparticle conductance but is also influenced by the frequency-dependent impedance of the junction leads In the harmonic approximation, the sum in Eq. ( The investigated samples were fabricated with a Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb trilayer process, as described elsewhere The sample is measured in liquid helium at 4.2 K by means of a dipstick cryostat containing a dielectric waveguide. The dielectric waveguide is connected to a horn to which the sample holder is attached, allowing for the irradiation of the sample by mm-waves. Low pass and current divider filters submerged in liquid helium reduce the thermal noise from the room temperature setup. The measurement setup is schematically shown in Fig. The start and the stop signal are detected by a time interval counter SR620 from Stanford Research Systems to measure the duration of the current ramp. The process is repeated continuously and the measured time intervals of the counter are read out by a computer. The time intervals are converted into switching currents through a calibration of the ramp rate. The biasing electronic is electrically isolated from the digital data acquisition devices by optocouplers and optical fibers. Additionally, the part of the measurement setup located in liquid helium is protected by a mumetal shield. Electromagnetic radiation in the W-band are generated by a low-noise frequency synthesizer APSYN140 from AnaPico connected to an active multiplier QMC-MX6-10F10 from Quantum Microwave, enabling the irradiation by mm-waves in the range from 75 GHz to 110 GHz onto the sample. The power of the mm-waves is regulated with a voltage-variable attenuator VA100 from MicroHarmonics. The attenuator is calibrated with the help of a vector network analyzer. In the conducted current-ramp experiment, the junction is initially in the zero-voltage state and the biascurrent is increased with a constant ramp rate 1 - For the analysis of the experimental data, the measured switching current distribution is collected in a histogram with a bin width ∆I resulting in a discrete escape probability density where n j is the number of counts in the j-th bin and N is the total number of counts. The according escape rate is IV. RESULTS First, the switching current distribution is measured without external mm-wave irradiation. The measurement is performed with a current-ramp rate of 0.8 A s -1 and a measurement frequency of 200 Hz for a total of 5 × 10 4 counts. The result is presented in Fig. A fit according to Eq. ( Under mm-wave irradiation, the switching current distribution, with the primary peak located at I p , shifts to lower values with increasing mm-wave power, until a second resonant peak at position I r < I p develops. This double-peak structure is shown in the inset of Fig. The frequency of the irradiated mm-waves is varied to measure the dependence of the resonant peak position I r on the radiation frequency. Here, the power of the irradiated mm-waves is adjusted, so that the primary and the resonant peak are of equal height. This ensures a statistically significant measurement of both peaks and provides a measure that allows to compare and reproduce the switching current measurements at varying frequencies. Each histogram is taken with at least 2×10 4 counts. The peak positions are determined by the fit of a curve with a double-Lorentzian shape for each histogram. The results are depicted in Fig. Measurements of the switching current distribution in dependence of the irradiated mm-wave power are shown in Fig. Using I c = 242 μA, ω = 2π • 100 GHz and ω p = 2π • 138.3 GHz yields E J • (ω/ω p ) 5 /ħω p ≈ 170 ≫ 1 , i.e., the condition for the strong-driving limit is fulfilled. Therefore, the data for the power dependence is compared to the model of effective barrier suppression. Dif-fering widths for the primary and the resonant peak are explained by the theory of escape in the strong-driving limit, as the width of the primary peak is determined by thermal fluctuations while the width of the resonant peak depends on the damping of the junction Figure In summary, we studied the interaction of Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb Josephson tunnel junction with mm-waves by investigating the switching current distribution. The analysis of the observed double-peak structures allows for the direct determination of the plasma frequency. Spectroscopic measurements of the dependence of the resonant peak bias current position on the radiation frequency are conducted. Furthermore, the dependence of the switching current distribution on the mm-wave power at fixed frequency was analyzed by means of a quantum model in the strong-driving limit. These measurements yield similar results and show that junctions with plasma frequencies of the order of ω p = 2π•140 GHz have successfully been fabricated. The application of these techniques provides a quick turnaround methodology for the characterization of mm-wave Josephson junctions, allowing a rapid process development for qubit devices.