We investigate the interplay between non-Hermitian skin effect (NHSE) and topological properties in two-dimensional topological superconductor. Two kinds of non-Hermiticity are considered. The first is the spin-independent non-reciprocal hopping, which respects particle-hole symmetry (PHS) and dictates the bulk as well as topological edge modes localize at opposite corners, manifested as the Z2 NHSE protected by PHS. The direction of the localization can be conveniently characterized by the sign of the winding numbers. The other is the spin-dependent non-reciprocal hopping, where the NHSE is protected by time-reversal symmetry (TRS). The Kramers doublets are localized at opposite corners, namely the TRS protected Z2 NHSE. When apply an external magnetic field, its internal symmetry changes from the symplectic class into the orthogonal class, eliminating the NHSE for the states in the spectrum continuum. For the zero energy states which are isolated, the NHSE still has its effects despite the orthogonality. For the spin-independent case, edge states can be effectively tuned by the direction of Zeeman field, where at certain directions the zero-energy edge state can be free of NHSE and uniformly distributed. Our work paves the way for the study of the interplay between topology and non-Hermiticity in superconducting systems. Topological superconductors have been extensively studied due to their topologically protected majorana zero modes(MZMs) and have made remarkable progress both theoretically and experimentally Recently, the topological properties of non-Hermitian systems have attracted much attention in condensed matter physics. The non-Hermitian system has non-Hermitian skin effect (NHSE) without Hermitian coun-terpart, and the non-Hermitian term breaks the traditional BBC, causing the energy spectrum under periodic boundary conditions (PBC) very different from that under open boundary conditions (OBC) In this paper, we analyze the topological properties and NHSE in two-dimensional p ± ip topological superconductor systems with two different kinds of nonreciprocal hoppings. The first is the spin-independent nonreciprocal hopping, meaning the nonreciprocal hopping of spinup and spin-down are the same; the second type is the spin-dependent nonreciprocal hopping, in which the nonreciprocal hopping of spin-up and spin-down occur in op- posite ways. When spin-independent nonreciprocal hopping is introduced, the NHSE protected by PHS localizes the bulk eigenstates at two opposite corners of the system. The localization direction of NHSE can be predicted by the sign of winding number. The particles and holes have winding numbers with opposite signs, corresponds to Z 2 NHSE protected by PHS We investigate a two-dimensional p ± ip topological superconductor with different nonreciprocal hoppings. In the Hermitian case, due to the protection of the TRS, a pair of one-dimensional helical edge states appear with opposite spins and opposite directions of motion as shown in Fig. where τ i , σ i are Pauli matrices in particle-hole and spin spaces, There are two ways to introduce the nonreciprocal hoppings as shown in the Fig. where δ i (i = x, y) are nonreciprocal hoppings in the i direction. This system respects PHS, In the second case, we add the spin-dependent nonreciprocal hopping, so that the Hamiltonian becomes In the absence of Zeeman fields, the system preserves PHS with C = τ y σ y and TRS, T -1 H 2 (k)T = H T 2 (-k) with T = iσ y . Due to T T * = -1,the Hamiltonian belong to symplectic class. When the Zeeman field is introduced, we have In this section, we discuss the NHSE protected by different symmetries under different nonreciprocal hoppings and their influence on the edge states. Adding spin-independent nonreciprocal hopping as presented in Eq.( where α indicates x or y, ⊥ is the direction perpendicular to α, and Since the system has PHS, the eigenstates of the particles and holes are located on the opposite corner of the system, namely the Z 2 skin effect, and the winding number of the particles and holes are opposite to each other: When (W x , W y ) = (-, -), the bulk eigenstate resides at the upper right corner, when (W x , W y ) = (+, +), the bulk eigenstate is localized at the lower left corner, where +/-represent the sign of winding number. For example, for bulk eigenstates with negative energy, under OBC along x (x-OBC) and PBC in the y direction (y-PBC),the winding number W x (0, E b ) of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Apart from the bulk eigenstates affected by Z 2 NHSE, the topological edge states are likewise affected, which is denominated as Z 2 skin-topological effect. The Z 2 skintopological effect is the interplay between the topological edge states and the Z 2 skin effect, which can also be characterized by the point gap topology: where H(k α ) is the Hamiltonian in cylindrical geometry, N is the total number of bands, encompassing both bulk and edge states. As depicted in Fig. Upon the introduction of a Zeeman field, the position of MZM will change with the rotation of the Zeeman field. When θ = π/2 or π, the edge states with zero energy will be uniformly distributed on the edge, while the edge states with non-zero energy are subject to the influence of the Z 2 NHSE and localized on the corner, as shown in Fig. With the addition of spin-dependent nonreciprocal hopping as in Eq. ( which means that both |ψ⟩ and T |χ⟩ * are right eigenstates of the energy E, and are orthogonal and linearly independent of each other Because of TRS, we have This indicates that |φ j ⟩ and T |χ j ⟩ * form a Kramer pair, which are localized on opposite sides of the system. The winding number in Eq. ( Where is the winding number of the nth bands. If the pth and qth energy bands are TRS of each other, then their winding number satisfies the formula Then the topological invariant of a non-Hermitian system with TRS is The edge states are also affected by Z 2 NHSE. The energy under x-OBC and y-PBC (red dots) encompasses the energy of the edge states under full OBC(green dots). We calculate the winding number W α of the topological edge states in Fig. When the Zeeman field is added, the system changes from symplectic class to orthogonal class, where the eigenvalue no longer has Kramers degeneracy. For the orthogonal class, the characteristic equation reads meaning no NHSE can exists for the continuous energy bands. However, for the isolated energy states, it might still be localized In conclusion, we reveal the topological properties and non-Hermitian skin effects of two-dimensional topological superconductor in two different nonreciprocal systems. For spin-independent nonreciprocal hopping, the bulk eigenstates exhibit Z 2 NHSE because of PHS. We utilize the winding number as an indicator to pinpoint the localization direction of NHSE. At the same time, Z 2 NHSE also acts on the edge states so that the edge states are localized at corners. When the Zeeman field is added, the position of MZMs will also shift with the change of the angle of the Zeeman field. At θ = π 2 , the edge states with zero energy are uniformly distributed on the opposite sides, while the edge states with non-zero energy is affected by Z 2 NHSE and localized on the opposite corners. For spin-dependent nonreciprocal transitions, Z 2 NHSE is protected by TRS, and the eigenstates of bulk are also localized in two opposite corners. We use topological invariant ν α to characterize this Z 2 NHSE, and the edge states are also affected by Z 2 NHSE, thus localized in the opposite corner. Due to the nature of TRS protection, NHSE is suppressed upon the introduction of the Zeeman field for the states in the continuum, while survived for the isolated zero energy states, and topological phase transition occurs as the Zeeman field increases. Our work has further deepened the understanding of symmetry-protected NHSE and provided a new platform for the study of the interplay between topological properties and non-Hermiticity.