Triangular lattice antiferromagnets are prototypes for frustrated magnetism and may potentially realize novel quantum magnetic states such as a quantum spin liquid ground state. A recent work suggests NdTa7O19 with rare-earth triangular lattice is a quantum spin liquid candidate and highlights the large family of rare-earth heptatantalates as a framework for quantum magnetism investigation. In this paper, we report the structural and magnetic characterization of CeTa7O19 and YbTa7O19. Both compounds are isostructural to NdTa7O19 with no detectable structural disorder. For CeTa7O19, the crystal field energy levels and parameters are determined by inelastic neutron scattering measurements. Based on the crystal field result, the magnetic susceptibility data could be well fitted and explained, which reveals that CeTa7O19 is a highly anisotropic Ising triangular-lattice antiferromagnet (gz/gxy∼3) with very weak exchange interaction (J∼0.22 K). For YbTa7O19, millimeter sized single crystals could be grown. The anisotropic magnetization and electron spin resonance data show that YbTa7O19 has a contrasting in-plane magnetic anisotropy with gz/gxy∼0.67 similar as that of YbMgGaO4. The above results indicate that CeTa7O19 and YbTa7O19 with pseudospin-1/2 ground states might either be quantum spin liquid candidate materials or find applications in adiabatic demagnetization refrigeration due to the weak exchange interaction. The geometrically frustrated triangular-lattice antiferromagnets (TLAF) that carry spin-1/2 have attracted great attentions in recent decades. Due to the spin frustration and strong quantum fluctuations, they may host the famous quantum spin liquid state (QSL) For Kramer rare-earth (RE) ions such as Ce, Nd and Yb, if they have a well separated ground-state doublet due to the crystal field effect, they can be viewed to carry an effective spin S=1/2 at low temperatures. In recent years, RE-based TLAFs have become important resources in searching for QSL candidates. The well known examples include the YbMgGaO 4 and AYbX 2 (A=Cs,K,Na; X=S,O,Se) family of materials NdTa 7 O 19 is recently proposed as a QSL candidate Polycrystalline CeTa 7 O 19 samples were prepared via the solid-state reaction method. Initially, CeO 2 powder and Ta 2 O 5 powder were mixed in a ratio of 1:3.5, thoroughly ground and pressed into a pellet. Subsequently, the mixture was placed in an alumina crucible, heated at 950°C for 7 days in a muffle furnace and finally furnace cooled to room temperature. The product at this stage contains large amount of impurity phases. In order to get phase-pure CeTa 7 O 19 powder, the product was reground, pressed and heated at 1000°C in the furnace for 5 days. This procedure was repeated with the heating temperature increased by 50°C in each firing. Then after the final reaction at 1150°C for 5 days, nearly phase-pure CeTa 7 O 19 polycrystalline samples which exhibit a light yellow color could be obtained. For the growth of YbTa 7 O 19 single crystals, firstly the precursor YbOCl powder needs to be prepared by the solid-state reaction of NH 4 Cl and Yb 2 O 3 powder, similar as that in preparing DyOCl in our previous work We should mention that phase-pure polycrystalline YbTa 7 O 19 could not be obtained from direct solid-state reaction method. The impurity phases always exist with large volume fraction. Therefore the data on polycrystalline YbTa 7 O 19 were collected on powders crushed from single crystals. Alternatively, it is found that single crystals of CeTa 7 O 19 could not be grown using similar method described above. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were collected from a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer using Cu K α radiation. Magnetization measurements were carried out in Quantum Design MPMS3. Inelastic neutron scattering experiments were performed on the fine-resolution Fermi chopper spectrometer SEQUOIA at the Spallation Neutron Source of Oak Ridge National Laboratory and employed neutrons with incident energies (E i ) of 140 meV According to the current inorganic crystal structure database (ICSD), CeTa 7 O 19 forms a crystal structure with honeycomb lattice of Ce and there is no record for YbTa 7 O 19 . However, as shown in Fig. Fig. For rare-earth compounds, the experimental determination of CEF levels and parameters is important to understand their magnetism. For CeTa 7 O 19 , Ce 3+ with J=5/2 has an odd number of f electrons and the CEF potential from oxygen will split them into three Kramers doublets. Therefore at low temperature, two CEF excitations from the ground state to the two excited states are expected to be observed in the inelastic neutron scattering (INS) data. From the INS spectra of CeTa 7 O 19 at 6.5 K in Fig. The CEF parameters could also be obtained through the fit of INS data. For CeTa 7 O 19 , the Ce 3+ has a D 3v local point-group symmetry. Then the CEF Hamiltonian can be written as , where the B m l are the CEF parameters and the Ôm l are the CEF Stevens equivalent operators. Since Ce 3+ has J=5/2 and all the sixth-order terms are zero, only three CEF parameters need to be derived from the fit of INS spectra. Using Mantid software From the above CEF results, several conclusions about the magnetism of CeTa 7 O 19 could be drawn. Firstly, the first excited CEF doublet lies at a very large energy gap 42.9 meV above the ground state, therefore CeTa 7 O 19 can be considered an effective spin-1/2 system below room temperature. Secondly, the negative second-order CEF parameter means that CeTa 7 O 19 possesses an easy-axis single-ion magnetic anisotropy along the c-axis. Thirdly, the knowledge on the CEF ground state allows us to determine the corresponding g-factor anisotropy using the equations below: where z and xy denote directions along the c-axis and parallel to the ab-plane, respectively. We further performed the electron spin resonance (ESR) measurements on CeTa 7 O 19 to check the anisotropic g-factors. The well-resolved Ce ESR line is shown in Fig. The reliability of the CEF model obtained from the INS experiment could be further confirmed by simulating the magnetization data. As shown in Fig. Next, we could make a comparison of the magnetic properties between CeTa 7 O 19 and previously reported NdTa 7 O 19 . Firstly the two compounds have a similar Ising-like c-axis magnetic anisotropy. Then based on the g-factors from CEF analysis and using the same calculation method considering an Ising-like spin Hamiltonian as in the report of NdTa 7 O 19 Further experimental characterization in ultra-low temperatures is needed for a final conclusion. Based on some early reports on the single crystal growth of RETa 7 O 19 In order to obtain the anisotropic g-factors, the ESR measurement on YbTa 7 O 19 powder was performed and the result is presented in Fig. In Fig. In summary, we have synthesized geometrically frustrated 2D TLAFs CeTa 7 O 19 and YbTa 7 O 19 . We find that these materials exhibit no structural disorder. For CeTa 7 O 19 , the CEF excitations and parameters are determined from INS experiment. Combined with the magnetic susceptibility analysis, CeTa 7 O 19 is identified as an effective spin-1/2 system with Ising-like magnetic anisotropy (g z /g xy ∼3) and weak antiferromagnetic exchange interaction (J∼0.22 K). For YbTa 7 O 19 , its easyplane magnetic anisotropy is directly identified by magnetization measurements on single crystal. Combined with ESR data analysis, the low temperature magnetic properties of YbTa 7 O 19 agree well with the expectation from a ground state Kramer doublet with effective spin-1/2. Although our initial structural and magnetic characterization of CeTa 7 O 19 and YbTa 7 O 19 shows that they could be considered as QSL candidate materials, it should be noted that their antiferromagnetic exchange interaction is much weaker than that of YbMgGaO 4 and AYbX 2 , which usually have J values of several kelvins. The reason should be the large distance between nearest RE-ions in the triangular lattice. As a result, it may be quite challenging for experimental characterizing the possible QSL state. On the other hand, the quite small J in RETa 7 O 19 means that their magnetic moments should be easily aligned by external magnetic field, causing a reduction of entropy. Therefore, both CeTa 7 O 19 and YbTa 7 O 19 could attract research interests as materials used in adiabatic demagnetization refrigeration 