Theoretically, Josephson junction (JJ) arrays can exhibit either a superconducting or insulating state, separated by a quantum phase transition (QPT). In this work, we analyzed published data on QPTs in three one-dimensional arrays and two two-dimensional arrays using a recently developed phenomenological model of QPTs. The model is based on the insight that the scaled experimental data depend in a universal way on two characteristic length scales of the system: the microscopic length scale L0 from which the renormalization group flow starts, and the dephasing length, Lφ(T ) as given by the distance travelled by system-specific elementary excitations over the Planckian time. Our analysis reveals that the data for all five arrays (both 1D and 2D) can be quantitatively and self-consistently explained within the framework of interacting superconducting plasmons. In this picture, Lφ = vpħ/kBT , and L0 ≈ Λ, where vp is the speed of the plasmons and Λ is the Coulomb screening length of the Cooper pairs. We also observe that, in 1D arrays, the transition is significantly shifted towards the insulating side compared to the predictions of the sine-Gordon model. Finally, we discuss similarities and differences with recent microwave studies of extremely long JJ chains, as well as with the pair-breaking QPT observed in superconducting nanowires and films. Josephson junction (JJ) arrays are a rich subject of study, both for their applications in superconducting devices and for the interesting physics they exhibit. These arrays can introduce a very high inductance to a superconducting circuit while maintaining negligible dissipative loss Josephson junction arrays also serve as a relatively simple and well-controlled platform for exploring the socalled "phase-only" superconductor-insulator transition (SIT). However, decades of research have shown that this apparent simplicity can be quite deceptive. Theoretical understanding of such a transition goes back to the work of Bradley and Doniach mapping the 1d chain onto a 2D XY model (with imaginary time providing the second dimension) In the limit of the very long arrays, Bradley and Do-niach predicted that, if C 0 = 0, the array couples to itself and is always insulating. If, however, the two capacitances are comparable, the quantum state of the chain is determined solely by the competition between E J and E 0 . When E J dominates, the transport is similar to a superconductor, and when E 0 dominates, the system behaves as an insulator. The theoretical literature on 1d JJ arrays is extensive. Recent studies include a mapping onto the sine-Gordon model in order to better investigate the dynamics of each phase Experimentally, the existence of the superconducting and insulating states was established in several classical works on relatively short arrays of SQUIDs (with N =63-255) The SIT has also been studied in 2D arrays, although less extensively. Both the superconducting and insulating states are predicted to undergo a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition at low enough temperatures. The key difference is that in the superconducting state, vortices become localized, while in the insulating state, charge localization occurs. The critical point of the transition is expected to occur at the self-duality point, where charge and phase are interchangeable, specifically when The 2D behavior was studied experimentally in In this paper, we analyze the existing DC data of the arrays using a newly developed empirical model of QPTs In addition to the exponential approximation, the second defining feature of the model is the inclusion of L 0 , the microscopic scale of the transition. This quantity is generally known and represents a minimum scale at which the quantum phases can exist and from which the renormalization group flow starts. This scaling behavior described by Eq. 1 is remarkably universal. By taking the dephasing length as the distance a non-interacting semiclassical carrier (or excitation) travels over the Planckian time, τ p = ħ/k B T , L 0 has been found to correspond closely to an expected minimum length scale in various systems. This includes mean free path in doped semiconductors, lattice constant in cold atomic gases and moiré superlattices In this paper, we will use this model to analyze the DC resistance data for three SQUID arrays studied in Refs. The QPT in 1d SQUID arrays was tuned by changing the magnetic field piercing the SQUID loops. In the first step of the analysis, we have traced R (T, B) data for arrays H1 (N = 63) and H2 (N = 255) from Fig. To compare data with Eq. 2, we need to take account for the temperature dependence in the prefactor of the exponent. Because we are studying a 1d system, in order to collapse all of the data onto a single curve, the measured resistance values must be divided by T 1/z . From our model, as explained below, we expect z = 1. The study of the 1d array also predicts that at the critical point, y = y c , resistance varies linearly with temperature We can see from the figure that, when plotted in this way, the data at T > 0.5 K display a fan-like behavior with a flat separatrix. Below 0.5 K, the resistance of the curves deviates towards insulating behavior. The reason for these deviations will be explored later, but in the interest of performing the scaling analysis we will (following Kuo and Chen While the transition in the SQUID array is physically driven by an applied magnetic field, this is actually a proxy for a more fundamental critical parameter. Theoretically, the QPT in a long array is driven by K 0 = E J /E 0 . Let us now quantitatively define this and other relevant parameters of the arrays. The unit cell is 0.2 μm in arrays H1 and H2 and 1 μm in array B1; we use these as length scales so in the text below "per length" and "per unit cell" is the same. The studied JJ chain is a 1d array of SQUIDs, so a unit cell has two Josephson junctions in parallel. The Josephson energy per unit cell varies with magnetic field as FIG. , where f = AB/Φ 0 is the normalized flux, A is the area of the SQUID loop, B is the magnetic field, Φ 0 is the flux quantum. The zero field Josephson energy per unit cell, E 0 J , was reported to be 130 μeV for device B1 We refer to the capacitance between neighboring islands as C 1 and its value was determined in Refs. With thus determined values of C 0 and E J , the normalized flux for each curve in Fig. According to Eq. ( The inset shows the corresponding standard log-log plots. The scaling analysis according to Eq. 2 was already performed in For all three samples, the scaled data close to the critical points can be well approximated by the exponential dependence, y = a 1 exp (-a 2 x), shown in the figure with solid lines. Let's notice that the "scaling collapse" by itself can be coincidental At strong coupling between the islands, the superconducting condensate in these arrays form a Tomonoga-Luttinger liquid state According to the general conjecture of our model, the dephasing length at the QPT in an interacting system is determined by the distance travelled by a system-specific excitation over the Planckian time. Adapting this rule for the specific case of the superconducting plasmons we get L φ (T ) = v p τ P = 1/ √ L J C 0 (ħ/k B T ). With this choice of the dephasing length and continuing using K 0 as the driving parameter, the scaling equation takes the form Using the parameter a 2 extracted from the exponential fit to the experimental data, y = a 1 exp (-a 2 x), and the speed of the plasmons at the critical point, we determined the experimental value of the microscopic scale for each array, L 0 . The values are given in Table To provide experimental verification and check the selfconsistency of our "interacting plasmons" picture of the QPT, we need to determine an expected value for the seeding length, L 0 . In the superconducting state, the plasmon is carried between islands by coherent tunneling of Cooper pairs. As the system becomes insulating, these Cooper pairs start to scatter off the junction barrier, causing a phase difference between the neighboring islands. Formal analysis of the Sine-Gordon model carried out in A complimentary way to view Λ as a minimal scale of the superconducting state is through the energy dispersion relation of the plasmons, given in where ω p = √ E J E 1 is the plasma frequency of a single junction. This dispersion relation effectively splits the plasmon behavior into two branches, separated by characteristic wavelength Λ. Plasmons with a larger wavelength (small k) will have a linear dispersion relation, while for shorter wavelength the spectrum is dispersionless. In other words, Λ acts as the minimum wavelength of an excitation that will propagate while a shorter wavelength oscillation will be stationary. This picture of the length scale in the insulating regime is also consistent with the high-frequency, short-distance plasmons seen in the insulating regime in Using the numerical values for capacitances C 0 and C 1 , we estimated the screening length for each array. For the 1d arrays, the numerical values for Λ listed in Table Let us first of all note that the exact match between L 0 and Λ is probably fortuitous; in general we expect agreement only to within a coefficient of order one. Let us further note that our analysis of the 1d arrays based on Eq. 3 is self-consistent. The obtained minimal scale is smaller than the dephasing length, which, in the range of the scaling analysis, 0.5 < T < 1 K, is in turn smaller than the length of the arrays. (The shortest L φ corresponding to T = 1 K is listed in the Table ). In other words, L 0 < L φ < L. These relations between the length scales are prerequisites for the system to undergo a QPT governed by the propagation and interaction of 1d plasmons. Our model is phenomenological and so it does not address important questions such as what determines the critical point of the transition, the correlation exponent ν, and the deviations from the scaling behavior at low temperatures. Let us now discuss these questions. For the SIT in a long, 1d JJ array, the theoretically predicted critical parameter is K 0 = E J /E 0 From the experiments we found the values of K * 0 ≈ 0.1 in arrays H1 and H2 and K * 0 ≈ 0.3 for array B1, both well below the theoretically predicted values. Looking at the table we can see that the transition actually occurs when K * 0 ≈ 1/Λ, or alternatively K * 1 ≈ 1 in all three arrays studied. In view of the inconsistency in K * 0 , it is quite tempting to claim K 1 as the effective critical parameter. If, on the other hand, one continues to insist that the transition is driven by K 0 , our finding appears to be qualitatively similar to what was found in the measurements in very long arrays In the microwave studies of the long arrays it was proposed that the superconducting state with local correla-tions appears as the result of "melting" of the global insulating state It is interesting to see if this temperature plays any role in the behavior of short SQUID arrays. Using for E J its critical value E * J , we found this "melting" temperature to be approximately 0.52 K for array B1 and 0.42 K for arrays H1 and H2. Comparing these temperatures to Fig. Let us also mention one distinction between the studies. In the long arrays the superconductor-from-meltedinsulator state is claimed to appear when L φ < Λ The value of the correlation length exponent extracted from the experiment is in the range ν ≈ 0.4 -0.65; the exponent also appears to grow with the effective length of arrays N/Λ. For a very long array, the transition is discontinuous, which corresponds to ν = ∞ After seeing the success of our model in 1d, we decided to attempt to scale and analyze data of 2d JJ arrays in the same manner. Similar to the 1d case, a magnetic field was used to drive QPTs in several studies of 2d arrays the transition in a 190(long)×60(wide) junction array in zero magnetic field by systematically varying E J in the fabrication process. We refer to this array as M1. Another very recent work on the QPT in 2d arrays studied the transition in 100×100 square arrays The scaling analysis has not been presented in either of these studies, so we carry it out here. The analysis in 2d is overall very similar to in 1d, but there are several differences. First, in 2d the prefactor in the scaling equation is temperature-independent. The downside to this is that we can not separate the critical exponents; instead we can only obtain their product, zν. Second, the driving parameter in 2d is predicted to be E J /E 1 Scaled data for arrays M1 and N1 are presented in Fig. For sample M1, we found the experimental critical value of E * J /E 1 ≈ 0.12 to be notably larger than the theoretical critical value of 2/π 2 ≈ 0.2 (0.051 in our notation) We are now in a position to test if the picture of interacting plasmons can account for the QPT in a 2d array. We use for this purpose Eq. 3 with two modifications: the prefactor for the 2d case is T -independent and the driving parameter is E J /E 1 instead of K 0 . Using the size of the unit cell, and the values of C 0 and L * J given in Table Our observation confirms that we have a (perhaps effective) QPT in a small 2d array of Joshephson junctions and that near the critical point it is represented by the physics of interacting superconducting plasmons. This picture appears somewhat surprising to us since we expected the BKT vortex-anivortex physics of the super-conducting phase to show up in some way in the quantum critical regime. In summary, we found that a quantum phase transition takes place in three short 1d SQUID arrays and two small 2d arrays. In all five systems, the critical fluctuations are interacting plasmon modes and the microscopic seeding scale of the QPT is determined by the screening length Λ. These QPTs should probably be considered as effective ones, since the quantitative scaling analysis describes the data only at high temperatures above about 0.5 K. For 1d arrays, this temperature is consistent with the melting temperature of the insulating state by superconducting fluctuations proposed in Ref. Let us now compare the QPT in short JJ arrays discussed in this paper with the magnetic-field-driven pairbreaking QPT (pbQPT) In JJ arrays all resistance comes from superconducting fluctuations. In contrast, near the pbQPT superconductivity becomes gapless, and the first step of the analysis is to estimate and subtract the noncritical, dominant contribution of normal electrons. In JJ arrays, the critical fluctuations are "phase-only" excitations, superconducting plasmons propagating with linear dispersion. In pbQPT the critical fluctuations are of Aslamazov-Larkin type, which involve both amplitude and phase. In both cases there is interaction between the fluctuations. Also, in the quantum critical regime of both scenarios, all effects of interactions are absorbed in the Planckian time. However, because of the different microscopic physics, the dephasing lengths of the two systems are different. In the arrays it is given by a "ballistic" expression L φ = v p ħ/k B T which implies that z = 1. In nanowires and films, L φ = ħD/k B T , which corresponds to a diffusion of superconducting fluctuations through regions of normal metal and implies z = 2. The experimental seeding scale L 0 emerges from very distinct microscopic physics and expectedly is very different. In the arrays it is given by the screening length Λ = C 1 /C 0 and in nanowires and films by the zerotemperature Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ(0). Finally let us comment that our model is phenomenological and is not a replacement of a complete critical theory which starts from microscopic physics and goes all the way to the prediction of the long-range critical scaling behavior. For 2d superconducting systems, such description has not yet been developed. We hope it will be stimulated and assisted by our work. It would also be interesting to see (for apparently quite a low computational cost, at least for 1d arrays) if effective QPT observed in experiments is reproducible in the numerical procedures of Ref. 