The recently synthesized η-carbide-type superconductors exhibit large critical fields. A notable example is Ti4Ir2O, for which the upper critical field strongly violates the Pauli paramagnetic limit, behavior that is unusual for cubic materials that preserve inversion symmetry. Here, by combining density functional theory (DFT) and analytic modeling, we provide an explanation for this enhanced Pauli limiting field. We show that the nonsymmorphic Fd3m symmetry implies that the electronic states near the X points exhibit strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which leads to a vanishing effective g-factor and enables the enhanced Pauli limiting field. Furthermore, our DFT results reveal a Van Hove singularity (VHS) peak near the X points, accounting for ∼65% of the total density of states (DOS), occurring near the chemical potential. We propose that the strong SOC and enhanced DOS in the vicinity of the X points provide the origin of the observed enhanced critical field. This leads to a prediction that the magnetic field will lead to a strongly momentum-dependent gap suppression. The gap due to electronic states away from (near to) the X points will be rapidly (slowly) suppressed by fields. Introduction. The investigation of large upper critical fields in superconductors is of technological importance since it holds potential for significant advances in highfield magnetic applications. High upper critical fields enable superconductivity for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, mass spectrometers, magnetic separation processes, highspeed magnetic levitation (Maglev) trains, high-energy particle accelerators, and magnetic confinement fusion reactors. Superconductors such as NbTi and the A15 superconductor Nb 3 Sn are widely used in these high-field applications due to their high upper critical fields The η-carbide-type superconductors crystallize in the cubic space group Fd3m(No. 227) It has been found that Zr 4 Rh 2 O 0.7 Insight into the origin of the enhanced Pauli field comes from the observation that a spin-orbit coupling (SOC)driven avoided band crossing appears near the chemical potential Specifically, we have carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations on Ti 4 Ir 2 O. We find that, centered at the X points, there are topological changes in the Fermi surface, Lifshitz transitions, which are accompanied by a Van Hove singularity (VHS) in the DOS As mentioned above, an additional important feature of our theory is that, near the X points, SOC is strong and leads to an anomalous Bloch pseudospin that only couples to magnetic fields oriented in a single direction. In particular, each X point lies at the intersection of two orthogonal momentum lines on which a four-fold degeneracy is guaranteed by symmetry when SOC is not included. When SOC is included this four-fold degeneracy splits into two two-fold degenerate Kramers pseudospin pairs. These pseudospin pairs have the feature that they do not couple to magnetic fields orthogonal to the momentum lines along which the original four-fold degeneracy appears. This lack of coupling ensures enhanced Pauli limiting fields in the superconducting state. Our analysis of these momentum lines generalizes our earlier analysis of a similar anomalous pseudospin that appears on momentum planes DFT calculations. Our DFT calculations are carried out using the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (FLAPW) method Figures As demonstrated in Fig. kp theory analysis. Our DFT results motivate an analysis of a symmetry-based kp-like Hamiltonian valid near the X points. The DFT calculations reveal that the X 4 IR provides the relevant electronic states near the chemical potential. The electronic X 4 IR is four-fold degenerate with a two-fold sublattice degeneracy and a two-fold spin-degeneracy. We use Pauli matrices τ i (σ i ) to describe the sublattice (spin) degrees of freedom. Following the approach developed in Ref. where the origin for the k i is the X(0,1,0) point (the formulas for the X 1 (1,0,0) and X 3 (0,0,1) points can be obtained by appropriate permutation of the subscripts of y , the λ i are SOC terms, and the t i are hopping terms. Eq. ( where keeping all terms up to k 4 under the square root in εk . (The t 2 term is neglected since that enters as k 6 .) Keeping terms related to order k 3 in spin-orbit (λ y λ ′ y , λ z λ ′ z , λ z λ ′′ z ) is required both formally and to describe the VHS and Fermi surfaces seen in our DFT calculations. To gain analytic insight, note that when the λ i = 0 (no SOC), εk = 0 for the lines k x = k y = 0 and k y = k z = 0. These are nodal lines protected by non-symmorphic symmetries (T M2,n ) 2 = -1 where T is time-reversal symmetry and M2,n is a glide mirror symmetry. Specifically, in T M2,x the k x nodal line is protected by M2,x = {M z |1/4, /14, 0}. Along these nodal lines, SOC is the only interaction that splits this degeneracy, leading to anomalous pseudospin. Specifically, for the k z (k x ) nodal line, only σ z (σ x ) appears. Furthermore, using a symmetry analysis similar to that in Ref. For an isotropic s-wave superconductor, which we assume to be the case for Ti 4 Ir 2 O, the SOC-driven Pauli limiting fields are determined by where ĥ is the direction of the applied magnetic field, h 0 is the usual Pauli limiting field in the absence of SOC, ⟨. . .⟩ k denotes an average over the Fermi surface weighted by the momentum-dependent DOS, and gk, ĥ is the effective g-factor for a field oriented along ĥ and is given by gk, ĥ = t Keeping only order k terms in the kp dispersion implies ellipsoidal Fermi surfaces around each X point. These Fermi surfaces are defined by μ = λ 2 z (k where μ is the chemical potential. It is possible to analytically show that h P, ĥ/h 0 = e ≈ 2.718 for all field orientations. This enhancement of the critical field is a consequence of the spin texture on the three ellipsoidal Fermi surfaces. Specifically, the spin quantization axis is along the surface normal to the ellipsoidal Fermi surfaces, implying that generically |g k, ĥ| < 1 (except for isolated points on the Fermi surface). Keeping up to linear terms in SOC and quadratic terms in the kp dispersion results in two different scenarios depending on the sign of β in ε 0,k = ħ 2 2m k 2 x + k 2 z + βk 2 y . When β = γ 2 > 0, the X point Fermi surfaces are ellipsoidal as was the case discussed above, and again an analytical result can be found for the critical field (see Supplemental When β = -γ 2 < 0, a VHS appears in the dispersion. It can be analytically shown that this VHS is due to a circle of saddle points defined by k and k y = 0, which leads to a logarithmic divergence in the DOS. In this case, numerical calculations reveal enhanced critical fields, typically by a factor of 2-3, for the chemical potential in the vicinity of the VHS. When the chemical potential is at the VHS, both the critical field and the DOS are maximal since gk, ĥ vanishes at points on the circle of saddle points that form the VHS (see Supplemental Choosing parameters that reveal the VHS Fermi surface, we numerically calculate the enhancement of the Pauli field h P,x /h 0 , as shown in Fig. Discussion and conclusions. Our analysis emphasizes anomalous pseudospin states near a VHS. However, for the chemical potential fixed to the VHS, there are also states, accounting for 35% DOS away from the VHS (this percentage becomes larger as the chemical potential is tuned away from the VHS). For these states, the effective g-factor of the Pauli limiting field is not expected to be reduced (a reduced g-factor leads to an enhanced Pauli field), that is g ≈ 1. The interplay between the reduced g-factor electrons near the VHS and the normal g-factor electrons away from the VHS can account for a variety of other observed properties in Ti 4 Ir 2 O. One such property is the pressure dependence of the upper critical field In addition, it has recently been observed that for fields on the order of the Pauli limiting field, specific heat measurements observe anomalies inside the superconducting state In summary, we argue that the surprisingly strong violation of the Pauli limit in the cubic superconductor Ti 4 Ir 2 O originates from two key factors. The first is a symmetry-required strong SOC and reduced g-factor for the electronic states near the X points; the other is a Van v FIG. Hove singularity near the X points associated with a DOS peak. This explanation also accounts for the pressure dependence of the upper critical field and the observed high-field specific heat anomalies. Finally, our theory leads to two predictions: the first is an anisotropy in the paramagnetic response and the second is a field-driven momentum-dependent gap suppression. where 