In many unconventional superconductors the pairing interaction is believed to be mediated by a fluctuating order. Although this is typically taken to be magnetic in origin, the role of other fluctuating orders has recently been considered. In this work we examine the weak-coupling pairing interaction produced by a general fluctuating order, and seek to identify the leading pairing instability. For a given pairing channel, we show that the superconducting fitness with the associated static order appears prominently in the expression for the coupling constant. We consequently argue that fit gaps (for which the static order is not pair-breaking) should have an attractive interaction, whereas unfit gaps (for which the static order is pair-breaking) have a repulsive interaction. We propose a simple heuristic test for the tendency of a given pairing state to have an attractive interaction. We show the validity of this test in the case of pairing caused by fluctuating density-wave order, and use it to probe the superconducting state generated by a fluctuating noncolinear magnetic order on the pyrochlore lattice. The origin of the pairing interaction in unconventional superconductors is an important open problem in condensed matter physics. Many unconventional superconducting phases are found upon suppressing a magnetically-ordered state, e.g. by doping or pressure, which is interpreted as evidence in favour of a pairing mechanism based on the exchange of spin-fluctuations Recently there has been interest in the possibility that other types of fluctuating order can mediate unconventional pairing The pair-breaking effect of disorder, inhomogeneity, or external fields is a defining feature of superconductivity and distinguishes different classes of superconductors A remarkable feature of the superconducting fitness is its simplicity, involving only a commutator-like quantity between the pairing potential and the Hamiltonian of the perturbation. This has recently been generalized to encompass the effect of disorder In this work we extend the concept of superconducting fitness to determine the leading pairing instabilities produced by a fluctuation-mediated interaction. Our analysis reveals the intuitively-appealing result that the pairing interaction is attractive (repulsive) for superconducting states which are fit (unfit) with respect to the static order. This result is rigorously established in several cases; More generally, our fitness argument acts as a convenient heuristic test to identify the pairing states favoured by a given fluctuating order. We present two tests of our approach. We first demonstrate the convenience of our approach by considering the well-known case of pairing induced by a fluctuating density-wave order. We further examine the pairing instability in a Luttinger semimetal induced by a fluctuating magnetic order on the pyrochlore lattice. Here we find that our theory successfully identifies the symmetry of the pairing state even when confronted with the complications induced by multiple distinct pairing states in each irrep. Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we study the pairing interaction within a weak-coupling theory, and show that the superconducting fitness naturally appears in the coupling constant for a given channel. The influence of the form of the interaction potential and basis states for the gap function are discussed in detail in Sec. II A and II B, respectively. Further, regarding a phenomenological Lorentzian form of the interaction potential, we argue that this should hold for a general range and thus we introduce a test of the pairing instability in Sec. II C. We apply our theory to pairing from fluctuating density waves in Sec. III, and fluctuating magnetic order on the pyrochlore lattice in Sec. IV. Following Refs. where c k,α (c † k,α ) is the electronic annihilation (creation) operator with momentum k, α and β represents a pseudospin degree of freedom labeling doubly-degenerate states of the normal state Hamiltonian. Hermiticity enforces the condition on the vertex function Γ k,αβ = Γ * k,βα . This can be generalized to a general spatial fluctuation of the static order with wavevector q as Integrating out the fluctuating order we obtain the electron-electron interaction where V q is proportional to the static susceptibility, which becomes sharply peaked near the ordering wavevector Q as one approaches the instability. Restricting the effective interaction Eq. ( where the interaction vertex V αβγδ (k, k ′ ) is expressed in terms of the fluctuating order as where we have introduced a cutoff ω C ≪ μ for the interaction, restricting it to the vicinity of the Fermi surface ξ k = ε k -μ = 0, with ε k the dispersion relation of the electrons and μ is the chemical potential. Because of the cutoff, it is convenient to restrict the momentum sum in Eq. ( The pairing interaction is decomposed into different Cooper channels as where the coefficients a n are the interaction strengths in the various channels, with a n < 0 and a n > 0 corresponding to an attractive and repulsive channel, respectively, and we define the Cooper pair operator for the channel n with pairing potential ∆n,k . The pairing potentials obey the orthonormal condition The "diagonal" representation of the pairing interaction Eq. ( Using the orthonormal condition for the pairing potentials, the interaction strengths in Eq. ( Inserting the definition of the interaction vertex and writing ∆n,k = ∆n,k iσ y , where iσ y is the unitary part of the time-reversal operator, we find the general formula This is the central result of our manuscript. Here sgn(T Γ ) = +1 (-1) according as the operator Q is even (odd) under time-reversal symmetry T . An important feature of this formula is the presence of the superconducting fitness functions F±,n,k For a time-reversal symmetric (symmetry-breaking) order Q, F-,n,k ( F+,n,k ) provides the measure of the degree to which it is pair-breaking for the channel n, whereas F+,n,k ( F-,n,k ) provides a measure of the insensitivity of channel n to the order. Thus, the fitness function can be understood as quantifying the "incompatibility" or "compatibility" between the fluctuating order and the pairing. The appearance of F±,n,k in Eq. ( This connection is complicated by the first trace inside the brackets, and also the interaction potential V k-k ′ appearing in Eq. where V 0 < 0 and ξ is the range of the interaction. Note that we restrict to the case where the ordering wavevector Q = 0; we shall see in the following section that our formalism can be straightforwardly adapted to commensurate ordering vectors. Although the formula Eq. ( In the limit of an on-site interaction ξ = 0 the expression for the coupling constant can be simplified to where Γ k is the fitness function for the average gap, and is therefore only present for s-wave pairing states. We first consider the result for non-s-wave gaps (i.e. ⟨ ∆n,k ⟩ k,FS = 0), which are allowed when Γ k has nontrivial momentum-dependence. In this case only the first line of Eq. ( That is, the pairing state is perfectly fit with respect to the fluctuating order. Likewise, the most repulsive state is completely unfit. The analysis for the s-wave states is less straightforward as the terms on the last line spoil the simplicity of the argument. Nevertheless, for an s-wave gap we expect that F±,n,k ≈ F av ±,n,k , and so a fit (unfit) s-wave gap should be expected to lead to an attractive (repulsive) interaction. We thus conclude that in the on-site limit the fluctuating order favours pairing states which are fit with respect to the static order, and vice versa. This agrees with the results of Ref. In the limit of an infinite-range interaction we can approximate the interaction potential as a δ-function, i.e. V k-k ′ = V 0 δ(k -k ′ ), which dramatically simplifies the expression for the coupling constants Here the role of the fitness is unambiguous: the coupling constant is directly proportional to the usual measure of the fitness of the pairing state with respect to the static order A general interaction potential can be written as where the {φ m (k)} are a complete set of orthogonal functions and v m are real coefficients. Inserting this expansion into Eq. ( where the a (m) n are identical to Eq. ( To simplify matters, we consider the case where all the v m < 0, as is the case of the Lorentzian. In the equivalent of Eq. ( A firm statement can be made in the important case where the gap function ∆n,k is perfectly fit or unfit, i.e. one of the fitness functions is vanishing. In these cases the first line is maximally negative or positive, respectively. The second line in Eq. ( The argument simplifies significantly in the case when Γ k is momentum-independent: here the first trace in Eq. ( In the theory above we have assumed a basis of pairing potentials {∆ n,k } such that the pairing interaction is diagonal. Although appropriate for developing our formalism, this is of limited practical use since it requires that we already know the diagonalizing basis. A more practical approach is to expand the interaction in terms of a set of convenient functions representing basis states of the various irreps, e.g. spherical harmonics or tightbinding functions. Since basis states within the same irrep Λ of the point group of the crystal can mix, we must generalize the decomposition of the pairing Hamiltonian as where the coupling constant a n,m is defined To find the leading instability within each irrep, we expand the gap as obey the linearized gap equation where F nl = ⟨Tr{ ∆ † n,k ∆l,k }⟩ k,FS denotes the overlap between different components of the pairing state and χ(T ) = N 0 log(1.14ω C /k B T ) is the pairing susceptibility. The critical temperature is the highest temperature at which at which where 1 is the unit matrix, and the elements of the matrices âΛ and F are given by a Λ mn and F nl , respectively. The expressions Eq.s Although we were only able to make a firm conclusion in limiting cases, the discussion above strongly suggests that the pairing interaction due to a fluctuating order will favor pairing in channels which are fit with respect to the corresponding static order, while being repulsive for the unfit superconducting channels. To practically apply this insight, we introduce the compatibility measure of the static order with a given pairing state ∆ k : The more positive F, the stronger the tendency that the fluctuating order induces an attractive interaction; con-versely, the more negative F, the more likely the pairing interaction is repulsive. Although of only approximate validity, this quantity is very simple to calculate and can act as a convenient guideline for assessing the pairing near a non-superconducting ordered phase. As a first application of our formalism, we consider pairing near a density-wave instability, since unconventional SC phases are often found in proximity to a spin-density wave (SDW) or charge-density wave (CDW) state where Γ CDW = τ x σ 0 and Γ SDW = τ x σ, the primed sum runs over the reduced Brillouin zone, and Ψ k is a spinor of annihilation operators defined The umklapp terms (defined at k + 1 2 G) in the definition of Ψ k can be considered as an additional discrete degree of freedom, which is encoded by the Pauli matrix τ x in the definitions of Γ CDW and Γ SDW . Expressed in this basis, the density wave is a Q = 0 instability, which immediately allows us to apply the formalism developed above. Ignoring the possibility of a pair-density wave, the general expression for a pairing potential in this basis is We specialize in two limits involving the umklapp degree of freedom: sign-preserving ("umklapp-trivial") pairing states where ∆k = ∆k+ 1 2 G , which implies trivial τdependence, i.e. ∆ = ∆k τ 0 ; and a ∆k = -∆k+ 1 2 G , giving the umklapp-nontrivial form ∆ = ∆k τ z . We further classify the pairing as spin-singlet ( ∆k = Φ k σ 0 ) or spin-triplet ( ∆k = d k • σ). A general pairing state will have both umklapp trivial and nontrivial components. In Table Table umklapp-trivial pairing. In contrast, the compatibility measure for a fluctuating SDW order favours attractive interactions for umklapp-nontrivial pairing states. This is consistent with the results of more sophisticated treatments: Taking the most famous example, for a twodimensional square lattice with (π, π)-fluctuating magnetic order, as is relevant to the cuprates Turning now to the triplet channel, we observe that the fluctuating CDW order again only gives attractive interactions for an umklapp-trivial pairing state. The situation for the fluctuating SDW order depends on the spin polarization of the SDW As a second example we consider pairing from fluctuating magnetic order on a pyrochlore lattice. The pyrochlore lattice consists of the corner-sharing tetrahedron, and is realized in a number of strongly-correlated materials, e.g. the location of the iridium ions in the rare-earth iridates R 2 Ir 2 O 7 (R is a rare-earth element). Due to the magnetic moments of the iridium ions and the inherent frustration of the pyrochlore lattice, these systems have been predicted to display so-called all-in-allout (AIAO) order where the magnetic moments on each tetrahedron either point towards or away from the tetrahedron's centre and Ty,z are given by cyclic permutations. in several family members A. Effective j = 3/2 electrons Up to the quadratic order in k, the j = 3/2 electron states at the centre of the Brillouin zone are described by the Luttinger-Kohn model where J i=x,y,z are 4 × 4 angular momentum matrices of j = 3/2 electrons and μ is the chemical potential. The β i=0,1,2 are material-dependent parameters determined by the electronic band structure; notably, β i=1,2 are the symmetric spin-orbit coupling terms. For simplicity, we consider the spherical limit with β 1 = β 2 ; we do not expect our results to significantly change for small cubic anisotropy. The energy eigenvalues of Eq. ( which describes two parabolic bands which touch at the Γ point. A Luttinger semimetal is realized when the two bands have opposite curvature, which for positive β 0 is realized when -9β 1 > 4β 0 > -β 1 . The band-touching point is located at chemical potential μ = 0; doping gives a nonzero μ, such that a Fermi surface is realized in either the upper or lower bands. In the spherical limit (k • J) 2 is a good quantum number, and so we can label the bands as either In the j = 3/2 representation, the AIAO order couples to the low-energy electron states with the momentumindependent form However, we cannot directly evaluate the compatibility measure using this form, since we must first re- strict to states at the Fermi energy, corresponding either to the m j = 3 2 or m j = 1 2 bands. To do this, we must project Γ and the gap function into the lowenergy subspace, i.e. Γ → Γ mj ,k = P mj ,k ΓP mj ,k , where ) is the projection operator onto the m j band, and m j = 1 2 for m j = 3 2 and vice versa. The projection operation is nontrivial, and typically introduces a momentum-dependence to the vertex for the fluctuating order; it is well known that the projection can produce nodal structures into the superconducting gap. The fluctuating AIAO order introduces repulsive interactions in all even-parity channels. This follows from the projection into the low-energy subspace, which due to inversion and time-reversal symmetry can be formulated in terms of a pseudospin basis. Within this basis the AIAO order has the form Γ mj ,k = ν=x,y,z ε ν,mj ,k ςν where the ςν are pseudospin Pauli matrices and the ε ν,mj ,k are momentum-even coefficients. Since the even-parity states are pseudospin-singlet, we must have ∆k ∝ ς0 . As such, the even-parity states are completely unfit with respect to the AIAO order, and so from the discussion in Sec. II A 3 it follows that the pairing attraction is repulsive. Turning to the odd-parity pairing channels, we restrict our attention to p-wave pairing states due to the small size of the Fermi surface in a doped semimetal. In Table II we list all the odd-parity p-wave pairing states for j = 3/2 fermions, classified in terms of the irreps of the T d point group which should be maximal for the leading pairing state. In Table In order to check our results we solve the linearized gap equation including the coupling between the different basis states. Assuming a Lorentzian interaction potential Eq. ( Our conclusions are in agreement with the analysis of a general phenomenological p-wave pairing interaction for the β 0 = 0 Luttinger semimetal presented in Ref. The authors classified the pairing states in terms of the total J = L + S angular momentum of the Cooper pairs. On the m j = 3/2 Fermi surface the authors found competing A 1 and triplet A 2 (i.e. ∆(k) = 2 √ 5 J • k) states, which correspond to the states with the largest value of F in Table We are not aware of any experimental reports of superconductivity arising from doping a compound displaying AIAO order. However, nodal superconductivity has been realized in doped Luttinger semimetals, specifically the noncentrosymmetric half-Heusler compounds YPtBi In this work we have developed a weak-coupling theory for Cooper pairing mediated by a general fluctuating order. chief insight is that whether the pairing interaction is attractive or repulsive in a particular superconducting channel can be related to the fitness of the gap function with respect to the static order; specifically, fit gaps are expected to experience an attractive interaction, whereas the interaction is repulsive for unfit gaps. Although a rigorous connection between fitness and the pairing interaction has proved elusive, the relationship is clear in the limits of an on-site and infinite-range interaction. We consequently propose the comparability measure Eq. ( We have applied our theory to the familiar case of pairing near a density-wave instability, verifying the wellknown result that fluctuating charge-density and spindensity waves favour sign-preserving and sign-changing gaps, respectively. Our results are notable in that they were obtained via simple matrix algebra, as opposed to complicated many-body theory calculations. As a test for a case where the pairing state is not known, and may involve a superposition of several possible basis states, we have considered the pairing instability that arises upon doping the AIAO-ordered state on the pyrochlore lattice. We find excellent agreement between the fitness argument and the solution of the linearized gap equation, with states in the A 1 and A 2 irreps closely competing on the m j = 3/2 Fermi surface, while a state in the E irrep is realized on the m j = 1/2 Fermi surface. Our work establishes superconducting fitness as a simple guide to understanding the phase diagram of unconventional superconductors. Although we anticipate that exceptions to the "rule" may be identified, we believe that it should be generally valid. It is also physically appealing, as the fitness associates repulsive interactions with pair-breaking orders. Our analysis further reveals the deep reach of the fitness concept 