We propose a concept of a superconducting photodiode -a device that transforms the energy and 'spin' of an external electromagnetic field into the rectified steady-state supercurrent and develop a microscopic theory describing its properties. For this, we consider a two-dimensional thin film cooled down below the temperature of superconducting transition with the injected dc supercurrent and exposed to an external electromagnetic field with a frequency smaller than the superconducting gap. As a result, we predict the emergence of a photoexcited quasiparticle current, and, as a consequence, oppositely oriented stationary flow of Cooper pairs. The strength and direction of this photoinduced supercurrent depend on (i) such material properties as the effective impurity scattering time and the nonequilibrium quasiparticles' energy relaxation time and (ii) such electromagnetic field properties as its frequency and polarization. The core of a semiconducting diode is a p-n junction that conducts electric current primarily in one direction thus causing the current rectification effect. Diodes represent fundamental building blocks for transistors and conventional integrated electric circuits in general. A superconducting (SC) diode, instead, is a p-n junctionfree valve-effect device, in which it is the current of Cooper pairs (the supercurrent) that flows in one particular direction Furthermore, a conventional photodiode represents a p-n-junction-based semiconductor diode that transforms the energy from an external light source into a rectified electric current. It is usually tuned to a specific range of frequencies (from IR and THz to the visual light and UV), depending on the material bandgap, and allows for the electromagnetic (EM) field-controlled particle transport. In this Letter, we develop a theory of nonreciprocal nonlinear photo-response in twodimensional (2D) superconductors and propose a SC photodiode based on SC thin films or gate-induced superconductors, which have been routinely produced recently by various techniques The study of the photoresponse in superconductors exposed to external EM fields is a broad and challenging research topic Interested in steady electric current density (timeindependent and unidirectional), we will consider the nonlinear (quadratic) in the external EM field amplitude contribution. One of the benefits of nonlinear response effects in superconductors, as compared with their linear counterparts, is the possibility of gate-tunability An attempt to make a superconductor interact with a uniform external EM field is only seemingly easy. One of the problems is that in clean single-band , where E β are the components of electric field amplitude where p s = (p s , 0) is the Cooper pairs' momentum. Phenomenological expression (1) describes the stationary photoinduced electric current in the system due to the emergence of a correction to the electron distribu- , which refers to the phenomenon called the anisotropic alignment of photoelectrons Microscopic description.-The Hamiltonian of a single-band isotropic 2D s-wave superconductor exposed to an external EM field reads (ħ = k where ξ(p) ≡ ξ p = p 2 /2m -E F is the electron kinetic energy, E F is the Fermi energy, and ∆ is a SC gap, which we assume to be real-valued. The electric current density is determined as the trace of the current operator with a "lesser" component of the Green's function, In Eq. ( and Ĝ< (t, t ′ ) is the lesser component of the Keldysh Green's function Ĝ(t, t ′ ) determined by the equation Expanding Ĝ(t, t ′ ) up to the first order with respect to p s and up to the second order with respect to A(t) yields the total current density. The main contribution to the transverse component of the current density (for the case of circularly polarized light) can be described by five diagrams, split into three types (Fig. ×γ where ĝ(t, t ′ ) is a bare Keldysh Green's function, which represents a solution of the equation (i∂ t -Ĥ)ĝ(t, t ′ ) = δ(tt ′ ) with the Hamiltonian (2), in which p s = 0 and A 0 = 0; γ ), with v s =p s /m. Furthermore, in Eqs. ( The Galilean invariance can be broken by an account of either i) non-parabolicity of the electronic dispersion Here, ε p = ξ 2 p + ∆ 2 is the quasiparticles dispersion, τ p is their effective lifetime, f ε = [exp(ε/T ) + 1] -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, is a renormalization factor, which accounts for the disorder with τ i = (2πν 0 nu 2 0 ) -1 the characteristic time of electron scattering on impurities with ν 0 is the density of states of electron gas in non-SC state, n is the density of impurities, u 0 is the impurity electrostatic potential However, the elastic scattering (characterized by τ i ) is not the only mechanism, and, in general, various relaxation processes may play role in a SC sample exposed to an EM field. Which particular relaxation time makes a dominant contribution depends on the frequency of the EM field, the properties of the SC sample, and how the frequency is related to the SC gap Substituting τ p in equations above and performing calculations (see the details in Supplemental Material [48]), we find where j 0 = σ(e 3 p s A 2 0 /mπ), and the dimensionless integrals read Eqs. ( Let us estimate the magnitude of the photodiode current and compare it with the magnitude of the built-in (longitudinal) supercurrent. Writing the Cooper pair momentum as p s /m = j s /(en s ), where n s (T ) is the density of particles in the condensate (here, n s (T ) = n(1 -T /T c ) = 7.1 • 10 12 cm -2 at T = 5 K for superconductor with T c = 5.67 K and n = 0.6 • 10 14 cm -2 ), and taking ω ≈ 20 GHz, τ E = 10 -10 s (for typical energy relaxation time see, e.g., Similarly, we can make estimations for other 2D SC materials, for instance, the ones based on NbN thin films or other transition metal dichalcogenide-based systems. Other typical examples are summarized in For all these materials, typical electron densities are 10 13 -10 14 cm -2 . The density can vary depending on such factors as the method of fabrication, doping levels, and the growing conditions. Besides, the values of critical temperatures and SC gap are of the same order. Thus, we conclude that all mentioned in the Table materials could be efficiently used as a base for SC photodiode. It should be noted, that the predicted photodiode effect (i.e. the emergence of a photoexcited quasiparticle current ∝ ∆ 2 (T ), and, as a consequence, oppositely oriented supercurrent in the direction transverse to the built-in supercurrent) can only occur in the SC state, namely, at T < T c . Why is that significant? Let us elaborate on that. The normal-state (non-SC) counterpart of the SC photodiode effect is a Photovoltaic Hall effect Figure Figure One of the possible experiment to measure the proposed effect involves using a SC loop that encloses the transverse boundaries of the sample (in y-direction). Due to the photoinduced phase difference associated with the supercurrent flow in y-direction, there emerges a correction to the flux through the loop, Φ = nΦ 0 +δΦ, δΦ ∝ j p , where Φ 0 is the flux quantum and n is an integer. The methods to measure such a flux are well developed; they have been used, e.g., to study the thermoelectric effect-induced condensate phase difference Conclusions.-We developed a nonequilibrium theory of nonlinear photoresponse in a two-dimensional superconductor, exposed to a circularly polarized light with a terahertz frequency, which is smaller than the superconducting gap. The resulting rectified photoinduced electric current of Cooper pairs represents the second-order correction with respect to the vector potential of light. This current is determined by the energy relaxation in the system and the presence of impurities, and its magnitude and direction can be controlled by the frequency and polarization of light. Thus, we proposed a photodiode based on two-dimensional superconductors.