We demonstrate the existence of doubly charged exciton states in strongly screened bilayers of transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) layers. These complexes are important because they are preformed electron pairs that can, in principle, undergo Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC), in which case they would also form a new type of superconductor, consisting of stable bosons with net charge. Our measurements include 1) continuous control of the doping density with both positive and negative carriers, showing the expected population dependencies on the free carrier density, and 2) measurement of the dependence on magnetic field, showing that this new bound state is a spin triplet. These results imply that it is promising to look for superconductivity in this system. Can electrons be paired into bosonic states by any mechanism other than Cooper pairing? While several mechanisms have been proposed, none has been clearly demonstrated. However, a novel proposal by by V.I. Yudson A metastable state of four fermions in a 2D structure is no longer controversial, in general. In the past decade, numerous reports have confirmed the existence of higherorder excitonic complexes in transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayer and bilayer structures. These include both intralayer and interlayer excitons Here we report definitive confirmation of this excitonic electron pairing. In one set of measurements, the density of the background free charge carriers was continuously varied via gating, which allows the comparison of the relative intensities of the quaternion, trion, and exciton lines. Since the quaternion must add an extra charge to a trion to form, its intensity should increase relative to the trion as the total background charge density increases, just as the trion intensity increases relative to the exciton Figure As shown in previous theory The vertical gating allows us to vary the free charge density in the bilayer region continuously. When the background charge is negative, an exciton can be bound to two free electrons, while if the background is positive, an exciton can bind to two free holes. The intrinsic doping for the MoSe 2 is n-type There was an offset in the open-circuit voltage caused by the intrinsic doping so that the structures had an asymmetric I -V current characteristic (see Supplemental Material). Electrical contact to the bottom MoSe 2 was grounded, acting as a drain, and the top gate contacting the top MoSe 2 layer could have an applied voltages like a source. This source-drain configuration allowed us to vary the charge in the bilayer without obscuring the imaging of the sample, or changing the asymmetric screening effect of the metallic back gate. For the magnetic field experiments, a similar structure was used, also with MoSe 2 but without the electrical contacts. The top layer of MoSe 2 was an n-type monolayer doped with Rhenium. In all experiments, the structures were cooled to approximately 10 K, and optically pumped non-resonantly with a wavelength short compared to the PL emission. In this case, the trion and quaternion lines reach a minimum, and then increase as positive versions of both appear when the bilayer region is hole-doped. The bath temperature in all of these cases was 5.5 K. (The diamond symbols in (C) and (D) give the conditions for the intensitydependence measurements of Figures When the structure described above is excited with a laser, an extra PL peak appears between trion and exciton, corresponding to the doubly charged exciton (quaternion) state described above, as seen in earlier work As seen in these figures, the relative intensities of the quaternions, trions and excitons varied significantly with varying doping levels. Fig. Figure As seen in Figure In addition to the above doping-dependent measurements, we have measured the magnetic-field dependence of the photoluminescence (PL) of these complexes. As described above, a n-type sample with Rhenium doping was used, without electrical contacts. The magnetic field was applied out-of-plane and swept from -12 to +12 Tesla, and the PL was measured for both circular-polarized components. (The pump polarization was right-circular, but since it was far above the exciton energy, the polarization of the injected carriers was almost certainly lost to scattering processes.) Figure Several effects are immediately observable in these figures. First, the exciton, biexciton, and trion all have linear shifts with magnetic field as previously observed These results, and the identification of the Q line as a quaternion, are consistent with a straightforward theory based on the configuration-space method of calculating the binding energies of the excitonic complexes. The same method gives the experimentally confirmed binding energies for both the interlayer trions and for biexcitons in TMD materials The details of the model are given in the Supplemental Material, but the essential results needed to understand the quaternion line shifts are straightforward. First, the ground state of the trion has a hole with two electrons in the same spin state. (We consider here the case of an n-doped system, corresponding to the sample used in the magnetic field measurements.) This makes the trion an overall spin-1/2 complex. Next, this intralayer trion is a stable "core" which is attached to an electron in the other monolayer, to form the quaternion complex. The total quaternion complex therefore is comprised of two spin-1/2 entities, forming triplet and singlet states. The ground state of this quaternion complex is the triplet state, consistent with the well-known empirical Hund's rule of atomic physics From the above analysis, the primary shifts of the states will be linear Zeeman-type terms, but as shown in Figure These experimental results present a highly convincing case for the existence of doubly charged excitons, a.k.a. quaternions, in these specially designed TMD bilayer structures. The doping density and magnetic field experiments give unique signatures for this state which agree well with theory. These are therefore preformed electron pairs that can undergo Bose-Einstein condensation at high density or low enough temperature, and such a BEC state would also be a superconductor. It is unclear whether this state should emit coherent light, as is the case for excitonic and polaritonic condensates. In the case of an excitonic or exciton-polariton condensate, the center-of-mass wave function maps directly to the momentum of an emitted photon. In the case of quaternions, the photon emission leaves behind two electrons and therefore does not map directly to the center of mass of the whole complex. Although we have increased the excitation density of our pump laser, we have not seen evidence for coherent light emission, for example, in spectral line narrowing. Condensation and the consequent superconductivity will be favored at low temperature. In these experiments the effective temperature of the quaternion gas tends to get hotter due to the excess energy put into the system by the non-resonant pump, which in turn raises the critical density needed for Bose condensation. At high density, nonradiative collisional Auger recombination may also become important; there is evidence for this in Figures 3C and 3D. Both of these effects could be reduced by better cooling the sample; for example, in an immersion flow cryostat as opposed to the cold-finder cryostats used in these experiments. Also, it may be beneficial to laterally confine the carriers in a trap, as done, e.g., for polaritons in Ref. Technically, true BEC is not possible in one and two dimensions, but it can often be the case that the coherence length of a two-dimensional Bose system is large compared to the system size. In general, in any finite system in which the size of the system is small compared to the coherence length, the system can undergo a transition indistinguishable from BEC. Another fascinating possibility is that since these complexes have long-range Coulomb repulsion, they could form a bosonic Wigner crystal at low temperature, and in principle, could even become a supersolid. The process of Wigner crystallization is controlled by the ratio of the Coulomb repulsion energy over the average kinetic energy of an ensemble of charged particles The establishment of quaternion complexes in bilayer systems with metal screening layers opens up a promising field of research, with the real possibility of finding a new, non-BCS type of superconductivity. The samples were built on 1.5cm x 1.5cm wafers of 300nm SiO2/Si substrates. A standard optical lithography process was employed using 650nm thick S1805 photoresist. The lithography was written using a Heidelberg MLA100 Direct Write Lithographer and further developed using AZ400K Developer (1:4). A two-step process was implemented to define local markers and the back gates in one step; and subsequently the contact pads in the second step. This was done to deposit the thinnest atomically flat ( δh rms < 1 nm) gold back gates while still maintaining thick contact pads sufficient for wire bonding. The thin flat back gates increase the yield and quality of the dry transfers required to build the Quaternion heterostructure. The back gates were fabricated using a Plassys E-beam Evaporation system to deposit 3nm Ti/ 20nm Au for the back gates and 5nm Ti/ 120nm Au for the contact pads. The source 2D material flakes were synthesized using standard mechanical exfoliation of bulk hBN and MoSe 2 bulk crystals on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) using Nitto blue tape As discussed in the main text, the middle layer of the structure is defined as the ground in all experiments. We therefore have two voltages to sweep, the back gate and top gate. Figure An overall trend can be seen, that when the top and back gates are both negative relative to ground, this will create a trap for the electrons in the grounded middle layer, enhancing negative trion formation, and by extension, negative quaternion formation. Similarly, if both are positive, this will trap holes in the middle layer, enhancing the creation of positive trions and quaternions. Figures Figure The eigenstates and selection rules of 2D materials have often been analyzed in terms of pseudospin, but it is instructive here to analyze the states in terms of the full group theory. As discussed in Ref. The conduction band states arise from the z 2 d-orbital, which is Γ 1 in D 3h , while the valence band states arise from the xz and yz d-orbital states, which have Γ 5 symmetry in D 3h , and the (x ± iy) 2 d-orbital states, which correspond to Γ 6 . These latter are the topmost valence bands. When electron spin, which corresponds to the Γ 7 in D 3h , is included, the conduction band states become Γ 7 , while the topmost valence band states split into Γ 7 ⊗Γ 6 = Γ 8 ⊕Γ 9 . On reduction to C 3h symmetry in the K-valleys, the Γ 8 states become Γ 9 ⊕Γ 10 (spin m J = ± 5 2 ), while the Γ 9 states become Γ 11 ⊕ Γ 12 (spin m J = ± 3 2 ). The spinorbit energy gives a value of around 100 meV between the 3 2 and 5 2 valence states. The "A" bright excitons are the lowest state, formed of the ± 3 2 holes and the ± 1 There are also two "dark" A-excitons corresponding to which cannot emit single photons. The intralayer trion-bound states are formed by adding another electron in the A-exciton state: Each of these emits a photon with the same handedness as an A-exciton in the same valley. Quaternions are formed of a trion in one layer and a free electron in the adjacent valley. The spin product of the J = 1 2 trions and the S = 1 2 extra electron gives a spin-0 singlet and a spin-1 triplet. As discussed in the main text, the triplet state is the lowest state, corresponding to the electron in the separated well having the opposite spin of the two electrons in the trion. These three states are written As seen in this analysis, two of the states emit with 100% circular polarization in one direction or the other, while the m J state is a 50% superposition of both handednesses. As with the trions, the energy of the emitted photon depends on the energy of the two remaining electrons. These have opposite spin for the two m J = ±1 quaternions, and a superposition of aligned spins in with m J = ±1 for the m J = 0 quaternion. In addition to the spin-triplet quaternion, there is also a spin singlet at higher energy, corresponding to the antisymmetric superposition This will also be 50% allowed to emit either handedness of polarization. We can also examine the spin structure of the indirect transitions, that is, the interlayer transitions. The m J = ±1 quaternion states in (S4) are forbidden to emit single photons corresponding to a hole in one layer and electron in the other layer, but the m j = 0 state can emit such a photon. There is evidence for this in the very weak line seen at low energy, labeled as Q ′ , in Fig. (S6) Both the interlayer exciton and interlayer trion states have emission that shifts with B-field similarly to the intralayer versions. Only the quaternion m J = 0 state does not have this linear shift. Finally, we look at the spin structure of a biexciton made of two A-excitons in the same layer. The ground state has two excitons of opposite spin Either of the two excitons can emit a photon. When a photon is emitted, the final state is an exciton of the opposite handedness. The energy of the photon is therefore the difference between the unshifted biexciton and the exciton energy shifted by magnetic field, which gives an energy shift of the emitted photon. To elucidate the behavior of quaternion states observed in magnetostatic field experiments, we constructed a theoretical framework based on the spin-Hamiltonian formalism. This approach was originally pioneered by Landau, Gor'kov and Pitaevski, Holstein and Herring, in their studies of molecular binding and magnetism We consider our quaternion complex being built of the spin-1/2 intralayer trion in a bottom monolayer coupled to a spin-1/2-like charge carrier in the top monolayer, consistent with both spin-structure analysis in the previous section and earlier works Here, A and μ e,T = (g e,T /m e,T ) μ B are the positive constants to represent the electron-trion hyperfine (spinspin) coupling and their respective magnetic moments with their effective masses (in units of the free electron mass m 0 ) and g-factors included, μ B = |e|ħ/(2m 0 c) = 0.0579 meV/T is the Bohr magneton, and σ e,T = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) e,T are the Pauli matrices of the electron and trion spin-1/2 subspaces, (S9) With the z-quantization axis directed along the magnetic field B and the general spin-state wave function where the C i for i = 1 through 4 are unknown coefficients, the matrix of the spin-Hamiltonian (S8) takes the where the electron g-factor and electron-hole effective masses can be obtained from the literature, g e ≈ 2.5 where and Here, for convenience, the normalized spin eigenfunctions are also written in the form |χ Sms ⟩ to indicate the actual spin configurations. The triplet with S = 1, m s = ±1, 0 is the ground state and the singlet with S = 0, m s = 0 is the excited state, as shown in Fig. In addition to the four bright states seen in Figure As discussed in the group theory section above, there are three allowed transitions for spatially indirect PL emission, all of which require tunneling through the barrier between the layers. Two of these are for distinct bound states that are not the same as those giving intralayer emission, namely the indirect exciton and indirect trion. These are seen in the strong circularly polarized emission at higher energies in Figure The PL measurements shown in Figure A second quaternion sample was also examined under a magnetic field, exhibiting a significantly smaller energy gap between the quaternion and trion states. The gap was sufficiently narrow that we cannot extract the quaternion state from the spectrum. To address this, we employed the same simulation algorithm used for Figure An additional point of note is the sequence of measurements: left-hand circularly polarized (LHC, σ -) emission was recorded following right-hand circularly polarized (RHC, σ + ) emission. The sequential nature of these measurements led to a slight increase in the sample temperature during the LHC data collection due to the liquid helium running low during the Florida lab measurements.