After the decade-long exhaustive study of binary high-Tc superconducting hydrides, the frontier of this stimulating research field has recently shifted to ternary hydrides with much expanded conformational space in search of coveted room-temperature superconductors. This task, however, presents a formidable challenge due to enormous demands on computational resources. Here, we devise an efficient high-throughput approach using keen material insights and a self-built database to screen for robust ternary hydrides in clathrate structures, which were proven to host highest Tc in binary hydrides, and to estimate Tc by a reliable empirical formula. This approach has made it possible to uncover a diverse set of complex multiple-hydrogen-cage ternary hydrides hosting near or above room-temperature Tc, which are beyond the reach of prevailing structure search methods. This study establishes a distinct paradigm that opens a fresh avenue to enable and accelerate the discovery of promising room-temperature superconductors among unprecedented complex clathrate hydrides. Ashcroft predicted in 1968 that metallic hydrogen may be a room-temperature superconductor To circumvent this difficulty, Ashcroft in 2004 proposed Recent studies of clathrate hydrides have turned to ternary hydrides for their richer stoichiometry and larger conformational space. Elemental substitution based on binary clathrate hydrides has thus far been the main route for making ternary clathrate hydrides such as (La, Y)H10 Recent synthesis of clathrate hydrides with stoichiometry M4H23 (M = Eu The structure of hot-superconductor Li2MgH16 is analogous to that of Li2LaH17, although some H defects are present In this work, we tackle the seemingly insurmountable challenge of searching for viable ternary clathrate hydrides with distinct H cages and also assessing their Tc. We proceed by noting two important clues. First, clathrate structures are common among hydrates, and water molecules (H2O) adopt cage structures, each of which contains 20 to 36 H2O, forming a rich variety of clathrate hydrates with multi-cage structures Second, group 14 elements tend to sp 3 hybridize in tetrahedral bonding pattern and form clathrate frameworks Based on these insights, we designed a series of geometrically rational clathrate hydrides with multi-cage structures in hydrates and frameworks of group 14 elements. For effective screening of superconductivity in identified clathrate hydrides, we use an empirical linear formula, known as the AE model, for estimating Tc. Our approach successfully found multiple viable ternary clathrate hydrides in Li-Na-H, Li-Ca-H, Li-Sr-H and Na-Sc-H systems with calculated Tc near or above room temperature. These findings demonstrate the efficacy of our strategy for rational structure design guided by known structural arrangements as key building blocks combined with rapid Tc evaluation via reliable empirical estimate, which produced promising results to guide experimental synthesis and characterization and also set stage for further exploration of complex hydrides. For our designed ternary clathrate hydrides with multi-cage structures, we followed the naming rules of Roman numerals used in a recent study Type I clathrate hydrides M3XH23 in Pm3 ̅ n space group symmetry comprises two H20 [4 0 5 We performed HTP calculations for thermodynamic stability of type I clathrate hydrides at 200 GPa and the results are summarized in the heatmap diagram given in Fig. GPa, and Tc calculated by the self-consist solution of isotropic Eliashberg function (Tc E ) are 97 K (200 GPa), 223 K (200 GPa), 79 K (200 GPa), 166 K (200 GPa), 197 K (300 GPa), 184 K (300 GPa), 95 K (200 GPa) and 135 K (200 GPa), respectively. Remarkably, Tc AE of metastable hydride Na3ScH23 is 324 K, which inspired further research. We constructed the convex hull of the Na-Sc-H system (see Supplementary Fig. We then calculated the phonon dispersion curves and Eliashberg spectral function to examine dynamic stability and superconductivity (Fig. Type II clathrate hydrides MX2H17 in Fd3 ̅ m space group symmetry contains four H20 [4 0 5 Also, NaLi2H17 33 in type II clathrate structure was recently reported to be a possible thermodynamically stable room-temperature superconductor at 350 GPa with Tc of 309-330 K. Thermodynamical stability of type II clathrate hydrides is summarized in Fig. We also found a new hydride CeLi2H17 that is thermodynamically favorable at 200 GPa. The electronic band structures and DOS are given in Supplementary Fig. GPa (Supplementary Fig. Type III clathrate hydride M10X5H86 in space group symmetry P42/mnm comprises ten H20 [4 0 5 Electronic band structures and DOS were given in Supplementary Fig. Alternatively, the modified AE model was used and produced Tc AE for Sr10Mg5H86 and Sr10Sc5H86 to be 73 K and 122 K, respectively (Supplementary Table GPa and becomes thermodynamically stable at 250 GPa (see Supplementary Fig. We carefully examined Na10Li5H86 since the modified AE model gives it a very high Tc AE of 306 K. We constructed the convex hull of the Li-Na-H system at 300 GPa, and Na10Li5H86 falls onto the hull, indicating its thermodynamic stability (Supplementary Fig. Type IV clathrate hydrides M4X3H40 in P6/mmm space group symmetry consists of three H20 [4 0 5 III hydrides, but are arranged differently here. The metal atoms in type IV clathrate hydrides are arranged as in P6/mmm-Zr4Al3 and the H/metal ratio is 5.71. To better compare the structures of type IV and III clathrate hydrides, we constructed a supercell of type IV clathrate hydrides with a tetragonal structure that is similar to type III structure, as shown in Fig. III structure, and they are arranged in an "angle-to-angle" pattern in type III structure but "edge-to-edge" in type IV. In fact, type III clathrate comprises type I and type IV, as shown in the right panel in Fig. The heatmap for thermodynamic stability type IV clathrate hydrides is given in Fig. We also studied metastable hydride Ca4Li3H40 that is above the convex hull by mere 18 meV/atom at 200 GPa. Its Tc AE is 294 K, suggesting potential for being a room-temperature superconductor. A von Hove singularity near the Fermi level electrons of H atoms dominates N(Ef) (Fig. Type V and II-4H clathrate hydrides share the same stoichiometry of MX2H17 with type II clathrate hydrides. The unit cell of type V structure contains four formula units and type II-4H structure contains eight. The three structures all consist of H20 [4 0 5 12 0 ] cages and H28 [4 0 5 The metal atoms in type V and II-4H structures are arranged as in P63/mmc-MgZn2 and P63/mmc-MgNi2, respectively (Fig. Their electronic band structures and DOS are given in Supplementary Fig. GPa. At 300 GPa, this value decreases to only 3 meV/atom, raising the prospect of experimental synthesis. Type II, type V and type II-4H structures are competing phases with the formation enthalpy difference within 2 meV/atom at 200 GPa (Supplementary Fig. Type H structure MX5H34 in space group symmetry P6/mmm consists of three H20 [4 0 5 The high-Tc clathrate hydrides uncovered in this study are summarized in Fig. The HTP data provide a good platform to summarize the general rules for thermodynamic stability of clathrate hydrides. Geometric parameters are important factors in the high-throughput screening for materials like perovskites where r m denotes the of metal atoms M where V M denotes the volume of the H cage in the "standard clathrate structures" and n is the number of the metal atoms in the unit cell. In addition, we introduce ρ r to measure the matching relationship between the volume ratio of different cages and that of the corresponding metal atoms to give a scaling tolerance to the "standard clathrate structure". Taking the example of a ternary hydride containing two different cages with metal atoms X and Y, the ρ r is defined by the formula Finally, ρ is defined as The calculated results of ρ for different types of clathrate hydrides are summarized in Fig. At the same time, the number of hydrides still need to be calculated after screened by the match factor is drastically reduced to 15% (type I), 12% (type II), 20% (type III), 37% (type IV), 20% (type V), 20% (type II-4H) and 8% (type H). This finding suggests that ρ can well catch thermodynamic stability of clathrate hydrides with little computational costs. However, since the lanthanides (e.g. La and Ce) have similar radii, so the match factor cannot distinguish between them. As a result, thermodynamic stability predicted by the match factors of clathrate hydrides containing Ce and La atoms are similar, as shown in the bottom of Fig. Overall, the match factor can help to screen for thermodynamically stable clathrate hydrides with little computational costs and facilitate high-throughput calculations of other clathrate hydrides with diverse and complex structures with larger unit cells. In summary, we have found a series of ternary multi-cage clathrate hydrides with non-integer H/metal ratios by a design principle that emulates the clathrate structures of hydrates and group 14 element frameworks. The central idea is a high-throughput evaluation for thermodynamic stability using a self-built hydride database, jointly with a rapid assessment of superconducting critical temperature Tc by an efficient modified AE model. This process leads to the discovery of an eclectic collection of nineteen complex ternary hydrides in distinct categories of structures that are thermodynamically stable at readily accessible pressure of 200 GPa, i. MAE is 24.5 K and most of the prediction errors are limited within 40 K, suggesting that the modified AE model can predict the Tc of clathrate hydrides with reasonable accuracy at much reduced computational costs.