Leveraging reciprocal-space proximity effect between superconducting bulk and topological surface states (TSSs) offers a promising way to topological superconductivity. However, elucidating the mutual influence of bulk and TSSs on topological superconductivity remains a challenge. Here, we report pioneering transport evidence of a thickness-dependent transition from conventional to unconventional superconductivity in 2M-phase WS2 (2M-WS2). As the sample thickness reduces, we see clear changes in key superconducting metrics, including critical temperature, critical current, and carrier density. Notably, while thick 2M-WS2 samples show conventional superconductivity, with an in-plane (IP) upper critical field constrained by the Pauli limit, samples under 20 nm exhibit a pronounced IP critical field enhancement, inversely correlated with 2D carrier density. This marks a distinct crossover to unconventional superconductivity with strong spin-orbit-parity coupling. Our findings underscore the crucial role of sample thickness in accessing topological states in 2D topological superconductors, offering pivotal insights into future studies of topological superconductivity. The quest for topological quantum states in superconductors has attracted significant attention in condensed matter physics, fueled by the promise of uncovering novel phenomena and potential applications in quantum computing. Inherently governed by topology, topological superconductors (TSCs) can host Majorana zero modes (MZMs) -quasiparticles crucial for achieving fault-tolerant quantum computing 2M phase WS2 (2M-WS2), a recently recognized TSC candidate via the reciprocal-space proximity effect In this study, we explore the superconductivity in 2M-WS2 thin layers through electrical transport measurements, focusing on how the TSS affects its unconventional superconductivity in the clean limit. Our samples, ranging in thickness from ~ 3 nm (~5 layers) to 50 nm (~83 layers), were prepared using the scotch tape method Like other 2D materials, the sample thickness was determined using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and optical contrast. Figure To study how thickness affects the transport properties of 2M-WS2, we conducted measurements on samples with thicknesses ranging from 3 to 50 nm. We note that the individual 2M-WS2 layer with a uniform thickness (roughness around or less than 1 nm, Fig. We first identified the carrier density and mobility via Hall effect measurements. The representative results of the Hall resistance (RXY) results are shown in Fig. Figure ) as a function of temperature for various 2M-WS2 thin flakes. Figure Figure We see that the I-V characteristics follow a power law dependence (V ~ I α ), consistent with Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition We further performed the transport measurements under both IP and out-of-plane (OOP) magnetic fields (Figs. 3 and S6,7). Figure To further understand the observed anisotropy and 2D superconductivity, we analyzed the angular dependence of BC2 for samples with different thicknesses (Figs. We further analyzed the temperature dependence of RXX for different samples under both the IP and OOP upper critical fields. Figure ), to fit the results for OOP fields, as shown in Fig. , does not fit our data. This discrepancy is evident in the fittings (two dotted curves) for the samples with 43 & 6 nm thicknesses, as shown in Fig. Next, we explore the nature of the unconventional superconductivity of samples thinner than 20 nm (Figs. However, this aspect has not been investigated before ) of the B C2 || versus TC curves (Fig. times. Our analysis reveals a pronounced correlation between the B C2 || and 2D carrier density of 2M-WS2. These findings suggest that SOPC underpins the enhanced B C2 || in 2M-WS2 thin layers (sub-20 nm) as the contribution from TSS is increased. Concurrently, the non-trivial crossover from conventional to spin-orbitparity coupled superconductivity (Fig. In summary, our study has unveiled critical insights into the effect of sample thickness on the unconventional superconductivity in 2M-WS2 thin layers. Through magnetotransport measurements, we have elucidated the 2D nature and pronounced anisotropy of the superconductivity in our samples. We demonstrated pioneering evidence of a thickness-dependent crossover from conventional to unconventional superconductivity in the 2M-WS2 thin layers. We further identified the critical role of 2D carrier density in understanding the significant enhancement of the IP upper crucial field, indicating the existence of spin-orbit-parity coupled superconductivity. Our findings thus provide critical insights into the interplay between bulk and surface states, highlighting the complex mechanisms at play and underscoring the potential of 2M-WS2 as a platform for studying topological superconductivity. in the vortex cores. Notably, recent studies have demonstrated that bulk states in 2M-WS2 feature singlegap s-wave superconductivity19,21 23-25 and a zero-bias conductance peak at the cores of magnetic vortices on the surface of 2M-WS2 layers