Recent developments in nonequilibrium and nonlinear terahertz (THz) spectroscopies have significantly advanced our understanding of collective excitations in superconductors. However, there is still debate surrounding the identification of Higgs or Leggett modes, as well as BCS charge fluctuations, in the well-known two-band superconductor MgB 2 . Here, we utilized both multi-cycle and single-cycle THz pump-broadband THz probe techniques to investigate the THz nonlinear response of MgB 2 . Through multicycle THz pump-THz probe experiments on MgB 2 , we observed distinct nonlinear signals at both the fundamental frequency (ω) and the second harmonic frequency (2ω) of the pump pulses, which exhibited resonant enhancement at temperatures where their frequencies respectively match 2∆ π (T ). They are mainly attributed to the π-band Higgs mode. By adjusting the THz pump pulse to a single-cycle waveform that satisfies non-adiabatic excitation criteria, we observed an over-damped oscillation corresponding to the Leggett mode. Our findings contribute to solving the ongoing debates and demonstrate the selective excitation of collective modes in multiband superconductors, offering new insights into the interaction between Higgs and Leggett modes. Investigating collective modes in superconductors is a critical area of research in condensed matter physics because these modes provide deep insights into the underlying properties of superconducting states and their interactions. In a single band superconductor, the spontaneous breaking of continuous U(1) symmetry leads to the emergence of two important collective modes: a massless phase (or Nambu-Goldstone) mode and a massive 'Higgs' amplitude mode Multiband superconductors host more collective modes compared to single-band superconductors. In two-band superconductors, each band has a Higgs mode related to amplitude fluctuation. In the phase sector, besides the overall phase fluctuation which is pushed up to the plasma energy, a relative phase fluctuation between the two bands emerges, which is called Leggett mode MgB 2 is a prototypical two-band s-wave superconductor with T c = 30-40 K, which features two types of electronic bands crossing the Fermi level E F : the three-dimensional π electron band and the quasi-two-dimensional σ hole band. A number of spectroscopic measurements have shown two distinct isotropic superconductivity gaps within the π and σ bands, ∆ π = 0.4-0.7 THz and ∆ σ = 1.3-1.9 THz, respectively To address the above questions, in this work, we systematically investigate the nonlinear response of superconductivity collective modes in 10 nm MgB 2 thin films (T c =33 K, as shown in the Supplementary Information Fig. Our study begins with multi-cycle THz pump-THz probe spectroscopy. The non-adiabatic excitation and the periodic driving of collective mode in superconductors are suggested to be equivalent Figure To further identify the origin of this ω peak, we turn to the two dimension (2D) frequency space of the measured 2D ∆E(t pump , t probe ) signals, in which the different nonlinear process can be distinguished through the frequency wavevector analysis. The corresponding 2D-THz spectra are obtained by FFT of ∆E(t pump , t probe ) with respect to both t = t probe (frequency ω t ) and τ = t pump -t probe (frequency ω τ ), where τ represents the pump-probe relative time (the definitions of t and τ are detailed in Supplementary Information Fig. The (ω p , ω p ) and (ω p , ω p -2(ω 0 ± ∆ω 0 /2)) peaks contribute to the ω oscillation, while the (2ω p , 2ω p + (ω 0 ± ∆ω 0 /2)) and (2ω p , 2ω p -(ω 0 ± ∆ω 0 /2)) peaks generate the 2ω oscillation in the one-dimensional pump-probe spectra. As elaborated below, the ω signal provides an alternative perspective for identifying the primary contributions to the nonlinear response in superconductors. Having identified the nonlinear process of ω and 2ω oscillations, we then perform the 1D pumpprobe measurement with a given t probe = 0.2 ps under various driving frequencies. The spectra of the narrowband driving pulses and σ 1 (ω, T = 2 K) of MgB 2 are shown in Fig. We further study the temperature evolution of the oscillations to uncover their connections with superconductivity collective modes. To quantitatively evaluate the temperature dependence of 2ω and 1ω oscillations, we calculate their normalized spectral weights as SW norm 2ω (T ) = Tr(ω,T )Tr 2 (ω probe ,T ) , respectively, where Tr(ω, T ) and Tr(ω probe , T ) denote the transmission coefficients of the pump and probe electric fields (see Supplementary Information Fig. To verify the selective excitation of collective mode responses in MgB 2 with different pump pulse durations, we replace the multi-cycle pump with a single-cycle pump and investigate whether the nonlinear response originates from the Leggett mode, as reported previously Its onset absorption around 0.88 THz ± 0.05 THz is corresponding to the π-band superconductivity gap 2∆ π . We estimate σ-band superconductivity gap ∆ σ by a empirical formula ∆ σ ∼ 3∆ π , which then yields 2∆ σ ∼ 2.64 THz. With the two superconductivity gap values, we then estimate the eigenfrequency of the Leggett mode to be approximately ω L ∼ 1.8 THz (detailed in Supple-mentary Information Fig. 2 ∼ 0.88, and τ p ∆ σ ∼ 1.32, indicating that the pump pulse satisfies the nonadiabatic condition (τ p ∆ < 1) for both π-band Higgs mode and the Leggett mode Figure The reduced signal intensity below T c is related to the superconducting condensation. Figuree 3D shows the temporal evolution of ∆E probe (t pump , t probe = 0.25 ps) as a function of t pump at different pump electric fields. At a high electric field with 250 kV/cm when the superconductivity is strongly excited, ∆E probe (t pump , t probe = 0.25 ps) shows a step function behavior without oscillation, being similar to previous study on NbN To further verify the observed damped oscillation in MgB 2 arising from the intrinsic nonlinear response of the collective modes rather than the insufficient resolution of our spectrometer, we repeated the single-cycle pump-probe experiments on NbN (T c = 13 K, 2∆ ∼ 1.1 THz). For the NbN sample, as shown in Fig. The THz pump-probe experiment set-up schematic is shown in Fig. The definition of [t pump ,t probe ] and [τ,t gate ] is shown in Fig. Fig S The schematic of dual modulation sampling is shown in Fig. Hz for the probe path, leading to a minimum experimental period of 4 ms. This period accommodates four sampling instances. On the first pulse, the chopper permits both pump and probe beams, enabling the balanced detector to detect E pump , E probe , and ∆E signals. The chopper's blocking results in the second pulse detecting Epump, the third pulse Eprobe, and the fourth pulse capturing the baseline. As a result, the nonlinear signal ∆E is calculated by the formula The signal is collected by a data acquisition card and processed with a sampling time of 1 s for each point, where each point corresponds to the fixed positions of two translation stages, allowing for an average of 250 repetitions for each ∆E signal. NIR pulse (repetition rate 1000Hz) THz Pump (chopper @ 250Hz) THz Probe (chopper @ 500Hz) In this section, we discuss the calculation of transmission coefficients for light transitioning from dry air into the sample across various terahertz frequencies. The transmission coefficient, Tr, is calculated using the formula: Where N is the complex refractive index, defined as where n is the refrac- Here, ∆E norm 1ω corresponds to the nonlinear susceptibility term χ (3) (ω pump , ω probe , -ω probe ), involving a single interaction with the pump, so it is divided by Tr(ω pump )Tr 2 (ω probe ). Similarly, ∆E norm 2ω corresponds to the susceptibility term χ (3) (ω pump , ω pump , ω probe ), which involves two pump interactions, so it is divided by Tr 2 (ω pump )Tr(ω probe ). Note that, referring to the E probe spectrum, The peak electric field strength of the driving pump pulses is determined using the formula: In this equation, W denotes the single-pulse energy of the terahertz pulse at the focal point, while A represents a normalization coefficient with dimensions of area. After normalizing with the peak electric field E max , the formula for the peak electric field strength is expressed as: The parameter A is calculated based on the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the terahertz spot along the horizontal axis, denoted as a, and the vertical axis, denoted as b, from a two-dimensional Gaussian distribution. The expression for A is given as: The distribution of the multi-cycle pump's spot is illustrated in of the peak electric field E 2 max . Additionally, the ratio of the electric field at a specific polarizer angle to the peak electric field E max is calculated. This allows us to determine the peak electric field strength inside the sample, denoted as E in max : In this equation, Tr represents the normal-incidence transmission coefficient at the air-to-sample interface, determined via THz-TDS measurements, while cos 2 θ indicates the relative intensity, with θ being the angle between two polarizers. The calculated parameters, including the peak electric field strengths at various terahertz frequencies, are presented in XI. CALCULATION OF NONLINEAR COEFFICIENT χ (3) After determining the peak electric field of the driving pump pulse inside the sample, the next step is to calculate the actual peak electric field of the 2ω oscillations. This value is obtained through electro-optic sampling and is corrected for dispersion effects introduced during the sampling process. Since our goal is to compare the nonlinear coefficients within the frequency range of 0.35 THz to 1.5 THz, it is sufficient to determine the normalized peak electric field of the corrected 2ω oscillations. To achieve this, we first derive the formula that converts the differential signal ∆I obtained from electro-optic sampling into the terahertz electric field E THz , as shown below For small signal conditions where ∆I ≪ I, the relationship simplifies to: Here, the parameter η(ω) represents the dispersion factor in the terahertz range. To determine η(ω), we use the mismatch correction response G(ω), the electro-optic coefficient r 41 , and the terahertz transmission coefficient t ZnTe (ω), with values obtained from referenced data By calculating the normalized dispersion factor η(ω) during the sampling process, we can combine it with the measured amplitude of the 2ω oscillations from electro-optic sampling. This allows us to derive the normalized amplitude of the 2ω terahertz electric field at each driving pulse frequency. The results are summarized in the Parameters related to the electro-optic sampling process using a ZnTe crystal, the maximum amplitude of the 2ω oscillations obtained from electro-optic sampling (under the flux and temperature conditions used for plotting Fig. Then, combining with the peak electric field strength E max of the pump pulse estimated in the previous section, we use the formula: to calculate the nonlinear coefficients at various driving pulse frequencies, as shown in Table . S 3 and Fig. The Leggett mode frequency can be calculated using the following formula, based on the intraband and inter-band pairing potentials, as well as the density of states and energy gaps Frequency (THz) E 2ω (a.u.) E trans max (kV/cm) χ (3) 0 Table S 3: Normalized maximum amplitude of 2ω oscillations at various driving pulse frequencies, peak electric field strength at the focus of the driving pulse, and the calculated normalized nonlinear coefficient χ (3) (as depicted in Fig. Here, V σσ , V ππ , and V σπ represent the intra-band and inter-band pairing potentials, N σ and N π are the corresponding densities of states, and ∆ σ (T) and ∆ π (T) are the temperature-dependent energy gaps. Reference V σσ (Ry) V ππ (Ry) V σπ (Ry) Table S 4: Intra-band (V σσ , V ππ ) and inter-band (V σπ ) pairing potentials in Ry units from different references The parameters used in the calculation are as follows: the densities of states are N σ = 2.04 and N π = 2.78 Ry -1 spin -1 cell -1 Based on the relationship between ω L and ∆ in the above expression, the temperature dependence of ω L can be calculated, as shown in Fig. To illustrate how the nonlinear signal detected in the single-cycle pump-probe experiment differs from the THz pump, we plotted the time-domain spectra of the nonlinear signal and the squared of the transmitted pump signal. The comparison reveals that at a pump fluence of 35 kV/cm (see Fig. Table. S 1 (where W in our experiment is measured using a thermal THz power meter).