Intrinsic pinning is caused by natural pinning centers that occur because of the modulation of the order parameter or weak superconducting layers. Early work has shown that intrinsic pinning generates a high pinning force and critical current density in some layered oxide superconductors. Studying the intrinsic pinning of superconductors is crucial for both fundamental studies and potential applications. Herein, we use torque magnetometry to study angle-resolved in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic torque for a series of high-quality FeSe1-xSx single crystals. A fourfold torque signal was observed when the magnetic field was within the ab plane. We interpret that this fourfold in-plane irreversible torque is from the intrinsic pinning due to combined effects of gap nodes/minimum and twin domains. Additionally, we attributed the observed out-of-plane torque peaks to intrinsic pinning due to the layered structure. Understanding the mechanism of intrinsic pinning in high T c layered cuprates Probing the intrinsic pinning requires a bulk technique with angular resolution. Magnetic torque (τ = M × H ) is a powerful thermodynamic tool used to obtain bulk information and is sensitive in probing any anisotropic susceptibility, which is defined as the first derivative of the free energy with respect to angle (τ = -∂F / ∂θ). This method could provide a direct way to study interesting issues, such as the symmetry of the SC order parameter The target material in this study is the prototypical 11-family iron chalcogenide FeSe 1-x S x Here, we systematically examined the angle-resolved magnetic torque of a series of FeSe 1-x S x (x = 0, 0.11, 0.15) single crystals. Fourfold in-plane and twofold outof-plane magnetic torque peaks were observed at particular magnetic field directions. By analyzing the obtained results, we considered that a combination of gap nodes/minimum and twin domains create the intrinsic pinning responsible for the in-plane magnetic torque peaks. Concurrently, the layered structure are responsible for the out-of-plane magnetic torque peaks. The single crystals of FeSe 1-x S x (x = 0, 0.11, 0.15) studied here were synthesized using the vapor transport method The XRD patterns and their log-scale plot of a series of FeSe 1-x S x single crystals are shown in Fig. F e S e S 0 . 1 ) ) / 2 v e r s i b l e T 0 -3 6 0 T 3 6 0 -0 F e S e -3 K 9 T i r r e v e r s i b l e F e S e -5 K 9 T 0 -3 6 0 F e S e -5 K 9 T 3 6 0 -0 angles with increasing the S content, which can be seen more clearly in the enlarged plot of the (004) peaks shown in Fig. F e S e 0 . 8 5 S 0 . 1 5 ( i ) law fitting ρ(T)=ρ 0 +AT α (ρ 0 , A, and α are the fitting parameters) from normal state data to zero temperature as shown by the dashed lines in Figs. Angular dependence of the in-plane torque τ (φ) and out-of-plane torque τ (θ) were investigated for series of FeSe 1-x S x single crystals with angles schematically shown in Fig. The in-plane irreversible torque of the three crystals display sharp peaks with maxima at 0 • , 90 • , 180 • , and 270 • in the SC mixed state (see Fig. FeSe comprises one hole-type α band located at the Γ point and two electron-type bands δ and ε at the M point In order to identify the twin domains, we check the topology surface for FeSe single crystal by using the polarized light at temperatures above and below the structure transition temperature. The stripe-like structures are observed only at temperature (∼ 5 K) below T s , as marked by the red solid lines in Fig. The low-temperature out-of-plane torque results are presented in detail in Fig. On the other hand, the broad peak ranging from 45 • to 135 • may be from the surface pinning, because the specific surface area of the crystals used for the torque measurements is relatively large (typical size 1 × 0.5 × 0.06 mm 3 ). Besides, a shoulder-like behavior is observed only in the S-doped crystals, and can be witnessed more clearly in the crystal of x = 0.15 (see the middle panel in Figs. Furthermore, in addition to the intrinsic pinning effect in the superconducting state, the electronic nematicity is also an important and interesting issue in FeSe-based superconductor. Unlike other iron-based families In summary, we observed fourfold and twofold torque peaks at particular magnetic field directions in the SC state for FeSe 1-x S x single crystals. We interpret the in-plane fourfold irreversible torque to the intrinsic pinning, which is generated by a combined effects of gap nodes/minima and twin domains. We attribute out-ofplane twofold torque peaks to intrinsic pinning due to the layered structure. 1(g)-1(i).