Single crystals of (Ca1-xLax)KFe4As4 (0 ≤ x ≤0.16) have been grown by using the self-flux method, and the evolution of physical properties including the critical current density (Jc) with La-doping has been investigated. Tc decreases monotonically with increasing x, while Jc at the same temperature and magnetic field increases initially and reach its maximum at x = 0.082. The increase in Jc is more obvious at low temperatures and high fields. At T = 5 K and H = 40 kOe, Jc reaches 0.34 MA/cm 2 , which is ~4 times larger than that for pure crystals. It is also found that anomalous temperature dependence of Jc in CaKFe4As4 is wiped away as the La content is increased. However, Jc shows non-monotonic field dependence (peak effect) at high fields in crystals with large x. In addition, we found that despite weak anisotropy of Hc2, there is extremely large anisotropy of Jc up to ~15, which is most likely caused by novel planar defects in the crystal, similar to CaKFe4As4. Jc characteristics in (Ca1-xLax)KFe4As4 with disorder outside FeAs planes is compared with that in CaK(Fe1-xCox)4As4 with disorder within FeAs planes. Since the discovery of LaFeAs(O,F) with T ~ 26 K , iron-based superconductors (IBSs) have been extensively studied as a new class of high-temperature superconductors The Jc is determined by pinning of vortices in superconductors. In addition to the pinning naturally present in the crystal, pinning centers can be artificially engineered into superconductors through defects generated by high-energy particle irradiation In this work, we have successfully grown high-quality single crystals of La-doped (Ca,La)KFe4As4 with various doping levels, keeping sharp superconducting transition with flat magnetization at low temperatures even after La-doping. We evaluated superconducting properties for La-doped (Ca,La)KFe4As4 including the effect of chemically introduced point defects on Tc and Jc, which could be related to the novel planar defects Single crystals of La-doped (Ca1-xLax)KFe4As4 with x up to 0.16 were grown by the self-flux method with FeAs flux. Ca granules (99.5%), La granules (99.5%), K ingots (99.5%), and FeAs powder were used as starting materials. FeAs was prepared by sealing stoichiometric amounts of As grains (7N) and Fe powder (99.9%) in an evacuated quartz tube. It was heated up to 500 °C for 10 h and then heated up to 700 °C for 40 h. A mixture with a ratio of Ca : La : K : FeAs = (1-x): x : 1.1: 10 was placed in an alumina crucible in an argon-filled glove box and nominal x = 0, 0.03, 0.075, 0.1, and 0.2. The alumina crucible was then sealed in a stainless-steel tube by mechanically swaging the cap. For x ≤ 0.1, the stainless-steel tube was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube to avoid oxidation. The whole assembly was heated up to 650 °C for 5 h, and then heated up to 1160 °C for 5 h. It was cooled down to 1050 °C in 5 h and slowly cooled down to 930 °C at a rate of 1.5 °C/h. For x > 0.1, the stainless-steel tube was placed in nitrogen flow during the growth. Different from the previous report After the growth, several samples were examined by a scanning electron microscope (S-4300, Hitachi High Technologies), and elemental analyze were conducted using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) with EMAX X-act (HORIBA). The experiment was carried out at room temperature with an electron accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The magnetization of single crystals was measured for the characterization of Tc and magnetic Jc by a superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (SQUID) (MPMS-5XL, Quantum Design). Tc was estimated from magnetization measurements for field parallel to the c-axis. Jc was evaluated from the results of magnetization measurements using the extended Bean model where ∆M (emu cm -3 ) is the difference of magnetization when the applied field is swept down and up. a (cm) and b (cm) are width and length of the single crystal. For the evaluation of two components of Jc for H//ab-plane, samples were carefully cut into a rectangular shape using a wire saw. Electrical resistivity along the ab-plane ( ) and Hall coefficient (RH) were measured by the four-probe method under a magnetic field parallel to the c-axis, and the resistance was measured by using an AC resistance bridge (LR-700, Linear Research). Low temperature conditions and static magnetic fields were provided by MPMS. It has been reported that actual compositions of IBS single crystals grown using the flux method can be different from the nominal composition, as evidenced by the case of Ba(Fe,Co)2As2 Figure is ~15, consistent with former reports Figure The irreversible magnetization for magnetic field parallel to the ab-plane is controlled by two kinds of critical current flowing in-plane (Jc2) and out-of-plane (Jc3) as shown in the inset of Fig. In this study, although electrons were successfully introduced in CaKFe4As4 by La doping, T did not increase at small doping levels. At larger La doping levels, the carrier density exceeds the optimal level of 0.2 holes per Fe, and Tc is suppressed as we anticipated. Although the ionic radius of Ca +2 (100 pm) is very similar to that of La +3 (103 pm), potential disorder close to the superconducting plane still introduces significant disorder. On the other hand, compared with Co doping, which also introduces electrons into the system, degree of disorder to the system is weaker, leading to much milder suppression of Tc at the same average valence of Fe. For undoped CaKFe4As4, there are clear crossings of Jc-H curves at different temperatures, which can be described as an unexpected peak effect in the Jc-T curve. Such unexpected enhancement of Jc at higher temperatures is rare, and requires some special explanation. Referring to previous study by Ichinose We have successfully grown single crystals of (Ca1-xLax)KFe4As4 (0 ≤ x ≤0.16) using self-flux method and investigated the evolution of physical properties including Jc. We found that the c-axis length does not change significantly with the doping amount. Sharp superconducting transition with flat magnetization at low temperatures even after La-doping demonstrates that the grown crystals are of high quality. By measuring several samples with different doping level, we found that the anisotropy did not change significantly with doping. By measuring the Hall coefficient, we confirm that the electrons are successfully introduced by Ladoping. As x increases, Jc at the same temperature and magnetic field increases initially and reaches its maximum at x = 0.082, and the anomalous temperature dependence of Jc in CaKFe4As4 is wiped away. Furthermore, we compare the effects of electron doping with two different substitutions, Co doping and La doping, on Tc, Jc, and the exponent α related to the magnetic field dependence of Jc. By measuring the magnetization for magnetic field parallel to the ab-plane, we observe a huge anisotropy between Jc2 and Jc3 similar to the case of CaKFe4As4. STEM observation clearly demonstrates that there are planar defects similar to those in CaKFe4As4. By comparing with (Ca1-xLax)KFe4As4 with CaK(Fe1-xCox)4As4, we find that doping outside FeAs planes can enhance Jc more effectively. FIG.