1 

 

Out-of-plane Ionicity versus In-plane Covalency Interplay in 

High-Tc Superconducting Oxides 

 

T.Guerfi1 

Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, M’Hamed Bougara University, Boumerdes, Algeria 

 

ABSTRACT 

It seems that the remarkable properties of the high temperature superconducting oxides, especially the Insulator-

Metal Transition (IMT) and the Metal-Superconductor Transition (MST) both originate from the competition (interplay) 

between ionic versus in-plane covalence nature of bonds in these materials. As a result of this competition, the microscopic 

order parameter, that is firmly identified to be the local field estimated from the ionic polarization at the sub-unit level (one 

half of the unit cell), shows a strong temperature as well as chemical doping dependence. While the out-of-plane ionicity is 

responsible for the interlayer charge transfer (electrons) that reduces it leading to IMT, the in-plane covalency is 

responsible for the in-plane intersite transfer of charge (holes) that increases the ionicity and leads to MST.  

This interplay of charge transfer, driven by the out-of-plane ionicity and the in-plane covalency, leads at the critical 

temperature Tc to a local field avalanche (ionic polarization catastrophe at the sub-unit cell level) that triggers an out-of-

plane correlation between the local polarization fields at the unit cell and drives the compound into the superconducting 

state. The asymmetry of the free charge carrier density breaks locally the inversion symmetry of the order parameter 

leading to an unconventional pairing mechanism characterized by the CPT transformation where C is the charge 

conjugation symmetry, P is the parity symmetry and T is the time reversal symmetry. 

It is established that the out-of-plane ionicity versus in-plane covalency is a necessary condition for the occurrence of both 

IMT and MST. The underlined microscopic mechanism provides a route to a possible unified description of high-Tc 

superconductivity. 

 

Keywords: High-Tc superconducting oxides, microscopic order parameter, broken symmetry, unconventional pairing 

mechanism. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 Corresponding author : tarek.guerfi@gmail.com 
Tel: +213555237358 
 


2 

 

 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The ionic model has provided the basis for our understanding of the very wide range of physical phenomena displayed 

by ionic crystals [1, 2]. However an unusual feature of ionic versus covalence nature of bonds was the origin behind the 

peculiar electrical and structural behaviors of some ionic crystals known to display a large values of a spontaneous 

polarization [3]. It is established that a mixed ionic-covalent B-O bonds is a necessary condition for the occurrence of a 

spontaneous polarization in ABO3 type of ferroelectric crystals [4].  

The High Temperature Superconductors (HTS) are ionic crystals with the parent compound to be charge transfer insulator 

[5].  In fact, all cuprate high-Tc superconductors are stacks of alternating anionic CuO2 layers and block layers which are 

in gross cationic. The stacking direction is commonly taken as the crystallographic c-direction, and the crystal symmetry is 

generally derived from a simple tetragonal or a body centered tetragonal (b.c.t) symmetry, although it is in fact often 

orthorhombic due to distortions or due to vacancy ordering. The key element shared by all the structures of cuprates is the 

CuO2 plane which has particular feature; its in-plane strong covalent character of bonds. The physical properties and the 

superconducting Tc are strongly influenced by the density of charge carriers in the CuO2 plane, which is regulated by 

variation of the charge-reservoir block composition. However, the maximum Tc varies widely between crystals sharing the 

same basic CuO2 in-plane electronic structure, by up to a factor of 10 at the same hole density in monolayer cuprates [6]. 

These variations, as it has been mentioned obviously [7, 8], cannot be due to the doping dependence of the CuO2 in-plane 

electronic structure, and it has been hypothesized for a long time that there must be a key out-of-plane influence [6] that 

controls the basic electronic structure of cuprates. 

 Also, the role of the lattice in the high temperature superconducting materials was demonstrated by Angle Resolved 

Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES) [9] and X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS) which revealed a local displacement 

of oxygen as carriers are doped indicating an intimate relation between the lattice effects and the pairing mechanism [10]. 

Moreover, isotope and strain (pressure) effects are considered as direct experiments that establish the role of the lattice in 

the HTS [11]. 

Through a competition between the ionic nature of bonds versus in-plane covalence nature of bonds mainly in the CuO2 

plane (the cuprates case), the local field that reflects interlayer polarization estimated from the ionic polarization at the sub-

unit cell level (one half of the unit cell) along the c-axis which is the polar axis, is the microscopic order parameter 

responsible for the in-plane and the out-of-plane physics of high-Tc superconductors[12, 13] . 

By means of chemical doping which consists in most cases in adding oxygen to the parent insulator compound, the 

interlayer local field can be reversed with respect to the parent undoped case especially between the anionic CuO2 and the 

adjacent cationic layer. A possible arrangement of the electronic structure that lowers the energy of the system consists in 

an interlayer transfer of electrons from the anionic CuO2 layer to the adjacent cationic layers reducing the ionicity of the 

layers and cancelling the resulting local electric field which otherwise would be present. This mechanism is the origin 

behind the observed Insulator-Metal phase Transition (IMT).  

Although the IMT reduces the iconicity and causes the local field (the order parameter) to vanish, however, the strong in-

plane covalency of CuO2 induces an in-plane intersite transfer of holes form oxygen to copper; this transfer of charge 

increases the iconicity and causes the local field to reemerge again. At a given critical temperature, this competition 

between ionicity and covalency leads to a sort of local field avalanche that triggers an out-of-plane correlation between the 

local polarizations fields at the unit cell level driving the metal into the superconducting state.  

 


3 

 

2. CHEMICAL DOPING AND TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF THE MICROSCOPIC ORDER PARAMETER IN YBA2CU3O7- 

The HTS are ionic crystals with the parent compound to be the charge transfer Mott insulator [5]. The oxygen p-

level and the cu d-level form hybridized bonding and anti-bonding orbitals states and the gap lies between the filled p-like 

of O band and the empty Cu d-like band [14]. In the purely ionic model for the HTS compounds, nominal valence charges 

are taken in order to compute the ionic polarization at the sub-unit cell level (the order parameter) in these materials. It is 

noted that these materials are centro-symmetric, so, the total ionic polarization at the unit cell level vanishes at any given 

temperature and there would be no external electric effects. However, the value of the local electric field that acts at the site 

of an ion is significantly different from the value of the macroscopic electric field. The reason of that is that by definition 

the macroscopic field is the field which is averaged over large number of dipoles, however the local field which acts on a 

particular atom is influenced by the nearest surrounding, and therefore can deviate from the average field.  

The most prominent evidence of the strong temperature as well as the oxygen dependence of the local ionic polarization 

field (the order parameter) has been found in YBa2Cu3O7-δ. The crystal structure of YBa2Cu3O6 and YBa2Cu3O7-δ is 

considered as juxtaposition along z-axis of successive layers including the anionic CuO2 layer which is characterized by 

strong in-plane hybridization. The resulting ionic polarization at the sub-unit cell (one half of the unit cell) is the order 

parameter, see figure. 1. The normal and the superconducting properties of this oxide are strongly dependent on oxygen 

doping as well as on temperature. Experimentally, in the range of oxygen content 0  δ  0.65, this compound has an 

orthorhombic crystal structure with a metallic behaviour at a normal state and superconducting behaviour at a critical 

temperature which decreases as the oxygen content decreases [15]. At an oxygen content corresponding to δ = 0.65, this 

oxide undergoes a simultaneous Insulator-Metal Transition (IMT) and an orthorhombic to tetragonal structural phase 

transition [15]. Lowering more the oxygen content 0.65  δ  1, the material remains insulator in the tetragonal phase. 

For an ideal ionic crystal the point charge model would apply. In the crystalline system, the macroscopic ionic polarization 

PCM is defined as the sum of dipoles moments in a given cell divided by the cell volume, 

 

1

CM
i i
P
 q r
           
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
         (1)               

 

 is the unit cell volume, 

qi are the formal ionic charges located at the atomic positions ri. 

 

The formal charges qi assigned for the different constituents ions are +3 for Y, +2 for Ba, -2 for O and assigning a formal 

charge for Cu balancing exactly the negative total valence charge of the oxygen. In case of YBa2Cu3O6.9, the formal 

valence charge assigned for Copper is +2.2667. The positions of the ions ri have been chosen on the basis of high 

resolution neutron diffraction crystallographic data from reference [16]. The oxygen content dependence of the order 

parameter estimated from the ionic polarization computed on one half of unit cell in YBa2Cu3O7-δ at 5 K is displayed in 

figure. 2. The order parameter P(6+x) shows almost a linear behavior for all oxygen content, however it vanishes for 

oxygen content corresponding to δ = 0.65 and its sign is reversed for 0  δ  0.65 oxygen content range. The maximum 

value of the order parameter, at 5 K, was obtained for optimally oxygenated samples. 

The oxygen dependence of the order parameter (the local ionic polarization field) correlates very well with the oxygen 

dependence of YBa2Cu3O7-δ experimental properties. It is noteworthy that YBa2Cu3O7-δ undergoes an IMT at oxygen 


4 

 

content  δ = 0.65 while  the order parameter (the local ionic polarization field) vanishes at the same oxygen content δ = 

0.65.  

By means of the chemical doping which consists in almost cases in adding oxygen to the parent undoped compound, the 

local ionic polarization field (the ionic polarization at sub-unit cell level) can be reversed with respect to the parent 

undoped case especially between the anionic CuO2 and the adjacent cationic layer (see figure. 1 and figure. 2). For 0.65  δ 

 1 oxygen content that corresponds to the insulating state of YBa2Cu3O7-δ, the resulting local ionic field at the sub-unit 

cell level points always from the anionic CuO2 layer to the cationic layer as it is the case in the parent undoped material 

YBa2Cu3O6. In fact, in the range of 0  δ  0.65 oxygen content, the local polarization field is reversed as it is illustrated in 

figure 3. Every layer will experience the resulting electric field and in order to minimize these polarizations, each layer’s 

constituent ions will move along the z-axis in the direction imposed by the resulting electric field and the signs of their 

charges, until they reach their equilibrium (real) positions, see figure. 4. So the apical oxygen O(4) and the Ba ions will 

move in opposite directions along the z-axis relatively to the parent undoped case. The apical oxygen O(4) tends to 

approache the anionic CuO2 layer conversely to Ba. But mainly because of the strong in-plane covalency, the copper Cu(2) 

and the Oxygen O(2, 3) do not feel much the field as no significant displacements is observed, see figure. 4. The other 

important effect of this local field is to tilt all the bands; but mainly because of the strong covalent character of bonds of the 

CuO2 layer, the bands that correspond to the cationic layer are lowered relative to those of the anionic CuO2 layer 

compared to the parent undoped case of YBa2Cu3O6, causing a possible arrangement of the electronic structure that 

consists in an interlayer transfer of electrons from the anionic layer CuO2 to the adjacent cationic layer BaO. This 

mechanism reduces the ionicity of the layers and removes the resulting local electric field driving a hole doping of the p-

like band of O. It is noteworthy that a similar mechanism involving charge transfer of electrons stabilizing the structure of 

polar oxide surfaces has been observed to also lead to 2D metallic surface state [17]. Accordingly, in all the range 0  δ  

0.65 of oxygen content, due to IMT the oxide of YBa2Cu3O7-δ is metallic, otherwise it is insulator.  

For a single phase specimen of optimally oxygenated sample YBa2Cu3O6.9 (x=0.9), a complete diffraction patterns using 

high resolution neutron powder diffraction taken at 300 K, 182 K, 101 K, 92 K, 82 K and 16 K have been analyzed by 

profile fitting methods [18] and the refinement procedures were processed exactly in the same way for all data sets in order 

to guarantee a reliable comparability of the results obtained for the different temperatures, so that any possible systematic 

errors occurring either in the experiment or in the data analysis were identical for all temperatures.  

For the atomic position, we have used the crystallographic data taken from [18] and by assuming a formal valence charges 

for the different constituent ions, the point charge model would always apply. The temperature dependence of the local 

ionic polarization field (the order parameter) in YBa2Cu3O6.9 is displayed in figure. 6. The compound YBa2Cu3O6.9 exhibits 

a local ionic polarization of 0.1959 C/m2 along the c-axis (the polar axis) at 300 K and of 0.2100 C/m2 at 92 K, which is 

the superconducting transition temperature. The main feature of the temperature dependence of this local polarization is its 

step like increase at the superconducting transition temperature which can be qualified as a local ionic polarization 

catastrophe at Tc. 

In ferroelectric oxides, the Born effective charge Z*, which relates the change of polarization ΔP with the displacement u 

as 

*

cell
P
Z eu V



 
is enhanced by a strong orbital hybridization as compared to the formal valence state of ions.  In these 

oxides the covalency induces an electronic polarization that points in the same direction as the ionic polarization doubling 

the Born effective charge in many cases [19, 20]. However, As it was pointed out by Egami [14], even though the doped 

cuprates are metallic, the ionic charges are not fully screened, and anions and cations approximately maintain their 

valences. Their mobile carrier density is low, and screening is ineffective at short distances. With displacement of copper 


5 

 

toward oxygen, covalency induces an in-plane hole transfer from oxygen to copper.  This time although, the electronic 

polarization points in the opposite direction to the ionic polarization, it increases the local charge of both ions (the ionicity 

increases) so that the vanishing local polarization field (the order parameter) reemerges again. There is a large volume of 

literature that shows coupling of superconductivity to the lattice and phonon [9, 21-23]. In particular, the in-plane Cu−O 

Longitudinal Optical (LO) bond-stretching phonon mode was observed by neutron inelastic scattering to show a strong 

softening with doping near the zone boundary along the Cu−O bond direction [21, 24, 25]. This mode induces charge 

transfer between Cu and O, and thus couples strongly to the charge [22, 26, 27]. Also the LO phonon dispersion observed 

by inelastic neutron scattering measurements on YBa2Cu3O7-δ (YBCO) suggests that the frequencies of the LO phonons are 

strongly softened with doping near the zone boundary [28].  

The displacements, in opposite directions along the z-axis of the center of positive and negative ions G+, G- in the sub-unit 

cell as function of the temperature, illustrated in the figure. 7, are the main signature of the emergent local field (the order 

parameter). But in the same time, this local field may always be removed and the ionicity is reduced, by an interlayer 

transfer of electrons form the anionic CuO2 layer to the cationic layer.  However, this mechanism leads to an increase in the 

density of holes in the p-like band of O and in turn it causes again an intersite hole transfer toward copper. At a given 

critical temperature, this interplay between ionicity versus in-plane covalency causes an ionic sub-unit cell polarization 

catastrophe or a local field avalanche. The signature of this local field avalanche is the discontinuity in the shift of the 

position of the center of positive and negative ions G+, G- respectively in opposite direction along the z-axis, observed at 

the superconducting transition temperature (figure. 6), but the shifts G+ and G- are limited to finite displacements because 

of the coupling at the unit cell level of these local fields. In other words, the local ionic polarization field catastrophe at the 

critical temperature Tc triggers the correlation out-of-plane between the local fields at the unit cell level and 

superconductivity is onset.   

The local field avalanche (the ionic polarization catastrophe) can be considered as the origin behind many structural 

instabilities and anomalies that have been observed by many research groups using different experimental methods [18, 29-

36] in YBa2Cu3O6.9 as well as other HTS near the critical temperature Tc. 

 

3. UNCONVENTIONAL PAIRING MECHANISM  

The local polarization field (the order parameter) at the unit cell level vanishes at any given temperature in the 

normal state. However, because of the interplay between the ionicity and the covalency the local field tends to become 

infinite at the avalanche state, but the coupling at the unit cell level of the local fields stopped the field avalanche and at the 

same time a perfect out-of-plane correlation between these local fields at the unit cell level is established. The mirror plane 

which is the yttrium plane divides the unit cell into two coupled right and left sub-units cell.  So, any decrease/increase of 

the local field in the right/left sub-unit cell is correlated by a local field increase/decrease in the left/right sub-unit cell. 

However in the avalanche (superconducting) state, the asymmetry of the free charge carrier density will break the inversion 

symmetry of the microscopic order parameter (figure. 8). As a consequence of this broken symmetry, the local field is no 

longer vanishing at the unit cell level leading to an unconventional pairing between the real current and the polarization 

current, or particle antiparticle pairing characterized by CPT transformation, where C is the charge conjugation symmetry, 

P is the parity symmetry and T is the time reversal symmetry. 


6 

 

 

4. CONCLUSION 

It seems that the remarkable properties of the high temperature superconducting oxides (HTS), especially the 

Insulator-Metal Transition (IMT) and the Metal-Superconductor Transition (MST) both originate from the competition 

(interplay) between the ionic versus the in-plane covalence nature of bonds in these materials. The microscopic order 

parameter that has been identified to be the local polarization field estimated from the ionic polarization at the sub-unit cell 

(one half of the unit cell) shows a strong temperature as well as the chemical doping dependence, as a result of this 

competition. 

It is showed that with chemical doping the local ionic polarization field can be reversed.  An arrangement of the electronic 

structure that consist in an interlayer transfer of charge, between the anionic CuO2 layer and the adjacent cationic layer, 

removes the resulting local polarization field and induces an IMT. However, the in-plane covalency induces also an 

intersite transfer of charge that increases the ionicity and causes the vanishing local polarization field to reemerge again. 

This interplay (competition) between ionicity-induced interlayer electron transfer and in-plane covalency-induced intersite 

hole transfer leads to a local field avalanche (a local ionic polarization catastrophe) at a given critical temperature Tc. This 

avalanche effect triggers an out-of-plane correlation between the local fields at the unit cell level driving the oxide into the 

superconducting state. The asymmetry or the free charge carriers density break locally the inversion symmetry of the order 

parameter leading to an unconventional pairing mechanism between the conduction current and the polarization current 

that is characterized by the CPT symmetry transformation. 

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The author would like to thank Dr S. Toumi for her assistance in the correction of the present manuscript and for numeral 

fruitful discussions.  

 

REFERENCES 

[1] N. F. Mott, R.W. Gurney, Electronic Processes in Ionic Crystals, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1946. 
[2] P.A. Cox, Transition Metal Oxides: An Introduction to Their Electronic Structure and Properties Clarendon Press, 
Oxford, 1992. 
[3] R.E. Cohen, Nature, 358 (1992) 136. 
[4] R. E. Cohen, H. Krakauer, Ferroelectrics, 136 (1992) 65. 
[5] J. Zaanen, G.A. Sawatzky, J.W. Allen, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 55 (1985). 
[6] H. Eisaki, N. Kaneko, D. L. Feng, A. Damascelli, P. K. Mang, K. M. Shen, Z. X. Shen, M. Greven, Phys. Rev. B: 
Condens. Matter, 69 (2004) 064512. 
[7] Y. Otha, T. Tohyama, S. Maekawa, Phys. Rev. B: Condes.Matter, 43 (1991) 2968. 
[8] J. A. Slezak, L. Jinho, M. Wang, K. McElroy, K. Fujita, B. M. Anderson, P. J. Hirschfeld, H. Eisaki, S. Ushida, J.C. 
Davis., PNAS 105, 9 (2008) 3203. 
[9] A. Lanzara, P.V. Bogdanov, X. J. Zhou, S.A. Kellar, D. L. Feng, E.D. Lu, T. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, A. Fujimori, K. 
Kishio, J-I. Shimoyama, T. Noda, S. Uchida, Z. Hussain, Z.X. Shen., Nature, 412 (2001) 510. 
[10] A. Bianconi, N. L. Saini, A. Lanzara, M. Missori, T. Rosseti, H. Oyanagi, H. Yamaguchi, K. Oka, T. Ito, Phys. Rev. 
Lett., 76 (1996) 3412. 
[11] R. Khasanov, D.G. Eshchenko, H. Luetkens, E. Morenzoni, T. Prokscha, T. Suter, N. Garifianov, M. Mali, J. Roos, K. 
Conder, H. Keller., Phys. Rev. Lett., 92 (2004) 57602. 
[12] T. Guerfi, J. Supercond. Nov Mag, 24 (2011) 485. 
[13] T.Guerfi, Int.J.Cond.Matter., (2013). 
[14] T. Egami, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn, 15 (2002). 
[15] J. D. Jorgensen, B. W. Veal, A. P. Paulikas, L. J. Nowicki, G. W. Crabtree, H. Claus, W.K. Kwok., Phys. Rev. B: 
Condens. Matter,, 41 (1990) 1863. 
[16] R. J. Cava, A.W. Hewat, E.A. Hewat, B. Batlogg, M. Marezio, K.M. Rabe, J. J. Krajewski, W.F. Jr. Peck, L.W.J. 
Rupp., Physica C, 165 (1990) 419. 


7 

 

[17] A. Wander, F. Schedin, P. Steadman, A. Norris, R. McGrath, T. S. Turner, G. Thornton, N.M. Harrison, Phys. Rev. 
Lett, 86 (2001) 3811. 
[18] W. Schäfer, G. Yansen, G. Will, Jr. J. Faber, B. Veal., Mater. Res. Bull., 23 (1988) 1439. 
[19] R. D. King-Smith, D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B, 47 (1993). 
[20] R. Resta, Rev. Mod. Phys, 66 (1994). 
[21] L. Pintschovius, W. Reichardt, Physical Properties of High Temperature Superconductors IV, ed. D. Ginsberg 
(Singapore,World Scientific), 1994, p. 295. 
[22] T. Egami, S.J.L. Billinge, Physical Properties of High Temperature Superconductors V, ed. D. Ginsberg (Singapore, 
World Scientific) 1996, p. 265. 
[23] H.A. Mook, F. Dogan, Nature, 401 (1999) 145. 
[24] L. Pintschovius, N. Pyka, W. Reichardt, A. Yu. Rumiantsev, N. L. Mitrofanov, A. S. Ivanov, G. Collin, P. Bourges, 
Physica C, 156 (1991) 185. 
[25] R. J. McQueeney, Y. Petrov, T. Egami, M. Yethiraj, G. Shirane, Y. Endoh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82 (1999) 628. 
[26] S. Ishihara, T. Egami, M. Tachiki, Phys. Rev. B, , 58 (1997) 9485. 
[27] Y. Petrov, T. Egami, Phys. Rev. B,, 58 (1998) 9485. 
[28] R.J.M. T. Egami, Y. Petrov, M. Yethiraj, G. Shirane, Y. Endoh, AIP. Conf. Proc, 483 (1999). 
[29] R. Srinivasan, K. S. Girirajan, V. Ganesan, V. Radhakrishnan, G.V.S. Rao, Phys. Rev. B,, 38 (1988) 889. 
[30] P. M. Horn, D. T. Keane, G. A. Held, J. L. Jordan-Sweet, D. L. Kaiser, F. Holtzberg, Phys. Rev. Lett., 59 (1987) 2772. 
[31] D. Cheng, W. Fei, C. Hong, C. Guangcan, L. Jingwei, F. Yongxin, Z. Zhongxian, Chinese Phys. Lett., 11 (1994) 494. 
[32] V. N. Molchanov, V.I. Simonov, Acta. Cryst. , A 54 (1998) 905. 
[33] Q. Xu, H.Wang, D. Yu, K. Wang, Z. Chen, D. Peng, G. Meng, Supercond. Sci. Technol,, 4 (1991) 114. 
[34] X.S. Wu, S.S. Jiang, J. Chen, R.W. Peng, J. Gao, Physica C, 349 (2001) 271. 
[35] C. J. Zhang, H. Oyanagi, Z. H. Sun, Y. Kamihara, H. Hosono, Phys. Rev. B,, 78 (2008) 214513. 
[36] R. H. Buttner, E. N. Maslen, N. Spadaccini, Acta Crystallogr. B, , 48 (1992) 21. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


8 

 

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Figure. 1 Crystal layered structure of YBa2Cu3O6 and YBa2Cu3O7-δ considered as juxtaposition along z-axis of successive 

layers including the anionic CuO2 layer which is characterized by strong in-plane hybridization. The resulting ionic 

polarization at the sub-unit cell (one half of the unit cell) is the order parameter. M denotes the mirror plane which is the 

yttrium plane that divides the unit cell into two sub-unit cell   

Figure. 2 Oxygen content dependence of the order parameter (the ionic sub-unit cell polarization) in YBa2Cu3O7-δ [13]. It 

is noteworthy that while the microscopic order parameter vanishes for YBa2Cu3O6.35 (δ=0.65), the oxide YBa2Cu3O6.35 

undergoes an insulator-metal phase transition at the same oxygen content  

Figure. 3 Z coordinate of the center of cations G+ and the center of anions G- along with z coordinate of anions and cations  

in the sub-unit cell, in the undoped YBa2Cu3O6 and in the doped YBa2Cu3O6.95 

Figure. 4 Relative displacements (𝑧 ∗ 𝑐 − 𝑧𝑟 ∗ 𝑐𝑟)/(𝑧𝑟 ∗ 𝑐𝑟)  along z axis, as function of  oxygen doping,  of Ba, O(4), 

Cu(2) and O(2, 3). zr , cr is the z coordinate of the corresponding ion and the c-axis parameter respectively in the parent 

undoped YBa2Cu3O6. Ba and O(4) of the cationic layer move in opposite directions in strong response to the resulting local 

field however Cu(2) and O(2, 3) of the anionic layer do not feel much the field as no significant relative displacement is 

observed ; note also that their displacements are in the same direction 

Figure. 5 Charge transfers inside the unit cell of YBa2Cu3O7-δ. By means of chemical doping, the local field can be 

inversed with respect to the parent undoped material YBa2Cu3O6; while a charge transfer (electrons) from the anionic CuO2 

layer to the cationic BaO layer reduces the ionicity of the layers and removes the local field leading to a metallic sate of the 

CuO2 layer, the in-plane covalency of CuO2 induces a transfer of charge (holes) from the in-plane oxygen O(2, 3) to the in-

plane copper Cu(2) increasing the ionicity and rising up  the vanishing field . This interplay causes a local field avalanche 

at a given critical temperature Tc that drives the metal into the superconductivity state 

Figure. 6 The temperature dependence of the order parameter in YBa2Cu3O6.9 [13]. A step-like increase of the order 

parameter is observed at the critical temperature 92 K; the ionic polarization catastrophe or a local field avalanche that 

results from the competition between ionicity and the in-plane covalency in the oxide  

Figure. 7 Temperature dependence of the relative displacement of the center of cations G+ and the center of anions G-   

normalized to 300 K. A discontinuity in the shift of the G- and G+ is observed at the critical temperature Tc which is the 

signature of the local field avalanche 

Figure.8. (a) Above Tc the Insulator-Metal Transition  (IMT) reduces the ionicity of the compound, therefore it cancels the 

order parameter. b) Due to in-plane covalency-induced  intersite charge transfer, the vanishing order parameter reemerges 

again. This competition competition between ionicity versus covalency causes an ionic polarization catasrophe at Tc (local 

field avalanche) that tiggers an out-of-plane correlation between the local fields at the unit cell level. (c) The mirror 

(inversion) symmetry of the microscopic order parameter is localy broken by the asymmetry of the free charge carriers 

density. (d) Uncoventionnal pairing mechanism between the real current and the polarization current characterized by CPT 

symmetry that results from the broken symmetry of the order parameter 

 

 

 


9 

 

 

 
 
 
Figure. 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


10 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure.2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


11 

 

 

 
 
 

Figure. 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


12 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure. 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


13 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure. 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 


14 

 

 

 
 
 

Figure.6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


15 

 

 

 
 
 
 

Figure. 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


16 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure. 8 


