Remotely induced magnetism in a normal metal using a 

superconducting spin-valve 

M.G. Flokstra1*, N. Satchell2, J. Kim2, G. Burnell2, P.J. Curran3, S.J. Bending3, J.F.K. Cooper4, 

C.J. Kinane4, S. Langridge4, A. Isidori5, N. Pugach5,6, M. Eschrig5, H. Luetkens7, A. Suter7, T. 

Prokscha7, S.L. Lee1 

1School of Physics and Astronomy, SUPA, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews KY16 9SS, 

United Kingdom. 

2School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom. 

3Department of Physics, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom. 

4ISIS, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Oxfordshire OX11 0QX, United Kingdom. 

5SEPnet and Hubbard Theory Consortium, Department of Physics, Royal Holloway, University 

of London Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, United Kingdom. 

6Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics Lomonosov Moscow State University (SYNP MSU), 

Leninskie Gory, Moscow 119991, Russia. 

7Labor für Myonspinspektroskopie, Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland. 

*Correspondence to: mgf@st-andrews.ac.uk. 

 
 


Abstract 

Superconducting spintronics has emerged in the last decade as a promising new field that seeks 

to open a new dimension for nanoelectronics by utilizing the internal spin structure of the 

superconducting Cooper pair as a new degree of freedom. Its basic building blocks are spin-

triplet Cooper pairs with equally aligned spins, which are promoted by proximity of a 

conventional superconductor to a ferromagnetic material with inhomogeneous macroscopic 

magnetization. Using low-energy muon spin rotation experiments, we find an entirely 

unexpected novel effect: the appearance of a magnetization in a thin layer of a non-magnetic 

metal (gold), separated from a ferromagnetic double layer by a 50 nm thick superconducting 

layer of Nb. The effect can be controlled by either temperature or by using a magnetic field to 

control the state of the remote ferromagnetic elements and may act as a basic building block for a 

new generation of quantum interference devices based on the spin of a Cooper pair. 

 
 


Main Text 

The ability to manipulate the spin degree of freedom of charge carriers is key to realizing future 

spin-based electronics. Integrating superconductors into spintronic devices can greatly enhance 

performance1 and allows the transport of spin over long distances without the dissipation of 

heat2. In order to achieve the alignment of electron spins ferromagnetic materials are used. 

Superconductivity and ferromagnetism are, however, antagonistic states of matter, and the 

interplay between these two states results in the conversion of conventional spin singlet into spin 

triplet pair correlations3. Whereas spin singlet pairs have spin angular momentum 𝑆 = 0, spin 

triplet pairs have 𝑆 = 1 with three possible spin projections 𝑠𝑧 = −1,0, +1. The realization of 

such spin-triplet pairs in mesoscopic systems containing interfaces between superconducting (S) 

and ferromagnetic (F) layers has attracted much interest from both the theoretical and 

experimental communities. Interaction of spin-singlet superconductivity with collinear 

ferromagnetism leads to oscillations and suppression of the pair correlation at a short distance ξf 

due to the exchange magnetic field in the ferromagnet, which tends to align the spins of electrons 

parallel4-7. However, in order to create longer-range penetration of spin-triplet superconductivity 

into the ferromagnet, interaction with a non-collinear magnetism is required8-10 motivating the 

discovery of superconducting currents through ferromagnetic metals over distances far longer 

than the singlet penetration length ξf11-13. These long-range triplet components (LRTC) have 

parallel spin projections (sz = ±1), and are not suppressed by the exchange field. Theory predicts 

that the conversion into spin triplet pairs should also give rise to an induced magnetic moment in 

the superconductor, decaying away from the interface14-16, often called the inverse or magnetic 

proximity effect. For diffusive systems this induced magnetic moment is predicted to be negative 

(opposite to the magnetization of itinerant electrons in the adjacent F layer) and accompanied by 


a small decrease of magnetization of this F layer on the scale of the ferromagnetic coherence 

length ξf. There are a small number of reports with observations that are attributed to this effect17-

19 though none use a measurement technique that has the required spatial sensitivity to uniquely 

determine this. A further report involving low-energy muon spin rotation (LE-μSR) 

measurements, a technique possessing the required spatial sensitivity to determine the location of 

the moment, found contradictory evidence20. The moment was found not to penetrate into the S 

layer over the expected distance of a coherence length, but rather it existed over a very much 

shorter length scale, indicating a rather different interfacial mechanism at play in that system and 

possibly also in related works. 

Here we report results obtained by high precision LE-μSR that are in conflict with the current 

theoretical predictions, and which yield instead a very surprising, hitherto unknown effect. We 

find a switchable magnetic moment to be induced remotely from the superconductor-

ferromagnet interface, at a nonmagnetic superconductor-normal metal interface about 150 atomic 

layers away from the ferromagnet. The moment appears, however, not inside the S layer, but in 

an adjacent normal metal (N) layer. It first appears at the onset of superconductivity and 

increases as the temperature is lowered. This remote induced magnetic moment also exhibits a 

spin-valve effect: a significant change in magnitude (~20 times) depending on the mutual 

orientation of magnetization in the F layers in the NSFF multilayered structure. The effect almost 

disappears when switching the spin-valve into a collinear state of the F layers’ magnetization, 

when LRTC are absent. This shows that LRTC in the ferromagnetic regions are a crucial 

ingredient contributing to the effect. 

For our experiments we use superconducting spin-valve structures Au(x) / Nb(50) / Co(2.4) / 

Nb(3) / Co(1.2) / IrMn(4) / Co(3) / Ta(7.5) / Si-substrate with numbers indicating the layer 


thicknesses in nm and x = 5 or 70. They consist of an S/F interface with an additional N layer 

atop the S, as well as a second F layer separated from the first by a thin normal metal spacer (n) 

creating a NSFnF device, shown schematically in Fig.1 (see supplementary information for more 

details of our spin valves). In our devices the exchange field of the outer F layer (Co(1.2)), can 

be pinned magnetically, by using an anti-ferromagnet (IrMn), while retaining easy manipulation 

of the other F layer (Co(2.4)). This enables us to control the angle between the two F 

magnetizations and thus to explore the inverse proximity effect in both the orthogonal 

configuration as well as the collinear configuration. In other words to examine the (possible) 

induction of magnetic moments when the LRTC are present (noncollinear configuration) and 

compare it with the case where they are absent (collinear configuration). A dependence of Tc on 

the magnetic configuration in such structures has been proposed21 and measured22-24. For the case 

of a strongly spin-polarised ferromagnet, due to appearance of the new LRTC channel for 

drainage of Cooper pairs from the S to the F layers, the change of 𝑇𝑐 between the collinear and 

perpendicular configuration may be much more pronounced than between parallel and 

antiparallel alignment24.  

To study the flux profile 𝐵(𝑦) as a function of depth 𝑦 in our superconducting spin-valves we 

use LE-μSR at low temperatures (3-10 K). During a muon experiment, low energy spin-1/2 

muons (~4-26 keV) are implanted into the sample at normal incidence to the sample surface. The 

actual implantation profile depends on the muon energy (see Fig.1) and can be accurately 

calculated using Monte Carlo simulations25. Once implanted, the muon spin starts to precess 

around the local field direction with a frequency that is proportional to the local field strength, 

before it eventually decays and emits a positron preferentially along its momentary muon spin 

direction, allowing the time evolution of the muon spin to be monitored. LE-μSR is an 


exquisitely sensitive technique with which to determine the local flux density with a spatial 

resolution better than the coherence lengths involved. We compare the flux profile 𝐵(𝑦) obtained 

above and below the superconducting transition temperature in order to study the remote 

proximity effect and to demonstrate its connection to superconductivity. 

A typical approach to fitting the muon data for a particular implantation energy is to use standard 

model functions characterized by the average flux 〈𝐵〉 across that stopping profile25. Repeating 

this for a range of implantation energies, each corresponding to a different average depth 〈𝑦〉 into 

the sample, provides a good indication of the spatial dependence of 〈𝐵〉(〈𝑦〉). A more 

sophisticated approach to modelling involves combining information from all implantation 

energies and fitting simultaneously to a common 𝐵(𝑦) describing the actual flux profile across 

the sample depth24 while taking into account the full stopping profiles of the muons. A series of 

measurements were made, varying the implantation energy at fixed temperatures, allowing both 

types of analysis to be performed (see supplementary information for more details on the data 

treatment). 

The main results of the analysis of our LE-μSR data are presented in Fig.2A. The induced 

magnetic profile 𝐵(𝑦) is presented as a function of position for orthogonal and collinear 

arrangements, determined both above (𝑇 = 10 K) and below (𝑇 = 3 K) the superconducting 

transition temperature (𝑇𝑐~7.5 K). Above 𝑇𝑐 the magnetic profile obtained, for both 

arrangements, is approximately constant at the external field of 150 G. However, upon cooling to 

below 𝑇𝑐 a sudden appearance of a magnetic induction in the Au layer is obtained for the 

orthogonal arrangement, which almost completely disappears in the collinear arrangement (in 

our experiments we probe the parallel aligned collinear state). Additionally, inside the 

superconductor no observable change is detected for either magnetic state, thus indicating that 


the Meissner screening is unobservably small. This is consistent with earlier findings20, reflecting 

both the thinness of the superconducting layer and the strong suppression of the superconducting 

order parameter by proximity to ferromagnetism. Fig.2B shows a comparison between both types 

of modelling, where the 〈𝐵〉(〈𝑦〉) obtained for each individual dataset (square symbols) are 

compared to the calculated values from the results shown in Fig.2A (solid lines). The generally 

good agreement shows the obtained 𝐵(𝑦) is indeed a good representation of the actual magnetic 

profile (see supplementary information for more details of alternative fitting functions). When 

comparing the behavior in the superconducting and normal states, the results can be summarized 

as follows. 1) A magnetization is induced in the normal metal with a sign opposite to the 

magnetization direction of the free F-layer (since it subtracts from the applied field of 150 G), 

which decays away towards the surface of the sample on a scale ~20 nm. 2) This effect is clearly 

visible in the orthogonal arrangement but diminishes (by a factor of 20) for the collinear 

arrangement. 3) Unexpectedly, no induced magnetization is observable in the superconducting 

layer. All these facts are inconsistent with the theory14-16 of the inverse (magnetic) proximity 

effect. 

The temperature dependence of this effect which disappears above 𝑇𝑐 shows a clear correlation 

with the onset of superconductivity (see Fig.2C). This demonstrates that the S layer, itself not 

being spin-polarized, nevertheless provides this nonlocal magnetic effect. To further examine 

this absence of induced moment in the superconductor we measure a sample with a much thinner 

(5 nm) normal metal cap but otherwise identical to the sample from Fig.2A, in the orthogonal 

arrangement. This allows the superconductor layer to be probed directly without mixing in a 

large contribution from the N cap. No difference in the field profiles with temperature is 

observed for muon energies that probe the sample up to the interface with the F layer (see Fig.3). 


Nevertheless a small contribution of an additional positive magnetization (along the external 

magnetic field) was detected at the highest muon energy where muons also stop in the FnF 

region which thus contributes to the signal. 

Current theories do not account for our observed effect, and two main facts require explanation: 

1) the remote magnetization provided by superconductivity of the interlayer, and 2) its 

dependence on the mutual orientation of the F layers magnetization. Here we propose potential 

mechanisms to understand these results (see supplementary information for further details). The 

first question to address is how a thick superconducting layer, itself not being magnetized, may 

provide the transfer of magnetization (or spin polarization) from the FnF region to the N layer. 

We envisage two possibilities: the first being spin transfer by crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) 

and elastic co-tunneling (EC)26 and the second being spin transfer by pure spin currents. The 

former involves spin-singlet pairs either being formed from electrons originating from the 

interfaces at opposite sides of the S layer (CAR) or being used to effectively transfer an electron 

from one of the interfaces to the other interface (EC). The alternative involves flows of spin-

triplet pairs (and is thus a direct consequence of having LRTC in the system) where a net flow of 

spin-up electron pairs moving from one side of the S layer to the other side is cancelled by an 

opposing flow of spin-down electron pairs. These mechanisms are illustrated in Fig.4. 

The second question to address is the observed spin-valve effect: the disappearance of the remote 

magnetization together with the LRTC at the collinear magnetic configuration. To transfer the 

observed negative magnetization into the N layer by the CAR or EC mechanism, some negative 

spin accumulation must exist near the S/F interface. Spin accumulation itself appears as a result 

of spin current decay27 (it could also be ascribed to the inverse proximity effect14 but since that 

wouldn’t result in spin-valve behavior, we exclude it as a candidate mechanism). It was shown 


that spin currents, both normal28 and superconducting29-30, appear in FnF spin-valves with 

noncollinear spin alignment (where LRTC are present), even in an unbiased structure, but 

disappear in the collinear geometry (where LRTC are absent). Thus spontaneous spin currents in 

the FnF region can lead to spin accumulation in the N layer by CAR and EC processes. 

In conclusion, our results demonstrate that the induced magnetization is directly connected to the 

presence of the LRTC, can be experimentally controlled by switching magnetization or 

temperature, and appears remotely (> 50 nm) from the interfaces that generate these spin triplet 

correlations. This motivates a re-evaluation of the theoretical mechanism leading to the 

observation of a measureable magnetization generated by spin triplets. In such spin valves large-

scale superconducting correlations together with spin-singlet – spin-triplet conversion provide 

this nonlocal magnetic effect. Our experiments demonstrate that a significant magnetization can 

be generated in a normal metal due to its proximity to a superconducting source, attributable to a 

spin triplet spin current that is controlled by a magnetic switch. This involves no charge current 

and no driving voltage. The magnetization in the N metal can only arise due to a net 

accumulation of excess spin. The separation of charge and spin currents and the induction of spin 

polarized electrons are building blocks of spintronic devices and our experiments provide a novel 

mechanism by which such devices might be realized. 

 
 


Methods 

Sample fabrication. Samples were prepared by dc magnetron sputtering at a base pressure of 

10-8 mbar. Layers were grown in situ on Si(100) substrates at ambient temperature at a typical 

growth rate of 0.2 nms-1. The layout of our spin-valves is Au(x) / Nb(50) / Co(2.4) / Nb(3) / 

Co(1.2) / IrMn(4) / Co(3) / Ta(7.5) / Si-substrate with numbers giving the layer thickness in nm 

and x = 5 or 70. Growth was performed in the presence of a homogeneous magnetic field at the 

sample to establish the magnetic pinning of the Co layers adjacent to the IrMn, where the bottom 

Co layer is needed to set the initial direction for the IrMn to be pinned. The Ta buffer layer is to 

improve growth quality and the Au capping layer has a dual purpose. It protects the sample from 

oxidation and, depending on its thickness, allows the muons to either probe the Nb layer directly 

(5 nm Au cap) or to probe the observed proximity effect in the Au layer (70 nm Au cap). 

 

LE-µSR measurements. The low energy muon spin rotation (LE-µSR) experiments have been 

carried out at the µE4/low energy muon (LEM) beamline31 of the Swiss Muon Source as 

described in SI 3.1. For all measurements the applied field was oriented in the sample plane, 

either perpendicular to the pinning direction (orthogonal arrangement) or aligned with the 

pinning direction (collinear arrangement). The field used to attain saturation of the free Co layer 

was 150G. Temperature scans at fixed muon implantation energy were performed over a 

temperature range of 3 to 20K, while energy scans were made both above Tc as well as below Tc. 

Typically 2 to 6 million muon decay events were counted for each muon experiment. 

 
 


References 

1. Linder, J. & Robinson, J.W.A. Superconducting spintronics. Nature Physics 11, 307 (2015). 

2. Eschrig, M. Spin-polarized supercurrents for spintronics. Physics Today 64, 43 (2011). 

3. Buzdin, A.I. Proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures. Rev. Mod. 

Phys. 77, 935 (2005). 

4. Jiang, J.S., Davidović, D., Reich, D.H. & Chien, C.L. Oscillatory superconducting transition 

temperature in Nb/Gd multilayers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 314 (1995). 

5. Ryazanov, V.V. et al., Coupling of two superconductors through a ferromagnet: evidence for 

a π junction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2427 (2001). 

6. Kontos, T. et al., Josephson junction through a thin ferromagnetic layer: negative coupling. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 137007 (2002). 

7. Demler, E.A., Arnold, G.B. & Beasley, M.R. Superconducting proximity effects in magnetic 

metals. Phys. Rev. B. 55, 15174 (1997). 

8. Bergeret, F.S., Volkov, A.F. & Efetov, K.B. Odd triplet superconductivity and related 

phenomena in superconductor-ferromagnet structures. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1321 (2005). 

9. Kadigrobov, A., Shekhter, R.I. & Jonson, M. Quantum spin fluctuations as a source of long-

range proximity effects in diffusive ferromagnet-superconductor structures. Europhys. Lett. 
54, 394 (2001). 

10. Eschrig, M., Kopu, J., Cuevas, J.C. & Schön, G. Theory of half-metal/superconductor 

heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 137003 (2003). 

11. Keizer, R.S. et al., A spin triplet supercurrent through the half-metallic ferromagnet CrO2. 

Nature 439, 825 (2006). 

12. Robinson, J.W.A., Witt, J.D.S. & Blamire, M.G. Controlled injection of spin-triplet 

supercurrents into a strong ferromagnet. Science 329, 59 (2010). 

13. Khaire, T.S., Khasawneh, M.A., Pratt Jr., W.P. & Birge, N.O. Observation of spin-triplet 

superconductivity in Co-based Josephson junctions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 137002 (2010). 

14. Bergeret, F.S., Volkov, A.F. & Efetov, K.B. Induced ferromagnetism due to 

superconductivity in superconductor-ferromagnet structures. Phys. Rev. B 69, 174504 (2004). 

15. Löfwander, T., Champel, T., Durst, J. & Eschrig, M. Interplay of magnetic and 

superconducting proximity effects in ferromagnet-superconductor-ferromagnet trilayers. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 187003 (2005). 

16. Pugach, N.G. & Buzdin, A.I. Magnetic moment manipulation by triplet Josephson current. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 242602 (2012). 

17. Salikhov, R.I. et al., Experimental observation of the spin screening effect in 

superconductor/ferromagnet thin film heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 087003 (2009). 

18. Xia, J., Shelukhin, V., Karpovski, M., Kapitulnik, A. & Palevski, A. Inverse proximity effect 

in superconductor-ferromagnet bilayer structures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 087004 (2009). 


19. Khaydukov, Yu.N. et al., On the feasibility to study inverse proximity effect in a single S/F 

bilayer by polarized neutron reflectometry. JETP Lett. 98, 116 (2013). 

20. Flokstra, M.G. et al., Measurement of the spatial extent of inverse proximity in a Py/Nb/Py 

superconducting trilayer using low-energy muon-spin rotation. Phys. Rev. B 89, 054510 
(2014). 

21. Fominov, Ya.V. et al., Superconducting triplet spin valve. JETP Lett. 91, 308 (2010). 

22. Leksin, P.V. et al., Evidence for triplet superconductivity in a superconductor-ferromagnet 

spin valve. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 057005 (2012). 

23. Zhu, L.Y. et al., Unanticipated proximity behavior in ferromagnet-superconductor 

heterostructures with controlled magnetic noncollinearity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 177001 
(2013). 

24. Flokstra, M.G. et al., Controlled suppression of superconductivity by the generation of 

polarized Cooper pairs in spin-valve structures. Phys. Rev. B 91, 060501(R) (2015). 

25. Bakule, P. & Morenzoni, E. Generation and applications of slow polarized muons. 

Contemporary Physics 45, 203 (2004). 

26. Noh, T., Houzet, M., Meyer, J.S. & Chandrasekhar, V. Nonlocal spin correlations mediated 

by a superconductor. Phys. Rev. B 87, 220502(R) (2013). 

27. Sears, M.R. & Saslow, W.M. Spin accumulation at ferromagnet/nonmagnetic material 

interfaces. Phys. Rev. B 85, 014404 (2012). 

28. Manchon, A., Ryzhanova, N., Vedyayev, A., Chschiev, M. & Dieny, B. Description of 

current-driven torques in magnetic tunnel junctions. J. Phys: Condens. Matter 20, 145208 
(2008). 

29. Grein, R., Eschrig, M., Metalidis, G. & Schön, G. Spin-dependent Cooper pair phase and 

pure spin supercurrents in strongly polarized ferromagnets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 227005 
(2009). 

30. Alidoust, M., Linder, J., Rashedi, G., Yokoyama, T. & Sudbø, A. Spin-polarized Josephson 

current in superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor junctions with inhomogeneous 
magnetization. Phys. Rev. B. 81, 014512 (2010). 

31. Prokscha, T. et al., The new µE4 beam at PSI: A hybrid-type large acceptance channel for 

the generation of a high intensity surface-muon beam. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 595, 317 (2008). 

 
 


Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge the support of the EPSRC through Grants No. EP/J01060X, No. EP/J010626/1, 

No. EP/J010650/1, No. EP/J010634/1, and No. EP/J010618/1, support of a studentship supported 

by JEOL Europe and the ISIS Neutron and Muon Source, and the support of the RFBR via 

awards No. 13-02-01452-a, and No. 14-02-90018 Bel-a. All muon experiments were undertaken 

courtesy of the Paul Scherer Institute. 

 

Author contributions 

J.K. and G.B developed the samples; M.G.F., S.L.L., N.S., J.F.K.C, H.L. and T.P. performed the 

muon measurements where H.L., A.S. and T.P. provided the beamline support; M.G.F., S.L.L., 

N.S., J.F.K.C., P.J.C., S.J.B., C.J.K. and S.L. performed various support and characterization 

measurements; A.I., N.P. and M.E. provided theoretical interpretation of the data and helped 

writing the paper; G.B. and M.E. helped designing the study; M.G.F. and S.L.L. designed the 

study, analysed data and wrote the paper. All authors discussed the results and commented on the 

manuscript.  

 

Competing financial interests  

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 
 


 

Fig. 1. Sample architecture and experimental arrangement. Schematic of the sample 

architecture (NSFnF), centered between the positron detectors within a homogeneous applied 

field (Hext) along the z-direction. The momentum (p) of the incoming muon (µ) is normal to the 

sample plane (along the y-direction) and its initial spin (s) points towards the left positron 

detector. The direction of the exchange field of the (free) F layer closest to the S layer is 

saturated along the applied field direction, while the second (pinned) F layer is always directed 

along the pinning direction from the anti-ferromagnet (Hpin). The sample orientations used were 

either with Hpin aligned with Hext (collinear arrangement) or perpendicular to it (orthogonal 

arrangement). Muon stopping profiles are overlayed on the front face of the sample to indicate 

the probability distribution for muons with increasing energies between 4 to 24 keV with 4 keV 

steps. The higher the energy the further the muons penetrate on average into the sample, but this 

also broadens the profile. Up to 12 keV all muons stop within the N layer and only for higher 

energies an increasing fraction stops within the S layer. 

 
 


 

Fig. 2. Fit results to LE-µSR data on the NSFnF architecture. (A) The magnetic flux 

profile 𝐵(𝑦) obtained from fitting all data simultaneously (at fixed temperature), for both the 

collinear (∥) and orthogonal (⊥) arrangement. Red for 𝑇 = 10 K and blue for 𝑇 = 3 K. For the 

latter an exponentially decaying model function was used while the former is taken to be 

constant. (B) The average magnetic flux 〈𝐵〉(〈𝑦〉) obtained from fitting each dataset individually 

(i.e. the conventional treatment) compared to the calculated values from the profiles of (A). Top 

axis shows the corresponding muon energies of the data points. (C) Temperature dependence of 

the average flux 〈𝐵〉 in the orthogonal arrangement, taken at a muon energy of 12 keV (muon 

stopping profile displayed in inset) to ensure all muons stopped in the Au layer. 

 
 


 

Fig. 3. Thin Au cap sample. The difference of the induced magnetic flux at 𝑇 = 3 K and that at 

𝑇 = 10 K for the NSFnF architecture with a very thin 5 nm N (Au) cap in the orthogonal 

arrangement (displayed with muon stopping profiles overlayed on the front face). The highest 

energy (12 keV) includes contributions from the n-spacer. It is only in the region of the FnF 

interface that any difference is detected between above and below 𝑇𝑐. 

 
 


 

Fig. 4. Spin-transfer mechanisms. Schematic of the proposed mechanisms to transfer spin 

across the superconductor (S) with gap energy Δ when there is a spin accumulation in the 

ferromagnet (F) resulting in a shift between the chemical potentials µ of the spin up and spin 

down band. (A) During a crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) a singlet Cooper pair (CP) is created 

from an electron at energy +𝛆 with spin down (+𝛆↓) originating from the F layer and an electron 

at energy −𝛆 with spin up (−𝛆↑) originating from the normal metal (N) layer (blue arrows). CAR 

can also annihilate a CP by donating electron +𝛆↓ into the N and −𝛆↑ into the F layer (red 

arrows). (B) During an elastic co-tunneling (EC) process a singlet CP attracts electron +𝛆↓ from 

the F layer while simultaneously donating its own +𝛆↓ electron into the N layer (blue arrows). 

EC can also attract electron −𝛆↑ from the N layer and donate its own −𝛆↑ electron into the F 

layer (red arrows). (C) A flow of polarized (triplet) Cooper pairs can transfer spin across the S 

layer, without generating a moment inside the S layer. Triplet pairs of +𝛆↓ electrons move from 

the F to the N layer while an equal flow of triplet pairs of −𝛆↑ electrons move from the N to the 

F layer. 


