Observation of universal strong orbital-dependent 

correlation effects in iron chalcogenides 

M. Yi1,2†, Z.-K. Liu1,2†, Y. Zhang1,3†, R. Yu4,5, J.-X. Zhu6, J. J. Lee1,2, R. G. Moore1, F. T. 

Schmitt1, W. Li1, S. C. Riggs1,2, J.-H. Chu7, B. Lv8, J. Hu9, M. Hashimoto10, S.-K. Mo3, Z. 

Hussain3, Z. Q. Mao9, C. W. Chu8, I. R. Fisher1,2, Q. Si5, Z.-X. Shen1,2*, and D. H. Lu10* 

1Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory 

and Stanford University, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 

2Departments of Physics and Applied Physics, and Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, 

Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA 

3Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 

4Department of Physics, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China 

5Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA 

6Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA 

7Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 

8Department of Physics, Texas Center for Superconductivity, University of Houston, Houston, 

Texas 77204, USA 

9Department of Physics and Engineering Physics, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisianna 

70118, USA 

10Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo 

Park, California 94025, USA 

†These authors contributed equally. 

*To whom correspondence should be addressed: dhlu@slac.stanford.edu and zxshen@stanford.edu 


2 

Establishing the appropriate theoretical framework for unconventional superconductivity 

in the iron-based materials requires correct understanding of both the electron correlation 

strength and the role of Fermi surfaces. This fundamental issue becomes especially relevant 

with the discovery of the iron chalcogenide superconductors. Here, we use angle-resolved 

photoemission spectroscopy to measure three representative iron chalcogenides, 

FeTe0.56Se0.44, monolayer FeSe grown on SrTiO3, and K0.76Fe1.72Se2. We show that these 

superconductors are all strongly correlated, with an orbital-selective strong 

renormalization in the dxy bands despite having drastically different Fermi surface 

topologies. Furthermore, raising temperature brings all three compounds from a metallic 

state to a phase where the dxy orbital loses all spectral weight while other orbitals remain 

itinerant. These observations establish that iron chalcogenides display universal orbital-

selective strong correlations that are insensitive to the Fermi surface topology, and are 

close to an orbital-selective Mott phase, hence placing strong constraints for theoretical 

understanding of iron-based superconductors. 

 

Introduction 

Since the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in the iron pnictides (FePn), 

extensive research efforts have revealed many common properties of these materials. In the vast 

material base of the FePns, all parent phases are metallic, and the observed electronic structures 

are largely consistent with the prediction of ab initio LDA calculations1-2. These properties have 

led to theoretical understanding that the electron correlations in FePns are much weaker than in 

cuprate superconductors, whose parent phases are Mott insulators. Furthermore, the observation 

of comparable sized hole pockets at the Brillouin zone (BZ) centre and electron pockets at the 


3 

BZ corner have resulted in the proposal that such a FS topology is ubiquitous and essential to 

superconductivity in iron pnictides, and pairing in the iron pnictides is mediated by 

antiferromagnetic fluctuations via Fermi surface (FS) nesting between the hole and electron 

Fermi pockets3. On the other hand, there have also been theoretical proposals of ‘incipient Mott 

localization’ for which the system is metallic but on the verge of localization4-6, supported by the 

normal state bad metal behaviour from optical conductivity measurements7 and the large 

fluctuating magnetic moment comparable to the antiferromagnetic insulating copper oxides8. 

This discussion became especially relevant with the more recent discovery of iron chalcogenides 

(FeChs)9-11, which not only possess large local magnetic moments12 and insulating phases13, but 

also include compounds that lack hole pockets needed for FS nesting yet have comparable TC’s 

as FePns14-17. 

There are currently three major classes of FeCh superconductors: FeTe1-xSex, KxFe2-ySe2, 

and FeSe film grown on SrTiO3. In the FeTe1-xSex family, superconductivity is achieved with 

isovalent substitution of Se for Te that suppresses magnetic order in the FeTe end18, and becomes 

optimal in FeTe0.56Se0.44 (FTS), where TC is 14.5 K. The KxFe2-ySe2 family has in its phase 

diagram insulating phases with magnetic moments as large as 3.3µB/Fe10,12-13, and optimal TC is 

32 K, such as achieved in K0.76Fe1.72Se2 (KFS). FeSe film grown on SrTiO3 is the latest addition 

to the FeCh family, with monolayer film (FS/STO) having a record TC possibly exceeding 65 

K11,16-17. In a previous angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study19 on KFS, we 

found the low temperature state to be a metallic state with orbital-dependent renormalization—

where the dxy orbital dominated bands are strongly renormalized as compared to other orbitals. 

Raising temperature drives the material to an orbital-selective Mott phase (OSMP) in which the 

dxy orbital completely loses spectral weight while other orbitals remain itinerant. Subsequently, 


4 

such a temperature scale was also identified by THz spectroscopy20, Hall measurements21 and 

pump-probe spectroscopy22, where the slight temperature scale variations are due to the different 

definitions used. This motivates the usage of orbital selectivity to address the fundamental open 

question of whether it is the electron correlation strength or the nature of the FS that plays a 

predominant role in the microscopic physics of the FeCh materials. 

In this work, we study systematically the optimal superconducting members of the three 

FeCh families, FTS, KFS, and FS/STO, using ARPES. We show that, in the low temperature 

state, in contrast to the FePns, all of the FeChs are in a strongly correlated regime where strong 

orbital-selective renormalization is observed on the dxy bands, despite having drastically different 

FS topologies. In addition, by increasing temperature, all of the FeChs crossover into a phase 

where the dxy orbital completely loses spectral weight while other orbitals remain metallic. These 

observations showcase the universally strong orbital-selective electron correlations in the FeChs, 

and that the superconductivity in the FeChs, which is insensitive to FS topology, occurs in 

proximity to an orbital-selective Mott phase, placing strong constraints on the theoretical 

understanding of the iron-based superconductors. 

 

Results 

Orbital-selective band renormalization at low temperatures 

The generic electronic structure of iron-based superconductors (FeSC) consists of three 

hole bands at the BZ centre, Γ, and two electron bands at the BZ corner, M. The hole bands are 

predominantly of dxz, dyz, and dxy orbital characters, while the electron bands are dxz and dxy along 

Γ-M. The relative positions of these bands with respect to each other as well as to the Fermi level 

(EF) could vary with differences in lattice parameters and doping level. Hence, the Fermi surface 


5 

topology among different FeSCs could be qualitatively different, as shown in Fig. 1a-d, where 

the Fermi pockets at the BZ centre vary from being hole-like to non-existent to electron-like. The 

measured band structure along the Γ-M high symmetry direction for the three compounds are 

shown in Fig. 1e-g, in comparison to that for the optimally Co-doped BaFe2As2 (BFCA) (Fig. 

1h), an iron pnictide as a reference. For FTS (Fig. 1i), one of the hole bands crosses EF, and both 

electron bands cross EF at M, resulting in roughly compensated hole pocket at Γ and electron 

pockets at M (Fig. 1a), consistent with isovalent substitution for this compound. For both 

FS/STO (Fig. 1j) and,KFS (Fig. 1k) in contrast, only the electron bands cross EF while the hole 

band tops are well below EF, with an additional small electron pocket at Γ in KFS. Thus, there is 

heavy electron doping in both compounds as reflected in a Fermi surface topology consisting 

only of electron pockets (Fig. 1b-c). Comparing the band structure of the three FeChs to the 

FePns, we notice a significant difference near the M point—there is an apparent gap between the 

bottom of the electron bands and the top of the hole band in all three FeChs, in sharp contrast to 

BFCA (Fig. 1l), in which the dxz electron band bottom is degenerate with the dyz hole band top.  

Generally in FeSC, this degeneracy between the dxz electron band bottom and dyz hole 

band top at the zone corner is protected by the C4 rotational symmetry, as seen in BFCA (Fig. 1l) 

and corresponding LDA calculations (Fig. 2a). This degeneracy is only lifted with the breaking 

of C4 symmetry, as in the orthorhombic phase of underdoped BFCA23, NaFeAs24-25, bulk FeSe26-

29, and multilayer FeSe film30-31, where a splitting between the corresponding dxz bands and dyz 

bands occurs, in addition to a doubling of the bands from twinning effects due to the 

orthorhombic distortion. However, no static C4 symmetry breaking has been reported for any of 

the FeChs studied here, nor are twinning effects observed here that is expected from a broken 

symmetry due to orthorhombic distortion. Rather, this apparent gap can be explained by a strong 


6 

orbital-dependent band renormalization and band hybridization. As the schematic shown in Fig. 

2, the LDA calculated dxy electron band bottom is deeper than that of the dxz band. If the dxy 

orbital is strongly renormalized compared to the other orbitals, the dxy electron band bottom, i.e., 

the corresponding dxy hole band top, would rise above that of the dxz electron band (Fig. 2b). The 

heavily renormalized dxy hole band then crosses the dxz electron band and the two bands 

hybridize such that a gap appears at the M point without lifting the dxz/dyz degeneracy protected 

by C4 symmetry (Fig. 2c). Evidence for two nearly degenerate electron bands can be seen in the 

high resolution spectra acquired on FS/STO (Fig. 3a). As an aside, we note that in the 

unrenormalized case (Fig. 2a), a hybridization gap between the dxy electron band and dyz hole 

band is not observed. This is because when considering the hopping via the chalcogen atoms 

along this high symmetry direction (x), both dxy and dxz are odd while dyz is even. Hence dxy does 

not mix with dyz to produce a hybridization gap32. 

This interpretation is further supported by the observed strong renormalization of the dxy 

hole band near Γ, which is significantly more renormalized than the dxz/dyz hole bands, clearly 

seen in all three compounds (Fig. 1i-k). For FTS, the dxy hole band is strongly renormalized by a 

factor of ~16 compared to LDA calculations, while dxz and dyz bands are only renormalized by 

factors of ~4. Moreover, in the FeTe1-xSex family, it has been found that the dxy band 

renormalization factor strongly increases towards the FeTe end compared to that of dxz/dyz, 

further revealing the strong orbital-dependence in the itinerant to localized crossover in this 

system33. For KFS, the dxy hole band is renormalized by a factor of ~10 compared to the factor of 

~3 for dxz/dyz bands19. This is even more apparent in FS/STO, where enhanced dxy orbital matrix 

elements in the second BZ shows the nearly flat dxy hole band extending towards the bottom of 

the shallow electron bands at M with a noticeable hybridization gap (Fig. 3b). In contrast, in 


7 

BFCA, the renormalization factor for dxy hole band is comparable to that of the dxz/dyz hole bands 

(2~3)2, as can be seen in the band slopes in the second derivative plot (Fig. 1l). In summary, all 

three FeCh systems show much stronger renormalization in the dxy orbital compared to the dxz/dyz 

orbitals in the low temperature state, in contrast to the FePns. Here we would like to note that 

while ARPES is a surface-sensitive probe, the universal orbital-selective renormalization among 

the FeChs despite their different structure and surface terminations indicate that these properties 

must represent the bulk, rather than a result of extrinsic variation of surface properties  

Temperature dependence 

Next, by raising temperature sufficiently high, we notice that in all three FeCh systems, 

the dxy orbital-dominated bands lose spectral weight completely (Fig. 4), as reported previously 

for KFS19. This can be seen first in the disappearance of the shallow dxy hole band near the Γ 

point. In the low temperature state of FTS, the dxy hole band crosses the dyz hole band near Γ, and 

a small hybridization gap appears as can be seen in the discontinuous intensity pattern of the 

strong dyz hole band (Fig. 4a). At high temperature, this discontinuity disappears as only the dxz 

and dyz hole bands remain (Fig. 4d). In KFS, the nearly flat dxy hole band in the low temperature 

state is entirely above the dxz/dyz hole band tops (Fig. 4c), and clearly disappears at high 

temperatures (Fig. 4f). The second evidence for the disappearance of dxy orbital at high 

temperatures is the vanishing of the apparent gap between the electron band bottom and the dyz 

hole band top at M. As shown in the schematic (Fig. 4g-h), when the dxy band disappears, its 

hybridization gap with the dxz electron band naturally vanishes, recovering the deeper non-

hybridized dxz electron band whose bottom is degenerate with the dyz hole band top as expected. 

This is clearly seen in the high temperature data in all three systems (Fig. 4d-f). Here we note 

that while KFS is known to have phase separation issues with the existence of superconducting 


8 

regions and insulating regions19, FTS and FS/STO, on the other hand, do not have such 

complication. Hence the universal behaviour of vanishing dxy spectral weight with raised 

temperature observed here reflects an intrinsic effect rather than a result of intricate phase 

separation in KFS. 

To examine this temperature dependence more carefully, we have quantitatively analysed 

the spectral weight of each FeCh system. For FTS, we track the dxy hole band slightly away from 

the Γ point where it is well separated from the dyz hole band (Fig. 5a). From the energy 

distribution curve (EDC) at this momentum, we fit Gaussian peaks for both dxy hole band near EF 

and dyz hole band at higher energies, along with a Shirley background (Fig. 5d), and track the 

integrated spectral weight of the dxy and dyz peaks as a function of temperature. Comparing these 

two orbitals, we see that the dxy spectral weight drops to zero around 110 K, in contrast to a very 

weak decrease of the dyz spectral weight. This is very similar to the situation in FS/STO and 

KFS, where we track the spectral weight of the dxy orbital at the dxy electron band bottom at M. 

For KFS, the fitted peak area precipitously drops around 100 K, and approaches zero above 180 

K (Fig. 5i). For FS/STO, the dxy spectral weight approaches zero above 150 K while that of the 

dyz orbital remains finite (Fig. 5h), demonstrating the orbital-dependence of this temperature 

evolution. 

Theoretical calculations 

For all three FeCh superconductors studied, two observations are universal: i) strong 

orbital-dependent renormalization at low temperatures, ii) disappearance of dxy spectral weight 

with raised temperatures. Theoretically, these behaviours can be understood in proximity to an 

OSMP, as predicted by both a slave-spin mean-field method34 and dynamical mean field theory 

method35 taking into account sufficiently strong intra-orbital Coulomb repulsion U and Hund's 


9 

coupling J. These works show that the FeChs are close to an OSMP in which the dxy orbital is 

completely Mott localized while the other orbitals remain itinerant, and that a temperature scale 

could be identified where the dxy orbital loses coherence and spectral weight, together with its 

hybridization to the other orbitals.  

The orbital-selectivity arises from two factors19,34. The crystal field splitting of the 

tetragonal lattice makes the dxy orbital energy level higher than that of dxz/dyz. Because the 

threshold interaction for the Mott transition is larger for degenerate orbitals than for non-

degenerate orbitals36, it is easier to localize the dxy electrons. The tendency towards OSMP is 

further enhanced when the projected bandwidth is different37, as is the case here with the dxy 

band being narrower than the dxz/dyz bands. When the material is sufficiently close to such an 

OSMP, the dxy mass renormalization is much stronger than that of other orbitals, as observed in 

the low temperature state of the FeChs. For the system to be close to this OSMP, it must exhibit 

strong electron correlations, which from the two theoretical studies is shown to be a combined 

result of Coulomb interactions U and Hund's coupling J. 

Among the three FeChs, FTS is undoped, with n = 6, while FS/STO and KFS are electron 

doped, with n = 6.12 and 6.15, as estimated from Fermi surface volume counting. Fig. 6 shows 

our calculated transition temperatures into the OSMP versus U phase diagrams for systematic 

dopings from n = 6 to 6.15. The blue shading indicates the dxy quasiparticle spectral weight, Zxy, 

for each doping. When Zxy drops to zero, the system enters the OSMP. This transition boundary 

is marked by solid blue lines in Fig. 6. Furthermore, we see that for and only for integer filling, n 

= 6 in the calculated doping range, there exists a Mott Insulator (MI) phase (marked by a red 

line), where all orbitals become Mott localized with sufficiently large U. With increasing 

electron filling, the critical U for the system entering the OSMP at a given temperature shifts to 


10 

larger values, as can be seen by tracing the blue lines at both 10 K and 240 K, indicating that 

electron doping brings the system away from the OSMP. This is consistent with the observation 

that the temperature at which the dxy spectral weight disappears increases from FTS (110 K) to 

the doped FS/STO (150 K) and KFS (180 K). Here we note that the resistivity for the FeTe1-xSex 

family exhibits a weak hump18 suggestive of a crossover from insulating-like to metallic-like 

behaviour much like the case of KFS10, and this crossover temperature scale shifts to lower value 

with decreasing x, consistent with the stronger renormalization values towards the FeTe end33 

and the understanding that the low temperature state of FeTe end sits closer to the OSMP. 

 

Discussion 

The strong orbital-selective behaviour in the FeCh family is a manifestation of its strong 

electron correlations, and suggests that they may serve as a bridge between the strongly 

correlated cuprates as doped Mott insulators and the weaker correlated FePns that are more 

itinerant. The OSMP of the FeChs can only occur when the overall electron correlations are 

strong. In that sense, the existence of an OSMP indicates the presence of strong correlations, 

such that the system is in proximity to a Mott transition. The latter links these materials to the 

cuprates, where optimal superconductivity develops not too far from a Mott insulating state. The 

linkage can be made more explicit by the Hunds-coupling-induced suppression of the interorbital 

coupling in the case of the iron-based materials19,34,38. This is relevant to the current discussion 

on the pairing mechanism of FeSC in both KFS and FS/STO as the lack of hole pockets do not 

seem to prevent them from superconducting at temperatures comparable to or even higher than 

FePns, which is unexpected from a weak-coupling Fermi surface nesting picture3. In a recent 

theoretical study39, it has been shown that under a strong-coupling approach, where the driving 


11 

force for pairing comes from the close-neighbour exchange interactions, the pairing strength can 

be comparable in the FeChs and FePns, as they approach a Mott transition by increasing 

exchange interaction in the former and reducing the renormalized bandwidth in the latter. The 

observed universal strong correlation in the FeChs and proximity to an OSMP here supports such 

a scenario.  

 

 

Methods 

Sample Growth 

High quality single crystals of K0.76Fe1.72Se2 and FeTe0.56Se0.44 were grown using the flux 

method19,40. Monolayer FeSe films were grown on SrTiO3 using molecular beam epitaxy17.  

ARPES Measurements 

ARPES measurements were carried out at beamline 5-4 of the Stanford Synchrotron 

Radiation Lightsource and beamline 10.0.1 of the Advanced Light Source using SCIENTA 

R4000 electron analyzers. The total energy resolution was set to 10 meV and the angular 

resolution was 0.3˚. Single crystals were cleaved in situ at 10 K for each measurement. The FeSe 

films were transported to the beamline under vacuum and further annealed before measurements. 

All measurements were done in ultra high vacuum with a base pressure lower than 4x10-11 torr.  

Theoretical Calculations 

The theoretical calculations were done using a slave-spin mean-field method on a five-

orbital Hubbard model34, with tight-binding parameters for FTS. Hund’s J is fixed at 0.6 eV. 

 

References 


12 

1. Lu, D. H. et al., Electronic structure of the iron-based superconductor LaOFeP. Nature 455, 

81-84 (2008). 

2. Yi, M. et al., Electronic structure of the BaFe2As2 family of iron-pnictide superconductors. 

Phys. Rev. B 80, 024515 (2009). 

3. Mazin, I. I., Singh, D. J., Johannes, M. D., and Du, M. H. Unconventional Superconductivity 

with a Sign Reversal in the Order Parameter of LaFeAsO1-xFx. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 057003 

(2008). 

4. Si, Q. And Abrahams, E. Strong Correlations and Magnetic Frustration in the High TC Iron 

Pnictides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 076401 (2008). 

5. Yu, R., Zhu, J.-X., and Si, Q. Mott Transition in Modulated Lattices and Parent Insulator of 

(K,Tl)yFexSe2 Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 186401 (2011). 

6. Yin, Z. P., Haule, K., and Kotliar, G. Kinetic frustration and the nature of the magnetic and 

paramagnetic states in iron pnictides and iron chalcogenides. Nature Mater. 10, 932-935 

(2011). 

7. Qazilbash, M. M. et al. Electronic correlations in the iron pnictides. Nature Phys. 5, 647-650 

(2009). 

8. Liu, M. et al. Nature of magnetic excitations in superconducting BaFe1.9Ni0.1As2. Nature 

Phys. 8, 376-381 (2012). 

9. Hsu, F.-C. et al., Superconductivity in the PbO-type structure α-FeSe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 

105, 14262-14264 (2008). 

10. Guo, J. et al. Superconductivity in the iron selenide KxFe2Se2 (0≤x≤1.0). Phys. Rev. B 82, 

180520(R) (2010). 


13 

11. Wang, Q. Y. et al. Interface induced high temperature superconductivity in single unit-cell 

FeSe films on SrTiO3. Chin. Phys. Lett. 29, 037402 (2012). 

12. Bao, W. et al. A Novel Large Moment Antiferromagnetic Order in K0.8Fe1.6Se2 

Superconductor. Chin. Phys. Lett. 28, 086104 (2011). 

13. Fang, M.-H. et al. Fe-based superconductivity with TC=31K bordering an antiferromagnetic 

insulator in (Tl,K)FexSe2. Europhys. Lett. 94, 27009 (2011). 

14. Zhang, Y. et al. Nodeless superconducting gap in AxFe2Se2 (A=K,Cs) revealed by angle-

resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Nature Mater. 10, 273-277 (2011). 

15. Qian, T. et al. Absence of a Holelike Fermi Surface for the Iron-Based K0.8Fe1.7Se2 

Superconductor Revealed by Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

106, 187001 (2011). 

16. Liu, D. et al. Electronic origin of high-temperature superconductivity in single-layer FeSe 

superconductor. Nature Commun. 3, 931 (2012). 

17. Lee, J. J.  et al. Interfacial mode-coupling as the origin of the enhancement of TC in FeSe 

films on SrTiO3. Nature 515, 245-248 (2014). 

18. Liu, T. J. et al. From (π,0) magnetic order to superconductivity with (π,π) magnetic 

resonance in Fe1.02Te1-xSex. Nature Mater. 9, 718-720 (2010). 

19. Yi, M. et al. Observation of Temperature-Induced Crossover to an Orbital-Selective Mott 

Phase in AxFe2-ySe2 (A=K,Rb) Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 067003 (2013). 

20. Wang, Z. et al. Orbital-selective metal-insulator transition and gap formation above TC in 

superconducting Rb1-xFe2-ySe2. Nature Commun. 5, 3202 (2014). 


14 

21. Ding, X. et al. Strong and nonmonotonic temperature dependence of Hall coefficient in 

superconducting KxFe2-ySe2 single crystals. Phys. Rev. B 89, 224515 (2014). 

22. Li, W. et al. Mott behaviour in KxFe2-ySe2 superconductors studied by pump-probe 

spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B 89, 134515 (2014). 

23. Yi, M. et al. Symmetry-breaking orbital anisotropy observed for detwinned Ba(Fe1-xCox) 

2As2 above the spin density wave transition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 6878-6883 (2011). 

24. Yi, M. et al. Electronic reconstruction through the structural and magnetic transition in 

detwinned NaFeAs. New J. of Phys. 14, 073019 (2012). 

25.  Zhang, Y. et al. Symmetry breaking via orbital-dependent reconstruction of electronic 

structure in uniaxially strained NaFeAs. Phys. Rev. B 85, 085121 (2012). 

26. Nakayama, K. et al. Reconstruction of Band Structure Induced by Electronic Nematicity in 

FeSe Superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 237001 (2014). 

27. Shimojima, T. et al. Lifting of xz/yz orbital degeneracy at the structural transition in 

detwinned FeSe. Phys. Rev. B 90, 121111(R) (2014). 

28. Watson, M. D. et al. Emergence of the nematic electronic state in FeSe. Phys. Rev. B 91, 

155106 (2015). 

29. Zhang, P. et al. Evidence for intertwining orders in the electronic nematic state of FeSe. 

Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.01390 (2015). 

30. Tan, S. et al. Interface-induced superconductivity and strain-dependent spin density waves in 

FeSe/SrTiO3 thin films. Nature Mater. 12, 634-640 (2013). 


15 

31. Zhang, Y. et al. Distinctive momentum dependence of the band reconstruction in the nematic 

state of FeSe thin film. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.01556 (2015). 

32. Lee, P. A. and Wen X.-G. Spin-triplet p-wave pairing in a three-orbital model for iron 

pnictide superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 78, 144517 (2008). 

33. Liu, Z. K. et al. Experimental Observation of Incoherent-Coherent Crossover and Orbital 

Dependent Band Renormalization in Iron Chalcogenide Superconductors. Preprint at 

http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.03074 (2015) 

34. Yu, R. and Si, Q. Orbital-Selective Mott Phase in Multiorbital Models for Alkaline Iron 

Selenides K1-xFe2-ySe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 146402 (2013). 

35. Yin, Z. P., Haule, K., and Kotliar, G. Fractional power-law behaviour and its origin in iron-

chalcogneide and ruthenate superconductors: Insights from first-principles calculations. Phys. 

Rev. B 86, 195141 (2012). 

36. de’ Medici, L., Hassan, S. R., Capone, M., and Dai, X. Orbital-Selective Mott Transition out 

of Band Degeneracy Lifting. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 126401 (2009). 

37. Anisimov, V., Nekrasov, I. A., Kondakov, D. E., Rice, T. M., and Sigrist, M. Orbital-

selective Mott-insulator transition in Ca2-xSrxRuO4. Eur. Phys. J. B 25, 191 (2002).  

38. de’ Medici, L., Giovannetti, G., and Capone, M. Selective Mott Physics as a Key to Iron 

Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 177001 (2014). 

39. Yu, R., Goswami, P., Si, Q., Nikolic, P., and Zhu, J.-X. Superconductivity at the border of 

electron localization and itinerancy. Nature Commun. 4, 2783 (2013). 

40. Liu, T. J. et al. Charge-carrier localization induced by excess Fe in the superconductor 

Fe1+yTe1-xSex. Phys. Rev. B 80, 174509 (2009). 


16 

41. Nekrasov, I. A. and Sadovskii, M. V. Electroni Structure, Topological Phase Transitions and 

Superconductivity in (K, Cs)xFe2Se2. JETP Lett. 93, 166-169 (2011). 

 
 

Acknowledgements ARPES experiments were performed at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation 

Lightsource and the Advanced Light Source, which are both operated by the Office of Basic 

Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy. The Stanford work is supported by the US DOE, 

Office of Basic Energy Science, Division of Materials Science and Engineering, under award 

number DE-AC02-76SF00515. The work at Rice is supported by NSF Grant DMR-1309531 and 

the Robert A. Welch Foundation Grant No. C-1411. The work at Renmin University is supported 

by the National Science Foundation of China Grant number 11374361, and the Fundamental 

Research Funds for the Central Universities and the Research Funds of Remnin University of 

China. The work at Tulane is supported by the NSF under grant DMR-1205469. 

Author Contributions M.Y., Z.K.L., and Y.Z. performed the ARPES experiments with 

assistance from M.H. and S.K.M. under the guidance of D.H.L. and Z.H.. R.Y., J.X.Z., and Q.S. 

performed the theoretical calculations. J.J.L., R.G.M., F.T.S., and W.L. grew the FeSe films. 

S.C.R., J.H.C., and B.L. grew the KFS single crystals with guidance from I.R.F. and C.W.C.. J.H. 

grew the FTS single crystals under the guidance of Z.Q.M.. Z.X.S. and D.H.L. provided overall 

guidance and project coordination. The paper was written by M.Y., D.H.L., R.Y., and Q.S. with 

contributions from all authors.  

Author Information The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and 

request for materials should be addressed to D. H. Lu (dhlu@slac.stanford.edu) and Z.-X. Shen 

(zxshen@stanford.edu). 


17 

Fig. 1: Low temperature band structure of iron chalcogenides in comparison to iron 

pnictide. 

Fermi surfaces measured on (a) FeTe0.56Se0.44 (FTS), (b) monolayer FeSe film on SrTiO3 

(FS/STO), (c) K0.76Fe1.72Se2 (KFS), and (d) Ba(Fe0.93Co0.07)2As2 (BFCA), shown in BZ notation 

corresponding to 2-Fe unit cell (For comparison purposes, we use the M point to denote the BZ 

corner where the electron pockets live for all compounds and LDA, even though for 122 crystal 

structures, this is the X point), with schematic outlines shown in red. (e) Spectral image of FTS 

along the Γ-M high symmetry direction, taken with 22eV (26eV) photons for near the Γ (M) 

point. Measurements along the same cut for (f) FS/STO, (g) KFS, and (h) BFCA, with photon 

energies of 22 eV, 26 eV, and 47.5 eV, respectively. In-plane polarization was odd with respect 

to the cut for all measurements, (e)-(g) has additional out-of-plane polarization. (i)-(l) Second 

energy derivatives for the spectral images above. Observable bands are marked with dominant 

orbital character (red: dxz, green: dyz, blue: dxy).  

 

Fig. 2: Schematics of the effect of orbital-dependent band renormalizations. (a) LDA 

calculations for KFS41. (b) Schematic based on (a) with dxy orbital strongly renormalized. (c) 

Schematic based on (b) by introducing hybridization between dxy band and dxz electron band.  

 

Fig. 3: Selected spectra from FS/STO. (a) High resolution spectra of FS/STO showing the 

presence of two electron bands around M. (b) Γ-M high symmetry cut of FS/STO taken in the 

second BZ, where dxy orbital matrix elements are strong. The dxy hole band has a lower band top 

at Γ than dxz/dyz, hence it crosses and hybridizes with the dxz/dyz hole bands, resulting in the 

apparent sharper curvature near Γ. 


18 

 

Fig. 4: Temperature dependence of the band structure of iron chalcogenides 

(a)-(c) Second energy derivatives of band structure along the Γ-M cut of FTS, FS/STO, and KFS, 

same as that of Fig. 1(e)-(g), taken in the low temperature state at 15 K, 9 K, and 10 K, 

respectively. (d)-(f) Same as that of (a)-(c) but taken in the high temperature state at 120 K, 190 

K, and 210 K, respectively. (g) Schematic showing the band structure in the low temperature 

state with finite spectral weight of dxy orbital, (red: dxz, green: dyz, blue: dxy). (h) Schematic 

showing the band structure in the high temperature state after dxy orbital completely loses 

spectral weight. 

 

Fig. 5: Quantitative analysis of temperature evolution in the iron chalcogenides 

(a)-(c) Raw spectral images of FTS, FS/STO, and KFS taken in the low temperature state. 

Yellow regions mark the momentum ranges integrated for energy distribution curve (EDC) 

analysis for each compound. (d) Integrated EDCs in the yellow region of (a) for FTS at selected 

temperatures, fitted by a Shirley background (gray), a Gaussian for the dxy band (blue), and a 

Gaussian for the dyz band (green), convolved by the Fermi-Dirac function. (e) Integrated EDCs in 

the yellow region of (c) for FS/STO at selected temperatures, with a Gaussian background (gray), 

a Gaussian for the dxy band (blue), and a Gaussian for the dyz band (green). (f) Integrated EDCs in 

the yellow region of (b) for KFS at selected temperatures, fitted by a Gaussian background (gray), 

and a Gaussian for the dxy band (blue). Residual spectral weight for the dxy peak is shaded for 

each temperature for all compounds. Fitted peaks for the lowest temperature are shown for each 

compound. (g)-(i) Temperature dependence of the fitted areas of the dxy and dyz peaks for FTS, 


19 

FS/STO, and KFS. Guides to eye are drawn in gray to show the trends. All curves are normalized 

by the initial value of the peak area. The error bars in g-i are error bars resulted from the fitting. 

 

Fig. 6: Calculated phase diagram of the OSMP as a function of temperature, U, and 

electron filling 

Slave-spin mean-field phase diagrams of the five-orbital Hubbard model at systematic electron 

fillings from n = 6 to 6.15. See Methods for calculation details. Blue shading shows the dxy 

quasiparticle spectral weight, Zxy. The OSMP phase boundary is shown by solid blue lines 

connecting blue squares marking the calculated temperatures where Zxy drops to zero. A Mott 

Insulator (MI) phase exists for n = 6, where all orbitals have zero spectral weight. Its phase 

boundary is marked by a red line. The temperatures at which Zxy is observed to vanish in FTS, 

FS/STO, and KFS are marked by magenta dotted lines. From these temperatures, the critical U’s 

for FTS, FS/STO, and KFS can be estimated, which is shown by a yellow guide to the eye strip 

at fixed U. Hund’s J is fixed at 0.6 eV. Here, electron doping bring the system away from the 

OSMP, as seen in the increasing critical U at fixed temperature (blue lines at 10 K and 240 K) as 

well as the increasing critical temperature at fixed U (magenta dots). 


20 

Figure 1 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure 2 

 

 

 
 
 

Figure 3 


21 

Figure 4 

 
 
 


22 

Figure 5 

 
 
 


23 

Figure 6 

 
 


