Few-photon imaging at 1550 nm using a low-
timing-jitter superconducting nanowire single-

photon detector 

Hui Zhou, Yuhao He, Lixing You, * Sijin Chen, Weijun Zhang, 

Junjie Wu, Zhen Wang, and Xiaoming Xie 

State Key Laboratory of Functional Materials for Informatics, Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information 

Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 865 Changning Road, Shanghai 200050, China 

*lxyou@mail.sim.ac.cn  

Abstract:  We demonstrated a laser depth imaging system based on the 
time-correlated single-photon counting technique, which was incorporated 
with a low-jitter superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD), 
operated at the wavelength of 1550 nm. A sub-picosecond time-bin width 
was chosen for photon counting, resulting in a discrete noise of less than 
one/two counts for each time bin under indoor/outdoor daylight conditions, 
with a collection time of 50 ms. Because of the low-jitter SNSPD, the target 
signal histogram was significantly distinguishable, even for a fairly low 
retro-reflected photon flux. The depth information was determined directly 
by the highest bin counts, instead of using any data fitting combined with 
complex algorithms. Millimeter resolution depth imaging of a low-signature 
object was obtained, and more accurate data than that produced by the 
traditional Gaussian fitting method was generated. Combined with the 
intensity of the return photons, three-dimensional reconstruction overlaid 
with reflectivity data was realized.  
 

References and links 

1. 
B. Schwarz, "Mapping the world in 3D," Nat. Photonics 4 (7), 429-430 (2010). 

2. 
R. E. Warburton, A. McCarthy, A. M. Wallace, S. Hernandez-Marin, R. H. Hadfield, S. W. Nam, and G. S. 
Buller, "Subcentimeter depth resolution using a single-photon counting time-of-flight laser ranging system 
at 1550 nm wavelength," Opt. Lett. 32 (15), 2266-2268 (2007). 

3. 
G. S. Buller, R. D. Harkins, A. McCarthy, P. A. Hiskett, G. R. MacKinnon, G. R. Smith, R. Sung, A. M. 
Wallace, R. A. Lamb, K. D. Ridley, and J. G. Rarity, "Multiple wavelength time-of-flight sensor based on 
time-correlated single-photon counting," Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76 (8) (2005). 

4. 
S. Pellegrini, G. S. Buller, J. M. Smith, A. M. Wallace, and S. Cova, "Laser-based distance measurement 
using picosecond resolution time-correlated single-photon counting," Measurement Science & Technology 
11 (6), 712-716 (2000). 

5. 
S. Chen, D. Liu, W. Zhang, L. You, Y. He, W. Zhang, X. Yang, G. Wu, M. Ren, H. Zeng, Z. Wang, X. Xie, 
and M. Jiang, "Time-of-flight laser ranging and imaging at 1550 nm using low-jitter superconducting 
nanowire single-photon detection system," Appl. Opt. 52 (14), 3241-3245 (2013). 

6. 
A. McCarthy, X. Ren, A. Della Frera, N. R. Gemmell, N. J. Krichel, C. Scarcella, A. Ruggeri, A. Tosi, and 
G. S. Buller, "Kilometer-range depth imaging at 1550 nm wavelength using an InGaAs/InP single-photon 
avalanche diode detector," Opt. Express 21 (19), 22098-22113 (2013). 

7. 
A. McCarthy, N. J. Krichel, N. R. Gemmell, X. Ren, M. G. Tanner, S. N. Dorenbos, V. Zwiller, R. H. 
Hadfield, and G. S. Buller, "Kilometer-range, high resolution depth imaging via 1560 nm wavelength 
single-photon detection," Opt. Express 21 (7), 8904-8915 (2013). 

8. 
L. Sjöqvist, M. Henriksson, P. Jonsson, and O. Steinvall, "Time-correlated single-photon counting range 
profiling and reflectance tomographic imaging," Adv. Opt. Techn. 3 (2), 187-197 (2014). 

9. 
N. J. Krichel, A. McCarthy, I. Rech, M. Ghioni, A. Gulinatti, and G. S. Buller, "Cumulative data 
acquisition in comparative photon-counting three-dimensional imaging," J. Mod. Opt. 58 (3-4), 244-256 
(2011). 


10. A. McCarthy, R. J. Collins, N. J. Krichel, V. Fernández, A. M. Wallace, and G. S. Buller, "Long-range 

time-of-flight scanning sensor based on high-speed time-correlated single-photon counting," Appl. Opt. 48 
(32), 6241-6251 (2009). 

11. J. Massa, G. Buller, A. Walker, G. Smith, S. Cova, M. Umasuthan, and A. Wallace, "Optical design and 

evaluation of a three-dimensional imaging and ranging system based on time-correlated single-photon 
counting," Appl. Opt. 41 (6), 1063-1070 (2002). 

12. F. Fereidouni, K. Reitsma, and H. C. Gerritsen, "High speed multispectral fluorescence lifetime imaging," 

Opt. Express 21 (10), 11769-11782 (2013). 

13. J. J. Degnan, "Photon-counting multikilohertz microlaser altimeters for airborne and spaceborne 

topographic measurements," J. Geodyn. 34 (3-4), 503-549 (2002). 

14. M. Ren, X. R. Gu, Y. Liang, W. B. Kong, E. Wu, G. Wu, and H. P. Zeng, "Laser ranging at 1550 nm with 

1-GHz sine-wave gated InGaAs/InP APD single-photon detector," Opt. Express 19 (14), 13497-13502 
(2011). 

15. M. Entwistle, M. A. Itzler, J. Chen, M. Owens, K. Patel, X. Jiang, K. Slomkowski, and S. Rangwala, 

"Geiger-mode APD camera system for single-photon 3D LADAR imaging," Advanced Photon Counting 
Techniques VI 8375, 83750D (2012). 

16. P. Yuan, R. Sudharsanan, J. Boisvert, X. Bai, P. McDonald, T. Isshiki, W. Hong, M. Salisbury, C. Hu, M. 

Liu, and J. C. Campbell, "High-performance InP Geiger-mode SWIR avalanche photodiodes," Advanced 
Photon Counting Techniques III 7320, 73200P (2009). 

17. L. X. You, X. Y. Yang, Y. H. He, W. X. Zhang, D. K. Liu, W. J. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Y. Liu, S. 

J. Chen, Z. Wang, and X. M. Xie, "Jitter analysis of a superconducting nanowire single photon detector," 
AIP Advances 3 (7), 072135 (2013). 

18. G. S. Buller, A. McCarthy, X. M. Ren, N. R. Gemmell, R. J. Collins, N. J. Krichel, M. G. Tanner, A. M. 

Wallace, S. Dorenbos, V. Zwiller, and R. H. Hadfield, "Depth imaging at kilometer range using time-
correlated single-photon counting at wavelengths of 850 nm and 1560 nm," Biosensing and Nanomedicine 
V 8460, 84601I (2012). 

19. A. J. Kerman, J. K. W. Yang, R. J. Molnar, E. A. Dauler, and K. K. Berggren, "Electrothermal Feedback In 

Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors," Phys. Rev. B 79 (10), 100509(R) (2009). 

20. S. Chen, L. You, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, and X. Xie, "Dark counts of 

superconducting nanowire single-photon detector under illumination," Opt. Express 23 (8), 10786-10793 
(2015). 

 

1. Introduction  

Light detection and ranging (LIDAR) is a remote sensing technology that measures distance 
by illuminating a target with a laser and analyzing the time-of-flight (TOF) of the reflected 
light. This method is used to make high-resolution maps for many applications, including 
remote sensing, terrain mapping, and space debris tracking [1, 2]. Combined with advanced 
time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) techniques, LIDAR is sensitive to ultra-low 
levels of light and exhibits excellent depth resolution, which are determined by the detection 
efficiency (DE) and the timing jitter (TJ) of the optical receivers. Laser ranging [3-5] and 
three-dimensional (3D) imaging [6-9] based on TCSPC have been progressively investigated 
in recent years, exhibiting shot-noise limited detection and good surface-to-surface resolution 
on the millimeter scale.  

Most LIDAR applications with outstanding performance have been realized at 

wavelengths under 1000 nm using a Si avalanche photodiode (APD) [3, 10, 11] or a 
photomultiplier [12, 13]. Recent progress in erbium-doped lasers suggests burgeoning various 
applications at the wavelength of 1550 nm, which lies in the eye-safe region of the spectrum 
and offers much lower solar background noise, as well as lower atmospheric attenuation. 
Investigations on TCSPC range profiling [14] and depth imaging [6] at this wavelength, in 
which a single InGaAs/InP APD or APDs in a focal plane array architecture [15, 16] were 
often applied, have been carried out in recent years. However, InGaAs/InP APDs, even when 
operated in gated Geiger mode to maintain better performance, often suffer from a large dark 
count rate (DCR), afterpulsing effects, and poor timing resolution, resulting in a relatively low 
surface-to-surface resolution. 

In the last decade, superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) have 

attracted considerable attention because of their high DEs, low DCRs, no afterpulsing, and 
low-TJ. SNSPDs are considered as a promising alternative to conventional single-photon 
detectors (SPDs) and have been successfully used in near-infrared laser ranging [5] and depth 


imaging [7]. Nevertheless, infrared depth imaging based on the TCSPC technique usually 
required hundreds of detected photons per pixel to obtain accurate information about the range 
and reflectivity, as the reported imaging system used a relatively noisy SPD with a high TJ in 
the receiver. The recently reported depth imaging at 1560 nm used an SNSPD with a TJ of 98 
ps and a DCR of 1 kHz and obtained centimeter resolution depth images of low-signature 
objects in daylight at stand-off distances of the order of one kilometer [7]. Pixel-by-pixel 
information was obtained by fitting the histograms of time delays between the transmitted and 
detected photons, and the surface-to-surface resolution was directly determined by the system 
TJ. Tens of signal photons per pixel were the minimal requirement for a correct fitting with 
reasonable background noise counts. In cases of the low-signature target return detection with 
a relatively high TJ detector, specific algorithms, such as the cross-correlation algorithm [9, 
10], had to be employed to analyze the presence of a signal in a high background level so as to 
improve the accuracy of the measurement.  

In general, the depth resolution of an imager is predominantly determined by the TJ of the 

detector. SPDs with relatively low-TJs may not only provide a higher depth resolution but 
also improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Indeed, the noise count per time bin, contributed by the 
stray light, has a random feature and can be decreased by employing a smaller time bin. In 
extreme cases, the target signal can be determined if the noise count per time bin is no more 
than 1, and the signal count is greater than 2. In this way, no fitting or algorithm is necessary. 
However, a low-TJ system is a prerequisite for realizing this simple yet effective method. 

In this paper, we demonstrated a TCSPC depth imager operated at a wavelength of 1550 

nm that incorporated a low-TJ SNSPD. The TJ of the optimized system was 44 ps full width 
at half maximum (FWHM). An 813-fs time-bin width was chosen for photon counting, which 
gave discrete noise of less than one count in indoor daylight condition and less than two 
counts in outdoor daylight condition for a 50-ms collection time. Because of the low-TJ 
SNSPD and sub-picosecond time bin, the depth information was determined directly by the 
highest bin counts, which produced more accurate data than the traditional Gaussian fitting 
method for the low-signature target. Combined with the intensities of the return photons, the 
indoor and outdoor depth imaging overlaid with reflectivity data for a target with a stand-off 
distance of 2.5 m were demonstrated. 

2. Experimental setup and results 

The experiment setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. A 20-MHz mode-locked fiber laser 
(FPL-01CAF, Calmar) centered at 1550 nm, with a pulse duration of 500 fs, and a typical 
maximum average output power of 2 mW was employed as the illumination source in our 
laser depth imaging system. The output beam was expanded and collimated with a single-
mode fiber (SMF, 9-μm fiber core) pigtailed reflective collimator with an output beam size of 
6 mm. The optical transceiver was coaxial and consisted of two reflective mirrors (M1 and 
M2). We used a commercial polyvinyl chloride (PVC) panda as the target object, which was 
placed at a distance of 2.5 m from M2. The beam size on the target was considered to be 
unchanged at this target distance. The size of the target was 15 × 10 × 22 cm (length × width 
× height, viewed from the side), denoting that depth profiling could be achieved without the 
concern of range ambiguity, which was limited to 7.5 m by the 20-MHz laser frequency. To 
realize the depth imaging of the target, the target was placed on the two-dimensional platform 
driven by stepper motors, which was controlled by the computer to complete the X-Y scan. 
The spatial resolution determined by the stepper motor was 25 μm. The scattered target return 
photons were collected with a reflection Newton telescope (150-mm aperture diameter), and 
filtered by an optical bandpass interference filter (FWHM ~ 12 nm) centered at 1550 nm to 
block the ambient light. The collected photon flux was then converged by a lens (3-cm focal 
length) and coupled into a multi-mode fiber (MMF), with a core size of 50 μm, which was 
connected to an SMF because the SNSPD was optically coupled with the SMF. The total 
optical loss of the system was about 30 dB, including the 20-dB coupling loss from MMF to 
SMF. The output of the SNSPD was connected to the “stop” of the TCSPC module, while the 
synchronous trigger signal of the laser source was linked to the “start” of TCSPC. All the 


measurements reported in this paper were taken while operating with an average emitted 
optical power of about 100 μW. 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Schematic of 1550 nm laser depth imaging system based on a TCSPC 
module using SNSPD. M1 and M2, high-reflectivity gold mirrors with 25-mm 
diameter; MMF, mutimode fiber; SMF, single-mode fiber; SYNC, synchronous 
trigger signal of the laser source. 

 

The SNSPD employed in the TCSPC system was a 90-nm wide meander-structured 

nanowire made of a 7-nm-thick NbN film, covering an active area of 15 × 15 μm2, with a 
filling factor of 37.5%. The SNSPD was coupled with SMF and mounted inside a closed-
cycle Gifford–McMahon cryocooler system, which was operated at 2.21 ± 0.02 K. The system 
detection efficiency (SDE) of SNSPD at 1550 nm was 29%, with a DCR of 20 Hz, when the 
detector was biased at 90% of its switching current (20.3 μA). The output voltage pulses from 
SNSPD were amplified by a low-noise amplifier (LNA650 from RF Bays Inc: 30 k–600 MHz, 
G=50 dB) at room temperature, before being routed to the “stop” port of the TCSPC module. 

To lower the TJ of the imaging system, we chose SPC-150 (Becker & Hickl GmbH) as 

the data acquisition module. This module had a lower TJ of 7.6-ps FWHM and was 
configured with a minimal time bin of 813 fs, as opposed to the popular TCSPC module 
PicoHarp 300 (PicoQuant GmbH), which had a TJ of 26-ps FWHM and a 4-ps time bin per 
channel. In addition, the TJs of the employed femtosecond-pulsed laser and its 
synchronization trigger were 60 fs and 4 ps, respectively.  

The retro-reflected photons were detected by the SNSPD, and the corresponding 

histograms were then recorded by the SPC-150 over a fixed integration time (with a time bin 
per channel of 813 fs). Figure 2 gives an example of the normalized statistical distribution, 
which indicated a system TJ of 44 ps. Although the SNSPD had a TJ higher than the value 
reported in our previous laser ranging system [5, 17], its SDE was higher by one order of 
magnitude. Besides, the TJ was smaller compared with the values reported in other studies [2, 
7]. Such a low-TJ TCSPC system could effectively reduce the uncertainty of the 3D 
reconstruction. 


  

Fig. 2. Normalized instrumental response of the 
system with a TJ of 44-ps (FWHM). 

 

In order to give an intuitive result of the system depth resolution, two retro-reflected 

mirrors were adopted to replace the target for the measurement. We adjusted the separations 
of the two mirrors, and the typical photon-return histograms were recorded by TCSPC and 
shown in Fig. 3. The red dashed lines and blue solid lines corresponded to the two-peak 
Gaussian fittings of the time correlation for the two mirrors. By locating the centroids of each 
of the two return signals, the separations between them were obtained. The distance was 
calculated using the formula 
2
L
c
 t
, where c  is the speed of light in air and t
  is  the 

time interval of the two centroids of the return signals. When the separation was 30 mm, the 
two peaks was clearly separated by a time interval of 200 ps, as shown in Fig. 3(a). For the 
separation of 6.6 mm (Fig. 3(b)), corresponding to 44 ps time interval which was also the 
system FWHM jitter, the two peaks were still easy to distinguish from one another. When the 
separation was further reduced to 3 mm, even the two peaks overlapped, we could 
differentiate them using the two-peak Gaussian fittings, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Thus, we may 
conclude that the depth resolution was about 5 mm. Optimized signal-processing algorithm 
based on a reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo method may provide a better depth 
resolution [2]. 

 

 

Fig. 3 Time correlation results from the targets of different surface separations. 

 

The depth information was obtained for each individual pixel while the target was 

scanned in the X-Y plane. A depth profile of the scanned target could then be reconstructed on 
a computer. Besides, the pixel-by-pixel relative reflectivity could be determined from the 
number of photons detected in a fixed dwell time. The number of collected photons varied 
with the target surface material, roughness, and incidence angle. Figure 4(a) shows a 
comparison of the return photon counts in 44-ps time bins, with logarithmic coordinates at the 
different positions indicated in Fig. 4(b).  Generally speaking, the counts varied by over three 
orders of magnitude; for example, the return photon count from the background paper 
(Location A) was 200 times larger than that from the center on the black neck part of the 


panda(Location B). The different color caused intensity variance can be found in location 
B&D. The different incident angle caused intensity variance can be found in location C&D. 
At the edge, with the surface normal nearly perpendicular to the incidence of the light, the 
difference was even larger. Though locations A&D have the similar white color, the reflected 
photon counts has a large difference due to the different reflectivity, i.e. different materials. 
The main challenge involved in the depth profiling was how to get depth information from a 
low-signal count when it was difficult to distinguish from the noise count. Some algorithms 
were introduced to improve SNR and minimize the depth uncertainty when these systems 
were applied in a high background level and were relatively noisy with a TJ on the order of 
hundreds of picoseconds [9, 18]. Here, we showed how to realize laser depth imaging with 
high accuracy using low-jitter SNSPD directly without any fitting method and/or algorithms. 

 

 

Fig. 4. (a) Integrated photon numbers with logarithmic coordinates at 
different locations of the target, and (b) the corresponding locations on 
the imaging target. The optical image of the PVC panda was taken by 
the first author (H ZHOU) using an optical camera. 

 

To improve the system, a low-TJ SNSPD was used in combination with the 813-fs time 

bin. The sub-picosecond time bin provided discrete counts of no more than 1 for each time bin 
at a dwell time of 50 ms under daylight indoor conditions. Because of the 44-ps TJ of this 
system, we could obtain enough signal counts using the sub-picosecond time bin at a dwell 
time of 50 ms, which could be discriminated from the noise count easily as long as it was over 
2. Figure 5(a) shows a typical example of a few signal photons with a collection time of 50 ms. 
The sum of the stray-light photons and intrinsic detector dark counts was about 300 Hz. For a 
collection time of 50 ms, only 15 noise counts were randomly distributed throughout the 50-ns 
pulse interval. Since we chose 3.3 ns as the observation window, the average number of noise 
counts was only 1 in an average of 4096 time bins. As a result, it was reasonable for us to 
observe only 1 noise count in a 3.3-ns observation window (Fig. 5(a)). In fact, no noise counts 
were observed for most of time during the measurement. Consequently, a very weak target 
signal could be easily distinguished from the noise, provided that the maximal count in one 
time bin was greater than or equal to 2 (≥2); thus, a sufficient accuracy for depth profiling 
was achieved because of the low-TJ of 44 ps. Indeed, this method is also applicable for 
outdoor daylight conditions. Figure 5(b) shows the stray light noise counts (roughly ~75 KHz) 
recorded under outdoor daylight conditions (in a sunny day), with a collection time of 50 ms, 
using the same time bin. The probabilities of seeing 2, 1, and 0 noise photons in each time bin 
were 0.17%, 5.75%, and 94.08%, respectively, indicating that if we set the threshold higher 
than 4, or even 3, we may easily obtain the correct depth information. The outdoor noise 
counts in cloudy weather and evening were also evaluated, which were about 30 KHz and 400 
Hz, respectively. 


 

 

Fig. 5. (a) The weakest signal counts distinguishable in the system in the 3.3-ns observation 
window with a 50-ms collection time. (b) Background noise counts recorded by the TCSPC 
system in outdoor daylight with a collection time of 50 ms. 

 
Following the above simple discrimination method, we could realize laser depth imaging 

without the use of fitting and/or algorithms. A 3D depth profile for the target is shown in Fig. 
6(a). The depth scan was acquired in a room with an incandescent lamp as the background 
light. The scan covered an area of 200 mm × 220 mm using 200 × 220 pixels, resulting in a 
pixel-to-pixel spacing of 1 mm in x and y. The dwell time was set to 50 ms per pixel to 
accomplish a quick scan. About 99.9% of the 200 × 220 pixels exhibited reasonable depth 
measurements with our discrimination method, when the discrimination threshold was set to 2. 
For the left 0.1% pixels with the maximal count of 1 in one time bin, we averaged the arrival 
time of all the time bins which included 1 count and regarded it as the target return signal. The 
method gave no error pixels as shown in Fig. 6(a). For comparison, the 3D reconstruction 
with data acquired from the conventional Gaussian fitting method, without using any data 
optimizing algorithm is also shown in Fig. 6(b). About 11.4% error pixels were registered, 
most of them lay in the positions of the ears, eyes, nose and hands of the panda where the 
return signals were too low to be distinguished from the noise counts. As a result, 
conventional Gaussian fitting could not give the correct data of the range measurement.  

 

 

 
Fig. 6. 200 × 220 pixel depth profile measurements on the PVC toy from a stand-off 
distance of 2.5 m. (a) Image reconstructed from the raw data using the highest channel of 
the recorded return histograms. (b) Image reconstructed using the peaks of the Gaussian 
approximation. 

 
The above results indicated that the simple discrimination method, combined with the 

low-TJ SNSPD and sub-picosecond time bin, allowed us to obtain the correct depth 
information for a low signal count target. In addition to the depth information obtained from 
the TOF, the intensity/counts from the target may also provide interesting information. The 
plot shown in Fig. 7(b) used colored contour lines to map the calculated numbers of detected 


return photons for each individual pixel, which could be regarded as the reflectivity imaging 
of the target object. The color bars directly indicated the logarithm (base 10) of the return 
photon counts. The reflectivity was related to several properties of the target, such as the 
surface material, roughness, and the incidence angle, which was hard to distinguish. By 
combining the depth ranging and reflectivity information, the detailed 3D reconstruction 
images of the front view (Fig. 7(c)) and lateral view (Fig. 7(d)) were generated using Matlab, 
with reflectivity data rendered in greyscale. Most of the fine structural features of the target 
such as the ears, eyes, nose, and fingers were registered. 

 

 

 
Fig. 7 (a) Close-up photograph of the target object. (b) Reflectivity 
reconstruction of the target with the common logarithm of the return photon 
numbers. (c) and (d), 3D reconstructions of the front and lateral views 
overlaid with reflectivity data. 

 

To further prove the feasibility of this method for few-photon imaging in outdoor noisy 

environment, the similar experiment was carried out in outdoor daylight condition. The 
experimental parameters such as the laser power and the stand-off distance were kept same as 
the indoor experiment. Nevertheless, due to the strong background noise in the daylight 
condition shown in Fig. 5(b), the total retro-reflected photons including the signal photons and 
noise photons in some pixels were so high that the SNSPD latched [19, 20]. Thus, we lowered 
the bias current of SNSPD slightly to 85% of its switching current to prevent the latching 
problem. The 3D reconstruction images were shown in Fig. 8. Owing to the strong 
background noise shown in Fig. 5(b), the discrimination threshold was set to 3. About 99.8% 
of the 200 × 220 pixels exhibited reasonable depth results with the simple discrimination 
method. The 0.2% error pixels, which could be seen more clearly in lateral view in Fig. 8(b), 
happened at some locations at the background paper and the low-signature parts of the panda. 
The error pixels at the background paper were caused by the latching of SNSPD which was 
not been totally avoided. The SNSPD latched then gave a wrong target signal. The error pixels 
on the panda were mainly caused by the low retro-reflected signal photon counts, which were 
comparable to the relative high background noise from the sunshine. These error pixels could 
be reduced by further reducing the bias current of SNSPD and increasing the laser power. 

 


 

Fig. 8. 3D reconstructions of the front (a) and lateral views (b) overlaid with 
reflectivity data in outdoor measurement. 

3. Conclusion  

We demonstrated a TCSPC imaging system that was operated at the wavelength of 1550 nm 
using a low-jitter SNSPD. The 44-ps system TJ, combined with a sub-picosecond time bin, 
allowed us to easily discriminate the signal counts from the noise signals at a very low return 
photon level. As a result, laser depth imaging was realized without the use of fitting or 
algorithms. The fine structural features of the target were registered in the 3D image both 
indoors and outdoors. This method is interesting for the ranging of low-signature targets and 
extending the ranging distance. By further decreasing TJ, ranging and imaging with only two 
retro-reflected signal photons will become possible. 

Acknowledgments 

Hui Zhou and Yuhao He contributed equally to this work. We were grateful for the discussion 
with G. Wu from the State Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, East China Normal 
University. This study was supported by the “Strategic Priority Research Program (B)” of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant XDB04020100&XDB04010200), the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (Grant 61401441) and the 973 Program (Grant 2011CBA00202).  


