Multilayer microwave integrated quantum circuits for scalable quantum computing

T. Brecht,∗ W. Pfaff, C. Wang, Y. Chu, L. Frunzio, M.H. Devoret, and R.J. Schoelkopf
Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA
(Dated: September 15, 2015)

As experimental quantum information processing (QIP) rapidly advances, an emerging challenge
is to design a scalable architecture that combines various quantum elements into a complex device
without compromising their performance.
In particular, superconducting quantum circuits have
successfully demonstrated many of the requirements for quantum computing, including coherence
levels that approach the thresholds for scaling. However, it remains challenging to couple a large
number of circuit components through controllable channels while suppressing any other interac-
tions. We propose a hardware platform intended to address these challenges, which combines the
advantages of integrated circuit fabrication and long coherence times achievable in three-dimensional
circuit quantum electrodynamics (3D cQED). This multilayer microwave integrated quantum circuit
(MMIQC) platform provides a path toward the realization of increasingly complex superconducting
devices in pursuit of a scalable quantum computer.

Experimental
quantum
information
processing
is
rapidly developing in several physical implementations,
and superconducting quantum circuits are a particu-
larly promising candidate for building a practical quan-
tum computer.[1, 2] In these systems, qubits made with
Josephson junctions behave like macroscopic atoms with
quantized energy levels in the microwave domain. Cou-
pling them to resonators forms a powerful platform
known as circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED)[3, 4]
that shares several important advantages with classical
computing architectures: For one, devices are created
in the solid state and their properties can be fully en-
gineered through circuit design and mass produced by
lithographic fabrication.
Further, electromagnetically
coupling qubits to superconducting transmission lines
enables communication of quantum information, rapid
multi-qubit gates, and entangling operations between el-
ements on or off the chip.[2, 5–9] Finally, electronic con-
trol and measurement are achieved through microwave
signals carried to and from the device by wires and ca-
bles. This capacity for quantum electrical engineering of
devices allows the lifetimes of quantum states to contin-
ually rise due to improvements in design and selection of
high quality materials. As a consequence, superconduct-
ing circuits fulfill many of the necessary requirements for
universal quantum computation, as evidenced by recent
experimental realizations of a large suite of desired build-
ing blocks.[10–12]

Building a fully functional, fault-tolerant quantum
computer, however, will require scaling to a device with
orders of magnitude more circuit elements than today’s
experimental devices. When scaling up the system size,
error rates need to remain below the threshold for quan-
tum error correction.[13, 14] At the same time, the dif-
ferent components must retain the ability to selectively
interact with each other while being externally addressed
and accurately controlled. Finally, they must be mass
producible in a reliable and precise manner. These cri-
teria cannot simply be achieved by replicating and con-

necting currently available hardware.

Superconducting quantum circuits are presented with
crucial challenges that prevent a scaling strategy similar
to that of classical integrated circuits. The strong elec-
tromagnetic interactions of the qubits allow for efficient
entanglement and control, but make them also especially
susceptible to undesired couplings that degrade quantum
information. This “crosstalk” results in either undesir-
able mixing of quantum states or decoherence. High iso-
lation to prevent these effects is especially important as
high-Q qubits (Q ≈ 106 − 109) must also be coupled to
high-speed, low-Q (Q ≈ 103) elements for readout, con-
trol, and feedback. Various strategies are employed in
large scale detector arrays and complex cQED circuits
to mitigate crosstalk.[15–20] On a small scale, these un-
intended couplings can be minimized by spectral and/or
spatial separation among elements on a single chip. How-
ever, with increasing number of elements, the former ap-
proach faces an increasingly crowded spectrum. The lat-
ter becomes ineffective when the device package grows in
size and consequently supports unintended electromag-
netic modes that can mediate detrimental couplings be-
tween elements.
Simply increasing the density of ele-
ments through miniaturization is subject to a trade-off
between size and coherence due to dissipative materials
surfaces.[21–25]

Scaling up quantum circuits also encounters a chal-
lenge in connectivity. A large number of qubits and res-
onators have to be selectively coupled to each other with
very low loss. This requires more internal connections
between circuit elements than can be achieved in a sin-
gle plane, demanding signal crossovers that are generally
hard to implement with high isolation.[19, 26] Even in
planar architectures that only require nearest-neighbor
coupling, such as the surface code[27], additional con-
nections are needed for measurement and control pur-
poses. As a result, development towards low-loss three-
dimensional connections has emerged as a pressing need.
A superconducting quantum computer will also require

arXiv:1509.01127v2  [quant-ph]  11 Sep 2015


2

a scalable input/output interface that provides exter-
nal connections with much higher density and isolation
than techniques that are presently employed, such as wire
bonding.
Therefore, the outstanding task is to design a hardware
platform that allows large number of quantum compo-
nents to couple through intended and controllable chan-
nels, while suppressing any other interactions.
In ad-
dition, crucial properties of the quantum circuit, such
as qubit and resonator frequencies, anharmonicities, and
mutual interaction strengths must be more predictable
and reproducible than what has been necessary to date.
It is possible to construct a scalable quantum com-
puter that overcomes these challenges by incorporating
other technologies into the cQED architecture. This can
be achieved by dividing the quantum circuit into sub-
systems and shielding each one with a three-dimensional
superconducting enclosure, as sketched in Figure 1. The
enclosures, represented as boxes in the figure, suppress
unintended crosstalk by providing a high degree of elec-
tromagnetic isolation. Some contain input and output
circuitry, while others are 3D cavity resonators coupled
to qubits.[28] In this 3D geometry, both qubits and res-
onators have been shown to experience substantial gains
in coherence times.[29] The use of intentionally designed
3D modes as quantum elements also alleviates the need
for suppressing spurious package modes.
Within each
shielded module, circuit complexity can be kept man-
ageable, and the engineering of different modules can be
mostly independent.
Interconnects between individual
modules are then created using superconducting trans-
mission lines. 3D shielding allows for the implementation
of a large number of internal and external connections,
shown as wires in Figure 1, without introducing crosstalk
or sacrificing coherence. A dilution refrigerator payload
space of one cubic meter can accommodate a device con-
taining millions of these components, each with linear
dimensions on the order of one centimeter.
As an approach for implementing this concept, we in-
troduce the multilayer microwave integrated quantum
circuit (MMIQC), which combines the advantages of in-
tegrated circuit fabrication with the long coherence times
attainable in 3D cQED (Figure 2). The shielding enclo-
sures are formed using established techniques from the
MEMS industry.[30] For example, recesses can be cre-
ated in silicon wafers by masking and subsequent etch-
ing.
The removal of bulk substrate material to create
3D features with precise dimensions is known as “micro-
machining”. The etched wafers are then lithographically
patterned with metal, aligned, and bonded to one an-
other to form integrated circuitry and shielding.
The MMIQC hardware platform is suited for integrat-
ing a wide variety of cQED components and utilizes a
number of existing technologies.[31] First, high-Q res-
onators for quantum memories with precise frequencies
are implemented with some of the superconducting en-

closures (Figure 2b). Micromachined cavity resonators
with Q∼1000 have previously been demonstrated with
normal metal coatings, and are used in low-loss multi-
cavity microwave filters.[32–34] These existing methods
can be extended to accommodate superconducting coat-

ѱ

ѱ

cables

output circuitry

input circuitry

~ cm

~ m

wiring layer

storage layer

FIG. 1.
Conceptual sketch of a QIP device suitable
for scaling. Modules of cQED components are surrounded
by superconducting enclosures approximately a centimeter in
size (boxes). Individual quantum states reside in storage mod-
ules with minimal loss and high isolation. Modules of input
circuitry may include filtered RF control lines and bias wiring,
and output circuitry may include quantum limited amplifiers,
filters and switches. Key requirements of the device are ad-
dressability via a large number of external connections, in-
dicated by yellow tubes at the surface, and internal selec-
tive coupling and isolation, indicated by grey tubes.
Each
component is well isolated from cross-talk and environmental
effects (red wave packets) by its enclosure, and components
interact only by transmission through shielded channels (blue
wave packets). While this sketch shows only a few modules, a
quantum processor composed of millions of these components
can occupy the payload space of industry standard dilution
refrigerators.


3

input circuitry

connectorization

wiring layer

storage layer

output circuitry

a
b

wafer substrate
shielding
enclosures

multilayer 
signal
interconnect

superconducting
film

c

microstrip 
apertures
wafer-to-wafer
bonding

~ 500 μm

~ cm

inner 
superconductor

~ mm

shielded
coupling line

~ mm

 Top view:

qubits

FIG. 2.
Proposed schematic of a multilayer microwave integrated quantum circuit (MMIQC). a, Layers are made
of silicon wafers with features etched out of the bulk using micromachining techniques to create enclosures that serve as high-Q
resonators and as shielding for internal components. Superconducting metalization (blue) covers the walls of these enclosures
and enables low-loss wafer-to-wafer bonding of the layers. Dense planar input/output circuitry, including filters, switches and
amplifiers can be embedded in other layers. RF and DC vertical interconnects carry signals between layers, and wirebonding
or ball-grid connection can be used to interface with external control and measurement electronics.
b, A cross-section of
the rectangular cavity resonator shows interlayer aperture coupling between the cavity and transmission lines above. c, 3D
superconducting transmission lines could be constructed using membranes (green) in the micromachined structure. Some of
these can be populated with qubits and act as a compact low-loss quantum bus.

ings to achieve the higher Q required for storing quantum
states.[28]

Another important feature of the MMIQC is the use
of shielded, low-loss, superconducting transmission lines
connecting elements on the same layer (Figure 2c) and
vertical interconnects to provide coupling between lay-
ers. Micromachining has been used to remove substrate
in both normal metal and superconducting transmission
lines to reduce dielectric loss.[33, 35] Several styles of
low-loss micromachined transmission lines have been de-
veloped in normal metals and feature 3D shielding that
can be adapted using superconducting materials.[36–38]
To route signal communication between layers, MMIQCs
must contain superconducting versions of layer-to-layer
RF interconnects.[39, 40] Coupling of the cavity res-

onators to one another or to planar transmission lines
is achieved, for instance, through apertures in the met-
alization of the enclosure through which electromagnetic
field radiates, as implemented in microwave cavities and
multi-cavity filters.[32–34] In the MMIQC, superconduct-
ing transmission lines and interconnects based on these
existing technologies will be further engineered to pro-
vide the large range of necessary couplings and minimize
any parasitic losses.

Other existing quantum circuit elements of vari-
ous geometries can be readily incorporated into the
MMIQC. These include planar devices such as qubits and
Josephson-junction based quantum amplifiers, which can
be situated inside shielding enclosures on non-metalized
surfaces. As shown in Figure 2c, some modules or buses


4

coupled to several qubits can even be made on mem-
branes to further suppress dielectric loss, as was demon-
strated in normal metal filters.[41, 42] It is also possible
to incorporate devices such as superconducting whisper-
ing gallery mode resonators.[43, 44] The device described
in Ref. [44] demonstrates coupling of a planar fabricated
qubit to the fields of a multilayer transmission line res-
onator, and the same mechanism can be applied to me-
diate coupling of fields between a variety of planar and
3D structures throughout the MMIQC.
The architecture presented here has several other ad-
vantages for meeting demands that future, large-scale
QIP devices will face. First, it allows for high-density
connectivity to external measurement and control cir-
cuitry through methods commonly used in integrated cir-
cuits, such as ball grid arrays and flip-chip bonding.[45,
46] Moreover, the platform is compatible with integra-
tion of classical control electronics in close proximity to
the quantum device, for example to reduce latency in
feedback circuits. When incorporated with adequate iso-
lation, such “cold electronics” may even be included in
the same structure as the quantum elements. Lastly, de-
vices like the one shown schematically in Figure 2 can
be fabricated in a single foundry to produce a compact
monolithic structure of macroscopic size containing com-
ponents made with lithographic precision.
While many features and components of the MMIQC
make use of existing technologies, there are certain as-
pects of the design that will require the development of
novel techniques. These include the fabrication of mi-
cromachined superconducting enclosures (both for use as
cavity resonators and as shielding), and engineering cou-
pling between 3D modes and embedded planar circuitry
throughout the multilayer device. In particular, enclo-
sures with high quality RF isolation will require a low-loss
bond between two wafers that are etched and coated with
a suitable superconductor. We have begun to investigate
the feasibility of such devices by fabricating and testing
3D superconducting cavity resonators. As described in
Ref. [28], we find that many of the above challenges can
be addressed through the selection of appropriate meth-
ods and materials.
In summary, we believe that practical implementation
of complex quantum circuits will require innovative ap-
proaches to scaling up. In the platform of cQED, the goal
is to create integrated QIP circuits with multiple inter-
connected cavities, qubits, and embedded control wiring
while also obeying the principles for minimizing materials
losses, and providing the high isolation and shielding that
quantum states require.
We emphasize that the most
pressing need in achieving this goal is not the miniatur-
ization of circuits, but the maintenance of high coherence.
We conclude that the solution is likely to heavily employ
superconducting 3D enclosures.
We have proposed a lithographic approach for fabri-
cating complex quantum circuits that incorporate super-

conducting enclosures. In a proof-of-principle experiment
described in Ref. [28], we have demonstrated a 3D micro-
machined resonator with a high quality superconducting
seam and planar multilayer coupling, which are two key
components of the architecture presented here. We fore-
see that various other components including qubits and
amplifiers can be readily incorporated in this multilayer
geometry. Transmission lines, wiring, and filtering can
also be added to provide suitably shielded connections
between subsystems and to the outside world. The even-
tual complete demonstration of the MMIQCs described
here could enable the large-scale fabrication of sophisti-
cated systems for quantum information processing.

We thank Harvey Moseley, Zlatko Minev, Ioan Pop,
Kyle Serniak, and Michael Hatridge for useful conversa-
tions.
This research was supported by the U.S. Army
Research Office (W911NF-14-1-0011). All statements of
fact, opinion or conclusions contained herein are those of
the authors and should not be construed as represent-
ing the official views or policies of the U.S. Government.
W.P. was supported by NSF grant PHY1309996 and by a
fellowship instituted with a Max Planck Research Award
from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.

∗ teresa.brecht@yale.edu
[1] Devoret, M. H. & Schoelkopf, R. J.
Superconducting
Circuits for Quantum Information: An Outlook. Science
339, 1169–1174 (2013).
[2] Barends, R. et al. Superconducting quantum circuits at
the surface code threshold for fault tolerance.
Nature
508, 500–503 (2014).
[3] Blais, A. et al. Quantum-information processing with cir-
cuit quantum electrodynamics. Phys. Rev. A 75, 032329
(2007).
[4] Schoelkopf, R. J. & Girvin, S. M. Wiring up quantum
systems. Nature 451, 664–669 (2008).
[5] Reed, M. D. et al. Realization of three-qubit quantum
error correction with superconducting circuits.
Nature
482, 382–385 (2012).
[6] Roch, N. et al. Observation of measurement-induced en-
tanglement and quantum trajectories of remote super-
conducting qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 170501 (2014).
[7] Majer, J. et al. Coupling superconducting qubits via a
cavity bus. Nature 449, 443–447 (2007).
[8] Steffen, L. et al.
Deterministic quantum teleportation
with feed-forward in a solid state system. Nature 500,
319–322 (2013).
[9] van Loo, A. F. et al. Photon-mediated interactions be-
tween distant artificial atoms. Science 342, 1494–1496
(2013).
[10] Divincenzo, D. P. The Physical Implementation of Quan-
tum Computation.
Fortschritte der Physik 48, 771
(2000).
[11] Ladd, T. D. et al. Quantum computers. Nature 464,
45–53 (2010).
[12] Perez-Delgado, C. A. & Kok, P. Quantum computers:
Definition and implementations. Phys. Rev. A 83, 012303


5

(2011).
[13] Gottesman, D. An Introduction to Quantum Error Cor-
rection and Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation. Proc.
Sympos. Appl. Math. 68, 13–58 (2010).
[14] Knill, E.
Quantum computing with realistically noisy
devices. Nature 434, 39–44 (2005).
[15] Noroozian, O., Day, P. K., Eom, B. H., Leduc, H. G. &
Zmuidzinas, J. Crosstalk Reduction for Superconduct-
ing Microwave Resonator Arrays. IEEE Trans. Microw.
Theory Tech. (2012). arXiv:1206.5571.
[16] Bintley, D. et al. Scaling the summit of the submillimetre:
instrument performance of SCUBA-2. In Holland, W. S.
(ed.) SPIE Astronomical Telescopes + Instrumentation,
845208–845208–13 (SPIE, 2012).
[17] Zmuidzinas,
J.
Superconducting
Microresonators:
Physics and Applications. Ann. Rev. Cond. Matter Phys.
3, 169–214 (2012).
[18] Wenner, J. et al. Wirebond crosstalk and cavity modes
in large chip mounts for superconducting qubits. Super-
conductor Science and Technology 24, 065001 (2011).
[19] Chen, Z. et al. Fabrication and characterization of alu-
minum airbridges for superconducting microwave cir-
cuits. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 052602 (2014).
[20] Vesterinen, V., Saira, O. P., Bruno, A. & DiCarlo, L.
Mitigating information leakage in a crowded spectrum of
weakly anharmonic qubits (2014). arXiv:1405.0450v2.
[21] Moore, G. E. Cramming More Components onto Inte-
grated Circuits. Electronics 38 (1965).
[22] Wenner, J. et al. Surface loss simulations of supercon-
ducting coplanar waveguide resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett.
99, 113513 (2011).
[23] Geerlings, K. et al. Improving the Quality Factor of Mi-
crowave Compact Resonators by Optimizing their Ge-
ometrical Parameters.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 192601
(2012).
[24] Reagor, M. et al. Reaching 10 ms single photon lifetimes
for superconducting aluminum cavities. Appl. Phys. Lett.
102, 192604 (2013).
[25] Wang, C. et al. Surface participation and dielectric loss
in superconducting qubits (2015). arXiv:1509.01854.
[26] Jeffrey, E. et al. Fast accurate state measurement with
superconducting qubits.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 190504
(2014).
[27] Fowler, A. G., Mariantoni, M., Martinis, J. M. & Cle-
land, A. N. Surface codes: Towards practical large-scale
quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 86 (2012).
[28] Brecht, T. et al. Demonstration of superconducting mi-
cromachined cavities (2015). arXiv:1509.01119.
[29] Paik, H. et al. Observation of high coherence in Joseph-
son junction qubits measured in a three-dimensional cir-
cuit QED architecture.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 240501

(2011).
[30] Rebeiz, G. M. RF MEMS: Theory, Design, and Technol-
ogy (Wiley, 2003).
[31] Katehi, L.P.B, Harvey, J. F. & Herrick, K. J. 3-D in-
tegration of RF circuits using Si micromachining. IEEE
Microwave Magazine 2, 30–39 (2001).
[32] Harle, L. Microwave micromachined cavity filters. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Michigan (2003).
[33] Brown, A. R., Blondy, P. & Rebeiz, G. M. Microwave
and millimeter-wave high-Q micromachined resonators.
Int. J. RF Microw. Comp. Aid. Eng. 9, 1–12 (1998).
[34] Papapolymerou, J., Cheng, J.-C., East, J. & Katehi,
L.P.B. A micromachined high-Q X-band resonator. IEEE
Microw. Guided Wave Lett. 7, 168–170 (1997).
[35] Bruno, A. et al. Reducing intrinsic loss in superconduct-
ing resonators by surface treatment and deep etching of
silicon substrates. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 (2015).
[36] Katehi, L. P. High Efficiency Micromachined Antennas:
Micromachined Antennas for Microwave and Mm-Wave
Applications.
Office of Naval Research Final Report
033095-1-F, Radiation Laboratory, University of Michi-
gan, Ann Arbor, Michigan (1997).
[37] Garro, I. L.
Micromachined microwave filters.
Ph.D.
thesis, University of Birmingham, England (2003).
[38] Reid, J. R., Marsh, E. D. & Webster, R. T. Microma-
chined Rectangular-Coaxial Transmission Lines.
IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 8, 3433–3442 (2006).
[39] Farrington, N. E. S. & Iezekiel, S.
Design of a Non-
Contact Vertical Transition for a 3D MM-Wave Multi-
Chip Module Based on Shielded Membrane Supported
Interconnects. Progress In Electromagnetics Research B
32, 405–423 (2011).
[40] Herrick, K. J., Yook, J.-G. & Katehi, L. Microtechnology
and the development of three-dimensional circuits. IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 46, 1832–1844 (1998).
[41] Chi, C.-Y. & Rebeiz, G. M.
Conductor-loss limited
stripline resonator and filters. IEEE Trans. Microw. The-
ory Tech. 44, 626–630 (1996).
[42] Blondy, P., Brown, A. R., Cros, D. & Rebeiz, G. M.
Low-loss micromachined filters for millimeter-wave com-
munication systems. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.
46, 2283–2288 (1998).
[43] Minev, Z. K., Pop, I. M. & Devoret, M. H. Planar su-
perconducting whispering gallery mode resonators. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 103, 142604 (2013).
[44] Minev, Z. K. et al. 2.5D circuit quantum electrodynamics
(2015). arXiv:1509.01619.
[45] Miller, T. M. & Jhabvala, C. A.
Enabling large focal
plane arrays through mosaic hybridization. Proc. SPIE
H, 84532 (2012).
[46] Lau, J. H. Flip chip technologies (McGraw Hill, 1996).


