R.Monaco et al.

Elliptic Annular Josephson Tunnel Junctions in an external magnetic field: The

dynamics

Roberto MonacoвҖ 1 and Jesper Mygind2

1)CNR-ISASI, Institute of Applied Sciences and Intelligent Systems вҖқE. CaianelloвҖқ,

Comprensorio Olivetti, 80078 Pozzuoli, Italya)

2)DTU Physics, B309, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby,

Denmarkb)

(Dated: 25 September 2021)

We analyze the dynamics of a magnetic flux quantum (current vortex) trapped in a

current-biased long planar elliptic annular Josephson tunnel junction. The system

is modeled by a perturbed sine-Gordon equation that determines the spatial and

temporal behavior of the phase difference across the tunnel barrier separating the

two superconducting electrodes. In the absence of an external magnetic field the

fluxon dynamics in an elliptic annulus does not differ from that of a circular annulus

where the stationary fluxon speed merely is determined by the system losses. The

interaction between the vortex magnetic moment and a spatially homogeneous in-

plane magnetic field gives rise to a tunable periodic non-sinusoidal potential which is

strongly dependent on the annulus aspect ratio. We study the escape of the vortex

from a well in the tilted potential when the bias current exceeds the depinning cur-

rent. The smallest depinning current as well as the lowest sensitivity of the annulus

to the external field is achieved when the eccentricity is equal to вҲ’1. The presented

extensive numerical results are in good agreement with the findings of the perturba-

tive approach. We also probe the rectifying properties of an asymmetric potential

implemented with an egg-shaped annulus formed by two semi-elliptic arcs.

a)Electronic mail:
r.monaco@isasi.cnr.it

b)Electronic mail: myg@fysik.dtu.dk

1

arXiv:1510.02254v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  8 Oct 2015


R.Monaco et al.

CONTENTS

I. Introduction
2

A. Elliptic annular junctions
4

II. The sine-Gordon modeling
5

A. PSGE for an elliptic annulus
6

III. Fluxon dynamics
7

A. The profile of the first Zero Field Step
7

B. Fluxon depinning currents
9

IV. Egg-shaped annular junctions
11

A. Deterministic ratchet potential
12

V. Conclusions
13

Acknowledgments
14

APPENDIX П„(s)
14

References
16

I.
INTRODUCTION

A planar Josephson tunnel junction (JTJ) is certainly the best solid-state device for the study

of non-linear phenomena and, in particular, for the investigation of soliton dynamics. In

this context, a soliton is a current vortex, also called a Josephson vortex or a fluxon carrying

one magnetic flux quantum. A fundamental model describing the fluxon dynamics is based

on the perturbed sine-Gordon equation with additional terms which account for dissipation

and driving fields. It has been recognized a long time ago1 that the fluxon(s) motion is

smoother in ring-shaped junctions since the collision of the fluxon with the boundaries are

absent. Another unique property of not simply-connected junctions is due to the fluxoid

quantization in the superconducting loop formed by either the top or the bottom electrodes of

the tunnel junction. One or more fluxons may be trapped in the junction during the normal-

2


R.Monaco et al.

superconducting transition. Once trapped the fluxons can never disappear and only fluxon-

antifluxon pairs can be nucleated. Later on, many researchers found the circular geometry

ideal for experimental tests of the perturbation models developed to take into account the

dissipative effects in the sine-Gordon analysis2вҖ“4. Circular annular JTJs, consisting of two

superconducting rings coupled by a thin dielectric layer were also recognized to be the

ideal device to investigate both the statics and the dynamics of sine-Gordon solitons in

the presence of a periodic potential5вҖ“8. A spatially periodic potential for the fluxon can be

easily implemented by a magnetic field applied in the junction plane. However, for JTJs

having a not simply-connected topology the most general and at the same time regular

geometry is provided by an elliptic annulus. At variance with a circle that has infinitely

many axes of symmetry, an ellipse has two axes of symmetry. Elliptic annular Josephson

tunnel junctions (EAJTJs) serve as a handy tool for the realization of complex periodic

potentials, including those lacking spatial reflection symmetry, known as ratchet potentials9.

An additional motivation to study EAJTJs is to cast in one unique class the many apparently

different JTJ configurations, including the linear geometry commonly studied in the context

of JTJs. Furthermore, by constructing the junction from two halves of different ellipses it is

possible to form an asymmetric oval or egg-shaped annulus with just one axis of symmetry.

In this article we focus on the dynamic properties of the phase in long EAJTJs; their

static properties in the presence of an externally applied field were the subject of a recent

work10. The paper is organized as follows. In the next subsection we state the problem

by describing what an EAJTJ is and introduce the mathematical notations and identities

used in the paper. In Section II we will describe the sine-Gordon modeling for curved long

JTJs and examine the partial differential equation appropriate to the specific case of an

elliptic annulus in a uniform in-plane magnetic field. In Section III we study the dynamic

properties of a single fluxon trapped in a long EAJTJ, particularly when a magnetic field

is present; we discuss the results of the numerical simulations and outline the effects of the

ellipse eccentricity. Later on, by combining two semi-elliptic junctions with different aspect

ratios, we suggest a simple geometrical configuration that implements a periodic ratchet

potential. The conclusions are drawn in Section V.

3


R.Monaco et al.

FIG. 1. Drawing illustrating the tunneling area of an elliptic annular Josephson tunnel junction in

a spatially homogeneous in-plane magnetic field H вүЎ (0, H). The annulus width is constant and

much smaller than the ellipse semi-axes a and b.

A.
Elliptic annular junctions

Let us consider a planar tunnel junction shaped as an elliptic annulus that, as shown

in Figure 1, lays in the plan identified by the X-Y Cartesian coordinate system whose

origin coincides with the annulus center of symmetry and whose axes are directed along the

principal semi-axes a and b. We define the axes ratio ПҒ вүЎ b/a and the eccentricity e2 вүЎ 1вҲ’ПҒ2.

We will assume the annulus width to be constant and much smaller than the ellipse semi-

axes.
The internal and external boundaries of such an annulus can be implemented by

drawing two closed curves parallel to a master ellipse, with constant but opposite offsets;

strictly speaking, such curves are not ellipses, but more complex curves11. The master ellipse

is described by the parametric equations x = a sin П„ and y = b cos П„, where the parameter

П„ is measured clockwise from the positive Y -axis such that П„ вүЎ ArcTan ПҒx/y, not to be

confused with the polar angle Оё вүЎ ArcTan x/y; for a circle, ПҒ = 1 (no eccentricity), so П„ and Оё

coincide, while for ПҒ Мё= 1, П„ = Оё only for Оё = mПҖ/2. The length of an elementary elliptic arc is

ds =
пҝҪ

dx2 + dy2 =
вҲҡ

a2 cos2П„ + b2 sin2П„dП„, therefore we introduce the non-linear curvilinear

coordinate along the ellipse s(П„) = a
пҝҪ П„
0 I(П„ вҖІ)dП„ вҖІ = aE(П„, e2), where I(П„) вүЎ
пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ e2 sin2П„ =
пҝҪ

cos2П„ + ПҒ2 sin2П„ is the integrand of the incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind,

E(П„, e2). s(П„) increases by one perimeter, P = 4aE(e2), as П„ changes by 2ПҖ; for a thin circular

ring with mean radius r, it would be s(П„) = s(Оё) = rОё. E(e2) вүЎ E(ПҖ/2, e2) is the complete

4


R.Monaco et al.

elliptic integrals of the second kind of real argument e2 вүӨ 1; typically, E(e2) is reported with

the argument in the [0, 1] interval; however, when ПҒ > 1, E(1вҲ’ПҒ2) = ПҒвҲ’1E(1вҲ’ПҒвҲ’2).

II.
THE SINE-GORDON MODELING

Following Refs.5,12, a one-dimensional planar curved JTJ of constant width in the pres-

ence of a barrier-parallel external magnetic field, H, is described by the following partial

differential equation for the Josephson phase ПҶ:

ПҶЛҶsЛҶs вҲ’ ПҶЛҶtЛҶt вҲ’ sin ПҶ = Оі(ЛҶs) + ОұПҶЛҶt вҲ’ ОІПҶЛҶsЛҶsЛҶt +
вҲҶ

JcО»J

dHОҪ
dЛҶs .
(1)

In Eq.(1) the subscripts on ПҶ denote partial derivatives; ЛҶs is the distance, s, normalized to

О»J and ЛҶt is the time, t, normalized to ПүвҲ’1
p , where Пүp/2ПҖ, is the oscillation frequency of small

amplitude waves. It is well known13 that the Josephson lenght О»J gives a measure of the

distance over which significant spatial variations of the phase occur. Further, Оі(ЛҶs) is the

local normalized bias current density. The second and third terms in the right-hand side take

into account the losses given by the normalized quasiparticle shunt loss coefficient Оұ and the

surface losses in the superconducting electrodes described by the surface loss coefficient ОІ13.

HОҪ is the component of the applied magnetic field normal to the junction perimeter and вҲҶ

is the coupling between the external field and the field in the junction5,14; it merely depends

on the geometry and thickness of the junction electrodes.
Jc is the uniform maximum

Josephson current density. Eq.(1) is called the Perturbed sine-Gordon Equation (PSGE).

Because of its local form, it is quite general and holds for long one-dimensional junctions of

any geometrical shape. It states that the magnetic field enters directly into the PSGE, in

contrast to the case of linear junctions for which it appears only in the boundary conditions.

For small fields a long linear JTJ behaves as a perfect diamagnet by establishing circulating

screening currents which maintain the interior field at zero. This вҖқMeissnerвҖқ effect does not

occur in long curved junctions where even a small magnetic field does penetrate the barrier;

nevertheless, still the critical current decreases linearly with the applied field10,12.

In the absence of the right-hand side, the solitonic solution of Eq.(1) is a Josephson vortex

(sine-Gordon kink), ПҶ(ЛҶs) = 4 arctan exp
пҝҪ
(ЛҶs вҲ’ ЛҶs0)/
вҲҡ

1 вҲ’ ЛҶu2пҝҪ
, centered at ЛҶs0(ЛҶt) and moving

with constant normalized velocity1 ЛҶu = dЛҶs0/dЛҶt; ЛҶu is the fluxon speed divided by the Swihart

velocity, c0 = ПүpО»J. The right-hand side of Eq.(1) is usually considered as a perturbation1; it

5


R.Monaco et al.

does not drastically change the vortex shape, but defines its dynamics, e.g., its equilibrium

velocity.
Such an approximation essentially treats the vortex as a rigid object, and its

dynamics can be reduced to that of a relativistic underdamped point-like particle15,16. As

soon as HОҪ Мё= 0, the fluxon experiences a magnetic potential due to the interaction of its

magnetic moment with the external magnetic field. If the normal field, HОҪ, changes slowly in

comparison with the fluxon size, the normalized potential is Uh(ЛҶs) = вҲ’вҲҶhОҪ(ЛҶs), where hОҪ вүЎ

HОҪ/JcО»J. In the well-known case of the ring-shaped junction, hОҪ(s) вҲқ cos(s/r), therefore

the potential is sinusoidal; for an elliptic annulus we expect the potential to be still periodic

and symmetric, but non-sinusoidal. The potential gradient, Fh(ЛҶs) вүЎ вҲ’dU/dЛҶs = вҲҶdhОҪ/dЛҶs,

gives the magnetic force exerted on the fluxon1; it is due to the interaction of the vortex

magnetic moment with the external magnetic field and corresponds to the last term on the

right-hand side of Eq.(1). In the small field limit, both Uh and Fh are proportional to the

magnitude of the external field.

A.
PSGE for an elliptic annulus

The PSGE for an EAJTJ in the presence of a spatially homogeneous magnetic field, H,

applied in the junction plane perpendicular to the a-semi-axis, has recently been derived10

with the assumption that the annulus width is constant and small compared to the Josephson

penetration length:

пҝҪО»J

aI

пҝҪ2 пҝҪ
ПҶП„П„ + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2

I2
sin П„ cos П„ ПҶП„

пҝҪ
вҲ’ ПҶЛҶtЛҶt вҲ’ sin ПҶ =

= Оі(П„) + ОұПҶЛҶt вҲ’
пҝҪО»J

aI

пҝҪ2
ОІ
пҝҪ
ПҶП„П„ЛҶt + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2

I2
sin П„ cos П„ ПҶП„ЛҶt

пҝҪ
+ hвҲҶ ПҒ2

I4 sin П„,
(2)

where h = H/Jc a; Eq.(2) is supplemented by the periodic boundary conditions14:

ПҶ(П„ + 2ПҖ) = ПҶ(П„) + 2ПҖn,
(3a)

ПҶП„(П„ + 2ПҖ) = ПҶП„(П„),
(3b)

where n is an integer number, called the winding number, corresponding to the algebraic

sum of Josephson vortices (or fluxons) trapped in the junction due to flux quantization

in one of the superconducting electrodes.
For ПҒ = I2(ПҒ, П„) = 1, Eq.(2) reduces to the

6


R.Monaco et al.

well studied PSGE for ring-shaped junctions5,14, while, in the limit ПҒ вҶ’ 0, it reproduces

the classical PDE for a linear junction.
Eq.(2) states that the different sections of the

annulus feel different fields; diametrically opposed points feel opposite fields and the field

term in Eq.(2) is out of phase with respect to the actual normal field. What matters in

long EAJTJs is not the normalized perimeter, в„“ = P/О»J = 4aE(e2)/О»J, but rather the

ratio a/О»J = в„“/4E(e2). Once a and О»j are given, a change in the annulus aspect ratio, ПҒ,

corresponds to a variation in the length of the b semi-axes. The commercial finite element

simulation package COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS (www.comsol.com) was used to numerically

solve Eq.(2) subjected to cyclic boundary conditions Eqs.(3a) and (3b). In all calculations we

set the damping coefficients Оұ = 0.1 (weakly underdamped limit) and ОІ = 0, while keeping

the current distribution uniform, Оі(П„) = Оі. Strictly speaking, a uniformly distributed bias

current would yield Оі(П„) = ПҖОіI/2E(e2); however, for small eccentricity (e2 вүғ 0), it is

ПҖI(П„, e2)/2E(e2) вүҲ 1. The uniformity of the current distribution in real samples is not a

matter of concern in this work which does not take into account the geometry of the current

carrying junction electrodes.

III.
FLUXON DYNAMICS

In this section we will consider the dynamic properties of a single Josephson vortex

trapped in a current-biased EAJTJ. We first consider the case when no magnetic field is

applied; later on we study the consequences of a periodic non-sinusoidal potential while

varying the annulus eccentricity.

A.
The profile of the first Zero Field Step

When cooling an annular junction below its critical temperature one or more Josephson

vortices (fluxons) may be spontaneously trapped in the junction on a statistical basis. The

corresponding flux quanta must be trapped in the superconducting loop formed by either the

bottom or top electrode. The trapping probability is known to increase with the speed of the

normal-to-superconducting transition17,18. After a successful trapping procedure the junc-

tion zero-voltage critical current is considerably smaller and a stable finite-voltage current

branch, called zero-field step (ZFS), appears in the junction current-voltage characteristic

7


R.Monaco et al.

FIG. 2. The dots refer to the numerically computed profile of the first zero-field step for an EAJTJ

with no external magnetic field; the profile is ПҒ-independent. Results are calculated integrating

Eq.(2) with l = 4ПҖ, ПҒ = 1, Оұ = 0.1, ОІ = 0, h = 0, and n = 1. The solid line is the perturbative

model expectation in Eq.(4). The dashed line depicts the quasi-particle current Оі/в„“Оұ.

indicating that the bias current forces the fluxon(s) to travel along the annulus in the ab-

sence of collisions. In the simplest picture the velocity of a single fluxon, considered as a

relativistic particle, is determined by a balance between the driving force on the fluxon and

the drag force due to the dissipative losses. In the absence of a magnetic field, the driving

force is proportional to the bias current density which is assumed uniform in the junction.

A relativistic formula for the fluxon motion was derived1 for an infinitely long junction using

a perturbative approach. It predicts a smooth current-voltage profile of the ZFS branch in

annular junctions where, as on an infinite line, the fluxon moves only subjected to cyclic

boundary conditions:

Оі(ЛҶu) =
4Оұ/ПҖ
вҲҡ

ЛҶuвҲ’2 вҲ’ 1.
(4)

The dots in Figure 2 show the numerically computed current-voltage (i.e., Оі versus < ПҶЛҶt >)

characteristic of a ring-shaped junction of normalized length в„“ = 4ПҖ with one trapped fluxon

(n = 1). Noticing that the mean voltage generated by a fluxon moving with velocity ЛҶu is

given by V вҲқ< ПҶЛҶt >= 2ПҖЛҶu/в„“, and since, from Eq.(1), Оі means a force, we can think of

the plot in Figure 2 also as force-velocity characteristics. The normalized velocity, ЛҶu, was

determined from the fluxon revolution period ЛҶT, as ЛҶu = в„“/ ЛҶT and was defined to be positive

for fluxons rotating clockwise.
The dashed line depicts the quasi-particle current Оі/в„“Оұ.

The profile of the ZFS smoothly goes to zero as the bias current goes to zero and is point-

8


R.Monaco et al.

(a)
(b)

FIG. 3. (Color online)(a) Plots of the magnetic potential Uh = IвҲ’1(П„) cos П„ for several ПҒ values

(вҲҶ = h = 1); (b) as in (a) for the forcing term Fh = ПҒ2 IвҲ’4(ПҒ, П„) sin П„.

symmetric for negative biases (not shown), meaning that the fluxon rotates counterclockwise.

The ZFS profile is insensitive to the annulus eccentricity as far as we keep its perimeter

constant; more specifically, numerical simulations showed that the fluxon travels at the same

stationary power-balance speed regardless of the annulus aspect ratio, i.e., the revolution

period only depends on the bias current. The solid line in Figure 2 is the Оі(ЛҶu) dependence

according to Eq.(4); the good agreement indicates that the perturbative approach also apply

to a fluxon traveling along an elliptic annulus.

B.
Fluxon depinning currents

In the presence of a magnetic field the fluxon is trapped in a potential well until the

Lorentz force associated with the bias current is strong enough to start its motion. The

potential shape drastically depends on the annulus eccntricity and so does the depinning

current, Оіd. Considering that H = (0, H), the normal field along the annulus perimeter

is10 HОҪ(П„) = HIвҲ’1(П„) cos П„. By assuming that the annulus is long enough so that the left

and right tails of the fluxon do not interact, it turns out that the magnetic potential for an

EAJTJ is Uh(П„) = вҲ’вҲҶhОҪ(П„) = вҲ’вҲҶhIвҲ’1(П„) cos П„ and is plotted in Figure 3(a) for several

ПҒ values (for вҲҶ = h = 1). It is seen that the potential is periodic and symmetric and

vanishes at the equatorial points, П„ = ВұПҖ/2 (it is sinusoidal only for ПҒ = 1). With our

settings, the potential well occurs at the origin, s = П„ = 0. In the limit ПҒ вҶ’ 0, Uh(П„)

9


R.Monaco et al.

FIG. 4. Depinning force Fd versus the annulus axes-ratio ПҒ for вҲҶ = h = 1; the solid lines refers to

Eq.(5), while the solid circles and the open squares are the numerically computed values for elliptic

annuli having the semi-axes a = 16О»j and a = 32О»j, respectively.

approaches a symmetric square wave profile, while it resembles a train of alternate unitary

pulses, in the opposite limit, ПҒ >> 1.
The directional derivative of the normal field is

dhОҪ/dЛҶs = (О»j/a)hвҲҘПҒ2IвҲ’4 sin П„, therefore, the potential force experienced by a fluxon is a

function of the vortex location: Fh вүЎ вҲ’dUh/dЛҶs = вҲҶdhОҪ/dЛҶs = (О»j/a)вҲҶhвҲҘПҒ2IвҲ’4 sin П„; Fh(П„)

is plotted in Figure 3(b) for different ПҒ values (for О»j/a = вҲҶ = h = 1). We found that as far

as ПҒ вүӨ 2/
вҲҡ

3 вүғ 1.154, Fh(П„, ПҒ) is maximum for П„ = ПҖ/2; increasing ПҒ a twofold maximum

develops at ВҜП„ = cosвҲ’1 Вұ
пҝҪ

(3ПҒ2 вҲ’ 4)/(3ПҒ2 вҲ’ 3) that approaches the values 0 and ПҖ for very

large aspect ratios. The fluxon depinning occurs when the bias current, Оі, just exceeds the

limit of the depinning force:

Fd(ПҒ) =

пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈІ

пЈҙ
пЈі

Fh
пҝҪ ПҖ

2, ПҒ
пҝҪ
= hвҲҶПҒвҲ’2
if 0 вүӨ ПҒ вүӨ
2
вҲҡ

3

Fh
пҝҪ
cosвҲ’1 пҝҪ

3ПҒ2вҲ’4
3ПҒ2вҲ’3, ПҒ
пҝҪ
= hвҲҶ
33/2 ПҒ2

24вҲҡ

ПҒ2вҲ’1
if ПҒ вүҘ
2
вҲҡ

3.
(5)

Fd(ПҒ)/hвҲҶ is shown by the line in Figure 4; it has a minimum when ПҒ =
вҲҡ

2. For small aspect

ratios it grows as ПҒвҲ’2, while it increases linearly in the opposite limit. The solid circles and

the open square are the numerically computed values of Оіd for, respectively, a = 16О»J and

a = 32О»J, setting hвҲҶ = О»J/a in Eq.(2). We see that the longer the annulus perimeter is,

the better is the agreement with the infinite length expectation. Further, the linearity of

the depinning current for small field values was also successfully tested.

Once the fluxon has been unpinned its speed is periodically modulated by the magnetic

10


R.Monaco et al.

FIG. 5. (Color online) Calculated magnetic diffraction patterns of long EAJTJs for several values

of the axis ratio, ПҒ when a = 32О»j and вҲҶ = 1. The magnetic field is normalized to Jca.

potential. However, due to the symmetry of the potential and the ohmic losses included in

the sine-Gordon modeling, its average value does not changes. The more realistic viscous

losses proportional to ПҶ2
t rather than ПҶt would yield a different results7.
вҲҡ

2 is a peculiar value of ПҒ for which the effect of a given applied field on an EAJTJ is

minimum. This can be seen also in the absence of trapped flux, by considering how the

external field modulates the critical current, Оіc, above which the junction switches to a a

finite voltage state. Figure 5 shows the main lobe of the magnetic diffraction patterns for

several ПҒ values when a = 32О»J. We see that the largest critical field is achieved when

ПҒ =
вҲҡ

2.

IV.
EGG-SHAPED ANNULAR JUNCTIONS

Asymmetric field profiles in long JTJs were recently investigated8,12,15 in order to exploit the

rectifying property9 of a ratchet potential. Playing with the shape of the tunnel barrier it is

possible to generate asymmetric periodic potentials by simply applying an uniform magnetic

field. It is easy to recognize that the asymmetric tapered oval configuration depicted in the

inset of Figure 6(a) implements a deterministic ratchet potential. It consists of two semi

ellipses having the same b semi-axis and different a semi-axis; to the left is al =
вҲҡ

2b/2 and

to the right ar = 2al =
вҲҡ

2b. In this way the oval assembles the cross section of an hen egg.

At variance with the other geometries previously used to study the effect of non symmetric

11


R.Monaco et al.

(a)
(b)

FIG. 6. (Color online)(a) The magnetic potential Uh and forcing Fh for the egg-shaped annular

junction shown in the inset; ЛҶs = s/О»j is the normalized distance measured from the top.
(b)

Numerically computed ZFS profiles for three different values of the normalized magnetic field,

hвҖІ = H/JcО»J. The inset shows the main lobe of the computed magnetic diffraction pattern.

potentials8,12, the fluxon dynamics in an asymmetric elliptic oval is described by an analytic

PSGE; in fact, Eq.(2) has been numerically solved by setting a(П„) = al and ПҒ(П„) =
вҲҡ

2/2

for П„ вҲҲ [вҲ’ПҖ, 0] and a(П„) = ar and ПҒ(П„) =
вҲҡ

2 for П„ вҲҲ [0, ПҖ]. We set b = 4.83О»J so that

the total annulus perimeter is L = 2alE(1/2) + 2arE(вҲ’1) =
вҲҡ

2bE(1/2)(1 +
вҲҡ

2) вүҲ 10ПҖО»j.

Since the magnetic potential is averaged over the vortex size (вҲқ О»j), the smooth changes in

the oval curvature allows us to apply perturbation theory. The magnetic potential and the

forcing term generated by an uniform in-plane magnetic field applied perpendicular to the

symmetry axis are shown in Figure 6(a), respectively, by the dashed and solid line. Eq.(A-1)

has been used to express Uh and Fh as a function of the normalized distance ЛҶs = s/О»j. We

see that on the average the accelerating force in the right side is about twice larger than the

mean decelerating one in the left; in addition, the positive force acts over a longer distance.

A.
Deterministic ratchet potential

Figure 6(b) shows the computed step profile for three values of the external magnetic field

hвҖІ = H/JcО»J, namely 3, 0 and вҲ’3. According to Eq.(2) a reversal of the magnetic field is

equivalent to a current reversal and vice versa. The full dots show the ZFS profile of the egg-

shaped annular JTJ with one trapped fluxon when the ratchet potential is off (H = 0); again

12


R.Monaco et al.

the fit with the perturbation result of Eq.(4) was excellent. When a positive ratchet field is

turned on (open stars) we see that the current amplitude of the step is reduced and a current

range with zero-mean voltage (zero velocity) appears. This hysteretic behavior reflects the

relevance of the inertial effects typical of underdamped systems. The zero-voltage current is

the fluxon trapping current, i.e., the minimum current at which a fluxon still moves along

the system, not being trapped by the potential. The situation drastically changes when the

magnetic field in reverted (open squares); as expected, the average fluxon speed is much

smaller and the hysteresis more pronounced.

The asymmetry of the potential has been also probed by calculating the main lobe of the

magnetic diffraction pattern for the egg-shaped geometry; as shown in the inset of Fig-

ure 6(b), the slopes for positive and negative fields are quite different.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we investigated the dynamic properties of a not simply connected planar

Josephson tunnel junction shaped as an elliptic annulus of constant width (which does not

imply that the barrier area is delimited by two confocal ellipses).
This system can be

analyzed in the contest of the theory developed for curved one-dimensional long Josephson

tunnel junctions12 provided cyclic boundary conditions are imposed; the perturbed sine-

Gordon equation for the Josephson phase appropriate to elliptic annular Josephson tunnel

junctions was derived in a recent paper10. Extensive numerical simulations showed that, as

far as no magnetic field is applied, the single fluxon dynamics in a current biased elliptic

annulus is not affected by its eccentricity; the stationary fluxon speed only depends on the

balance between the Lorentz force induced by the bias current and the dissipation drag

acting on the vortex.

Elliptic annular junctions inherently have specular symmetry with respect to their principal

axes: quite obviously an in-plane magnetic field breaks the system symmetry along its direc-

tion. If the field is applied along one semi-axis the induced periodic potential is symmetric

and non-sinusoidal. We studied the trapping properties of the potential as a function of

the ellipse aspect ratio and found that smallest effect is achieved when ПҒ =
вҲҡ

2. We also

suggested an egg-shaped geometry with only one axis of symmetry; here the magnetic field

coupled to the annulus lacks reflection symmetry, so accomplishing a rectifying potential in

13


R.Monaco et al.

which a soliton is preferentially accelerated in one half of the junction perimeter and acceler-

ated in the opposite part. In passing, we note that an asymmetric potential can simply be im-

plemented by applying the uniform in-plane field at a generic angle Оё Мё= kПҖ/2 measured from

the b semi-axis of an EAJTJ, H = (H sin Оё, H cos Оё); in this case the normal field along the

annulus perimeter would be HОҪ(Оё, П„)/H = (a cos Оё cos П„ + b sin Оё sin П„)/
вҲҡ

a2 cos2 П„ + b2 sin2 П„.

However, in such a case the ratchet effect would be much less pronounced than for the

asymmetric oval case.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

RM and JM acknowledge the support from the Danish Council for Strategic Research under

the program EXMAD.

APPENDIX П„(s)

If one wants to express magnetic potential, Uh, or force, Fh, as a function of the more intuitive

curvilinear coordinate, s, then the dependence П„(s) is needed. Unfortunately, the elliptic

integrals of the second kind are not invertible in terms of single-valued functions (at variance

with the elliptic integrals of the first kind). In Ref.19 a series expansion of П„ in powers of

E(П„, m) is reported, but only in the limit of small E. Another efficient ansatz is a higher

order Newton-Raphson root-finding method, since the derivatives of E(П„, e2) with respect to

П„ are well known: вҲӮE(П„, e2)/вҲӮП„ =
пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ e2 sin2 П„ and вҲӮ2E(П„, e2)/вҲӮП„ 2 = e2 sin 2П„(2вҲӮE/вҲӮП„)вҲ’1;

for this one needs the implementation of an iterative algorithm and, in addition, a solid

computation of the original E(П„, e2) itself.

To circumvent these difficulties, let us consider, with no loss of generality, an ellipse of

generic eccentricity, e2 = 1 вҲ’ ПҒ2, and length 2ПҖ, whose curvilinear coordinate Пғ(П„, e2) =

2ПҖs(П„, e2)/L = ПҖE(П„, e2)/2E(e2) simply scales with the distance s measured on a ellipse

having the same eccentricity and generic length L. Figure 7 shows the П„-dependence of

Пғ(П„, e2) for two reciprocal values of the axis ratio ПҒ =
вҲҡ

1 вҲ’ e2, namely, 1/2 and 2. We

see that the incomplete elliptic integrals of the second kind are quasi-periodic functions

with respect to П„, namely, E(П„ +kПҖ, e2) = E(П„, e2)+2kE(e2); in terms of the the normalized

distance, Пғ, it is Пғ(П„ +kПҖ, e2) = Пғ(П„, e2)+kПҖ. In other words, Пғ(П„, e2) is a linear function in П„

14


R.Monaco et al.

FIG. 7.
Curvilinear coordinate normalized to the ellipse circumference Пғ(П„, ПҒ) = ПҖE(П„, 1 вҲ’

ПҒ2)/2E(1 вҲ’ ПҒ2); in the inset вҲҶПғ(П„) = Пғ вҲ’ ПғвҖІ where ПғвҖІ(П„, e2) вүЎ П„ + A2(e2) sin 2П„ + A4(e2) sin 4П„.

plus a ПҖ-periodic oscillation, and a Fourier expansion of the difference Пғ(П„, e2)вҲ’П„ with one or

two terms is sufficient when the ellipse is not extremely eccentric; accordingly we can write:

Пғ(П„, e2) вүғ П„ +A2(e2) sin 2П„ +A4(e2) sin 4П„ вүЎ ПғвҖІ(П„, e2), where, in general20, A2(1/ПҒ) = вҲ’A2(ПҒ)

and A4(1/ПҒ) = A4(ПҒ), while, for 0 вүӨ ПҒ вүӨ 1, A2(ПҒ) вүҲ (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)/3 and A4(ПҒ) вүҲ (1 вҲ’ вҲҡПҒ)/30.

The inset of Fig. 7 shows the difference вҲҶПғ = Пғ вҲ’ ПғвҖІ whose absolute value is always less

than 10вҲ’3. We also note that, to a very high degree of approximation, П„(Пғ, ПҒ) вүғ Пғ(П„, 1/ПҒ), in

other words, Пғ(П„) can be inverted by simply operating the transformation ПҒ вҶ’ 1/ПҒ, namely,

П„(Пғ, ПҒ) вүғ Пғ + A2(1/ПҒ) sin 2Пғ + A4(1/ПҒ) sin 4Пғ = Пғ вҲ’ A2(ПҒ) sin 2Пғ + A4(ПҒ) sin 4Пғ.
(A-1)

This empirical finding provides an overall accuracy better than 0.5% for ПҒ = 0.5 and 2; the

accuracy improves a lot for intermediate values. For an elliptic annulus of physical length

L, one has to remind that Пғ = 2ПҖs/L.

15


R.Monaco et al.

REFERENCES

1D. W. McLaughlin and A. C. Scott, Phys. Rev. A 18, 1652 (1978); A. V. Ustinov, Physica

D123, 315 (1998).

2A. Davidson, B. Dueholm, B. Kryger, and N. F. Pedersen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2059

(1985).

3A. Davidson, B. Dueholm, and N. F. Pedersen, J. Appl. Phys. 60, 1447 (1986).

4A. V. Ustinov, T. Doderer, R. P. Huebener, N. F. Pedersen, B. Mayer, and V. A. Oboznov,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1815 (1992).

5N. GrВЁonbech-Jensen, P. S. Lomdahl, and M. R. Samuelsen, Phys. Lett. A 154, 14 (1991);

N. GrВЁonbech-Jensen, P. S. Lomdahl, and M. R. Samuelsen, Phys. Rev. B 43, 12799 (1991).

6A.V. Ustinov, JETP Lett., 64 191 (1996).

7N. Martucciello, J. Mygind, V.P. Koshelets, A.V. Shchukin, L.V. Filippenko and R.

Monaco, Phys. Rev. B 57, 5444 (1998).

8A. Wallraff, A. Lukashenko, J. Lisenfeld, A. Kemp, M.V. Fistul, Y. Koval and A. V.

Ustinov, Nature 425, 155 (2003).

9M.O. Magnasco, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1477 (1993).

10R. Monaco, C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, and J. Mygind, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28, 085010

(2015).

11http://mathworld.wolfram.com/EllipseParallelCurves.html

12E. Goldobin, A. Sterck, and D. Koelle, Phys. Rev. E 63, 031111 (2001).

13A. Barone and G. Patern`o, Physics and Applications of the Josephson Effect (Wiley, New

York, 1982).

14N. Martucciello, and R. Monaco, Phys. Rev. B 53 3471 (1996); N. Martucciello, C. Soriano

and R. Monaco, Phys. Rev. B 55 15157 (1997).

15G. Carapella, Phys. Rev. B 63, 054515 (2001); G. Carapella, and G. Costabile Phys. Rev.

Lett. 87, 077002 (2001).

16M. Knufinke, K. Ilin,M. Siegel, D. Koelle, R. Kleiner, and E. Goldobin, Phys. Rev. E 85,

011122 (2012).

17R. Monaco, M. Aaroe, J. Mygind, R.J. Rivers, and V.P. Koshelets, Phys. Rev. B 74,

144513 (2006).

18R. Monaco, M. Aaroe, J. Mygind, R.J. Rivers, and V.P. Koshelets, Phys. Rev. B 77,

16


R.Monaco et al.

054509 (2008) and references therein.

19Abramowitz, Milton; Stegun, Irene A., eds. (1972), Handbook of Mathematical Func-

tions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, New York: Dover Publications,

ISBN 978-0-486-61272-0. As outlined in chapter 3.6.25 the following series expansion holds:

П„ = E(П„, m) + (m/6)E3(П„, m) + (m/120)(13m вҲ’ 4)E5(П„, m) + (m/5040)(493m2 вҲ’ 284m +

16)E7(П„, m) + (m/362880)(37369m3 вҲ’ 31224m2 + 4944m вҲ’ 64)E9(П„, m)...; the expansion

can be obtained by the Mathematica command In[1]:=InverseSeries[Series[EllipticE[П„, m],

П„, 0, 10]].

20The analytic expressions of the Fourier coefficients are:

A2(e2) = [(2 вҲ’ e2) вҲ’ 2(1 вҲ’ e2)K(e2)/E(e2)] /3e2 and

A4(e2) = [вҲ’ (16 вҲ’ 16e2 + e4) + 8 (2 вҲ’ 3e2 + e4) K(e2)/E(e2)] /30e4,

where K(e2) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind.

17


