 1 

 

 

Progress in nonmagnetic impurity doping studies on Fe-based 

superconductors 

 

Jun Li,1,2,3* Yan-Feng Guo,4, 2,† Zhao-Rong Yang,5,6 Kazunari Yamaura,2,7  

Eiji Takayama-Muromachi,2 Hua-Bing Wang,1,2,3 Pei-Heng Wu 1 

 

1 Research Institute of Superconductor Electronics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China 

2 National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

3 Cooperative Innovation Centre of Terahertz Science, Chengdu 610054, China 

4 School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, China 

5 Key Laboratory of Materials Physics, Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of 

Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, 230031, China. 

6 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 

210093, China 

7 Graduate School of Chemical Science and Engineering, Hokkaido University, Hokkaido 060-0810, 

Japan 

 

Corresponding authors: J.L. (E-mail: junli@nju.edu.cn), Y.F.G. 

(E-mail:guoyf@shanghaitech.edu.cn) 

 

Abstract 

We review the progress of nonmagnetic impurity doping study on the Fe-based superconductors. 

On the theoretical side, two highly potential candidates for the pairing symmetry order parameter, i.e. 

the multi-gap s++ and s± wave models, have been proposed but continuously debated. The debate 

arises because of the complex gap structure, exceptive magnetic and metallic behaviors of Fe-based 

superconductors which may make the influences of nonmagnetic defects varied in chemical potential, 

impurity disorder, inter- and intra-band scattering strength, and electron localization, and hence 


 2 

 

difficulty in directly obtaining the most important information for understanding the symmetry order 

parameter. Experimentally, the nonmagnetic impurity substitution study has been widely carried out, 

which has provided very useful insights. We review herein the various nonmagnetic impurity doping 

experiments, including the controlled defects within the superconducting Fe2X2 planes through 

samples quality improvement, a single impurity effects on the electronic state and local moment, the 

magnetic response of the Fe2X2 planes both on macroscopic scale as antiferromagnetic state and local 

scale of moment, as well as the significant effect in modifying the transport properties. The 

experiments enable us to qualitatively analyze the nonmagnetic impurities effects on the 

superconducting state for many Fe-based superconductors. We also propose herein some strategies 

for the nonmagnetic impurity doping study. As an important model for explaining the nonmagnetic 

impurities doping effects, the pair-breaking model is compared with various theoretical approaches 

via analyzing the pair-breaking rates of various Fe-superconductors. 

 


 3 

 

1. Introduction 

In 2006, Kamihara et al. discovered superconductivity with a critical temperature (Tc) of 5 K in 

LaFePO1-xFx which has a layered ZrCuSiAs-type (1111-type) tetragonal structure [1]. Adopting the 

same strategy by substituting fluorine for oxygen in an analogue LaFeAsO, a much higher Tc of 26 K 

was achieved in early 2008 [2]. The exciting discovery aroused another research climax of 

superconductivity which announced that a new high-Tc superconductor family, the so-called Fe-based 

superconductor (FBS), was born. The FBS family has attracted intensive attentions and the studies 

have been advanced rather rapidly [1-7]. This is not only due to that the FBS is a second class of 

high-Tc superconductors after the cuprate superconductors, but also because it is highly promising to 

understand the superconducting (SC) mechanism of high-Tc by comparing the two families.  

To date, one of the remained key issues is to elucidate the pair-symmetry of the FBS, for which 

several possible models were proposed just after the discovery [8-18]. Among the various models, 

the multi-gaped s-wave is generally acceptable but still has been debated between the s± [8, 9] and s++ 

wave models [10, 11]. In both models, the Fermi surface has the same hole-type pockets but the 

electron-type pockets within the s± wave model have opposite signs, i.e. a sign-reversal s-wave model, 

whilst have the same sign within the s++ wave model. Additionally, the d-wave model with opposite 

signs for the nearest-neighbor electron pockets remains competing, provided that there are nodes on 

the hole pockets or even on both the electron and hole pockets [10, 16, 17]. The various experiments 

results can hardly reach a consensus on the symmetry model. More recent results even suggested that 

different systems in the iron-pnicitide family may represent different pairing symmetries, and the 

superconductors with different doping levels are as well [12,15,18]. The divergences appeal further 

investigations to provide solid evidences. Among the various strategies, the impurity substitution, 

especially the nonmagnetic impurities substitution for Fe, is one of the most promising approaches to 

address the issue.  

The SC Fe2X2 (X=As, P or Se) plane, which is similar as the SC CuO2 layer in cuprate 

superconductors, is a common feature shared by the various iron-pnicitide superconductors. The 

substitution of point defects for the Fe-site has been proposed for understanding the physical 

properties, which has been demonstrated as an effective way and has been intensively undertaken in 

cuprate superconductors. According to Anderson’s theorem [19], the nonmagnetic impurity (NMI) 

cannot break Cooper pairs in an isotropic SC gap but for an anisotropic gap, while the pair-breaking 

effect of the magnetic impurities is independent of gap type. Thus, the introduction of nonmagnetic 


 4 

 

point defects is crucial to probe the information of the gap. The zinc ion (Zn2+) with tightly closed 

d-shell is considered as an ideal NMI [20-28]. The study of Zn substitution effects for Cu on the 

cuprate family such as YBa2Cu3O7-δ [20-22], (La,Sr)2CuO4 [20, 23-25], and Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 [20, 

26-28] was carried out over the last two decades. Only a few at.% of Zn which acts as a strong 

scattering center can remarkably depress SC due to the d-wave anisotropic gap [20]. Since the doped 

Zn often plays a crucial role in pairing symmetry judgment demonstrated by the investigations on 

many superconductors, it is expected to work in the FBS as well. 

In this article we review both theoretical and experimental studies of the NMI effects on the 

superconductivity of FBS. We start with the introduction of the potential gap symmetries of FBS and 

recent theoretical studies on the defect impurities in Section 2, and then overview the NMI 

substitution methods in Section 3, including both chemical doping and irradiation inducing defects. 

The effects of NMI on the various properties of the host superconductors are reviewed by introducing 

the various experiments in Section 4: (i) The sample quality will be discussed for the controlled 

impurities within the SC Fe2X2 planes in Section 4.1. (ii) In Section 4.2, a single impurity effects on 

the electronic state and local moment are introduced. (iii) Magnetic response of the Fe2X2 planes to 

NMI on both macroscopic scale as antiferromagnetic state and local scale of moment will be 

reviewed in Section 4.3. (iv) Significant modifications of the transport properties of the 

superconductors are discussed in details in Section 4.4. (iv) Some potential experiments for 

introduction of NMI are also proposed in Section 4.5. (v) Finally, as the most prominent qualitative 

feature from the impurities doping, the effects on SC state are discussed in Section 4.5, which covers 

many systems of superconductors. As a summary, the pair-breaking rates in different systems will be 

reviewed in Section 5 by comparing with various theoretical approaches. 

2. Theoretical background 

2.1. Gap symmetry of Fe-based superconductors 

Theorists have proposed four models as candidates for the SC energy gap symmetry of FBS as 

shown in Figure 1 [6]. Figure 1 (a) illustrates the order parameter (OP) for the conventional 

Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors [29], in which the electrons pairing via gaining 

energy from the electron-phonon interactions and the SC OP is the same for all electrons, namely, an 

“s-wave” model. The s-wave SC is associated with an isotropic energy gap for the Cooper pairs, 


 5 

 

being completely symmetric along all directions. The electron-electron magnetic interaction [30-34] 

dominates another type of SC gap with the “d-wave” OP as shown in Figure 1(b), where the sign 

variation of the OP has direction dependence, e.g. cos2α, which can result in an anisotropic gap 

symmetry. The OP of the cuprate superconductors is generally of the d-wave symmetry. Additionally, 

the multi-gap model (s++ wave) is also proposed, as shown in Figure 1(c) [35]. It is believed that the 

SC mechanism for MgB2 is of the BCS-type with the s++ symmetry, whereby the Fermi surface 

comprises two small hole pockets around the Γ = (0, 0) point and two electron pockets around the M 

= (π, π) point in the 2-Fe (Mg?) Brillouin zone. The OP is positive for all bands but has different 

magnitudes for different bands, belong to an isotropic symmetry. After the discovery of FBS, another 

type of multi-gap model, the so-called “s± wave” model (see Figure 1 (d)) was proposed to interpret 

the OP. In the s++ wave model, the Fermi surface also consists of two small hole pockets and two 

electron pockets, whereas the OP in some band(s) has positive sign but in the other band(s) has 

negative sign. Within such a framework, the s± wave gap structure possesses a strongly anisotropic 

symmetry. 

For FBS, the conventionally simple s-wave model has already been eliminated by various 

studies and the multi-gapped s-wave models, i.e., the s± [8,9] and the s++ wave [10-12], are currently 

promising candidates, where the former likely has a magnetic fluctuation origin while the latter likely 

has a charge fluctuation origin. Both models have positive OPs for the hole Fermi pockets, while 

have opposite signs for the electron pockets, thus the s± wave is sometimes called as a sign-reversal 

s-wave, and the s++ state as a non-sign-reversal. As a competing candidate, the d-wave model with 

nodes on the hole pockets or even on both the electron and hole pockets remains possible for the OP 

of FBS [10,16,17].  

Various experiments have been performed to investigate the OP symmetry of FBS, including 

angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, quantum oscillation, London penetration depth, and 

Josephson tunneling effect, and so on. However, the issue remains inclusive because of the rather 

contrary results derived from these experiments. Here, we will review the NMI doping study on this 

issue.  

 

 

 


 6 

 

 

Figure 1. Schematic images for various SC order parameter models. (a) single-gap s-wave for the 

conventional superconductors, (b) single-gap d-wave for the cuprates, (c) multi-gap s++ wave for 

MgB2, and (d) multi-gap s± wave, from Mazin [8]. 

 

2.2. Nonmagnetic impurity doping effect on superconductivity 

In this section, we focus on theoretical studies on the effect of impurity atoms or the atomic 

defects. The pair-breaking effect by magnetic and NMI will be introduced. As we mentioned above, 

magnetic impurity suppresses SC independently of the gap symmetry while the NMI effect depends 

strongly on it. The NMI, for instance Zn, will suppress Tc according to the Abrikosov-Gor’kov (AG) 

formula [36-38]  

2)]
2 + 2) - (1
[ (1
ln
0


μ

T
T

c

c
  








                           (1), 

where φ(x) is the digamma function. In mathematics, the digamma function is defined as the 

logarithmic derivative of the gamma function [37]  

)
(

)
('
( )
ln
( )
x
Γ

Γ x
Γ x
dx
d
x



                              (2). 

It also has an integral representation as 

dt
e

e

t
e
x
t

xt
t

)
-1-
 (
)
(
-

-
-

0





                            (3). 

 The μ in Eq. (1) is defined by 


 7 

 

k T τ
μ

 B c
2



                                      (4), 

where τ is the relaxation time of NMI scattering. Ω in Eq.(1) is the gap anisotropy defined as 

Δ(k) >
<

1- < Δ(k) >
Ω ≡
2

2

                                    (5). 

For an isotropic SC gap, for instance the isotropic s-wave, Ω=0, while Ω is 1 for an anisotropic gap 

like d-wave and anisotropic s-wave. 

As we can see from Eq. (1), the introduction of NMI does not break paired electrons for an 

isotropic SC gap but for an anisotropic gap [38]. However, Tc also depends on the Debye frequency 

ωD and density of states D(Ef) according to the BCS theory in a form 

exp( D E V )
k
T

f
B

D

c
)
(

-1
≈ .1 14 ω

                             (6), 

where V is the electron-phone interaction strength. If the introduction of NMI affects D(Ef) (due to 

the carrier doping) or ωD, Tc will consequently vary even in the isotropic s-wave superconductors. 

Except for (?) the effect on D(Ef) and ωD, NMI can also break the Cooper pairs in anisotropic 

superconductors due to Ω≠0, as given by the following equation derived from Eq. (1)  

τ
k
T
T

B
c

c
1

- 8
1

0



                                   (7). 

It is clear from Eq.(7) that the suppression of Tc is proportional to the impurity scattering strength and 

the last part is defined as pairing breaking rate 

τ
kB

1

8

  
                                     (8), 

where 1/τc, which is defined as the critical scattering rate where SC is completely suppressed, can be 

expressed as 




B

c

k

τ

1  8
                                     (9). 


 8 

 

We will strengthen the discussions on this critical parameter in Section 3 and 4. 

 

2.3. Pair-breaking 

To study the pair-breaking effect from magnetic and NMI on FBS, one of the most direct ways 

is to quantify the relation between Tc suppression and the doping level nimp. Onari and Kontani [11] 

firstly analyzed the effect of local impurity on iron pnicitides, based on the five-orbital model. 

Figure 2 shows the calculation results for Tc suppression as a function of doping level for both s± and 

s++ wave models. They suggested that in the s± wave state, the inter-band impurity scattering is 

promoted by the d-orbital degree of freedom. Consequently, the s± wave state should be very fragile 

against impurities, regardless of magnetic or nonmagnetic impurities. Tc was estimated to vanish with 

nimp of 0.01, 0.02, and 0.066 for I =1 eV, ∞, and -1 eV, respectively, thus giving rise to the reduction 

rate of Tc (dTc/dnimp) caused by the impurity is ~50z K/at.% [11], where z is the renormalization 

factor (= m/m*; m and m* are the band-mass and the effective-mass, respectively). Since the effective 

mass was estimated to be between 2me and 4me in the 122-type superconductors from ARPES 

measurements [39-41], one can obtain dTc/dnimp= 25 K/at.% (17 K/at.%) for z = 0.5 (z = 0.33). As a 

contrast, non-sign reversal s++ wave state can strongly against the NMI. It seems not so complicated 

to judge which order parameter symmetry is the nature of these superconductors, once we can 

quantify the relation of Tc vs. nimp. Nevertheless, direct accurate determinations of the real scattering 

rate are hardly achieved, which is generally much more complicated by some other important factors 

that can also result in obvious Tc suppression. 

 

 

 


 9 

 

 

Figure 2. Obtained Tc as functions of nimp for the case of s++ wave and s± wave states with various 

chemical potential. Here the Tc0 with impurity-free was considered as 46 K, from the reference by 

Onari and Kontani [11].  

 

The impurity disorder can also affect the SC due to that the SC mostly origins from doping. 

Efremov et al. [14] analyzed the effect from disorder on two-band gap symmetry, namely, intra- and 

inter-band impurity scattering for which the Tc suppression rate 
ab
~  is given by 

2
2
( )
(~ - )1
) /
1( - ~)
~

1( - ~)
~


 






 


b
a
b
a

a b
ab
N N
N
（N
                  (10). 

Here, η is the parameter as the ratio of intra- and inter-band scattering as 
  v2 /u2
, Na and Nb are 

the density of states for each band (a, b) at the Fermi level, and ~  and 
a(b)
 are the generalized 

cross-section normal state scattering rate parameters given as follow: 

)
) 1(
(
~
2
2
2
2
N N u
N N u
b
a
a b





                         (11), 

and 

 
~)
1(
2

( )
( )





u
N
n
a b
imp
a b
                            (12). 

In the weak scattering (Born) limit, one can get 
~ 0

, while in the unitary limit (strong scattering) 

~ 1

. On the other hand, for the strong scattering case, 
0
~
ab 
, hence Tc is independent of NMI. 


 10 

 

Figure 3 gives the calculation results for the effective inter-band scattering rate 
ab
~  dependent Tc 

suppression in various ~  and η. The slopes of Tc collapse onto one of three ‘universal’ curves, 

depending on the average pairing strength parameter λ  as positive, zero, and negative. Here the 

sign of λ  depends on the coupling constant (λij) of two-band superconductor as given by 

1
1
λ )
(λ
λ )
(λ
λ






N N
N N
b
bb
ba
a
ab
aa
                     (13), 

where N = Na+Nb. The results indicate that a universal behavior of Tc suppression controlled by a 

single parameter λ . As a result, the s± wave SC can be suppressed by NMI for
λ  0
, but also 

demonstrates robust against impurities once 
λ  0
. Typically, the critical value of the scattering 

rate 
crit
 defined by Tc(
crit
) = 0 is given by  

.1 12
/ 2
/
0
c

crit





T
                           (14) 

within the Abrikosov-Gor’kov (AG) theory. In addition, as the increase of such disorder, the s± wave 

may change to a fully-gaped symmetry, s++ wave, which was suggested to be manifested by 

thermodynamic and transport properties.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 11 

 

 

Figure 3. Normalized Tc as a function of effective inter-band scattering rate 
ab
~  for various ~  and 

η, where the 
ab
~  was calculated by using the linearized Eliashberg equation. The curves for different 

sets of 
ab
~  and η overlap and fall onto one of the three universal curves depending on the λ . Nb/Na 

= 2, coupling constants for illustrative purpose are chosen for 
λ  > 0 as (λaa, λab, λba, λbb) = 

(3,-0.2,-0.1,0.5), for 
λ  = 0 as (2,-2,-1,1), and for 
λ  < 0 as (1,-2,-1,1), from Efremov et al. [14]. 

 

On the other hand, Wang et al. [42] and Efremov et al. [43] also suggested that measurements of 

Tc suppression relative to the amount of chemical potential and disorder can hardly determine the gap 

structure in multiband systems. To improve the situation, one first needs to find a way to create 

points like potential scattering centers, so as to create disordered systems. From an experimental view, 

we need more accurate measurements on residual resistivity ρ0 from high quality NMI-doped single 

crystals. Here, ρ0 is corresponding to the change in the extrapolated T → 0 value of the resistivity 

with disorder. Compared with the nimp dependent Tc, the observation of ρ0 is the more accurate way to 

explore the pair-breaking effect from impurity scattering. Wang et al. [42] calculated the relation 

between Tc suppression and the change of ρ0, and showed how these results change for various types 

of gap structures and assumptions regarding the impurity scattering. Figure 4 shows the calculation 

results for Tc suppression vs. the corresponding change in ρ0 for isotropic s± wave model and 


 12 

 

anisotropic one with various values of the inter- to intra-band scattering ratio α ≡ u/v. Note that s± gap 

can be anisotropic with nodes on the electron pockets, whose gap function (Δe) can be given as  

cos2 )
0 1(

r
e

 
                             (15), 

where Δ0 is angle-independent part of the gap function, r is the anisotropic factor, and ϕ corresponds 

to the angle around the electron pocket. For a fully isotropic s-wave gap, r = 0, hence the Tc is 

independent of NMI doping. In respect that a gap which has nodes on the electron pockets, for 

instance set r = 1.3, the results exhibit a wide variety of initial slopes of Tc-ρ0, which strongly 

depends on the scattering character of the impurity, but not just the doping lever itself. Namely, the 

Tc may be suppressed weakly or sharply by the change of ρ0, for instance, the pair-breaking residual 

resistivity 
c
0
 can be up to 1000 μΩ cm once the α is less to 0.2, and even without any suppression 

for α = 0. Previous calculation results also showed α-dependent suppression rate [42].  

 

 

 

 

 


 13 

 

 

Figure 4. (a) Disorder-induced resistivity change ρ0 dependence of normalized critical temperature 

Tc/Tc0, for the case of isotropic s± wave pairing with various values of the inter- to intra-band 

scattering ratio α ≡ u/v. Inset: Same quantity plotted over a larger ρ0 scale. (b) The same as (a) but for 

an anisotropic (nodal) gap with anisotropy parameter r = 1.3, from Wang et al. [42]. 

 

Studying on the pair-breaking effect associated with the defects is a complicated issue. 

Besides the pair-breaking and the scattering character of the impurity, one has to consider the 

separation of the exploration of impurity effects on different length scales, from lattice spacing to 

the coherence length to sample size, as suggested by Anderson theorem [19]. In addition, Sato et al. 

[44] proposed two other mechanisms for Tc suppression from impurities substitution: (i) the 

electron localization with sheet resistance R□ exceeding h/4e2 = 6.45 kΩ, and (ii) the disappearance 

(or reduction in the area) of the whole Fermi surfaces around the Γ point in the reciprocal space. 

Furthermore, considering the NMI in the isotropic s++ wave state, the SC suppression may be 

caused by the following mechanisms: (i) suppression of the orbital fluctuations, which is a possible 


 14 

 

origin of the s++ wave state, because of the violation of the orbital degeneracy near the impurity 

atom, and (ii) the strong localization effect in which the mean-free-path is comparable to the lattice 

spacing.  

To well probe pair-breaking behavior, the fabrication of high quality nonmagnetic Zn-doped 

compound, especially for single crystals, is the most important issue. In the next section, we will 

show the recent progresses on the fabrication of impurity-substituted FBS.  

 

3. Impurity substitution methods 

Substitution of impurity is considered as the simplest defect to “tune” the nature (magnetic 

and/or electronic properties) of the perturbation potential. Generally, the substitution was obtained by 

either chemical doping during the synthesis process or irradiating defects into a host crystal. Here, 

the substituted chemicals work as external impurities, while the irradiating defects as intrinsic 

impurities. In this section, we will discuss the fabrication of chemicals doped FBS crystals using 

ambient and high-pressure methods, and also impurities introduced by irradiation technique. 

 

3.1. Chemical substitution 

Compared with the host atoms, the impurities may vary in the atomic size, bond valance, 

electron structure, magnetic state, and so on. The experimental design for chemical substitution 

should choose at least the similar atomic size and bond valance of the impurity as the host atoms, and 

the atomic substitution site should be confirmed as well before and after the synthesis. Taking the 

well-studied cuprate superconductors as an example [20-28], impurities of Zn, Ni and Co can be 

successfully substituted for Cu-site owing to the similar atomic size. However, the substitution sites 

may occur on various Cu-site, for instance in the multi-layered Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ superconductors the 

impurities may go into the CuO2-planes or the chain Cu-site, where the former is believed as the SC 


 15 

 

layer but the latter is non-SC site and will provide misleading on the impurity-doping experiments. 

Therefore, we have to consider the structure of the FBS before doping. 

Up to now, seven series have been discovered in the Fe-based family as given in Figure 5 [1-8]. 

Similar to the cuprates, each Fe-based compound has the distinct layered structure with the key layer 

of FeX (X =As, P, Te, or Se) (see Figure 6). Actually, the common FeX layer should be more 

accurately written as Fe2X2, because half of the X atoms lie above the Fe plane and the others lie 

below the plane [45]. For the Fe-site, however, we can consider it as only one site regardless of the 

spin direction. Thus, it consists of a square lattice of iron atoms coordinated tetrahedrally by the X 

anions that form a checkerboard pattern below and above the Fe plane which can double the unit cell 

size. Except for the case of X=Se, the Fe2X2 layers are separated by blocking layer(s) through which 

carrier doping into the Fe2X2 layer takes place in the same manner as in the cuprates. The blocking 

layer provides a quasi-two-dimensional character to the crystal since it forms bonds of more ionic 

nature with the Fe2X2 layer. The Fe2X2 layer itself is characterized by a combination of covalent (i.e., 

Fe-X) and metallic (i.e., Fe-Fe) bonding. We note that among these seven systems, the 122-system 

has arrested big deal of attention owing to the availability of high quality single crystals. To 

substitute for the Fe-site, transition metals, including Cr, Mn, Ru, Co, Rh, Ir, Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Zn, etc. 

are the choice. 

 

 

 


 16 

 

 

Figure 5. Crystal structures of the FBS, where the red shadow indicates the Fe2X2 (X =As, P, Te, or 

Se) layers. All seven series of compounds have the tetragonal lattice structure with space-group of 

P4/nmm [1-8]. 

 

 

Figure 6. Structure of the Fe2X2 (X =As, P, Te, or Se) layer, where half of the X atoms lie above the 

Fe plane, while the others lie below the plane.  

 

Generally, the FBS was synthesized through the solid-state reaction in an inert atmosphere or 

vacuum. Besides, the solid-state reaction can also be implemented under high-pressure as few tens of 

thousands atmosphere pressure. To distinguish these two methods, we name them as 


 17 

 

ambient-pressure and high-pressure techniques. It is worth noting that the growth of impurity-doped 

epitaxial thin film by pulsed-laser deposition is also a promising way, but there is no any report yet. 

(i) Ambient-pressure technique 

Up to now, most of our present FBS were synthesized under ambient-pressure which can be 

divided into several steps [1-3, 46, 47]: firstly, the starting materials are stoichiometrically mixed 

together. Secondly, the mixture was sealed into a tantalum capsule, which was sometimes with an 

h-BN inner to isolate the sample from the capsule, because of the toxicity and low vaporization 

temperature of arsenic/phosphorus elements and the high reactivity of rare-earth, alkali, and 

alkali-earth metals. Thirdly, the as-prepared pellets were sealed in an evacuated quartz tube and 

then heat-treated, where the heating conditions may vary from different material systems and 

different labs. Fortunately, apart from the oxygen-deficient system like AFeAsO1-δ, of which the 

sample quality may very sensitive to the synthesis procedure like the heat-treatment process and 

even the used furnace as those of oxygen-deficient cuprate, most of other Fe-based systems are 

quite reproducible. Here, we take the 122-type (Ba,K)Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 as an example [46, 47]. The 

arsenide compounds as BaAs, KAs, FeAs, and ZnAs were synthesized from the metal pieces (Ba, 

K, Fe, Zn, etc.) and As powders at a relatively low temperature (500 - 700°C), which is essential to 

avoid the loss of As in the next steps and also to obtain fine powder of all starting materials other 

than metal pieces. The stoichiometric mixture of BaAs (lab made), KAs (lab made), FeAs (lab 

made), Fe (3N), and Zn (4N) or ZnAs (lab made) was placed in a tantalum capsule with an h-BN 

inner (preheated in advance at ~1900 ºC for 1 hour in nitrogen). The loaded capsule was sealed in 

an evacuated quartz tube under vacuum condition. The sample was finally heated at 1000 °C for 72 

hours, and then slowly cooled down to room temperature at a rate of 20 °C/hr.  

(ii)High-pressure technique 

In a high-pressure process the as-prepared pellets were sealed in BN crucibles [48-50], then 

placed into a graphite heating tube and mounted into a high-pressure sintering equipment for the 

solid-reaction process, which can be belt-type or cubic-type with different kinds of anvils. Here, 


 18 

 

the pressure, target temperature, and heat-treatment time all strongly depend on the material system 

and doping type. For the 1111-system [48], the pressure should be up to 6 GPa, while less to 3 GPa 

for the 122-system. We take 122-system as an example [49, 50], e.g., BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 and 

Ba1-yKyFe2-2xM2xAs2 (M = Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn). The stoichiometric mixture and capsule 

sealing processes resemble those of ambient-pressure technique, but here 50 wt.% of BaAs for 

BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 and 50 wt.% of BaAs/KAs for Ba1-yKyFe2-2xM2xAs2 were added as flux for 

single crystals growth. The capsule was compressed at 3 GPa in the belt-type high-pressure 

apparatus and heated at 1300 °C for 4 hours, followed by a decrease to a constant temperature of 

1100 °C for 1 hour. Note that the pellet was self-separated into sizes of around 0.3×0.2×0.1 mm3 or 

much smaller after it left in vacuum for 2-3 days. Since additional BaAs and KAs were added in 

excess to be the flux, which can be washed away using pure ethanol. The single crystals can be 

cleaved along the c-axis. 

 

3.2. Irradiation  

For the heavy impurities doping level, the chemical substitutions may lead to inhomogeneity in 

the lattice sites, resulting in change of local electronic density and even the Fermi-surface topology, 

which may mask the intrinsic impurity effects on the superconductivity. Despite that Zn is similar as 

that of Cu in the cuprate superconductor system YBa2Cu3O8, previous experiments demonstrated that 

Zn impurities cannot be substituted beyond 5% per Cu [20, 27], or some second phases like 

Y2BaCuO5 will appear and some Zn ions will gather around the surface of grains, which will mislead 

the nature of SC suppression effects caused by Zn. Alternatively, particle irradiation, generally used 

to introduce intrinsic defects or carrier artificially for the semiconductors, is a promising method to 

study the scattering centers.  

The particles should be light elements as electron, proton, neutron, and low power α-particle. 

However, most particle irradiation introduce correlated disorder and external defects as columnar 

and/or clusters, especially for the heavy particles like proton. Although the MeV-range electron 


 19 

 

irradiation can produce vacancy-interstitial (Frenkel) pairs as scattering centers [20], one should be 

extremely careful with identifying the defect types before concluding their nature of pair-breaking 

effects. Figure 7 demonstrates various particle irradiation and the corresponding defects types [87]. 

The profiles of the irradiation induced defects strongly depend on the irradiation particles and power. 

To create uniformly distributed point defects over the entire crystal, it is essential to apply long 

attenuation length and the small recoil energy, such as electron irradiation with the small mass of 

electron particles. Nevertheless, the relatively large recoil energy may induce complex defects such 

as clusters and cascades, and even bulk defects as columnar tracks. Besides, the sample itself is also 

crucial for the irradiation experiments, for which the crystal structure, composition, and even the 

sample geometry can influence the irradiation results. Therefore, the particle irradiation can hardly 

replace the chemical doping completely. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 20 

 

 

Figure 7. Various particle irradiation and the corresponding defects types. (a) Contour plot of 

particle mass m and particle energy E for various irradiations on the maximum energy transferred to 

Fe atoms. Typical particles of electron, neutron, and proton are marked as red square, green diamond 

and purple circle, respectively. Schematic images for three types of irradiation induced defects, 

including (b) the columnar defects, (c) cascades of point defects and (d) uniform point defects, where 

the last defects were expected as the ideal ones from the electron irradiation, from Mizukami et al. 

[87].  

 

4. Experiments on impurity effects 

4.1. Controlled impurities within the Fe2X2 planes  

Up to now, most of the previous impurity-doping studies have been carried out on the 

polycrystalline samples synthesized under ambient-pressure. Figure 8 shows a scanning electron 

microscopy image for the Zn-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.9Zn0.1As2 polycrystal from Cheng et al. [51]. The 

crystal was detected by energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) in several points, and the compositions of 

Zn in different grains were found as close to the nominal one. However, one possibility is that the 


 21 

 

Zn may filter onto the surface of grains, which cannot be detected by EDX because the technique 

cannot eliminate the surface element from the real concentration of grains.  

 

 

Figure 8. Scanning electron microscopy image of Zn-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.9Zn0.1As2 polycrystal. 

Several grains with diameters of ~ 1 μm were chosen randomly to carry out the measurement of 

energy dispersive x-ray. The EDX data suggested the compositions of Zn were accordance with that 

of normal content, from Cheng et al. [51]. 

 

To avoid the possibility of that Zn can precipitate, high-quality single crystals are essential for 

the study. Compared with the polycrystal, a single crystal often has substantially lower defects and 

less strain [20]. A single crystal also has sizable and atomically ordered surfaces, which are vital 

for surface sensitive measurements, such as STM [45, 52, 53] and ARPES [54-56]. As we 

mentioned in Section 3.1, most of single crystals are from 122-system, owing to the best quality 

and stability [58]. However, it is still extremely difficult to grow the high-doping level and 

high-quality Zn-doped Fe-based single crystals, for which the main difficulty is from the low 

melting point (419 ºC) of Zn which is far below the reaction temperature (around 800 - 1000 ºC). 


 22 

 

On the other hand, although one can select ZnAs alloy instead of Zn metal [51], such method has 

been scarcely used due to the difficulty of ZnAs preparation. 

 Tan et al. [58] utilized the starting material of Fe2−xZnxSe2 instead of Zn or ZnSe, and 

synthesized the hole-type single crystal K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2, as shown inside Figure 9. The XRD and 

EDX results demonstrated that the Zn had been successfully doped into the crystal. This is an 

impressive method for the future growth of other single crystals under ambient-pressure.  

 

 

Figure 9. Powder x-ray diffraction patterns for the K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 single crystals with x=0-0.023. 

The red curve is the single-crystal XRD pattern of a K0.8Fe2−ySe2. An optical photo of the as-grown 

single crystal is given on the top of insert, from Tan et al. [58]. 

 

Under the ambient-pressure conditions, it is generally necessary to synthesize the single crystals 

for long time, for instance, 92 hours for K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 [58]. To shorten the time, the high-pressure 

method is a promising approach to synthesize Zn-doped single crystals, owing to the virtues of high 

reaction temperature and short time synthesis period typically of only a few hours. Figure 10 shows 

typical single crystals of Zn-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2grown by high-pressure method. The 

crystals crystallize into the tetragonal ThCr2Si2-type structure (I4/mmm), which has a 

two-dimensional feature. However, the two-dimensional anisotropic factor is not as large as those of 

cuprates or other 2-D materials, and few reports have been presented on the cleavable of the crystals, 

except for some studies by using special techniques like STM and ARPES. The high-pressure grown 

single crystals can be cleaved by using scotch tape. Indeed, cleaving technique is indispensable to 


 23 

 

explore the real concentration of Zn in the crystal, and consequently to elucidate the intrinsic 

properties of Zn substitution effect on SC. In Figure 10(c), a flake-like crystal was cleaved on a 

scotch tape. The crystal demonstrates mirror-like surface and free of inhomogeneous distribution or 

grain boundary. Such thin crystals were held on silicon substrate using epoxy as shown in Figure 

10(a) and (b), which were then used for the electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA), EDX, x-ray 

diffraction, and transport properties measurements.  

 

 

Figure 10. (a) and (b) SEM and (c) optical images of the Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 single crystals. The 

crystals were firstly cleaved along c-axis into a clear surface as shown in (c), where we can see the 

cleaved crystal on tape, and some perpendicular steps corresponding to the a- or b-axis, owing to the 

tetragonal structure. The cleaved thin crystals were held on a silicon substrate by epoxy, and cleaved 

again before deposited a 20 nm gold layer for the SEM, EDX, and some other measurements. 

 

EPMA and EDX measurements on such cleaved single crystals showed that the real 

concentration of Zn is in well accordance with the nominal one. Powder and single crystal x-ray 

diffraction measurements demonstrated (see Figure 11) that the impurities induced systematic 

change of lattice parameters. Thus, the expected difficulties of the substitution due to the high 

volatility of Zn and the electronic difference between Zn2+ and Fe2+ had been really overcome by 

using high-pressure technique. 

 

 

 


 24 

 

 

Figure 11. XRD patterns of the single crystals of Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 doped with various 

impurities of M= Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn. Here the impurity concentration x=0.05 is as the 

nominal value, from Li et al. [49]. 

 

4.2. Single impurity in superconducting state 

Single NMI dot Zn2+ has a filled d-shell, and hence works as quasiparticle interference 

scattering and provides information of the gap structure of the superconductors [1-4]. Since any sort 

of impurity or defect in a crystal can be screened by the conducting electrons which leads to the 

well-known Friedel oscillations of the charge and spin density around the imperfection. In real space, 

interference among such oscillations stemming from random impurities is currently irresolvable in 

these systems, but the Fourier transform of the measured electron density will reflect the structure of 

the charge susceptibility in reciprocal space. A natural technique to map out the electron density near 

the Fermi level is by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STM) which worked well for the study on 

cuprates, especially on Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 [20, 52, 53]. It is worth noting that the most crucial 

requirements in this experiment are doping impurity into the SC layer and such crystal should be in 

high quality free of other defects. In addition, the single crystal should behave as 2-D structure as to 

be mechanically cleaved to obtain atomically flat and clean surfaces.  

Zhu and co-workers [59] have calculated the effects of a single NMI on the (K,Tl)FexSe2 

superconductors, within both a two-band model and five-band model. Figure 12 gives the estimated 

density of states in the system without impurity and the local density of states at the site nearest 


 25 

 

neighboring to the NMI dot. The authors found that the impurity-induced resonance state can only 

exist for a dx2−y2 -wave pairing state. In addition, they also found that the bound-state peak in the 

local density of states occurs at a nonzero energy even in the unitary limit, indicating an opposite 

situation from the cuprate systems. The prediction arouses subsequent various theoretical studies 

[60-64]. Chen et al. [60] calculated the local effect of Zn on the 122-type Ba(Fe1-x-yCoyZnx)2As2, and 

suggested quite short correlation lengths ξΔ for the case of s± wave state, which is only two lattice 

sites, namely, ξΔ is about two lattice distance of Fe ions. Such a short screening length was attributed 

mainly to the strong local Coulomb repulsion U which acts on the charge sector.  

 

 

Figure 12. Simulation results for the local density of states of a single NMI site. (a) The local density 

of states at the first nearest neighboring site, where the black line corresponds to the bare density of 

states, red line to the local density of states without interband scattering (u = 100 eV and v = 0), and 

green line with black line (u = v = 100 eV). (b), (c) The local density of states imaging in the 

superconductor with (d1) pairing symmetry without and with interband scattering, respectively, from 

Zhu et al. [59]. 


 26 

 

However, for the STM measurement on the Zn-doped single crystals, there is no any report on 

FBSs up to now. The main reason lies in the technique difficulty in growth of high quality single 

crystals, as discussed in Section 4.1. Moreover, to probe the local effect of Zn ion the surface layer 

should be Fe-X plane, but not the barrier layer, i.e., the A-site ions as Ba, Sr, Ca, K, Eu, etc. However, 

the terminal ions are often end up on either of the two cleaved Fe-X surfaces, masking the profile of 

Zn. Previous successful observations of atomically resolved STM images are mostly on A-ions 

terminal, few reports on the As-ion terminal, depending on the materials system and cleaving 

temperatures [45].  

Recently, Yang and co-workers [65] studied the scattering of Cu impurities on 

Na(Fe0.97-xCo0.03Cux)As via the STM, instead of Zn. They considered the Cu as a NMI or weak 

magnetic impurity comparing with the strong magnetic host ions Fe2+. Figure 13 shows spatial maps 

of local density of states measured at different energies. The local density of states around the Cu 

impurity exhibits a systematic evolution with a spatial length of about 1.5-2.0 nm being about 5-7 Fe 

sites, which is well consistent with the coherence length. Therefore, the Cu impurity was believed to 

result in a point disorder, leading to decay of the in-gap quasiparticle states in a scale of the 

coherence length. Consequently, Cu impurities induce Cooper pair-breaking in the strongly 

anisotropic s± pairing symmetry state.  

 


 27 

 

 

Figure 13. Local density of states mapping of the first nearest neighboring site of Cu cite in 

Na(Fe0.97-xCo0.03Cux)As superconductors. (a) The topographic image of a Cu impurity, where the 

scale bar is 1 nm. (b-f) The mapping of the local density of states measured at bias voltages of -5, 

-0.6, 0.6, 1.8 and 5mV, respectively. The spatial influence of a Cu impurity is about 20Å, being about 

5-7 Fe sites as the corresponding coherence length, from Yang et al. [65]. 

 

To explain the reduction of superconducting regions by Zn impurity in the cuprate 

superconductor, Nachumi et al. [66] proposed a 2-dimensional “swiss cheese” model based on the 

muon spin relaxation measurements. In this model, the charge carriers are excluded from 

superconductivity around each Zn ion, resulting in non-superconducting regions with the diameter 

of characterized coherence length ξΔ. The result was consistent with the subsequent magnetic 

susceptibility measurement [67]. 

In the FBS, a most recent work demonstrates the local destruction of superconductivity by 

nonmagnetic Zn impurities in Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 by exploring phase-slip phenomena in a mesoscopic 

structure with 119×102 nm2 cross-section [68]. However, the impurity-free nanobridges 

demonstrated thermal stability due to smaller number of defects. Considering the general condition 


 28 

 

for the appearance of phase-slip, the cross-sectional area should be comparable with the value of 

√2πξ [69-71]. However, the ξab and ξc of Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 were estimated to be only 2.05 and 1.20 

nm, respectively, two orders magnitude less than the cross-section of the nanowire. The Zn 

impurity was therefore proposed to suppress superconductivity in a "Swiss cheese"-like pattern as 

that of cuprate superconductors. Since the 122-type superconductors possess weakly anisotropic 

layered structure, the Cooper pairs reside both in and out-of the Fe2As2 superconducting planes, 

indicating a 3-D "Swiss cheese" model, where the order parameter can fluctuate along abundant 

narrow superconducting channels with both in-plane and out-of-plane directions as shown in 

Figure 14. For a conventional superconducting gap like s++, the nonmagnetic impurity ions work as 

point defects, but do not affect the Cooper pairs. As a contrast, the Zn ions can induce local 

destruction of superconductivity for the unconventional s± pairing symmetry, and consequently 

result in phase-slip phenomenon in the Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.94Zn0.06As2 nanobridges. The local destruction 

may provide an evidence for the pair-breaking effect of nonmagnetic impurities and the 

unconventional s± pairing symmetry for the iron pnictide superconductors.  

 

 

 

 

 


 29 

 

 

Figure 14 (a) Transport measurement scheme along a nanobridge. The current flows along the 

ab-plane. (b) High angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy image of a 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.94Zn0.06As2 flake, where the crystal was detected along the c-axis. The scale bar 

represents 50 nm. (c) and (d) Scanning transmission electron microscopy energy dispersive X-ray 

spectroscopy mapping for Zn/Fe and Zn distributions, respectively, within the area indicated in (b). 

(e) and (f) Schematic representation of the 2-D and 3-D "Swiss cheese" models, respectively. The 

yellow oblate spheroid corresponds to the non-superconducting regions centered on Zn ions with 

an equatorial length ξab and a polar length ξc, from Li et al. [68].  

 

4.3. Magnetic properties 

Since the SC mechanism for the FBS was widely considered as a spin fluctuation origin, 

magnetic properties are of great importance to understand the NMI effects on the SC [5-12]. First of 

all, magnetic susceptibility measurement provides a direct determination of Tc owing to the Messier 

effect. More importantly, since the FBS demonstrates metallic nature for the parent compounds 

before the carrier doping, and an antiferromagnetic (AF) order phase appears below the critical 

temperature of spin density wave (SDW) ordering at TN ≈130 K, as well as in the under-doped regime, 

substitution of spinless Zn2+ ions will be greatly interesting to explore information of the pair 


 30 

 

symmetry and even the SC mechanism [72-77]. However, compared with the transport properties, 

magnetic properties of the Zn-doped FBS are reported in very few works. In this section, we will 

briefly summarize some present work of the Zn effects on AF state and local magnetic moments. 

(i)Antiferromagnetic state 

In the SDW state, the ordered magnetic moment is about 0.3 μB and the ordering vector is Q ≈ (π, 

0). SC was induced by suppression of TN via carrier doping, the AF phase however generally exists 

within the underdoped regime. It was expected from the single-defect calculation [73-77] that the 

substitution of spinless Zn2+ (s = 0) ions for strongly magnetic host ions of Fe2+ (s = 2) may result in 

a strong local suppression of short-range AF order, hence the Zn may also suppress TN as what was 

done from the carrier doping.  

Li and co-workers studied the Zn-doping effect on the polyscrystalline LaFeAsO parent 

compound [78]. Figure 15 shows the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility (χ) of 

LaFe1−xZnxAsO with various doping level of Zn. The insets show the enlarged plots for x = 0 and 

0.02. The arrows indicate the anomaly in susceptibility related to structural and/or magnetic 

transitions. Slight Zn doping in LaFe1−xZnxAsO drastically suppresses the AF in the parent compound. 

For instance, the TN is decreased to 137 K with 2at.% doping of Zn, slightly less than that of Zn-free 

sample (150 K). However, the SDW can hardly be observed with Zn up to 5at.%. Since the sample is 

polycrystalline and the SDW order is weak even for the impurity-free sample, the sample quality may 

dominate the SDW other than the Zn-doping. Even though, the magnetic data together with their 

resistivity properties indicated that the SDW order was sensitive to Zn doping. Zhang and Singh [77] 

proposed two mechanisms for the TN suppression from Zn doping: (i) Zn ion provides localized states 

and disrupts the electronic structure of the Fe sheets near Fermi level. (ii) It introduces local moments 

that have the pattern of the checkerboard antiferromagnetic state mainly on the four neighboring Fe. 


 31 

 

 

Figure 15. Magnetic susceptibility (χ) vs. temperature for Zn-doped parent compound 

LaFe1−xZnxAsO. The insets show the enlarged plots for samples with x = 0 and 0.02. The arrows 

indicate the anomaly in susceptibility related to structural and/or magnetic transitions, from Li et al. 

[78]. 

 

(ii) Local magnetic moments 

The impurity ions of Zn2+ work as spinless centers, which may induce moments of s = 2 on the 

Fe-sites. However, there is still an open question for the Zn-induced local moment behavior and no 

direct experimental evidences can support it. For instance [62-64, 79, 80], the first question is 

whether a nonmagnetic site can induce a free paramagnetic moment in a metallic correlated system. 

It should be noted that the study on Zn suppression effects on TN should be focused on the 

under-doped or undoped regimes where the AF state is still exist. A few candidates can be used to 

explore the Zn-induced local moment, such as STM, muon spin rotation, neutron scattering, specific 

heat, magnetic susceptibility, and so on. Among these methods STM measurement is the best and 

most direct method as we introduced in detail in Section 3. However, the STM analysis was plagued 

by materials problems as in Sec 4.2, as well as the muon spin rotation and neutron scattering 

measurements. Apart from the specific heat experiment as we will introduce in Section 4.5, magnetic 

susceptibility measurement is a promising and simple method.  


 32 

 

Theoretically, once substitution of Zn provides the local spin moment, it will enhance a 

Curie-like behavior in the uniform magnetic susceptibility, despite that the host material represents 

the metallic conduction of carriers. Curie-like behavior for the characteristics of temperature 

dependent magnetic susceptibility χ(T) is given by [20] 

)
(
3
( )
)
(

2
2

0
 


T
k

NP
T
T

B

eff B


                             (16), 

where χ0(T) corresponds to the χ(T) without Curie-Weiss background which depends on the carrier 

density of the impurity-free sample, N is the number of magnetic ions, Θ is the Curie-Weiss 

temperature, and Peff is the effective moment in the units of the Bohr magnet (μB) and relates to the 

Zn doping. Therefore, by fitting the temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility χ(T) for different 

doping level of Zn, one can systematically obtain the Peff. Although an initial susceptibility data on 

Zn-substituted Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 polycrystals did suggest yielding of moments from 0.482μB/Fe 

to 0.362μB/(Fe+Zn) [51], the nature of impurities contribution to the magnetic susceptibility can only 

been determined since, in carefully impurity-controlled samples as discussed in Section 4.1. Future 

comprehensively study on Curie-Weiss behavior of Zn-doped single crystals is essential.  

In addition, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) can probe nuclei coupled to the SC Fe2X2 planes 

which is capable of yielding insights into the local magnetic structure. Using a variety of nuclei, 

NMR can develop a fairly clear picture of how a nominally NMI provides a cloud of local staggered 

polarization on nearby Fe-site, and can characterize the response as a function of doping and 

temperature, for different materials. Kitagawa and co-workers [79] studied the Zn-substituted 

LaFeAsO0.85 polycrystal using 75As and 139La NMR and nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) (see 

Figure 16). Although SC in LaFeAsO0.85 disappears by 3% Zn substitution as we will introduce in 

Section 4.6.1 [48], it was found that NMR/NQR spectra and NMR physical quantities in the normal 

state can hardly been changed, indicating that the crystal structure, electronic states and magnetic 

moments are not modified by Zn substitution. The results suggest that the suppression of SC by Zn 


 33 

 

substitution is not due to the change of the normal-state properties, but the strong nonmagnetic 

pair-breaking effects. 

 

 

Figure 16. Temperature dependence of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 139La NMR 

spectra for polycrystalline LaFe1-xZnxAsO0.85 substituted with Zn of 0, 3%, and 5 %. The Zn was 

observed weak change for FWHM. (Inset) Field swept 139La NMR spectra at 50 K at 72.1 MHz. The 

lower panel gives temperature dependence of 139La NMR Knight shift for H // ab, from Katagawa et 

al. [79]. 

 

4.4. Transport properties 

Transport properties measurements can probe the impurities or defects effects on various SC 

properties, including the carrier, coupling between charges, spin degrees of freedom, and so on [20]. 

All of these parameters are correlated with the induced suppression of Tc, and more importantly with 

the pair-breaking from impurities. In this section, we will firstly discuss the in-plane transport 


 34 

 

properties in both high-temperature and low-temperature (around Tc) regions. Although transport 

properties of the 2-D FBS show slightly anisotropic along c-axis and ab-plane, we will focus on the 

in-plane properties where the impurities scattering occurs within the SC Fe2X2 planes.  

(i) In-plane transport properties 

Studying on the normal state in-plane resistivity is the most common way to explore the 

impurities influence. Apart from few systems like hole-doped (e.g. Ba1-xKxFe2As2 and K1-δFe2−ySe2 

[49, 81]), most of FBSs behave as a typically metallic nature, especially for the optimal-doped 

crystals. The in-plane resistivity (ρab) decreases linearly with temperature above Tc as 

kT
ab
 0 
 =
  
                                      (17), 

where ρ0 is the residual resistivity which will be discussed in detail in the Section 4.4.2.  

According to the Mathiessen’s rule [81], the impurity scattering rate in classical metals adds 

incoherently with the inelastic scattering rate in the pure material, usually owing to phonons. The 

normal state ρab(T) consequently will display upwards in parallel. The approximate additives of the 

impurity scattering was found for the ρab(T) of Zn-doped BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 (x = 0-0.08) as 

shown in Figure 17 [50]. However, the parallel shift phenomenon occurs at high temperature 

regions. For the low-temperature regions around Tc, a slight upturn was observed as increasing 

doping level. Such weak low-T upturn behavior was also found in cuprate superconductors, which 

could be attributed to some factors as: (i) disorder, due to that the spinless impurity may result in a 

scattering on magnetic perturbations induced in the planes, as discussed in Section 2.2.2; (ii) 

charge localization, leading to a metal-insulator transition (MIT) with decreasing carrier content, 

which can been evidenced by the low-T upturn of Hall coefficient. 

 


 35 

 

 

Figure 17. Temperature dependence of in-plane resistivity (ρab) for the BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 with 

Zn content of x = 0-0.08, from Li et al. [50]. 

 

Since the impurities suppression on Tc is an additional element of characterization available 

although it is not solely linked to the properties of the normal metallic state, as discussed in 

Section 3.2, the transport properties measurement strongly depends on the crystal quality and the 

measurement technique. Otherwise, the impurity concentration, fractional site occupancies, and 

actual carrier density of single crystals cannot always be accurately determined. Particle irradiation 

is one of the promising method, as one can span a series of defect concentrations using only one 

single crystal by increasing the irradiation dose progressively. Figure 18 shows temperature 

dependence of ρ for the NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 single crystal under α-particle irradiation in different steps 

[82]. At high T far above Tc, the ρ(T) curves are observed as upward parallel shift, indicating the 

enhancement of the hole content introduced by irradiation. On the other hand, a much more 

obvious upturn than that of chemical doping appeared in the low-T regions, which was interpreted 

in terms of a MIT, the so-called Kondo-like phenomenon. Similar results were also found for the 

neutron irradiated polycrystalline LaFeAsO0.9F0.1 [83]. However, such low-T upturn behavior was 

neither seen for the proton irradiated Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 single crystals [84, 85], nor 

electron-irradiated Ba1−xKxFe2As2 [86], BaFeAs2-xPx [87] and BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 [88]. This is 


 36 

 

probably because the defect profiles are different from those of α-particle and proton irradiation 

induced samples, for which the α-particle irradiation defects were proposed as both magnetic and 

nonmagnetic scatterings, while the light particles of proton and electron were suggested to induce 

nonmagnetic ones. The scattering behavior of these experiments will be discussed in details in 

Section 5.  

 

 

Figure 18. Temperature dependence of resistivity for the NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 single crystal under 

α-particle irradiation in different steps, where the black curve corresponds to the pristine sample and 

the curves from yellow to cyan indicates the data after each step of irradiation. Inset shows magnified 

temperature region near Tc, from Tarantini et al. [82]. 

 

(ii) Improvement on measurement method 

The FBS are semimetallic at the normal state, and the resistivity is generally in unit of μΩ cm. 

Thus, it is rather challenged to measure the transport properties for a bulk crystal with a 

millimeter-size. In the traditional four-probe measurement technique, a high current bias is often 

necessary to enhance the measurement resolution, especially for the Hall signal, owing to the large 

geometry and strongly metallic behavior of the crystals. In this case, the heat effects can be a serious 

problem, especially at the interface between silver paste and crystal. To improve the experimental 


 37 

 

accuracy, micro- and nano-patterning techniques are promising ways to enhance the resistance and 

Hall signal.  

Recently, we developed a micro-patterning technique to fabricate the microbridges on the 

122-type FBS [89, 90]. The crystal was firstly cleaved into pieces with 1-2 µm thickness using scotch 

tape as shown from Figure 10, and then glued on Si substrate with the ab-plane parallel to the 

substrate surface using a thin layer of epoxy. The as-prepared crystal was then milled to a layer of 10 

nm thickness by low energy argon ion beam (ion acceleration voltage of 200 V and beam current 

density JAr+ of ~0.25 mA/cm2), and immediately covered by a 100 nm layer of Au. To improve the 

interface contact between gold and crystal, we annealed the sample at 300 °C for 24 hours under 

nitrogen atmosphere, which can decrease the interface contact resistance to less than 0.1 Ω at room 

temperature. The crystals were fabricated as micro-devices as follows: (i) making microbridge 

patterns using the photolithography technique; (ii) argon ion milling the sample into a thickness of 

300 nm; (iii) removing the photoresist by acetone and connecting the electrodes with silver epoxy; 

and (iv) etching the whole device until the crystal was completely removed except the micro-bridge. 

Note that the whole sample was etched in step (iv), except the parts under the silver paste. 

Figure 19 shows a scanning electron microscopic image of a Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 microbridge for 

both in-plane resistivity and Hall resistance measurements. We emphasize that, in the present method, 

high quality area of the crystal was carefully selected as for the microbridge with small geometry of 

10 × 4 × 0.2 μm3. Besides, the electrodes are SC as well, so that we can restrict the heat effects 

considerably. Consequently, the measurements should be more actuate than those of bulk crystals. To 

measure the Hall coefficient the sample should be rotated along the axis of transverse current (
Ixx
 ) to 

avoid the Lorentz force along the
Ixx
 , namely, 


0
cos


Ixx
H

 
. The sign of magnetic field can be 

changed via rotating the microbridge during the Hall coefficient measurements, where the effective 

magnetic field can be considered as 

Ixy 
H
H
H






0 sin
 and 
Ixy


 is the transversal current, i.e. the 


 38 

 

Hall current. To avoid the magnetoresistance for the transversal electrodes, we calculated the Rxy by 

changing the sign of fields as 

 
 





  2
 

H
R
H
R
H
R
xy
xy
xy
                        (18) 

 

 

Figure 19. Scanning electron microscopic image of a microbridge for transport measurements, from 

Li et al. [90].  

 

For the present measurement setup, the resistance of microbridge is relatively large enough, 

normally above 20 Ω, thus we can apply such a low current as 10 µA. Figure 20 shows the 

temperature dependence of in-plane resistivity ρxx for Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 (BK), nonmagnetic impurity 

Zn-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 (BKZn), and magnetic impurity Co-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Co0.05As2 

(BKCo). The values of ρxx were found as to be about one order magnitude less than our previous 

results on bulk crystals [49], suggesting the release of scattering from impurities or other 

imperfections, for which we can attribute to the improvement of crystal synthesis technique and 

measurement setup.  

 


 39 

 

 

Figure 20. Temperature dependence of transverse resistivity for the Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 (BK), 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 (BKZn), and magnetic impurity Co-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Co0.05As2 (BKCo). 

The blue lines indicate T-linear fitting for ρ as ρ= ρ0+kT, and the red lines correspond to the 

T-nonlinear ρ fitting as ρ= ρ0 +AT n, from Li et al. [90].  

 

(iii) Residual resistivity 

Let us come back to Eq. (17), in which the ρ0 should access zero for an ideal metal, while the 

appearance of non-zero ρ0 is related to the scattering of carriers by the impurity atoms. However, 

SC of the high-Tc superconductors were introduced by electron or hole doping, regardless of 

cuprate or FBS, which is hard to be free of impurity atoms and hence non-zero ρ0. The behavior of 

ρab(T) slop is generally depended on various factors [20], including the host crystal, samples 

quality, and doping type. In this section, we will not discuss the scattering originated from the 

superconductor itself, but for the external scattering from impurity, namely, the impurity induced 

change of residual resistivity as Δρ0. 

To estimate the ρ0 owing to the impurities scattering, one can extrapolate the ρab(T) to 0 K, or 

by measuring the parallel shift of the ρab(T) curves at high-T as what was done on the cuprate 

system [20, 91, 92]. Indeed, it is easy to evaluate from a metallic compound owing to the linear 


 40 

 

behavior of the ρab(T) slops, while difficult for the non-linear ρab(T) slops in some materials like 

hole-doped Ba1-xKxFe2As2 and K1-δFe2−ySe2 [49,81]. In Figure 20 one can find that the ρab(T) slops 

of Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2, Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 and Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Co0.05As2 consist of a high-T linear 

and low-T nonlinear regions. The former region establishes a metallic-like resistivity dominated by 

phonon. The T-nonlinear regime can be fit using a power-law relation  

ρ = ρ0+ATn                                (19), 

where ρ0 is the residual resistivity at 0 K. Surprisingly, all powers are considerably less than that of 

a normal Fermi liquid (n = 2) which is dominated by strong electron-electron interactions, probably 

suggesting the effect from critical antiferromagnetic fluctuations. However, it is impossible to 

conclude the quantum critical profile from the extrapolation of normal state ρ(T) to low-T since all 

fittings were based on the normal state results, unless the superconductivity can be suppressed by 

high magnetic field. Particularly, the ρ0’s of both impurity-free and impurity-doped crystals are 

dramatically less than previous measurements on the bulk crystals. Again, the relatively low ρ0 

indicates the improvement of measurement setup.  

On the other hand, the strongly low-T upturn in ρab(T) makes it difficulty in estimation of the 

Δρ0 using linear or nonlinear fitting as shown in Figure 18. An alternative approach is to measure 

the parallel shift of the ρab(T) curves at low temperature region as described in [93]. In contrast, 

Nakajima and co-workers found no upturn in ρab(T) curve of BaFe2-2xCo2xAs2 single crystals 

irradiated by proton, although the SC was depressed as well. The defects induced by the proton 

irradiation were suggested as nonmagnetic scattering centers, while α-particle irradiated defects 

should be complex which are not only the NMI but also others that may adjust the effective carrier 

density. 

The residual resistivity can hardly provide accurate determinations of the scattering rate 

directly; instead, it is a promising method to seek information from the depression of Tc induced by 

the scattering centers. The decrease of Tc (ΔTc) can be related with Δρ0 as [20, 91] 


 41 

 





kB
T
4

 
= -
c



                                 (20). 

Here, τ-1 is the scattering rate, which is given by the ρ0 as 





m

ne
 
= -
0

2

1


                                (21), 

where m* is the effective mass with the value between 2me and 4me, and it should be 

temperature-independent regardless of carriers. 

Figure 21 shows the normalized Tc as a function of differential residual resistance (Δρ0) for 

BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 (x = 0-0.08) [50], Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 (x=0-0.15) [49], K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 

(x = 0 and 0.005) [58], BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 under proton-particle irradiation [84], and NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 

under different α-particle irradiation [82], BaFeAs2-xPx and BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 under electron 

irradiation [87,88]. For the chemical doping case like BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 calculated from the 

data in Figure 17, the ΔTc vs. Δρ0 is observed as a nearly linear relation. Similar relation was also 

found in the hole-doped Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 (M = Mn, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) system [50]. 

Considering the linear condition of Eq. (17), the chemical doping results may suggest a weakly 

change of effective carrier density from doping. For the α-particle irradiated NdFeAsO0.7F0.3, the Tc 

slopes nonlinearly with increasing of Δρ0, owing to that the irradiation shifted the chemical potential 

and enhanced the effective carrier density in linear with irradiation dose, which was demonstrated by 

Hall effect measurements [82]. We emphasize that the slopes of Tc-Δρ are mostly located within the 

gray 
region 
for 
BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2, 
Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, the 
α-particle 
irradiated 

NdFeAsO0.7F0.3, and electron irradiated Ba1-xKxFe2As2. The slope of K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 may also 

locate on the gray region, because the Zn doping level of x = 0.005 cannot be considered as the 

critical point, which is probably pronouncedly less than the experimental result. Note that under the 

irradiation of light particles like protons and electrons, various 122-type superconductors exhibit 

relatively larger slopes than other crystals, including the proton-irradiated n-type BaFe1.85Co0.15As2, 

and the electron-irradiated p-type Ba1-xKxFe2As2, isovalence-type BaFeAs2-xPx, and BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2. 

However, it is a big challenge to access the critical Δρ for an exact evaluation of the slop, due to the 


 42 

 

weak power of the irradiation. We emphasize that the recent measurements on the 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 microbridges (BaK-Zn-2) demonstrate much smaller slope of Tc-Δρ than the 

bulk crystals (BaK-Zn), although using the same materials. The pronounced reduction of Δρ can be 

attributed to the improved characteristic method which can provide accurate evaluation for the 

pairing-breaking effect (see Figure 19).  

 

 

Figure 21. (a) Normalized Tc as a function of differential residual resistance (Δρ0) for single crystals 

BaK-Zn (Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0-0.15) [50], BaCo-Zn (BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2, x = 0-0.08) [49], 

KFeS-Zn (K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2, x = 0 and 0.005) [58], BaCo-irr (BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 under different 

proton-particle irradiation) [84], NdF-irr (NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 under different α-particle irradiation) [82], 

BaK-irr (Ba1-xKxFe2As2 under electron irradiation) [86], BaP-irr (BaFeAs2-xPx under different 

electron irradiation) [87], and BaRu-irr (BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 under different electron irradiation) [88]. 

BaK-Zn-2 (Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0 and 0.05) is measured from microbridges as shown in Figure 

20 [90]. All data are fitted linearly and marked in the same color as the data. The grey region 

demonstrates the located region for most points. (b) The enlarged view of the low Δρ0 region.  

 

(iv) Residual resistance per plane 


 43 

 

The residual resistance may vary from crystals, and some intrinsic defects as grain boundary 

or magnetic domain may contribute additional scattering as well, thus one can hardly obtain 

accurate determinations of scattering rate directly from the resistivity results. Instead, further 

seeking the residual resistance per plane (Δρ□) is a promising approach. In a 2D system, the Δρ□ 

can provide crucial information for the scattering rate of conduction electrons by the impurity 

potential. Δρ□ can be described as Δρ□= Δρ0/t, where t corresponds to the distance between the 

nearest neighboring SC layers. Once Δρ□ reaches to the limit of metallic conductivity Rq = h/4e2 = 

6.45 kΩ, the metallic nature of the material will be depressed, as a result of the electron 

localization. Such method was successfully applied to analyze the cuprate system, for instance, 

YBa2Cu6O7-δ [93] and Bi2Sr2YxCa1-xCu2O8 [20], whose superconductivity was completely 

suppressed when Δρ□ exceeds 6.8 and 8.0 kΩ, respectively.  

Figure 22 gives the normalized Tc as a function of Δρ□ for BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 (x = 

0-0.08) [50], Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 (x=0-0.15) [49], K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 (x = 0 and 0.005) [58], 

BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 under different proton-particle irradiation [84], NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 under different 

α-particle irradiation [82], Ba1-xKxFe2As2 (x=0.19, 0.26, and 0.34), BaFeAs2-xPx, and 

BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 under electron irradiation [87,88,90]. For the 122-system, regardless of p-type or 

n-type, substitution of Zn enhances the Δρ□ remarkably and depresses the superconductivity at 6 

kΩ. The α-particle irradiated NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 single crystal demonstrates a slightly larger critical 

point of Δρ□ (~7.5 kΩ). In addition, the K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 exhibits intense increase of Δρ□ (~8.7 kΩ) 

with only 0.25at.% of Zn-doping, where the superconductivity was completely depressed. Indeed, 

the critical point of Δρ□ may be less than the present values, due to lack of intermediate doping 

levels. The superconductivity of α-particle irradiated NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 and K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 is 

suppressed at the metallic limit point 6.45 kΩ, suggesting the possible effect from electron 

localization. In contrast, the proton irradiated BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 single crystal, electron-irradiated 

Ba1-xKxFe2As2, BaFeAs2-xPx, and BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 single crystals, and Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 

microbridges exhibit considerably smaller critical points below 1.5 kΩ, being far away from 6.45 


 44 

 

kΩ. However, another important parameter should be taken into account, i.e., the carrier density (n). 

For instance, in the electron-type superconductors, the electron-provider, e.g. Co, contributes to the 

scattering as well. Therefore, the scattering factor can be revised as Δρ□n, for which the Hall 

coefficient measurements are essential. 

 

 

Figure 22. Normalized Tc as a function of residual resistance per plane (Δρ□) single crystals BaK-Zn 

(Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0-0.15) [50], BaK-Zn-2 (Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0 and 0.05) 

microbridges [90], BaCo-Zn (BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2, x = 0-0.08) [49], KFeS-Zn (K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2, 

x = 0 and 0.005) [58], BaCo-irr (BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 under different dose of proton-particle irradiation) 

[84], NdF-irr (NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 under different dose of α-particle irradiation) [82], BaK-irr 

(Ba1-xKxFe2As2 under different dose of electron irradiation) [86], BaP-irr (BaFeAs2-xPx under 

different dose of electron irradiation) [87], and BaRu-irr (BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 under different dose of 

electron irradiation) [88]. All data are fitted in linear and marked in the same color as the data. The 

grey region demonstrates resistance larger than the Rq=6.45 kΩ. 

 

(v) Carrier density 


 45 

 

Different from the normal metal, the Hall coefficient of FBS displays a temperature dependent 

behavior, which is one of the important signatures of the normal state as those of the cuprate 

systems. In the cuprate superconductors, Anderson [94-96] proposed a unconventional approach to 

deal with the anomalous Hall effect, namely, the NMI doping effect on the carrier density and Hall 

angle. As substitution for Fe atoms in the Fe2X2 plane, the Zn impurity provides a large negative 

scattering potential (around -8 eV [10]). However, the Zn substitution negligibly changes the 

electronic structure, which was supported by the 75As NMR and NQR measurements on 

La(Fe1−xZnx)AsO0.85 polycrystal [79]. In addition, the 139La NMR spectra indicated that the 

substituted Zn could not cause any static moments around the impurity [79], different from that of 

cuprate systems in which both local spin susceptibility and staggered susceptibility are prominently 

enhanced around the Zn site, within a radius of the antiferromagnetic correlation length ξAF.  

Up to now, apart from few reports on Hall effect measurements on the Zn-doped polycrystals, 

there are only studies on in-plane Hall effect on the 122-type single crystals, namely, the n-type 

BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 and p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 (M = Fe, Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) as 

shown in Figure 23 [49]. The data of the impurity-free crystals are compatible with the earlier data. 

Regarding the normal state, no significant change of Hall coefficient is induced by the Zn 

substitution in the under-, optimal-, and over-doped regimes of Co in the n-type 

BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2, indicating that the substitution is truly isovalent which negligibly change 

the carrier density. The weak carrier density change in the p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 Was likely 

caused by transferring of carrier type from hole to electron since it is anomalous that the Zn 

impurities resulted in a negative RH. Here, it should be noted that the present system has the 

multi-band nature with both electron and hole carriers. The results for the Zn doped samples may 

suggest that the electron carrier become dominant with existence of the substitution. However, 

such Hall experiments were implemented on a bulk crystal, while the Hall resistance was generally 

rather small owing to the bulk size and in-plane metallic behavior, thus we can hardly understand 

the nature of Zn impurities effect on the in-plane scattering.  


 46 

 

 

Figure 23. Temperature dependence of in-plane Hall coefficient (RH) for single-crystalline (a) 

BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 and (b) Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 (M = Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn, nominal 

x=0.05), from Li et al. [49]. 

 

To enhance the Hall signal we recently developed a method to measure the transport properties 

on single crystalline microbridges as shown in Figure 19. Since the thickness of the microbridge 

can be down to 91 nm or less, thus the in-plane resistance and Hall resistance (under magnetic field 

of 5 T) at room temperature were up to 20 Ω and 0.5 Ω, respectively, which provides an impressive 

way to study the accurate transport properties of the metallic Fe-based superconductors. Figure 24 

shows contours of RH for Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 (BK), Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 (BKZn), and 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Co0.05As2 (BKCo) measured in various magnetic fields and temperatures regions. For 

the BK, RH shows two pronounced H-dependence regions, those are, an H-dependent region above 

250 K and an H-independent below ~ 250 K as described above. In the H-independent region, the 

RH behaves positive indicating hole-type carriers, while a negative RH(H) phenomenon is observed 

at relatively low field condition in the H-dependent region, suggesting a Hall sign reversal occurs 

which seems like that the electrons dominate the carriers. However, further increasing of field turns 

the sign back to positive. Meanwhile, the negative RH(H) appears in a narrow temperature region 

between 290 and330 K.  

As substituting of nonmagnetic Zn ions into the BK, the RH is increased to about twice of the 

original magnitude, and the field dependent behavior is modified as well, i.e., the RH is independent 

of field in the whole temperatures region and the negative RH disappears, indicating H-independent 


 47 

 

carriers at all temperatures. For the magnetic impurity Co substituted BK, the RH becomes more 

complicated: (i) the RH demonstrates a pronounced increase; (ii) RH reveals intense H-dependent 

behavior at high temperature, and the TH (~ 240 K) is slightly smaller than that of BK; and (iii) the 

negative RH regime exists at almost the whole H-dependent region, and the saturated high field is 

essential to suppress the negative RH. These data suggest that the carriers are electron-type at 

almost all fields above the TH (240 K). However, the carriers of both BKZn and BKCo are similar 

with those of BK below the TH, which seems like that the impurities induce modification only on 

electron-pocket but not on the hole-pocket. To confirm the possible effect of Co2+ and Zn2+ on the 

electronic state, it is necessary to study the Hall angle for both impurity-free and impurity-doped 

samples. 

 

 

Figure 24. Contours of RH for Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 (BK), Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 (BKZn), and 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Co0.05As2 (BKCo) with respect of magnetic fields and temperatures. The white dot 

line separates two temperature regions demonstrating linear (left side) and non-linear (right side) 

field dependent regions for RH(H), where we define the crossover temperature as TH (~ 250 K for 

BK and ~240 K for BKCo), which separates the two temperature regions as H-dependent and 

H-independent RH(H), from Li et al. [90]. 

 

(vi) Hall angle 


 48 

 

To explore the impurity effects on the electronic state, Anderson proposed a picture for 

describing the Hall angle (cotθH) within the framework of the Luttinger-liquid theory which can be 

expressed as [94-96] 

C
T
ρ
ρ

xy

xx


2

cot H =


                                  (22), 

where ρxx and ρxy are the longitudinal and transversal resistivity, respectively, and α is a parameter 

dependeding on the energy-scale of the spinon-spinon scattering  

s

s

eHW

m
 =
                                           (23), 

where ms and Ws are effective mass and the bandwidth of spin excitations, respectively, and C is 

the in-plane impurity contributed scattering rate  

M

s

eH

m
C

=
                                           (24) 

in which τM is the impurity contribution. Therefore, the cotθH depends only on the transverse 

scattering lifetime (τH), which is determined mainly by spinon-spinon interactions and 

characterized by a T2 dependence. Among the appealing features of the theory few parameters are 

required to describe the normal-state transport, and the understanding of the general features of the 

normal-state properties does not involve details of the electronic structure. In the cuprate 

superconductors, for instance YBCO, the quantity C behaves a linear function of Zn-doping level 

(x) while α is a constant [97, 98], the slops of various crystals are consequently a constant 

regardless of the Zn-doping levels.  

Figure 
25(a) 
shows 
the 
T2 
dependence 
of 
cotθH 
for 
Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 
(BK), 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Zn0.05As2 (BKZn), and Ba0.5K0.5Fe1.95Co0.05As2 (BKCo) superconductors, which are 

abbreviated as BK, BKZn and BKCo, respectively. All crystals exhibit a non-linear change with T2 

at the high-T region. For instance, for BK the non-linear T2 dependence appears above 250 K, 

suggesting a larger power of Tn with n>2. The crossover temperature, however, is well accordance 


 49 

 

with both T* and TH as discussed above. As nonmagnetic Zn substitution, the cotθH shows weak 

non-linear change at high-T. For the magnetic Co impurity the cotθH(T2) however indicates a 

dramatically modification from that of BK at high-T. Since the Hall signals are rather small at this 

temperature region, where sign reversal takes place as discussed above, we can hardly acquire 

reliable information from these results. We then focus on the low-T regions where the cotθH 

demonstrates linear change with T2. Figure 25(b) gives the linear fitting of T2 for cotθH of BK, 

BKZn and BKCo at T < 140 K. The α (C) is observed as 2.69×10-3 (3.96), 2.43×10-3 (15.38) and 

3.48×10-3 (12.84) for BK, BKZn and BKCo, respectively. The Zn seems unlikely to change the 

slope of cotθH from that of BK, which could be understood in terms of Eq.(22). The behavior of 

cotθH is consistent with the intrinsic relaxation rate of the elementary excitations (spinons) in the 

normal state, but not a "transverse" relaxation rate. Indeed, the weak modification of Zn of the spin 

state was confirmed by the 75As NMR and NQR measurements on La(Fe1−xZnx)AsO0.85 polycrystal 

[2]. The 139La NMR spectra as well indicated that the substituted Zn could hardly induce static 

moments around the impurity [2]. On the other hand, the Zn substitution increases the in-plane 

impurity scattering rate dominated C (15.38) of BK (3.96). It is reasonably understood because the 

Zn provides a large negative scattering potential (around -8 eV [1]) within the Fe2As2 plane. The 

Zn increases the residual resistivity in linearity and consequently suppresses the superconductivity 

as described in Figure 21 and 22. Substitution of Zn on YBCO demonstrated a similar parallel shift 

of the cotθH vs.T2 curves with different doping levels [97, 98].  

 


 50 

 

 

Figure 25.  The Hall angle cotθH =ρxx/ρxy for a systematic set of BK, BKZn and BKCo.  The high 

temperature data can be easily fitted by a square law cotθH = αT2 +C, from Li et al. [90]. 

 

4.5. Heat capacity 

It is essential to understand whether a NMI can induce a local moment on its vicinity, especially 

in the low enough temperature regions. The transport properties measurements can hardly be carried 

out below Tc, unless using extremely high fields, large current density, or heavy level impurity 

doping. Technically, the upper critical fields Hc2 for FBS are quite high, for instance, the Hc2 for 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 was found as around 55 T [99]. In other case, the heavy level impurity doped crystals 

often confront with disorder and inhomogeneous distribution problem. STM measurement is the best 

method to explore the low-T local moment of Zn as discussed in detail in Section 3. Alternatively, 

low-T heat capacity measurement is a simple approach owing to the bulk properties. From low-T heat 

capacity measurements, applying a magnetic field will split the free Zn-induced moments into a 

two-level system and a Schottky anomaly should appear [100,101].  

A recent study on optimal Fe1+yTe1-xSex (x≈0.4) showed that the Co or Cu substitution for Fe 

mainly serves as scatters rather than charge carrier doping [102]. In comparison with Cu doping, 

the Co substitution shows a less evident suppression effect on superconductivity while it exhibits a 

stronger influence on magnetism. Upon substitution of Co for Fe, a Schottky heat capacity anomaly 


 51 

 

develops at low temperatures, implying the existence of a paramagnetic moment, as displayed in 

Figure 26. In contrast, Cu substitution may mainly serve as non-magnetic scatters, where no 

Schottky anomaly is observed. The results qualitatively support the s± wave symmetry of the order 

parameter. 

 

 

Figure 26. The C/T versus T2 plots (a) for CoxFe1+y-xTe0.6Se0.4 and (b) for CuxFe1+y-xTe0.6Se0.4 from 

Zhang et al. [102]. 

 

4.6. Penetration depth 

In addition, the behavior of SC suppression may be determined by a wide range of other 

possibilities, for instance another low-temperature property like the London penetration depth λ, 

when disorder is systematically increased. To make more precise statements, Wang et al. [42] 

proposed some independent ways to fix the scattering potential of a given impurity, and in 

particular the relative proportion of inter- to intra-band scattering.  


 52 

 

Cho and co-workers [86] studied the λ(T) of electron-doped Ba1−xKxFe2As2 single crystals. 

The low-temperature behavior of Δλ(T) was found as a power-law function 

n

cT
A T
(λ T )











                                 (25), 

where A is a constant parameter depending on the compound. Figure 27 shows fitting results for 

the Δλ(T) of the e-irradiated Ba1−xKxFe2As2 single crystals. To eliminate the uncertainty related to 

the upper fitting limit, several fittings were applied with a variable high-temperature end of the 

fitting range, namely, Tup/Tc ~ 0.1 to 0.3, while keeping the lower limit at the base temperature. The 

heavily doped samples exhibit strong saturation behavior with the large exponent values, n > 3. For 

the samples close to the optimal doping, namely, x = 0.24 and 0.32, the exponent n remained high 

(n = 3) and increases with decreasing Tup/Tc. This implies that the temperature dependent λ(T) 

remains exponential at low temperatures with the addition of nonmagnetic scattering, and 

consequently supports the isotropic gap like single-band s-wave or multiband s++ wave. For the 

most under-doped state with x = 0.19, there is a clear evolution toward the T2 relation, which 

reveals the changes from exponential in the clean limit to ∼T2 in the dirty limit, and supporting the 

nodeless s± pairing. 

 


 53 

 

 

Figure 27. Temperature dependence of Δλ at the low-temperature region for Ba1−xKxFe2As2 single 

crystals with and without electron irradiation. The data were fitted with a power-law function as Eq. 

(25). (e)-(h) Corresponding to fit exponents with fitting errors less than ±0.1, from Cho et al. [86]. 

 

4.7. Electronic thermoelectric power 

The transport properties, for instance the Hall effect, is measured for the whole compound, but 

some compounds, like BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2, have already doped with other elements that will 

strongly influence the Hall effect. Therefore, two scattering rates occur unless for an “ideal” pure 

single crystal. However, it is even harder to perform quantitative comparisons between samples 

than for the residual resistivity. Thus, the data can hardly provide the determination of the physical 

origin for the actual difference between the two scattering rates alone, for which some additional 

experiments such as electronic thermoelectric power on the Zn-substituted single crystals will be 

greatly helpful. In this case we can systematically study the electronic thermoelectric power in SC 


 54 

 

states of various Zn-doped compounds, and explore if Zn has contributed to the normal-state 

electronic or SC states, as what were comprehensively studied in cuprates [103]. 

   

5. Impurities in superconducting state 

5.1. 11-system 

The 11-system is featured by without the separating blocking-layer among the FBS family. 

The substitution of impurity is indeed onto the Fe-site rather than other sites within the 

blocking-layer as that occurs in other systems. Zhang and co-workers showed that among the 3d 

transition metals from Cr to Zn, only the Co, Ni, and Cu with smaller ionic radii for valence state 

2+ can substitute effectively for Fe in Fe1+yTe1-xSex (x≈0.2) [102]. The substitutions of any 3d 

metals with the concentration of ~5% can lead to the formation of spin-glass state and suppression 

of superconductivity. As shown in Figure 28, in contrast to the Co substitution which slightly 

suppresses the superconductivity, the Cu and Ni substitutions with the same concentration 

completely destroy the superconductivity. 

 

Figure 28. In-plane resistivity as functions of temperature for MzFe1+y-zTe1-xSex (M=Co, Ni and Cu, 

z = 0, 0.06, x ≈ 0.2), from Zhang et al. [102]. 

 


 55 

 

5.2. 1111-system 

As briefly introduced in Sec 1, the Fe-based 1111- and 122-system are two preferred systems for 

study on the NMI substitution effects. The Zn-doping study was firstly carried out on the 

1111-system which possesses the highest Tc among the FBS. The first observation of Tc suppression 

was reported by Guo et al. in polycrystalline Zn-doped LaFeAsO0.85 [48]. Figure 29 presents the 

magnetic susceptibilities of the LaFe1-xZnxAsO0.85, which manifest a large Tc decrease from 26 K to 

zero only by a minimal amount of Zn (< 3 at. %) substitution. The results likely indicate that the 

conventional s-wave model is highly unlike for LaFeAsO0.85, but the s± wave model and the nodal 

d-wave model both remain possible. Li and co-workers [104, 105] also studied the Zn substitution 

effects on SC of the polycrystalline LaFe1−yZnyAsO1−xFx. As is shown in Figure 30, the Tc 

suppression by Zn was only observed in the fluorine over-doped regime, whereas in the fluorine 

under- and optimal-doped regimes, the Tc was even slightly enhanced which was unusual and had 

never been found in any other superconductors. Seen from the temperature dependent resistivity of 

the fluorine under-doped samples, the low-T upturn was gradually suppressed by Zn impurities and 

the carrier density was also enhanced indicated by the Hall measurements. Apart from the influence 

of polycrystalline nature of samples, one can hardly explain the Zn effects according to the 

discussion in Section 4.4. It seems like that the Zn substitution might improve the disorder or other 

intrinsic reasons. Later theoretical study from their colleagues suggested that the presence of a Zn 

impurity could induce an electron transferring from As to Fe atoms in both the fluorine under-doped 

and over-doped regions and modify the local lattice structure. Further experiments on the single 

crystals could be helpful to elucidate this phenomenon.  

 

  

 


 56 

 

 

Figure 29. T and x dependence of χ of LaFe1-xZnxAsO0.85 measured at 10 Oe under ZFC and FC 

conditions.  Open and closed symboles represent data from independent set of samples.  (h) Tc vs. 

x, from Guo et al. [48].   

 

 

Figure 30. Tc as the function of Zn content in polycrystalline LaFe1−yZnyAsO1−xFx. Solid and open 

symbols refer to Tc determined from resistivity (midpoint) and susceptibility (onset point) 

measurements, respectively, from Li et al. [104]. 

 

Li and co-workers also studied the Zn-substitution effect on the n-type 1111-system [106]. 

Figure 31 shows the Zn content dependent Tc of polycrystalline LaFe1−x−yCoyZnxAsO in the cobalt 


 57 

 

under-, optimal- and over-doped regimes. Different from their previous results on the p-type 

LaFe1−yZnyAsO1−xFx, SC in these samples was suppressed by Zn doping in all cobalt-doped 

regimes. The SC disappears at Zn content of about 12at.%, 4at.%, and 3at% for the cobalt under-, 

optimal- and over-doped regimes, respectively. The slopes of Tc(x) are similar for the optimal- and 

over-doped regimes and both of them are more sharply than that of under-doped case. 

 

 

Figure 31. Zn content dependence of Tc of polycrystalline LaFe1−x−yCoyZnxAsO. Solid and open 

symbols refer to Tc determined from resistivity (midpoint) and susceptibility (onset point) 

measurements, respectively, from Li et al. [106]. 

 

In addition, Sato and co-workers suggested that the Co impurity should act as a NMI 

comparing with the host atom Fe. They studied the substitution effects of Mn and Co on 

RFeAsO0.89F0.11 (R= La and Nd) polycrystalline samples [13]. Figure 32 gives Tc as a function of 

the impurity content for RFe1-yMyAsO0.89F0.11 (R= La and Nd; M = Co and Mn). In these studies, 

the Co ion was believed to provide two electrons to the host conduction bands and was 

characterized as a NMI. Ni [107] and Ru [108] were considered as nonmagnetic as well. The SC 

was completely suppressed with Co impurity content of 7.5at.%, suggesting that the Tc suppression 


 58 

 

rate is well accordance with LaFe1−x−yCoyZnxAsO case as we discussed above. It is worth noting 

that magnetic impurity of Mn introduced more dramatic Tc suppression than any other impurities.  

 

 

Figure 32. The Tc as a function of impurity content for RFe1-yMyAsO0.89F0.11 polycrystal, where the 

R= La and Nd, and M = Mn and Co, from Sato et al. [13]. 

 

5.3. n-type 122-system 

Up to now, most of NMI study on FBS was reported on polycrystals as introduced above. 

Nevertheless, a single crystal has sizable and atomically ordered surfaces, which is crucial for 

surface sensitive measurements and scattering behavior within the SC plane, as discussed in 

Section 4.1 to 4.3. Consequently, the growth of Zn-doped single crystals is of great importance to 

study the intrinsic Zn impurity effects. Since it is rather difficult in the growth of single crystals for 

the 1111-system, the well-studied 122-system is a promising candidate for the study. 


 59 

 

Utilizing the high-pressure technique, Zn impurities were successfully doped into the single 

crystal in 122-system, as discussed in Section 4.1. Figure 33 summarizes for the results of Tc 

suppression as a function of the impurity concentration for BaFe2-2x-2yM2xCo2yAs2 (M = Zn, Mn) 

[46]. Here, the Tc is derived from the resistivity. SC is fully suppressed by Zn at the common 

doping level of ~8 at.%, regardless of the under- (y = 0.045), optimal- (y = 0.055) and over-doped 

(y = 0.11) regimes. The suppression rate for the Zn doping was roughly estimated by applying a 

linear function fit to the data, giving 2.31, 3.63, and 2.45 K/at.% for the under-, optimal- and 

over-doped states, respectively. The Tc decreasing rates by Zn change little from the under- to 

over-doped SC states, being a remarkable feature discovered in this study. Clearly, the rates are 

much smaller than the expected one for the s± wave model (25 K/at.%, see below), indicating that 

the observed SC is much robust against the NMI than the expectation for the s± wave SC state. 

Similar results were also found in the Zn-doped BaFe1.92-2xZn2xPt0.08As2 single crystals [109]. For a 

comparison, the data for polycrystalline BaFe1.87-2xZn2xCo0.13As2 prepared under ambient-pressure 

are co-plotted by a dotted line in Figure 32. The discrepancy between the present and the earlier 

data is probably due to overestimation of the Zn content in the ambient-pressure sample. Since the 

Zn substitution is not easy caused by the low melting point and high volatility of Zn-containing 

compounds, it is uncertain that whether Zn can be substituted into the Fe-site by the normal 

ambient-pressure synthesis. The suppression rate for the magnetic Mn doped sample was estimated 

to be 6.32 K/at.%, which is still quite smaller than the theoretical value for the s± wave model [10, 

11]. Figure 34 shows the SC phase diagram of BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2, where Tc is determined by 

the resistivity measurements. As aforementioned, SC is suppressed by the common doping level of 

Zn, ~8at.%.  

 


 60 

 

 

Figure 33. Impurity concentration x dependence of Tc for BaFe2-2x-2yM2xCo2yAs2 single crystals, 

where the impurities M are Mn and Zn, and the Tc were derived from resistivity. The data shown by 

the broken line are from the samples prepared under ambient-pressure, from Li et al. [46].  

 

 

Figure 34. Electronic phase diagram for BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 single crystals, from Li et al. [46]. 

 

Similar Tc-suppression behavior was reported by Nakajima et al. [84], which was caused by the 

application of 3 MeV proton irradiation on BaFe2-2xCo2xAs2 single crystals at under-, optimal-, and 

over-doping levels. Figure 35 shows the normalized Tc for crystals under different irradiation dose, 

where Tc0 is the Tc irradiation-free sample. In all the doping regimes, Tc/Tc0 decreases linearly with 


 61 

 

increasing the dose, whereas the slopes are different with respect to the doping regimes, from which 

the over-doped case was estimated as the most drastic SC suppression effect. In contrast, the Tc in the 

optimal-doping regime showed relatively robust against irradiated defects than other regimes. Such 

sample dependent Tc suppression behavior seems like inconsistence with those of chemical doping 

results as discussed above. Detailed analysis for the ρ0 and pair-breaking will be discussed in Section 

5. 

 

 

Figure 35. Irradiation dose dependence of the normalized critical temperature Tc/Tc0 for 

BaFe2-2xCo2xAs2 single crystals. The doping state of Co were in under- (x = 0.045), optimal- (x = 

0.075), and over-doping (x = 0.113) regions, whose Tc0 is 15.1 K, 24.8 K, and 12.8 K, respectively. 

Inset: Δρ0 as a function of dose, where 
unirr
irr

0
0
0






, from Nakajima et al. [84]. 

 

5.4. p-type 122-system 

Cheng et al. studied the Zn and Mn substitution effects on SC of the p-type polyscrystalline 

Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 synthesized under ambient-pressure (see Figure 36) [51]. They found that the Mn 

doping depressed the SC transition temperature drastically with a rate of ΔTc/Mn=−4.2 K/at.%. 

Transport properties measurement revealed that the Mn doping enhanced the ρ0 significantly, and 


 62 

 

induced strong local magnetic moments (~2.58 μB) for distinct pair-breaking. Such results were 

well consistent with those of Mn-doping in other systems [46]. In contrast, the Tc and ρ0 were 

observed as almost independent of Zn-doping. The weak Zn substitution effect is only similar as 

that of Zn under- and optimal-doped LaFeAsO1-yFy system [104].  

 

 

Figure 36. Tc vs. impurity content for Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-xMxAs2 polycrystals, where M = Zn and Mn, from 

Cheng et al. [51]. 

 

To elucidate the real effect of Zn, the Zn-doped p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 single crystals 

were synthesized by high-pressure technique as introduced in Section 4.1. The magnetic and 

nonmagnetic elements around Fe in the element periodic table were selected as the dopants, including 

3d metals of Mn, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn, and 4d metal of Ru [49]. The decreases of Tc determined by ρ 

and χ data (Tcρ and Tcχ) with the dopant concentration x are given in Figure 37. The suppression rate 

by Zn was estimated at 2.22 K/% by applying a linear function fit to Tcρ vs. x, which is well 

accordance with the results for the BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 superconductors. Applying a linear 

function fit to Tcρ-x, the suppression rates for Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, and Cu are 6.98, 0.27, 1.73, 2.21 and 

2.68 K/%, respectively. Based on the density functional calculations, it was found that the impurity 

atoms in iron-based superconductors could be classified into three groups according to the scattering 

potential: (i) Mn (0.3 eV), Co (-0.3 eV), and Ni (-0.8 eV), (ii) Ru (0.1 eV) and (iii) Zn (-8 eV) [110]. 


 63 

 

Among these impurities, the nonmagnetic Zn works as a unitary scattering center due to the quite 

strong potential comparable to the bandwidth. Consequently, it is expected to have strong 

pair-breaking effect on the SC with the anisotropic SC gap. The observed robustness of SC against 

Zn seems to contradict the s± wave model. As discussed in Section 2.2.2, the reduction in Tc due to 

the impurity is 25 K/at.%. It has also been mentioned that Tc will be weakly suppressed by the 

impurities in the s++ wave state in contrast to s± wave state. Among these impurities, Mn has the 

strongest suppression effect, even though it is much weaker than what is expected for the s± wave 

model (25 K/at.%). The negligible suppression effect by Ru is consistent with the results for the 

1111-system [13], for which we will not discuss this isovalance-doping effect in this article. 

 

 

Figure 37. Tc vs. impurity content x for the Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 single crystals, where M= Mn, 

Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn), from Li et al. [49]. 

 

In addition, Tan and co-workers [58] grew Cr, Mn, Co, and Zn substituted K0.8Fe2−ySe2 single 

crystals as can be seen in Figure 38. The Tc was drastically depressed by substitution of Cr, Co, and 

Zn for Fe, regardless of magnetic or nonmagnetic impurities. It is interesting that all impurities 

showed similar suppression rate of about 30 K/at.% approaching the value expected for the s± wave 


 64 

 

model (25 K/at.%), and only about 1at.% of dopant could kill the SC completely. On the other hand, 

these impurities induced drastic enhancement of residual resistivity, especially for nonmagnetic Zn, 

which resulted in change of ρ0 about 1320 μΩ cm just from an extremely low doping level of 

0.25at.%. The dramatically large change of ρ0 may indicate the occurrence of serious disorder [20, 91, 

111] as analyzed in Section 4.4. It is rather surprising that the SC of K0.8Fe2−ySe2 behaves as 

exceptionally robust against the Mn substitution which even induced a slight increase in Tc. The 

result seems likely in contrast with the Anderson theory as introduced in Section 2.2. The manganese 

atoms generally work as strongly magnetic scattering center in superconductors regardless of any 

order parameters, namely, it should suppress the Tc for both isotropic and anisotropic pair-symmetry. 

In addition, substation of Mn introduces drastic charge localization and hence results in MIT in the 

low-T region of ρ-T curves, which was actually absent in this experiment. The authors attributed this 

anomalous phenomenon to the decrease of SC volume fraction owing to the nonSC islands around 

the Mn dopants. If so, the crystal may consist of two phases including a SC K0.8Fe2−ySe2 and a nonSC 

Mn-rich phase, hence, the present results may not be considered as intrinsic substitution effect. 

 

 

Figure 38. (a) The plot of the Tc value vs x for the K0.8Fe2−y−xMxSe2 (M = Cr, Mn, Co, and Zn) 

samples. (b) The plot of the residual resistivity vs x, from Tan et al. [58]. 

 


 65 

 

6. Pair-breaking 

As discussed in Section 2.2, it is yet far from understanding the nature of NMI scattering 

based on an individual analysis of doping level dependent Tc. Instead, one should study various 

properties, among which the pair-breaking rate is the most important issue. The pair-breaking rate 

from NMI can be calculated as [11] 

0
 = 2
 

BTc
k

z γ
α



                                        (26), 

where γ is the electron scattering rate, Tc0 is the Tc of the Zn-free compound. Based on the 

five-orbital model for the 122-system, theoretical study proposed a relation between γ and Δρ0 as 

[11] 

cm)  = 0.18  (K)
( 
  
0
 γ
μ
ρ


                                 (27). 

Here Δρ0 is the difference of the residual resistivity between the Zn-doped and Zn-free crystals. For 

the s± wave state, SC should vanish in the range of α > α±c= 0.22 [11]. Thus, taking the results of 

Zn-doped BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 single crystals as an example, we can estimate the α (Figure 39) 

through 

0

0

1

 
= 0.88 Δ
 

cT
ρ
z
α
                                     (28) 

and using z = 0.33 or 0.50,, where the effective mass for calculation of z are from the ARPES 

experiments [54]. To obtain the elastic scattering rate, we also calculated the pair-breaking 

parameter using Eq. (17) as 

0

2
2
 = 

kBTc
z
α



                                       (29) 

by deriving γ using the relation [11] 

m

ρ
ne
γ
2

Δ
 =
 
0

2

                                       (30), 


 66 

 

where n is the carrier number estimated from the Hall data. Both α1 and α2 data change roughly 

linearly; thereby we applied a linear function fit to the data and estimated the critical pair-breaking 

parameters as 7.64, 11.49, and 6.76 for α1 (z = 0.33), α1 (z = 0.05), and α2, respectively. In addition, 

using the relation 

2
0
0
0

0

3
4

 
Δ
 =
μ λ
T

ρ
α

 c

                                    (31), 

we obtained α3~2.58 for λ= 195 nm [86]. Obviously, the pair-breaking parameters experimentally 

estimated for the present system are far above the limit α±c = 0.22 for the s± wave model, 

suggesting that the s± wave model may be not a candidate for the 122-type superconductor.  

 

 

Figure 39. Tc/Tc0 vs. α with various calculations for BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 (x = 0-0.08) by using 

Eqs. (28), (29), and (31), from Li et al. [50]. 

    

It is possible that the α1, α2 and α3 are slightly overestimated if Δρ0 was overestimated due to 

the grain boundary or undetected electrically resistive factors. For further clarification, we made 

another estimation regarding the critical impurity concentration for the s± wave state (n±imp). Since 

Zn (I> 1 eV) corresponds to n±imp ~0.5z/Tc (K), we predicted n±imp to be 0.01 (0.015) for z = 0.5 

(0.33); obviously, the experimentally determined nimp of 0.08 for Tc = 0 is much higher than the 


 67 

 

theoretical values. Thus, the quantitative discussion regarding the n±imp does not accept the s± wave 

model for the BaFe1.89Co0.11As2 superconductor as well.  

Nakajima and co-workers [84] also calculated the pair-breaking rate on their proton-irradiated 

Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 single crystals, as can be seen from Figure 34. Using Eq. (26) they found that the 

critical scattering rates were 6.1, 3.5, and 2.4 for the under-, optimal-, and over-doped regimes, 

respectively. The results are well in accordance with the chemical doping data as shown in Figure 

40. Note that the critical pair-breaking rates of all samples are much higher than that expected for 

the s± pairing scenario (≈0.22).  

 

 

Figure 40. Normalized critical temperature Tc/Tc0 as a function of normalized scattering rate. The 

Ba(Fe,Co)2As2 single crystals were irradiated by proton irradiation. Dashed lines are linear 

extrapolations. gc± is the critical scattering rate expected in the s± wave model, from Nakajima et al. 

[84]. 

 

On basis of previous pair-breaking analysis for the n-type BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 

superconductors, Li et al. also calculated the pair-breaking rate for the p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 

(M = Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) single crystals [49]. Here α can be estimated from Eq. (26) by 

using z = 0.50 as shown in Figure 41. The Tc/Tc0 changes against α in roughly linear way; thereby 


 68 

 

we applied a linear function fit to the data and estimated the critical pair-breaking parameters as 

6.52, 5.23, 4.24, 5.41 and 6.05 for impurities of Mn, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn, respectively. The 

comparable result was obtained for the pair-breaking effect of Zn in the BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2 

system as α = 11.49 with z = 0.5. The results are consistent with the proton irradiated 

Ba(Fe,Co)2As2 experiments [84]. Obviously, the pair-breaking parameters experimentally 

estimated for the present system are far above the limit of α±c = 0.22 expected from the s± wave 

model, suggesting that the s± wave model may be unlikely in the 122-type FBS.  

 

 

Figure 41. Tc/Tc0 vs. pair-breaking rate α for Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 single crystals with M = Mn, Co, 

Ni, Cu and Zn. The Tc of each impurity-doped sample is normalized with Tc0 of the impurity-free 

compound. The α is estimated as Eq. (28), from Li et al. [49]. 

 

To understand the relative low pair-breaking rate of Zn on the 122-type iron pnicitides, Chen 

and co-workers [60] calculated the disorder effects of Zn impurities in the strong (unitary) 

scattering limit on various properties of the system in the case of s± wave pairing symmetry, by 

solving the lattice Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation (BdG) self-consistently. Figure 42 shows the 

suppression effect of Zn on the superfluid density in BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2. The local superfluid 


 69 

 

density was found to decay significantly with impurity content of 3.83% at zero temperature as 

visualized in Figure 42(a). As a result, the zero temperature bulk superfluid density 
s
  and Tc are 

completely destroyed by ~8% of Zn impurities, implying the importance of spatial 

disorder-induced fluctuations. However, the decrease rate of 
s
  is larger than that of Tc, which 

were attributed to the “Swiss-cheese” scenario for a short coherence superconductor. Further 

corroborating with Uemura plot provides further proof for the different rates of suppression as 

shown in Figure. 42(c). The Uemura plot indicates the breakdown of the Abrikosov-Gorkov theory 

for impurity-averaged Green’s functions. The numerical results are in agreement with the 

experiments, namely, SC phase is fully suppressed close to the critical impurity concentration of 

roughly nimp ≈ 8%.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 70 

 

 

Figure 42. Suppression effect of Zn on the superfluid density in BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2. (a) The 

intensity of normalized local superfluid density ρs(i)/ ρs(0) with Zn doping level of 3.83% at zero 

temperature. The open black circles indicate the impurity locations. (b) The Zn doping level 

dependent bulk superfluid density 
s
  at 0 K and Tc. The data are averaged over five randomly 

distributed impurity configurations. (c) The normalized Tc/Tc0 as a function of normalized 
0
/
s s
 

shown in the Uemura plots based on short-coherence superconductors. 
s
  is obtained from a 

pristine system. The results of the one-band Abrikosov-Gorkov calculations for d-wave pairing 

symmetry and the two-band Abrikosov-Gorkov calculations for the s± wave symmetry are also 

plotted for comparison, from Chen et al. [60]. 

 

For the Zn substitution results of 1111-system from Li et al. [112], recent simulation studies 

also showed the scattering rate. Figure 43 gives the calculation of Tc for Zn scattering rates and the 

experimental results for impurity content dependent Tc. They suggested that FBS might be 

characterized by the strength of the effective on-site pairing potential g0, and proposed three types 

of cases for the disorder effect: (i) Large g0 (Figure 43(a)), where the on-site pairing dominates, 


 71 

 

and Tc is independent of Zn doping. The experiment results of under- and optimal-doped 

LaFe1−yZnyAsO1−xFx were believed as consistent with this case (Figure 43(b). (ii) Weak g0, SC is 

destroyed by the impurity. The authors considered the results for over-doped LaFe1−yZnyAsO1−xFx, 

LaFe1−xZnxAsO1−δ, and BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 satisfied to this model. (iii) g0≈g2, Tc is initially 

suppressed rapidly with Zn-doping, and then saturates with a certain doping level. The data from 

polycrystalline SrFe1.8-2yZn2xCo0.2As2 was classified to this case.  

 

 

Figure 43. (a), (c) and (e) Tc/Tc0 vs. pair-breaking rate g2 with strong, weak, and moderate on-site 

pairing coupling g0. (a), (c) and (e): Zn-impurity effect on Tc in various FBS observed in experiments. 

The references of the data are listed, from Yao et al. [112]. 

 

For a comparison, we summarized the above data of the NMI study on single crystals in Figure 

44. The Tc/Tc0-α curves locate at three different regions marked as I, II, and III in Figure 44(b). 

Region I: For the K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2 data, although the SC was depressed with substituting only 

0.25at.% of Fe-site by Zn, the change of residual resistivity Δρ0 was quite high as about 1320 μΩ cm, 

as a result the critical pair-breaking rate is still large as around 19.94. Nevertheless, we cannot define 

19.94 as the real critical pair-breaking rate of K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2, unless one can grow more crystals 


 72 

 

with SC partially suppressed by Zn to fit linear function of Tc/Tc0 vs. α, namely, the critical α may be 

more less than 19.94. However, one may confront with a technical difficulty during the crystal 

growth due to the extremely low doping level as <0.25at.%. Larger pair-breaking rates are also 

observed in the Zn-substituted 122-type crystals, regardless of p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 or n-type 

BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2, whose critical α’s are mostly as 11. Nevertheless, the evaluation of 

well-characterized microbridges exhibits a considerably less critical pair-breaking rate as 1.32, which 

should be close to the nature of the pair-breaking rate. With respect to the calculation from Efremov 

et al. [14], the critical pair-breaking rate for s± wave model was estimated as 
28
25K
0
c

crit



）
（T
 

with inter- to intra-band scattering ratio α ≡ u/v =1 from Eq. (15), much larger than what was 

expected from Onari’s model (α±c = 0.22) [11]. In the case of Onari’s model, the authors considered a 

“natural” formulation for impurity potential, i.e., diagonal on the basis of the five Fe d-orbitals, 

automatically leading to significant interband scattering if one transforms back to the band basis. 

From Efremov’s estimation [14], however, the ratio between inter- and intra-band scattering has been 

considered as the pair-breaking contribution (see the detailed discussion in Section 2.2), as a result 

the pair-breaking rates of most data collected in Figure 44 are faster than the expected data of 

crit


. 

The results may indicate that measurements of Tc suppression with respect to the amount of chemical 

potential or disorder can hardly determine the gap structure in multiband systems. 

Region II: The pair-breaking rates from irradiation data are quite similar for proton irradiated 

BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 (α=3.50) [84] and α-particle irradiated LaFeAsO0.7F0.3 (α=2.91) [82], although 

different irradiation sources and different superconductor systems were used. Considering the 

relatively larger size and power of these particles, impurities other than nonmagnetic defects may 

provide additional influence on the pair-breaking evaluation, as discussed in Section 3.2. 

Region III: Under the light electron particle irradiation the 122-type crystals are induced similar 

critical pair-breaking rates as 1.32, 1.26 and 1.21 for BaFeAs2-xPx, Ba1-xKxFe2As2, and 

BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2, respectively. Particularly, the pair-breaking rate of chemical doping (data from the 


 73 

 

Ba1-xKxFe2As2 microbridges) seems to resemble those of electron-irradiation induced defects. 

Although the pair-breaking parameters of the electron-irradiated crystal and Zn-doped microbridges 

are a slightly larger than the expected critical value for s± wave (α±c = 0.22), being about 5 times as 

α±c, the experimental results are consistent with the theoretical calculation, which provide strongly 

evidence for s± wave as the nature of pair symmetry in the FBSs.  

 

 

Figure 44. (a) Tc/Tc0 vs. α for various single crystals, here all samples are under the optimal-doped 

regimes. (b) The enlarged view on the low pair-breaking region. The pair-breaking rate α was 

estimated as Eq. (28) for single crystals BaK-Zn (Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0-0.15) [50], BaK-Zn-2 

(Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0 and 0.05) was measured from microbridges [90], BaCo-Zn 

(BaFe1.89-2xZn2xCo0.11As2, x = 0-0.08) [49], KFeS-Zn (K0.8Fe2−y−xZnxSe2, x = 0 and 0.005) [58], 

BaCo-irr 
(BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 
under 
different 
proton-particle 
irradiation) 
[84], 
NdF-irr 

(NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 under different α-particle irradiation) [82], BaK-irr (Ba1-xKxFe2As2 under electron 

irradiation) [86], BaP-irr (BaFeAs2-xPx under different electron irradiation) [87], and BaRu-irr 

(BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2 under different electron irradiation) [88]. α±c is the pair-breaking parameter 

expected for the s± wave model, and it was calculated as around 0.22. All data are fitted in linear 

and marked in the same color as the data. 

 


 74 

 

7. Summary 

In this review, we overviewed the theoretical and experimental progress in the nonmagnetic 

impurity substitution study on the Fe-based superconductors. Theoretically, scientists proposed two 

highly potential order parameter symmetries, i. e. the multi-gap s++ and s± wave. Because of the 

complex gap structure, exceptive magnetic and metallic behaviors of Fe-based superconductors, 

influences of nonmagnetic defects may vary in chemical potential, impurity disorder, inter- and 

intra-band scattering features, and electron localization, and of course the most important information 

for the understanding of symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. Experimentally, the first 

concern on the defects is naturally focused on its sample quality. Zn impurities have been 

successfully substituted into the single-crystalline 122-type superconductors, providing significant 

results by various measurements. Considering the effects of Zn impurities, the largest one is found in 

its immediate neighborhood within a ball region, which have not yet been investigated by using local 

probes such as NMR, NQR, μSR, or STM, while proofed by superconducting order-parameter 

phase-slip phenomenon in the Zn-doped nanowires, in which the radius of the correlation length of 

order around the non-superconducting regions around Zn was observed as a few lattice spacings. A 

single impurity also influences the electronic state and local moment, magnetic response of the Fe2X2 

planes both on macroscopic scale as antiferromagnetic state and local scale of moment.  

Most of experiments on the effects of nonmagnetic impurities are from the transport properties. 

The Zn ions provided direct modifications of the superconductivity, including the suppression of 

critical temperature and the enhancement of residual resistivity. Particularly, the superconductivity 

disappears when the residual resistance per plane accesses to the quantum resistance limit (6.45 kΩ). 

The Hall measurements demonstrated that Zn impurities contributed weakly modification of the 

carrier densities. However, the Zn seems unlikely to change the slope of T2 dependent Hall angle, 

suggesting the inducing in-plane impurity scattering rate with substitution of Zn. On the other hand, 

Zn ions can also influence the heat capacity, the London penetration depth, the electronic 

thermoelectric power, and so on.  

On basis of these experiments we emphasize the qualitative feature of impurities effects on 

superconducting state for many FBS systems. Considering an overall nice agreement between many 

different experiments on different materials systems, we can safely conclude that the nonmagnetic 

impurity can suppress the superconductivity with major concerns about sample quality variations. As 

a summarization, the pair-breaking rates of nonmagnetic defects on various superconductors are 


 75 

 

collected to compare with various theoretical approaches. The pair-breaking rates of the 

electron-irradiated 122-type crystals and the Zn-doped microbridges are consistent with the 

theoretical calculated value for s± wave (α±c = 0.22), which provide strongly evidence for s± wave as 

the nature of pairing symmetry in the Fe-based superconductors, but not an isotropic gap symmetry. 

However, we can hardly exclude a much more complex symmetry, s+id wave, which behaves as 

strongly anisotropic gap symmetry as well. Further experimental and theoretical investigations are 

still required. 

 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Drs. H.-H. Wen, H. Kontani, and Z.-X. Shi for valuable discussions. The work was 

supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11234006, 51102188, and 

U1332143), Jiangsu Provincial Natural Science Fund (SBK2015040804), Fundamental Research 

Funds for the Central Universities, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher 

Education Institutions, World Premier International Research Center from MEXT, the Grants-in-Aid 

for Scientific Research (25289233, 25289108) from JSPS, the Funding Program for World-Leading 

Innovative R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST Program) from JSPS, and the National Key 

Basic Research of China Grants (Nos. 2011CBA00111). 

 

References 

[1]  
Kamihara Y, Watanabe T, Hirano M and Hosono H, 2008 J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 3296 

[2]  
Kamihara Y, Hiramatsu H, Kawamura R, Yanagi H, Kamiya T and Hosono H, 2006 J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 128 10012 

[3]  
Rotter M, Tegel M and Johrendt D, 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 107006  

[4]  
Ren Z A, Lu W, Yang J, Yi W, Shen X L, Zheng C, Che G C, Dong X L, Sun L L, Zhou F, 

Zhao Z X, 2008 Chinese Phys. Lett. 25 2215 

[5]  
Paglione J and Greene R L, 2010 Nat. Phys. 6 645 


 76 

 

[6]  
Mazin I, 2011 Physics 4 26 

[7]  
Hoffman J E, 2010 Science 328 441-443 

[8]  
Mazin I I, 2010 Nature 464 183  

[9]  
Mazin I I, Singh D J, Johannes M D and Du M H, 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 057003  

[10]  Kuroki K, Onari S, Arita R, Usui H, Tanaka Y, Kontani H and Aoki H, 2008 Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 101 087004  

[11]  Onari S and Kontani H, 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 177001  

[12]  Hirschfeld P J, Korshunov M M and Mazin I I, 2011 Rep. Prog. Phys. 74 124508 

[13]  Sato M, Kobayashi Y, Lee S C, Takahashi H, Satomi E and Miura Y, 2010 J. Phys. Soc. 

Jpn. 79 014710  

[14]  Efremov D V, Korshunov M M, Dolgov O V, Golubov A A and Hirschfeld P J, 2011 Phys. 

Rev. B 84 180512(R)  

[15]  Hirschfeld P J, Korshunov M M and Mazin I I, 2011 Rep. Prog. Phys. 74 124508  

[16]  Chen W Q, Yang K-Y, Zhou Y and Zhang F-C, 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 047006  

[17]  Maiti S, Korshunov M M, Maier T A, Hirschfeld P J and Chubukov A V, 2011 Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 107 147002  

[18]  Reid J-Ph, Juneau-Fecteau A, Gordon R T, René de Cotret S, Doiron-Leyraud N, Luo X G, 

Shakeripour H, Chang J, Tanatar M A, Kim H, Prozorov R, Saito T, Fukazawa H, Kohori 

Y, Kihou K, Lee C H, Iyo A, Eisaki H, Shen B, Wen H-H and Taillefer L, 2012 Supercond. 

Sci. Technol. 25 084013  

[19]  Anderson P W, 1961 Phys. Rev. 124 41  

[20]  Alloul H, Bobroff J, Gabay M and Hirschfeld P J, 2009 Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 452009 

[21]  Williams G V M, Tallon J L and Dupree R, 2000 Phys. Rev. B 61 4319  

[22]  Bernhard C, Niedermayer Ch, Blasius T, Williams G V M, De Renzi R, Bucci C and 

Tallon J L, 1998 Phys. Rev. B 58 8937  


 77 

 

[23]  Julien M-H, Fehér T, Horvatić M, Berthier C, Bakharev O N, Ségransan P, Collin G and 

Marucco J-F, 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 3422  

[24]  Tarascon J M, Wang E, Kivelson S , Bagley B G, Hull G W, Ramesh R, 1990 Phys. Rev. B 

42 218  

[25]  Armitage N P, Foumier P and Greene R L, 2010 Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 2421  

[26]  Tallon J L, 1998 Phys. Rev. B 58 5956  

[27]  vom Hedt B, Lisseck W, Westerholt K and Bach H, 1994 Phys. Rev. B 49 9898  

[28]  Kuo Y K, Schneider C W, Skove M J, Nevitt M V, Tessema G X and McGee J J, 1997 Phys. 

Rev. B 56 6201 

[29]  Bardeen J, Cooper L N and Schrieffer J R, 1957 Phys. Rev. 108 1175  

[30]  Zhang X, Catlow C R A, Parker S C, Wall A, 1992 J. Phys. Chem. Solids 53 761  

[31]  Millet P, Seeger O, Enjalbert R and Galy J, 1991 J. Solid State Chem. 90 344  

[32]  Sato S, Nakada I, Kohara T and Oda Y, 1988 Acta Cryst. C 44 11  

[33]  Armitage N P, Fournier P and Greene R L, 2010 Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 2421  

[34]  Tsuei C C and Kirtley J R, 2000 Rev. Mod. Phys. 72 969  

[35]  Yang H D, Lin J-Y, Li H H, Hsu F H, Liu C J, Li S-C, Yu R-C and Jin C-Q, 2001 Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 87 167003  

[36]  Balatsky A V, Vekhter I and Zhu J-X, 2006 Rev. Mod. Phys. 78 373  

[37]  Samokhin K V, 2012 Lecture Notes in Physics 847 269-295  

[38]  Ni N, 2009 A dissertation in Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, pp 26-33  

[39]  Evtushinsky D V, Inosov D S, Zabolotnyy V B, Viazovska M S, Khasanov R, Amato A, 

Klauss H-H, Luetkens H, Niedermayer Ch, Sun G L, Hinkov V, Lin C T, Varykhalov A, 

Koitzsch A, Knupfer M, Büchner B, Kordyuk A A and Borisenko S V, 2009 New J. Phys. 

11 055069  

[40]  Nakayama K, Sato T, Richard P, Xu Y-M, Sekiba Y, Souma S, Chen G F, Luo J L, Wang 

N L, Ding H and Takahashi T, 2009 Europhys. Lett. 85 67002  


 78 

 

[41]  Zhao Lin, Liu Hai-Yun, Zhang Wen-Tao, Meng Jian-Qiao, Jia Xiao-Wen, Liu Guo-Dong, 

Dong Xiao-Li, Chen Gen-Fu, Luo Jian-Lin, Wang Nan-Lin, Lu Wei, Wang Gui-Ling, 

Zhou Yong, Zhu Yong, Wang Xiao-Yang, Xu Zu-Yan, Chen Chuang-Tian and Zhou 

Xing-Jiang, 2008 Chinese Phys. Lett. 25 4402 

[42]  Wang Y, Kreisel A, Hirschfeld P J and Mishra V, 2013 Phys. Rev. B 87 094504  

[43]  Efremov D V, Golubov A A and Dolgov O V, 2013 New J. Phys. 15 013002  

[44]  Sato M, Kobayashi Y, Lee S C, Takahashi H, Satomi E and Miura Y, 2010 J. Phys. Soc. 

Jpn. 79 014710  

[45]  Hoffman J E, 2011 Rep. Prog. Phys. 74 124513  

[46]  Li J, Guo Y F, Zhang S B, Tsujimoto Y, Wang X, Sathish C I, Yu S, Yamaura K and 

Takayama-Muromachi E, 2012 Solid State Commun. 152 671-679  

[47]  Li J, Guo Y F, Zhang S B, Yu S, Tsujimoto Y, Yamaura K and Takayama-Muromachi E, 

2011 Physica C 471 213-215  

[48]  Guo Y F, Shi Y G, Yu S, Belik A A, Matsushita Y, Tanaka M, Katsuya Y, Kobayashi K, 

Nowik I, Felner I, Awana V P S, Yamaura K and Takayama-Muromachi E, 2010 Phys. Rev. 

B 82 054506  

[49]  Li J, Guo Y F, Zhang S B, Tsujimoto Y, Wang X, Sathish C I, Sun Y, Yu S, Yi W, 

Yamaura K, Takayama-Muromachi E, Shirako Y, Akaogi M and Kontani H, 2012 Phys. 

Rev. B 85 214509  

[50]  Li J, Guo Y F, Zhang S B, Yu S, Tsujimoto Y, Kontani H, Yamaura K and 

Takayama-Muromachi E, 2011 Phys. Rev. B 84 020513(R)  

[51]  Cheng P, Shen B, Hu J P and Wen H H, 2010 Phys. Rev. B 81 174529  

[52]  Pan S H, Hudson E W, Lang K M, Eisaki H, Uchida S and Davis J C, 2000 Nature 403 746  

[53]  Hudson E W, Lang K M, Madhavan V, Pan S H, Eisaki H, Uchida S and Davis J C, 2001 

Nature 411 920  


 79 

 

[54]  Ding H, Richard P, Nakayama K, Sugawara K, Arakane T, Sekiba Y, Takayama A, Souma 

S, Sato T, Takahashi T, Wang Z, Dai X, Fang Z, Chen G F, Luo J L and Wang N L, 2008 

Europhys. Lett. 83 47001  

[55]  Zhang Y, Yang L X, Chen F, Zhou B, Wang X F, Chen X H, Arita M, Shimada K, 

Namatame H, Taniguchi M, Hu J P, Xie B P and Feng D L, 2010 Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 

117003 

[56]  Terashima K, Sekiba Y, Bowen J H, Nakayama K,Kawahara T, Sato T, Richard P, Xu 

Y-M, Li L J, Cao G-H, Xu Z-A, Ding H and Takahashi T, 2009 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 

U.S.A. 106 7330 

[57]  Johnson P D, Xu G and Yin W-G, 2015 Iron-based superconductivity, Springer 

[58]  Tan D, Zhang C, Xi C, Ling L, Zhang L, Tong W, Yu Y, Feng G, Yu H, Pi L, Yang Z, Tan 

S and Zhang Y, 2011 Phys. Rev. B 84 014502 

[59]  Zhu J-X, Yu R, Balatsky A V and Q Si, 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 167002 

[60]  Chen H, Tai Y-Y, Ting C S, Graf M J, Dai J and Zhu J-X, 2013 Phys. Rev. B 88 184509 

[61]  Wang Q E, Yao Z J and Zhang F C, 2013 Europhys. Lett. 101 57002 

[62]  Zhu J-X and Bishop A R, 2012 Europhys. Lett. 100 37004 

[63]  Zhu J-X, Yu R, Balatsky A V and Si Q, 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 167002 

[64]  Zhu J-X, Julien J-P, Dubi Y and Balatsky A V, 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 186401 

[65]  Yang H, Wang Z, Fang D, Deng Q, Wang Q-H, Xiang Y-Y, Yang Y and Wen H-H, 2013 

Nat. Commun. 4 2749  

[66]  Nachumi B, Keren A, Kojima K, Larkin M, Luke G M, Merrin J, Tchernyshöv O, Uemura 

Y J, Ichikawa N, Goto M and Uchida S, 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 5421 

[67]  Adachi T, Yairi S, Takahashi K, Koike Y, Watanabe I and Nagamine K, 2004 Phys. Rev. B 

69 184507 

[68]  Li J, Ji M, Schwarz T, Ke X, Van Tendeloo G, Yuan J, Pereira P J, Huang Y, Zhang G, 

Feng H-L, Yuan Y-H, Hatano T, Kleiner R, Koelle D, Chibotaru L F, Yamaura K, Wang 


 80 

 

H-B, Wu P-H, Takayama-Muromachi E, Vanacken J and Moshchalkov V V, 2015 Nat. 

Commun. 6 7614 

[69]  Little W A, 1967 Phys. Rev. 156 396. 

[70]  Tinkham M, 2004 Introduction to superconductivity: Second Edition, Dover Publications 

[71]  Bezryadin A, 2013 Superconductivity in nanowires, WILEY-VCH 

[72]  Bobroff J, MacFarlane W A, Alloul H, Mendels P, Blanchard N, Collin G and Marucco J-F, 

1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 4381  

[73]  Tarascon J M, Wang E, Kivelson S, Bagley B G, Hull G W and Ramesh R, 1990 Phys. Rev. 

B 24 218 

[74]  Vieira V N, Pureur P and Schaf J, 2002 Phys. Rev. B 66 224506 

[75]  Fong H F, Bourges P, Sidis Y, Regnault L P, Bossy J, Ivanov A, Milius D L, Aksay I A 

and Keimer B, 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 1939 

[76]  Zhu J-X and Ting C S, 2001 Phys. Rev. B 64 060501(R) 

[77]  Zhang L and Singh D J, 2009 Phys. Rev. B 80 214530 

[78]  Li Y K, Lin X, Tao Q, Wang C, Zhou T, Li L J, Wang Q B, He M, Cao G H and Xu Z A, 

2009 New J. Phys. 11 053008 

[79]  Kitagawa S, Nakai Y, Iye T, Ishida K, Guo Y F, Shi Y G, Yamaura K and 

Takayama-Muromachi E, 2011 Phys. Rev. B 83 180501(R)  

[80]  Guo J, Jin S, Wang G, Wang S, Zhu K, Zhou T, He M and Chen X, 2010 Phys. Rev. B 82 

180520(R) 

[81]  Dugdale J S and Basinski Z S, 1967 Phys. Rev. 157 552 

[82]  Tarantini C, Putti M, Gurevich A, Shen Y, Singh R K, Rowell J M, Newman N, 

Larbalestier D C, Cheng Peng, Jia Ying and Wen Hai-Hu, 2010 Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 

087002 

[83]  Karkin A E, Werner J, Behr G and Goshchitskii B N, 2009 Phys. Rev. B 80 174512 


 81 

 

[84]  Nakajima Y, Taen T, Tsuchiya Y, Tamegai T, Kitamura H and Murakami T, 2010 Phys. 

Rev. B 82 220504(R) 

[85]  Taen T, Nakajima Y, Tamegai T and Kitamura H, 2012 Phys. Rev. B 86 094527 

[86]  Cho K, Kończykowski M, Murphy J, Kim H, Tanatar M A, Straszheim W E, Shen B, Wen 

H H and Prozorov R, 2014 Phys. Rev. B 90 104514  

[87]  Mizukami Y, Konczykowski M, Kawamoto Y, Kurata S, Kasahara S, Hashimoto K, 

Mishra V, Kreisel A, Wang Y, Hirschfeld P J, Matsuda Y and Shibauchi T, 2014 Nat. 

Commun. 5 5657 

[88]  Prozorov R, Kończykowski M, Tanatar M A, Thaler A, Bud’ko S L, Canfield P C, Mishra 

V and Hirschfeld P J, 2014 Phys. Rev. X 4 041032 

[89]  Li J, Yuan J, Yuan Y-H, Ge J-Y, Li M-Y, Feng H-L, Ishii A, Hatano T, Silhanek A V, 

Vanacken J, Yamaura K, Wang H-B, Takayama-Muromachi E and Moshchalkov V V, 

2013 Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 062603  

[90]  Li J, Yuan J, Ji M, Zhang G, Ge J-Y, Feng H-L, Yuan Y-H, Hatano T, Hu W, Jin K, 

Schwarz T, Kleiner R, Koelle D, Yamaura K, Wang H-B, Wu P-H, Takayama-Muromachi 

E, Vanacken J and Moshchalkov V V, 2014 Phys. Rev. B 90 024512.  

[91]  Rullier-Albenque F, Vieillefond P A, Alloul H, Tyler A W, Lejay P and Marucco J 

F,  2000 Europhys. Lett. 50 81 

[92]  Fukuzumi, Mizuhashi K, Takenaka K and Uchida S, 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 684  

[93]  Rullier-Albenque F, Alloul H and Tourbot R, 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 157001 

[94]  Anderson P W, 1959 Phys. Rev. Lett. 3 325  

[95]  Anderson P W, 1970 J. Phys. C 3 2436  

[96]  Anderson P W, Yuval G and Hamann D R, 1970 Phys. Rev. B 1 4464 

[97]  Chien T R, Wang Z Z and Ong N P, 1991 Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 2088 

[98]  Mizuhashi K, Takenaka K, Fukuzumi Y and Uchida S, 1995 Phys. Rev. B 52 R3884 (R) 


 82 

 

[99]  Yuan H Q, Singleton J, Balakirev F F, Baily S A, Chen G F, Luo J L and Wang N L, 2009 

Nature 457 565 

[100]  Loram J W, Mirza K A, Cooper J R and Liang W Y, 1993 Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1740  

[101]  Tallon J, Cooper J, Silva P de, Williams G and Loram J, 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 4114 

[102]  Zhang Z T, Yang Z R, Li L, Ling L S, Zhang C J, Pi L and Zhang Y H, 2012 J. Phys.: 

Condens. Matter 25 035702 

[103]  Sun X F, Ono S, Abe Y, Komiya S, Segawa K and Ando Y, 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 

017008 

[104]  Li Y, Shen C, Luo Y, Yang X, Tao Q, Cao G-H, and Xu Z-A, 2013 Europhys. 

Lett. 102 37003 

[105]  Cheng J, Zhou J, Hu R, Xu W, Li Y, Zhang L, Marcelli A, Chu W, Xu Z-A and Wu Z, 

2012 New J. Phys. 14 033005  

[106]  Li Y, Tong J, Tao Q, Cao G and Xu Z, 2011 J. Phys. Chem. Solids 72 410  

[107]  Kawamata T, Satomi E, Kobayashi Y, Itoh M and Sato M, 2011 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 80 

084720. 

[108]  Lee S C, Satomi E, Kobayashi Y and Sato M, 2010 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 79 023702. 

[109]  Guo Y F, Li J J, Wang X X, Zhang S B, Belik A A, Yamaura K and Takayama-Muromachi 

E, 2012 Journal of Physics: Conference Series 400 022138  

[110]  Nakamura K, Arita R and Ikeda H, 2011 Phys. Rev. B 83 144512  

[111]  Wang Y, Kreisel A, Hirschfeld P J and Mishra V, 2013 Phys. Rev. B 87 094504 

[112]  Yao Z-J, Chen W-Q, Li Y-K, Cao G-H, Jiang H-M, Wang Q-E, Xu Z-A and Zhang F-C, 

2012 Phys. Rev. B 86 184515  


