Simultaneous emergence of superconductivity, inter-pocket scattering and 

nematic fluctuation in potassium-coated FeSe superconductor 

Z. R. Ye1, †, C. F. Zhang2, 3, †, H. L. Ning1, W. Li2, 3, L. Chen1, T. Jia2, 3, M. Hashimoto4, D. H. 

Lu4, Z.-X. Shen2, 3, and Y. Zhang1, 5, * 

1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 

100871, China 

2Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator 

Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 

3Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Departments of Physics and Applied Physics, 

Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA 

4Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 

2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 

5Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

† These authors contribute equally to this work. 

* To whom correspondence should be addressed: yzhang85@pku.edu.cn  


Superconductivity originates from pairing of electrons. Pairing channel on Fermi 

surface and pairing glue are thus two pivotal issues for understanding a superconductor. 

Recently, high-temperature superconductivity over 40 K was found in electron-doped 

FeSe superconductors including KxFe2-ySe2, Li0.8Fe0.2OHFeSe, and 1 monolayer FeSe 

thin film. However, their pairing mechanism remains controversial. Here, we studied 

the systematic evolution of electronic structure in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. 

The doping level is controlled precisely by in situ evaporating potassium onto the 

sample surface. We found that the superconductivity emerges when the inter-pocket 

scattering between two electron pockets is turned on by a Lifshitz transition of Fermi 

surface. The nematic order suppresses remarkably at the same doping and strong 

nematic fluctuation remains in a wide doping range of the phase diagram. Our results 

suggest an underlying correlation among superconductivity, inter-pocket scattering, 

and nematic fluctuation in electron-doped FeSe superconductors.  

 

Most iron-pnictide superconductors share the same Fermi surface topology. The Fermi 

surface consists of both hole and electron pockets at the center and corner of the Brillouin 

zone (BZ) and the inter-pocket scattering between the hole and electron pockets is believed to 

be critical for the high-Tc superconductivity1-3. However, in electron-doped FeSe 

superconductors, the heavy electron doping pushes the hole bands well below the Fermi 

energy (EF) and the Fermi surface consists only of electron pockets at the BZ corner4-7. 

Surprisingly, high-Tc superconductivity emerges on such a Fermi surface. The Tc is over 30 

K in KxFe2-ySe2 and Li0.8Fe0.2OHFeSe8, 9, and possible superconductivity over 65 K was 


observed in 1 monolayer (ML) FeSe thin film6, 7, 10. The discovery of high-Tc 

superconductivity in electron-doped FeSe superconductors challenges our previous 

understanding on iron-based superconductor. It is still not clear how the pairs of electron 

scatter on the Fermi surface and what fluctuation mediates the superconductivity. The answer 

to these questions immediately connects to the pairing mechanism of high-Tc 

superconductivity in electron-doped FeSe superconductors and needs to be settled 

experimentally.  

 

One effective way to understand a superconductor is to characterize its phase diagram. 

However, the doping level is difficult to control in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. 

Discrete phases are found in KxFe2-ySe2 due to its intrinsic phase separation11. The electron 

doping of 1ML FeSe is believed to originate from the oxygen vacancy in SrTiO3 substrate 

and its fine control has not been achieved so far7. On the other hand, efforts have been made 

to dope electrons into iron-pnictide compounds in order to remove the central hole pockets 

and reproduce the Fermi surface topology that is similar to electron-doped FeSe 

superconductors. However, superconductivity has not been realized in most electron-doped 

iron-pnictide compounds12, 13. Candidates such as LaO1-xHxFeAs and Ca1-xLaxFe2As2 are 

rarely studied due to the lack of high-quality single crystal and possible low superconducting 

volume14, 15.  

 

Recently, potassium evaporation has been found to be an effective method that can dope 

electrons into a sample16. Utilizing such a method, electron doping is realized in FeSe thin 


film and the emergence of superconductivity associated with the suppression of nematicity 

was observed16-18. Here, we performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) 

measurements on potassium-coated FeSe single crystals. By in situ evaporating a small 

amount of potassium onto the sample surface step by step, we successfully doped electrons 

into FeSe single crystal with unprecedented precision (See details in Methods section). We 

found that the Fermi surface goes through two Lifshitz transitions with electron doping. The 

hole pocket first vanishes at BZ center which triggers the first Lifshitz transition. Then, by 

further electron doping, one electron band sinks below EF at the BZ corner resulting in the 

second Lifshitz transition. Intriguingly, the superconductivity emerges at the second Lifshitz 

transition when the inter-pocket scattering between the electron pockets is turned on 

Meanwhile, the nematic order suppresses remarkably and the residual nematic order is 

observed penetrating deeply into the superconducting dome. Our result provides crucial clues 

for understanding the high-Tc superconductivity in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. 

The pairing of electron occurs through inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets 

and the nematic fluctuation plays an important role in mediating the superconducting pairing.   

 

Result 

Evolution of band structure with electron doping. The doping process is divided into 15 

fine steps (D0-D14). The doping dependence of the second derivative photoemission spectra 

is shown in Fig.1. The sharpness of the spectra indicates the high quality of our sample 

surface during the evaporation. At zero doping (D0), two hole-like bands (β1 and β2) are 

observed around the BZ corner, the (π, π) point. They correspond to the split dxz and dyz bands 


stemming from the band reconstruction in the nematic state19-21. Around the BZ zone center, 

the (0, 0) point, three hole-like bands (α, β, and γ) are observed. They are constructed by the 

dxz, dyz, and dxy orbitals respectively21. Similar to the β1/β2 bands at (π, π), the β band splits 

near EF due to the presence of nematic order. The γ band disperses across the α and β bands. 

Hybridization gap opens at the band crossing between the β and γ bands. 

 

When doping electrons into the system, bands shift downwards to higher binding energy as 

expected (Fig. 1). However, one set of bands remains unchanged and resembles the bulk 

FeSe bands even in heavily doped sample (Fig. 1h). One possible explanation is the 

potassium inhomogeneity on the sample surface. However, the doping inhomogeneity usually 

generates multiple sets of bands with different doping levels, which is inconsistent with the 

observation of only two sets of bands. On the other hand, because the probing depth of 

ARPES can reach several layers below the sample surface, our results suggest that potassium 

evaporation only dose the topmost layer, while the layers beneath remain undoped (Fig. 1i). 

The invariant bands are thus attributed to the undoped bulk state.  

 

Figure 2 illustrates how bands and Fermi surface evolve with electron doping in 

potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. For the hole bands at the (0, 0) point, the band tops of 

α and β move to higher binding energy as characterized by the energy distribution curves 

(EDCs) taken at the (0, 0) point (Fig. 2a and 2b). We note that, all the data were taken with 

23 eV photons. The corresponding kz is around the Z point of BZ21, where the band tops of 

the hole bands are the highest. Therefore, when the β band sinks below EF at D3, the entire 


hole pocket disappears and the first Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface occurs. Comparing 

with the α and β bands, the γ band shows weak photoemission intensity and therefore cannot 

be tracked directly from the spectra. However, we can determine the energy position of the γ 

band through the hybridization gap between the γ and β bands. As shown in Figs. 1b, 1e, and 

1h, the energy position of the hybridization exhibits no observable change implicating that 

the γ band remains unchanged during the doping process (Fig. 2c). 

 

We then turn to the bands around the (π, π) point. The energy splitting between the β1 and β2 

bands reflects the strength of nematic order. As shown in Fig. 2d and 2e, the β1 and β2 bands 

shift to higher binding energy and meanwhile their energy splitting decreases. A kink is 

observed for the band shift of β2, which indicates a remarkable suppression of nematic order 

at D5. Besides the β1 and β2 bands, three electron bands are observed during the doping 

process (Fig. 1 and 2f). The δ and ζ bands construct the highly anisotropic electron pocket at 

the BZ corner (Fig. 2g) and are originated from the dyz and dxy orbitals respectively20. As 

shown in Figs. 1b, 1e and 1h, when doping electrons, the δ band shifts downward and 

eventually merges with the ζ band. As a result, the ζ/δ electron pocket becomes isotropic and 

circular-like in heavily doped samples (Fig. 2g). Besides the δ and ζ bands, the η band is 

above EF and thus cannot be observed in the lightly doped samples. With electron doping, the 

η band sinks below EF at D5 (Figs. 1, 2e and 2d), triggering the second Lifshitz transition of 

Fermi surface. The η band constructs a circular-like electron pocket and is originated from 

the mixing of dxz and dxy orbitals20. The η electron pocket emerges at the second Lifshitz 

transition and overlaps with the δ/ζ electron pockets at the BZ corner (Fig. 2g). The band 


structure of heavily electron-doped FeSe single crystal resembles that observed in KxFe2-ySe2, 

Li0.8Fe0.2OHFeSe, and 1 monolayer FeSe thin film7-10. The band bottom of all electron bands 

degenerates at around 50meV below EF, which implicates that the ζ band bottom does not 

shift during the electron doping process. The invariability of γ and ζ  suggests that the 

occupation of dxy orbital is barely affected by the electron doping in contrast to the dxz and dyz 

orbitals. Such orbital-selectivity may originate from the orbital-selective correlation effect in 

FeSe22, 23. In contrast to the strongly correlated dxy orbital, electrons prefer to fill in the more 

itinerate dxz and dyz orbitals. 

 

Evolution of superconductivity with electron doping. After characterizing the band 

structure, it is then intriguing to study how superconductivity evolves during the doping 

process. The EDCs are taken at the Fermi crossing (kF) of the ζ band along (0, 0) to (π, π) 

direction. To remove the effect of Fermi distribution function near EF, we symmetrize the 

EDCs as shown in Figs. 3a and 3b. The superconducting gap opening is characterized by the 

emergence of an intensity dip at EF and two coherence peaks in the symmetrized EDCs. The 

gap magnitude is determined by the gap fitting using a phenomenology spectral function24. 

The superconducting gap emerges at D5, then increases to its maximum around 8 meV at 

D11, and finally decreases to around 7 meV at D14. The Tc is characterized by the onset 

temperature of gap opening and the suppression of spectral weight at EF as shown in Figs. 

3c-3h. The Tc correlates with the gap magnitude showing dome-like behavior. Specifically, it 

is 18.5 K at D8, 25 K at D11, and 20 K at D14. 

 


Phase diagram. Considering that most microscopic models of iron-based superconductors 

are constructed in one-iron BZ1-3, we unfolded the Fermi surface into one-iron BZ and the 

transition of Fermi surface topology is more transparent. The disappearance of β hole pocket 

and the emergence of η electron pocket trigger two Lifshitz transitions of Fermi surface (Fig. 

4a). For the type I Fermi surface, the inter-pocket scattering connects the hole and electron 

pockets through a (π, 0) momentum transfer, while for the type III Fermi surface, the 

inter-pocket scattering occurs between the two electron pockets. Its scattering vector is (π, π) 

in one-iron BZ, which corresponds to a small momentum transfer in two-iron BZ. In the 

middle, the inter-pocket scattering is strongly suppressed and only intra-pocket scattering 

presents. 

 

Figure 4b shows the phase diagram of potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. We estimate the 

electron doping level by counting the Fermi surface volume. The nematic transition 

temperature (Tnem) is calculated from the energy splitting between the β1 and β2 bands (Δnem ). 

The Δnem/kBTnem is 6.22 as determined by the Δnem and Tnem in undoped FeSe single crystal. 

The doping dependence of Δnem/kBTnem is ignored. Similarly, the Tc is calculated from the 

superconducting gap magnitude (Δsc) and the 2Δsc/kBTc is 7.74 as determined from the data in 

Fig.3. When doping electrons, a dome-like superconducting phase (SCe-e) emerges at the 

second Lifshitz transition. Its optimal doping is around 0.1 electrons per iron and the maximal 

Tc is around 25K. Note that, the gap is not observed in lightly doped samples due to the 

limitations of the energy resolution and the lowest achievable sample temperature in our 

experiment. The SCh-e dome is illustrated according to the recent scanning tunneling 


microscopy (STM) study on FeSe thin film grown on graphitized SiC whose properties 

resemble the bulk FeSe26.  

 

The Tnem decreases remarkably at the second Lifshitz transition but does not reach zero (Fig 

4b). The residual nematic order shows a tail-like behavior penetrating deeply into the SCe-e 

dome. When the nematic fluctuation is strong in a system, an external uniaxial pressure can 

stabilize the fluctuation resulting in an emergent nematic order. This has been observed near 

the nematic transition along the temperature axis in detwinned iron-pnictides19. Here in 

potassium-coated FeSe single crystal, the doping dependence of Tnem can be explained by a 

smearing of nematic transition along the doping axis due to the presence of uniaxial pressure 

(inset of Fig. 4b). As discussed in Fig. 1i, the bottom layers are undoped and therefore remain 

C2 symmetric. The symmetry breaking of the bottom layers applies a uniaxial pressure on the 

topmost layer, which smears the sharp suppression of nematic order at around 0.03 electron 

doping resulting in a tail-like residual nematic order. Such emergent nematic order can be 

observed until 0.1 electron doping, which implicates that strong nematic fluctuation presents 

in a wide doping range in the topmost layer of potassium-coated FeSe single crystal.  

 

Discussion 

The Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface, the emergence of superconductivity and the 

suppression of nematic order all occurs at the same doping level, which suggests an 

underlying correlation among them. The SCe-e phase emerges when the inter-pocket scattering 

between two electron pockets is turned on by the second Lifshitz transition. This suggests 


that the inter-pocket scattering is crucial for the superconducting pairing in the SCe-e phase. 

Such inter-pocket scattering can be mediated by spin fluctuation as proposed in both weak- 

and strong-coupling theories27, 28. However, the long-range magnetic order has not been 

observed in FeSe. It is still not clear how strong the spin fluctuation is and whether the 

absence of magnetic order in FeSe is due to quantum fluctuation or not29. Alternatively, the 

nematic fluctuation may mediate the inter-pocket scattering through a small momentum 

transfer in two-iron BZ. Our result suggests that strong nematic fluctuation presents in 

potassium-coated FeSe single crystal when the nematic order is suppressed by electron 

doping. Intriguingly, when the nematic order at zero doping is enhanced from FeSe single 

crystal (Tnem = 90K) to FeSe thin film (Tnem = 160~180K), the optimal doping Tc increases 

from 25 K to around 44~48 K and the superconducting gap increases from 8 meV to 12~14 

meV19-21. All these suggest that the nematic order is most likely the parent phase for 

electron-doped FeSe superconductors. It is expected that Tc would be further increased if the 

nematic fluctuation can be further enhanced. 

 

Due to its distinctive Fermi surface topologies, the potassium-coated FeSe single crystal 

serves as a model system for further experimental and theoretical studies. The SCh-e dome 

ends at the first Lifshitz transition where the central hole pocket vanishes implying that the 

inter-pocket scattering between hole and electron pockets is critical for the SCh-e phase. 

Furthermore, the SCh-e phase coexists with the nematic order and its superconducting dome is 

well beneath the nematic transition. This suggests that, unlike the SCe-e phase, the nematic 

fluctuation is absent above Tc for the SCh-e phase due to the formation of long-range nematic 


order. Therefore, our result suggests possible different pairing mechanisms for the SCe-e and 

SCh-e phases in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. The two superconducting phases (SCe-e 

and SCh-e) represent two distinct superconducting pairing channels in iron-based 

superconductors. It is intriguing to further study how they interplay in iron-pnictide 

superconductors when both hole-electron and electron-electron inter-pocket scatterings exist 

on the Fermi surface.  

 
 

Methods 

High quality FeSe single crystal was synthesized using vapor transport method25. The 

superconducting transition temperature is 8.4 K and the nematic transition temperature is 90K 

as characterized by magnetic susceptibility measurements. The potassium was evaporated 

onto the cleaved sample surface in-situ. The pressure is less than 5×10−10 torr during the 

evaporation. ARPES measurements were performed at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation 

Lightsource Beamline 5-4. All the data were taken with 23 eV photons. The temperature was 

maintained at 6 K for the low temperature measurement. The overall energy resolution was 5 

meV, and the angular resolution was less than 0.3 degree. All the samples were measured in 

ultrahigh vacuum with a base pressure better than 3×10−11 torr. 

 

References 

1. Kuroki, K. et al. Unconventional Pairing Originating from the Disconnected Fermi 

Surfaces of Superconducting LaFeAsO1-xFx. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 087004 (2008). 

2. Mazin, I. I. et al. Unconventional Superconductivity with a Sign Reversal in the Order 

Parameter of LaFeAsO1-xFx. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 057003 (2008). 


3. Hirschfeld, P. J. et al. Gap symmetry and structure of Fe-based superconductors. Rep. on 

Progress in Phys. 74, 124508 (2011). 

4. Zhang, Y. et al. Nodeless superconducting gap in AxFe2Se2 (A=K, Cs) revealed by 

angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Nat. Mater. 10, 273-277 (2011). 

5. Niu, X. H. et al. Surface electronic structure and isotropic superconducting gap in 

(Li0.8Fe0.2)OHFeSe . Phys. Rev. B 92, 060504 (2015). 

6. He, S. L. et al. Phase diagram and electronic indication of high-temperature 

superconductivity at 65 K in single-layer FeSe films. Nat. Mater. 12, 605–610 (2013). 

7. Tan, S. et al. Interface-induced superconductivity and strain-dependent spin density 

waves in FeSe/SrTiO3 thin films. Nat. Mater. 12, 634-640, (2013). 

8.  Guo, J. et al. Superconductivity in the iron selenide KxFe2Se2 (0≤x≤1.0). Phys. Rev. B 

82, 180520 (2010). 

9. Lu, X. F. et al. Coexistence of superconductivity and antiferromagnetism in 

(Li0.8Fe0.2)OHFeSe. Nat. Mater. 14, 325-329 (2015). 

10. Wang, Q. Y. et al. Interface-induced high-temperature superconductivity in single 

unit-cell FeSe films on SrTiO3. Chin. Phys. Lett. 29, 037402 (2012). 

11. Yan, Y. J. et al. Electronic and magnetic phase diagram in KxFe2-ySe2 superconductors. 

Sci. Rep. 2, 212 (2012). 

12.  Ye, Z. R. et al. Extraordinary Doping Effects on Quasiparticle Scattering and Bandwidth 

in Iron-Based Superconductors. Phys. Rev. X 4, 031041 (2014).  

13.  Liu, C., et al. Importance of the Fermi-surface topology to the superconducting state of 

the electron-doped pnictide Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2. Phys. Rev. B 84, 020509 (2011). 


14.  Iimura, S. et al. Two-dome structure in electron-doped iron arsenide superconductors. 

Nat. Commun. 3, 943 (2012). 

15.  Lv, B. et al. Unusual Superconducting State at 49 K in Electron-Doped CaFe2As2 at 

Ambient. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 15705-15709 (2011). 

16. Miyata, Y. et al. High-temperature superconductivity in potassium-coated multilayer 

FeSe thin films. Nat. Mater. 14, 775-780, (2015). 

17. Wen, C. H. P. et al. Anomalous correlation effects and unique phase diagram of electron 

doped FeSe revealed by angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Preprint at 

http://arXiv.org/abs/1508.05848 (2015). 

18. Tang, C. et al. Interface enhanced electron-phonon coupling and high temperature 

superconductivity in potassium-coated ultra-thin FeSe films on SrTiO3. Preprint at 

http://arXiv.org/abs/1508.06368 (2015). 

19. Yi, M. et al. Symmetry-breaking orbital anisotropy observed for detwinned 

Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 above the spin density wave transition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 

6878-6883 (2011). 

20. Zhang, Y. et al. Distinctive momentum dependence of the band reconstruction in the 

nematic state of FeSe thin film. Preprint at http://arXiv.org/abs/1503.01556 (2015). 

21. Watson, M. D. et al. Emergence of the nematic electronic state in FeSe. Phys. Rev. B 91, 

155106 (2015). 

22. Yi, M. et al. Observation of universal strong orbital-dependent correlation effects in iron 

chalcogenides. Nat. Commun. 6, 7777 (2015). 

23. Yu, R. and Si, Q. Orbital-Selective Mott Phase in Multiorbital Models for Alkaline Iron 


Selenides K1-xFe2-ySe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 146402 (2013). 

24. Norman, M. R., Randeria, M., Ding, H. and Campuzano, J. C. Phenomenology of the 

low-energy spectral function in high-Tc superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 57, R11093 

(1998). 

25. Böhmer, A. E. et al. Lack of coupling between superconductivity and orthorhombic 

distortion in stoichiometric single-crystalline FeSe. Phys. Rev. B 87, 180505. (2013). 

26. Song, C. L. et al. Observation of Double-Dome Superconductivity in Potassium-Doped 

FeSe Thin Films. Preprint at http://arXiv.org/abs/1511.02007 (2015). 

27. Maier, T. A. et al. d-wave pairing from spin fluctuations in the KxFe2-ySe2 

superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 83, 100515 (2011). 

28. Wang, F. et al. The electron pairing of KxFe2-ySe2. Euro Phys. Letts. 93, 57003 (2011). 

29. Wang, F., et al. (2015). Nematicity and quantum paramagnetism in FeSe. Nat. Phys. 11, 

959-963 (2015).  

 

Acknowledgements 

We gratefully thank F. Wang and D.-H. Lee for stimulating discussions. This work is 

supported by National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under the grant No. 91421107. 

Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource is operated by the Office of Basic Energy 

Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy.  

 

Author Contributions 

Z. R. Y. and Y. Z. conceived the project. Z. R. Y., L. C. and Y. Z. synthesized the single 

crystals. C. F. Z., H. L. N., W. L., J. T. and Y. Z. took the ARPES measurements. Z. R. Y and 


Y. Z. analyzed the data. M. H., D. H. L., and Z. X. S supported the ARPES measurements at 

Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource. Z. R. Y, H. L. N and Y. Z. wrote the paper with 

the input from all coauthors. 

 

Author Information 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and request for 

materials should be addressed to Y. Zhang (yzhang85@pku.edu.cn). 

 
 


 

Figure 1 | Evolution of the photoemission spectra in potassium-coated FeSe single 

crystal. a-h, Doping dependence of the second derivative photoemission spectra taken along 

the (0, 0)-(π, π) high symmetry direction. The cut momentum is illustrated by the red solid 

line in the inset of panel a. We use D0-D14 to denote the doping sequence, where D0 

represents the undoped sample. For the convenience to observe the evolution of the bands, we 

label out the bulk states (Bulk) and different bands (α, β, γ, δ, ζ, β1, β2, and η) in the 

representative panels. i, Schematic of potassium doping process. Only the top layer is dosed 

by the potassium ions while the bottom layers remain undoped. 

 


 

Figure 2 | Evolution of the band structure and Fermi surface in potassium-coated FeSe 

single crystal. a, Doping dependence of the energy distribution curves (EDCs) taken at the (0, 

0) point. b, Merged image (left panel) and its second derivate image (right panel) of the 

EDCs in panel a. The peak positions of α and β are illustrated using red and green circles. 

The dashed line is the guide to eyes for following the bulk state. The white arrow illustrates 

the first Lifshitz transition. c, Illustration of the α, β, and γ bands at D0, D7, and D12. The 

color of bands reflects their orbital characters. d-f are the same as panel a-c but taken around 

the (π, π) point. g, Fermi surface mapping and the corresponding topology schematics taken 

around the (π, π) point at D0, D2, D6, D8, and D14. Note that, our spectra consist of signals 

from two perpendicular domains due to the sample twinning effect in the nematic state. 


 

Figure 3 | Evolution of superconductivity in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. a, 

Doping dependence of the symmetrized EDCs taken at the Fermi crossing (kF) of the ζ band 

at 6 K. The gap size is obtained by fitting the symmetrized EDCs using a phenomenology 

function24. The fitting results are shown by the red solid lines. The dashed lines are the guides 

to eye of the superconducting peak positions. b, The merged image of the symmetrized EDCs 

in panel a. The white arrow indicates the emergence of superconducting gap. c, Temperature 

dependence of the symmetrized EDCs taken at the kF of the ζ band at D8. The Tc is 

determined by the gap opening temperature as characterized by the dip emergence at EF. d, 

Temperature dependence of the spectra weight integrated near EF within [-3, 3 meV] energy 

window. The Tc is determined by the sharp suppression of spectral weight at EF. e, f, g, and h 

are the same as c and d, but taken at D11 and D14. 


 

Figure 4 | Phase diagram of potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. a, the Lifshitz 

transitions of Fermi surface in two-iron (upper panel) and one-iron (lower panel) BZ. The red 

arrows denote the vectors of inter-pocket scattering. b, Phase diagram of potassium-coated 

FeSe single crystal. The black dashed lines represent the two Lifshitz transitions. The Tc is 

around 8.4 K for bulk FeSe25 and the SCh-e dome is illustrated by red solid line according to 

ref. 26. 

 


