Room Temperature de Haas – van Alphen Effect in Silicon Nanosandwiches 

N.T. Bagraev1, 2, V.Yu. Grigoryev2, L.E. Klyachkin1, A.M. Malyarenko1, 

V.A. Mashkov2 and V.V. Romanov2 

1Ioffe Physical-Technical Institute, 194021, St. Petersburg, Russia 

2Peter the Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University, 195251, St. Petersburg, 

Russia 

 

e-mail: bagraev@mail.ioffe.ru 

 

Abstract 

The negative-U impurity stripes confining the edge channels of semiconductor 

quantum wells are shown to allow the effective cooling inside in the process of the 

spin-dependent transport. The aforesaid promotes also the creation of composite 

bosons and fermions by the capture of single magnetic flux quanta on the edge 

channels under the conditions of low sheet density of carriers, thus opening new 

opportunities for the registration of the quantum kinetic phenomena in weak 

magnetic fields at high temperatures up to the room temperature. As a certain 

version noted above we present the first findings of the high temperature de Haas-

van Alphen, 300K, and quantum Hall, 77K, effects in the silicon sandwich 

structure that represents the ultra-narrow, 2 nm, p-type quantum well (Si-QW) 

confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-type Si (100) 

surface. These data appear to result from the low density of single holes that are of 

small effective mass in the edge channels of p-type Si-QW because of the impurity 

confinement by the stripes consisting of the negative-U dipole boron centers which 

seems to give rise to the efficiency reduction of the electron-electron interaction. 

 

 
 


The Shubnikov – de Haas (ShdH) and de Haas – van Alphen (dHvA) effects as 

well as the quantum Hall effect (QHE) are quantum phenomena that manifest 

themselves at the macroscopic level and have attracted a lot of attention, 

because they reveal a deeper insight into the processes due to charge and spin 

correlations in low-dimensional systems1,2. Until recently the observation of 

these quantum effects in the device structures required ultra-low 

temperatures and ultra-high magnetic fields3. Otherwise there were the 

difficulties to provide small effective mass, m*, and long momentum 

relaxation time, τm, of charge carriers, which result from the so-called strong 

field assumption, μB>>1, where μ=eτm/m* is the mobility of the charge 

carriers. This severe criterion along with the condition ħωc>>kT hindered the 

application of the ShdH-dHvA-QHE techniques to control the characteristics 

of the device structures in the interval between the liquid-nitrogen and room 

temperatures, where ħωc is the energy gap between adjacent Landau levels, 

ωc = eB/m* is the cyclotron frequency. Nevertheless, the ShdH oscillations 

were observed at room temperature in graphene, a single layer of carbon 

atoms tightly packed in a honeycomb crystal lattice, owing to the small 

effective mass of charge carriers,~10–4m0, although the magnetic field as high 

as 29T was necessary to be used because of relatively short momentum 

relaxation time4-6. Thus, the problem of the fulfillment of the strong field 

assumption at low magnetic fields has remained virtually unresolved. 

Perhaps, its certain decision is to use the pairs of edge channels in topological 

two-dimensional insulators and superconductors, in which the carriers with 

anti-parallel spins move in opposite directions7. Especially as recently the 

ideas are suggested that the mobility and spin-lattice relaxation time of the 

carriers in topological channels can be increased, if to hide them in the cover 

consisting of the d- and f-like impurity centers8,9. Here we use as similar 

clothes the striations of the negative-U dipole boron centers that allow except 

noted advantages to achieve the effective cooling inside the edge channels of 

semiconductor quantum wells in the process of the spin-dependent transport. 


The aforesaid promotes also the creation of composite bosons and fermions by 

the capture of single magnetic flux quanta on the edge channels under the 

conditions of low sheet density of carriers, thus opening new opportunities for 

the registration of the quantum kinetic phenomena in weak magnetic fields at 

high temperatures up to the room temperature. As a certain version noted 

above we present the first findings of the high temperature de Haas-van 

Alphen, 300K, and quantum Hall, 77K, effects in the silicon sandwich 

structure that represents the ultra-narrow, 2 nm, p-type quantum well (Si-

QW) confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-type Si 

(100) surface. These data appear to result from the low density of single holes 

that are of small effective mass in the edge channels of p-type Si-QW because 

of the impurity confinement by the stripes consisting of the negative-U dipole 

boron centers which seems to give rise to the efficiency reduction of the 

electron-electron interaction. 

The device was prepared using silicon planar technology. After precise 

oxidation of the n-type Si (100) wafer, making a mask and performing 

photolithography, we have applied short-time low temperature diffusion of boron 

from a gas phase10,11. Finally, the ultra-shallow p+-n junction has been identified, 

with the p+ diffusion profile depth of 8 nm and the extremely high concentration of 

boron, 5 1021 cm-3, according to the SIMS data (Fig. 1a)10. Next step was to apply 

the cyclotron resonance (Fig. 1b), the electron spin resonance, the tunneling 

spectroscopy (Fig. 1c), infrared Fourier spectroscopy methods as well as the 

measurements of the quantum conductance staircase for the studies of the quantum 

properties of the silicon nanosandwich structures11-14.  

Firstly, the cyclotron resonance angular dependences have shown that the p+ 

diffusion profile contains the ultra-narrow p-type silicon quantum well, Si-QW, 

confined by the wide-gap delta-barriers heavily doped with boron (Fig. 1a)12,13. 

Secondly, the one-electron band scheme for the delta barriers and the energy 

positions of two-dimensional subbands of holes in the Si-QW have been revealed 

using the tunneling and the infrared Fourier spectroscopy techniques (Fig. 1d)11,13. 


Then, the studies of the spin interference by measuring the Aharonov – Casher 

oscillations allowed the identification of the extremely low value of the effective 

mass of holes11. These data have been also confirmed by measuring the 

temperature dependence of the ShdH and dHvA oscillations13,15. 

The planar silicon sandwich structures prepared were very surprised to 

demonstrate the high mobility of holes in the Si-QW in spite of the extremely high 

concentration of boron inside the delta barriers. Specifically, the cyclotron 

resonance spectra exhibit the long moment relaxation time for both heavy and light 

holes, >5 10-10 s, and electrons, >2 10-10 s (Fig. 1b)12,13. These results appeared to 

be caused by the formation of the trigonal dipole boron centers, B+ - B- , due to the 

negative-U reaction: 2Bo → B+ + B¬ (Fig. 1e)11,14. The excited triplet states of the 

negative-U centers were observed firstly by measuring the electron spin resonance 

angular dependences. It is important that the ESR spectra of the negative-U centers 

are revealed only after cooling in magnetic fields above critical value of 0.22T, 

with persistent behavior in the dependence of temperature variations and 

crystallographic orientations of magnetic field under cooling procedure16. Such 

persistent behavior of the ESR spectra seems to be evidence of the dynamic 

magnetic moment due to the arrays of the trigonal dipole boron centers which 

dominate inside the delta-barriers confining the p-type Si-QW11,13,16. 

The scanning tunneling microscopy, STM, as well as the scanning tunneling 

spectroscopy, STS, studies showed that the negative -U dipole boron centers are 

able to form the stripes crystallographically oriented along the [110] axes (Fig. 1f 

and 1g)11. Moreover, the subsequences of these stripes are able to create the edge 

channels that define the conductance of the silicon nanosandwiches. And, if the 

sheet density of holes is rather small, on each such stripe no more than one hole 

settles down that appears to result in the neutralization of the electron-electron 

interaction owing to the exchange interaction with the negative-U dipole boron 

centers. Therefore we could apparently control the step-by-step capture of single 

magnetic flux quanta on the negative-U dipole boron stripes containing single 

holes by measuring the field dependences of the static magnetic susceptibility. We  


 

 

 

 


Figure 1. Planar silicon nanosandwiches. 
(a) Scheme of the silicon nanosandwich that represents the ultra-narrow p-type silicon quantum well (Si-
QW) confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-type Si (100) wafer. 
(b) Cyclotron resonance (CR) spectrum for a QW p+-n junction on {100}-silicon (500Ohm·cm), magnetic 
field B within the {110}-plane perpendicular to the {100}-interface (Bǁ<100> +30o); T=4.0K, ν=9.45 
GHz. 
(c) The current-voltage characteristics under forward bias applied to the silicon nanosandwich. The 
energy position of each subband of 2D holes in Si-QW is revealed as a current peak under optimal 
tunneling conditions when it coincides with Fermi level. T=300K. 
(d) The one-electron band scheme of the p-type Si-QW confined by the δ-barriers heavily doped with 
boron on the n-type Si (100) surface. 2Δ depicts the correlation gap in the delta barriers that results from 
the formation of the negative-U dipole boron centers. 
(e) Model for the elastic reconstruction of a shallow boron acceptor which is accompanied by the 
formation of the trigonal dipole (B+ - B-) centers as a result of the negative-U reaction: 2B0 → B+ + B-. 
(f) STM image of the upper delta barrier heavily doped with boron that demonstrates the chains of dipole 
boron centers oriented along the [011] axis. 
(g) The fragments of the edge channels that contain the stripes consisting of the negative U dipole boron 
centers. 
(h) Experimental device prepared within the Hall geometry based on an ultra-narrow p-type silicon 
quantum well (Si-QW) confined by  the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-Si (100) surface. 
(i) The model of the edge channel in the silicon nanosandwich that is confined by the impurity stripes 
containing single holes. 
 
have carried out these experiments with the long edge channel, 2 mm, of the p-type 

Si-QW, taking account of the sheet density of holes, 3x1013 m-2, measured with 

similar device prepared within frameworks of the Hall geometry (Fig. 1h). This 

value of the sheet density of holes specified previously that each stripe seems to 

contain a single hole in this edge channel (Fig. 1i). 

Figures 2a and b show the room temperature field dependences of the static 

magnetic susceptibility of the silicon nanosandwiches that have been obtained by 

the Faraday method. The high sensitivity, 10–9–10–10 GGS, of the balance 

spectrometer MGD31FG provided the high stability that is necessary to calibrate 

the BdB/dx values. In turn, for the BdB/dx calibration, we used pure InP single 

crystals that are similar to investigated samples in shape and size, and reveal the 

high temperature stability of the magnetic susceptibility value, χ = –313 × 10–9 

cm3/g13,15. 

Owing to so high sensitivity of the balance spectrometer up to weak 

magnetic fields, the oscillations of the static magnetic susceptibility that is due to 

the step-by-step capture of single magnetic flux quanta appeared to be revealed 

against the background of the strong diamagnetism of the negative-U dipole boron 

stripes (Figs. 2c and d). The half-circle value of these oscillations is evidence of 


 

 
Figure 2. Step-by-step capture of magnetic flux quanta on the edge channel in 
silicon nanosandwich. 
(a) and (b) The field dependences of the static magnetic susceptibility at room temperature in silicon 
nanosandwich, p2D=3x1013m-2, which reveal strong diamagnetism that is caused by the spin precession of 
single holes confined by the negative-U dipole boron stripes in the edge channel and the oscillations due 
to the step-by-step capture of single magnetic flux quantum on the edge channel at perpendicular (a and c) 
and parallel (b and d) orientation of a magnetic field related to the Si-QW plane. T=300K. 
 

such an assumption, with the alternation of the spin-up and spin-down for holes 

under these step-by-step processes in the edge channel, if the size of the edge 

channel is taken into account, Φ0 = ΔΦ = ΔB·S, where ΔB = 10G; S = 2 mm x 2 nm 

= 4·10-12m2 is the area of the edge channel; Φ0=h/e is the single magnetic flux 

quantum. Thus, the step-by-step change of a magnetic field that is equal to ΔB = 

10G is able to result in the capture of single magnetic flux quanta on each hole 

after 124 circles, which correspond approximately to the number of them in the 

edge channel in view of the sheet density value. Under these conditions, Φ0 = ΔB·S 

= B0·S0, where B0 = 124·ΔB = 1240G, S0 is the area occupied by a single hole 

inside the negative-U dipole boron stripes which is defined by the middle distance 

between holes in the edge channel, S0 = S/124 = 16.6 microns. So, there is a unique 

possibility to create composite bosons since weak magnetic fields that result from 


the capture of single magnetic flux quanta on the holes which are poorly 

interacting with each other in the presence of the negative-U dipole boron stripes. 

These reasons are supported by the analysis of huge amplitudes of the static 

magnetic susceptibility oscillations which appears to give rise to the values of 

magnetization, J=χH, up to 0.2 Oe. From here it is possible to estimate the value of 

the magnetic moment created by the capture of the magnetic flux quantum on a 

single hole in view its volume, M=J·V0, where V0 = L·S1; L is the middle distance 

between holes in the edge channel and S1 is the cross section of the edge channel. 

This assessment results in the value of the magnetic moment, 2.4 104 mB, that 

unambiguously points to a fundamental role of the stripes consisting of the 

negative U dipole boron centers in its formation, where mB is the Bohr magneton. 

And really, if we estimate the number of these centers in the volume occupied by a 

single hole in view of the concentration of boron, 5 1021 cm-3, and having 

compared everyone the magnetic moment equal to the Bohr magneton, it is 

possible to be convinced that it practically coincides with the value given above. 

Similar results are important to be obtained in the case of both parallel and 

perpendicular orientation of the magnetic field to the Si-QW plane, because the 

edge channel has square section (see Figs. 2c and d). It is also necessary to note 

supervision of almost limit value of a diamagnetic static susceptibility in weak 

magnetic fields, χ = 1/4π, that appears to be due to superconducting properties of 

edge channels because of the formation of the negative-U dipole boron centers. 

Thus, the magnetic susceptibility response to the capture of magnetic flux 

quanta on the edge channel is caused by the magnetic ordering of the stripes 

through single holes. This exchange interaction seems to lead to partial localization 

of single holes and as a result to the reduction of electron-electron interaction. 

Moreover, by increasing the magnetic field the static magnetic susceptibility 

begins to reveal the dHvA oscillations due to the creation of the Landau levels, Eν 

= ħωc(ν + ½), ν is the number of the Landau level. In particular, a prerequisite to 

cover the edge channel by single magnetic flux quanta appears to be accomplished 

when the external magnetic field is equal to B0 = 1240G, see the relationship 


presented above, Φ0 = ΔB·S = B0·S0, that is consistent with the first Landau level 

feeling, ν1 = 1, ν1 = p2D·h/e B0 . 

We studied carefully the dHvA oscillations created at both parallel and 

perpendicular orientation of the magnetic field to the Si-QW plane and registered 

except the dips related to the Landau levels, ν = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, the fractional peaks, 

ν = 4/3 and ν = 5/3 (Figs. 3a-f). These findings demonstrate that in certain ratio 

between the number of magnetic flux quanta and single holes, 1/ν, both composite 

bosons and fermions seem to be proceeded by step-by-step change of a magnetic 

field. Besides, using specific diagram of magnetic field – edge channel feeling, the 

variations of integer and fractional values of ν illustrate conveniently their 

relationship by varying the external magnetic field (Fig. 4). It should be noted also 

that the strong diamagnetism of the negative U impurity stripes surrounding the Si-

QW edge channels allowed the observation of the room temperature hysteresis of 

the dHvA oscillations dependent on the proximity of the Landau and Fermi levels. 

In turn, the creation of the composite bosons ever in weak magnetic fields inside 

stripes containing single holes can lead to the emergence of the Faraday effect 

under the conditions of the source - drain current in the edge channel, Ids = dE/dΦ. 

This model has been suggested by Laughlin to account for the quantum staircase of 

the Hall resistance17. Here we present the results of the measurements of not only 

integer but also fractional quantum Hall effect in the same magnetic field as well 

as the dHvA oscillations, Ids = Ixx = eUxy/(1/ν)Φ0, = > Gxy = νe2/h, where ν can 

accept both integer and fractional values. 

Firstly, the SdH oscillations and the quantum Hall staircase are 

demonstrated, with the identification of both the integral and fractional quantum 

Hall effects (Figs. 5a, b and c). Secondly, the range of a magnetic field 

corresponding to the Hall plateaus and the longitudinal “zero” resistance is in a 

good agreement with the interval of the dHvA oscillations thereby verifying the 

principal role of the Faraday effect in these processes. Here, the confinement of 

single holes inside the stripes consisting of the negative-U dipole boron centers 

seems  to  lead  not  only  to  the  efficiency  reduction  of  the electron-electron 


 

 

Figure 3. The de Haas – van Alphen oscillations. 
The de Haas – van Alphen oscillations revealed in the field dependences of the static magnetic 
susceptibility measured at room temperature in silicon sandwich, p2D=3x1013m-2, at perpendicular (a, b, c) 
and parallel (d, e, f) orientation of a magnetic field related to the Si-QW plane. The dips is related to the 
Landau levels ν=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. T=300K. 
 
 


 

 

Figure 4. Composite bosons and fermions. 
Diagram showing the subsequent creation of composite bosons (green line) and fermions (red line) that 
result from the capture of single magnetic flux quantum at the edge channel of silicon nanosandwich 
confined by the negative-U impurity stripes containing single holes. 
 

interaction, but also promotes quantization of the interelectronic spacing18-21. Thus, 

the stabilization of a ratio between the number of magnetic flux quanta and single 

holes in edge channels, 1/ν, is reached at certain values of an external magnetic 

field, thereby promoting the registration of both integer, and fractional quantum 

Hall effect22,23.  


 


Figure 5. Quantum Hall effect. 
The Hall resistance Rxy=Vxy/Ids and the magnetoresistance Rxx = Vxx/Ids, Ids= 10 nA, of a two-dimensional 
hole system, p2D=3x1013m-2, in silicon nanosandwich at the temperature of 77K vs magnetic field. (b) – 
Manifestation of the fractional quantum Hall effect near ν=1/2, p2D=3x1013m-2. (c) - Rxx and Rxy vs 
magnetic field at the temperature of 77K, Ids= 10 nA, for low sheet density of holes, p2D=1.3x1013m-2, that 
is revealed by varying the value of the top gate voltage (Fig. 1h), Vtg=+150 mV, see Ref. 11. 
 

In addition to the aforesaid, the DX- and oxygen –related centers as well as 

the antisite donor-acceptor pairs reveal the negative-U properties to confine 

effectively the edge channels in III-V compound low-dimensional structures24-27. 

However the preparation of dipolar configurations in this case appears to be 

accompanied by preliminary selective illumination at low temperatures. 

Nevertheless, the question arises – how is possible to measure these 

quantum effects at high temperatures in weak magnetic fields? One of the reasons 

that are noted above is small effective mass, 10-4m0, which is considered within the 

concept of the squeezed silicon arising owing to the negative-U impurity stripes in 

edge channels (Fig. 6)11. Other reason is caused by very effective self-cooling 

inside negative-U dipole boron strata under the conditions of the drain-source 

current. 

In order to interpret the experimental data presented above, we propose the 

following thermodynamic model of the self-cooling process in the silicon 

nanosandwich. In the frameworks of this model, the whole thermodynamic process 

consists of multiple self-cooling cycles, each of which includes the following two 

stages: A) the adiabatic electric depolarization process of the spontaneously 

polarized stripe that is due to the presence of holes in the edge channel, and B) the 

fast spontaneous isothermal polarization of the negative-U boron dipoles in the 

stripe with transition back into the ferroelectric state. 

The model presented is based on 1) the energy conservation law in the 

electric depolarization process, and 2) the expression for the free energy,  f  , and 

the internal energy,  u,  of the ferroelectric state related to the thermodynamic work 

reserved in the edge channel of the silicon nanosandwich, 

 


 

Figure 6. One-electron band scheme of the silicon nanosandwich. 
The one-electron band scheme of the p-type Si-QW confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with 
boron on the n-type Si (100) surface. The delta-barriers are of wide-gap as a result of the formation of the 
negative-U dipole boron centers (see also Fig. 1d). The negative-U impurity stripes are of importance to 
result in the squeeze of the p-type Si-QW between the delta-barriers. In the frameworks of the squeezed 
silicon, the anti-crossing between the conduction band of the delta barriers and the valence band of the p-
type Si-QW becomes to be actual thereby giving rise to the small effective mass of holes11. 
 

       Q
T s
u
E PdV







                                      (1) 

 

                                   (2) 

 

Here T and s are the local effective temperature and the entropy of the nanosystem 

under consideration. 

Combining the equations 1 and 2, we obtain the fundamental relationship 

describing a single thermodynamic self-cooling cycle of the negative-U stripe that 

is induced by the drain-source current in the edge channel: 

 


                                  
                                                (3) 

 

Here E, P and cp are related to the local electric field, spontaneous dielectric 

polarization and the local lattice thermocapacity of the negative-U stripe. 

Integration reveals a significant cooling effect in the edge channel of the silicon 

nanosandwich.  

 

 

 

Figure 7. The red shift of the radiation from the edge channels of silicon 
nanosandwich. 
(a) and (b) - The cooler effect is identified by the red shift of the radiation caused by the dipole boron 
centers from the edge channels of the silicon nanosandwich device (see Fig. 1h) that is induced by the 
stabilized drain-source current in different spectral range; T=300 K. 
 

Thus, this model allows our interpretation of high temperature quantum 

kinetic effects in silicon nanosandwiches confined by the negative-U ferroelectric 

or superconductor barriers. Specifically, the self-cooling effect of the edge 


channels can be derived as a red shift in the electroluminescence spectra that is 

enhanced by increasing the drain-source current, see Fig. 7.  

 

SUMMARY 

Negative-U impurity stripes containing single holes appear to reduce the 

electron-electron interaction in the edge channels of the silicon nanosandwiches 

that allow the observations of quantum kinetic effects at high temperatures up to 

the room temperature.  

The edge channels of semiconductor quantum wells confined by the 

subsequence of negative-U impurity stripes containing single holes give rise to the 

creation of the composite bosons and fermions in weak magnetic fields by the step-

by-step capture of magnetic flux quanta. 

The strong diamagnetism of the impurity stripes that consist of the negative 

U dipole boron centers surrounding the Si-QW edge channels allowed the high 

temperature observation of the de Haas – van Alphen oscillations as well as integer 

and the fractional quantum Hall effect. 

Finally, it should be noted that the step-by-step capture of magnetic flux 

quanta on all negative U impurity stripes in the edge channels is determined by the 

balance between the numbers of composite bosons and fermions that is very 

interesting for models of quantum computing. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The work was supported by the programme «5-100-2020», project 6.1.1 of SPSPU 

(2014); project 1963 of SPbGPU (2014); the programme of fundamental studies of 

the Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences “Actual problems of low 

temperature physics” (grant 10.4); project 10.17 “Interatomic and molecular 

interactions in gases and condensed matter”.  

 
 


REFERENCES 

1. Ezawa, Zyun F. Quantum Hall Effects: Recent Theoretical and Experimental 

Developments (World Scientific, Singapore 2013). 

2. Eisenstein, J. P. et al. Density of States and de Haas —van Alphen Effect in 

Two-Dimensional Electron Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 875-878 (1985). 

3. Landwehr, G. et al.Quantum transport in n-type and p-type modulation-doped 

mercury telluride quantum well. Physica E 6, 713-719 (2000). 

4. Novoselov, K.S. et al. Two-dimensional gas of massless Dirac fermions in 

graphene, Nature 438, 197-200 (2005). 

5. Novoselov, K. S. et al. Room-Temperature Quantum Hall Effect in Graphene. 

Science 315 (5817), 1379 (2007).  

6. Geim, A.K. & Novoselov, K. S. The rise of grapheme. Nature Materials 6, 183-

191 (2007). 

7. Hasan, M.Z. & Kane, C.L. Colloquium: Topological insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys. 

82, 3045-3067 (2010). 

8. Klinovaja, J., Stano, P., Yazdani, A. & Loss, D. Topological Superconductivity 

and Majorana Fermions in RKKY Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 186805-5 (2013). 

9. Zyuzin, A.A. & Loss, D. RKKY interaction on surfaces of topological insulators 

with superconducting proximity effect. Phys. Rev.B 90, 125443-5 (2014). 

10. Bagraev, N. et al. Self-assembled impurity superlattices and microcavities in 

silicon. Def. Dif. Forum 194-199, 673-678 (2001). 

11. Bagraev, N.T., Galkin, N.G., Gehlhoff, W., Klyachkin, L.E. & Malyarenko, 

A.M. Phase and amplitude response of “0.7 feature” caused by holes in silicon 

one-dimensional wires and rings. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 20, p.164202-12 

(2008). 

12. Gehlhoff, W., Bagraev, N.T. & Klyachkin, L.E. Cyclotron resonance in heavily 

doped silicon quantum wells. Sol. St. Phenomena 47-48, 589-594 (1995). 

13. Bagraev, N.T., Klyachkin, L.E., Kudryavtsev, A.A., Malyarenko, A.M., & 

Romanov, V.V. Superconductor Ch. 4 (SCIYO, Croatia, 2010). 


14. Bagraev, N.T., Ivanov, V.K., Klyachkin, L.E. & Shelykh, I.A. Spin 

depolarization in quantum wires polarized spontaneously in a zero magnetic field. 

Phys. Rev. B 70, 155315-9 (2004). 

15. Bagraev, N.T., et al. Shubnikov–de_Haas and de_Haas–van_Alphen 

Oscillations in Silicon Nanostructures. Semiconductors 45, 1447–1452 (2011). 

16. Bagraev, N.T. et al. EDESR and ODMR of Impurity Centers in Nanostructures 

Inserted in Silicon Microcavities, Appl. Magn. Reson. 39, 113–135, (2010). 

17. Laughlin, R. B. Quantized Hall conductivity in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. B 

23, 5632-5633 (1981). 

18. Laughlin, R. B. Quantized motion of three two-dimensional electrons in a 

strong magnetic field. Phys. Rev. B 27, 3383-3389 (1983). 

19. Halperin, B.I. Theory of the Quantized Hall Conductance. Helvetica Physica 

Acta 56, 75-102 (1983). 

20. Dolgopolov, V.T. Integer quantum Hall effect and related phenomena. Phys. 

Usp. 57 105–127 (2014). 

21. Devyatov, E.V. Edge states in the regimes of integer and fractional quantum 

Hall effects. Phys. Usp. 50, 197–218 (2007). 

22. von Klitzing, K., Dorda, G. & Pepper, M. New method for high-accuracy 

determination of the fine-structure constant based on quantized Hall resistance. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 494-497 (1980). 

23. Willett, R. et al. Observation of an Even-Denominator Quantum Number in the 

Fractional Quantum Hall Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1776-1779 (1987). 

24. Zazoui, M. Feng, S. L. & Bourgoin, J. C. Nature of the DX center in Ga1-

xAlxAs, Phys. Rev. B 44, 10898-10900 (1991). 

25. Peale, R. E. Mochizuki, Sun, Y.H. & Watkins, G. D. Magnetic circular 

dichroism of the DX center in Al0.35Ga0.65As:Te, Phys. Rev. B 45, 5933-5943 

(1992).  

26. Alt, H. Ch. Experimental evidence for a negative-U center in gallium arsenide 

related to oxygen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3421-3425 (1990).  


27. Bagraev N.T., The EL2 center In GaAs: Symmetry and Metastability, J. Phys. 

(France) I, 1, 1511-1527 (1991). 


