Spin texture on top of vortex avalanches in Nb/Al2O3/Co thin film 
heterostructures 
 
R. F. Lopes1, D. Carmo2, F. Colauto2,3, W. A. Ortiz2, A. M. H. de Andrade1, 
T. H. Johansen4, E. Baggio-Saitovitch5, P. Pureur1 
 
1 Instituto de Física, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, P.O. Box 15051, 91501-970  
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
 
2 Departamento de Física, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, 13565-905 São Carlos, SP, Brazil. 
 
3 Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA. 
 
4 Department of Physics, University of Oslo, P. O. Box 1048 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway and 
Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Northfields Avenue, 
Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. 
 
5 Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas, Rua Dr. Xavier Sigaud 150, 22290-180 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
Brazil. 
 
 
Key words: spin texture, vortex avalanches, magneto-optics imaging, magneto-transport 
 
PACS: 74.78.Fk, 74.70.Ad, 74.25.Uv, 75.47.-m, 75.70.-i  
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
We report on magneto-optical imaging, magnetization, Hall effect and magneto-
resistance experiments in Nb/Al2O3/Co thin film heterostructures.   The magnetic field is 
applied perpendicularly to the plane of the film and gives rise to abrupt flux penetration of 
dendritic form. A magnetization texture is imprinted in the Co layer in perfect coincidence with 
these ramifications. The spin domains that mimic the vortex dendrites are stable upon the field 
removal. Moreover, the imprinted spin structure remains visible up to room temperature. 
Complementary magnetization, Hall effect and magneto-resistance experiments were performed 
in a similar sample where electrical contacts were placed on the Co layer. In the region of the 
field - temperature diagram where flux instabilities are known to occur in Nb films, irregular 
jumps are observed in the magnetic hysteresis and large amplitude noise is detected in the 
magneto-resistance and Hall resistivity data when measured as a function of the field.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


I.  
INTRODUCTION 
 
The study of non-collinear spin configurations structured at meso and microscopic 
scales have been a subject of great interest for fundamental and applied research. 
Previously, investigations were devoted to understand the microscopic mechanisms 
leading to non-trivial spin arrangements [1]. On the other hand, in the present time 
many of these structures may have potential application in innovative processes 
involving data manipulation and spintronics devices [2]. 
Domain walls [1], small magnetic domains in single or multilayered thin films 
with perpendicular anisotropy [3], spontaneous bubble domains formed on the surface 
of a bulk ferromagnetic material with planar anisotropy [4], and stripe domains in 
multilayered magnetic films [5] are just a few examples of spin textures structured at 
sub-micron scale. These structures in general result from the interplay between the 
exchange energy, magnetocrystalline anisotropy and dipolar interaction. 
 
Recently, novel spin textures have been put forward. Among them are vortex- 
and chiral-type magnetic arrangements. Spin configurations in form of vortices 
structured at nanometric scale are usually associated to very small samples with circular 
geometries [6]. Chiral magnetic structures are extremely interesting since their 
stabilization is crucially dependent on the spin-orbit interaction [7]. Chiral spin textures, 
for instance, have been proposed to explain the anomalous Hall effect in the Kondo 
lattice Pr2Ir2O7 [8] and were observed in the surface states of the topological insulator 
Bi1-xSbx with ARPES experiments [9].  
A remarkable nanoscale chiral spin structure is the magnetic skyrmion, 
discovered a few years ago [10, 11]. Reference [10] reports the first observation of a 
skyrmion lattice using neutron scattering in the magnetic crystal MnSi that lacks the 
inversion symmetry. Other observations of skyrmions using different experimental 
techniques have been reported in bulk materials and thin films [12, 13]. Skyrmions are 
described as quasiparticles in an otherwise homogeneous magnetic medium that are 
formed by a local spin pointing opposite to the global magnetization that is surrounded 
by a whirling twist of spins as illustrated in figure 1 of reference [14]. These spin 
arrangements are stabilized by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, whose magnitude 
depends on the spin-orbit coupling [14]. 
Heterostructures formed by bilayers and multilayers including ferromagnetic and 
superconducting thin films are also potentially interesting systems to produce unusual 
spin textures. However, most of the works on these hybrids are dedicated to the study of 
the effects of the magnetic layers on the superconducting films [15]. A relatively 
smaller number of investigations are focused in the effects of superconductivity on the 
spin configuration of the magnetic layers [16, 17, 18]. One interesting possibility along 
this line of investigation is the generation of unconventional spin textures in the 
ferromagnetic layers using the properties of the superconducting films. It seems 
reasonable to suppose that the Abrikosov vortex lattice of type-II superconducting 
layers may induce nanoscopic and non-trivial spin structures in nearby ferromagnetic 
layers grown from materials with strong spin-orbit coupling. Owing to the hexagonal 
symmetry that characterizes both the Abrikosov vortex lattice [19] and the skyrmion 


lattice [10], one might expect that some chiral-type spin configuration forms on top of 
superconducting vortices, at least in the field limit where the distance between vortices 
is larger than the typical spin quasiparticle diameter.  
In this article we report on spin texture generated by vortices in a Nb/Al2O3/Co 
thin film hybrid. The magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the superconducting 
layer gives rise to abrupt flux penetration in the form of dendrites. A magnetization 
texture is imprinted in the Co layer in perfect coincidence with these ramifications. 
Magneto-optical imaging (MOI) experiments were carried out to observe the flux 
avalanches and the imprinted spin texture. It is remarkable that the spin domains that 
mimic the vortex dendrites are stable upon the field removal. Moreover, the imprinted 
spin structure remains visible up to room temperature. Complementary magnetization, 
magneto-resistance and Hall effect experiments were performed in a similar sample 
were electrical contacts were placed on the Co film. In the region of the H-T diagram 
where flux instabilities are known to occur in the Nb film [20], irregular jumps are 
observed in the magnetic hysteresis. The magneto-resistance and the Hall resistivity 
show a noisy behavior when measured in fixed temperatures under slowly varying 
magnetic fields. The noise in the magneto-transport measurements ceases at a 
characteristic field which depends on the temperature. Using the magneto-resistance and 
Hall resistivity data we were able to define the boundary of the instability region for the 
vortex penetration.  
 
 
II.  
MATERIAL AND METODS  
 
Several samples of the thin film heterostructure Nb/Al2O3 /Co were made by UHV 
magnetron sputtering using the system Orion 8@ manufactured by AJA International 
Inc. The films thicknesses for all samples are 200 nm, 22 nm and 24 nm for Nb, Al2O3  
and Co, respectively. The thicknesses were determined by x-ray reflectomety for each 
film individually. Base pressure was better than 5 10-8 Torr. Growth was done under the 
Ar working pressure of 2 mTorr. The surface of the metallic films is homogeneous 
when observed using optical microscopy.  The structure of the prepared heterostructures 
is show in the schematic picture of Fig. 1. First, the Nb film with area 7x7 mm2 was 
deposited on a thermally oxidized Si (100) wafer. This particular layer was grown at T = 
500 0C. Then, the Al2O3 layer was deposited on the Nb film covering its entire surface. 
Above the insulating layer, a rectangular shaped Co film with areal size 2 x 4 mm2 was 
deposited. The Al2O3 spacer prevents electrical metallic contact between the 
superconductor and the ferromagnetic sheets. The insulator layer also avoids the 
proximity effect between the metallic films. On top of the Co film, a thin Al2O3 layer 
was grown in order to prevent sample degradation. Six thin and small Ag pads were 
deposited on the Al2O3 film previously to the Co film growth. In the extremities of these 
pads, shown in Fig. 1, gold wires were glued with silver paint. These pads provide 
electrical contacts to the Co film so that magneto-resistance and Hall effect experiments 
could be carried out in this particular layer. The Ag contact pads and the rectangular Co 
were shaped using a hollowed mask placed on the samples during the deposition 


process. In some samples, additional electrical contacts could be placed in order to test 
the superconducting layer only. The Nb films of our heterostructures have a critical 
temperature Tc = 8.9 K,  
 
The magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design 
MPMS-5S@. The field was applied perpendicularly to the plane of the film. The images 
were carried out in a magneto-optical imaging (MOI) setup, using a Faraday rotating 
Bi-substituted ferrite-garnet film with in-plane magnetization as a sensor [21, 22]. 
Mounting the sensor plate directly on the film surface, the flux density distribution over 
the film area was detected as an image in a polarized light microscope with crossed 
polarizers. Electrical resistivity, magneto-resistance and Hall effect measurements were 
carried out in a Quantum Design DynaCool@ Physical Properties Measuring System. In 
the magneto-transport experiments, the magnetic field was oriented perpendicular to the 
film surface.  
 
 

 
FIG. 1. Studied Nb/Al2O3/Co heterostructure (schematic). The Si100 substrate has 
400 µm thickness. The material layers and thicknesses are in the following 
sequence: Nb, 200 nm; Al2O3, 22 nm; Ag, 20 nm; Co, 24 nm; and not shown 
Al2O3, 10 nm. 
 
 
III.  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
III.a  Magnetization and magneto-optical measurements 
 
It is well known that Nb films exhibit flux avalanches when submitted to magnetic 
fields within a certain range and for temperatures below 5 K approximately [20]. We 
have confirmed this feature in our sample, as can be observed in Fig. 2 that shows 
hysteresis cycles in fields up to B = ± 20 mT at four different temperatures. Before each 
isothermal cycle the sample was warmed up above Tc. At this stage, the Co layer was 
demagnetized by successively applying fields with alternating orientations and 
decreasing amplitude. The isotherms at 6 K and 8 K are smooth, as expected for a 
superconductor in the critical state. Consistently, the area of the hysteresis loop at 6 K is 
larger than that registered at 8 K.  On the other hand, the isotherms at 2 K and 4 K differ 
from the ordinary behavior, having an areal size smaller than that in 6 K. In addition, 


they look strongly noisy, both in the upward and downward branches, which is a well-
known signature of flux entry in the form of avalanches [20, 23]. 
 

 
 
FIG. 2. Magnetic moment versus applied field for the heterostructure 
Nb/Al2O3/Co. The noise in the hysteresis loop at T = 2 K and T = 4 K is 
typical of the occurrence of flux avalanches. 
 
 
The avalanches develop inside the sample with a dendritic morphology, as 
observed in the magneto-optical image in Fig 3 (a) and (b). Since the sample is larger 
than the microscope field of view, the magneto-optical images were taken in a fraction 
of the sample, which encompasses the edge between the bare Nb and the Nb/Al2O3/Co 
heterostructure. Vertical lines were added to the figure in order to identify the boundary 
separating the uncovered Nb layer and the heterostructure. The images (a) and (b) were 
carried out after a zero field cooling (ZFC) from a temperature above Tc to 2.5 K and the 
image (c) shows the remnant out-of-plane magnetization of the Co film. In the image 
(a), taken at 2.5 mT, one sees two dendritic structures that start at the edge of the sample 
and reach the area including the magnetic layer. There is no significant deflection or 
suppression of branches as the avalanche invades the area covered by the Co layer. 
However, those branches that are about to end at the boundary are stopped. When the 
field is increased to 6.0 mT, as shown in image (b), several dendrites penetrate inside 
the heterostucture. When the magnetic field is removed and the sample is warmed to a 
temperature above Tc the Co layer stays magnetized as is shown in the image (c). 
Through a meticulous comparison between the images (b) and (c), one sees that the 
same branches developed at 2.5 K are imprinted in the magnetic layer. 


 
FIG. 3. Magneto-optical imaging (a) 2.5 K and 2.5 mT; (b) 2.5 K and 6 mT; (c) 
Remnant state of the Co layer at T = 10 K. 
 
The magnetic texture produced by flux avalanche remains stable in the Co layer 
in temperatures much above Tc and is erased only by applying a magnetic field  of 1 T 
magnitude or higher. As an example, Fig. 4 shows a micrograph of imprinted vortex 
obtained in room temperature. Although some branches merged into a bulky one and 
others look blurry at this temperature, their observation is an indication of the 
robustness of the imprinted magnetic structure.  
 

                          
 
 
FIG. 4. Magneto-optical imaging of the Co layer showing imprinted 
            vortex avalanches in T = 300 K . Bar corresponds to 250 µm. 
 
The vortex induced spin texture also affects the field penetration in temperatures 
where the field penetrates smoothly, as can be observed in  Fig. 5, which shows a MOI 
experiment carried out at T = 8 K. It is quite visible the difference between the bare Nb 
and the Nb/Al2O3/Co regions. In the uncovered Nb film the flux distribution is 


homogeneous, while in the Nb/Al2O3/Co area the flux is guided by the previous 
dendrite imprints. The image (a) was taken at 0.3 mT.  It shows the beginning of flux 
penetration into the Co area. Increasing the field, as in image (b) taken at 0.6 mT, the 
flux occupies the locations magnetized by the avalanches. Clearly, the flux follows the 
branches and bifurcations left by dendrites. The image (c) was taken at 1 mT. It shows 
the surface appearance when the flux is almost fully penetrated into the sample. The 
flux inhomogeneity takes all over the Nb/Al2O3/Co portion that was previously 
submitted to avalanche occurrences at a lower temperature. 
 
 

 
 
FIG. 5. Magneto-optical imaging at T = 8K (a) 0.3 mT; (b) 0.6 mT; (c) 1 mT. 
 
 
III.b 
Hall effect and magneto-resistance experiments 
 
In this section, magneto-transport measurements in the Nb/Al2O3/Co hybrid are 
presented and discussed.  The results shown are those obtained when the electrical 
contacts were placed on the ferromagnetic film. We notice that the longitudinal 
resistivity (results not show) exhibit a metallic behavior, as usually observed in cobalt 
thin films [25]. The measured residual resistivity is ρ0 ≈ 15µΩcm, which is a typical 
value for a Co film with 20 nm thick [25, 26]. Moreover, the overall behavior of our 
magneto-transport data in Co at temperatures above the superconducting Tc of the 
nearby Nb layer is in agreement with previously reported results [25-27].  
Figure 6 shows representative Hall resistivity results in low fields at some fixed 
temperatures below and above Tc. In T = 2 K and T = 4 K a rather noisy behavior is 
observed in ρxy in the low applied field limit. The noise amplitude is much larger than 
the experimental resolution of the PPMS@. The erratic fluctuations in ρxy are sharply 
suppressed above a temperature-dependent threshold field µ0Ht(T), signaled by arrows 
in Fig. 6. The values obtained for µ0Ht in different isotherms are plotted in the diagram 


of Fig. 8. These field values define an upper boundary for observing instabilities in the 
magneto-transport properties.  As shown in Fig. 6(c), the noise is not observed in 
measurements carried out above Tc. We attribute the observed instabilities in ρxy(H) to 
successive voltage spikes induced in orientations parallel to the Co layer by the abrupt 
penetration of the vortex dendrites. Indeed, since the average time for avalanche 
penetration ranges around 0.1 to 0.4 µs [28, 29], the penetration of a single bundle of 
100 vortices may produce an easily detectable spike of 1 µV magnitude.   
 

 
FIG. 6. Low field Hall resistivity as a function of the applied field of the Co layer 
in the Nb/Al2O3/Co hybrid measured in temperatures (a) 2 K, (b) 4 K e (c) 10 K. 
Red balls represent results recorded while the field is increased and black symbols 
correspond to data obtained in decreasing fields. Arrows denote the maximum field 
for observing instabilities in the ρxy data. 
 
Magneto-resistance (MR) measurements versus the applied field in the same fixed 
temperatures studied in the ρxy experiments are shown in Fig. 7. The MR shows a noisy 
behavior in the same field and temperature intervals as for the Hall resistivity data. In 
addition, the usually observed hysteretic behavior in the MR of ferromagnetic metals is 
rounded off in the temperature range where instabilities were identified in the Co layer 
of our hybrid. As seen in Fig. 7(c), the normal hysteretic behavior of the MR is restored 
above Tc [25]. The peaks indicate the position of the coercive field µ0Hc ≅ 0.05 T. The 
non-observation of hysteresis in the MR results at T = 2 K (see Fig. 7(a)), is probably 
due to a smoothing resulting from rapid inductive fluctuations due to vortex avalanches. 
In T = 4 K (Fig. 7(b)), the peaks at ±Hc are discernible though smudged by large 
amplitude noise.  


As for the Hall resistivity, the anomalous fluctuations in ρxx cease suddenly at the 
threshold field µ0Ht(T). The values for this characteristic field obtained from the MR 
measurements are also plotted in Fig. 8. 
It is worthwhile to note that a simple device as our trilayer heterostructure allows 
the detection of vortex avalanches using a conventional electrical transport 
measurement technique. Clearly, in the present stage, the signal detection method 
employed in our measurements does not allow detailed studies of the noise spectrum as 
done in the more complex experiments reported in references [28] and [29]. However, 
the use of a normal layer inductively coupled to an electrically isolated superconducting 
film might be an interesting alternative to study the rapid dynamics of vortex 
penetration.  
   

                 
 
FIG. 7. Low field magneto-resistance of the Co layer in the Nb/Al2O3/Co 
hybrid measured in temperatures (a) 2 K, (b) 4 K and (c) 10 K. Black balls 
represent measurements taken as the field increases from µ0H = – 0.4 T up to 
µ0H = + 0.4 T. The data plotted as red balls were obtained while the field 
was varied in the opposite way. 
  
In the diagram of Fig. 8 the threshold induction µ0Ht is plotted as a function of the 
temperature in a logarithmic scale for better visualization of the results in temperatures 
close to Tc. We propose that this characteristic field defines the upper boundary for the 
region where vortex instabilities occur in the Nb layer of our heterostructure. Indeed, for 
field values above 10 mT and temperatures below 5 K, the diagram in Fig. 8 reproduces 
quite nicely similar results reported for Nb films with thicknesses varying from 20 to 
500 nm [20]. In the low H – high T region, the diagram in Fig. 8 does not show the 


reentrance of the instability region in the single layer Nb [20]. Figure 8 suggests instead 
that µ0Ht(T)  approaches zero near Tc. We note that similar enlargements of the H-T 
region characterized by irregular jumps in magnetization measurements were observed 
in Nb/permalloy bilayers [30]. Authors in Ref. [30] suggest that the pinning of vortices 
in channels due to the underlying magnetic domains combined with the intrinsic pinning 
of the Nb film could explain the enlargement of the H-T domain where vortex 
instabilities are observed. 

 
FIG. 8 – Characteristic magnetic induction µ0Ht(T) plotted as a function of the 
temperature for the Nb/Al2O3/Co hybrid. The H versus T line drawn through the 
experimental points denotes the upper limit for observing noisy behavior in the 
Hall resistivity and magneto-resistance measurements. This line corresponds to the 
instability boundary for vortex penetration into the Nb layer.  
 
 
IV.  
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CONCLUSION 
 
Our magneto-optical experiments in Nb/Al2O3/Co heterostructures clearly show that 
dendrites produced by vortex avalanches in the Nb layers generate a template consisting 
of magnetic textures in the adjacent Co layer. The dynamics of the avalanches induces 
anomalous noise in magneto-transport properties of the Co film. Magnetization 
measurements in these tri-layer heterostructures show irregular jumps consistently both 
with MOI experiments and magneto-transport results.  
Due to the similarities between the vortex lattice in superconductors and the 
skyrmion lattice in magnetic materials, we are lead to consider that the macro and 
mesoscopic magnetization texture observed in the Co layer of our Nb/Al2O3/Co hybrid 
might be microscopically formed by skyrmions or some other non-conventional spin 
chiral or vortex-type structures. This hypothesis, however, should be checked by 
performing other experiments able to discern magnetization inhomogeneities at the 
nanoscopic scale. At this stage, we can not exclude the possibility that the spin texture 
clearly revealed in Fig. 3(c) is related to perpendicular domain polarization following 
the geometry dictated by the flux penetration into the Nb layer. However, it was shown 


with magnetic force microscopy that in Co films having 20 nm thickness, which is close 
to that of the Co layer in our hybrid, only domains with in-plane magnetization are 
stable [25]. Thus, it might be difficult to conceive that small domains with 
perpendicular magnetization would subsist in the absence of vortices and applied fields 
in the Co layer of the studied heterostructure. Moreover, a rough estimation shows that 
the magnetic energy density transferred by vortices to the ferromagnetic film is not 
enough to overcome the in-plane shape anisotropy energy for a thin Co film, which is of 
the order K = 1.3 106 J/m3, as reported in Ref [31].  
As a final remark, we mention that the imprinting of vortex avalanches in a 
ferromagnetic thin film might represent a step forward to the development of an 
alternative technique for achieving vortex decoration in a medium useful for data 
recording and processing. 
    
 
 
Note added.  
 
After the completion of this manuscript we become aware of a recent work by J. 
Brisbois et al. [32] where observations of vortex avalanches imprints in a permalloy 
film adjacent to a Nb layer are reported. 
 
Acknowledgements.   
 
We acknowledge Dr. Eduardo M. Bittar from the Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas (CBPF) 
for invaluable help during the realization of the magneto-transport experiments. One of the 
authors (RFL) acknowledges the Brazilian agency “Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas Científicas 
e Tecnológicas” (CNPq) for financial support.   
 
 
 
References 
 
[1] G.T. Rado and H. Suhl, editors, Magnetism, Vol. III: Spin Arrangements and 
Crystal Structure, Domains and Micromagnetism, Academic Press (London) 1963. 
[2] S.A. Wolf, D.D. Awschalom, R.A. Buhrman, J.M. Daughton, S. von Molnár, M.L. 
Roukes, A.Y. Chtchelkanova, and D.M. Treger, Science 294, 1488 (2001). 
[3] V. Gehanno, A. Marty, B. Gilles, and Y.  Samson, Phys. Rev. B 55, 12552 (1997). 
[4] T. Fukumura, H. Sugawara, H. Hasegawa, K. Tanaka, H. Sakaki, T. Kimura, and Y. 
Tokura, Science 284, 1970 (1999). 
[5] Y.Z. Wu, C. Won, A. Scholl, A. Doran, H.W. Zhao, X.F. Jin, and Z.Q. Qiu, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 93, 117205 (2004). 
[6] T. Shinjo, T. Okuno, R. Hassdorf, K. Shigeto, and T. Ono, Science 289, 930 (2000). 
[7] C. Day, Physics Today 62, 12 (2009). 


[8] Y. Machida, S. Nakatsuji, Y. Maeno, T. Tayama, T. Sakakibara, and S. Onoda, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 057203 (2007). 
[9] D. Hsieh, Y. Xia, L. Wray, D. Qian, A. Pal, J.H. Dil, J. Osterwalder, F. Meir, G. 
Bihlmayer, C.L. Kane, Y.S. Hor, R.J. Cava, and M.Z. Hasan, Science 323, 919 (2009). 
[10] S. Mühlbauer, B. Binz, F. Jonietz, C. Pfleiderer, A. Rosch, A. Neubauer, R. 
Giorgii, and P. Böni, Science 323, 915 (2009). 
[11] A. Neubauer, C. Pfleiderer, B. Binz, A. Rosch, R. Ritz, P.G. Niklowitz, and P. 
Böni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 186602 (2009). 
[12] X.Z. Yu, Y. Onose, N. Kanazawa, J.H. Park, J.H. Han, Y. Matsui, N. Nagaosa, and 
Y. Tokura, Nature (London) 465, 901 (2010). 
[13] S. Heinze, K.V. Bergmann, M. Menzel, J. Brede, A. Kubetzka, R. Wiensendanger, 
G. Bihlmayer, and S. Blügel, Nat. Phys. 7, 713 (2011) 
[14] A. Fert, V. Cros, and J. Sampaio, Nature Nanotech. 8, 152 (2013) and references 
therein. 
[15] D. Stamopoulos and E. Aristomenopoulou, J. Appl. Phys. 116, 233908 (2014). 
[16] A.I. Buzdin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 935 (2005). 
[17] M. Berciu, T.G. Rappoport, B. Jankó, Nature 435, 71 (2005) 
[18] J. Fritzshe, R.B.G. Kramer, and V.V. Moshchalkov, Phys. Rev. B 79, 132501 
(2009). 
[19] A.A. Abrikosov, Fundamentals of the Theory of Metals, North Holland, 
Amsterdam, 1988.  
[20] F. Colauto,  E. J. Patiño, M. G. Blamire, and W. A. Ortiz, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 
21, 045018 (2008). 
[21] T. H. Johansen, M. Baziljevich, H. Bratsberg, Y. M. Galperin, P. Lindelof, Y. 
Shen, and P. Vase, Phys. Rev. B 54, 16264 (1996). 
[22] L. Helseth, R. Hansen, E. Ilyashenko, M. Baziljevich, and T. H. Johansen, Phys. 
Rev. B 64, 174406 (2001).  
[23] F. Colauto, E. M. Choi, J. Y. Lee, S. I. Lee, V. V. Yurchenko, T. H. Johansen, and 
W. A. Ortiz, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 20, L48 (2007). 
[24] T. H. Johansen, M. Baziljevich, D. V. Shantsev, P. E. Goa, Y. M. Galperin, W. N. 
Kang, H. J. Kim, E. M. Choi, M.-S. Kim, and S. I. Lee, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 14, 
726 (2001). 
[25] W. Gil, D. Görlitz, M. Horisberger, and J. Kötzler, Phys. Rev. B 72, 134401 
(2005). 
[26] A.B. Pakhomov, J.C Denardin, O.F. de Lima, M. Knobel, and F.P. Missell,  J. 
Magn. Magn 226-230, 1631 (2001). 
[27] J. Kötzler and W. Gil, Phys. Rev. B 72, 060412 (2005). 
[28] P. Mikheenko, A.J. Quiller, J.I. Vesgarden, S. Chaudhuri, I.J. Maasilta, Y.M. 
Galperin, and T.H. Johansen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 022601 (2013). 
[29] P. Mikheenko, T.H. Johansen, S. Chaudhuri, I.J. Maasilta, and Y.M. Galperin, 
Phys. Rev. B 91, 06507(R) (2015). 
[30] M. Lavarone, A. Scarfato, F. Booba, M. Longobardi, S.A. Moore, G. Karapetrov, 
V. Yefremenko, V. Novosad, and A.M. Cucolo,  IEEE Trans. Magn. 48, 3275 (2012). 
[31] F. Cardarelli, “Materials Handbok: a concise desktop reference”, Springer, 2nd ed., 


2008, p. 502. 
[32] J. Brisbois, M. Motta, J. I. Avila, G. Shaw, T. Devillers, N.M. Dempsey, S. K. P. 
Veerapandian, P. Colson, B. Vanderheyden, P. Vanderbemden, W. A. Ortiz, N. D. 
Nguyen, R. B. G. Kramer, and A. V. Silhanek, Sci. Rep. 6:27159 |  
DOI: 10.1038/srep27159. 
 


