Identification of a possible superconducting transition above room temperature in
natural graphite crystals

Christian E. Precker,1 Pablo D. Esquinazi,1 Ana Champi,2 Jos´e Barzola-Quiquia,1 Mahsa
Zoraghi,1 Santiago Mui˜nos-Landin,1 Annette Setzer,1 Winfried B¨ohlmann,1 Daniel
Spemann,3, ∗ Jan Meijer,3 Tom Muenster,4 Oliver Baehre,4 Gert Kloess,4 and Henning Beth5

1Division of Superconductivity and Magnetism, Institut f¨ur Experimentelle Physik II,
Universit¨at Leipzig, Linn´estraße 5, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany
2Centro de Ciˆencias Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC, 09210-170, Santo Andr´e, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
3Division of Nuclear Solid State Physics, Institut f¨ur Experimentelle Physik II,
Universit¨at Leipzig, Linn´estraße 5, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany
4Institut f¨ur Mineralogie, Kristallographie und Materialwissenschaft,
Fakult¨at f¨ur Chemie und Mineralogie, Universit¨at Leipzig,
Scharnhorststraße 20, D-04275 Leipzig, Germany
5Golden Bowerbird Pty Ltd., 32 Alidenes Rd., 2482 Mullumbimby, NSW Australia

Measuring with high precision the electrical resistance of highly ordered natural graphite samples
from a Brazil mine, we have identified a transition at ∼350 K with ∼40 K transition width. The step-
like change in temperature of the resistance, its magnetic irreversibility and time dependence after
a field change, consistent with trapped flux and flux creep, and the partial magnetic flux expulsion
obtained by magnetization measurements, suggest the existence of granular superconductivity below
350 K. The zero-field virgin state can only be reached again after zero field cooling the sample from
above the transition. Paradoxically, the extraordinarily high transition temperature we found for this
and several other graphite samples is the reason why this transition remained undetected so far. The
existence of well ordered rhombohedral graphite phase in all measured samples has been proved by
x-rays diffraction measurements, suggesting its interfaces with the Bernal phase as a possible origin
for the high-temperature superconductivity, as theoretical studies predicted. The localization of the
granular superconductivity at these two dimensional interfaces prevents the observation of a zero
resistance state or of a full Meissner state.

I.
INTRODUCTION

The recently reported record temperature for super-
conductivity at 203 K in the sulfur hydride system at high
pressures[1] appears to be consistent with the Bardeen–
Cooper–Schrieffer (BCS) theory for conventional super-
conductivity.
Theoretical estimates suggest the prox-
imity of the Fermi surface to a Van Hove singular-
ity as one possible reason for the high-temperature
superconductivity[2]. In this case the interaction between
carriers[3] would give rise to the Khodel-Shaginyan flat
band, a band with a dispersionless energy relation[4, 5].
Theoretical studies predict superconductivity at high
temperatures in electronic systems with a flat band[6,
7] as, for example, at the surface of rhombohedral
graphite[8] or at the interfaces between this and Bernal
graphite[9]. Whereas evidence for flat bands at the sur-
face of epitaxial rhombohedral multilayer graphene was
recently found[10], hints for the existence of supercon-
ductivity above room temperature in different graphite-
based systems were reported in the last 40 years[11–15]
without providing, however, any knowledge of the critical
temperature Tc.
The recently observed superconductivity at Tc ∼ 5 K
in intercalated Ca and Li-doped graphene[16–18] is prob-

∗ Present address: Leibniz Institute of Surface Modification, Phys-
ical Department, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany

ably related to the increase of the density of states due
to a change in the carrier density. The low critical tem-
perature is due to the common exponential suppression
from the BCS equation for systems with a quadratic dis-
persion relation. In case of having similar Cooper pairs
interaction strength and within the flat-band predictions,
one expects a critical temperature Tc orders of magnitude
larger because in this case Tc is proportional to the pair-
ing interaction strength and to the area of the flat band
in momentum space. Therefore, for a finite electron pair-
ing interaction strength, we expect that at certain inter-
faces between rhombohedral and Bernal stacking ordered
regions[8, 9], or at certain paths between (small-angle)
twisted Bernal crystalline regions[19, 20], superconduc-
tivity may be triggered in graphite with a considerably
higher critical temperature than in most bulk supercon-
ductors.
The transition in the electrical resistance we
found at T ≳ 350 K in several graphite samples and
the behavior of the trapped flux and partial flux expul-
sion vs. temperature suggest that at that temperature
superconducting regions are formed. Lowering temper-
ature the size of these regions may increase as well as
their Josephson coupling triggering the large decrease in
the resistance below ∼ 100 K observed in graphite sam-
ples with interfaces. In this paper we present results ob-
tained from different graphite samples, natural graphite
crystals from Brazil and Sri Lanka, thin flakes obtained
from those bulk crystals, and bulk and thin flakes from
commercial highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG)

arXiv:1606.09425v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  30 Jun 2016


2

samples.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

The images of the internal structure of the natural
graphite samples were obtained using the scanning trans-
mission electron microscope (STEM) of a Nova NanoLab
200 dual beam microscope from the FEI company (Eind-
hoven). The lamellae were prepared with STEM using
the in-situ lift out method of the microscope cutting them
normal to the graphene layers. The STEM pictures were
done with a voltage applied to the electron column of
20 kV and the currents used were between 38 to 140 pA.
The impurity content of the samples was determined
by RBS/PIXE using a 2 MeV proton beam of 0.8 mm di-
ameter. From the surface of the samples we removed the
first hundreds of nanometers that usually have some con-
tamination. The PIXE measurements of the clear surface
and with a penetration depth of ∼ 35 µm indicate a con-
centration of 6.4 ppm of Fe and 5.9 ppm of Ti; most of
the other elements being below the detection limit. Here
“ppm” means µg element per gram sample. A thorough
study of the impurity concentration of the HOPG sam-
ple used in this study (Advanced Ceramics, grade A) has
been recently published[21]. The total magnetic elements
concentration in the HOPG sample used in this work is
below 2 ppm.
The electrical resistance measurements were done in
a He-flow cryostat from Quantum Design with a super-
conducting solenoid. The field provided by the solenoid
in the low field region as well as the rest field, at nomi-
nal zero field, was measured with a Hall sensor especially
designed to measure low fields. After applying fields be-
low 100 mT the rest field trapped by the solenoid at the
sample position and at nominally zero field, was below
0.1 mT.
We used the usual four-contacts method for the re-
sistance measurements, two for the current across the
whole sample width and flowing parallel to the graphene
layers and interfaces, and two for the voltage. The volt-
age electrodes were placed always on the top graphene
layer of the samples.
To check for the reproducibility
of the observed behavior, the voltage electrodes were
placed contacting half of the sample width as well as
the whole width.
The high-resolution resistance mea-
surements were done using an AC bridge (16 Hz) LR-700
with 10−5 relative resolution. Due to the low resistance
(mΩ) value of some of the bulk samples, the input cur-
rents ranged from 0.1 to 30 mA. The shown results did
not depend on the current value within experimental er-
ror.
The temperature dependence of the resistance has been
measured in equilibrium avoiding any sweeping measur-
ing mode, commonly used for measurements in a broad
temperature range. It means that after reaching and reg-
ulating the selected temperature, we waited 5 minutes
before the measurement started. This measuring mode

is time consuming but mandatory, especially to measure
the tiny transition at T > 320 K we describe below. The
maximum temperature available in the used equipment
was 390 K.
The magnetization was measured using a supercon-
ducting quantum interferometer device (SQUID) from
Quantum Design.
The used RSO option allows us to
measure the magnetic moments of our bulk samples with
a resolution ≲ 10−8 emu at low applied fields.

III.
X-RAYS CHARACTERIZATION OF
SELECTED SAMPLES

Ordered graphite samples can exhibit a regular pat-
tern of alternating Bernal (ABAB...) (2H) and rhombo-
hedral (ABCABC...) (3R) stacking with areas as small
as (200 nm)2 [22]. A certain amount of isolated 3R crys-
tallites has been detected in bulk samples without suffer-
ing severe shear deformation [23]. Upon graphite sam-
ple, a concentration of up to 30% of the 3R stacking or-
der is possible, especially in natural graphite crystals[24].
Therefore, in this work we studied the transport proper-
ties and the internal structure of natural graphite sam-
ples from Minas Gerais in Brazil. These highly ordered
natural graphite samples show in general an extraordi-
narily large resistance ratio R(300)/R(4) ≳ 20, which is
an indication of highly conducting and large interfaces
in agreement with low-energy STEM results [25].
For
comparison, we also measured thin flakes obtained from
the same natural graphite samples from Brazil, a bulk
natural graphite sample from Sri Lanka as well as bulk
and thin flakes from HOPG of grade A with 2H and 3R
phases.
The internal structure of the natural graphite flakes,
revealed by the STEM measurements, see Fig. 1, consists
of well defined and several micrometers long interfaces
between crystalline regions with different stacking orders
or twisted regions around the c−axis. Clear evidence for
the existence of the 2H and 3R phases in the measured
samples is obtained by x-ray diffraction (XRD).
XRD studies were carried out in order to show the
coexistence of well ordered hexagonal and rhombohedral
graphite in the investigated samples. The XRD measure-
ments of the natural graphite samples and highly ori-
ented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) were performed with
a D8 Discover (Bruker AXS) operated at 40 mA and
40 kV (Cu-Kα) and equipped with a Goebel mirror. The
measuring area on the samples was limited to 2 mm2

using a pinhole and a snout. The XRD measurements
of ultrapure graphite powder RWA-T were done with a
Phillips Xpert diffractometer. Table I lists the expected
Bragg angles for the Bernal (2H) and rhombohedral (3R)
stacking order phases.
The diffraction pattern of an ultra pure polycrystalline
powder RWA-T, see Fig. 2, shows all reflexes of the 2H
and 3R phases of graphite. This powder treated with wa-
ter shows granular superconducting-like hysteresis loops


3

FIG. 1.
Internal structure of a 100 nm thick lamella from a
Brazilian natural graphite obtained with a transmission elec-
tron microscope at low energy and with the electron beam
parallel to the graphene planes. The bottom right bar indi-
cates 1 µm length. Regions with different grey colors indicate
either regions with Bernal or rhombohedral stacking (with in-
terfaces between them) or twisted Bernal regions around the
c−axis. The c−axis is perpendicular to the graphene layers
and interfaces.

Hexagonal
Rhombohedral

hkl
2θ(degree) hkl
2θ(degree)

002
26.543
003
26.611
100
42.321
101
43.454
011
44.518
012
46.321
012
50.656
004
54.662
006
54.812
104
56.676
013
59.852
015
63.677
014
71.471
110
77.400
110
77.696
107
80.738
112
83.527
113
83.848
015
85.375
006
87.053
009
87.330

TABLE I. Expected Bragg angles for the hexagonal (Bernal,
2H) and rhombohedral (3R) stacking orders in graphite for
several Miller indices (hkl). Note that there are several Bragg
maxima not suitable for distinguishing both stacking orders.
This table is taken from the Inorganic Crystal Structure
Database (ICSD), Fachinformationszentrum Karlsruhe (FIZ)
& National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
(2005).

FIG. 2. X-rays diffraction pattern for an ultra pure graphite
powder at room temperature.
The labels near the Bragg
peaks indicate whether the maximum belong to Bernal (2H)
or rhombohedral (3R) phase. Note that some of the maxima
coincide with both phases within experimental resolution, see
also Table I.

in the magnetization[26].
Note that there are several
peaks not suitable for distinguishing both modifications:
00l reflexes with l = 2n for 2H and with l = 3n for 3R are
as superposed as the (hh0) reflexes, see Table I. There-
fore, the 2Θ range 40◦−47◦ was selected to determine and
approximately quantify the 3R phase in the samples. The
selected Bragg maxima are at 2θ = 42.223◦ and 44.393◦

for the 2H phase and 2θ = 43.451◦ and 46.334◦ for the
3R phase.
In natural graphite samples from Brazil (Fig. 3), in
natural graphite samples from Sri Lanka (Fig. 4), as well
as in HOPG samples (Fig. 5), the 3R phase is clearly

FIG. 3. X-rays diffraction pattern in a restricted diffraction
angle region for a natural graphite sample from Brazil. The
(red) line through the measurement is a fit used by the Ri-
etveld refinement to estimate the amounts of the phases.


4

FIG. 4. X-rays diffraction pattern in a restricted diffraction
angle region for a natural graphite sample from Sri Lanka.

FIG. 5. X-rays diffraction pattern in a restricted diffraction
angle region for a HOPG sample.

identified. The Rietveld refinement using TOPAS 4.2 ap-
plied on the diffraction patterns obtained at different po-
sitions of the natural graphite samples from Brazil gives
83 . . . 89 wt.% for the 2H and 17 . . . 11 wt.% for the 3R
phase. The same refinement applied on the patterns of
several natural graphite samples from Sri Lanka gives a
percentage range for the 3R phase between 5% and 32%.
For the sample of Fig. 4 the refinement gives 75±7 wt.%
for the 2H and 25 ± 7 wt.% for the 3R phase.

For the HOPG sample (grade A), see Fig. 5, we ob-
tained similar quantities as for the Brazilian graphite
sample within experimental error, i.e.
∼ 86% for the
2H phase and ∼ 14% for the 2H phase. We note that
the magnetization of a similar HOPG sample with inter-
faces showed granular superconductivity behavior (hys-
teresis loops, partial flux expulsion as well as flux creep)
in the magnetization at room temperature[27], similar to
the water-treated graphite powder[26], whereas a HOPG
sample without interfaces did not[27].
We note that the overall x-ray diffraction characteri-
zation presented in this study is rather unique because
of the identification of the existence of well ordered 3R
phase in all graphite samples that show hints for the ex-
istence of high-temperature superconductivity.

IV.
ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE VS. TEMPERATURE: FIRST HINT FOR A TRANSITION AT HIGH
TEMPERATURES

Because interfaces between the 2H and 3R phases are
embedded inside the samples, there is no simple method
to make electrical contacts directly on the interfaces. In
principle, TEM lamellae (typical size ∼ 10 µm2 area and
∼ 500 nm thick) from natural graphite samples would en-
able us to contact the interfaces edges directly, as done
for HOPG samples[28]. However, the several microme-
ters long interfaces in these crystals, see Fig. 1, influence
the mechanical stability of the thin TEM lamella in such
a way that its further and necessary handling is intricate,
breaking the sample before fixing and contacting it on the
substrate. Moreover, there is actually no precise knowl-
edge in which part of the sample and at which depth the
interfaces of interest are localized in a sample of several
mm2 area. Therefore, we decided to make the electrical
contacts at the top surface of the flakes measuring the

voltage response of an area of ∼ 0.5 mm2. In this case, it
is clear that no zero voltage is expected in case one path
inside the sample gets superconducting. Taking into ac-
count previous work[14], in samples of this size we expect
to observe some behavior compatible with the existence
of (granular) superconductivity at certain interfaces.

The temperature dependence of the resistance at dif-
ferent magnetic fields applied normal to the interfaces
and graphene planes (the field component [29] that trig-
gers the extraordinarily large metal-insulator transition
(MIT) at T < 200 K) is shown in Fig. 6(a). A recent
discussion of the origin of the MIT in graphite can be
read in [14]. It is related to the existence of certain inter-
faces in bulk samples and it is not intrinsic of the ideal
graphite structure [25, 30].
The MIT is not the main
scope of this study but a transition we found at much


5

FIG. 6.
Temperature dependence of the longitudinal electrical resistance of a Brazilian natural graphite: (a) At different
magnetic fields applied normal to the graphene planes and interfaces. (b) Normalized resistance data at high temperatures.
The numbers at the curves indicate the field in Tesla applied at 380 K. The measurements were done after the application of
the magnetic field and decreasing temperature. (c) Temperature dependence of the difference between FC (field cooled) and
ZFC (zero field cooled) magnetic moments (left y−axis) measured with a SQUID, after applying a field of 50 mT at 250 K
with the sample in the virgin state. The natural graphite sample is from the same batch as the one used for the resistance
measurements. Right y−axis: Temperature dependence of the resistance at zero field from (b), after subtracting a straight line
background to show the clear change in slope of R(T), indicating a well-defined transition region. The natural graphite sample
had 0.4 mm length between voltage electrodes and ≃ 1 mm width.

higher temperatures.

A careful look at the temperature dependence of the
resistance at T > 300 K provides the first hint of a transi-
tion at T ≃ 350 K, see Figs. 6(b) and 6(c). The existence
of this transition is the main message of this work. Re-
sults obtained on different samples show that this step-
like behavior in the resistance starts at similar or even
higher temperatures.

Figure 7 shows the temperature dependence of the re-
sistance around the transition of a bulk natural graphite
sample (Brazil), similar to the one shown in Fig. 6. Each
point was obtained in thermal equilibrium after waiting
5 to 10 minutes before measuring the signal. Afterwards
we heated or cooled the sample to the next preselected
temperature. Figure 7(a) shows a weak temperature ir-
reversibility at nominal zero field. We note that the rest
field of the superconducting solenoid was measured by
a Hall sensor especially designed for the measurement
of very small fields. The background field at nominally
zero field was below 0.02 mT after applying a maximum
field of 10 mT. The starting temperature was 360 K for
both sets of measurements in Figs. 7(a) and 7(b). It is
interesting to note the difference in the irreversibility be-
tween the curves taken at nominally zero field (a) and
at 10 mT (b).
The zero field measurement shows the

warming curve partially below the one measured first by
cooling, though this hysteresis is small.
The opposite
behavior is observed when a low field is applied.
Figure 8 shows the transition in the resistance of a bulk
natural graphite sample from Sri Lanka. In Fig. 8(a) we
show the background line subtracted to show the transi-
tions in (b). The two curves in (b) were obtained in two
different days by cooling and warming.
The observed
difference indicates the reproducibility of our measure-
ments. The sample was heated to 390 K several times
during a whole week, before obtaining the second (cool-
ing down) curve.

V.
INFLUENCE OF A MAGNETIC FIELD

A.
High magnetic field influence on the high
temperature transition

Under a magnetic field and for usual bulk superconduc-
tors we expect a shift of the superconducting transition
Tc to lower temperatures, given by the upper critical field
Bc2(T). However, in case of (granular) superconductiv-
ity in low dimensional systems, as in an interface, Bc2(T)
can be much larger than its value in bulk and, moreover,


6

FIG. 7. (a) Temperature dependence of the resistance of a
bulk natural graphite sample (Brazil) at zero field, first cool-
ing down and then warming up, starting at 360 K. (b) Similar
as in (a) but after applying a magnetic field of 10 mT at 360 K.
Note that a linear in temperature background was subtracted
from all experimental curves to facilitate the recognition of
the transition step in the resistance and the differences in the
temperature loop.

Tc can even increase with field[31] or could remain field
independent as in carbon nanotubes[32]. The transition
at different magnetic fields (applied always normal to the
interfaces and graphene planes) in field cooling mode can
be seen in Fig. 6(b). It is convenient to plot the normal-
ized resistance vs. temperature to minimize the effect of
the increase of the resistance with field. Whereas the re-
sistance step is clearly recognized at different fields, the
transition does not show a clear shift to lower tempera-
tures with field, within the shown field range. Note that
the magnetoresistance is clearly larger at temperatures
below T ∼ 350 K. This result also suggests a non-simple
origin of the observed transition.
In order to obtain some hint of the upper critical field
we have measured the temperature dependence of the
resistance at different magnetic fields. Figure 9 shows the
temperature derivative of the resistance at two different
magnetic fields of the bulk natural graphite crystal from
Sri Lanka, see Fig. 8. A flattening of this derivative at
T ≳ 375 K is observed. The temperature at which this

FIG. 8.
(a) Resistance vs.
temperature at zero field for a
natural graphite sample from Sri Lanka. The line is an ar-
bitrary line taken as background. (b) Difference between the
measured temperature dependence of the resistance and the
linear dependence taken as background, see (a).
The two
curves were obtained by warming and cooling at two different
days.

FIG. 9.
Temperature dependence of the first temperature
derivative of the resistance at two different applied magnetic
fields for a natural graphite bulk sample from Sri Lanka.


7

flattening starts does not show a clear shift with field
within the available field range.

We show results of a thin flake obtained from a bulk
natural graphite sample from Brazil. The thickness of the
flake was ∼ 200 nm and several micrometers length and
width. The Pd/Au electrical contacts were made using
electron lithography, see e.g. Ref. 33. Figure 10(a) shows
the electrical resistance measured after zero field cooling
(ZFC) from 390 K to 290 K and measured by warming
after applying the magnetic field at 290 K. After reaching
390 K, the sample was cooled down at zero field again
and the next measurement at higher field was done. At
all applied fields we found a small temperature hysteresis,
see Fig. 10(b).

Figure 10(b) shows the resistance at a field of 0.5 T
applied in the ZFC state at 290 K. This measurement
was done after the zero field measurement shown in (a).
The origin of this hysteresis can be due to: (a) an ir-
reversible change in the resistance due to an annealing
process at the relatively high temperatures (and mea-
suring time) and/or (b) flux pinning. Because the flux

FIG. 10.
(a) Resistance vs.
temperature at three applied
fields for a thin (∼ 200 nm thick natural graphite flake with
voltage electrodes distance of ≃ 5 µm. All the curves were
measured after ZFC state from 390 K and applying the field
at 290 K. (b) Temperature hysteresis of the resistance at a
field of 0.5 T applied at 290 K. Note the slight increase in the
resistance in the heating up curve at T ≳ 380 K.

free virgin state cannot be fully reached if the onset of
the transition is above 390 K, as it appears for this sam-
ple (see the curve at zero field in Fig. 10(a)), it is not
possible to discern, which of the two possibilities is the
origin of the irreversibility, unless one takes the sample
out of the cryostat and anneal it above 390 K in an inde-
pendent oven. For that, however, other technical prob-
lems appear especially with the electrical contacts and
the already fixed wires. As in all the other temperature
dependent measurements, each point was obtained after
waiting for thermal equilibrium (no temperature sweep-
ing mode), i.e. each point took about 5 to 10 minutes
waiting time.
We may conclude that the large magnetoresistance
makes difficult a clear determination of Bc2(T), in case
it exists, at this stage and for the usual electrode con-
figuration. Nevertheless and within the obtained data it
appears that the Bc2(T) is significantly larger than the
one measured in the CuO2-based high-temperature su-
perconductors. The magnetization measurements shown
below support this conclusion. Taking into account the
two-dimensionality of the superconducting regions local-
ized at the interfaces, a high bulk critical field is in prin-
ciple expected, see Section VII.


8

FIG. 11. Magnetoresistance at low fields of a Brazilian natural graphite: (a) Difference between the resistance and its value at
zero field vs. applied field in two opposite directions at 325 K. The arrows indicate the sweep field direction. The red points
were measured at 5 K. (b) Similar as in (a) but at 300 K and increasing stepwise the maximum field after returning to zero
field. After reaching −10 mT the field direction is changed to the opposite direction starting with a maximum field of 5 mT.
(c) Very low field response of the sample starting in its virgin state at 300 K after ZFC from 390 K.

B.
Low magnetic field response: irreversibility and remanence

Taking into account the low-field sensitivity of ear-
lier transport measurements in annealed graphite pow-
der samples [11] and the hints for the existence of the
Josephson-effect in HOPG lamellae [28], in this work
we have studied carefully and with high resolution the
change of the electrical resistance with field, in the low
field region. Figure 11(a) shows the magnetoresistance
at 325 K of a bulk natural graphite sample from Brazil,
starting after ZFC from 390 K. The measured virgin
curve starting at zero field shows a rapid increase in the
resistance with field. At around 10 mT it shows a clear
decrease in the slope and continues increasing slowly with
field. Note that after applying a field ∼ 60 mT or higher,
the magnetoresistance shows a quadratic in field and re-
versible behavior, within experimental error, see Fig. 11.

We note that graphite flakes shows an anomalous field
hysteresis but at T < 25 K compatible with the exis-
tence of Josephson coupled superconducting regions [33].
Due to the resolution limits and the relatively large back-
ground, for the observation of the small anomalous field
hysteresis it is necessary to restrict the sample size by,
for example, introducing micro-constrictions [34].
The

irreversibility we find at much higher temperatures in the
studied samples and discussed in this work does not show
a field hysteresis but has a different character and it is
observed in large samples, although it can be also related
to granular superconductivity, as we explain below.
Figure 11(c) shows the change in resistance and its
irreversible behavior at fields below 0.5 mT at 300 K,
starting from the ZFC state. Figure 3(b) shows similar
data but increasing a small amount the maximum applied
field after each field cycle.
At a given resistance/field
value we changed the direction of the field to show that
the resistance does not return to its virgin state. It is
important to note that to return to the virgin state one
needs to heat the sample at T ≳ 350 K and cool it at
zero field. This remanence in the resistance after apply-
ing such small fields indicates the existence of trapped
magnetic flux.
Figure 12 shows the irreversibility in the resistance at
a temperature below the transition (300 K, Fig. 12(a))
and in the transition region (350 K, Fig. 12(b)), for a
bulk natural graphite sample similar to the one shown in
Fig. 6. The starting zero-field cooled state was reached


9

FIG. 12. (a) Resistance vs. applied field applied following the
arrows for the same natural graphite bulk sample (Brazil) as
shown in Fig. 6. The initial state at zero field was reached
after cooling the sample from 390 K at zero field to the respec-
tive temperature. (b) The same as in (a) but at 350 K, i.e. at
the middle of the transition in the resistance, see Fig. 6(b,c).

after cooling the sample from 390 K. Note the absence
of remanence at 350 K within experimental error. This
result is a further proof for the existence of a transition
at ∼ 350 K, as shown in Fig. 6.
To quantify the temperature dependence of the rema-
nence we used a three-points method that consists in: 1)
cooling the sample at zero field from 390 K to the pres-
elected temperature, 2) measuring the resistance at zero
field R0(0), 3) applying a certain magnetic field, 4) re-
turning to zero field and measure the resistance again.
The remanence is then defined as the difference between
these two resistances at zero field ∆R(0).
Figure 13
shows this difference vs.
temperature.
The transition
at T ∼ 350 K is clearly discernible in the remanence and
it shows a maximum at T ∼ 200 K, tending to zero at
the lowest temperature.

Figure 14 shows the remanence of a different bulk

FIG. 13.
Temperature dependence of the remanence of a
Brazilian natural graphite crystal. Each point was measured
after ZFC from 390 K. ∆R(0) is the difference between the
resistance at zero field after applying a field of 10 mT and
the resistance at zero field in the virgin state, prior to the ap-
plication of 10 mT. The red points (right y−axis) represent
the resistance normalized by the resistance at 380 K at zero
field, after subtraction of a linear in temperature background
(a straight line), similar to Fig. 6(c).

FIG. 14.
Remanence defined as ∆R(0) = R10(0) − R0(0),
where R10(0) is the resistance measured at zero field after
applying a field of 10 mT, and R0(0) means the resistance
at zero field in the virgin state after ZFC from 390 K. The
sample was a natural graphite bulk sample (Brazil) different
from the sample shown in Figs. 12 and 13.

natural graphite sample obtained using the three-points
method. The two curves shown in the figure were ob-
tained in the same way but after waiting for a couple
of days between the two measurements. Note that each
point was obtained starting with the sample in the virgin
state, as the results of Fig. 13. It means that before mag-
netizing the sample at a given temperature, it was heated
to 390 K and cooled down at the respective temperature
at zero field.


10

FIG. 15.
Remanence defined as ∆R(0) = RB(0) − R0(0),
where RB(0) is the resistance measured at zero field after
applying a field of B = 15 mT (◦) and 30 mT (red •). R0(0)
means the resistance at zero field in the virgin state after ZFC
from 390 K. The sample was a natural graphite bulk sample
(Sri Lanka).

Figure 15 shows the temperature dependence of the
remanence at two different applied fields for a bulk nat-
ural graphite sample from Sri Lanka. Basically the same
results are obtained for both relatively large fields, as
expected taking into account the behavior of the magne-
toresistance shown in Fig. 11.
Figure 16 shows a similar plot for a natural graphite
thin flake obtained from a bulk natural crystal from
Brazil. Qualitatively, the measured temperature depen-
dence of the remanence resembles that obtained for bulk
natural graphite samples. The insert in that figure shows
the temperature dependence of the resistance measured
increasing temperature at zero field.
Similar measurements were done for a thin (∼ 50 nm)
HOPG flake that has interfaces according to STEM stud-
ies, see [25, 35]. Figure 17 shows the remanence resistance
∆R(0) vs. temperature for the HOPG flake. Note that
the temperature dependence is similar to the other mea-
sured samples (see Figs. 14, 15 and 16) but it has a larger
scatter. This scatter is possibly due to the higher tran-
sition temperature, i.e. with an onset at T ≳390 K, and
a large transition width that prevent to reach always the
same flux-free virgin state before cooling to the selected
temperature.
The observed behavior for the temperature dependence
of the remanence is general for all samples we measured
but the details are sample dependent. It is interesting
to note that the irreversibility of the magnetization (dif-
ference between FC and ZFC curves) of graphite bulk
HOPG samples (with interfaces) shows local maxima at
≃ 305 K, ≃ 200 K and ∼ 100 . . . 130 K, which remain
independent of the applied field to 7 T,[27] indicating a
general behavior in the pinning of trapped flux in this

FIG. 16. Main panel: Remanence vs. temperature (similar
to Figs. 13, 14 and 15) for a natural graphite thin (thickness
≃ 200 nm) flake. The remanence was defined as ∆R(0) =
R15(0) − R0(0), where R15(0) is the resistance measured at
zero field after applying a field of 15 mT, and R0(0) means the
resistance in the virgin state after ZFC from 390 K, at zero
field. The inset shows the virgin resistance vs. temperature
at zero field measured by warming.

FIG. 17.
Remanence vs.
temperature for the HOPG thin
flake. The remanence was defined as ∆R(0) = R10(0)−R0(0),
where R10(0) is the resistance measured at zero field after
applying a field of 10 mT, and R0(0) means the resistance at
zero field and in the virgin state after ZFC from 390 K.

material.


11

FIG. 18. Temperature dependence of the difference between
FC and ZFC magnetic moment at two different applied fields
of a natural graphite bulk sample (Brazil).

VI.
MAGNETIZATION MEASUREMENTS

A.
Temperature dependence

If superconductivity is localized at the interfaces and
the field is applied normal to them, the large demagne-
tization factor would prevent a full flux expulsion (the
Meissner effect). However, partial flux expulsion is al-
ways possible to observe if vortex (or fluxon) pinning ex-
ists in the superconducting sample. In this case a positive
difference between the FC and ZFC magnetic moment is
expected below Tc and after applying the field at the low-
est temperature of the temperature loop cycle with the
sample in the ZFC state. Figure 6(c) shows the difference
in the magnetic moment of other natural graphite sam-
ple from Brazil, at an applied field of 50 mT. Lowering
temperature, this difference starts to increase just below
the transition temperature measured with the resistance,
right y-axis in Fig. 6(c).
Figure 18 shows the temperature dependence of the dif-
ference between FC and ZFC magnetic moment at two
different applied fields of the same natural graphite bulk
sample (Brazil).
Note the increase in the irreversibil-
ity values with field.
In spite of that, a clear shift of
the temperature onset, where mF C − mZF C starts to
be larger than zero, to lower temperatures by increasing
the applied field cannot be clearly recognized from the
measurements. Measurements done of this difference at
higher fields are shown in Fig. 19.
At such high temperatures one expects that the
strength and temperature dependence of the measured
irreversibility in the magnetization is mainly due the pin-
ning of the involved magnetic entities (vortices and/or
fluxons, see Sec. VII). The shift to low temperatures with
applied field of the onset in the magnetic moment differ-
ence would be given by the depinning or irreversibility
line, as in the oxides high-temperature superconductors.

FIG. 19. As in Fig. 18 but at higher applied fields of the same
natural graphite bulk sample (Brazil).

FIG. 20. Difference between FC and ZFC magnetic moment
vs.
temperature obtained for a HOPG bulk sample at an
applied field of 7T.

The apparently small, if at all, shift of the onset with
field in the measured field region would indicate there-
fore a surprisingly large pinning strength.

Figure 20 shows the difference between FC and ZFC
magnetic moment vs.
temperature at an applied field
of 7T of a bulk HOPG sample, similar to those shown in
Ref. [27]. The field was applied at 250 K with the sample
in the virgin state (cooled from 390 K at zero field). In
agreement with previous measurements[27], this differ-
ence indicates that the onset of the (possible supercon-
ducting) transition temperature should be above 390 K.
The turning point in these measurements was 390 K.


12

FIG. 21. (a) Normalized resistance vs. time at different con-
stant temperatures, after applying a field of 1 T from zero field
(virgin state) reached after ZFC from 390 K. The continuous
lines are fits to the function R(t)/R(0) = 1−m1 ln(1+(t/τ)).
The numbers at right indicate the resistance at t = 60 s at
the corresponding temperature. (b) The fit parameter m1 vs.
temperature (left y−axis) obtained from the curves in (a).
The line is only a guide to the eye. Right y−axis: The line is
the measured resistance transition after subtracting a linear
in temperature background, see Fig. 8(b).

B.
Time dependence

Usually, due to the finite pinning strength of the mag-
netic entities, one expects to measure a time relaxation
in certain properties like the magnetization or magne-
toresistance. The time dependence of the magnetization
of water treated graphite powder[26] at zero field, af-
ter applying a finite field, has been shown to follow the
well known logarithmic time dependence m(t)/m(0) =
1−m1 ln(1+(t/τ)) with coefficient m1 ∼ kBT/Ua, where
Ua is an apparent flux creep activation energy and τ a
time constant that determines a transient stage before
the beginning of the logarithmic relaxation[36]. Due to
the small mass of the natural graphite samples, magneti-
zation measurements are not enough sensitive to observe
the time dependence due to a possible flux creep. How-
ever, our resistance measurements have enough resolu-
tion to measure this time relaxation. Figure 21(a) shows

the time relaxation for the same bulk natural graphite
sample (Sri Lanka) shown in Fig. 8. The curves were ob-
tained applying (at constant temperature, waiting half
an hour for temperature stabilization) a field of 1 T from
the ZFC state of the sample (starting always at 390 K).
The zero time was defined 10 s after the superconduct-
ing solenoid was set in permanent modus.
The resis-
tance follows a similar logarithmic time dependence as
the magnetization[26]. Note that after applying the field
the magnetoresistance decreases with time because of the
entrance of flux inside the sample, which implies a de-
crease of the effective field seeing by the sample.
From the fits to the time dependence shown in
Fig. 21(a) we obtain the parameter m1(T). Figure 21(b)
shows the temperature dependence of this parameter. It
shows a clear increase decreasing temperature in the re-
gion of the transition (y−axis in Fig. 21(b)). Note that
one expects that m1 ∝ T. This dependence appears to
be followed below 200 K, see Fig. 21(b).

VII.
DISCUSSION

The main reasons to identify the small step in the re-
sistance with temperature, see Figs. 6 and 8, as a su-
perconducting transition are: (1) Step-like decrease in
the resistance decreasing temperature (see Fig. 6(b)), (2)
relatively large positive magnetoresistance at very small
applied fields and temperatures (see Fig. 11), (3) field ir-
reversibility with finite remanence at small applied fields
(see Figs. 11, 13-17), (4) time dependence of the magne-
toresistance after changing the apply magnetic field, com-
patible with flux creep (see Fig. 21), and (5) partial mag-
netic flux expulsion below the transition (see Figs. 6(c),
18, 19 and 20).
In general, we can imagine two possibilities that a ma-
terial shows a magnetic field irreversibility and finite re-
manence, namely: a) due to vortex pinning or flux trap-
ping, requiring the existence of superconducting currents,
or b) magnetic order, due to the pinning of magnetic do-
mains or magnetic field anisotropy, that appear below the
corresponding Curie temperature and without applying
any external field. We do not expect to have magnetic
order due to impurities or defects in all graphite sam-
ples we measured because the measured concentration of
magnetic impurities is far too small (see Sec. II). More-
over, the observed behavior does not seem to be compat-
ible to phenomena related to magnetic order in graphite,
namely: - we observe a positive instead of a negative
magnetoresistance measured for magnetic graphite[37], -
relatively large response of the resistance in the virgin
state of the sample in a field range below a few mT and
at room temperature, - the virgin state resistance is not
reached anymore after applying a finite magnetic field,
even changing the field direction, - the field irreversibility
and the remanence tend to vanish at low temperatures.
Magnetic field-induced structural changes in the graphite
samples at such small field strengths can be disregarded.


13

Note also that the transition does not change basically
after applying a magnetic field below 1 T, see Fig.6(b).
The overall behavior shown in Fig. 11 is com-
patible
with
trapped
magnetic
flux
in
granular
superconductors[38] and in Josephson junctions[39]. The
trapped flux can occur within the superconducting re-
gions, i.e. through the existence of pinned intragranular
vortices, but also within superconducting loops enclos-
ing regions where the Josephson junctions allow super-
conducting currents (intergranular vortices). Although
an explanation to all details of the temperature depen-
dence of the remanence shown for example in Figs. 13, 14,
15, 16 and 17, requires knowledge of the pinned entities,
the vanishing of ∆R(0) to lower temperatures appears
at odds with the expected increase in Josephson cou-
pling, Josephson critical current as well as in the overall
increase of pinning strength of intragranular vortices de-
creasing temperature. Because this behavior measured
by the magnetization[27] and resistance appears to be
rather general, we provide below a possible general ex-
planation.
Assuming that the superconductivity has a 2D char-
acter and it is localized at the interfaces, one should
first clarify to what extent this would be at all possi-
ble. Following early theoretical work on this issue (see
chap. 7 in Ref. [40]) a superconducting layer of circu-
lar size R (in our case the size of the 2D interfaces in
graphite R ≲ 10 µm) can exhibit superconductivity if
R ≪ λ⊥, the effective screening length for transverse
magnetic field. Taking into account that in 2D the ef-
fective London penetration depth is given by the Pearl
result[41] λ⊥ = 2λ2
L/d, where λL is the London penetra-
tion depth of the bulk superconductor (λL ∼ 1 µm) and
d ∼ 1 nm the thickness of the superconducting layer, we
estimate λ⊥ ≳ 1 mm ≫ R. The existence of Pearl vor-
tices with such a giant effective penetration depth would
imply a priori a very weak pinning. We speculate there-
fore that the trapped flux is mainly due to fluxons, inter-
granular vortices, and not intragranular ones. Upon the
characteristics of the interfaces and decreasing temper-
ature, the trapped flux can increase due to an increase
in the Josephson coupling between the superconducting
domains. On the other hand, decreasing temperature the
size of the superconducting domains may increase, reduc-
ing the effective superconducting loop areas for fluxons.
This can be the reason for the vanishing of trapped flux
at T < 200 K (see Fig. 13), in the same temperature
range where the giant MIT is observed, see Fig. 6(a).
Our findings would imply then that the MIT has a re-
lation to superconductivity, as has been speculated in
the past[14]. It is interesting to note that in spite of a
nearly 100 times larger magnetoresistance at 5 K than at
∼ 300 K (virgin state), see Fig.11(a), it shows basically
the same field dependence in the low field range. The
observed time relaxation of the magnetoresistance after

applying a magnetic field and its change with tempera-
ture (see Fig. 21) are also compatible with the existence
of vortices/fluxons.
The data presented in this study took more than one
and a half years of systematic measurements in several
samples. During the measurements and after tempera-
ture cycling to 390 K some of the samples several times,
we recognized that the strength of the remanence de-
creased systematically, although the transition temper-
ature did not change within experimental error. Note,
for example, that the maximum remanence shown in
Fig. 13, measured after several temperature cycles, is
< 7 µΩ, whereas the same sample at the beginning of
the measurements showed already at 300 K a remanence
of ∼ 40 µΩ, see Fig. 11. This relatively low temperature
annealing effect has some similarity to the irreversible
behavior observed in the magnetization of a HOPG sam-
ple with interfaces after heating it above 400 K[27]. Be-
cause the remanence depends on the pinning strength
and this on the characteristics of the superconducting
regions (size, defects, etc.), it appears plausible that this
low-temperature annealing influences the remanence and
should be taken into account in future experiments. Note
that the domains exhibiting rhombohedral stacking in
thin graphite flakes are stable to 800 ◦C [42] and to
1000 ◦C in bulk graphite[43, 44]. Therefore, annealing
effects appear to be more related to the annealing of cer-
tain defects or even hydrogen diffusion than structural
changes at the interfaces.
The existence of a superconducting transition in
graphite samples at such high temperatures clarifies to
some extent the origin of the superconducting-like be-
havior of different graphite samples reported in the last
40 years[14]. Those reports were not taken seriously by
most of the scientific community. Future studies should
clarify the origin of the superconductivity and the char-
acteristics of the trapped flux or pinned entities using
methods that allow, for example, its local visualization
at the sample surface.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

P.D.E. gratefully acknowledges fruitful discussions
with:
J. G. Rodrigo, also for kindly sharing his un-
published low-temperature STM results on graphite; T.
Heikkil¨a and G. Volovik for explaining their thoughts
about high-temperature superconductivity at the inter-
faces of graphite and the flat-band effects. A.C. acknowl-
edges the Nacional de Grafite Ltda., Itapecerica - MG in
Brazil for supplying the graphite samples. C.E.P. grate-
fully acknowledges the support provided by The Brazilian
National Council for the Improvement of Higher Educa-
tion (CAPES).


14

[1] A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Kseno-
fontov, and S. I. Shylin, Nature 525, 73 (2015).
[2] A. Bianconi and T. Jarlborg, European Phys. Lett. 112,
37001 (2015).
[3] D. Yudin, D. Hirschmeier, H. Hafermann, O. Eriksson,
A. I. Lichtenstein,
and M. I. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 112, 070403 (2014).
[4] V. A. Khodel and V. R. Shaginyan, JETP Letters 51,
553 (1990).
[5] G. Volovik, JETP Lett. 59, 830 (1994).
[6] G. E. Volovik, J Supercond Nov Magn 26, 2887 (2013).
[7] S. Peotta and P. T¨orm¨a, Nature Communications 6, 8944
(2015).
[8] N. B. Kopnin, M. Ij¨as, A. Harju,
and T. T. Heikkil¨a,
Phys. Rev. B 87, 140503 (2013).
[9] W. A. Mu˜noz, L. Covaci, and F. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B
87, 134509 (2013).
[10] D. Pierucci,
H. Sediri,
M. Hajlaoui,
J.-C. Girard,
T. Brumme, M. Calandra, E. Velez-Fort, G. Patri-
arche, M. G. Silly, G. Ferro, V. Souliere, M. Marangolo,
F. Sirotti, F. Mauri,
and A. Ouerghi, ACS Nano 9,
54325439 (2015).
[11] K. Antonowicz, Nature 247, 358 (1974).
[12] K. Antonowicz, phys. stat. sol. (a) 28, 497 (1975).
[13] Y.
Kopelevich,
P.
Esquinazi,
J.
Torres,
and
S. Moehlecke, J. Low Temp. Phys. 119, 691 (2000).
[14] P. Esquinazi, Papers in Physics 5, 050007 (2013).
[15] Y. Kawashima, AIP Advances 3, 052132 (2013).
[16] J. Chapman, Y. Su, C. A. Howard, D. Kundys, A. Grig-
orenko, F. Guinea, A. K. Geim, I. V. Grigorieva,
and
R. R. Nair, arXiv:1508.06931.
[17] B. M. Ludbrook, G. Levy, P. Nigge, M. Zonno, M. Schnei-
der, D. J. Dvorak, C. N. Veenstra, S. Zhdanovich,
D. Wong, P. Dosanjh, C. Straer, A. Stohr, S. Forti, C. R.
Ast, U. Starke,
and A. Damascelli, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 112, 11795 (2015).
[18] S. Ichinokura, K. Sugawara, A. Takayama, T. Takahashi,
and S. Hasegawa, ACS Nano 10, 2761 (2016).
[19] P. San-Jose and E. Prada, Phys. Rev. B 88, 121408(R)
(2013).
[20] P. Esquinazi, T. T. Heikkil¨a, Y. V. Lysogoskiy, D. A.
Tayurskii,
and G. E. Volovik, JETP Letters 100, 336
(2014), arXiv:1407.1060.
[21] D. Spemann, P. Esquinazi, A. Setzer, and W. B¨ohlmann,
AIP Advances 4, 107142 (2014).
[22] S. Hattendorf, A. Georgi, M. Liebmann,
and M. Mor-
genstern, Surface Science 610, 53 (2013).

[23] Q. Lin, T. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Song, L. He, Z. Hu, Q. Guo,
and H. Ye, Carbon 50, 2369 (2012).
[24] B. T. Kelly, Physics of Graphite (London: Applied Sci-
ence Publishers, 1981).
[25] N. Garc´ıa,
P. Esquinazi,
J. Barzola-Quiquia,
and
S. Dusari, New Journal of Physics 14, 053015 (2012).
[26] T. Scheike, W. B¨ohlmann, P. Esquinazi, J. Barzola-
Quiquia, A. Ballestar,
and A. Setzer, Adv. Mater. 24,
5826 (2012).
[27] T. Scheike, P. Esquinazi, A. Setzer, and W. B¨ohlmann,
Carbon 59, 140 (2013).
[28] A. Ballestar, J. Barzola-Quiquia, T. Scheike, and P. Es-
quinazi, New J. Phys. 15, 023024 (2013).
[29] H. Kempa, H. C. Semmelhack, P. Esquinazi,
and
Y. Kopelevich, Solid State Commun. 125, 1 (2003).
[30] M. Zoraghi, J. Barzola-Quiquia, M. Stiller, A. Setzer,
P. Esquinazi, G. H. Kloess, T. Muenster, T. L¨ohmann,
and I. Estrela-Lopis, arXiv:1603.06365.
[31] H. J. Gardner, A. Kumar, L. Yu, P. Xiong, M. P. Waru-
sawithana, L. Wang, O. Vafek, and D. G. Schlom, Nature
Phys. 7, 895 (2011).
[32] Z. Wang, W. Shi, R. Lortz, and P. Sheng, Nanoscale 4,
21 (2012).
[33] P. Esquinazi, N. Garc´ıa, J. Barzola-Quiquia, P. R¨odiger,
K. Schindler, J.-L. Yao, and M. Ziese, Phys. Rev. B 78,
134516 (2008).
[34] S. Dusari, J. Barzola-Quiquia,
and P. Esquinazi, J Su-
percond Nov Magn 24, 401 (2011).
[35] J. Barzola-Quiquia, J.-L. Yao, P. R¨odiger, K. Schindler,
and P. Esquinazi, phys. stat. sol. (a) 205, 2924 (2008).
[36] A. Gurevich and H. K¨upfer, Phys. Rev. B 48, 6477
(1993).
[37] P.
Esquinazi,
J.
Barzola-Quiquia,
D.
Spemann,
M.
Rothermel,
H.
Ohldag,
N.
Garc´ıa,
A.
Setzer,
and T. Butz, J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 322, 1156 (2010).
[38] L. Ji, M. S. Rzchowski, N. Anand,
and M. Thinkam,
Phys. Rev. B 47, 470 (1993).
[39] N. Watanabe, A. Nakayama, and S. Abe, J. Appl. Phys.
101, 09G105 (2007).
[40] E. ˘Sim´anek, Inhomogeneous Superconductors, Interna-
tional Series of monographs on Physics (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1994).
[41] J. Pearl, Applied Physics Letters 5, 65 (1964).
[42] C. H. Lui, Z. Li, Z. Chen, P. V. Klimov, L. E. Brus, and
T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett. 11, 164 (2011).
[43] E. Matuya, Nature 178, 1459 (1956).
[44] E. J. Freise and A. Kelly, Philos. Mag. A 8, 1519 (1963).


