Inducing Superconducting Correlation in Quantum Hall Edge States 

Gil-Ho Lee1, Ko-Fan Huang1, Dmitri K. Efetov2, Di S. Wei1, Sean Hart1, Takashi Taniguchi3, Kenji Watanabe3, Amir 
Yacoby1, and Philip Kim1,* 

1Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA 
2Department of Electrical Engineering, M.I.T., Cambridge, MA 02138 
3National Institute for Materials Science, Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan 
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.K. (email: pkim@physics.harvard.edu).

 
The quantum Hall (QH) effect supports a set of 
chiral edge states at the boundary of a 2-dimensional 
electron gas (2DEG) system. A superconductor (SC) 
contacting these states can induce correlations of the 
quasi-particles in the dissipationless 1D chiral QH edge 
states. If the superconducting electrode is narrower than 
the superconducting coherence length, the incoming 
electron is correlated to the outgoing hole along the chiral 
edge state by the Andreev process1-3 across the SC 
electrode. In order to realise this crossed Andreev 
conversion (CAC)4-7, it is necessary to fabricate highly 
transparent 
and 
nanometer-scale 
superconducting 
junctions to the QH system. Here we report the 
observation of CAC in a graphene QH system contacted 
with a nanostructured NbN superconducting electrode. 
The chemical potential of the edge states across the SC 
electrode exhibits a sign reversal, providing direct 
evidence of CAC. This hybrid SC/QH system is a novel 
route to create isolated non-Abelian anyonic zero modes, 
in resonance with the chiral QH edge7-12. 

Inducing superconducting correlations via the 
proximity effect into a 2DEG in the QH regime has been a 
long standing challenge and has attracted renewed attentions 
due to its promise for realising non-Abealian zero modes13-15. 
Unlike conventional conductors, the 2DEG can exhibit an 
insulating incompressible bulk electronic state under 
perpendicular quantizing magnetic fields. In this QH regime, 
the conduction of electric charge occurs only along the edges 
via 1D chiral edge states, which the SC can make contacts to. 
In order to realise the hybrid system of QH and SC, the upper 
critical field of the SC needs to be high enough such that 
Cooper pairs in the SC are correlated mostly to the quasi-
particles in well-developed 1D QH edge states. The 
experimental realisation of such hybrid systems often 
encounters challenges in semiconductor 2DEGs due to the 
formation of large Schottky barriers at the SC/semiconductor 
interfaces16. Graphene is a compelling candidate for the 
SC/QH platform, since the zero-band gap of graphene 
ensures Ohmic contacts for most metals, including SCs with 
high upper critical fields. Highly transparent SC/graphene 
interfaces 
have 
been 
demonstrated 
with 
strong 
superconducting proximity interactions and Josephson 
couplings15,17-23. In addition, high mobility hBN-encapsulated 
graphene channels exhibit integer and fractional QH 

effects24,25 at much lower magnetic field than the upper 
critical field of a few select SCs. 

 
The microscopic picture of charge flow across the 
SC/QH system can be described by extending the Andreev 
process1-3 between a SC and a normal conductor. Figure 1a 
depicts local Andreev reflection at zero magnetic field. An 
electron with energy (eV), which is smaller than the 
superconducting gap (), can enter the grounded SC 
electrode to form a Cooper pair, while retro-reflecting a hole 
back to the source of the electron. In the presence of a 
magnetic field, however, the chiral nature of the QH edge 
state forces the converted hole to keep flowing with the same 
chirality as the incoming electron. Note that the hole has the 
same chirality as the electron, because the sign of its charge 
and mass are both opposite to those of the electron. There can 
be two different regimes in this Andreev process, depending 
on the width of the SC electrode (W) compared to the 
superconducting coherence length (s). When W >> s, the 
electron and hole will propagate along the edge of the SC 
electrode forming an Andreev edge state (AES)1-3 (Fig. 1b). 
In a quasi-classical picture, the AES is an alternating skipping 
orbit of electrons and holes. Unless the probability of each 
Andreev reflection (PAR) is very close to zero or unity, the 
AES quickly becomes an equal mixture of electrons and holes 
after a few bounces (Supplementary Fig. 1). The resulting 
mixed AES along the ground SC (i.e. at zero chemical 
potential) carries the averaged chemical potential equal to 
zero. However, when W << s the converted hole can tunnel 
through the SC electrode and continue to flow on the other 
side of the QH edge state, a process termed as crossed 
Andreev conversion (CAC)7 (Fig. 1c). Note that in the CAC 
process, the converted hole in the downstream carries 
negative (electron) chemical potential. Therefore, unlike the 
case of the AES, the spatial separation of electrons and holes 
in CAC facilitates their independent detection by measuring 
the chemical potential of upstream and downstream edge 
states with respect to the ground SC electrode, which we 
demonstrate in this paper. Interestingly, in the asymptotic 
limit of W << s and a long finger-like SC electrode whose 
length L >> hvF/, the CAC picture corresponds to creating 
two non-Abelian anyons in resonance with the QH edge 
state7-12. Here, h is a Planck constant and vF is the Fermi 
velocity of QH edge states. The counter propagating QH edge 
modes along the both sides of the finger electrode are coupled 


by the SC, creating two zero modes: one in resonance with 
the QH edge and the other at the end of the SC finger (inset 
of Fig. 1c). In order to measure the chemical potential of QH 
edge states across the SC electrode, we fabricate a multi-
terminal graphene device with a SC drain electrode as shown 
in Fig. 1d. To obtain a high-quality graphene channel, we 
encapsulated mechanically exfoliated graphene samples with 
two h-BN crystals using a dry-transfer technique26. NbN was 
chosen for the SC drain contact, since its high upper critical 
field (Bc2 ~ 25 T) and high critical temperature (Tc = 12 K) 
enable us to experimentally access a wide range of magnetic 

fields where superconductivity and the QH effect in graphene 
coexist. 

The contact transparency of the SC/graphene 
interface can be characterized by measuring the differential 
conductance enhancement which directly represents local 
Andreev process (LAP) efficiency. Fig. 1e shows the 
differential conductance ( = dIad/dVec) of the graphene/NbN 
interface normalised by the value obtained at the temperature 
above Tc. Here Iad is the current biased from a to d, and Vec is 
the voltage drop between electrodes e and c (marked in Fig. 
1d). We apply a large backgate voltage of Vbg = 60 V to put 

FIG. 1. Magnetic field dependence of Andreev reflection. a-c, Schematic diagram of an Andreev pairs of electrons and holes without an
external magnetic field (a), and in the quantum Hall (QH) regime with a wide superconductor (b) or a narrow superconductor (c). Inset of c,
counter-propagating QH edge states are coupled via the superconducting gap (), resulting in non-Abelian anyonic zero modes at the ends of
the NbN electrode (red ellipse). d, False colour scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the device with measurement configurations.
Ti/Au normal electrodes (yellow) and a NbN superconducting electrode (green) contacts the graphene Hall bar (blue). Inset, one-dimensional
NbN contact to the graphene edge is highlighted with a dotted red line. Note that due to the finite slope of the etching profile of h-BN, the
NbN contact is positioned slightly more inwards than the boundary shown in SEM image (see the schematic of cross-section in the lower
inset of Fig. 4). A black dotted rectangle guides the NbN segment contributing to the downstream resistance. e, The differential conductance
of the graphene/NbN interface at Vbg = 60 V, under various magnetic fields. The data taken at T = 1.8 K is normalised by the data taken at T
= 13 K when the NbN loses superconductivity. Experimental data (symbols) are fitted to the modified BTK theory (solid lines) with a fixed
barrier parameter Z = 0.18. f, The Andreev reflection probability (PAR) at zero bias was calculated from the fitting parameters (inset) obtained
by fittings in e. g, The filling fraction () dependence of the downstream edge resistance (RD) at different temperatures with B = 14 T. 


the graphene channel in high filling fractions, away from the 
well-developed QH regime even at the highest field of B = 14 
T. In this weak field limit, the magnetic field dependent  is 
determined only by the LAP, not by the modulating density 
of state (DOS) of the graphene (see Supplementary Fig. 2 for 
the case when  is mostly determined by the DOS of 
graphene in the strong field limit). Thus,  serves as a useful 
probe for characterizing the magnetic field dependence on 
LAP. At zero magnetic field, we observe that the normalised 
exhibits a pronounced zero-bias enhancement up to 45%, 
which shows that the SC/graphene junction is reasonably 
transparent. As B increases, the height of the zero-bias 
conductance peak reduces, reflecting a reduction of the 
Andreev reflection probability (PAR). This reduction can be 
understood, considering the excitation of low-energy quasi-
particles inside of the SC gap by the magnetic vortices 
induced by the external magnetic field. The presence of these 
sub-gap states allows incident electrons to enter the 
superconductor without the Andreev process. The Blonder-

Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) theory that includes a magnetic 
field27 fits the data with fitting parameters of  and energy 
broadening (), as plotted in the inset of Fig. 1f. Here, ħ/ 
represents the finite quasi-particle lifetime with ħ = h/2. 
Encouragingly, PAR estimated from the fitting parameters is 
larger than 0.1 for all experimental values of B < 14 T. 

Employing a highly transparent SC/graphene 
contact, the CAC process can be now investigated in 
dissipationless chiral edge modes in the QH regime of 
graphene. For this experiment we performed non-local 
measurements, monitoring the voltage drop between 
electrodes e and c (downstream chemical potential, VD) with 
current I biased between electrodes a and d. There is no 
apparent current flow between e and c except along a small 
segment of the NbN electrode (marked with a black box in 
the inset of Fig. 1d), which does not contribute to the voltage 
drop when it is superconducting. In this non-local 
configuration, the measurement of VD is free from any local 
signal that comes from the modulation of the DOS of 
graphene in the QH regime, and is only sensitive to the 
Andreev converted holes. Figure 1g shows the downstream 
resistance (RD=VD/I) as a function of the filling fraction  
tuned by Vbg. The most striking feature in this graph is a 
negative downstream chemical potential at low T for well-
developed QH states of  = 1, 2, and 6. In the Landauer-
Büttiker picture this negative chemical potential corresponds 
to a contact transmission coefficient of the drain electrode 
greater than unity, that is hard to be interpreted without 
considering the CAC due to the SC electrode (see 
Supplementary Fig. 3 for the comparison with the similar 
device without a SC electrode). Non-local transport with 
negative resistance clearly indicates the presence of crossed 
Andreev converted holes, namely the coupling between two 
QH edge states via the narrow SC electrode. Negative RD is 
consistently reproduced in five other devices (see 
Supplementary Fig. 4). However, when the current flows 
through the bulk ( ≠ 1,2 or ,6) RD recovers its positive value. 

To further quantitatively analyse the CAC, we now 
discuss the temperature dependent negative downstream 
chemical potential for the  = 2 QH state. Its large Landau 
energy gap (~ 100 meV at B = 8 T) allows us to study the 
system below and above Tc without degrading the QH edge 
state. As shown in Fig. 2a, RD for the  = 2 QH state starts to 
decrease as T decreases only for the range below the onset 
critical temperature (Tc,on = 8.7 K). Note that in this 
temperature range where the superconductivity is not yet 
fully developed, RD still contains the positive contribution 
(RNbN) which stems from a finite resistance of the NbN 
electrode segment due to the device geometry. The 
contribution from RNbN vanishes in the lower temperature 
range T < Tc = 5.2 K. We note that the positive value of RD(T 
= Tc) = 180  corresponds to the additional series resistance 
of the SC/graphene channel due to the imperfect contact. By 
comparing RD at T >Tc,on and T = Tc, we determine RNbN ~ 250 

FIG. 2. Temperature dependence of quantum Hall edge
chemical potentials at B = 8 T. a, The downstream resistance (RD) 
at  = 2 decreases with temperature and eventually becomes
negative. b, The upstream resistance (RU) also changes in a similar
manner to RD. c, The quantized Hall resistance (Rxy = RU – RD= 
h/2e2, black symbols) and vanishing longitudinal resistance (Rxx, 
blue symbols) confirm that the quantum Hall state is stable up to 11
K. d, The temperature dependence of the NbN electrode resistance
(RNbN line) exhibits an onset critical temperature Tc,on = 8.7 K and a 
critical temperature Tc = 5.2 K below which superconductivity in the
SC electrode is fully attained. 


, nearly insensitive to temperature T >Tc,on. This estimation 
is also in good agreement with the value estimated from the 
NbN resistance measured from a segment fabricated as a part 
of the SC electrode in Fig. 2d. While the negative value of RD 
is clearly visible without any further analysis, our quantitative 
analysis of the finite positive contribution indicates that the 
full contribution from CAC process is considerably larger 
than the bare value of RD. We define the net contribution of 
CAC process by RD = RD(T = 0.3 K) - RD(T = Tc), which is 
represented by the shaded area in Fig. 2a. At the lowest 
temperature of our experiment 0.3 K, RD = -230 , about 4 % 
of the signal expected for perfectly efficient CAC process 
(RD,max = -h/4e2), where e is an electron charge. It is also 
interesting to note that not only the downstream but also the 
upstream chemical potential (VU) changes as the drain 
electrode becomes superconducting in our constant current-
bias scheme. Fig. 2b shows the upstream resistance (RU = VU/I) 
as a function of temperature. RU(T) behaves similarly to RD(T) 

except for the constant offset independent of the temperature. 
The difference between RU and RD is directly related to the 
Hall resistance. In our current-biasing scheme, the total 
conductance ( = I/VU) enhancement by Andreev conversion 
processes reduces VU to keep I constant. Therefore, VU 
decreases as much as VD does, and the Hall resistance (Rxy = 
RU – RD) stays precisely at h/2e2 although RU and RD are 
changed by the CAC (Fig. 2c).  

In principle, the observed negative non-local signal 
in RD can possibly be also attributed to other effects, such as 
ballistic electron transport26 or viscous electron backflow28. 
To rule out these non-SC related scenarios, we further 
examined the differential resistance (dVD/dI) as a function of 
the measured bias voltage VU (Fig. 3). When the incident 
electron energy (eVU) exceeds the SC gap (), electrons can 
enter the quasi-particle state above the SC gap and the 
Andreev process probability is rapidly suppressed. As shown 
in Fig. 3, dVD/dI sharply turns from a negative value (-50 ) 
to a positive value (180 ) as VU exceeds the crossover 
voltage ~2 mV. This crossover voltage agrees well with /e 
estimated from the independent measurement in the inset of 
Fig. 1f. We note that the amount by which dVD/dI sharply 
increases across the crossover voltage agrees with the value 
of RD, independently determined in Fig. 2a. Above this 
crossover voltage, a broad background develops in dVD/dI. 
As we further increase VU above 5 mV, dVD/dI approaches 

FIG. 3. Bias dependence of the negative response. a, The 
differential downstream resistance (dVD/dI) as a function of the
incident electron voltage (upstream voltage, VU), at different
temperature values. dVD/dI becomes positive when |eVU| > , with 
the resistance change of RD = -230 from the zero bias value. b, 
A colour-coded plot of dVD/dI shows the temperature dependence
of , which follows the temperature dependence of the BCS theory
(dotted line). 

FIG. 4. Superconducting electrode width (W) dependence on 
negative response. The downstream resistance change (RD) 
exponentially decreases as W increases, due to the suppression of 
the CAC in a wide SC electrode. The data is fitted to the exponential 
function of RD = RD,0exp[-W/s], with the superconducting 
coherence length (s) of NbN and the zero-width-limit value (RD,0) 
as fitting parameters. Upper inset, False-coloured scanning electron 
microscope images of the devices of W = 98, 111, 146, 188, 200, 600 
nm, from the left to the right, respectively. Lower inset, A detailed 
schematic of the cross-section along the dotted red line in upper 
inset. Owing to the finite slope of the etching profile of the top h-
BN, the effective width (W) between two graphene/NbN contacts is 
smaller than the apparent width of the superconducting electrode 
measured by the scanning electron microscope on the order of top h-
BN thickness. 


the value of RD at T > Tc,on where the superconductivity of the 
NbN electrode completely vanishes. Indeed, the colour-coded 
plot of dVD/dI in Fig. 3b exhibits a BCS-type temperature 
dependence on  indicating that RD is closely related to the 
superconductivity of the drain electrodes. 

The CAC process with different widths W allows us 
to study its tunnelling nature and to estimate the SC 
coherence length s. During the Andreev process, a pair of 
electrons propagates through the superconductor as an 
evanescent mode, eventually condensing into a Cooper pair 
within the length scale of s (lower inset of Fig. 4). For a SC 
electrode with W ≲ s, the converted hole has a finite 
probability of tunnelling through the SC and continuing on to 
the other side of the QH edge state. Since the evanescent pair 
wave function decays exponentially, the CAC process is 
suppressed as W increases. To quantify this exponential 
suppression of the CAC process, we study the RD found in 
devices with different W, in the range of 50 to 600 nm. Figure 
4 shows RD versus W, obtained from seven different 
devices. All devices with W ≲ 300 nm exhibit a finite 
negative non-local signal, which rapidly decreases as W 
increases. We fit data to RD(W) =RD,0 exp[-W/s], where 
RD,0 and s are the two fitting parameters corresponding to 
the maximal CAC efficiency in a zero-width limit and the SC 
coherence length, respectively. From fitting to the data, we 
obtain s = 52 ± 2 nm, which approximately agrees with the 
SC coherence length of NbN, BCS~ ħvF/100 nm. We 
note that RD,0 = -600 ± 27  is still well below the ideal 
value of RD,max = -h/4e2, presumably due to the presence of 
the magnetic field induced quasi-particle excitations in the 
SC. The low RD,0 can be related to the degraded Andreev 
reflection efficiency PAR. From Fig. 1f, we obtained PAR ~ 0.1 
at B = 8 T. Considering the maximum efficiency is bounded 
by RD,max, we take the product of PAR to RD,max, resulting in 
~ -640  which is close to RD,0. Since the magnetic field 
necessary for the QH effect also degrades the CAC, a careful 
optimization is needed to maximize the CAC process of QH 
edge states within the constraint. 

Although we mostly focused on the most stable  = 
2 QH state in this study, a negative downstream chemical 
potential is also clearly observed in  = 1 QH state. The spin-
polarized (or spinless)  = 1 QH state is of particular interest 
as a possible host of Majorana zero modes. It is intriguing to 
note that the spin-polarized  = 1 QH state demonstrates the 
CAC process with a spin singlet s-wave SC, showing a 
substantially large negative downstream chemical potential. 
We understand this CAC process to be enabled by the large 
spin-orbit coupling inherited from the NbN superconducting 
electrode29, where spin is no longer a good quantum number. 
The general idea and methodology presented in this work can 
be readily extended to  = 1 for hosting Majorana zero modes 
or to fractional QH states for parafermionic zero modes, 

opening a new route towards a universal topological quantum 
computation. 
 

Methods The superconducting film is optimized for high 
transparent contact to the graphene channel. After plasma 
etching of the h-BN encapsulated graphene, 5-nm-thick Ti is 
electron-beam evaporated at a pressure lower than 1×10-8 
Torr, followed by sputtering 5-nm-thick Nb and 50-nm-thick 
NbN superconducting films without breaking vacuum. For 
NbN film, we employ reactive sputtering in an Ar/N2 
environment. A thin layer of Nb film is deposited before the 
NbN film formation to protect the initial Ti layer from the 
reactive N radicals during the NbN film growth. The width of 
the SC is limited by the fabrication process (W > 50 nm). The 
length of the SC electrode (L ~ 1 m) was chosen to ensure 
the aforementioned asymptotic limit to create the zero-energy 
resonance mode at the end of SC electrode. All the other 
electrodes for source and voltage probes are made of Ti/Au 
normal metal. We fabricate the contacts by an in-situ etching 
scheme21,22,30 to improve the contact transparency. It is also 
important to note that there is no graphene left underneath the 
SC electrode due to the in-situ etching, leaving a narrow 
trench of graphene whose edge makes electrical contact to the 
SC. 

 

Acknowledgments We thank S.-C. Zhang, B. Halperin and 
J. Alicea for fruitful discussions. The major experimental 
work, including sample preparation and measurement are 
supported by DOE (DE-SC0012260). G.-H. L acknowledges 
support from the Nano Material Technology Development 
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea 
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, 
ICT and Future Planning (2012M3A7B4049966). P.K. 
acknowledges partial support from the Gordon and Betty 
Moore Foundation's EPiQS Initiative through Grant 
GBMF4543 and ARO (W911NF-14-1-0638). K.H. is 
supported by NSF (EFRI 2-DARE 1542807). A.Y. 
acknowledges support from the U.S. DOE Office of Basic 
Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and 
Engineering 
under 
award 
de-sc0001819. 
D.S.W. 
acknowledges the support from the National Science 
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 
DGE1144152. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the 
Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan 
and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP26248061, 
JP15K21722, and JP25106006. A portion of this work was 
performed at the Center for Nanoscale Systems at Harvard, 
supported in part by an NSF NNIN award ECS-00335765.  
 
Author contribution G.-H.L. and P.K. conceived the idea 
and designed the project. P.K. supervised the project. G.-H.L., 
K.-F.H., and S.H. fabricated the devices. T.T. and K.W. 
provided single crystal of h-BN. G.-H.L. and D.S.W. 
performed the measurements. G.-H.L. and P.K. analysed the 


data and wrote the manuscript. G.-H.L., K.-F.H., D.K.E., 
D.S.W., S.H., A.Y. and P.K. contributed to the discussion. 
 

References 
1 Hoppe, H., Zülicke, U. & Schön, G. Andreev Reflection 
in Strong Magnetic Fields. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1804-
1807, (2000). 
2 Chtchelkatchev, N. M. & Burmistrov, I. S. Conductance 
oscillations with magnetic field of a two-dimensional 
electron gas-superconductor junction. Phys. Rev. B 75, 
214510, (2007). 
3 Khaymovich, I. M., Chtchelkatchev, N. M., 
Shereshevskii, I. A. & Mel'nikov, A. S. Andreev 
transport in two-dimensional normal-superconducting 
systems in strong magnetic fields. EPL 91, 17005, 
(2010). 
4 Beckmann, D., Weber, H. B. & v. Löhneysen, H. 
Evidence for Crossed Andreev Reflection in 
Superconductor-Ferromagnet Hybrid Structures. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 93, 197003, (2004). 
5 Russo, S., Kroug, M., Klapwijk, T. M. & Morpurgo, A. 
F. Experimental Observation of Bias-Dependent 
Nonlocal Andreev Reflection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 
027002, (2005). 
6 Cadden-Zimansky, P. & Chandrasekhar, V. Nonlocal 
Correlations in Normal-Metal Superconducting Systems. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 237003, (2006). 
7 Clarke, D. J., Alicea, J. & Shtengel, K. Exotic circuit 
elements from zero-modes in hybrid superconductor-
quantum-Hall systems. Nature Phys. 10, 877-882, 
(2014). 
8 Qi, X.-L., Hughes, T. L. & Zhang, S.-C. Chiral 
topological superconductor from the quantum Hall state. 
Phys. Rev. B 82, 184516, (2010). 
9 Lindner, N. H., Berg, E., Refael, G. & Stern, A. 
Fractionalizing Majorana Fermions: Non-Abelian 
Statistics on the Edges of Abelian Quantum Hall States. 
Phys. Rev. X 2, 041002, (2012). 
10 Clarke, D. J., Alicea, J. & Shtengel, K. Exotic non-
Abelian anyons from conventional fractional quantum 
Hall states. Nat. Commun. 4, 1348, (2013). 
11 Mong, R. S. K. et al. Universal Topological Quantum 
Computation from a Superconductor-Abelian Quantum 
Hall Heterostructure. Phys. Rev. X 4, 011036, (2014). 
12 Alicea, J. & Fendley, P. Topological Phases with 
Parafermions: Theory and Blueprints. Annu. Rev. 
Condens. Matter Phys. 7, 119-139, (2016). 
13 Rickhaus, P., Weiss, M., Marot, L. & Schönenberger, C. 
Quantum Hall Effect in Graphene with Superconducting 
Electrodes. Nano Lett. 12, 1942-1945, (2012). 

14 Wan, Z. et al. Induced superconductivity in high-
mobility two-dimensional electron gas in gallium 
arsenide heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 6, 7426, 
(2015). 
15 Amet, F. et al. Supercurrent in the quantum Hall regime. 
Science 352, 966-969, (2016). 
16 Takayanagi, H. & Kawakami, T. Superconducting 
Proximity Effect in the Native Inversion Layer on InAs. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2449-2452, (1985). 
17 Heersche, H. B., Jarillo-Herrero, P., Oostinga, J. B., 
Vandersypen, L. M. K. & Morpurgo, A. F. Bipolar 
supercurrent in graphene. Nature 446, 56-59, (2007). 
18 Jeong, D. et al. Observation of supercurrent in PbIn-
graphene-PbIn Josephson junction. Phys. Rev. B 83, 
094503, (2011). 
19 Mizuno, N., Nielsen, B. & Du, X. Ballistic-like 
supercurrent in suspended graphene Josephson weak 
links. Nat. Commun. 4, 2716, (2013). 
20 Lee, G.-H., Kim, S., Jhi, S.-H. & Lee, H.-J. Ultimately 
short ballistic vertical graphene Josephson junctions. 
Nat. Commun. 6, (2015). 
21 Calado, V. E. et al. Ballistic Josephson junctions in 
edge-contacted graphene. Nature Nanotech. 10, 761-764, 
(2015). 
22 Ben Shalom, M. et al. Quantum oscillations of the 
critical current and high-field superconducting proximity 
in ballistic graphene. Nature Phys. 12, 318-322, (2015). 
23 Efetov, D. K. et al. Specular interband Andreev 
reflections at van der Waals interfaces between graphene 
and NbSe2. Nature Phys. 12, 328-332, (2015). 
24 Zhang, Y., Tan, Y.-W., Stormer, H. L. & Kim, P. 
Experimental observation of the quantum Hall effect and 
Berry's phase in graphene. Nature 438, 201-204, (2005). 
25 Bolotin, K. I., Ghahari, F., Shulman, M. D., Stormer, H. 
L. & Kim, P. Observation of the fractional quantum Hall 
effect in graphene. Nature 462, 196-199, (2009). 
26 Wang, L. et al. One-dimensional electrical contact to a 
two-dimensional material. Science 342, 614-617, (2013). 
27 Dynes, R. C., Narayanamurti, V. & Garno, J. P. Direct 
Measurement of Quasiparticle-Lifetime Broadening in a 
Strong-Coupled Superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 
1509-1512, (1978). 
28 Bandurin, D. A. et al. Negative local resistance caused 
by viscous electron backflow in graphene. Science 351, 
1055-1058, (2016). 
29 Wakamura, T., Hasegawa, N., Ohnishi, K., Niimi, Y. & 
Otani, Y. Spin Injection into a Superconductor with 
Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 
036602, (2014). 
30 Lee, G.-H., Park, G.-H. & Lee, H.-J. Observation of 
negative refraction of Dirac fermions in graphene. 
Nature Phys. 11, 925-929, (2015). 

 


Supplementary Information 

Inducing Superconducting Correlation in Quantum Hall Edge States 

Gil-Ho Lee1, Ko-Fan Huang1, Dmitri K. Efetov2, Di S. Wei1, Sean Hart1, Takashi Taniguchi3, Kenji Watanabe3, Amir 
Yacoby1, and Philip Kim1,* 

1Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA 
2Department of Electrical Engineering, M.I.T., Cambridge, MA 02138 
3National Institute for Materials Science, Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan 
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.K. (email: pkim@physics.harvard.edu). 

S1. Andreev reflection probability under the magnetic fields 
 
In a quasi-classical picture, electrons and Andreev-reflected holes in the quantum Hall (QH) regime1-3 propagate together 
along the superconducting interface forming a skipping orbit. This picture is valid when the crossed Andreev process is 
fully suppressed (i.e. when the width of the superconductor is much larger that the superconducting coherence length s). 
We can evaluate how fast impinging quasi-particles (e.g., electrons) become an equal mixture of electrons and holes by 
calculating the probability of getting a sign-reversed outcome (hole) for various Andreev reflection probabilities (PAR). 
Fig. S1 shows quasi-classical calculation of the probability of obtaining a quasi-particle with reversed sign as a function 
of the number of bounce to the SC interface at given PAR. Unless PAR is very close to 0 or 1, the outgoing current 
becomes an equal mixture of electrons and holes within 20 bounds at the interface, which corresponds to travel of less 
than 200 nm along the superconducting interface at B = 8 T where the magnetic length is about 10 nm. 
 

 
Figure S1 | Probability of the sign reversal of incident particles. Quasi-classical calculation of the probability of 
obtaining a quasi-particle with reversed sign after multiple bounds across the superconducting surface with the 
probability of Andreev reflection, PAR. 
 
 
S2. Local differential conductance measurement in the magnetic fields 
Local differential conductance ( = dI/dV) measurements are a convenient way to investigate Andreev 
reflection (or superconducting proximity effect), which is well described by the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) 
theory4. Here, ‘local’ means that the current flows along the path of the voltage probe. In a magnetic field, however, the 
local differential conductance ( = dI/dV) is determined by the combination of Andreev reflection at the interface and the 
density of states (DOS) of graphene modulated by Landau level (LL) formation under the magnetic field. In the presence 
of LLs in the QH regime, the DOS of graphene changes dramatically with varying magnetic field (B) or back gate 
voltage (Vbg). To evaluate the contributions from the AR process and the LL DOS modulation separately, we fabricated 
two independent devices of bilayer graphene, each of which is contacted with superconductor (SC/G) or normal metal 
electrode (NM/G). Hall resistance shown in Figs. S2a and b shows well quantized plateaus for both cases. At B = 0, 
differential conductance enhancement near zero-bias in SC/G exhibits Andreev reflection process with a transparent 
contact (Fig. S2c), while NM/G displays no appreciable changes (Fig. S2d). Despite of this difference at B = 0, they 
show similar peak and dip features of  at higher B (Figs. S2e and f) where Landau levels (LLs) are formed. This high 
field modulations can be understood rather in a straightforward way for NM/G; the modulating DOS of graphene in the 
QH regime results in such an alternating features5. However, the situation for SC/G device is more complicated; The 
Andreev reflection processes appear in , strongly convoluted with the modulating DOS of graphene. We find that local 


differential conductance measurements alone are not enough to study Andreev reflection on QH edge states in our 
experiment. 
 

 

Figure S2 | Local measurement on superconductor/graphene and normal-metal/graphene interfaces. a,b, Magnetic 
field (B) dependence of Hall resistance (Rxy) of bilayer graphene contacted with (a) superconductor (SC/G) and (b) 
normal metal (NM/G) shows well quantized plateaus. c, Differential conductance () enhancement (~ 40 %) observed 
with superconducting electrode shows an Andreev reflection process with a transparent contact. d, Normal metal contact 
exhibits voltage independence . e,f, Normalized differential conductance () as a function of bias voltage (V) 
and B of SC/G (e) and NM/G (f). Differential conductance is normalized by the data taken at the temperature of 13 K, 
well above the critical temperature of superconductor. 

 
S3. Non-local measurement with all normal electrodes 
 
As a control experiment, we fabricated a device similar to the one studied in the main text only but with normal 
metals and performed nonlocal measurement in the same manner (Fig. S3). Downstream resistance (RD) shows a positive 
value of ~ 29  with no temperature dependence. Similarly, upstream resistance (RU) stays constant so that Hall 
resistance (Rxy = RU – RD) is quantized to be h/2e2. A longitudinal resistance (Rxx) also remains at ~0  showing that =2 
QH state is stable in the entire temperature range up to 11 K. 


 
Figure S3 | Normal drain electrode case. a, Downstream resistance (RD) in a magnetic field (B) of 13 T at temperature 
(T) ranging from 1.8 K to 12 K. b-e,Temperature dependence of (b) RD, (c) upstream resistance (RU), (d) Hall resistance 
(Rxy), longitudinal resistance (Rxx), and (e) gold electrode resistance (RAu) shows constant behaviour within the same 
temperature range that was used for the experiment with superconducting contacts in the main text. 
 
S4. More data from other devices 
 
The data taken from other devices of width W = 110 nm and W = 600 nm are presented in Fig. S4. As W 
increases, the net contribution from crossed Andreev conversion (RD) is considerably suppressed compared to RD = -
230  of device with W = 50 nm presented in the main text. 


 
Figure S4 | Temperature dependence of quantum Hall edge chemical potentials at B = 8 T of the devices W = 110 
nm and W = 600 nm. Temperature dependence taken from the device of W = 110 nm (a-d) and the device of W = 600 
nm (e-h). a,d, The downstream resistance (RD). b,f, The upstream resistance (RU). c,g, The quantized Hall resistance (Rxy 
= RU – RD= h/2e2, black symbols) and vanishing longitudinal resistance (Rxx, blue symbols). d,h, The temperature 
dependence of the NbN electrode resistance (RNbNline) shows an onset critical temperature Tc,on and a critical temperature 
Tc below which superconductivity of the SC electrode is fully achieved. 
 
 
Supplementary References 
 
1 
Hoppe, H., Zülicke, U. & Schön, G. Andreev Reflection in Strong Magnetic Fields. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1804-
1807, (2000). 
2 
Chtchelkatchev, N. M. & Burmistrov, I. S. Conductance oscillations with magnetic field of a two-dimensional 
electron gas-superconductor junction. Phys. Rev. B 75, 214510, (2007). 
3 
Khaymovich, I. M., Chtchelkatchev, N. M., Shereshevskii, I. A. & Mel'nikov, A. S. Andreev transport in two-
dimensional normal-superconducting systems in strong magnetic fields. EPL 91, 17005, (2010). 
4 
Blonder, G. E., Tinkham, M. & Klapwijk, T. M. Transition from metallic to tunneling regimes in 
superconducting microconstrictions: Excess current, charge imbalance, and supercurrent conversion. Phys. Rev. 
B 25, 4515-4532, (1982). 
5 
Velasco, J. et al. Transport Measurement of Landau Level Gaps in Bilayer Graphene with Layer Polarization 
Control. Nano Lett. 14, 1324-1328, (2014). 
 


