Vortex spectroscopy in the vortex glass: A real-space numerical approach

C. Berthod
Department of Quantum Matter Physics, University of Geneva, 24 quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
(Dated: September 23, 2016)

A method is presented to solve the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes equations with arbitrary distributions of vortices.
The real-space GreenвҖҷs function approach based on Chebyshev polynomials is complemented by a gauge
transformation which allows one to treat finite as well as infinite, ordered as well as disordered vortex
configurations. This tool gives unprecedented access to vortex lattices at very low magnetic fields and
glassy phases. After describing in detail the method and its implementation, we use it to address a series
of problems related to d-wave superconductivity on the square lattice. We first study the continuity of
the vortex-core energy spectrum and its evolution from the quantum regime to the semiclassical limit; we
investigate the effect of the band structure on the vortex by following the self-consistent solution through
a Lifshitz transition; we then study the evolution from the vortex lattice to the isolated-vortex limit with
decreasing field and show that a new emerging length scale controls this transition; finally, we perform a
statistical study of the vortex-core local density of states in the presence of positional disorder in the vortex
lattice. The calculations reveal a number of qualitative differences between the properties of vortices in the
quantum and semiclassical regimes.

PACS numbers: 74.25.Jb, 74.25.Uv, 74.62.En

I.
INTRODUCTION

The vortices in superconductors provide excellent oppor-
tunities in the exploration of disordered elastic systems.1,2

Understanding the collective response of the vortex lattice
to driving forces and to pinning remains a stimulating chal-
lenge nowadays.3 Vortices are also fascinating quantum
objects. As topological defects in the superconducting or-
der, they bind low-energy electronic states in their core,
which can be studied experimentally by local spectroscopic
probes.4вҖ“6 The interplay between quantum and classical as-
pects is one of the important questions at these mesoscopic
length scales: little is known about the role of the vortex-
core bound states in the collective behavior of the vortex
lattice7 and, reciprocally, not much is understood about the
influence of the neighboring vortices on the energy spec-
trum in a given vortex core. Although, in the clean limit, the
energy spectrum of the vortex core may contain key informa-
tion about the superconducting ground state, the interpre-
tation of experimental spectra turns out to be controversial
in many important cases, due to a lack of exact theoretical
results. At present, a reliable analytical solution for the
vortex-core energy spectrum only exists for a single isolated
vortex in an isotropic superconductor with s-wave pairing
symmetry, for energies much smaller than the superconduct-
ing gap.8 Several approximate solutions have been devel-
oped for the vortex lattice in d-wave superconductors,9вҖ“16

as well as for random vortex configurations,17вҖ“20 but these
approaches target mainly the low-energy states in between
vortices and are not applicable in the cores. Our under-
standing of the vortex-core states relies almost exclusively
on numerical solutions of the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes equa-
tions, or their semiclassical approximation, the Eilenberger
equations,21 which may be used away from the quantum
regime kFОҫ вҲј 1.
Our focus here is on the microscopic
BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes equations, for which powerful and
accurate methods are highly valuable.

The published numerical methods apply either to the iso-
lated vortex or to ideal vortex lattices at rather high fields.
For the isolated vortex in a continuum model, a projection
on the basis of angular-momentum eigenstates reduces the
calculation to a set of one-dimensional eigenvalue problems.
This has been solved for three-dimensional s-wave22 and
two-dimensional s- and d-wave23,24 order parameters. The
accuracy and spectral resolution of these calculations are
set by the size of a normalization volume and by the largest
angular momentum retained. In a discrete tight-binding
model, the isolated vortex can be studied in finite systems
by exact diagonalization,25,26 recursion methods,27,28 or by
solving a Dyson equation.29вҖ“31 The accuracy is again limited
by the system size. Ideal vortex lattices have been stud-
ied in discrete models by taking advantage of the Bloch
theorem.32вҖ“37 There, the limitations come from the size of a
magnetic unit cell accommodating two vortices: the achiev-
able cell sizes correspond to magnetic fields often larger
than usual laboratory fields. The purpose of this paper is
to present a method giving access to problems unreachable
with the other approaches, in particular low fields and disor-
dered vortex lattices as occur in the vortex-glass phases.38,39

The method computes the normal and anomalous GreenвҖҷs
functions directly in real space by means of their expansion
on Chebyshev polynomials,40,41 and uses an asymmetric
single-valued singular gauge transformation to describe ar-
bitrary vortex configurations in terms of a short-ranged and
continuous phase field. The method has several advantages
from a computational viewpoint: it is straightforward to
implement, memory inexpensive, and trivially parallel. The
main drawback is that all energy scales are treated with
the same accuracy, which may become a problem if the su-
perconducting gap to bandwidth ratio is small. Regarding
applications, the methodвҖҷs main targets are superconductors
in the clean limit and in the quantum regime showing disor-
dered vortex arrangements. These involve small-coherence
length materials like the cuprates where vortices are easily

arXiv:1609.07285v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  28 Nov 2016


2

pinned, systems where vortices are displaced by a long-
wavelength disorder not affecting the mean-free path, or
other clean systems at weak fields below the vortex ordering
transition.

The main obstacle when considering infinite (ordered
or disordered) vortex configurations in real space is to ob-
tain a good ansatz for the phase of the superconducting
order parameter. For a single vortex in two dimensions, the
phase at a given point is given by the angle formed by this
point, the vortex center, and some arbitrary reference axis
going through the vortex center.8 The phase winds by 2ПҖ
along any trajectory encircling the vortex once and defines
a branch cut along the reference axis. As it carries a phase
jump of exactly 2ПҖ, this cut is irrelevant. Most importantly,
the phase is a number of order one irrespective of the dis-
tance to the core. In a multivortex configuration, the angles
associated with each vortex add up to build the local phase.
This sum obviously will not converge for an infinite number
of vortices. The difficulty is usually circumvented by means
of a gauge transformation which removes the phase of the
order parameter and introduces half the gradient of this
phase in the kinetic energy. The phase gradient decreases
as the inverse of the distance to the vortex, such that the
infinite-vortex sum, although still formally divergent, can
be regularized in a way similar to the Madelung energy in
crystals. More annoying is the halved phase gradient: on a
lattice, this quantity is replaced by the halved phase differ-
ence between neighboring sites, which is a small number
everywhere except on the bonds crossing the reference axis,
where it takes a value close to ПҖ. With this choice of gauge,
the Hamiltonian has an inconvenient line of discontinuity
attached to each vortex. This order-one contribution again
leads to divergences for an infinite number of vortices. A so-
lution is to use a bipartite gauge transformation in which a
full phase gradient from half of the vortices is transferred to
the kinetic energy,13 rather than a half gradient from all vor-
tices. We propose here to use a variant that does not require
one to partition the vortices in two families, and is therefore
more convenient for disordered vortex configurations.

The method is ideally suited for two-dimensional lattice
models and gives access to system sizes of typically a million
sites, two orders of magnitude larger than with the usual
Hamiltonian methods. The possibility to treat large systems
will be essential for investigating the transition from the
quantum regime to the semiclassical limit at mesoscopic
scales. Here we focus mainly on the quantum regime, but
we use large systems in order to achieve high energy resolu-
tion. We also study self-consistently low magnetic fields with
intervortex distances as large as 100 lattice spacings. The
paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a pedagogical
and self-contained account of the method, going through the
Chebyshev expansion (II A), the order-parameter ansatz for
multivortex configurations (II B), the asymmetric singular
gauge transformation for infinite vortex configurations (II C
and II D), the self-consistency equations (II E), and finally
discussing some issues regarding accuracy and implementa-
tion (II F). In Sec. III, the method is applied to four problems
connected with two-dimensional d-wave superconductivity

on the lattice: the continuity and symmetry of the vortex
energy spectrum (III A), the evolution of the vortex core
and spectroscopy across a Lifshitz transition (III B), the mag-
netic field scale above which the vortex-core states feel the
orientation of the vortex lattice (III C), and the amount of
disorder in the vortex lattice needed to wash out this infor-
mation (III D). The main results are summarized in Sec. IV.

II.
NUMERICAL METHOD

The mean-field theory of inhomogeneous superconduc-
tivity can take the form of a SchrГ¶dinger-like eigenvalue
problem (BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes equations) or the form
of a Dyson-like equation (Gorkov equations).
Both for-
mulations are equivalent, the GreenвҖҷs function G(z) solu-
tion of the Gorkov equations at complex energy z being
the resolvent of the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes Hamiltonian
H: GОұОІ(z) = вҢ©Оұ|(z вҲ’ H)вҲ’1|ОІвҢӘ. Оұ and ОІ are single-particle
state indices and z вҲ’ H is to be understood as z11 вҲ’ H. In
practice, we will only be interested in retarded GreenвҖҷs func-
tions evaluated immediately above the real-energy axis, i.e.,
z = E + i0. The solution boils down to an inversion of the
operator z вҲ’ H.

A.
Expansion of GreenвҖҷs function on Chebyshev polynomials

The method introduced in Ref. 40 performs the inver-
sion of z вҲ’ H recursively, by means of Chebyshev polynomi-
als. The polynomials are defined as Tn(x) = cos(narccos x)
for x in the interval [вҲ’1,1].
Any sufficiently smooth
complex-valued function F(x) has a representation F(x) =
пҝҪвҲһ
n=0 cnTn(x) for x вҲҲ [вҲ’1,1] with the coefficients cn =
(2 вҲ’ Оҙn0)/ПҖ
пҝҪ ПҖ

0 dП‘ F(cosП‘)cos(nП‘). The strength of this
representation is a better convergence than other expan-
sions, e.g., Taylor or Fourier. The expansion needed for our
purposes is

(E + i0 вҲ’ H)вҲ’1 = 1

a

вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=0

i(Оҙn0 вҲ’ 2)eвҲ’inarccos(ЛңE)

пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ ЛңE2
Tn( ЛңH).
(1)

ЛңH = (H вҲ’ b)/a is a rescaled dimensionless Hamiltonian
whose spectrum falls entirely within the interval [вҲ’1,1]
where Tn( ЛңH) is meaningful.
Thus a is an upper bound
for the width of the spectrum of H and b is the center of
this spectrum. Likewise, ЛңE = (E вҲ’ b)/a. The BogoliubovвҖ“
de Gennes Hamiltonian has a symmetric spectrum, so one
can set b = 0 (Appendix A; see, however, Sec. II F). The
requirement to rescale the whole energy spectrum within
the range [вҲ’1,1] means that the spectral resolution is set
by the largest energy scale, which is the main weakness
of the method. Equation (1) reduces the calculation of
the GreenвҖҷs function to the evaluation of the matrix ele-
ments вҢ©Оұ|Tn( ЛңH)|ОІвҢӘ. This task is greatly simplified thanks
to a recursion relation obeyed by the Chebyshev polyno-
mials: Tn(x) = 2xTnвҲ’1(x) вҲ’ TnвҲ’2(x) with T0(x) = 1 and


3

T1(x) = x. The evaluation of Tn( ЛңH) breaks down into a se-
quence of elementary operations of the form H|ПҲвҢӘ. Starting
with |ПҲ0вҢӘ = |ОІвҢӘ and |ПҲ1вҢӘ = ЛңH|ОІвҢӘ, the series of coefficients
вҢ©Оұ|Tn( ЛңH)|ОІвҢӘ вүЎ вҢ©Оұ|ПҲnвҢӘ follows from the recursion scheme
|ПҲnвҢӘ = 2 ЛңH|ПҲnвҲ’1вҢӘвҲ’|ПҲnвҲ’2вҢӘ. The method applies to any prob-
lem with a bounded energy spectrum and such that H|ПҲвҢӘ
can be computed. In fact, H|ПҲвҢӘ is the only time-consuming
operation for this algorithm, whose overall performance
therefore depends on how efficiently this operation can be
implemented. A procedural implementation, as opposed
to a straight matrix-vector multiplication, is preferable for
sparse Hamiltonians.40 The memory cost is limited to the
storage of three state vectors.
We specialize now to a superconductor on a discrete tight-
binding lattice. A state vector |ОұвҢӘ is represented by complex
BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes amplitudes uОұ(r) and vОұ(r) at each
lattice site r. The Hamiltonian connects the amplitudes at
two sites r and r вҖІ via the 2 Г— 2 block

Hr r вҖІ =
пҝҪ
tr r вҖІ
вҲҶr r вҖІ
вҲҶвҲ—
r вҖІr вҲ’tвҲ—
r r вҖІ

пҝҪ
.
(2)

Up to a gauge transformation to be discussed later, the
diagonal matrix elements are given by tr r вҖІ = t0
r r вҖІeiпҝҪr rвҖІ вҲ’
ВөОҙr r вҖІ, where t0
r r вҖІ is the bare hopping amplitude, Вө is the
chemical potential, and

пҝҪr r вҖІ = e

Д§h

пҝҪ r вҖІ

r
dв„“ В· A(в„“)
(3)

is the Peierls phase with A the vector potential and e = |e|
the magnitude of the electron charge.42 вҲҶr r вҖІ is the super-
conducting order parameter, which must be solved self-
consistently as described below. The property tr r вҖІ = tвҲ—
r вҖІr is
sufficient to enforce the Hermiticity of H. In the usual (i.e.,
symmetric) gauges, the property вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲҶr вҖІr also holds; it
does not hold in the asymmetric gauge discussed below. We
denote |rвҢӘ the state representing an electron localized at
site r, which has u(r) = 1, v(r) = 0, and u(r вҖІ) = v(r вҖІ) = 0
for r вҖІ Мё= r. A hole localized at r has v(r) = 1 and all other
components equal to zero and is denoted |ВҜrвҢӘ. The local
density of states (LDOS) at each site is related to the GreenвҖҷs
function Gr r вҖІ(z) = вҢ©r|(z вҲ’ H)вҲ’1|r вҖІвҢӘ by

N(r, E) = вҲ’ 2

ПҖIm Gr r(E + i0).
(4)

We see that the calculation of the LDOS mimics the evolution
of an electron injected at point r: starting with the state |rвҢӘ,
at each iteration the wave function is spread over neighbor-
ing sites by the application of H and the resulting amplitude
u(r) at the starting point is measured to get the correspond-
ing coefficient of the Chebyshev expansion. The system size
needed in order to obtain the matrix element вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|rвҢӘ
without boundary errors is therefore proportional to n and
to the range of the hopping amplitudes.
The order parameter is given by вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲ’Vr r вҖІвҢ©ПҲrвҶ‘ПҲr вҖІвҶ“вҢӘ,
where Vr r вҖІ is the pairing interaction and ПҲrПғ annihilates
a spin-Пғ electron at position r. It can be related to the

anomalous GreenвҖҷs function Fr r вҖІ(z) = вҢ©r|(z вҲ’ H)вҲ’1|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ and
evaluated in the same way as the LDOS. Unlike the expres-
sion (4) for the LDOS, the expression relating вҲҶr r вҖІ to Fr r вҖІ
depends on the gauge, and will be derived in Sec. II E.

B.
Ansatz for the order parameter

For large systems or systems lacking symmetries, the self-
consistent calculation of вҲҶr r вҖІ can be prohibitive. On the
other hand, the fine details of вҲҶr r вҖІ are often irrelevant for
the LDOS, which is the quantity we are ultimately interested
to compare with experimental data. This underlines the
need for a good starting ansatz, either to lower the number
of cycles necessary in order to reach self-consistency, or to
ignore self-consistency altogether. We express the order
parameter as

вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲҶA
r r вҖІ
пҝҪ
1 + вҲҶmsc
r r вҖІ
пҝҪ
eiвҲҶpsc
r rвҖІ ,
(5)

where вҲҶA is our ansatz, вҲҶmsc and вҲҶpsc being the self-
consistent corrections to the modulus and phase, respec-
tively. A good ansatz should respect the symmetries of the
problem and be such that the differences between the LDOS
calculated using вҲҶA and вҲҶ are unimportant.
From here on, we specialize to a two-dimensional lattice
of sites r = (x, y). We consider a distribution of vortices
at positions R = (X, Y ). The vortices can sit on or in be-
tween lattice sites. The order parameter is written as a
superposition of contributions from each vortex in the form

вҲҶA
r r вҖІ = вҲҶ0sr вҖІвҲ’r
пҝҪ

R
S(r вҲ’ R, r вҖІ вҲ’ R).
(6)

вҲҶ0 is the gap magnitude and sr вҖІвҲ’r describes the local order-
parameter symmetry. The most common symmetries are s
and nearest-neighbor dx2вҲ’y2 on a square lattice, for which
we have

s symmetry :
sr вҖІвҲ’r = Оҙr r вҖІ

dx2вҲ’y2 symmetry :
sr вҖІвҲ’r =

пЈұ

пЈІ

пЈі

1/4
r вҖІ вҲ’ r = ВұЛҶx
вҲ’1/4
r вҖІ вҲ’ r = ВұЛҶy
0
otherwise.

The order parameter has no Peierls phase for symmetric
gauges, but a phase eвҲ’iпҝҪr rвҖІ appears self-consistently in the
asymmetric gauge (Sec. II C). The function S(r, r вҖІ) describes
the modulus and phase of the order parameter for a single
vortex at the origin:

S(r, r вҖІ) = p

пҝҪ
|r + r вҖІ|

2

пҝҪ

ei
пҝҪ
П•(r)+П•(rвҖІ)

2
+вҲҶП•(r,r вҖІ)+вҲҶП•c(r,r вҖІ)
пҝҪ
. (7)

p(r) gives the profile of the order-parameter modulus,
which vanishes for r = 0 and approaches unity at large
r over a length scale given by the coherence length Оҫ. The
self-consistent profile is not in general a radial function even
for an isolated vortex, such that вҲҶmsc in Eq. (5) contains,


4

among other things, the deviations from cylindrical symme-
try. In the limit of large intervortex distances |R вҲ’ RвҖІ| вү« Оҫ,
p(r) coincides with the profile of an isolated vortex. At
larger fields, the profiles from several vortices overlap in
the product in Eq. (6), such that the function p(r) must be
adjusted in order to match the self-consistent solution at
best. An isolated vortex in the Ginzburg-Landau theory is
characterized by p(r) = tanh(r/Оҫ). It was noticed in the
pioneering calculations22,24 that this functional form fails
to describe the self-consistent solution at low temperature.
Here we will use the empirical two-parameter function31

p(r) =
1

1 + (Оҫ0/r)eвҲ’r/Оҫ1 ,
(8)

and adjust the parameters Оҫ0 and Оҫ1 to minimize вҲҶmsc.
The second factor in Eq. (7) gives the order-parameter
phase for a single vortex at the origin. It is expressed in
terms of a geometric angle defined in the interval ] вҲ’ ПҖ,ПҖ]
with the cut along the negative x axis [Fig. 1(a)]:

П•(r) = arg(x вҲ’ i y).
(9)

By convention, we set arg(0) = 0 and arg(вҲ’|x|) = ПҖ. This
choice of sign corresponds to a positive magnetic field along
the z axis with a supercurrent circulating counterclockwise
around the vortex. For an s-wave gap, r вҖІ = r in Eq. (7),
the corrections вҲҶП•(r, r) = вҲҶП•c(r, r) = 0 drop, and the
vortex phase is simply П•(r). For a nonlocal gap the average
1
2[П•(r) + П•(r вҖІ)] returns a value close to zero for bonds
crossing the cut, instead of the desired value close to ВұПҖ.
This is corrected by вҲҶП•(r, r вҖІ), which adds a phase ВұПҖ on
the appropriate bonds [Figs. 1(c) and 1(d)]. вҲҶП•(r, r вҖІ)
is a long-range correction extending from the vortex core
to infinity. On the contrary, вҲҶП•c(r, r вҖІ) is a short-range
core correction adjusting the phase on the bonds touching

x

y

+ПҖ
вҲ’ПҖ

П•(r)

вҲ’ПҖ

4

ПҖ
2

+ПҖ

4

вҲҶП•c(r, r вҖІ)

вҲ’ПҖ
вҲ’ПҖ
вҲ’ПҖ

вҲҶП•(r, r вҖІ)

ПҖ
ПҖ
ПҖ

вҲҶП•(r, r вҖІ)

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

FIG. 1. Local phase and nonlocal phase corrections for an isolated
vortex. The big and small dots indicate the vortex center and
lattice sites, respectively. (a) Local phase and branch cut. The
phase is +ПҖ on the cut and zero at the vortex center. (b) Core
correction for a vortex sitting on a lattice site in a square lattice.
(c) and (d) Long-range correction for bonds touching the branch
cut.

the vortex core [Fig. 1(b)]; it is zero for vortices sitting in
between lattice sites. All in all, the phase is given within
1% by the geometric angle measured from the middle of the
bonds. The complicated writing in Eq. (7) will prove useful
below.
The ansatz (6)вҖ“(9) works perfectly for any finite distribu-
tion of vortices. For infinite distributions, the sum of phases
does not converge as discussed in the Introduction, and a
change of gauge is necessary.

C.
Asymmetric singular gauge transformation

The unitary transformation U =
пҝҪeig
0
0
eвҲ’ih

пҝҪ
, where g

and h are arbitrary functions of r, changes the Hamiltonian
(2) into

(UHUвҲ’1)r r вҖІ =

пҝҪ
tr r вҖІei[g(r)вҲ’g(r вҖІ)]
вҲҶr r вҖІei[g(r)+h(r вҖІ)]

вҲҶвҲ—
r вҖІr eвҲ’i[h(r)+g(r вҖІ)] вҲ’tвҲ—
r r вҖІeвҲ’i[h(r)вҲ’h(r вҖІ)]

пҝҪ

.

For an s-wave order parameter, the symmetric choice g =
h = вҲ’ПҶ/2, where ПҶ(r) is the phase of вҲҶr r, removes
the phase from the off-diagonal terms and puts a phase
[ПҶ(r вҖІ) вҲ’ ПҶ(r)]/2 on the diagonal ones. This is analogous
to a usual gauge transformation A вҶ’ A+ Д§h

2eвҲҮПҶ [see Eq. (3)],
except that ПҶ is not a pure gauge, but carries a singularity
attached to each vortex: вҲҮ Г— вҲҮПҶ(r) = вҲ’2ПҖЛҶz
пҝҪ

R Оҙ(r вҲ’ R).
The problem here is that the halved phase difference appear-
ing in the diagonal terms is discontinuous at the branch cut
of each vortex. For a d-wave order parameter, there is also
a discontinuity remaining in the off-diagonal terms. Franz
and TeЕЎanoviВҙc13 introduced the bipartite singular gauge
g = вҲ’ПҶA and h = вҲ’ПҶB, where ПҶA,B are the phases asso-
ciated with half of the vortices and ПҶA + ПҶB = ПҶ. This
attaches half of the vortices to the particles, the other half
to the holes, and solves the problem, leading to real off-
diagonal terms (for s-wave order) without discontinuity
in the diagonal ones. For ideal vortex lattices, the parti-
tion of vortices in two groups is natural, by means of a
magnetic unit cell containing two of them. Each vortex sub-
lattice builds into the hopping term the analog of a Peierls
phase with a gradient whose spatial average cancels exactly
the spatial average of пҝҪr r вҖІ. The Bogoliubov quasiparticles
therefore feel an effective magnetic field that is zero on
average, and the phase of the diagonal terms is periodic
in space.13 In the case of nonlocal pairing, a local gauge
transformation cannot remove the phase of вҲҶr r вҖІ entirely,
but it is sufficient that it removes the 2ПҖ phase winding,
leaving a nontopological phase in the off-diagonal terms.
For arbitrary vortex configurations, we have found it more
convenient to use the asymmetric singular gauge

g(r) = вҲ’
пҝҪ

R
П•(r вҲ’ R),
h(r) = 0.
(10)

This attaches all vortices to the particles and none to the
holes. The spatial average of the Peierls-like phase built
in this way into the hopping term is equal to the spatial


5

average of вҲ’2пҝҪr r вҖІ. As a result, the particles and holes now
feel effective magnetic fields that are opposite on average.
Performing the unitary transformation, one finds that the
phase of the hopping term for particles is the sum of a Peierls
phase вҲ’пҝҪr r вҖІ and the function

ОҰОҙ(r) =
пҝҪ

R

пҝҪП•(r + Оҙ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R)пҝҪ + 2пҝҪr,r+Оҙ, (11)

where we have introduced the notation Оҙ = r вҖІ вҲ’ r. This
function is periodic for vortex lattices. The phase differ-
ence in the square brackets decreases as the inverse of the
distance to the vortex, such that the expression must be
regularized for infinite sums. The phase of the off-diagonal
term is

пҝҪ

R

пҝҪ 1

2[П•(r вҖІ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R)] + вҲҶП•(r вҲ’ R, r вҖІ вҲ’ R)

+вҲҶП•c(r вҲ’ R, r вҖІ вҲ’ R)пҝҪ.

The discontinuity of the halved phase difference is exactly
compensated by the correction вҲҶП•, such that the first two
terms in the curly braces form together a continuous func-
tion whose sum is just half the sum in Eq. (11). Hence,
in the asymmetric singular gauge, our ansatz for the order
parameter can also be expressed in terms of the function
ОҰОҙ(r),

вҲҶA
r,r+Оҙ = вҲҶ0sОҙ
пҝҪ

R
p
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪr + 1

2Оҙ вҲ’ R
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ
пҝҪ
eвҲ’iпҝҪr,r+Оҙ

Г— exp

пҝҪ

i

пЈ®

пЈ°ОҰОҙ(r)

2
+
пҝҪ

R
вҲҶП•c(r вҲ’ R, r + Оҙ вҲ’ R)

пЈ№

пЈ»

пҝҪ

,
(12)

and the transformed Hamiltonian is simply

H r r вҖІ =

пҝҪ
t0
r r вҖІei[ОҰrвҖІвҲ’r (r)вҲ’пҝҪr rвҖІ]
вҲҶ r r вҖІ

вҲҶвҲ—
r вҖІr
вҲ’t0
r r вҖІeвҲ’iпҝҪr rвҖІ

пҝҪ

.
(13)

We underline the non-gauge-invariant quantities expressed
in the asymmetric gauge. The phase field (11) together
with the ansatz (12) and the Hamiltonian (13) provide
a convenient framework to treat finite as well as infinite,
ordered as well as disordered vortex configurations.43 In
this real-space formulation, it is also straightforward to add
various ingredients like pinning potentials, charge density
waves, antiferromagnetic order, etc.
As the diagonal matrix elements вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|rвҢӘ are invari-
ant under the unitary transformation (10), the expression
(4) for the LDOS holds in the asymmetric gauge, that
is, if G is computed using the Hamiltonian (13).
For
completeness and later reference, we note that the func-
tion ОҰ in (11) relates simply to the gauge-invariant su-
perfluid velocity given by mvs = (Д§h/2)вҲҮПҶ + eA, where
m is the electron mass, ПҶ is the order-parameter phase,
and A is the vector potential. To see this, write вҲҮПҶ(r)
as [ПҶ(r + ЛҶx) вҲ’ ПҶ(r),ПҶ(r + ЛҶy) вҲ’ ПҶ(r)]/a, a the lattice

parameter, A(r) as [
пҝҪ r+ЛҶx

r
dr вҖІ Ax(r вҖІ),
пҝҪ r+ЛҶy

r
dr вҖІ Ay(r вҖІ)]/a =
Д§h/(ea)(пҝҪr,r+ЛҶx,пҝҪr,r+ЛҶy), and use Eq. (11) to get

vs(r) =
Д§h

2ma

пҝҪ
ОҰЛҶx(r),ОҰЛҶy(r)
пҝҪ
.
(14)

The superfluid current density follows as j = вҲ’2e|вҲҶ|2vs.

D.
Phase field for infinite vortex configurations

We proceed to the evaluation of the phase field (11) for
infinite vortex configurations, starting with ideal vortex
lattices. The phase field for disordered vortex configurations
will be constructed by displacing vortices in an ideal lattice.
The asymptotic behavior of the phase difference for a vortex
at a large distance R from the points r and r + Оҙ is

П•(r + Оҙ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R) =
ОҙyX вҲ’ ОҙxY

X 2 + Y 2
+ пҝҪ
пҝҪ 1

R2

пҝҪ
.

Due to this slow decay, the sum in (11) is formally divergent.
In practice, the divergent contributions from vortices at
R and вҲ’R cancel. Since all common vortex lattices have
inversion symmetry, we can group the vortices in pairs:

П•(r + Оҙ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R) + П•(r + Оҙ + R) вҲ’ П•(r + R)

= ОӣОҙ(r,R) + пҝҪ
пҝҪ 1

R4

пҝҪ
.

The function Оӣ decays as 1/R2 and its sum is convergent:

ОӣОҙ(r,R) = 2пҝҪОҙy x + Оҙx y + ОҙxОҙy
пҝҪ X 2 вҲ’ Y 2

(X 2 + Y 2)2

вҲ’ 2пҝҪ2Оҙx x вҲ’ 2Оҙy y + Оҙ2
x вҲ’ Оҙ2
y
пҝҪ
X Y

(X 2 + Y 2)2 .
(15)

The actual convergence of the sum (11) is faster than 1/R2,
because the other spatial symmetries of the vortex lattice
will in general suppress these 1/R2 terms as well. In fact,
if R is written as R(cosП‘,sinП‘), the term of order 1/Rn in
the expansion of П•(r + Оҙ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R) contains one
contribution proportional to cos(nП‘) and another propor-
tional to sin(nП‘). In a continuum limit, both contributions
vanish upon integrating on П‘. This shows that short-range
physics dominates the sum in (11), which therefore also
converges for disordered lattices or lattices lacking inversion
symmetry.
For each lattice point r, we denote R0 the vortex closest
to r and we compute the phase field as

ОҰОҙ(r) =
пҝҪ
П•(r + Оҙ вҲ’ R0) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R0)

+
пҝҪ

R

вҖІ пҝҪП•(r + Оҙ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R)

+П•(r + Оҙ + R) вҲ’ П•(r + R) вҲ’ ОӣОҙ(r,R)пҝҪ

+ ОҰвҖІ
Оҙ(r) + 2пҝҪr,r+Оҙ
пҝҪ
.
(16)


6

The notation вҢҲВ·В·В·вҢү means that the result must be recast in
the interval ] вҲ’ ПҖ,ПҖ]; this operation is neededвҖ”and was
implicit in Eq. (11)вҖ”because the phase halved enters in
Eq. (12). The symbol
пҝҪвҖІ
R stands for a sum on half the vor-
tices grouped in pairs (R,вҲ’R), excluding the vortex at R0.
ОҰвҖІ
Оҙ(r) =
пҝҪвҖІ
R ОӣОҙ(r,R) can be evaluated exactly, as summa-
rized in Table I for the most common vortex lattices.

The magnetic field distribution has the periodicity of
the vortex lattice. It is the sum of its average value and
a periodic modulation which averages to zero: B(r) =
[ВҜB + ОҙB(r)]ЛҶz. Likewise, we can write the Peierls phase as
пҝҪ =
ВҜ
пҝҪ + ОҙпҝҪ . Only
ВҜ
пҝҪ carries a nontrivial gradient, while
ОҙпҝҪ is periodic. In the present study, we will neglect the
periodic modulation of the field. This is justified at high
fields when the intervortex distance d is small compared
with the penetration depth О». In the opposite limit О» вүІ d,
the correction ОҙпҝҪ must be determined self-consistently. As
the Peierls phase scales like 1/d2, however, it disappears in
the low-field regime and ОҙпҝҪ is a correction to a small effect.
For a vector potential A(r) = B(вҲ’y,0,0) corresponding to
a uniform field BЛҶz, the Peierls phase is

пҝҪr r вҖІ = ПҖ

2S (x вҲ’ xвҖІ)(y + yвҖІ),
(17)

where B = ОҰ0/S with ОҰ0 = ПҖД§h/e the flux quantum and
S the surface of the vortex unit cell, namely S = d2 and
S = (
пҝҪ

3/2)d2 for square and triangular vortex lattices,
respectively. Our choice of gauge for the vector potential
is consistent with the definition (9) and ensures that the
function ОҰ in (11) is periodic. An example is shown in
Fig. 2(a).

Disordered vortex configurations are generated from a
perfect vortex lattice by removing and adding individual
vortices. If the numbers of vortices removed and added
are equal, the average magnetic field is unchanged and the
function ОҰ has no long-range gradient. Figure 2(b) shows
an example with nine vortices displaced in a square vortex
lattice. If the two numbers differ, ОҰ acquires a linear term.

TABLE I. Vortex-lattice sums entering ОҰвҖІ
Оҙ(r) =
пҝҪвҖІ
R ОӣОҙ(r,R). d
is the intervortex distance.
The vortex positions in the four
lattices listed are (X, Y ) = (n, m)d, (n вҲ’ m, n + m)d/
пҝҪ

2, (n вҲ’
m/2, m
пҝҪ

3/2)d, and ((n вҲ’ m)
пҝҪ

3, n + m)d/2, respectively.

Type of vortex lattice
пҝҪ

R

вҖІ
X 2 вҲ’ Y 2

(X 2 + Y 2)2
пҝҪ

R

вҖІ
X Y

(X 2 + Y 2)2

Square along (10)
ПҖ

2d2
0

Square along (11)
0
ПҖ

4d2

Triangular along (10)
ПҖ

пҝҪ

3d2
0

Triangular along (01)
ПҖ

2
пҝҪ

3d2
ПҖ

4d2

Оҙ = ЛҶy

(a)

вҲ’0.5

0

0.5

Оҙ = ЛҶx

(b)

FIG. 2.
(a) Function ОҰЛҶy(r) for an ideal square vortex lattice
oriented along the (11) direction. The vortex centers are located
on the nodes of the underlying square lattice. An expanded view
of a vortex core is displayed in the inset. (b) Function ОҰЛҶx(r) for
a disordered vortex configuration embedded in a square vortex
lattice oriented along the (10) direction. The vortex centers are in
the plaquettes of the underlying square lattice.

E.
Self-consistency

The self-consistent order parameter and the anomalous
function Fr r вҖІ(z) = вҢ©r|(z вҲ’ H)вҲ’1|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ are related by

вҲҶr r вҖІ = Vr r вҖІ

пҝҪ вҲһ

вҲ’вҲһ
dE f (E) i

2ПҖ

пҝҪFr вҖІr(E + i0) вҲ’ Fr r вҖІ(вҲ’E + i0)пҝҪ,

where f (E) = (eE/kBT + 1)вҲ’1 is the Fermi function. Note
that in general Fr r вҖІ(z) Мё= Fr вҖІr(z); the equality holds only for
translation-invariant systems. Owing to the symmetry of
the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes Hamiltonian, though, the rela-
tion Fr r вҖІ(z) = Fr вҖІr(вҲ’z) always holds (Appendix A). If ЛңH is
defined with b = 0, this same symmetry of H also implies
вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ = (вҲ’1)n+1вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ. The latter, together
with the expansion (1), allows one to rewrite the order
parameter as

вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲ’Vr r вҖІ

вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=1
DnвҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ.
(18)

The
first
term
of
the
sum
in
(1)
drops
because
вҢ©r вҖІ|T0( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ = вҢ©r вҖІ|ВҜrвҢӘ = 0. The coefficients Dn carry the
explicit temperature dependence according to

Dn = вҲ’ 2

ПҖ

пҝҪ 1

вҲ’1
d ЛңE f (E)cos(narccos ЛңE)

пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ ЛңE2

= 2

ПҖn

пҝҪ вҲһ

вҲ’вҲһ
dE [вҲ’f вҖІ(E)]sinпҝҪnarccos(E/a)пҝҪ.
(19)

The energy integration must be cut to the spectral range of
H, or to a lower cutoff given by the pairing interaction. The
second line follows after integrating by parts. The integral is
now cut by the temperature and can therefore be extended
again to ВұвҲһ, unless kBT вҲј a. For even values of n, the sine
function is odd and consequently Dn = 0. One sees that the
coefficients become simply Dn = 2sin(nПҖ/2)/(ПҖn) at T = 0.
It is shown in Appendix A that Eq. (18) entails the property


7

вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲҶr вҖІr. If the starting ansatz вҲҶA
r r вҖІ is symmetric, the
self-consistency cycles will therefore preserve this symmetry.
The expressions (18) and (19) make an explicit use of
the fact that the spectrum of ЛңH is symmetric. These expres-
sions are therefore not valid if the numerical calculation is
performed with b Мё= 0. More complicated formulas apply
(Appendix A) to the cases where setting b to a finite value
is an advantage (see Sec. II F). Equation (18) must still be
corrected to comply with the choice of gauge (10). Under
this gauge transformation, the anomalous matrix elements
change according to вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ вҶ’ eig(r вҖІ)вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ. At
the same time, the order parameter changes according to
вҲҶr r вҖІ вҶ’ вҲҶr r вҖІeig(r). A factor exp{i[g(r)вҲ’g(r вҖІ)]} must there-
fore appear in the right-hand side of (18). Hence, in the
asymmetric gauge the self-consistency equation is

вҲҶ r r вҖІ = вҲ’Vr r вҖІei[ОҰrвҖІвҲ’r (r)вҲ’2пҝҪr rвҖІ]
вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=1
DnвҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜrвҢӘ.
(20)

Again, this only applies if b = 0. The expression appropriate
in the case b Мё= 0 is given in Appendix A.
Two comments are in order. For an ideal vortex lattice the
function ОҰ is periodic, but the Peierls phase пҝҪ is not. The
ansatz (12) is therefore nonperiodic: it becomes periodic
once multiplied by eiпҝҪ . The self-consistent expression (20)
has the same property (Appendix A) so that the periodicity
of вҲҶeiпҝҪ is preserved during the cycles to self-consistency.
The nonperiodicity of вҲҶ balances the nonperiodicity of H
such that all gauge-invariant quantities, in particular the
LDOS, display the periodicity of the vortex lattice. Second,
while вҲҶr r вҖІ is symmetric under the exchange of coordinates,
in the asymmetric gauge we have

вҲҶ r вҖІr = вҲҶ r r вҖІeвҲ’i[ОҰrвҖІвҲ’r (r)вҲ’2пҝҪr rвҖІ].
(21)

This property is obvious in the ansatz (12) if one notices
that both ОҰ and пҝҪ are antisymmetric under the exchange
of coordinates. The property is also guaranteed by Eq. (20)
as shown in Appendix A. On the contrary, the property
вҲҶA
r вҖІr = (вҲҶA
r r вҖІ)вҲ—, which is verified where вҲҶП•c = 0, is not
obeyed by the self-consistent solution.

F.
Accuracy and some implementation notes

Four parameters determine the accuracy of the calcula-
tion. Beside the energies a and b (Sec. II A), these are the
order N of the Chebyshev expansion and the size M of the
system. Ideally, the size of the system must be such that the
last Chebyshev coefficient вҢ©r|TN( ЛңH)|rвҢӘ is not perturbed by
the systemвҖҷs boundaries. The optimal shape of the system
depends on how the Hamiltonian diffuses the wave func-
tion. On a square lattice, for instance, the state |rвҢӘ spreads
with a diamond-like shape if there are only nearest-neighbor
hoppings. In such a case, it is better to define the system
with a diamond shape as in Fig. 3(a). If r is the central site
and N = M, the wave function reaches the boundary at the
last iteration; if N = 2M the reflection from the boundary

reaches the central site; if N = 4M the interference of waves
reflected from the boundaries are felt at the central site. For
N > 4M, these interferences develop spurious oscillations
in the LDOS.
Figure 4 illustrates the roles of a, b, N, and M. The
upper panel presents a typical LDOS curve and two ways of
choosing a and b. The model considered is a square tight-
binding lattice with nearest-neighbor hopping t1, second-
neighbor hopping t2 = вҲ’0.3t1, and chemical potential Вө =
t1, with a d-wave gap of magnitude вҲҶ = 0.2|t1|. This is a
setup typically used to represent the electronic structure of
the cuprate high-Tc superconductors. For the calculation
of the self-consistent order parameter it is convenient to
set b = 0 (see Sec. II E). The electron-hole symmetry of the
BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes Hamiltonian then requires one to
take a вүі aвҲҶ = 2max(|Emax|,|Emin|). Here Emin = вҲ’(Оҫ2
min +
вҲҶ2)1/2 and Emax = (Оҫ2
max + вҲҶ2)1/2 mark the limits of the
electronic spectrum, with Оҫmin and Оҫmax the extrema of
the tight-binding band. While the use of aвҲҶ and b = 0
is in principle also mandatory for the calculation of the
LDOS, in practice it is sufficient to choose values of a and b
that fit the electronic excitation spectrum, i.e., aN = Emax вҲ’
Emin and bN = (Emax + Emin)/2.
The reason is that the
Hamiltonian does not mix appreciably electron and hole
states for energies larger than a few times вҲҶ. In the example
of Fig. 4, the repeated action of H on the state |rвҢӘ (which
spans the whole band) does not visit the hole states with
energies below Emin, because the superconducting gap is
sufficiently far from the band bottom. For the LDOS, one can
therefore choose aN with a little security margin (a = 1.1aN
was used for Fig. 4) and b = bN. The use of aN rather than
aвҲҶ does not change qualitatively the LDOS but improves the
resolution as seen in the inset of Fig. 4(a).
Increasing M and/or N also improves the resolution. As
the calculation of H|ПҲвҢӘ scales like M2, the total computing

1
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

M = 3
(a)

1
2

3
4
5

6

7
8
9
10

11

12

13
14
15
16
17

18

19

20

21
22
23
24
25

M = 2

(b)

FIG. 3. (a) Diamond-like system of size M = 3 with 1+2M(1+M)
sites on the square lattice. This shape is optimal if the range of
the Hamiltonian extends to the first, third, or fifth neighbors. We
typically use M = 500, corresponding to a system of 501 001 sites.
(b) Square-like system of size M = 2 with (2M + 1)2 sites. This
shape is optimal if the range of the Hamiltonian extends to the
second or fourth neighbors. We typically use M = 350 in this case,
corresponding to 491 401 sites. A possible sequential numbering
of the sites is indicated.


8

вҲ’6
вҲ’4
вҲ’2
0
2
4
6
E/|t1|

Emax

Emin

aN

bN

aвҲҶ

(a)

вҲ’0.5
0
0.5
E/|t1|

M = 350, N = 4M
M = 150, N = 4M
M = 150, N = 8M

(b)

вҲ’2
вҲ’1.8
вҲ’1.6
E/|t1|

FejГ©r

О“ = 0.02|t1|

No kernel

Jackson

(c)

FIG. 4.
(a) DOS calculated with a = 1.1aN, b = bN (black, blue
shade) and a = aвҲҶ, b = 0 (red). The dashed curve is the image
of the DOS by particle-hole symmetry. The inset shows the loss
of resolution in the gap region for a = aвҲҶ. The other parameters
are M = 350 and N = 4M. (b) DOS in the gap region for various
system sizes and expansion orders. (c) DOS at the lower band edge
showing Gibbs oscillations and their removal by various kernels
(see Ref. 44).

time scales like N M2: optimal performance requires taking
N as large as possible and M as small as possible. The
choice N = 4M ensures that the LDOS is not perturbed
by boundary effects, but higher values of N are sometimes
acceptable. Figure 4(b) shows that the substantial loss of
resolution observed at low energy when reducing M from
350 to 150 with N = 4M can be largely recovered by taking
N = 8M. This also leads, however, to oscillations of the
LDOS at higher energy (not shown in the figure).

If the Chebyshev expansion is stopped at order N, the ap-
proximate LDOS displays so-called Gibbs oscillations close
to the LDOS singularities.44 Figure 4(c) shows these oscilla-
tions at the lower band edge. The oscillations are removed
by filtering the approximate LDOS with a kernel. The choice
of a Lorentzian kernel is most natural because it enforces the
positivity of the calculated LDOS; it is equivalent to intro-
ducing a scattering rate О“ in the propagators, i.e., replacing
i0 by iО“ in Eq. (1). The convolution with a kernel amounts
to multiplying the Chebyshev coefficients вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|rвҢӘ by an
n-dependent factor.44 For a Lorentz kernel, we thus obtain

0
10
20
30
40
50
M

0.195

0.200

0.205

вҲҶM
вҲһ /|t1|

(a)

102
103
104

N

0.19

0.20

0.21

вҲҶ100
N /|t1|

No kernel

Jackson
FejГ©r

Lorentz, О“ = 0.02|t1|

(b)

103
104

FIG. 5. Convergence of the self-consistent gap as a function of (a)
system size and (b) expansion order and truncation kernel. Inside
the gray shaded regions the convergence is better than 0.1%. The
calculations are done with a = 12|t1| and b = 0 for the same model
as in Fig. 4.

the explicit expression of the LDOS as

N(r, E) = 2

ПҖa

пЈұ

пЈІ

пЈіRe

пЈ®

пЈ°
1

пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ ЛңE2

пЈ№

пЈ» + 2

N
пҝҪ

n=1
вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|rвҢӘ

Г—Re

пЈ®

пЈ° eвҲ’inarccos(ЛңE)

пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ ЛңE2

пЈ№

пЈ» sinhпҝҪ(N вҲ’ n)О“/aпҝҪ

sinh(NО“/a)

пЈј

пЈҪ

пЈҫ.
(22)

Note that the correction factor (last in the curly braces) is
not unity for О“ = 0 but 1 вҲ’ n/N, which is the FejГ©r kernel:
a delta-function-like Lorentz kernel has the good virtue
of turning a truncated Chebyshev expansion into a causal
function. Unless explicitly stated, all LDOS calculations
reported in this paper use the FejГ©r kernel.
While relatively large system sizes are required in or-
der to converge the LDOS,40 the calculation of the self-
consistent order parameter can usually be performed in
smaller systems.41 The matrix element in Eq. (18) implies
the conversion of a hole at r into an electron at r вҖІ. This
process has a spatial cutoff of the order of the coherence
length. As a result, this matrix element saturates when the
system size exceeds a few times the coherence length. An
expansion order N much larger than 4M is needed, how-
ever, and the Jackson kernel turns out to be preferable. To
see this, let us denote вҲҶM
N the left-hand side of Eq. (18)
when the right-hand side is converged and the infinite sum
is truncated to order N. Figure 5(a) shows вҲҶM
вҲһ as a function
of M, where вҖңвҲһвҖқ means full convergence with respect to N.
The model is the same as in Fig. 4 with a pairing strength
set to вҲ’0.7975|t1| to reproduce the gap of 0.2|t1|. The gap
value is converged to better than 0.1% for M вүі 50. Fig-
ure 5(b) shows the convergence as a function of increasing
N for M = 100 and the different behaviors obtained with
different kernels. Without correction of the truncation er-
ror, the calculated gap converges with oscillations to the
exact value. With the Jackson kernel, which modifies the


9

coefficients (19) according to44

DJackson
n
= Dn

(NвҲ’n+1)cos
пҝҪ
ПҖn
N+1

пҝҪ
+ sin
пҝҪ
ПҖn
N+1

пҝҪ
cot
пҝҪ
ПҖ

N+1

пҝҪ

N + 1
,

(23)
the exact value is approached from below without oscilla-
tions. The FejГ©r kernel also leads to convergence from below,
but at a much slower rate. Finally, with the Lorentz kernel
the gap converges to a lower value because the scattering
rate О“ is pair breaking. In the present example, N = 2000
and the Jackson kernel ensure a 0.1% convergence.
All calculations of the self-consistent order parameter
reported in this paper use the Jackson kernel and values
of M and N that ensure at least 0.1% convergence. When
studying systems with broken translational symmetry, we
build the system of size M such that the site/bond where
the LDOS/gap is being calculated sits at the center; i.e.,
we use a different system for each site. In this way the
systematic errors associated with the systemвҖҷs boundaries
are comparable for all sites.

III.
APPLICATIONS

In this section, we present four brief studies illustrating
the potential of the method. The first two studies deal with
isolated vortices and do not require the asymmetric gauge,
yet they reveal the sensitivity of the vortex core to the band
structure and allow us to validate the model (8). The last
two studies deal with infinite ordered and disordered vortex
lattices and make use of the asymmetric gauge.
We first address the dichotomy between discrete vortex-
core bound states as predicted for superconductors of s-wave
symmetry and the continuous energy spectrum expected for
d-wave symmetry, both in the quantum and semiclassical
regimes. Although this problem is not new, the improved
energy resolution of the method allows us to differenti-
ate discrete states from a continuum in parameter regimes
where other methods see no distinction. We then inves-
tigate the self-consistent order parameter for an isolated
d-wave vortex as the chemical potential is tuned across a
Lifshitz transition. Variations of the order-parameter profile
have been previously studied as a function of temperature,45

magnetic field,46вҖ“49 and more recently confinement,50 but
the relation between the shape of the vortex core and the
Fermi-surface topology in the quantum regime has not been
considered so far. Our calculations show that the order pa-
rameters for isolated vortices have different shapes for open
and closed Fermi surfaces. The LDOS in and around the
vortex does not show signatures revealing unambiguously
the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter.
Next, still for a dx2вҲ’y2 pairing symmetry, we consider the
influence of nearby vortices on the LDOS in one vortex core.
In a perfect vortex lattice, it is known that the LDOS not
only depends on the field, but also on the vortex-lattice
orientation with respect to the microscopic lattice.33,35 It
is not clear how these dependencies disappear as the field

is lowered and the vortex spectra converge to the isolated-
vortex limit. Another question is how the differences due
to different orientations at the same field disappear when
disorder is introduced in the vortex positions and the distinc-
tion between orientations looses significance. We provide
here an answer to these questions.

A.
Resonant states in the d-wave vortex from the quantum
regime to the semiclassical limit

The inter-level spacing of the bound states predicted by
Caroli et al.8 is controlled by the parameter вҲҶ/EF вҲј 1/kFОҫ,
which is a small number for all known conventional su-
perconductors. A direct observation of the discrete levels
remains a challenge nowadays, which requires an extremely
clean limit and low temperature, Д§h/П„, kBT вүӘ вҲҶ/kFОҫ, where
П„ is the quasiparticle relaxation time. The core states are
so densely packed that they appear as a continuum in tun-
neling experiments.4вҖ“6 The two subgap levels observed first
in YBa2Cu3O7вҲ’Оҙ

51 and later in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ

52,53 vortex
cores were initially regarded as discrete bound states re-
solved due to the small value kFОҫ вҲј 1 in the cuprates. After
some debate,54,55 this interpretation has been progressively
abandoned as it became clear that the vortex-core spectrum
in a superconductor with dx2вҲ’y2 pairing symmetry has no
discrete levels.24 The topic remains somewhat controversial
on the theory side, because an analytical solution compara-
ble with the one of Caroli et al. could not be achieved for
the d-wave vortex. On the experimental side, it was shown
very recently that the two subgap levels in YBa2Cu3O7вҲ’Оҙ are
actually not vortex-core states, because they are observed
in zero field as well.56

Deciding whether a spectrum is discrete or continuous
based on numerics is not straightforward: in finite systems
the spectrum is intrinsically discrete and a careful finite-
size scaling is mandatory to prove the survival of discrete
states in the thermodynamic limit. Our method gives access
to very large systems and is well suited to settle the ques-
tion. We will compare lattice models that are identical in
all respects except the order-parameter size and symmetry,
and show that the vortex spectrum is discrete for s-wave
symmetry and continuous for d-wave symmetry, both in the
quantum and semiclassical regimes. Furthermore, we will
study how the signature of the Fermi surface in the vortex
LDOS progressively disappears as the system becomes more
and more classical.
Consider the square-lattice tight-binding model of
Sec. II F, ignoring the next-nearest neighbor hopping, and
setting the chemical potential to zero. This model is half-
filled with a bandwidth 8t1 and a Van Hove singularity at
the Fermi level. By varying the pairing strength, we tune the
system from the quantum regime where вҲҶ0/t1 вҲј 1 towards
the semiclassical limit where вҲҶ0/t1 вүӘ 1. Self-consistency
is ignored here for simplicity, as it will be considered at
length in the following subsection: a Ginzburg-Landau vor-
tex core is assumed, with profile p(r) = tanh(r/Оҫ) and
Оҫ/a = t1/вҲҶ0 вүҲ Д§hvF/(ПҖвҲҶ0). For a given system size, the


10

вҲҶ0/t1 = 1
d-wave

вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.5

вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.2

вҲ’2
вҲ’1
0
1
2
E/вҲҶ0

вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.1

(a)

вҲҶ0/t1 = 1
s-wave

вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.5

вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.2

вҲ’2
вҲ’1
0
1
2
E/вҲҶ0

вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.1

(b)

FIG. 6. LDOS at the vortex center for the half-filled square lattice
with nearest-neighbor hopping t1, second-neighbor hopping t2 = 0,
and various values of вҲҶ0 for (a) d-wave pairing and (b) s-wave
pairing. The thick horizontal bars denote the energy resolution
(which is identical in all panels). The dashed vertical lines in (b)
show multiples of вҲҶ0/t1, indicating the typical inter-level spacing
for bound states; the long (short) solid vertical lines mark the
actual bound-state energies with (without) weight at the vortex
center. All calculations use the system geometry of Fig. 3(a) for
M = 1000, N = 4M with the Jackson kernel, a = 8t1, and b = 0.

energy resolution of the calculation is set by the bandwidth
as discussed in Sec. II A. With decreasing вҲҶ0/t1, the system
size necessary in order to reach a sufficient subgap resolu-
tion therefore increases. We use a lattice of two million sites
with the diamond-like shape shown in Fig. 3(a). This sets
the resolution to вүҲ 0.015t1 and allows one to distinguish
discrete subgap features for вҲҶ0/t1 вүі 0.1. Figure 6(a) shows
the LDOS at the vortex center for the dx2вҲ’y2 symmetry. The
spectrum is continuous,24,28 showing a broad zero-bias peak
which narrows on entering the semiclassical regime and be-
comes resolution-limited for вҲҶ0/t1 вүІ 0.1. This calculation
would not miss discrete levels if they were present. This
is demonstrated by comparing with the LDOS calculated
for s-wave pairing [Fig. 6(b)], where discrete states are
easily resolved. In the continuum model,8 the half-integer
quantization of angular momentum forbids a state at exactly
zero energy. Here, due to broken rotational symmetry and
exact particle-hole symmetry, a state exists at exactly zero
energy. This state is mostly localized on the central site, giv-
ing a strong resolution-limited peak at E = 0. Note that the
width of this peak is independent of вҲҶ0, although it appears
broader at small вҲҶ0 in the figure due to rescaled energy axis.
The other bound states are mostly localized on neighboring
sites with little or no weight at the vortex center, where
they appear (or not) as small peaks at finite energies. The
vertical lines in Fig. 6(b) show all bound states which can
be identified according to the following three criteria: (i)
the peak width scales as 1/N, (ii) the peak energy saturates
with increasing N, (iii) at the peak energy, the LDOS has a
maximum at some distance from the center, which increases
with increasing energy. Note that every second state has
no weight on the central site. It is seen that the low-lying

states agree well with the scaling En/вҲҶ0 = (n/2)вҲҶ0/t1 with
integer n, while the inter-level spacing decreases as one
approaches the gap edges, like in the continuum model.22

For вҲҶ0/t1 = 0.1, the resolution limit is reached and the
spectrum looks continuous. If вҲҶ0/t1 < 0.1, the calcula-
tion alone cannot decide whether the zero-bias peak in the
d-wave case is a continuum or a superposition of discrete
levels; its smooth evolution into a continuum upon entering
the quantum regime leaves no doubt, however. In summary,
while the core states have to be exponentially localized in an
s-wave superconductor because no state can exist at subgap
energies far from the vortex, for a d-wave order parameter
the existence of excitations degenerate with the core states
in the bulk of the superconductor prevents the formation
of truly localized states. We will study further the spatial
behavior of the resonant core states in Sec. III C.

We now turn to the spatial distribution of the zero-energy
LDOS for the d-wave vortex. In the semiclassical approxima-
tion, this quantity has arms pointing along the nodal direc-
tions of the gap.47,57 In the quantum regime, one expects the
Fermi-surface anisotropy to become relevant. If kFОҫ вҲј 1, the
order parameter varies spatially over length scales similar
to 1/kF: the vortex therefore has Fourier components close
to kF, can induce extended transitions on the Fermi surface,
and thus feel its shape. To illustrate this, we compare the
model considered up to now, t1 вүЎ t, t2 = Вө = 0, with the
model t2 вүЎ t, t1 = Вө = 0. The latter appears somewhat
artificial but is quite interesting, because it has the same
normal-state DOS as the former with a Fermi surface rotated
by 45в—Ұ (see Fig. 7). Figure 7 compares the vortex LDOS
of the zero-energy peak in both models.58 In the quantum
regime (вҲҶ0/t вҲј 1), the LDOS in the second model exhibits
strong arms pointing along the lattice (antinodal) directions.
The rule of thumb learned from impurity scattering in the
quantum limit is that LDOS structures develop along the
directions perpendicular to the Fermi surface. The same
principle can explain the pattern seen in Fig. 7(b). The
pattern is more diffuse for the first model in Fig. 7(a), pre-
sumably due to a competition between the principle just
mentioned, which produces weak arms running along the
nodal directions, and the singular DOS associated with the
Van Hove singularity at (ПҖ,0), which enhances scattering
along the antinodal ones. On approaching the semiclassical
limit, the sensitivity to Fermi-surface anisotropy is progres-
sively reduced. In the first model, the LDOS displays arms
along the nodal directions28 like in the semiclassical approx-
imation, suggesting a link with the gap anisotropy. In the
second model, a rotation from antinodal to nodal star shape
seems to take place as the LDOS becomes more isotropic,
but the transformation is not yet completed at вҲҶ0/t = 0.1.
The data shown in Fig. 7 emphasize the difficulty of ascrib-
ing LDOS anisotropies to a single source when all length
scales are similar: some of the principles valid in the semi-
classical limit are not appropriate in the quantum regime.
Further illustrations will be given in Secs. III B and III C.


11

О“

вҲ’ПҖ
ПҖ
kxa
вҲ’ПҖ

ПҖ

kya

(a)

вҲҶ0/t = 1
вҲҶ0/t = 0.5
вҲҶ0/t = 0.1

О“

вҲ’ПҖ
ПҖ
kxa
вҲ’ПҖ

ПҖ

kya

(b)

20a
40a
200a

FIG. 7. Fermi surface and low-energy LDOS58 for a d-wave vortex
at three values of вҲҶ0/t on the square lattice with (a) t1 = t,
t2 = Вө = 0 and (b) t2 = t, t1 = Вө = 0. The vortex-core size is t/вҲҶ0
in units of the lattice parameter, corresponding to a single pixel in
each image. The color scale is logarithmic going from minimum
LDOS (black) to maximum LDOS (white).

B.
Reshaping of the vortex core across a Lifshitz transition

The BCS expression Оҫ = Д§hvF/(ПҖвҲҶ) suggests that the vor-
tex core may show anomalies at a Lifshitz transition, where
the Fermi velocity has a singularity. In order to explore the
dependence of the self-consistent vortex-core order parame-
ter on vF, we consider a tight-binding model on the square
lattice typical for the cuprates, with hopping amplitudes
t1 = вҲ’250 meV and t2 = 75 meV, and we vary the chem-
ical potential Вө between вҲ’500 meV and 0. The Lifshitz
transition takes place at Вө = вҲ’300 meV. Figures 8(a) and
8(b) show the corresponding evolution of the Fermi surface
and average Fermi velocity, respectively. We assume dx2вҲ’y2
pairing symmetry and adjust the nearest-neighbor attraction
V to keep the maximum gap along the Fermi surface fixed to
вҲҶ = 40 meV: in this way, we preclude changes of the vortex
core associated with variations of вҲҶ. The evolution of V is
also shown in Fig. 8(b). It is qualitatively consistent with
the relation вҲҶ вҲј exp{вҲ’1/[|V|N(0)]}, since the Fermi-level
DOS has a maximum at the Lifshitz point. The evolution
of the self-consistent order parameter for an isolated vortex
is displayed in Fig. 8(c). The calculations were performed
within the square system [Fig. 3(b)] of size M = 100 with
a Chebyshev expansion order N = 10000, a = 2.6 eV вҲ’ 2Вө,
and b = 0.
For each value of the chemical potential, we fit the func-
tion (8) to the self-consistent order parameter and extract
the values Оҫ0 and Оҫ1 plotted in the figure. The fit works
pretty well for the pure d-wave component, as illustrated
by the three examples for Вө = вҲ’500 meV, вҲ’275, and 0. The
upper blue surface shows the average of the gap modulus on
the four bonds surrounding each lattice site, while the lower
orange surface is the difference between the model and the
self-consistent solution. The order parameter does not reach
zero at the vortex center because the latter sits on a lattice
site, while the order parameter lives on nearest-neighbor
bonds.

О“

Вө = 0

вҲ’500 meV

(a)

вҲ’400
вҲ’200
0
Вө (meV)

1

2

3

4

vF (107 cm/s)

(b)

0.2

0.3

0.4

вҲ’V (eV)

0

10

20

30

40

sвҲ—-wave component (%)

вҲ’500
вҲ’400
вҲ’300
вҲ’200
вҲ’100
0
Вө (meV)

0

1

2

3

Lattice parameter units

Оҫ = Д§hvF

ПҖвҲҶ

Оҫc
Оҫ0

Оҫ1 (Г·10)

(c)

FIG. 8. (a) Evolution of the Fermi surface with varying chemical
potential Вө for a square lattice with t1 = вҲ’250 meV and t2 =
75 meV. (b) Evolution with Вө of the average Fermi velocity (left
scale) and nearest-neighbor interaction needed to produce a d-
wave gap of 40 meV on the Fermi surface (right scale).
The
velocity is calculated for a lattice parameter a = 3.8 Г…. The vertical
line indicates the Lifshitz transition. (c) Evolution of the vortex
parameters Оҫ0, Оҫ1, and Оҫc = Оҫ1W(Оҫ0/Оҫ1) (left scale). The length
Д§hvF/(ПҖвҲҶ) is also indicated for comparison. The squares (right
scale) show the maximum amplitude of the sвҲ—-wave component.
The surface plots show, for three values of the chemical potential
and for each node of the microscopic square lattice (black lines),
the self-consistent order parameter modulus (blue), the difference
between the model (8) and the self-consistent data (orange), and
the sвҲ—-wave component in one quarter of the field of view (green).
The lattice grid also marks the zero of the vertical scale, such
that positive (negative) values of the difference shown in orange
appears above (below) the lattice.

One observes a clear change, not only in the size, but
also in the shape of the vortex-core profile across the Lif-
shitz transition. While the formula Оҫ = Д§hvF/(ПҖвҲҶ) would
predict a monotonic increase of the core size on increasing
Вө, with a weak anomaly at the Lifshitz point, the size ac-
tually increases on both sides of this point where it has a
minimum. To be more quantitative, we define the size Оҫc of
the core as the вҖңwidth at half heightвҖқ given by the condition


12

p(Оҫc) = 1/2. The solution is Оҫc = Оҫ1W(Оҫ0/Оҫ1) where W is
the Lambert function. One sees in Fig. 8(c) that this quantity
indeed has a minimum close to the Lifshitz point. Because
Оҫ1 вү« Оҫ0 and W(x) = x for x вҶ’ 0, we have Оҫc вүҲ Оҫ0. The
shape of the core also changes at the Lifshitz point: on the
right, where the Fermi surface is hole-like, the minimum at
the vortex center is sharp, on the left it is more rounded.
The model (8) captures this change by varying the ratio
Оҫ0/Оҫ1: while the slope at the origin is controlled only by Оҫ0,
pвҖІ(0) = 1/Оҫ0, the curvature pвҖІвҖІ(0) = 2(Оҫ0 вҲ’ Оҫ1)/(Оҫ2
0Оҫ1) is
positive if Оҫ1 < Оҫ0. Finally, while the model (8) has cylindri-
cal symmetry, the self-consistent solution presents a weak
anisotropy. The gap relaxes faster to its bulk value along the
diagonals of the square lattice than along the (10) and (01)
directions. The same behavior is found in the semiclassical
approximation.57 Consequently, the model overestimates
the data along (10) and underestimates it along (11). The
anisotropy is similar on both sides of the Lifshitz point where
it is minimal, such that the core is nearly isotropic there.
The figure also shows that the induced sвҲ—-wave component25

varies strongly across the transition. Small for the hole-like
Fermi surfaces (вҲј 6% at Вө = 0 and вҲј 2% at Вө = вҲ’275 meV),
it reaches вҲј 40% at Вө = вҲ’500 meV.

Figure 9 shows the vortex LDOS calculated at three repre-
sentative values of the chemical potential. The zero-energy
LDOS extends from the vortex center along the antinodal
directions,28,31 both for electron-like and hole-like Fermi
surfaces. This is to be contrasted with the result in the semi-
classical limit47,57вҖ”as well as in the quantum limit for a half-
filled square lattice without second-neighbor hopping;28 see
Sec. III AвҖ”where the zero-energy LDOS extends along the
nodal directions. It also hurts the widespread belief that the
LDOS should extend farther along the directions where the
gap is smallest. Weak arms pointing along the nodal direc-
tions only show up on a logarithmic scale. Above 15 meV
(0.3вҲҶ) the LDOS has the same starlike spatial pattern as
in the semiclassical approximation57,59 when the chemical
potential is close to the Lifshitz point; for lower and higher
band fillings the patters are different. The spectral traces
displayed in Figs.9(b) and 9(c) change considerably with
varying the chemical potential. At Вө = 0, while two dis-
persing features are seen in Fig.9(c) along the direction
(11), like in the CaroliвҖ“de GennesвҖ“Matricon vortex,8 four
structures show up in Fig.9(b) along (10), like in the semi-
classical model.57 At Вө = вҲ’275 meV, the LDOS looks globally
more isotropic, although is falls off more quickly along (11)
as seen in the spatial maps. The coherence peak at negative
energy is taller due to the Van Hove singularity at вҲ’25 meV
in the bare dispersion. At Вө = вҲ’500 meV, the main peculiar-
ity is that the zero-energy peak is skewed toward positive
energy. We attribute this to the strong sвҲ—-wave component
in the order parameter, which destroys locally the d-wave
symmetry and is not captured by the model (8).

The LDOS in and around d-wave vortices is not univer-
sal, as exemplified by the differences between the traces of
Fig. 9. The figure also demonstrates that the variations are
mostly due to changes in the band structure, not to changes
in the order parameter. This is established in two steps. The

Вө = 0

log

(a)
E = 0

lin

5 meV
10 meV
15 meV
20 meV

вҲ’275 meV

log
lin

вҲ’500 meV

log
lin

вҲ’50
0
50

Вө = 0
(b)

(0,0)

(20,0)

вҲ’50
0
50

вҲ’275 meV

вҲ’50
0
50

вҲ’500 meV

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

(c)

Вө = 0
(0,0)

(20,20)

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

вҲ’275 meV

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

вҲ’500 meV

FIG. 9. (a) Spatial and (b), (c) spectral distributions of the LDOS
for open hole-like Fermi surface (Вө = 0), nearly square Fermi
surface (Вө = вҲ’275 meV), and closed electron-like Fermi surface
(Вө = вҲ’500 meV). The first two columns in (a) show the same data
on logarithmic (log) and linear (lin) scales. The scale for the other
maps is linear. All maps show the same region of size 41aГ—41a. (b)
and (c) display spectral traces running from the core along the (10)
and (11) directions, respectively; spectra are shifted vertically. The
solid lines show the LDOS for the self-consistent order parameter;
the red-dashed lines in (b) show the LDOS calculated with the
isotropic model (8) using the fitted parameters; the blue-dashed
lines in (c) show the LDOS calculated using (8) with the fixed
values Оҫ0 = 1.3a and Оҫ1 = 14a. Only one quarter of the dashed
spectra is shown for clarity. All calculation were performed with
M = 350, N = 4M, a = 2.6 eV, and b = 0.3 eV вҲ’ Вө.

three traces in Fig. 9(b) compare the LDOS for the fully self-
consistent order parameter with the LDOS calculated using
the model (8). When the model is in qualitative agreement
with the self-consistent result (small sвҲ—-wave component),
the two sets of traces only differ by tiny quantitative details.
At Вө = вҲ’500 meV, where the model misses the large sвҲ—-wave
component, the differences are bigger but the traces remain
qualitatively similar. It appears that qualitative properties
of the order parameter, like an induced sвҲ—-wave component,


13

do play a role in the LDOS, but quantitative details such
as the differences displayed in orange in Fig. 8 do not. In
Fig. 9(c), the three traces plotted with dotted lines were
all calculated with identical order parameters. They never-
theless exhibit the same typical variations with changing Вө
as the fully self-consistent traces, which proves that these
variations are linked with changes in the band structure. An
examination of the spatial maps leads to the same conclu-
sion: the core size defined by the contrast of the LDOS maps
is not uniquely linked with the core size Оҫc in Fig. 8, but
shows different trends at different energies. At E = 0, the
core appears smallest near the Lifshitz point and increases
both for open and closed Fermi surfaces like Оҫc. But at
E = 20 meV the trend seems rather to follow the Fermi
velocity like Оҫ. These trends also display polarity: for in-
stance, for Вө = вҲ’500 meV the core appears much larger in
the LDOS at E = вҲ’15 meV than at E = +15 meV. These ob-
servations confirm the disconnection in the quantum regime
between the spatial patterns of the LDOS and the spatial
structure of the order parameter. A similar conclusion has
been recently drawn from studies of the vortex-core struc-
ture in LiFeAs.37,60

In summary, the self-consistent order parameter of an
isolated vortex in a superconductor of dx2вҲ’y2 symmetry
varies across a Lifshitz transition. Part of this variation
can be tracked by the two-parameter model (8), but the
emergence of a local sвҲ—-wave component goes beyond the
model. The simple correlation implied by the BCS formula
between the vortex-core radius and the Fermi velocity is
broken in the quantum regime. The LDOS around the vortex
is not tightly linked with the quantitative details of the order
parameter, but depends on band-structure properties in a
way which has not been fully clarified so far. Last but not
least, there is no clear-cut signature of the dx2вҲ’y2-wave
symmetry of the order parameter in the LDOS. The latter
statement will be further illustrated in the next subsection.

C.
New emerging length for quasibound vortex-core states

Previous studies of ideal vortex lattices with d-wave order
parameter have shown that the LDOS in the core changes
significantly with increasing field.33,35 At a given field, the
LDOS also depends on the orientation of the vortex lattice.35

The interpretation is that the vortex-core states are not ex-
ponentially localized and connect the various cores to form
bands.13,33 It is natural to ask whether there is a new emerg-
ing length scale, between the coherence length and the
penetration depth, associated with the overlap of the core
states. The magnetic field being uniform in our calcula-
tions, the penetration depth is in effect infinite. We examine
the existence of a new length scale by asking the follow-
ing question: how far apart must the vortices be, for the
LDOS in each core to be independent of the vortex-lattice
orientation? We find that the sensitivity of the LDOS to
vortex-lattice orientation increases exponentially with re-
ducing the intervortex distance, over a characteristic length
unrelated to the parameter Оҫ0, which determines the gap

modulus near the core, but possibly connected with the
parameter Оҫ1.
The microscopic model is the same as in the previous
section, with Вө = t1 and вҲҶ = 41.3 meV: the Van Hove singu-
larity of the bare DOS is at вҲ’50 meV and the largest gap on
the Fermi surface is 40 meV. We consider two orientations
of the vortex lattice with respect to the microscopic lattice,
0в—Ұ and 45в—Ұ. For both orientations, we compute the self-
consistent order parameter at various intervortex distances
d between 20a and 100a. The corresponding field range
is 35вҖ“1.5 T for a lattice parameter typical of the cuprates.
Such low fields are unreachable by conventional numerical
techniques, but relatively easy to access with the real-space
method. We fit the ansatz (12) to the self-consistent solution
and obtain the field dependence of the parameters Оҫ0 and
Оҫ1 displayed in the insets of Fig. 10(a). The sвҲ—-wave com-
ponent is smaller than 1.6% at all fields and the difference
between the fit and the self-consistent data is below 6%.
The field dependencies of Оҫ0 and Оҫ1 are well described by
the exponential form Оҫ(d) = Оҫ(вҲһ) + AeвҲ’d/в„“ with lengths в„“
that are typically 21a for Оҫ0 and 37a for Оҫ1. We see that
Оҫ1 вү« Оҫ0 in the whole field range, such that the vortex-core
size is Оҫc вүҲ Оҫ0.
We first observe that the core size increases with in-
creasing field.
This trend suggests that the cores grow
and eventually merge as the critical field is approached,
which contradicts the idea that the cores shrink due to the
overlapping currents.61 Several measurements46,62,63 and
calculations46,47 have indeed reported a decrease of the core
size with increasing field. We note that these measurements
have probed the low-field regime (below 1.5 T) for s-wave
superconductors such as NbSe2, which are far from the
quantum limit. Likewise, all calculations have been done for
s-wave superconductors within the semiclassical approxima-
tion. Our results show that the behavior of the core size in
a d-wave superconductor, in the quantum limit and at high
field, is opposite to the behavior in a s-wave superconductor,
in the classical limit and at low field.
Next we calculate, for the two vortex-lattice orientations,
the LDOS in the core and at the most symmetric point in-
between the cores, as a function of field. The result is
displayed in Figs. 10(b) and 10(c), respectively. As the
field increases [top to bottom in Figs. 10(b) and 10(c)],
the zero-energy peak in the core gets suppressed and the
superconducting gap in between the vortices gets filled. For
the lowest field (d = 100a) the LDOS depends very little
on the orientation, while significant differences appear for
d < 50a. We quantify these differences by computing the
correlation (Ei are discrete energies)

пҝҪ =

пҝҪ

i N (0в—Ұ)(r, Ei)N (45в—Ұ)(r, Ei)

пҝҪпҝҪ

i[N (0в—Ұ)(r, Ei)]2 пҝҪ

i[N (45в—Ұ)(r, Ei)]2 .
(24)

Figure 10 shows that пҝҪ decreases exponentially from unity
as the vortices get closer until d вүҲ 30a (16 T). For shorter
distances, the LDOS curves are qualitatively different and
the correlation пҝҪ is less meaningful. The exponential behav-
ior extends over two decades with the same characteristic


14

20
40
60
80
100
d/a

10вҲ’4

10вҲ’3

10вҲ’2

1 вҲ’пҝҪ

(38)

(38)
(a)

B (T)
1.5
2
5
10
100

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

(b)

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

100

50

10

0в—Ұ

45в—Ұ
(c)

20
40
60
80 100
d/a

0.5

1

1.5
Оҫ0/a

(19)

(23)
20
40
60
80 100
d/a

10

15

Оҫ1/a

(32)

(42)

FIG. 10. Insets in (a). Parameters Оҫ0 and Оҫ1 as a function of inter-
vortex distance d in the 0в—Ұ (black squares) and 45в—Ұ (red diamonds)
vortex lattices. The solid lines show exponential behavior with
the characteristic lengths indicated in parentheses. (b) LDOS in
the core and (c) in-between vortices for increasing field (top to
bottom, from d/a = 100 to d/a = 10, shifted vertically) in the 0в—Ұ

(black solid lines) and 45в—Ұ (red dashed lines) vortex lattice. The
main graph (a) shows how the correlation between the spectra for
the 0в—Ұ and 45в—Ұ orientations approaches unity with decreasing field
in the core (filled circles) and in-between vortices (empty circles).
The magnetic field B = ОҰ0/d2 is shown for a lattice parameter
a = 3.8 Г…. The self-consistent calculations were performed with
M = 100, N = 10000, a = 3.1 eV, b = 0; the LDOS calculations
with M = 500, N = 4M, a = 2.6 eV, b = 0.55 eV.

length in the core and in between the vortices: в„“ = 38a.
This length is 50 times longer than Оҫ0 of the isolated vortex,
and two times longer than Оҫ1.
In order to better understand the meaning of в„“, we re-
turn to the isolated vortex and study the behavior of the
LDOS at long distances from the core, using a large sys-
tem (M = 500). Figure 11 shows the spatial dependence
of the LDOS N(r, E) along the directions (10) and (11) at
various energies. We overlook particle-hole asymmetry by
averaging the LDOS at positive and negative energies. For
convenience, we also normalize N(r, E) to its zero-field (no
vortex) value N0(E). Because in the calculation we keep the
position r fixed at the system center and move the vortex
with respect to this position, the boundary errors affect in
the same way all points in the graph. Looking at zero en-

ergy first, one sees the LDOS being larger along (10) than
along (11) at short distances, with an inversion for r > 4a.
Both tails extend far from the core: there is no sign that
they have converged at r = 200a. The stronger tail in the
nodal direction explains why the parameters Оҫ0 and Оҫ1 of
the vortex lattice are more sensitive to the field for the 45в—Ұ

orientation. It is worthwhile stressing that the zero-energy
LDOS leaks out of the core to very large distances in the
nodal and antinodal directionsвҖ”as a matter of fact, in all
directions with the longest tails about 10в—Ұ off the nodal
direction; see Fig. 9(a). This indeed reveals the existence
of nodal excitations degenerate with the zero-energy core
states everywhere in the bulk of the superconductor, but it
also underlines that the gap nodes do not show up in the
form of a star in real space around the vortex. The reason is
that the LDOS mainly probes the center-of-mass coordinate
of the Cooper pairs, while the nodes are a property of the
relative coordinate. The nodes are directly visible in real
space when probing nonlocal properties connected with the
off-diagonal elements Gr r вҖІ of the GreenвҖҷs function.31

At finite energy, the LDOS appears to reach an asymptotic
value at some finite length of the order of в„“. No particular
meaning has been associated yet with the length Оҫ1 in the
model (8). The profile p(r) is mostly sensitive to Оҫ1 in
the region r вүі
пҝҪ

2Оҫ0Оҫ1, which is well outside the core.
Since Оҫ1 probes the order parameter far from the core,
while в„“ probes the LDOS in the same region, it is tempting
to connect the two lengths. The fact that в„“ seems to set
the field dependence of Оҫ1 (Fig. 10) points to the same
direction. The relation в„“ вүҲ 2Оҫ1 may be a consequence of the
fact that the LDOS depends on the order parameter squared.

|E| = 0

Оҫ0/a

Оҫ1/a

в„“/a

100
101
102

r/a

100

101

N(r, E)/N0(E)

Isolated vortex

10 meV

20 meV

30 meV

40 meV

r along (10)
r along (11)

FIG. 11.
Spatial evolution of the LDOS along the antinodal
(filled black symbols) and nodal (empty red symbols) directions at
various energies for an isolated vortex. The LDOS is normalized to
its value in the absence of vortex. The vertical lines indicate the
characteristic lengths Оҫ0, Оҫ1, and в„“.


15

Consequently, Оҫ1 may be interpreted as half a characteristic
dimension of the vortex, which describes the localization
of states at finite energies. A systematic study of в„“ and its
possible relation with Оҫ1 is left for a future work.

D.
Vortex-core LDOS in disordered vortex lattices

In superconductors with short coherence length, the vor-
tices are easily pinned by defects leading to glassy vortex
phases.38,39 In Bi-based cuprates, for instance, the disorder
can be such that the short-range coordination between vor-
tex positions has no obvious symmetry at high fields.64,65

Disordered vortices have also been observed in the iron
pnictides.66 This raises the question of how severely the
vortex-core spectra are affected by disorder in the vortex
lattice. For strong enough disorder, the information about
the initial vortex-lattice orientation is lost and the average
vortex-core spectrum should no longer depend on this ori-
entation. In this section, we build on the results of the
previous section to study how the spectra in the 0в—Ұ and 45в—Ұ

vortex-lattice orientations progressively become identical
as disorder is increased. Unlike previous studies,17,20 we
consider positional disorder with respect to a perfect lattice
rather than completely random vortex positions, and we
focus on the vortex-core spectrum rather than the average
DOS. Starting from the ideal lattices, we introduce a dis-
order ОҙR = dПҒ(cosП„,sinП„) in the vortex positions, where
d is the initial distance between vortices, ПҒ is a random
number with Gaussian distribution of variance О·, and П„
is a uniform random number between 0 and 2ПҖ. О· mea-
sures the strength of disorder, the mean displacement being
dО·
пҝҪ

2/ПҖ. We mimic the vortex repulsion by constraining
the intervortex distance to be larger than 18a. For each dis-
order strength and both lattice orientations, we generate 30
vortex configurations and, for each configuration, we com-
pute the vortex-core spectrum in 121 vortices. The resulting
3630 spectra are averaged and the correlation пҝҪ between
the averages is calculated. The results are summarized in
Fig. 12.
Figures 12(a) and 12(b) display average vortex-core spec-
tra for two fields and three disorder strengths. In each case,
the standard deviation of the distribution of spectra gives
a measure of the disorder-induced spectral variability in
the core. The energy dependence of the standard deviation
shows that the effect of disorder on the LDOS is limited
to low energies вүІ 30 meV and is maximal for zero-energy
states, as expected given their large spatial extension. Less
expected is the non-monotonic behavior of the standard
deviation, with a minimum near Вұ6 meV. It appears that
positional disorder transfers spectral weight across a well-
defined energy. This energy increases slowly with increasing
field and disorder, from 5 to 7 meV for d = 50a over the
range of disorder considered, respectively from 6 to 8 meV
for d = 30a. As spectral weight is removed at low energy,
the average zero-energy peak is suppressed with increasing
disorder, while at the same time the orientation dependence
disappears. At О· = 0.1, the spectral differences between

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
О·

0.999

1

пҝҪ

d = 50a

вҲј eвҲ’О·/0.11

(c)

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
О·

0.995

1

d = 30a

вҲј eвҲ’О·/0.11

(d)

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

(a)

(b)

d = 50a
О· = 0.1

d = 30a
О· = 0.1

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

d = 50a
О· = 0.3

d = 30a
О· = 0.3

вҲ’50
0
50
E (meV)

d = 50a
О· = 0.5

d = 30a
О· = 0.5

FIG. 12.
(a) and (b) Average vortex-core spectra in the disor-
dered 0в—Ұ (solid black) and 45в—Ұ (dashed red) vortex lattices for (a)
d = 50a and (b) d = 30a and for three disorder strengths. In
each case, the average is calculated from a distribution of 3630
spectra. The standard deviation of the distribution is displayed
as gray area and light red lines for the 0в—Ұ and 45в—Ұ orientations,
respectively. (c) and (d) Correlation between the average spectra
for both orientations as a function of disorder strength. Linear
and exponential behaviors are shown by solid lines on top of the
calculation (circles).

the two orientations are bigger than the disorder-induced
variations, such that the average spectra remain orientation
dependent. At О· = 0.5, the disorder-induced variations are
a substantial fraction of the signal and orientation depen-
dence is lost. The correlation пҝҪ indicates a transition from
a weak-disorder regime, where пҝҪ increases linearly with
О·, to a strong-disorder regime characterized by an expo-
nential suppression of the orientation dependence over a
characteristic disorder strength of the order of 10%.

The data shown in Fig. 12 were compiled from the LDOS
calculated exactly at the vortex centers, i.e., at the lattice
points where the phase is singular and the order parameter
is zero. An inspection reveals that a small number of these
spectra exhibit a split zero-energy peak. Figure 13 shows the
zero-energy LDOS in a region containing 18 vortices. Two
nearby vortices at the center form a pair in which one has a
split peak and the other not. Zooming in [Fig. 13(b)], we
see that the split peak occurs because the maximum of the
zero-energy LDOS is spatially dissociated from the vortex
center: where the zero-energy LDOS has its maximum, the
peak is not split (spectrum 2). In the second vortex of the
pair, the LDOS maximum is spread over four sites and a
peak subsists at the center (spectrum 7). The dissociation
of the maximum zero-energy LDOS from the vortex center


16

is due to an asymmetric distribution of supercurrent around
the core,30 as illustrated in Fig. 13(c). For an isolated vortex
or an ideal vortex lattice, the supercurrent averages to zero
around each vortex and there is no resultant Lorentz force.
Positional disorder breaks this symmetry, so each vortex
endures a net force F = J Г— B, where J stands for a spatial
average of the current density j over the core. Hence F
is a measure of the strength and direction of the current
asymmetry. Figure 13(c) shows that F is twice as large in
the vortex where the dissociation takes place compared with
the partner in the pair. The reason appears in Fig. 13(a):
a vortex-deficient zone in the direction of the force, with
no equivalent for the partner. In response to the Lorentz
force, the electronic structure gets polarized in the direction
of the force, leading to the separation of the geometric
and electronic vortex centers. Since experiments access the
LDOS but are blind to the order-parameter singularities, a
systematic study of the LDOS polarization as a function of
the force may provide the knowledge required in order to
infer exact vortex positions from experimentally observed
LDOS maxima.

IV.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The vortex cores hold keys to understand the supercon-
ducting state, especially its phase coherence and interaction
with competing orders. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy
provides an access to the LDOS, where much of this in-
formation is stored. While the measurements are usually
performed in low magnetic fields and the vortex positions
are often disordered, the calculations reported so far con-
sidered either isolated vortices or ideal vortex lattices at
high fields. These results may not be relevant to interpret
some of the experiments. The method described here opens
new doors and improves our capability to simulate experi-
ments realistically. We have demonstrated this by reporting
self-consistent BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes calculations for fields
as low as 1.5 T, as well as LDOS calculations for infinite
disordered vortex configurations. Thanks to a good energy
resolution and excellent scalability, the method is ideally
suited for two-dimensional lattice models in the quantum
limit. We have obtained several results for isolated vortices
in d-wave superconductors: the vortex LDOS is not univer-
sal and depends largely on the band structure, which also
affects the vortex-core profile; the representation of this
profile requires at least two characteristic lengths, which
show different behaviors compared with the canonical BCS
coherence length; consideration of the vortex LDOS alone
does not allow one to determine unambiguously the order-
parameter symmetry; the LDOS is delocalized in all spatial
directions at zero energy, while at finite energy it is con-
fined by a third characteristic length different from those
describing the vortex profile. The observation of this new
emerging scale was not possible with previous methods, as
it requires very large systems and/or vortex lattices at fields
lower than 10 T. For two square vortex lattices, we have
found that in the quantum limit, unlike in the semiclassical

(a)

low
high

Г—

Г—

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

(b)

Г—
1
2
3

4

Г—

5

6

7
8

Г—

Г—

(c)

FIG. 13.
(a) Zero-energy LDOS over a 200a Г— 200a region
in a disordered 45в—Ұ vortex lattice with d = 50a and О· = 0.3.
The energy-dependent LDOS calculated at the vortex centers is
displayed next to each vortex. (b) Zoom of the central region
showing spectral traces across two vortex cores at the positions
indicated in the insets. Red crosses mark the vortex centers (phase
singularity points). The distance between the two centers is 22a.
(c) Superfluid current density (color scale and black arrows) in
the same region as (b) and resultant Lorentz force on each vortex
(green arrows). The force is the average of j Г— B inside the dashed
circles of radius 11a.

limit, the vortex cores grow with increasing field. Disorder
in the vortex positions leads to a redistribution of spectral
weight around a characteristic energy inside the gap. The
net result is a broadening of the average zero-energy LDOS
peak and disappearance of its dependence on vortex-lattice


17

orientation. This disappearance crosses over from linear at
weak disorder to exponential at stronger disorder, defining
a characteristic positional disorder at 10% of the intervortex
distance. Lastly, we showed that a sufficiently asymmetric
distribution of supercurrent can dissociate the geometric
and electronic vortex centers in response to the Lorentz
force polarizing the LDOS.

The numerical method used here has a broad scope and
is straightforwardly generalized to include, e.g., multiple
bands, impurity potentials, and competing orders such as
antiferromagnetism or charge-density waves. NbSe2 is an in-
teresting material to consider, being a charge-density wave
superconductor in which vortices have been extensively
studied by STM,6 and sitting in an intermediate regime be-
tween the quantum and semiclassical limits. The interplay
between charge-density wave and vortex-core structure67

has so far not been studied theoretically. Other interest-
ing problems where the real-space Chebyshev-expansion
approach offers obvious advantages include the evolution of
the vortex-core structure and spectroscopy on approaching
a surface or a grain boundary,68 or the Josephson vortices
pinned at step edges.69 We have complemented the tool-
box of this approach with an ansatz order parameter for
infinite disordered vortex configurations; we hope this will
stimulate further studies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Discussions with T. Giamarchi and D. van der Marel in
the initial stage of this project are gratefully acknowledged.
I also thank H. Suderow for valuable comments on the
manuscript. The work was supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation under Division II. The calculations were
performed in the University of Geneva with the clusters
Mafalda and Baobab.

Appendix A: Symmetries of the order parameter

The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the BogoliubovвҖ“de
Gennes Hamiltonian H may be defined as H =
пҝҪ

Оұ |ОұвҢӘEОұвҢ©Оұ|.
The electron and hole amplitudes are uОұ(r) = вҢ©r|ОұвҢӘ and
vОұ(r) = вҢ©ВҜr|ОұвҢӘ, respectively. Alternatively, this means that
the amplitudes satisfy H(uОұ, vОұ) = EОұ(uОұ, vОұ). By manip-
ulating this equation and using the form (2), it is easy
to see that, if (and only if) вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲҶr вҖІr, the following
also holds: H(vвҲ—
Оұ,вҲ’uвҲ—
Оұ) = вҲ’EОұ(vвҲ—
Оұ,вҲ’uвҲ—
Оұ). The symmetry
(uОұ, vОұ, EОұ) вҶ” (vвҲ—
Оұ,вҲ’uвҲ—
Оұ,вҲ’EОұ) shows that the spectrum of
H is symmetric. Of course, this does not imply that the
electronic spectrum (the LDOS) is particle-hole symmetric.
Making use of this symmetry, we can see how the anoma-
lous function Fr r вҖІ(z) at complex energy z changes upon

exchanging the spatial indices:

Fr r вҖІ(z) = вҢ©r|(z вҲ’ H)вҲ’1|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ =
пҝҪ

Оұ

uОұ(r)vвҲ—
Оұ(r вҖІ)

z вҲ’ EОұ

= вҲ’
пҝҪ

Оұ

vвҲ—
Оұ(r)uОұ(r вҖІ)

z + EОұ
= Fr вҖІr(вҲ’z).
(A1)

If b = 0 (see Sec. II A), this symmetry also provides a useful
relation between the Chebyshev coefficients вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ
and вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ. In this case, ЛңH has the same symmetries
as H, such that

вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ =
пҝҪ

Оұ
uОұ(r)Tn(ЛңEОұ)vвҲ—
Оұ(r вҖІ)

= вҲ’
пҝҪ

Оұ
vвҲ—
Оұ(r)Tn(вҲ’ЛңEОұ)uОұ(r вҖІ)

= (вҲ’1)n+1вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ
(b = 0),
(A2)

were we have used a property of the Chebyshev polynomials:
Tn(вҲ’x) = (вҲ’1)nTn(x). Inserting (A2) into (18), we can
establish the symmetry of вҲҶ:

вҲҶr r вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҶr вҖІr = вҲ’Vr r вҖІ

вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=1
Dn[1 + (вҲ’1)n]вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ = 0.

This results because Dn = 0 for n even and 1 + (вҲ’1)n = 0
for n odd. The symmetry (uОұ, vОұ, EОұ) вҶ” (vвҲ—
Оұ,вҲ’uвҲ—
Оұ,вҲ’EОұ) is
broken in the asymmetric gauge, because the BogoliubovвҖ“
de Gennes amplitudes are gauge covariant: uОұ = uОұeig,
v Оұ = vОұeвҲ’ih. Consequently, for the gauge (10) we have
вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜrвҢӘ = eig(r вҖІ)вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ which, together with
вҲҶ r r вҖІ = вҲҶr r вҖІeig(r), leads to Eq. (20). Proceeding like for
(A2), we find

вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ = (вҲ’1)n+1ei[ОҰrвҖІвҲ’r (r)вҲ’2пҝҪr rвҖІ]вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜrвҢӘ.

Inserting this in (20) yields the symmetry property (21):

вҲҶ r r вҖІeвҲ’i[ОҰrвҖІвҲ’r (r)вҲ’2пҝҪr rвҖІ] вҲ’ вҲҶ r вҖІr

= вҲ’Vr r вҖІ

вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=1
Dn[1 + (вҲ’1)n]вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ = 0.

We now provide the relations which must be used instead
of (18) and (20) if the calculation is performed with b Мё= 0.
Proceeding like in Sec. II E, we find in this case

вҲҶr r вҖІ = вҲ’Vr r вҖІ

вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=1

пҝҪ
D+
n вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜrвҢӘ + DвҲ’
n вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH)|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ
пҝҪ
,

where the coefficients are now given by

DВұ
n = вҲ“ 1

ПҖ

пҝҪ 1

вҲ’1
d ЛңE f (ВұE) eвҲ’inarccos(ЛңE)

пҝҪ

1 вҲ’ ЛңE2

= вҲ’i

ПҖn

пҝҪ

(вҲ“1)n вҲ’

пҝҪ вҲһ

вҲ’вҲһ
dE [вҲ’f вҖІ(E)]eвҲ’inarccos[(EвҲ’b)/a]
пҝҪ

.


18

In the asymmetric gauge, the corresponding expression is

вҲҶ r r вҖІ = вҲ’Vr r вҖІ

вҲһ
пҝҪ

n=1

пҝҪ
ei[ОҰrвҖІвҲ’r (r)вҲ’2пҝҪr rвҖІ]D+
n вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜrвҢӘ

+DвҲ’
n вҢ©r|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜr вҖІвҢӘ
пҝҪ
.

To conclude this appendix, we show that in a vortex
lattice, the self-consistency equation (20) warrants the prop-
erty that вҲҶeiпҝҪ has the periodicity of the vortex lattice. We
proceed by recurrence, noting that the property is satis-
fied by the ansatz (12), because the function ОҰ is peri-
odic. If the order parameter has the required periodicity,
a shift by a vortex-lattice vector R changes it according to
вҲҶ r+R,r вҖІ+R = вҲҶ r r вҖІei(пҝҪr rвҖІвҲ’пҝҪr+R,rвҖІ+R). The key point is that the
phase пҝҪr r вҖІ вҲ’ пҝҪr+R,r вҖІ+R is a gradient which we can write as

пҝҪr r вҖІ вҲ’ пҝҪr+R,r вҖІ+R = TR(r вҖІ) вҲ’ TR(r).

Indeed, the Peierls phase is the sum of a linear term deter-

mined by the average magnetic field and given by Eq. (17),
and a periodic contribution which drops in the difference.
Using (17), we get TR(r) = ПҖY x/S. The hopping amplitude,
hence the whole Hamiltonian H, transforms in the same way
as the order parameter. Based on this, it is straightforward
to check that the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes amplitudes in the
asymmetric gauge transform as uОұ(r + R) = uОұ(r)eвҲ’iTR(r)

and v Оұ(r + R) = v Оұ(r)eвҲ’iTR(r). Consequently, a shift of the
Chebyshev coefficient by R gives

вҢ©r вҖІ + R|Tn( ЛңH )|r + RвҢӘ =
пҝҪ

Оұ
uОұ(r вҖІ + R)Tn(ЛңEОұ)vвҲ—
Оұ(r + R)

= ei[TR(r)вҲ’TR(r вҖІ)]вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜrвҢӘ

= eвҲ’i(пҝҪr rвҖІвҲ’пҝҪr+R,rвҖІ+R)вҢ©r вҖІ|Tn( ЛңH )|ВҜrвҢӘ.

Inserted in Eq. (20), this achieves proving the periodicity of
вҲҶeiпҝҪ .

1 G. Blatter, M. V. FeigelвҖҷman, V. B. Geshkenbein, A. I. Larkin, and
V. M. Vinokur, Vortices in high-temperature superconductors, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 66, 1125 (1994).

2 T. Giamarchi and S. Bhattacharya, in High Magnetic Fields: Ap-
plications in Condensed Matter Physics and Spectroscopy, Lecture
Notes in Physics, Vol. 595, edited by C. Berthier, L. P. Levy, and
G. Martinez (Springer, Berlin, 2001) p. 314.

3 See, e.g., I. GuillamГіn, R. CГіrdoba, J. SesГ©, J. M. De Teresa,
M. R. Ibarra, S. Vieira, and H. Suderow, Enhancement of long-
range correlations in a 2D vortex lattice by an incommensurate
1D disorder potential, Nat. Phys. 10, 851 (2014), and references
therein.

4 H. F. Hess, R. B. Robinson, and J. V. Waszczak, Vortex-Core
Structure Observed with a Scanning Tunnelling Microscope, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 64, 2711 (1990).

5 Гҳ. Fischer, M. Kugler, I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Berthod, and C. Ren-
ner, Scanning tunneling spectroscopy of high-temperature super-
conductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353 (2007).

6 H. Suderow, I. GuillamГіn, J. G. Rodrigo, and S. Vieira, Imag-
ing superconducting vortex cores and lattices with a scanning
tunneling microscope, Supercond. Sci. Tech. 27, 063001 (2014).

7 W. A. Atkinson and A. H. MacDonald, Electrodynamics of a clean
vortex lattice, Phys. Rev. B 60, 9295 (1999).

8 C. Caroli, P. G. de Gennes, and J. Matricon, Bound fermion states
on a vortex line in a type II superconductor, Phys. Lett. 9, 307
(1964).

9 G. E. Volovik, Superconductivity with lines of gap nodes: density
of states in the vortex, PisвҖҷma Zh. Гүksp. Teor. Fiz. 58, 457 (1993),
[JETP Lett. 58, 469 (1993)].

10 B. JankГі, Theory of Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy of Magnetic-
Field-Induced Discrete Nodal States in a d-Wave Superconductor,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4703 (1999).

11 L. Marinelli, B. I. Halperin,
and S. H. Simon, Quasiparticle
spectrum of d-wave superconductors in the mixed state, Phys. Rev.
B 62, 3488 (2000).

12 A. S. MelвҖҷnikov, Theory of Vortex Lattice Effects on STM Spectra
in d-Wave Superconductors, JETP Lett. 71, 327 (2000).

13 M. Franz and Z. TeЕЎanoviВҙc, Quasiparticles in the Vortex Lattice of

Unconventional Superconductors: Bloch Waves or Landau Levels?,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 554 (2000).

14 M.-R. Li, P. J. Hirschfeld, and P. WГ¶lfle, Vortex state of a d-wave
superconductor at low temperatures, Phys. Rev. B 63, 054504
(2001).

15 O. Vafek, A. Melikyan, M. Franz, and Z. TeЕЎanoviВҙc, Quasiparti-
cles and vortices in unconventional superconductors, Phys. Rev. B
63, 134509 (2001).

16 S. Ganeshan, M. Kulkarni, and A. C. Durst, Quasiparticle scat-
tering from vortices in d-wave superconductors. II. Berry phase
contribution, Phys. Rev. B 84, 064503 (2011).

17 P. D. Sacramento, Quasiparticle spectrum of a type-II supercon-
ductor in a high magnetic field with randomly pinned vortices,
Phys. Rev. B 59, 8436 (1999).

18 J. Ye, Random Magnetic Field and Quasiparticle Transport in the
Mixed State of High-Tc Cuprates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 316 (2001).

19 D. V. Khveshchenko and A. G. Yashenkin, Two different quasi-
particle scattering rates in the vortex-line liquid phase of layered
d-wave superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 67, 052502 (2003).

20 J. Lages, P. D. Sacramento, and Z. TeЕЎanoviВҙc, Interplay of disor-
der and magnetic field in the superconducting vortex state, Phys.
Rev. B 69, 094503 (2004); J. Lages and P. D. Sacramento, Local
density of states of a strongly type-II d-wave superconductor: The
binary alloy model in a magnetic field, Phys. Rev. B 71, 132501
(2005).

21 G. Eilenberger, Transformation of GorkovвҖҷs Equation for Type II
Superconductors into Transport-Like Equations, Z. Phys. 214, 195
(1968).

22 F. Gygi and M. SchlГјter, Electronic tunneling into an isolated
vortex in a clean type-II superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 41, 822
(1990); Self-consistent electronic structure of a vortex line in a
type-II superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 43, 7609 (1991).

23 N. Hayashi, T. Isoshima, M. Ichioka, and K. Machida, Low-Lying
Quasiparticle Excitations around a Vortex Core in Quantum Limit,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2921 (1998).

24 M. Franz and Z. TeЕЎanoviВҙc, Self-Consistent Electronic Structure
of a dx2вҲ’y2 and a dx2вҲ’y2 + idx y Vortex, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4763
(1998).


19

25 P. I. Soininen, C. Kallin, and A. J. Berlinsky, Structure of a vortex
line in a dx2вҲ’y2 superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 50, 13883 (1994).

26 Y.-D. Zhu, F. C. Zhang, and M. Sigrist, Electronic structure of a
vortex line in a type-II superconductor: Effect of atomic crystal
fields, Phys. Rev. B 51, 1105 (1995).

27 A. M. Martin and J. F. Annett, The importance of self-consistency
in determining interface properties of SIN and DIN structures,
Superlattices and Microstructures 25, 1019 (1998).

28 L. Udby, B. M. Andersen, and P. HedegГҘrd, Recursion method
for the quasiparticle structure of a single vortex with induced
magnetic order, Phys. Rev. B 73, 224510 (2006).

29 C. Berthod and B. Giovannini, Density of States in High-Tc
Superconductor Vortices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 277002 (2001);
C. Berthod, Vorticity and vortex-core states in type-II supercon-
ductors, Phys. Rev. B 71, 134513 (2005).

30 C. Berthod, Quasiparticle spectra of Abrikosov vortices in a uni-
form supercurrent flow, Phys. Rev. B 88, 134515 (2013).

31 C. Berthod, Bogoliubov quasiparticles coupled to the antiferro-
magnetic spin mode in a vortex core, Phys. Rev. B 92, 214505
(2015).

32 Y. Wang and A. H. MacDonald, Mixed-state quasiparticle spec-
trum for d-wave superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 52, R3876 (1995).

33 K. Yasui and T. Kita, Quasiparticle of d-Wave Superconductors in
Finite Magnetic Fields, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4168 (1999).

34 M. Takigawa, M. Ichioka, and K. Machida, Theory of Vortex
Excitation Imaging via an NMR Relaxation Measurement, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 83, 3057 (1999);
Site-Selective Nuclear Magnetic
Relaxation Time in a Superconducting Vortex State, J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 69, 3943 (2000).

35 Q. Han, Z. D. Wang, L.-y. Zhang, and X.-G. Li, Electronic struc-
ture of the vortex lattice of d-, d + is-, and dx2+y2 + idx y-wave
superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 65, 064527 (2002).

36 Q. Han, A method of studying the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes equations
for the superconducting vortex lattice state, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 22, 035702 (2010).

37 B. M. Uranga, M. N. Gastiasoro,
and B. M. Andersen, Elec-
tronic vortex structure of Fe-based superconductors: Application
to LiFeAs, Phys. Rev. B 93, 224503 (2016).

38 T. Giamarchi and P. Le Doussal, Elastic theory of pinned flux
lattices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1530 (1994).

39 T. Nattermann and S. Scheidl, Vortex-glass phases in type-II
superconductors, Adv. Phys. 49, 607 (2000).

40 L. Covaci, F. M. Peeters,
and M. Berciu, Efficient Numerical
Approach to Inhomogeneous Superconductivity: The Chebyshev-
BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes Method, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 167006
(2010).

41 Y. Nagai, Y. Ota,
and M. Machida, Efficient Numerical Self-
Consistent Mean-Field Approach for Fermionic Many-Body Systems
by Polynomial Expansion on Spectral Density, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
81, 024710 (2012).

42 We consider only paramagnetic solutions in the present work
and ignore the Zeeman splitting.

43 Strictly speaking,
Eq. (12) with ОҰ given by Eq. (11)
is
only
valid
for
infinite
vortex
configurations.
If
one
uses
the
asymmetric
gauge
for
a
finite
number
of
vortices,
ОҰ/2
in
Eq.
(12)
must
be
computed
as
пҝҪ

R
пҝҪ 1

2[П•(r вҖІ вҲ’ R) вҲ’ П•(r вҲ’ R)] + вҲҶП•(r вҲ’ R, r вҖІ вҲ’ R)
пҝҪ
in
or-
der to remove the line of discontinuity of each individual
vortex.

44 A. Weisse, G. Wellein, A. Alvermann, and H. Fehske, The kernel
polynomial method, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 275 (2006).

45 L. Kramer and W. Pesch, Core structure and low-energy spectrum
of isolated vortex lines in clean superconductors at T вүӘ Tc, Z.

Phys. 269, 59 (1974).

46 A. A. Golubov and U. Hartmann, Electronic Structure of the
Abrikosov Vortex Core in Arbitrary Magnetic Fields, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 72, 3602 (1994).

47 M. Ichioka, A. Hasegawa, and K. Machida, Vortex lattice effects
on low-energy excitations in d-wave and s-wave superconductors,
Phys. Rev. B 59, 184 (1999); Field dependence of the vortex
structure in d-wave and s-wave superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 59,
8902 (1999).

48 M. Ichioka, M. Takigawa, and K. Machida, вҖңVortices in uncon-
ventional superconductors and superfluids,вҖқ (Springer, Berlin,
2002) Chap. Magnetic Field Dependence of the Vortex Structure
Based on the Microscopic Theory, p. 225.

49 V. G. Kogan and N. V. Zhelezina, Field dependence of the vortex
core size, Phys. Rev. B 71, 134505 (2005).

50 Y. Chen, W. Hong-Yu, F. M. Peeters,
and A. A. Shanenko,
Quantum-size effects and thermal response of anti-Kramer-Pesch
vortex core, J. Phys.: Cond. Mat. 27, 125701 (2015).

51 I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Renner, A. Erb, E. Walker, and Гҳ. Fischer,
Direct Vortex Lattice Imaging and Tunneling Spectroscopy of Flux
Lines on YBa2Cu3O7вҲ’Оҙ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2754 (1995).

52 B. W. Hoogenboom, C. Renner, B. Revaz, I. Maggio-Aprile, and
Гҳ. Fischer, Low-energy structures in vortex core tunneling spectra
in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Physica C 332, 440 (2000).

53 S. H. Pan, E. W. Hudson, A. K. Gupta, K.-W. Ng, H. Eisaki,
S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, STM Studies of the Electronic Struc-
ture of Vortex Cores in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,
1536 (2000).

54 Y. Morita, M. Kohmoto,
and K. Maki, Quasiparticle Spectra
around a Single Vortex in a d-Wave Superconductor, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 78, 4841 (1997).

55 M. Franz and M. Ichioka, Comment on вҖңQuasiparticle Spectra
around a Single Vortex in a d-Wave SuperconductorвҖқ, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 79, 4513 (1997).

56 J. BruГ©r, I. Maggio-Aprile, N. Jenkins, Z. RistiВҙc, A. Erb,
C. Berthod, Гҳ. Fischer, and C. Renner, Revisiting the vortex-
core tunnelling spectroscopy in YBa2Cu3O7вҲ’Оҙ, Nat. Comm. 7,
11139 (2016).

57 M. Ichioka, N. Hayashi, N. Enomoto, and K. Machida, Vortex
structure in d-wave superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 53, 15316
(1996).

58 The model with t2 = 0 is particle-hole symmetric with the LDOS
peak centered at E = 0. The model with t1 = 0, despite having
the same normal-state DOS as the former, is not particle-hole
symmetric such that the LDOS peak is not exactly at E = 0. In
Fig. 7, we plot the LDOS integrated around the peak maximum
in an energy window corresponding to our resolution.

59 N. Schopohl and K. Maki, Quasiparticle spectrum around a vortex
line in a d-wave superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 52, 490 (1995).

60 Y. Wang, P. J. Hirschfeld, and I. Vekhter, Theory of quasiparticle
vortex bound states in iron-based superconductors: Application
to scanning tunneling spectroscopy of LiFeAs, Phys. Rev. B 85,
020506 (2012).

61 J. E. Sonier, Investigations of the core structure of magnetic vor-
tices in type-II superconductors using muon spin rotation, J. Phys.:
Cond. Mat. 16, S4499 (2004).

62 F. D. Callaghan, M. Laulajainen, C. V. Kaiser, and J. E. Sonier,
Field Dependence of the Vortex Core Size in a Multiband Super-
conductor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 197001 (2005).

63 A. Fente, E. Herrera, I. GuillamГіn, H. Suderow, S. MaГұas-Valero,
M. Galbiati, E. Coronado, and V. G. Kogan, Field dependence
of the vortex core size probed by scanning tunneling microscopy,
Phys. Rev. B 94, 014517 (2016).

64 B. W. Hoogenboom, M. Kugler, B. Revaz, I. Maggio-Aprile,


20

Гҳ. Fischer, and C. Renner, Shape and motion of vortex cores in
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Phys. Rev. B 62, 9179 (2000); B. W. Hoogen-
boom, K. Kadowaki, B. Revaz, M. Li, C. Renner, and Гҳ. Fischer,
Linear and Field-Independent Relation between Vortex Core State
Energy and Gap in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 267001
(2001).

65 T. Machida, Y. Kohsaka, K. Matsuoka, K. Iwaya, T. Hanaguri,
and T. Tamegai, Bipartite electronic superstructures in the vortex
core of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Nat. Comm. 7, 11747 (2016).

66 Y. Yin, M. Zech, T. L. Williams, X. F. Wang, G. Wu, X. H. Chen,
and J. E. Hoffman, Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy and Vortex
Imaging in the Iron Pnictide Superconductor BaFe1.8Co0.2As2, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 102, 097002 (2009).

67 I. GuillamГіn, H. Suderow, S. Vieira, L. Cario, P. Diener, and
P. RodiГЁre, Superconducting Density of States and Vortex Cores of
2H-NbS2, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 166407 (2008).

68 S. Graser, C. Iniotakis, T. Dahm, and N. Schopohl, Shadow on
the Wall Cast by an Abrikosov Vortex, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 247001
(2004).

69 S. Yoshizawa, H. Kim, T. Kawakami, Y. Nagai, T. Nakayama,
X. Hu, Y. Hasegawa, and T. Uchihashi, Imaging Josephson Vor-
tices on the Surface Superconductor Si(111)-(
пҝҪ

7 Г—
пҝҪ

3)-In using
a Scanning Tunneling Microscope, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 247004
(2014).


