Observation of the spin-polarized surface state in a

noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd

Madhab Neupane*,1 Nasser Alidoust*,2 M. Mofazzel Hosen*,1 Jian-Xin Zhu,3

Klauss Dimitri,1 Su-Yang Xu,2 Nagendra Dhakal,1 Raman Sankar,4

Ilya Belopolski,2 Daniel S. Sanchez,2 Tay-Rong Chang,5 Horng-Tay Jeng,5, 6

Koji Miyamoto,7 Taichi Okuda,7 Hsin Lin,8, 9 Arun Bansil,10 Dariusz

Kaczorowski,11 Fangcheng Chou,4 M. Zahid Hasan,2 and Tomasz Durakiewicz12, 13

1Department of Physics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA

2Joseph Henry Laboratory and Department of Physics,

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA

3Theoretical Division and Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies,

Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA

4Center for Condensed Matter Sciences,

National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

5Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan

6Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan

7Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center,

Hiroshima University, 2-313 Kagamiyama,

Higashi-Hiroshima 739-0046, Japan

8Centre for Advanced 2D Materials and Graphene Research Centre,

National University of Singapore, Singapore 117546

9Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117542

10Department of Physics, Northeastern University,

Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA

11Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research,

Polish Academy of Sciences, 50-950 Wroclaw, Poland

12Condensed Matter and Magnet Science Group,

Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA

13Institute of Physics, Maria Curie - Sklodowska University, 20-031 Lublin, Poland

(Dated: November 13, 2021)

1

arXiv:1610.03431v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  11 Oct 2016


Abstract

Recently, noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd has attracted considerable re-

search interest due to the possibility of hosting topological superconductivity. Here

we report a systematic high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy

(ARPES) and spin-resolved ARPES study of the normal state electronic and spin

properties of BiPd. Our experimental results show the presence of a surface state at

higher-binding energy with the location of Dirac point at around 700 meV below the

Fermi level. The detailed photon energy, temperature-dependent and spin-resolved

ARPES measurements complemented by our first-principles calculations demonstrate

the existence of the spin polarized surface states at high-binding energy. The absence

of such spin-polarized surface states near the Fermi level negates the possibility of

a topological superconducting behavior on the surface. Our direct experimental ob-

servation of spin-polarized surface states in BiPd provides critical information that

will guide the future search for topological superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric

materials.

2


Recently, noncentrosymmetric (NCS) superconductors (SCs) have attracted considerable

research interest due to the possibility that they host several exotic states [1–3]. The lack of

inversion symmetry creates an asymmetric potential gradient, which may split the electron

bands by lifting the spin degeneracy, allowing hybrid-pairing of spin-singlet and spin-triplet

states within the same orbital channel [1, 3–5]. Furthermore, with the advent of topological

insulators [2, 3, 7–15, 18], it was recently proposed that NCS SCs with a strong spin-orbit

coupling are potential candidates for realizing topological superconductivity [19–22], holding

promise for hosting protected Majorana surface states [15, 23, 24]. But so far, evidence of

topological surface states in noncentrosymmetric materials is still lacking. Such convincing

evidence may be obtained by angle- and spin-resolved photoemission, which provides an

energy- and momentum-resolved probe of the electronic and spin structure.

A NCS system provides a good platform to look for exotic states such as the Weyl

semimetal in TaAs [25] and the topological nodal-line phase in PbTaSe2 [26]. Another NCS

SC BiPd can provide a platform to study the interplay of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effects

with superconductivity. This compound undergoes a structural transition from β - BiPd

(orthorhombic) to α - BiPd (monoclinic) at 210 ◦C and then becomes superconducting at the

transition temperature (Tc) ∼ 3.7 K [1, 5]. In comparison to many other NCS SCs, BiPd is a

weakly correlated compound possessing a heavy atom, Bi. Measurements by point-contact

spectroscopy [27] and nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) [28] indicate a complex gap

structure in BiPd, which might be caused by the lack of inversion symmetry [1, 5]. Recent

scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements reveal that the superconducting state

of BiPd appears to be topologically trivial, consistent with Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory

with an s-wave order parameter [4]. Further momentum and spin-resolved experimental evi-

dence is highly desirable in order to establish the presence of topological Dirac surface states,

and to study the underlying microscopic mechanism of superconductivity. A detailed high-

resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and spin-resolved ARPES

study is necessary to prove or disprove the topological nature of the surface states in the

normal state of BiPd.
Such a characterization of the normal state is currently missing,

but necessary and needed as a first step towards opening a discussion on the relationship

between superconductivity and the topological properties of NCS systems.

In this paper, we report the experimental observation of spin-polarized surface states in

the NCS material BiPd using ARPES and spin-resolved ARPES. Our experimental results

3


show the presence of a surface state at higher-binding energy, with the Dirac node located at

around 700 meV below the Fermi level. Furthermore, the Dirac node located at around 650

meV below the Fermi level is also observed for different surface cleaving, providing direct

evidence for the noncentrosymmetic crystal structure presented in BiPd. Our measurements

suggest that the observed states may be topological in nature.
Our results are further

supported by our first-principles calculations. The absence of spin-polarized surface states

near the Fermi level of BiPd negates the possibility that this system might host topological

superconductivity on the surface.

Results

Crystal structure and sample characterization. The crystal structure of BiPd at

low temperatures (< 210 ◦C) has a monoclinic unit cell with a = 5.63 ˚A, b = 10.66 ˚A,

c = 5.68 ˚A, α = γ = 90◦, and β = 101◦ with the b axis being as its unique axis (see Fig.

1a; Ref. [1]). Detailed characterization of the single crystals used in our study indicated

their high quality (see Supplementary Figure 1-7; Supplementary Note 1-4; Supplementary

References).
They exhibit a simple metallic behavior in the normal state and a sharp

superconducting transition at Tc ∼ 3.7 K. The low-temperature magnetic susceptibility

data is shown in Fig. 1b (see also Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Note 1 for

additional data and discussion). A schematic bulk Brillouin zone is shown in Fig. 1c, where

the projected surface along (010) is also illustrated. In order to experimentally identify its

electronic structure, we study the electronic structure of BiPd on the cleaved (010) surface.

Figure 1d (a picture of the single crystal measured is displayed in the inset of Fig. 1d) shows

momentum-integrated ARPES spectral intensity over a wide energy window. Sharp ARPES

intensity peaks at binding energies EB ∼ 23 and 26 eV corresponding to the bismuth 5d3/2

and 5d5/2 energy levels are observed.

Electronic structure of BiPd. We study the overall electronic structure of BiPd using

ARPES. Figure 2a shows an ARPES dispersion map in a 1.3 eV binding energy window,

where several dispersive bands within the valence band are identified. Moreover, several

crossing or metallic bands in the vicinity of the Fermi level are observed.
Remarkably,

a nearly linearly dispersive Dirac cone-like state is observed at the Brillouin zone center,

showing a Dirac node located at a binding energy of EB ∼ 700 meV. The Dirac-like state

4


can be observed in the region of the blue rectangle in the Fig. 2a, at the binding energy

region of 500−900 meV. At the Fermi level only the metallic bands, but no other Dirac like

linearly dispersive bands are observed. On the other hand, the linearly dispersive Dirac-like

bands are found to be in the region of higher-binding energies.

Figure 2b-e shows the Fermi surface and constant energy contour plots, respectively. In

the vicinity of the Fermi level, many metallic bands are observed (Fig. 2b). We also study

the ARPES measured constant energy contour maps (Fig. 2c-e). At the Fermi level, the

constant energy contour consists of many metallic pockets. With increasing binding energy

at ∼ 600 meV, the circular pocket formed by the upper Dirac cone is observed (Fig. 2c).

On increasing the binding energy, the size of the pocket decreases and eventually shrinks to

a point (the Dirac point) near EB ∼ 700 meV (Fig. 2d). At even higher binding energies,

the nearly circular pocket formed by the lower Dirac cone is observed (for EB ∼ 750 meV

in Fig. 2e).

To reveal the nature of the states observed in BiPd, we performed photon energy and

temperature-dependent ARPES, as well as spin-resolved ARPES measurements which are

further complemented by calculations. Figure 3 shows the energy-momentum cuts measured

with varying photon energies from 30 to 58 eV with a 4 eV energy step (see Supplementary

Figure 2-4 and Supplementary Note 2 for additional ARPES data and discussion). Clear E-k

dispersion of the bulk bands is observed. Remarkably, the dispersion of the linearly dispersive

states at high-binding energy (500-900 meV) is found to be unchanged with respect to the

varying photon energy, supporting the two-dimensional nature of this state. It is important

to note that the Dirac-like two-dimensional states are not found to be perfectly linear in

energy-momentum axis. Furthermore, it is important to recall that in real materials such as

pure Bi, graphene, or topological insulators, the Dirac cones are never perfectly linear over a

large energy window yet they can be approximated as linear within a narrow energy window

around the Dirac point. This linear part represents the massless dispersion, in contrast to

the large effective mass of conventional band electrons in other materials. Moreover, we note

that the weak asymmetry of the surface bands with respect to k and -k is probably coming

from the matrix element effects, and from the fact that these measured spectra were slightly

off from the ¯X − ¯Γ − ¯X direction.

To test the robustness of the surface state observed in BiPd, we have performed a

temperature-dependent measurement as shown in Fig. 4a. On raising the temperature,

5


the Dirac-like surface states survive even at room temperature, which establishes that the

Dirac-like surface states are robust to the rise of temperature and potential surface contami-

nation, resulting from increased partial pressure of residual gases released upon heating, see

Fig. 4a. Furthermore, the observed Dirac-like states are found to be robust against thermal

cycling (20 K - 300 K - 20 K), since lowering the temperature back down to 20 K results

in the similar spectra with the strong presence of Dirac-like state features (see the panel of

Fig. 4a with the note of Re 20K).

NCS electronic signature. To better understand the electronic structure observed with

ARPES, we perform first-principles calculations of the bulk band structure (Supplementary

Figure 5; Supplementary Note 3) and slab calculations of BiPd using the generalized gradient

approximation plus spin-orbit coupling (SOC) method (see Fig.
4b,c for the calculated

electronic structure for the top and bottom surfaces, respectively). We note that the band

structure calculations were performed on a conventional unit cell for the bulk system and

on a supercell for the slab structure, which leads to folding of the states at the S point to

the Γ point. Our slab calculations show that the surface states are predicted to be at the Γ

point with the location of the Dirac nodes at ∼ 0.5 and 0.6 eV below the Fermi level, one of

which comes from the top surface and the other from the bottom surface. The Dirac node of

the surface state coming from the top and bottom surfaces are located at different binding

energies (not degenerate), which comes from the fact that BiPd lacks inversion symmetry.

Since the calculations were made for slab geometry, the obtained band structure always

involves bands from two surfaces, one on the top and the other on the bottom of the slab.

Experimentally, one can only measure one surface (corresponding to either top or bottom

surface of the slab geometry) at a time.
In principle, it should be possible to measure

either the top or bottom surface on the two sample pieces based on the cleaving. Therefore,

depending on whether the cleaved surface is a top or bottom one, the location of the Dirac

point energy is predicted to be different. Experimentally, the location of the Dirac point

energy is found to be different based on the cleaving either the top or the bottom surface, in

agreement with our calculations. Actually, we experimentally observed the different Dirac

point energy for top and bottom surface cleaving. For the top surface the Dirac point is ∼

700 meV, while for the bottom surface cleaving Dirac point is ∼ 650 meV from the Fermi

level (Supplementary Figure 4; Supplementary Note 3). We note that such two terminations

6


of the crystal surface in BiPd are directly observed by STM topographic image [4].

To further understand the nature of the observed Dirac-like band, we measured the

in-plane spin polarization or spin-texture properties of BiPd. Spin-resolved ARPES mea-

surements were performed on the top-cleaved surface of BiPd. Two spin-resolved energy-

dispersive curves (EDCs) are shown at momenta of ∼ ± 0.1 on the opposite sides of the

Dirac-like dispersion. The blue dash lines on the ARPES dispersion map shown in Fig. 5

mark the approximate momentum positions for the spin-resolved energy distribution curves.

The spin-resolved EDCs and corresponding net spin polarization are shown in Fig. 5b,c for

momentum positions #1 and #2. The obtained spin data presented in Fig. 5b,c show ob-

servable net spin polarization. Importantly, the observed spin polarization at one branch of

the cone is opposite with that of another cone, thus confirming the spin-momentum locking

behavior. Spin-resolved ARPES data reveals a characteristic helical spin-texture, suggesting

the possible topological origin of the states we observed. However, we caution that two-band

crossings at a time-reversal invariant momentum should have an opposite value of the spin

polarization independent of any topological invariant.

Discussion

The experimental realization of the topological insulator phase in a NCS crystal structure

is an object of intense research. Such a system may be utilized in testing several proposed

exotic phenomena, such as crystalline-surface-dependent topological electronic states, py-

roelectricity, and natural topological p-n junctions [29]. Recently, the first principles cal-

culations predicted III-Bi to be an inversion asymmetric topological insulator with large

band gap possessing intrinsic topologically protected edge states and forming quantum spin

Hall systems [29], but these have not yet been realized experimentally. At the same time,

the proposal of topological insulating nature in an inversion asymmetric compound BiTeCl

still remains under debate [30, 31]. Furthermore, the small bulk band gaps of the realized

inversion asymmetric topological insulators severely limit the manipulation and control of

the topological surface states.

We note that BiPd consists of many bands near the Dirac-like states, which makes this

system very complicated with no global band gap in the normal state. The topology in

BiPd is not well defined like in Bi2Se3. In ARPES experiments, the samples were cleaved

and measured in an ultrahigh vacuum environment that kept its surface clean during the

7


measurements. The surface cleaving generates surface potential due to the surface charges,

which may develop a large effective pressure along the b (perpendicular to the surface,

see Fig. 1a) direction and thus drive the crystal (possibly the several top layers) into the

topological insulator phase. Our calculations on strained BiPd show the bulk band gap

opening, (Supplementary Figure 7; Supplementary Note 4). This study will enable further

discussion on the theoretical origin of the topological order in NCS materials.

BiPd is a superconductor below Tc ∼ 3.7 K. Since the spin polarized surface state

is located at high binding energy, it negates the topological superconductivity behavior

on the surface at its native Fermi level.
However, by electrical gating or surface de-

position, the Fermi level can be tuned near the Dirac surface state, which provides an

opportunity to realize the topological superconductivity in this noncentrosymmetic material.

Methods

Crystal growth and characterization.
Single crystals of BiPd were grown by a

modified Bridgman method as described elsewhere [1]. The crystals were characterized by

means of X-ray diffraction, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, magnetic susceptibility,

electrical resistivity and heat capacity measurements, using standard commercial equipment.

Electronic
structure
measurements.
Synchrotron-based ARPES measurements

of the electronic structure were performed at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), Berkeley

at Beamline 10.0.1 and Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) at Beamline

5-4 both equipped with a high efficiency R4000 electron analyzer. The energy resolution

was set to be better than 20 meV for the measurements with the synchrotron beamline.

The angular resolution was set to be better than 0.2◦ for all synchrotron measurements.

Samples were cleaved in situ and measured at 10 - 80 K in a vacuum better than 10−10 torr.

They were found to be very stable and without degradation for the typical measurement

period of 20 hours.

Spin-resolved ARPES measurements.
Spin-resolved ARPES measurements were

performed at the ESPRESSO end station installed at Beamline-9B of the Hiroshima Syn-

chrotron Radiation Center (HiSOR), Hiroshima, Japan, equipped with state-of-the-art very

low-energy electron diffraction (VLEED) spin detectors utilizing preoxidized Fe(001)-p(1

8


x 1)-O targets [32, 33].
The two spin detectors are placed at an angle of 90 ◦ and are

directly attached to a VG-Scienta R4000 hemispheric analyzer, enabling simultaneous spin

resolved ARPES measurements for all three spin components. We also measured the x and

z component of the spin which shows negligible spin polarization.

First-principles calculations.
The first-principles calculations were based on the

generalized gradient approximation (GGA) [34] using the projector augmented-wave

method [35] as implemented in the VASP package [36, 37]. The experimental crystallo-

graphic structure was used [38] for the calculations. The spin-orbit coupling was included

self-consistently in the electronic structure calculations with a 6 × 4 × 5 Monkhorst-Pack

k-mesh. In order to simulate surface effects, we used 1 × 5 × 1 supercell for the (010)

surface, with a vacuum thickness larger than 20 ˚A.

Data availability.
All relevant data are available from the corresponding author

upon request.

[1] Bauer, E. & Sigrist, M. Non-Centrosymmetric Superconductors: Introduction and Overview,

vol. 847 Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer Berlin, 2012).

[2] Bauer, E. et al. Heavy fermion superconductivity and magnetic order in noncentrosymmetric

CePt3Si. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 027003 (2004).

[3] Frigeri, P. A., Agterberg, D. F., Koga, A. & Sigrist M. Superconductivity without Inversion

Symmetry: MnSi versus CePt3Si. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 097001 (2004).

[4] Joshi, B. Thamizhavel, A. & Ramakrishnan, S. Superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric BiPd.

Phys. Rev. B 84, 064518 (2011).

[5] Jiao, L. et al. Anisotropic superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric BiPd. Phys. Rev. B 89,

060507(R) (2014).

[6] Sun, Z. et al. Dirac Surface States and Nature of Superconductivity in Noncentrosymmetric

BiPd. Nat. Commun. 6, 6633 (2015).

9


[7] Hasan, M. Z. & Kane, C. L. Colloquium: topological insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045-3067

(2010).

[8] Qi, X-L. & Zhang, S-C. Topological insulators and superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057-

1110 (2011).

[9] Hasan, M. Z., Xu, S.-Y. & Neupane, M. in Topological Insulators: Fundamentals and Perspec-

tives (eds Ortmann, F., Roche, S. & Valenzuela, S. O.) (John Wiley & Sons, 2015).

[10] Neupane, M. et al. Observation of quantum-tunnelling-modulated spin texture in ultrathin

topological insulator Bi2Se3 films. Nat. Commun. 5, 3841 (2014).

[11] Hasan, M. Z., Xu, S.-Y. & Bian, G. Topological insulators and superconductors. Phys. Scr.

T164, 014001 (2015).

[12] Neupane, M. et al. Observation of a topological 3D Dirac semimetal phase in high-mobility

Cd2As3. Nat. Commun. 5, 3786 (2014).

[13] Bansil, A., Lin, S., & Das, T. Colloquium: Topological band theory. Rev. Mod. Phys. 88,

021004 (2016).

[14] Neupane, M. et al., Non-Kondo-like Electronic Structure in the Correlated Rare-Earth Hexa-

boride YbB6, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 016403 (2015).

[15] Xu, S.-Y. et al. Momentum-space imaging of Cooper pairing in a half-Dirac-gas topological

superconductor. Nat. Phys. 10, 943-950 (2014).

[16] Neupane, M. et al. Surface electronic structure of the topological Kondo-insulator candidate

correlated electron system SmB6. Nat. Commun. 4, 2991 (2013).

[17] Xia, Y. et al. Observation of a large-gap topological-insulator class with a single Dirac cone

on the surface. Nat. Phys. 5, 398-402 (2009).

[18] Neupane, M. et al. Gigantic Surface Lifetime of an Intrinsic Topological Insulator. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 115, 116801 (2015).

[19] Chadov, S. et al. Tunable multifunctional topological insulators in ternary Heusler compounds.

Nat. Mater. 9, 541-545 (2010).

[20] Lin, H. et al. Half-Heusler ternary compounds as new multifunctional experimental platforms

for topological quantum phenomena. Nat. Mater. 9, 546-549 (2010).

[21] Schnyder, A. P., Ryu, S., Furusaki, A. & Ludwig, A. W. W. Classification of topological

insulators and superconductors in three spatial dimensions. Phys. Rev. B 78, 195125 (2008).

[22] Lu, C.-K. & Yip, S. Spin current in topologically trivial and nontrivial noncentrosymmetric

10


superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 82, 104501 (2010).

[23] Sato, M. & Fujimoto, S. Topological phases of noncentrosymmetric superconductors: Edge

states, majorana fermions, and non-abelian statistics. Phys. Rev. B 79, 094504 (2009).

[24] Hosur, P., Ghaemi, P., Mong, R. S. K. & Vishwanath, A. Majorana modes at the ends of

superconductor vortices in doped topological insulators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 097001 (2011).

[25] Xu, S.-Y. et al. Discovery of a Weyl Fermion semimetal and topological Fermi arcs . Science

349, 613-617 (2015).

[26] Bian, G. et al. Topological nodal-line fermions in spin-orbit metal PbTaSe2 . Nat. Commun.

7, 10556 (2016).

[27] Mondal, M. et al. Andreev bound state and multiple energy gaps in the noncentrosymmetric

superconductor BiPd. Phys. Rev. B 86, 094520 (2012).

[28] Matano, K. et al. NMR and NQR Studies on Non-centrosymmetric Superconductors Re7B3,

LaBiPt, and BiPd. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 82, 084711 (2013).

[29] Ma, Y. et al. Two-Dimensional Inversion Asymmetric Topological Insulators in Functionalized

III-Bi Bilayers. Phys. Rev. B 91, 235306 (2015).

[30] Landolt, G. et al. Bulk and surface Rashba splitting in single termination BiTeCl. New J.

Phys. 15, 085022 (2013).

[31] Chen, Y. L. et al. Discovery of a single topological Dirac fermion in the strong inversion

asymmetric compound BiTeCl. Nat. Phys. 9, 704-708 (2013).

[32] Okuda, T. et al. Efficient spin resolved spectroscopy observation machine at Hiroshima Syn-

chrotron Radiation Center. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 82, 103302 (2011).

[33] Okuda, T. et al. A double VLEED spin detector for high-resolution three dimensional spin

vectorial analysis of anisotropic Rashba spin splitting. Jour. of Ele. Spect. and Rel. Phen. 201,

23-29 (2015).

[34] Perdew, P., Burke, K., & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[35] Blochl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).

[36] Kresse, G. & Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for open-shell transition metals. Phys.

Rev. B 48, 13115 (1993).

[37] Kress, G. & Furthmuller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations

using a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 15-50 (1996).

11


[38] Bhatt, Y. C. et al. Kristallstruktur von PdBi.r. J. Less-Common Met. 64(2), 17-24 (1979).

Acknowledgements

M.N. is supported by the start-up fund from University of Central Florida and LANL

LDRD Program. T.D. was supported by NSF IR/D program. D.K. was supported by the

National Science Centre (Poland) under research grant 2015/18/A/ST3/00057. J.-X. Zhu is

supported by the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, a U.S. DOE Office of Basic Energy

Sciences user facility, in partnership with the LANL Institutional Computing Program for

computational resources. The work at Princeton and synchrotron x-ray-based measurements

are supported by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, US Department of Energy (DOE)

Grant No. DE-FG-02-40105ER46200. The work at Northeastern University is supported by

the DOE, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences grant number DE-FG02-07ER46352, and

benefited from Northeastern University’s Advanced Scientific Computation Center (ASCC)

and the NERSC supercomputing center through DOE grant number DE-AC02-05CH11231.

H.L. acknowledges the Singapore National Research Foundation for the support under NRF

Award No. NRF-NRFF2013-03. T.R.C. and H.T.J. were supported by the National Science

Council, Taiwan.
We also thank NCHC, CINC-NTU, and NCTS, Taiwan for technical

support. The measurements at HiSOR were performed with the approval of the Proposal

Assessing Committee of HSRC (Proposal No. 15-A-66). We thank Sung-Kwan Mo and

Makoto Hashimoto for beamline assistance at the LBNL and the SSRL.

Authors Contributions

M.N. designed the study; D.K., R.S. and F.-C.C. synthesized the samples and performed

the transport characterization; M.N. performed the spectroscopy measurements with the

help of N.A., S.-Y.X., I.B., D.S., M.M.H., K.D., N.D., K.M., T.O., M.Z.H., T.D.; J.X.Z.,

T.-R.C., H.-T.J, A.B. performed the calculations; M.N. wrote the manuscript and discussed

with all the co-authors. M.N. was responsible for the overall research direction, planning

and integration among different research units.

Additional Information

Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

12


Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/ na-

turecommunications.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.N. (Email: Mad-

hab.Neupane@ucf.edu).

13


FIG. 1: Crystal structure and sample characterization of BiPd.
a, Crystal structure

of BiPd with the b axis shown as its unique axis.
It crystallizes in a monoclinic structure at

low temperatures. b, The magnetic susceptibility as a function of temperature showing a sharp

superconducting transition temperature at ∼ 3.7 K in the field of 20 Gs. c, Schematic drawing

of surface and bulk Brillouin zones, corresponding to a primitive cell, are shown. We note that

all electronic structure calculations were performed on a conventional unit cell for the bulk and

a supercell for the slab.
High-symmetric points are also marked.
d, Core level spectroscopic

measurement of BiPd showing sharp peaks of Bi 5d. The inset shows a photograph of the BiPd

sample.

14


FIG. 2: Electronic structure of BiPd.
a, Dispersion map of BiPd along the zone centre

obtained by using incident photon energy of 50 eV at a temperature of 10 K. The blue rectangle

in the binding energy range of about 500 meV to 900 meV shows the linearly dispersive states. b,

Fermi surface map. c, Constant energy contour at binding energy of 600 meV shows the intensity

map in the region above the Dirac point. d-e, The constant energy contours at 700 meV and 750

meV show the intensity map at around and below the Dirac point, respectively. The values of

binding energies are noted on the plots. Data were collected at ALS BL 10.0.1.

15


FIG. 3: Photon energy dependent ARPES dispersion maps. The measured photon energies

are noted on the plots. The linearly dispersive states at a binding energy of around 700 meV do

not show any dispersion with photon energy, which indicate its two dimensional nature. These

data were collected along ¯Γ − ¯X high symmetry direction at ALS BL 10.0.1 at a temperature of

10 K. Additional photon energy data are presented in Supplementary Information.

16


FIG. 4: Temperature dependent spectra and first-principles calculations. a, ARPES

energy momentum dispersion maps measured using a photon energy of 30 eV along the ¯X − ¯Γ − ¯X

momentum space cut-direction with varying temperatures. The measured values of temperature

are noted on the plots. The panel with the note of Re 20K is the spectrum measured after thermal

cycling (20 K→300 K→20 K). These data were collected at SSRL BL5-4 with a photon energy of

30 eV. b, Slab calculations of BiPd for the top surface and c, the bottom surface along the high

symmetry lines. The blue (red) dots represent surface states for the top (bottom) surface. Details

of the calculation method is given in Method Section and additional calculation plots are shown

in Supplementary Information.

17


FIG. 5: Spin-resolved ARPES results. a, Spin-integrated ARPES spectrum of surface states.

The blue dashed lines and number indicate the momentum positions at which SR-ARPES mea-

surements were carried out. b, Spin-resolved EDCs (blue and red circles for up and down spin)

and the in-plane spin polarization (red circle with error bar -right axis) at momentum position #1.

c, Same as b, for momentum position #2. Helical spin-texture is observed in BiPd. Error bars

represent the experimental uncertainties (standard deviation) in determining the spin polarization.

Spin-resolved measurements were carried out with photon energy of 25 eV and temperature of 20

K at Beamline-9B of the Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center (HiSOR), Hiroshima, Japan.

18


Supplementary Information:
Observation of the spin-polarized surface state in a
noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd

This files includes:
Supplementary Figures

Supplementary Notes

Supplementary References

19


Supplementary figure 1: Sample characterization of BiPd. (a) Temperature dependence of elec-

trical resistivity within (010) plane showing a sharp transition at Tc ∼ 3.7 K. (b) The temperature

dependence of the specific heat capacity with no field (black filled circles) and with field (red filled

circles).

20


Supplementary figure 2:
Photon energy dependent spectra. ARPES dispersion maps measured

at zone center Γ point with varying photon energy. The measured photon energy is noted on the

spectra. These data were collected at SSRL beamline 5-4 at a temperature of 10 K.

21


Supplementary figure 3: Photon energy dependent ARPES measurements: Measured photon

energies are marked on the plots.

22


Supplementary figure 4: ARPES energy momentum spectra obtained from two different cleaved

surfaces. Blue dash line shows the energy position of the Dirac point for the cleaved surface I (left)

and a small arrow shows the slightly different energy position for the cleaved surface II (right).

These two spectra were measured in similar experimental conditions.

23


Supplementary figure 5: Calculation results. Calculated bulk band structure with the projection

along the (010) direction considering no spin-orbit coupling (left) and with spin-orbit coupling

(right).

24


Supplementary figure 6: In-plane spin polarization. Slab calculations at around the Γ point

showing the helical in-plane spin structure of the surface band for the top surface (left) and bottom

surface (right).

25


Supplementary figure 7:
(a) Band structure of BiPd without considering strain. (b) Band

structure of BiPd with applying strain. We apply strain with b′=0.81b, a′=a/0.9, and c′=c/0.9 to

keep the volume unchanged.

26


Supplementary Note 1

Sample characterization

Besides the Meissner state evidenced in the magnetic susceptibility data, the superconduc-

tivity in BiPd was proved by means of electrical transport and heat capacity measurements.

The electrical resistivity was measured on a bar-shaped specimen with the dimensions 0.17

mm × 0.52 mm × 1.48 mm (the estimated error in geometrical factor is less than 10%) and

the electrical contacts were made of silver epoxy paste. The measurement was performed

with current flowing within the (010) plane. Fig. S1a displays the low-temperature electrical

resistivity with a sharp drop to zero resistance at Tc ∼ 3.7 K. It is worth noting that just

above Tc, the resistivity is only ρ0 = 0.36 µΩcm, and the ratio between the resistivity at

room temperature and ρ0 (residual resistivity ratio RRR) is as large as 113, which signals

the high-quality of the single crystal studied. At the same temperature, the specific heat

forms a distinct anomaly (see Fig. S1b), which corroborates the bulk nature of the super-

conducting state. The obtained results are in very good agreement with the literature data

[1].

Supplementary Note 2

Photon energy dependent ARPES measurements

We present ARPES measured dispersion maps at the Γ point, with photon energies from

18 eV to 28 eV with every 2 eV energy step in Fig. S2. At a low photon energy, the bulk

bands are suppressed and Dirac like surface states are highly enhanced. Most importantly,

our wide range of photon energy measurements (from 18 eV to 82 eV) reveal a negligible

dispersion of the Dirac like states confirming its two-dimensional nature as shown in Ref.

[2, 3].

To further confirm the nature of the states in BiPd, we cleaved another sample. The

ARPES dispersion map of this sample is shown in Fig. S3. ARPES spectra were measured

from 56 eV to 82 eV with every 4 eV energy step. These data show that there is no clear

dispersion with photon energy, which suggests its two-dimensional nature.

Since the calculations were made for slab geometry, the obtained band structure always

involves bands from two surfaces, one on the top and the other on the bottom of the slab.

Experimentally, one can only measure one surface (corresponding to either top or bottom

surface of the slab geometry) at a time. In principle, it should be possible to measure either

27


top or bottom surface on the two sample pieces based on the cleaving. Therefore, depending

on whether the cleaved surface is a top or bottom one, the location of the Dirac point energy

is predicted to be different.

To approach both the top and bottom surfaces, we cleaved multiple samples and measured

in identical experimental conditions such as sample temperature, photon energy, and the

light polarization etc. Experimentally, the location of the Dirac point energy is observed to

be different based on the cleaving of either the top or bottom surface, which is consistent

with our calculations. We observed a different Dirac point energy for the top and bottom

surfaces, based on the cleaving. For the top surface, the Dirac point is located at about

700 meV from the Fermi level, whereas the Dirac point is located at about 650 meV from

the Fermi level for the bottom surface (see Fig.
S4).
It is a direct consequence of the

centrosymmetric behavior of BiPd. We note that we cleaved multiple samples and most of

cleaved surfaces show the Dirac point located at about 700 meV. We note that such two

terminations of the crystal surface are directly observed by STM topographic image [4].

Supplementary Note 3

Calculations

Figures S5 and S6 show the calculated band structure along the high symmetry lines.

In Fig. S5, the bulk band structure is shown along various high-symmetry lines without

considering spin-orbit coupling (left) and with considering spin-orbit coupling (SOC) (right).

These results are in agreement with Ref. [4]. SOC leads to the spin splitting of the bands as

well as the shifting the energy position of the bands. The orbital character of the bands near

the Fermi level is mostly contributed from Bi 6p and Pd 4d and they hybridized strongly

leading to the complex Fermi surface as shown in Fig. 2 of the maintext.

Furthermore, our slab calculations show a helical in-plane spin structure (see Fig. S6) of

the surface bands at the Γ point, which suggests that the surface states we experimentally

observed in our ARPES measurements may be topological in nature. Spin calculation is

consistent with the results obtained with spin-resolved ARPES measurements.

Our systematic experimental data and calculations reveal the following important prop-

erties of the electronic structure in BiPd:

(1) The bands located around the binding energy range of 900 meV to 500 meV are found

to exhibit nearly linear (Dirac like) in-plane dispersion.

28


(2) No observable out-of-plane (kz) dispersion is observed for these Dirac like bands.

(3) Our spin-resolved ARPES results and slab calculations show the helical spin structure

of these surface states.

(4) We found an odd number of spin-momentum locked constant energy contour per Bril-

louin zone. This implies that if the Fermi level is tuned in the vicinity of the Dirac point,

the odd number of Fermi surfaces formed by spin-momentum locked states can be found.

(5) The spin-momentum locked states wind around the time-reversal invariant momentum

point.

All these above properties suggest the possibility of the topological surface state in BiPd.

However, we caution that such properties are also present in noncentrosymmetric materials

with high values of spin orbit coupling.

Supplementary Note 4

Effect of strain

We note that in ARPES experiments, the samples were cleaved and measured in the

ultrahigh vacuum environment that kept the surface clean during the measurements. The

sample cleaving process generates surface potential due to the surface charges, which may

develop a large effective pressure along the b direction (perpendicular to the surface) and

thus drive the crystal (possibly the several top layers) in the gapped state. It may be one

of the possible reasons for the topological insulating behavior observed in BiPd. Such an

argument is also suggested by a recent work in another noncentrosymmetric system [5]. We

have done calculations with varying lattice constant b, keeping total volume constant. New

calculations show that strain can open up the bulk band gap.

Here we used a full-potential linearized augmented plane wave method as implemented

in the WIEN2k code [6]. The generalized gradient approximation [7] was also used for the

exchange-correlation functional. The spin-orbit coupling was included in a second variational

way. The muffin-tin radius 2.08a0 (a0 being the Bohr radius), and 2.35a0 and for Bi and Pd,

respectively, and a plane wave cutoff RKmax = 8 were taken in calculations that included

11 × 7 × 11 k-points. We note that the result for BiPd without strain from full-potential

electronic structure calculations (left panel in Fig. S7) and that from the pseudopotential

electronic structure calculations (right panel in Fig. S5) are quite consistent. In the case

of compressive strain along the b direction, there is a clear tendency to open up a gap (see

29


right panel in Fig. S7). In other word, the gap region is increased due to the strain applied

on BiPd system.

Supplementary References

[1] Joshi, B. et al. Superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric BiPd. Phys. Rev. B 84, 064518 (2011).

[2] Xia, Y. et al. Observation of a large-gap topological-insulator class with a single Dirac cone on

the surface. Nat. Phys. 5, 398 (2009).

[3] Neupane, M. et al. Surface electronic structure of the topological Kondo-insulator candidate

correlated electron system SmB6. Nat. Commun. 4, 2991 (2013).

[4] Sun, Z. et al. Dirac Surface States and Nature of Superconductivity in Noncentrosymmetric

BiPd. Nat. Commun. 6, 6633 (2015).

[5] Bahramy, M. S., Yang, B.-J., Arita, R., and Nagaosa, N. Emergence of non-centrosymmetric

topological insulating phase in BiTeI under pressure. Nature Commun. 3, 679 (2012).

[6] Blaha, P. et al. An Augmented Plane Wave + Local Orbitals Program for Calculating Crystal

Properties (K. Schwarz, Tech. Universitat Wien, Austria, 2001).

[7] Perdew, P., Burke, K., and Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.N. (Email: Mad-

hab.Neupane@ucf.edu).

30


