LAST WORDS ON THE CUPRATES 
P W Anderson, Princeton University 
 
Abstract 
Much of what I have to say in the following (not all!) is 
contained in my “informal history” published in 1011 in the 
Int’l Journ of Mod Phys and available in ArXiv  form as 
Cond.mat/1011.2732.  But because the literature on the 
subject continues to burgeon, mostly without much if any 
reference to the fundamentals that I laid out  in that article,  I 
think it is time to distribute a summary of the conclusions I 
reached in that article, as well as a few newer thoughts. 
 
In the first place , I have to point out that the “problem”,  as it is 
referred to in the naïve discussion which prefaces many of the 
papers in the literature, is not really a problem: the basic facts 
of the superconductivity itself, of much of the anomalous 
behavior which accompanies it, and of the energy 
(temperature) scale of the phenomena, are not mysterious.  
The dominant interaction coupling the superconducting 
electron pairs is the same “superexchange” spin coupling 
which causes the undoped cuprates to be antiferromagnetic  
Mott insulators, as I described in my early Science paper in 
1987.1 There I made, perhaps confusingly, the point that the 
physical nature of the interaction is very similar to that of the 
ubiquitous valence bond of Paulingesque chemistry, and that it 
therefore binds singlet pairs of electrons making mobile 
“valence bonds” between Cu atoms, which become the 
superconducting carriers. 
Within two years, two papers using this interaction and 
formalisms based on  the ideas in the Science paper had 
presented  reasonably quantitative, rough descriptions of “d‐
wave” superconductivity in the cuprates, one by Rice and 
collaborators 2using the renormalized, projected “t‐J” 


Hamiltonian  of Spalek and Rice, and solving it using Monte 
Carlo; another by Kotliar and a student 3using a slave Bose field 
projection technique, essentially equivalent to the t‐J method.   
It is noteworthy that at the time d‐wave had not yet been 
suspected, much less confirmed, so this represented a 
remarkable prediction, at least five years in advance of  its 
experimental confirmation.  A feature of that prediction worth 
noting is that it unequivocally led to a real energy gap 
vanishing at nodes in k‐space,  inexplicable in other terms. 
This arises because of a mechanism rather unique to this 
system, which  I have called “spin‐charge locking”.4 
 
A fairly complete exposition of the mean field theory  was 
provided by Edegger, Gros and others5 in 2006.   
 
I would emphasize that the pairing interaction  is not 
appropriately described by the term “spin fluctuations”, as it 
was in work by Scalapino,  Pines,  and others.  “Spin 
fluctuations” is a term originated by Doniach, Schrieffer et al to 
describe the (possibly) long‐range fermion‐fermion 
interactions near a ferromagnetic critical point and can be 
logically viewed as an extension of a Feynman diagrammatic 
theory for an almost ferromagnetic Fermi liquid. 
Antiferromagnetic superexchange6 is not derivable from a 
simple Feynman theory 7and has no  special relation to 
fluctuations near a critical point, and the numerous attempts to 
fit parameters to such a theory have led only to confusion.  
Also, the interaction is demonstrably short range in space and 
time.   
This confusion of antiferromagnetic “kinetic” exchange  with 
ferromagnetic “direct” exchange has afflicted generations of 
researchers. In particular, full‐scale numerical methods indeed 
eventually led to d‐wave superconductivity,8 because they 
were essentially including all of the relevant physics; but when 


reinterpreted in terms of Feynman graph concepts such as 
vertices and self‐energies they gave misleading answers.  
Analytic methods are essential in this case if one is looking for 
an effective low‐energy theory with which to predict the range 
of material properties, not just the ground state.  When the 
experimental observations demonstrate that the behavior is 
not conventional Eliashberg, it is not  useful to fit Eliashberg 
parameters to numerical calculations. 
 
Conventional Fermi liquid theory is necessarily symmetrical 
between electrons and holes in the neighborhood of the Fermi 
surface, and the striking and ubiquitous asymmetry of the 
Green’s functions of electrons vs holes which is revealed by 
vacuum tunneling experiments (and which follows from 
projective theories) is the most prominent experimental effect 
which demonstrates the  inappropriateness of conventional 
theory.  I remain baffled by the almost universal refusal of 
theorists to confront this evident fact of hole‐particle 
asymmetry head on.  Its meaning is that the first step of any 
attempt at theory must be the perturbative “Gutzwiller”‐type 
projective transformation, first formalized by Kohn,9 to a 
Hamiltonian with matrix elements to double occupancy of 
holes eliminated.  This has the important effect of allowing  a 
consistent treatment of kinetic exchange as the consequence of 
the projection. 
 
I should give  prominence to a series of papers by Gros, 
Edegger,  Muthukumar and others10 who worked out further 
numerical consequences of the skeletal theory sketched above 
and showed that it does indeed fit the experimental facts in 
some detail. 
 
A second fact which was discovered in the early literature and 
should be kept in mind throughout is the severe limitation of 


the superconducting Tc by thermal excitation of vortex 
fluctuations.  It was early remarked that superconducting 
fluctuations were expected to be the strongest limitation on Tc, 
by PWA (see ref 1)and Baskaran in 1987 and by Fukuyama 
shortly thereafter; but the community as a whole rightly paid 
more attention to Emery and Kivelson,11 who showed 
quantitatively in 1995 that the universal linear relationship 
between Tc and s, the superfluid density, which had been 
emphasized by Uemura, could be interpreted as meaning that 
Tc  is  a “BKT” vortex proliferation transition in the thermally 
decoupled planar square CuO2 lattices. That this relationship 
holds up to and beyond the maximum Tc of the “dome” shows 
unequivocally that this is the fundamental limitation on Tc for 
the superexchange mechanism.  The renormalization of s by 
projection is, both experimentally and theoretically, 
proportional to the ratio g=2x/(1+x), where x is the doping 
fraction, and therefore Tc drops drastically at small x.  The 
effective antiferromagnetic exchange integral renormalizes  
downward with  increasing x , as I have estimated12 using 
methods similar to those of Brinkman and Rice, leading to the 
decrease in Tc at high doping  and the familiar dome‐shaped x‐
dependence of Tc. 
 
Although it is not a fact generally remarked in the textbooks, 
the BKT transition is not from a superconductor into a normal 
metal.  The phase above the transition as formally described in 
the BKT theory actually has no mechanism for destroying the 
superconducting pair field, only for disordering its phase, so 
that formally a space‐time‐dependent s(r,t)) is present above 
Tc, with, near Tc, the same magnitude as below Tc but without 
long‐range phase stiffness.  The kinetic energy of flow of this 
fluid  may be written, for the two‐dimensional case, as the sum 
of two terms. The first  is the sum,  over all pairs of vortices, of 
the logarithmic interactions 


    Eij=qiqj(h2s/2m)ln(rij/a) 
between each pair of vortices.  Here q is the sign of the 
circulation of vortex i, and a is a core radius;  rij  is the distance 
between each pair ij of vortices. This is the term which is used 
in the conventional BKT theory and which allows the 
proliferation of vortex pairs  above Tc, which gives the metal 
resistance. But the density of vortex pairs does not 
immediately diverge above Tc , it rises(according to theory) as  
exp‐(2/(T‐Tc)), thus does not even have a singular derivative 
at Tc.  Therefore for a considerable range of T above Tc  we 
may assume that the superfluid continues to be well 
represented as a liquid of vortices, and this is the ”Ong vortex 
liquid”. It terminates (in T) at a higher transition whose nature 
I do not know.  
 
The second term which arises from the kinetic energy of the 
vortex array is, interestingly, independent of the positions ri of 
the individual vortices, depending only on the total vorticity  
Σiqi and diverging with the upper cutoff size R of the sample: 
E2=(iqi)2(h2s/m)ln(R/a) 
In the standard discussions of the BKT transition this divergent  
term is removed by assuming that the sum of the q’s is 0;  but it 
is  not remarked that this is equivalent to the statement that in 
zero field, even above Tc  the system retains a topological 
order: the net circulation measured along any large loop 
vanishes.  But this is true, of course, only in the absence of a 
magnetic field; the correct prescription for removing this 
divergence in a field must be that the sum of the q’s must 
match the net density of flux quanta in the field, as was pointed 
out decades ago by Onsager, Feynman and Abrikosov. 
This term is manifestly unaffected by the specific locations of 
the vortices:  it manifestly cannot be screened out by any 
rearrangement of the thermally excited vortices in the 
liquid!  This somewhat counterintuitive result was not 


emphasized in the textbook treatments of BKT systems and is 
responsible for the striking diamagnetism and Nernst effect of 
these vortex liquids,. which was first observed in 2000 and 
explored in detail by Wang, Li and Ong . 13 
The effect of a uniform density of unpaired vortices of the same 
sign is to mimic the large‐scale flow caused by a uniform field 
at  any scale larger than the distance between the unpaired 
vortices, which may be taken to be roughly RB =(hc/2eB).  Our 
argument is that this flow energy can in fact be screened out by 
a uniform density of unpaired vortices at scales larger than  RB, 
but that the granularity of the flow caused by the quantization 
of vorticity cannot be neglected at scales less that RB, so that 
every field vortex (with density proportional to B) contributes 
a self‐energy proportional to ln(RB/a)or ½ ln (1/B).  This BlnB 
term (B for the number of vortices) is the characteristic BlnB 
dependence which appears in the Nernst and diamagnetism 
measurements on all underdoped cuprates, and which is so 
strikingly continuous at finite field in the field‐temperature 
plane as one passes the nominal Tc.  This is so even though the 
superconductivity is 3‐dimensional below Tc, but 2‐
dimensional above. 
 
A  great deal of attention has been devoted to the  quantum 
oscillations that appear in some of the cuprates at intermediate 
doping levels and high fields.  There is in particular a transition 
into a state which appears to result from a CDW formation 
which brings into existence a 3‐dimensional Fermi surface 
pocket, whose nature has been investigated most thoroughly in 
the “ortho‐2” doping of  YBCO. It now appears, from extensive 
investigations by Ong among others,14 that these phenomena 
occur only above a large threshold field of around 18 Tesla 
which destroys the smaller energy gaps around the gap nodes,  
permitting the Fermi surface pockets to grow into Fermi arcs 
and to reconnect (as described by Sebastian and Harrison) by 


means of scattering on a lattice distortion—basically, a CDW‐
induced magnetic breakdown. (or, equivalently, one can think 
of it as magnetic breadown inducing a CDW.) The whole 
phenomenon leaves intact the large antinodal gaps which 
disappear only at much higher fields, and which determine Hc2.  
The phase diagram showing this is reproduced here in a figure 
from reference 14. 
 
The region of the phase diagram which is best understood 
theoretically is the region to the right of and above the pairing 
transition, which is  commonly called T*.  This is where the 
characteristic symptoms of the “strange metal” occur: a Hall 
constant rising at low T, a “linear‐T” resistivity and, more 
crucially, a power law Drude tail in the infrared conductivity, 
as established by van der Marel15 (following Schlesinger and 
Bontemps.) This is the region which may be thought of as a 
continuation from the “t‐model”, where the superexchange  
interaction J, of order t2/U, may be treated as a small 
perturbation relative to the renormalized kinetic energy tx.  All 
of the phenomena are caused by the Kohn‐Spalek‐Rice 
projective transformation eliminating matrix elements to 
double occupancy of holes.  
 
The formal discussion of the large U case has never been 
written down explicitly but it goes more or less like this: 
As we increase U towards the critical value Uc at which the 
ladder diagrams diverge, at every U there is a Luttinger‐size  
Fermi surface of zero‐energy Fermionic excitations which  
decay at a rate proportional to 2=(E‐EF)2, and are therefore 
exact at a Fermi surface. 
It is at least possible that this Fermi surface of exact 
excitations, with Luttinger volume, continues to exist through 
and above Uc. 


This is, in fact, the basic Ansatz of the Hidden Fermi Liquid 
theory: that the Hilbert space of the low‐energy excitations in 
the states above Uc is representable in terms of these 
excitations, but that this Hilbert space must be restricted by 
projecting out double occupancy, because of the divergence of 
the ladder diagrams which leads to the “upper Hubbard band” 
of doubly‐occupied states. These  therefore must not be 
counted as part of the Hilbert space allowed to the excitations 
near the Fermi level.  
We represent the Fermionic excitations by a band of 
renormalized pseudoparticles ck*, ck, and the Fourier 
transformed local operators by ci*, ci.  Then the Gutzwiller‐like 
projection process which eliminates double occupancy may be 
carried out by multiplying, in the band kinetic energy, every ci, 

 and c*i, by the projector  P =ci,‐c*i, ‐.  The mean field theory 
used by Rice et al, and effectively by Kotliar et al, and later by 
Paramekanti et al,  and Edegger et al, involves replacing the 
projectors by their mean values (and renormalizing, 
incorrectly in the early papers as shown by Pretko16, the size of 
the exchange interaction from that given by perturbation 
theory).  The Hidden Fermi liquid theory instead observes that 
in the normal Fermi liquid the Green’s function of the projector 
has an algebraic singularity  which vanishes at =0, q=0, and  
the projector does not have a true mean value , because of the 
entanglement properties of the Fermi sea ground state.  This is 
the same type of algebraic singularity that enters in the “x‐ray 
edge” singularity (the ‘orthogonality catastrophe”) of normal 
metals.  It is related to the “chiral anomaly” of field theory, in 
that it is caused by the deep entanglement of the Fermion fluid, 
and like it appears as a term which affects the spectrum at all 
energies. The HFL theory takes the simplest path of calculating 
the Green’s function of the composite operator  as the product 
of those of its two components. 
 


As we move into the underdoped regime an additional 
complication arises. The down‐spin projector multiplying the 
up‐spin particle has a component which can be thought of as a 
down‐spin particle  ci,‐*  multiplying a spin operator Si+.  This 
will cause structure in the tunneling spectrum, especially at the 
frequency of the “soft mode” resonance  at several tens of mev 
which can be (and is) misinterpreted as indicating a role in 
causation of the superconducting gap. 
 
The anomaly becomes much less severe in the  optimally 
doped .superconductor because the energy  gap allows the 
infrared end to converge, and the mean field theory should be 
otherwise quite satisfactory in this case, as shown in the fits by 
Anderson and Ong 17of a projected BCS theory to tunneling 
data.  The tunnelling data also seem to  confirm that there is an 
actual zero of the energy gap, again confirming that it is real 
rather than complex. 
 
There remain a number of details in the phase diagram which 
have not yet become clear to me.  I have mentioned the upper 
temperature limit of the Ong vortex liquid phase, which seems 
rather sharp and leads to a phase which still shows some 
evidence of pairing.  I also do not pretend to understand the 
transport theory in this region; I have given arguments that 
h/ T but they are very qualitative. 
 
But most persistently, there appears evidence of some kind of 
T‐symmetry breaking, and recently of second harmonic 
generation, near the T* line where one presumes pairing first 
appears.  One should emphasize that the incontrovertible 
evidence for  gap zeroes at low temperatures from thermal 
conductivity and thermal Hall conductivity measurements18 
proves that the well‐developed energy gap is real, the gap 
zeros are protected,  and hence demonstrates T‐invariance in 


the ground state. But since the process of spin‐charge locking 
is due to energy terms which are not relevant at the  pairing 
transition, it may be that the pairing transition is more 
complicated than we envision and leaves room for a complex 
gap phase (“d+id”) near T*.  Otherwise I must confess to my 
failure to find a reasonable explanation for these observations. 
 
Let me, in closing, say a few words about problem‐solving 
strategy in materials science.  In the first place, one must 
realize that unlike particle physics or cosmology the problems 
in materials science are over‐ rather than under‐determined.  
There is much too much data.  Any hypothesis which does not 
contradict something evident in the data is likely to be true.  
Equally, it will usually be easy to exclude false or irrelevant 
ideas. 
 
For instance, one set of evident facts is that in reasonably well‐
developed superconducting states, the effective mass is low, 
there are well‐developed and persistent zeroes of the 
gap(hence it is real),and the transition out of superconductivity 
is caused by phase disorder. Thus bipolarons play no central 
role, nor do loop currents and T asymmetry(which is puzzling 
but peripheral); the superfluid density is renormalized 
downwards linearly in x but not otherwise changed.  Second, 
the simplest theory produces an obviously satisfactory 
explanation of the scale and central nature of the 
phenomena—d‐wave, t2/U, rapid decrease of scale as doping is 
increased, asymmetric Green’s functions. It is not surprising 
that at low doping, where the kinetic energy has been 
drastically reduced, some compositions will exhibit 
inhomogeneous phases, but there is no evidence that the 
central phenomenon of superconductivity with a gap in the  
region of tens of mev  is profoundly dependent on such details; 
they mostly tend to compete with it.  All the fuss about a 


“mystery” seems almost a fiction  providing gainful 
employment for theorists.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Magnetic phase diagram in untwinned YBa2Cu3Oy (y = 6.55) inferred from magnetization and the thermal conductivity. 
Given the 2D nature of the transition curves, the vertical axis refers to the z  component  of  H applied in the torque experiments 
(for κxx measurements, H is always k^z). Above ∼ 8 K, the vortex solid is stable below the melting field Hm (solid circles). Below ∼ 
8 K, the Hm curve splits into two branches: Hm1 (solid circles) and Hm2 (open circles). The vortex solid 1 below Hm1 displays a large 
critical current density Jc  and shear modulus, whereas the solid 2 (Hm1 < H < Hm2) has a much smaller Jc but survives to ∼ 41 T at 0.5 
K. Throughout, the vortex- liquid state is stable to at least 41 T (region shaded light blue), but likely much higher judging from 
the trend in Md vs. H. The nearly T-independent kink field HK, identified as the onset of static charge order, is plotted as blue 
squares (inferred from χd) and as red solid triangles (from κa and κb). It in- tersects Hm1 without affecting the melting (to our 
resolution). The field scale Hp (open triangles, derived from κa and κb) appears to terminate at the lower melting field Hm1 in the limit 
T → 0. At 0.5 K, the dHvA oscillations onset near 25 T (coexist with the vortex liquid below ∼ 41 T). 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

Hm
2

H

Hm
1

HK

H


 
 
                                                        
1 P W A, Science 235, 1196 (1987) 
2 F C Zhang, C Gros, T M Rice and Shiba, J Superc Sci &Tech 1,1,1988 
3 G Kotliar and J Liu, Phys Rev B38, 5132 (1988) 
4 P W Anderson, Phys Rev Lett  96, 017001 (2006)  
5 B Edegger, C Gros, V N Muthukumar and PWA, Phys Rev Lett 96, 203002, (2006) 
6 P W Anderson, Phys Rev 115 , 2 (1959) 
7  See the Wikipedia article on “Instantons”, especially the section on Holstein‐
Herring Theory  
8 D J Scalapino, cond‐mat/0610710 ; this article appears in another form in the 
proceedings of the Dresden M2S and was intended to appear in a handbook edited 
by J R Schrieffer. It contains an excellent summary of the numerical work, and 
numerous references.  In an addendum it also presents a remarkably uncritical 
statement of the “problem” of high Tc. 
9 Walter Kohn, Phys Rev 133 A, 171 (1964)  
10 B Edegger et al, Adv in Phys 56, 927(2007); ref 5;C Gros et al, PNAS 103, 14298 
(2006) 
11 V J Emery and S Kivelson, Phys Rev Lett  74,3253 (1995) 
12 P W Anderson, J P Chem Solids 63, 2145 (2002) 
13 see PWA,  cond.mat/0603726  
14 F Yu et al, PNAS 1612591113(2016) 
15 D van der Marel, et al, Nature 425, 271, (2003)  
 
16 M Pretko, Senior thesis, Princeton Physics Dept (2012) 
17P W Anderson and N P Ong J P Chem Solids 67, 1 (2004) 
 
18 N P Ong, PWA et al ,Phys Rev Lett 86, 890(2001) 


