Stochastic Single Flux Quantum Neuromorphic 
Computing using Magnetically Tunable Josephson 
Junctions 

 

Stephen E. Russek, Christine A. Donnelly, Michael L. Schneider, Burm Baek, Mathew R. Pufall, William H. Rippard, 
Peter F. Hopkins, Paul D. Dresselhaus, Samuel P. Benz  

NIST, Boulder CO 

 
 

Abstract— Single flux quantum (SFQ) circuits form a natural 
neuromorphic technology with SFQ pulses and superconducting 
transmission lines simulating action potentials and axons, 
respectively. Here we present a new component, magnetic 
Josephson 
junctions, 
that 
have 
a 
tunablility 
and 
re-
configurability 
that 
was 
lacking 
from 
previous 
SFQ 
neuromorphic circuits.  The nanoscale magnetic structure acts as 
a tunable synaptic constituent that modifies the junction critical 
current. These circuits can operate near the thermal limit where 
stochastic firing of the neurons is an essential component of the 
technology.  This technology has the ability to create complex 
neural systems with greater than 1021 neural firings per second 
with approximately 1 W dissipation.   

Keywords—single flux quantum, neuromorphic, magnetic 
Josephson junctions 

I. INTRODUCTION  

Single flux quantum (SFQ) logic[1-3] relies on voltage 
pulses generated by 2π phase slips of the superconducting 
order parameter across a Josephson junction.  These voltage 
pulses have a time-integrated amplitude given by the flux 
quantum φ0= 2.068 x 10-15 Vs. Complex logic circuits have 
been fabricated using this technology and major efforts are 
ongoing to fabricate a new class of low power SFQ 
supercomputers.[4]   Neuromorphic variations of SFQ logic 
have been proposed and fabricated.[5-7] These papers have 
highlighted the natural analogy between SFQ pulse trains and 
action potentials. However, key components of neural 
operation, such as neuromorphic synapses that are dynamically 
reconfigurable and system operation near the thermal limit, 
have not been addressed. Here, we introduce magnetic 
Josephson junctions based on reconfigurable magnetic 
nanoclusters, as a new component for neuromorphic SFQ.  
Further, we develop stochastic models required to characterize 
and design SFQ neural circuits which, to achiever ultra-low 
power, need to operate near the thermal limit.  In addition to 
achieving ultra-low power, operating in the partially stochastic 
regime has been identified as important for efficient 
neuromorphic learning systems.[8] 

Design tools and state-of-the-art fabrication facilities have 
been developed for SFQ logic circuits including fabrication on 
200 mm wafers, planarized multilayer wiring and high junction 

uniformity.[9]  These capabilities can be leveraged to develop 
high-complexity very fast neural systems that may be suitable 
for both application specific computing such as image analysis 
and, more importantly, for computations that require cognitive 
processes.   

While SFQ logic circuits require a high degree of device 
uniformity, this constraint is greatly relaxed for neuromorphic 
circuits. Further, SFQ logic requires precise timing and clock 
distribution, at frequencies of 10 GHz and above, which can be 
very challenging, while neuromorphic SFQ is asynchronous 
(although strongly correlated). Finally, SFQ circuits usually 
require significant bias currents, typically 100 µA per device, 
which can lead to a prohibitively large total current when 
device counts are on the order of 109. Stochastic SFQ works 
very close to equilibrium and does not require significant bias 
currents. 

II. STOCHASTIC JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS 

A standard circuit model of a Josephson junction is shown 
in Fig. 1 along with the equations dictating the junction 
dynamics.[10]  The supercurrent is given by Is = Ic sin(θ), 
where θ is the change of the phase of the superconducting 
order parameter across the junction, V is the voltage across the 
junction which is proportional to the time derivative of θ, Ic is 
the critical current, Rn is the normal state resistance of the 
device, C is the junction capacitance, In is the thermal noise 
term, and Ib is the total current through the junction. Here, In is 
assumed to be random Gaussian noise with rms amplitude of 
(4kBT/Rnτ)0.5, where kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the device 
temperature, and τ is the noise sampling time used in 
modeling. The resulting dynamics are the same as a driven 
damped pendulum. The energy barrier, the difference between 
the energy at θ = 0 and θ = π, is given by Icφ0/2π. For 
stochastic operation (as shown in the modelling below) we 
require Icφ0/kBT ≈ 10 to 20, with the exact value being an 
important circuit parameter. The damping is given by the 
McCumber parameter βc = 2πIcRn
2C/φ0.  Most SFQ circuits 
require the junctions to be close to critical damping with βc ≈ 1. 

 

Fig. 2 shows numerical solutions of the dynamical 
equations for a typical stochastic SFQ junction with an 

Contribution of the US government, not subject to copyright.


operation temperature of 4 K and a critical current of 0.5 µA.  
Fig. 2b shows the resting state spiking characteristic of the 
junction, while Figs. 2a, c show the spiking with small applied 
bias currents of ± 0.1 µA.  Unlike real neural systems, the 
resting state can generate either positive or negative pulses and 
the pulse durations are < 100 ps. We see that small bias 
currents can stimulate strong pulse trains. The bias current can 
be viewed as integrated inputs from other neural spike chains. 

 

Figure 2 Simulations of spiking characteristics of a Josephson jucntion with 
0.5 µm diameter, 2 nm thick  Si barrier, Ic = 0.5 µA, Rn = 400 Ω, T = 4 K. 
Icφ0/kBT = 18: a) -0.1 µA bias current, b) resting state spiking, c) spiking with 
+0.1 µA bias currents. The circuit bandwidth gives a pulse width near 50 ps. 

 

Fig. 3 shows the spiking characteristic of two otherwise 
identical junctions with different critical currents, Ic = 0.5 µA 
and 1.0 µA.  Since the spiking rate is exponentially dependent 
on the critical current, a small change in critical current has a 
dramatic effect in the spiking characteristics.  This type of Ic 
change is what we hope to dynamically produce through the 
use of magnetically tunable junctions discussed in the next 
section.  

The spiking rate shown in Fig. 3b is approximately 1010 
single flux quantum per second. The power dissipated for a 
single active SFQ neuron, the bias current times the average 
voltage, is therefore 1010 s-1Ibφ0 ≈ 1 x 10-11 W.  Hence, large 
scale neural circuits can be fabricated with up to 1011 neurons 
and 1021 firings per second that consume less than 1 W of 
power (this does not include the refrigeration power).  

0
5
10
15
20
-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Ic = 1.0 µA

Voltage (µV)

Tiµe (ns)

Ic = 0.5 µA

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

(b)

Voltage (µV)

(a)

Figure 3 Simulations of spiking of a 0.5 µm diameter 400 Ω junction at 4.2 K 
for critical currents of a) 1.0 µA and b) 0.5 µA and a bias current of 0.3 µA.  
The Ic = 0.5 µA junction shows spikes corresponding to 1, 2 and 3 flux quanta. 

 

III. MAGNETIC JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS 

Magnetic Josephson junctions have recently received a lot 
of attention due to their potential use as compact nonvolatile 
memory elements in SFQ circuits.   It has been shown that by 
changing the magnetic state of a spin valve incorporated into a 
Josephson junction, one can modulate both the amplitude and 
phase of the supercurrent.[11-16]  For carefully chosen 
thicknesses of the magnetic layers, the modulation of the 
critical current can be greater than 100%.[17] Further, it has 
been shown that in small devices of less than 100 nm diameter, 
the magnetic state can be changed by current pulses through 
the device via spin transfer torque.[17, 18] 

An existing drawback of the digital magnetic Josephson 
devices is that large currents are required to switch them.  This 
is due to the fact that the magnetic layers have large moments 
and that each electron can only transfer ћ of angular 
momentum. A large number of electrons are required to 
transfer the required angular momentum, while only a small 
percent of the energy of the electrons is used to overcome the 
magnetic energy barrier. To make the magnetic Josephson 
junction have an analog Ic variation and to make switching 

Figure 1 Circuit model of a Josephson junction, along with the corresponding 
dynamical equations. 


more efficient, we fabricate Josephson junctions with Mn 
clusters embedded in the Si barrier, as shown in Fig. 4.  These 
Josephson junctions, with the exception of Mn doping, are very 
similar to the ones used in NIST Josephson voltage 
standards.[19, 20] 

 

Figure 4 Schematic of magnetic Josephson junction with Mn clusters 
embedded in a Si barrier. 

 

The junctions, as seen in Fig. 5, show nearly ideal current-
voltage characteristics for overdamped junctions, nearly ideal 
Ic vs field characteristics, high uniformity as determined by 
measurements on large arrays, and high quality microwave 
response. The presence of the magnetic clusters can greatly 
suppress Ic and it has been shown (to be reported in another 
publication) that Ic, as with other magnetic Josephson junction 
structures [11, 21-24], depends on the magnetic state.  While 
the critical currents for the junctions shown here are quite 
large, for smaller junctions with dimensions of 100 nm, which 
are appropriate for large scale neural networks, the critical 
currents will be on the order of a few microamps. 

 

Figure 5 Critical current vs. magnetic field for a 3 um x 6 µm Mn-doped 
Josephson junction.[24] The insets show the current-voltage curves for series 
array of 600 Mn-doped Josephson junctions with and without 4.7 GHz 
microwaves applied.  

 

The cluster size and switching energies are set by post 
deposition anneals.  The anneals are done in a rapid thermal 
annealer at 573 K to 723 K for approximately 2 min. Fig. 6 
shows typical zero-field-cooled and field-cooled moment vs. 
temperature data. Below the blocking temperature, indicated by 
the vertical arrows, the Mn spins can be configured in either 
random or ordered states. Figure 6a shows a sample that was 

annealed at 573 K with a blocking temperature of 34 K.  Figure 
6b shows a sample that was annealed at 723 K with a blocking 
temperature of 240 K.  Figure 6 demonstrates the ability to 
readily change both the blocking temperature as well as the 
total moment by varying the annealing temperature.  By 
varying the anneal time and temperature we have been able to 
vary the blocking temperature, TB, from 10 K to 240 K.   

The lower the blocking temperature, the easier the magnetic 
clusters are to switch, with a tradeoff of loss of thermal 
stability.  The switching energy for a magnetic cluster is given 
approximately by Es ≈ ln(tm/ta) kBTB, where tm is a 
measurement time, and ta is an attempt time.  For a blocking 
temperature of 30 K, Es ≈ 70 meV.  The cluster moment can be 
estimated from Langevin fits to moment versus field curves 
above the blocking temperature.  These fits give the cluster 
moments of a few Bohr magnetons to several hundred Bohr 
magnetons, depending on the annealing conditions. A key 
element of these junctions is that the ratio of the switching 
energy to the angular momentum of the clusters is close to the 
ratio of energy to angular momentum of an electron, indicating 
that efficient energy and angular momentum transfer can occur.  

 

 

Figure 6 Zero field cooled (red) and field cooled (black) magnetic moment 
plots of a Mn-doped Josephson juntion showing hysteretic magnetic states 
below the blocking temperature, indicated by the vertical arrows. 

IV. MAGNETIC JOSPEHSON JUNCTION DEVICE MODEL 

To develop complex neural circuits, it is essential to have a 
device model that can be incorporated into large scale circuit 
simulations.  We have modified existing Verilog A models of a 
standard Josephson junction to accommodate an internal 
magnetic order parameter.  Fig. 7 shows the circuit model of a 
nanocluster magnetic Josephson junction, now with the 
supercurrent a function of the magnetic order parameter m, 
which in turn is a function of the integrated voltage history. 
The parameter m is zero when the spins are disordered and 1 
when they are completely aligned. Positive applied voltage 
pulses will drive the system to a disordered state with m = 0, 
while negative pulses will drive the system to m = 1. 

Here we ignore the dependence of the phase on the 
magnetic order parameter, δ(m) = constant, and only allow the 
critical current to vary.  As with the spin valve Josephson 
junctions, the critical current is maximized in the state with 
unaligned spins and minimized in the state with spins aligned. 
The temperature is a critical experimental parameter that can 
simultaneously scale all critical currents to allow evaluation of 
the performance with different levels of resting state activity.  
At present, this model is not validated by experimental data.  It 
represents the simplest dependence of Ic on m to allow 


simulations to determine the utility of such a device in complex 
neural circuits. 

Given this device model, the performance of devices and 
circuits can be modeled with SPICE as shown in Fig. 8. This 
simulation shows similar device response as seen in Fig.1, but 
now with dynamically variable critical current and done in 
SPICE, which is capable of extension to large scale circuit 
simulation. Fig. 8b shows the dynamical response, voltage vs. 

time, of a magnetic cluster Josephson junction, at T = 0 K, for 
large negative bias, zero bias, and large positive bias. The 
voltage oscillation amplitude is seen to first decrease with time 
in the negative current bias regime and then increase with time 
in the positive current bias regime.  This corresponds to a time 
dependent decrease in the critical current during negative bias 
(negative input pulses) and an increase in critical current 
during positive bias.  As shown in Fig. 3, this change in critical 
current can activate a magnetic Josephson junction or 
deactivate it.  An input of negative pulses to a junction will 
increase Ic causing it to fire more strongly, while a series of 
positive input pulses will raise Ic preventing future firings. 

SUMMARY 

We have introduced nanocluster magnetic Josephson 
junctions as a potential synaptic component for SFQ neural 
circuits.  We have demonstrated that in the stochastic limit the 
spiking behavior can be made very sensitive to small changes 
in critical currents that can be obtained by changing the 
magnetic structures in magnetic Josephson junctions.  We have 
shown that operating in the stochastic limit can achieve much 
lower power and eliminate the need for large total bias 
currents. Finally, we have introduced stochastic circuit models 
that can be used in large scale SPICE simulations of SFQ 
neural circuits. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We thank the IARPA C3 program for providing inspiration 
and guidance for this work. 

 

 

 

Figure 7 Circuit model of a nanocluster magnetic Josephson junction along 
with model equations describing dependence of Ic on the magnetic order 
parameter. 

Figure 8 SPICE simulations showing voltage vs. time of a magnetic Josephson junction, with a critical current of 0.5 µA, when time dependent bias 
currents are applied. a) Stochastic spiking behavior for a junction at T= 4 K with bias currents of -0.15 µA, 0 µA, and 0.15 µA. b) Oscillation behavior at 
T = 0 K, with applied bias currents larger than Ic showing dynamic reconfigurablilty of the junction critical current. 


REFERENCES 

 

1 
Likharev, K.K., and Semenov, V.K.: ‘RSFQ logic/memory family: a new Josephson-junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-
frequency digital systems’, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 1991, 1, (1), pp. 3-28 

2 
Bunyk, P., Likharev, K., and Zinoviev, D.: ‘RSFQ Technology: Physics and Devices’, International Journal of High Speed Electronics 
and Systems, 2001, 11, (01), pp. 257-305 

3 
Dorojevets, M., Chen, Z., Ayala, C.L., and Kasperek, A.K.: ‘Towards 32-bit Energy-Efficient Superconductor RQL Processors: The 
Cell-Level Design and Analysis of Key Processing and On-Chip Storage Units’, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 
2015, 25, (3), pp. 1-8 

4 
Holmes, D.S., Ripple, A.L., and Manheimer, M.A.: ‘Energy-Efficient Superconducting Computing; Power Budgets and 
Requirements’, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 2013, 23, (3), pp. 1701610-1701610 

5 
Hirose, T., Asai, T., and Amemiya, Y.: ‘Pulsed neural networks consisting of single-flux-quantum spiking neurons’, Physica C: 
Superconductivity and its Applications, 2007, 463-465, pp. 1072-1075 

6 
Onomi, T., Kondo, T., and Nakajima, K.: ‘High-speed single flux-quantum up/down counter for neural computation using stochastic 
logic’, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2008, 97, pp. 012187 

7 
Crotty, P., Schult, D., and Segall, K.: ‘Josephson junction simulation of neurons’, Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys, 2010, 82, 
(1 Pt 1), pp. 011914 

8 
Neftci, E.O., Pedroni, B.U., Joshi, S., Al-Shedivat, M., and Cauwenberghs, G.: ‘Stochastic Synapses Enable Efficient Brain-Inspired 
Learning Machines’, Front Neurosci, 2016, 10, pp. 241 

9 
Tolpygo, S.K., Bolkhovsky, V., Weir, T.J., Johnson, L.M., Gouker, M.A., and Oliver, W.D.: ‘Fabrication Process and Properties of 
Fully-Planarized Deep-Submicron Nb/Al2O3/Nb Josephson Junctions for VLSI Circuits’, IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, 2015, 25, (3), pp. 1-12 

10 
Van Duzer, T., and Turner, C.W.: ‘Principles of superconductive devices and circuits’ (Elsevier, 1981. 1981) 

11 
Bell, C., Burnell, G., Leung, C.W., Tarte, E.J., Kang, D.J., and Blamire, M.G.: ‘Controllable Josephson current through a pseudospin-
valve structure’, Applied Physics Letters, 2004, 84, (7), pp. 1153-1155 

12 
Abd El Qader, M., Singh, R.K., Galvin, S.N., Yu, L., Rowell, J.M., and Newman, N.: ‘Switching at small magnetic fields in Josephson 
junctions fabricated with ferromagnetic barrier layers’, Applied Physics Letters, 2014, 104, (2), pp. 022602 

13 
Baek, B., Rippard, W.H., Benz, S.P., Russek, S.E., and Dresselhaus, P.D.: ‘Hybrid superconducting-magnetic memory device using 
competing order parameters’, Nature communications, 2014, 5, pp. 3888 

14 
Banerjee, N., Robinson, J.W.A., and Blamire, M.G.: ‘Reversible control of spin-polarized supercurrents in ferromagnetic Josephson 
junctions’, Nature communications, 2014, 5 

15 
Niedzielski, B.M., Gingrich, E.C., Loloee, R., Pratt, W.P., and Birge, N.O.: ‘S/F/S Josephson junctions with single-domain 
ferromagnets for memory applications’, Superconductor Science and Technology, 2015, 28, (8), pp. 085012 

16 
Gingrich, E.C., Niedzielski, B.M., Glick, J.A., Wang, Y., Miller, D.L., Loloee, R., Pratt Jr, W.P., and Birge, N.O.: ‘Controllable 0-[pi] 
Josephson junctions containing a ferromagnetic spin valve’, Nat Phys, 2016, advance online publication 

17 
Baek, B., Rippard, W.H., Pufall, M.R., Benz, S.P., Russek, S.E., Rogalla, H., and Dresselhaus, P.D.: ‘Spin-Transfer Torque Switching 
in Nanopillar Superconducting-Magnetic Hybrid Josephson Junctions’, Physical Review Applied, 2015, 3, (1) 

18 
Ralph, D.C., and Stiles, M.D.: ‘Spin transfer torques’, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 2008, 320, (7), pp. 1190-1216 

19 
Olaya, D., Dresselhaus, P.D., Benz, S.P., Herr, A., Herr, Q.P., Ioannidis, A.G., Miller, D.L., and Kleinsasser, A.W.: ‘Digital circuits 
using self-shunted Nb/NbxSi1−x/Nb Josephson junctions’, Applied Physics Letters, 2010, 96, (21), pp. 213510 

20 
Tang, Y., Ojha, V.N., Schlamminger, S., Ruefenacht, A., Burroughs, C.J., Dresselhaus, P.D., and Benz, S.P.: ‘A 10 V programmable 
Josephson voltage standard and its applications for voltage metrology’, Metrologia, 2012, 49, (6), pp. 635-643 

21 
Ryazanov, V.V., Oboznov, V.A., Rusanov, A.Y., Veretennikov, A.V., Golubov, A.A., and Aarts, J.: ‘Coupling of two superconductors 
through a ferromagnet: Evidence for a pi junction’, Physical Review Letters, 2001, 86, (11), pp. 2427-2430 

22 
Kontos, T., Aprili, M., Lesueur, J., Genet, F., Stephanidis, B., and Boursier, R.: ‘Josephson junction through a thin ferromagnetic 
layer: Negative coupling’, Physical Review Letters, 2002, 89, (13) 

23 
Blum, Y., Tsukernik, A., Karpovski, M., and Palevski, A.: ‘Oscillations of the superconducting critical current in Nb-Cu-Ni-Cu-Nb 
junctions’, Physical Review Letters, 2002, 89, (18) 

24 
Baek, B., Benz, S.P., Rippard, W.H., Russek, S.E., Dresselhaus, P.D., Pufall, M.R., Rogalla, H.,  ‘Magnetic barrier structures for 
superconducting-magnetic hybrid Josephson junctions’, 2013 IEEE 14th International Superconductive Electronics Conference 
(ISEC), 2013 

 


