”Internal” coherent effects in HTS-normal metal point contacts

L. F. Rybal’chenko, I. K. Yanson, V. V. Fisun, N. L. Bobrov, Yu. D. Tret’yakov,* A. R. Kaul’,* and I. E. Graboi*
Physicotechnical Institute of Low Temperatures,
Academy of Sciences of the Ukrainian SSR, Kharkov,
and M. V Lomonosov State University, Moscow*
Email address:
bobrov@ilt.kharkov.ua
(Dated: November 8, 2021; Published (Fiz. Nizk. Temp., 16, 1033 (1990)); (Sov. J. Low Temp. Phys., 16, 602 (1990))

Electrical characteristics are measured in submicron YBaCuO-normal metal point contacts with
a direct conductivity. In a microwave field, such contacts reveal a nonstationary Josephson effect
which can occur in the current concentration region not only in the initial weak bonds in YBaCuO
but also the weak bonds of a phase-slip center type, formed as a result of a significant current
injection (as well as a microwave field). The existence of internal weak bonds in the HTS-electrode
contact area produces a narrow minimum in the differential resistance near zero biases. Moreover,
the effect of magnetic flux quantization is observed for separate granules in magnetic fields stronger
than the first critical field.

PACS numbers: 74.25.Kc, 74.45.+c, 73.40.-c, 74.20.Mn, 74.72.-h, 74.72.Bk, 74.50.+r

The observation of quantum coherent effects in ordi-
nary superconductors requires the presence of artificially
prepared weak couplings like tunnel barriers, microcon-
strictions, and point contacts. The new metaloxide high-
temperature superconductors are distinguished by the
existence of weak couplings which are inherent in these
materials.
This makes it possible to observe quantum
interference in bulk samples [1] as well as the Josephson
effects in HTS-normal metal point contacts [2].
By subjecting the YBaCuO-Ag point contacts with a
direct type conductivity to a microwave field, we have
been able to observe the nonstationary Josephson ef-
fect in the form of strongly blurred Shapiro steps with
an anomalously large period whose magnitude is mainly
determined by the resistance of the normal bank. The
Josephson effect could be observed not only in the ini-
tially existing weak couplings in YBaCuO, but also in
weak couplings of the phase-slip center type which were
produced by a significant current injection (and the mi-
crowave field). In magnetic fields stronger than the first
critical field Hc1 for granules, we also observed oscilla-
tions of the differential resistance of point contacts, pro-
duced apparently by the magnetic flux quantization at
individual granules.
In the course of our investigations, we studied the
electrical characteristics I(V ) and dV/dI(V ) of submi-
cron size pressure point contacts (PC) with a direct con-
ductivity between the normal electrode (Ag or Fe) and
the cleaved surface of YBa2Cu3O7−y ceramic pellets pre-
pared by cryo-chemical technology [3]. The pellets were
cleaved either in air or directly in liquid helium in a spe-

cial device ensuring the mutual displacement and contact
of electrodes, thus enabling the creation of point contacts
by the displacement technique. This technique is found
to be quite effective for obtaining PC with a direct-type
conductivity, as indicated by the relatively large value
of the excess current Iexc on the current-voltage charac-
teristics I(V ) of most of the investigated contacts (see,
e.g., Fig.
1a).
The voltage V1(V ) of the fundamental
harmonic of the modulating signal of frequency 487 Hz,
which is proportional to the differential contact resistance
dV/dI(V ), was measured by the bridge technique. The
magnetic field, oriented approximately at right angles
to the contact axis, was produced by a superconduct-
ing solenoid with a maximum strength H ≈ 50 kOe. A
microwave signal of frequency 7.5 GHz was supplied to
the point contact through a coaxial cable terminating in
a loop in the vicinity of the contact. Most of the mea-
surements were made at a temperature of 4.2 K in liquid
helium. In some cases higher temperatures were attained
by using an intermediate cryostat of a small volume, to
which a heater was attached. Figure 1a shows atypical
IVC and its first derivative for one of the YBaCuO-Ag
contacts formed on the surface of the S-electrode cleaved
at room temperature.
In the region of increasing Iexc
the dV/dI(V ) dependence reveals the presence of min-
ima at eV ≃ 20 meV which apparently reflect the energy
gap in YBaCuO. In addition, another relatively narrow
minimum which is typical of most of the investigated con-
tacts is observed near V = 0. The half-width of this cen-
tral minimum is usually of the order of, or smaller than,
2.0 mV , and its intensity may be much higher than of the

arXiv:1702.01305v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  4 Feb 2017


2

FIG. 1:
The I(V ) and dV/dI(V ) dependences of a point contact between silver and the air-cleaved surface of YBaCuO ceramic
at T = 4.2 K; a) in the absence of microwave power P and magnetic field H; b) initial segment of the dependence dV/dI(V ) on
a magnified scale for P = 0(1), 0.5Pmax(2), Pmax(3, 4), 0.7Pmax(5), Pmax(6), 0.6Pmax(7), 0.3Pmax(8), 0(9), and H= 0(1,2,3),
1(4,5), 13(6), and 13.6(7,8,9) kOe.

gap minima. For some contacts, the gap minima are pre-
served with increasing temperature right up to T ≈ 80 K,
while for some other contacts these minima disappear at
temperatures of about 20-30 K.
At first, it was assumed that the existence of the cen-
tral minimum is associated with the proximity effect, i.e.,
with the superconductivity induced in the N-electrode
since the coherence length in YBaCuO, which is identi-
fied with the size of a Cooper pair, is much smaller than
the size of the investigated contacts. However, such an
assumption had to be rejected in view of the fact that
this minimum is preserved even when a magnetic mate-
rial (iron) is used for normal electrode (Fig. 2).
Figure 1b shows the effect of a constant magnetic field
and a varying microwave field on the central peak (near
V = 0) of the dV/dI(V ) dependence on a scale stretched

along the abscissa axis.
Apparently, the emergence of
regular oscillations of the differential resistance at the
edges of this zero-point anomaly in a zero magnetic field
under microwave radiation (curves 2, 3) is associated
with the nonstationary Josephson effect at internal weak
couplings (away from the contact center). The oscilla-
tions on the dV/dI(V ) dependence reflect the strongly
blurred Shapiro steps on the IVC. The oscillation period
δVexp ≈ 0.12 mV is much larger than the theoretical
value δVtheor ≈ 0.016 mV for an isolated Josephson con-
tact at the microwave radiation of frequency 7.5 GHz.
Moreover, the onset of the oscillations is displaced by
several millivolts from the origin.
The observed pecu-
liarities of the oscillations can be explained by the exis-
tence of an ohmic resistance connected in series to the
Josephson element in the region of the PC constriction.


3

FIG. 2: The I(V ) and dV/dI(V ) dependences for a YBaCuO-
Fe point contact at 4.2 K. Curve 3 shows the initial segment
of the dV/dI(V ) dependence on a magnified scale.

Its magnitude is primarily determined by the silver elec-
trode and, probably, by the nonsuperconducting regions
of the HTS electrode. The threshold voltage near which
the oscillations begin corresponds to the attainment of
the critical current passing through the weak Josephson
coupling.
The jump (∼ 0.2 Ω) in the differential resistance pre-
ceding the onset of oscillations can be estimated by a
comparison of the curves 1-3 in Fig. 1b. In the resis-
tive model of weak Josephson couplings, this jump can
be identified with its internal resistance RI ≈ 0.2 Ω.
In this case,
each step on the IVC of a Joseph-
son element will correspond to a current increment
δII = δVP /RJ ≈ 0.08 mA.
Since δVexp ≈ 0.12 mV ,
the resistance Rser ≈ 1.5 Ω connected in series to the
Josephson element is found to be quite close to the di-
rectly measured differential resistance R0 of the contact
for zero bias.
Such a coincidence is a strong argument in favor of the
Josephson nature of the oscillations (curves 2, 3 in Fig.
1b). The fact that some part of Rser be on the side of
the HTS electrode is immaterial in this case. Judging
by the shape of the IVC presented in Fig. 1, this part
mainly shunts the superconducting channel and results
in a smoothing of the Shapiro steps as well as a decrease
in Iexc and R0 as compared to the expected values.
A combined action of a microwave field and a constant
magnetic field on the contact results in a different type of
oscillations (curves 4-8 in Fig. 1b), which is in sharp con-

trast with the earlier oscillations (curves 2, 3). Firstly,
the region of onset of the new oscillations is displaced
towards zero biases. Secondly, the considerably increase
in the period of these oscillations is accompanied by a
loss of their strict regularity. The latter circumstance is
especially noticeable for H > 1 kOe and in higher mag-
netic fields for an insufficient power P of the microwave
field (curve 5). With increasing H, a lower level of P is
required for improving the regularity of the oscillations
(curve 7). At the same time, an increase in the power P
beyond a certain optimal value also has a negative effect
on the regularity of oscillations (curve 6).

It can be assumed that the emergence of the second
type of oscillations (near V = 0) is not associated with
the Josephson effect (as in the first case). If this were
not so, the oscillation period would gradually approach
the value δV = hω/2e ≃ 16 µV (for 7.5 GHz) as V → 0,
which is not observed in actual practice.
Since these
oscillations completely disappear upon the introduction
of a microwave field (curve 9), the formation of a chain of
successive phase slip centers (PSC) under the action of a
transport current observed by us in point contacts based
on perfect YBaSrCuO single crystals [4] cannot serve on
its own as the reason behind the oscillatory effects.

We believe that the emergence of these oscillations can
be associated with the magnetic flux quantization at the
crystallographic objects in the vicinity of the point of
contact between Ag and YBaCuO that are asymmetric
relative to the current flow axis. Indeed, if the period
of these oscillations is measured in units of voltage, we
can use the IVC to express it in terms of the magnetic
field generated by the transport current flowing through
the contact. The approximate value of this period is esti-
mated at several oersteds, which gives a value of quanti-
zation contour of several square microns. Electron micro-
graphs reveal that most of the elongated granules which
form this ceramic do possess such a cross-sectional area.
Hence it can be concluded that flux quantization occurs
at individual granules. By the way, the vortex nature
of the observed effect is also indicated by an insufficient
reproducibility of individual oscillations upon repeated
recordings of the dV/dI(V ) dependences.

The possibility of observing flux quantization in be-
tween the granules is ruled out for two reasons, viz., their
considerably larger size than the theoretically calculated
quantization area, and the magnetic fields much stronger
than Hc1 for granules required for observing such oscil-
lations. The role of the magnetic field is apparently re-


4

FIG. 3: The I(V ) and dV/dI(V ) dependences for a point
contact between Ag and the YBaCuO ceramic surface cleaved
in liquid helium at T = 4.2 K and H = 0 in the absence
of a microwave field (1,2) and at its maximum power (3,3’).
Curves 3a and 3’b are identical, but the latter is presented on
a magnified scale.

duced to the suppression of superconductivity at weak
couplings between granules and to a transfer of the gran-
ules to the mixed state (Hc1 for granules is of the order
of several hundred oersteds).
The microwave field ap-
parently plays a stabilizing and/or synchronizing role,
ordering the passage of magnetic vortices into (or out of)
the quantization contour.
The YBaCuO-Ag contacts, in which the point of con-
tact was formed on the S-electrode surface cleaved in
liquid helium, reacted in a different manner to the mi-
crowave radiation (Fig.3)*. In this case, the oscillations
on the dV/dI(V ) dependence under the action of the mi-
crowave field alone were manifested not in the region
V
∼ 2 mV as in the previous type of contacts, but
for much higher bias voltages exceeding the values cor-

responding to the gap minima (eV∆ ≃ 32 meV ). The
emergence of oscillations for high bias voltages eV ≥ ∆
for which the increase in the excess current has practi-
cally stopped is apparently associated with the formation
of a constriction in the PC under the action of a consid-
erable injection of the weakly coupled superconducting
structure, e.g., a phase-slip center (or plane), where or-
der parameter oscillations with the Josephson frequency
are possible [5].

Similar oscillations of the differential resistance were
observed by us earlier [6] in LaSrCuO-based point con-
tacts for bias voltages eV ≥ ∆.
It was assumed that
along the current paths, the PC constriction region on
the side of the S-electrode contains local effects of the
crystal lattice, an increase in the critical current density
near which may lead to the formation of phase-slip cen-
ters (planes). In view of the small coherence length and
energy relaxation length of the charge carriers, the elec-
tric field penetration depth in the HTS is also found to be
small, and hence the phase-slip center (plane) is found to
lie in the PC constriction for typical values of the contact
diameter (several hundred angstroms or more). This is
reflected in the PC characteristics of the intrinsic Joseph-
son effect.

Note that the displacement of the region of onset of
differential resistance oscillations of the second type to-
wards higher voltages (Fig. 3) as compared to the pre-
vious case (Fig. 1b) was also accompanied by a consid-
erable increase in their period (δV ≃ 1.3 mV ). Hence it
can be assumed that the factors determining the nature
of onset of Josephson oscillations are identical for both
types of contacts. Indeed, an estimate of the ohmic resis-
tance connected in series with the Josephson element for
the second type of contacts shows that as before (Fig. 3),
it is comparable with the resistance of the normal bank.

Thus, it has been established in the present work that
in the investigated contacts of YBaCuO-Ag type, the
internal nonstationary Josephson effect may emerge on
initial weak couplings in YBaCuO or on weak couplings
of phase slip center type, formed under the effect of a
considerable current injection (or microwave field).
In
addition, the magnetic field quantization effect has been
observed in individual granules in the mixed state.

*The effect of magnetic field on these contacts was not studied.


5

[1] B. I. Verkin, I. M. Dmitrenko, V. M. Dmitriev, et al., Fiz.
Nizk Temp. 14, 34 (1988) [Sov. J. Low Temp. Phys. 14,
18 (1988)].

[2] O. P. Balkashin, I. K. Yanson, and Yu. A. Pilipenko, Fiz.
Nizk Temp. 14, 697 (1988) [Sov. J. Low Temp. Phys. 14,
382 (1988)].

[3] A. R. Kaul’, I. E. Graboi, and Yu. D. Tret’yakov, in: Su-
perconductivity: Investigations of High-temperature Met-
aloxide Superconductors, VoL 1 [in Russian], Inst. Atomic
Energy, Moscow (1987).

[4] I. K. Yanson, L. F. Rybal’chenko, V. V. Fisun, N. L. Bo-

brov, M. A. Obolenskii, M. B. Kosmyna, and V. P. Semi-
nozhenko, Fiz. Nizk. Temp. 14, 1157 (1988) [Sov. J. Low
Temp. Phys. 14, 639 (1988)], arXiv:1512.06416.

[5] B. I. Ivlev and Yu. V. Kopaev, Usp. Fiz. Nauk 142, 435
(1984) [Sov. Phys. Usp. 27, 206 (1984)].

[6] I. K. Yanson, L. F. Rybal’chenko, V. V. Fisun, N. L. Bo-
brov, M. A. Obolenskii, Yu. D. Tretyakov, A. R. Kaul,
and I. E. Graboi, Fiz. Nizk Temp. 15, 803 (1989) [Sov. J.
Low Temp. Phys. 15, 445 (1989)], arXiv:1701.06003.


