Giant ultrafast Kerr effect in type-II superconductors

Charles W. Robson, Kieran A. Fraser, and Fabio Biancalana
School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, EH14 4AS Edinburgh, UK

We study the ultrafast Kerr effect and high-harmonic generation in type-II superconductors by
formulating a new model for a time-varying electromagnetic pulse normally incident on a thin-film
superconductor. It is found that type-II superconductors exhibit exceptionally large Žć(3) due to
the progressive destruction of Cooper pairs, and display high-harmonic generation at low incident
intensities, and the highest nonlinear susceptibility of all known materials in the THz regime. Our
theory opens up new avenues for accessible analytical and numerical studies of the ultrafast dynamics
of superconductors.

PACS numbers: 74.25.Gz, 42.65.-k, 42.65.Ky

Introduction ŌĆö
The discovery of superconductivity
in 1911 by Kamerlingh Onnes introduced a startling new
phenomenon to physics: that of systems exhibiting zero
electrical resistance at low temperatures [1]. Although
superconductivity is relatively easy to measure in the
laboratory, a full microscopic explanation was not put
forward for over 40 years, in the form of the Bardeen-
Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory [2]. Between the discov-
ery of superconductivity and its satisfactory explanation
there were several powerful attempts: including that of
the London brothers in the 1930s [3], used to describe the
observed expulsion of external magnetic fields; and the
Ginzburg-Landau theory of the 1950s [4], a phenomeno-
logical model that was subsequently proved to be strictly
linked to the BCS theory in certain limits, and was able
to explain the existence of the spatial lattice distribution
of flux vortices in type-II superconductors [5].
Research into superconductivity is currently very ac-
tive, with recent work on high-temperature superconduc-
tors ŌĆō reaching up to a critical temperature of 203 oK ŌĆō
attracting considerable attention [6].
The finding that
superconductors can act as very effective single-photon
detectors also demonstrates their aptness in the field of
photonics [7ŌĆō9].
The effect of static external magnetic fields on a su-
perconductor is one of the subjectŌĆÖs most fascinating
and studied aspects, and all the introductory and ad-
vanced textbooks contain many details on how supercon-
ductors behave under the influence of time-independent
fields. However, somewhat surprisingly, the influence of
a time-dependent electromagnetic pulse has been some-
what neglected in the literature, with very few exceptions
[10, 11]. Testardi [11] looked into the experimental de-
struction of superconductivity by laser pulses; GorŌĆÖkov
and ┬┤Eliashberg [10] explored the theory of interaction of
weak time-varying fields with impure alloyed supercon-
ductors and found tripled-frequency radiation generation
ŌĆō their derivations utilised GreenŌĆÖs functions, complex
analysis, and they employed a diagrammatic method.
More recently, Matsunaga et al. observed experimentally
the third-harmonic generation in NbN samples in the
THz regime [12], which was explained theoretically by

Cea et al., who calculated the nonlinear currents by us-
ing the full microscopic model based on the BCS theory
[13].

In this paper we present for the first time exhaus-
tive analytical and numerical calculations based on the
time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation, and show the
appearance of a Kerr effect in a type-II superconduc-
tor induced by an incident, arbitrarily short light pulse.
We show that, due to progressive and step-like Cooper
pair destruction, these superconducting materials display
large nonlinear optical behaviour, such as high harmonic
generation, at extremely low laser intensities ŌĆō typically
on the kW/cm2 scale in the THz regime ŌĆō and may prove
to be a key element in future photonics applications. Our
approach is physically more transparent and much more
intuitive than the approach based on the BCS Hamilto-
nian. We specialise our discussion to elemental niobium
(Nb) thin films.

FIG. 1: Sketch of the system studied in this paper. A su-
perconducting thin film is excited by a normally incident,
x-polarized electromagnetic pulse.
The pulse destroys the
Cooper pairs already present in the film, generating more
ŌĆśnormalŌĆÖ electrons, which then diffuse and slowly recombine
due to the electron-phonon interaction.

arXiv:1703.06984v1  [physics.optics]  20 Mar 2017


2

Governing equations ŌĆö
We begin our study with the
time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation (TDGLE)
[14] (using the zero scalar potential gauge):

ŌäÅ2

2mŌłŚDŌłétŽł +
1

2mŌłŚ

’┐Į
p ŌłÆ q

cA
’┐Į2
Žł +╬▒Žł +╬▓|Žł|2Žł = 0, (1)

where Žł(x, y, t) is the complex order parameter (|Žł|2 is
proportional to the total number of Cooper pairs present
in the sample: Žł = ŌłÜncei╬Ė), nc is the number density of
Cooper pairs, x, y are the coordinates on the plane of the
thin film, mŌłŚ is the mass of a Cooper pair (approximately
equal to twice the mass of a free electron, when neglect-
ing the binding energy), q = ŌłÆ2e is its charge (equal
to twice the free electron charge ŌłÆe), D is the diffusion
constant, A(x, y, t) is the vector potential describing the
spatial and temporal structure of the incident electro-
magnetic pulse, p is the electron momentum operator
and c is the speed of light in vacuum. The phenomeno-
logical Ginzburg-Landau parameters ╬▒ and ╬▓ have units
of energy and energy├Śvolume respectively and are ex-
plicitly given by ╬▒ = ╬▒0 (T ŌłÆ Tc), where ╬▒0 and ╬▓ are
constants specific for the material used. T is the tem-
perature of the system and Tc is the critical temperature
below which superconductivity emerges [1].
Note the quite unconventional structure of Eq.
(1):
since Žł is strictly speaking not a wave function, there is
a missing imaginary unit in the first term of this equa-
tion, which sets a strong difference from the nonlinear
Schr┬©odinger equation. This difference is due to the ther-
modynamical interpretation of Žł as an order parame-
ter, related to the free energy of the sample [4]. This
makes Eq. (1) a nonlinear diffusion equation. The time-

dependent Eq. (1), which is typically not discussed in ba-
sic textbooks on superconductivity (where its static ver-
sion is usually treated), is the core equation of this paper
as it describes how the order parameter of a superconduc-
tor varies due to an electromagnetic field interaction and
contains all of the important system parameters.
The
Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory describes the emergence
of superconductivity in terms of a phase transition and
was shown to be derivable from the BCS theory in close
proximity to the critical temperature [16], although the
theory is used regularly and has been shown to be prac-
tically valid for temperatures well below Tc. It is a very
general phenomenological model used in many areas of
physics and avoids the use of many-body wavefunctions
[1, 17]. We choose to use the GL formalism instead of
the microscopic BCS theory as we believe the former con-
tains all of the necessary concepts and tools required ŌĆō
once combined with basic electrodynamics ŌĆō to show the
ultrafast optical nonlinearities inherent in type-II super-
conductors. The original motivation for the development
of GL theory was indeed to describe superconductivity
without needing to delve into its microscopic structure.
The gauge field can however be introduced in the BCS
theory via a Peierls substitution in real space, as in Ref.
[13].

The set-up considered in this paper is sketched in Fig.
1. An electromagnetic pulse is normally incident to the
2D superconducting thin film. We make the simplifying
assumption that the electric field of the incident light is
polarized along the x-direction only, as is the magnetic
vector potential A = [A(x, y, t), 0, 0]. Expanding equa-
tion (1) gives:

ŌäÅ2

2mŌłŚDŌłétŽł ŌłÆ ŌäÅ2

2mŌłŚ Ōłć2Žł + iŌäÅq

2mŌłŚc(Ōłć ┬Ę A)Žł + iŌäÅqA

mŌłŚc (ŌłćŽł) + q2A2

2mŌłŚc2 Žł + ╬▓|Žł|2Žł + ╬▒Žł = 0.
(2)

As a first attempt to understand the origin of the op-
tical nonlinearity [not to be confused with the electronic
nonlinearity, which is given by the |Žł|2Žł term in Eq. (2),
and due to the phonon-mediated electron-electron inter-
action], we now use Eq. (2) to make a rough estimate of
the third-order nonlinear optical coefficient exhibited by
the thin film. In order to find an intensity scale around
which nonlinear optical effects in the superconductor be-
come important we make the following assumptions: the
order parameter Žł varies slowly in the spatial variables,
and we use the London gauge Ōłć┬ĘA = 0, due to the Žå = 0
gauge and the fact that at ultrafast time scales the charge
density can be taken as zero throughout the process. See
the review by Hirsch [18] for a detailed look into the sub-
tleties associated with the gauge choices and charge den-

sity in a superconducting system. Using the expanded
TDGLE (2), and the assumptions detailed above, gives

ŌäÅ2

2mŌłŚDŌłétŽł +
’┐Į
q2A2

2mŌłŚc2 + ╬▒
’┐Į
Žł + ╬▓|Žł|2Žł = 0. We see that
optical nonlinearities become important when the vector
potential term in parentheses is dominant, and by using
E = ŌłÆ(1/c)ŌłétA (in the Žå = 0 gauge) to approximate the
amplitudes A Ōēł ŌłÆEc/Žē0, along with the usual light in-
tensity equation I = ŽĄ0cE2/2 (assuming unity refractive
index), we find a value for the nonlinear intensity scale
given by I0 = cŽĄ0mŌłŚ|╬▒|Žē2
0/q2, where Žē0 is the carrier fre-
quency of the pulse. For light of intensity I Ōēź I0 then the
term proportional to A2Žł in (2), which is responsible for
the nonlinear interplay between the field and the super-
conductor, cannot be ignored; and as we will see below a
very powerful cubic nonlinearity is predicted.


3

The first term in (2) represents the rate of change of the
order parameter with respect to time; the second term en-
codes the spatial diffusion dynamics of the Cooper pairs;
the third term vanishes due to our choice of gauge for
A; the fourth term does not affect the systemŌĆÖs nonlin-
ear dynamics, only adding a linear phase; the fifth and
sixth terms illustrate the inherent nonlinearities of the
system manifested in the electronic cubic order param-
eter |Žł|2Žł, and the photonic A2Žł cross terms; the last
term contributes to the ŌĆ£recoveryŌĆØ of the order parame-
terŌĆÖs original value, i.e. Cooper pair recombination after
the superconductor has interacted with light.
The basic physics of the process giving rise to Kerr
optical nonlinearity can be explained as follows: as the
light pulse impacts the superconductor Cooper pairs are
destroyed, increasing the number of normal electrons in
the material. As each progressive peak and trough of the
light pulse reaches the material the value of the order
parameter drops and then begins to recover as Cooper
pairs are destroyed ŌĆō generating harmonics ŌĆō and then
reformed, due to the phonon-mediated potential. This
mechanism is reminiscent of the ionization dynamics in
plasma physics in which light strips electrons (free elec-
trons are ŌĆ£createdŌĆØ) from their atoms, see for instance a
recent work on the subject [15].
The total current in the superconductor is composed
of an Ohmic component and a supercurrent, the latter
given explicitly by [14]:

Js = ŌłÆ q2

mŌłŚc|Žł|2A ŌłÆ iqŌäÅ

2mŌłŚ (ŽłŌłŚŌłćŽł ŌłÆ ŽłŌłćŽłŌłŚ) ,
(3)

where the second term is proportional to the spatial gra-
dient of the phase ╬Ė of the order parameter, as can be
seen if we rewrite (3) as Js = ŌłÆ q2

mŌłŚc|Žł|2A + qŌäÅ

mŌłŚ |Žł|2Ōłć╬Ė.
All time-dependences are implicit and vector notation
has been removed as Js has only an x-component, since
the input pulse is linearly polarized.
Estimate of Žć(3) ŌĆö
The nonlinear electric suscepti-
bility Žć(3) of the superconducting film can be derived as
follows. The magnetic vector potential evolves due to the
current density via the well-known wave equation:
’┐Į 1

c2
Ōłé2

Ōłét2 ŌłÆ Ōłć2
’┐Į
A = 1

ŽĄ0cJ,
(4)

where ŽĄ0 is the vacuum permittivity.
Taking the par-
tial time derivative of both sides of equation (4) and us-

ing E = ŌłÆ 1

c
ŌłéA
Ōłét produces
’┐Į
1
c2 Ōłé2

Ōłét2 ŌłÆ Ōłć2’┐Į
E = ŌłÆ
1

ŽĄ0c2 ŌłétJ,
where the right-hand side is proportional to the mate-
rial polarization. Assuming that the normal part of the
current can be disregarded as it does not contribute to
the optical nonlinearity (the metallic part of the system
is simply absorptive) then the nonlinear polarization is
seen to be of Kerr type, i.e. PNL = Žć(3)E3, by solving
analytically Eq. (2) for a space-independent continuous

wave A(t) = A0 cos(Žē0t) and expanding in Taylor series
of A2
0, stopping at the first order. One obtains:

|Žł|2 Ōēā ŌłÆa

b ŌłÆ
d

2bŽē3
0

’┐Į
a2Žē0cos(2Žē0t) ŌłÆ aŽē2
0sin(2Žē0t)
’┐Į
+ ...,

(5)
where we have defined a ŌēĪ 2mŌłŚD╬▒/ŌäÅ2; b ŌēĪ 2mŌłŚD╬▓/ŌäÅ2;
d ŌēĪ q2DA2
0/(ŌäÅc)2. Inserting expression (5) into the su-
percurrent (3), one can derive the following GL form of
the complex nonlinear coefficient:

Žć(3)
GL = ŌłÆ128k2
B (T ŌłÆ Tc)2 e4

ŽĄ0╬▓Žē6
0ŽĆ2ŌäÅ2m2e
(6)

The value of Žć(3)
GL in Eq. (6) is negative and depends on
the input pulse frequency Žē0, and the parameters ╬▓ and
Tc which depend strongly on the specific material cho-
sen, and of course on the temperature T, which must be
below Tc. It must also be noted that the frequency de-
pendence ŽēŌłÆ6
0
makes the superconductor very nonlinear
for longer wavelengths, as it happens, for instance, in 2D
Dirac materials like graphene [19]. Equation (6) is the
first novel result of this paper.
Simulations and results ŌĆö
Using the above TDGL
equation (1) we perform time-dependent simulations in
both one and two spatial dimensions to analyse how the
order parameter of the superconductor evolves under the
influence of an ultrashort pulse, which harmonics are pro-
duced, and the form of the supercurrent as a function of
time. We analyze both cases as although the 1D case is
the simplest, and produces the essential results of the pa-
per, we find that the more realistic 2D results illustrate
the spatial variation in order parameter with more clarity
ŌĆō we also expect future experimental tests of the theory
to be carried out in a thin-film (i.e. quasi 2D) geome-
try. The time-dependent simulations are also necessary
to check the ultrafast response of the thin superconduc-
tive film in realistic situations.
As a representative example, for our estimates we
choose pure niobium (Nb) as it has the highest criti-
cal temperature Tc of all elemental superconductors [20].
The following results were taken for simulations of the
system at temperature T = 4 oK.
The critical temperature of bulk Nb is Tc = 9.25 oK
[21], and the zero-temperature coherence length ╬Š(0) =
0.74ŌłÜŽć╬Š0, where ╬Š0 is the intrinsic BCS coherence length
and Žć is the GorŌĆÖkov parameter [22]. This parameter de-
pends on whether the superconductor is in the ŌĆ£dirty
limitŌĆØ or the ŌĆ£clean limitŌĆØ: a mean free electron path
satisfying l Ōē½ ╬Š0 (i.e.
the clean limit) gives Žć Ōēł 1;
the other limit l Ōē¬ ╬Š0 gives Žć Ōēł 1.33(l/╬Š0). In the fol-
lowing we will assume our system is in the dirty limit
as Nb has a mean free path l = 9.5 nm and ╬Š0 = 38
nm (Fermi velocity vF = 1.37 ├Ś 106msŌłÆ1 and mean
free electron flight time Žäfree = 7 fs) [23, 24].
In this
dirty limit ╬Š(0) = 16.2 nm, and the diffusion parame-
ter value is D = 8.09 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ4m2sŌłÆ1, while the constants


4

FIG. 2: (a) Effect of a sech-type pulse on order parameter,
showing progressive step-like destruction of Cooper pairs; (b)
Same is in (a) but for a supergaussian pulse with same du-
ration and intensity. (c) Supercurrents for the two types of
pulses used; (d) Final spectra showing the generation of odd
harmonics.
The pulse temporal profiles are normalized to
unity. Note that in (a,b) 1 ŌłÆ |Žł|2 is plotted, so when Cooper
pairs are destroyed this quantity increases towards unity.

╬▒0 Ōēā 1.2618 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ24 J/oK, and ╬▓ Ōēā 1.256 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ51 J┬Ęm3.
We study the effects on the order parameter for sech-
type pulses and for supergaussian pulses on the scale of
tFWHM = 9.55 ps, which is available experimentally in
the THz regime [25].
Using a laser pulse with carrier wavelength ╬╗0 = 188
┬Ąm and a Nb film for a target, we find that optical nonlin-
ear effects should emerge at very low incident intensities
of the order of kW/cm2, and on ultrafast time scales of
the order of picoseconds. Specifically, at a temperature
T = 4 oK, I0 Ōēł 3.1 kW/cm2. Our parameters used give
the value of Žć(3) Ōēł ŌłÆ4.24 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ7 m2/V2, which is to the
best of our knowledge the highest theoretical value ever
predicted in a Žć(3)-material in the THz regime [26].
In the first simulation we show what happens in a sim-
plified scenario, when taking into account one spatial di-
mension only (x). Figure 2 displays the results of simula-
tions in the 1D case analysing the effects of a short pulse
of the form A(x, t) ŌēĪ A0sech (t/t0) sin (Žē0t) eŌłÆ(x/x0)2 at
intensity I = 16I0 = 49.6 kW/cm2, and a beam width
x0 = 200 ┬Ąm; as well as an 8-th order supergaussian pulse
with the same duration and peak intensity. Fig. 2(a)
shows the sech-type pulse intensity (normalised to unity,
blue line) and its effect on the order parameter (quantity
1ŌłÆ|Žł|2, also normalized to unity, red line). Note that we
show 1 ŌłÆ |Žł|2 for clarity, so when this quantity increases
the pulse is destroying Cooper pairs. It can be seen that
the order parameter drops in step-like fashion with each

peak and trough of the pulse, eventually recovering af-
ter interacting with the pulse (not shown).
Fig.
2(b)
presents the same data in this case for the supergaussian
pulse, also showing a very similar dynamics. The super-
currents generated by both types of pulse are given in
Fig. 2(c), whilst Fig. 2(d) displays the emission spectra
induced by both pulses, showing the formation of odd
harmonics in both cases, as expected from our theory.
We now consider two spatial dimensions (x, y) in Fig. 3,
which displays the results of simulations in two spatial
dimensions analysing the effects of a short pulse of the
form A(x, y, t) = A0sech (t/t0) sin (Žē0t) eŌłÆ(x2+y2)/x2
0, us-
ing the same parameters as in Fig. 2. Figures 3(a) and
3(b) show frames of the evolution of the order parameters
at t = ŌłÆ7.5 ps and t = ŌłÆ4.5 ps using the same horizontal
scale as in Fig. 2(a): Fig. 3(a) showing the dip in order
parameter as the pulse first interacts with the material,
while Fig. 3(b) showing the plateau as superconductivity
is completely destroyed in a localised region about which
pulse intensity is highest. Results in the 2D case exactly
match those of the 1D case when the spatial distribution
of the pulse is approximated at its origin x = y = 0 value,
and give the same spectra and supercurrents as in Fig. 2,
confirming the validity and the accuracy of the simplified
1D model above.

FIG. 3: (a) Early frame from the 2D simulation, taken at
t = ŌłÆ7.5 ps [same horizontal scale used in Fig. 2(a)], showing
the effect of a short sech-type pulse on the spatial distribu-
tion of order parameter; (b) same as (a) but for a later time
t = ŌłÆ4.5 ps, showing the saturation of the order parameter
around the highest intensity region of the beam, where the
pulse has locally destroyed all the available Cooper pairs.

Conclusions ŌĆö
It is found that type-II superconduct-
ing thin films below the critical temperature show an ex-
ceptionally large Kerr effect at low light intensities with a
fast response on ultrafast time scales in the THz regime.
Our simulations show in real-time the effects on the or-
der parameter of Nb due to sech-type and supergaussian
incident pulses and the efficient generation of odd har-
monics. The approach used here is simple and effective,
and is generally suited to the study of all type-II super-
conductors. We hope this work will stimulate further in-
vestigations into superconductor-based nonlinear optical
materials for ultrafast applications, with these materials


5

proving to be a key element in future nonlinear photonics
systems.
K.A.F. is supported by the Scottish Carnegie Trust.

[1] J. F. Annett, Superconductivity, Superfluids and Conden-
sates, (Oxford University Press, New York, 2004).

[2] J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys.
Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).

[3] F. London and H. London, Proc. of the R. Soc. A 149,
71 (1935).

[4] V. L. Ginzburg and L. D. Landau, Sov. Phys. JETP 20,
1064 (1950).

[5] A. A. Abrikosov, Sov. Phys. JETP 5, 1174 (1957).
[6] A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Kseno-
fontov, and S. I. Shylin, Nature 525, 73 (2015).

[7] A. D. Semenov, G. N. GolŌĆÖtsman, A. A. Korneev, Physica
C 351, 349 (2001).

[8] G. N. GolŌĆÖtsman, O. Okunev, G. Chulkova, A. Lipatov,
A. Semenov, K. Smirnov, B. Voronov, A. Dzardanov, C.
Williams, and R. Sobolewski, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 705
(2001).

[9] F. Marsili, V. B. Verma, J. A. Stern, S. Harrington, A.
E. Lita, T. Gerrits, I. Vayshenker, B. Baek, M. D. Shaw,
R. P. Mirin, and S. W. Nam, Nature Photonics 7, 210
(2013).

[10] L. P. GorŌĆÖkov and G. M. ┬┤Eliashberg, Sov. Phys. JETP
27, 328 (1968).

[11] L. R. Testardi, Phys. Rev. B 4, 2189 (1971).
[12] R. Matsunaga, N. Tsuji, H. Fujita, A. Sugioka, K.
Makise, Y. Uzawa, H. Terai, Z. Wang, H. Aoki, and R.
Shimano, Science 345, 1145 (2014).

[13] T. Cea, C. Castellani and L. Benfatto, Phys. Rev. B 93,
180507R (2016).

[14] Q. Tang and S. Wang, Physica D 88, 139 (1995).
[15] M. F. Saleh et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 203902 (2011).
[16] L. P. GorŌĆÖkov, Sov. Phys. JETP 36, 1364 (1959).
[17] G. Grosso, G. P. Parravicini, Solid State Physics, (Else-
vier, London, 2000).

[18] J. E. Hirsch, Phys. Rev. B 69, 214515 (2004).
[19] S. A. Mikhailov, Eur. Phys. Lett. 79, 27002 (2007).
[20] M. Peiniger and H. Piel, Nucl. Sci. 32, 3610 (1985).
[21] D. K. Finnemore, T. F. Stromberg, and C. A. Swenson,
Phys. Rev. 149, 231 (1966).

[22] P. G. de Gennes, Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys,
(Westview Press, 1999).

[23] N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics,
(Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1976).

[24] B. W. Maxfield and W. L. McLean, Phys. Rev. 139,
A1515 (1965).

[25] K.-L. Yeh, M. C. Hoffman, J. Hebling, and K. A. Nelson,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 171121 (2007).

[26] J. Wang, Y. Li, and N. Yang, Journ. of Phys.: Conf. Ser.
574, 012053 (2015).


