a)Electronic mail: steffen.doerner@kit.edu 

Frequency-Multiplexed bias and readout of a 16-pixel Superconducting 
Nanowire Single-Photon Detector Array. 

S. Doerner,1,a) A. Kuzmin,1 S.Wuensch,1 I.Charaev,1 Florian Boes,² Thomas 
Zwick² and M. Siegel1 

 

1Institut für Mikro- und Nanoelektronische Systeme, KIT, Hertzstr. 16, 76187, Karlsruhe, Germany 
²Institut für Hochfrequenztechnik und Elektronik, KIT, Engesserstr. 5, 76131, Karlsruhe, Germany 

Abstract: We demonstrate a 16-pixel array of radio-frequency superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors with an 
integrated and scalable frequency-division multiplexing architecture, reducing the required bias and readout lines to a single 
microwave feed line. The electrical behavior of the photon-sensitive nanowires, embedded in a resonant circuit, as well as the 
optical performance and timing jitter of the single detectors is discussed. Besides the single pixel measurements we also 
demonstrate the operation of a 16-pixel array with a temporal, spatial and photon-number resolution.  

 

Superconducting 
Nanowire 
Single-Photon 

Detectors (SNSPDs) play an increasing role in 
applications like light detection and ranging 
(LIDAR)1, 
quantum 
optics2,3, 
long-distance 

optical 
communication4, 
or 
time-resolved 

spectroscopy5. Many of these applications require 
multi-pixel devices in order to reduce analysis 
time or to achieve a photon-number resolution. 
For that reason, SNSPD arrays have been 
developed during the last years. These arrays 
require a multiplexing scheme to reduce the 
increasing system complexity and heat load due to 
high-pixel 
numbers. 
The 
state-of-the-art 

multiplexing schemes are based on a rapid single-
flux quantum logic6, time-tagged readout7,8 or 
current splitting techniques9. However, none of 
those approaches is able to multiplex the bias 
lines without losing the adjustability of the bias 
current for each pixel, individually. In addition to 
SNSPDs, superconducting transition-edge sensors 
(TES) as well as microwave kinetic-inductance 
detectors (MKIDs) also provide a single-photon 
resolution in a wide spectral bandwidth10,11. 
Furthermore, they can be operated in large arrays 
using frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) 
readout schemes12,13. However, their response in 
the single-photon regime is rather slow and 
merely in the range of µs10,11. To combine the 
advantages of classical SNSPDs, especially the 
ps-range temporal resolution14, with the intrinsic 
FDM capability of MKIDs we developed the 
Radio-Frequency 
Superconducting 
Nanowire 

Single-Photon Detector (RF-SNSPD)15. 

 
The RF-SNSPD consist of the classical 

meander-shaped SNSPD which is embedded into 
a 
lumped-element 
resonator. 
The 
current, 

oscillating in this resonant circuit at certain 
resonant frequency, is used to bias and readout the 
detector. Thus, the detector can be easily 
multiplexed in the frequency domain like MKIDs. 
However, the operation of the RF-SNSPD differs 
drastically from the MKID. To enable single-
photon detection the RF-SNSPD is driven by a 
strong microwave signal with amplitudes close to 
the critical current, IC, of the meander, which has 
a significantly smaller current-carrying cross-
section. In this highly nonlinear regime the 
absorption of a single-photon is sufficient to 
create a normal conducting domain inside the 
meander which increases the damping of the 
resonator and rapidly stops any oscillation. Since 
it could be also considered as a reduction of the 
quality factor of the RF-SNSPD, the timing 
resolution is in the same order of magnitude as 
conventional SNSPDs. In contrast to MKIDs, 
where a slight change in the kinetic inductance 
due to photon absorption should be carefully 
amplified and detected, the switching of the 
resistance due to photon absorption in the RF-
SNSPD is much stronger than the readout noise 
and allows operation at 4.2 K.  

 
In this paper, we present results, of the 

development of a 16-pixel RF-SNSPD array. All 
detectors are coupled to one common feed line. 
This reduces the number of wires between the 
readout electronics at room temperature and the 


 

cryogenic stage to a minimum of two coaxial 
cables. The FDM method enables readout of all 
16 pixels at the same time with a time, spatial and 
photon-number resolution. Furthermore, the FDM 
allows adjustable individual bias levels for each 
detector. To the best of our knowledge there have 
been no experiments, which are demonstrating 
bias-line multiplexing or the operation of a 
SNSPD array with time, spatial and photon-
number resolution requiring less wiring. 

In figure 1(a) a 16-pixel array is shown. All RF-
SNSPDs are placed in the gaps of one common 
coplanar waveguide (CPW) and are coupled in 
parallel to the inner conductor and the ground 
planes. On figure 1(b) an SEM image illustrates 
the layout of a single pixel. The resonant 
frequency fres is mainly defined by a parallel 
lumped element LC circuit, consisting of a 
meandered inductor Lp and interdigital capacitor 
Cp with a line width w > 1 µm. This resonator is 
coupled to the CPW using an interdigital capacitor 
on the one side and the photon sensitive meander 
with w < 100 nm on the opposite. The inductance 
of LP is varying among the pixels starting from 55 
pH for pixel 1 and decreasing down to 24 pH in 
pixel 16. The capacitance of CP is fixed for all 
devices at 54 fF. A more detailed explanation of 
the used resonant circuit can be found in our 
previous article.16 

 
To obtain a spatial resolution of the array, we 

matched each RF-SNSPD to a certain fres. 
Therefore, we tuned the inductance of the parallel 
LC circuit of each pixel to get a frequency spacing 
of 85 MHz between two detectors which results in 
a total bandwidth of 1250 MHz to operate all 

pixels (FIG 2). All other parts of the RF-SNSPDs, 
especially the photon sensitive nanowires, are the 
same in each structure. In figure 2 the simulated 
transmission parameters over frequency of the 
CPW are shown. For the simulation we used 
Sonnet em software17 and took the properties of 
330 µm thick R-plane sapphire (r = 10.06 and 
tan = 10-9) as substrate into account. As 
superconducting material 4 nm thick NbN with a 
surface inductance of 55 pH/□ is used. To prevent 
crosstalk, we arranged the pixels among the array, 
so that two pixels facing each other on the chip 
are not adjacent in frequency. Furthermore, two 
neighboring pixels in frequency are alternately 
placed in the upper and lower gap of the CPW. 
The position of each pixel in the frequency range 
and on the chip is given in figure 1 and 2. 

 
The RF-SNSPD requires only one single NbN 

layer which is used for the resonant circuit as well 
as for the photon sensitive nanowire. Thus, it is 
easy to fabricate the RF-SNSPD in the standard 
SNSPD fabrication process. At the first step, the 
4-nm-thick NbN is deposited on one-side polished 
R-plane sapphire substrates at a temperature of 
850°C using reactive magnetron sputtering. 
Second fabrication step is the patterning of the 
CPW and the RF-SNSPDs using electron-beam 
lithography with PMMA 950k resist. The final 
step is the transfer of the patterned geometry into 
the NbN layer using Ar-ion beam etching. 

FIG 1 
(a) Optical microscope image of a 16-pixel array. The 

corresponding pixel numbers are labeled on the inner conductor 
of the CPW. (b) SEM image of pixel number 1.  

FIG 2 
Simulation of the transmission over frequency of the 

16-pixel array. The pixel numbers, corresponding to the 
transmission dips, are labeled below. 


 

Figure 3 shows one of the fabricated nanowires 
with a length of 17 µm and w = 73 nm. We 
designed the radius of the nanowire’s bends to be 
rather big to avoid any influence of the current 
crowding effect18, which later results in a filling 
factor of 14%. In future devices the filling factor 
could be increased using spiral nanowires19.  

 
We measured the microwave transmission 

spectrum of the fabricated array, which is shown 
in figure 4. The chip was mounted in a gold-
coated brass housing, equipped with 2 coaxial 
adapters to feed through microwave signals. The 
housing also allows optical illumination of the 
detector through a multimode fiber. The input 
microwave signal is attenuated prior the array by 
32 dB using a cold attenuator to reduce external 
noise. The output signal is boosted by a 
broadband low-noise HEMT amplifier. The setup 
was mounted in a dipstick and cooled down to 4.2 
K using a transport 4He dewar. The transmission 
spectrum of the sample was recorded in the 
relevant bandwidth using a vector network 
analyzer (VNA). Appling low power levels to the 
CPW in the bandwidth of the array, all resonances 
of the detectors are visible (FIG 4). At a certain 
level of the microwave power, PC, the oscillating 
current inside each resonator reaches the critical 
current of the nanowire and the meander switches 
to the normal-conducting state. The transmission 
spectrum for a level above PC, which is depicted 
in figure 4, shows that all RF-SNSPDs are 
functional. The strongly increased damping of the 
resonator in this case stops the oscillation.  

 
In order to tune each resonance frequency, we 

change the length of the inductor Lp, assuming a 

constant surface inductance of 55 pH per square. 
But, the current distribution in the bends of the 
inductor is non-uniform18. Thus, the non-equal 
frequency spacing between the pixels in figure 4 
can be explained by the varying number of bends 
in the inductor LP among the pixels. Some pixels 
differ only in the length of LP, where some others 
differ in the length and in the number of bends. To 
check if the designed relative position of each 
detector in the array corresponds to the designed 
position in the frequency domain, we measured 
the transmission spectrum sequentially shorting 
each RF-SNSPD with an indium bond. The result 
of the measurements matches the expected 
relative positions of the pixels. During all 
transmission measurements, we did not see any 
crosstalk between any pixels. The increased 
damping for higher frequencies in figure 4 results 
from the uncalibrated setup.  

 
For the optical measurements, the VNA was 

replaced with an analog signal generator, which 
produces the single tones to bias and probe the 
RF-SNSPDs. A 32-GHz real-time oscilloscope, 
which measures the time-resolved detector 
response, was used as back-end. This setup was 
used to record the change of the transmission due 
to a single-photon detection event of the RF-
SNSPD. The example of such an event is depicted 
in figure 5 for detector number 16. At t < 0 the 

FIG 3 
SEM Image of the nanowire used in the RF-SNSPDs. 

The overall length of the wire is 17µm and the width is 73 nm. 

FIG 4 
Measured transmission over frequency of the 16-pixel 

array. We performed one measurement well above and one well 
below the critical power level of each device.  


 

detector is in the superconducting state. At t = 0 
an instantaneous change in the transmission can 
be observed, which is caused by the formation of 
a normal-conducting domain in the nanowire after 
photon absorption. The rise of the transmitted 
signal is about 11 dB, as one would expect from 
the depth of the resonance, measured on VNA 
(FIG. 4). This instantaneous change of the quality 
factor to almost zero allows very high timing 
precision of the detector. At t > 0 the nanowire 
recovered the superconducting state and the 
transmitted signal starts to decrease according to 
the quality factor of the RF-SNSPD which mainly 
limits the reset time after photon detection. 

 
To quantify the timing resolution, we 

performed a jitter measurement using a pulsed 
femtosecond laser at 1.55-µm wavelength. We 
statistically analyzed the delay times between the 
detector 
responses 
and 
the 
correspondent 

reference pulses of the laser. As a detector 
response we used the amplitude change of the 
complex 
transmission. 
To 
perform 
fast 

measurement 
of 
the 
complex-transmission 

transient we used a phase-sensitive homodyne 
scheme similar to MKID readout schemes. It 
includes a signal generator and IQ mixer for the 
demodulation of the carrier signal. To eliminate 
the quadrature component Q at the output of the 
IQ mixer, the phase of the input microwave 

carrier was adjusted with a phase shifter. The 32-
GHz oscilloscope is used as the back-end to 
record the I-component of the transient, which 
represents the count events of photons. A scheme 
of our setup is given in figure 6. Recording a 
delay time distribution of more than 104 events, 
we measured a typical detector jitter of 59 ps at 
the full width at half maximum. 

 
The optical performance of each detector was 

characterized individually, measuring their pulse-
count rates. Each detector was biased with 80% of 
the critical-power level. The wavelength of the 
incident photons have been varied during each 
measurement from 400 nm up to 750 nm. The 
detection 
efficiency 
(DE) 
was 
afterwards 

calculated as the ratio of the measured count rate 
to the number of incident photons onto the 
nanowire. The measured results showed a single-
photon sensitivity of each pixel with a maximum 
detection efficiency ranging from 2% up to 10%. 
We also tested the performance of the array 
operating multiple pixels simultaneously. The 
signal generator was replaced by an arbitrary 
waveform generator, which is able to produce 
eight tones with a specific power level at once. 
The readout of the array is similar to other FDM 
schemes and based on the observation of an 
amplitude 
change 
at 
the 
corresponding 

frequencies. A detailed explanation of the readout 
method is given in our previous article16, where 

FIG 5 
Measured voltage over time on the feed line. The 

microwave signal, measured after the first amplifyer as well as the 
down-mixed microwave signal using the IQ-mixing setup is 
shown. For a better comparison, the voltage levels of the down-
mixed pulse is scaled to the measured microwave pulse. 

FIG 6 
Schematic of our setup used to down mix the 

amplitude modulation of the carrier frequency after a 
detection event. 


 

we demonstrated the crosstalk-free operation of a 
two-pixel RF-SNSPD array with photon-number 
resolution. Using this setup, we were able to 
record the spot profile of the fiber tip above the 
array in only two measurements. The results are 
shown in figure 7. The center of the spot was 
adjusted on the first pixels of both rows where the 
maximum count rate was measured. With 
increasing detector index the count rate drops 
down. It does not drop down to zero because the 
spot diameter is much larger than the array. Our 
setup does not allow the illumination of single 
pixels by keeping others dark. To get the proper 
beam distribution we normalized the count rates 
to the measured detection efficiencies.  

 
In 
summary, 
we 
have 
successfully 

demonstrated the operation of a 16 pixel RF-
SNSPD array with an integrated and scalable 
multiplexing scheme. The bias and readout signals 
are multiplexed in the frequency domain which 
allows the operation of each pixel at an individual 
bias level using only one common microwave 
feed line. We showed the photon sensitivity of 
each pixel as well as the time, spatial and photon-
number resolution of the array. Furthermore, we  
demonstrated the timing accuracy of the detected 
single photons with a precision of 59 ps. 

 

 
This work was supported in part by the 

Karlsruhe School of Optics and Photonics 
(KSOP). 

References:  

1 A. McCarthy, N. Krichel, N. Gemmell, X. Ren, M. Tanner, S. Dorenbos, 
V. Zwiller, R. Hadfield, and G. Buller, Opt. Express, 21, 8904 (2013). 

²H. Takesue, S. W. Nam, Q. Zhang, R. H. Hadfield, T. Honjo, K. Tamaki, 
and Y. Yamamoto,  Nat. Photonics 1, 343 (2007) 

³C. Clausen, I. Usmani, F. Bussieres, N. Sangouard, M. Afzelius, H. de 
Ridematten, and N. Gisin,  Nature London 469, 508 (2011). 

4M. Grein, A. Kerman, E. Dauler, O. Shatrovoy, R. Molnar, D. Rosenberg, 
J. Yoon, C. DeVoe, D. Murphy, B. Robinson, and D. Boroso, International 
Conference on Space Optical Systems and Applications, 78 (2011) 

5J. Toussaint, S. Dochow, I. Latka, A. Lukic, T. May, H. Meyer, K. Il’in, 
M. Siegel, and J. Popp, Opt. Express, 23, 5078, (2015). 

6S. Miki, H. Terai, T. Yamashita, K. Makise, M. Fujiwara, M. Sasaki, and 
Z. Wang, Applied Physics Letters, 99, 111108, (2011) 

7M. Hofherr, M. Arndt, K. Il'in, D. Henrich, M. Siegel, J. Toussaint, 
T.May, and H. Meyer, Applied Superconductivity, IEEE Transactions on, 
23, 2501205, (2013) 

8Q. Zhao, D. Zhu, N. Calandri, A. Dane, A. McCaughan, F. Bellei, 
H.Wang, D. Santavicca, and K. Berggren, Nature Photonics, 11, 247 
(2017) 

9M. Allman, V. Verma, M. Stevens, T. Gerrits, R. Horansky, A. Lita, 
F.Marsili, A. Beyer, M. Shaw, D. Kumor, R. Mirin, and S. Nam, Applied 
Physics Letters, 106, 192601, (2015) 

10A. Lita, A. Miller, and S. Nam, Opt. Express, 16, 3032 (2008). 

11J. Gao, M. Vissers, M. Sandberg, F. da Silva, S. Nam, D. Pappas, D. 
Wisbey, E. Langman, S. Meeker, B. Mazin, H. Leduc, J. Zmuidzinas, and 
K. Irwin, Appl. Phys. Lett, 101, 142602 (2012). 

12B.Mazin, K. O'Brien, S. McHugh, B. Bumble, D. Moore, S. Golwala, J. 
Zmuidzinas, Proc. SPIE 7735, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation 
for Astronomy III, 773518 (2010) 

13M. Dobbs, M. Lueker, K. Aird, A. Bender, B. Benson, L. Bleem, J. 
Carlstrom, C. Chang, H. Cho, J. Clarke, T. Crawford, A. Crites, D.  
Flanigan, T. de Haan, E. George, N. Halverson, W. Holzapfel, J. Hrubes, 
B. Johnson, J. Joseph, R. Keisler, J. Kennedy, Z. Kermish, T. Lanting, A. 
Lee, E. Leitch, D. Luong-Van, J.  McMahon, J. Mehl, S. Meyer, T. 
Montroy, S. Padin, T. Plagge, C. Pryke, P. Richards, J. Ruhl, K. Schaffer, 
D. Schwan, E. Shirokoff, H. Spieler, Z. Staniszewski, A. Stark, K. 
Vanderlinde, J. Vieira, C. Vu, B. Westbrook, and R. Williamson, Rev. Sci. 
Instrum. 83, 073113 (2012) 

14C. Natarajan, M. Tanner, and R. Hadfield, Superconductor Science and 
Technology, 25, 063001, (2012) 

15S. Doerner, A. Kuzmin, S. Wuensch, K. Ilin, and M. Siegel, IEEE 
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 26, 1, (2016) 

FIG 7 
Normalized average pulse count rate of the 

16-pixel array. On the right side the pixels are in the 
center of the spot, why the maximum count rates are 
measured. To the left side the count rates show the 
decaying of the spot intensity.  


 

16S. Doerner, A. Kuzmin, S. Wuensch, I. Charaev and M. Siegel, IEEE 
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 27, 1, (2017). 

17Sonnet User’s Guide-Manual of the Program Sonnet, Sonnet Software 
Inc., North Syracuse, NY, USA, (2007) 

18J. Clem, and K. Berggren, Phys. Rev. B 84, 174510 (2011) 

19I Charaev, A Semenov, S Doerner, G Gomard, K Ilin, and M Siegel, 
Superconductor Science and Technolog, 30, 025016, (2017) 


