Unconventional Superconductivity 
 
G. R. Stewart  
 Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL USA 32611 
 
 
 
 
Gregory Randall Stewart 
Department of Physics 
2001 Museum Road 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, FL 32611 
USA 
*Email:  stewart@phys.ufl.edu 
001 352 3929263 
 
Acknowledgements:  This work was supported by the United States Department of Energy, 
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under contract number DE-FG02-86ER45268. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Abstract: 
 
“Conventional” superconductivity, as used in this review, refers to electron-phonon coupled 
superconducting electron pairs described by BCS theory.  Unconventional superconductivity 
refers to superconductors where the Cooper pairs are not bound together by phonon-exchange 
but instead by exchange of some other kind, e. g. spin fluctuations in a superconductor with 
magnetic order either coexistent or nearby in the phase diagram.  Such unconventional 
superconductivity has been known experimentally since heavy fermion CeCu2Si2, with its 
strongly correlated 4f electrons, was discovered to superconduct below 0.6 K in 1979.  Since the 
discovery of unconventional superconductivity in the layered cuprates in 1986, the study of these 
materials saw Tc jump to 164 K by 1994.  Further progess in high temperature superconductivity 
would be aided by understanding the cause of such unconventional pairing.  This review 
compares the fundamental properties of 9 unconventional superconducting classes of materials - 
from 4f-electron heavy fermions to organic superconductors to classes where only three known 
members exist to the cuprates with over 200 examples – with the hope that common features will 
emerge to help theory explain (and predict!) these phenomena.  In addition, three new emerging 
classes of superconductors (topological, interfacial – e. g. FeSe on SrTiO3, and H2S under high 
pressure) are briefly covered, even though their “conventionality” is not yet fully determined. 
 
 
Keywords:  superconductivity; unconventional; symmetry; heavy fermion; cuprate 
 
PACS index categories:   
74.20.Mn   Nonconventional mechanisms 
74.25.-q     Properties of superconductors 
74.70.-b     Superconducting materials other than cuprates 
74.72.-h     Cuprate superconductors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 


1.  Introduction 
 
Superconductivity, the phenomenon where the resistivity falls to zero below a certain critical 
temperature Tc (discovered in Hg at 4.2 K in 1911) and the magnetic flux is expelled from the 
bulk of the  superconductor (a phenomenon discovered in 1933), was explained as due to 
electron-phonon coupling by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) in 1957.  The BCS weak-
coupled theory describes the condensation into the superconducting state as due to the exchange 
of phonons between electrons of opposite spins, an s=0 singlet ground state.  Thus the average 
phonon frequency, <>, or equivalently the characteristic Debye temperature, D, (a 
phenomenological cutoff of the phonon frequencies) plays an important role in the BCS 
expression for Tc 
  
 
 
 
 
 
TcBCS  <>exp(-1/N(0)V)  
 
eq. 1 
 
where N(0) is the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy and V is an average electron-
phonon coupling strength parameter.  The BCS weak coupling theory has N(0)V<1.  Many 
superconductors (e. g. the over 25 superconducting elements [1] and various classes including 
A15 superconductors [2] - useful for high field magnets), are generally believed to be described 
by the BCS model, as extended by various improvements (called Eliashberg theory) that 
encompass stronger coupling. 
Defining “Unconventional Superconductor” (UcS) as a material where the Cooper 
pairing deviates from the BCS description, where the attraction between pairs and driving 
mechanism for condensation into the superconducting state might come from, e. g., exchange of 
spin fluctuations, is not a definition new to this review.   This is consistent, e. g., with the 
definition of UcS in the phenomenological theory review of UcS by Sigrist and Ueda [3] from 
1991.  There are several other ways (as discussed thoroughly in section 2) to define an UcS.  
Based on a discussion of symmetry [4] by Tsuei and Kirtley, any long range ordering transition 
is accompanied by a lowering of symmetry.  In a BCS superconductor the only symmetry broken 
is the one dimensional global gauge symmetry, U(1), caused by the macroscopic phase 
coherence that occurs below Tc.  In an UcS, one or more additional symmetries (e. g. time 
reversal symmetry or reflection symmetry) are broken.  p-, d-, and f-wave as well as s± 
(theorized for iron based superconductors [IBS]) pairing symmetries all break reflection 
symmetry. Thus, another definition of UcS could be a superconductor in which at least two 
symmetries are broken at Tc.  As we will see, although a majority of the 9 superconducting UcS 
classes discussed herein exhibit such additional symmetry breaking (e. g. time reversal and 
reflection symmetry breaking in the hole-doped cuprates), others (including recently discovered 
classes or classes with only a few members) do not.  Thus, we will remain with the “non-BCS” 
definition of UcS as being the best representation of the fundamental theme of this review. 
Here, in the Introduction, a short overview discussion will help the reader follow the 
discussion of the nine classes of UcS, and the three additional classes.  As can be inferred from 
the short discussion above, it is not at present possible to state the cause of UcS, if indeed (as 
seems unlikely) there is only one such cause.  The present review aims to summarize the 
properties of the various classes of UcS in a way that points to fundamental similarities.  
One of the questions important for understanding UcS is:  what characteristics of 
materials are causes of, or at least consistent with, UcS?  1.)  As we will see in this review, most 
UcS have strong electron correlations through their d-electrons (cuprates, IBS, Sr2RuO4, cobalt 


oxide hydrates, layered nitrides) or f-electrons (heavy Fermions and coexistent superconductivity 
and ferromagnetism).  Only the organic UcS rely on pairing between p-electrons.             
2.)  The main instability found in UcS is antiferromagnetism (as will be seen herein in phase 
diagrams and discussions for the heavy Fermion 115 structure, CeCu2Si2, U(Pd,Ni)2Al3, for both 
electron- and hole-doped cuprates, for the majority (but not all) of the IBS, the non-
centrosymmetric superconductors like CePt3Si that are strongly correlated, organics, and cobalt 
oxide hydrates.)  In addition there are coexistent superconducting and ferromagnetic compounds 
like UGe2.  Another instability found in some UcS is charge density waves (hole-doped cuprates, 
theorized in some heavy Fermion superconductors, and cobalt oxide hydrates.)                                           
3.)  Two dimensional behavior based on the crystalline structure plays an important role and is 
widespread in many of the UcS:  cuprates (where the ratio of resistivities along the c-axis vs the 
ab-plane can be larger than 1000), IBS (c/ab ~ 100), Sr2RuO4, layered metal nitride halides, 
cobalt oxide hydrates, and the 115 structure heavy Fermion superconductors, while there is 
quasi-1d behavior in some of the organics.  This d<3 behavior can play an important role in 
creating UcS since according to the Mermin Wagner theorem fluctuation effects for d<3 become 
more important.  Such fluctuation effects are predicted (as discussed below) to be a possible  
superconducting pairing mechanism (superconducting ‘glue’) in these same aforementioned 
superconductors.  2d antiferromagnetic fluctuations are repulsive, so a Fermi surface with a sign 
change in the order parameter where the repulsive interaction is large can cause (see the s± 
model discussed below for the IBS) attraction and condensation into a superconducting state.  
Put another way, this sign change in the order parameter under translation by the magnetic 
ordering vector of the parent phase “tends to remove the detrimental effects of the on-site 
Coulomb repulsion between the electrons.”  (Norman [5]).  Thus, details of the Fermi surface 
topology are important and 2d crystalline structures are indeed widespread in UcS.  Of course, 
there are obvious counterexamples, for instance the indisputably 3d nature of the cubic 
unconventional heavy Fermion superconductor UBe13.   
With all of these named properties being ‘consistent’ with UcS, there still remains no 
ability to a priori predict unconventional superconductivity.  Put another way, there is no 
‘microscopic’ theory of UcS, like the BCS theory for conventional superconductivity, since - due 
to the strong correlations - solving the pairing in UcS is a non-perturbative problem.  As Norman 
has put it [5] “developing a rigorous theory for any of these classes of materials [in the UcS] has 
proven to be a difficult challenge, and will continue to be one of the major problems in physics 
in the decades to come.”  It is the goal of this review to provide a comprehensive overview of 
UcS in one place to aid in this challenge. 
 
 


Fig. 1 (color online):  Time line of the discovery of some 
unconventional superconductors 
 
  
The first superconductor identified as 
unconventional was CeCu2Si2, Tc=0.6 K, reported [6] by 
Steglich et al. in 1979.  Rather than electron-phonon 
coupling, the pairing in CeCu2Si2 has been described as due 
to some sort of fluctuations (either quantum critical and/or 
antiferromagnetic.)  Steglich et al.’s discovery led to the 
discovery of other unconventional superconductors of the 
same class as shown in Fig. 1 (UBe13 in 1983, UPt3 in 
1984, . . . ), where this class is known as heavy fermion 
superconductors (HFS) due to the large (sometimes > 100 
rest mass of the electron) effective mass m* of the 
conduction electrons, where these large m* electrons are 
beyond a doubt involved in the superconductivity.  UPt3 is 
a very well studied material with numerous properties 
(including breaking of the time reversal and reflection 
symmetries at Tc) arguing for UcS.  Organic 
superconductors were discovered [7] soon after CeCu2Si2 
but were not so clearly identified as unconventional until after several years of investigation.  
Cuprate superconductors, starting [8] with the discovery by Bednorz and Mueller of La2CuO4 
doped with Ba, were the next discovered class of UcS, followed by numerous others (see Fig. 1 
for a partial timeline).  Today, ~9 classes (perhaps 12 or more) of UcS have been identified, all 
with a pair binding interaction involving some other exchange than that of phonons in 
‘conventional’ BCS superconductors. 
       This review attempts, for the first time, to bring together in one place a discussion and 
intercomparison of the properties of all of these UcS classes, spanning layered nitrides to heavy 
fermions, cuprates to organics, IBS to non-centrosymmetric, and other classes as well.  There are 
of course numerous existing reviews devoted to individual UcS classes (e. g. there are over 20 
reviews for HFS) as will be cited in the appropriate sections below.  As well, there are 
compendia of reviews of individual superconducting classes (e. g. 24 chapters in 
Superconductivity, Bennemann. and Ketterson, ed. [9]; 32 articles on various superconducting 
classes, Hirsch, Maple and Marsiglio, ed. [10]; see also [11].)  Although not their main purpose, 
these compendia sometimes provide useful intercomparisons between some of the classes, e. g  
Maple et al., Chap. 13 in [9] compare the organics, the cuprates, and HFS in their summary.  In 
addition, coming closest to the intent of the current review, there are reviews with the specific 
intent to compare several UcS (typically including cuprates and heavy fermions) together, see, e. 
g., Refs. [12-14].    
Discussions of the UcS experimental properties herein are intertwined with the associated 
theories with thorough references of the continuing effort to achieve theoretical understanding of 
UcS.  UcS are after all the pathway (or one of the pathways, see section 13) to ever higher Tc and 
perhaps eventually the ‘holy grail’ of room temperature superconductivity.  As with any 
endeavor on the forefront of understanding, there remain unresolved controversies on whether 
particular classes exhibit UcS – indeed even the prototype UcS CeCu2Si2 has been recently 
reexamined in the light of data analysis indicating conventional behavior.  We focus on the 9 


classes of superconductors for which there is substantial evidence indicating UcS (with a 
discussion of three additional emerging, possible UcS classes in section 13), and omit the classes 
where the current consensus is “uncertain” (e. g. for the borocarbides, see ref. [15] for 
discussion). 
As discussed below in section 13, beyond the 9 classes (counting electron-doped and 
hole-doped cuprates as one class) of superconductors reviewed herein as unconventional, there 
certainly exist other possibilities for UcS classes.   
One class of current interest is the relatively young field of topological superconductors, 
which can be defined as superconductors with “non-trivial” topological states.  One predicted 
possibility for finding topological superconductivity (which until now is mostly a theoretical 
study) is at the interface between a topological insulator (where the bulk is an insulator and there 
are conducting surface states that are symmetry protected) and a conventional superconductor.  
The first 3D topological insulator was discovered in 2008 [16].  The use of the term 
“topological” in describing either the insulating or theorized superconducting states is reserved 
for describing the special conducting surface states that are symmetry protected by particle 
number conservation and time reversal symmetry.  The use of the word “topology” in describing 
simply the structure of, e. g., a superconducting Fermi surface, is unrelated to the concept of 
“topological” superconductor, even though indeed unusual Fermi surface topologies like in the 
s± states theorized for the IBS are certainly connected to unconventional superconducting 
behavior.  
The two other classes of superconductor discussed in section 13 are the new high 
temperature superconductor monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3 (interfacial superconductivity) as well as 
the 200 K Tc superconductor H2S under pressure.  Although the latter has been primarily 
described as a conventional superconductor, there are opposing viewpoints – which illustrates 
our point here that there continues to be discussion as to which classes of superconductors are 
unconventional.  However, there exists ample evidence for a core understanding of UcS, which it 
is hoped will assist, among other things, in understanding the emerging new superconductors.   
We discuss in the next section, section 2, 16 experimental measurements that either 
(relatively) definitively establish a given material to be an UcS or, again approximately, may be 
misleading in identifying UcS.  When in sections 3-12 below the experimental evidences for UcS 
for the superconductors in the various classes are discussed, as each piece of evidence for UcS in 
a particular superconductor is discussed, it will be noted “#” in the text, where “#” is between 1 
and 10 (i. e. the lower numbers), for ‘strongly suggestive’ characteristics and between 11 and 16 
(the higher numbers) for indicative but possibly misleading characteristics to keep track of all the 
UcS features.  At the end of each UcS class’ section, a short summary of its properties and the 
current theoretical understanding and outstanding puzzles of interest will be appended.  For some 
classes where the members are quite disparate, a table of the unconventional properties found for 
each superconductor discussed will be part of the summary. 
It is this intercomparing of the classes, as well as identifying the important open 
questions (‘puzzles’) still present in many of the classes, that hopefully will help understanding 
of this disparate set of superconductors as an interrelated group.  Although comparisons of 
cuprates, heavy fermions, and to a lesser extent the IBS have been rather common, the entire set 
(which we admit is likely still incomplete, see section 13) of UcS contains of the order of 9-12 
members.  Although the current review cites over 75 reviews of the individual classes of UcS 
and their experimental properties and the theories thereof, no review has so far attempted to 
discuss them all simultaneously.  At the very least, bringing a description, primarily experimental 


but with attention paid to the theory as well, of these disparate UcS together here in one place 
should help further investigation into the important commonalities. 
 
2.  Experimental Evidence for UcS (non electron-phonon coupled)  (Note:  many UcS show 
only a few of these properties) 
 
2.1.  Strongly Suggestive Evidence 
2.1.1.  Characteristic energy TF (as obtained, e. g., from ~(T/TF)2) is much less than the Debye 
temperature, D 

 
In the BCS theory, as already mentioned, the superconducting transition temperature involves 
two factors.  One factor is an exponential containing the electronic density of states at the Fermi 
energy, N(0), and a parameter V expressing the strength of the electron phonon coupling.  The 
other factor is some measure of the average phonon frequency which sets the energy scale for the 
strength of the electron-phonon coupling, as now discussed.  Thus, all things being equal, a 
stiffer lattice leads to a higher Tc in BCS theory.  
 
One way to approximately quantify these quantities together in a more typical form (for a 
thorough discussion see Allen and Dynes, ref. [17]) is to identify N(0)*V as equal to , where  
can be calculated from the electron-phonon spectral function 2()F() (F() is just the phonon 
density of states as a function of energy ħ determined, e. g., from neutron scattering): 
 
 
 
 
= 2  ()2 F() d/ 
 
 
 
eq. 2 
 
The limits of integration are formally from 0 to infinity, however the upper bound can be set 
much lower.  For example in the 22 K superconductor A15 Nb3Ge [18], where ()2 F() was 
determined by electron tunneling, an effective cutoff for the integral is 33 meV or about 1.3 
times kBD.  Thus, using the Debye model cutoff temperature as the energy scale for electron 
phonon coupling is a good approximation. 
 
The BCS model may be the correct description of a superconductor if the characteristic 
energy scales are arranged thusly: 
 
 
 
 
 Tc < D < TF  
 
 
 
 
eq. 3 

where TF is the Fermi energy, EF (several to ~ 10 eV for most metals), divided by kB.  In the 
current context, we are of course interested in the inverse of this relationship, i. e. if a 
superconductor does not obey eq. 3, then it is not a BCS superconductor.  (It still may be the case 
that a superconductor whose properties obey eq. 3 is not a BCS superconductor, but matches one 
or more of the other indicators for being an UcS discussed in the following sections.)   

One useful rough approximation for TF is that it is inversely proportional to the 
coefficient of the normal state electronic specific heat,  (=Cnormal/T as T0).  Another method 
for estimating TF is – in strongly correlated metals – to measure the low temperature resistivity, 
, which in a Fermi liquid will follow a T2 law: 

 
 
(T0) = 0 + AT2  
 
 
 
eq. 4 


where 0 is the ‘residual’ (or remnant) resistivity as T0.  The coefficient ‘A’ is proportional to 
1/TF2.  (Other methods for estimating characteristic electronic energy scales in addition to TF are 
discussed below in the various UcS sections.) 

 As an example, Re, which is an elemental BCS superconductor with Tc=1.4 K, has [19]  
D=416 K, =2.3 mJ/molK2 and EF = 11.2 eV [20].  The quadratic temperature resistivity 
coefficient A is [21] 4 10-6 -cm/K2.  The unconventional HFS CeCu2Si2 has [22] Tc=0.6 K, 
D=310, =1000 mJ/molK2, and the coefficient A is [23] 9.3 -cm/K2, i. e. two million times 
that of Re.  Finding TF for CeCu2Si2 by scaling EF of Re times  (ARe/ACeCu2Si2)1/2 gives for 
CeCu2Si2 TF =  85 K and a characteristic energy of ~ 7 meV.  Thus, Re – based on 1.4 K < 416 K 
< 1.3 105 K – would be consistent with the BCS model, whereas CeCu2Si2 – based on 0.6 K < 
310 K > 85 K – clearly does not follow the BCS picture and would therefore fit one of the 
‘strongly suggestive’ indicators (1) for UcS. 

2.1.2.  Superconductivity forms out of a non-Fermi liquid normal state, implying that quantum 
critical fluctuations are involved in the Cooper pairing. 

When superconductivity in a phase diagram (where pressure, doping or magnetic field is the 
tuning parameter) occurs near where a second order phase transition (such as 
antiferromagnetism) is suppressed to T=0 with the tuning (see Fig. 2 for a schematic), then the 
possibility arises that the exchange of fluctuations that may arise near such a possible quantum 
critical point (QCP) could be responsible for the superconducting pairing.  (Despite the common 
misperception, not every suppression of a second order phase transition to T=0 results in 
detectable quantum critical fluctuations, see ref. [24].  The thinking that a QCP and the 
associated fluctuations provide the superconducting pairing is ubiquitous in discussions of 
several UcS, particularly in the heavy Fermions (where the specific heat [25] of CeCoIn5 actually 
obeys the quantum critical, non-Fermi liquid behavior C/T  logT above Tc=2.3 K), in the 
cuprates, and in the IBS.   


Fig. 2:  The second order magnetic phase transition decreases in temperature with increasing the 
tuning parameter, e. g. by varying the composition, x, but is interrupted by the superconducting 
dome.  The dashed line extrapolates Tmag to T=0, where strong quantum critical fluctuations can 
occur at a QCP (a Quantum Critical 
Point). 

Thus, the possibility that 
quantum critical fluctuations could be 
causing the UcS would be, as a first 
indication, raised by a phase diagram 
(such as that in Fig. 2) where 
superconductivity occurs at, or near a 
second order phase transition going to 
T=0.  At such a quantum critical point, 
C/T may behave as logT but more 
often the resistivity (=0 + AT2 for 
Fermi liquid behavior, but =0 + 
AT, <2 for non-Fermi liquid 
behavior at a quantum critical point) is 
the deciding measurement.  For 
example, see the case of CePd2Si2 
[26].  The relevant UcS sections below 
contain thorough discussions.  As 
already noted, not every suppression of 
a second order phase transition to T=0 results in fluctuations strong enough to cause such 
interesting effects. 
 
2.1.3.  neutron spin resonance peak develops in the superconducting state 
 
A magnetic resonance in inelastic neutron scattering below Tc is usually (but see counter-
arguments for iron based UcS in Hosono and Kuroki [27]) considered to be definitive evidence 
for a sign change in the superconducting energy gap  on different parts of the Fermi surface, as 
would be consistent with d-wave or s± pairing.  It is common to argue (see, e. g., P. C. Dai et al. 
[28]) that the properties of the resonance suggest that magnetism (e. g. exchange of spin 
fluctuations) plays an important role in the superconductivity, thus such a resonance serves as a 
strong indication (3) of UcS.   
Inelastic neutron scattering experiments find a magnetic resonance below Tc quite  
broadly in two of the classes of UcS discussed in this review, the cuprates (see the review [29] 
by Eschrig) and in the IBS (see the review [30] by Stewart).  The usual understanding [31]  of 
the magnetic resonance in the cuprates, with some continuing discussion in the IBS, is that it is 
an isotropic triplet excited state of the ground state Cooper pair singlet.  As well, such a neutron 
spin resonance is found in two heavy Fermion UcS:  CeCoIn5 [32] and in UPd2Al3, Tc=1.8 K 
[33].  A broadened inelastic line that extends from the peak at 0.2 meV to at least 1 meV in the 
superconducting state has also been found [34] in CeCu2Si2.  (The authors do not discuss the 
possibility of sample quality in the rather large (2g) single crystal of CeCu2Si2 playing a role in 
the peak width.  As a reasonable indicator of the good quality of the sample, the transition width, 


Tc, in the specific heat of the same 2g crystal used for the neutron scattering is [35] ~10% of Tc.   
A neutron spin resonance below Tc has been searched for [36] in heavy Fermion UPt3 and in the 
UcS Sr2RuO4 [37] without success. 
 
When discussing the magnetic resonance in cuprates, it is common to point out that there 
is an approximately uniform scaling of the resonance energy with Tc, implying that the resonance 
is intimately connected to the superconductivity.  In the cuprates, Hüfner et al. [38] state that 
Eresonance is about 5kBTc.  Discussion of this scaling in the IBS [30] gives a similar ratio, while in 
CeCu2Si2 the ratio is 4 [34], in CeCoIn5 the ratio is about 3.1 [32] and in UPd2Al3 the ratio is 
only 2.3 [33]. 
 
2.1.4.  Existence of a pseudogap (measured by, e. g., , point contact, or tunneling 
spectroscopies above Tc) 
 
The pseudogap is well established as a property for underdoped (‘underdoped’ implies doping - 
e. g. oxygen stoichiometry ‘x’ in YBa2Cu3O6+x - where x is less than the concentration needed 
for ‘optimal’ – or maximum – Tc) cuprates (see Fig. 3 for a phase diagram for hole doped), and is 
– as will be discussed - not well established in most of the other UcS classes (with perhaps the 
exception of the IBS, where work on the pseudogap continues.)  
 

Fig. 3 (color online):  In hole doped 
cuprates, below optimal (peak Tc) doping 
there appears below a temperature T* a 
pseudogap phase with properties as 
discussed in the text.  The 
superconductivity under the red dome in 
hole-doped cuprates is understood to 
have d-wave pairing symmetry.  The 
region between the blue 
antiferromagnetism (AFM) region in the 
phase diagram and the red 
superconductivity region is somewhat uncertain, with varying reports of some form (e. g. spin 
glass or spin density wave) of magnetic order (figure is reproduced from ref. [39].   IOP 
Publishing.  Reproduced with permission.  All rights reserved.) 

 
A nice overview of pseudogap physics in the hole-doped cuprates can be found in the 
recent theoretical review [39] by Rice, Yang, and Zhang.  Fig. 3 shows a schematic of a hole-
doped cuprate phase diagram.  In the pseudogap region, anomalies at T* occur in a number of 
experimental measurements in the under hole-doped cuprates, including Knight shift in NMR, 
ARPES measurement of a shrinking (or partial gapping, whence the description ‘pseudogap’) of 
the full Fermi surface present in the overdoped regime down to four Fermi arcs, scanning 
tunneling microscopy, quantum oscillations, in-plane optical conductivity, specific heat, London 
penetration depth, Raman scattering, magnetic neutron scattering, and dc resistivity.  (See also 
Timusk and Statt [40] for a somewhat older experimental review.  For reviews of electron doped 
cuprates, with their different pseudogap behavior (e. g. the pseudogap in the optical spectrum in 


electron doped cuprates is more distinct [41]) in the underdoped regime, see Armitage, Fournier, 
and Greene [41] and, more recenty, Fournier [42]. 
 
To give an example of a physical picture of the effect of a pseudogap, as the Fermi 
surface becomes partially gapped with increasing underdoping (see Fig. 3) in YBa2Cu3O6+x, the 
normal state specific heat n, proportional to the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy, 
N(0), decreases as does the superconducting condensation energy U (the pseudogap removes low 
energy spectral weight in the normal state spectrum) and the jump in the specific heat, C, at Tc 
(since C  U).  C(Tc) actually falls more than a factor of 5 below optimal doping [43].  The 
electrical resistivity in under-hole doped cuprates shows [44] a clear decrease at temperatures 
less than T* below the extrapolated linear-with-temperature behavior at high temperatures, 
ascribed to a decrease in the scattering by spin fluctuations caused by the opening of a gap in the 
spin excitation spectrum.  To contrast, Zheng et al., using NMR measurements, found no 
evidence of such a spin pseudogap in an under-electron-doped cuprate [45].   
The theoretical explanation for the pseudogap remains under discussion, and includes 
electron correlation effects, hidden order parameters due to various causes, and precursor 
(“preformed”) pairing.  See Timusk and Statt [40] for a discussion of the top competing theories 
as of 1999, and the review by Rice, Yang and Zhang [39] for an update.      
 
Thus, although pseudogap behavior is common in both under- electron and hole doped 
cuprates, the behavior is not consistent between the two sides (electron- and hole-doped) of the 
phase diagram and may indeed have different origins.  Further, although the pseudogap only 
occurs below optimal doping on both the electron- and hole-doped sides of the phase diagram, 
the superconductivity throughout the phase diagram is unconventional.  Thus, the presence of a 
pseudogap in the phase diagram is an indication of UcS throughout the superconducting dome in 
a superconductor. 
 
Indications of pseudogap behavior in point contract spectroscopy and resistivity exist in 
one of the HFSs (CeCoIn5), which will be discussed below in section 4.  Pseudogap behavior, as 
we will see, is under discussion in the IBS, section 6.   
 
2.1.5.  Power law (instead of BCS exponential) temperature dependences in properties like 
penetration depth, T, or NMR spin lattice relaxation time (1/T1) but must be to very low 
temperatures to escape the possibility of deep minima in the gaps causing the observed power 
laws at temperatures > (energy of gap minimum)/kB 

 
This is a very common type of experimental evidence used to determine UcS.  A BCS 
superconductor has an energy gap open at Tc, thus giving many experimental properties (e. g. 
electronic specific heat, Cel) an exponential temperature dependence.  (Note that since the size of 
the energy gap increases with decreasing temperature below Tc, the temperature dependence of 
experimental properties only fits a pure exponential form over limited temperature ranges, e. g.  
0.4Tc < T < 0.17Tc [46].)   
 
Before the 1957 BCS theory, other temperature dependences, motivated by early theories, 
were used.  For example, the specific heat of Nb, Tc=9.2 K, fits the Gordon-Casimir model 
prediction of Cel  T3 below Tc down to almost 0.4 Tc [47].   
 


Since the advent of UcS in heavy Fermion CeCu2Si2 in 1979, power law temperature 
dependences have often been used to rule out BCS exponential-with-temperature behavior.  In 
addition, specific power laws (e. g. T for the penetration depth) have been used to distinguish 
particular symmetries in the nodal behavior and thus in the pairing symmetry of an UcS.  As 
clear from the above historical discussion, this involves various cautions.  First, a pure power law 
must be seen over a large temperature region (not, e. g., just over half a decade in temperature), 
is only valid for T<<Tc, and therefore extend down to a very low temperature, T<<Tc.  In 
addition to being measured in the low temperature limit where the simple power law is valid, 
there is another reason why low temperature measurements are critical.  For example, 
distinguishing nodal UcS (where the energy gap, , goes to zero at points or lines on the Fermi 
surface) from deep minima behavior via, e. g., a finite thermal conductivity divided by 
temperature, /T, requires data as T0.  Thus, such data should be measured at dilution 
refrigerator (T<0.1 K) temperatures.  Even then, the presence of impurities can mask the intrinsic 
behavior [48].  Fortunately, most of the materials discussed herein as candidates for UcS appear 
not to be dominated by impurity effects. 
 
As an example, some typical power laws that have been used to argue for UcS are 
discussed briefly here (see also Table 1).  When each class of superconductor is discussed more 
thoroughly in the following sections below, a more complete discussion will be offered. 
 
Table 1 (From Heffner and Norman [48]) Theoretical temperature dependencies for several low 
temperature measurements in clean, defect-free samples, assuming a spherical Fermi surface and 
either line (‘polar’) or point (‘axial’) nodes in the superconducting gap structure 
 
Measurement  
 
   Polar (lines)  
 
Axial (points) 
Specific Heat (C)  
 
 
T2  
 
 
 
T3 
NMR Relaxation (1/T1)  
 
T3  
 
 
 
T5 
Thermal Conductivity ()  
 
T2  
 
 
 
T3 
Penetration Depth (1/||)2  
 
T3  
 
 
 
T2 
Penetration Depth (1/)2  
 
T  
 
 
 
T4  
 
The specific heat in the superconducting state of CeCu2Si2 follows [49] C ~ T2 – 
consistent with line nodes in the superconducting gap - down to 0.1 Tc.  As already mentioned, 
this old result has been superseded [50] by specific heat data below 0.15 Tc that can be fit to a 
two band model, where both band gaps are fully gapped BCS-like.   
 
As a second example, penetration depth, , measurements, for a fully gapped  
superconductor, (T)  exp(-/T), where (T) = (T) - (T0).  (T)  T is clear 
indication of nodes (e. g.  lines nodes from d-wave pairing symmetry) and therefore UcS.  For a 
review of penetration depth in UcS, see Prozorov and Gianetta [51].  In addition to the caveats 
mentioned above (measured over a large temperature range and including T<<Tc), an additional 
caveat applies:  it is theoretically possible [52] for (T)  T to be caused by phase fluctuations.  
Experimentally this effect is too small, e. g. in the IBS [30] to compete with the large T-linear 
coefficients observed.  (T)  T2 at low temperatures for both d-wave parity in the presence of 
strong scattering, i. e. not the case covered in Table1 [53] as well as for a fully gapped s± state 
also with strong impurity scattering [54].  Thus, impurities/quality of sample can play an 
important role in being able to translate a ‘simple’ temperature dependence of (T) into a firm 


conclusion as to the gap structure.  As a further example of the difficulty in interpretation, (T) 
 T2 has also been interpreted [55] – as will be discussed in the heavy Fermion section - as 
evidence for axial spin triplet, p-wave pairing in the HFS UBe13 [30]. 
 
2.1.6.  Multiple superconducting phases with different order parameter symmetries 
Superfluid 3He is the prototypical material with two ordered phases, as discovered in 1972 (for a 
review, see D. M. Lee, ref. [56]).  Upon cooling under ~33 bar pressure, first the anisotropic ‘A’ 
phase, described [57] by Anderson, Brinkman, and Morel (p-wave pairing), with nodal points, 
appears below 2.65 mK followed by the isotropic ‘B’ phase, described by Balian and Werthamer 
[58] (another type of p-wave pairing) below ~ 2 mK.   
 
Amongst the UcS classes, heavy fermions have several examples of this metric for 
unconventional superconductivity with UPt3, (Tc=0.54 K) the third discovered HFS, being the 
prototype.  First discovered by ultrasonic attenuation measurements [59] and visible in good 
quality samples in the bulk specific heat (two distinct zero field transitions [60]), the three 
distinct superconducting phases (see Fig. 4) in UPt3 have different nodal structures based on 
small angle neutron scattering off the flux line lattice [61] and based on theory [62]. 
 
Fig. 4  (color online)  Phase 
diagram of UPt3 as determined by 
Adenwalla et al. [63] using 
ultrasonic attenuation.  The three 
phases (A, B, and C) all have nodes 
in the superconducting gap and 
different gap structures as well.  
The zero field transitions into the A 
and B states can be seen in specific 
heat.  Reprinted figure with 
permission from Adenwalla et al., 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990), p. 2298. 
[63] Copyright (1990) by the 
American Physical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
Other UcS classes that show multiple phases, as will be discussed, might include Sr2RuO4 in 
magnetic field. 
 
2.1.7.  Josephson tunneling/Phase sensitive measurement that shows non-BCS order parameter 
symmetry (e. g. triplet p-wave in Sr2RuO4) 
 
In UcS, one or more symmetries in addition to U(1), the one dimensional global gauge 
symmetry, are broken at the onset of superconductivity [4].  The amount of symmetry breaking 
involved in the Cooper pairing state is reflected in the symmetry properties of the order 
parameter.  Phase insensitive measurements, such as the temperature dependence of low 


temperature penetration depth (see section 2.1.5. above), can prove the presence of line nodes but 
cannot distinguish between extended s-wave states (as found in some IBS) or d-wave pairing.  d-
wave pairing was first established in the cuprates by Tsuei, et al. [64] using the phase-sensitive 
measurement of Josephson tunneling.  See section 5 on cuprates for a complete discussion of this 
technique.  Josephson tunneling has also, as will be discussed in the respective sections below, 
helped establish the details of the order parameter symmetry in heavy fermions, Sr2RuO4, and 
IBS. 
 
2.1.8.  Breaking of Time Reversal Symmetry: Polar Kerr Effect or SR measured spontaneous 
appearance of an internal magnetic field below Tc 
 
In superconductors with time reversal symmetry breaking, the Cooper pairs have non-zero 
magnetic moments.  These small moments align locally producing very small spontaneous 
magnetic fields which can be detected using SR or magneto-optic measurements of the Faraday 
or Kerr effects [12].  Magneto-optic methods of demonstrating the breaking of time reversal 
symmetry (TRS) in UcS have been used in Sr2RuO4 and cuprates.  More recently, the polar Kerr 
effect has also been observed in heavy fermion UPt3 [65] and URu2Si2 [66].  Without time 
reversal symmetry, the Cooper pairs have to have some admixture of triplet pairing symmetry 
[67]. 
 
2.1.9.  Superconductivity is extremely sensitive to impurities, non-magnetic as well as magnetic 
 
It is accepted that magnetic impurities are harmful to BCS superconductors.  For a review, see 
Maple [68] wherein the Abrikosov-Gorkov (AG) model for Tc suppression by a local spin is 
discussed.  The AG theory assumes randomly located magnetic impurity spins that do not 
correlate with one another.  Plots of C/C0 vs Tc/Tc0 (where the subscript ‘0’ indicates the 
undoped superconductor) after the AG model lie below the straight line (law of corresponding 
states) derived from BCS, except where the two lines join at Tc/Tc0 = 1 and 0.  Also, 
conventional s-wave (s-wave (ℓ=0)) superconductors are relatively insensitive to non-magnetic 
impurities [69].  Contrariwise, in an UcS the ability of the electrons to pair is a function of the 
momentum k over the Fermi surface, and impurity scattering mixes the k values – making UcS 
sensitive to either magnetic or non-magnetic impurities and impeding the superconducting 
pairing.  Symptoms of such harmful effects on the superconductivity include lowering of Tc 
(sometimes to T=0), incomplete opening of the superconducting gap (finite C/T as T0 in the 
superconducting state) and smaller normalized jumps (C) in the specific heat at Tc. 
In the early days of unconventional superconductivity in studies of HFSs, doping 
experiments were carried out to just qualitatively measure if a non-magnetic dopant had a slower 
depression rate of Tc than a magnetic one, i. e. if the Tc vs doping was consistent with non-BCS 
superconductivity.  As with any doping experiment (in contrast to application of magnetic field 
or pressure), there were always concerns that the process of doping had a wider effect than 
simply placing a local-moment-carrying ion into the lattice.  Since (see, e. g., Figs. 2 and 3) the 
superconductors under discussion here for their unconventional behavior very often lie close to 
(or coexistent with) magnetic order, any disturbance in the host lattice by the dopant (e. g. 
different ionic radius causes lattice expansion or contraction) can have secondary magnetic 
effects on the superconductivity independent of the presence or lack of a local moment on the 
dopant ion.  Further, what might appear as a clearly non-magnetic dopant ion can, in a particular 


host lattice with the surrounding ligand atoms, be in actuality itself not as ‘non-magnetic’ as 
believed.  (For a good general discussion of this point, see Pfleiderer [70]). 

 
Good examples of checking for strong Tc - sensitivity to non-magnetic dopants to 
determine where the superconductivity is unconventional exist, e. g., in the heavy fermions.  For 
example, chemical substitution of Pt with Rh in U2PtC2 suppresses Tc, but not as rapidly as 
expected for a superconductor with spin-triplet pairing, which should be extremely sensitive to 
the presence of nonmagnetic impurities [71]. Triplet pairing in UPt3 was previously inferred 
from the mean free path dependence after doping with selected impurities [72]. 

As another example, in organic superconductors there is a strong influence of non-
magnetic impurities on Tc, see e. g. Joo et al. [73] and the review by Brown [74]. 

 
One interesting (reverse) example of magnetic vs non-magnetic dopants and their 
effect on Tc in conventional and UcS is the case of DyNi2B2C, believed to be a conventional 
BCS superconductor [15].  This material is a magnetic superconductor, Tc=6 K, inside an 
antiferromagnetic phase, TN=11 K where non-magnetic impurities (e. g. Y on the Dy site) 
suppress Tc at almost the same rate as magnetic (Gd) substitution [15]. 

 
2.1.10.  Non-centrosymmetric crystal structure (usually) coupled with strong electronic 
correlations 
 
By the name, this indication of UcS is reserved for those superconductors that do not have a 
center of symmetry in their crystal structure.  As discussed in Kneidinger et al. [67], only the 
non-centrosymmetric superconductors that also have strong electron-electron correlations exhibit 
UcS.     
This observation can be understood as follows.  As discussed by Mineev and Samokhin 
[75], mixed singlet and triplet pairing superconducting states can occur in the absence of 
crystalline inversion symmetry, which – due to the admixture of triplet – would mean UcS.  
However, Kneidinger et al. state that anomalous spin fluctuations caused by the lack of inversion 
symmetry stabilize the triplet pairing part of the superconducting condensate and that these spin 
fluctuations are enhanced in strongly correlated (high specific heat ) systems.  They then state 
that without strong correlations the triplet part of the condensate in non-centrosymmetric 
superconductors is not sufficiently stabilized and that weakly correlated superconductors without 
inversion symmetry have their physical properties dominated by the singlet part of the 
condensate and thus appear to be conventional superconductors.  This is born out in numerous 
experimental systems.  
   
We now discuss indicative, but possibly misleading, experimental evidence for UcS in 
sections 2.1.11. through 2.1.16. 
 
2.1.11. C(H,)/(,H) shows evidence for nodal behavior, but can be due to deep gap minima 
(e. g. YNi2B2C) 
 


The measurement of the angular dependence of the electronic density of states at the Fermi 
energy in the superconducting state (determined from specific heat data) in zero and applied 
magnetic fields, coupled with theory, has been used to find nodal, unconventional 
superconductivity in several UcS.  ((,H) can be analyzed similarly.) Where this (technically 
challenging) method can give a false positive for UcS is when deep gap minima mimic at finite 
temperatures nodal behavior.  One example of this behavior is in YNi2B2C, where C(H,) data 
were measured at 2 K by Park et al. [76].  In a recent review [15] of the quaternary borocarbide 
superconductors, Mazumdar and Nagarajan argue based on a broad range of data, including 
isotope effect, that YNi2B2C is a conventional, electron-phonon coupled superconductor.  
Another way to have the measurement of C(H, ) be misleading is to measure at too high a 
temperature, before the nodal and antinodal directions become inverted to their correct angular 
locations.  The theory of this was developed by Vorontsov and Vekhter [77].  Thus, for example, 
measurements of C(H, ) in CeCoIn5 originally concluded (see section 4 below) that the pairing 
symmetry was dxy, rather than the currently accepted consensus view that it is dx2-y2. 
 
2.1.12.  See 2.1.5. above – power laws measured over a limited temperature range 
 
Power laws are not measured in the proper temperature range (T<0.1 Tc) for the theory 
indicating unconventional behavior to apply.  Certainly data only down to Tc/2 can be ignored. 
 
 
 
2.1.13.  Isotope effect  
 
Elemental Ru (which is a conventional superconductor), when Tc is measured as a function of 
isotope mass, does not show the BCS predicted Tc  M -1/2, but instead shows essentially no 
mass dependence for Tc. [78] because of details of the screened Coulomb interaction * between 
the electrons.  Thus, the lack of an isotope effect on Tc can be an indication of UcS, but is not 
definitive.  Conversely, if a superconductor shows a (substantial) isotope effect then it is not 
unconventional.  Here the size of the isotope effect measured must be considered.  For example, 
in the IBS (certainly considered to be UcS) an isotope effect has been measured [30] on the Fe 
site (TcM-0.35) but not on the O site.  This implies that phonon modes that involve the Fe (a 
magnetoelastic effect) affect the spin fluctuations (theorized to provide the pairing mechanism) 
and thus the superconductivity. 
 
2.1.14.  Large Finite  in the Superconducting State Specific Heat 
 
Although nodes in the superconducting gap are indicative of UcS, it is a misapprehension to 
expect a  measured in the superconducting state of much more than 2 mJ/molK2 (the value in 
high quality nodal d-wave YBCO crystals discussed herein) to be due to nodes.  For example, the 
value of the residual  in UPd2Al3 of 24 mJ/molK2 measured by Caspary [79] should not be 
considered as evidence for nodes in the gap function, but is rather due to some other cause.  As 
will be discussed with the IBS, a finite residual can be a sample quality issue, where part of the 
sample remains normal due to defects, improper annealing, or similar issues.  When the residual in 
a high quality (annealed, pure, well ordered) superconducting material is an abnormally large 
fraction of normal (e. g. in UPt3 the fraction can be [80] as high as 45%), this is evidence (linked 
to the effect of non-magnetic impurities, Section 2.1.9 above) of UcS.  However, the 
determination of the quality of the sample is clearly very important to this determination. 


 
 
2.1.15.  Specific heat  varies as H1/2 in the Superconducting State 
 
 
Originally done by Moler et al. [81] for YBCO, H1/2 is, according to Volovik [82] indicative 
of lines of nodes in the gap.  As was later pointed out [83], a behavior close to H1/2 can occur 
in superconductors with two fully gapped s-wave symmetry bands.  Thus, H1/2 can only be 
taken as indicative of UcS. 
 
2.1.16.  Plot of Tc vs mean free path (proportional to sample quality through the Residual 
Resistivity Ratio, RRR) following Abrikosov-Gorkov model, e. g. in URhGe or UPt3. 
 
For a conventional superconductor, Tc is independent of the mean free path, ℓ, while for UcS Tc 
is suppressed as ℓ is suppressed down to of order the superconducting coherence length.  (this 
argument is from Hardy and Huxley [84]). The superconductivity in various UcS, e. g. URhGe 
or UPt3, is quite sensitive to the sample purity. With increasing residual resistivity, 0, the Tc 
decreases, and vanishes for low sample quality, consistent with unconventional 
superconductivity.  Also: critical field data in URhGe strongly supports an odd-parity p-wave 
state with gap node parallel to the magnetic moments [70].   The dependence of Tc on sample 
quality (ℓ  RRR = (300 K)/0) in, e. g., URhGe provides evidence that the superconductivity 
is non-conventional [85]. The sensitivity of Tc to the electronic mean free path (proportional to 
RRR or inversely proportional to the residual resistivity, 0) is evidence for a nonconventional 
order parameter (having a vanishing angular average) [85].  
 
 
3.  Brief Summary of Status of Theories to Explain UcS 
 
Theorists have been heavily involved in working to understand UcS since the first recognized 
discovery of unconventional behavior in heavy fermion CeCu2Si2 in 1979 (see Fig. 1).  
(Recognition of superconductivity - first discovered [86] by Bucher et al. in 1975 - as being a 
bulk property in heavy fermion UBe13 had to wait until 1983.)  However, no overarching 
common theory of all the various classes (9 in the current review, plus evolving discoveries at 
the time of writing) exists.  Thus, the summary of theory given here (the interested reader may 
delve more deeply into the theory of the various classes by following the representative cited 
references below), in this primarily experimentally-oriented review, is perforce composed of 
parts not all that strongly interrelated.  It is one of the goals of this review that, with the 
experimental situation of the many classes of UcS described herein, that more all-encompassing 
theoretical approaches may be inspired. 
 
That said, there have been a few attempts to begin to form a common theory.  Tohyama 
[87] discusses the similarities and differences of the IBS and the cuprates.  Taillefer [88] pointed 
out a phenomenological correlation in the resistivity related to a nearby QCP in the cuprates, the 
organics, and the IBS.  In the organic, IBS, and some heavy Fermion superconductors, Taillefer 
notes that “the central organizing principle is the presence of a QCP inside the superconducting 
dome, at which SDW order ends.”  Taillefer cites work by Bourbonnais and Sedeki [89] using a 
renormalization group approach that shows that low energy antiferromagnetic fluctuations are 
responsible for the superconducting pairing at least in the organic Bechgaard salts, T1 K. 


Fig. 5:  From Moriya and Ueda [13], a plot 
of the superconducting Tc vs a 
characteristic temperature/energy ( 
energy spread) of the spin fluctuations, T0, 
of various heavy Fermion and cuprate 
superconductors.  According to Scalapino 
[14], Moriya and Ueda estimate T0=1.25 
104/, with  in units of mJ/molK2 for the 
heavy Fermions; for the high Tc cuprates, 
Moriya and Ueda use the coefficient of the 
linear-in-temperature resistivity.  (figure is 
reproduced from ref. [13].   IOP 
Publishing.  Reproduced with 
permission.  All rights reserved.) 

 
 
 
Scalapino [14], using “Hubbard-
like” models, proposes that 
(antiferromagnetic) spin fluctuation 
mediated pairing can explain cuprates, IBS, 
and a number of heavy Fermion 
superconductors.  As shown in Fig. 5, Moriya and Ueda in 2003 [13] showed a correlation 
between Tc and the characteristic energy of spin fluctuations, T0 (often referred to as TSF) for 
cuprates and heavy Fermion superconductors.  
The history of explaining unconventional superconductivity with spin fluctuations as 
mediating the pairing extends back to the discovery of UPt3, the third heavy Fermion 
superconductor (see Fig. 1), where in the discovery paper [90] in 1984 (ferromagnetic) spin 
fluctuations (FMSF) were speculated to cause triplet superconductivity.  This was based on a 
comparison with the specific heat of 3He (where FMSF lead to triplet pairing) and the theories of 
Doniach and Engelsberg [91] and Fay and Appel [92].    Later neutron scattering results [36]  
confirmed anti-ferromagnetic spin fluctuations in UPt3.   
A large number of early theories address this issue of spin fluctuation mediated 
superconductivity specifically in heavy Fermion superconductors:  Anderson [93]; Varma [94]; 
Miyake et al. [95]; Scalapino et al. [96]; Norman [97].  
Proposals that fluctuations near a spin density wave transition could cause UcS in the 
organic Bechgaard salts were also made [98-99].   
After the cuprates were discovered, these ideas were extended to include this new 
superconducting class:  [13], [100-101].  Anderson [102] expressed a contrary opinion about the 
utility of exchange-of-antiferromagnetic-spin-fluctuation theories for the cuprates.  His point was 
that the Eliashberg extension of BCS theory discusses electrons coupled by exchange of low 
frequency bosons (phonons for BCS, antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations proposed for the 
cuprates).  Exchange of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations, in Anderson’s view, is a high 
frequency interaction – only the exchange of ferromagnetic spin fluctuations (FMSF) offers the 
low frequency energy scale required by the Eliashberg formalism.  Although UPt3 is thought to 


be in a triplet (parallel spin) pairing state (as is Sr2RuO4 discussed below in section 7) as would 
result from FMSF exchange, the cuprates are known to have (discussed below in section 5) d-
wave (antiparallel spin) pairing.   Thus, according to Anderson, the cuprates, with their large (> 2 
eV) Hubbard repulsion and large (~0.12 eV) antiferromagnetic exchange coupling, cannot be 
described by Eliashberg theory and low frequency “bosonic glue.”  In response, Scalapino [14] 
says that indeed “there is pairing glue in the Hubbard models."  For an easily readable overview 
discussion on the theory of the cuprates, including the issue of the “glue”, see Norman [103].  
The issue of what provides the pairing interaction in cuprates remains under discussion, see e. g. 
Fanfarillo et al. [104] and an analysis of Raman spectra to determine the pairing interaction in 
Sr-doped 214 cuprate compounds.  
For the IBS, Scalapino [14] notes that measurements support the importance of 
antiferromagnetic SDW-like fluctuations.  Many of the IBS have SDW transitions in the 
undoped, non-superconducting parent compounds (e. g. in BaFe2As2, TSDW=140 K) which are 
then suppressed with doping until the falling line describing TSDW vs doping concentration joins 
the superconducting dome (Tc vs doping) in the phase diagram, see Fig. 2 above.  (Stewart [30]) 
As discussed in the introduction to this section above, the theories of UcS in the other 
classes or even in individual compounds within a class, e. g. UPt3 with its multiple 
superconducting phases, coexistent ferromagnet-superconductor UGe2 (section 11) or triplet 
pairing Sr2RuO4 (section 7), do not exhibit much overlap with one another, and are best 
discussed below in their respective sections.  As made clear here already for the heavy Fermion, 
cuprate, organic, and IBS, although there are theories that attempt to address a wider selection of 
superconducting classes, these theories are still very much under discussion and development.  
As Anderson said [102], “The Secret” of the pairing mechanism is still unknown. 
 
4. Heavy Fermions (CeCu2Si2, UBe13, U1-xThxBe13, UPt3, UNi2Al3, UPd2Al3, PrOs4Sb12, 
CeCoIn5, CeIrIn5, CeRhIn5, PuCoGa5, CePd2Si2, URu2Si2, others) 

Heavy fermions, and their unusual highly correlated f-electron-derived properties, were first 
discovered in non-ordered CeAl3 in 1975 (Andres, Graebner, and Ott [105]).  CeAl3 has a very 
large C/T (T0) ~ 1600 mJ/molK2 ( m*, the electron effective mass), along with the 
concomitant large magnetic susceptibility as T0, (0), of 36 memu/mole and large T2 
coefficient in the low temperature resistivity ( = 0 + AT2), A=35 -cm/K2.  What made the 
field of heavy Fermions much more exciting was the discovery of superconductivity in CeCu2Si2 
(the first UcS) in 1979.  Later discoveries included further superconducting heavy fermion 
systems (see Fig. 1 and below), another non-ordered example – CeCu6, as well as several 
antiferromagnetic heavy fermion systems, e. g. U2Zn17 and UCd11.  For an early review, see 
Stewart [106].   

Because of the long time frame of the ongoing studies, the field of UcS as it relates to  
heavy fermion materials is an extremely broad one, with disparate results because of the wide 
range of electronic states (for example the possibility of quadrupolar ordering discussed below in 
section 4.2.6. for PrOs4Sb12 oftentimes not easily classified in an all-encompassing fashion.  (As 
will be discussed, this is also somewhat true for the extremely large body of work in the 
cuprates, although they at least have the commonality of the importance of Cu-O planes.)  The 
present review thus not only attempts to meld the properties of heavy fermion UcS into the 
properties of the broad range of UcS now known, but also to provide some overview within the 
sub-field of unconventional superconductivity in heavy fermions alone.   


Just because the low temperature value of C/T (T0) (often just called ) is large for a 
superconductor is not conclusive that the superconductivity is unconventional, although it is 
consistent with UcS.  Thus Tc < D > TF (section 2.1.1.) is satisfied (1) by all HFSs by virtue 
of their large  values (since TF  1/) and will not be further mentioned in this section on heavy 
fermions. Also, the gray area of how to decide which  values are ‘large’ is clearly somewhat 
arbitrary.  A  value (expressed as mJ/molCe/U/Pr-K2, where the normalization scales the  value 
per mole of contributing f-atoms) that is several times the largest d-electron metal value (e. g.  
for -Mn is [107] ~70 mJ/molK2 and for [2] V3Ga ~35 mJ/molV-K2) is a good candidate for the 
classification ‘heavy fermion.’  Although it would be defensible to restrict ourselves to 100 
mJ/molCe/U/Pr-K2 in this heavy fermion section, it is common (see, e. g., Pfleiderer [70]) to 
include PuCoGa5, CePd2Si2, and URu2Si2 (all with ~60-70 mJ/molPu/Ce/U-K2) as heavy 
fermions.  Since they do not belong to any of the other UcS classes and are interesting examples 
of unusual superconducting behavior, we include them below, with the reminder that for these 
100 mJ/molCe/U/Pr-K2 compounds Tc < D > TF does not hold.  
In terms of the ‘strongly suggestive evidence’ for determining UcS, the HFSs – being the 
first discovered – have a very rich set of such characteristics. Tunneling measurements (Section 
2.1.7.), which were the first proof of d-wave pairing in the cuprates [64], are difficult to perform 
on heavy-fermion superconductors due to their short superconducting coherence lengths.  
However, the requisite clean sample surfaces have been achieved in several heavy fermion 
systems, including UPt3, CeCoIn5, and UPd2Al3.  The only ‘strongly suggestive of’ UcS 
characteristic from section 2.1. missing is non-centrosymmetric crystal structure, which of course 
is its own unique class-determiner.   
 
We will start our discussion chronologically – discussing in detail the first three 
discovered HFSs (CeCu2Si2, UBe13 and UPt3).  Following a similarly thorough discussion of 
PrOs4Sb12 and CeMIn5, with emphasis on M=Co, we will then cover the high points of several 
other HFS with  < 100 mJ/molK2 and then attempt to provide a concise summary/overview of 
UcS in HFS.  This review, in order to remain of quasi-readable length, will not discuss in depth 
every possible UcS.  For example, nothing new would be gained in discussing PuRhGa5, Tc=8.5 
K, after PuCoGa5, Tc=18.5 K, since they are essentially identical in their important properties.  
Similarly, UNi2Al3 is arguably very similar to UPd2Al3, which is more extensively studied. 

4.1.  A Short Summary of the Theory of Heavy Fermion Superconductivity: 
 
Theory that is unique to a particular system will be discussed below with that compound, with 
this short introduction meant to provide an overview.  Considering first the normal state out of 
which the superconductivity forms, heavy fermion compounds are highly correlated electron 
systems with both large low temperature normal state (T>Tc) specific heat  values and large 
magnetic susceptibilities which reflect their nearness to magnetic behavior.  As one example, 
textbook Curie Weiss behavior in the susceptibility (where 1/  (8/eff2)*(T+)) – considered 
evidence for a local moment - in PuCoGa5 extends [108] unchanged from 300 K all the way 
down to Tc=18.5 K, with an effective moment of 0.68 B and =2 K.  (See Flint, et al. [109] for 
a theoretical discussion of the implications and section 4.3.1. for discussion of sample 
dependence.)  The theoretical understanding of a localized spin with an antiferromagnetic 
interaction (1/ extrapolated from higher temperature  0 for T<0) with the conduction 
electrons in the normal state is based on Kondo physics.  However, the problem of going from 


the (understood theoretically) single ion Kondo model to the case of the heavy fermion materials, 
where each unit cell contains a localized spin on the f-ion site, is still the subject of 
approximations rather than an established theory.  Thus, despite a few scattered results to the 
contrary, heavy fermion normal state physical properties such as (T0) and  do not scale with 
f-atom concentration (as they would have to in any so-called “Kondo lattice” picture) but instead 
demonstrate a wealth of correlation effects, see e. g. Satoh et al.[110] for studies of Ce1-xLaxCu6 
and Kim et al. [111] for studies of U1-xMxBe13. 
 
In the superconducting state, although exchange of spin fluctuations (ferromagnetic spin 
fluctuations, Berk-Schrieffer [112]; antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations, Scalapino [14]) as a 
pairing mechanism in the nearly magnetic heavy Fermions is an attractive theory, there are 
others in competition as will be discussed below in the individual cases.  The search for a unified 
theory of superconductivity in heavy fermion systems (Grewe and Steglich, 1991 [113]; Sigrist 
and Ueda, 1991 [3];  Mineev and Samokhin, 1999 [75]; Thalmeier and Zwicknagl, 2005 [114]; 
Scalapino, 2012 [14]) or for a theory for a particular compound (UPt3 Sauls, 1994 [62] and Joynt 
and Taillefer, 2002 [115]; U1-xThxBe13 Kumar and Wölfle, 1987 [116] and Sigrist and Rice, 1989 
[117]; skutterudites Maple et al., 2008 [118]) is made more difficult by the very different 
microscopic natures of the various discovered compounds (although see a recent paper  (Kim, 
Tam, and Stewart, 2015 [119]) for a scaling law for the superconducting condensation energy, U, 
that shows universal behavior for all superconductors vs Tc).  For example, the nature of the 
multiple (three in number) superconducting phases (7) in UPt3 seems, after a long struggle, to 
be solved while in U1-xThxBe13 (with two phases) there is still debate.  The pairing symmetry of 
the various UcS heavy fermions (discussed below), thanks to the powerful experimental tools 
that have been developed, is mostly agreed upon. Sigrist and Ueda [3] point out that in heavy-
fermion systems that have ions with heavy mass like Ce or U, spin-orbit coupling should also be 
important for the Cooper pairs (Anderson, 1984 [93], [120]). An important consequence of group 
theory is that, with this non-negligible spin orbit coupling, line zeros are not allowed for odd-
parity (l=1 or 3, p- or f- wave ) superconductors (Volovik and Gor'kov, 1984 [121] and 1985 
[82]; Blount, 1985 [122]; Ueda and Rice, 1985a and 1985b [123-124]). Blount, in particular, 
gave a general proof of this. Therefore at very low temperatures pure samples should obey power 
laws corresponding to the point zeros when they are odd parity superconductors., e. g. 1/T1 ~ T5 
point zeros, not T3 (line zeros) and C ~ T3 (point zeros), not T2 (line zeros).   
As will be seen below, the use of group theoretical arguments to restrict the possible gap 
structures (Anderson [120] and Volovik and Gorkov [82]) in the various crystal symmetries 
(tetragonal, e. g. CeCu2Si2; cubic, e. g. UBe13; and hexagonal, e. g. UPt3) provided an important 
set of guidelines in distinguishing which theories were appropriate.  

4.2.  Heavy Fermion Superconductors with  > 100 mJ/molK2 

4.2.1.  CeCu2Si2 , Tc  0.5-0.6 K: 

The distinguishing feature of HFSs is that at the second order superconducting phase transition 
where the discontinuity/broadened transition in the specific heat occurs, the size of this anomaly, 
C, is roughly equal to the electronic normal state specific heat, Tc.  (In weak coupling BCS 
theory, C/Tc = 1.43.)  Since the definition of a heavy fermion system is that the electronic 
specific heat coefficient  ( m*, the electron effective mass) is large (as just discussed primarily 


 100 mJ/molK2), this therefore implies that C/Tc is also large.  This of course was the initial 
exciting development in CeCu2Si2 [6] that the heavy Fermion superconducting electrons have 
large m* (1000 mJ/molK2 which is still increasing with decreasing temperature down to Tc) 
and strong correlations (“probably magnetic in origin”) (2), contrary to the existing weak 
electron-phonon coupled theories.  Of course, another characteristic property of UcS, Tc < D > 
TF (section 2.1.1.) is satisfied (1) by all HFSs by virtue of their large  values since TF  1/. 

When Steglich et al. first published [6] that heavy Fermion superconductivity occurred in 
CeCu2Si2, sample quality problems had required [125] approximately a year of effort to get 
samples with C/Tc values anywhere near 1 (see Fig. 6 for a comparison between the specific 
heat of their superconducting polycrystalline sample and a non-superconducting single crystal).  
Samples with resistive and inductive indications of  

Fig. 6:  Specific heat (x’s, 
superconducting polyxtal from 
Steglich et al. [6], circles and squares 
– two different non-superconducting 
single crystal samples from Stewart, 
Fisk, and Willis [22] vs logT 
showing the same normal state 
behavior just above Tc, but with the 
superconducting sample having a 
Kondo peak higher in temperature – 
4 K vs 2 K.  Both samples have an 
extrapolated normal state  of about 
1.05 J/molK2, thus fulfilling (1) TF 
( 1/)< D (section 2.1.1.) for UcS. 
Figure from ref. [22].                                                  

 

superconductivity were produced early in their studies, but refinement of the sample preparation 
was required to improve C/Tc. Now these many years hence it is known that the detailed Cu 
stoichiometry is important, with Cu above the 1:2:2 ‘stoichiometric’ ratio required for a bulk 
C/Tc anomaly in the specific heat.  Although this extreme sample dependence (where the 
ground state depends “very delicately on the actual stoichiometry” –Stockert et al. [126]) (9) in 
CeCu2Si2 has not been quantified, it is fundamentally related to the discussion in section 2.1.9. 
above about the extreme sensitivity of superconductivity in UcS to non-magnetic defects.  A 
more quantifiable measure of the sensitivity of CeCu2Si2 to non-magnetic defects is the 
measured rapid suppression of Tc in Ce1-xLaxCu2Si2 (Tc decreases by ~ 50% by x=0.06.) [127].  
 
Work later established the presence of an antiferromagnetic (‘A’) phase as a function of 
stoichiometry (slight Cu deficit) in CeCu2Si2, whose proximity to superconductivity in the phase 
diagram is thought (see section 2.1.2. above) [126], [128-129] to cause a quantum critical point 
(2) important for the unconventional superconductivity (section 2.1.2.) in CeCu2Si2 at a nearby 
stoichiometry.  Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) measurements [35], which supersede an earlier 
work [34], on a large, 2g superconducting crystal revealed spin excitations (broad in energy and 


not a narrow spin resonance as found in the cuprates and the IBS as sketched in section 2.1.3.) at 
the same Q vector associated with the antiferromagnetic quantum critical point found in the A 
phase.  These INS measurements identify the antiferromagnetic fluctuations “as a main driving 
force” for the superconductivity.  A recent analysis of the dynamical spin response and 
thermodynamic properties of CeCu2Si2 near its quantum-critical point is consistent with 
antiferromagnetic excitations being the primary pairing mechanism.  [35]  

 
Despite all these evidences for UcS in CeCu2Si2, one of the standard methods for 
determining UcS (that of non-BCS power laws in, e. g., the specific heat, section 2.1.5.) has 
recently revealed conventional behavior.  In earlier studies on the specific heat of CeCu2Si2, 
Tc=0.63 K, Lang et al. [49] found C ~ T2 down to approximately 0.1 K.  Now, in 2014 Kittaka et 
al. [50], in a slightly less ideal crystal (Tc=0.6 K, C/Tc smaller by 20%) analyze specific heat 
down to 0.04 K.  In this altered analysis using more modern theoretical insight, they fit their data 
over the whole temperature range of 0.04 to 0.6 K to a two band, fully gapped BCS model (with 
energy gaps 1/kBTc=1.76 and 2/kBTc=0.7) as has been done routinely to both IBS and MgB2.  
Thus, partly due to improved analysis, and partly due to data slightly lower in temperature than 
previously, the conclusion of Kittaka et al. is that superconductivity in CeCu2Si2 is fully gapped, 
non-nodal.  In addition to the temperature dependence, they also confirm the lack of nodes by 
finding H (see section 2.1.15.) and no angular dependence in C() (section 2.1.11.).  Another 
recent report [130] involving specific heat, thermal conductivity, and penetration depth 

measurements on CeCu2Si2 down to 0.06 K also found behavior consistent with non-nodal 
behavior:  both C and  varied exponentially with temperature at low T and thermal conductivity 
/T  0 (no linear term).  Contrasting with the modelling of Kittaka et al. [50] and Yamashita et 
al. [130], G. M. Pang et al. [131] - with measurements of the penetration depth of CeCu2Si2 
down to 0.04 K and fitting of the specific heat data of Kittaka et al. – propose another model.  
Pang et al. propose that indeed the new low temperature measurements in CeCu2Si2 are 
consistent with nodeless behavior, but offer the novel explanation that this is the result of the 
summing of dx2-y2 and dxy pairing, which add in quadrature, producing an s-wave (nodeless) like 
result.  (For a deeper discussion of the theory behind this model, see ref. [132].)  Qualitatively, 
the d+d model of Pang et al. for the Kittaka et al. CeCu2Si2 specific heat data appears to better fit 
the data than the two gap BCS model of Kittaka et al. 

The final resolution of these new low temperature results, which imply nodeless 
behavior, requires some further time to digest and analyze the data.  It would certainly be a 
surprise if the first UcS in the end was determined to have s-wave symmetry.  Such a large 
specific heat , the strong sensitivity to stoichiometry, a nearby magnetic phase in the phase 
diagram and evidence for quantum criticality, still argue for a pairing mechanism other than via 
electron-phonon coupling, but we now understand the correct description as no longer the old 
picture of CeCu2Si2 as d-wave nodal. 

4.2.2.  UBe13: 
 
Fortunately for the sample growers, although superconductivity in UBe13 is sensitive to defects, 
both magnetic and non-magnetic, (however superconductivity is not destroyed by grinding [86] – 
unlike UPt3, see below) this binary compound is alone in its phase diagram with only the pure U 
and the pure Be endpoints in addition to the 1:13 line compound.  Thus – contrary to the 


experience with CeCu2Si2 - the discovery of bulk superconductivity in UBe13, with a large 
C/Tc, was made in the first sample whose specific heat was measured to a low enough 
temperature. [133]  In order for the superconducting and normal state entropies at Tc (Ss(Tc) and 
Sn(Tc) to match in UBe13, the extrapolation of the normal state specific heat divided by 
temperature, Cn/T, to T=0 () has to increase with decreasing temperature below Tc, to about 
1000 mJ/molK2.  A rising Cn/T as T0 is also observed with an applied magnetic field to 
suppress Tc. This is a definition of non-Fermi liquid (nFl) behavior (section 2.1.2. 2), even 
though there is no magnetic phase in the zero field phase diagram to create a QCP to produce 
such nFl behavior.  Gegenwart et al. [134] however find evidence ( ~ T3/2 between 0.4 and 1.5 
K in 8 T; C/T ~ -logT between 0.15 and 3 K in 12 T) in magnetic field which they speculate 
implies a field-induced QCP at 4.5 T.  
The critical field of UBe13 displays unusual behavior, with Hc2(0)=14 T [[135] – a record 
high for HFSs.  Another record high for HFSs, and superconductors in general, found in UBe13 is 
the slope of Hc2 at Tc, Hc2’, which is -45 T/K [136-137].  Finally, there is an inflection point in 
Hc2 vs T/Tc at about T/Tc=0.5.  Y. Shimizu, et al. [138] have proposed that the upward curvature 
of Hc2 around T/Tc = 0.5 is simply due to anisotropy rather than very strong coupling and an 
FFLO state. 
 

In penetration depth measurements from Tc=0.86 K down to ~ 0.060 K [55]  was 
found to vary approximately at T2.  These data allowed for “a fairly good fit” to an axial (point 
nodes) p-wave gap function.   This is consistent with the power law found in the specific heat, 
C~T3 (but only between 0.2 and 0.9 K) by Jin et al. [139] which also implies point nodes and an 
axial state.  In apparent contradiction, NMR measurements [140] find that 1/T1, the spin-lattice 
relaxation rate, is proportional to T3 between Tc and 0.2 K, with a deviation at lower 
temperatures.  These data were interpreted as being consistent with a polar (line node) p-wave 
state.  However, it is worth noting here the argument of Heffner and Norman [48], where they 
point out the ubiquity of 1/T1  T3 in HFSs may be masking point node behavior because of a 
relative smaller phase space occupied by the latter behavior.  In summary, these power law 
results can be used to infer UcS in UBe13 (5) but, because of their internal inconsistencies (and, 
in the case of the NMR data, because of their limited temperature range) they are not conclusive.   

As discussed above in section 2.1.7., Josephson tunneling can help establish the 
symmetry of the order parameter in a superconductor if high quality surfaces are available.  Han 
et al. [141], in a rather clever tunneling experiment, established that the induced s-wave order 
parameter in UBe13 around the contact region with the BCS superconductor Ta is suppressed 
when UBe13 becomes superconducting.  They then inferred that this “negative s-wave proximity 
effect” implies that UBe13 might have an odd (triplet) parity order parameter. 

 
Multiple phases in the superconducting state as an indication of UcS (section 2.1.6.) in 
UBe13 are in general identified with Th-doped samples (discussed below.)  However, after the 
discovery of multiple superconducting phase in doped U1-xThxBe13, Rauchschwalbe et al. [142-
143] found an indication of a second transition in the specific heat of pure UBe13, Tc=0.87 K, at 
around 0.5 K.   This has been confirmed in various other measurements, including field sweeps 
of the specific heat at fixed temperatures below Tc [144] and the thermal expansion [145].   

Although, as will be discussed, there is a good amount of theory to describe the two UcS 
transitions in U1-xThxBe13, the anomaly in pure UBe13 at a temperature not unlike that of the 


second, lower superconducting transition in U1-xThxBe13 remains a puzzle.  It is an important 
function of this review to point out such interesting, but either unaddressed or poorly understood 
features of UcS.  Thus, in addition to the contradiction discussed above for CeCu2Si2 between 
the low temperature temperature dependence of C/T (fully gapped) and the other measurements 
(e. g. 1/T1 and thermal expansion) which indicated nodal behavior, the ~0.5 K anomaly in C/T in 
pure UBe13 and its possible connection to the second superconducting transition in U1-xThxBe13 
joins the ‘to-be-understood’ list of this review. 

4.2.3.  U1-xThxBe13: 

Although this subject is properly a part of the discussion of UBe13, since it is one of the more 
fascinating cases of UcS in the heavy Fermions, we will devote a separate section to it. 

Smith et al. [146], in doping UBe13 with eight different elements to try to better 
understand the superconductivity in the parent compound, discovered an unusual non-monotonic 
decrease in Tc (measured with ac susceptibility and resistivity) with increasing Th content.   Ott 
et al. [147] then discovered that a second transition C in the bulk specific heat of U1-xThxBe13 
appears with small amplitude with increasing Th content at x=0.0216 (nominal composition), 
while this second C becomes quite large and distinct around x0.03, and disappears around 
x=0.04.  An example of the specific heat, C, for two samples (annealed and unannealed) of  

Fig. 7 (color online) Kim et al. [148] data are 
black triangles (high purity sample annealed at 
1400 C for 1220 hrs) and Ott et al. [147] 
unannealed data (red circles).  The lower 
transition appears to be more sensitive to 
defects removed by annealing than the upper 
transition.  Figure from [148]. 

       Fig. 8 Figure from Scheidt et al. [149].  The 
non-monotonic-with-x resistive Tc transition at Tc1 in U1-xThxBe13 [146] was the first clue that 
something unusual was happening.  

U0.97Th0.03Be13 is shown in Fig. 7, with a phase diagram of Tc1 (upper transition) and Tc2 as a 
function of Th composition shown in Fig. 8.   


The origin of the lower transition has been the subject of numerous experiments and 
theories.  Since the upper superconducting transition blocks many of the probes (e. g. resistivity, 
ac) that might have been applied to characterizing the lower transition at Tc2, progress was at 
first slow.  Batlogg et al. [150] measured a very large peak in the ultrasonic attenuation at Tc2 
and inferred that the lower transition was antiferromagnetic, rather than an unconventional 
superconducting phase as speculated in the discovery paper [147] by Ott et al.  Thinking that the 
behavior of the lower transition vs that of the upper transition with field might provide a useful 
comparison, Mayer et al. [151] measured the specific heat of the two peaks and remarked that the 
two transitions were suppressed “at a qualitatively similar rate” with applied magnetic field.  
However, Ott et al. [152] found that field suppressed the specific heat transition at Tc2 at a 
“somewhat smaller” rate.  (This controversy was later resolved using high quality annealed 
samples with sharper transitions as shown in Fig. 7 by Kim et al. [148], who found that the 
Hc2(T) curves for the two transition are indeed parallel for H1.25 T, which a priori argues 
against the two transitions being of radically different (e. g. antiferromagnetic vs 
superconducting) nature.  Susceptibility measurements [153] of Tc as a function of pressure in 
various compositions of U1-xThxBe13 are analyzed as also consistent with two superconducting 
states. Rauchschwalbe et al. [154] discovered that the slope of the lower critical field, Hc1, 
markedly increased as temperature was lowered through Tc2, indicating a strong increase in the 
superfluid density.  They proposed that a second portion of the Fermi surface becomes 
superconducting below Tc2.  Heffner et al., [155] and references therein, using SR 
measurements, found that quasistatic magnetism, with a moment in the range of 10-3 to 10-2 B/U 
atom, appears below Tc2.  Whether this result implies time reversal symmetry breaking (section 
2.1.8.) depends on determining the nature of the second transition at Tc2.  The entropy associated 
with the lower transition (in unannealed material like that measured by Heffner et al. [155], see 
Fig. 7) would be consistent with a local magnetic moment of ~ 0.01 B/U atom.   
Various theories have been proposed to explain these seemingly contradictory results.  
Kumar and Woelfle [116] proposed two different superconducting symmetries, d-wave at Tc1 
and s-wave below Tc2, with a mixture of the two for Tc2 < T < Tc1.  In their theory, the muon 
result of magnetism below Tc2, discovered later, is not addressed.  Sigrist and Rice [117] also 
predict two superconducting symmetries being present, with non-unitary (unconventional) 
superconductivity below Tc2 (which would be consistent with the greater sensitivity to 
annealing/removal of defects of the lower transition shown in Fig. 7), where such non-unitary 
pairing creates [82] a finite local spin polarization – consistent with the result [155] of Heffner et 
al.  Concerning the ultrasonic attenuation peak at Tc2, this is ascribed to dissipative domain wall 
motion.  A non-unitary order parameter (Ohmi and Machida [156]) below Tc2 would also be 
consistent with the large residual  in the low temperature superconducting state data of Jin et al. 
[139], where for a high purity, long term annealed sample of U0.97Th0.03Be13 they found 
residual=750 mJ/molK2.  This residual is 30% of normal extrapolated [157] from above Tc1 to match 
the superconducting and normal state entropies at Tc:  Ssc(Tc)=Sn(Tc).  Such a large residual  
(14) in the superconducting state is also found in UPt3, see below, while residual is only [139] 
7% of normal in undoped UBe13. 
Due to the limited temperature range available below Tc2 in U1-xThxBe13, there are not a 
great deal of power law determinations.  Jin et al. [139], whose lowest temperature of 
measurement (0.09 K) was determined by the radioactive self heat from the depleted U, observed 
that - for all three of their measured concentrations of Th with x>xc1 (see Fig. 8)  – the low 
temperature specific heat can be fit from 0.09 to 0.32 K by a fully gapped BCS temperature 


dependence with an adjustable size of the energy gap,  - rather than C~T3 as they found for pure 
UBe13.  The value of the gap that gave the best fit to the data for all three compositions was 
/kBTc=2.7, i. e. much larger than the weak-coupled BCS value of 1.76.  Recall the result of 
Kittaka et al. [50] discussed above for CeCu2Si2, where they measured C down to 0.04 K (no self 
heating problem in Ce) and also found a BCS model, fully gapped fit to be appropriate, with 
however two gaps, both of which were weak coupled. 
More recently, in a theory review by Thalmeier and Zwicknagl [114], the extent of 
theoretical understanding of U1-xThxBe13 was summarized “there is no developed microscopic 
theory for this complex behavior.”  Thus, the precise nature of the UcS lower transition and its 
pairing symmetry, as well as its cause, in U1-xThxBe13 joins our unsolved puzzle list. 
 
4.2.4.  UPt3: 
 
In its discovery as the third known HFS (Stewart et al. [90]), the specific heat transition C of a 
collage of annealed needle single crystals of UPt3 was broad (Tc  0.1 K with Tconset = 0.54 K) 
and somewhat smaller than the BCS predicted size.  C/Tc, 450 mJ/molK2, extrapolated to an 
idealized sharp transition was only 1.0 vs 1.43 for BCS (one of the signs as discussed in section 
2.1.9. of sensitivity to defects).  Since the normal state specific heat could be fit [90] to the spin 
fluctuation form (C=T + T3 + T3logT), and since the superconductivity was destroyed by 
grinding (sensitivity to defects, 9), UPt3 was from its discovery as a superconductor believed to 
be unconventional in its pairing, with exchange of spin fluctuations as a possible pairing 
mechanism (see, e. g., M. R. Norman [158]).  
 
 
Besides the normal state temperature dependence of the specific heat (implying the 
presence of Fermi liquid spin fluctuations) and the T2 temperature dependence (Willis et al. 
[159]) (Fermi liquid behavior) of resistivity (=0 + 0.5 -cm/K2 T2), the temperature 
dependences of various quantities in the superconducting state in UPt3 are of course of interest 
for confirming UcS and drawing inferences about nodal structure.  In the superconducting state 
specific heat, this goal is somewhat thwarted since there is (Schuberth et al. [160]) an enormous 
peak in the specific heat below 0.1 K of unknown origin (although see Brison et al. [161]).  As 
discussed already (Heffner and Norman [48]), the NMR 1/T1 temperature dependence in UPt3 is 
T3 (measured down to 0.1 K, Kohori et al. [162]), typical of heavy fermion systems and lines of 
nodes.  Since the zero field, low temperature B phase (see Fig. 4) is thought (Sauls [62]) to have 
both line and point nodes (anisotropic gap structure), knowledge of the temperature dependence 
of the ultrasonic attenuation and the penetration depth in the B phase is of less utility than a 
measure of the anisotropy (see Joynt and Taillefer [115] for a detailed discussion.)  A very 
thorough study of the low temperature thermal conductivity (down to 0.016 K) by Suderow et al. 
[163] points up the difficulties of obtaining clean, definitive power laws in UPt3 with its multiple 
phases and its anisotropy. 
 
 
Mueller et al. [59], in 1987, using a single crystal of UPt3 and ultrasonic attenuation 
measurements as a function of field, found three (later named A, B, and C) distinct phases (6) 
in the superconducting state.  These data were later refined by Adenwalla et al. [63], also using 
ultrasonic attenuation, resulting in the phase diagram in Fig. 4 above.   Aeppli et al. [36] found a 
small (0.02 B) fluctuating antiferromagnetic moment in the basal plane of UPt3 starting below 5 
K.  The magnetic order parameter stops evolving at Tc, establishing a link between the 


superconducting and magnetic orders.   Fisher et al. [60], in polycrystalline samples, and later 
Hasselbach et al. [80] in a 270 mg single crystal could follow the field evolution of the A and B 
phases (present in zero field as shown in Fig. 4) in a bulk measurement, see Figure 9.  Thus, UPt3 
joined U1-xThxBe13 as an unconventional superconductor with multiple phases (see CeCoIn5 
below for the third example of multiple superconducting phases in the heavy fermions).  While 
some of the indications of UcS listed in section 2 above are only suggestive (e. g. temperature 
dependences not measured over a decade of temperature and down to at least Tc/10), the 
presence of multiple superconducting phases is certain proof of UcS. 
 
Fig. 9  Two representative fields, 0 
and 0.25 T, are shown (in [80] are 
five fields), which make it clear that 
the decrease of Tc2 with field is 
slower than for the upper, Tc1 
transition, unlike the behavior found 
for U1-xThxBe13.  The upper 
transition is 0.015 K wide; the lower 
transition is 0.010 K wide.  The 
large residual  value (14) in the 
superconducting state (190 
mJ/molK2), almost ½ of normal, in 
this high quality sample is discussed 
in the 1D, spin triplet model by 
Ohmi and Machida [156].  
Reprinted figure with permission 
from Hasselbach et al., Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 63 (1989), p. 93. [80] 
Copyright (1989) by the American Physical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 The discovery of multiple superconducting phases in UPt3 by Mueller et al. and the 
subsequent further experimental investigations led, just as in U1-xThxBe13, to intense theoretical 
efforts to explain the UcS.  Starting from the group theoretical discussions of possible gap 
symmetries by Anderson [120] and Volovik and Gorkov [82], numerous theories were proposed 
to explain the complex UcS in UPt3 (for a review, see Joynt and Taillefer [115]).   
Although there is no complete theoretical understanding of this complex behavior, Joynt 
and Taillefer [115] argue for a two component order parameter belonging to either the E1g or the 
E2u 2D group theoretical representations.  Sauls [62] gave a thorough discussion of the so called 
E2u odd parity, triplet (S=1 or 3, p- or f-wave) 2D representation order parameter for hexagonal 
UPt3 (see Fig. 10), where the order parameter determines the gap symmetry and any nodes (see 
Table V in Volovik and Gorkov [82]).  The E1g representation (see, e. g., Putikka and Joynt [164]  
and Park and Joynt [165]) is a singlet, even parity representation, s- or d-wave. In the E2u model, 
the coupling (Aeppli et al. [36]) of the small antiferromagnetic moment to the superconducting 
order parameter provides a symmetry breaking field which is responsible (Sauls [62]) for the 
apparent tetracritical point and the two transitions in zero field, Figs. 4, 9, and 10.  For competing 
proposed models, see Chen and Garg [166] – with two order parameters that are degenerate), as 


well as Machida and Ozaki [167] and Ohmi and Machida [156] – both 1D representations.)  The 
1D model of Ohmi and Machida has been used to explain the large residual specific heat  (up to 
45% of n) observed in the superconducting state (see Fig. 9).  Note that this large residual is 
strongly sample dependent, with, e. g., Ott et al. [168] reporting residual  0 (measured down to 
0.07 K), Sulpice et al. [169] reporting residual  110 mJ/molK2, and Fisher et al. [60] reporting  
 
Fig. 10 (color online): Graph from 
Huxley et al. [61].  Magnetic field 
along c-axis.  Nodes exist (Joynt and 
Taillefer [115]) in all three 
superconducting phases.  The B 
phase has a line node in the basal 
plane and point nodes along the 
hexagonal c axis.  In the A phase, 
according to Huxley et al., antinodes 
(maxima in the gap function) occur 
along bisectors of the a, a* directions 
(45 o rotated from the a direction) 
while antinodes occur along the a 
direction and the direction 
perpendicular to the a direction. A, 
B, and C come together in an 
apparent tetracritical point.  UPt3 is 
unusual in that the superconducting 
gap does not have the same 
rotational symmetry as the 
crystalline lattice.  The graphical 
pictures for the Fermi surfaces 
shown in the white squares for the A 
and B phases correspond to the E2u 
model (f-wave), see Strand et al. 
[170] for further depictions. 
Reprinted by permission from 
Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature 
[61], copyright (2000). 
 
residual  150 mJ/molK2 for their two samples.  The Ott et al. sample was an adjacent piece to a 
sample in which dHvA oscillations were observed, i. e. presumably of high quality.  The Sulpice 
sample was the first one to clearly show two transitions in the specific heat at Tc (i. e., the sample 
was well ordered) – later recognized by Fisher et al. [60] and Hasselbach et al. [80] (Fig. 9) to 
represent transitions into the A and B phases.  This strong sample dependence of residual in a 
priori well ordered and low-impurity samples is an indication of strong sensitivity of the UcS to 
low level amounts of impurities/defects (9).  

There have been various further measurements consistent with the triplet E2u model and contrary 
to, e. g., the singlet E1g model.  These include small angle neutron scattering [61] which studied 


the alignment of the superconducting flux line lattice in field applied along the hexagonal c-axis 
(Fig. 4), Josephson tunneling experiments as a function of angle (Strand et al. [171]), and 
anisotropy of the thermal conductivity at low temperatures in the B phase (see the review [115] 
by Joynt and Taillefer).  Polar Kerr effect measurements have been recently performed (Schemm 
et al. [65]) in UPt3 and show the breaking of time reversal symmetry (8) in the B phase.  These 
measurements are consistent with any one of the four 2D representations possible for hexagonal 
UPt3, i. e. are also consistent with, but not proof of, the E2u representation.  Kycia et al. [172] plot 
Tc vs 0 (inversely proportional to the mean free path) for various annealed single crystals of 
UPt3 (see discussion in section 2.1.16.) and get good agreement (16) with the Abrikosov-
Gorkov theory modified for UcS with anisotropy. 

 
4.2.5.  UNi2Al3 / UPd2Al3: 
 
After the discoveries of heavy fermion superconductivity in CeCu2Si2 (1979), UBe13 (1983), and 
UPt3 (1984) there was a long period with no further discoveries (URu2Si2, discovered in 1986, 
has a  value only as large as -Mn and will be discussed below in the  < 100 mJ/molK2 section, 
section 4.3.) until 1991, when the group of Frank Steglich found the heavy fermion 
antiferromagnets UNi2Al3 and UPd2Al3, Tc = 1.1 and 2 K respectively. (Geibel et al. [173-174]).  
These hexagonal materials, with coexistent antiferromagnetism (TN = 4.6 and 14 K respectively), 
have  values extrapolated from just above Tc (i. e. in the antiferromagnetic state) of 120 [173] 
and 140 [79] mJ/molK2 respectively.  Due to the greater availability of quality samples of 
UPd2Al3, research has tended to focus primarily on this compound.  As well, the lower Tc in 
UNi2Al3 has resulted in power law investigations over much too limited a range (e. g. between 
0.5 and 1.0 K for 1/T1 Tou et al. [175]) to allow any conclusions about nodal behavior (section 
2.1.12.).   
Neutron scattering experiments (Geibel et al. [176]) established the local moment in 
UPd2Al3 to be 0.85 B, while that in UNi2Al3 is (Schroeder et al. [177]) is much smaller, 0.24 B.  
These were the first heavy fermion superconductors coexistent with a static local moment.  (The 
very small moment (~0.020.01 B) starting below 5 K in UPt3 is thought to be dynamic, as 
discussed above.)  Elastic neutron scattering (Krimmel et al. [178]) on a single crystal was 
measured to study the magnetic order in UPd2Al3.  The data show a “remarkable” dip in the 
integrated scattering intensity (for the (0 0 ½) magnetic Bragg peak) as temperature is lowered 
through Tc, followed by a full recovery upon further cooling.  This 10% ‘bite’ out of the 
scattering intensity, about 1 K wide and centered on Tc, indicates an interaction between 
superconductivity and magnetism different from the cessation of order parameter evolvement 
seen at Tc in UPt3 and remains unexplained. 
More recent neutron scattering experiments have been used to explore the connection 
between the superconducting pairing mechanism and the observed magnetic response of the 
antiferromagnetic UPd2Al3.  Bernhoeft et al. [179] propose a superconducting interaction 
between quasiparticles strongly renormalized by low frequency spin fluctuations in the 
antiferromagnetic state.  A more unique-to-UPd2Al3 mechanism for superconductivity was 
proposed by Sato et al. [33] based on their neutron scattering results, and further discussed 
theoretically by McHale et al. [180] and Chang et al. [181].  In this model, one f-electron is 
itinerant and experiences an effective attractive interaction produced by crystalline electric field 
excitations of the remaining two localized f-electrons.  Sato discovered a resonance peak in the 


neutron scattering intensity below Tc.  They identify this as evidence for collective modes 
(bosons) which are local crystalline electric field excitations that propagate because of exchange 
between local moments.  These ‘magnetic exciton’ bosons are then theorized ([33], [180-181]) to 
cause an effective attractive interaction between the itinerant (heavy) f-electrons, causing 
superconductivity. 
Other evidence for UcS in UPd2Al3 includes (, H) (Watanabe et al. [182]) (11).   
Specific heat has been measured (Caspary et al. [79]) down to 0.4 K, but the T3 variation noted 
between 0.4 and 1 K is over too limited a temperature range to draw conclusions about nodal 
structure.     
Josephson tunneling on heteroepitaxial thin films of UPd2Al3 on LaAlO3 was carried out, 
where the film quality was somewhat less than for bulk specimens (Tc decreased by 20%, TN 
decreased by 15%, residual resistivity increased a factor of seven (Huth et al. [183]; Geibel et al. 
[174]).  The authors concluded that a feature in the tunneling conductivity data at 1.2 meV was a 
spin fluctuation mode that was coupled to the superconducting order parameter.  Despite some 
sample quality issues, this tunneling work (7), coupled with the neutron scattering data (Sato et 
al. [184]) and Bernhoeft et al. [179]) that show a feature in the scattering intensity around 1.2-1.5 
meV, is one of the more experimentally-grounded proposals for spin-fluctuation- mediated 
superconductivity in a heavy fermion system. 
 
 
4.2.6.  PrOs4Sb12:  
 
PrOs4Sb12, Tc=1.8 K, in the skutterudite family, has a low temperature specific heat above Tc 
(from where the normal state  is extrapolated) that is complicated by a low lying first excited 
crystal field level that is only 7 K above the ground state.  Various extrapolations/estimations for 
 exist (Bauer et al. [185]; Maple et al. [186]) that range from 350 to 500 mJ/molK2.  Since 
PrOs4Sb12 has a nonmagnetic ground state, it has been conjectured (Maple et al. [187]) that the 
superconducting electron pairing may be unconventional and mediated by quadrupolar 
fluctuations.    
Although the discovery work [185] did not see a double peak structure in the specific 
heat at Tc, numerous later works (Maple et al. [186]; Vollmer et al. [188]; Measson et al. [189-
190]; McBriarity et al. [191]) resolved two anomalies.  These anomalies, with respect to their 
relative amplitudes, are much like in UPt3 discussed above with Fig. 9.  However, the upper 
transition in the specific heat of PrOs4Sb12 is significantly (~factor of two) broader whereas in 
UPt3 both transitions are equally narrow.  The current consensus appears to be (see references 
and discussion in McBriarity et al. [191]) that the upper transition is due to inhomogeneous 
superconductivity and not due to an intrinsic second superconducting phase as convincingly 
proven to exist in UPt3. 
 
The superconducting upper critical field, Hc2(0), is approximately 2 T.  At fields starting 
~ 4.5 T, there is (Aoki et al. [192]; Ho et al. [193]) a field induced ordered phase (non-
superconducting) characterized by neutron scattering (Kohgi et al. [194]) as antiferro-
quadrupolar ordering. 
 
Concerning indications of UcS in PrOs4Sb12, muon spin resonance (Aoki et al. [195]) 
data show unambiguous evidence (spontaneous appearance of static internal magnetic fields 
below Tc) for time reversal symmetry breaking in the superconducting state (8).   However, 
thermal conductivity (Izawa et al. [196]), , measurements as a function of field and angle are 
less clear an indication for UcS.  These data indicated a transition between two superconducting 


phases as a function of field at 0.52 K, with the higher field phase having four fold symmetry and 
the low field (<0.6 T) having two fold symmetry.  This apparent change of the gap symmetry has 
been addressed theoretically by Curnoe et al. [197] and by Alrub and Curnoe [198-199].  Since 
there are no other measurements which support this second superconducting phase at low fields 
in PrOs4Sb12 (for example the small angle neutron scattering results up to 1 T of Huxley et al. 
[200] discussed in the next paragraph see no evidence of this gap symmetry change; similarly 
high resolution magnetization measurements (Tayama et al. [201]) down to 0.4 K and up to 1.4 T 
see no “appreciable anomaly” corresponding to the result of Izawa et al.), this (H,) result must 
be viewed with some caution. 
 
In terms of temperature dependence of various measured parameters in the 
superconducting state, these measurements give mixed indications.  Penetration depth  
determined by SR indicates (MacLaughlin et al. [202]) no nodal behavior, i. e. consistent with 
conventional superconductivity.  The rather slow depression (Frederick et al. [203]) of Tc with 
the doping of the non-magnetic Ru in PrOs4-xRuxSb12 is also consistent with conventional 
superconductivity (section 2.1.9.).  Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) measurements 
(Suderow et al. [204]) indicate no nodal behavior, but a variation of the gap over the Fermi 
surface consistent with a multiband superconductor.  This somewhat general conclusion of more 
than one gap value on the Fermi surface has since been refined.  For example, Seyfarth et al. 
[205], using thermal conductivity, identified two fully open gaps, with a size ratio of ~3.   In 
contrast to these measurements indicating fully gapped, nodeless behavior, several other 
measurements were interpreted as evidence for nodal behavior.   Thermal conductivity 
measurements [206] down to 0.05 K saw a significant value of /T as T0, strong evidence for 
nodal behavior.  Penetration depth  determined using a tunnel diode oscillator (Chia et al. 
[207])  two point nodes on the Fermi surface like in the 3He A-phase, although their sample 
showed the upper superconducting transition thought to be due to inhomogeneous 
superconductivity, i. e. samples were not of the best quality.  Finally, small-angle neutron 
scattering experiments (Huxley et al. [200]) measured distortions in the flux-line lattice 
consistent with nodes in the gap.   
 
In summary, despite improvements in sample quality the arguments for UcS in PrOs4Sb12 
are not as uniform as for the other heavy fermion superconductors in section 4.  Perhaps this is 
inherent in the proposed different superconducting pairing mechanism – exchange of 
quadrupolar rather than magnetic fluctuations. 
 
 
4.2.7.  CeMIn5, M=Co,Ir,Rh:   
 
These tetragonal 115 compounds are a subset of the more general series CenMmIn3n+2m, with 
M=Co, Ir, Rh, Pd and Pt.  The basic building block of these compounds is CeIn3, called the 
‘infinite layer’ compound since, when n gets very large, CenMmIn3n+2m approaches CeIn3. These 
very interesting superconductors, along with the PuMGa5, M=Co, Rh, have been frequently 
reviewed, see, e. g., Setai et al. [208], Sarrao and Thompson [209], Pfleiderer [70] and White et 
al. [210]. Ce2RhIn8 has Tc=2.0 K under 2.3 GPa pressure and Ce2CoIn8 has Tc=0.4 K at ambient 
pressure.  For n=m=1, CeCoIn5 (Petrovic et al. [211]) has Tc=2.3 K and 1150 mJ/molK2, 
CeIrIn5 (Petrovic et al. [212]) has Tc=0.4 K and 625 mJ/molK2 (where  in this review is 
always defined as Cnormal/T extrapolated to T0 and not C/T at Tc+ as is found in, e. g., 
Pfleiderer [70]), while CeRhIn5 is an antiferromagnet, TN=3.8 K, where =380 mJ/molK2 (Fisher 


et al. [213]).  CeRhIn5 becomes superconducting at 2.1 K under an applied pressure of 1.6 GPa.  
(For a detailed description of the structure, see Pfleiderer [70])  Although band structure 
calculations combined with dHvA measurements (see, e. g., Hall et al. [214]) give an 
approximately 2D Fermi surface with “undulating cylinders” for these compounds, the 
anisotropy in, e. g., the electrical resistivity, the magnetic susceptibility, or the upper critical 
magnetic field, is only about a factor of two – i. e. they are much more isotropic than the 
cuprates. 
 
4.2.7.1  CeCoIn5:  Grown from an In flux, crystals of CeCoIn5 – the highest Tc heavy fermion 
compound known - are flat platelets, allowing easy determination of properties both in the basal 
a-b plane as well as along the c-axis.  There is a peak in the resistivity vs temperature curve at 
around 50 K, so that the residual resistivity ratio (RRR), defined as (300 K)/normal(T0), of 
14 underestimates the high quality of the crystals, in which dHvA oscillations can be seen.   
(Shishido et al. [215]).  CeCoIn5 has been identified as being in the ‘superclean’ limit, with the 
superconducting quasiparticle mean free path, ℓ, being over 1 m and a short (~50 Å) coherence 
length,  (Kasahara et al. [216]). 
. 
As mentioned above in section 2.1.2., the normal state specific heat (extended down to 
low temperature by an applied field of 5 T) of CeCoIn5 follows the non-Fermi liquid temperature 
dependence Celectronic/T  -logT (Kim et al. [25]), indicating the presence of quantum critical 
fluctuations (2).  This is reinforced by a normal state resistivity  ~ T from Tc up to 20 K, again 
consistent with non-Fermi liquid behavior.  (Petrovic et al. [211])  The NMR 1/T1 in the normal 
state varies as T1/4, consistent with spin fluctuation theory’s prediction near an antiferromagnetic 
instability.  (Kohori et al. [217]). 
In addition, CeCoIn5 possesses a large number of non-exponential temperature 
dependences in various superconducting state properties (5), all consistent with line nodes as 
listed in Table 1.  These properties include: thermal conductivity /T ~ T2 (Movshovich et al. 
[218]) – but only in the limited temperature range 0.033 – 0.100 K; superconducting state 
specific heat Csc~T2 [219] – but only between 0.1 and 0.4 K; NMR 1/T1 ~ T3 (Y. Kohori, et al. 
[217]) (again – common to heavy fermions) from Tc down to 0.3 K;  penetration depth  ~ T 
along the c-axis (Chia et al. [220]) interpreted as consistent with d-wave with line nodes along 
the c-axis.   
Tunneling measurements (Zhou et al. [221] and Allan et al. [219]) imply nodal dx2-y2 
pairing symmetry with line nodes in the a-b plane.  Angle resolved measurement of  (Izawa et 
al. [222]) and of C/T (An et al. [223]) in field for T<0.1 Tc – both very powerful techniques 
applied successfully in only a few UcS – also imply nodal dx2-y2 pairing symmetry (11) with 
line nodes in the a-b plane.    The difference between An et al.’s C/T work’s conclusions about 
the correct nodal direction (in the [110] direction) and previous somewhat higher temperature 
C/T (,H) work (Aoki et al. [224]) which incorrectly assigned dxy pairing with nodes in the 
[100] direction is the inversion of the nodal/antinodal directions with lowering temperature in the 
superconducting state as theoretically explained by Vorontsov and Vekhter [77].  See also Das et 
al. [225].   
The question of a possible pseudogap in CeCoIn5 is at present the subject of conflicting 
measurments. The resistivity at 1.35 GPa (where Tc as a function of pressure is a maximum at 
2.6 K) shows a slight decrease ~0.4 K above Tc that has been called (Sidorov et al. [226]) 
consistent with a pseudogap, although no such feature in  at lower pressure (Nicklas et al. 
[227]) had been remarked upon previously.    STM [221] and STS (Wirth et al. [228]) tunneling 


studies support a pseudogap interpretation, with the work by Zhou et al. [221] showing a 
pseudogap feature 3 K above Tc.  However, Van Dyke, Davis, and Morr [229] explain the 
tunneling STM data of Zhou et al. as not being due to a pseudogap, but rather that their measured 
dI/dV line shape can be explained by the electronic band structure.  A further possible support 
for there being a pseudogap in CeCoIn5 is the (,H) work by Izawa et al. [222], where the 
oscillations seen with angle appear to survive 0.9 K above Tc, although a factor of 10 smaller in 
amplitude than the low temperature data.  Whether these higher temperature remanent (,H) 
oscillations can be explained by an anisotropy in the in-plane electrical resistivity is not clear.  
Works using Andreev reflection (L. Greene et al. [230] and W. K. Park et al. [231]) see, in 
contrast, no evidence of a pseudogap in CeCoIn5. 
In summary, there appears to be conflicting evidence, pro and con, for a pseudogap in 
CeCoIn5, so at present this remains an open question.  We will discuss the well established 
pseudogap behavior in both the electron and the hole doped cuprates below.  Once that 
discussion is complete, it will become clear how, in comparison, uncertain the existence of a 
pseudogap in CeCoIn5 is.  
Joining the list of strong indications for UcS in CeCoIn5 is the presence of a magnetic 
resonance in inelastic neutron scattering below Tc (C. Stock et al. [32]).  As discussed above in 
2.1.3., such a resonance would normally be considered to be evidence for a sign change in the 
superconducting energy gap  on different parts of the Fermi surface, as would be consistent 
with the d-wave pairing symmetry already implied from numerous measurements discussed here.  
However, recent neutron scattering data (Song et al. [232]) on Ce1-xYbxCoIn5, x=0, 0.05, and 0.3, 
have called this interpretation of the observed resonance in CeCoIn5 into question.  Rather than 
being due to a spin exciton that implies a sign change of the gap function (d or s± symmetry), 
Song et al. describe the observed resonance as being due to a magnon-like excitation, with no 
implication about a sign change in (k).  This is still indicative of UcS (3), but now for a more 
strongly coupled version. 
Another piece of evidence for UcS in CeCoIn5, which is the result of many experiments 
leading up to what is now considered the final answer, is the presence of a second 
superconducting phase (6) – see Fig. 11 - as a function of field – just as already discussed in 
U1-xThxBe13 and UPt3 above.  This additional (so called Q-) phase (triplet p-wave) occurs just 
below Hc2(0) and for T<0.3 K.  This behavior was initially (H. Radovan et al. [233]; A. Bianchi, 
et al. [234]; H. A. Radovan et al. [235]) assigned to be a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov 
(FFLO) superconducting phase with a finite momentum caused by Zeeman (field) splitting of the 
bands.  (As discussed also below in section 9, Organic Superconductivity, an FFLO phase  
 


Fig. 11 (color online) The Q-phase exists 
in a narrow region of the H-T phase 
diagram (determined by specific heat 
(Radovan et al. [233]; Bianchi et al. 
[234]), T<~0.3 K, for CeCoIn5, with the 
solid red circles representing second order 
phase transitions while the upper 
boundary to the Q-phase is first order.  
For field in the c-axis direction, the Q-
phase exists in a much more restricted 
field region between 4.9 and 5 T.  The Q-
phase is extremely sensitive to doping, 
with less than 1% substitution of Cd, Hg, 
or Sn on the In site erasing any sign of a 
transition in the specific heat. (Y. Tokiwa 
et al. [236]) 
 
 
is by itself not proof of UcS, although it preferentially occurs in UcS.)  Subsequent NMR results 
(B.-L. Young et al. [237]; Koutroulakis et al. [238]) revealed evidence for a local moment in this 
region of the phase diagram, rather than the long wavelength spin density modulation expected 
for the FFLO phase.  Using sensitive high field neutron diffraction on a 155 mg single crystal of 
CeCoIn5, Gerber et al. [239] concluded that modulated triplet p-wave superconductivity occurs 
in the Q-phase due to the interaction of the host’s d-wave superconductivity with the spin-
density-wave (SDW) order discovered by NMR. 
A last piece of evidence for UcS in CeCoIn5 is the response (J. P. Paglione et al. [240]) of 
its Tc to substitution of various rare earths for Ce as a function of 0.  Qualitatively similar to the 
decrease of Tc with increasing 0 as discussed already for UPt3 (see also section 2.1.16. and 
section 11.2. for URhGe below), although no fit to a modified Abrikosov-Gorkov model is made 
these data are also (~16) consistent with UcS. 
To summarize the experimental measures that indicate UcS in CeCoIn5, small 
characteristic temperature (1) superconductivity forms out of a non-Fermi liquid normal state 
(2), magnetic resonance below Tc (3), some disputed evidence for a pseudogap (4), power 
law temperature dependences of various properties (, C/T, 1/T1, and ) in the superconducting 
state (5), presence of more than one superconducting phase (7), and (, H) as well as C(, 
H) show an angular dependence characteristic of nodal (in this case dx2-y2) behavior (11) are all 
present.  Concerning the metric for UcS of high sensitivity to impurities (2.1.9.), it is believed 
from band structure calculations that the M transition metal site in CeMIn5 is relatively 
decoupled from the Ce site (Sarrao and Thompson [209]), thus decreasing the sensitivity of 
superconductivity to doping on the M site.  However, doping of non-magnetic La on the Ce site 
in Ce1-xLaxCoIn5 does show a rapid, UcS-like depression of Tc with x (50% suppression of Tc for 
about x=0.1) (Petrovic et al. [241]).(9)  Although this is less rapid than discussed above for 
CeCu2Si2, where Tc falls by 50% for only approximately 6% doping by La on the Ce-site, the 
magnitude of this effect in CeCoIn5 is still entirely consistent with UcS. 
To summarize the theoretical and experimental insights into the UcS in CeCoIn5, the 
large set of experimental results have not yet lent themselves to a comprehensive theoretical 


understanding.  Magnetic fluctuations are strongly believed to be important, see for example the 
magnetic interaction model proposed by Monthoux et al. [101].  In fact, using quasiparticle 
interference imaging, van Dyke et al. [242] present evidence that indeed the Cooper pairing in 
CeCoIn5 is mediated by antiferromagnetic f-electron interactions.  The normal ground state, with 
its non-Fermi liquid behavior in specific heat (C/T ~ -logT) – evidence for quantum criticality, is 
unusually robust against suppression by magnetic field with 5 T having apparently no effect.  
(Kim et al. [25]).  The theoretical understanding of the field induced second superconducting Q-
phase shown in Fig. 11 (modulated triplet p-wave symmetry due (Gerber et al. [239]) to the 
host’s dx2-y2 superconductivity interacting with the field induced spin density wave with a 
moment of 0.15 B (Kenzelmann et al. [243]) was a tour de force.   
 
4.2.7.2  CeIrIn5:  Due to its lower Tc (0.40 K), CeIrIn5 (Petrovic et al. [212]) is less thoroughly  
characterized than CeCoIn5, e. g. there is no measure of a resonance in neutron scattering below 
the 0.4 K Tc.  Power laws of superconducting properties indeed show non-exponential behavior, 
but suffer from a typical lowest-temperature-of-measurement of 0.05 K.  For example, 
Movshovich et al. [218] report C/T  T2 (indicative just as in CeCoIn5 of line nodes in the gap) 
between 0.05 and 0.2 K, as well as /T  a + bT (consistent with line nodes) between 0.05 and 
0.2 K.  The normal state specific heat C/T follows the non-Fermi liquid temperature dependence 
0-AT1/2 between 0.6 and 6 K (2) (Kim et al. [25]).   C/T as a function of field and angle has 
been done in CeIrIn5 under pressure to raise the superconducting temperature and to allow 
reaching sufficiently low temperature to obtain correct measurement of the nodal directions 
following the Vorontsov and Vekhter [77] discussion.  For P=0.9, 1.5, and 2.05 GPa, Tc for 
CeIrIn5 is 0.50, 0.75 and 0.85 K respectively.  (X. Lu et al. [244]).  The result of these C(H, ) 
measurements were the same as in CeCoIn5:  4 four fold rotation consistent with dx2-y2 symmetry 
pairing with lines of nodes in the a-b plane (11).    

No resistive or tunneling evidence for a pseudogap just above the bulk Tc of 0.4 K exists, 
presumably because of the electrical short at 1.2 K due to a resistive transition, 0, proposed 
by Bianchi et al. [245] to be due to filamentary superconductivity caused by crystalline defects.  

By doping Hg on the In site, Bauer et al. [246] found long range antiferromagnetism in 
CeIr(In1-xHgx)5 for x>0.05.  Shang et al. [247] doped both Hg and Sn on the In site as well as Pt 
on the Ir site.  They find a maximum in the specific heat  (proportional to the effective mass, 
m*) at about CeIr(In0.97Hg0.03)5 and suggest that pure CeIrIn5 is therefore “in proximity” to an 
antiferromagnetic quantum critical point.  They further postulate that the superconductivity in 
CeIrIn5 is mediated by magnetic quantum fluctuations. 
 
4.2.7.3  CeRhIn5: 
Hegger et al. [248] demonstrated superconductivity at 2.1 K in CeRhIn5 
via resistive measurements under an applied pressure of 1.63 GPa.  At zero pressure, CeRhIn5 is 
an antiferromagnet with TN=3.8 K.  There is coexistent antiferromagnetism (AFM) (local 
moment of 0.37 B) and superconductivity below 1.8 GPa demonstrated by ac specific heat and 
NMR, with the peak in Tc vs pressure approximately at where pressure suppress TN0, i. e. at a 
quantum critical point (2) (T. Park et al., [249]).   As shown below in Fig. 12, TN0 (causing 
quantum critical behavior and its possible influence on UcS – section 2.1.2) can also be reached 
by substituting either Co or Ir for Rh.  In the case of CeRh1-xIrxIn5, the specific heat above Tc 
shows [250] non-Fermi liquid behavior (C/T rising as T is lowered), consistent with a magnetic 
quantum critical point at TN 0 causing UcS.  In contrast, the specific heat [251] above Tc in 
CeRh1-xCoxIn5 where TN  0 (around x=0.6-0.7, see Fig. 12) does not show the non-Fermi 


liquid behavior characteristic of pure CeCoIn5. (This specific heat evidence of lack of quantum 
criticality near where TN0 in CeRh1-xCoxIn5 is consistent with dHvA measurements, which 
show [252] no divergence in the effective mass m* in this region of the phase diagram.)  In the 
coexistence region, neutron scattering (Aso et al. [253]) implies direct coupling of the 
antiferromagnetic and superconducting order parameters.  Specific heat under pressure (Fisher, 
et al. [213]) in the superconducting state give the non-exponential power law C ~ T2 from 0.5 K 
(lowest temperature of measurement) to 2 K, too limited a temperature range to strongly infer 
UcS.   Also in the superconducting state, NQR measurements (T. Mito et al. [254]) (as for all the 
heavy fermions) find 1/T1 ~ T3, although only between 0.35 and 2 K.  In another NQR under 
pressure work (S Kawasaki et al. [255]), a claim is made that a small anomaly in the 1/T1 data in 
1.6 GPa at 4 K (Tc at that pressure is 1 K, with TN=2.7 K) corresponds to the opening of a 
pseudogap.  The possibility of a pseudogap in CeRhIn5 under pressure has not been confirmed by 
any other measurement.   Angle resolved specific heat in a field, C(H, ), reveals 4 fold 
oscillations (11) implying d-wave pairing symmetry in both the coexistent AFM and 
superconductivity regime (P<1.8 GPa) *and* in the regime P>2.3 GPa, where superconductivity 
exists *after* the AFM is suppressed (T. Park et al. [256]). 
 
Fig. 12 (color online) Phase diagram [209] of 
CeMIn5, where M is varied between Co, Rh, 
and Ir as well as between Ir and Co.  The two 
regions highlighted with narrowly spaced 
parallel vertical lines exhibit true microscopic 
coexistent antiferromagnetism and 
superconductivity.  As of the time of the 
Sarrao and Thompson [209] review in 2007, 
microscopic measurments to determine the 
nature of the light blue phase region in CeIr1-

xCoxIn5, in which a second superconducting 
transition had previously been observed 
(Pagliuso et al. [257]) had not been 
completed.  Figure reproduced with 
permission from J. L. Sarrao and J. D. 
Thompson, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 76 (2007), p. 
051013 [209].  
 
  
In Fig. 12 is displayed the tuning of 
the electronic properties in CeMIn5 by doping 
rather than via pressure.  Even though all 
three of the CeMIn5, M=Co, Ir, Rh (all isovalent), are UcS, Fig. 12 shows clearly that 
superconductivity is relatively insensitive to doping on the M site, even when the doping is 
between the non-superconducting endpoint CeRhIn5 and either CeCoIn5 or CeIrIn5.  This aspect, 
that the M site appears to be rather decoupled from the Ce site in terms of the effect of impurities 
on Tc, was already discussed above for CeCoIn5 but Fig. 12 reinforces this point. 
 
 
Thus, in summary, all three CeMIn5, M=Co, Ir, Rh, appear to exhibit UcS, with the most 
complete case being made for M=Co, where the results are particularly rich in scope. 


 
4.3.  “Heavy” Fermion Superconductors,  < 100 mJ/molK2 
 
Below are listed a few of the less strongly correlated compounds which are often lumped under 
the “heavy fermion” label.  This is meant to be a representative, not exhaustive, list.  The 
ferromagnetic compounds UGe2 and URhGe are discussed in section 11. (ferromagnetic UcS). 
 
4.3.1 PuCoGa5: 
 
Also occurring in the tetragonal 115 structure as do the CeMIn5 just discussed, PuCoGa5 has 
Tc=18.5 K and was, surprisingly enough, the first Pu compound found to superconduct at any 
temperature (Sarrao et al. [108]).  (PuRhGa5, Tc=8.5 K, was the obvious follow up, with Rh 
isoelectronic to Co, and was characterized shortly thereafter.)  As discussed in the Introduction to 
section 2, PuCoGa5 is on the border of being a heavy fermion system, with a  value of 
approximately 70/95 mJ/molK2 (Sarrao et al. [108]/Bauer et al. [258]).  Also, of course, the Tc of 
18.5 K makes PuCoGa5 clearly different from heavy fermion systems, where the highest Tc is 2.3 
K for CeCoIn5.   However, as a possible UcS it clearly belongs together with the discussion of 
the three 115’s just discussed, where the  values (defined as Cnormal/T as T0) indeed indicate 
large effective mass, ‘heavy’ electrons for CeMIn5, M=Co, Ir, Rh, with  = 1150, 625, and 380 
mJ/molK2 respectively.   An additional argument for considering the Pu 115 superconductors 
together with the CeMIn5 materials is that Bauer et al. [258] pointed out (see Fig. 13) that Tc in 
both the PuMGa5 and the CeMIn5 compounds has essentially the same variation with the c/a 
tetragonal axes ratio.  This commonality of Tc vs c/a, combined with the calculated/measured-by-
dHvA approximately two dimensional Fermi surfaces for both sets of superconductors, led Bauer 
et al. to propose a common mechanism of magnetically mediated UcS that is strongly linked to 
the structural c/a ratio.  A theoretical understanding of the origin of the Tc scaling with c/a was 
declared (Sarrao and Thompson [209]) an “important open question” and seems of fundamental 
interest, thus joining the ‘to-be-understood’/puzzle list of this review. 
 
Fig. 13 (color online)  Tc for the 
CeMIn5 compounds has the same 
linear behavior vs the ratio of the c-
axis to the a-axis, along with the same 
slope, as do the plutonium based 
PuMGa5 superconductors.  (Figure 
based on Bauer et al. [258] and Sarrao 
and Thompson [209].) Reprinted 
figure with permission from Bauer et 
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004), p. 
147005. [258] Copyright (2004) by the 
American Physical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
The low temperature non-exponential temperature dependences of superconducting 
PuCoGa5 are as follows.  For specific heat on PuCoGa5 (using the rare 242Pu isotope to decrease 
the self heating due to radioactive decay by a factor of 15 compared to 239Pu) down to 1 K, C  
T2 up to 7 K (Bauer et al. [258]).  Measurement of the penetration depth, , between 3 and 12 K 
results in    T, consistent with d-wave pairing (Morris et al. [259]).  As is common for heavy 
fermion systems, 1/T1  T3, but only down to ~ Tc/2, below which 1/T1  T (Curro et al. [260]) 
which of course as seen in Table 1 does not fit theoretical predictions for either line or point 
nodes.  Thus, although these non-exponential temperature dependences are consistent with UcS, 
they are – due to the internal heat generated in the sample by the rapidly decaying Pu nuclei – 
known only over limited temperature ranges.  The NMR normal state 1/T1 data [260], T>Tc, 
were analyzed as consistent with antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations. 
 
The normal state temperature dependence of the resistivity in PuCoGa5 is   T1.35 from 
Tc to 50 K, consistent with non-Fermi liquid behavior although there is no sign of a magnetic 
phase transition or a quantum critical point to cause this behavior.  Perhaps more interesting, the 
normal state magnetic susceptibility published in the discovery paper (Sarrao et al. [108]) 
follows a Curie-Weiss temperature dependence,  = 0 + C/(T - ) with a fairly large effective 
moment of 0.68 B, all the way from room temperature downwards until it is interrupted by the 
diamagnetic superconducting transition at 18.5 K.  This is unlike any known heavy fermion 
system (superconducting, magnetic, or non-ordering)  (Stewart [106]), for example  of UBe13 
deviates from its high temperature Curie-Weiss behavior already below 100 K.  This evidence 
that the superconductivity forms directly out of a normal state with a 0.68 B effective moment is 
in and of itself evidence for UcS, as discussed in a theory by Flint et al. [109].  Polarized neutron 
scattering data (Hiess et al. [261]) – albeit on a sample of PuCoGa5 with a somewhat depressed 
Tc (15 vs 18.5 K) due to Sb impurities from the preparation - finds that the magnetic behavior in 
PuCoGa5 is dominated by orbital contributions at q=0 and is inconsistent with the localized Pu 5f 
electron picture suggested by the Curie Weiss behavior reported by Sarrao et al. [108].  
Additionally, the measured  just above Tc in the Hiess et al. work is ~3-4 times smaller 
than is the Sarrao et al. sample.  Further unpublished work by the Los Alamos group (J. D. 
Thompson [262]) showed an array of results in six different samples of PuCoGa5 for  - all still 
able to be fit to  = 0 + C/(T - ) (although with varying 0 and  values and – with one 
exception - only able to be fit down to 25-125 K depending on sample) – but with magnitudes 
indeed varying from 3.15 memu/mol just above Tc (the Sarrao et al. discovery result), to 2.0 
memu/mol in a 242Pu sample (Curie-Weiss behavior down to Tc), and all the way down to ~0.9 
memu/mol just above Tc like in the Hiess et al. sample.  This range of results for  remains 
unexplained, and may at least partly be due to the large background subtraction of the 
encapsulation required.   Thus, this important point of the intrinsic behavior of  down to Tc in 
PuCoGa5 – the subject of a concerted (but inconclusive) examination at Los Alamos National 
Laboratory - is likely to remain an unsolved puzzle.  
 
4.3.2 CePd2Si2: 
 
The study of CePd2Si2 represents a significant subfield of UcS, that where antiferromagnetism is 
suppressed by applied pressure and a dome of superconductivity appears in the phase diagram, 


see Fig. 2 for an overview.  Specifically in CePd2Si2, the peak of the dome is at Tc=0.43 K at 2.8 
GPa.  Thus, CePd2Si2 fulfills condition 2 discussed above in section 2 where quantum critical 
fluctuations are thought to be important for the superconducting pairing.  CePd2Si2 is an 
antiferromagnet with TN=10 K, and the specific heat above TN in zero pressure extrapolates to 
give a =65 mJ/molK2.  At pc = 2.8 GPa, the normal state resistivity follows T1.2 up to ~ 40 K 
(Grosche et al. [263]), consistent with quantum critical spin fluctuations.  Mathur et al. [26] 
argue (also for the similar (see also Pfleiderer [70]) CeIn3, where TN=10.2 K, =140 mJ/molK2, 
at pc=2.5 GPa, Tc=0.19 K, and T1.6) for superconducting pairing mediated by magnetic spin-
spin interactions.  Due to the high pressures, very low temperatures, and small volume of sample 
involved, the set of measurements on these compounds is quite restricted.  They serve as 
important, but understudied in comparison even to PuCoGa5, examples of UcS. 
 
4.3.3 URu2Si2: 
 
URu2Si2 was discovered to be a superconductor, Tc=1.5 K, by W. Schlabitz et al. [264] (see also 
Palstra et al. [265] and Maple et al. [266].  The specific heat  value extrapolated to T=0 from the 
data in the normal state above Tc is 65-75 mJ/molK2 ([264], [266].)  At 17.5 K there is an 
anomaly in the specific heat which, in the initial discovery papers, was assigned to be due to 
antiferromagnetism.  The entropy associated with this transition was found by Schlabitz et al. to 
be about 0.15 Rln2, certainly a large enough amount for neutron scattering to find the putative 
local moment.  Thirty years later, it is fair to say that the majority of work on URu2Si2 has been 
focused on this 17.5 K anomaly, rather than on the superconductivity (the subject of the present 
review.)  The reason for the effort expended is that the measured order U moment is only 0.04 B 
(neutron scattering Broholm et al. [267] or 0.02 B (magnetic xray scattering, Isaacs et al. [268]), 
i. e. the anomaly in the specific heat is not predominantly due to magnetic ordering.  What 
exactly this order (dubbed ‘hidden order’ as its origin remains hidden from our understanding) is 
due to remains the subject of vigorous investigation, both experimental and theoretical, and 
debate (for a review, see Mydosh and Oppeneer [269]). 
 
Concerning the superconducting properties of URu2Si2, the temperature 
dependences in the superconducting state that imply line nodes (C  T2 Fisher et al. [270]; 
1/T1~T3 Kohori et al. [271]) are less than conclusive because of limited temperature dependence 
(C/T, 0.2-1.0 K) and the possibility of a point node 1/T1  T5 (Table 1) behavior being masked 
(Heffner and Norman [48]).  However, (, H) (Kasahara et al. [272]) and C(, H) (Yano, et al. 
[273]) measurements give definite evidence (11) for horizontal line nodes in the hole band and 
point nodes in the electron band – an interesting difference in nodal topology in one material.  
These two works build on the earlier  and  work of Kasahara et al. [274], who argued for 
unconventional d-wave superconductivity with two (a light hole band and a heavy electron band) 
superconducting energy gaps.  Schemm et al. [66] have recently presented evidence for breaking 
of time reversal symmetry (8) in URu2Si2. 
Point-contact spectroscopy measurements on a URu2Si2 single crystal with the tip applied 
along the a-axis direction (on the 0.5 mm thin edge of the crystal) yielded evidence for a 
pseudogap (4) that extended above Tc = 1.37 K by 0.6 K (Morales and Escudero [275]).  Since 
the point contact is expected to apply significant pressure (estimated to be ~1 GPa in another 
experiment (Rodrigo et al. [276]) on URu2Si2 to investigate the 17.5 K transition), the alignment 
of the tip on the single crystal is of critical importance, since pressure increases Tc (~0.1 K for 
0.2 GPa) when applied in the c-axis direction, and reduces Tc when applied in the a-axis 


direction (Bakker et al. [277]).  Confirmation of these important results – only the second 
indication of a pseudogap in a heavy fermion superconductor, after CeCoIn5 - by another 
measurement technique would be desirable.   
 
4.3.4  CeIn3: 
 
CeIn3 is an antiferromagnet, TN=10.2 K, =130 mJ/molK2, which superconducts (the 
superconducting dome, see Fig. 2, is peaked at Tc=0.22 K) under 2.5 GPa pressure at the point in 
the phase diagram where pressure suppresses TN to T=0 (Walker et al. [278]; Knebel et al. 
[279]).  There is evidence [279] in the resistivity,  = 0 + aT~1.6, for antiferromagnetic quantum 
critical fluctuations (2) near the critical 2.5 GPa pressure.  The other indication for UcS is a 
sensitivity [70] to non-magnetic impurities (9).  For a theory of the superconductivity in CeIn3, 
see Fukazawa and Yamada [280]. 
 
4.3.5  PrPt4Ge12 
 
This skutterudite is included here for completeness.  With its high Tc (7.9 K), it is an unlikely 
candidate for triplet superconductivity, where Tc should be highly sensitive to defects.  With a  
value of 87 mJ/molK2 (Gumeniuk et al. [281]), it is further quite unlike PrOs4Sb12, Tc=1.8 K, 
with a 350 mJ/molK2.  However, according to muon spin resonance measurements 
(Maisuradze et al. [282]), PrPt4Ge12 breaks TRS below its Tc.  Maisuradze et al. speculate that 
the nature of the pairing (rather than triplet) could be a complex ℓ=0 (spin singlet) function with 
an internal phase, which would [282] also break TRS.  In terms of power laws, Maisuradze et al. 
[283] find C ~ T3 (consistent with point nodes, see Table 1) over the limited temperature range of 
0.4 to 1.6 K and fit their penetration depth data also to a model with point nodes. 
 
4.4.  Summary: 
 

Having discussed a number of heavy fermion superconductors as pertains to the question of 
whether their superconductivity is unconventional, we have seen a wide variety of properties and 
proposed explanations.  As clear from the discussion, this question is sufficiently complex that 
the answer is not always straightforward.  For example, the prototype heavy fermion 
superconductor, CeCu2Si2, with its several properties consistent with UcS (including strongly 
enhanced effective electron mass, strong antiferromagnetic fluctuations, sensitivity to non-
magnetic defects, nearness in the phase diagram to a magnetic phase transition) has recently had 
its specific heat down to 0.04 K analyzed as a fully gapped superconductor (Kittaka et al. [50]).   
Such a two gap model involves a relatively large number (four) of fitting parameters, and awaits 
confirmation of the two gap nature from other measurements – such as ARPES, as was important 
in substantiating the two gap nature in MgB2 and the IBS.  Further understanding of the ~0.5 K 
anomaly below Tc in C/T in pure UBe13 and its possible connection to the second 
superconducting transition in U1-xThxBe13 might aid in understanding the precise nature of the 
UcS lower transition and its pairing symmetry, as well as its cause, in U1-xThxBe13.   
As we have discussed, the proposed mechanisms for superconductivity in heavy fermion 
systems, although spin-fluctuation mediation is a strong favorite, include other possibilities:  
antiferro-quadrupolar (PrOs4Sb12) and magnetic exciton (UPd2Al3).  Of course, some heavy 


fermion systems are inarguably UcS, e. g. UPt3, U1-xThxBe13, and CeCoIn5 all have more than 
one superconducting phase; CeCoIn5 has a narrow spin resonance below Tc in the neutron 
scattering, indicative of a sign change in the order parameter as well as tunneling evidence for 
dx2-y2 pairing symmetry; U1-xThxBe13 and UPt3 both – in the best quality samples – have large 
(sample dependent) residual specific heat  values in the superconducting state (30% and from 0 
up to 45% respectively of normal). 
As will be seen when the other superconducting classes are discussed in the following 
sections, the heavy fermion superconductors, diverse as their properties are (see Table 2 for a 
summary), do not present the full breadth of complexity to be found in UcS. 
 
 
Table 2:  Presence of Strongly Suggestive Evidence Indicating UcS in Heavy Fermion 
Superconductors.  The symbol ‘’ means that that property was specifically looked for but not 
found 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
 11 
   14 
16 

 
TF 
<< 
D 

QC 
Spin 
res 
PG 
T 
>1 sc 
phase 
Phase sens. 
tunneling   
non-BCS 

TRSB 
Tc/non-
mag imp 
C(H,) 
(H,) 

residual 
large 
Tc vs 0 fits 
AG model 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CeCu2Si2 
 
 
broad 
    
~ 
 
 
 
     
       
 
 

UBe13 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 

U1-xThxBe13 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 

UPt3 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
    


U(Ni/Pd)2Al3 
 
 
Pd 
 
 
  
 for Pd 
 
 
for Pd 
 
 

PrOs4Sb12 
 
 
 
 
mix 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 

CeCo/Ir/RhIn

5 
 
C
o,Ir 
Co 
?Co 
 
Co 
 
 
for Co 
Co,Rh 
 
~ Co 

PuCoGa5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CePd2Si2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

URu2Si2 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
       
 
 


 
 
 
5.  Cuprates (Hole and Electron Doped) 
 
Superconductivity was discovered in Ba (hole)-doped La2CuO4, Tc~35 K (tetragonal structure 
with planes of CuO2), in 1986 by Bednorz and Mueller.  Measurements of Tc vs pressure (Chu et 
al. [284]) showed an increase in Tc of 25% at 1.3 GPa, leading to doping the compound with the 
smaller Y ion on the La site to exert “chemical” pressure.  This led to superconductivity at 93 K 
(Wu et al. [285]) in what was later determined to be YBa2Cu3O7- (a different composition than 
the original Bednorz and Mueller compound and with an orthorhombic structure with chains of 
Cu-O as well as planes of CuO2)-  Based on these discoveries in two different copper perovskite 
structures, the race for higher Tc, and for applications, was on.   
Although the search for higher Tc in the ‘cuprate’ superconductors has reached a Tc as 
high as 134 K (for HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8+), which increases to 164 K at 31 GPa (Gao et al. [286]), 
the search for understanding many fundamental issues, including even the pairing mechanism 
(“The Secret”, Anderson [102], see section 2 above), remains unfinished.  Both experimental 
(see, e. g., the recent laser ARPES measurements (J. M. Bok et al. [287]) that suggest quantum 
critical fluctuations as the “glue”) and theoretical work continues apace.  As Abrahams [288] 
observes, it is difficult “to give a comprehensive survey” of the theory of the cuprates.  A partial 
list of theoretical reviews includes Orenstein and Millis [289],  Norman and Pepin [290], 
Sachdev [291], Lee, Nagaosa and Wen [292], Anderson [293], Norman [294], Ogata and 
Fukuyama [295], Abrahams [288], Norman [103], Scalapino [14], and Das, Markiewicz and 
Bansil [296].  

There are several collections of experimental reviews of the cuprates, e. g. the five 
volumes of The Physical Properties of High Temperature Superconductors [#1-5 references) ed. 
by D. M. Ginsberg, the two volumes (30 and 31) of Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of 
the Rare Earths (ed. by K. A. Gschneidner, Jr., L. Eyring, and M. B. Maple ([#1,2 references] 
devoted to High Temperature Superconductors, here are also specialized experimental reviews, 
or even multiple reviews, on just one measurement technique or property in the cuprates (e. g. 
SQUID devices: Koelle et al. [297], phase sensitive detection of the pairing symmetry: Van 
Harlingen [298], Andreev reflection spectroscopy: Deutscher [299], scanning tunneling 
microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS): Fischer et al. [300], photoemission measurements: 
Damascelli et al. [301], pseudogap behavior: Timusk and Statt [40] and Rice et al. [39] and 
Norman, Pines and Kallin [302], and isotope effect: Zhao et al. [303] and Franck [304].   

Thus, although not the first discovered UcS (which were heavy fermions) nor even the 
second (organic superconductors), the amount of theoretical and experimental work on the 
cuprate superconductors probably exceeds that on all the other classes of UcS combined.  
Distilling this body of theoretical and experimental work down to just one link in the chain of 
understanding UcS in general will necessitate brevity on subjects worthy of the entire length of 
this review. 
An overview of a representative cuprate phase diagram (both the more heavily studied 
hole doped side and the less studied electron doped side - represented by R2-xCexCuO4-, R=Pr, 
Nd, Sm, discovered by Tokura, Takagi and Uchida [305] - is given in Fig. 14.  Like sometimes 
found in the heavy fermion superconductors already discussed and in some organic, IBS, non-
centrosymmetric, and perhaps the cobalt oxide hydrate superconductors discussed below, UcS in 


the cuprates forms near to (sometimes coexistent with) antiferromagnetism in the phase diagram.  
In addition to the ordered antiferromagnetic phase, in the cuprates there are a variety of 
incommensurate spin-density-wave striped phases (see, e. g., Lake et al. [306]) that compete and 
interact with the superconducting phase.  The nearness of magnetism in the phase diagram leads 
to proposals of spin excitation mediated pairing just like in the heavy fermions (see, e. g., 
Chubukov, Pines and Schmalian [307] and Scalapino [14]).  However, the differences between 
the cuprate and the heavy fermion superconductors, as will be discussed, are numerous.   
We begin with a brief outline of the electron doped R2-xCexCuO4-, then discuss their 
superconducting properties, followed by similar treatment for the more-completely-studied hole 
doped cuprates.  
 

Fig. 14  Phase diagram of the 
high temperature 
superconducting cuprates 
with the hole doped cuprates  
represented by La2-xSrxCuO4, 
and the electron doped 
cuprates represented by R2-

xCexCuO4, after Armitage, 
Fournier and Greene [41].  
Both sides show rapid 
suppression of TN with 
doping.  On the hole doped 
side, there is a region of spin 
glass behavior connecting the 
antiferromagnetic regime and the superconducting dome, and actually extending into the dome 
(Julien [308]).  Below T*, pseudogap behavior is observed as discussed below in the text, 
although the origin of the behavior on the two sides of the phase diagram appears to be different 
[41], [309].  As will be discussed, this difference is likely tied to the greater extent of the 
antiferromagnetic region with doping as well as its coexistence with the superconducting dome 
on the electron doped side of the phase diagram.  The light green region represents uncertainty in 
the extent of the antiferromagnetic region.  At zero doping, both La2CuO4 and R2CuO4, R=Pr, 
Nd, Sm, are antiferromagnetic Mott insulators.  Despite the specific compounds listed in the 
figure, this phase diagram roughly fits the 200+ known cuprate superconductors, hole and 
electron doped.  Reprinted figure with permission from Armitage et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 
(2010), p. 2421. [41] Copyright (2010) by the American Physical Society. 

 
5.1.  Electron Doped: 
 
Two recent reviews exist for the electron doped cuprates, Armitage, Fournier, and Greene [41] 
and Fournier [42].  The focus of much of the former is on normal state properties.  There are 
more than just the R2-xCexCuO4  (R=Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu) electron doped compounds, there are also 
the Sr1-xLnxCuO2, Ln=La, Nd, Sm, Eu, as well as R2-xThxCuO4, R=Pr [310], Nd [311].  The Sr1-

xLnxCuO2 are the so called ‘infinite layer’ compounds, which consists of CuO2 planes alternating 


with alkaline earth planes, the limit with large n of the perovskite structure stacking, see Siegrist 
et al. [312].  This is similar, as discussed above, to CeIn3 being the infinite layer, n, 
compound for CenMmIn3n+2m.  Some examples are Sr0.84Nd0.16CuO2, Tc=40 K (Smith et al. [313]) 
and Sr0.9La0.1CuO2, Tc=42 K (Kikkawa et al. [314]) vs Tc=24 (22, 20, 13) K for R2-xCexCuO4, 
R=Nd (Pr, Sm, Eu) and Tc=20 and 23 K for R1.85Th0.15CuO4, R=Nd, Pr respectively.  For a fourth 
kind of electron doped cuprate, there is also F doping to add electrons to the undoped parent 
compound, Nd2CuO4-yFy, Tc=27 K (James et al. [315]).    
The focus of the current review is on the superconducting properties which, unavoidably, 
are influenced by the properties of the normal state out of which the condensation into the 
superconducting state occurs.  Thus, we offer here a brief synopsis of the complex normal state 
on the right side of the phase diagram in Fig. 14 to serve as a background.  In the above 
discussion for the heavy fermion superconductors, individual compounds could be extremely 
different from one another and were discussed individually.  In contrast, the electron doped 
cuprates (R2-xCexCuO4, R=Nd (Pr, Sm, Eu) and the infinite layer compounds, e. g. 
Sr0.84Nd0.16CuO2 and Sr0.9La0.1CuO2) lend themselves for the most part to broad generalities.  For 
a more in-depth discussion thereof, see Armitage, Fournier and Greene [41]. 
Although not of particular import for the superconducting properties, the 
antiferromagnetism for the electron doped R2-xCexCuO4, R=Nd (Pr, Sm, Eu), is not just the 
simple ordering of Cu spins (for R=Nd, TN=255 K) in the CuO2 layers like on the hole-doped 
side, despite the similar ordering temperatures.  The rare earth R atoms give rise to a “rich set” 
[41] of magnetic properties due to coupling between the Cu and R atom spins, including, e. g., 
further ordering transitions of the Cu spins.  These further transitions (TN2=75 K, TN3=30 K for 
R=Nd  (Lynn and Skanthakumar [316]) are followed by ordering of the R atoms at low 
temperatures.  For example, for R=Nd, there is a further antiferromagnetic transition at 1.7 K 
(Ghamaty et al. [317]) with an ordered moment on the Nd of 1.3 B (Matsuda et al. [318]). 
The normal state resistivity for ‘optimally doped’ (meaning at the peak of the 
superconducting dome) electron doped cuprates follows a T2 (Fermi liquid) temperature 
dependence from Tc up to 200 K (e. g. in Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4 (‘NCCO’) Tsuei, Gupta and Koren 
[319]) in contrast to the non-Fermi liquid =0+AT dependence reported for some of the heavy 
fermion superconductors and for the hole doped cuprates.    
However, the electron doped cuprates display a broad arrange of behavior just as do the 
hole doped cuprates, and several samples display linear-with-temperature resistivities, thought to 
be consistent with spin fluctuations and quantum criticality (Jin et al. [320]).  Resistivity in thin 
film La2-xCexCuO4 shows a band of =0+AT (2) vs composition behavior above the 
superconducting dome, with the maximum in temperature extent (up to 50 K) at optimal doping 
x=0.10 [320].   In thin films of Pr2-xCexCuO4 at the particular concentration of x=0.17 (just past 
optimal doping), =0+AT is found between 0.04 and 30 K, in this case in applied fields up to 12 
T to suppress Tc (~ 19 K at zero field). 
As was mentioned with Fig. 14, pseudogap behavior appears to be different in the 
electron-doped cuprates, with the majority of the pseudogap behavior seemingly related to the 
antiferromagnetic spin correlations.  (Armitage, Fournier and Greene [41]; Motoyama et al. 
[321].  In contrast, in the hole-doped cuprates, T* (as will be discussed below for these 
materials) possibly signals a phase transition that extrapolates to a quantum critical point near a 
hole doping p=0.19.   


Turning now to investigation of the superconducting state properties which can provide 
evidence for UcS (Unconventional Superconductivity), we begin with tunneling into the electron 
doped cuprates (which has been quite revealing as discussed below for the hole doped cuprates).  
  
5.1.1.  Tunneling 
 
This work has had a number of materials issues, as well as puzzling results.  In addition, early 
work (e. g. point contact spectroscopy, Huang et al. [322]) was interpreted as consistent with 
predominantly electron-phonon mediated coupling, which in the more recent work is no longer 
the case.   
Unlike in the hole doped materials discussed below, point contact tunneling in zero field 
shows no sign of a gap above Tc (the pseudogap), although other measurement techniques (e. g. 
optical conductivity, ARPES, photoemission) do as depicted by the dashed T* line in the right 
side of Fig. 14 above, see the review by Armitage, Fournier and Greene [41].   One puzzling 
tunneling result still under recent discussion (J. Yuan et al. [323]) is the existence (Biswas et al. 
[324] and Kleefisch et al. [325]) – known since 2001 - of a so-called ‘normal state energy gap’ 
(NSG) of ~5 meV in M2-xCexCuO4, M=Pr,Nd, at 2 K in magnetic field > Hc2.  Work in 2003 by 
L. Alff et al. [326] added LCCO to the list of electron doped cuprates that show an NSG.  This 
NSG is distinct from the large (~100 meV) ‘pseudogap,’ which is observed via ARPES 
(discussed next below.) The explanations under discussion for the NSG include preformed 
superconducting singlet pairs (Y. Dagan et al. [327]), hidden order parameter (viz. discussion of 
URu2Si2 above) under the superconducting dome [326], and a Coulomb gap caused [324] by 
electron-electron interactions.  See ref. [41] for a complete discussion.  Although not a focus of 
recent work in understanding the superconductivity in electron doped cuprates, this NSG joins 
our list of interesting and unresolved puzzles.  
In zero field and below Tc, point contact spectroscopy on NCCO, Tc=25.1 K, gives (Shan 
et al. [310]) a superconducting energy gap of ~4 meV.  (The early work of Huang et al. [322] on 
NCCO, Tc=22 K, gave =3.7 meV.)  STM measurements (Niestemski et al. [329]) on 
Pr0.88LaCe0.12CuO4 (PLCCO), Tc=24 K, resulted in a superconducting energy gap of 7.2±1.2 
meV.  Obviously, the ratios for 2/kBTc obtained from these two measurement methods (3.7 and 
7.0 respectively, vs 3.52 from BCS theory) differ significantly.  Such variation in  is also seen 
in other measurements, as will be discussed below.   
More interesting than this (long standing in the hole doped cuprates) disagreement on , 
is Niestemski et al.’s analysis of their STM data on PLCCO.  They conclude that their tunneling 
spectra can be related to an electron-bosonic (where the bosons are spin fluctuations) mode 
coupling at energies of 10.5±2.5 meV. This energy is consistent with a (inferred from inelastic 
neutron scattering and discussed below) magnetic resonance (3) mode energy (~11 meV) in 
PLCCO (S. D. Wilson et al. [330]).   
Another use of tunneling data is via model fits to determine s- vs d-wave symmetry.  In 
the electron doped cuprates, these fits are not definitive.  Most n-type cuprate tunneling data are 
on epitaxial thin films or crystals.  The lack of a zero bias conduction peak (ZBCP) (normally if 
such a peak is present it implies a sign change in the phase of the order parameter, i. e. consistent 
with d-wave or s as found in the IBS) can be due to inherent disorder.  The critical comparison 
of the mean free path and the coherence length, 0 ~ ℓ, for disorder to suppress the ZBCP (Aprili 
et al. [331]) is easily exceeded (Fournier [42]) in the electron doped cuprates due to the relatively 
long 0 ~ 50Å.  


 
5.1.2.  ARPES 
 
Although of great utility for the hole doped cuprate superconductors and the IBS, because of 
those materials’ larger superconducting gaps, ARPES results for the superconducting gap in 
electron doped superconductors, with ~4 meV, are less conclusive.  Armitage et al. [332] 
interpret their ARPES data on single crystals of  NCCO as consistent with an anisotropic energy 
gap, consistent with d-wave pairing.  However, within their measurement uncertainty, they 
cannot rule out an anisotropic s-wave ordering parameter with a small gap below their detection 
limit.  Matsui et al. [333] present ARPES data on PLCCO that are described as “basically 
consistent” with dx2-y2 pairing symmetry. 
When it comes to a high energy gap-like structure (the ‘pseudogap’), ARPES see such a 
structure (4), e. g. in single crystal PLCCO, Tc=26 K, without difficulty [333]. 
 
5.1.3. Specific Heat: 
 
Yu et al. [334] measured the low temperature C/T of PCCO, Tc=22 K, and found that the field 
dependence was proportional to H1/2, consistent with d-wave pairing (as first done by K. Moler et 
al. [81] for YBCO.)  However, as is now understood and discussed below in IBS, such behavior 
in the two band electron doped cuprates can be mimicked by two fully gapped s-wave bands. 
 
5.1.4.  Penetration Depth 

As discussed above in section 2.1.5., the power law dependence of the penetration depth can be 
affected by impurities and therefore be difficult to interpret definitively.  In addition, early 
measurements of  in NCCO returned results (exponential temperature dependence) consistent 
with s-wave pairing symmetry.  Cooper [335] reanalyzed these penetration depth data using the 
strong Nd magnetic contribution to arrive at T1 or T2.   In the case of PCCO, where the 
magnetic contribution of Pr is weaker, Prozorov et al. [336] found that their data on single 
crystals for  varied as T2 between 0.025 K up to 0.3 Tc, consistent with d-wave pairing with 
impurities.   

5.1.5.  NMR 
 
Despite the lack of a pure power law, the 1/T1 data for single crystal PLCCO, Tc=24 K, of Zheng 
et al. [45] can be well fit to a model for disordered d-wave superconductors.  No evidence of a 
pseudogap in the penetration depth data is observed. 
 
5.1.6.  Raman 
 
Blumberg et al. [337] interpret their Raman data on single crystals of NCCO, Tc=22 K, as 
consistent with dx2-y2 order parameter symmetry.  They further analyze their data as indicating 
that the maximum in  is near where the antiferromagnetic fluctuations are at a maximum in the 
Brillouin zone (a so-called ‘hotspot’), emphasizing the role of such fluctuations in the 
superconductivity. 
 


5.1.7.  Isotope Effect 
 
Batlogg et al. [338] prepared powdered samples of NCCO, Tc=24.5 K, and exchanged 
approximately 85% of the 16O for 18O.  In contrast with results for hole doped La2-xMxCuO4 (see 
section 5.2.4.), they found no isotope effect with a limit on  (TcM-) of 0.05. 
 
5.1.8.  Phase sensitive experiments  
 
Phase sensitive measurements (7) were performed using patterned thin film SQUID devices 
with Josephson junctions.   The first results, on the half-flux quantum effect (discussed below, 
see also Figs. 17 and 18, with the hole doped cuprates where the technique was first employed), 
were performed by Tsuei and Kirtley [339]  on NCCO, Tc=22-25 K, and Pr1.85Ce0.15CuO4-, 
Tc=22-23 K.  Later work has been performed in La1.895Ce0.105CuO4, Tc=29 K (Chesca et al. [340] 
and in the infinite layer Sr0.85La0.15CuO2, Tc=18 K (Tomaschko et al. [341]).  These works offer 
convincing proof of dx2-y2 pairing symmetry.  Obviously, these tour-de-force efforts in the 
electron doped cuprates benefited from the years of effort achieving the same results in the hole 
doped cuprates (for reviews, see Tsuei and Kirtley [4] and Kirtley [342]). 
 
5.1.9.  Neutron Spin Resonance 
 
Wilson et al. [330] reported a sharp magnetic excitation (resonance) in the inelastic neutron 
scattering of PLCCO, Tc=24 K, in the superconducting state, where the energy of the resonance, 
Er, was approximately 5.3 kBTc.  This result further linked the electron doped cuprates to the hole 
doped, where such a resonance (with Er5.8 kBTc) had been seen (see also below) since 1991 
(Rossat-Mignod et al. [343]).  In PLCCO, the integrated scattered intensity around Q=(1/2,1/2,0) 
in the reciprocal lattice of the CuO2 planes (the antiferromagnetic Bragg peak position in the 
undoped compound) increases dramatically below Tc – just as seen in YBCO [343] and other 
hole doped cuprates (see below).   Although not understood, this resonance is theorized to be 
fundamentally linked to the superconducting pairing mechanism. 
 
5.1.10.  Summary for Electron Doped Cuprates 
 
Although not as mature a materials class as the hole doped cuprates, these materials – thanks to 
the definitive phase sensitive experiments which build on prior experience in the hole doped 
superconductors – appear to be clearly UcS, with nodal dx2-y2 pairing symmetry.  Besides the 
phase sensitive, tricrystal experiments, the fit to the NMR data [45] and the inelastic neutron 
scattering resonance mode [330] seem quite clear evidence for UcS.  The STM data [329] on 
PLCCO and the Raman data [337] on NCCO provide indications of the importance of spin 
fluctuations for the (unconventional) superconductivity.  The underinvestigated apparent gap (the 
NSG) in the electronic energy spectrum of approximately the same size as the superconducting 
gap, but found in the normal state for H>Hc2 remains an interesting puzzle. 
 
 
Table 3:  Strong Indications of UcS in the electron-doped cuprates 
 
 
    1 
     2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
13 
   14 


 
TF << 
D 
   
QC 
Spin 
res 
PG 
T 
>1 
sc 
phas
e 

Phase 
sens. 
tunneling  
 non-
BCS 

TRS
B  
Tc/non-
mag 
imp 

C(H,) 
(H,) 
Lack 
of 
isotope 
effect 

residual 
large 

electron-
doped 
cuprates 

 
     
   
 
~ 
~  
      
 
        
       
   
  

 
 
5.2.  Hole Doped 
 
5.2.1.  Introduction 
 
In terms of the phase diagram sketched above in Fig. 14, the hole doped cuprates are roughly 
similar to the just-discussed electron doped materials.  The major differences are the broader-in-
composition superconducting dome and the lack of coexistence of long range 
antiferromagnetism and superconductivity.   After a brief introduction, we will discuss the 
detailed differences as they pertain to UcS. 
Discovered in 1986 by Bednorz and Mueller, Tc above 30 K in the low electronic density 
of states Ba-doped La2CuO4 (the tetragonal ‘214’ perovskite structure, with two layers 
containing La followed by a CuO2 layer, then repeat – see Fig. 15) was a definite surprise.  Until 
then, higher Tc had been sought in the high density of states A15 superconducting class (for a 
review, see Stewart [2], where the pairing is mediated by electron-phonon coupling.  The 
pathway to higher Tc in the cuprates, which are believed to have a different primary pairing 
mechanism (with some contribution from electron-phonon coupling), led initially to the 
YBa2Cu3O7- (orthorhombic ‘123’ perovskite structure with both Cu-O chains and CuO2 planes – 
see Fig. 16) but soon diverged along numerous paths.    
Rather than digress into the fascinating history of these discoveries, we simply list the 
resultant main cuprate superconductor ‘classes’ (the Bi-, Tl-, and Hg-based families: Bi2Sr2Can-

1CunO2n+4, Tl2Ba2Can-1CunO2n+4 HgBa2Can-1CunO2n+3-, n=1, 2, 3, …) - with some representative 
Tc values given in Table 4 – that were discovered after the two discovery compounds (La2-x-
MxCuO4, M=Ba,Sr,Ca and YBa2Cu3O7-) and refer the reader interested in more detail to the 
recent history of cuprate research by Chu et al. [344].  Below, after a discussion of La2-xMxCuO4 
to start the discussion of the hole doped cuprates, we discuss the ‘strongly suggestive’ pieces of 
evidence of section 2 for determining unconventional superconductivity across all the hole doped 
cuprate materials, since the properties therein are much more uniform across the classes than in 
section 4, where the heavy fermion superconductors were often entirely different from each 
other. 
 
Table 4:  Tc and number of CuO2 planes in the unit cell (all structures are tetragonal except for 
YBCO, which is orthorhombic) for some representative (data from [344]) cuprate 
superconductors.  Note the peak in Tc at n=3, noticed early by P. W. Anderson [345]. 
Compound 
Abbreviation 
Tc(K) 
n 
Year of discovery 

La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 
214 
30 
1 
1986 

YBa2Cu3O7 
123 or YBCO 
93 
2 
1987 


Bi2Sr2CuO6 
Bi-2201 
9 
1 
1987 

Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8  

 
Bi-2212 
84 
2 
1988 

Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10 

 
Bi-2223 

 
110 
3 
1988 

 Bi2Sr2Ca3Cu4O12 
Bi-2234 
90 
4 
1988 

Tl2Ba2CuO6  

 
Tl-2201 
90 
1 
1987 

Tl2Ba2CaCu2O8  

 
Tl-2212 
110 
2 
1988 

Tl2Ba2Ca2Cu3O10  

 
Tl-2223 
125 
3 
1988 

TlBa2Ca3Cu4O11  

 
Tl-1234 
104 
4 
1988 

HgBa2CuO4  

 
Hg-1201 
95 
1 
1993 

HgBa2CaCu2O6  

 
Hg-1212 
114 
2 
1993 

HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8  

 
Hg-1223 
133 
3 
1993 

HgBa2Ca3Cu4O10 
Hg-1234 
125 
4 
1993 

 
  
5.2.2.  La2-xMxCuO4, M=Ba,Sr,Ca 
 
First presented as a mixed phase BaxLa5-xCu5O5(3-) sample by Bednorz and Mueller [8], Cava et 
al. [346] refined the superconducting phase to be La2-xMxCuO4, doped with M=alkaline earth 
ions on the La site (for Ba, Tc=35 K, for Sr, Tc=30 K).  Another method to hole dope La2CuO4 is 
to use high pressure (0.3 GPa) at 600 oC to drive additional oxygen into the lattice, to form 
La2CuO4+, 0.13, with Tc=28 K.  (Schirber et al. [347]) 
 
As discussed above already, La2-xMxCuO4 has layers of CuO2 (see Fig. 15), as do all the 
cuprate superconductors, but no CuO chains, as does only the YBa2Cu3O7 class (see Fig. 16).  
Doping by alkaline earths introduces holes into the CuO2 planes.   Both the CuO2 planes, and the 
CuO chains in YBCO, are important for superconductivity. 


 
Fig. 15 (color online) (Hosono et al. [348]). This 
La2CuO4  tetragonal structure (called the T214 
phase, and also sometimes called a one layer 
cuprate structure) has two apical oxygens above and 
below the Cu (blue atom) in the center of the 
structure, and the four oxygens above and below 
these two apical oxygens  form a square and are on 
the unit cell corners.    In the electron doped R2-

xCexCuO4  structure (called the T’214 phase, not 
shown) discussed above in the text, the apical 
oxygens are missing and the four oxygens above 
and below the planes of La atoms (shown in the 
figure at the left for the T214 and in the same place 
for the T’214) are centered on the faces and not at 
the corners.  Figure reproduced with permission 
from Hosono et al., ref. [348] according to the 
license at 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fig. 16 (color online) YBCO (from S. Thiess et 
al. [349]).  The direction of the a, b, and c axes 
is the same as in Fig. 15.  There are two sheets 
of CuO2 in the a-b plane around the central Y 
atom involving the Cu2 atoms, with chains of 
Cu-O in the b-axis direction above and below 
the Ba atoms involving the Cu1 atoms.  
Reprinted figure with permission from Thiess et 
al., Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015), p. 075117. [349] 
Copyright (2015) by the American Physical 
Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since La2-xMxCuO4, M=Ba, Sr, or Ca, was the first discovered cuprate high temperature  
superconductor, this material rapidly attracted an enormous amount of experimental and 
theoretical attention.  For example, from the publication of the discovery by Bednorz and 
Mueller in June, 1986, the resonating valence bond theory [350] of Anderson appeared already in 
March, 1987.  As an index to the amount of work that has transpired in trying to understand the 
cuprates, the discovery paper has been cited ~9400 times, while the seminal theory paper of 
Anderson has been cited ~5700 times, as of the writing of this review. 
 
In the theory of Anderson, in order to capture the essential physics of superconductivity 
in La2-xMxCuO4, the focus is on the Cu d-electron orbital which, after hybridization with the O 
anions, results in a single d-band.  With the addition of on-site Coulomb repulsion with strength 
U, Anderson proposes a nearly half filled single band 2D Hubbard model (although in reality 
there is coupling between the CuO2 layers).  As reviewed by Scalapino [14], there have since 
been a large number of theoretical approaches (e. g. random phase approximations [RPA], 
renormalized mean field theory, self consistent renormalization, slave boson approximations, 
various numerical Monte Carlo approaches, and many others) to arrive at the predicted physical 
properties of such Hubbard models.   
The fundamental question in the cuprates, and indeed in all UcS, is what is the interaction 
that causes the pairing of the electrons?  One facet that *is* known is that the pairing symmetry 
in the cuprate superconductors is d-wave, from phase sensitive tunneling, ARPES, and several 


other measurement techniques as will be discussed.  At present, the consensus in the cuprates is 
that the cause of the pairing interaction remains “disputed” (Anderson [102]) and that “diverging 
views” remain (Chu et al. [344]).  There is however a pairing mechanism often mentioned in the 
cuprates (as well as in the IBS) that is certainly a strong candidate, namely the exchange of 
antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations (see the review by Scalapino [14]) rather than of virtual 
phonons as in the BCS theory.   
In this primarily experimental review, our task vis-à-vis theory is to inform the reader of 
the current state of theoretical understanding where consensus has been reached, and – after an 
introductory discussion - to provide appropriate recent references to introduce the ongoing 
debatable issues.  We now turn to the rather thorough experimental characterization of the 
superconducting properties as they shed light on UcS in the five sub-classes (La2-xMxCuO4, 
YBa2Cu3O7-, and the Bi, Tl, and Hg based compounds) representative of hole doped cuprates. 
 
5.2.3.  Discussion of phase sensitive experiments/the half-flux quantum effect 
 
Since much of the following discussion of the hole doped cuprates and their unconventional 
superconductivity focuses on their pairing symmetry being d-wave, we present the proof of d-
wave pairing by phase sensitive tunneling experiments first, somewhat out of historical order.  
As will be discussed, numerous other measurement techniques also strongly support the presence 
of d-wave pairing in the hole doped cuprates.   
In 1994, Tsuei et al. [64] developed a clever technique to determine if a superconductor has dx2-y2 
pairing symmetry.  They realized that the symmetry of a pair wave function can be probed at a 
weak link junction where the Cooper pairs tunnel through.  This is because the sign of the 
Josephson tunneling current between two putative d-wave superconducting regions joined by the 
weak link is a function of how their relative order parameters are aligned at the interface.  
 
 
 
Fig. 17:  A sketch from Tsuei et al. 
showing four YBCO rings epitaxially 
deposited on SrTiO3, where the 
SrTiO3 substrate has three crystals (1, 
2, and 3) coming together at the 
center of the diagram with the 
crystalline orientations as shown.  
Reprinted figure with permission 
from Tsuei et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 
(1994), p. 593.  [64] Copyright 
(1994) by the American Physical 
Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
In the figure is a schematic of four rings of YBCO, deposited as an epitaxial thin film on 
a SrTiO3 (perovskite structure) crystal specially manufactured such that the three adjacent grains 
(1, 2, and 3) shown had their x and y axes oriented as shown.  Using ion-milling 
photolithography techniques, four rings (ID 48 m, width 10m) were made as depicted.  One of 
the rings (over grain 1) serves as a control with no weak links.  Two of the rings (across the 1-2 
grain boundary and across the 2-3 boundary) have two weak links each where, with the epitaxy, 
the covering YBCO superconductor crystalline orientation in the ring changes at the grain 
boundary to form a weak link.  These two rings also serve as controls. The fourth ring, at the 
“tricrystal” point where 1, 2, and 3 come together, in zero field (Tsuei et al. achieved B<0.4T) 
is designed (for details, see the review by Tsuei and Kirtley [4] as well as Tsuei et al. [64]) with 
its three weak links, each one generating a phase shift of  in the superconducting current, to be 
‘frustrated’ (where one circuit around the ring does not cause a phase shift equal to an integer 
multiple of 2) for dx2-y2 pairing symmetry.  For all other pairing symmetries, including g-wave, 
Tsuei et al. were able to show different, non-frustrated behavior would obtain.   
The most measureable effect caused by a superconducting ring containing an odd number 
of  phase shifts is that – under the conditions in the Tsuei et al. design – one half of a flux 
quantum, 0/2, will be spontaneously generated.  This generation of 0/2 in Josephson junctions 
in a frustrated geometry of superconductors with unconventional pairing was first theoretically 
proposed for the heavy fermion superconductors by Geshkenbein, Larkin and Barone [351].  
Using a high resolution scanning SQUID microscope, Tsuei et al. were able to show that a 
magnetic field equivalent to one half of a flux quantum was present in the three junction central 
ring, proving conclusively that YBCO has dx2-y2 pairing symmetry.  For a scan of the fields at the 
four rings, see Fig. 18. 
 
Fig. 18 (color 
online) (from Tsuei 
Kirtley [4])  The 
tricrystal, half flux 
quantum 
experiment of Tsuei 
et al. [64] that 
showed 
conclusively that 
YBCO has dx2-y2 
pairing symmetry.  
The three outer 
rings, in this 
scanning SQUID 
microscope image of the sketched arrangement of Fig. 17, show no magnetic field, while the 
center ring, with three Josephson junctions, i. e. with frustration, shows one half of a 
superconducting quantum of flux.  The grain boundaries are along the line A-A’, and along the 
line connecting the center of the picture to C’.  Reprinted figure with permission from Tsuei and 
Kirtley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72 (2000), p. 969.  [4] Copyright (2000) by the American Physical 
Society. 


 
5.2.4.  Isotope Effect  
 
In BCS theory, the dependence of Tc on the molar mass of a superconductor is TcM-1/2.  As 
discussed in section 2.1.13., there are well known exceptions even in the elemental 
superconductors, e. g. the Tc of Ru is essentially independent of M (T. H. Geballe et al. [78]) due 
to renormalized Coulomb interaction effects. Thus, if there *is* an isotope effect, this implies 
that lattice vibrations (phonons) play some role in the microscopic mechanism for 
superconductivity.  As discussed in section 2.1.13., this does not necessarily imply that electron 
phonon coupling is responsible for the pairing interaction.  While it is clear that electron phonon 
coupling alone is not sufficient to explain the high Tc’s in the cuprates (references:  R. Heid et al. 
[352], Bohnen et al. [353], Giustino, Cohen and Louie [354]), as we will discuss there are 
models that suggest that such coupling can enhance the pairing correlations from another 
dominant interaction, e. g. spin fluctuations.  For reviews of the isotope effect in cuprates, see J. 
Franck [304] and Zhao, Keller and Conder [303]. 
 
In the case of the optimally doped cuprates, only a small isotope shift (where 16O is 
replaced by 18O or 63Cu is replaced by 65Cu),  significantly less than 0.5, is observed.  Thus, in 
general, the role of phonons for the peak high temperature superconductivity in the cuprates is 
not considered to be of primary importance [303].   As well, even for the under hole-doped 
cuprates,  behaves monotonically (except for the special case of La2-xMxCuO4) and in general 
remains too small to explain the high Tc values observed.  Despite these statements, the isotope 
effect in the hole doped cuprates has been extremely well characterized and can serve as a guide 
for efforts to characterize this effect in other UcS classes.  Thus, we describe the results in some 
detail. 
 
5.2.4.1.  Optimally hole-doped cuprates:  In optimally doped La1.85Sr0.15CuO4, Franck, Harker 
and Brewer [355] report the unsubstituted compound had Tc=37.94 K.  For isotopic substitution 
of 16O by 18O, Tc decreased by 0.41 K, to give Tc=M-, =0.10, while for substitution of 63Cu by 
65Cu, Tc decreased by 0.14 K to give =0.12, i. e. the two values for  are comparable.  This 
equality of ’s for both O and Cu isotopic substitution is important (J. P Franck [304]) to rule out 
a special role of phonons involving the oxygen atoms.  (For the case of the isotope effect being 
especially influenced by phonons involving the Fe atoms in IBS, see section 6.)   The oxygen 
substitution result was confirmed by Zhao et al. [356], with a Tc decrease of 0.52 K. 
In YBa2Cu3O7-, for an oxygen content of 6.94 and Tc=93 K (i. e. optimally doped), the 
isotope exponent  for substitution of 63Cu by 65Cu is (Zhao et al [357]) slightly negative, -0.017.   
For oxygen substitution in YBa2Cu3O7- at optimal doping, Tc~92 K and ~0.1, =0.025 (Zech 
et al. [358]).  Results for oxygen substitution in Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3Ox~10 (“2223”) (Katayama-Yoshida 
et al. [359]), Tc=110 K and in Pb stabilized 2223 (Bornemann, Morris and Liu [360]), Tc=108 K 
gave =0.03 and -0.013 respectively.   Thus, although the  exponents for optimally doped 
La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 seem small, they are four to five times larger than in optimally doped  
YBa2Cu3O7- and Bi 2223. 
 
5.2.4.2.  Under hole-doped cuprates:  The above is not to say that the isotope effect is small for 
all levels of hole doping in the cuprates.  In fact, for an oxygen content that gives Tc~50 K in 
YBCO,  exceeds 0.2 (Zech et al. [358])/0.3 (Kamiya et al. [361]) (although the variation of  
with doping remains monotonic).  A careful reexamination (Soerensen and Gygax [362]) of 18O 


doping experiments in YBCO, substituted with Pr and Ca on the Y site and Zn on the Cu site, 
called earlier results into question but concluded that the Zn-doped results were accurate.  Thus, 
 for 18O substituted YBa2(Cu1-xZnx)3O7-, with Tc suppressed by the Zn doping below 10 K is 
found to be over 0.3.    
As an interesting separate case, in La2-xSrxCuO4 as a function of Sr content  can exceed 
1 (Zhao et al. [363]) in the deeply underdoped regime, see Fig. 19.    

Fig. 19:  (color online) Isotope effect 
, from the shift in Tc from 
replacement of 16O by 18O, in La2-

xSrxCuO4 as a function of x.  (Zhao 
et al. [363]). Tc in units of K for the 
16O samples at each Sr composition 
where  was measured shown in 
red.  The non-monotonicity of Tc vs 
x (vs the smooth Tc vs x dome 
shown in the phase diagram in Fig. 
14) is partly explained by the fact 
that the data for x=0.105, 0.11, and 
0.115 are from a different work 
(Zhao et al. [364]).  Zhao et al. [363] 
– in the face of skepticism about the 
validity of their reported strong 
dependences of Tc on oxygen mass 
depicted in Fig. 19 – give convincing experimental verifications for the accuracy of their 
data.  They explain their data for x0.09 based on a polaron model of superconductivity.  
This figure is from Zhao et al. [363].  © IOP Publishing.  Reproduced with permission.  All 
rights reserved. 

 
5.2.4.3. Theory:  As an example of the development over time of theory to correctly explain the 
varied isotope results for the hole doped cuprates, the enhancement of  in La2-xSrxCuO4 around 
x=0.115 (where Tc27 K) was argued by Pickett, Cohen and Krakauer [365] to be due to strong 
anharmonicity in the phonon modes that is sensitive to the O mass – thus the peak in .  This 
explanation, which is based on a drop in the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy, 
N(0), due to an anharmonicty-driven phase transformation, assumed an electron-phonon 
coupling mechanism for superconductivity.     
More recently, Johnston et al. [366] performed calculations in a five band model for 
electron phonon coupling in the cuprates which tracked the electron phonon coupling to oxygen 
phonons.    They found that cuprates with the largest electron coupling to phonons in the B1g 
branch (the out of phase bond-buckling planar oxygen branch), which unlike isotropic phonon 
modes primarily provide d-wave (known to be dominant in the cuprates) pairing, have the largest 
Tc values.  They argued that electron phonon coupling enhances the pairing correlations provided 
by another, more dominant interaction.  Note that [366] to first order there is no electron phonon 
couping to the B1g branch phonon modes in single layer (e. g. La2-xMxCuO4) cuprates, consistent 
with (see Table 4 and Fig. 19) their lower Tc values.   


Bang [367], in results similar to Johnston et al., (see similar approaches also by 
Honerkamp, Fu and Lee, [368]; Nunner, Schmalian and Bennemann [369];  Nazarenko and 
Dagotto [370]) found that anisotropic phonon interaction (the B1g buckling phonon mode of the 
in-plane oxygen motion) can enhance d-wave pairing and therefore can enhance Tc together with 
a dominant coupling interaction that Bang assumes to be antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin 
fluctuations.   With the assumption that the electron phonon coupling strength, ph, is unchanged 
with doping and that the AFM increases with increasing doping, Bang put forward a simple 
formula for the isotope effect = ½ ph/(AFM + ph) which gives a plausible explanation of the 
behavior of the isotope effect (decreasing as doping approaches the optimal concentration/Tc) in 
the n2 cuprates (e. g. YBCO but excluding single layer La2-xMxCuO4 with its absent-to-first-
order B1g mode coupling.) 
Greco and Zeyher [371] calculate in a t-J model that the large measured  values in the 
underdoped YBCO- and Bi-based cuprates come from a shift of the electronic density of states 
from low to higher energies.  This shift is caused by a ground state (e. g. a charge density wave 
state) that competes with (rather than enhancing) the superconductivity, with the competing state 
also the source of the pseudogap.  In this approach, the large values of  for under-hole-doped 
cuprates are not evidence for strong electron phonon coupling.  When they apply their model to 
the data for  shown in Fig. 19, they propose a second pseudogap around the 1/8 doping level in 
La2-x(Ba/Sr)xCuO4 that is due to static (Ba) or fluctuating (Sr) stripes (for a discussion of charge 
and spin stripes in the cuprates, see Tranquada [372].)  This second pseudogap indeed competes 
with the superconductivity, with Tc falling to ~5 K (Huecker et al. [373]) for Ba doping at 
x=0.125 (from above ~30 K for optimally doped, x=0.155), and dipping several Kelvin (see Fig 
19) to a local minimum in Tc vs x for Sr doping at x=0.125 (Suryadijaya, Sasagawa and Takagi 
[374]).  Thus, in the model of Greco and Zeyher, the large isotope effect  in La2-x(Ba/Sr)xCuO4, 
rather than enhancing Tc, suppresses it.  
In summary, clearly the isotope effect in single layer La2-xMxCuO4 remains the exception 
amongst the cuprates.  The behavior of  for optimally hole-doped materials, n2, appears to be 
understood by numerous authors to provide evidence for electron coupling to anisotropic phonon 
(B1g oxygen) modes providing at least an enhancement in Tc over an alternative d-wave pairing 
interaction such as exchange of spin fluctuations.  
 
5.2.5.  Pseudogap 
 
A ‘pseudogap’ refers to particular observed properties above Tc in both the electron and hole 
doped cuprates (although there are differences between the two, e. g. point contact spectroscopy 
in the electron doped cuprates does not show a pseudogap).  This term was first used for the 
cuprates by J. Friedel [375].  A pseudogap is nothing more or less than a partial gap – admittedly 
that manifests itself differently in different measurements – where parts of the Fermi surface 
become gapped above the superconducting transition temperature.  Part of the justification for 
tying the pseudogap at T*>Tc with the actual superconducting gap at Tc is that the pseudogap, at 
T*>Tc, in the under doped cuprates (e. g. in under-hole-doped BiSCCO, 2212) has (Harris et al. 
[376]), with some extra smearing (“dirty d-wave” scenario) near the nodal angle, the same dx2-y2 
angular dependence as the superconducting, T<Tc, gap.   NMR data were the first (Warren et al. 
[377]), see the discussion in the review [40] by Timusk and Statt, to show evidence of this partial 
gap in the normal state. Other, later measurements including ARPES (see review by Damascelli, 
Hussain and Shen [301]), optical conductivity (see review by Basov and Timusk [378]), 


resistivity (see Fig. 20), electronic specific heat, thermoelectric power (Tallon et al. [379]), 
electronic Raman scattering (F. Slakey et al. [380] and Opel et al. [381]), and magnetic neutron 
scattering (Rossat-Mignod et al. [343]) also gave clear indications.   
 
 
Fig. 20  (color online) (Takagi et al. [382]). 
Resistivity vs temperature of an underdoped 
single crystal of La1.96Sr0.04CuO4, showing the 
decrease in the rate of rise of the resistivity with 
temperature at the onset of the pseudogap at 
T*500 K.  Data are black points; red lines are 
guides to the eye.  Reprinted figure with 
permission from Takagi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 
69 (1992), p. 2975.  [382] Copyright (1992) by 
the American Physical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although, as discussed above for the heavy fermion superconductors CeCoIn5 and URu2Si2 (and 
below for IBS and the cobaltates), there are other superconductors where evidence for a partial 
gap above Tc has been observed, the reviews that exist on the pseudogap (see, e. g., Timusk and 
Statt[40]; B. Batlogg et al. [383]; Norman, Pines and Kallin [302];  Lee [384]; the latter half of 
the article by Abrahams [288]; Rice, Yang and Zhang [39]; Fujita et al. [385]; Tallon and Loram 
[386]) all focus on the hole-doped cuprates (see the schematic sketch of the phase diagram in 
Fig. 14).   
 
 
 
The pseudogap in the cuprates remains a central focus of much research today, and 
should be named as one of the outstanding puzzles in UcS.  As Norman says in his 2012 
overview of the theory of cuprates, “the nature of the pseudogap phase is key.”  There are several 
important open questions concerning the pseudogap in the cuprates:  what is its cause, how does 
it relate to/interact with the superconducting gap, and – seemingly a straightforward, easily 
answereable question - where does T* go to zero (a potential quantum critical point) as a 
function of composition?   Concerning this last question, despite an enormous amount of data, 
there exists no consensus.  One set of experiments and analysis states that T*0 at an 
approximate hole doping of p=0.19 (e. g., see Vishik et al. [387]), somewhat past optimal doping 
(see Fig. 14).  Another set of experiments and analysis states that T* intersects the edge of the 
superconducting dome on the overdoped side (see Fig. 21).  This seeming important 
contradiction has developed with time, and relies on the evolution of analysis of data taken with 
surface techniques such as ARPES and STM.  We will now give a short review of some of the 
many various observational techniques (far more than for any other class of UcS) that 
demonstrate pseudogap behavior in the cuprates, some of which agree with Fig. 14 and some of 


which with Fig. 21.  This question of where T* intersects the x-axis in a temperature vs 
composition phase diagram has long been a point of contention, although current thinking seems 
to trend toward the scheme depicted in Fig. 14 or, more precisely, around p.=0.19. 
 

Fig. 21 (color online) 
Pseudogap (Epg=2pg) and 
superconducting energy 
gap, Esc, (in red) for a 
number of hole doped 
cuprates with Tcmax ~ 95 K 
(Bi2212, YBCO, Tl2201 
and Hg1201, see Table 4.)  
(Huefner et al. [38]).  The 
measurement methods (for 
refs. see Huefner et al.) are 
given in the righthand key:  
ARPES, Raman 
Spectroscopy (which can 

give two spectra:  B1g (antinodal) and B2g (nodal), each representing a different average over the 
Fermi surface), various tunneling spectroscopies (SIS, STM, and SIN), and Heat Conductivity 
(HC).  In addition, the energy r of the magnetic resonance (see next section) - as determined by 
Inelastic Neutron Scattering (INS) – which scales with Tc just as the superconducting energy 
gap, Esc, does is also shown (in red).  (figure is reproduced from ref. [38].   IOP 
Publishing.  Reproduced with permission.  All rights reserved.) 

 
 
5.2.5.1  ARPES:  ARPES is a very powerful tool for characterizing the partial gap in the normal 
state in the cuprates (the pseudogap), as reviewed by Damascelli, Hussain and Shen [301] and 
Vishik et al. [388].  ARPES first succeeded in detecting the cuprate pseudogap in 1996 (Marshall 
et al. [389]; Loeser et al. [390]; Ding et al. [391].)  Marshall et al., using the easily cleavable hole 
doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (2212), (as did both Loeser et al. and Ding et al.) discovered portions 
of missing Fermi surface (i. e. where a gap had opened) in underdoped samples, Tc=65-67 K,  
related to the opening of a pseudogap above Tc.  Measurements (Marshall et al.) were taken at 
110 K/100 K by Loeser et al.  For an extreme underdoped 2212 sample, Tc=10 K, Ding et al. 
found that the pseudogap extended up to at least 301 K.  In their review of ARPES in cuprates, 
Damascelli, Hussain and Shen [301] show in a plot (their Fig. 62) of T* vs composition as 
determined by various groups in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+ (the cleanest and most cleavable cuprate) that 
T* extrapolates approximately to the far (overdoped) side of the superconducting dome, 
consistent with Fig. 21.  Tallon and Loram [386] argue however that ARPES shows two gaps, 
the larger one of which (the leading edge gap) is the pseudogap (which extrapolates to the 
composition axis, T*0, at approximately p=0.19) and the smaller one of which is associated 
with the superconducting gap (which joins together with the superconducting dome in the 
overdoped regime).  In a more recent comprehensive review of ARPES, tunneling, resistivity, 
NMR and other measurement techniques on Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+, Vishik et al. [387] show a plot of 


T* determined by these measurements.  From a consideration of the higher temperature data, T* 
extrapolates to the overdoped end of the superconducting dome as shown in Fig. 21.  However, 
the low temperature determined T* data bend backwards under the superconducting dome 
(similar to TStructural in Co-doped BaFe2As2 discussed below for IBS in section 6.1) and approach 
0 at p=0.19. 
 
It is fair to say that ARPES measurements, along with tunneling discussed below, have 
been at the forefront at trying to unravel both the important pseudogap-related questions:  the 
correct, intrinsic behavior of the pseudogap and the relationship between the pseudogap and the 
superconducting gap.  Although this effort is far from complete, recent STM (discussed below in 
section 5.2.5.3) work is providing important clues.  
 
To finish the section on ARPES investigation of the pseudogap in hole-doped cuprates, 
Fig. 22a shows, in one quadrant of the Brillouin zone, ARPES data for a partially (pseudo-) 
gapped Fermi surface (“Fermi arc”) at T>Tc, while Fig. 22b shows a continuous Fermi surface 
measured at T<Tc. 
 
 

 

Fig 22:  (color online)  a.) A graph of the ARPES spectral intensity (color coded from low [blue], 
through green then yellow and high is represented by brown) in one quadrant of the first 
Brillouin zone (lower left 0,0 to upper right , is the nodal direction) showing the missing 
portions of the T>T* Fermi surface, where the pseudogap has opened along the anti-nodal 
direction 0, to ,0.  The sample is Ca1.9Na0.1CuO2Cl2, Tc=13 K, data taken (Shen and Davis 
[392] at 15 K.  The black outline shows the area in k-space where measurements were made.  b.) 
ARPES spectral intensity (from blue [low] to yellow then red and finally white) for 
Tl2Ba2CuO6+, with  adjusted to give Tc=30 K, also in one quadrant of the first Brillouin zone 
showing a complete presence of electron density at the Fermi surface.  The quarter circle black 
line is a tight binding fit of the data.  Data were taken (Platé et al. [393]) at 10 K.  The lower left 
corner in both plates is the 0,0 zone origin; the upper right is the , point.  Fig. 22 a:  Reprinted 
from Materials Today, vol. 11, K. M. Shen and J. C. Davis, p. 14, Copyright (2008), with 


permission from Elsevier.  Fig. 22b:  Reprinted figure with permission from Platé et al., Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 95 (2005), p. 077001.  [393] Copyright (2005) by the American Physical Society. 

5.2.5.2.  NMR:  While ARPES provides evidence for the opening of a pseudogap in the charge 
channel, NMR is sensitive to behavior in the spin channel.  Warren et al. [377] found a sharp 
decrease in the spin lattice relaxation rate 1/T1 (called a ‘spin’ gap) at T*=100 K in the 
underdoped, 60 K superconductor YBa2Cu3O6.7.  This first indication of a pseudogap was called 
a ‘precursor’ effect, which seems quite descriptive as a harbinger of the opening of the full 
superconducting gap.  For a short review of NMR in the cuprates, with a table of T* values for 
various cuprates determined from the point where the spin relaxation rate drops precipitously 
upon cooling, see Kotegawa et al. [394].  Timusk and Statt [40], in their Fig. 22, summarize 
Knight shift and 1/T1 data for a broad range of hole doped cuprates, and state that the line 
through the determined pseudogap T* values merges into the Tc dome “slightly into the 
overdoped region of the phase diagram.”  This is essentially consistent with Fig. 14, and also 
agrees with Knight shift data on eight different hole concentrations in Y0.8Ca0.2Ba2Cu3O7-δ 
presented by Tallon and Loram [386].   

5.2.5.3. Tunneling Spectroscopy:  Because of the short coherence length in cuprate 
superconductors (e. g. ~25 Å in the a-b plane, 2-3 Å in the c-direction, in YBCO – similar in 
BiSCCO), the need for clean surfaces restricted the application of this technique for a number of 
years to the easily cleavable 2212 BiSCCO kept under ultra high vacuum conditions.  Tao, Lu 
and Wolf [395] reported a gap in the tunneling conductance in the normal state, T*=110-150 K, 
in 2212 BiSCCO, Tc=85-90 K.  Qualitatively, the dI/dV vs V data show a dip in the conductivity 
at zero bias, with two symmetrically placed conductance peaks at about 40 mV, for T<Tc.  In 
the normal state, the peaks disappear but a reduced dip of the conductance remains.   The width 
of this conductance dip (or the size of the pseudogap) is temperature independent from T* down 
to Tc, unlike the behavior of a real superconducting gap.  

The cause of this pseudogap, both in the tunneling conductance and in the other 
measurement techniques discussed here, has been a question of key theoretical interest.  One 
proposal is that the pseudogap was a precursor (the nomenclature used by Warren et al. in 
discussing their NMR data) to the full superconductivity that occurs at lower temperature, with 
‘preformed’ (incoherent) Cooper pairs at T* but no phase coherence/no diamagnetic fluctuations 
above Tc ( see the review by M. Norman [396]).  Gomes et al. [397], using STM on several 
dopings of BiSCCO 2212, find that pairing gaps nucleate in nanoscale regions above Tc.  For 
underdoped samples, they find that such pairing occurs well below T* and that the broad dip in 
the STM-measured conductance starting at T* is a second energy scale unrelated to 
superconducting pairing.  Nernst effect measurements (Wang, Li and Ong [398]) corroborate this 
point of view, with the onset of the Nernst signal (indicating vortex excitations  
superconducting pairing) lying between the superconducting dome and the T* line in both 2212 
BiSSCO and in LSCO.   As a related piece of information for what the second energy scale could 
be, Valla et al. [399], using photoemission and STM, find that the pseudogap phase in La2-

xBaxCuO4, x=1/8 (where static spin and charge orders – ‘stripes’ – form and Tc is suppressed to 
T=0) has an energy gap at the Fermi energy consistent with a phase incoherent d-wave 
superconductor, but that the Cooper pairs form spin-charge ordered structures instead of 
superconducting pairs. 


As seen in Fig. 21, T* determined from tunneling (and other) determinations of the 
pseudogap from 2008 and before extrapolates to the high end of the superconducting dome.  
Tallon and Loram [386], similarly to the discussion above (section 5.2.5.1) of the ARPES data, 
argue for two gaps in the tunneling data, the higher one of which in their view corresponds to the 
pseudogap and which extrapolates with composition somewhere around the middle of the 
superconducting dome.  More recent STM work tends to argue that T* of the pseudogap more 
likely joins the superconducting dome just past optimal doping, see, e. g., [400].  

In addition, recent work (K. Fujita et al. [401]) has revealed further information:  that the 
cuprate pseudogap phase involves a new charge density state with a d-symmetry form factor.  
(These charge modulations were first seen by STM in 2002 (Hoffman et al. [402].)    Recent 
work (S. Badoux et al. [403]) suggests, in the hole doped cuprates, that this pseudogap phase is 
distinct from the charge ordering.   
Finding how this fluctuating charge ordering relates to the pseudogap and the 
superconductivity (see Huxley [404] for a discussion) is clearly one of the future foci in 
investigating pseudogap physics in the cuprates. 

5.2.5.4.  Specific Heat  The specific heat displays evidence for the cuprate pseudogap in several 
ways.  When the doping level is at or above optimal doping, the jump in the specific heat at Tc, 
C, is approximately 1 times the normal state electronic specific heat, as expected (D. Einzel 
[405) for a d-wave superconductor.  When the doping falls below optimal, this C starts to fall 
precipitously (see Fig. 23).  Second, the extrapolation of the normal state electronic specific heat 
from above Tc to T=0, which is defined as  (Cen(T0)) also starts to decrease in size (see Fig. 
23) below optimal doping, where  is proportional to the electronic density of states at the Fermi 
energy.  Third, the normal state entropy from above Tc should extrapolate to 0, which it does 
until the doping decreases below optimal in the cuprates.  At this point Sn begins to extrapolate to 
a negative (unphysical) value – indicating a decrease in low energy spectral weight. 

 
Tallon and Loram [386] plot T* determined from the normal state specific heat vs hole 
doping p for Y0.8Ca0.2Ba2Cu3O7-.  The values go all the way to zero at p=0.19.   


Fig. 23:  Normal and     
superconducting state electronic 
specific heat, Cc, for 
YBa2(Cu0.98Zn0.02)3O6+x, 0.80  x  
0.97 (J.W. Loram et al [43]).  Note 
how the extrapolation of the 
normal state, T>Tc, Ce/T to T=0 
decreases for x=0.83 and 0.80 
compared to the higher oxygen 
doped samples.  Also, C/Tc 
clearly shrinks very rapidly with 
decreasing x for the underdoped 
samples.  Both properties are 
consistent with a pseudogap which, 
as we have seen from the ARPES 
data, is accompanied by a decrease 
in the electronic density of states at 
the Fermi energy.  Reprinted from 
J. Phys. Chem. Solids, vol 62, J.  
W. Loram et al., p. 59, copyright 
(2001) [43], with permission from 
Elsevier. 

5.2.5.5.  Optical Measurements  Evidence for a pseudogap in, e. g., YBa2Cu4O8 (Tc=82 K, 
naturally underdoped) and in underdoped YBa2Cu3O6.6 (Tc=59 K) is found in the scattering rate 
and far infrared conductivity along the c-axis direction determined from the optical reflectance 
(Basov et al. [406]).  For example, there is a gaplike depression (sharp decrease from linear with 
frequency) in 1/ at around 750 cm-1 in the normal state, T=85 K, for YBa2Cu4O8 (Timusk and 
Statt [40]).  Tallon and Loram [386] discuss infrared conductivity data for Y0.8Ca0.2Ba2Cu3O7- 
and point out that such data combine two gaps, that from the pseudogap and that from the 
superconducting gap.  At higher hole doping, they say that the IR conductivity data is dominated 
by the superconducting gap, and thus a plot of T* joins the overdoped side of the 
superconducting dome and goes to zero at the high doping end of the dome when Tc0. 

5.2.5.6.  Pseudogap Summary:  The phenomenon of a pseudogap in the underdoped cuprates is 
observed by a number of different types of measurements (in both spin – e. g. NMR – and charge 
– e. g. ARPES – channels) – a far richer set of observations of this phenomenon that in any other 
class of UcS.  See Fig. 21 for a summary of values measured for T* and Tc in a select subset of 
the hole doped cuprates where T* merges with the superconducting gap in the strongly 
overdoped regime.   
As is apparent, some of the above set of data (e. g. NMR) for the pseudogap and the data 
shown in Fig. 21 are contrary to the T* line extrapolating to zero near p=0.19 as shown in Fig. 
14.  Measurements that give the Fig. 14 result, implying the possibility of a quantum critical 
point under the superconducting dome, in addition to the data discussed above, include polarized 
elastic neutron diffraction in (Y,Ca)Ba2Cu3O6+x (B. Fauqué et al. [407]) and HgBa2CuO4+ (Li et 
al. [408]), polar Kerr effect in YBCO, where T* is found  below Tc (J. Xia et al. [409]), and 


resonant ultrasound spectroscopy in YBCO (Shekhter et al. [410])  For a review of these 
pseudogap measurements consistent with the plot in Fig. 14, see K. Fujita et al. [385]. 
To make clear that the question of where T*0 is still open, there are ARPES data 
(Kondo et al. [411]) on (Bi;Pb)2(Sr;La)2CuO6+ (Bi2201) which appear to show conclusively that 
T* in this cuprate joins the horizontal axis above where the superconducting dome goes to zero 
on the overdoped side. 

The proposed theories for explaining the cuprate pseudogap are still under discussion.  
(for a review, see Scalapino [14])  In any case, the pseudogap is related to the real 
superconducting gap, having the same d-wave symmetry, however with the difference that the 
size of the pseudogap is temperature independent.   

5.2.6. Neutron Spin Resonance 

As discussed above for the electron doped cuprates, a narrow-in-energy (resolution limited) 
resonance that is magnetic in nature has been observed in the superconducting state in the 
neutron scattering data for the hole doped cuprates.  This resonance - peaked at the 
antiferromagnetic wavevector - was first discovered in bilayer YBCO, Tc=91 K by Rossat 
Mignot et al. [321].  Such a resonance, where the resonance energy scales with Tc, was later 
reported for 2212 BiSCCO, also bilayer, (Fong et al.[412]), and single layer Tl2Ba2CuO6+ (He et 
al. [413]), - but not in single layer La2-xSrxCuO4 (Eschrig [29]).  (For a discussion of the 
difference between the neutron scattering data in La2-xSrxCuO4 and the other hole doped 
cuprates, see Birgeneau et al. [414] and Eschrig [29]).   This neutron spin resonance in YBCO, 
2212 BiSCCO, and Tl2Ba2CuO6+ is thought to be associated with the pairing boson – magnetic 
instead of phononic - for the high temperature superconductivity because the energy of the 
resonance r (see Fig. 21) scales with Tc just as the superconducting gap Esc does.   For 
discussion of the implications of the neutron spin resonances seen in the hole doped cuprates, see 
the aforementioned reviews by Eschrig [29] and Birgeneau et al. [414]. 

5.2.7.  Power Law 

Most experimental characterization of cuprates does not focus on non-exponential temperature 
dependences of measured quantities as evidence for UcS nearly as much as in the heavy 
fermions, instead focusing on the properties just discussed above.  However, some data do exist 
in the literature, and will be discussed here.  For a review, see Tsuei and Kirtley [4]. 

 
Penetration depth data on optimally doped YBCO (Hardy et al. [415]) show that ~T 
(indicative of line nodes in a clean d-wave superconductor, Table 1) between 3 and 20 K.  The 
thermal conductivity of the hole doped cuprates (e. g. for optimally doped and Zn-doped YBCO 
Taillefer et al. [416]) finds /T = a + bT2.  Originally the size of ‘a’ was thought to be universal 
for the hole doped cuprates, consistent with calculations for a gap with d-wave symmetry.  More 
recent work (Sun et al. [417]) has shown a breakdown of this universality, stressing the 
importance of electronic inhomogeneities in understanding .   

In some classes of superconductors, the temperature dependence of the NMR 1/T1 spin 
lattice relaxation time deep in the superconducting state can be used (see Table 1 above) to 


distinguish point vs line nodes (see discussion for the heavy fermions, where 1/T1 behaves 
typically as T3, or indicative of line nodes).  In the cuprates (see also discussion for electron 
doped PLCCO above), however, the temperature dependences of NMR and NQR measurements 
are not so simple and are typically (see, e. g., data by Corey et al. [418] on YBa2Cu4O8) fit to 
model calculations over a broad temperature range (see, e. g., the model by Pines and Wróbel 
[419]) for d-wave superconductivity. 

Determinations of power laws in the electronic component of the specific heat in the 
cuprates are also not of the same utility as for some other classes of UcS.  This is because of 
impurity effects (Schottky anomaly) dominating the low temperature C/T (specific heat divided 
by temperature) in all but the purest samples of, e. g., YBCO (Revaz et al. [420]).  Celectronic  
T2 , with a coefficient  of ~0.2 mJ/molK3 (quite small!), was found in YBCO (Junod et al. 
[421]) in the low field limit.  In the high field, low temperature limit C  TB1/2 [421] – see 
theory papers on the specific heat of d-wave superconductors with line nodes by Volovik [422] 
and Kuebert and Hirschfeld [423].  (We will revisit this subject when discussing the IBS below.)    

5.2.8.  Breaking of Time Reversal Symmetry: Polar Kerr Effect or SR measured spontaneous 
appearance of an internal magnetic field below Tc 
 
Xia et al. [409] report a polar Kerr effect (and breaking of time reveral symmetry) *above* Tc 
near the pseudogap temperature T* in underdoped YBCO.  At optimally doped YBCO, the onset 
of the polar Kerr effect is below Tc.  Since the time reveral symmetry is not broken *at* Tc, this 
is not evidence for UcS.  Thus, the behavior of the polar Kerr effect (occurring above Tc) is 
different in YBCO than in the heavy fermion superconductors. 

 
5.2.9. Superconductivity is extremely sensitive to impurities, non-magnetic as well as magnetic 
 
YBCO has been shown to be extremely sensitive to Zn substitution on the Cu site, e. g. the Tc for 
pure YBCO is suppressed from 92 K to ~50 K for YBa2Cu2.9Zn0.1O7-.  (Chien, Wang and Ong 
[424])  However, even though Zn is a priori a spinless dopant, it has been shown (Bobroff et al. 
[425]) that Zn (as well as Li) substituted on the Cu site causes local moments on its near 
neighbor Cu atoms.  This is also the case for Al substitution for Cu in La1.85Sr0.15CuO4, where Tc 
is suppressed at the rate of 23 K/%Al.  (Ishida et al. [426]). Thus, just as in the heavy fermion 
superconductors, it is difficult to achieve non-magnetic doping in the highly correlated cuprates.  
However, when the Tc suppression from the induced moments is calculated [426], it is almost a 
factor of 40 smaller than the measured suppression, and the anisotropy of the d-wave order 
parameter is understood theoretically as the dominant cause of the strong scattering effect on Tc. 
 
5.2.10.  C(H,theta) 

As will be discussed for IBS, and as has been discussed above for CeCoIn5, angle resolved 
specific heat in field can graphically display the nodal structure of UcS.  Although many 
measurements for the cuprates give clear evidence for dx2-y2 pairing symmetry, with the 
accompanying nodal structure, C(H,) measurements in the cuprates have been less successful – 
presumably due to the low temperature magnetic impurities (see section 5.2.7.) above).  For 


example, measurements by Park and Salamon [427] were unable to resolve the expected 4 fold 
variation with  in C(H,) for YBCO. 

5.2.11.  Specific heat  varies as H1/2 in the Superconducting State: 

As already discussed in section 2.1.15., Moler et al. [81] did the original ‘proof’ of lines of nodes 
in the gap (theory by Volovik) in YBCO, showing that H1/2.   The problem with that as an 
indication of UcS is that a field dependence close to the Volovik H1/2 prediction can be obtained 
for superconductors with two fully gapped bands [83].  The original work by Moler et al. was 
improved upon later in better samples of YBCO by Wang et al. [428], who also used the 
powerful technique of scaling to convincingly show the presence of line nodes. 

 
In addition to the superconducting properties of the hole-doped cuprates as they pertain to 
UcS, the question of quantum criticality (section 2.1.2.) is of interest.  Due to the high critical 
fields of the hole-doped cuprates, measurement of non-Fermi liquid behavior in the normal state 
resistivity down to low temperatures is rare. 

5.2.12.  Superconductivity forms out of a non-Fermi liquid normal state, implying that quantum 
critical fluctuations are involved in the Cooper pairing. 
 
Cooper et al. [429] found  = 0 + AT,  within 0.1 of 1.0, in La2-xSrxCuO4 around the optimal 
doping at x=0.19 that extends above Tc up to 200 K.  Measurements in 48 T to suppress 
superconductivity were performed in one sample, x=0.23, and found linear-with-T behavior 
down to below 2 K (lowest temperature of measurement).  For various reasons, including that the 
T-linear behavior of the resistivity extends over a fairly broad composition range (0.18  x  
0.28), this non-Fermi liquid behavior is not typical of the known behavior (see Stewart [24]) 
around a quantum critical point. (~2)  Similar results (R. Daou et al. [430]) in a lower Tc (~20 
K) doped sample of La1.6-xNd0.4SrxCuO4 in a 35 T applied field found linear in T resistivity 
between 2 (lowest temperature of measurement) and 25 K. 
 
 
5.2.13.  Summary 

Now that the cuprates (electron- and hole-doped) have been (briefly in relation to the extant body 
of knowledge) discussed, we see that indeed the cuprates offer an important additional set of 
properties bearing on the overall question of UcS beyond what is seen with heavy fermion 
superconductors.   Most importantly, the broad range of properties in the cuprates that show 
pseudogap behavior (from ARPES to specific heat to even the polar Kerr effect) makes the rather 
sparse indications of a pseudogap in just two heavy Fermion compounds (CeCoIn5 and URu2Si2) 
seem – in comparison - both qualitatively and quantitatively uncharacteristic of that class of 
materials.   Secondly, the proof of d-wave pairing in the cuprates by phase sensitive 
measurements – despite CeCoIn5, URu2Si2, and others heavy fermion compounds having 
convincing evidence for d-wave symmetry – is lacking for the heavy fermion superconducting 
class.  Thirdly, the large body of knowledge on the isotope effect (or sometimes the lack thereof) 
in the cuprates provides important insight for the theorists into the superconducting pairing 
mechanisms that is totally lacking in the heavy fermion superconductors with their lower ( 2.3 
K in CeCoIn5) Tc’s.  (Although PuCoGa5, Tc=18.5 K, and PuRhGa5, Tc=8.7 K, have higher Tc 


values, their  values do not really qualify them as ‘heavy’ Fermion systems.  Plus, the problems 
of substitution using the extremely radioactive Pu isotopes and the attendant Tc decay with time 
(Tc ~ -0.5 K/month) due to self-irradiation damage effects [431] seem insurmountable obstacles 
to determining the isotope effect accurately enough.) 

 
In terms of puzzles that remain unsolved in the cuprates, certainly that of the provenance 
of the pseudogap, about which so much experimentally is known, - together with convincingly 
explaining the pairing mechanism for the superconductivity – must be rated number one.  The 
many differences between Lax-2(Sr,Ba)xCuO4 and the other hole doped cuprates also certainly 
need to be further understood. 

Table 5:  Strong Indications of UcS in the hole-doped cuprates 
 
 
    1 
 2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
13 
   
14 

 
TF << 
D 
   
QC 
Spin 
res 
PG T 
>1 sc 
phase 
Phase 
sens. 
tunneling  
 non-
BCS 

TRSB 
Tc/non-
mag 
imp 

C(H,
) 
(H,) 

Lack of 
isotope 
effect 

resi

dual 
lar
ge 

hole-doped 
cuprates 
 
~      
  
  
 
     
   
    ~ 
       
Opt. 
doped


   
 

 

6.  Iron Based Superconductors 

6.1.  Introduction 

What the community considers to be iron based superconductors (IBS) involves 
superconductivity in iron 3d electrons, not just superconductivity in a compound that contains 
iron such as Th7Fe3, Tc=1.8 K discovered in 1961 (Matthias, Compton and Corenzwit [432]) or 
Lu2Fe3Si5 discovered in 1980 (Tc=6.1 K) (H. F. Braun [433]).  Although the modern IBS are 
commonly traced back to the discovery by Kamihara et al. [434] in 2008 of Tc=26 K in 
LaFeAsO1-xFx, in fact the first discovery of superconductivity in an iron pnictide was at the less 
exciting Tc=5 K in LaFePO [435].  Both these compounds belong to the so-called ‘1111’ family 
(see Table 6 below), named after the stoichiometry of the principle constituents. (And, of course, 
the first example of superconductivity in iron 3d electrons is iron itself under pressure, with Tc at 
the even lower value of 2 K at 21 GPa (Shimizu et al. [436]).   

 
IBS since their rapid emergence starting in 2008 have continued to bring new interesting 
physics, with some of the important problems being related to unusual charge and spin ordering 
(stripes).  Like in the cuprates (see Fig. 14), there is often magnetism in the phase diagram in the 
various families (listed below in Table 6) of IBS.  In fact, the IBS may be even more influenced 
by magnetism and magnetic fluctuations since – unlike in the cuprates - there are families (the 


122, the doped 11’s, and the 122* (also called 245’s)) where magnetism is coexistent with 
superconductivity (see the representative phase diagram for Co-doped 122 BaFe2As2 in Fig. 24.)  

There are numerous overviews on both experiment and theory for the IBS, for example 
see reviews by Johnston [437], Paglione and Greene [438], Stewart [30], Hirschfeld, Mazin and 
Korshunov [439], Hosono and Kuroki [27], Chang et al. [440], Hosono et al. [348].  

 

Fig. 24 (color online) Nandi et al. [441].     
As Co is doped on the Fe site in BaFe2As2, 
the structural (tetragonal orthorhombic) 
and antiferromagnetic phase transitions at 
TS and TN respectively split apart (both are 
about 138 K at x=0) and decrease in 
temperature until they intersect the 
superconducting dome at around the 
maximum Tc (currently 27 K, J S Kim et 
al. [442] at ‘optimal doping’).  The 
retrograde behavior of TS with x below Tc  
is caused [441] by magnetoelastic coupling 
between nematic magnetic fluctuations and 
the lattice.  (For a discussion of the theory 
of nematic order in IBS, see ref. [443].  
The superconductivity competes with the 
time-dependent magnetic order (Pratt et al. 
[444]), which allows the lattice to transform back to tetragonal as the sample at optimal doping is 
cooled below Tc.  Reprinted figure with permission from Nandi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 
(2010), p. 057006.  [441] Copyright (2010) by the American Physical Society. 

    

In addition, just like in the cuprates there are numerous reviews on just one aspect of IBS, see, e. 
g., the review on neutron scattering (Dai [445]), the recent collection of topical reviews in 
Comptes Rendus Physique [446] and the earlier collection of topical reviews in Reports on 
Progress in Physics [447].  Each review presents a snapshot of the current status at that time of 
IBS.  Unfortunately for the timelessness of the reviews, this status keeps evolving almost yearly.   
For example, several new families (see Table 6 below) of IBS have appeared since the earliest 
reviews in 2010, i. e. the 122* (defect structure of the 122 structural family – sometimes called 
the 245 family) was discovered in early 2011, the 10-3-8 and 10-4-8 families in late 2011 and the 
112 family (monoclinic Ca1-xLaxFeAs2, Tc=34 K, Katayama et al. [448]) was discovered in 2013.  
Even since the middle of 2015, the statement of Hosono and Kuroki [27] that Tc in the 1111 
family remains below 10 K except for the “iron oxy-arsenides” has been at least questioned in 
one paper in early 2016 by an  

Table 6:  Tc and structure for eight prototypical IBS.  Hosono and Kuroki [27] note two 
additional IBS families achieved by intercalation:  NH3 and alkali metal co-intercalation in FeSe, 


and 11-derived 1111.  Note that Tc for bulk IBS maxed out already at 56 K in less than a year 
after the discovery of Tc=26 K by Kamihara et al. [434].  According to band structure 
calculations, the five Fe 3-d orbits dominate the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy 
of this class of superconductor, thus the name ‘iron based’ is appropriate. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

unconfirmed report of a new sub-family of the 1111’s involving nitrogen, ThFeAsN, Tc=30 K 
(C. Wang et al. [460]).  The recent theoretical review by Hirschfeld [461] talks about “many . . . 
fascinating problems” still to be solved in the field of IBS.  Even some problems thought to be 
solved (just as discussed above for the heavy Fermion CeCu2Si2) (Kittaka et al. [50]), e. g. the 
quantum critical point and accompanying divergent effective mass (Walmsley et al. [462]) in 
BaFe2As2-xPx at x=0.3 have been called into question [445] by the recent result that the magnetic 
order being suppressed there in the phase diagram is weakly first order, i. e. inconsistent with 
quantum criticality.    

Compound 
Abbreviation/Structure 
Tc(K) 
Discovery 
references  

 LaFeAsO1-xFx 
 Gd0.8Th0.2FeAsO 
1111/tetragonal 
26 
56 
2008 
2008 
[434] 
[449] 

 Ba1-xKxFe2As2 
122/tetragonal 
38 
2008 
[450] 

LiFeAs  

 
111/tetragonal 
18 
2008 
[451] 

 FeSe 
11/tetragonal 
8 
2008 
[452] 

Sr2ScO3FeP  

 Sr2VO3FeAs 

21311,42622/tetragonal
17 
37.2 
2009 
2009 
[453] 
[454] 

K0.8Fe1.6Se2  

 
122*,245/tetragonal 
32 
2011 
[455] 

(Ca0.85La0.15FeAs)10Pt3As8 
(CaFeAs)10Pt4As8 
10-3-8/triclinic 
10-4-8/tetragonal 
34.6 
38 
2012 
2011 
[456] 
[457-458] 

 
Ca1-xLaxFeAs2 
 Ca1-xLaxFeAs2-ySby 

 

112/monoclinic 
34 
47 
2013 
2014 
[448] 
[459] 


 
In addition to the continuing discoveries in bulk IBS, much recent work [463] starting in 
2012 has been spent on interfacial superconductivity involving monolayer FeSe (Tc=8 K in bulk 
form) on SrTiO3 (see section 13.3. below).  The Tc has been pushed as high as 109 K in single 
layer FeSe on SrTiO3 (Ge et al. [464]).  Although the measurement tools discussed above in 
section 2 mostly do not function in monolayer films, ARPES (Lee et al. [465]), STM and other 
measurements have generated conflicting theoretical explanations for the high Tc in FeSe on 
SrTiO3, including a simple s-wave pairing symmetry (Fan et al. [466]).  In addition to the 
monolayer FeSe interfacial superconductivity work, 2 dimensional techniques have been used on 
epitaxial 10 nm insulating films of FeSe, where a gating voltage causes superconductivity 
starting at 35 K.  (Hanzawa et al. [467]) 
 
Thus, cognizant of the continuing vibrant development of the IBS, the current review 
focuses on a broad overview of the unconventionality of these superconductors – which 
definitely need to be discussed in any review of UcS.  We present the evidence for UcS in the 
bulk IBS, which join the HFS and the cuprates as clearly unconventional in their 
superconductivity.  We will organize this section by the measurement techniques implying UcS – 
as done above for the cuprates – rather than individual materials as done for the HFS. 
 
6.2. Gap Structure 
 
Presenting a finalized overview of UcS in the IBS is somewhat hampered by the ongoing 
discussion of the gap structure.  Early on, Mazin and co-workers (Mazin et al. [468]) proposed 
s symmetry, based on the exchange of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations (a repulsive 
interaction) between different parts of the Fermi surface with opposite signs for the gap function 
(k) (see the simple depiction in Fig. 25, see also Chubukov [469]) in momentum space.  
Neutron 
 
 
 
Fig. 25 (color online) On the left, schematic of 
the nodeless s gap symmetry proposed for IBS 
by Mazin et al. [468]. The hole pocket is in red at 
the center  point (0,0) with energy gap +, 
while the electron pockets are in blue at the 
corner M (,) points with energy gap -.  The 
spin density wave momentum wave vector Q 
spans the two nested pockets.  This repulsive 
interaction is theorized to mediate attractive 
pairing in IBS.  On the right, s gap symmetry 
with nodes (where the sign of the gap changes 
from – to + at the intersecton of the red and blue 
lines) on the corner M electron pockets.  One of 
the 8 ‘accidental’ nodes is indicated. 
 
 
 


scattering experiments have established the presence of strong magnetic fluctuations in most of 
the IBS, even in compounds such as FeSe (Q. Wang et al. [470]) which have no long range 
order.    

 
As shown, the s gap symmetry on the left in Fig. 25 has no nodes, which are not 
required by symmetry to be present in an s superconductor.  Nodes (shown in the right 
diagram) may be present in the structure of one or more of the pockets in s, but come from 
details of the pairing interaction.  Because such nodes in an s superconductor are not dictated 
by symmetry, theorists call these nodes ‘accidental.’ 

 
There are some exceptions where experimental evidence suggests d-wave gap symmetry 
in the IBS.  For example, see Tafti et al. [471] and Reid et al. [472] in heavily overdoped 122 
Ba1-xKxFe2As2, x>0.8, Tafti et al. and Reid et al.  However, a recent work (Kim et al. [473]), with 
a painstaking analysis of low temperature specific heat for x up to 0.91 in Ba1-xKxFe2As2, 
indicates still the possibility of deep minima – 0.2 to 0.4 K in temperature units - rather than true 
nodal behavior.  In any case, it is probably fair to say that the consensus is that spin-fluctuations 
mediate the pairing and are the cause of superconductivity, i. e. s gap structure obtains in the 
IBS. Some of the first data consistent with this were NMR measurements in all the IBS families 
which show a lack of a peak (the Hebel-Schlichter coherence peak consistent with simple s-
wave) in 1/T1 (the spin lattice relaxation time) just below Tc.  Parker et al. [474] offer a 
theoretical discussion of why the lack of this coherence peak is consistent with nodeless s gap 
structure (Fig. 25).   

For spin singlet (s- or d-wave) pairing, the spin susceptibility part of the NMR Knight 
shift should decrease to zero below Tc in all crystalline directions - thus ruling out triplet (p- or f-
wave, i. e. spin triplet pairing.)  As discussed in the review by Stewart [30], such a decrease in 
the NMR Knight shift below Tc has been measured in the IBS families.  However, it is also the 
case that the view that all the evidence for sign changes in the gap structure (see discussion 
below) has another explanation and that s++ pairing mediated by orbital fluctuations (Kontani 
and Onari [475], Onari and Kontani [476]) is the correct gap structure/pairing mechansim for 
IBS continues to be espoused by some.   As concluded in the review of Hosono and Kuroki [27], 
“existing theories all confront some kind of difficulties.”  Thus, we begin our detailed discussion 
of UcS in the IBS below with two experimental indications of sign changes in the gap (INS and 
tunneling), and then consider the other ‘strongly suggestive evidences’ of UcS outlined above in 
section 2.  We perforce leave the resolution of the interminable debate of the pairing mechanism 
(unconventional in either the s or the s++ case) to the future.   

6.2.1.  Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) – consistent with s 

Inosov, in his review [477], says that neutron spin resonance measurements are not 
straightforward proof of a sign change in the gap, and the two scenarios of s++ vs s are 
“difficult to disentangle.”    Dai, in his review [445] states that this spin resonance “can arise” 
from sign reversed quasiparticle excitations in an s superconductor. Observations of a narrow 
peak in the neutron scattering intensity in the superconducting state, which is typically taken as 
consistent with a sign change in the gap function somewhere on the Fermi surface, have been 
made (see Table 4 in Stewart [30] and references therein) in Co and Ni doped BaFe2As2, 


FeSe0.5Te0.5, Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2, LaFeAsO1-xFx and BaFe2(As0.65P0.35)2, with the observed ratio of 
the resonance energy, Er, to kBTc about 5, just as in the cuprates, where this resonance is a sign of 
the sign change in the d-wave symmetry gap.  More recent work (Q. Wang et al. [470]) has 
found a similar sharp resonance in FeSe (which has no long range magnetic order) below Tc with 
Er/kBTc also about 5. As reported by Knolle et al. [478], their INS results for 111 LiFeAs are 
more “ambiguous,” and do not display a true resonance mode – making the choice in LiFeAs 
between s and s++ more difficult. 

6.2.2.  Phase sensitive tunneling/STM/STS  s 

Phase sensitive tunneling was instrumental in proving that cuprates have UcS.  A good quality of 
the junction is important, and difficult to achieve in the IBS.  A clever work-around was carried 
out by Chen et al. [479].  Using a polycrystalline sample of NdFeAsO doped with fluorine, 
Tc=46 K, they formed a superconducting loop with Nb with multiple junctions.  The observance 
of half-integer flux quantization in this loop for some junctions is convincing evidence for a sign 
change in the superconducting order parameter of the 1111 sample.  Since Hicks et al. [480] 
performed STM measurements on a similar NdFeAsO1-xFx, Tc=48 K, sample and ruled out a 
strong d-wave component, Chen et al. argue that the sum of their and Hicks et al.’s results argue 
for a sign change s gap structure.   
 
Since the work of Chen et al., other researchers have done tunneling work in further IBS 
– all concluding that their data favor the s gap structure:  directional point contact Josephson 
effect in Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 (Tortello et al. [481]); STM in LiFeAs (Chi et al. [482]); STS in Co-
doped BaFe2As2 (Teague et al. [483]); point contact Andreev reflection in Co-doped BaFe2As2 
(Tortello et al. [484]);  STM in FeSe0.4Te0.6 (Hoffman [485]) and Hanaguri et al. [486]). 
 
6.3.  Superconductivity forms out of a non-Fermi liquid normal state, implying that quantum 
critical fluctuations are involved in the Cooper pairing.   
 
As apparent from the sample phase diagram in Fig. 24 for Co-doped BaFe2As2, there are 
examples of IBS where a second order antiferromagnetic transition is suppressed to T=0 by 
doping, raising the possibility of a quantum critical point.   
As discussed first in section 2.1.2, one of the indications of non-Fermi liquid behavior is 
when the resistivity deviates from Fermi liquid behavior ( = 0 + AT2) and varies as, e. g.,  = 
0 + aT, i. e. linear in temperature, over a significant temperature range above Tc.  This was the 
case in the discussion above of, for example, CeCoIn5.  As detailed in Stewart [30], there are a 
number of IBS where such  = 0 + aT evidence for quantum criticality (and therefore for 
quantum critical fluctuations) has been found:  Ba(Fe0.9Co0.1)2As2 (from Tc=22 K up to 100 K) 
(Ahilan et al. [487]), SrFe1-xIrxAs2, x>0.4, up to 300 K (F. Han et al. [488]), BaFe2As1.4P0.6 above 
Tc=30 K up to 150 K (Kamihara et al. [489]), for FeSe from Tc ~ 8 K up to almost 50 K 
(Sidorov, Tsvyashchenko and Sadykov [490] and Masaki et al. [491]).  Since there is no 
magnetic order in FeSe, the source of the non-Fermi liquid behavior in this compound may not 
be from quantum criticality where a second order (usually magnetic) phase diagram is 
suppressed to T=0. 
Another possible evidence for quantum critical behavior is the expected divergence of the 
electronic effective mass, m*, at the quantum critical point.  Corroborating the resistivity data, 
divergence of m* has also been seen in BaFe2As1.4P0.6 (Walmsley et al. [462]).   However, as 


mentioned above in the Introduction to this section (6) on IBS, recent work (including NMR, 
high resolution x-ray, and neutron scattering) (Hu et al. [492]) indicates that the 
antiferromagnetic order in BaFe2(As1-xPx)2 vanishes in a weakly first order fashion, which would 
rule out quantum criticality from a second order phase transition being suppressed to T=0. 
Thus, clearly some of the IBS show non-Fermi liquid behavior, mostly  = 0 + aT, 
indicating at least the possibility of quantum critical fluctuations being involved in the (therefore 
unconventional) superconductivity. 
 
6.4.  Pseudogap 
 
Until now in this review pseudogap behavior, where part of the Fermi surface becomes gapped 
above Tc at T* for some unknown reason, has been primarily a property of the cuprates.  Do the 
IBS show pseudogap behavior that can be identified as separate from remnant SDW 
fluctuations?   
 
6.4.1.  ARPES 
 
One of the most direct measurements of a pseudogap – a gap opening in the electronic density of 
states at the Fermi energy above Tc – is ARPES.  ARPES measurements have been done on 
several IBS systems to date.  (Due to the multiple bands at the Fermi surface in the IBS, not to 
mention the difficulties of obtaining clean surfaces, ARPES measurements are obviously more 
difficult/laborious in the IBS than in the cuprates.)   
Shimojima et al. [493] report convincing ARPES data in all of the Fermi surface bands 
(, , , and /) for optimally doped BaFe2(As1-xPx)2, x=0.3, for a gap opening well above 
Tc=30 K (where at this concentration TSDW has already been suppressed below the 
superconducting dome, Stewart [30]):  T*~90 K.  For lower x, the pseudogap also forms above 
TS/TN (e. g. T*~160 K for x=0.07, while TSDW~110 K [30], and for larger x the pseudogap 
disappears around x=0.6.   
On underdoped Ba0.75K0.25Fe2As2, Tc=26 K, Xu et al. [494] report ARPES data on the , 
 and , Fermi surface sheets and show convincing data of a pseudogap that extends up to about 
120 K.  This is clearly above the SDW transition at this composition which, according to 
Johrendt and Pöttgen [495] is somewhere below 90 K.  Xu et al. discuss extensively the possible 
insights to be gained from their data, and conclude that both the superconducting gap and the 
pseudogap could have their origins from antiferromagnetic correlations (the s model).  They 
further note the similarity between their underdoped data in Ba1-xKxFe2As2 and data in 
underdoped cuprates, and argue for a possible “unifying picture” of high temperature 
superconductivity based on antiferromagnetic fluctuations.   Contrary wise, Shimojima et al. 
interpret their pseudogap data in P-doped BaFe2As2 as evidence for the importance of orbital 
ordering, and that such a mechanism “is not applicable” to the cuprates with their single dx2-y2 
orbital. 
Sato et al.[496] performed photoemission spectroscopy on LaFeO1-xFx, 0  x  0.14, (the 
prototypical IBS, Tc~25 K for 0.07  x  0.11) and show evidence for a very clear gap opening 
in the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy. T* is about 115 K/100 K for x=0.07/0.11 
respectively, which as shown by red triangles in Fig. 26 is consistent with possible remnant 
SDW fluctuations (extrapolated from x0.045).  The size of the pseudogap, PG, was about 17 
meV/14.5 meV respectively (195 K/170 K in temperature units.)  


Fig. 26 (color online) (Luetkens et al. [497]) 
SR determined phase diagram for LaFeAsO1-

xFx.  Red triangles are from the photoemission 
spectroscopy data of Sato et al. [496] which 
found a gap opening at those temperatures and 
compositions as discussed in the text.   
Reprinted by permission from Macmillan 
Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials [497], 
copyright (2009). 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.2  NMR  
 
Nakai et al. [498] used a fit of their 1/T1T spin lattice relaxation rate data on LaFeO1-xFx, x=0.11, 
to infer PG ~ 170 K, in good agreement with the photoemission work of Sato et al.  As pointed 
out in the 75As NMR work by Grafe et al. [499] on LaFeAsO0.9F0.1, measurements of 1/T1T – 
unlike in the cuprates - do not (at least in the early data) show a fall off below a temperature 
identified as T* in the IBS.  Grafe et al. offer as one speculation that perhaps As is insensitive to 
the antiferromagnetic fluctuations.    
 
In a doped triclinic 10-3-8 (non-magnetic) IBS, Tc=13 K, Surmach et al. [500] using INS 
find an increase in scattered magnetic intensity (at the spin excitation peak energy) below T*=45 
K.  Using NMR, and contrary to most IBS results, Surmach et al. find a strong decrease in 1/T1T 
starting below a T* of 31 K.  In the related 10-4-8 IBS, Tc=33 K, Kobayashi et al. [501] and also 
Ikeuchi et al. [502] see no evidence of pseudogap behavior in their NMR data.  
Note that the falloff in 1/T1T observed in LaFeO1-xFx, 0.045  x  0.075 – i. e. Tc from 19 
to 22 K – by Hammerath et al. [503] was identified by them as due to a glassy spin freezing (see 
Fig. 26), and not a pseudogap.  Further, Ma et al. [504], upon analyzing their NMR data for the 
122* IBS Tl0.47Rb0.34Fe1.63Se2, argue that NMR data in general in the IBS do not give evidence 
for a pseudogap.  Thus, in summary, NMR data appear to be of limited utility for determining 
pseudogap behavior in the IBS, unlike in the cuprates where NMR data were the first indication 
of a pseudogap. 
Based on NMR 1/T1 data, Cui et al. [505] report a nearly composition independent 
pseudogap-like phase in Ca(Fe1-xCox)2As2, 0.023  x   0.059. 

 
 
6.4.3.  Optical/STS/Resistivity/STM 
 
Moon et al. [506], using infrared spectroscopy, find a decrease in the scattering rate below about 
700 cm-1 below 200 K (T*) in BaFe2(As0.67P0.33)2 and  Ba(Fe0.92Co0.08)2As2 (both optimally 
doped).   The first result in P-doped BaFe2As2 agrees in principle with the ARPES data of 
Shimojima et al. [493] discussed above, although the values of T* disagree (90 vs 200 K).   In 
contradiction to the second result in Co-doped BaFe2As2, Massee et al. [507], using scanning 


tunneling spectroscopy (STS), report no evidence for a pseudogap in Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2, x=0.04, 
0.07, and 0.105. 
Kwon et al. [508] measured the optical reflectivity of Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2, Tc=36 K (where 
TSDW has been suppressed below the superconducting dome), and make a strong case for 
pseudogap behavior starting below 100 K.  These data and their interpretation are not 
inconsistent with the ARPES data of Xu et al. [494] discussed above for Ba0.75K0.25Fe2As2, 
Tc=26 K and T*=120 K, considering (as discussed for the cuprates) that T* should fall with 
increasing doping.  Kwon et al. also discuss the preformed pairing model (proposed by Emery 
and Kivelson [509]) (see Rice, Yang, and Zhang [39] for a discussion) of the pseudogap to 
explain their data.  
Hess et al. [510] identify features (inflection point in  at ~150 K where the resistivity 
falls below the linear-with-T behavior at higher temperatures) in the resistivity in dopings of 
LaFeAsO1-xFx (x0.05) and SmFeAsO1-xFx (x0.06) as “pseudogap-like behavior.”  These 
resistivity features are much less distinct (see Fig. 20) than seen in the cuprates.  The authors 
themselves point out the similarity to the SDW transition in the parent compounds (x0.04 in 
LaFeAsO1-xFx, see Fig. 26).  In fact, according to SR data (Drew et al. [511]), the SDW 
transition in SmFeAsO1-xFx exists well into the region of the superconducting dome, which is an 
exception in the 1111 to the typical behavior shown in Fig. 26 where the magnetism ends before 
the start of superconductivity.  Despite this, the article by Hess et al. is still often cited (see, e.g., 
Massee et al. [507] as evidence for pseudogap behavior in the IBS. 
Hoffman [485] in a review of STM measurements in IBS states that there are no STM 
data supporting the existence of a gap above Tc in IBS. 
 
 
Summary: 
 
Whether or not the IBS display pseudogap behavior as observed in the cuprates (a gap 
above Tc due to unknown origins) must be judged at this time as an open question.  The data 
until now are mixed – in some cases discussed above, there is indeed a gap opened at a 
temperature T* above Tc and not associated with any possible SDW remnant fluctuations.  In 
other cases this gap is identifiable with the SDW transition of the parent compound decreasing in 
temperature with increasing doping – e. g. in 1111 LaFeAsO1-xFx (Fig. 26).  
 
The measurements of possible pseudogap behavior are still incomplete vis-à-vis the full 
set of IBS families and the various measurement methods.  There seems to be some consensus 
regarding pseudogap-like features – not associated with remnant SDW fluctuations - in P-doped 
and K-doped BaFe2As2.  As clearly pointed out in the review on STM in the IBS by Hoffman 
[485], very often – particularly in the 1111 and 122 families – surface sensitive measurements in 
the IBS can be non-reproducible due to surface states caused by difficulty in obtaining well-
cleaved surfaces.  Further, many of the standard methods of determining pseudogap behavior - 
discussed above in section 2 and also in section 5 for the cuprates – seem not to show clear (or 
any) pseudogap-like behavior in the IBS, e. g. in NMR.  Thus, the cuprates must still be judged 
as the only UcS with overwhelmingly clear pseudogap behavior, although the IBS are certainly 
the strongest alternative UcS class for pseudogap behavior. 
 


6.5.  Power law (instead of BCS exponential) temperature dependences in properties like 
penetration depth, T, or NMR spin lattice relaxation time (1/T1), indicating nodes in the 
superconducting gap function 
 
(T)  T is a clear indication of nodal, UcS behavior.  This linear temperature dependence has 
been found (Fletcher et al. [512] and Hicks et al. [513]) in the 1111 superconductor LaFePO 
(Tc=6 K), and in the 122 IBS’s KFe2As2 (Tc=3.4 K, RRR=1200) (Hashimoto et al. [514]) and 
BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 (Tc=30 K, Hashimoto et al. [515]).  
 
1/T1  T3 is normally taken as indication of nodal behavior and has been observed in 
1111  LaFeAsO0.9F0.1 (Tc=26 K Grafe et al. [499], Nakai et al. [498] and Nakai et al. [516]).  
However, Chubukov, Efremov, and Eremin [517] argue that the 1/T1 ~ T3 observed in this 
material is in the presence of sufficient impurities that the superconductor could in fact be 
nodeless.  
 
6.6.  C(H, ); angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy 
 
The measurement of the angular dependence of the electronic density of states at the Fermi 
energy in the superconducting state (determined from specific heat data) in zero and applied 
magnetic fields, coupled with theory, can be used to indicate nodal, unconventional 
superconductivity – with the caveat that deep minima can mimic nodal behavior. 
 
Malone et al. [518] measure C(H, ) in BaFe2(As0.67P0.33)2 (Tc=28.8 K) down to 0.5 K 
and infer line node behavior.  Zeng et al. [519] measured C(H, ) in FeSe0.4Te0.6, Tc=14.5 K, and 
analyzed their data as consistent with a nodeless s gap structure.  Hoffman [485] points out that 
the STM data of Hanaguri et al. [486] on a crystal of Fe(Se,Te) with similar Tc are also 
consistent with deep minima but still nodeless. 
 
Zhang et al. [520] measured angle resolved photoemission (ARPES) data on the gap 
structure of BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 and analyze their data as consistent with nodes (see Fig. 25) in an 
s-wave pairing symmetry scenario, and inconsistent with d-wave pairing. 
 
6.7.  Time reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) 
 
TRSB has not been observed in IBS, although the work of Tafti et al. [471] suggests a 
transformation from d-wave to s in KFe2As2 must proceed as a function of pressure through a 
TRSB s+id state.  However, there is significant theoretical work suggesting its possibility – 
perhaps in Ba1-xKxFe2As2 at strong overdoping.  A short summary of these theory works would 
include Lee, Zhang and Wu [521], Platt et al. [522], and Håkansson, Löfwander and Fogelström 
[523].  The idea involves competition between s and dx2-y2 gap symmetries as a function of 
doping (or pressure), with the possibility that an s+id (or s+is) state could form that would have 
TRSB.  For an overview of these arguments, see Hirschfeld [461].  
 
6.8.  Response to non-magnetic impurities 
 
Such impurities are pair breaking only if they scatter electrons between parts of the Fermi 
surface with different signs.  Before the advent of IBS and their proposed s gap structure, the 
belief was that a strong influence of non-magnetic impurities on Tc implied d-wave 
superconductivity.  


 
The use of non-magnetic impurities as a way to distinguish s++ from s gap symmetry 
has been thoroughly discussed in Hirschfeld’s review [461].  The point raised is that claims of 
whether a putative non-magnetic impurity causes a ‘slow’ (no gap sign change) or ‘fast’ 
(gap sign change) depression of Tc are “mostly not relevant.”  What is needed [461] to arrive 
at conclusions of s++ vs s in the IBS, with their multiband character, is to examine Tc 
suppression together with the accompanying change in the residual resistivity, 0, which is 
proportional to the amount of pair breaking.   The case to date where this has been done is the 
injection of non-magnetic (as checked (R. Prozorov et al. [524]) by low temperature 
measurements on (T)) impurities into Ba(Fe0.76Ru0.24)2As2 (Tc=17.8 K) via electron 
irradiation.  Such irradiation, which creates local defects, avoids the problem of chemical 
impurities which can have the additional effect of doping carriers at the Fermi energy.  Prozorov 
et al. conclude that their Tc suppression vs 0 is “fully compatible” with s pairing. 
 
6.9.  Isotope effect 
 
In the introductory section 2 above, we discussed the fact that there is an Fe isotope effect 
(TcM-0.35), 54Fe replacing 56Fe, seen both in IBS (SmFeAsO0.85F0.15, Tc=41 K, and in 
Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2, Tc=38 K, Liu et al. [525], with however no O isotope effect, 18O replacing 16O, 
in either compound.  Due to the site selectivity of the observed isotope effect, this is interpreted 
to mean that in the IBS phonon modes than involve the Fe (a magnetoelastic effect) affect the 
spin fluctuations (theorized to provide the pairing mechanism) and therefore the 
superconductivity.  Thus, the measured Fe isotope effect in the IBS is not an indication of 
conventional superconductivity. 
 

6.10.  Specific heat   varies as H1/2 in the Superconducting State 

In addition to the C(H, ) measurements (Malone et al. [518]) on P-doped BaFe2As2 discussed 
in section 6.6., where line node behavior was inferred, Wang et al. [526] measured the specific 
heat to 35 T on BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2.  Their low temperature  data varied as H1/2 only up to ~ 4 T, 
with linear behavior at higher fields.  They analyzed their data in a two band model assuming 
nodes or deep minima on the small mass electron band, to explain the crossover from Volovik 
H1/2 behavior to a higher field, linear (non-nodal) behavior already at 4 T.   
 
 
6.11.  Summary 
  
IBS are clearly unconventional.  There are some data that strongly support the s gap structure 
and exchange of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations model first proposed for the IBS by Mazin 
et al. [468], including phase sensitive tunneling, STM, STS, and the electron-irradiation creation 
of non-magnetic impurities and their effect on Tc and 0.  There are some data that support d-
wave pairing in select materials, e. g. heavily overdoped Ba1-xKxFe2As2.  There are data which 
have been called inconclusive vis-à-vis distinguishing s++ and s gap structure, including some 
INS (Inosov [477]).  As proof of UcS of whatever gap structure (other than BCS simple s-wave), 
there is good agreement between ARPES and optical data for a pseudogap in near optimally P-
doped and K-doped BaFe2As2, there is strong evidence for nodal behavior from penetration 


depth, C(H, ), and ARPES data, and there is at least indicative evidence for a connection 
between magnetism (antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations) and superconductivity. 
 
Table 7:  Strong Indications of UcS in the iron based superconductors 
 
 
    1 
     2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
13 
   14 

 
TF << 
D 
   
QC 
Spin 
res 
PG 
T 
>1 
sc 
phas
e 

Phase 
sens. 
tunneling  
 non-
BCS 

TRS
B  
Tc/non-
mag 
imp 

C(H,) 
(H,) 
Lack of 
isotope 
effect 

residual 
large 

IBS 
 
     
   
 
~ 
 
 
      
     
    ~ 
       
    
   ~ 

 
 
 
 
 
7.  Sr2RuO4  

 
Sr2RuO4, with the same structure as the original 214 cuprate superconductor discovered by 
Bednorz and Mueller, was discovered to be superconducting, Tc=0.93 K, by Maeno et al. [527] 
in 1994 while searching for new high Tc perovskite-structure oxides.  As sample quality has 
improved, Tc has reached 1.48 K while C/Tc has only reached 0.74 (NishiZaki et al. [528]) in a 
sample with a low residual resistivity, 0, of 0.1 -cm.  Sr2RuO4 is an excellent example of an 
UcS being sensitive to non-magnetic defects (9).  Even samples with a respectable RRR value 
of 240, have depressed Tc (1.2 K) and C/Tc (0.43) values, as well as C/T (T0) residual 
values in the superconducting state equal to half of the normal state value (vs res ~ 0 in the 
NishiZaki et al. sample).  Samples with a residual resistivity value above 1 -cm are not 
superconducting at all (Mackenzie et al. [529]), while Tc rises monotonically for 0 below this 
value. 
Already less than a year after the discovery by Maeno et al., Rice and Sigrist [530] had 
suggested that Sr2CuO4 might be a triplet (p-wave) superconductor in analogy to 3He  and 
suggested NMR measurements of the Knight shift as a way to check their prediction.  (See also 
G. Baskaram [531].)  Ishida et al. [532] measured the Knight shift and indeed found no change in 
the spin susceptibitlity when cooling through Tc, leading to the definite conclusion that Sr2RuO4 
is a spin triplet superconductor.  More measurements supporting this point of view will be 
discussed below.  Before these experimental evidences for UcS in Sr2RuO4 are discussed, a short 
discussion of the theory of p-wave superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 is in order.  (A more complete 
discussion may be found in the reviews by Mackenzie and Maeno [533] and by Sigrist and Ueda 
[3].  See also Balian and Werthamer [58].).   
In a p-wave (ℓ=1) superconductor, the spatial part of the wave function is antisymmetric 
and thus the spin part must be a symmetric triplet state, with the spin dependence described by 
three complex functions.  (Balian and Werthamer)  The spin dependence of the pairing is 
typically given in a 2 x 2 matrix for the momentum dependent gap function (k).  However, 
Balian and Werthamer proposed the use of a three component complex vector d(k) for triplet 
pairing.  Discussing now specifically (Liu and Mao [534]) tetragonal Sr2RuO4 believed to be in 


the spin triplet state, there are five possible spin triplet pairing states (five possible d(k)) allowed.  
As we will see after further discussion of the experimental data (in particular the time reversal 
symmetry breaking, section 7.6) below, the preferred one of these pairing states for Sr2RuO4 is 
the Eu (5-), with d(k) = z(kx  iky) – the only one of the five with d(k) along the c-axis.  The 
analog with the same d(k) in the other well known triplet pairing material, superfluid 3He, is the 
A-phase (ABM state).   
The 5- pairing state in a single band superconductor (which Sr2RuO4 – just like the IBS 
– is not) would be a priori fully gapped, with (Liu and Mao [534]) gapless chiral edge states.   
The 5- pairing state has the possibility of domains (kx + iky or kx – iky) and chiral surface 
currents.  Using scanning SQUID microscopies, Kirtley et al. [535] saw no evidence of the 
expected spontaneously generated surface supercurrents, with their limit of detection a factor of 
100 smaller than the predicted magnitude.  This important inconsistency with Sr2RuO4 being in 
the 5- pairing state has recently been sidelined by the theoretical work of Scaffidi and Simon 
[536] who, in a three band, weak coupling model, predict a large reduction in surface currents 
from previous predictions.  (This is a demonstration of the importance of using multi-band 
models where appropriate, rather than simplifying down to a one band model which can lead to 
incorrect conclusions.  This was also shown to be important in the IBS in numerous cases, as 
discussed above in section 6.) 
 
Sr2RuO4 has been reviewed numerous times, the most recent review was by Liu and Mao 
[534] in 2015.  Some other important reviews, in addition to those mentioned above, include 
those by Maeno et al. [537], Maeno, Rice and Sigrist [538], and Bergemann et al. [539].  We 
present here, as we did for the individual heavy fermion compounds, a brief synopsis of the 
evidence for UcS in Sr2RuO4, with discussion of where controversy/measurement difficulties 
still exist.  Also discussed is how Sr2RuO4 is similar/different to the other UcS discussed so far. 
 
7.1.  Superconductivity forms out of a non-Fermi liquid normal state, implying that quantum 
critical fluctuations are involved in the Cooper pairing. 
 
This is not the case for Sr2RuO4 – both the in-plane and c-axis resistivity behave as a Fermi 
liquid,  = 0 + AT2 up to about 25 K (Maeno et al. [540]).  The resistivity is strongly two 
dimensional (similar to the layered cuprates) – in the sample in Maeno et al. [540] Ac/Aab > 500. 
 
7.2.  Neutron spin resonance peak develops in the superconducting state 
 
Such a peak is an indication of a sign change in the superconducting energy gap  on different 
parts of the Fermi surface, as would be consistent with d-wave or s± pairing.  Since the (a priori 
nodeless) energy gap in p-wave Sr2RuO4 varies as 0 (kx 2 + ky 2 )1/2, where kx and ky are wave 
vectors on the Fermi surface (Mackenzie and Maeno [533]), there is no neutron spin resonance 
peak in Sr2RuO4. 
 
7.3. Pseudogap 
 
Sr2RuO4 is not believed to exhibit pseudogap behavior in any of its properties.  In the interests of 
completeness, it should be mentioned that Jin, Liu and Lichtenberg [541] claim that their 
magnetoresistance data imply a pseudogap, but only over a small portion of the Fermi surface 
making it hard to observe. 


 
 
7.4.  Power laws 
 
Power laws in various measured parameters like specific heat, spin-lattice relaxation time 1/T1, 
or penetration depth  - as discussed above in section 2.1.5. and Table 1 – can, if measured over 
a broad range of temperature and down to at least 0.1 Tc, indicate nodal behavior and assist in 
identifying the pairing symmetry in an UcS.  Such power laws have been found in Sr2RuO4 and 
offer some evidence for nodal behavior.  The question of whether Sr2RuO4 has nodal behavior 
remains controversial.   
 
7.4.1.  Specific heat   
 
Although C/T of Sr2RuO4 varies (NishiZaki, Maeno and Mao [542]) as T below 0.5 K 
(consistent with line nodes, Table 1), a fit [533] of the data up to Tc over the whole temperature 
range to a full line node model (described in [543]) shows rather poor agreement.  
 
7.4.2.  Thermal conductivity  
 
Izawa et al. [544] measured the in-plane thermal conductivity in the [110] and [100] directions as 
a function of an applied magnetic field rotated in the ab plane.  They concluded that what little 
oscillation as a function of angle that they observed in their ab (, H) data was not due to the 
effect on the density of states due to line nodes along the Fermi surface cylinder (from the 2 
dimensional character of Sr2RuO4 inferred from the strong anisotropy in the resistivity).  Similar 
work by Tanatar et al. [545] also found very little anisotropy in their ab (, H) data.  Thus, in 
order to explain the evident presence of quasiparticles in the gap implied by the measured   T2 
(Table 1, line nodes) behavior, both sets of authors suggest line nodes perpendicular to the Fermi 
surface cylinder (horizontal nodes).  
 
7.4.3.  NMR 
 
The absence of the Hebel Schlichter peak in 1/T1 (Ishida et al. [532]) just below Tc is already 
evidence of non s-wave superconductivity in Sr2RuO4.  Using high quality samples (with low 
impurity pair breaking) of Sr2RuO4, Ishida et al. [546] measured 1/T1 down to 0.09 K and found 
1/T1  T3 between 0.15 and 1 K – consistent with “line-node-like models.”  However, as 
discussed above for the heavy fermion superconductors, such a T3 dependence (taken as 
implying line nodes, see Table 1) for the spin lattice relaxation rate is only indicative as carefully 
phrased by Ishida et al. [546]. 
 
7.4.4. Penetration depth  
 
Bonalde et al. [547] find (T)  T2 (not the line node linear-in-T behavior from table 1) from 
0.04 to 0.8 K in good quality (Tc between 1.39 and 1.44 K) samples.  They propose that this 
temperature dependence is indicative of line nodes with non-local electrodynamic effects  
(Kosztin and Leggett [548]), arguing against all the proposed (Sigrist and Ueda [3]) p-wave 
states that are suggested by the other data, and in particular the 5- pairing state. 
 


7.4.5. Ultrasonic attenuation  
 
Lupien et al.’s [549] ultrasonic attenuation data follow a power law (T1.4 to T`1.8 – depending on 
mode) from Tc/30 up to 0.7 K – clear sign of nodal (or very deep minima) behavior.  However, 
just like the other power law measurements, these data are not consistent with these nodes being 
vertical.  
 
7.4.6. Summary  
 
Liu and Mao, in their recent review [534] of Sr2RuO4, state that whether or not the order 
parameter (k) has nodes remains unresolved.  If one - using the presence of the three bands at 
the Fermi energy in Sr2RuO4 – argues that the 5- pairing state can have an admixture of another 
state which brings in kz dependence (for example the triplet f-wave pairing state d(k) = z(kx  
iky)coskzc – see Hasegawa, Machida and Ozaki [550]) , then one can have horizontal nodes 
[534].  Or, indeed, the multiple bands (just as discussed above for the IBS for the field 
dependence of the specific heat ) can mimic nodal behavior without there being any nodes. 
 
7.5.  Josephson tunneling/STM/Phase sensitive measurement that shows non-BCS order 
parameter symmetry (e. g. triplet p-wave in Sr2RuO4) 
 
Josephson tunneling work by Jin et al. [551] between good quality (Tc=1.45 K) single crystals of 
Sr2RuO4 and a BCS superconductor (In) were consistent with the 5- pairing state, but did not 
rule out d-wave pairing.  Similar work by Liu et al. [552] found their Josephson tunneling results 
consistent with either the 5- pairing state or with the f-wave pairing state with admixture of kz 
and horizontal nodes proposed by Hasegawa et al. [550] mentioned above.  Andreev reflection 
on lower quality single crystals (Tc=1.02 K) of Sr2RuO4 (F. Laube et al. [553]) was interpreted to 
imply triplet pairing.   
 
Firmo et al. [554], using STM measurements of, conclude that Sr2RuO4 is a magnetically 
mediated pairing, odd parity (p- or f-wave) superconductor with either nodes or deep minima. 
Finally, Nelson et al. [555] succeeded in performing a phase sensitive tunneling 
measurement (joining, as discussed above, the cuprates, section 5.2.3., and the IBS, section 
6.2.2.)  Their results proved conclusively that the pairing state in Sr2RuO4 is triplet (either p- or 
f-wave.)  A nice overview of these measurements in given in Liu [556].  At the current time, the 
question of d(k) = z(kx  iky)coskzc vs the 5- pairing state (horizontal node f-wave vs vertical 
node p-wave) appears to be still open.  The lack of the ability to make superconducting thin films 
of Sr2RuO4 (due to the defect sensitivity of the superconductivity) at this time hampers the effort 
to distinguish between these two pairing states. 
 
7.6.  Breaking of Time Reversal Symmetry: Polar Kerr Effect or SR measured spontaneous 
appearance of an internal magnetic field below Tc 

 
Luke et al. [557] performed muon spin relaxation measurements on high quality (Tc=1.46 K) 
single crystal Sr2RuO4 and found an internal magnetic field appearing upon cooling below Tc.  
This implies that the superconducting state in Sr2RuO4 breaks time reversal symmetry. (8).  
Also, Kerr effect measurements (Xia et al. [558] and Kapitulnik et al. [12]) in Sr2RuO4 observed 
definite evidence of time reversal symmetry breaking. 


 
7.7.  . C(H,)/(,H) 
 
 
Deguchi et al. [559] measured the field and orientation dependence of a high quality 
(Tc=1.48 K) single crystal of Sr2RuO4.  Their analysis of the low temperature, H<1.2 T (below 
the field inversion (Vorontsov and Vekhter [77]) as discussed in 2.1.11.) data was found to be in 
good agreement with the p-wave order parameter d(k) =  ẑ 0 (sinakx +  isinaky), which indicates 
the absence of nodes but a very small gap. 
 
Hassinger et al. [560] measured the thermal conductivity of a single crystal of Sr2RuO4 
(Tc=1.2 K, residual resistivity 0=0.24 -cm) in fields down to Hc2/100 and temperatures down 
to Tc/30 both in-plane and along the c-axis.  Their analysis indicates vertical line nodes on all 
three sheets of the Fermi surface in Sr2RuO4. 
 
7.8.  Summary 
 
 
 
Table 8:  Strongly Suggestive Evidence for UcS for Sr2RuO4.  The symbol ‘’ means that 
that property was specifically looked for but not found 
 
 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
   14 

 
TF << 
D 
QC 
Spin res 
PG T 
>1 sc 
phase 
tunneling  
non-BCS 
TRSB  Tc/non-
mag imp 
C(H,) 
(H,) 

residual 
large 

Sr2RuO4 
 
 
 
 
 ? 
  
     
 
       
     
  

 
 
Sr2RuO4 displays several clear signs of UcS:  strong sensitivity of Tc to non-magnetic impurities, 
breaking of time reversal symmetry, and phase sensitive tunneling proving triplet 
superconductivity.  Evidence for non-exponential power laws in various measurements (e. g. 
penetration depth, 1/T1) are consistent with nodal behavior, which remains controversial.  The 
ability to prepare thin films of Sr2RuO4 (until now impossible due to the extreme sample 
dependence on impurities) would be helpful for furthering understanding.   
Although the theory of the pairing state is well advanced, the actual mechanism that 
causes this pairing is at this point not well understood.  In the IBS discussed above, there seems 
to be a preference (although no proof) for considering the exchange of antiferromagnetic spin 
fluctuations as the pairing mechanism.  Although this is also one of the proposed pairing 
mechanisms in Sr2RuO4 (Kuwabara and Ogata [561]), there are other proposals:    
1.)  Agterberg, Rice and Sigrist [562], before higher quality samples were prepared and 
characterized, proposed a model in which the primary superconductivity occurred in just one of 
the Fermi surface sheets (Sr2RuO4 is strongly two dimensional), the  sheet with Ru dxy orbital 
character.  This orbital dependent form of superconductivity explained various results, including 
the large finite res in the low temperature specific heat.  With the improvement in the sample 
quality, and res approaching zero, this theory required modification.  For a review of the 
Agterberg, Rice and Sigrist orbital dependent model for the microscopic mechanism in Sr2RuO4, 
see Maeno, Rice and Sigrist [538]. 
2.)  Theorists soon after Maeno et al.’s discovery in 1994 of superconductivity in 
Sr2RuO4 have speculated that Sr2RuO4 is near a ferromagnetic instability (e. g. Rice and Sigrist 


[530]), partially at least since the related compound SrRuO3 is ferromagnetic.   Such early 
speculation of parallel spin correlations helped fuel the consideration of the parallel spin, p-wave 
(ℓ=1) pairing state, which as we have seen in this section is believed to be the case for Sr2RuO4.  
Although there is not a lot of experimental evidence for ferromagnetic spin fluctuations, Yoshida 
et al. [563] argued that their resistivity under pressure data support “in a qualitative sense” 2D 
ferromagnetic spin correlations in Sr2RuO4 and also note that the NMR Knight shift data of 
Ishida et al. [564] are consistent with ferromagnetic spin correlations.    Mazin and Singh [565] 
calculated Tc in Sr2RuO4 assuming the pairing mechanism is due to exchange of paramagnons.   
Monthoux and Lonzarich [566], using a one Fermi sheet model, also calculated Tc with exchange 
of ferromagnetic fluctuations as the pairing ‘glue.’  
 
8.  Non-centro-symmetric superconductors 
 
In UcS, one or more symmetries in addition to U(1), the one dimensional global gauge 
symmetry, are broken at the onset of superconductivity.  Breaking of time reversal symmetry 
(TRS) is not infrequently seen in UcS as discussed in several places already in this review  
starting in section 2.1.8., e. g. for the transition to the B-phase (cf. Figs. 4 and 10) in UPt3, 
PrOs4Sb12, PrPt4Ge12, Sr2RuO4, URu2Si2, and the cuprates. 
 
The lack of inversion symmetry (“non-centro-symmetric”) in superconductors is another 
important breaking of symmetry, which leads to non-s-wave parity pairing to some extent 
(enhanced by the electronic correlation strength) being mixed in with conventional s-wave 
pairing.  (For additional theoretical discussion of this class of UcS, see section 2.1.10. above.)  
This class of UcS began with the discovery in 2004 of superconductivity (Tc=0.75 K) in non-
centrosymmetric CePt3Si (Bauer et al. [567], which has =390 mJ/molK2 (i. e. a strongly 
correlated system).  (The fact that CePt3Si is also antiferromagnetic below 2.2 K is less important 
for the properties.)   The field of non-centrosymmetric superconductivity has been recently 
reviewed (Bauer and Sigrist [568] and Kneidinger et al. [67]).  Although, as we will discuss, 
there have been many non-centrosymmetric superconductors discovered stretching back to the 
1960’s, most of them display conventional superconductivity, with only a handful with UcS 
properties. 
 
Based on a result of Anderson in 1984 [120], it was commonly believed at the time of 
discovery of CePt3Si that a superconductor without a center of inversion symmetry would not 
exhibit spin triplet pairing.  Theoretically, Frigeri et al. [569] showed that triplet 
superconductivity is not necessarily excluded in non-centrosymmetric systems, which was an 
important result considering how the upper critical field in the recently discovered CePt3Si so 
exceeded (Bauer et al. [567]) (~factor 4) the Pauli paramagnetic limit, HP (=1.8 kTc/B) – usually 
taken as a sign of possible triplet pairing since an applied magnetic field does not break Cooper 
pairs with parallel spins.  Kneidinger et al. [67] discuss how anomalous spin fluctuations, which 
tend to cause triplet pairing, occur in non-centrosymmetric materials (original theory from 
Takimoto and Thalmeier [570]).  Such spin fluctuations are enhanced by strong electronic 
correlations, but vanish in the weakly correlated limit.  Thus, most (the weakly correlated, low  
examples) non-centrosymmetric superconductors display conventional, phonon-coupled s-wave 
pairing symmetry superconductivity, while the (relatively few) more strongly correlated 
examples like CePt3Si, CeRhSi3, and CeIrSi3 (the latter two are superconducting only under 
pressure) display mixed pairing symmetry behavior and definite UcS.  Another route to 
enhancing the anomalous spin fluctuations that lead to triplet pairing is asymmetric spin orbit 


correlations (ASOC) found in compounds like ZrRe6 with heavier elements.  These ASOC lift 
the spin degeneracy of the bands; these spin split bands can then have either spin singlet or triplet 
pairing.  (Kneidinger et al. [67]).   
We review the properties of the prototype material, CePt3Si, and summarize properties 
for two strongly correlated, believed to be UcS, examples – CeRhSi3 and CeIrSi3 - (which 
require pressure to superconduct) and two low correlation, ASOC induced examples.  Another 
strongly correlated non-centrosymmetric material, CeCoGe3, (not discussed here) is an 
antiferromagnet that superconducts (Tc = 0.72 K) under pressure (5.6 GPa) with a high (~7 T, or 
five times HP) Hc2, taken as consistent with triplet superconductivity.  (Settai et al. [571] and 
Kneidinger et al. [67]) 
 
8.1.  CePt3Si 
 
Yogi et al. [572] measured the Knight shift in CePt3Si and found no change in the spin 
susceptibitlity when cooling through Tc, implying that CePt3Si is a spin triplet superconductor 
like Sr2RuO4.  (A more circumstantial indicator of triplet pairing is the measurement of the upper 
critical magnetic field, Hc2, which exceeds the paramagnetic limit. (Bauer et al. [567]) as 
discussed above.)  Yogi et al. also surprisingly found in CePt3Si a peak (presumably the Hebel-
Schlichter coherence peak consistent with simple BCS s-wave) in 1/T1 (the spin lattice relaxation 
time) just below Tc.   Yogi et al. note that the observed peak is “much smaller” than in a 
conventional BCS superconductor.   
It may be that this minor indication of BCS behavior is just simply consistent with the 
predicted mixture of pairing symmetries (a two component order parameter), and the multi-band 
nature of CePt3Si.   Mukuda et al. [573] offer another interpretration for the Yogi et al. small size 
coherence peak below Tc in their 1/T1 data.  In the Mukuda et al. 1/T1 measurements, they 
proposed two kinds of physical domains in their single crystal (which was crushed into coarse 
powder for the NMR measurments), whose NMR relaxation signals they can separate in their 
data analysis.  (They quantify the quality of their single crystal sample by the small residual  of 
34 mJ/molK2, < 10% of n, in the superconducting state.)  In the ordered domains (in one sample, 
70%), Mukuda et al. propose that coherent f-electron bands are responsible for spin triplet 
behavior, with no peak in 1/T1 below Tc=0.35 K.  In disordered domains, non-f-electron bands 
present in LaPt3Si are posited to be responsible for conventional s-wave superconductivity below 
Tc=0.6 K, and the Mukuda et al. 1/T1 data from these disordered domains show a small peak 
below Tc.  This explanation helps clarify the rather broad superconducting transition width in the 
discovery paper [567], where Tc in the bulk specific heat of CePt3Si is >20% of Tc. 
In terms of power law measurement that imply UcS in CePt3Si, Mukuda et al. [573]  
analyze their NMR 1/T1 data in terms of a line node gap.  Bonalde et al.[574] find that the 
penetration depth  T in CePt3Si in the low temperature limit from 0.12 K down to 0.049 K 
(admittedly a limited temperature range), also consistent with line nodes.  Izawa et al. [575]  
analyze their low temperature (down to 0.04 K) thermal conductivity data as consistent with line 
nodes.  
Thus, in summary, CePt3Si qualifies on several counts as an UcS, with the caveat that the 
power law measurements are over limited temperature ranges. 
 


Table 9:  Strongly Suggestive Evidence for UcS for CePt3Si.  The symbol ‘’ means that that 
property was specifically looked for but not found.   Note that time reversal symmetry breaking 
has been found in the low correlation non-centrosymmetric superconductors ZrRe6 and LaNiC2. 
 
 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
10 
   11 
   14 

 
TF << 
D 
QC 
Spin 
res 
PG T 
>1 sc 
phase 
tunneling  
 non-
BCS 

TRSB 
Tc/non-
mag 
imp 

Non-
centro-
sym 

C(H,) 
(H,) 

residual 
large 

CePt3Si  
 
 
    
~    
     
 
      
      
     
  

 
  
8.2.  Other strongly correlated non-centrosymmetric superconductors:  CeRhSi3, CeIrSi3 
 
At zero pressure CeRhSi3 orders antiferromagnetically at 1.8 K and has a specific heat =120 
mJ/molK2 (Muro et al. [576]).  Applied pressure creates a superconducting dome, and the TN vs 
pressure line joins the dome at 2 GPa (Kimura et al. [577]).  The peak Tc is 1.05 K at 3 GPa.  
CeRhSi3 has an extremely large upper critical field – estimated to be ~30 T in 2.9 GPa, far above 
the paramagnetic limit (Hp = 1.8 kTc/B).   This is cited [568] as an indication of possible triplet 
behavior, and is apparently (Kneidinger et al. [67]) the only measurement which implies UcS in 
CeRhSi3. 
 
CeIrSi3 is similar to CeRhSi3.  In zero applied pressure, TN=5 K and =125 mJ/molK2 
(Muro et al. [576]).  2.5 GPa applied pressure corresponds to the peak in the pressure-induced 
superconducting dome, with Tc=1.6 K. (Sugitani et al. [578]).  The upper critical field, although 
larger than the paramagnetic limit, is reduced from that of CeRhSi3 (despite the higher Tc of the 
Ir compound), with Hc2(0)=11 T at 2.5 GPa.  The resistivity at zero pressure is proportional to T2 
(Fermi liquid like), and behaves linearly (non-Fermi liquid like) with temperature from Tc up to 
18 K in 2.5 GPa.  (Sugitani et al. [578])  Again like in CeRhSi3, except for the large upper 
critical field (and the possibility of a quantum critical point in the phase diagram where TN0 
and indicated by the   T), CeIrSi3 has little in the way of experimental evidence for UcS. 
 
8.3.  Low correlation, ASOC induced examples 
 
LiPt3B is a superconductor (T. Badica et al. [579]) with Tc=2.7 K.   Nishiyama et al. [580], using 
NMR data, propose that this non-centrosymmetric compound is a spin triplet superconductor 
with line nodes, with weak electron-electron correlations.  They state that the strong spin orbit 
coupling causes the spin triplet state to dominate, rather than the spin singlet pairing found in the 
partner compound, LiPd3B.  
 
SR data in the non-centrosymmetric superconductor ZrRe6, Tc=6.75 K, by Singh et al. 
[581] showed spontaneous static magnetic fields below Tc, indicating (see section 2.1.8. above) 
breaking of time reversal symmetry.in the superconducting state, and UcS with strong singlet-
triplet pairing symmetry mixing.  The specific heat =26 mJ/molK2 [581], which is definitely not 
a highly correlated value, especially considering that six times the elemental  of Re plus the 
elemental  of Zr would (Stewart [19]) already be 16.5 mJ/molK2.   Similar SR data (Hillier et 
al. [582]) in the non-centrosymmetric superconductor LaNiC2, Tc=2.7 K, also indicate the 
appearance of spontaneous magnetic fields below Tc, and thus time reversal symmetry breaking 
and UcS with dominant triplet pairing symmetry.   


Thus, non-centrosymmetric superconductors add two members (ZrRe6 and LaNiC2)  to 
our list (B-phase UPt3, Sr2RuO4, PrOs4Sb12, and PrPt4Ge12) of UcS with time reversal symmetry 
breaking so far in this review, with the non-centrosymmetric ZrRe6 and the filled skutterudite  
PrPt4Ge12 having the largest Tc’s (6.75 and 7.9 K respectively) by more than a factor of two.  
 
Finally, there are a large number (see Kneidinger et al. [67] for an overview) of known 
non-centrosymmetric superconductors that, due to weak correlations and a lack of strong spin 
orbit coupling, are simply normal BCS superconductors.  Such materials predate the discovery of 
UcS in the non-centrosymmetric, highly correlated CePt3Si by over three decades, and include 
the high Tc (17 K) Y0.7Th0.3C1.5 (discovered by M.C. Krupka et al. [583]), where the specific heat 
 is only (Stewart, Giorgi and Krupka [584]) 4.7 mJ/molK2. 
 
Theoretically, non-centrosymmetric superconductors have been calculated to show a rich 
variety of complex phenomena, including – e. g. in quasiparticle tunneling – multigap features 
and spin currents carried by surface states.  For reviews, see M. Sigrist [585] and several articles 
in Bauer and Sigrist [568].  
 
 
 9.  Organic superconductors 
 
The discovery of organic superconductors was published in early 1980, shortly after the heavy 
fermion CeCu2Si2.   Jérome et al. [7] reported superconductivity, Tc=0.9 K, in the quasi-one 
dimensional (TMTSF)2PF6 under 1.2 GPa pressure (which suppresses the metal insulator (Mott 
localization) transition at 12 K).   Several anions other than PF6 cause similar superconducting 
behavior around 1 GPa, with ClO4 resulting (K. Bechgaard et al. [586]) in Tc~1.4 K at room 
pressure. 
 
Two dimensional organic superconductivity, Tc=1.4 K, at zero pressure was discovered 
in 1984 (Yagubskii et al. [587]) in -phase -(BEDT-TTF)2I3 (also called -ET2I3).  Soon 
thereafter, Tokumoto et al. [588] discovered a high Tc phase (Tc=8 K) of the same compound, 
H-(BEDT-TTF)2I3, that could be stabilized at zero pressure by cycling up to 0.13 GPa and back 
to ambient.  Further progress in increasing Tc in 2D organic superconductors was made by Jack 
Williams’ group at Argonne National Laboratory bringing Tc up to 11.6 K in the ambient 
pressure superconductor -phase -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br (Kini et al. [589]) and to 12.8 K under 
0.03 GPa in -phase -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl (Williams et al. [590]).  

 
The restricted-dimension organic superconductors, where the superconductivity comes 
from p-electrons from the chalcogens, have many interesting and unique properties.  These 
properties can be measured in a single sample (i. e. no change of chemical purity) simply by 
varying pressure.  For example, the 12.8 K superconductor -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl can be tuned 
(S. Lefebvre et al. [591]) between insulating (P=0), metallic, antiferromagnetic, and 
superconducting (P=0.03 GPa) states within a few hundreths of a GPa.  While in the cuprates 
superconductivity occurs near (hole-doped) or coexistent with (electron-doped) 
antiferromagnetism (Fig. 14), in the organic superconductors superconductivity occurs in the 
phase diagram near to Mott localization due to a balance between the correlation strength and the 
strength of the interchain coupling. 

 
In the early years of research on the 1 and 2D organic superconductors, although there 
were data consistent with UcS (e. g. the work of Choi et al. [592] where a very low level of 


controlled defects from proton irradiation suppressed superconductivity in (TMTSF)2PF6 under 
pressure – consistent with triplet pairing (9), see also S Bouffard et al. [593]), in general the 
belief (Brown et al. [594]) was that these new materials were conventional superconductors.  
 
However, theorists began to propose UcS.  Abrikosov [595], citing the Bouffard et al. Tc 
suppression with low irradiation result, proposed triplet pairing for (TMTSF)2PF6.   Gorkov and 
Jerome [596], citing Hc2 values that exceed the Pauli paramagnetic limit (see the discussion of 
non-centrosymmetric superconductors above), also proposed triplet pairing for the organic 
superconductors.  Bulaevskii [597] discussed unconventional pairing for the 2D organic 
superconductors, and Bourbonnais and Caron [598] proposed a spin fluctuation mediated 
coupling between the chains in 1D organic superconductors.  More recently, 2D organic 
superconductors like ’’-(ET)2SF5CH2CF2SO3 have been discovered where there are apparently 
no low frequency antiferromagnetic fluctuations and coupling is believed to be mediated by 
charge fluctuations (G. Koutroulakis et al. [599]). 
 
By the early to mid-1990’s, a number of physical measurements had been gathered that – 
with some exceptions – confirmed UcS in the organic superconductors.  These measurements 
mostly concentrated on the highest Tc ambient pressure (2D) superconductor, -
(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br and, for the 1D materials, on (TMTSF)2X (X=PF6 under pressure and 
X=ClO4 at ambient pressure). 
 
9.1.  1D  
 
For X=ClO4, line nodes concluded from:  measurements (Takigawa et al. [600]) of NMR 1/T1 
(down to Tc/2)~T3; measurements (Shinagawa et al. [601]) of the Knight shift implying singlet 
(d-wave) pairing; measurements (Yonezawa et al. [602]) of C(H, ) (d-wave pairing).  
Bourbonnais and Sekeki put forward a theory [89] for these materials with d-wave 
superconductivity caused by the exchange of spin correlations.  Doiron-Leyraud et al. [603] 
applied pressure to cause superconductivity in (TMTSF)2PF6.  At 1.18 GPa, where Tc is a 
maximum and TSDW0, they found that the resistivity was linear with temperature between 0.1 
K (Tc suppressed by 0.05 T) and 8 K.  This implied quantum critical behavior (2) at the critical 
point where the second order magnetic transition is suppressed to T=0. 
 
9.2.  2D   
 
For -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br (-Br for short):  measurements of scanning tunnel spectroscopy 
(STS) were interpreted as strongly supporting d-wave pairing with line nodes (Ichimura et al. 
[604]); measurements (Mayaffre et al. [605]) of NMR 1/T1 ~ T3 indicate strongly anisotropric 
superconducting gap or maybe nodes, with no Hebel Schlichter peak in 1/T1 below Tc, i. e. 
arguing against s-wave; measurements (De Soto et al. [606]) of NMR indicate unconventional 
pairing, possible nodes; measurements (Kanoda et al. [607]) of NMR indicate UcS with strong 
gap anisotropy and possibly nodes; measurements in -Br and -(ET)2Cu(NCS)2 (-NCS for 
short) (Le et al. [608]) of penetration depth ~T consistent with line nodes; measurements 
(Achkir et al. [609]) in -NCS of penetration depth imply line nodes and UcS; measurements 
(Dressel et al. [610]) in -Br and -NCS of surface impedance indicate an anisotropic 
superconducting gap but without nodes in the gap; measurements (Taylor, Carrington and  
Schlueter [611]) in -Br and -NCS of the specific heat C~T2 plus a fit of C from 0.1 T up to Tc 


both indicate d-wave pairing symmetry;  measurements (Milbradt et al. [612]) in -Br of surface 
impedance indicate d-wave behavior.   
In summary, most of these measurements support a superconducting energy gap with 
nodes, i. e. UcS. 
 
Besides these measurements, there is not much other evidence for UcS in the organic 
superconductors.  There is apparently no pseudogap, 3 (Brown review [74]), and the small 
masses of crystals available prohibit neutron scattering investigations of a possible resonance, 
4.  Further, to date there are no phase sensitive determinations of the pairing symmetry, 
although there are STS measurements 7 as already mentioned.   Specific heat investigations of 
(TMTSF)2ClO4 (Garoche et al. [613]) give =10.5 mJ/molK2 and on -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br 
(Andraka et al. [614]) provided a value for  of 22 mJ/molK2.  Thus,  of neither organic 
superconductor is anywhere near large enough to satisfy strongly suggestive evidence #1, 1).  
Also, there was no evidence of a significant residual  value in (TMTSF)2ClO4 or -
(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br, thus 14.  
 
Finally, although there is strong evidence for the FFLO phase (where high magnetic field 
in a clean singlet, Pauli-paramagnetic-limited superconductor causes an inhomogeneous, finite 
momentum state) in several organic superconductors, e. g. in -NCS  (Wright et al. [615]; Lortz 
et al. [616]; Singleton et al. [617]; Bergk et al. [618]; in λ−(BETS)2FeCl4, a field induced 
superconductor (Uji et al. [619]) above 17 T (Uji et al. [620]) and in ’’-(ET)2SF5CH2CF2SO3, 
Tc=4.3 K, (G. Koutroulakis et al. [621]), this is not necessarily evidence for UcS. 
 
Table 10:  Strongly Suggestive Evidence for UcS for Organic Superconductors.  The symbol 
‘’ means that that property was specifically looked for but not found 
 
 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
   14 

 
TF << 
D 
QC 
Spin 
res 
PG T 
>1 sc 
phase 
tunneling   
non-BCS 
TRSB  Tc/non-
mag imp 
C(H,) 
(H,) 

residual 
large 

organics 
 
      
 
  

  
     
   
       
     
  

 
 
 
10.  Layered Nitrides  
 
This superconducting class consists of electron-doped layered metal nitride halides MNX, with 
M= Ti, Zr, Hf and the halides X = Cl, Br, I.  The undoped parent compounds are 2D layered 
structure band insulators, with a large (>2.5 eV) gap (Kasahara et al. [622]) and two distinct 
structures, see Fig. 27.  Unlike many of the other UcS discussed herein, there is no magnetism in 
the phase diagram of either structure.  The  structure has an orthogonal metal-nitride layer 
network with two halogen layers in between, while the  structure has a double honeycomb 
metal-nitride layer with two close packed halogen layers in between.  (See Zhang et al. [623], 
Yamanaka [624] and Kasahara et al. [622] for more structural details.)  To cause 
superconductivity, electron doping is carried out by intercalation of atoms such as Li, Ca, Na, K 
and Yb between the twin halogen layers, sometimes with co-intercalation of organic molecules 
to spread the halogen layers further apart.  As well, Zhu and Yamanaka [625] discovered that de-
intercalating the Cl in -(Zr,Hf)NCl1-x, x~0.3, causes sufficient electron doping to result in 
approximately the same superconducting transitions as when doping with, e. g., Li. 


 

Fig. 27 (color online) From Zhang et al. [623].   Pictorial representation of the two layered metal 
nitride halides MNX structures.  The nitrogen, N, is blue, the metal atoms, M, are red, and the 
halide atoms X are large light brown spheres. (figure is reproduced from ref. [623].   IOP 
Publishing.  Reproduced with permission.  All rights reserved.) 

 

 
 
 
Superconductivity in this class of superconductor was first discovered (Yamanaka et al. 
[626]) in 1996, with Tconset=12.5 K in -ZrNCl intercalated with Li:  Li0.16ZrNCl.  This first 
layered nitride superconductor, with its Tc higher than the corresponding 3D metal nitride ZrN 
(Tc=9.05 K (Matthias and Hulm [627]) was surpassed in Tc two years later with -HfNCl 
intercalated with Li0.48(THF)~0.3 (where THF is tetrahydrofuran), Tc=25.5 K for 
Li0.48(THF)~0.3HfNCl.  The Hf compounds are quite air sensitive.  (Kasahara et al. [628])  


The  form of MNX has been intercalated between the halide layers with various alkali 
metals, with or without additional organic molecules (PC, propylene carbonate, and BC, butylene 
carbonate) besides THF, with success at causing superconductivity up to 16.3 K via electron 
doping into the insulating parent compound first in 2009.  (Yamanaka et al. [629]).  See Fig. 28 
for Tc of intercalated -TiNCl, where Tc for this sequence is plotted as a function of the inter-
MN layer spacing d. 
 

Fig. 28 (color online) Tc vs log(d) and 1/d for 
intercalated -TiNCl (figure from Zhang et al. 
[630]).  The outlier, Li0.13TiNCl, is thought to 
have a lower Tc because the Li ions are small 
enough to penetrate into the Cl layer, while the 
process of co-intercalation with the THF 
molecule is thought to retain the Li ions 
between the Cl layers.  A similar graph for 
intercalated -TiNBr (Zhang et al. [623]), 
without the Na(BC) and the Li points, shows 
very similar behavior of Tc vs 1/d. Both the -
TiNCl and the -TiNBr intercalated 
compounds are air sensitive.  For the -form, 
Tc increases with d at small d and then flattens 
out with increasing d (K. Hotehama et al. [631]), rather than increasing linearly with 1/d as 
shown here for the -form.  Reprinted figure with permission from Zhang et al., Phys. Rev. B 86 
(2012), p. 024516  [630] Copyright (2012) by the American Physical Society. 

 
 
10.1.  Superconducting properties that impinge on possible UcS, -form 
 
The upper critical field, Hc2, of this class of superconductors is quite high and gives convincing 
evidence for quasi-2D behavior, as expected based on the structure (Fig. 27).  For Hc in de-
intercalated -ZrNCl0.7, Hc2(T=0)= 27 T, with Hc2(T=0) for H||c equal to 7 T. (H. Tou et al. 
[632])  Another way to quantify anisotropy using Hc2 measurements that avoids the need for such 
high fields is to compare the slopes dHc2/dT (Hc2) near to Tc, which from Tou et al.’s work at 
H=1 T is Hc2c/ Hc2||c ~ 4.5.   
 
The isotope effect in Li-intercalated -HfNCl decreases the 25.5 K Tc upon substitution 
of 15N for 14N by only 0.1 K, implying that the exponent in Tc  M- is =0.070.02.  (H. Tou et 
al. [633])  The isotope effect in Li-intercalated -ZrNCl decreases Tc=11.4 K upon substitution 
of 15N for 14N by only 0.06 K, implying that the exponent in Tc  M- is =0.070.04.  As will 
be discussed below, both these works argued that the data suggest considering the relevance of 
something instead of/in addition to the conventional electron-phonon pairing interaction 
although, as discussed above in section 2.1.13., the absence of an isotope effect can be 
misleading. 


 
NMR measurements of 1/T1 and the Knight shift in -LixZrNCl show singlet behavior 
with no Hebel-Schlichter peak.  (H. Kotegawa et al. [634]; Kasahara et al. [622]). 
 
Using band structure calculations of the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy 
and their specific heat data (where the rather low value of =1.1 mJ/molK2 is found, similar to 
the value of 2.7 mJ/molK2 for conventional electron-phonon coupled superconductor MgB2, 
Tc=39 K) for -Li0.12ZNCl, Tc = 12.7 K, Taguchi et al. [635] argue that the electron phonon 
coupling parameter  is only 0.22.  They then argue that this value used in the McMillan formula 
gives Tc too low by a factor of five.   
Kasahara et al. (Y. Kasahara et al. [636]) report the specific heat of -LixZrNCl for 
various x, and find for 0.10x0.40, 15 KTc10 K, that  as a function of magnetic field H rises 
quickly at first, and then more slowly.  Such behavior is indicative of either two s-wave gaps 
(Bang [83])) or strong anisotropy/possible nodal behavior in a single gap (Wang et al. [526]).  
The calculation of large 2/kBTc values (up to 4.5) by Kasahara et al. [636], which they claimed 
as evidence for an increase in coupling strength with doping above x=0.07, was done using an 
empirical theory (Padamsee, Neighbor, and Shiffman [637]) that assumed an “isotopically [sic] 
gapped state,” which is questionable based on the evidence from their own (H) data which 
implied strong anisotropy. 
SR measurements (Hiraishi et al. [638]) on -LixZrNCl were interpreted to mean an 
anisotropic gap, in agreement with the specific heat (H) data already discussed.  SR 
measurements (T. Ito et al. [639]) on -Lix(Hf,Zr)NCl, both with and without co-intercalated 
THF/PC, were interpreted as strongly favoring 2D superconductivity with only weak interlayer 
coupling.  (This is of course in contrast to the data for -TiNCl in Fig. 28, where Tc is a strong 
function of interlayer distance.) 
Due to the air sensitivity of -ZrNCl0.7, tunneling data were measured (Takasaki et al. 
[640]) by breaking a pressed-pellet sample in an inert atmosphere glove box to expose a fresh 
surface (“break junction” tunneling spectroscopy.)  More recently, the same composition was 
measured (T. Ekino et al. [641]) by the same group, but using a single crystal facet on a 
polycrystalline sample as the probing surface.  In both works there were two gap features, one 
similar to the BCS value (2/kBTc ~ 3.52) plus a rather large gap feature (2/kBTc ~ 10), with 
both gaps disappearing as the sample is warmed to Tc ~ 13 K, leading the authors to conclude 
that this compound displays “unusual” superconducting properties.  This large gap apparently 
has not been confirmed by other measurement techniques – unlike a similar measured very large 
(factor of two to three larger than the BCS 2/kBTc=3.52) gap in the cuprates, see Fig. 21 for the 
cuprate superconducting energy gap and the multiple measurement techniques. 
 
10.2.  Superconducting properties that impinge on possible UcS, -form 
 
The -form, where superconductivity was discovered 13 years after its discovery in the -form, 
is much less well characterized.  Based both on the structural differences (Fig. 27) and on the 
different behavior of Tc with interlayer spacing d (Fig. 28), the superconductivity in the -form 
may well be different than in the -form of the layered metal nitrides.  Certainly, the -form’s Tc 
 1/d dependence suggests that the Coulomb interlayer coupling in these materials is more 
central to the pairing mechanism than in the -form. 
 
Unlike in the -form, where Hc2(T=0) was different by ~factor of four in the planar and 
c-axis directions (and Hc2c/ Hc2||c at 1 T was 4.5), in the -form of intercalated TiNCl Hc2c/ 


Hc2||c ~ 1.2 to 1.5 (Zhang et al. [630]), depending on the intercalate.  This lack of anisotropy in 
Hc2 is also observed in intercalated TiNBr (Zhang et al. [623]), with Tc values up to 17.2 K. 
Thus, the -form is more isotropic than the -form, which agrees with bandstructure calculations 
(Kasahara et al. [622]).    
 
10.3.  Discussion of the Possible Superconducting Pairing Mechanism in the -form 
(honeycomb lattice) Layered Metal Nitrides 
 
Unfortunately, much of the theoretical discussion is focused on the -form with its higher (25.5 
vs 16.3 K) Tc.  The -form is experimentally significantly different in two important aspects:  it 
is more isotropic, and Tc is a linear function (see Fig. 28) of the inverse of the interlayer spacing, 
1/d. 
 
10.3.1.  Phonon coupled  
 
Phonon-mediated pairing in -NaxHfNCl, Tc=25 K, was considered by Weht, Filippetti, and 
Pickett [642].  In their band structure calculations, the electron-phonon coupling was considered 
too weak to explain the relatively high Tc, and the authors concluded that “the origin of the high 
Tc remains mysterious.”  Heid and Bohnen [643] performed calculations for -LixZrNCl, and 
came to the same conclusion:  “the calculated electron-phonon coupling is too weak to explain 
the observed Tc.”  
 
10.3.2.  Low energy conduction electron collective modes (plasmons)  
 
Bill, Morawitz, and Kresin [644] calculate a strong coupling phonon-plasmon scheme to explain 
the Tc in this class of materials, where the dynamic screening of the Coulomb interaction in the 
superconducting layered metal nitrides is the dominant interaction. 
 
10.3.3.  Spin fluctuations in a honeycomb lattice (-form, Fig. 27) doped band insulator 
 
Despite the weakness of the spin fluctuations, Kuroki [645] considers this a possible model to 
explain the superconductivity in the -form layered metal nitrides due to the disconnectivity of 
the Fermi surface in the honeycomb lattice.  If this model applies, Kuroki predicts d + id gap 
symmetry and breaking of time reversal symmetry. 
 
10.4.  Summary   
The layered metal nitride superconductors may well be UcS, although they are rather 
understudied – particularly in the -form, at least partially due to air sensitivity and lack of 
single crystals.  Also, a Tc of 25 K discovered in 1998 did not draw the attention that it would 
have in 1973, when A15 structure Nb3Ge held the record (Stewart [2]) for the highest Tc at 22.8 
K.  It is certainly still under discussion whether this class is an example of UcS, with no 
conclusive strong substantiating evidence as yet. 
 
Table 11:  Strongly Suggestive Evidence for UcS for Layered Nitrides.  The symbol ‘’ 
means that that property was specifically looked for but not found 
 


 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5    6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
13 
   14 

 
TF 
<< 
D 

QC Spin 
res 
P
G 
T 
>1 
sc 
phas
e 

tunneling  
non-BCS 
TRS
B  
Tc/non-
mag 
imp 

C(H,) 
(H,) 
Lack of 
isotope 
effect 

residual 
large 

Li0.1ZrNCl 
 
 
 
 
  
    
       
     
       
       
    
    

 
 
 
11.  Unconventional Superconductivity caused by Coexistence with Ferromagnetism, has to 
break TRS 
 
This class is similar to the non-centrosymmetric class (section 8) in that there are only a few 
known UcS examples in this class, along with several conventional superconductors that are 
coexistent (due to special circumstances as will be described) with ferromagnetism.  However, 
the ferromagnet-superconductor UcS’s have a large amount of theoretical interest despite the 
limited number of compounds.  In order to avoid the magnetic field breaking anti-spin aligned 
Cooper pairs, triplet (e. g. p-wave) pairs are favored in cases where TCurie>Tc – unless of course 
(for reasons of, e. g., separation of the moment-bearing ions from the ions supplying the 
superconducting electrons) the local B field is less than Hc2 for the superconducting electrons. 
 
11.1.  Conventional coexistent superconducting/ferromagnetic compounds 
  

A long-standing example of conventional superconductivity coexisting with ferromagnetism is 
the Chevrel phase HoMo6S8.  With special care given to forming a single domain using external 
fields to reduce the induction B through the demagnetizing field, the local exchange field, Bloc, 
from the Ho ions can be made less than the upper critical field of the superconducting Mo 
electrons, and the sample, TCurie ~ 0.7 K, is superconducting below 0.1 K.  (Burlet et al. [646]).  
Without such special effort, the superconductivity in HoMo6S8 (which forms below Tc=1.82 K) 
is destroyed below TCurie=0.61 K, i. e. the only coexistence is between superconductivity and an 
oscillatory magnetic state between 0.71 and 0.61 K. (Lynn et al. [647])   

RuSr2GdCu2O8 achieves (Tallon et al. [648]) coexistent superconductivity, Tc=37 K, and 
ferromagnetism, TCurie=132 K, in a fashion similar to HoMo6S8, by spatially separating two sets 
of ions.  In the case of RuSr2GdCu2O8, the Ru (ferromagnetic, ~ 0.1 B/Ru (Yang et al. [649]) is 
in RuO2 planes and causes a rather small (~ 10 G) magnetic dipole field in the superconducting 
CuO2 planes.  Of course, since the superconducting CuO2 planes can be expected to exhibit UcS 
just as in a regular, non-ferromagnetic cuprate, this is a somewhat different example of a mix 
between superconductivity and ferromagnetism.  This compound is mentioned here together with 
HoMo6S8 in the ‘conventional’ section because the Ru ferromagnetism in RuSr2GdCu2O8 is not 
causing the UcS. 

Huxley, in his recent review of ferromagnetic superconductors (Huxley [85]), although 
he does not mention RuSr2GdCu2O8, does mention AuIn2, in which Herrmannsdoerfer et al. 
[650] discovered ferromagnetic ordering of the 113,115In nuclear moments at 37 K while the 


AuIn2 compound’s electrons undergo a superconducting transition at 207 mK.  Any 
coupling/interaction between the In nuclei and the superconducting compound’s electrons is 
through polarization of the conduction electrons by the local In nuclear moments.  Thus the 
opening of the superconducting gap in AuIn2 at 207 mK (>> 37 K) implies that there are 
essentially no conduction electrons at the Fermi energy left to polarize by the time ferromagnetic 
order between the In nuclei sets in.  Thus, AuIn2 is the ultimate in separating the fermions (in this 
case, the In nuclei) that are coupled ferromagnetically from the superconducting electrons, i. e. 
the superconductivity in AuIn2 is entirely without influence from ferromagnetism and therefore 
entirely conventional. 

11.2.  Unconventional coexistent superconducting/ferromagnetic compounds 
 
The more interesting, UcS, examples of coexistent superconductivity and ferromagnetism (UGe2 
(S.S. Saxena et al. [651], add references Aoki and Flouquet, JPSJ 74, 705 2005).and its two 
derivatives UCoGe and URhGe) were discovered starting in 2000.   UGe2 is a ferromagnet, 
TCurie=52 K, at ambient pressure which has a resistive/bulk specific heat superconducting 
transition (which is sensitive to defects) at 0.8 K/0.6 K under 1.2 GPa pressure (Pfleiderer [70]/ 
N. Tateiwa et al. [652]), see Fig. 29.   The phase diagram (Fig. 29) also shows a second 
ferromagnetic (FM2) phase (dashed line) within the higher temperature, FM1 phase, where the 
transition FM1  FM2 becomes first order [653] around the peak of the superconducting dome.  
(This transition has also been discussed as metamagnetic, see ref. [654].)  Thus, UGe2 is the first 
homogeneous coexistent ferromagnet/superconductor with its Curie temperature greater than the 
superconducting transition temperature, joined later by UCoGe (single crystalline values TCurie=2 
K and Tc=0.6 K) and URhGe (TCurie=9.6 K, Tc=0.25 K) – both at ambient pressure.  These three 
ferromagnetic superconductors all break time reversal symmetry (8).  
 
 
Fig. 29.  From Monthoux, Pines and 
Lonzarich [101].  Phase diagram of 
ferromagnetic ordering and 
superconductivity as a function of 
applied pressure for UGe2.  Note that 
the superconducting dome’s Tc 
values are multiplied by a factor of 
10 to make them more visible in the 
plot.  Reprinted by permission from 
Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature 
[101], copyright (2007). 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 


For UGe2, the specific heat n=32 mJ/molK2 at zero pressure and ~100 mJ/molK2 under pressure, 
with the residual  in the superconducting state under pressure equal to 72 mJ/molK2 (Tateiwa et 
al. [652]).  Indications for UcS (besides the coexistent magnetism/superconductivity (with 
breaking of time reversal symmetry 8), sensitivity of Tc to impurities 9 (as indicated by 
residual resistivity), and the large residual  14) are mostly lacking – partially due to the 
restricted temperature range below Tc and partly due to the difficulty of making measurements 
under pressure.  The fact of coexistent superconductivity and ferromagnetism in UGe2 has 
engendered numerous theoretical models, including spin triplet superconductivity mediated by 
spin fluctuations (Kirkpatrick et al. [655]); coupled CDW and SDW fluctuations (Watanabe and 
Miyake [656]); magnon exchange (Karchev [657]); special features of the density of states 
(Sandeman, Lonzarich and Schofield [658]).  For a thorough (4 ½ text pages) discussion of this 
coexistent ferromagnet-superconductor (presumed to be p-wave), see Pfleiderer [70].    
 
The specific heat  of URhGe above TCurie (9.6 K) is 20 mJ/molK2.  Below TCurie, the term 
in the specific heat linear with temperature is raised to 160 mJ/molK2 (Pleiderer [70]) – how 
much of that is due to the T3/2 magnon contribution in a ferromagnet (difficult to distinguish 
from C/T  ) is not known.  Other than the coexistence of ferromagnetism and 
superconductivity, indications of UcS in URhGe include sensitivity of Tc to lattice defects 9 ( 
residual resistivity, see Aoki et al. [659].)  Stated another way, as argued by Huxley [85] and 
discussed above in section 2.2.3., Tc plotted vs mean free path ( to sample quality through 
RRR) for URhGe follows the Abrikosov-Gorkov model (discussed in section 2.1.16.) like 
observed for UPt3 and qualitatively for CeCoIn5.  In addition, another indicator of UcS in 
URhGe is the large residual  in the superconducting state (~ ½ n).  (Aoki et al. [660]) 
 
The Tc of UCoGe is, unlike UGe2 and URhGe, insensitive to sample quality (Aoki et al. 
[659]) as determined by a Tc that is independent of RRR down to RRR=2.  This brings into 
question the normal assumption that a coexistent ferromagnet/superconductor is in a spin triplet 
state.  The normal state specific heat n=57 mJ/molK2 (Pfleiderer [70]).  As discussed in Huxley 
[77], it is the upper critical field Hc2 (T=0) in the direction of the moment that is the important 
test of whether the critical field exceeds the paramagnetic limit.  In the case of UCoGe, the upper 
critical field in the direction of the moment is only 0.6 T, i. e. less than the Pauli limit of 1.8 
kTc/B.  (Huxley [85]).  Thus, both the low critical field in the direction of the moment and the 
independence of Tc on sample quality argue against triplet pairing in UCoGe.  
 
In summary, UGe2, URhGe, and UCoGe exhibit coexistent superconductivity and 
magnetism, with evidence for UcS fairly conclusive for the first two. 
 
 
Table 12:  Strongly Suggestive Evidence for UcS for UGe2 and URhGe.  The symbol ‘’ 
means that that property was specifically looked for but not found 
 
 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
   14 

 
TF << 
D 
QC 
Spin res 
PG T 
>1 sc 
phase 
tunneling  
non-BCS 
TRSB  Tc/non-
mag imp 
C(H,) 
(H,) 

residual 
large 

UGe2/URhGe 
 
 
 
 
  
    
       
    
       
       
   

 

12.  Cobalt Oxide Hydrate 


The two dimensional (Hc2(T=0)ab ~ 4 Hc2(T=0)c) Co oxide material Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O was 
discovered (K. Takada et al. [661]) to be a superconductor in 2003.  Further work has refined the 
initial estimate of the sample’s composition to include the (H3O) listed here, and Tc values are 
about 4.7 K for Na concentrations x between 0.26 and 0.28 (Zheng et al. [662].)  For further 
details on the subtleties of the phase diagram, where the Co valence s=4 – (x+z) = 3.48 gives one 
superconducting phase vs Na content x (see Fig. 30b) while s=3.40 gives two superconducting 
phases separated by a non-superconducting phase vs 
Na content as shown in Fig. 30a, see the recent 
review by Sakurai, Ihara and Takada, [663].  The 
proper description of the non-superconducting 
phase is still open, with Sakurai, Ihara and Takada 
preferring magnetic ordering over charge 
modulations.  
 

Fig. 30 (color online) (From Sakurai, Ihara and 
Takada [663].)  Two phase diagrams, Tc vs Na 
content, in Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O, with valence 
s=3.40 in Fig. 30a with two superconducting phases 
below Na concentration x=0.33 and above x=0.35.  
In Fig. 30b, with valence s=3.48, only one 
superconducting phase occurs, with no non-
superconducting phase centered at x=0.34 as seen 
for s=3.40.  Reprinted from Physica C, vol 514, H. 
Sakurai et al., p. 378, copyright (2015), with 
permission from Elsevier. 

 
 
 
Sufficient water molecules (a double layer) intercalated between the Co oxide planes are 
necessary for superconductivity, and this composition is known as the bilayered hydrate, while 
the mono-layered hydrate structure is not superconducting.  This dependence on the water 
content, and the tendency of the water to evaporate at ambient conditions, makes this compound 
the material with the most sample dependence of any in this review.  It displays also the extremal 
aging dependence of any sample discussed herein:  while 239PuCoGa5, Tc=18.5 K, due to self-
irradiation damage, shows [431] a diminishing Tc (Tc ~ -0.5 K in one month),  Nax(H3O)zCoO2 
 yH2O shows a superconductivity that changes on the scale of (two) days (Oeschler et al. [664].)  
Within 40 days at ambient conditions, the sample is entirely non-superconducting. 
Despite the sample difficulties, some measurements indicative of UcS have been made.  
Photoemission (Shimojima et al. [665]) and NMR (Ihara et al. [666]) indicate a pseudogap (4) 
at about 20 meV.  NMR measurements (Zheng et al. [662]) of 1/T1T at one composition, x=0.26 
(but not the neighboring ones with approximately the same Tc) indicate a T2 dependence from Tc 
down to Tc/6, consistent with line nodes (5) in the superconducting gap (see Table 1).  Zheng 
et al. also report the presence of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations.  Ihara et al. (Ihara et al. 
[667]) report that their NQR data track the magnetic ordering temperature to T=0 at the point of 


the maximum Tc in the phase diagram and argue for quantum critical fluctuations (2) being the 
cause of the superconductivity.   SR data (Kanigel et al. [668]) are also consistent with some 
sort of nodal behavior.  Specific heat gives (Oeschler et al. [664]) a large residual (6.4 or 11.0 
mJ/molK2 depending on aging vs 16.1 mJ/molK2 for normal), 14.  Isotope effect experiments 
are unclear (Yokoi et al. [669]), since the measured changes are a.) expected to be small 
(substitution for 16O in the CoO2 planes) and b.) uncertain due to sample dependence.  Impurity 
doping (Ir and Ga for Co) effects on Tc result in a too small effect (Yokoi et al. [670]) (1 K/%) 
for non-magnetic impurities (9) in an ℓ0 UcS.  SR measurements (Higemoto et al. [671] and 
Sugiyama [672]) rule out time reversal symmetry breaking 8. 
Discussion of theory:  Using a multiorbital Hubbard model and the random phase 
approximation, Mochizuki and Ogata [673] find that the non-superconducting phase at s=3.4 
(Fig. 30a) is magnetic, and that the two superconducting phases on either side in the phase 
diagram vs Na content are s and a triplet p-wave.  For the higher Co valence (s=3.48) where 
there is just a single superconducting phase present in the phase diagram (Fig. 30b) vs Na 
content, they predict that this has p-wave symmetry.  Yada and Kontani [674] argue for an 
anisotropic (nodal) s-wave state brought about by the interaction between the electron-phonon 
interaction and antiferromagnetic fluctuations. 
In summary, Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O – with its complex phase diagram and extreme 
sample dependence – seems clearly to be an UcS.  
 
 
Table 13:  Strongly Suggestive Evidence for UcS in Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O.  The symbol 
‘’ means that that property was specifically looked for but not found 
 
 
    1 
  2 
   3 
 4 
  5 
   6 
   7 
     8 
 9 
   11 
   14 

 
TF << 
D 
QC 
Spin res 
PG T 
>1 sc 
phase 
tunneling  
non-BCS 
TRSB  Tc/non-
mag imp 
C(H,) 
(H,) 

residual 
large 

Nax(H3O)zCoO2  
yH2O 
    
   
 
 

    
       
    
       
       
   

 
 
 
 

 

13.  Other Unusual Superconductors:  Toplogical, H2S, Interfacial FeSe on SrTiO3  

Here at the end of the review of UcS, we mention some interesting new superconducting classes, 
one (H2S under pressure) with values of Tc over 200 K. At present, these emerging classes might 
properly be described as “possible” UcS.  If H2S is finally adjudged to be conventional, this 
would run counter to the 30 year old experience that the route towards higher Tc is via UcS based 
on the example of the cuprates (which up until recently held the record for high Tc:  166 K in 
fluorinated Hg-1223 at 23 GPa pressure – a slight, 2 K, increase over the 1994 value of Gao et 
al.) (Monteverde et al. [675]).  However, the question of conventional vs unconventional 
superconductivity is still the subject of intensive study in the emerging classes in this section.     


13.1.  Topological Superconductors 

There are several thorough (mostly theoretical due to lack of extensive experimental results as 
yet) reviews on this subject, e. g. Qi and  Zhang [676], Sasaki and Mizushima [677], and Alicea 
[678].  See also the special focus issue in Superconducting Science and Technology, ref. [679].  
Topological superconductors are predicted to host Majorana fermions, which is a fermion that is 
its own antiparticle hypothesized by E. Majorana in 1937.  Majorana fermions are theorized to 
exist as quasiparticle excitations in superconductors (either as gapless bound surface states or in 
vortices).  Although some researchers talk about having found topological superconductors, 
others state that “experimentally realizing topological superconductivity is not trivial.” (Fleet 
[680])  Thus, the question of possible other explanations for the few experimental systems as yet 
identified as topological superconductors continues to be a subject of investigation. 
 
Current discussion of strong experimental candidates for topological surface states on 
bulk topological insulators include [676] BiSb alloys, and Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3 crystals.  Possible 
topological superconductivity may occur at the interface between a topological insulator (where 
the bulk is an insulator and there are conducting surface states that are symmetry protected) and a 
conventional superconductor (theory by Fu and Kane [681])  In addition to such interfaces, 
hybrid devices involving InSb nanowire and normal and superconducting contacts have also 
produced evidence for Majorana fermions (Mourik et al. [682].)   

More recently, scanning tunneling microscopy (Nadj-Perge et al. [683]) found convincing 
evidence for Majorana bound states at the edge of a chain of Fe atoms on superconducting Pb.  
Doping Cu into the topological insulator Bi2Se3 causes superconductivity at  3.8 K (Hor et al. 
[684]) with the topological surface states still present, as determined by ARPES, at the Fermi 
level of the superconductor (Wray et al. [685].)  Point contact spectroscopy on Cu-doped Bi2Se3 
show a zero-bias conductance peak, indicative of Majorana fermions and topological 
superconductivity (Sasaki et al. [686].) Instead of manipulating the topological surfaces states in 
Bi2Se3 via proximity to a superconductor, this discovery of superconductivity in Cu-doped 
Bi2Se3 offers another route to structuring novel hybrid devices. 

Although the superconducting properties of the materials which are thought to be 
candidate topological superconductors (theoretically predicted (Nagai [687]) to be robust against 
non-magnetic disorder) are certainly unusual, whether or not they are unconventional is still 
under discussion.  On one side of this continuing discussion, -phase PdBi2 – identified as a 
topological superconductor by Biswas et al. [688] – as characterized by SR exhibits 
preservation of time reveral symmetry in a nodeless single band s-wave isotropic gap 
superconductor.  The topologically protected surface states do not affect the bulk properties of 
the superconductor.  On the other hand, Matano et al. [689], using NMR, find that Cu-doped 
Bi2Se3 has odd pairing (triplet) symmetry and state that their results have a “potential impact on 
establishing topological superconductivity” in this compound. 

13.2.  H2S at high pressure 

The pathway to discovery of superconductivity above 200 K in H2S under pressure was an 
interesting and somewhat convoluted one.  Fundamentally, theorists were trying to help in 
establishing a pathway to higher Tc values using conventional Eliashberg theory for electron-


phonon coupling.  Three necessary conditions were listed:  high characteristic phonon frequency 
(<0>), large electronic density of states at the Fermi energy (N(0)), and strong electron-phonon 
coupling.  For example, Ashcroft [690], as well as others, discussed pressurizing insulating 
compounds (to metallize them and create a finite N(0)) with large hydrogen atom content (e. g. 
MH4, or ternary compounds, with M a heavier atom), which then satisfies the high characteristic 
phonon frequency since <log>  1/(mass)1/2.  Based on infrared measurements, H2S was known 
(Sakashita et al. [691]) to become a metal under a pressure of 96 GPa (using diamond anvil 
techniques available since the mid 1970’s.)  Various theoretical predictions were made, including 
one by Li et al. (Li et al. [692]) that H2S would superconduct at Tc=80 K under a pressure of 160 
GPa.  Another prediction was by Duan et al. [693] for a partially dissociated H2S (stoichiometry 
H3S) under 200 GPa pressure with a Tc between 191 and 204 K. 
 
Experimentally, Drozdov et al. [694] reported a lengthy set of experiments.   A first 
(unpublished) report, Drozdov, Eremets, and Troyan [695], at the end of 2014 reported Tc = 190 
K on H2S under pressures up to 225 GPa.  Seven months later, the same team expanded on their 
earlier work with the highest Tc reported to be ~203 K at 155 GPa.  D2S was reported to have a 
large isotope effect with Tc decreased by about 30 K.  This is large compared to BCS, depending 
on what mass is considered appropriate in the relationship TcM- (i. e. is M=34 g/mol for H2S 
and 36 g/mol for D2S – i. e.  is unphysically large, or are the S modes unimportant and the 
vibrational frequency has only to do with the masses of H2 and D2, i. e. ~0.3 ?)  Already the 
earlier, 2014 initial report of Tc=190 K in H2S under pressure caused numerous theoretical 
analyses, e. g. Papaconstantopoulos et al. [696] who find that H3S is “basically an atomic 
hydrogen high temperature superconductor” involving electron-phonon (conventional) coupling.  
In this analysis, H2S under high pressure is a conventional, electron-phonon coupled 
superconductor with an electron-phonon coupling parameter  between 1.5 and 2.2 ( is around 
1.7 for Tc~20 K A15 superconductors [2]) and a characteristic phonon frequency <log> of 1500 
to 1770 K [696].  If one takes a phenomenological formula from 1987 from Bourne et al. [697] 
(Tc=<log>(exp(2/)-1)-1/2/(2)), sometimes called the Kresin-Barbee-Cohen formula, one 
obtains about Tc=182 K for =2 and <log>=1500 K.  
 
Although this view that superconductivity with Tc~200 K in H2S under pressure is 
conventional (including the predictions of Li et al. and Duan et al.) remains the consensus, there 
are opposing views that hold that such a high Tc (and such a large isotope effect) cannot come 
from electron-phonon coupling.  For example, Hirsch and Marsiglio [698] propose the so-called 
“hole superconductivity” approach, where a non-phononic mechanism pairs highly-
renormalized-mass hole carriers.  It has been commonly assumed (for an early paper on the 
subject, see Cohen and Anderson [699]) that electron-phonon coupling could not cause 
superconductivity at high temperatures due to the required large  causing lattice instabilities.  
Much has changed since then, and MgB2, discovered (Nagamatsu et al. [700]), in 2001 with 
Tc=39 K, is accepted as a conventional electron-phonon coupled superconductor.  
Also since the early work by Cohen and Anderson, numerous works on predicting Tc in 
metallic hydrogen under pressure (germane to the discussion of H3S) have been published, e. g. 
by Papaconstantopoulos and Klein [701] - where pure electron-phonon coupling was assumed 
resulting in Tc=234 K at 460 GPa - and by Richardson and Ashcroft [702] where both electron-
electron and electron-phonon coupling contributes to a high Tc.   How this discussion over the 
pairing mechanism in H3S under pressure will be resolved awaits further work. 
 


13.3. Interfacial FeSe on SrTiO3 
 
The unfolding reports on high Tc in monolayer films of FeSe (bulk Tc~8 K) on SrTiO3 (STO) 
substrates were spread over almost a year.  Wang et al. [463] had the initial report, with Tc~53 K.  
Submitted 9 months later, He et al. [703] reported Tc=655K.  The highest Tc reported so far, 
using four point resistivity measurements, is 109 K [704].  Various work on FeSe on STO 
substrates ensued, including an ARPES work (Lee et al. [465]) that indicated strong coupling 
between FeSe electrons and longitudinal optical phonons in STO.  For recent reviews, see refs. 
[705-706].  Recently TiO2 has also been found to work as a substrate, with monolayer FeSe on 
TiO2 resulting in Tc=63 K (Rebec et al. [707].) 
 
Obviously, much theoretical work has been devoted to understanding this unusually high 
Tc interfacial superconductivity.  One representative work is the quantum Monte Carlo study by 
Li et al. [708].  (See also the comment on this work by Kivelson [709].)  Li et al. take the 
approach that they should separately calculate various (three) interactions which they estimate 
might be primarily responsible for the superconducting ‘glue’, and then add on the additional 
influence on the superconducting order parameter of either electron-phonon interactions or 
nematic fluctuations.  The three possible primary interactions are:  exchange of one of two types 
of antiferromagnetic fluctuations (either nearest neighbor or next nearest neighbor exchange of 
antiferromagnetic fluctuations) or antiferro-orbital fluctuation mediated pairing.  Li et al.’s 
graphs show that the secondary interactions can increase the calculated order parameter (i. e. the 
energy gap, presumed to be proportional to Tc) by around 60%.  The nearest neighbor 
antiferromagnetic fluctuations produced nodeless d-wave pairing, while the next-nearest 
neighbor antiferromagnetic fluctuations and the orbital fluctuations both produce s-wave pairing.  
In their more speculative final discussion, Li et al. argue for the d-wave pairing (i. e. nearest 
neighbor AFM fluctuations), enhanced either by electron-phonon exchange or nematic 
fluctuations (or by both.) 
 
Clearly, the theory of Li et al. suggests UcS for interfacial FeSe on STO (or TiO2).  The 
correct explanation remains the subject of intense ongoing discussions. 
 
 
14.  Summary and Conclusions 

We stated in the beginning that a goal of this review was to assist in forming a common 
description of the various diverse UcS classes, an equivalent to the BCS theory that described 
what for four and a half decades (1911-1957) had seemed a host of unconnected properties in the 
electron-phonon coupled superconductors.  As clear from Tables 2-3, 5, and 7-13 in this review, 
which describe the indications for UcS of each class, the breadth of behavior in these 
unconventional superconductors is indeed very large.  It may be the case that the classes 
described herein are so disparate that a common understanding – in the manner of a BCS theory 
– is not possible.  Can coexistent ferromagnetism and superconductivity in UGe2 be understood 
by a theory that also describes the cuprates?    

We espouse the belief that a common description of a significant fraction of these 
disparate classes, which contain pairing symmetries from s to f-wave, which see 
superconductivity in p-, d-, and f-electron (both 4f and 5f) systems, must be possible.  Preparing 
a theory focussing on commonalities in the various UcS classes may be easier than describing in 


depth all the special features of just one class.  On the other hand, perhaps, as claim various 
theorists, the explanation for the superconductivity in a particular class (e. g. the cuprates or the 
IBS) or subclass (e. g. UPt3 or Th-doped UBe13) is already published and awaits merely a wider 
consensus to be recognized.  Such a consensus could be the starting point for a more general 
theory.  In the end, the various indications for UcS for the 9 (up to 12) UcS classes described 
herein have been analyzed for reproducibility and agreement with other measurement techniques.  
The hoped-for overarching theory awaits only the proper connection of the various – sometimes 
seemingly disparate - properties together. 

With that optimistic note expressed, let us review some of the extant “puzzles” and 
difficulties in forming an overarching theoretical description which this review of UcS has 
identified. 

1.  Chief amongst the important questions is of course:  what interaction is coupling the 
electrons?  Certainly spin fluctuations is a popular answer for a number of UcS classes where 
antiferromagnetism is present in the phase diagram near (e. g. in the hole-doped cuprates and in 
some heavy fermions) or coexistent with (e. g. in the electron-doped cuprates, in heavy fermion 
UPd2Al3 and UNi2Al3, and most of the IBS) superconductivity.  Fig. 5 shows a linear 
relationship between log(Tc) and log(T0), where T0 is a characteristic temperature/energy of the 
spin fluctuations, for various heavy fermion and cuprate superconductors.  Further classes of 
UcS discussed herein whose pairing could be describable by exchange of antiferromagnetic spin 
fluctuations would include high specific heat  non-centrosymmetric superconductors, where the 
lack of inversion symmetry should cause anomalous spin fluctuations, which are then enhanced 
by strong correlations ( high ) in some materials. 

If spin fluctuations are the cause of superconductivity, whence do they come?  One of the 
commonly discussed sources is quantum criticality near in the phase diagram to where an 
antiferromagnetic transition is suppressed to T=0.   (There are of course other possibilities for 
causing a QCP.)  As one example, neutron scattering data (Stockert et al. [35]) on CeCu2Si2 have 
been interpreted as showing that spin fluctuations near an antiferromagnetic QCP are the primary 
cause of superconducting pairing in that compound.   

It is worth noting that this review finds evidence (primarily linear-with-temperature low 
temperature resistivity) for quantum criticality 2 in the majority of the UcS classes discussed 
herein.  As Si and Steglich [710] point out, “antiferromagnetic quantum criticality can provide a 
mechanism for superconductivity” in not only heavy fermions and cuprates, but also in the 
organics and the IBS.  Moriya and Ueda [13], in their review before the discovery of the IBS, 
took the same point of view for the cuprates, organics, and heavy fermion UcS.  Scalapino [14], 
making similar arguments for an overarching theory, points out that pairing mediated by spin 
fluctuations is not like the BCS virtual exchange of a phonon with a sharp, well defined relation 
between energy and momentum.  Instead, spin fluctuations have a spread out spectral weight in 
 and q.  Also worth noting is that, as pointed out by Millis, Sachdev, and Varma [711], lower 
frequency spin fluctuations are pair breaking.  Thus the frequency range for the optimal spin 
fluctuation mediated pairing corresponds to an energy that is larger than twice the 
superconducting Tc.  


 
Despite the oft stated proposal that spin fluctuations may provide the pairing glue in 
various UcS, this still remains very much an open question (although there is no clear second 
explanation with any sort of broad acceptance as we have discussed herein.)   Anderson [102] 
has argued (as discussed in section 3) against exchange of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation as 
responsible for pairing in the particular case of the cuprates -  stating that the frequency of such 
an AFM spin fluctuation interaction would be too high for the Eliashberg formalism.  
Anderson’s argument for the exchange of ferromagnetic spin fluctuations (FMSF) offering the 
low frequency energy scale required by the Eliashberg theory has the problem that in general, as 
discussed herein, with minor exceptions (e. g. possibly UPt3) the experimental data show support 
only for AFM fluctuations being present.    

 
As a final word, Norman [103] states –  in the specific instance of the cuprates – that in 
any case magnetic correlations play “a prominent role” in the superconductivity, with the 
Resonating Valence Bond model of Anderson [350], the afore discussed spin fluctuations, orbital 
currents (Varma [712]), or some mixture being the appropriate manifestations of such 
correlations.  

2.  Perhaps the next most important puzzle is one that indeed does not appear to lend 
itself to linking the various UcS classes together with one description:  the pseudogap.  This 
phenomenon is strongly present in the cuprates, and is called “key” by Norman for 
understanding the pairing in the cuprates.  In the other UcS classes, a pseudogap is possibly 
present in CeCoIn5,  is present in URu2Si2 and Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O and – in the IBS - only 
appears to be present with any certitude in two cases:  BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 and Ba0.75K0.25Fe2As2.  
(In fact, even the word “pseudogap” does not appear in the recent review of the IBS by Hosono 
and Kuroki [27].) Thus, it is incorrect to say that the phenomenon of a pseudogap is 
characteristic of any class of UcS other than the cuprates and perhaps cobalt oxide hydrate (the 
latter based on two measurements).  As discussed herein and summarized in the tables, a 
pseudogap has been searched for in both Sr2RuO4 and the organic superconductors with no 
success.  Thus, a theory to describe all classes of UcS must account for the cuprates showing a 
pseudogap while the other classes in general do not.  Perhaps the few instances of a pseudogap 
occurring outside the cuprate class provide an important clue, just as the presence or absence of 
the isotope effect in the elemental superconductors provided an experimental clue for the 
importance of the retarded Coulomb interaction * in the BCS theory. 

3.  Rather than considering the non-unifying pseudogap, is there a strong indication of 
UcS – other than quantum criticality in the phase diagram - that is more or less commonly 
present/universal in the classes discussed herein?  Rather trivially, the UcS commonly have 
anisotropy in their gap function (k), ranging from a sign changing s gap function in the IBS; to 
triplet p-wave in Sr2RuO4, Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O, UGe2, URhGe, the field induced phase in 
CeCoIn5, and UBe13; to d-wave in the cuprates, organics, possibly heavily overdoped Ba1-

xKxFe2As2, several of the heavy fermions including CeCoIn5; to possible f-wave in UPt3 and 
Sr2RuO4 (which would then have mixed pairing symmetries).  (As thoroughly discussed herein, 
specific assignments of pairing symmetry, with a few exceptions, are still under discussion.)  
Thus, any theory which attempts to include a broad spectrum of UcS must deal with this strong, 
but diverse anisotropy in the energy gap. 


4.  We turn now to a short list of a few of the more unique puzzles of the individual 
classes mentioned herein that also appear to defy the quest for a common theory of the full set of 
classes.    

a.  The second, lower Tc bulk C anomaly in the specific heat of U1-xThxBe13 (Fig. 7) 
around x=0.03 seems unique.  No other dopant besides Th into superconducting, Tc=0.95 K, 
UBe13 causes such a second transition, and such a second transition – which has its own phase 
diagram vs composition, Fig. 8 – is seen in no other material.  (The second transition in UPt3, 
according to data to date, has a fixed C and fixed separation between Tc1 and Tc2 in optimally 
annealed samples.)   The pairing symmetry at Tc2 in U1-xThxBe13 is under debate.  Perhaps an 
investigation into time reversal symmetry breaking would be revealing. 

b.   The linear relation between Tc and the c/a ratio in the 115 structure Ce(M1-xM’x)In5 
and Pu(Co1-xRhx)Ga5 superconducting family is an interesting puzzle.  This Tc  c/a correlation 
argues for some common explanation for a sub-class of superconductors which have quite 
disparate material’s properties (e. g. the sample dependent Curie Weiss behavior of the normal 
state susceptibility all the way from 300 K down to Tc=18.5 K in PuCoGa5). 

c.  The many differences between Lax-2(Sr,Ba)xCuO4 and the other hole doped cuprates 
certainly need to be further understood. 
 
 
In summary, the classes of UcS reviewed herein show both many similar properties, as 
well as many properties that may be unique to an individual material.  A challenge for theory is 
to forge a common explanation for the salient points of at least a majority of the classes.  Such a 
starting point would help select directions for further exploration of the remaining unique 
puzzles and, hopefully, show the way to even higher Tc.    
 
Acknowledgements:  The author gratefully acknowledges helpful discussions with Y. Bang, A. 
Biswas, S. Brown, M. Cohen, P. Coleman, I. Eremin, R. Greene, P. Hirschfeld, S. Johnston, A. 
Kapitulnik, H.-Y. Kee, P. Kumar, D. Morr, T. Shibauchi, O. Stockert, J. Thompson, I. Vekhter, I. 
Vishik and H.-H. Wen.  Several of these discussions took place while the author was at the 
Aspen Center of Physics, supported by National Science Foundation grant PHY1066293.  Work 
at Florida performed under the auspices of the United States Department of Energy, Office of 
Basic Energy Sciences, contract no. DE-FG02-86ER45268. 
 
 
 
 
References 
[1] G. W. Webb, F. Marsiglio, and J. E. Hirsch, Phys. C 514 (2015), p. 17. 
[2] G. R. Stewart, Phys. C 514 (2015), p. 28. 
[3] M. Sigrist and K. Ueda, Rev. Mod. Phys. 63 (1991), p. 239. 
[4] C. C. Tsuei and J. R. Kirtley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72 (2000), p. 969. 
[5] M. R. Norman, Science 332 (2011), p. 196. 
[6] F. Steglich, J. Aarts, C. D. Bredl, W. Lieke, D. Meschede, W. Franz and H. Schaefer, Phys.  
     Rev. Lett. 43 (1979), p. 1892. 


[7] D. Jerome, A. Mazaud, M. Ribault, and K. Bechgaard, J. de Phys. Lett. 41 (1980), p. L95. 
[8] J. G. Bednorz, and K. A. Müller, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter 64 (1986), p. 189. 
[9] Superconductivity Volume 1: Conventional and Unconventional Superconductors Volume 2:  
     Novel Superconductors, K.-H. Bennemann and J. B. Ketterson, ed., Springer, Berlin, 2008. 
[10] Superconducting Materials:  Conventional, Unconventional and Undetermined, J. E.  
         Hirsch, M. B. Maple, and F. Marsiglio, ed., Physica C 514 (2015), p. 1-444.  
[11] R. Hott, R. Kleiner, T. Wolf, and G. Zwicknagl, “Review on Superconducting Materials,” in  
       Encyclopedia of Applied Physics, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Published Online : 20 DEC 2016,  
       DOI: 10.1002/3527600434.eap790). 
[12] A.Kapitulnik, J. Xia, E. Schemm, and A. Palevski, New. J. Phys. 11 (2009), p. 055060.   
[13] T. Moriya and K. Ueda, Rep. Prog. Phys. 66 (2003), p.  1299.    
[14] D. J. Scalapino, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84 (2012), p. 1383.    
[15] C. Mazumdar and R. Nagarajan, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 173. 
[16] D. Hsieh, D. Qian, A. L. Wray, Y. Xia, Y. Hor, R. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, Nature 452  
       (2008), p. 970.   
[17] P. B. Allen and R. C. Dynes, Phys. Rev. B 12 (1975), p. 905. 
[18] K. E. Kihlstrom, D. Mael, and T. H. Geballe, Phys. Rev. B 29 (1984), p. 150. 
[19] G. R. Stewart, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 54 (1983), p.1. 
[20] L. F. Mattheis, M. Hill, and N. Jersey, Phys. Rev. 450 (1966), p. 151. 
[21] J. T. Schriempf, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 28 (1967), p. 2581. 
[22] G. R. Stewart, Z. Fisk, and J. O. Willis, Phys. Rev. B 28 (1983), p. 172. 
[23] F. G. Aliev, N. B. Brandt, V. V. Moshchalkov, and S. M. Chudinov, J. Low Temp. Phys. 57  
       (1984), p. 61. 
[24] G. R. Stewart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73 (2001), p. 797. 
[25] J. S. Kim, J. Alwood, G. R. Stewart, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. B 64  
       (2001), p. 134524. 
[26] N. D. Mathur, F. M. Grosche, S. R. Julian, I. R. Walker, D. M. Freye, R. K. W.   
       Haselwimmer, and G. G. Lonzarich, Nature 394 (1998), p.39. 
[27] H. Hosono and K. Kuroki, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 399. 
[28] P. C. Dai, H. A. Mook, G. Aeppli, S. M. Hayden, and F. Dogan, Nature 406 (2000), p. 965. 
[29] M. Eschrig., Adv. Phys. 55 (2006), p. 47. 
[30] G. R. Stewart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 (2011), p. 1589.   
[31] O. J. Lipscombe, Leland W. Harriger, P. G. Freeman, M. Enderle, Chenglin Zhang,  
       Miaoying Wang, Takeshi Egami, Jiangping Hu, Tao Xiang, M. R. Norman, and Pengcheng  
       Dai, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), p. 064515. 
[32] C. Stock, C. Broholm, J. Hudis, H.J. Kang, and C. Petrovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008), p.   
       087001.  
[33] N. K. Sato, N. Aso, K. Miyake, R. Shiina, P. Thalmeier, G. Varelogiannis, C. Geibel, F.  
       Steglich, P. Fulde, and T. Komatsubara, Nature 410 (2001), p. 340.  
[34] O. Stockert, J. Arndt, A. Schneidewind, H. Schneider, H. S. Jeevan, C. Geibel, F. Steglich,  
       and M. Loewenhaupt, Physica B 403 (2008), p. 973. 
[35] O. Stockert, J. Arndt, E. Faulhaber, C. Geibel, H. S. Jeevan, S. Kirchner, M. Loewenhaupt,  
       K. Schmalzl, W. Schmidt, Q. Si, and F. Steglich, N. Phys. 7 (2011), p. 119 Supplementary  
       Information.  
[36] G. Aeppli, E. Bucher, C. Broholm, J. K. Kjems, J. Baumann, and J. Hufnagl, Phys. Rev.  
       Lett. 60 (1988), p. 615.   


[37] M. Braden, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, P. Pfeuty, J. Kulda, Z. Mao, and Y. Maeno, Phys. Rev. B  
       66 (2002), p. 064522.   
[38] S. Hüfner, M. A. Hossain, A. Damascelli, and G. A. Sawatzky, Rep. Prog. Phys. 71 (2008),  
       p. 062501.   
[39] T. M. Rice, Kai-Yu Yang, and F. C. Zhang, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75 (2012), p. 016502. 
[40] T. Timusk, and B. Statt, Rep. Prog. Phys. 62 (1999), p. 61.   
[41] N. P. Armitage, P. Fournier, and R. L. Greene, Rev. Mod.  Phys. 82 (2010), p. 2421.    
[42] P. Fournier, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 314.   
[43] J.W. Loram, J. Luo, J.R. Cooper, W.Y. Liang, and J.L. Tallon, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 62  
       (2001), p. 59.   
[44] B. Bucher, P. Steiner, J. Karpinski, E. Kaldis, and P. Wachter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993), p.  
       2012.   
[45] G.-q. Zheng, T. Sato, Y. Kitaoka, M. Fujita, and K. Yamada, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003), p.  
       197005. 
[46] G. Rickayzen, Theory of Superconductivity, Interscience, New York, 1965.   
[47]  A. Brown, M. W. Zemansky, and H. A. Boorse, Phys. Rev. 92 (1953), p. 52.  
[48] R. H. Heffner and M. R.  Norman, Comments on Cond. Matt. Physics 1 (1996), p. 361. 
[49] M. Lang, R. Modler, U. Ahlheim, R. Helfrich, P. H. P. Reinders, F. Steglich, W. Assmus,  
       W. Sun, G. Bruls, D. Weber, and B. Luethi, Physica Scripta T39 (1991), p. 135.   
[50] S. Kittaka,Y. Aoki, Y. Shimura, T. Sakakibara, S. Seiro, C. Geibel, F. Steglich, H. Ikeda,  
        and K.  Machida, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014), p. 067002.   
[51] R. Prozorov, and R. W. Gianetta, Supercon. Sci. Tech 19 (2006), p. R41.   
[52] E. Roddick, and D. Stroud, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 (1995), p. 1430.    
[53] P. J. Hirschfeld and N. Goldenfeld, Phys. Rev. B 48 (1993), p. 4219. 
[54] A. B. Vorontsov, M. G. Vavilov, and A. V. Chubukov, Phys. Rev. B 79 (2009), p. 060508. 
[55] D. Einzel, P. J. Hirschfeld,  F. Gross, B. S. Chandrasekhar, K. Andres, H. R. Ott, J. Beuers,  
       Z. Fisk, and J. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. Letter 56 (1986), p. 2513. 
[56] D. M. Lee, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 (1997), p. 645.    
[57] P. W. Anderson and W. F. Brinkman, in The Helium Liquids (Proceedings of the Fifteenth  
       Scottish Universities Summer School in Physics), J. G. M. Armitage and I. E. Farquhar, eds.  
       (Academic Press, London, 1975). 
[58] R. Balian, and N. R. Werthamer, Phys. Rev. 131 (1963), p. 1553.   
[59] V. Mueller, Ch. Roth, D. Maurer, E. W. Scheidt, K. Luders, E. Bucher, and H. E. Boemmel,  
       Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987), p. 1224.    
[60] R. A. Fisher, S. Kim, B. F. Woodfield, N. E. Phillips, L. Taillefer, K. Hasselbach, J.  
       Flouquet, A. L. Giorgi, and J. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989), p. 1411. 
[61] A. Huxley, P. Rodiere, D. M. Paul, N. van Dijk, R. Cubitt, and J. Flouquet, Nature 406  
       (2000), p. 160. 
[62] J. A. Sauls, Adv. Phys. 43 (1994), p. 113.   
[63] S. Adenwalla, S. W. Lin, Q. Z. Ran, Z. Zhao, J. B. Ketterson, J. A. Sauls, L. Taillefer, D. G.  
       Hinks, M. Levy, and Bimal K. Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990), p. 2298.    
[64] C. C. Tsuei, J. R. Kirtley, C. C. Chi, L. S. Yu-Jahnes, A. Gupta, T. Shaw, J. Z. Sun, and M.  
        B. Ketchen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, (1994), p. 593.    
[65] E. R. Schemm, W. J. Gannon, C. M. Wishne, W. P. Halperin, and A. Kapitulnik, Science  
       345 (2014), p. 190.  
[66] E. R. Schemm, R. E. Baumbach,  P. H. Tobash, F. Ronning, E. D. Bauer, and A. Kapitulnik,  


       Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015), p. 140506 (R).  
[67] F. Kneidinger, E. Bauer, I. Zeiringer, P. Rogl, C. Blaas-Schenner, D. Reith, and R.  
       Podloucky,  Phys C 514 (2015), p. 388. 
[68] M. B. Maple, Appl. Phys. 9 (1776), p. 179.      
[69] P. W. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 11 (1959), p. 26. 
[70] C. Pfleiderer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 (2009), p. 1551. 
[71] Wakeham, N. Ni, E.D. Bauer, J.D. Thompson, E. Tegtmeier, and F. Ronning, 
        Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015), p. 024408. 
[72] Y. Dalichaouch, M. C. de Andrade, D. A. Gajewski, R. Chau, P. Visani, and M. B. Maple,   
        Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995), p. 3938. 
[73] N. Joo, P. Auban-Senzier,C. R. Pasquier, D. Jerome, and K.Bechgaard, Europhys. Lett. 72  
      (2005), p. 645. 
[74] S. E. Brown, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 279. 
[75] V. P. Mineev and K. V. Samokhin, Introduction to Unconventional Superconductivity,  
       Gordon and Breach, Amsterdam, 1999. 
[76] T. Park, M. B. Salamon, E. M. Choi, H. J. Kim, and S.-I. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003),  
        177001. 
[77] A. B. Vorontsov and I. Vekhter, Phys. Rev. B 75 (2007), p. 224501.     
[78] T.H. Geballe, G.W. Hull, E. Corenzwit, and B.T. Matthias, Phys. Rev. Lett. 6 (1961), p.  
        275. 
[79] R.Caspary, P. Hellmann, M. Keller, G. Sparn, C. Wassilew, R. Koehler, C. Geibel, C.  
       Schrank, F. Steglich, and N. E. Phillips, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993), p. 2146. 
[80] K. Hasselbach, L. Taillefer, and J. Flouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989), p. 93. 
[81] K. A. Moler, D. J. Baar, J. S. Urbach, Ruixing Liang, W. N. Hardy, and A. Kapitulnik,  
       Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (1994), p. 2744.     
[82] G. E. Volovik and L. P. Gor'kov, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 88 (1985), p. 1412.  
[83] Y. Bang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010), p. 217001. 
[84] F. Hardy and A. D. Huxley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), p. 247006. 
[85] A. D. Huxley, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 368. 
[86] E. Bucher, J. P. Maita, G. W. Hull, R. C. Fulton, and A. S. Cooper 
        Phys. Rev. B 11 (1975), p. 440. 
[87] T. Tohyama, Jap. Journal. Appl. Phys. 51 (2012), p.  010004.     
[88] L.Taillefer, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 1 (2010), p. 51. 
[89] C. Bourbonnais and A.Sedeki, Phys. Rev. B. 80 (2009), p. 085105.     
[90] G. R. Stewart, Z. Fisk, J. O. Willis, and J. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984), p. 679.    
[91] S. Doniach and S. Engelsberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17 (1966), p.750.     
[92] D. Fay and J. Appel, Phys. Rev. B 16 (1977), p. 2325.     
[93] P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. B. 30 (1984), p. 1549. 
[94] C. M. Varma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55 (1985), p. 2723. 
[95] K. Miyake, S. Schmitt-Rink, and C. M. Varma, Phys. Rev. B 34 (1986), p. 6554(R).  
[96] D. J. Scalapino, E. Loh, Jr., and J. E. Hirsch, Phys. Rev. B 34 (1986), p. 8190.  
[97] M. R. Norman, Phys. Rev. B 43 (1991), p. 6121. 
[98] V. J. Emery, Synth. Met. 13 (1986), p. 21.   
[99] V. J. Emery, Mechanisms of Organic Superconductivity, in Low-Dimensional Conductors  
        and Superconductors, Springer, N. Y., 1987.   
[100] D. J. Scalapino, Phys. Rep. 250 (1995), p. 329.  


[101] P.  Monthoux, D. Pines, and G. G. Lonzarich, Nature 450 (2007), p. 1177. 
[102] P. W. Anderson, Science 316 (2007), p. 1705. 
[103] M. R. Norman, J Supercond Nov. Magn 25 (2012), p. 2131.     
[104] L. Fanfarillo, M. Mori, M. Campetella, M. Grilli, and S. Caprara, J. Phys.: Condens.  
          Matter 28 (2016), p. 065701. 
[105] K. Andres, J. E. Graebner, and H. R. Ott, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 (1975), p. 1779.  
[106] G. R. Stewart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 56 (1984), p. 755.    
[107] T. Shinkoda, Ken-ichi Kumagai, and K. Asayama, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 46 (1979), p. 1754.  
[108] J. L. Sarrao, L. A. Morales, J. D. Thompson, B. L. Scott, G. R. Stewart, F. Wastin, J.  
         Rebizant, P. Boulet, E. Colineau, and G. H. Lander, Nature 420 (2002), p. 297. 
[109] R. Flint, M. Dzero, and P. Coleman, Nature Physics 4 (2008), p. 643. 
[110] K. Satoh, T. Fujita, Y. Maeno, Y. Ōnuki, and T. Komatsubara, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 58  
         (1989), p. 1012. 
[111] J. S. Kim, B. Andraka, C. S. Jee, S. B. Roy, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B 41, (1990),  
         p.11073.  
[112] N. F. Berk and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17 (1966), p. 433. 
[113] N. Grewe and F. Steglich, Heavy fermions, Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of  
         Rare Earths Vol. 14, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1991. 
[114] P. Thalmeier, and G. Zwicknagl, Unconventional Superconductivity and Magnetism in  
         Lanthanide and Actinide Intermetallic Compounds, Handbook of the Physics and  
         Chemistry of Rare Earths Vol. 34, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2005. 
[115] R. Joynt and L. Taillefer. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 (2002), p. 235. 
[116] P. Kumar and P. Wölfle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 (1987), p. 1954.  
[117] M. Sigrist and T. M. Rice, Phys. Rev. B 39 (1989), p. 2200. 
[118] M. B. Maple, Z. Henkie, R. E. Baumbach, T. A. Sayles, N. P. Butch, P.-C. Ho1, T.  
         Yanagisawa, W. M. Yuhasz, R. Wawryk, T. Cichorek, and A. Pietraszko,  J. Phys. Soc.  
         Jpn. 77 (2008) Suppl. A, p. 7.  
[119] J. S. Kim, G. N. Tam, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015), 224509.  
[120] P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. B 30 (1984), p. 4000. 
[121] G. E. Volovik and L. P. Gor'kov, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz 39 (1984), p. 550. 
[122] E. I. Blount, Phys. Rev. B 32 (1985), p. 2935. 
[123] K. Ueda, and T. M. Rice, Phys. Rev. B 31 (1985a), p. 7114. 
[124] K. Ueda, and T. M. Rice, in Theory of Heavy Fermions and Valence Fluctuations,  
         Springer, Berlin, 1985b p. 267. 
[125]  F. Steglich, private communication.    
[126] O. Stockert, E. Faulhaber, G. Zwicknagl, N. Stüßer, H. S. Jeevan, M. Deppe, R. Borth, R.  
         Küchler, M. Loewenhaupt, C. Geibel, and F. Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004), p.  
         136401. 
[127] U. Ahlheim, M. Winkelmann, P. van Aken, C. D. Bredl, F. Steglich, and G. R. Stewart, J.  
          Magn. Magn. Mater. 76&77 (1988), p. 520. 
[128] P. Gegenwart, C. Langhammer, C. Geibel, R. Helfrich, M. Lang, G. Sparn, F. Steglich, R.  
         Horn, L. Donnevert, A. Link, and W. Assmus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998), p. 1501.     
[129] H. Q. Yuan, F. M. Grosche, M. Deppe, C. Geibel, G. Sparn, and F. Steglich, Science 302  
         (2003), p. 2104. 


[130] T. Yamashita, T. Takenaka, Y. Tokiwa, J. A. Wilcox, Y. Mizukami, D. Terazawa, Y.  
          Kasahara, S. Kittaka, T. Sakakibara, M. Konczykowski, S. Seiro, H. S. Jeevan, C. Geibel,  
          C. Putzke, T. Onishi, H. Ikeda, A. Carrington, T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda,  
          arXiv1703.02800. 
[131] G. M. Pang, M. Smidman, J. L. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. F. Weng, E. M. Nica, Y. Chen, W. B.  
         Jiang, Y. J. Zhang, H. S. Jeevan, P. Gegenwart, F. Steglich, Q. Si, and H. Q. Yuan,  
         arXiv1605.04786. 
[132] E. Nica, R. Yu, Q. Si, arXiv1703.03170. 
[133] H. R. Ott, H. Rudigier, Z. Fisk, and J. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 (1983), p. 1595.  
[134] P. Gegenwart, C. Langhammer, R. Helfrich, N. Oeschler, M. Lang, J.S. Kim, G.R. Stewart,   
         and F. Steglich, Physica C 408-410 (2004), p. 157. 
[135] L. Glémot, J. P. Brison, J. Flouquet, A. I. Buzdin, I. Sheikin, D. Jaccard, C. Thessieu, and  
         F. Thomas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999), p. 169.   
[136] F. Thomas, B. Wand, T. Luhmann, P. Gegenwart, G. R. Stewart, F. Steglich, J. P. Brison,  
         A. Buzdin, L. Glemot, and J. Bouquet, J. Low Temp. Phys. 102 (1996), p. 117. 
[137] M. B. Maple, J. W. Chen, S. E. Lambert, Z. Fisk, J. L. Smith, H. R. Ott, J. S. Brooks and 
          M. J. Naughton, Phys. Rev. Lett 54 (1985), p. 477. 
[138] Y. Shimizu, Y. Haga, K. Tenya, T. Yanagisawa, H. Hidaka and H. Amitsuka,.Journal of  
          Physics: Conference Series 391 (2012), p. 012065.     
[139] D. S. Jin, T. F. Rosenbaum, J. S. Kim, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B 49 (1994), p.  
          1540(R). 
[140] D. E. MacLaughlin, Cheng Tien, W. G. Clark, M. D. Lan, Z. Fisk, J. L. Smith, and H. R.   
         Ott, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 (1984), p. 1833.                                                                          
[141] S. Han, K. W. Ng, E. L. Wolf, A. Millis, J. L. Smith, and Z. Fisk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57   
         (1986), p.  238.                                                                                                                           
[142] U. Rauchschwalbe, C. D. Bredl, F. Steglich, K. Maki, and P. Fulde, EPL 3 (1987), p. 757.        
[143] U. Rauchschwalbe, F. Steglich, A. de Visser, and J .J. M. Franse, J. Magn. Magn. Mater.  
         63-64 (1987), p. 347. 
[144] B. Ellman, T. F. Rosenbaum, J. S. Kim, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B 44 (1991), p.  
         12074(R).  
[145] M. Lang, R. Helfrich, F. Kromer, C. Langhammer, F. Steglich, G. R. Stewart, and J. S. 
         Kim, Physica B 259 (1999), p. 608. 
[146] J. L. Smith, Z. Fisk, J. O. Willis, B. Batlogg, and H. R. Ott, J. Appl. Phys. 55 (1984), p.  
         1996. 
[147] H. R. Ott, H. Rudigier, Z. Fisk, and J. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. B 31 (1985), p. 1651(R).  
[148] J. S. Kim, B. Andraka, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B 44 (1991), p. 6921. 
[149] E.-W. Scheidt, T. Schreiner, P. Kumar, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B 58 (1998), p.  
         15153.  
[150] B. Batlogg, D. Bishop, B. Golding, C. M. Varma, Z. Fisk, J. L. Smith, and H. R. Ott, Phys.  
         Rev. Lett. 55 (1985), p. 1319.       
[151] H. M. Mayer,  U. Rauchschwalbe,  F. Steglich,  G. R. Stewart, and A. L. Giorgi, Z. Physik  
         B – Condensed Matter 64 (1986), p. 299. 
[152] H. R. Ott, H. Rudigier, E. Felder, Z. Fisk, and J. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. B 33 (1986), p. 126. 
[153] S. E. Lambert, Y. Dalichaouch, M. B. Maple, J. L. Smith, and Z. Fisk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57   


         (1986), p. 1619. 
[154] U. Rauchschwalbe, F. Steglich, G. R. Stewart, A. L. Giorgi, P. Fulde and K. Maki, EPL 3  
         (1987), p. 751. 
[155] R. H. Heffner, D. W. Cooke, A. L. Giorgi, R. L. Hutson, M. E. Schillaci, H. D. Rempp, J.  
         L. Smith, J. O. Willis, D. E. MacLaughlin, C. Boekema, R. L. Lichti, J. Oostens, and A. B.  
         Denison, Phys. Rev. B 39 (1989), p. 11345. 
[156] T. Ohmi and K. Machida, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (19993), p. 625. 
[157] T. Schreiner, E.-W. Scheidt, and G. R. Stewart, Solid State Commun. 108 (1998), p. 53.  
[158] M. R. Norman, Phys. Rev. B 41 (1990), p. 170.  
[159] J. O. Willis, J. D. Thompson, Z. Fisk, A. de Visser, J. J. M. Franse, and A. Menovsky,  
         Phys. Rev. B 31 (1985), p. 1654(R).     
[160] E. A. Schuberth, B. Strickler, and K. Andres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992), p. 117.   
[161] J. P. Brison, N. Keller, P. Lejay, A. Huxley, L. Schmidt, A. Buzdin, N.R. Bernhoeft, I.  
        Mineev, A.N. Stepanov, J. Flouquet, D. Jaccard, S.R. Julian,  and G.G. Lonzarich, Physica  
         B 199 & 200 (1994), p. 70. 
[162] Y. Kohori, T. Kohara, H. Shibai, Y. Oda, Y. Kitaoka, and K. Asayama, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.  
         57 (1988), p. 395. 
[163] H. Suderow, J. P. Brison, A. Huxley, and J. Flouquet, J. Low Temp Phys. 108 (1997), p.  
         11.ey, and J 
[164] W. Putikka and R. Joynt, Phys. Rev. B 37 (1988), p. 2372(R).   
[165] K. A. Park and R. Joynt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, (1995), p. 4734.  
[166] D.- C. Chen and A. Garg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993), p. 1689.  
[167] K. Machida and M.-a. Ozaki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991), p. 3293.   
[168] H. R. Ott, E. Felder, A. Bernasconi, Z. Fisk, J. L. Smith, L. Taillefer, and G. G. Lonzarich,  
         Jap. J. App. Phys. 26, Suppl. 26-3 (1987), p. 1217. 
[169] A. Sulpice, P. Gandit, J. Chaussy, J. Flouquet, D. Jaccard, P. Lejay, and  J. L. Tholence, J.  
         Low Temp Phys 62 (1986), p. 39. 
[170] J. D. Strand, D. J. Van Harlingen, J. B. Kycia, and W. P. Halperin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103  
         (2009), p. 197002.    
[171] J. D. Strand, D. J. Bahr, D. J. Van Harlingen, J. P. Davis, W. J. Gannon, and W. P.  
         Halperin, Science 328 (2010), p. 1368. 
[172] J. B. Kycia, J. I. Hong, M. J. Graf, J. A. Sauls, D. N. Seidman, and W. P. Halperin, Phys.  
         Rev. B 58 (1998), p. R603. 
[173] C. Geibel,  S. Thies, D. Kazorowski, A. Mehner, A. Grauel, B. Seidel, U. Ahlheim, R.  
         Helfrich, K. Petersen, C. D. Bredl, and F. Steglich, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter 83 (1991), 
         p. 305. 
[174] C. Geibel, C. Schank, S. Thies, H. Kitazawa, C. D. Bredl, A. Bohm, M. Rau, A. Grauel, R. 
         Caspary, R. Helfrich, U. Ahlheim, G. Weber, and F. Steglich,  Z. Phys. B: Condens.-Matter 
         84 (1991), p.  1. 
[175] H. Tou, Y. Kitaoka, T. Kamatsuka, K. Asayama, C. Geibel, C. Schank, F. Steglich, S. 
         Süllow, and J. Mydosh, Physica B 230-232 (1997), p. 360. 
[176] C. Geibel, A. Böhn, R. Caspary, K. Gloos, A. Grauel, P. Hellmann, R. Modler, C. Schank, 
         G. Weber, and F. Steglich, Physica B 186-188 (1993), p. 188.  
[177] A. Schroeder, J. G. Lussier, B. D. Gaulin,  J. D. Garrett, W. J. L. Buyers, L. Rebelsky, and  


         S. M. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994), p. 136. 
[178] A. Krimmel, A. Loidl, P. Fischer, B. Roessli, A. Dönni, H. Kita, N. Sato, Y. Endoh, T. 
         Komatsubara, C. Geibel, and F. Steglich, Solid State Commun. 87 (1993), p.  829. 
[179] N. Bernhoeft, N. Sato, B. Roessli, N. Aso, A. Hiess, G. H. Lander, Y. Endoh, and T. 
         Komatsubara, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998), p. 4244.    
[180] P. McHale, P. Fulde, and P. Thalmeier, Phys. Rev. B 70 (2004), p. 014513. 
[181] J. Chang, I. Eremin, P. Thalmeier, and P. Fulde, Phys. Rev. B 75 (2007), p. 024503.  
[182] T. Watanabe, K. Izawa, Y. Kasahara, Y. Haga, Y. Onuki, P. Thalmeier, K. Maki, and Y. 
         Matuda, Phys. Rev. B 70 (2004), p. 184502.  
[183] M. Huth, A. Kaldowski, J. Hessert, C. Heske, and H. Adrian, Physica B 199-200 (1994), p. 
         116. 
[184] N. Sato, N. Aso, G. H. Lander, B. Roessli, T. Komatsubara, and Y. Endoh, J. Phys. Soc. 
         Jpn. 66 (1997), p. 1884. 
[185] E. D. Bauer, N. A. Frederick, P.-C. Ho, V. S. Zapf, and M. B. Maple, Phys. Rev. B 65 
          (2002), p. 100506(R).    
[186] M. B. Maple, P.-C. Ho, V. S. Zapf, N. A. Frederick, E. D. Bauer, W. M. Yuhasz, F. M. 
         Woodward, and J. W. Lynn, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 71 (Supple.) (2002), p. 23. 
[187] M. B. Maple, N. A. Frederick, P.-C. Ho, W. M. Yuhasz, and T. Yanagisawa, J. Supercond. 
         Novel Mag. 19 (2006), p. 299. 
[188] R. Vollmer, A. Faißt, C. Pfleiderer, H. v. Löhneysen, E. D. Bauer, P.-C. Ho, V. Zapf, and  
         M. B. Maple, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003), p. 057001.  
[189] M.-A. Measson, D. Braithwaite, J. Flouquet, G. Seyfarth, J. P. Brison, E. Lhotel, C.  
          Paulsen, H. Sugawara, and H. Sato, Phys. Rev. B 70 (2004), p. 064516.  
[190] M.-A. Méasson, D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet, P. Bordet, H.  
         Sugawara, and P. C. Canfield, Phys. Rev. B 77 (2008), p. 134517. 
[191] M. E. McBriarty, P.  Kumar, G.  R.  Stewart, and B. Andraka, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 21 
         (2009), p. 385701. 
[192] Y. Aoki, T. Namiki, S.  Ohsaki, S. R. Saha, H. Sugawara, and H. Sato, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 
         71 (2002), p.  2098. 
[193] P.-C. Ho, V. S. Zapf, E. D. Bauer, N. A. Frederick, M. B. Maple, G. Giester, P. Rogl, S. T. 
         Berger, C. H. Paul, and E. Bauer, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 16 (2002), p. 3008. 
[194] M. Kohgi, K. Iwasa, M. Nakajima, N. Metoki, S. Araki, N. Bernhoeft, J.-M. Mignot, A.  
         Gukasov, H. Sato, Y. Aoki, and H. Sugawara, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 72 (2003), p. 1002. 
[195] Y. Aoki, A. Tsuchiya, T. Kanayama, S. R. Saha, H. Sugawara, H. Sato, W. Higemoto, A. 
          Koda, K. Ohishi, K. Nishiyama, and R. Kadono, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003), p. 067003.  
[196] K. Izawa, Y. Nakajima, J. Goryo, Y. Matsuda, S. Osaki, H. Sugawara, H. Sato, P. 
         Thalmeier, and K. Maki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003), p. 117001.   
[197] S.H. Curnoe, T.R. Abu Alrub, I.A. Sergienko, and I. Vekhter, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 310 
         (2007), p. 605.  
[198] T. R. Abu Alrub and S. H. Curnoe, Phys. Rev. B 76 (2007), p. 054514.  
[199] T. R. Abu Alrub and S. H. Curnoe, Phys. Rev. B 76 (2007), p. 184511.   
[200] A. D. Huxley, M.-A. Measson, K. Izawa, C. D. Dewhurst, R. Cubitt, B. Grenier, H. 
         Sugawara, J. Flouquet, Y. Matsuda, and H. Sato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004), p. 187005. 
[201] T. Tayama, T. Sakakibara, H. Sugawara, Y. Aoki, and H. Sato, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 72 


         (2003), p. 1516. 
[202] D. E. MacLaughlin, J. E. Sonier, R. H. Heffner, O. O. Bernal, Ben-Li Young, M. S. Rose, 
         G. D. Morris, E. D. Bauer, T. D. Do, and M. B. Maple, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002), p. 
         157001.   
[203] N. A. Frederick, T. D. Do, P.-C. Ho, N. P. Butch, V. S. Zapf, and M. B. Maple, Phys. Rev. 
         B 69 (2004), p.  024523. 
[204] H. Suderow, S. Vieira, J. D. Strand, S. Bud’ko, and P. C. Canfield, Phys. Rev. B 69 
         (2004), p. 060504(R).  
[205] G. Seyfarth, J. P. Brison, M.-A. Méasson, D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, and J. Flouquet, 
         Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006), p. 236403.  
[206] R. W. Hill, S. Li, M. B. Maple, and L. Taillefer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), p. 237005.  
[207] E. E. M. Chia, M. B. Salamon, H. Sugawara, and H. Sato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003), p. 
         247003.  
[208] R. Settai, T. Takeuchi, and Y. Ōnuki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76 (2007), p. 051003.   
[209] J. L. Sarrao and J. D. Thompson, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76 (2007), p. 051013. 
[210] B.D. White, J.D. Thompson, and M.B. Maple, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 246. 
[211] C. Petrovic, P. G. Pagliuso, M. F. Hundley, R. Movshovich, J. L. Sarrao, J. D. Thompson, 
         Z. Fisk, and P. Monthoux, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 13 (2001), p. L337. 
[212] C. Petrovic, C., R. Movshovich, M. Jaime, P. G. Pagliuso, M. F. Hundley, J. L. Sarrao, Z. 
         Fisk, and J. D. Thompson, Europhys. Lett. 53 (2001), p. 354. 
[213] R. A. Fisher, F. Bouquet, N. E. Phillips, M. F. Hundley, P. G. Pagliuso, J. L. Sarrao, Z. 
         Fisk, and J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. B 65 (2002), p. 224509. 
[214] D. Hall, E. C. Palm, T. P. Murphy, S. W. Tozer, Z. Fisk, U. Alver, R. G. Goodrich, J. L. 
         Sarrao, P. G. Pagliuso, and T. Ebihara, Phys. Rev. B 64 (2001), p. 212508. 
[215] H. Shishido, R. Settai, D. Aoki, S. Ikeda, H. Nakawaki, N. Nakamura, T. Iizuka, Y. Inada, 
         K. Sugiyama , T. Takeuchi, K. Kindo, T. C. Kobayashi, Y. Haga, H. Harima, Y. Aoki,  H. 
Sato, and Y. Ōnuki, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 71 (2002), p. 162. 
[216] Y. Kasahara, Y. Nakajima, K. Izawa, Y. Matsuda, K. Behnia, H. Shishido, R. Settai, and 
Y. Onuki, Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005), p. 214515. 
[217] Y. Kohori, Y. Yamato, Y. Iwamoto, T. Kohara, E. D. Bauer, M. B. Maple, and J. L. 
Sarrao, Phys. Rev. B 64 (2001), p. 134526. 
[218] R. Movshovich, M. Jaime, J. D. Thompson, C. Petrovic, Z. Fisk, P. G. Pagliuso, and J. L. 
Sarrao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001), p. 5152. 
[219] M. P. Allan, F. Massee, D. K. Morr, J. Van Dyke, A. W. Rost, A. P. Mackenzie, C. 
Petrovic, and J. C. Davis, Nature Phys. 9 (2013), p. 468. 
[220] E. E. M. Chia, D. J. Van Harlingen, M. B. Salamon, Brian D. Yanoff, I. Bonalde, and J. L. 
Sarrao, Phys. Rev. B 67 (2003), p. 014527. 
[221] B. B. Zhou, S. Misra, E.  H. da Silva Neto, P. Aynajian, R. E. Baumbach, J. D. Thompson, 
E. D. Bauer, and A. Yazdani, Nature Phys. 9 (2013), p. 474. 


[222] K. Izawa, H. Yamaguchi, Yuji Matsuda, H. Shishido, R. Settai, and Y. Onuki, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 87 (2001), p. 057002. 
[223] K. An, T. Sakakibara, R. Settai, Y. Onuki, M. Hiragi, M. Ichioka, and K. Machida, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 104 (2010), p. 037002. 
[224] H. Aoki, T. Sakakibara, H. Shishido, R. Settai, Y. Ōnuki, P. Miranović, and K Machida, J. 
Phys.: Condens. Matter 16 (2004), p. L13. 
[225] T. Das, A. B. Vorontsov, I. Vekhter, and Matthias J. Graf, Phys. Rev. B 87 (2013), p. 
174514. 
[226] V. A. Sidorov, M. Nicklas, P. G. Pagliuso, J. L. Sarrao, Y. Bang, A. V. Balatsky, and J. D. 
Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002), p. 157004. 
[227] M. Nicklas, R. Borth, E. Lengyel, P. G. Pagliuso, J. L. Sarrao, V. A. Sidorov, G. Sparn, F. 
Steglich, and J. D. Thompson, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 13 (2001), p. L905. 
[228] S. Wirth, Y. Prots, M. Wedel, S. Ernst, S. Kirchner, Z. Fisk, J. D. Thompson, F. Steglich, 
and Y.  Grin, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 83 (2014), p. 061009. 
[229] J. S. Van Dyke, J. C. Séamus Davis, and Dirk K. Morr, Phys. Rev. B 93 (2016), p. 
041107(R). 
[230] L. Greene, W. K. Park, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. Thompson, Physica B 378-380 (2006), p. 
671. 
[231] W. K. Park, J. L. Sarrao, J. D. Thompson, and L. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008), 
p. 177001. 
[232] Y. Song, J. Van Dyke, I. K. Lum, B. D. White, S. Y. Jang, D. Yazici, L. Shu, A. 
Schneidewind, P. Cermak, Y. Qiu, M. B. Maple, D. K. Morr, and P. C. Dai, Nat. Comm. 7 
(2016), p. 12774. 
[233] H. A. Radovan, N. A. Fortune, T. P. Murphy, S. T. Hannahs, E. C. Palm, S. W. Tozer, and 
D. Hall, Nature 425 (2003), p. 51. 
[234] A. Bianchi, R. Movshovich, C. Capan, P. G. Pagliuso, and J. L. Sarrao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 
(2003), p.187004. 
[235] H. A. Radovan, S. W. Tozer, T. P. Murphy, E. C. Palm, N. A. Fortune, S. T. Hannahs, C. 
C. Agosta, C. Martin, J. L. Sarrao, and J. C. Cooley, Physica B  
         378-380 (2006), p. 343. 
[236] Y. Tokiwa, R. Movshovich, F. Ronning, E. D. Bauer, A. D. Bianchi, Z. Fisk, and J. D. 
Thompson,  Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), p. 220502. 
[237] B.-L. Young, R. R. Urbano, N. J. Curro, J. D. Thompson, J. L. Sarrao, A. B. Vorontsov, 
and M. J. Graf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007), p. 036402. 
[238] G. Koutroulakis, M. D. Stewart, Jr., V. F. Mitrović, M. Horvatić, C. Berthier, G. Lapertot, 
and J. Flouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010), p. 087001.   
[239] S. Gerber, M. Bartkowiak, J. L. Gavilano, E. Ressouche, N. Egetenmeyer, C. Niedermayer,  
A. D. Bianchi, R. Movshovich, E. D. Bauer, J. D.       Thompson, and M. Kenzelmann, Nature 
Phys. 10 (2014), p. 126. 
[240] J. P. Paglione, T. A. Sayles, P.-C. Ho, J. R. Jeffries and M. B. Maple, Nat. Phys. 3 (2007), 
p. 703. 
[241] C. Petrovic, S. L. Bud’ko, V. G. Kogan, and P. C. Canfield, Phys. Rev. B 66 (2002), p. 
054534.  
[242] J. S. Van Dyke, F. Massee, M. P. Allan, J. C. Seamus Davis, C. Petrovic, and D. K. Morr, 
PNAS 111 (2014), p. 11663. 


[243] M. Kenzelmann, Th. Strässle, C. Niedermayer, M. Sigrist, B. Padmanabhan, M. Zolliker, 
A. D. Bianchi, R. Movshovich, E. D. Bauer, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. Thompson, Science 321 
(2008), p. 1652. 
[244] X. Lu, H. Lee, T. Park, F. Ronning, E. D. Bauer, and J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 
(2012), p. 027001.  
[245] A. Bianchi, R. Movshovich, M. Jaime, J. D. Thompson, P. G. Pagliuso, and J. L. Sarrao, 
Phys. Rev. B 64 (2001), p. 220504(R). 
[246] E. D. Bauer, F. Ronning, S. Maquilon, L. D. Pham, J. D. Thompson, and Z. Fisk, Physica 
B 403 (2008), p. 1135. 
[247] T. Shang, R. E. Baumbach, K. Gofryk, F. Ronning, Z. F. Weng, J. L. Zhang, X. Lu, E. D. 
Bauer, J. D. Thompson, and H. Q. Yuan, Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014), p. 041101(R).  
[248] H. Hegger, C. Petrovic, E. G. Moshopoulou, M. F. Hundley, J. L. Sarrao, Z. Fisk, and J. D. 
Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000), p. 4986.   
[249] T. Park, F. Ronning, H. Q. Yuan, M. B. Salamon, R. Movshovich, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. 
Thompson, Nature 440 (2006), p. 65. 
[250] P. G. Pagliuso, C. Petrovic,  R. Movshovich, D. Hall, M. F. Hundley, J. L. Sarrao, J. D. 
Thompson, and Z. Fisk, PRB 64, (2001), p. 100503. 
[251] V. S. Zapf, E. J. Freeman, E. D. Bauer, J. Petricka, C. Sirvent, N. A. Frederick, R. P. 
Dickey, and M. B. Maple PRB 65 (2001), p. 014506. 
[252] S. K. Goh, J. P. Paglione, M. Sutherland, E. C. T. O’Farrell, C. Bergemann, T. A. Sayles, 
and M. B. Maple PRL 101 (2008), p. 056402. 
[253] N. Aso, K. Ishii, H. Yoshizawa, T. Fujiwara, Y. Uwatoko, G.-F. Chen, N. K. Sato, and K.  
Miyake, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 78 (2009), p. 073703. 
[254] T. Mito, S. Kawasaki, G.-q. Zheng, Y. Kawasaki, K. Ishida, Y. Kitaoka, D. Aoki, Y. Haga, 
and Y. Onuki, Phys. Rev. B 63 (2001), p. 220507(R).  
[255] S. Kawasaki, M. Yashima, T. Mito, Y. Kawasaki, G.-q. Zheng, Y. Kitaoka, D. Aoki, Y. 
Haga, and Y. Onuki, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 17 (2005), p. S889. 
[256] T. Park, E. D. Bauer, and J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), p. 177002.  
[257] P.G. Pagliuso, R. Movshovich, A.D. Bianchi, M. Nicklas, N.O. Moreno, J.D. Thompson, 
M.F. Hundley, J.L. Sarrao, and Z. Fisk, Physica B 312-313 (2002), p. 129. 
[258] E. D. Bauer, J. D. Thompson, J. L. Sarrao, L. A. Morales, F. Wastin, J. Rebizant, J. C. 
Griveau, P. Javorsky, P. Boulet, E. Colineau, G. H. Lander, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
93 (2004), p. 147005.   
[259] G.D. Morris, R.H. Heffner, E.D. Bauer, L.A. Morales, J.L. Sarrao, M.J. Fluss, D.E. 
MacLaughlin, L. Shu, and J.E. Anderson, Physica B 374-375 (2006), p. 180. 
[260] N. J. Curro, T. Caldwell, E. D. Bauer, L. A. Morales, M. J. Graf, Y. Bang, A. V. Balatsky, 
J. D. Thompson, and J. L. Sarrao, Nature 434 (2005), p. 622. 
[261] A. Hiess, A. Stunault, E. Colineau, J. Rebizant, F. Wastin, R. Caciuffo, and G. H. Lander, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008), p. 076403.  
[262] J. D. Thompson, private communication. 
[263] F. M. Grosche, S. R. Julian, N. D. Mathur, and G. G. Lonzarich, Physica B 223-224 
(1996), p. 50. 
[264] W. Schlabitz, J. Baumann, B. Pollit, U. Rauchschwalbe, H. M. Mayer, U. Ahlheim, and C. 
D. Bredl, Z. Phys. B 62 (1986), p. 171. 


[265] T. T. M. Palstra, A. A. Menovsky, J. van den Berg, A. J. Dirkmaat, P. H. Kes, G. J. 
Nieuwenhuys, and J. A. Mydosh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55 (1985), p. 2727. 
[266] M. B. Maple, J. W. Chen, Y. Dalichaouch, T. Kohara, C. Rossel, M. S. Torikachvili, M. 
W. McElfresh, and J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 (1986), p. 185.  
[267] C. Broholm, J. K. Kjems, W. J. L. Buyers, P. Matthews, T. T. M. Palstra, A. A. Menovsky, 
and J. A. Mydosh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987), p. 1467.  
[268] E. D. Isaacs, D. B. McWhan, R. N. Kleiman, D. J. Bishop, G. E. Ice, P. Zschack, B. D. 
Gaulin, T. E. Mason, J. D. Garrett, and W. J. L. Buyersn Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990), p. 3185.   
[269] J. A. Mydosh and P. M. Oppeneer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 (2011), p. 1301.   
[270] R. A. Fisher, S. Kim, Y. Wu, N. E. Phillips, M. W. McElfresh, M. S. Torikachvilin and M. 
B. Maple, Physica B 163 (1990), p. 419. 
[271] Y. Kohori, K. Matsuda, and T. Kohara, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 65 (1996), p. 1083. 
[272] Y. Kasahara, H. Shishido, T. Shibauchi, Y. Haga, T. D. Matsuda, Y. Onuki, and Y. 
Matsuda, New J. Phys. 11 (2009), p. 055061. 
[273] K. Yano, T. Sakakibara, T. Tayama, M. Yokoyama, H. Amitsuka, Y. Homma, P. 
Miranović, M. Ichioka, Y. Tsutsumi, and K. Machida, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008), p. 017004. 
[274] Y. Kasahara, T. Iwasawa, H. Shishido, T. Shibauchi, K. Behnia, Y. Haga, T. D. Matsuda, 
Y. Onuki, M. Sigrist, and Y. Matsuda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 (2007), p. 116402. 
[275] F. Morales and R. Escudero, J. Low Temp. Phys. 154 (2009), p. 68. 
[276] J. G. Rodrigo, F. Guinea, S. Vieira, and F. G. Aliev, Phys. Rev. B 55 (1997), p. 14318. 
[277] K. Bakker, A. de Visser, E. Brueck, A. A. Menovsky, and J. J. M. Franse, J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater. 108 (1992), p. 63. 
[278] I. R. Walker, F. M. Grosche, D. M. Freye, and G. G. Lonzarich, Physica C 282-287 (1997), 
p. 303.  
[279] G. Knebel, D. Braithwaite, P. C. Canfield, G. Lapertot, and J. Flouquet, Phys. Rev. B 65 
(2001), p. 024425. 
[280] H. Fukazawa and K. Yamada, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 72 (2003), p. 2449. 
[281] R. Gumeniuk, W. Schnelle, H. Rosner, M. Nicklas, A. Leithe-Jasper, and Yu. Grin, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 100 (2008), p. 017002. 
[282] A. Maisuradze, W. Schnelle, R. Khasanov, R. Gumeniuk, M. Nicklas, H. Rosner, A. 
Leithe-Jasper, Yu. Grin, A. Amato, and P. Thalmeier, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), p. 024524. 
[283] A. Maisuradze, M. Nicklas, R. Gumeniuk, C. Baines, W. Schnelle, H. Rosner, A. Leithe-
Jasper, Yu. Grin, and R. Khasanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009), p. 147002. 
[284] C. W. Chu, P. H. Hor, R. L. Meng, L. Gao, Z. J. Huang, and Y. Q. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
58 (1987), p. 405. 
[285] M. K. Wu, J. R. Ashburn, C. J. Torng, P. H. Hor, R. L. Meng, L. Gao, Z. J. Huang, Y. Q. 
Wang, and C. W. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987), p. 908.  
[286] L. Gao, Y. Y. Xue, F. Chen, Q. Xiong, R. L. Meng, D. Ramirez, C. W. Chu, J. H. Eggert, 
and H. K. Mao, Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994), p. 4260(R).  
[287] J. M. Bok, J. J. Bae, H.-Y. Choi, C. M. Varma, W. Zhang, J. He, Y. Zhang, L. Yu, and X. 
J. Zhou, Science Advances 2 (2016), p. e1501329.  
[288] E. Abrahams, Int. J.  Mod.  Phys.  B 24 (2010), p. 4150. 
[289] J. Orenstein and A. J. Millis, Science 288 (2000), p. 468. 
[290] M. R. Norman and C. Pepin, Rep. Prog. Phys. 66 (2003), p. 1547. 


[291] S. Sachdev, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75 (2003), p. 913. 
[292] P. A. Lee, N. Nagaosa, and X.-G. Wen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78 (2006), p. 17.  
[293] P. W. Anderson, Low Temp. Phys. 32 (2006), p. 282.   
[294] M. R. Norman, Handbook of Magnetism and Advanced Magnetic Materials,Vol. 5, Wiley, 
New York, 2007, p. 2671. 
[295] M. Ogata and H. Fukuyama, Rep. Prog. Phys. 71 (2008), p. 036501.  
[296] T. Das, R.S. Markiewicz, and A. Bansil, Adv. Phys. 63 (2014), p. 151.  
[297] D. Koelle, R. Kleiner, F. Ludwig, E. Dantsker, and John Clarke, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71 
(1999), p. 631.  
[298] D.J. Van Harlingen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 67 (1995), p. 515. 
[299] G. Deutscher, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77 (2005), p. 109. 
[300] Ø. Fischer, M. Kugler, I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Berthod, and C. Renner, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79 
(2007), p. 353. 
[301] A. Damascelli, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75 (2003), p. 473.  
[302] M. R. Norman, D. Pines, and C. Kallin, Adv. Phys. 54 (2005), p. 715.  
[303] G.-m. Zhao, H.  Keller, and K. Conder, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 13 (2001), p. R569.  
[304] J. P. Franck, Physical Properties of High Temperature Superconductors IV, Ed. D. M. 
Ginsberg, World Scientific, Singapore, 1994, p. 189. 
[305] T. Tokura, H. Takagi, and S. Uchida, Nature 337 (1989), p. 345. 
[306] B. Lake, H. M. Rønnow, N. B. Christensen, G. Aeppli, K. Lefmann, D. F. McMorrow, P. 
Vorderwisch, P. Smeibidl, N. Mangkorntong, T. Sasagawa, M.  
         Nohara, H. Takagi, and T. E. Mason, Nature 415 (2002), p. 299. 
[307] A. V. Chubukov, D. Pines, and J. Schmalian, The Physics of Superconductors (Vol. I),  
         Chap. 7, Ed. K. H. Bennemann and J. B. Ketterson, Springer, Berlin 2003,  
         p. 495. 
[308] M. H. Julien, Physica B 329-333 (2003), p. 693. 
[309] Y. Onose, Y. Taguchi, K. Ishizaka, and Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. B 69 (2004), p. 024504. 
[310] J. T. Markert, E. A. Early, T. Bjornhom, S. Ghamaty,B. W. Lee, J. J. Neumeier, R. D. 
Price, C. L. Seaman, and M. B. Maple, Phys. C 158 (1989), p. 178. 
[311] J. T. Markert and M. B. Maple, Solid State Commun. 70 (1989), p. 145. 
[312] T. Siegrist, S. M. Zahurak, D. W. Murphy, and R. S. Roth, Nature 334 (1988), p.231. 
[313] M. G. Smith, A. Manthiram, J. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough, and J. T. Markert, Nature 351 
(1991), p. 549.Miyamoto 
[314] G. Er. S. Kikkawa, F. Kanamaru, Y. Miyamoto, S. Tanaka, M. Sera, M. Sato, Z. Hiroi, M. 
Takano and Y. Bando, Physica C 196 (1992), p. 271. 
[315] A. C. W. P. James, D. W. Murphy, and S. M. Zahurak, Nature 338 (1989), p.240. 
[316] J. Lynn and S. Skanthakumar, Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, 
Elsevier, New York, Vol. 31, 2001, p. 313. 
[317] S. Ghamaty, B.W. Lee, J.T. Markert, E.A. Early, T. Bjørnholm, C.L. Seaman, and M.B. 
Maple, Physica C 160 (1989), p. 217. 
[318] M. Matsuda, K. Yamada, K. Kakurai, H. Kadowaki, T. R. Thurston, Y. Endoh, Y. Hidaka, 
R. J. Birgeneau, M. A. Kastner, P. M. Gehring, A. H. Moudden, and G. Shirane, Phys. Rev. B 42 
(1990), p. 10098.  
[319] C. C. Tsuei, A. Gupta, and G. Koren, Physica C 161 (1989), p. 415.  
[320] K. Jin, N. P. Butch, K. Kirshenbaum, J. Paglione, and R. L. Greene, Nature 476 (2011), p. 
73. 


[321] E. M. Motoyama, G. Yu, I. M. Vishik, O. P. Vajk, P. K. Mang, and M. Greven, Nature 445 
(2007), p. 186. 
[322] Q. Huang, J. F. Zasadzinski, N. Tralshawala, K. E. Gray, D. G. Hinks, J. L. Peng, R. 
L. Greene, Nature 347 (1990), p. 369. 
[323] J. Yuan, G. He, H.Yang, Y. J. Shi, B. Y. Zhu, and K. Jin, Sci. China-Phys Mech. Astron, 
58 (2015), p. 107401. 
[324] A. Biswas, P. Fournier, V. N. Smolyaninova, R. C. Budhani, J. S. Higgins, and R. L. 
Greene, Phys. Rev. B 64 (2001), p. 104519.  
[325] S. Kleefisch, B. Welter, A. Marx, L. Alff, R. Gross, and M. Naito, Phys. Rev. B 63 (2001), 
p. 100507(R). 
[326] L. Alff, Y. Krockenberger, B. Welter, M. Schonecke, R. Gross, D. Manske, and M. Naito, 
Nature 422 (2003), p. 698. 
[327] Y. Dagan, M. M. Qazilbash, and R. L. Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), p. 187003. 
[328] L. Shan, Y. Huang, H. Gao, Y. Wang, S. L. Li, P. C. Dai, F. Zhou, J. W. Xiong, W. X. Ti, 
and H. H. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005), p. 144506.   
[329] F. C. Niestemski, S. Kunwar, S. Zhou, Shiliang Li, H. Ding, Z. Wang, P. Dai, and V. 
Madhavan, Nature 450 (2007), p. 1058. 
[330] S. D. Wilson, P. Dai, S. Li, S. Chi, H. J. Kang, and J. W. Lynn, Nature 442 (2006), p. 59. 
[331] M. Aprili, M. Covington, E. Paraoanu, B. Niedermeier, and L. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. B 57 
(1998), p. R8139(R).  
[332] N. P. Armitage, D. H. Lu, D. L. Feng, C. Kim, A. Damascelli, K. M. Shen, F. Ronning, Z.-
X. Shen, Y. Onose, Y. Taguchi, and Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001), p. 1126.  
[333] H. Matsui, K. Terashima, T. Sato, T. Takahashi, M. Fujita, and K. Yamada, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 95 (2005), p. 017003.  
[334] W. Yu, B. Liang, and R. L. Greene, Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005), p. 212512.  
[335] J. R. Cooper, Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996), p. R3753(R).  
[336] R. Prozorov, R. W. Giannetta, P. Fournier, and R. L. Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000), p. 
3700. 
[337] G. Blumberg, A. Koitzsch, A. Gozar, B. S. Dennis, C. A. Kendziora, P. Fournier, and R. L. 
Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002), p. 107002.  
[338] B. Batlogg, S-W. Cheong, G. A. Thomas, L. Cooper, L. W. Rupp, Jr., D. H. Rapkine, and 
A. S. Cooper, Physica C 185-189 (1991), p. 1385. 
[339] C. C. Tsuei and J. R. Kirtley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000), p. 182.  
[340] B. Chesca, K. Ehrhardt, M. Mößle, R. Straub, D. Koelle, R. Kleiner, and A. Tsukada, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003), p. 057004.   
[341] J. Tomaschko, S. Scharinger, V. Leca, J. Nagel, M. Kemmler, T. Selistrovski, D. Koelle, 
and R. Kleiner, Phys. Rev. B 86 (2012), p. 094509. 
[342] J. R. Kirtley, Rep. Prog. Phys. 73 (2010), p. 126501.  
[343] J. Rossat-Mignot, L.P. Regnault, C. Vettier, P. Bourges, P. Burlet, J. Bossy, J Y. Henry, 
and G. Lapertot, Physica C 185-189 (1991), p. 86. 
[344] C.W. Chu, L.Z. Deng, and B. Lv, Physica C (2015), p. 290. 
[345] P. W. Anderson, Science 268 (1995), p. 1154. 
[346] R. J. Cava, R. B. van Dover, B. Batlogg, and E.A. Rietman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987), p. 
408. 


[347] J. E. Schirber, B. Morosin, R. M. Merill, P. F. Hlava, E. L. Venturini, J. F. Kwak, P. J. 
Nigrey, R. J. Baughman and D. S. Ginley, Phys. C 152 (1988) p.121. 
[348] H. Hosono, K. Tanabe, E. Takayama-Muromachi, H. Kageyama, S. Yamanaka, H. 
Kumakura, M. Nohara, H. Hiramatsu, and S. Fujitsu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 16 (2015), p. 
033503. 
[349] S. Thiess, T.-L. Lee, C. Aruta, C. T. Lin, F. Venturini, N. B. Brookes, B. C. C. Cowie, and 
J. Zegenhagen, Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015), p. 075117. 
[350] P. W. Anderson, Science 235 (1987), p. 1196. 
[351] V. B. Geshkenbein, A. I. Larkin, and A. Barone, Phys. Rev. B 36 (1987), p. 235.  
[352] R. Heid, K.-P. Bohnen, R. Zeyher, and D. Manske, Phys. Rev.Lett. 100 (2008), p. 137001. 
[353] K.-P. Bohnen, R. Heid, and M. Krauss, Europhys. Lett. 64 (2003), p. 104.  
[354] F. Giustino, M. L. Cohen, and S. G. Louie, Nature 452 (2008), p. 975.  
[355] J. P. Franck, S. Harker, and J. H. Brewer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993), p. 283.  
[356] G.-m. Zhao, M. B. Hunt, H. Keller, and K. A. Müller, Nature 385 (1997), p.236. 
[357] G.-m. Zhao, V. Kirtikar, K. K. Singh, A. P. B. Sinha, D. E. Morris, and A. V. Inyushkin, 
Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996), p. 14956.  
[358] D. Zech, K. Conder, H. Keller, E. Kaldis, and K. A. Mueller, Physica B 219&220 (1996), 
p. 13.  
[359] H. Katayama-Yoshida, T. Hirooka, A. Oyamada, Y. Okabe, T. Takahashi, T. Sasaki, A. 
Ochiai, T. Suzuki, A. J. Mascarenhas, J. I. Pankove, T. F. Ciszek, S. K. Deb, R. B. Goldfarb, and 
Y. Li, Physica C 156 ( 1988 ), p. 481. 
[360] H. J. Bornemann, D. E. Morris, and H. B. Liu, Phys C 182 (1991), p. 132.  
[361] K. Kamiya, T. Masui, S. Tajima, H. Bando, and Y. Aiura, Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014), p. 
060505(R).  
[362] G. Soerensen and S. Gygax, Phys. Rev. B 51 (1995), p. 11848.   
[363] G.-m. Zhao, K. Conder, H. Keller, and K. A. Mueller, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 10 (1998), 
p. 9055. 
[364] G.-m. Zhao, K. K. Singh, A. P. B. Sinha, and D. E. Morris, Phys. Rev. B 52 (1995), p. 
6840. 
[365] W. E. Pickett, R. E. Cohen, and H. Krakauer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991), p. 228.  
[366] S. Johnston, F. Vernay, B. Moritz, Z.-X. Shen, N. Nagaosa, J. Zaanen, and T. P. 
Devereaux, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), p. 064513.   
[367] Y. Bang, Phys. Rev. B 78 (2008), p. 075116.  
[368] H. C. Honerkamp, C. Fu, and D. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 75 (2007), p. 014503.  
[369] T. S. Nunner, J. Schmalian, and K. H. Bennemann, Physical Review B 59 (1999), p. 8859. 
[370] A. Nazarenko and E. Dagotto, Phys. Rev. B 53 (1996), p.  R2987(R).  
[371] A. Greco and R. Zeyher, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 29 (2016), p. 015002. 
[372] J. M. Tranquada, AIP Conf. Proc. 1550 (2013), p. 114.  
[373] M. Huecker, M. v. Zimmermann, G. D. Gu, Z. J. Xu, J. S. Wen, Guangyong Xu,1 H. J. 
Kang, A. Zheludev, and J. M. Tranquada, Phys. Rev. B 83  
         (2011), p. 104506. 
[374] Suryadijaya, T. Sasagawa, and H. Takagi, Physica C 426 (2005), p. 402. 
[375] J. Friedel, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 1 (1989), p. 7757.  


[376] J. M. Harris, Z. -X. Shen, P. J. White, D. S. Marshall, M. C. Schabel, J. N. Eckstein, and I. 
Bozovic, Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996), p. R15665(R).  
[377] W. W. Warren, Jr., R. E. Walstedt, G. F. Brennert, R. J. Cava, R. Tycko, R. F. Bell, and G. 
Dabbagh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989), p. 1193.  
[378] D. N. Basov and T. Timusk, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77 (2005), p. 721.  
[379] J. L. Tallon, J. R. Cooper, P. S. I. P. N. de Silva, G. V. M. Williams, and J. W. Loram, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995), p. 4114.   
[380] F. Slakey, M. V. Klein, J. P. Rice, and D. Ginsberg, Phys. Rev. B 42 (1990), p. 2643. 
[381] M. Opel, R. Nemetschek, C. Hoffmann, R. Philipp, P. F. Müller, R. Hackl, I. Tüttő, A. Erb, 
B. Revaz, E. Walker, H. Berger, and L. Forró, Phys. Rev. B  
         61 (2000), p. 9752.  
[382] H. Takagi, B. Batlogg, H. L. Kao, J. Kwo, R. J. Cava, J. J. Krajewski, and W. F. Peck, Jr.,  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 (1992), p. 2975.  
[383] B. Batlogg, H. Y. Hwang, H. Takagi, R. J. Cava, H. L. Kao, and J. Kwo,  Physica C 235–
240 (1994), p. 130. 
[384] P. Lee, Rep.  Prog.  Phys. 71 (2008), p. 012501. 
[385] K. Fujita, C. K. Kim, I. Lee, J. Lee, M. H. Hamidian, I. A. Firmo, S. Mukhopadhyay, H. 
Eisaki, S. Uchida, M. J. Lawler, E.-A. Kim, and J. C. Davis,  
         Science 344 (2014), p. 612. 
[386] J. L. Tallon and J.W. Loram, Physica C 349 (2001), p. 53. 
[387] I. M. Vishik, M Hashimoto, R.-H. He, W. S. Lee, F. Schmitt, D. H. Lu, R. G. Moore, C. 
Zhang, W. Meevasana, T. Sasagawa, S. Uchida, K. Fujita, S.  
         Ishida, M. Ishikado, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, Z. Hussain, T. P. Devereaux, and Z.-X. Shen, 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 109 (2012), p. 18332. 
[388] I. M. Vishik, W. S. Lee, R.-H. He, M. Hashimoto, Z. Hussain, T. P. Devereaux, and Z.-X. 
Shen, New J. Phys. 12 (2010), p. 105008. 
[389] D. S. Marshall, D. S. Dessau, A. G. Loeser, C.-H. Park, A. Y. Matsuura, J. N. Eckstein, I. 
Bozovic, P. Fournier, A. Kapitulnik, W. E. Spicer, and Z.-X.  
         Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996), p. 4841. 
[390] A. G. Loeser, Z.-X. Shen, D. S. Dessau, D. S. Marshall, C. H. Park, P. Fournier, and A. 
Kapitulnik, Science 273 (1996), p. 325. 
[391] H. Ding, T. Yokoya, J. C. Campuzano, T. Takahashi, M. Randeria, M. R. Norman, T. 
Mochiku, K. Hadowaki, and J. Giapintzakis, Nature (1996) 382, p.  
         51. 
[392] K. M. Shen, and J. C. Davis, Materials Today 11 (2008), p. 14. 
[393] M. Platé, J. D. F. Mottershead, I. S. Elfimov, D. C. Peets, Ruixing Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. 
N. Hardy, S. Chiuzbaian, M. Falub, M. Shi, L. Patthey, and  
         A. Damascelli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005), p. 077001.  
[394] H. Kotegawa, Y. Tokunaga, K. Ishida, G.-q. Zheng, Y. Kitaoka, H. Kito, A. Iyo, K. 
Tokiwa, T. Watanabe, and H. Ihara, Phys. Rev. B 64 (2001), p.  
         064515.   
[395] H. J. Tao, F. Lu and E. J. Wolf, Physica C 282–287 (1997), p. 1507. 
[396] M. R. Norman, Physics 3 (2010), p. 86.     
[397] K. K. Gomes, A. N. Pasupathy, A. Pushp, S. Ono, Y. Ando, and A. Yazdani, Nature 477 
(2007), p. 569. 


[398] Y. Wang, L. Li, and N. P. Ong, Phys. Rev. B 73 (2006), p. 024510.  
[399] T. Valla, A. V. Fedorov, J. Lee, J. C. Davis, and G. D. Gu, Science 314 (2006), p. 1914. 
[400] http://hoffman.physics.harvard.edu/talks/2011‐04‐22‐Hoffman‐Minnesota.pdf 
[401] K. Fujita, M. H. Hamidian, S. D. Edkins, C. K. Kim, Y. Kohsaka, M. Azuma, M. Takano, 
H. Takagi, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, A. Allais, M. J. Lawler, E. -A. Kim, S. Sachdev,  and J. C. 
Davis, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 111 (2014), p. E3026. 
[402] J. E. Hoffman, E. W. Hudson, K. M. Lang, V. Madhavan, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. 
Davis, Science 295 (2002), p. 466. 
[403] S. Badoux, W. Tabis, F. Laliberté, G. Grissonnanche, B. Vignolle, D. Vignolles, J. Béard, 
D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, R. Liang, N. Doiron-Leyraud, L. Taillefer, and C. Proust, Nature 531 
(2016), p. 210. 
[404] N. Huxley, Nature Phys. 12 (2016), p. 290. 
[405] D. Einzel, J. Low Temp. Phys. 131 (2003), p. 1.  
[406] D. N. Basov, R. Liang, B. Dabrowski, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, and T. Timusk, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 77 (1996), p. 4090.  
[407] B. Fauqué, Y. Sidis, V. Hinkov, S. Pailhè, C. T. Lin, X. Chaud, and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 96 (2006), p. 197001. 
[408] Y. Li, V. Balédent, N. Bari i , Y. Cho, B. Fauqué, Y. Sidis, G. Yu, X. Zhao, P. Bourges, 
and M. Greven, Nature 455 (2008), p. 372. 
[409] J. Xia, E. Schemm, G. Deutscher, S. A. Kivelson, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, R. Liang, W. 
Siemons, G. Koster, M. M. Fejer, and A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008), p. 127002. 
[410] A. Shekhter, B. J. Ramshaw, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, F. F. Balakirev, R. D. 
McDonald, J. B. Betts, S. C. Riggs, and Albert Migliori, Nature 498 (2013), p. 75. 
[411] T. Kondo, Y. Hamaya, A. D. Palczewski, T. Takeuchi, J. S.Wen, Z. J. Xu, G. Gu, J. 
Schmalian, and A. Kaminski, Nature Phys. 7 (2011), p. 21. 
[412] H. F. Fong, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, L. P. Regnault, A. Ivanov, G. D. Guk, N. Koshizuka, and 
B. Keimer, Nature 398 (1999), p. 588. 
[413] H. He, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, C. Ulrich, L. Regnault, S. Pailhe` s, N. Berzigiarova, N. 
Kolesnikov, and B. Keimer, Science 295 (2002), p. 1045.  
[414] R. J. Birgeneau, C. Stock, J. M. Tranquada, and K. Yamada,  J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75 (2006), 
p. 1110. 
[415] W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, D. C. Morgan, R. Liang, and K. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 
(1993), p. 3999.  
[416] L. Taillefer, B. Lussier, R. Gagnon, K. Behnia, and H. Aubin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997), 
p. 483.  
[417] X. F. Sun, S. Ono, Y. Abe, S. Komiya, K. Segawa, and Y. Ando, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 
(2006), p. 017008.  
[418] R. L. Corey, N. J. Curro, K. O'Hara, T. Imai, C. P. Slichter, K. Yoshimura, M. Katoh, and 
K. Kosuge, Phys. Rev. B 53 (1996), p. 5907.   
[419] D. Pines and P. Wróbel, Phys. Rev. B 53 (1996), p. 5915.  
[420] B. Revaz, J.-Y. Genoud, A. Junod, K. Neumaier, A. Erb, and E. Walker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
80 (1998), p. 3364.  
[421] A. Junod, B. Revaz, Y. Wang, and A. Erb,  Physica B 284-288 (2000), p. 1043.  
[422] G .E. Volovik, JETP Lett. 65 (1997), p. 491. 
[423] C. Kuebert and P. J. Hirschfeld, Solid State Commun. 103 (1998), p. 459.  


[424] T. R. Chien, Z. Z. Wang, and N. P. Ong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991), p. 2088.  
[425] J. Bobroff, W. A. MacFarlane, H. Alloul, P. Mendels, N. Blanchard, G. Collin, and J.-F. 
Marucco, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999), p. 4381.   
[426] K. Ishida, Y. Kitaoka, K. Yamazoe, K. Asayama, and Y. Yamada, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 
(1996), p. 531.  
[427] T. Park and M. B. Salamon, Mod. Phys. Lett. B 18 (2004), p. 1205.  
[428] Y. Wang, B. Revaz, A. Erb, and A. Junod, Phys. Rev. B 63 (2001), p. 094508.  
[429] R. A. Cooper, Y. Wang, B. Vignolle, O. J. Lipscombe, S. M. Hayden, Y. Tanabe, T. 
Adachi,Y. Koike, M. Nohara, H. Takagi, Cyril Proust, and N. E.  
         Hussey, Science 323 (2009), p. 603. 
[430] R. Daou, N. Doiron-Leyraud, D. LeBoeuf, S. Y. Li, F. Laliberté, O. Cyr-Choinière, Y. J. 
Jo, L. Balicas, J.-Q. Yan, J.-S. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough, and L.  
         Taillefer, Nat. Phys. 5 (2009), p. 31. 
[431] F. Jutier, J.-C. Griveau, C. J. Van Der Beek, E. Colineau, F. Wastin, J. Rebizant, P. Boulet, 
T. Wiss, H. Thiele, and E. Simoni, Europhys. Lett. 78 (2007),  
          p. 57008. 
[432] B. T. Matthias, V. B. Compton, and E. Corenzwit, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 19 (1961), p. 130. 
[433] H. F. Braun, Phys. Lett. A 75 (1980), p. 386. 
[434] Y. Kamihara, T. Watanabe, M. Hirano, and H. Hosono, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (2008), p. 
3296. 
[435] Y. Kamihara, H. Hiramatsu, M. Hirano, R. Kawamura, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya, and H.  
Hosono, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 (2006), p. 10012. 
[436] K. Shimizu, T. Kimura, S. Furomoto, K. Takeda, K. Kontani, Y. Onuki, and K. Amaya, 
Nature 412 (2001), p. 316. 
[437] D. C. Johnston, Adv. in Phys. 59 (2010), p. 803. 
[438] J. P. Paglione and R. L. Greene, Nat. Phys. 6 (2010), p. 645. 
[439] P. J. Hirschfeld, M. M. Korshunov, and I. I. Mazin, Rep. Prog. Phys. 74 (2011), p. 124508. 
[440] C. C. Chang, T. K. Chen, W. C. Lee, P. H. Lin, M. J. Wang, Y. C. Wen, P. M. Wu, and M. 
K. Wu, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 423. 
[441] S. Nandi, M. G. Kim, A. Kreyssig, R. M. Fernandes, D. K. Pratt, A. Thaler, N. Ni, S. L.  
Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, J. Schmalian, R. J. McQueeney, and A.  
          I. Goldman, Phys.  Rev. Lett. 104 (2010), p. 057006. 
[442] J. S. Kim, G. N. Tam, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B. 91 (2015), p. 144512. 
[443] R. M. Fernandes, A. V. Chubukov, and J. Schmalian, Nat. Phys. 10 (2014), p. 97. 
[444] D. K. Pratt, W. Tian, A. Kreyssig, J. L. Zarestky, S. Nandi, N. Ni, S. L. Bud’ko,  P. C. 
Canfield, A. I. Goldman, and R. J. McQueeney, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009), p. 087001. 
[445] P. Dai, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87 (2015), p. 855.   
[446] Comptes Rendus Physique 17 (2016), p. 1-232.  
[447] Rep. on Prog. Phys. 74 (2011), no. 12, p. 120301-124513.  
[448] N. Katayama, K. Kudo, S. Onari, T. Mizukami, K. Sugawara, Y. Sugiyama, Y. Kitahama, 
K. Iba, K. Fujimura, N. Nishimoto, M. Nohara, and H. Sawa,  
          J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 82 (2013), p. 123702. 
[449] C. Wang, L. Li, S. Chi, Z. Zhu, Z. Ren, Y. Li, Y. Wang, X. Lin, Y. Luo, S. Jiang, X. Xu, 
G. Cao, and  Z. Xu, Europhys. Lett. 83 (2008), p. 67006. 
[450] M. Rotter, M. Tegel, and D. Johrendt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), p. 107006. 


[451] X. C. Wang, Q.Q. Liu, Y. X. Lv, W. B. Gao, L. X. Yang, R. C. Yu, F. Y. Li, and C.Q. Jin, 
Solid State Commun. 148 (2008), p. 538. 
[452] F.-C. Hsu, J.-Y. Luo, K.-W. Yeh, T.-K. Chen, T.-W. Huang, P. M. Wu, Y.-C. Lee, Y.- L. 
Huang, Y.-Y. Chu, D.-C. Yan, and M.-K. Wu, Proc. Nat.  
         Acad. Sci. USA 105 (2008), p. 14262.  
[453] H. Ogino, Y. Matsumara, Y. Katsura, K. Ushiyama, S. Horii, K. Kishio, and J.-I. 
Shimoyama,  Supercond. Sci. Technol. 22 (2009), p. 075008. 
[454] X. Zhu, F. Han, G. Mu, P. Cheng, B. Shen, B. Zeng, and H.-H. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 79 
(2009) p. 220512(R). 
[455] D. M. Wang, J. B. He, T.-L. Xia, and G. F. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011), p. 132502. 
[456] T. Stürzer, G. Derondeau, and D. Johrendt, Phys. Rev. B 86 (2012), p. 060516(R).  
[457] C. Löhnert, T. Stürzer, M. Tegel, R. Frankovsky, G. Friederichs, and D. Johrendt, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (2011), p. 9195. 
[458] N. Ni, M. Jared, B. Allred, C. Chan, and R. J. Cava, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 108 
(2011), p. E1019. 
[459] K. Kudo, Y. Kitahama, K. Fujimura, T. Mizukami, H. Ota, and M. Nohara, J. Phys. Soc. 
Jpn. 83 (2014), p. 093705.   
[460] C. Wang, Z.-C. Wang, Y.-X. Mei, Y.-K. Li, L. Li, Z.-T. Tang, Y. Liu, P. Zhang, H.-F. 
Zhai, Z.-A. Xu, and G.-H. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016), p.  
          2170. 
[461] P. J. Hirschfeld, C. R. Physique 17 (2016), p. 197.  
[462] P. Walmsley, C. Putzke, L. Malone, I. Guillamón, D. Vignolles, C. Proust, S. Badoux, A. I. 
Coldea, M. D. Watson, S. Kasahara, Y. Mizukami, T.  
          Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, and A. Carrington, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013), p. 257002.  
[463] Q.-Y. Wang, Z. Li, W.-H. Zhang, Z.-C. Zhang, J.-S. Zhang, W. Li, H. Ding, Y.-B. Ou, P. 
Deng, K. Chang, J. Wen, C.-L. Song, K. He, J.-F. Jia, S.-H. Ji, Y.-Y. Wang, L.-L. Wang, X. 
Chen, X.-C. Ma, and Q.-K. Xue, Chin. Phys. Lett. 29 (2012), p. 037402.  
[464] J.-F. Ge, Z.-L. Liu, C. Liu, C.-L. Gao, D. Qian, Q.-K.Xue, Y.Liu, and J.-F.Jia, Nature 
Mater. 14 (2015), p. 285. 
[465] J. J. Lee, F. T. Schmitt, R. G. Moore, S. Johnston, Y.-T. Cui, W. Li, M. Yi, Z. K. Liu, M. 
Hashimoto, Y. Zhang, D. H. Lu, T. P. Devereaux, D.-H. Lee, and Z.-X. Shen, Nature 515 (2014), 
p. 245. 
[466] Q. Fan, W. H. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. J. Yan, M. Q. Ren, R. Peng, H. C. Xu, B. P. Xie, J. P. Hu, 
T. Zhang, and D. L. Feng, Nature Phys. 11 (2015), p. 946. 
[467] K. Hanzawa, H. Sato, H. Hiramatsu, T. Kamiya, and H. Hosono, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 
USA 113 (2016), p. 3986. 
[468] I. I. Mazin, D.  J. Singh, M. D. Johannes, and M. H. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), p. 
057003. 
[469] A. V. Chubukov, Physica C 469 (2009), p. 640. 
[470] Q. Wang, Y. Shen, B. Pan, Y. Hao, M. Ma, F. Zhou, P. Steffens, K. Schmalzl, T. R. 
Forrest, M. Abdel-Hafiez, X. Chen, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev,  
          P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, H. Cao, and J. Zhao, Nature Mater. 15 (2016), p. 159. 
[471] F. F. Tafti, A. Juneau-Fecteau, M-È. Delage, S. René de Cotret, J.-Ph. Reid, A. F.Wang, 
X.-G. Luo, X. H. Chen, N. Doiron-Leyraud, and L. Taillefer,  
         Nature Phys. 9 (2013), p. 349. 


[472] J.-Ph. Reid, M. A. Tanatar, A. Juneau-Fecteau, R. T. Gordon, S. René de Cotret, N. 
Doiron-Leyraud, T. Saito, H. Fukazawa, Y. Kohori, K. Kihou, C. H.  
         Lee, A. Iyo, H. Eisaki, R. Prozorov, and L. Taillefer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012), p. 
087001.  
[473] J. S. Kim, G. R. Stewart, Y. Liu, and T. A. Lograsso, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015), p. 214506. 
[474] D. Parker, O.V. Dolgov, M. M. Korshunov, A. A. Golubov, and I. I. Mazin, Phys. Rev. B 
78 (2008),  p. 134524. 
[475] H. Kontani and S. Onari, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010), p. 157001. 
[476] S. Onari and H. Kontani, Phys. Rev. B 84 (2011), p. 144518.  
[477] D. S. Inosov, Comptes Rendus Physique 17 (2016), p. 60. 
[478] J. Knolle, V. B. Zabolotnyy, I. Eremin, S. V. Borisenko, N. Qureshi, M. Braden, D. V. 
Evtushinsky, T. K. Kim, A. A. Kordyuk, S. Sykora, Ch. Hess, I.  
         V. Morozov, S. Wurmehl, R. Moessner, and B. Büchner, Phys. Rev. B 86 (2012), p. 
174519.  
[479] C.-T. Chen, C. C. Tsuei, M. B. Ketchen, Z.-A. Ren, and Z. X. Zhao, Nature Phys. 6 
(2010), p. 260. 
[480] C. W. Hicks, T. M. Lippman, M. E. Huber, Z.-A. Ren, J. Yang, Z.-X. Zhao, and K. A. 
Moler, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 78 (2009), p. 013708. 
[481] M. Tortello, V. A. Stepanov, X. Ding, H. H. Wen, R. S. Gonnelli, L. H. Greene, J. 
Supercond. Nov. Magn. 29 (2016), p. 679. 
[482] S. Chi, S. Johnston, G. Levy, S. Grothe, R. Szedlak, B. Ludbrook, Ruixing Liang, P. 
Dosanjh, S. A. Burke, A. Damascelli, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy,  
          and Y. Pennec, Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014), p. 104522.  
[483] M. L. Teague, G. K. Drayna, G. P. Lockhart, P. Cheng, B. Shen, H.-H. Wen, and N.-C. 
Yeh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 (2011), p. 087004.  
[484] M. Tortello, D. Daghero, G. A. Ummarino, V. A. Stepanov, J. Jiang, J. D. Weiss, E. E. 
Hellstrom, and R. S. Gonnelli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010), p.  
         237002.  
[485] J. E. Hoffman, Rep. Prog. Phys. 74 (2011), p. 124513.  
[486] T. Hanaguri, S. Niitaka, K. Kuroki, and H. Takagi, Science 328 (2010), p. 474. 
[487] K. Ahilan, J. Balasubramaniam, F. L. Ning, T. Imai, A. S. Sefat, R. Jin, M. A. McGuire, B. 
C. Sales, and D. Mandrus, J. Phys.:  Condens. Matter 20  
         (2008), p. 472201. 
[488] F. Han, X. Zhu, P. Cheng, G. Mu, Y. Jia, L. Fang, Y. Wang, H. Luo, B. Zeng, B. Shen, L. 
Shan, C. Ren, and H.-H. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 80 (2009), p. 024506. 
[489] Y. Kamihara, T. Nomura, M. Hirano, J. E. Kim, K. Kato, M. Takata, Y.  Kobayashi, S. 
Kitao, S. Higashitaniguchi, Y. Yoda, M. Seto, and H. Hosono, New Journal of Physics 12 
(2010), p. 033005. 
[490] V. A. Sidorov, A.V. Tsvyashchenko, and R. A. Sadykov, J. Phys.:  Cond. Matter 21 
(2009), p. 415701. 
[491] S. Masaki, H. Kotegawa, Y. Hara, H. Tou, K. Murata, Y. Mizuguchi, and Y. Takano, J. 
Phys. Soc. Japan 78 (2009), p. 063704. 
[492] D. Hu, X. Lu, W. Zhang, H. Luo, S. Li, P. Wang, G. Chen, F. Han, S. R. Banjara, A. 
Sapkota, A. Kreyssig, A. I. Goldman, Z. Yamani, C. Niedermayer,  
         M. Skoulatos, R. Georgii, T. Keller, P.  Wang, W. Yu, and P. Dai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 
(2015), p. 157002.  


[493] T. Shimojima, T. Sonobe, W. Malaeb, K. Shinada, A. Chainani, S. Shin, T. Yoshida, S. 
Ideta, A. Fujimori, H. Kumigashira, K. Ono, Y. Nakashima, H.  
         Anzai, M. Arita, A. Ino, H. Namatame, M. Taniguchi, M. Nakajima, S. Uchida, Y. 
Tomioka, T. Ito, K. Kihou, C. H. Lee, A. Iyo, H. Eisaki,  K. Ohgushi,  
         S. Kasahara, T. Terashima, H. Ikeda, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, and K. Ishizaka, Phys. 
Rev. B 89 (2014), p. 045101.  
[494] Y.-M. Xu, P. Richard, K. Nakayama, T. Kawahara, Y. Sekiba, T. Qian, M. Neupane, S. 
Souma, T. Sato, T. Takahashi, H.-Q. Luo, H.-H. Wen, G.-F. Chen, N.-L. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. 
Fang, X. Dai, and H. Ding, Nature Commun. 2 (2011), p. 392. 
[495] D. Johrendt and R. Pöttgen, Physica C 469 (2009), p. 332. 
[496] T. Sato, S. Souma, K. Nakayama, K. Terashima, K. Sugawara, T. Takahashi, Y. Kamihara, 
M. Hirano, and H. Hosono, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77 (2008), p.  
          063708. 
[497] H. Luetkens, H.-H. Klauss, M. Kraken, F. J. Litterst, T. Dellmann, R. Klingeler, C. Hess, 
R. Khasanov, A. Amato, C. Baines, M. Kosmala, O. J.  
         Schumann, M. Braden, J. Hamann-Borrero, N. Leps, A. Kondrat, G. Behr, J.Werner, and 
B. Büchner, Nature Mater. 8 (2009), p.305. 
[498] Y. Nakai, K. Ishida, Y. Kamihara, M. Hirano, and H. Hosono, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77 (2008), 
p. 073701.  
[499] H.-J. Grafe, D. Paar, G. Lang, N. J. Curro, G. Behr, J. Werner, J. Hamann-Borrero, C. 
Hess, N. Leps, R. Klingeler, and B. Büchner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101  
         (2008), p. 047003. 
[500] M. A. Surmach, F. Brückner, S. Kamusella, R. Sarkar, P. Y. Portnichenko, J. T. Park, G. 
Ghambashidze, H. Luetkens, P. K. Biswas, W. J. Choi, Y. I.  
         Seo, Y. S. Kwon, H.-H. Klauss, and D. S. Inosov, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015), p. 104515.     
[501] Y. Kobayashi, K. Suzuki, T. Kawamata, M. Itoh, and M. Sato, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 83 
(2014), p. 014712. 
[502] K. Ikeuchi, Y. Kobayashi, K. Suzuki, M. Itoh, R. Kajimoto, P. Bourges, A. D. 
Christianson, H. Nakamura, M. Machida, and M. Sato, J. Phys.: Condens.  
          Matter 27 (2015), p. 465701. 
[503] F. Hammerath, U. Gräfe, T. Kühne, H. Kühne, P. L. Kuhns, A. P. Reyes, G. Lang, S. 
Wurmehl, B. Büchner, P. Carretta, and H.-J. Grafe, Phys. Rev. B  
         88 (2013), p. 104503.  
[504] L. Ma, G. F. Ji, J. Dai, J. B. He, D. M. Wang, G. F. Chen, B. Normand, and W. Yu, Phys. 
Rev. B 84 (2011), p. 220505(R).  
[505] J. Cui, B. Roy, M. A. Tanatar, S. Ran, S. L. Bud’ko, R. Prozorov, P. C. Canfield, and Y. 
Furukawa, Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015), p. 184504. 
[506] S. J. Moon, A. A. Schafgans, S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, T. Terashima, Y. Matsuda, M. A. 
Tanatar, R. Prozorov, A. Thaler, P. C. Canfield, A. S. Sefat,  
          D. Mandrus, and D. N. Basov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012), p. 027006.  
[507] F. Massee, Y. K. Huang, J. Kaas, E. van Heumen, S. de Jong, R. Huisman, H. Luigjes, J. 
B. Goedkoop, and M. S. Golden, EPL 92 (2010), p. 57012. 
[508] Y. S. Kwon, J. B. Hong, Y. R. Jang, H. J. Oh, Y. Y. Song, B. H. Min, T. Iizuka, S.-i. 
Kimura, A. V. Balatsky, and Y. Bang, New J. Phys. 14 (2012), p.  
          063009. 
[509] V. J. Emery and S. A. Kivelson, Nature 374 (1995), p. 434. 


[510] C. Hess, A. Kondrat, A. Narduzzo, J. E. Hamann-Borrero, R. Klingeler, J. Werner, G. 
Behr, and B. Buechner,  EPL 87 (2009), 17005. 
[511] A. Drew, Ch. Niedermayer, P. J. Baker, F. L. Pratt, S. J. Blundell, T. Lancaster, R. H. Liu, 
G. Wu, X. H. Chen, I. Watanabe, V. K. Malik, A. Dubroka,  
         M. Rössle, K. W. Kim, C. Baines, and C. Bernhard, Nature Mater. 8 (2009), p. 310. 
[512] J. D. Fletcher, A. Serafin, L. Malone, J. Analytis, J.-H. Chu, A. S. Erickson, I. R. Fisher, 
and A. Carrington, Phys.  Rev. Lett. 102 (2009), p. 147001. 
[513] C. W. Hicks, T. M. Lippman, M. E. Huber, J. G. Analytis, J.- H. Chu, A. S. Erickson, I. R. 
Fisher, and K. A. Moler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009), p.  
         127003. 
[514] K. Hashimoto, K., A. Serafin, S. Tonegawa, R. Katsumata, R. Okazaki, T. Saito, H. 
Fukazawa, Y. Kohori, K. Kihou, C.H. Lee, A. Iyo, H. Eisaki, H.  
         Ikeda, Y. Matsuda, A. Carrington, and T. Shibauchi, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), p. 014526. 
[515] K. Hashimoto, M. Yamashita, S. Kasahara, Y. Senshu, N. Nakata, S. Tonegawa,  K. Ikada, 
A. Serafin, A. Carrington, T. Terashima, H. Ikeda, T.  
         Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, Phys. Rev. B 81 (2010), p. 220501(R). 
[516] Y. Nakai, S. Kitagawa,  K. Ishida, Y. Kamihara, M. Hirano, and H. Hosono, 2009, Phys. 
Rev. B 79 (2009), p. 212506.      
[517] A. V. Chubukov, D. Efremov, and I. Eremin, 2008, Phys. Rev. B 78 (2008), p. 134512. 
[518] L. Malone, Y. Mizukami, P. Walmsley, C. Putzke, S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, 
and  A. Carrington, arXiv:1409.7523. 
[519] B. Zeng, G. Mu, H.Q. Luo, T. Xiang,  I.I. Mazin, H. Yang, L. Shan,  C. Ren, P.C. Dai, and 
H.-H. Wen, Nature Commun. 1 (2010), p. 112. 
[520] Y. Zhang, Z. R. Ye, Q. Q. Ge, F. Chen, J. Jiang, M. Xu, B. P. Xie, and D. L. Feng, Nat. 
Phys. 8 (2012), p. 371.  
[521] W.-C. Lee, S.-C. Zhang, and C. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009), p. 217002.  
[522] C. Platt, R. Thomale, C. Honerkamp, S.-C. Zhang, and W. Hanke, Phys. Rev. B 85 (2012), 
p. 180502.  
[523] M. Håkansson, T. Löfwander, and M. Fogelström, Nature Phys. 11 (2015), p. 755.  
[524] R. Prozorov, M. Ko´nczykowski, M.A. Tanatar, A. Thale, S.L. Bud’ko, P.C. Canfield, V. 
Mishra, and P.J. Hirschfeld, Phys. Rev. X 4 (2014), p. 041032. 
[525] R. H. Liu, T. Wu, G. Wu, H. Chen, X. F. Wang, Y. L. Xie, J. J. Yin, Y. J. Yan, Q. J. Li,  B. 
C. Shi, W.  S. Chu, Z.  Y. Wu, and X. H. Chen, Nature 459  
         (2009), p. 64. 
[526] Y. Wang, J. S. Kim, G. R. Stewart, P. J. Hirschfeld, S. Graser, S. Kasahara, T. Terashima, 
Y. Matsuda, T. Shibauchi, and I. Vekhter, Phys. Rev. B 84  
          (2011), p. 184524.  
[527] Y. Maeno, H. Hashimoto, K. Yoshida, S. Nishizaki, T. Fujita, J. G. Bednorz, and F. 
Lichtenberg, Nature 372 (1994), p. 532. 
[528] S. NishiZaki, Y. Maeno, and Z. Mao, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 69 (2000), p. 572. 
[529] A. P. Mackenzie, R. K. W. Haselwimmer, A. W. Tyler, G. G. Lonzarich, Y. Mori, S. 
NishiZaki, and Y. Maeno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998), p. 161.  
[530] T. M. Rice and M.Sigrist, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 7 (1995), p. L643. 
[531] G. Baskaram, Physica B 223-224 (1996), p. 490.  
[532] K. Ishida, H. Mukuda, Y. Kitaoka, K. Asayama, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, and Y. Maeno, 
Nature 396 (1998), p. 658. 


[533] A. P. Mackenzie and Y. Maeno, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75 (2003), p. 657.  
[534] Y. Liu and Z.-Q. Mao, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 339. 
[535] J. R. Kirtley, C. Kallin, C. W. Hicks, E.-A. Kim, Y. Liu, K. A. Moler, Y. Maeno, and K. D. 
Nelson, Phys. Rev. B 76 (2007), p. 014526.  
[536] T. Scaffidi and S. H. Simon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015), p. 087003. 
[537] Y. Maeno, S. Kittaka, T. Nomura, S. Yonezawa, and K. Ishida, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 81 
(2012), p. 011009. 
[538] Y. Maeno, T. M. Rice, and M. Sigrist, Phys. Today 54 (2001), p. 42. 
[539] C. Bergemann, A. P. Mackenzie, S. R. Julian, D. Forsythe, and E. Ohmichi, Adv. Phys. 52 
(2003), p. 639. 
[540] Y. Maeno, K. Yoshida, H. Hashimoto, S. NishiZaki, S.-i. Ikeda, M. Nohara, T. Fujita, A. 
P. Mackenzie, N. E. Hussey, J. G. Bernorz, and F. Lichtenberg,  
          J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 66 (1997), p. 1405. 
[541] R. Jin, Y. Liu, and F. Lichtenberg, Phys. Rev. B 60 (1999), p. 10418.  
[542] S. NishiZaki, Y. Maeno, and Z. Q. Mao, J. Low Temp. Phys. 117 (1999), p. 1581. 
[543] K. Hasselbach, J. R. Kirtley, and J. Flouquet, Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993), p. 509.  
[544] K. Izawa, H. Takahashi, H. Yamaguchi, Y. Matsuda, M. Suzuki, T. Sasaki, T. Fukase, Y. 
Yoshida, R. Settai, and Y.Onuki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001),  
          p. 2653. 
[545] M. A. Tanatar, M. Suzuki, S. Nagai, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Maeno, and T. Ishiguro, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 86 (2001), p. 2649.  
[546] K. Ishida, H. Mukuda, Y. Kitaoka, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, and Y. Maeno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 
(2000), p. 5387.  
[547] I. Bonalde, Brian D. Yanoff, M. B. Salamon, D. J. Van Harlingen, E. M. E. Chia, Z. Q. 
Mao, and Y. Maeno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000), p. 4775.  
[548] I. Kosztin and A. Leggett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997), p. 135.  
[549] C. Lupien, W. A. MacFarlane, C. Proust, L. Taillefer, Z. Q. Mao, and Y. Maeno, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 86 (2001), p. 5986. 
[550] Y. Hasegawa, K. Machida, and M.-a. Ozaki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 69 (2000), p. 336. 
[551] R. Jin, Y. Liu, Z. Q. Mao, and Y. Maeno, Europhys. Lett. 51 (2000), p. 341.  
[552] Y. Liu, K. D. Nelson, Z. Q. Mao, R. Jin, and Y. Maeno, J. Low Temp. Phys. 131 (2003), p. 
1059. 
[553] F. Laube, G. Goll, H. v. Löhneysen, M. Fogelström, and F. Lichtenberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
84 (2000), p. 1595.  
[554] I. A. Firmo, S. Lederer, C. Lupien, A. P. Mackenzie, J. C. Davis, and S. A. Kivelson, Phys. 
Rev. B 88 (2013), p. 134521. 
[555] K. D. Nelson, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Maeno, and Y. Liu, Science 306 (2004), p. 1151. 
[556] Y. Liu, New J. Phys. 12 (2010), p. 075001.  
[557] G. M. Luke, Y. Fudamoto, K. M. Kojima, M. I. Larkin, J. Merrin, B. Nachumi, Y. J. 
Uemura, Y. Maeno, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, H. Nakamura, and M.  
          Sigrist, Nature 394 (1998), p. 558. 
[558] J. Xia, Y. Maeno, P. Beyersdorf, M. M. Fejer, and A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 
(2006), p. 167002. 
[559] K. Deguchi, Z.Q. Mao, H. Yaguchi, and Y. Maeno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004), p. 047002. 
[560] E. Hassinger, P. Bourgeois-Hope, H. Taniguchi, S. René de Cotret, G. Grissonnanche, M. 
S. Anwar, Y. Maeno, N. Doiron-Leyraud, and Louis Taillefer,  


          arXiv1606.04936. 
[561] T.  Kuwabara and M. Ogata, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000), p. 4586.  
[562] D. F. Agterberg, T. M. Rice, and M. Sigrist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (1997), p. 3374.  
[563] K. Yoshida, F. Nakamura, T. Goko, T. Fujita, Y. Maeno, Y. Mori, and S. NishiZaki, Phys. 
Rev. B 58 (1998), p. 15062.  
[564] K. Ishida, Y. Kitaoka, K. Asayama, S. Ikeda, S. NishiZaki, Y. Maeno, K. Yoshida, and T. 
Fujita, Phys. Rev. B 56 (1997), p. R505(R).  
[565] I. I. Mazin and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997), p. 733.  
[566] P. Monthoux and G. G. Lonzarich, Phys. Rev. B 59 (1999), p. 14598.  
[567] E. Bauer, G. Hilscher, H. Michor, C. Paul, E. Scheidt, A. Gribanov, Y. Seropegin, H. Noël, 
M. Sigrist, and P. Rogl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) p.  
         027003. 
[568] E. Bauer and M. Sigrist, Non-Centrosymmetric Superconductors: Introduction and 
Overview, Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 847, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  
         2012. 
[569] P. A. Frigeri, D. F. Agterberg, A. Koga, and M. Sigrist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004), p. 
097001.  
[570] T. Takimoto and P. Thalmeier, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 78 (2009), p.103703. 
[571] R. Settai, Y. Okuda, I. Sugitani, Y. Onuki, T. D. Matsuda, Y. Haga, and H. Harima, Int. J. 
Mod. Phys. B 21 (2007), p. 3238. 
[572] M. Yogi, H. Mukuda, Y. Kitaoka, S. Hashimoto, T. Yasuda, R. Settai, T. D. Matsuda, Y. 
Haga, Y. Onuki, P. Rogl, and E. Bauer, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75  
         (2006), p. 013709. 
[573] H. Mukuda, S. Nishide, A. Harada, K. Iwasaki1, M. Yogi, M. Yashima, Y. Kitaoka, M. 
Tsujino, T. Takeuchi, R. Settai, Y. Onuki, E. Bauer, K. M. Itoh,  
         and E. E. Haller, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 78 (2009), p. 014705. 
[574] I. Bonalde, W. Braemer-Escamilla, and E. Bauer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), p. 207002.  
[575] K. Izawa, Y. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, K. Behnia, T. Yasuda, R. Settai, and Y. Onuki, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), p. 197002.  
[576] Y. Muro, D. Eom, N. Takeda, and M. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 67 (1998), p. 3601. 
[577] N. Kimura, K. Ito, H. Aoki, S. Uji, and T. Terashima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007), p. 
197001. 
[578] I. Sugitani, Y. Okuda, H. Shishido, T. Yamada, A. Thamizhavel, E. Yamamoto, T. D. 
Matsuda, Y. Haga, T. Takeuchi, R. Settai, and Y. Onuki, J. Phys.  
         Soc. Jpn. 75 (2006), p. 043703. 
[579] T. Badica, T. Kondo, and K. Togano, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 74 (2005), p. 1014.  
[580] M. Nishiyama, Y. Inada, and G.-q. Zheng, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007), p. 047002.  
[581] R. P. Singh, A. D. Hillier, B. Mazidian, J. Quintanilla, J. F. Annett, D. McK. Paul, G. 
Balakrishnan, and M. R. Lees, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014), p.  
         107002.  
[582] A. D. Hillier, J. Quintanilla, and R. Cywinski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009), p. 117007.  
[583] M.C. Krupka, A.L. Giorgi, N.H. Krikorian, and E.G. Szklarz, J. Less Common Metals 19 
(1969), p. 113.  
[584] G. R. Stewart, A. L. Giorgi, and M. C. Krupka, Solid State Commun. 27 (1978), p. 413. 


[585] M. Sigrist, 
http://www.scienceweb.tohoku.ac.jp/special/gcoeis2009/programAndSlides/talk/Slide_talk7.p
df 
[586] K. Bechgaard, M. Carneiro, M. Olsen, and F.B. Rasmussen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 46 (1981), p. 
852.  
[587] E. B. Yagubskii, I. F. Shchegolev, V. N. Laukhin, P. A.  Kononovich, M. V. Kartsovnik, 
A. V. Zvarykina, and L. L. Buravov, JETP Lett. 39 (1984), p.  
         12.  
[588] M. Tokumoto, K. Murata, H. Bando, H. Anzai, G. Saito, K. Kajimura, and T. Ishiguro, 
Solid State Commun. 54 (1985), p. 1031.  
[589] A. M. Kini, U. Geiser, H. H. Wang, K. D. Carlson, J. M. Williams, W. K. Kwok, K. G. 
Vandervoort, J. E. Thompson, D. Stupka, D. Jung, and M.-H.  
         Whangbo, Inorg. Chem. 29 (1990), p. 2555. 
[590] J. M. Williams, A. M. Kini, H. H. Wang, K. D. Carlson, U. Geiser, L. K. Montgomery, G. 
J. Pyrka, D. M. Watkins, J. M. Kommers, S. J. Boryschuk, A.  
         V. Strieby Crouch, W. K. Kwok, J. E. Schirber, D. L. Overmyer, D. Jung,  and M.-H. 
Whangbo, Inorg. Chem. 29 (1990), p. 3272. 
[591] S. Lefebvre, P. Wzietek, S. Brown, C. Bourbonnais, D. Jérome, C. Mézière, M. 
Fourmigué, and P. Batail, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000), p. 5420. 
[592] M. -Y. Choi, P. M. Chaikin, S. Z. Huang, P. Haen, E. M. Engler, and R. L. Greene, Phys. 
Rev. B 25 (1982), p. 6208.  
[593] S. Bouffard, M. Ribault, R. Brusetti, D. Jerome, and K. Bechgaard, J. Phys. C 15 (1982), p. 
2951. 
[594] S. E. Brown, P. M. Chaikin, and M. J. Naughton, in A.G. Lebed (Ed.), The Physics of 
Organic Superconductors and Conductors, Springer Series in  
         Materials Science, vol. 110, p. 49-87, Springer, Heidelberg, 2008.    
[595] A. A. Abrikosov, J. Low Temp. Phys. 53 (1983), p. 359. 
[596] L .P. Gorkov and D. Jerome, J. Phys. Lett. 46 (1985), p. L643. 
[597] L. N. Bulaevskii, Adv. Phys. 37 (1988), p. 443. 
[598] C. Bourbonnais and L. G. Caron, Europhys. Lett. 5 (1988), p. 209. 
[599] G. Koutroulakis, H. Kuehne, H.-H. Wang, J. A. Schlueter, J. Wosnitza, and S. E. Brown, 
arXiv1601.06107. 
[600] M. Takigawa, H. Yasuoka, and G. Saito, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 56 (1987), p. 873. 
[601] J. Shinagawa, Y. Kurosaki, F. Zhang, C. Parker, S. E. Brown, D. Jérome, J. B. Christensen, 
and K. Bechgaard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007), p. 147002. 
[602] S. Yonezawa, Y. Maeno, K. Bechgaard, and D. Jérome, Phys. Rev. B 85 (2012), p.140502. 
[603] N. Doiron-Leyraud, P. Auban-Senzier, S. René de Cotret, C. Bourbonnais, D. Jérome, K. 
Bechgaard, and L. Taillefer Phys. Rev. B 80 (2009), p.  
          214531. 
[604] K. Ichimura, S. Higashi, K. Nomura, and A. Kawamoto, Synthetic Metals 153 (2005), p. 
409. 
[605] H. Mayaffre, P. Wzietek, D. Jérome, C. Lenoir, and P. Batail, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995), 
p. 4122. 
[606] S. M. De Soto, C. P. Slichter, A. M. Kini, H. H. Wang, U. Geiser, and J. M. Williams, 
Phys. Rev. B 52 (1995), p. 10364. 


[607] K. Kanoda, K. Miyagawa, A. Kawamoto, and Y. Nakazawa, Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996), p. 
76. 
[608] L. P. Le, G. M. Luke, B. J. Sternlieb, W. D. Wu, Y. J. Uemura, J. H. Brewer, T. M. 
Riseman, C. E. Stronach, G. Saito, H. Yamochi, H. H. Wang, A. M.  
         Kini, K. D. Carlson, and J. M. Williams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992), p. 1923. 
[609] D. Achkir, M. Poirier, C. Bourbonnais, G. Quirion, C. Lenoir, P. Batail, and D. Jérome, 
Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993), p. 11595. 
[610] M. Dressel, O. Klein, G. Grüner, K.  D. Carlson, H.H. Wang, and J. M. Williams, Phys. 
Rev. B 50 (1994), p. 13603. 
[611] O. J. Taylor, A. Carrington, and J. A. Schlueter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 (2007), p. 057001. 
[612] S. Milbradt, A. A. Bardin, C. J. S. Truncik, W. A. Huttema, A. C. Jacko, P. L. Burn, S.-C. 
Lo, B. J. Powell, and D. M. Broun, Phys. Rev. B 88 (2013), p.  
         064501. 
[613] P. Garoche, R. Brusetti, D. Jérome, and K. Bechgaard, J. de Phys. Lett. 43 (1982), p. L147. 
[614] B. Andraka, C. S. Jee, J. S. Kim, G. R. Stewart, K. D. Carlson, H. H. Wang, A. V. S. 
Crouch, A. M. Kini, and J. M. Williams,  Solid State Commun. 79  
         (1991), p. 57.  
[615] J. A. Wright, E. Green, P. Kuhns, A. Reyes, J. Brooks, J. Schlueter, R. Kato, H.Yamamoto, 
M. Kobayashi, and S. E. Brown, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107  
         (2011), p. 087002. 
[616] R. Lortz, Y. Wang, A. Demuer, P. H. M. Böttger, B. Bergk, G. Zwicknagl, Y. Nakazawa, 
and J. Wosnitza, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 (2007), p. 187002. 
[617] J. Singleton, J. A. Symington, M.-S. Nam, A. Ardavan, M. Kurmoo, and P. Day, J. Phys.: 
Condens. Matter 12 (2000), p. L641. 
[618] B. Bergk, A. Demuer, I. Sheikin, Y. Wang, J. Wosnitza, Y. Nakazawa, and R. Lortz, Phys. 
Rev. B 83 (2011), p. 064506. 
[619] S. Uji, H. Shinagawa, T. Terashima, T. Yakabe, Y. Terai, M. Tokumoto, A.Kobayashi, H. 
Tanaka, and H. Kobayashi, Nature 410 (2001), p. 908. 
[620] S. Uji, T. Terashima, M. Nishimura, Y. Takahide, T. Konoike, K. Enomoto, H. Cui, H. 
Kobayashi, A. Kobayashi, H. Tanaka, M. Tokumoto, E. S. Choi,  
         T. Tokumoto, D. Graf, and J. S. Brooks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006), p. 157001. 
[621] G. Koutroulakis, H. Kühne, J. A. Schlueter, J. Wosnitza, and S. E. Brown, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
116 (2016), p. 067003. 
[622] Y. Kasahara, K. Kuroki, S. Yamanaka, and Y. Taguchi, Physica C (2015), p.354. 
[623] S. Zhang, M. Tanaka, E. Watanabe, H. Zhu, K. Inumaru, and S. Yamanaka, Supercond. 
Sci. Technol. 26 (2013), p. 122001. 
[624] S.Yamanaka, J. Mater. Chem. 20 (2010), p. 2922. 
[625] L. Zhu and S. Yamanaka, J. Mater. Chem. 15 (2003), p. 1897. 
[626] S. Yamanaka, H. Kawaji, K. Hotehama, and M. Ohashi, Adv. Mater. 8 (1996), p. 771. 
[627] B. T. Matthias and J. K. Hulm, Phys. Rev. 87 (1952), p. 799. 
[628] Y. Kasahara, T. Kishiume, K. Kobayashi, Y. Taguchi, and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. B 82 
(2010), p. 054504.  
[629] S. Yamanaka, T. Yasunaga, K. Yamaguchi, and M. Tagawa, J. Mater. Chem. 19 (2009), p. 
2573. 
[630] S. Zhang, M. Tanaka, and S. Yamanaka, Phys. Rev. B 86 (2012), p. 024516. 


[631] K. Hotehama, T. Koiwasaki, K. Umemoto, S. Yamanaka, and H. Tou, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 79 
(2010), p. 014707. 
[632] H. Tou, Y. J. Tanaka, M. Sera, Y. Taguchi, T. Sasaki, Y. Iwasa, L. Zhu, and S. Yamanaka, 
Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005), p. 020501(R).  
[633] H. Tou, Y. Maniwa, and S. Yamanaka, Phys. Rev. B 67 (2003), p. 100509(R). 
[634] H. Kotegawa, S. Oshiro, Y. Shimizu, H. Tou, Y. Kasahara, T. Kishiume, Y. Taguchi, and 
Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014), p. 020503. 
[635] Y. Taguchi, M. Hisakabe, and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), p. 217002. 
[636] Y. Kasahara, T. Kishiume, T. Takano, K. Kobayashi, E. Matsuoka, H. Onodera, K. Kuroki, 
Y. Taguchi, and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009), p.  
          077004. 
[637] H. Padamsee, J. E. Neighbor, and C. A. Shiffman, J. Low Temp. Phys. 12 (1973), p. 387.  
[638] M. Hiraishi, R. Kadono, M. Miyazaki, S. Takeshita, Y. Taguchi, Y. Kasahara, T. Takano, 
T. Kishiume, and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. B 81 (2010), p. 014525. 
[639] T. Ito, Y. Fudamoto, A. Fukaya, I. M. Gat-Malureanu, M. I. Larkin, P. L. Russo, A. Savici, 
Y. J. Uemura, K. Groves, R. Breslow, H. Hotehama, S.  
          Yamanaka, P. Kyriakou, M. Rovers, G. M. Luke, and K. M. Kojima, Phys. Rev. B 69 
(2004), p. 134522. 
[640] T. Takasaki, T. Ekino, H. Fujii, and S. Yamanaka, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 74 (2005), p. 2586. 
[641] T. Ekino, A. Sugimoto, A. M. Gabovich, Z. F. Zheng, and S. Yamanaka, Physica C 494 
(2013), p. 89. 
[642] R. Weht, A. Filippetti, and W. E. Pickett, Europhys. Lett. 48 (1999), p. 320. 
[643] R. Heid and K.-P. Bohnen, Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005), p. 134527. 
[644] A. Bill, H. Morawitz, and V. Z. Kresin, Phys. Rev. B 68 (2003), p. 144519. 
[645] K. Kuroki, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 9 (2008), p.  044202. 
[646] P. Burlet, J. Flouquet, J. L. Genicon, R. Horyn, O. Pena, and M. Sergent, Physica B 215 
(1995), p. 127. 
[647] J. W. Lynn, G. Shirane, W. Thomlinson, R. N. Shelton, and D. E. Moncton, Phys. Rev. B 
24 (1981), p. 3817. 
[648] J. Tallon, C. Bernhard, M. Bowden, P. Gilberd, T. Stoto, and D. Pringle, IEEE Trans. 
Appl. Supercond. 9 (1999), p. 1696. 
[649] C. Y. Yang, B. C. Chang, H. C. Ku, and Y. Y. Hu, Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005), p.  174508. 
[650] T. Herrmannsdörfer, S. Rehmann, M. Seibold, and F. Pobell, J. Low Temp. Phys. 110 
1998), p. 405. 
[651] S. S. Saxena, P. Agarwal, K. Ahilan, F. M. Grosche, R. K. W. Hasselwimmer, M. J. 
Steiner, E. Pugh, I. R. Walker, S. R. Julian, P. Monthoux, G. G.  
          Lonzarich, A. Huxley, I. Sheikin, D. Braithwaite, and J. Flouquet, Nature 406 (2000), p. 
587. 
[652] N. Tateiwa, T. C. Kobayashi, K. Amaya, Y. Haga, R. Settai, and Y. Onuki, Phys. Rev. B 
69 (2004), p. 180513(R). 
[653] H. Kotegawa, A. Harada, S. Kawasaki, Y. Kawasaki, Y. Kitaoka, Y. Haga, E. Yamamoto, 
Y. Ōnuki, K. M. Itoh, E. E. Haller, and H. Harima, J. Phys.  
         Soc. Japan 74 (2005), p. 705. 
[654] N. Tateiwa, K. Hanazono, T. C. Kobayashi, K. Amaya, T. Inoue, K. Kindo, Y. Koike, N. 
Metoki, Y. Haga, R. Settai and Y. Onuki, J. Phys. Soc. Japan  
         70 (2001), p. 2876. 


[655] T. R. Kirkpatrick, D. Belitz, T. Vojta, and R. Narayanan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001), p. 
127003.  
[656] S. Watanabe and K. Miyake, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 71 (2002), p. 2489.  
[657] N. Karchev, Phys. Rev. B 67 (2003), p. 054416.  
[658] K. G. Sandeman, G. G. Lonzarich, and A. J. Schofield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003), p. 
167005.  
[659] D. Aoki, A. Gourgout, A. Pourret, G. Bastien, G. Knebel, and J. Flouquet, C. R. Physique 
15 (2014), p. 630.  
[660] D. Aoki, A. Huxley, E. Ressouche, D. Braithwaite, J. Flouquet, J.-P. Brison, E. Lhotel, and 
C. Paulsen, Nature 413 (2001), p. 613. 
[661] K. Takada, H. Sakurai, E. Takayama-Muromachi, F. Izumi, R. A. Dilanian, and T. Sasaki, 
Nature 422 (2003), p. 53. 
[662] G.-q. Zheng, K. Matano, R. L. Meng, J. Cmaidalka, and C. W. Chu, J. Phys.:  Condens. 
Matter 18 (2006), p. L63. 
[663] H. Sakurai, Y. Ihara, and K. Takada, Physica C 514 (2015), p. 378. 
[664] N. Oeschler, R. A. Fisher, N. E. Phillips, J. E. Gordon, M.-L. Foo, and R. J. Cava, Phys. 
Rev. B 78 (2008), p. 54528. 
[665] T. Shimojima , T. Yokoya, T. Kiss, A. Chainani, S. Shin, T. Togashi, C. Zhang, C. Chen, 
S. Watanabe, K. Takada, T. Sasaki, H. Sakurai, and E.  
         Takayama-Muromachi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 67 (2006), p. 282. 
[666] Y. Ihara, H. Takeya, K. Ishida, C. Michioka, K. Yoshimura, K. Takada, T. Sasaki, H. 
Sakurai, and E. Takayama-Muromachi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 68  
          (2007), p. 2119. 
[667] Y. Ihara, H. Takeya, K. Ishida, H. Ikeda, C. Michioka, K. Yoshimura, K. Takada, T. 
Sasaki, H. Sakurai, and E. Takaayama-Muromachi, J. Phys. Soc.  
          Jpn. 75 (2006), p. 124714. 
[668] A. Kanigel, A. Keren, L. Patlagan, K. B. Chashka, P. King, and A. Amato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
92 (2004), p. 257007. 
[669] M. Yokoi, Y. Kobayashi, M. Sato, and S. Sugai, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77 (2008), p. 094713. 
[670] M. Yokoi, H. Watanabe, Y. Mori, T. Moyoshi, Y. Kobayashi, and M. Sato, J. Phys. Soc. 
Jpn. 73 (2004), p. 1297. 
[671] W. Higemoto, K. Ohishi, A. Koda, S. Ranjan Saha, R. Kadono, K. Ishida, K. Takada, H. 
Sakurai, E. Takayama-Muromachi, and T. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. B  
          70 (2004), p. 134508. 
[672] J. Sugiyama, Y. Ikedo, M. Månsson, J. H. Brewer, S. L. Stubbs, E. J. Ansaldo, K. H. 
Chow, J. S. Lord, H. Ohta, C. Michioka, and K. Yoshimura, Phys.  
         Rev. B 82 (2010), p. 214505. 
[673] M. Mochizuki and M. Ogata, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76 (2007), p. 013704. 
[674] K. Yada and H. Kontani, Phys. Rev. B 77 (2008), p. 184521. 
[675] M. Monteverde, M. Nunez-Regueiro, C. Acha, K. A. Lokshin, D. A. Pavlov, S. N. Putilin, 
and E. V. Antipov, Phys. C 408-410 (2004), p. 23. 
[676] X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 (2011), p. 1057. 
[677] S. Sasaki and T. Mizushima, Phys. C 514 (2015), p. 206. 
[678] J. Alicea, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75 (2012), p.  076501. 
[679] http://iopscience.iop.org/journal/0953-2048/page/Topological_Superconductors. 
[680] L. Fleet, Nature Physics 11 (2015), p. 523. 


[681] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10 (2008), p. 096407. 
[682] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov,  S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, and L. P. 
Kouwenhoven, Science 336 (2012), p. 1003. 
[683] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon, J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. 
Bernevig, and A.  Yazdani, Science. 346 (2014), p. 602. 
[684] Y. S. Hor, A. J. Williams, J. G. Checkelsky, P. Roushan, J. Seo, Q. Xu, H. W. Zandbergen, 
A. Yazdani, N. P. Ong, and R. J. Cava, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104  
          (2010), p. 057001. 
[685] L. A. Wray, S.-Y. Xu, Y. Xia, Y. S. Hor, D. Qian, A. V. Fedorov, H. Lin, A. Bansil, R. J. 
Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, Nature Physics 6 (2010), p. 855. 
[686] S. Sasaki, M. Kriener, K. Segawa, K. Yada, Y. Tanaka, M. Sato, and Y. Ando, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 107 (2011), p. 217001.  
[687] Y. Nagai, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015), p. 060502(R). 
[688] P. K. Biswas, D. G. Mazzone, R. Sibille, E. Pomjakushina, K. Conder, H. Luetkens, C. 
Baines, J. L. Gavilano, M. Kenzelmann, A. Amato, and E.  
         Morenzoni, Phys. Rev. B 93 (2016), p. 220504(R). 
[689] K. Matano, M. Kriener, K. Segawa, Y. Ando, and Guo-qing Zheng, Nature Physics 12 
(2016), p. 852.  
[690] N. W. Ashcroft, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004), p. 187002. 
[691] M. Sakashita, H. Yamawaki, H. Fujihisa, K. Aoki, S. Sasaki, and H. Shimizu, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 79 (1997), p. 1082. 
[692] Y. Li, J. Hao, H. Liu, Y. Li, and Y. Ma, J. Chem. Phys. 140 (2014), p. 174712. 
[693] D. Duan, Y. Liu, F. Tian, D. Li, X. Huang, Z. Zhao, H. Yu, B. Liu, W. Tian, and T. Cui, 
Sci. Rep. 4 (2014), p. 6968. 
[694] A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Ksenofontov, and S. I. Shylin, Nature 525 
(2015), p. 73. 
[695] A.P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, and I. A. Troyan, arXiv1412:0460. 
[696] D. A. Papaconstantopoulos, B. M. Klein, M. J. Mehl, and W. E. Pickett, Phys. Rev. B 91 
(2015), p. 184511. 
[697] L. C. Bourne, A. Zettl, T. W. Barbee III, and Marvin L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B 36 (1987), p. 
3990R. 
[698] J. E. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, Phys. C 511 (2015), p. 45. 
[699] M. L. Cohen and P. W. Anderson, Superconductivity in d- and f-band Metals, ed. by D. H. 
Douglas, AIP, New York, 1972, p. 17. 
[700] J. Nagamatsu, N. Nakagawa, T. Muranaka, Y. Zenitani, and J. Akimitsu, Nature 410 
(2001), p. 63 (2001). 
[701] D. A. Papaconstantopoulos and B. M. Klein, Ferroelectrics 17 (1977), p. 307. 
[702] C. F. Richardson and N.W. Ashcroft, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (1997), p. 118. 
[703] S. He, J. He, W. Zhang, L. Zhao, D. Liu, X. Liu, D. Mou, Y.-B. Ou, Q.-Y.Wang, Z. Li, 
L.Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Liu, C. Chen, L. Yu, G. Liu, X. Dong, J.  
          Zhang, C. Chen, Z. Xu, X. Chen, X. Ma, Q. Xue, and X. J. Zhou, Nature Mater. 12 (2013), 
p. 605. 
[704] J.-F. Ge, Z.-L. Liu, C. Liu, C.-L. Gao, D. Qian, Q.-K. Xue, Y. Liu, and J.-F. Jia, Nat. Mat. 
14 (2015), p. 285). 
[705] D. Huang and J. E. Hoffmann, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. (2017), p. 311. 
[706] L. Wang, X. Ma and Q.-K. Xue, Supercond. Sci. Technol.29 (2016), p.123001. 


[707] S. N. Rebec, T. Jia, C. Zhang, M. Hashimoto, D.-H. Lu, R. G. Moore, and Z.-X. Shen, 
arXiv1606.09358v1. 
[708] Z.-X. Li, F. Wang, H. Yao, and D.-H. Lee, Sci. Bull. 61 (2016), p. 925. 
[709] S. A. Kivelson, Sci. Bull. 61 (2016), p. 911. 
[710] Q. Si and F. Steglich, Science 329 (2010), p. 1161. 
[711] A. J. Millis, S. Sachdev, and C. M. Varma, Phys. Rev. B 37 (1988), p. 4975. 
[712] C. M. Varma, Phys. Rev. B 73 (2006), p. 115113.  
 
 
 
 
Kyoto 6 
11, Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


