arXiv:1711.07336v1  [physics.ins-det]  15 Nov 2017

High-speed fluorescent thermal imaging of quench
propagation in high temperature superconductor
tapes

Roland Gyur´aki1, Fr´ed´eric Sirois2 and Francesco Grilli1

1Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
2Polytechnique Montr´eal, Canada

E-mail: roland.gyuraki@kit.edu

Abstract.
Fluorescent Microthermographic Imaging, a method using rare-earth
fluorescent coatings with temperature-dependent light emission,
was used for
quench investigation in high temperature superconductors (HTS). A fluorophore
was embedded in a polymer matrix and used as a coating on top of an HTS
tape, while being excited with UV light and recorded with a high-speed camera.
Simultaneously, the tape was pulsed with high amplitude, short duration DC current,
and brought to quench with the help of a localized defect. The joule heating during
a quench influences the fluorescent light intensity emitted from the coating, and by
recording the local variations in this intensity over time, the heating of the tape
can be visualized and the developed temperatures can be calculated. In this paper,
the fluorophore Europium tris[3-(trifluoromethylhydroxymethylene)- (+)-camphorate]
(EuTFC) provided sufficient temperature sensitivity and a usable temperature range
from 77 K to 260 K. With the help of high-speed recordings, the normal zone
development was imaged in a 20 µm copper stabilized HTS tape held in a liquid nitrogen
bath, and using a calibration curve, the temperatures reached during the quench have
been calculated.

Keywords:Quench,
High-speed
recording,
Fluorescence,
Thermal
imaging,
High
temperature superconductor


2

Introduction

High temperature superconductors (HTS), are promising for electrical applications, such
as motors, generators, cables and high field magnets [1–5], due to their high critical
current density in high applied magnetic fields and to their mechanical properties.
However, a problem associated with HTS applications is the behaviour of the
conductor when part of it reverts from the superconducting state back to its normal
conducting state due to some initial disturbance [6, 7].
This phenomena is referred
to as “quench”, and it can be caused by e.g. excessive local temperatures, magnetic
fields or non-uniform current density.
After a quench, a normal conducting zone is
present in the tape. This zone has a finite resistance that dissipates energy due to joule
heating. Due to the thermal conductivity, this now normal zone starts to spread along
the length of the tape at a given speed, referred to as the Normal Zone Propagation
Velocity (NZPV). While this speed can be in the range of m/s in low temperature
superconductors (LTS) [8], in the case of HTS, it is generally in the order of a few
cm/s [9,10].
The NZPV is a crucial aspect for the thermal stability of the tape, since a slow
speed means that a small portion of the tape is bearing the full heating power, whereas
a larger normal zone has an extended surface that can dissipate the heat more effectively
to e.g. a liquid nitrogen bath. Generally speaking, one would want a fast NZPV to avoid
the conductor being damaged by excessive local heating. For this reason, it would be
very useful to be able to monitor the temperature of the tape when designing a new
device that is prone to quenching. However this has proven to be challenging to over
large areas and with sufficient temporal resolution.
In this work, a new optical method is presented for the measurement of quench
propagation and NZPV in HTS tapes. In addition to imaging the quench itself, the
method allows measuring the spatial temperature profile on the surface of the sample.
The capability of mapping the temperature distribution over a 2D surface at high speeds
(millisecond time scale) constitutes the main novelty of the method. The technique
is based on the temperature dependent light emission of a rare-earth fluorophore in
conjunction with a high-speed camera, capable of recording thousands of images per
second.
Together, these allow for direct observation of dynamic events, such as the
quench, in the time range of milliseconds. Using the light intensity of each pixel in
the recording and adequate post-processing steps allow for the extraction of thermal
data. Hence, the measurements provide both qualitative and quantitative temperature
information, which can be used to compare quench behaviour of various tapes and
architectures. This work shows a proof of concept of the developed method together
with preliminary results of quench propagation measurements in a copper stabilized
HTS tape.


3

1. Fluorescent microthermographic imaging

Fluorescent Microthermographic Imaging (FMI) was developed in 1982 by Kolodner
et al. [11, 12] as a temperature measurement method for providing high spatial and
thermal resolution. It was demonstrated on MOSFETs in a packaged integrated circuit
and the method showed a temperature accuracy of 0.01 ◦C and a spatial resolution
of 15 µm.
A year later, a temperature accuracy of 0.08 ◦C and a spatial resolution
of 0.7 µm were reported.
Haugen et al. [13, 14] then used FMI for the first time to
image superconducting bridges carrying small amounts of currents and demonstrated
that measurements are possible in superconductors down to 4.2 K.

1.1. Absorption and emission

In this paper, Europium tris[3-(trifluoromethyl- hydroxy-methylene)-(+)-camphorate],
abbreviated EuTFC, was used for high-speed fluorescent thermal imaging [13, 14].
Fluorescence spectroscopy was done on a sample prepared as described in next section
(Sample Preparation), in order to determine the optimal illumination wavelength, as
well as to confirm the emission spectrum.
The results are shown in figure 1 and figure 2, where figure 1 uses arbitrary units for
showing the absorbance of the fluorophore. Absorbance is defined by the Beer-Lambert
law as

α = log(I0

I1
) ,
(1)

where I0 is the intensity of the incoming light and I1 is the intensity of the light measured
after passing through the sample. Hence, an absorbance of 1 means that 90% of the
light is absorbed by the sample, whereas an absorbance of 3 would mean that 99.9% is

340 360 380 400 420 440 460 480 500
Wavelength (nm)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Absorbance (a.u.)

Figure 1:
Absorbance spectra of EuTFC embedded in PMMA polymer film at room
temperature. An absorption of over 90% of the incoming light is possible between 340 nm
and 400 nm.


4

560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
Wavelength (nm)

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Emission Intensity (a.u.)

Figure 2: Emission spectra of EuTFC embedded in PMMA polymer film and excited with
365 nm light at room temperature. The principal emission peak of 612.9 nm is clearly visible.

absorbed. Over 90% of the light between wavelengths of 360 nm and 400 nm is absorbed
with the absorbance peaking at 376 nm.
Figure 2 shows the characteristic emission spectra of EuTFC at room temperature
and over a narrow wavelength scale, in arbitrary units as well, however here the units
simply represent a digital signal without any absolute meaning. The peak emission was
observed at 612.9 nm, which correlates with previous literature [14]. These results were
used for selecting the optimal excitation light source and optical filters to use in the
experimental setup.

1.2. Temperature dependence

The emission peak shown in figure 2 changes its intensity depending on the temperature.
It can thus be used to extract temperatures by recording the emission strength
during a calibration measurement. Figure 3 shows temperature dependent fluorescent
spectroscopy of an EuTFC sample over a temperature range from 70 K to 260 K. One can
observe a quasi-linear decrease in light intensity with increasing temperature over this
whole range. Beyond 260 K the fluorescence is barely recordable, hence this constitutes
the upper temperature limit of the method. Since HTS conductors are often cooled with
liquid nitrogen, the temperature range from 77 K to 260 K (nearly room temperature)
is perfectly convenient for the purpose of quench characterization.
In order to generate the data shown in figure 2, the sample has been excited using
a frequency doubled Ti:Saphire laser (excitation wavelength of 365 nm) and measured
with an AvaSpec-ULS3648 high-resolution spectrometer, after the emission light has
been filtered with a 610 nm central wavelength bandpass filter with a bandwidth of 10
nm. The temperature control was done in an Oxford closed cycle cryostat controlled by
a LabVIEW code. Light intensity was measured at every 10 K by setting the required
temperature. Upon reaching the target temperature, the sample was given 5 minutes
to reach thermal equilibrium. At this point, the laser beam excited the sample and a


5

70
100
130
160
190
220
250
Temperature (K)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Light intensity (a.u.)

Figure 3: Light intensity (in arbitrary units) of EuTFC embedded in PMMA, baked at 175
◦C for 30 minutes. The range of 70 K to 260 K was investigated in steps of 10 K, which is an
interesting temperature range for HTS coated conductors.

measurement was taken. Following this, the laser beam’s path was blocked while the
sample was reaching a new measurement temperature in order to avoid photobleaching
of the EuTFC layer due to prolonged excitation.

1.3. UV excitation light

Previous measurements have often used Hg-Xe lamps [13,14] and Hg-arc lamps [11,12,15]
in a microscopy setup as a source for excitation for fluorescence. The light of the lamp
was filtered, only allowing the necessary UV component to pass. In addition, the UV
lighting was directed towards the sample using an optical guide. Such optical guides,
however, generally only allow a small area to be illuminated. This solution was not
deemed favourable to excite an area as large as 15 cm by 1.2 cm necessary in this
research.
For this reason, as well as due to size and place limitations, instead of a
Hg-Xe or Hg-arc lamp, UV LEDs were used in the experiment with a wavelength of
365 nm. At this excitation wavelength, more than 90% of the light is absorbed by the
fluorophore, as shown previously in figure 1.
The light intensity is one of the key aspects that make such a measurement work.
In static measurements, the exposure time of the camera can be arbitrarily chosen.
Furthermore, additional post-processing can be applied to improve the final image
quality. Haugen et al. [13] achieved 75-84 mK resolution using an exposure time of
2 s. Before that, Kolodner et al. [11] have used 20 s exposures and then combined the
images into a total effective exposure of 320 s to improve temperature resolution to
±8 mK.
Achieving the same image quality and thermal resolution in the time frame of a few
tens of milliseconds is more challenging. The exposure times are limited by the transient
effect to be recorded. As a consequence, the detected fluorescence is much fainter. In
order to reach acceptable emission levels at frame rates between 500 and 2500 pictures


6

per second, first a total of 4 UV LEDs (and eventually 8) were used in close proximity
of the sample [16]. The total radiant flux power is therefore of approximately 4,800 to
12,000 mW, however some of this power is lost due to absorption and reflection in glass
interfaces as well as in form of stray illumination (light not reaching the sample). The
exact level of illumination at the surface of the HTS tape is hard to determine as it
depends strongly on the distance to the sample and exact amount of DC current flowing
in the LEDs.
Note that although the optical density of liquid nitrogen is different than that of
air, it was found that UV light can still propagate through lengths of tens of centimetres
without considerable attenuation in this medium.

1.4. Camera

While fluorescent thermographic imaging has been previously used in microscopy
applications (see [11–15]), observing large objects in transient state in a time scale of
milliseconds posed new challenges, as already mentioned above. The main determining
factors about the applicability and final quality of the recordings are:

• Digital resolution (in bits)

• Recording speed (in frames per second, fps)

• Recording resolution

Digital resolution defines the number of discrete levels available for the digitalization of
the analogue light signal. Our Memrecam HX3 camera can operate with 12-bit digital
resolution, meaning that 4096 different light intensity levels can be recorded at any
chosen recording speed.
This directly defines the maximum theoretical temperature
resolution of the measurement. If the maximum light intensity of the CCD chip, i.e.
the value 4095, is achieved at the temperature of 77 K, and if the sensor records a value
of 0 at the maximum temperature (260 K), then the theoretical maximum temperature
resolution is,

(260 − 77)/(4095 − 0) = 0.0447 K.

This is, however, unrealistic, mainly due to noise in the CCD sensor, which reduces the
effective digital resolution.
Sufficiently high recording speed and resolution are required for capturing the
quench itself and having a sharp enough image. From experience, a recording speed
of 2500 fps (one image every 0.4 ms) allows clearly seeing the quench propagation in
HTS tapes. Anything beyond that is not strictly necessary, however it can be useful
for obtaining smoother recordings. The HX3 camera can maintain an HD resolution
of 1280 × 720 pixels at 10,000 fps; hence the speed and resolution are not limiting the
accuracy of the measurement. Nevertheless the resolution of the area of interest (only
the tape) is not necessarily available in high-definition due to the used lens and optics
of the setup. Being at the minimum working distance of the current camera lens, the
recorded images are approximately 200 × 500 pixels, or roughly 1 Megapixel.


7

Additionally a 610 nm central wavelength bandpass filter with a 10 nm bandwidth
was used to filter out any light not resulting from the temperature-dependant
fluorescence. Since the central wavelength of such filters shifts with the light incidence
angle, mounting the filter in front of the camera lens (as in traditional photography) was
unfavourable. Furthermore, these filters are made in small diameters and are mainly
used for experiments in traditional optics. Here, a custom 3D printed frame was made
for the bandpass filter, which could hold it between the lens and the camera’s standard
C-mount. This allowed all the light to first pass through the camera’s lens, and then
through the filter. This is illustrated in figure 4, described in details in the next section.

2. Experimental details

2.1. Sample preparation

A 12 mm wide HTS tape sample from SuperPower was cut into a final length of 15 cm.
The fluorophore was mixed with Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and dissolved in
acetone in a ratio of 1.3 wt%, 1.7 wt% and 97 wt% of fluorophore, PMMA and acetone,
respectively [14,17]. A high doping of fluorophore in the PMMA matrix is required for
sufficient light emission during excitation, especially when recording at high speeds.
The solution, which is mostly acetone, is brought onto the surface of a sample tape
using simple droplet deposition. As the acetone covers the tape and forms a thin layer, it
evaporates rapidly and leaves behind a layer of fluorophore and PMMA mixture. Finally,
in order to mechanically stabilize the layer and the photoluminescence itself, the sample
is heat treated at 175 ◦C for 30 minutes [14]. The heating profile was chosen arbitrarily
with a rising rate of 175 ◦C/hour, a hold time of 30 minutes at the set temperature,
and natural cool down thereafter. Figure 5a shows a 15 cm long non-stabilized HTS
tape after the heat treatment, where the coating is visible over the middle section of
the tape. Figure 5b shows the same HTS tape when excited with UV light; the light
emission is uniform around the characteristic 612 nm wavelength since the sample was
held at constant temperature for this measurement.
It has been previously shown that a thin layer of insulator between an HTS tape and
a cooling bath can influence the heat transfer properties [18,19]. Therefore, the presence
of a fluorescent coating may have to be kept in mind when interpreting measurement
results about the dynamics of the quench.

2.2. Experimental setup

A schematic of the experiment is shown in figure 4. A tape is held between two copper
terminals and placed into an optical cryostat, filled with liquid nitrogen. The UV light
array is placed outside of the cryostat and the light excites the tape at an oblique angle.
A short, generally 50 ms to 150 ms current pulse, is sent through the tape and at the
same time, the high-speed camera is triggered. In the current setup, the sample is in a
vertical position in the cryostat, which itself is placed in a larger metal enclosure covered


8

Figure 4: Schematic image of the measurement setup. A sample HTS tape is placed in an
optical liquid nitrogen cryostat and excited with UV light. A recording is made at high speed
and at the same time a high amplitude current pulse is sent through the tape. The change in
light intensity emitted by the tape indicates the surface temperature.

b

a

Figure 5: A: shows the coating over the central section of a 15 cm long, non-stabilized HTS
under normal lighting conditions. B: shows the same tape when excited with 365 nm UV light.

with insulating blankets, mainly to block out any ambient light that would affect the
measurement. Due to the arrangement of the metal enclosure, the camera is looking at
the sample through a mirror.

2.3. Post-processing

Since the amount of light varies based on the temperature of the sample, recording
these changes allows calculating the temperatures, based on the previously determined
calibration curve. If the temperature calibration is done on the exact same setup as
the measurement, with the exact same conditions, then the measurement results could
be simply interpolated using the calibration curve to extract the exact temperatures.
However, this is generally not the case, as it is rather difficult to accurately control the
temperature of the sample for calibration in the same setup where the measurements
will be performed. Furthermore, if not recorded by the same camera, the arbitrary units
of measurements cannot be compared directly.


9

A solution to this problem was introduced by L. D. Barton [17] by working with
relative light intensity changes instead of using an absolute scale. Let S(x, y) represent
the light intensity at a point in a 2D image. This value depends on the: excitation
intensity, I(x, y), the optical collection efficiency, η(x, y), the sample reflectivity, r(x, y)
and the quantum efficiency Q(T(x, y)). The relation can be described as

S(x, y) = I(x, y) · η(x, y) · r(x, y) · Q(T(x, y)) .
(2)

In order to remove all optical artefacts, one can create a relative scale instead of
the absolute measurement and divide the hot (biased) image, SH(x, y), by the cold
(reference) image, SC(x, y), to get the ratio SR(x, y), i.e.

(3)

SR(x, y) = SH(x, y)

SC(x, y)

= I(x, y) · η(x, y) · r(x, y) · Q(TH(x, y))

I(x, y) · η(x, y) · r(x, y) · Q(TC(x, y))

= Q(TH(x, y))

Q(TC(x, y)) .

Since only the quantum efficiency of the fluorophore depends on the temperature, all
other optical artefacts cancel out. Hence, the local variations in e.g. optical collection
efficiency or excitation light intensity are no longer a concern. This allows the calibration
to be done on a different measurement device as the actual measurement.
The complete calibration process works as follows: firstly, the calibration curve is
normalized around 77 K as shown in figure 6, resulting in a relative scale. Then, the
quench recording is also normalized on a pixel-by-pixel basis by dividing all images of
the video with the average of the first few images, where the tape is known to be at
constant temperature (here 77 K since it is immersed in a liquid nitrogen bath, but the
the tape could be held at any other reference temperature). Since the light intensity
in the case of this fluorophore varies almost linearly with the temperature, thermal
data can be extracted from the images using linear interpolation on the normalized
calibration curve.

3. Results

Figure 7 shows an actual image recorded by the high-speed camera next to a post-
processed image following the procedure introduced above. Non-uniformities in light
intensity, caused most likely by the varying thickness of the coating over the surface,
are clearly visible in the camera’s image. However they completely disappear in the
post-processed images thanks to the normalization. On the other hand, rising N2 gas
bubbles due to the boiling cryogenic bath, pose a problem. Since these change position
in successive images, they cannot be filtered out from the recordings and are clearly
visible.
Figure 8 shows the time evolution of a quench in a SuperPower, 20 µm copper-
stabilized HTS tape coated with EuTFC. In the current experiment, a tape is shown


10

70
100
130
160
190
220
250

Temperature (K)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Normalized light intensity

-5.6262E-03T + 1.455
R 2=0.986

Figure 6: Light intensity of EuTFC embedded in PMMA and baked at 175◦C and normalized
around 77 K. The R2 value shows a nice fit to a linear approximation.

Coating thickness
variations
Boiling LN2 

Temperature (K)

Figure 7: Reference images with a 20 µm copper stabilized sample with a 3 cm long section at
the centre narrowed down to 3 mm width for quench initiation. Left: Image of the high-speed
camera where the bright layer is the fluorescence at 77 K. Right: Post-processed image using
the previously shown normalization method and temperature calibration curve.

with a special structure, solely for controlling the quench initiation. The tape’s central
section has been narrowed down to 3 mm in width over a total length of 3 cm using a
Nd:YAG laser. The tape was quenched using a current pulse amplitude of 250 A with
a duration of 100 ms. The thermal imaging shows that the narrowed section heats up
gradually, almost completely uniformly. The first heating effects are visible after 40 ms,
with parts of the tape reaching close to 90 K, i.e. close to the critical temperature of
YBCO conductors. At 60 ms, the narrow section is almost uniformly above the critical
temperature and heats further during the current pulse. After the 100 ms mark, the
tape reaches temperatures of 260 K and more, beyond which the fluorophore used here
does not emit anymore light (see figure 6), so the colour remains apparently frozen, even
if the temperature continues to rise in this case. The individual images in figure 8 are
extracted from the high-speed fluorescent recording attached to this publication.


11

HTS Tape

Figure 8: Schematic of the structured 20 µm copper stabilized SuperPower tape and the time
evolution of a quench following a 100 ms long rectangular current pulse with an amplitude of
250 A. The recording was done at 2,500 images per second with the sample placed in a liquid
nitrogen cryostat in a vertical position.

4. Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced a high-speed fluorescent thermal imaging technique aimed
at measuring temperatures in HTS tapes during a quench. Using a high-speed camera
and EuTFC as a fluorophore, quench temperatures could be observed at high speeds in
HTS coated conductors immersed in liquid nitrogen. Recording speeds of 2,500 frames
per second were found sufficient, as well as UV LED arrays with a total light emission
of approximately 12,800 mW placed up to 30 cm away from the sample. With EuTFC
and sufficient calibration, the temperature range from 77 K to 260 K can be imaged
with reasonable accuracy. It was found that liquid nitrogen does not block considerable
amounts of UV light, hence the method works well even in this medium, despite the
slight distortion induced by bubbles.
In a copper coated HTS tape, a gradual overall heating was observed over a 3 cm
by 3 mm section. This indicates a strong current sharing between the superconducting
layer and the copper coating. During the current pulse, the tape has reached the limit
of temperature sensitivity, 260 K, in about 60 ms, and heated even further.

5. Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Nicolo Baroni and Marius Jakoby from the Institute
of Microstructure Technology, KIT, for their help with the fluorescent spectroscopy and
calibration measurements, as well as to Rainer Nast from the Institute of Technical
Physics, KIT, for preparing the HTS sample.


12

6. References

[1] C. Rey, Superconductors in the Power Grid. Elsevier Science, 2015.
[2] Z. Melhem, High Temperature Superconductors (HTS) for Energy Applications.
Woodhead
Publishing Limited, 2012.
[3] S. S. Kalsi, Applications of high temperature superconductors to electric power equipment. Wiley-
IEEE Press, 2011.
[4] A. M. Luiz, Z. G. ¨Ozdemir, A. C¸ataltepe, ¨U. Onbal, G.-J. Lee, and Y. Wang, Applications of
High-Tc Superconductivity. InTechOpen, 2011.
[5] H. W. Weijers, U. P. Trociewitz, W. D. Markiewicz, J. Jiang, D. Myers, E. E. Hellstrom, A. Xu,
J. Jaroszynski, P. Noyes, Y. Viouchkov, and D. C. Larbalestier, “High field magnets with HTS
conductors,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 576–582, 2010.
[6] A. A. Armenio, A. Augieri, G. Celentano, V. Galluzzi, A. Mancini, A. Rufoloni, A. Vannozzi,
U. Gambardella, A. Saggese, P. Sessa, and S. Pace, “Stability Measurements on YBCO Coated
Conductors,” vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1293–1296, 2008.
[7] H. Song and J. Schwartz, “Stability and Quench Behavior of YBa2Cu3O(7−x) Coated Conductor
at 4.2 K, Self-Field,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3735–
3743, 2009.
[8] F. Trillaud, F. Ayela, A. Devred, M. Fratini, D. Leboeuf, and P. Tixador, “Quench propagation
ignition using single-mode Diode Laser,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity,
vol. 15, no. 2 PART III, pp. 3648–3651, 2005.
[9] J. Pelegr´ın, E. Mart´ınez, L. A. Angurel, Y. Y. Xie, and V. Selvamanickam, “Numerical and
experimental analysis of normal zone propagation on 2G HTS wires,” IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity, vol. 21, no. 3 PART 3, pp. 3041–3044, 2011.
[10] X. Wangu, P. Trociewitzj, and J. Schwartz, “Near-adiabatic quench experiments on short Near-
adiabatic quench experiments on short Y Ba2Cu3O7 coated conductors,” vol. 053904, no. 2007,
2008.
[11] P. Kolodner and J. A. Tyson, “Remote thermal imaging with 0.7-µm spatial resolution using
temperature-dependent fluorescent thin flims,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 117–
119, 1983.
[12] P. Kolodner and J. A. Tyson, “Microscopic fluorescent imaging of surface temperature profiles
with 0.01 C resolution,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 782–784, 1982.
[13] O. Haugen, T. H. Johansen, H. Chen, V. Yurchenko, P. Vase, D. Winkler, B. A. Davidson, G. Testa,
E. Sarnelli, and E. Altshuler, “High resolution thermal imaging of hotspots in superconducting
films,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 3215–3218, 2007.
[14] Ø. Haugen and T. Johansen, “Temperature dependent photoluminescence down to 4.2K in
EuTFC,” Journal of Luminescence, vol. 128, no. 9, pp. 1479–1483, 2008.
[15] G. Hampel, P. Kolodner, P. L. Gammel, P. A. Polakos, E. de Obaldia, P. M. Mankiewich,
A. Anderson, R. Slattery, D. Zhang, G. C. Liang, and C. F. Shih, “High power failure of
superconducting microwave filters: investigation by means of thermal imaging,” Applied Physics
Letters, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 571–573, 1996.
[16] LED ENGIN, “365nm UV LED Gen 2 Emitter LZ1-00UV00,” 2016.
[17] L. D. Barton, “Fluorescent Microthermographic Imaging,” Journal of Chemical Information and
Modeling, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1689–1699, 2013.
[18] S. Hellmann and M. Noe, “Influence of different surface treatments on the heat flux from solids to
liquid nitrogen,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 24, no. 3, 2014.
[19] T. Rubeli, D. Colangelo, B. Dutoit, and M. Vojenciak, “Heat transfer monitoring between
quenched high-temperature superconducting coated conductors and liquid nitrogen,” Progress
in Superconductivity and Cryogenics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 10–13, 2015.


