Silicon Optical Phased Array with High-Efficiency Beam 
Formation over 180 Degree Field of View 

 

Christopher T. Phare1,2, Min Chul Shin1, Steven A. Miller1,2, Brian Stern1,2, and Michal Lipson1* 

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA 

2School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA 

*Corresponding Author: ml3745@columbia.edu 

 

 

Chip-scale optical phased arrays1–15 could enable compact beam steering and LIDAR for 

autonomous vehicles, precision robotics, and free-space optical communications.  Because these 

applications demand wide angle beam steering as well as high optical power in the output beam, a 

natural design choice would be to space the array emitters at a half-wavelength pitch, as is common 

in radiofrequency phased arrays.  Optical phased arrays, however, unlike RF phased arrays, have 

been limited by the tradeoff between field of view (i.e. angle steering) and beamforming efficiency 

(i.e. optical power in the output beam).  This tradeoff exists because optical phased arrays rely on 

waveguides as emitters, which suffer from strong crosstalk when placed in close proximity relative 

to their mode size.  Here we overcome these limitations and demonstrate a platform for optical 

phased arrays with 180° field of view, where more than 72 percent of the power is carried in a 

single diffraction-limited beam even when steered up to 60° off-axis.  Our platform leverages high 

index-contrast, dispersion-engineered waveguides spaced one half-wavelength apart without 

incurring crosstalk. 

Optical phased arrays to date, despite ever-increasing array size and element count6,11, remain 

limited in beam quality and steering angle because of unwanted coupling between dielectric 

waveguides, which forces radiating emitters to be placed several microns apart.  Emitter spacing 

greater than half a wavelength steals optical power from the main beam, redirecting it into 


unwanted periodic grating lobes tens of degrees away that limit the uniquely addressable steering 

range of the array.  While strong confinement in metals makes half-wavelength spacing possible in 

RF arrays, the nearby plasmon resonance makes such approaches16,17 impractically lossy at optical 

frequencies.  Kossey et al.12 have demonstrated half-wavelength emitter pitch in a 5-element array 

of dielectric waveguides without controlling crosstalk, but that approach works only for very small 

end-fire arrays, where waveguides run parallel for only a few microns.  Creative solutions to 

achieve wide field of view, like non-uniform emitter pitch4,6,18, successfully suppress grating lobes 

but sacrifice power in the main beam by redirecting power carried in grating lobes over many 

angles rather than back in the desired direction.  In LIDAR systems, this redirected power causes 

multiple problems, both decreasing the signal to noise ratio from the desired target and raising the 

overall background of returned signal, obscuring far-away or low-reflectivity targets and creating 

false images.  In these phased arrays, since an emitter pitch of 2-3 μm is required to avoid crosstalk, 

power in the main beam, even theoretically, rarely exceeds 30-40 percent of the total array 

output18. 

We simultaneously achieve wide steering angle and high beam efficiency by designing an end-

fire optical phased array at true half-wavelength pitch, engineered to avoid coupling between 

closely-spaced output waveguides even over millimeter-scale propagation lengths.  In order to 

minimize coupling of modes of adjacent waveguides, we minimize their overlap in phase space 

instead of real space19.  This mismatch can be seen in Figure 1a, where we show the ω-k dispersion 

diagram for two adjacent waveguides, with widths 300 and 400 nm.   At the operation wavelength 

the waveguide confinement causes a clear mismatch in k-space.  We achieve this k-mismatch while 

ensuring that all the waveguide widths are kept similar, critical to ensure uniform illumination 

across the array, by designing the waveguide cross section to have high dispersion (∂β/∂w, Figure 

1b).  The dispersion makes a small variation in width between adjacent waveguides induce a strong 

shift of propagation constant.  Since maximum power coupling between two waveguides varies as 


1/((Δβ/2κ)2 + 1) where Δβ is the difference in propagation constant and κ is the field overlap 

coupling strength20, this engineered phase velocity mismatch allows weak coupling between 

waveguides even when their evanescent fields overlap.  In our design, waveguides are phase-

mismatched with both their nearest neighbor and with their second-nearest neighbor (separated 

by λ/2 and λ, respectively) by cycling through a set of three widths (300, 350, and 400 nm, in 

sequence).  Third-nearest neighbors, separated by 3λ/2, have equal widths.  The 250 nm waveguide 

height ensures all of these waveguides are single-mode for TE polarized light.  We find that even for 

several-mm propagation lengths, coupling between nearest, second-nearest, and third-nearest 

neighbors is below 17 dB and power propagates only in the waveguide into which light was 

launched, as shown in Figure 1d. 

We demonstrate wide-angle beam steering with a 64-channel thermooptically-steered silicon 

phased array.  Figure 2a shows a schematic of the chip design. A tree of cascaded 1x2 MMI splitters 

distributes the power of a 1550 nm input laser into 64 separate output waveguides.  Each of these 

waveguides acts as a phase shifter when a thin platinum wire, 50 nm thick by 700 nm wide and 300 

μm long, is placed on top of the 1 μm cladding oxide.  These microheaters are designed to induce 

highly localized heat and minimize thermal crosstalk. Figure 2b shows a finite element method 

simulation of the thermal phase shifter, demonstrating a temperature change localized to within a 

few micrometers of the waveguide.  Phase shifters are placed on a 20 μm pitch to further minimize 

thermal crosstalk; an optical micrograph of the phase shifters and splitter tree is shown in Figure 

2c.  After the microheaters, we route the waveguides in a nested 90° bend to form the final 775 nm 

output pitch.  The scanning electron micrograph in Figure 2d shows the final varying waveguide 

widths on equal pitch.  A 200 μm bend radius is sufficiently large to not significantly perturb the 

effective index of the waveguides and thus minimizes coupling as they are brought close together.  

Waveguides run parallel for up to 680 μm and then terminate in a low-roughness plasma-etched 

facet21.  At this facet, the waveguides act as emitters with a quasi-dipole emission pattern.  To 


control the large number of phase shifters, we use thick aluminum wires to route each microheater 

to a bond pad at the chip perimeter and connect the opposite terminal of the heaters together in a 

low-resistance common ground.  We mount the chip with high thermal conductivity silver sintering 

paste directly to an aluminum heatsink and then wirebond each heater to an attached printed 

circuit board.  Figure 2e shows the packaged chip.  A 64 output digital to analog converter drives 

each microheater individually, allowing arbitrary phase control over more than 2π. 

We experimentally achieve grating-lobe-free operation over an entire 180° field of view.  Figure 

3a shows emitted far-field beam profiles with the beam steered up to ±80° off-axis.  In order to 

compensate phase mismatch in each of the 64 channels when no heater is applied, we place a 

single-element, 1 mm diameter photodiode in the Fraunhofer far-field approximately 20 cm away 

from the chip and use a global optimization algorithm (see Supplementary Information) to align the 

phases and form a beam centered on the fixed detector position.  To measure emission over such a 

large field of view while simultaneously avoiding optical aberrations from a high numerical 

aperture measurement system, we design a mechanically scanned far-field imager by placing the 

photodiode on an optical rail and rotating it in the waveguide plane about the chip output facet.  

Total phase shifter power consumption regardless of beam position is approximately 600 mW. 

Our array emits a high quality beam with 11.4 dB peak to sidelobe power ratio, close to the 

theoretical maximum of 13 dB (fundamentally limited by the sinc2 diffraction pattern of a 

uniformly-illuminated rectangular aperture).  This peak to sidelobe ratio is achieved over the entire 

180° field of view, and it is to our knowledge the highest demonstrated to date.  Figure 3b shows 

one beam in logarithmic scale to make sidelobe levels easier to visualize.  Even when the beam is 

steered 70° off-axis, the peak to sidelobe power ratio drops only slightly, to 11.0 dB, simply due to 

the fundamental cos2 dipole-like emission pattern of a single waveguide emitter.  The beam width 

(FWHM) is limited by the diffraction from the 49.6 μm wide aperture to 1.6°.  When steered to 

sharp angles, the beam broadens (to 2.9° at 60° off-axis) because the glancing angle decreases the 


apparent size of the aperture.  Residual sidelobe levels above the sinc2 pattern are limited only by 

the uncontrolled phase from two malfunctioning microheaters and by phase uncertainty in each 

channel caused by detector noise in the beam convergence process. 

The array shows at least twice the optical efficiency expected in randomized coarse-pitch 

arrays, concentrating 72% of the total emitted power in the main 0° beam.  Theoretically, with 

perfect phase alignment, our tightly-packed waveguide approach would direct a full 90% of the 

total output power into the main beam (corresponding to the integral of a sinc2 function between 

the first nulls), compared to a theoretically expected 30-40 % in randomized coarse-pitch arrays. 

We have demonstrated an all-dielectric optical phased array with true half-wavelength emitter 

pitch that generates nearly diffraction-limited output beams over a full 180° field of view.  Our anti-

crosstalk design maintains beam quality even at very small emitter spacing, allowing high fill 

factors, and scales to a large number of channels.  Such systems will enable the next generation of 

extremely compact and lightweight long-range LIDAR. 

 

References 

1. Sun, J., Timurdogan, E., Yaacobi, A., Hosseini, E. S. and Watts, M. R. Large-scale nanophotonic 

phased array. Nature 493, 195–199 (2013). 

2. Sun, J. et al. Two-dimensional apodized silicon photonic phased arrays. Opt. Lett. 39, 367 

(2014). 

3. Yaacobi, A. et al. Integrated phased array for wide-angle beam steering. Opt. Lett. 39, 4575 

(2014). 

4. Hulme, J. C. et al. Fully integrated hybrid silicon two dimensional beam scanner. Opt. Express 23, 

5861 (2015). 


5. Doylend, J. K. et al. Two-dimensional free-space beam steering with an optical phased array on 

silicon-on-insulator. Opt. Express 19, 21595–21604 (2011). 

6. Hutchison, D. N. et al. High-resolution aliasing-free optical beam steering. Optica 3, 887 (2016). 

7. Abediasl, H. & Hashemi, H. Monolithic optical phased-array transceiver in a standard SOI CMOS 

process. Opt. Express 23, 6509 (2015). 

8. Aflatouni, F., Abiri, B., Rekhi, A. & Hajimiri, A. Nanophotonic projection system. Opt. Express 23, 

21012 (2015). 

9. Poulton, C. V. et al. Large-scale silicon nitride nanophotonic phased arrays at infrared and 

visible wavelengths. Opt. Lett. 42, 21 (2017). 

10. Chung, S., Abediasl, H. & Hashemi, H. A 1024-element scalable optical phased array in 0.18 μm 

SOI CMOS. 2017 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) 262–263 (2017). 

doi:10.1109/ISSCC.2017.7870361 

11. Chung, S., Abediasl, H. & Hashemi, H. A Monolithically Integrated Large-Scale Optical Phased 

Array in Silicon-on-Insulator CMOS. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits PP, 1–22 (2017). 

12. Kossey, M. R., Rizk, C. & Foster, A. C. End-Fire Silicon Optical Phased Array with Half-

Wavelength Spacing. arXiv:1706.01452 (2017). 

13. Kwong, D. et al. On-chip silicon optical phased array for two-dimensional beam steering. Opt. 

Lett. 39, 941 (2014). 

14. Sayyah, K. et al. Two-dimensional pseudo-random optical phased array based on tandem 

optical injection locking of vertical cavity surface emitting lasers. Opt. Express 23, 19405–19416 

(2015). 

15. DeRose, C. T. et al. Electronically controlled optical beam-steering by an active phased array of 

metallic nanoantennas. Opt. Express 21, 5198–5208 (2013). 

16. Gramotnev, D. K. and Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Plasmonics beyond the diffraction limit. Nat. Photonics 4, 

83–91 (2010). 


17. Oulton, R. F., Sorger, V. J., Genov, D. A., Pile, D. F. P. and Zhang, X. A hybrid plasmonic waveguide 

for subwavelength confinement and long-range propagation. Nat. Photonics 2, 496–500 (2008). 

18. Komljenovic, T., Helkey, R., Coldren, L. and Bowers, J. E. Sparse aperiodic arrays for optical 

beam forming and LIDAR. Opt. Express 25, 2511–2528 (2017). 

19. Song, W. et al. High-density waveguide superlattices with low crosstalk. Nat. Commun. 6, 7027 

(2015). 

20. Saleh, B. E. A. and Teich, M. C. Fundamentals of Photonics. (John Wiley & Sons, 2007). 

21. Cardenas, J. et al. High Coupling Efficiency Etched Facet Tapers in Silicon Waveguides. IEEE 

Photonics Technol. Lett. 26, 2380–2382 (2014). 

 

Acknowledgements 

Funding was provided by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) (HR0011-16-C-

0107).  This work was performed in part at the City University of New York Advanced Science 

Research Center NanoFabrication Facility. 

Author Contributions 

C.T.P., B.S., and M.L. conceived the work.  C.T.P. designed and fabricated the devices, conceived and 

implemented device testing, and wrote the manuscript.  M.C.S. designed and carried out chip 

packaging.  S.A.M. assisted with testing.  S.A.M. and B.S. wrote the beam convergence algorithm.  

M.L. supervised the project and edited the manuscript. 

 
 


 

Figure 1: Waveguide array avoided coupling.  a. Omega-k dispersion relation for two widths of 
250 nm thick Si waveguides.  At the operation frequency, adjacent waveguides are well-separated 
in k space.  b. Effective index versus waveguide width.  We choose widths between 300 and 400 nm 
(green shading) to take advantage of the steep index slope.  Keeping waveguide widths roughly 
equal but well-separated in index is key to creating a uniformly-illuminated aperture.  c. Eigenmode 
expansion simulation of an array of eight waveguides with equal width of 400 nm on 775 nm pitch.  
Light is launched into a single waveguide from the left and couples strongly when adjacent 
waveguides are introduced.  d. Simulation of the waveguide array with sequentially varying widths 
of 300, 350, and 400 nm.  Light is launched into the 300 nm wide waveguide, and less than 3% 
coupling is observed, only to the waveguides with equal width. 

 


 

Figure 2: Fabricated device.  a. Schematic of chip design.  Light enters at the right and travels 
sequentially through the splitter tree, thermal phase shifters, and the narrow-pitch output section.  
b. Finite element method simulation of thermal phase shifter.  Heat is localized to within a few 
micrometers of the heater and waveguide.  c. Optical micrograph of part of the splitter tree, thermo-
optic phase shifters, and aluminum wires.  d. Top-view scanning electron micrograph of the varying 
waveguide widths on equal 775 nm pitch.  e. Low-magnification optical image of the wire-bonded 
chip on its heatsink.  Over 90% of the chip area is dedicated to fan-out wiring to match the 200 μm 
trace pitch on the PCB.  Note the output facet overhangs the heatsink to ensure an unobstructed 
180° view of the output beam. 


 

Figure 3: Far-field beam measurements.  a. Measured far-field optical power versus output angle 
over a 180° field of view as a function of target beam angle, for target angles up to ±80°.  Power is 
normalized to the 0° peak, but relative amplitudes are as-measured. The dashed line corresponds to 
the expected attenuation from the dipole-like emitter envelope.  b. Logarithmic scale plot of beam 
steered normal to the array output.  Peak to sidelobe ratio is 11.4 dB, with all but the nearest 
sidelobes below 17 dB.  c. Sinc2 theoretical emission profile fit to data in (b) with a single aperture 
width parameter. 
 


Supplementary Information 

 

Supplementary Figure 1: Conceptual phased array for convergence algorithm.  The entire system 
from laser to detector (including free-space portions) is a multichannel interferometer, with phase 
contributions from deliberate phase shifting as well as on-chip and free-space propagation length. 

 

Consider the model N-channel phased array in Supplementary Figure 1.  After exiting the 1:N 

splitter, each channel acquires a phase offset from multiple contributions: ϕshifter from the deliberate 

controllable phase shifter, ϕchip from propagation length between the splitter and the output facet, 

and ϕfree-space from the distance between the output facet and the target or detector.  We the 

represent the total phase of the light from channel n at the detector as ϕn = ϕshifter + ϕchip + ϕfree-space.  

In the far-field in broadside (0°) operation, all the lengths ϕfree-space from each channel to the 

detector are equal, so forming a beam at the detector is equivalent to lining up the phases at the 

output facet of the chip.  Similarly, moving the detector left or right in the far field lengthens some 

ϕfree-space with respect to others, requiring a phase tilt at the facet for constructive interference at the 

detector.  Bringing the detector closer, into the Fresnel region, makes the outer channels travel 

noticeably farther than the inner channels, so constructive interference requires a phase curvature 


at the chip facet and therefore a focusing beam.  In all cases, the beams from each channel 

coherently sum: 

𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑡 = ∑ 𝑎𝑛𝑒𝑖𝜙𝑛

𝑛

 

where an is the amplitude of channel n, and our goal is to choose the set of ϕn such that |𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑡|2 is 

maximized.  We find that set of ϕn through a genetic algorithm-based global optimization that 

accounts for channel non-ideality and crosstalk (thermal and electrical) between phase shifter 

channels.  A genetic algorithm (GA) is a procedure for optimizing functions of many variables, 

functioning analogously to biological evolutionS1.  In order to find an optimized set of ϕn , we use a 

GA with |𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑡|2 as the fitness function to be maximized, as measured by a photodetector at the 

desired beam position.  In our GA procedure, a population of sets of ϕn values is first initialized to 

random values corresponding to voltages for the phase shifters. In each generation, or iteration, the 

sets in the population are evaluated, and new sets are created from combinations of parent sets in a 

crossover process.  Sets having higher fitness values more likely to pass on ϕn values to the 

following generation.  In addition to crossover, mutation events occur in each generation, whereby 

ϕn values are randomly varied.  By this procedure, successive generations approach an optimized 

set of ϕn values and the beam is converged onto the detector’s position. 

  

S1. Skaar, J. and Risvik, K. M. A Genetic Algorithm for the Inverse Problem in Synthesis of 

Fiber Gratings. J. Lightwave Technol. 16, 1928 (1998). 

 


