High Quality Factor Surface Fabry-Perot Cavity of Acoustic Waves

Yuntao Xu, Wei Fu, Chang-ling Zou, Zhen Shen, and Hong X. Tang∗

Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA
(Dated: February 14, 2018)

Surface acoustic wave (SAW) resonators are critical components in wireless communications and
many sensing applications. They have also recently emerged as subject of study in quantum acoustics
at the single phonon level.
Acoustic loss reduction and mode confinement are key performance
factors in SAW resonators. Here we report the design and experimental realization of a high quality
factor Fabry-Perot SAW resonators formed in between tapered phononic crystal mirrors patterned
on a GaN-on-sapphire material platform . The fabricated SAW resonators are characterized by both
electrical network analyzer and optical heterodyne vibrometer. We observed standing Rayleigh wave
inside the cavity, with an intrinsic quality factor exceeding 1.3 × 104 at ambient conditions.

I.
INTRODUCTION

In last decades, surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices
have found wide use in analog signal processing [1, 2],
wireless communications [3, 4] and a range of sensing ap-
plications [5, 6]. Recently, SAW based quantum acoustics
have received considerable attention for their flexibility
in coupling with various quantum systems, including the
superconducting qubits [7, 8], NV centers in diamond [9],
quantum dots [10], and is potential for building hybrid
quantum networks [11]. Despite their significance in clas-
sical and quantum information processing, achieving low
loss resonator and efficient mode confinement are still
challenging.
By analogy to optics, an acoustic resonator can be con-
structed in the form of Fabry-Perot (FP) cavity in which
the SAW is bounced between two mirrors and confined
in between. Unlike optics where highly reflective mirrors
can be patterned from a high-refractive-index waveguid-
ing layer, unsuspended, directly etched acoustic reflectors
are often insufficient in producing high enough reflectiv-
ity to prevent coupling to bulk acoustic modes [12]. By
shorting interdigital transducers (IDT), the SAW can be
confined more gently because of the small velocity con-
trast between the region with and without metal cladding
[13]. This gentle confinement however requires a large
number of IDTs and hence very large device area for high
reflectivity which in turn could cause SAW suffering from
the Ohmic loss of the metal, leading to limited quality
factor.
Recently, such FP type SAW resonators have
been demonstrated in the context of quantum acoustics
utilizing superocnducting electrodes, with Q reaching 0.5
million but the devices are limited to operate only at
cryogenic temperatures [14].
Recently it was shown that it is feasible to confine
SAW with phononic band gap structures[15, 16]. Chal-
lenges remain in achieving full acoustic confinement and
bringing the quality factor of such acoustic resonators
to the value of their suspended counter part, which is
fragile and requires micromachining processing. Here we

∗ hong.tang@yale.edu

report a SAW FP cavity formed by surface patterned
phononic crystal (PnC) mirrors which provide high re-
flectivity with a much reduced mirror length, thus en-
abling high-Q room temperature SAW resonators.
By
harnessing the engineered band gap of phononic struc-
ture [17–21], we design the cavity for the Rayleigh surface
modes. The device is fabricated by GaN-on-sapphire ma-
terial system, and the cavity modes are excited by intra-
cavity IDTs. The microwave reflection spectrum shows
very high Q resonances with predicted free spectral range
(FSR) , indicating the strong confinement of SAW modes
and enhanced coupling to the IDTs. In addition, the cav-
ity acoustic field is also probed by a custom-built opti-
cal vibrometer, allowing for the identification of the con-
fined SAW modes. The demonstrated devices pave a new
direction for the study of strong phonon-matter interac-
tion as an analogue to the cavity quantum electrodynam-
ics [22] and the cavity optomechanics [23]. The demon-
strated high Q resonators are also promising for sensing
applications based on surface acoustic wave devices.

II.
DESIGN

The acoustic FP resonators are patterned from Gal-
lium Nitride (GaN) (0001) epitaxially grown on c-plane
sapphire substrate [24].
GaN is a piezoelectric mate-
rial with low mechanical damping [25]. Due to its lower
acoustic shear velocity than that of the sapphire sub-
strate, the acoustic waves can be guided by the GaN
layer, where an acoustic cavity can be further formed by
lateral confinement through a pair of PnC acoustic mir-
rors, schematically shown in Fig. 1(a). IDTs are directly
placed within the cavity atop the GaN layer to excite
SAW. At cavity resonances, standing waves are built-up
within the excitation bandwidth of the IDTs. Within the
cavity, the coupling between acoustic waves and the IDTs
are enhanced and therefore the number of IDT electrodes
can be minimized (5 pairs are utilized in a typical device).
To avoid the scattering loss to the substrate, we adapted
a tapered mirror design which is first proposed in Ref.
[16] for achieving efficient acoustic wave transitions in
the phononic crystals .
The unit cell of the PnC structure, a square pillar with

arXiv:1802.04788v1  [physics.app-ph]  13 Feb 2018


2

Figure 1. (a) Schematic illustration of acoustic Fabry-Perot
cavity design where the SAW is confined by a pair of square
lattices PnC mirror and excited by IDTs. (b) The dispersion
of Rayleigh and Love mode without PnC. The unit cell is set
to have a period of a = 11 µm and thickness of b = 5 µm.
(c) The phononic band structures of GaN-on-sapphire square
PnC with elliptical hole in each unit cell.
The unit cell is
shown as inset and a, b, r1, r2 represent the period of square
lattice, the thickness of GaN , the major and minor radius
of elliptical hole, respectively. Here the parameters are set as
a = 11 µm, b = 5 µm, r1 = 4.4 µm, r2 = 0.88 µm. Different
colors represent different groups of modes in PnC unit cell:
red and yellow modes have dominant out-of-plane displace-
ment; blue and green modes have dominant in plane displace-
ment. (d) Simulated displacement profile of Love mode in the
SAW cavity. (e) Simulated displacement profile of Rayleigh
mode in the SAW cavity.

a centered elliptical hole in GaN layer, is shown in the
inset of Fig. 1(c), where a is the period of the square
lattice for both x and y directions, b is the thickness of
GaN layer, r1, r2 are the major and minor radius of the el-
liptical hole respectively. Finite element method (FEM)
simulation is performed to determine geometrical param-
eters of PnC unit cell using published material elastic and
piezoelectric coefficients[26]. By gradully increasing the
aspect ratio of elliptical PnC hole, larger phononic band
gap and better comfinement of SAW can be obtained.
The band structure of optimized PnC unit cell is shown
in Fig. 1(c), in which the parameters are chosen to be
a = 11 µm, b = 5 µm, r1 = 4.4 µm, r2 = 0.88 µm. As
a comparison, the band structure for a unit cell without
hole is shown in Figure 1b. The band structures are ob-
tained by calculating the eigenmode of the PnC unit cell
for different wave vectors along x direction. The lightly
shaded area of the band diagram represent the sound
cone, in which region surface modes may coupled with
bulk modes and therefore are considered to be lossy. Grey
shaded areas in Figs. 1(b) and (c) indicate two phonon
band gaps for wave-vectors along x direction, while gap-
free Rayleigh mode and Love mode are supported on flat
surface without PnC structure.
The performance of PnC resonator is then analyzed
with FEM simulation. Due to the relatively large trans-
verse dimension (width) of the cavity, the resonator could
be approximated to have translational symmetry along
transverse (y) direction. Hence we only simulate one pe-
riod in y direction with periodical boundary condition ap-
plied. 40 periods of elliptical holes are placed on each side
of cavity regime with a length of l = 525µm. The size of
PnC holes is linearly tapered from 1 µm to 4.4 µm within
7 periods starting from the cavity mirror interface. While
the simulation shows that love mode resonances are sup-
ported in both band gap 1 and band gap 2, Rayleigh
mode resonances with good confinement are only found
in band gap 1. At the frequency regime of band gap 2,
Rayleigh wave is scattered by the PnC holes at cavity
boundary, which induce a coupling between SAW and
bulk mode in the sound cone, therefore prevent a strong
confinement of surface mode. Hence the frequency range
of band gap 1 (180 MHz to 200MHz) is chosen to design
the SAW FP cavity. The modal profiles of the simulated
eigenmodes are given in Figs.
1(d) and (e), including
both Love modes (with mainly in-plane displacement)
and Rayleigh modes (with mainly out-of-plane displace-
ment).

III.
FABRICATION AND
CHARACTERIZATION

The device fabrication starts from the growth of
5 µm GaN on c-plane sapphire wafers by metal-organic
chemical vapour depositon (MOCVD) [24].
To fab-
ricate the PnC resonator, a 1.2 µm layer of SiO2 is
deposited with plasma-enhanced chemical vapor depo-


3

Figure 2. (a) SEM image of a fabricated PnC SAW resonator
(top view) with 100 periods of elliptical holes on each side of
the SAW cavity. (b) Microwave reflection spectrum of fab-
ricated SAW cavity indicates high Q resonances with a free
spectral range (FSR) of 3.25 MHz. The bandwidth of IDTs
could be estimated by f0/2N ∼ 20 MHz.
Insets show the
zoom in spectrum (symbols) of an acoustic mode with high-
est quality factor (left inset) and another acoustic mode with
largest extinction ratio (right inset) fitted by a Lorentz func-
tion.

sition (PECVD). The PnC structures are patterned
with electron beam lithography (EBL) using polymethyl
methacrylate (PMMA) resist, followed by a lift-off pro-
cess to deposit a 40 nm thin layer of chromium.
Af-
ter liftoff, the pattern are transferred to SiO2 layer
by florine-based reactive ion-etching (RIE), then subse-
quently transferred to GaN layer by chlorine-based RIE.
A second EBL process is carried on using a bi-layer
PMMA resist to deposit the IDTs by a lift-off process
(50nm chromium and 50nm gold).
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the
fabricated device is shown in Fig. 2(a). The size of cavity
regime is 1.1 mm wide (in y direction) and 0.5 mm long
(in x direction), with a pair of PnC mirrors on the ends of
cavity. Each mirror contains a square lattice PnC with
100 × 100 elliptical holes whose dimensions are identi-
cal with the simulation. The inset shows the first eight

columns of PnC holes.
A chip with several fabricated
devices is placed on a printed circuit board (PCB) with
SMA connectors and wire bonded for the electrical char-
acterization.
The reflection spectrum around the working frequency
of the resonator is recorded with a vector network an-
alyzer. As shown in Fig. 2(b), a series of Lorentzian-
shaped dips is clearly observed, indicating a group of well
confined resonance modes supported in the cavity. All
modes share an approximately same free spectral range
(around 3.25 MHz, as marked in the figure), suggesting
that they have similar group velocities but the modes
within one FSR should have different modal profiles.
Based on group veolcity of Rayleigh mode (the confir-
mation of mode type is made through vibrometer mea-
surement and will be discussed later) vR = 4705.8 m/s
from simulation, the effective cavity length L = 724 µm
could be estimated as FSR = vR/2L, which matches well
with the vibrometer measurement. We attribute the res-
onances between each pair of main resonance dips to
high-order modes along the thickness direction.
They
have lower extinction ratios comparing to mian reso-
nances since the coupling between these modes and IDTs
is relatively weak. Lorentzian fitting is then applied to
all mode. The resonance with highest quality factor has
a central frequency of 192.52 MHz, with a loaded Q of
1.37 × 104. Because all the modes are weakly coupled
to the external circuit, the intrinsic Q is nearly the same
with loaded Q. This quality factor is more than one order
of magnitude larger than the previous work on GaN SAW
resonator, while the f × Q product (∼ 2.7 × 1012) is im-
proved by a factor of three [16] and becomes comparable
to the suspended GaN PnC resonators [27]. Neverthe-
less, this measured f × Q is still below the theoretical
prediction [25], suggesting we have not yet reached the
material limited qualty factor. The quality factor can be
further improved by further reducing the radiation and
the metal losses, for example, by increasing the cavity
length in y direction or by eliminating the radiation loss
at IDT-electrode interfaces.
The resonance at f0 = 194.07 MHz, on the other hand,
have the largest extinction ratio among all observed
modes and is selected to analyze the coupling efficiency
between IDTs and SAW. According to input-output fo-
mula [28], the amplitude reflection of a cavity could be
written as

R = κint − κext − 2i∆

κint + κext − 2i∆
(1)

where ∆ = ω−ω0 is the frequency detuning from the res-
onance frequency, and κint, κext are the internal and ex-
ternal coupling coefficient. In our case, κint = 2πf0/Qint
represents the intrinsic loss in cavity (including all the
losses except the loss to microwave channel), κext de-
scribes the coupling strength between microwave and
SAW through the IDTs. The value of internal and ex-
ternal coupling coefficient could be extracted from the
Lorentzian fitting:
κint/2π = 26.3 kHz , κext/2π =


4

Figure 3. (a) Schematic of the optical heterodyne vibrometer
used in imaging acoustic resonators. (b) Optical micrograph
of the device, where the scan regimes are marked in red, blue
and yellow, and the corresponding measurement data are re-
spectively shown in Fig. 3(c), (d) and (e). (c) Out-of-plane
displacement of the selected mode at 194.07 MHz acquired by
optical heterodyne vibrometer over a 100μm×100μm square
inside the cavity. (d) Recorded out-of-plane vibration ampli-
tude along x-axis inside the cavity for the selected mode at
194.07 MHz. (e) The vibration amplitude along x-axis in the
PnC regime where SAW attenuates rapidly (∼ 10a) within
the PnC mirror. The spikes in the tail regime is due to laser
reflection at hole edges and do not correspond to a true dis-
placement.

458 Hz. If we consider the IDTs at resonance frequency
as a lumped element in transmission line, the amplitude
reflection is R = (Zeff −Z0)/(Zeff +Z0), where Z0 = 50 Ω
is the characteristic source impedance and Zeff is the ef-
fective impedance of IDT and resonator. If κint and Z0
are fixed, we have κext ∝ 1/Zeff. Here Zeff is found to
be 2.87 kΩ.
Since the IDTs should be effectively con-
sidered as parallel connected component in circuit, the
external coupling coefficient κext is propotional to the
area of IDTs. By further increasing the area of IDTs, a
critical coupling between microwave and acoutic cavity
could be reached. In this work 5 pairs of IDT fingers are
sufficient to excite SAW.
A custom-built optical heterodyne vibrometer [29] is
then applied to assess and identify the modal profile of
the resonator. A simplified scheme of the optical hetero-
dyne vibrometer is shown in Fig. 3(a). The mode with
central frequency of 194.07 MHz with largest extinction

is chosen to be the imaged. Due to the limited field of
view of the vibrometer, we select three different scan lo-
cations to assess the vibration mode: a square near the
center of cavity (red box in Fig. 3b), a line scan inside
the cavity (blue line) and a line scan extending outside
the cavity into the PnC mirror along x axis (yellow line).
The measurement results are shown in Figs. 3(c), (d)
and (e) respectively. From Figs. 3(c) and (d), we confirm
that a well confined Rayleigh mode with sinusoidal out-
of-plane displacement is obtained. Love mode have not
been observed under the vibrometer, due to the low ex-
citation efficiency of IDTs for Love mode. And Fig. 3(e)
shows a smooth and fast attenuation of z direction dis-
placement amplitude after the acoustic wave enters PnC
regime, indicating that 100 periods of elliptical holes we
use is redundant. A PnC mirror with 20 periods of PnC
holes would be sufficient to confine high Q acoustic mode
within the cavity, reducing the mirror length to less than
220 µm.

IV.
CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we have designed and fabricated high-
Q SAW Fabry-Perot resonators at the frequency around
200 MHz, with highest Q-factor about 1.3×104. Through
vibrometer measurement, confined Rayleigh mode is di-
rectly visualized inside the cavity and evanescent wave
observed at the phononic crystal mirror. Our approach
can also be extended to other frequencies and may
achieve even higher Q, particularly at cryogenic temper-
atures or with other materials. The demonstrated high-
Q resonator is compatible with the sensing applications
(such as mass sensor [30] and gyroscope [31]) and also is
promising for the study of strong phonon-matter interac-
tion, especially when the device is advanced to operate
at tens of GHz under cryogenic condition.
Acknowledgment:
We acknowledge useful discus-
sions with M.-H. Shen.
This work is supported by
DARPA/MTO’s PRIGM: AIMS program through a
grant from SPAWAR (N66001-16-1-4026), the Labora-
tory of Physical Sciences through a grant from Army Re-
search Office (W911NF-14-1-0563), an Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (AFOSR) MURI grant (FA9550-15-1-
0029) and a NSF MRSEC grant (1119826). H.X.T. ac-
knowledges support from a Packard Fellowship in Science
and Engineering.
The authors thankand Dr.
Michael
Rooks, Michael Power, James Agresta, and Christopher
Tillinghast for assistance in device fabrication.

[1] D. Morgan, Surface acoustic wave filters: With applica-
tions to electronic communications and signal processing
(Academic Press, 2010).
[2] C. Campbell, Surface acoustic wave devices and their sig-

nal processing applications (Elsevier, 2012).
[3] C. Campbell, Surface acoustic wave devices for mobile
and wireless communications (Academic press, 1998).
[4] K.-y.
Hashimoto,
Surface
acoustic
wave
devices
in


5

telecommunications (Springer, 2000).
[5] H. Wohltjen, Sens. Actuators 5, 307 (1984).
[6] K. Länge, B. E. Rapp,
and M. Rapp, Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 391, 1509 (2008).
[7] Y. Chu, P. Kharel, W. H. Renninger, L. D. Burkhart,
L. Frunzio, P. T. Rakich, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Science
(2017), 10.1126/science.aao1511.
[8] M. V. Gustafsson, T. Aref, A. F. Kockum, M. K. Ek-
ström, G. Johansson, and P. Delsing, Science 346, 207
(2014).
[9] D. A. Golter, T. Oo, M. Amezcua, I. Lekavicius, K. A.
Stewart, and H. Wang, Phys. Rev. X 6, 041060 (2016).
[10] M. J. Schuetz, J. Knörzer, G. Giedke, L. M. Vander-
sypen, M. D. Lukin,
and J. I. Cirac, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.04860 (2017).
[11] M. J. A. Schütz, “Universal quantum transducers based
on surface acoustic waves,” in Quantum Dots for Quan-
tum Information Processing: Controlling and Exploiting
the Quantum Dot Environment (Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2017) pp. 143–196.
[12] E. Staples, J. Schoenwald, R. Rosenfeld,
and C. Hart-
mann, in 1974 Ultrasonics Symposium (IEEE, 1974) pp.
245–252.
[13] D.-P. Chen and H. A. Haus, IEEE Trans. Sonics Ultrason
32, 395 (1985).
[14] R. Manenti, M. J. Peterer, A. Nersisyan, E. B. Magnus-
son, A. Patterson,
and P. J. Leek, Phys. Rev. B 93,
041411 (2016).
[15] T.-W. Liu, Y.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Lin, T. Ono, S. Tanaka,
and T.-T. Wu, AIP Adv. 4, 124201 (2014).
[16] S. Wang, L. C. Popa,
and D. Weinstein, in 2015 28th
IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Me-
chanical Systems (MEMS) (2015) pp. 1028–1031.
[17] A. Khelif and A. Adibi, Phononic Crystals: Fundamen-
tals and Applications (Springer, 2015).
[18] V. Laude, Phononic crystals: artificial crystals for sonic,

acoustic, and elastic waves, Vol. 26 (Walter de Gruyter
GmbH & Co KG, 2015).
[19] M. Maldovan, Nat. Mater. 14, 667 (2015).
[20] N. Zen, T. A. Puurtinen, T. J. Isotalo, S. Chaudhuri, and
I. J. Maasilta, Nat. Commun. 5, 3435 (2014), article.
[21] S. Benchabane, O. Gaiffe, R. Salut, G. Ulliac, V. Laude,
and K. Kokkonen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 081903 (2015).
[22] O. O. Soykal, R. Ruskov, and C. Tahan, Phys. Rev. Lett.
107, 235502 (2011).
[23] A. Okada, F. Oguro, A. Noguchi, Y. Tabuchi, R. Ya-
mazaki, K. Usami,
and Y. Nakamura, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.04593 (2017).
[24] A. W. Bruch, C. Xiong, B. Leung, M. Poot, J. Han, and
H. X. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 141113 (2015).
[25] M. Rais-Zadeh, V. J. Gokhale, A. Ansari, M. Faucher,
D. ThÃľron, Y. Cordier,
and L. Buchaillot, J. Micro-
electromech. Syst. 23, 1252 (2014).
[26] J. Pedrós, F. Calle, J. Grajal, R. J. Jiménez Riobóo,
Y. Takagaki, K. H. Ploog, and Z. Bougrioua, Phys. Rev.
B 72, 075306 (2005).
[27] S. Wang, L. C. Popa, and D. Weinstein, in Proc. Solid-
State Sens., Actuators, Microsyst. Workshop (Hilton
Head) (2014) pp. 72–75.
[28] M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg,
and F. Marquardt,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 1391 (2014).
[29] Z. Shen, W. Fu, R.-S. Cheng, H. Townley, C.-L. Zou, and
H. X. Tang, “A high frequency scanning vibrometer for
phase sensitive visualization of guided surface acoustic
wave modes,” (2017), submitted.
[30] J. Luo, P. Luo, M. Xie, K. Du, B. Zhao, F. Pan, P. Fan,
F. Zeng, D. Zhang, Z. Zheng,
and G. Liang, Biosens.
and Bioelectron. 49, 512 (2013).
[31] K. Jose, W. Suh, P. Xavier, V. Varadan, and V. Varadan,
Wave Motion 36, 367 (2002).


