Alternative explanation for the steep subthreshold 

slope in ferroelectric FETs

Jan Van Houdt and Philippe Roussel

imec, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium

*) also with K.U. Leuven, Arenbergpark 10, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium

phone: +32 16 28 1268, vanhoudt@imec.be

Abstract — Since many years, sub-60mV/decade switching 
has been reported in ferroelectric FETs. However, thus far
these reports have lacked full physical explanation since 
they typically use a negative capacitance in the 
ferroelectric layer to be able to explain the experimental 
observations. Because negative capacitance as such is not a 
physical concept, we propose an alternative model that 
relies on the non-linear and non-equilibrium behavior of 
the ferroelectric layer. It is shown that a steep subthreshold 
slope can be obtained by a 2-step switching process, 
referred to as nucleation and propagation. Making use of 
the concept of domain wall motion as known also from 
fracture dynamics, we are able to explain the steep slope 
effect. A simple mathematical model is added to further 
describe this phenomenon, and to further investigate its 
eventual benefit for obtaining steep slope transistors in the 
sub-10nm era.

Index Terms — FeFET, domain wall motion, polarization, 
dielectric response, steep subthreshold slope

I.
INTRODUCTION

Ferroelectrics have regained a lot of interest since the 

discovery of a ferroelectric phase in HfO2 [1], the most obvious 
application being nonvolatile memories (as in the case of
perovskites [2]). However, many research groups have reported 
steep subthreshold slope behavior of ferroelectric FETs as well. 
This has increased the expectations for overcoming the 
Boltzmann tyranny
[3]. The full explanation for this 

phenomenon has however been lacking since. When 
considering the peculiar dynamics of ferroelectric switching we 
can obtain a steep slope without the need for introducing 
negative capacitance values. In order to obtain this result, we 
have to include the concept of domain wall motion which 
allows to include the dielectric response acceleration needed to 
amplify the surface potential. This theory is then formalized by 
means of a simple charge balance equation to describe the 
phenomenon in a more quantitative way. A non-equilibrium 
dielectric response is found as a main condition for showing 
steep slope in FeFETs.

II.
PHYSICAL MODEL

In contrast to paraelectric polarization, when switching a 

ferroelectric layer the polarization of the layer is highly non-
linear as a function of the applied field. This is clear from the 
initial P(V) curve as measured on any ferroelectric capacitor 
when starting from unpolarized (zero) state (Fig. 1). This can 
be explained by the increasing dielectric response to the 
external field when increasing the voltage (super-linear 

behavior of the polarization or increasing dielectric 
susceptibility, the latter being equal to the slope of the P(E) 
curve -1). From basic electrostatics this can be explained by the 
more than proportional increase in the volumetric density of the 
number of dipole moments with field (i.e. by nucleation). This 
happens already at low (subthreshold) voltage because the layer 
consists of many domains with different coercive fields. In fact, 
single domain loops can be shifted along the V-axis depending 
on the local electric field from the surrounding dipoles as 
described by the Preisach model [4] (Fig.1). 

Fig 1 Typical P-V loop can be reconstructed from a large number of 
single domain (rectangular) loops as dictated by the Preisach model 
[4]. The S-shape curve initiating from the origin shows a superlinear 
behavior in the low voltage regime indicating the increased dielectric 
response already at low voltages.

As a result, the coercive voltage shows a wide distribution 

over the number of involved ferroelectric domains which are 
gradually starting to contribute to the overall polarization when 
the voltage increases. That explains the partial polarization 
starting already
in the subthreshold regime
and then 

accelerating with the externally applied field. From literature it 
is known that ferroelectric switching is typically accompanied 
also by domain wall motion [5]. This is usually requiring much 
less energy than the actual switching energy to reverse the 
dipoles by 180◦ [6]. This mechanism is also at the origin of
crack propagation in materials: there is a critical strain at which 
the crack continues to grow with only a small external stimulus
(positive feedback effect). This effect is correlated with twin 
motion which is known to happen at the speed of sound (or even 
faster, see [5] or [6] for the case of ferroelectric BaTiO3). A 
similar twin motion is used to explain the domain wall motion 
in ferroelectric switching as well [6]. Since the speed of sound 
in such crystalline materials is on the order of 10km/s (or 
10nm/ps) the propagation of the dipole switching is much faster 


than the typical gate pulse applied to the gate of a state-of-the-
art transistor especially in a laboratory environment (>10ns). 
That means that the polarization (i.e. density of dipoles) is 
further accelerated as a function of time without following the
externally applied voltage conditions. The domain wall motion 
is known to be stalled by defects (so-called pinning [6]) which 
explains why the ferroelectric will not reach full saturation at 
small voltages and depolarization can take place.

III.
MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION

Since the material properties are changing during 

ferroelectric switching, the concept of dielectric constant 
becomes highly unpractical. But it is clear when using average 
values for the dielectric response (in space), the charge balance 
equation is still valid. This lemma can be derived directly from 
the basic Maxwell equations (not shown here). 

Splitting the FeFET structure into 2 capacitors, one being 

the ferroelectric part and the other one describing the series of 
the interfacial oxide capacitor and the substrate depletion 
capacitor (in subthreshold), we get the simple capacitive divider 
shown in Fig.2. However, both capacitors are voltage 
dependent. We can equalize the charge on both capacitors and
obtain Eq. (1).


 
int 
0
int

int

2 2
1

V
V
V
C
V

N
q

V
C

C

g

n
g

Si
a
e

ox

ox

















Eq.(1)

where Na is the doping concentration of the substrate and Si is 
the permittivity of silicon. The other parameters are clear from 
Fig.2. The bottom capacitor formula (left side of the equation)
is taken from [7] which provides a closed formula for the 
depletion capacitor in series with the interfacial one, while for 
the ferroelectric capacitor we need to include an increasing 
function with time to take care of the propagation effect. Since 
we consider the case where Vg = .t this is equivalent to 
assuming that the ferroelectric capacitor is a function of Vg 
only.

The solution of Eq.(1) for reasonable values of the 

parameters (see caption) yields the characteristics shown in 
Fig.3. The green (lower) curve is the physical solution of the 
charge balance equation.

If we raise the voltage at the gate, the voltage over both 

capacitors will increase, which implies that the bottom 
capacitor decreases and the ferroelectric one increases. Thus, 
the internal voltage Vint will start to increase faster than at t=0. 
If the response of the material reaches the propagation phase 
(i.e. domain growth takes over), the polarization keeps on 
increasing to the point where the voltage over the ferroelectric 
capacitor starts to decrease with time. At that point, the internal 

voltage Vint increases faster than the gate voltage and an 
amplification is seen at the level of the surface potential 
(ds/dVg>1). 

Fig 2 Capacitive divider consisting of 2 non-linear capacitors with 

a time dependent response added for the ferroelectric capacitor. Vint is 
the potential at the interface between the interfacial and the 
ferroelectric layer or at the intermediate gate when considering 
MFMIS structures [3]. It can be shown that the non-linearity of the 
MOS capacitor is enhancing the ‘boosting’ of the surface potential.

In summary, it is possible to observe a boost or

amplification of the surface potential response ds/dVg. It 
suffices that the internal node goes up faster than the gate bias, 
which is the case when the dielectric response stops following 
the voltage over the capacitor and becomes a function of time 
only. At that point, the ferroelectric capacitor increases further 
with decreasing voltage (Fig.4).

Fig 3 By taking Co = Cox a capacitive division of exactly 0.5 is obtained 
at Vg=t=0.  Solving Eq.(1) for Vint with Cox=Co, n=3, =3E-4 shows an 
increasing slope for Vint beyond that of Vg. This is causing a higher 
surface potential response than in the case without ferroelectric 
capacitor.

Vg= .t

Cfe = Co + .Vg

n

CMOS = Cox (1+Cox

2 Vint/qNaSi) 

-1/2

Vint






Fig 4 Dynamic value of the ferroelectric capacitor as calculated from 
Eq.(1).

IV.
DISCUSSION

According to the model, the steep slope effect will only appear 
under certain conditions. As can be seen from Fig.3 it will not 
be there from Vg=0 but only when the voltage over the 
capacitor starts to decrease. It is, however, possible that the 
device reaches inversion faster than in the reference case 
provided that the nucleation of the ferroelectric domains 
happens faster than the gate ramp rate. Taking some typical
numbers from [8] (fo=1THz) and [9] (Landau barrier = 
100meV for the case of orthorhombic HfO2), one can calculate 
from an attempt-to-escape-frequency model that nucleation
happens with a time constant on the order of 50ps at room 
temperature, which is of the order of state-of-the-art MOS 
transistors (~10ps). In practice, this time constant is reduced 
by the application of an electric field.
Alternatively, 

ferroelectrics with larger fo or lower barrier may be required. 
The fact that steeper slope is obtained for larger hysteresis can 
be explained from the basic P-V loop: the more domains are 
switching, the stronger the effect will be and the larger the 
remnant polarization. At lower fields, the partial polarization

is expected to disappear on a relatively short time scale due to 
depolarization (so-called subloop operation) [10].
Fig.5
summarizes how the steeper internal voltage is 

equivalent to a steeper surface potential.

V.
CONCLUSION

It has been shown that the domain wall motion effect in 

ferroelectrics can be described as a walk-out (or ‘domino’ 
effect) of the dielectric response in the ferroelectric capacitor 
which leads to decreasing voltage over the capacitor. As a 
consequence, the surface potential can increase faster than the 
external gate voltage leading to steep slope behavior in a limited 
range of gate biases. The presented model will be helpful in 
order to better understand the behavior of ferroelectric FETs in 
the subthreshold regime as well as its potential applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported by imec’s Industrial Affiliation 

Program on Ferroelectrics. 

REFERENCES

[1]
T.S. Boscke et al., IEDM Tech. Dig. p.547, 2011

[2] 
J.A. Rodriguez et al., 2016 Proceedings of the IMW, p.157-160.

[3]
Asif I. Khan, Chun W. Yeung, Chenming Hu, Sayeef Salahuddin, 
“Ferroelectric Negative capacitance MOSFET: capacitance tuning and 
antiferroelectric operation”, IEDM Tech. Dig. 2011, p.255-258.

[4]
A.T. Bartic, D.J. Wouters, H.E. Maes, J.T. Rickes and R.M. Waser,
“Preisach model for the simulation of ferroelectric capacitors”, vol. 89, 
nr.6, Journal of Applied Physics, 2001, p. 3420-3425

[5]
Multifunctional polycrystalline ferroelectric materials, Eds. L. Pardo, J. 
Ricote, Springer Science and Business Media, 2011, p.479.

[6]
Eilon Faran and Doron Shilo, “Twin motion faster than the speed of 
sound”, Phys.Rev.Lett. 104, 155501 (2010)

[7]
Jean-Pierre Colinge and 
Cynthia A. 
Colinge, “Physics of 

Semiconductor Devices”, Kluwer Academic Publishers, p.177.

[8]
V.Zhirnov, IEEE EDS Webinar, March 14, 2013

[9]
S. Clima et al. , Appl. Physics Lett. 104, 092906 (2014)

[10]
Chun-Hu Cheng and Albert Chin, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol.35, 
nr.1, 2014, p.138-140.

Fig 5 surface potential boosting from steeper internal voltage (equivalent to steeper subthreshold slope in a transistor using such a stack).

Vg= .t

Vg= .t

Ideal MOS cap:

ds/dVg = 1

Ferro cap on top of MOS cap:

ds/dVg > 1

Vint= .t with  > 

Ideal MOS
Ideal MOS

Ferro cap


