The study of electronic nematicity in an overdoped (Bi, Pb)2Sr2CuO6+δ superconductor 
using scanning tunneling spectroscopy 
 
Yuan Zheng1, Ying Fei1, Kunliang Bu1, Wenhao Zhang1, Ying Ding2, Xingjiang Zhou2,3, Jennifer E. 
Hoffman4, Yi Yin1,5,* 
 
1. Department of P23hysics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China.  
2. Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Academy of 

Science, Beijing 100190, China. 

3. Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China. 
4. Department of Physics, Harvard University, 17 Oxford St. Cambridge, 02138, USA. 
5. Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China.  

*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y. Y. (email: 
yiyin@zju.edu.cn). 

 
 
Abstract 

The pseudogap (PG) state and its related intra-unit-cell symmetry breaking remain the focus in 

the research of cuprate superconductors. Although the nematicity has been studied in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, 
especially underdoped samples, its behavior in other cuprates and different doping regions is still 
unclear. Here we apply a scanning tunneling microscope to explore an overdoped (Bi, Pb)2Sr2CuO6+δ 
with a large Fermi surface (FS). The establishment of a nematic order and its real-space distribution is 
visualized as the energy scale approaches the PG. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


The electronic nematic order has attracted a lot of interests in both the cuprate and iron-based 
high-transition-temperature (high-Tc) superconductors [1-3]. In solid state systems with the nematic 
order, the rotational symmetry is broken while the translational lattice symmetry is preserved [4]. 
Various experimental techniques, such as x-ray scattering, neutron scattering, angle-resolved 
photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), and scanning tunneling microscope (STM), have been applied 
to determine the nematicity through the evidences of symmetry breaking in orbital and magnetic 
orders [5-8]. The understanding about nematic order may help unravel the mechanism of the 
superconducting (SC) state [9-11]. 
 

STM is a powerful tool for detecting electronic structures with an atomic resolution in the real 

space. For Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (Bi-2212), the STM studies have revealed a 90º rotational symmetry 
breaking for the O sites within each CuO2 unit cell, around the energy level of the pseudogap (PG) 
states [4]. The nematicity is suggested to be a relevant order parameter of the PG state which strongly 
intertwines with the SC state. The STM studies of Bi-2212 have further clarified that the nematic 
order in general decreases with doping and finally disappears when a small-to-large Fermi surface (FS) 
reconstruction occurs at carrier doping of 𝑝 ∼ 0.19 [12].  

 
With similar phase diagrams, various cuprate superconductors can differ in the detailed electronic 

structures [13-14]. As the doping increases, the small-to-large FS transition also occurs in (Bi, 
Pb)2Sr2CuO6+δ (Bi-2201) at 𝑝 ∼ 0.15. However, the PG phase extends to the overdoped regime for 
Bi-2201 [14-15] while terminating in the SC dome for Bi-2212. It is thus physically interesting to 
investigate the nematic order in overdoped Bi-2201 where the PG state coexists with a large FS. The 
study in this regime may enable us to explore the early stage in the formation of the nematicity. In this 
paper, we apply STM to study an overdoped Bi-2201 sample through an analysis approach similar to 
that in Ref. [4]. Our studies confirm the establishment of the nematic order and reveal a strong 
real-space fluctuation of site-specified order parameters. 
 
Results 
Topographical and electronic properties of overdoped Bi-2201. The samples studied in this paper 
are overdoped (Bi, Pb)2Sr2CuO6+δ single crystals with 𝑇𝑐 = 13 K and all the data are taken in an 
ultra-high-vacuum STM at 𝑇 = 4.5 K. Figure 1a displays a topographic image obtained on a cleaved 

BiO surface, showing a clear square lattice of Bi atoms with interatomic spacing of 𝑎0 ≈ 3.8 Å. A part 
of Bi atoms are substituted by Pb atoms, represented by brighter spots in the lattice, and the 
incommensurate supermodulation is completely suppressed due to the elimination of the periodic 
potential of strain [16].  
 

The local electronic property can be probed by the differential conductance (𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉) spectroscopy, 

which is proportional to the local density of states (LDOS). A spectral survey is taken simultaneously 
with the topographic image in Fig. 1a, at a dense array of locations. All the following data are shown 
and analyzed in the same field of view (FOV) and the atomic registry is precisely maintained. Figure 
1c presents a typical slice of the spectroscopy image or a differential conductance map, 𝑔(𝑟⃗,𝐸), at a 


relative low bias voltage 𝑉 = 7.5 mV. The wavelike spatial pattern of the LDOS modulation mainly 
originates from the Bogoliubov quasi-particle interference (QPI) [17-18]. In the Fourier transformed 
map, 𝑔̃(𝑞⃗, 𝐸 = 7.5 meV) (see Fig. 1d), the dominant QPI wave vectors extracted around strong 
signals could provide the Fermi surface (FS) information. We observe a ‘triplet’ signal in the 
anti-nodal region and a trace extending from the nodal to anti-nodal regions. These two features are 
assigned as the signature of a large FS [14]. As a comparison, an ‘octet’ QPI associated with a small 
FS has been observed for underdoped Bi-2212 and Bi-2201 samples (see Fig. 1b) [13, 14, 17].    

 
The Bogoliubov quasi-particle excitations, which is related with the SC phase, are often detected 

around the Fermi energy. The electronic excitations behave differently as the energy increases to the 
PG energy scale [13]. In Fig. 1e, we present another 𝑔(𝑟⃗, 𝐸) at a relative high bias voltage 
𝑉 = 25 mV. The wavelike pattern here is not from the QPI, but related with a quasi-localized charge 
order (also called the smectic order) [4, 9]. In the Fourier transformed map, 𝑔̃(𝑞⃗, 𝐸 = 25 meV) (see 

Fig. 1f), the dominant wave vectors are near 𝑞⃗∗ ∼ ±

3

4 𝑄⃗⃗𝑥 and ±

3

4 𝑄⃗⃗𝑦, corresponding to the real-space 

periodicity of charge order modulation. Here ±𝑄⃗⃗𝑥 = (±

2𝜋

𝑎0 , 0) and ±𝑄⃗⃗𝑦 = (0, ±

2𝜋

𝑎0) are positions 

of Bragg peaks. Although both the intra-unit-cell nematicity and the charge order are developed when 
the energy approaches the PG magnitude (see Fig. 1b), these two orders are prominent at different 
wave vectors in the Fourier transformed map. The former is around the Bragg peaks, while the latter is 
around 𝑞⃗∗ [4, 9].   
 
Collective nematic order. Although the current Bi-2201 sample is overdoped with a large FS, the PG 
state is known to exist [14, 15]. The PG magnitude (𝛥PG) at each location in the FOV is determined by 
extracting the bias voltage of the positive coherence peak from its 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectroscopy. The resulting 
PG map in Fig. 2a shows a strong nanoscale inhomogeneity where large-𝛥PG regions are spread in 
space and surrounded by low-𝛥PG regions. In the broad distribution of 𝛥PG, we also find ~10.9% zero 
gap patches, which are attributed to van Hove singularities (VHS, with details in Supplementary Note 
S1 and Fig. S1). The similar VHS behavior was specified in pure non-cation-doped Bi-2201 samples 
[19]. To detect the electronic order hidden by the strong inhomogeneity of the PG distribution, we 
apply a ratio map, 𝑍(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) = 𝑔(𝑟⃗,𝜀)/𝑔(𝑟⃗,−𝜀) [20]. The reduced energy 𝜀 = |𝐸|/𝛥PG(𝑟⃗) is rescaled 
with respect to the PG magnitude at each location. The ratio 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀) between the LDOS at two 
opposite reduced energies (±𝜀) can minimize the systematic error of 𝑔(𝑟⃗, ±𝜀) caused by the setpoint 
effect [20]. 
 

Figure 2b displays a typical image of 𝑍(𝑟⃗, 𝜀 = 0.975) in the same atomically resolved area as in 

Fig. 1a. The spatial average of 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀)  is artificially assigned for the VHS regions (see 
Supplementary Note S1 and Fig. S1), which however does not affect the main conclusion of this paper. 
The electronic spatial patterns consist of an apparent charge order modulation and an underlying 
intra-unit-cell order. To obtain an atomic registry with picometer-scale precision, we implement a 
lattice drift correction of the topographic image in all the 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 maps simultaneously acquired [4, 


21]. After the lattice drift correction, we implement the Fourier transform and obtain a ratio map, 

𝑍̃(𝑞⃗, 𝜀 = 0.975), in the momentum space (Fig. 2c). Four sharp Bragg peaks at ±𝑄⃗⃗𝑥 and ±𝑄⃗⃗𝑦 are 
observed, each collapsing into a single pixel due to the drift correction. However, the two sets of 

Bragg peaks are not degenerate as revealed by the difference between Re 𝑍̃(±𝑄⃗⃗𝑥, 𝜀 = 0.975) and 
Re 𝑍̃(±𝑄⃗⃗𝑦, 𝜀 = 0.975) (shown in the inset of Fig. 2c). As a Cu site is selected as the origin when 
performing the Fourier transform, this difference signifies a symmetry breaking from 𝐶4𝑣 (90° 
rotational symmetry for four O sites surrounding each Cu site) to 𝐶2𝑣 (180° rotational symmetry for 
two O sites along the 𝑥/𝑦 direction). A collective nematic order for this FOV of overdoped Bi-2201 is 
thus determined around the PG energy scale. The same investigation is applied to other reduced 
energies, which leads to the definition of a normalized order parameter,  
 

                  𝑂̃(𝜀) = [Re 𝑍̃(𝑄⃗⃗𝑥,𝜀) − Re 𝑍̃(𝑄⃗⃗𝑦,𝜀)]/𝑍̅(𝜀),                    (1) 

 
where 𝑍̅(𝜀) is the spatial average of 𝑍(𝑟⃗, 𝜀). In Fig. 2d, the order parameter 𝑂̃(ε) increases 
monotonically as 𝜀 approaches the PG energy, illustrating a gradual establishment of the nematic 
order. 
 

The information extracted from the Bragg peaks in the momentum space represents an 

asymmetric intra-unit-cell electronic modulation along the 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions in the real space. 

Based on the spatial structure shown in the inset of Fig. 3a, the dominant order in Re 𝑍̃(±𝑄⃗⃗𝑥, 𝜀) and 
Re 𝑍̃(±𝑄⃗⃗𝑦, 𝜀) arises from the O sites. In the real space ratio map of 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀), we take a summation 
over the unit cells and calculate an alternative order parameter [4],  
 
               𝑂(𝜀) = ∑ 𝑂(𝑛, 𝜀)
𝑛
/𝑁 = ∑ [𝑍𝑦(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀) − 𝑍𝑥(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀)]/[𝑁𝑍̅(𝜀)]
𝑛
,             (2) 

 
where 𝑟⃗𝑛 is the location of the Cu site centered in the 𝑛th unit cell, and 𝑁 is the total number of unit 
cells. The results of 𝑍𝑥(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀) and 𝑍𝑦(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀) are averaged from the O sites of the 𝑛th unit cell along 

the 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions (labeled by Ox and Oy), respectively. As the reduced energy 𝜀 increases, 
𝑂(𝜀) follows the same trend as 𝑂̃(𝜀), and a smooth transition from 𝐶4𝑣 to 𝐶2𝑣 is observed (as 
shown in Fig. 3a). The nematicity is a manifest from the asymmetric electronic structures on the Ox 
and Oy sites. As a comparison, we assign two set of copper sites, Cu1 and Cu2, along the two 
perpendicular directions, and the symmetry breaking of Cu sites is not found over the whole range of 
𝜀.  
 

The nematicity defined in (2) is explored in the 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀) maps which are derived from the 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 

spectra. To confirm that the nematicity is not artificially induced by our data analysis, we directly 
average the 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectrum over all the Ox/Oy sites in the FOV. As shown in Fig. 3b, the 
Ox/Oy-averaged spectra are distinguished from each other in the regime of negative bias voltages. The 
dataset analyzed above was taken with a tunnel junction of sample bias 𝑉𝑏 = +100 mV. Since the 
spectral weight is normalized for empty states (positive bias voltages), the spectral shift from 
asymmetric nematic order appears in the filled states (negative bias voltages). Under the condition of 


𝑉𝑏 = −100 mV, we find the spectral shift of the Ox/Oy-averaged 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectra in the empty states 
(see Supplementary Information Note S3 and Fig. S4). The symmetry breaking of Ox and Oy sites is a 
result of the asymmetric LDOS while the ratio 𝑍-map provides a clearer identification of the nematic 
order parameter. Instead, the averaged 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectra from Cu1 and Cu2 sites are indistinguishable 
over the whole energy range, which is consistent with the zero nematicity of Cu sites in Fig. 3a. 

 

Real-space distribution of the nematic order. The two order parameters, 𝑂̃(ε) and 𝑂(ε), reflect 
the same phenomenon of the nematic order, despite the fact that they are defined separately in the 
momentum and real spaces. The real-space 𝑍(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) map will be further applied to explore the spatial 
distribution of nematicity. However, the electronic modulations other than the intra-unit-cell 
periodicity lead to strong interference signal in the real space, and the atomic-scale nematic order is 
buried in background noise and other electronic orders. A solution to this difficulty is to retain 𝑍̃(𝑞⃗, 𝜀) 
within a limited region around four Bragg peaks in the momentum space, which can be realized by 
 

      𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀) = 𝑍̃(𝑞⃗,𝜀)[𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ + 𝑄⃗⃗𝑥) + 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ − 𝑄⃗⃗𝑥) + 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ + 𝑄⃗⃗𝑦) + 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ − 𝑄⃗⃗𝑦)].       (3) 

 
The Gaussian filtering function, 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗) = exp(−𝑞2/2𝛬2), is defined with a filtering size 𝛬−1. Figure 
3c presents a typical result of 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗,𝜀 = 0.975) filtered from Fig. 2c using 𝛬−1 = 1.05 nm. The 
inverse Fourier transform is subsequently applied to 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀 = 0.975) for a real-space map of 
𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀 = 0.975), as shown in Fig. 3d. Compared to the original map in Fig. 2b, this filtered map 

reduces longer-wavelength modulations while the spatial inhomogeneity is partially preserved. In the 
real space, the filtration is equivalent to a locally weighted average for each spatial location so that the 
background signal can be significantly suppressed. Following the definition in equation (2), we 
calculate the order parameter 𝑂𝑓(𝜀) after the filtration, and the comparison with 𝑂(𝜀) in Fig. 2a 

reveals the same development of the nematicity. Although the measurements of the collective order, 
𝑂𝑓(𝜀) and 𝑂(𝜀), are similar, the filtering procedure is important for detecting the spatial distribution 

of nematic order. For each 𝑛th unit cell, the difference between the electronic structures of the O sites 
leads to the order parameter of this cell, 
 

                  𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) = [𝑍𝑓,𝑦(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀) − 𝑍𝑓,𝑥(𝑟⃗𝑛, 𝜀)] 𝑍̅𝑓(𝜀)
⁄
,                    (4) 

 
where 𝑍𝑓,𝑥(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀) and 𝑍𝑓,𝑦(𝑟⃗𝑛, 𝜀) are averaged over the O sites along the 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions. A 

coarse-grained average within the area of 𝛬−2 is implied in our cell order parameter, which is 
consistent with a previous approach of estimating the correlation length by a local Fourier transform 
[4]. Consequently, we construct a new map of the cell nematic order parameter 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀). The image 
resolution of 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) is reduced compared to that of 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀), as the information of each unit cell is 

compressed into a single pixel.  
 

Three typical cell order parameter maps with 𝜀 = 0.150, 0.375,and 0.975 are displayed in Fig. 

4a-4c, to demonstrate the evolution of 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) with the change of the reduced energy, while the full 

evolution is provided in Supplementary Fig. S3. At each reduced energy, the order parameter map is 


inhomogeneously distributed. Both positive and negative nematicities form nanoscale domains, which 
are depicted in red and blue colors in Fig. 4a-4c. For a small reduced energy (𝜀 = 0.150, in Fig. 4a), 
these two opposite nematic domains occupy roughly the same percentage of the image, leading to 
nearly zero collective nematicity. With the increase of the reduced energy, the colors of both domains 
are intensified so that the local nematicity is enhanced. In our selected FOV, the average strength of 
the positive nematicity however experiences a stronger enhancement than that of the negative 
nematicity. At the same time, the size of red domains grows, showing a gradual formation of the 
collective positive nematicity. For example, a blue domain at the top left corner of Fig. 4a is cut into 
two parts and a red domain emerges in Fig. 4b when the reduced energy changes from 0.150 to 
0.375. On the other hand, the major domain structure is considerably preserved. With the Ising 
symmetry 𝑥𝑛 = ±1 assigned to a red or blue pixel for each unit cell, a correlation function, 
𝐶 = ∑ |𝑥𝑛 − 𝑥𝑛′ |
𝑛
 / ∑ (|𝑥𝑛| + |𝑥𝑛′ |)
𝑛
, is used to quantitatively describe the structural difference 

between the images of local order parameters at two different reduced energies. A similarity over 75% 
is found between Fig. 4a and 4b. As the reduced energy further approaches the PG energy level 
(𝜀 = 0.975, in Fig. 4c), both the size increase of red domains and the color intensification of the two 
domains slow down, since the cell and collective nematic orders start to be saturated. The electronic 
structure in overdoped Bi-2201 follows a smooth transition of symmetry breaking, and a nanoscale 
disorder is frozen during the establishment of the nematicity. 

 
To gain a more quantitative description of the site-specified nematicity, we draw a histogram of 

𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) for each reduced energy 𝜀 by counting 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) over a selected bin size 𝛿𝑂𝑓 =  0.001. In 

Fig. 4e, the histograms resulted from Fig. 4a-4c are plotted, each being well fitted by a Gaussian 

envelope, 𝐹(𝑂𝑓) ∝ exp [−(𝑂𝑓 − 𝑂𝑓

𝐺)

2/2𝜎𝑓

2], with a mean 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) and a standard deviation 𝜎𝑓. The 

same good accuracy of Gaussian fitting is found for all the other histograms. The center of each 
Gaussian distribution, 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀), provides another estimation of the averaged collective nematic order. 

As shown in Fig. 4f, the result of 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) is almost the same as the collective order parameter 𝑂𝑓(𝜀) 

defined in equation (2) after considering the error of the bin size. The positive collective nematic order 
in the selected FOV is formed by the shift of 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) to the right, consistent with the gradual growth 

of the red domains in Fig. 4a-4c. Due to its strong inhomogeneous nature, 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) is always broadly 

distributed with a large standard deviation due to the two types of nematic domains in nanoscale. The 
value of 𝜎𝑓 in general increases with 𝜀, as demonstrated by the gradual color intensification in Fig. 
4a-4c. The evolution of 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) and 𝜎𝑓(𝜀) suggests that the nematic order is first randomly generated 

by a real-space fluctuation and then is enhanced following the increase of the reduced energy. In the 
development of a positive nematicity extended over a larger region in the FOV, some blue domains are 
sustained possibly due to a non-negligible energy cost for flipping microscopic nematic orders. The 
broadening of the Gaussian distribution is however less severe than the shift of its center position, 
with the relative ratio of 𝜎𝑓(𝜀)/𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) consistently reduced as 𝜀 increases (see the inset of Fig. 4f). 

 
Discussion  
The STM experiment reported in this paper confirms the nematic order in overdoped Bi-2201, 


extending previous studies in Bi-2212 [4]. The collective nematic orders with rotational symmetry 
breaking at O sites are observed in both momentum and real spaces. A filtering procedure allows us to 
extract the site-specified intra-unit-cell signal and reveal the spatial distribution of electronic 
nematicity. In an underdoped Bi-2212 with a strong nematicity, the dominant order can extend over a 
few tens of nanometers [4]. In our overdoped Bi-2201 with a weak nematicity, the two opposite orders 
coexist when a nonzero collective order is developed around PG. Nanoscale domains are aggregated 
in real space for each of two opposite nematicities, which are induced by local fluctuations. With the 
increase of the reduced energy, the domain size of one nematicity increases, and its order strength 
gradually dominates although both orders are enhanced. The collective nematic order is established by 
the combination of these two effects. The evolution of the nematicity in our sample can help build a 
multi-step picture for the order formation. 
 

In Bi-2212, the nematic order is determined in underdoped and optimal samples, but disappears 

for overdoped samples without the PG state. Our observation in the overdoped Bi-2201 presents the 
nematicity in cuprates with a large FS, implying the nematicity more correlated with the PG state than 
the FS structure. On the other hand, the nematic order also coexists with other electronic orders, e.g., 
the charge order (smectic order) which is interpreted by a Landau-Ginzberg theory [9]. The charge 
order is recently identified as a d-form factor order with a sophisticated phase sensitive analysis 
[22-24]. The PG state and related charge order are believed to originate from strong-correlated doped 
Mott insulator [25-26], whereas the large FS is often related with a Fermi liquid behavior [2]. Future 
studies will be necessary to further explore the connections between the nematicity, charge order and 
FS. 
 
Methods 
Sample growth. The high-quality Pb-doped Bi2Sr2CuO6+δ single crystals are grown by the traveling 
solvent floating zone method [27]. Starting materials of Bi2O3, PbO, Sr2CO3 and CuO with 99.99% 
purity are mixed in an agate mortar and calcined at 750 ºC - 810 ºC in muffle furnace for 24 h. After 
pressed into a cylindrical rod in a hydrostatic pressure of ~ 70 MPa, the sample is sintered in a vertical 
molisili furnace at 840 ºC for 48 h in air. The sintered rod was then pre-melted in the floating zone 
furnace at a traveling velocity of 25 ~ 30 mm/h to obtain a dense feed rod. By trying and optimizing 
the growing conditions, the dense feed rod was again melted on the seed rod just like the pre-melting 
process but with a slower travelling velocity of 0.5 mm/h. Single crystals of ~ 50 × 5 × 2 mm3 can 
be obtained by cutting from the as-grown ingot. 
STM measurement. The STM experiments are performed with an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) and low 
temperature STM system. The overdoped Bi-2201 samples are cleaved in the UHV chamber at liquid 
nitrogen temperature (~77 K), and immediately inserted into the measurement stage. All STM results 
in this paper are acquired at liquid helium temperature (~4.5 K). The STM topography is typically 
taken with a sample bias 𝑉 = 100 mV and a setpoint current 𝐼 = 100 pA. The 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectra are 
taken with a standard lock-in technique with modulation frequency 𝑓 = 983.4 Hz and amplitude 
𝑉ac = 3 mV. The tips are fabricated from thin Tungsten wires (0.25-0.5 mm) by electrochemical 
reaction recipes, and treated by e-beam sputtering and field emission cleaning on the Au (111) crystal 


sample. 
Data availability. The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are 
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 
Reference 
1. Fradkin, E., Kivelson, S. A., Lawler, M. J., Eisenstein, J. P. & Mackenzie, A. P. Nematic Fermi 
fluids in condensed matter physics. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 1, 153-178 (2010). 
2. Keimer, B., Kivelson, S. A., Norman, M. R., Uchida, S. and Zaanen, J. From quantum matter to 
high-temperature superconductivity in copper oxides. Nature 518, 179-186 (2015). 
3. Chen, X. H., Dai, P. C., Feng, D. L., Xiang, T. & Zhang, F. C. Iron-based high transition 
temperature superconductors. Natl. Sci. Rev. 1, 371-395 (2014). 
4. Lawler, M. J. et al. Intra-unit-cell electronic nematicity of the high-Tc copper-oxide pseudogap 
states. Nature 466, 347-351 (2010). 
5. Kaminski, A. et al. Spontaneous breaking of time-reversal symmetry in the pseudogap state of a 
high-Tc superconductor. Nature 416, 610-613 (2002). 
6. Fauqué, B. et al. Magnetic order in the pseudogap phase of high-Tc superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
96, 197001 (2006). 
7. Li, Y. et al. Unusual magnetic order in the pseudogap region of the superconductor HgBa2CuO4+𝛿. 
Nature 455, 372-375 (2008). 
8. Yi, M. et al. Symmetry-breaking orbital anisotropy observed for detwinned Ba(Fe1-xCo)2As2 above 
the spin density wave transition. PNAS 108, 6878–6883 (2011). 
9. Mesaros, A. et al. Topological defects coupling smectic modulations to intra–unit-cell nematicity in 
cuprates. Science 333, 426-430 (2011). 
10. Rosenthal, E. P. et al. Visualization of electron nematicity and unidirectional antiferroic 
fluctuations at high temperatures in NaFeAs. Nat. Phys. 10, 225-232 (2014). 
11. Chu, J. H., Kuo, H. H., Analytis, J. G. & Fisher, I. R. Divergent nematic susceptibility in an iron 
arsenide susperconductor. Science 337, 710-712 (2012). 
12. Fujita, K. et al. Simultaneous transitions in cuprate momentum-space topology and electronic 
symmetry breaking. Science 344, 612-616 (2014). 
13. Kohsaka, Y. et al. How Cooper pairs vanish approaching the Mott insulator in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+𝛿. 
Nature 454, 1072-1078 (2008). 
14. He, Y. et al. Fermi surface and pseudogap evolution in a cuprate superconductor. Science 344, 
608-611 (2014). 
15. Boyer, M. C. et al. Imaging the two gaps of the high-temperature superconductor Bi2Sr2CuO6+x. 
Nat. Phys. 3, 802-806 (2007). 
16. Slezak, J. A. et al. Imaging the impact on cuprate superconductivity of varying the interatomic 
distances within individual crystal unit cells. PNAS 105, 3203-3208 (2008). 
17. Hoffman, J. E. et al. Imaging quasiparticle interference in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+𝛿. Science 297, 
1148-1151 (2002). 
18. Wang, Q.-H. & Lee, D.-H. Quasiparticle scattering interference in high-temperature 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 67, 020511(R) (2003). 
19. Piriou, A., Jenkins, N., Berthod, C., Maggio-Aprile, I. & Fischer, Ø. First direct observation of the 


Van Hove singularity in the tunnelling spectra of cuprates. Nat. Commun. 2, 1229 (2011). 
20. Hanaguri, T. et al. Quasiparticle interference and superconducting gap in Ca2−xNaxCuO2Cl2. Nat. 
Phys. 3, 865-871 (2007). 
21. Zeljkovic, I. et al. Scanning tunnelling microscopy imaging of symmetry-breaking structural 
distortion in the bismuth-based cuprate superconductors. Nat. Mater. 11, 585-589 (2012). 
22. Fujita, K. et al. Direct phase-sensitive identification of a d-form factor density wave in underdoped 
cuprates. PNAS 111, E3026–E3032 (2014). 
23. Hamidian, M. H. et al. Atomic-scale electronic structure of the cuprate d-symmetry form factor 
density wave state. Nat. Phys. 12, 150-156 (2016). 
24. Torre, E. G. D., He, Y. & Demler, E. Holographic maps of quasiparticle interference. Nat. Phys. 12, 
1052-1056 (2016). 
25. Silva Neto, E. H. da et al. Ubiquitous interplay between charge ordering and high-temperature 
superconductivity in cuprates. Science 343, 393-396 (2014). 
26. Cai, P. et al. Visualizing the evolution from the Mott insulator to a charge-ordered insulator in 
lightly doped cuprates. Nat. Phys. 12, 1047-1051 (2016). 
27. Zhao, L. et al. High-quality large-sized single crystals of Pb-doped Bi2Sr2CuO6+𝛿 high-Tc 
superconductors grown with traveling solvent floating zone method. Chin. Phys. Lett. 27, 087401 
(2010). 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank F. C. Zhang for helpful discussions. This work is supported by the National Basic Research 
Program of China (2014CB921203, 2015CB921004), the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (NSFC-11374260), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities in China. 
XJZ thanks financial support from the NSFC (11190022 and 11334010), and the Strategic Priority 
Research Program (B) of CAS with Grant No. XDB07020300. 
 
Author contributions 
Y. Z. analyzed the data. Y. F. and K. L. B. performed the STM measurements. W. H. Z. participated in 
the measurements. Y. D. and X. J. Z. grew the single crystal samples. J. E. H. discussed the results and 
modified the manuscript. Y. Y. designed the project and prepared the manuscript. All authors have read 
and approved the final version of the manuscript. 
 
Additional Information 
Supplementary information accompanies this at http://www.nature.com/srep 
 
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests. 


 

 
Figure 1 | Topography and electronic properties of an overdoped Bi-2201 (𝑻𝒄 = 𝟏𝟑 K). (a) 

Topographical image (270 × 270 Å2) of a cleaved BiO layer with the bias voltage 𝑉 = 100 mV and 
tunneling current 𝐼 = 100 pA. The brighter spots in the lattice correspond to the Pb substitutes. (b) A 
diagram of different electronic behaviors, evolving as the energy increases from the Fermi energy 
(zero) to the PG energy 𝛥PG. (c) A differential tunneling conductance 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 map measured at 
𝑉 = 7.5 mV on the same FOV as in a. (d) The 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 map in the momentum space after the Fourier 
transform of panel b. The four Bragg peaks are labelled in the small circles. The dashed arc represents 


a large FS. (e) Another 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 map measured at 𝑉 = 25 mV on the same FOV as in a. (f) The 
𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 map in the momentum space after the Fourier transform of panel e. The four peaks 
representing a charge order are enclosed in the dashed circles inside the first Brillouin zone near Bragg 
peaks. 
 
 

 

Figure 2 | Ratio Z-map and collective nematic order (q-space). (a) The PG map in the same FOV 
as in Fig. 1a. (b) A typical 𝑍(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) map at the reduced energy of 𝜀 = 0.975, with the VHS regions 

filled with the spatial average value. (c) The Fourier transform 𝑍̃(𝑞⃗,𝜀) map of panel b in the 
momentum space. For the four Bragg peaks, the positions at 𝑄𝑥 and 𝑄𝑦 are highlighted and 

enlarged, in which both Bragg peaks collapse into one pixel. In the inset, the real parts of the line cuts 
at 𝑄𝑥 and 𝑄𝑦 are shown in red and blue colors, respectively. The charge order is prominent at 

different wave vectors, as labeled by the dashed circles. (d) The collective order parameter as a 
function of 𝜀 in the momentum space. 
 


 

 

 

Figure 3 | Filtered Z-map and collective nematic order (r-space). (a) The collective order 
parameter in the real space as a function of 𝜀. The lines with filled circles and diamonds are the 
results of 𝑂(𝜀) from the O and Cu sites, respectively. The lines with open circles and diamonds are 
the results of 𝑂𝑓(𝜀) from the same two types of sites after the filtration. The inset is a schematic of 

CuO2 layer. (b) The averaged spectra on four different type of atomic sites (Ox, Oy, Cu1, and Cu2 as 
labeled in the inset of panel a.). The spectra for O sites are offset vertically for clarity. (c) The filtered 
ratio 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀) map in the momentum space after a Gaussian filtration around the four Bragg peaks. A 

circle centered at 𝑄𝑥 with the radius 𝛬−1 = 1.05 nm is drawn to show the filtering size. (d) The 
filtered ratio 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) map after the inverse Fourier transform of panel c. 

 
 


 

 
Figure 4 | Distribution of Local nematic orders. Maps of cell order parameters 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) in the real 

space with the reduced energies of (a) ε = 0.150, (b) ε = 0.375, and (c) ε = 0.975. (d) The 
magnification of the selected region in a. The positions of Cu and O atoms are shown in the left corner, 
while the cell order parameters of unit cells are retained in the rest part. (e) Histograms of the cell 
order parameters from panels a-c with the bin size 𝛿𝑂𝑓 = 0.001. Each histogram is fitted by a dashed 

line of the Gaussian distribution. (f) The mean (filled squares) and ratio between the mean and relative 
standard deviation (filled triangular in the inset) of the Gaussian fitting as the function of 𝜀. The error 
bar due to the bin size is shown for each mean of the Gaussian fitting. The collective order parameters 
𝑂𝑓(𝜀) (open circles) in Fig. 2e are provided for comparison. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Supplementary Information for “The study of electronic nematicity in an overdoped 
(Bi, Pb)2Sr2CuO6+δ superconductor using scanning tunneling spectroscopy” 
 
Yuan Zheng1, Ying Fei1, Kunliang Bu1, Wenhao Zhang1, Ying Ding2, Xingjiang Zhou2,3, Jennifer E. 
Hoffman4, Yi Yin1,5,* 
 
6. Department of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China 
7. Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Academy of 

Science, Beijing 100190, China 

8. Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China 
9. Department of Physics, Harvard University, 17 Oxford St. Cambridge, 02138, USA 
10. Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China 

*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y. Y. (email: 
yiyin@zju.edu.cn). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Supplementary Figure S1 | Analysis on van Hove singularity region. (a) The 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectra with 
a single peak VHS in the same FOV as in the main text. Each curve is a spatial average of all spectra 
sharing the same peak position of 𝐸𝑃 binned by 2.5 meV. From top to bottom, the curves are sorted 
by increasing ranging from -37.5 meV to 15 meV, where a vertical offset is applied for clarity. (b) 
Histogram of the VHS peak energies. The average peak position is -10.5 meV and the standard 
deviation is 12.2 meV. (c) Reduced energy 𝜀-dependence of the collective order parameters with the 
VHS region filled with zero (red curve) and 𝑍̅ (black curve). 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 
Supplementary Figure S2 | Gaussian filtering procedure for 𝜺 = 𝟎. 𝟗𝟕𝟓. From left to right, 
figures (a, e, i, m) in the first column are the ratio maps (𝑍̃(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) and 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀)) in the momentum space; 
figures (b, f, j, n) in the second column are the ratio maps (𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀) and 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀)) in the real space; 
figures (c, g, k, o) in the third column are the local nematic order maps (𝑂(𝑛, 𝜀) and 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀)); 

figures (d, f, j, n) in the fourth column are the histogram of the corresponding cell nematic order 
parameters. From top to bottom, (a, b, c, d) in the first row are the unfiltered results; (e, f, g, h) in the 
second row are the filtered results with Λ−1 = 0.527 nm; (i, j, k, l) in the third row are the filtered 
results with Λ−1 = 1.05 nm; (m, n, o, p) in the fourth row are the filtered results with Λ−1 = 1.58 


nm. The filtration size is shown by a black circle in each filtered map. For clarity of comparison, the 
unit cells with 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) > 0.025 and 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) < 0.025 are depicted in pure red and blue colors with 

the largest contrasts, respectively. The Gaussian fitting function for each histogram is represented by a 
solid curve. 
 

 

 
Supplementary Figure S3 | Establishment of the nematic order. (a)-(o) The evolution of the cell 
nematic order 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) maps with the increase of the reduced energy from 0.075 to 1.200. All these 

maps are obtained under the Gaussian filtering procedure with the filtration size Λ−1 = 1.05 nm. For 
each reduced energy, the value of 𝜀 is provided for the corresponding figure. For clarity of 
comparison, the unit cells with 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) > 0.025 and 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) < 0.025 are depicted in pure red and 

blue colors with the largest contrasts, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 

 

Supplementary Figure S4 | The comparison of nematic order for two datasets with opposite 
sample bias polarities. Maps of cell nematic order in the real space with reduced energy ε = 0.975, 
for two datasets with the sample bias voltage (a) 𝑉𝑏 = +100 mV, and (b) 𝑉𝑏 = −100 mV. (c) 
Reduced energy dependence of collective order parameters for both sample bias polarities. (d) The 
averaged spectra on Ox and Oy sites with the sample bias voltage 𝑉𝑏 = −100 mV. With a negative 
sample bias, the spectral weight is normalized in the filled states (negative bias voltages), and the 
spectral shift mainly appears in the empty states (positive bias voltages). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 

 
Supplementary Figure S5 | Size effect of the collective nematic order. (a) Size (side length) 
dependence of the collective order parameter of a square area. One corner of the square is fixed at the 
upper-left point of the same FOV as in the main text. (b) Size dependence of the collective nematic 
order extracted from the ratio map 𝑍(𝑟⃗, 𝜀 = 0.975), for four different series of square areas and with 
corners fixed at four different points. UL, upper-left, LL, lower-left, LR, lower-right, UR, upper-right. 
(c) Size dependence of the collective nematic order similar as in panel b, but extracted from the 
filtered ratio map 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀). (d) Reduced energy dependence of the collective nematic order for four 

square areas at different locations, each with a size of 15 × 15 nm2 (as schemed in the inset).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Supplementary Note S1 | Differential conductance spectra with a van Hove singularity 
 

For the overdoped Bi-2201 sample studied in this paper, a pseudogap (PG) state can be 

determined for most of the differential conductance (𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉) spectra taken in the scanning field of 
view (FOV) (shown in Fig. 1a of the main text). Instead, a single logarithmic peak is observed around 
the Fermi energy level for a small portion (~10.9%) of 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 spectra. Such a peak is considered as 
the signature of a van Hove singularity (VHS) in the electronic density of state (DOS). In Fig. S1a, a 
series of spatially averaged VHS spectra under a bin size of 𝛿𝐸𝑃 = 2.5 meV are presented as the 
VHS peak energy 𝐸𝑃 varies from -37.5 meV to 15 meV. As shown by the histogram in Fig. S1b, the 
majority of the VHS peak energies follows a distribution centered at -15 meV. However, hundreds of 
VHS peaks are extended to be above the Fermi energy level. In a previous study [18], the VHS spectra 
was found to appear as a non-cation-doped Bi-2201 sample approaches to the overdoped region. The 
positive PG peak is suppressed, while the original negative coherence peak is shifted to the Fermi 
energy level, gradually becoming a sharp VHS peak. In the whole FOV, the VHS areas are found to be 
surrounded by the PG areas with small gaps, and a smooth transition occurs between two 
characteristic spectra.  

 
To minimize the influence of the VHS state in our analysis of the nematic order, the ratio 

𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀) = 𝑔(𝑟⃗, 𝜀)/ 𝑔(𝑟⃗,−𝜀) for positions inside the VHS region is replaced by a mean value, 𝑍̅(𝜀). 
To make sure this assumption will not affect the main conclusion of nematic order in this paper, we 
also assign the ratio values in the VHS region with different constants, and compare the 
correspondingly analyzed results. In Fig. S1c, we show the collective order as a function of the 
reduced energy, with the VHS region set as zero and 𝑍̅(𝜀) respectively. There is a similar trend of 
how the nematicity develops. The nematicity is qualitatively not affected by the artificial treatment of 
VHS region in our analysis. On the other hand, although a portion of ~10.9% VHS area is discovered 
in the FOV analyzed in this paper, this ratio is not a general percentage of VHS region in the current 
sample. The detailed study of the VHS region is not explored in this paper.  
 
Supplementary Note S2 | The Gaussian filtration procedure 
 

A key step of analyzing the nematic order in this paper is to apply a Gaussian filtering to the ratio 

𝑍-map in the momentum space. In Fig. S2, we take a typical example around the PG energy level, 
𝜀 = 0.975, to demonstrate this filtration procedure. Figures S2a and S2b present the original𝑍̃(𝑞⃗,𝜀) 
and 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀) maps, which include information of all the wavelengths in addition to the intra-unit-cell 
modulation. A cell nematic order, 𝑂(𝑛, 𝜀) = [𝑍𝑦(𝑟⃗𝑛, 𝜀) − 𝑍𝑥(𝑟⃗𝑛,𝜀)]/𝑍̅(𝜀), is subsequently defined for 
each 𝑛th unit cell in the real space. The resulting 𝑂-map is displayed in Fig. S2c, from which we 
observe a significant inhomogeneity of both positive and negative nematicities. The spatial average, 
𝑂(𝜀) = ∑𝑛𝑂(𝑛, 𝜀)/𝑁, leads to a collective order, 𝑂(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.008. The histogram of 𝑂(𝑛, 𝜀) 
with the bin size 𝛿𝑂 = 0.02 in Fig. S2d is fitted by a Gaussian distribution with a mean 𝑂𝐺(𝜀 =
0.975) = 0.0052  and a standard deviation 𝜎(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.107 . The atomic-site-specified 


nematic order is hard to be extracted from this real space distribution due to a large deviation between 
𝑂(𝜀) and 𝑂𝐺(𝜀) as well as an extremely strong background noise, 𝜎(𝜀)/𝑂𝐺(𝜀) ≈ 20.  

 

Since the intra-unit-cell modulation is reflected by the Bragg peaks in the 𝑍̃(𝑞⃗, 𝜀) map, we can 

concentrate on signals near these peaks by filtering out interference information from other spatial 
modulations. In practice, a smooth Gaussian cut off, 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗) = exp(−𝑞2/2𝛬2), is applied to each 
Bragg peak, which gives rise to a filtered signal, 
 

𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀) = 𝑍̃(𝑞⃗, 𝜀)[𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ + 𝑄⃗⃗𝑥) + 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ − 𝑄⃗⃗𝑥) + 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ + 𝑄⃗⃗𝑦) + 𝑓𝛬(𝑞⃗ − 𝑄⃗⃗𝑦)]. 

 

Figure S2e presents a filtered 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀) map under the filtration size of Λ−1 = 0.527 nm, which 

is equal to 5 pixels of the FOV (the total 256 × 256 pixels). Next we can take an inverse Fourier 
transform of 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗,𝜀) to obtain the filtered ratio map, 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀), in the real space. Compared to the 
unfiltered map in Fig. S2b, 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) in Fig. S2f exhibits lattice-like patterns since a locally weighted 
average is considered for each spatial position. Accordingly, the filtered 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) map in Fig. S2g is 

less fluctuated than the unfiltered map in Figure S2c, and inhomogeneous domains of the two opposite 
nematicities are observed. The parameters of the Gaussian fitting function for the histogram in Fig. 
S2h are 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.0067 and 𝜎𝑓(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.034. Although the mean value 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) is 

closer to the collective nematic order, 𝑂𝑓(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.0079, the background noise still dominates 
with 𝜎𝑓(𝜀)/𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) ≈ 5.  

 
Next we consider a larger filtration size, Λ−1 = 1.05 nm, which is equal to 10 pixels of the FOV. 

The maps of 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀), 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀), and 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) following the filtering procedure are plotted in Fig. S2i, 
S2j, and S2k, respectively. The lattice-like patterns in 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗, 𝜀) and the real-space nematic domains in 
𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) are further strengthened although more information is filtered out at the same time. For the 
histogram in Figure S2l, the parameters of the Gaussian fitting function are 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.0074 

and 𝜎𝑓(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.014. The mean value is nearly the same as the collective order, 𝑂𝑓(𝜀 =

0.975) = 0.0077, and the nematic peak can be distinguished from the background noise with 
𝜎𝑓(𝜀)/𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) ≈ 2. 

 

 
The third filtration size studied is Λ−1 = 1.58 nm, which is equal to 15 pixels of the FOV. The 

maps of 𝑍̃𝑓(𝑞⃗, 𝜀), 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗, 𝜀), and 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) following the filtering procedure are plotted in Figures S2m, 
S2n, and S2o, respectively. As the contrast of the 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀) map decreases significantly, the 
fluctuations of local nematic domains in the 𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) map are further suppressed. For the histogram 
in Figure S2p, the parameters of the Gaussian fitting function are 𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.0068 and 

𝜎𝑓(𝜀 = 0.975) = 0.088. Although the nematic peak is further narrowed with 𝜎𝑓(𝜀)/𝑂𝑓

𝐺(𝜀) ≈ 1.3, it 

becomes more difficult for us to extract information of atomic-site-specified nematicity, which could 
be essential for understanding the mechanism of nematicity. 
 
 
Therefore, an appropriate filtration size Λ−1 is required in our analysis of the nematicity. On one 

hand, the filtered 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀) map is expected to be weakly correlated with the unfiltered 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀) map 


so that the dominant background interference signal is efficiently filtered out. On the other hand, Λ−1 
is required to be within the average size of the electronic order, e.g., the PG state, so that the locally 
weighted average is roughly taken within the area of the same 𝛥PG. In the main text, all the filtered 
results are calculated using Λ−1 = 1.05 nm, which can satisfy both requirements and is also close to 
the filtration size in a previous study of Bi-2212 [3]. However, we must emphasize that the qualitative 
conclusion of this paper is unaffected by the choice of Λ−1. The establishment of the collective 
nematic order 𝑂𝑓(𝜀) is consistently observed as Λ−1 increases. In addition, a broad distribution of 
𝑂𝑓(𝑛, 𝜀) is sustained for a large filtration size, Λ−1 = 1.58 nm, which confirms the coexistence of 

the two opposite nematicities and their strong spatial inhomogeneity. 
 
 
Supplementary Note S3 | Dataset taken with a negative sample bias voltage  
 

As an intrinsic electronic property, the nematic order should not be dependent on the tunnel 

junction condition with which the spectra dataset is taken. In the same FOV as in the main text, we 
have changed the sample bias voltage to 𝑉𝑏 = −100 mV and taken another dataset of 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉 
spectra. The similar analysis has been made to explore the nematic order. In Fig. S4a and S4b, we 
compare the cell nematic order maps for 𝑉𝑏 = +100 mV and 𝑉𝑏 = −100 mV. The similar order 
patterns are displayed, with very slight difference in details. The collective orders as a function of 
reduced energy are also compared in Fig. S4c. Qualitatively, they show the similar trend of nematicity. 
Furthermore, the averaged spectra on the Ox and Oy sites are compared in Fig. S4d. With the negative 
sample bias condition, the spectral weight is normalized for filled states (negative bias voltages) and 
the spectral shift mainly appears in the empty states (positive bias voltages). We consider the two 
detected nematic order consistent with each other, although the datasets are taken one after another 
and with different tunnel junction conditions. 
 
Supplementary Note S4 | Size effect of the collective nematic order  
 

From the cell nematic order maps we analyze and display in the main text, there is a broad 

real-space distribution of the site-specified nematicity, and a real space fluctuation of positive and 
negative regions of nematicity. The real space order fluctuation is also reproducible as shown in the 
supplementary note S3. With this real space fluctuation, we should reconsider how the collective order 
evolves as the size of the analyzed area increases. For the FOV in the main text, an area of 27 ×
27 nm2, we define a series of square areas with different sides, but sharing the same upper-left corner. 
For each square area, the collective nematic order is correspondingly calculated for the ratio maps 
𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀). The size dependence of the collective order is displayed in Fig. S5a. We could notice that the 
collective nematic order oscillates a lot for the areas with the area smaller than ~10 × 10 nm2, 
depending on how the positive or negative regions of nematicity aggregate in the small area. But when 
the size increases, the collective nematic order converges to a positive value.  

 
In Fig. S5b, we display the similar order evolution as the size increases for square areas starting 


from four different corners in the same FOV. The initial oscillations of the order for small square areas 
vary dramatically among four different series, illustrating the location dependence of evolved orders. 
The range of oscillation is much larger than the final converged order values, because we analyze the 
data based on unfiltered ratio maps 𝑍(𝑟⃗,𝜀). The range of initial oscillation is reasonably smaller when 
the filtered ratio maps 𝑍𝑓(𝑟⃗,𝜀) are applied to obtain the size dependence of nematic order evolution, 

as shown in Fig. S5c.  

 
In Fig. S5d, we roughly separate the original FOV to four different areas, each with a size of 

15 × 15 nm2, and display their corresponding 𝜀-dependence of collective nematic order. They share a 
similar trend of nematicity, although the four areas are at different locations. With the size-effect 
analysis of collective nematic order as above, we consider the FOV of 27 × 27 nm2 is a reasonable 
large enough size to define the collective nematic order. Although the quantitative value of nematic 
order should vary with the location and size of the FOV, we claim a qualitative discovery and mapping 
of nematicity in the over-doped sample in this paper.  
 
 


