Long-term deep supercooling of large-volume water via surface sealing with immiscible 

liquids  

Haishui Huang1, Martin L. Yarmush1,2*, O. Berk Usta1* 

1 Center for Engineering in Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School 

and Shriners Hospitals for Children, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, United States 

2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, 

United States 

 

* Correspondence should be addressed to: 
O. Berk Usta, PhD 
Center for Engineering in Medicine (CEM) 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
Harvard Medical School 
Shriners Hospitals for Children 
51 Blossom Street 
Boston, MA 02114 
E-mail: berkusta@gmail.com 
 

Martin L. Yarmush, MD, PhD 
Center for Engineering in Medicine (CEM) 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
Harvard Medical School 
Shriners Hospitals for Children 
51 Blossom Street 
Boston, MA 02114 
E-mail: ireis@sbi.org 

 

Abstract: 

Supercooling of aqueous solutions below their melting point without any crystallization is a 
fundamentally and practically important physical phenomenon with numerous applications in 
biopreservation and beyond. Under normal conditions, heterogeneous nucleation mechanisms 
critically prohibit the simultaneous long-term (> 1 week), large volume (> 1 ml) and low 
temperatures (< -10 oC) supercooling of aqueous solutions. Here, in order to overcome this 
bottleneck and enable novel and practical supercooling applications, we report on the use of 
surface sealing of water by an oil phase to drastically diminish the primary heterogeneous 
nucleation at the water/air interface. Using this approach, we have achieved deep supercooling 
(as low as -20 oC) of large-volumes of water (up to 100 ml) for long periods (as long as 100 days) 
simultaneously. Since oils are mixtures of various hydrocarbons we also report on the use of pure 
alkanes and primary alcohols of various lengths to achieve the same. All alcohols and some of 
the longer alkane chains we studied show high capacity to inhibit freezing. The relationship of this 
capacity with the chain length, however, shows opposite trends for alcohols and alkanes due to 
their drastically different interfacial structures with the water molecules. We find that the deeply 
supercooled water (at -20 oC) can withstand vibrational and thermal disturbances with all sealing 
liquids used, and even an extreme disturbance, ultrasonication, when alcohols are used as the 
sealing phase. The deep supercooling approach we developed here, for large samples and long 
periods, is expected to enable novel applications of supercooling in a variety of areas including 
biopreservation and food storage among others.  

 
 


 

Water is a seemingly simple yet a practically complex liquid with extraordinary phase behavior, 
which enables many of life’s intricacies. While water is possibly the most studied liquid, there 
remain many areas where its behavior is still largely mysterious (1). A prime example for this is 
the freezing and the supercooling of water, one of the most important yet least understood 
phenomena in our daily lives and scientific research (2, 3). Ice formation and the preceding 
supercooled state of microdroplets in atmospheric clouds is a crucial element for precipitation and 
reflection of solar radiation (4, 5). Furthermore, chilling, freezing, freeze avoidance, and 
supercooling are important strategies to combat cold weather for ectothermic animals (6, 7) , treat 
malignant diseases via cryotherapy (8), and preserve food  and various biological samples, such 
as cells, tissues, and organs (9, 10).   

Recent advances have shown that supercooling can be a promising alternative approach for the 
preservation of cells, tissues, and especially organs (11). Nevertheless, an important hurdle for 
supercooling preservation, as well as other applications of supercooling, is that simultaneous low 
temperature (< -10 oC), large volume (> 1ml), and long period (> 1 week) of supercooling for 
aqueous solutions cannot be readily achieved (12-14). While high pressure based approaches  
have provided supercooled states of water down to -92 oC briefly (1), according to the water phase 
diagram.They are, however, expensive, might further complicate preservation of biological 
samples, and their long-term fate is unknown. Few experiments have unstably supercooled large 
volumes, several hundred milliliters, of water to -12 oC (15), albeit also for periods on the order of 
seconds. Similarly, in Dorsey’s classical work on freezing of supercooled water, he was able to 
achieve a temperature of -19 oC for a few milliliters of water very briefly during his constant cooling 
experiments (16). A method that overcomes these hurdles and enable long-term supercooling of 
large aqueous samples at low temperatures could enable applications in biopreservation as well 
as many other areas which have previously been practically prohibited.   

Under normal atmospheric conditions, ice transitions into water at 0 °C, i.e. the melting point or 
the equilibrium temperature (𝑇𝑒). Nevertheless, the observed freezing temperature (𝑇𝑓) for pure 
water is usually below the equilibrium temperature (𝑇𝑒). Water, in the liquid phase, below the 
equilibrium temperature is said to be “supercooled” where ∆𝑇 = 𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑓 measures the degree of 
supercooling. Supercooled water is intrinsically metastable and can spontaneously transform to 
lower-energy-level ice crystals through the formation of ice nuclei, which can be readily achieved 
by ice seeding (17), ultrasonicating (18), or presenting ice-nucleating agents (19). On the contrary, 
it is very difficult to maintain supercooled water unfrozen, especially for a large volume, under a 
high degree of supercooling (∆𝑇), or for a long period, as each of these increases the possibility 
of ice nucleation and water freezing (Supplemental Information (SI)). For instance, ∆𝑇 of a water 
droplet decreases logarithmically with increasing volume under a constant cooling rate (20). 
Similarly, supercooling frequency (𝑓𝑠, 𝑓𝑠 = number of unfrozen droplets / number of total droplets) 
of an ensemble of droplets decreases exponentially with increasing droplet volume, storage time, 
and nucleation rate (𝐽) (21, 22), while 𝐽 itself increases exponentially with ∆𝑇 (23). Consequently, 
simultaneous long-term (> 1 week), large-volume (> 1 ml), and deep supercooling (DSC, ∆𝑇 > 10 
°C) of water has not yet been achieved. In what follows, we describe a novel and unexpected 
method based on sealing of the water surface by an immiscible hydrocarbon based liquid, such 
as oils, pure alkanes and pure primary alcohols. This method, as we demonstrate through a series 
of experiments, enables stable supercooling of large volumes of water for long periods at 
temperatures well below -10 °C. 


There are two general ice nucleation mechanisms, homogenous and heterogeneous 
crystallization. Homogeneous crystallization occurs due to random aggregation of interior water 
molecules to create a critically large nucleus of ice crystal, which could only be achieved and 
observed below -20 °C (24). Heterogeneous crystallization, on the other hand, stems from ice 
nucleus formation catalyzed by a substrate and/or  with the aid of foreign objects at much higher 
temperatures (25). Consequently, water freezing is generally initiated by heterogeneous 
nucleation, and especially, the water/air interface is the primary nucleation site as revealed in 
theoretical (26, 27), experimental (14, 28), and numerical (29, 30) studies. When water molecules 
aggregate on the water surface (water/air interface) to form an ice nucleus, they need to overcome 
an energy barrier 𝛾𝑖𝑎 − 𝛾𝑤𝑎 (𝛾: interfacial tension, superscripts 𝑖, 𝑤, 𝑜, and 𝑎 refer to ice, water, 
oil, and air, respectively) per unit area as the ice/air interface replaces original water/air interface. 
In comparison, the energy barrier for homogeneous ice nucleation within bulk water is proportional 
to the water/ice interfacial tension, 𝛾𝑤𝑖. This interfacial tension can be expressed via the Young 
equation as 𝛾𝑤𝑖 = 𝛾𝑖𝑎 − 𝛾𝑤𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑎 ≥ 𝛾𝑖𝑎 − 𝛾𝑤𝑎 (𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑎: water contact angle on ice/water/air 
interface, Fig. S1(A)). This inequality indicates that heterogeneous ice nucleation on the surface 
is thermodynamically more favorable than homogeneous nucleation in bulk as complete wetting 
(𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑎 = 0°) is not generally observed (27),  and receding contact angles of 12o have been reported 
(31). Therefore, if the water surface is sealed by an oil phase, the energy barrier of ice nucleation 
at the water-oil interface would be  𝛾𝑖𝑜 − 𝛾𝑤𝑜. Similarly, the homogenous nucleation energy barrier 
can be now expressed in terms of another triple interface, namely the oil/water/ice as 𝛾𝑤𝑖 = 𝛾𝑖𝑜 −
𝛾𝑤𝑜𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑜   where  𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑜, for many oils can be nearly  0° (Fig. S1(B)) (28, 32). In the case of  
𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑜 ≅ 0, the energy barrier approaches the limiting case 𝛾𝑖𝑜 − 𝛾𝑤𝑜 ≅  𝛾𝑤𝑖 . This analysis 
indicates that the energy barrier of heterogeneous crystallization at the surface is elevated almost 
to the level of homogeneous one when the water/air interface is replaced by an oil-water interface. 
Accordingly, we hypothesized that surface sealing of water with an appropriate oil phase could 
suppress primary heterogeneous ice nucleation at the surface and enable extended storage of 
deeply supercooled water.  

First, we cooled a large ensemble of polystyrene tubes containing 1ml of ultra-pure water to -13 
°C (Fig. 1(A-B)).  This resulted in > 90% of samples to be frozen after 24 hours and nearly all 
samples to be frozen after 5 days. In contrast, the ultra-pure water samples could be kept in the 
liquid phase for a week, at the same temperature, if their surfaces were sealed by various types 
of immiscible oils, such as light mineral oil (MO), olive oil (OO), heavy paraffin oil (PO), and 
nutmeg oil (NO). Interestingly, the curdling of OO during DSC does not trigger water freezing, 
though the cumulative freezing frequency (𝑓𝑓, 𝑓𝑓 = 1 − 𝑓𝑠 ) increases significantly compared to 
water sealed by other oils (Fig. 1(A)). In supplementary experiments, we have observed that the 
water degassed by vacuuming for 24 hours, has similar 𝑓𝑓 as normal water, with or without oil 
sealing (Fig. S2). These experiments indicate that air dissolved in the water does not play a major 
role in ice nucleation in our experiments. Given this result and the consistent efficacy of surface 
sealing by different oils on freezing reduction, we infer that the air-water interface is the primary 
nucleation site. 

We also examined the influence of water volume on the efficacy of oil sealing for freezing 
inhibition. We studied the two most promising oils, MO and PO, at -13 and -16 oC for ultra-pure 
water ranging from 100  ̴  105 µl (Fig. 1(C-D), Fig. S3). We found that MO sealing can effectively 
suppress water freezing for water volumes up to 104 µl at -13 and -16 °C. PO sealing was even 
more effective with a low 𝑓𝑓 throughout the entire volume range at -13 °C, and only 45.8% of 


samples frozen at -16 °C for the 105 µl samples.  In addition, 8 out of 35 (22.8%) samples of 105 
µl water were kept in the supercooled state at -16 °C for 100 days without any freezing event after 
Day-3 (Fig. S3(B)). While further investigations might be necessary, these observations are 
incompatible with conventional stochastic freezing processes (SI), which implies exponential 
decrease of 𝑓𝑠 with time (21, 22). Alternatively, the freezing of DSC water sealed by oil could be 
depicted as “case-specific” that some of sealed water samples are more susceptible to 
crystallization than others due to their unique and slightly different microstructures on the 
interface, even though all of them possess higher capability to resist freezing compared to the 
water without sealing. A reconciliation of these two cases might lie in the fact that those samples 
that don’t’ freeze within our observation period have much fewer impurities and thus a much 
smaller exponential for the decay of 𝑓𝑠 than those that freeze within 3 days.   

In order to further support our hypothesis that the water/air interface plays a dominant role in ice 
nucleation and subsequent freezing, we measured water freezing frequencies under differential 
degrees of surface sealing by MO, ranging from a) unsealed (0 oil), b) ring sealed along the 
contact line between water and tube wall (0.01 ml), c) partially sealed with partial exposure to air 
(0.1 ml), d) critically sealed with water surface just completely covered (0.15 ml), e) normally 
sealed (0.5 ml), and f) over sealed with excessive oil mounted on water surface (3.5 ml) (Fig. 2(A-
B) and Fig. S4). The results indicate that the capacity of freezing inhibition increases with the 
degree of sealing, with a statistically maximum plateau achieved by critical sealing (Fig. 2(A)). 
Ring sealing (0.01 ml) that nullifies the triple solid/water/air contact line has a mild effect on 
freezing inhibition at high temperatures (-10 °C) but is not effective below -13 °C. Taken together 
with partial sealing results (0.1 ml), this result implies that the contact nucleation at the air-water-
solid triple interface is not as dominant as that at water/air interface especially at low 
temperatures. Considering the crystallization efficiency depends on the integration of nucleation 
probability 𝐽 and nucleation length (or area), the triple contact line of short length would provide 
smaller crystallization efficiency compared than the air/water interface even though it has higher 
𝐽  (33, 34). Overall, we confirmed that the water/air interface is the primary ice nucleation site for 
DSC water, and surface oil sealing that removes the water/air interface can effectively inhibit ice 
nucleation and water freezing.  

We also observed that additional oil beyond the critical sealing has a statistically negligible effect 
on freezing suppression. This indicates that additional pressure and dampening effects, 
associated with a long-column of viscous oil phase, have a negligible effect on freezing inhibition. 
In order to further test this, we examined the effects of viscosity of the sealing agents where we 
used hydroxy (-OH) terminated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) of different chain lengths (Fig. 
2(C)). In a similar fashion, we did not observe statistically significant differences in the capacity of 
freezing inhibition of PDMS with a viscosity range of 1 - 5x105 cP, with the exception of 3500 cP 
PDMS which resulted in almost no freezing suppression effect. We hypothesize that this odd 
behavior is likely due to the formation of an ordered structure between water and this particular 
PDMS on the interface through hydrogen bonding, which closely matches the lattice of hexagonal 
ice (35). 

Most oils are complex mixtures of alkanes, saturated cyclic alkanes, alkylated aromatic groups, 
and fatty acids among other hydrocarbon compounds. In an effort to more systematically study 
the observed freezing inhibition effect of supercooled water sealed with an immiscible 
hydrocarbon phase, we studied two prototypical families of hydrocarbons: linear alkanes and their 
corresponding primary alcohols of different lengths (Fig. 3). Specifically, we have studied alkanes 


(CmH2m+2, denoted Cm, m = 5 - 11) and primary alcohols (CmH2m+1OH, denoted CmOH, m = 4 - 8) 
as the sealing agents for DSC water at -20 °C. Since linear alkanes have very low polarity, they 
have weak interaction with polar water molecules. On the other hand, the primary alcohols, which 
are amphipathic, can form strong hydrogen bonds with water through their hydroxyl group 
(hydrophilic end) and even stable ordered interfacial structures.     

We found that 𝑓𝑓 of DSC water, at -20 °C, sealed with alkanes decreases monotonically with 
increasing carbon number m and chain length 𝑙 (Fig. 3(A)). The capacity of alkanes in freezing 
inhibition matches that of MO (Fig. 2(A) at -20 °C) at m > 9. Given that mineral oils tend to have 
carbon chain lengths above 10, this result is expected. We posit that this trend, correlated with 
the alkane chain length, might also explain the capacity differences between PO and MO in Fig. 
1(D); PO likely consists of higher carbon chain alkanes than MO based on their densities (PO ~ 
0.855-0.88 vs MO ~ 0.838 g/ml). On a molecular level, the mechanism for this trend might lie in 
the structure of the alkane/water interface. It has been observed that an interfacial electron 
depletion layer with a thickness 𝛿 exists between water and hydrophobic alkane chains by both 
X-ray reflectivity (XR) measurements (36, 37) and atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations 
(38, 39). The few water molecules in the depletion layer (electron density < 40% that of bulk water 
(40)) can buckle in the intermolecular space near the ends of alkane molecules (Fig. 3(B)), and 
create a template for the formation of an ice nucleus (29). The alkane chains adjacent to the water 
molecules preferentially have their longest axis parallel to the water interface with a tilt angle 𝛽 
(36). This tilt angle increases with m and 𝑙, resulting in a more parallel orientation for longer 
alkanes (36). Accordingly, longer alkane chains are expected reduce the corrugation and 
roughness of the interface on the side of alkanes. This, consequently, is expected to decrease 
the number of buckled water molecules and nucleus templates, and thus lower the probability of 
heterogeneous ice nucleation on that layer (29). These expectations are in line with our 
observations of decreasing freezing frequencies for longer alkane chain lengths. From the 
perspective of thermodynamics, longer and flatter-oriented alkanes results in fewer and sparser 
buckled water molecules in the interface serving as nucleation template, which implies smaller 
contact region between ice embryo and sealing alkanes, smaller 𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑜(even though they are 
already much smaller than 𝜃𝑖𝑤𝑎), and higher energy barrier for heterogeneous ice nucleation (Fig. 
S1(B)). 

On the other hand, 𝑓𝑓 of DSC water, at -20 °C, sealed with alcohols increases with m and 𝑙. This 
opposite trend is likely due to the starkly different structures of the alcohol/water interface 
compared to that of alkane/water interface (Fig. 3(C)). Unlike the alkanes which prefer a parallel 
orientation, the primary alcohols orient perpendicularly to the interface with a small 𝛽. The primary 
alcohols align their hydroxyl (-OH) heads toward the interface to form hydrogen bonds with water 
molecules. Accordingly, no depletion layer of interfacial water exists as in the alkane/water 
interface. The 2D layer of interfacial water molecules are strongly hydrogen-bonded to the 
hydroxyl groups, with their H atoms pointing toward alcohol as revealed by heterodyne-detected 
vibrational sum frequency spectroscopy (SFG) (41). Therefore, structures and dimensions of the 
contacting layer of amphilic alcohols essentially determine the distribution and arrangement of 
interfacial water molecules, and the formation of heterogeneous ice nucleus (35, 42).  

Experimental and computational investigations of ice nucleation in droplets under monolayers of 
long primary alcohol chains with 16 ≤ 𝑚  ≤ 31, revealed a very low tilt angle 𝛽 (~ 7.5 - 10 °) and a 
very good lattice match between hexagonal ice and the alcohol structure for  29 ≤ m ≤ 31 (43). 
For these longest chains ice nucleation occurs at temperatures as high as -1 °C.  As m and 𝑙 


decrease, the tilt angle 𝛽 increases up to ~ 19° for m = 16 (44). In conjunction, a greater lattice 
mismatch between hexagonal ice lattice and ordered alcohol layer at the interface along with a 
lower ice nucleation efficiency and freezing temperature were observed (35, 43-45). Extrapolating 
this information and trend to the shorter alcohols (4 ≤ m ≤ 8) in this study, we expect a larger tilt 
angle 𝛽 (e.g. 𝛽 = 28° for m = 6 and 𝛽 = 30° for m = 5 (44)) and a greater lattice mismatch between 
hexagonal ice and ordered alcohol structure given the general structural similarity of primary 
alcohols. Compared to longer alcohol chains, the interfacial -OH groups anchored to smaller 
alcohols have stronger in- and out-of-plane fluctuations at the same temperature. We, therefore, 
expect that the large lattice mismatch along with the –OH group fluctuations can destabilize any 
ordered domaine of crystalline water and impede the formation of ice nucleus of critical size (45). 
Given that both effects are larger with smaller chain lengths, we expect that higher nucleation 
inhibition can be achieved by smaller primary alcohols, in line with our experimental observations. 
From the perspective of thermodynamics, greater lattice mismatch and interface fluctuation 
associated with shorter alcohol molecules directly reduce the probability of the formation of icing 
template of critical size for successful nucleation, which indicates smaller stable contact area 
between ice nucleus and sealing alcohols and thus, higher free energy barrier for heterogeneous 
ice nucleation at the interfac. Once again, we observed that there is no significant difference of 𝑓𝑓 
between 1-day and 7-day storage when sealed by either alkanes or alcohols. This further 
suggests the case-specific, rather than stochastic, nature of water freezing with oil sealing that 
we have previously discussed.  

Having established the efficacy of the deep supercooling approach using either oils or pure alkane 
and alcohol phases, we then studied its stability under vibrational, thermal, and ultrasonic 
disturbances. Vibrational disturbances were introduced by placing DSC water onto a shaking 
plate with various shaking speeds and frequencies (SI). When the DSC water (-20 °) is sealed by 
MO, its 𝑓𝑓 is 0% and 5.6%, respectively, under 0.84 g and 2.1 g centrifugal acceleration (Fig. 
4(A)), which are are much higher than ac/deceleration forces of a commercial airliner (0.2-0.4 g) 
during potential transporation. Thermal distrubances were induced by putting the DSC samples 
into 37 °C incubator or plungig them into 37 °C water bath with warming rate of 100 C/min (heated 
by natural convection in air) or 102 C/min (heated by forced convection in water), respectively. 
Very few (0% for gas warming, 2.5% for water warming) of the samples freeze under these 
thermal fluctuations. In contrast, these samples can not endure ultrasonication in 40 kHz 
ultrasonic water bath (Fig. 4(A) and Video S1), with 𝑓𝑓 of ~ 84%. This is probably due to the 
vigorous collapse of cavitation bubbles in water during ultrasonication (18), which would cause 
ultrahigh local pressure (> 1 GPa) (48), and therefore, significantly increase equilibrium 
temperature 𝑇𝑒 and  the degree of supercooling ∆𝑇. 

Upon the  instability of DSC water sealed by MO under ultrasonication, we further tested its 
stability sealed by pure alkanes and pimary alcohols. DSC water sealed by alkanes freeze 
immediately upon being ultrasonicated (Fig. 4(B-C) and Video S2), which is consistent with 
previous observation of MO sealed water since MO has a high content of various alkanes. On the 
contrary, none of the samples freeze upon ultrasonification if they were sealed by any of the 
primary alcohols (Fig. 4(B)). Instead, the sealing alcohols would be emulsified with supercooled 
water, starting from the interface and then evolving toward supercooled water (Fig. 4(C) and Video 
S3). The exact mechanism of the freezing resistance of DSC water sealed by alcohols to 
ultrasonic disturbance is still unknown, and one hypothesis would be that ultrasound 
preferrentially transduces its energy into joint molecular motion at interface due to the hydrogen 


bonding between water and amphilic alcohols to form nanoemulsion (49), rather than cavitation 
bubbles for ice nucleation in viscous DSC water.  

In the preceding, we demonstrated a seemingly counterintuitive and novel approach to achieve 
long-term deep supercooling of large-volume water by using a hydrocarbon-based immiscible 
phase to seal the water surface. Our initial observations with laboratory grade oils demonstrated 
that replacing the water/air interface, which is the primary ice nucleation site, with a water/oil 
interface dramatically inhibits stochastic freezing processes. The seemingly time independent 
nature of the freezing frequency of oil-sealed water suggests that its freezing might be case-
specific rather than stochastic. Our studies with linear alkanes and primary alcohols suggest that 
freezing inhibition can be achieved by surface sealing with starkly different interfacial structures 
and microscopic mechanisms, which results in opposite trends of inhibition capacity correlated to 
the chain length. While all sealed DSC water show great stability under vibrational and thermal 
disturbances simulating normal storage and transportation conditions, only the primary alcohol 
sealed supercooled water can withstand ultrasonication. We note that while we have 
hypothesized about possible macroscopic (thermodynamic) and microscopic mechanisms that 
might explain our observations, further studies are warranted to test, confirm, and improve upon 
them. Especially, since most existing literature focuses on longer alkane and alcohol chains at 
the water interfaces and the resulting molecular structures, computational and experimental 
studies with short chains might prove useful. Similarly, careful measurements of interfacial 
properties and structures at low temperatures with mixed and pure hydrocarbons can shed further 
light on why some oils are more effective than others.   

Given that monolayers of long alcohol chains have been historically used to initiate ice nucleation, 
our results with the short chains to prevent nucleation expand the use of alcohols to provide a 
robust control mechanism over the temperature at which nucleation can be achieved in an 
aqueous solution. Further studies with different families of hydrocarbons and their mixtures will 
be aimed at expanding this robust control of supercooling degree to allow novel applications. 
Beyond its fundamental implications, deep supercooling of large volumes of aqueous solutions 
can enable previously prohibitive applications, and provide new biopreservation methodologies 
for cell, tissue, and organ engineering and transplantation, as well as other areas, such as food 
preservation. Given our  prior experience and interest in both organ and cell preservation using 
supercooling and the limitations we have previously encountered in terms of temperatures, 
volumes and durations for preservation, we believe that the deep supercooling via the surface 
sealing with immiscible phases will be vital in advancing these applications forward. The 
immediate goal is to translate this approach to preservation of large number of cells that are 
amenable to preservation at the supercooled temperatures we can achieve here, and then 
translate such results to the clinic. We will then explore tissue and organ preservation with deep 
supercooling approaches.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We are grateful to Prof. Mehmet Toner for the very helpful discussions and his suggestions. We 
would also like to thank the NIH for funding this work through grants no. 5P41EB002503 
(BioMEMS Resource Center), 1R21EB020192, 5R01EB023812. 

 
 


REFERENCES 

1. 
H. Kanno, R. J. Speedy, C. A. Angell, Supercooling of Water to -92°C Under Pressure. Science 189, 
880-881 (1975). 

2. 
T. Bartels-Rausch, Chemistry: Ten things we need to know about ice and snow. Nature 494, 27-
29 (2013). 

3. 
R. E. Lee Jr, G. J. Warren, "Biological ice nucleation and its applications,"  (1995). 

4. 
J. D. Atkinson et al., The importance of feldspar for ice nucleation by mineral dust in mixed-
phase clouds. Nature 498, 355-358 (2013). 

5. 
U. Burkhardt, B. Kärcher, Global radiative forcing from contrail cirrus. Nature climate change 1, 
54 (2011). 

6. 
J. P. Costanzo, M. C. do Amaral, A. J. Rosendale, R. E. Lee, Jr., Hibernation physiology, freezing 
adaptation and extreme freeze tolerance in a northern population of the wood frog. J Exp Biol 
216, 3461-3473 (2013). 

7. 
J. S. Bale, S. A. Hayward, Insect overwintering in a changing climate. J Exp Biol 213, 980-994 
(2010). 

8. 
W. K. Yiu, M. T. Basco, J. E. Aruny, S. W. Cheng, B. E. Sumpio, Cryosurgery: A review. Int J Angiol 
16, 1-6 (2007). 

9. 
G. J. Morris, E. Acton, Controlled ice nucleation in cryopreservation--a review. Cryobiology 66, 
85-92 (2013). 

10. 
C. James, G. Purnell, S. J. James, A review of novel and innovative food freezing technologies. 
Food and bioprocess technology 8, 1616-1634 (2015). 

11. 
T. A. Berendsen et al., Supercooling enables long-term transplantation survival following 4 days 
of liver preservation. Nat Med 20, 790-793 (2014). 

12. 
A. Gholaminejad, R. Hosseini, A study of water supercooling. Journal of Electronics Cooling and 
Thermal Control 3, 1 (2013). 

13. 
O. B. Usta et al., Supercooling as a viable non-freezing cell preservation method of rat 
hepatocytes. PloS one 8, e69334 (2013). 

14. 
R. A. Shaw, A. J. Durant, Y. Mi, Heterogeneous surface crystallization observed in undercooled 
water. J Phys Chem B 109, 9865-9868 (2005). 

15. 
T. Inada, X. Zhang, A. Yabe, Y. Kozawa, Active control of phase change from supercooled water 
to ice by ultrasonic vibration 1. Control of freezing temperature. International Journal of Heat 
and Mass Transfer 44, 4523-4531 (2001). 

16. 
N. E. Dorsey, The Freezing of Supercooled Water. Transactions of the American Philosophical 
Society 38, 247-328 (1948). 

17. 
H. Huang et al., Pre-dehydration and Ice Seeding in the Presence of Trehalose Enable Cell 
Cryopreservation. ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering,  (2017). 

18. 
R. Hickling, Nucleation of freezing by cavity collapse and its relation to cavitation damage. 
Nature 206, 915-917 (1965). 

19. 
B. Nagare, C. Marcolli, A. Welti, O. Stetzer, U. Lohmann, Comparing contact and immersion 
freezing from continuous flow diffusion chambers. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 16, 8899-
8914 (2016). 

20. 
E. Langham, B. Mason, in Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical 
and Engineering Sciences. (The Royal Society, 1958), vol. 247, pp. 493-504. 

21. 
B. Krämer et al., Homogeneous nucleation rates of supercooled water measured in single 
levitated microdroplets. The Journal of Chemical Physics 111, 6521-6527 (1999). 


22. 
T. Koop, B. Luo, U. M. Biermann, P. J. Crutzen, T. Peter, Freezing of HNO3/H2SO4/H2O solutions 
at stratospheric temperatures: Nucleation statistics and experiments. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 101, 1117-1133 (1997). 

23. 
B. J. Murray et al., Kinetics of the homogeneous freezing of water. Physical chemistry chemical 
physics : PCCP 12, 10380-10387 (2010). 

24. 
E. Sanz et al., Homogeneous ice nucleation at moderate supercooling from molecular 
simulation. Journal of the American Chemical Society 135, 15008-15017 (2013). 

25. 
C. Hoose, O. Möhler, Heterogeneous ice nucleation on atmospheric aerosols: a review of results 
from laboratory experiments. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 12, 9817 (2012). 

26. 
J. W. Cahn, Critical point wetting. The Journal of Chemical Physics 66, 3667-3672 (1977). 

27. 
Y. Djikaev, A. Tabazadeh, P. Hamill, H. Reiss, Thermodynamic conditions for the surface-
stimulated crystallization of atmospheric droplets. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 106, 
10247-10253 (2002). 

28. 
A. Tabazadeh, Y. S. Djikaev, H. Reiss, Surface crystallization of supercooled water in clouds. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 99, 15873-15878 (2002). 

29. 
M. Fitzner, G. C. Sosso, S. J. Cox, A. Michaelides, The Many Faces of Heterogeneous Ice 
Nucleation: Interplay Between Surface Morphology and Hydrophobicity. J Am Chem Soc 137, 
13658-13669 (2015). 

30. 
S. J. Cox, S. M. Kathmann, B. Slater, A. Michaelides, Molecular simulations of heterogeneous ice 
nucleation. I. Controlling ice nucleation through surface hydrophilicity. J Chem Phys 142, 184704 
(2015). 

31. 
C. A. Knight, The contact angle of water on ice. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 25, 280-
284 (1967). 

32. 
A. Konno, K. Izumiyama, in Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on Okhotsk Sea and 
Sea Ice. (2002), pp. 275-282. 

33. 
S. Suzuki et al., Freezing of water droplets on silicon surfaces coated with various silanes. 
Chemical Physics Letters 445, 37-41 (2007). 

34. 
R. P. Sear, Nucleation at contact lines where fluid–fluid interfaces meet solid surfaces. Journal of 
Physics: Condensed Matter 19, 466106 (2007). 

35. 
M. Gavish, R. Popovitz-Biro, M. Lahav, L. Leiserowitz, Ice nucleation by alcohols arranged in 
monolayers at the surface of water drops. Science 250, 973-975 (1990). 

36. 
M. Fukuto et al., Nanoscale Structure of the Oil-Water Interface. Phys Rev Lett 117, 256102 
(2016). 

37. 
T. R. Jensen et al., Water in contact with extended hydrophobic surfaces: direct evidence of 
weak dewetting. Physical review letters 90, 086101 (2003). 

38. 
C. D. Wick, T.-M. Chang, J. A. Slocum, O. T. Cummings, Computational investigation of the n-
alkane/water interface with many-body potentials: the effect of chain length and ion 
distributions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 116, 783-790 (2011). 

39. 
Y. Qiu, V. Molinero, Strength of Alkane–Fluid Attraction Determines the Interfacial Orientation 
of Liquid Alkanes and Their Crystallization through Heterogeneous or Homogeneous 
Mechanisms. Crystals 7, 86 (2017). 

40. 
A. Poynor et al., How water meets a hydrophobic surface. Physical review letters 97, 266101 
(2006). 

41. 
J. A. Mondal, V. Namboodiri, P. Mathi, A. K. Singh, Alkyl Chain Length Dependent Structural and 
Orientational Transformations of Water at Alcohol-Water Interfaces and Its Relevance to 
Atmospheric Aerosols. J Phys Chem Lett 8, 1637-1644 (2017). 

42. 
L. H. Seeley, G. T. Seidler, Two-dimensional nucleation of ice from supercooled water. Phys Rev 
Lett 87, 055702 (2001). 


43. 
Y. Dai, J. S. Evans, Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Template-Assisted Nucleation: Alcohol 
Monolayers at the Air− Water Interface and Ice Formation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 
105, 10831-10837 (2001). 

44. 
R. Popovitz-Biro et al., Induced freezing of supercooled water into ice by self-assembled 
crystalline monolayers of amphiphilic alcohols at the air-water interface. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society 116, 1179-1191 (1994). 

45. 
Y. Qiu et al., Ice Nucleation Efficiency of Hydroxylated Organic Surfaces Is Controlled by Their 
Structural Fluctuations and Mismatch to Ice. J Am Chem Soc 139, 3052-3064 (2017). 

46. 
A. Abdelmonem et al., Surface charge-induced orientation of interfacial water suppresses 
heterogeneous ice nucleation on α-alumina (0001). 

47. 
D. Ehre, E. Lavert, M. Lahav, I. Lubomirsky, Water freezes differently on positively and negatively 
charged surfaces of pyroelectric materials. Science 327, 672-675 (2010). 

48. 
R. Hickling, Transient, high-pressure solidification associated with cavitation in water. Phys Rev 
Lett 73, 2853-2856 (1994). 

49. 
A. Gupta, H. B. Eral, T. A. Hatton, P. S. Doyle, Nanoemulsions: formation, properties and 
applications. Soft Matter 12, 2826-2841 (2016). 

 

 
 


Figures 

Figure 1. Deep supercooling (DSC) of pure water enabled by surface sealing with various types 
of oils. (A) Cumulative freezing frequency (𝑓𝑓) for 1 ml water at -13 °C over 7-day DSC, without 
sealing (W/O seal), with surface sealing by light mineral oil (MO), olive oil (OO), heavy paraffin oil 
(PO), and nutmeg oil (NO). Number of independent experiments n = 6, number of total tested 
samples for each case N = 56. NS: p > 0 .05; *: 0.005 < p < 0.05; **: 1.0 × 10-6 < p < 0.005, ***: p 
< 1.0 × 10-6. Error bar represents standard deviation. (B) Corresponding samples of (A) post 1-
day storage. (C) 𝑓𝑓 of DSC water of various volumes post 1-day storage at -13 and -16 °C. n = 7, 
N = 272, 145, 336, 123, and 125 for 3, 30, 200, 1000, and 10000 μl water, respectively. (D) 𝑓𝑓 of 
100000 μl water with different sealing oils and temperatures post 1-day storage, n = 7, N = 35. 

Figure 2. Dependence of freezing efficiency of DSC water on the volume and viscosity of sealing 
agent. (A) Effect of sealing oil (MO) volume on 𝑓𝑓 post 1-day DSC at different temperatures. n = 
6, N = 70. (B) Side view of corresponding samples of (A). MO includes Oil Red O for staining and 
imaging. 0 oil, 0.01 ml, 0.1ml, 0.15 ml, 0.5 ml, and 3.5 ml indicate no seal, ring seal, partial seal, 
critical seal (just complete surface seal), standard seal, and over seal by MO, respectively. (C) 
Effect of viscosity of sealing agents on 𝑓𝑓 post 1-day DSC at -16 °C. The sealing agents are 
hydroxy (OH) terminated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) of different chain lengths and viscosities. 
n = 5, N = 56.  

Figure 3. Freezing efficiency of 1 ml water sealed with linear alkanes and primary alcohols at -20 
°C. n = 7, N = 87. When m > 11 for linear alkanes and m > 8 for primary alcohols, the sealing 
agents are frozen at -20 °C and cause DSC water frozen. When m < 5, the linear alkanes are 
gaseous under atmospheric condition and not suitable for sealing. When m < 4, the primary 
alcohols are miscible with water and not suitable for sealing either. (B-C) Schematic 
configurations of alkane/water (B), and alcohol/water interface (C), respectively. The alkane and 
alcohol molecules are displayed without aliphatic hydrogen atoms and colored in light green. The 
O and H atoms in hydroxyl group of alcohol and water are shown in red and white dots, 
respectively.  

Figure 4. Stability tests for -20 °C DSC water. (A) 𝑓𝑓 of DSC water sealed by MO under various 
disturbances. Vibrational disturbance was imposed by shaking plate with different shaking 
frequencies and centrifugal forces (i.e. 0.84 g or 2.1 g). Thermal disturbance was imposed by 
placing or plunging the DSC tubes into 37 °C incubator (37 °C gas) or water bath (37 °C water). 
Ultrasonic disturbance was introduced by putting the DSC tubes into 40 kHz ultrasonic water bath. 
n = 6, N = 48. (B) 𝑓𝑓 of DSC water sealed by linear alkanes and primary alcohols under 40 kHz 
ultrasonic disturbance. n = 3, N = 24 (except for C5, N = 8). (C) Representative image sequences 
of ultrasonication tests for DSC water sealed by linear alkanes or primary alcohols. 

 

 
 


Figure 1 

 

 

 
 


Figure 2 

 

 
 


Figure 3 

 

 
 


Figure 4 

 

 


Supplemental Information (SI) 

Materials and Methods 

For all experiments in this study, DNase/RNase-free distilled water (Life Technologies/Thermo-
Fisher Scientific, USA) was used to minimize potential pollutants or ice-nucleating agents, except 
DSC trials of 100 ml water where deionized (DI) water (resistivity 𝑅 = 18.2 MΩ) produced by a 
deionizing water system (METTLER TOLEDO Thornton, USA) was used. All water containers 
(dishes, 96-well plates, round-bottomed tubes, and bottles, Corning, USA) were made of 
polystyrene, and clean and sterile before experiments. The purity of all oil phases used for water 
surface sealing is at least 99% as specified by the vendor (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). 

The loading of water into containers was performed in a chemical hood to avoid contamination of 
the samples by pollutants or dust particles in the air. Water of small volume (< 1 ml) was loaded 
into containers (dishes or 96-well plates) using clean and sterile tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
USA) and calibrated pipets (PIPETMAN, Gilson, USA), while that of large volume (≥ 1 ml) was 
loaded into containers (round-bottomed tubes or bottles) using serological pipets (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, USA) by pipette filler (Drummond Scientific, USA). We note that as water droplets 
smaller than 100 µl are subject to significant evaporation during long-term deep supercooling 
(DSC) experiments, and those bigger than 105 µl (100 ml) beyond the volume capacity of the 
freezing chamber, they were not investigated in this study. After loading water samples into the 
containers, oil phase was gently added onto the water surface using serological pipets, trickling 
down along the wall of containers to avoid splashing or trapping air bubbles at the interface. The 
water-laden containers (with or without sealing oil) were transferred into portable temperature 
controlled freezers (Engel MHD-13, Engel, USA) that were placed in 4 °C cold room to minimize 
temperature fluctuations, or stored in -20 °C freezer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The 
temperatures within these freezers were verified by Toluene-filled low-temperature thermometer 
(Sigma, USA). 

To examine the effects of dissolved air in water on ice nucleation and water freezing, the water 
was vacuumed at a pressure below 10-4 atmosphere for 24 hours to extract dissolved air 
molecules. The degassed water was, then, gently pipetted into tubes and sealed with mineral oil 
(MO) for supercooling tests at -16 °C. The air content of the degassed water is significantly lower 
than that of normal water without degassing, as no air bubbles emerge from the degassed water 
(second row of Fig. S2(B)) under vacuum. The same procedure was carried out for normal water 
for comparative purposes, and several big air bubbles can be observed after 3-hour degassing 
(first row of Fig. S2(B)) 

To test the stability of DSC water sealed by oil phase, three types of disturbances, vibrational, 
thermal, and ultrasonic disturbances, were studied. For vibrational disturbance test, DSC tubes 
were placed on shaking plate (Labline 4625 titer shaker, Marshall Scientific, USA) with shaking 
speed 500 and 800 rpm for 30 seconds, which give rise to the centrifugal acceleration of 0.84 and 
2.1 g (g is gravitational acceleration), respectively. To prevent heat transfer, the tubes were 
wrapped with thick tissue paper in tube racks, all of which had been previously cooled to -20 °C 
in freezer. The temperature of the DSC water would not change noticeably during experiments 
given the brief shaking period and thick insulation layer. For thermal disturbance test, the DSC 
tubes were put into 37 °C incubator (warmed by air) or plunged into 37 °C water bath (warmed by 
water). Therefore, DSC water would experience different warming rates and temperature 
gradient. For ultrasonic disturbance test, DSC tubes would be plunged into 4 °C ultrasonic water 


bath. The sonicator (Branson B-200, TMC Inductries, USA) generates 40 kHz ultrasonic wave 
with power 30 W. The freezing of the DSC water can be evidenced by the change of sample 
transparency (from transparent to opaque). 

All data were organized and reported as the mean ± standard deviation from at least three 
independent runs of experiments (n > 3); further information on sample numbers are disclosed in 
figure captions. The statistical significance of mean values between two groups was determined 
by Microsoft Excel based on Student’s two-tailed t-test, assuming equal variance. Although a p-
value less than 0.05 is generally regarded as statistically significant, different ranges of p-value 
(NS: 0.05 < p, *: 0.005 < p < 0.05, **: 0.005 < p < 10-6, ***: p < 10-6) were provided to show different 
degrees of significance. 

Stochastic process of ice nucleation and freezing 

The formation of a critical ice embryo, i.e. a successful nucleation, in metastable supercooled 
water is generally regarded as a stochastic process that does not depend on the number of 
previous nucleation trials or correlate to other nucleation events during the same period (1, 2). In 
addition, heterogenous nucleation is the major type of crystallization in this study since 
homogeneous nucleation in water occurs at much lower temperatures (around - 40 °C). As a 
result, the heterogeneous ice nucleation on water surfaces/interfaces would follow Poisson 
statistics 

𝐼𝑛 (1 − 𝑓𝑓(𝑡)) = −𝐽(𝑇) ∙ 𝑆 ∙ 𝑡 

where 𝑓𝑓(𝑡) is the freezing frequency after supercooling of a period 𝑡, 𝐽(𝑇) is the nucleation rate 
at temperature 𝑇,  and 𝑆 is the area of heterogeneous nucleation sites. Therefore, for water 
samples of the same volume and shape under a constant temperature, the non-frozen 
(supercooled) fraction is expected to decline exponentially with time.  

However, in our experiments we found that 𝑓𝑓(𝑡) of DSC water with oil sealing does not change 
significantly after Day 3 as shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 3, Fig. S2, and Fig. S3. These results indicate 
that the heterogeneous ice nucleation in DSC water sealed by oil phase does not follow the 
conventional theory of stochastic nucleation processes at the interface. Particularly, since 45.8% 
of 100 ml DSC water (-16 °C) sealed by PO are frozen post 1-day storage (Fig. 
1(D)), 𝐼𝑛 (1 − 0.458) = −𝐽(−16 °𝐶) ∙ 𝑆 ∙ 1, which gives rise to 𝐽(−16 °𝐶) ∙ 𝑆 = 0.612.  Therefore, the 
expected fraction of unfrozen samples, 1 − 𝑓𝑓(𝑡) = 𝑒−0.612𝑡, would decrease exponentially with 
storage time for DSC water of the same volume and shape at -16 °C. As a result, the fraction of 
unfrozen samples would be 0.22% and 2.5×10-25 % on Day-10 and Day-100, respectively, which 
implies almost all the sample would be frozen after 10-day storage. However, we observed that 
22.9% (8 out of 35) of samples were still unfrozen post 100-day storage in our experiments. 
Moreover, no freezing event occurred between Day-3 and Day-100; that is all the samples that 
were unfrozen on Day-3 remained unfrozen till the end of our experiments on Day-100. These 
observations strongly demonstrated a non-stochastic process of ice nucleation in our DSC water-
oil phase systems.  

Using similar heuristics, our experimental results also suggest that the freezing we observed is 
not due to homogeneous ice nucleation either, where the formation of critical ice embryo is caused 
by spontaneous aggregation of water molecules via random translational, rotational, and 
vibrational movements that would conform stochastic process (3). The exact kinetics and statistics 


of this heterogeneous ice nucleation in DSC water sealed by oil phase is still unknown and 
detailed future investigations are certainly warranted. 

Freezing point depression due to oil-water mixing 

When a water sample is sealed by an oil phase (i.e mixed oils, and pure alkanes and alcohols) 
for DSC, the “immiscible” oil might slightly dissolve in supercooled water to decrease the 
equilibrium melting temperature 𝑇𝑒 below 0 °C, the equilibrium melting point of pure water under 
atmospheric conditions. We, therefore, quantified the potential depression of freezing point due 
to this effect and assessed whether it’s comparable to the high degree of supercooling we 
observed in our experiments. According to the Bladgen’s Law, the extent of freezing point 
depression ∆𝑇𝐹 can be calculated by 

∆𝑇𝐹 = 𝑖𝑏𝐾𝐹 

where 𝑖 is the Van’t Hoff factor (𝑖 = 1 for nonelectrolytes or oil phase in this study), 𝑏 is the molality 
of oil phase in water, and 𝐾𝐹 is the cryoscopic constant (𝐾𝐹 = 1.85 K∙kg/mol for water).  Therefore, 
∆𝑇𝐹 can be determined by the solubility of sealing oils in water at DSC temperatures. Solubility of 
oils in metastable water at DSC temperatures are not readily available; as such we have assessed 
∆𝑇𝐹 using the available solubility data of oils in water under room temperature. This approach, 
likely, leads to an overestimation since solubility of oils in water typically increases with 
temperature (4).  

For oil mixtures (MO, OO, PO, NO, and PDMS) and linear alkanes (C5 ~ C11) utilized in this study, 
the maximum solubility is 0.04 g/L (or 0.55 mM) (C5 in water), and the corresponding estimate for 
∆𝑇𝐹 is less than 1.03 × 10-3 °C, which is negligible compared to the degree of supercooling ∆𝑇 (10 
to 20 °C) achieved using these oil phases as sealing agents. 

For alcohols used in this study, the maximum solubility is 73 g/L (or 0.98 M) (C4OH in water at 
room temperature) and the corresponding estimate for ∆𝑇𝐹 is less than 1.82 °C. This likely 
overestimated freezing point depression accounts for about 9.1% of ∆𝑇 (20 °C) enabled by alcohol 
sealing. Moreover, the DSC water and sealing alcohols are likely not mixed altogether. The stable 
contact interface with strong hydrogen bonding on the head and a long hydrophobic tail of 
alcohols, low molecular mobility, and viscous water at - 20 °C would significantly impede the 
diffusion of alcohol molecules into water. We, therefore, conclude that the depression of freezing 
temperature due to oil-water mixing does not play a significant role in achieving the observed high 
degree of supercooling in our experiments.      

 

1. 
T. Koop, B. Luo, U. M. Biermann, P. J. Crutzen, T. Peter, Freezing of HNO3/H2SO4/H2O solutions 
at stratospheric temperatures: Nucleation statistics and experiments. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 101, 1117-1133 (1997). 

2. 
D. Niedermeier et al., Heterogeneous ice nucleation: exploring the transition from stochastic to 
singular freezing behavior. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11, 8767-8775 (2011). 

3. 
B. Krämer et al., Homogeneous nucleation rates of supercooled water measured in single 
levitated microdroplets. The Journal of Chemical Physics 111, 6521-6527 (1999). 

4. 
S. Paasimaa, Factors affecting water solubility in oils. Vaisala News 169, 24-25 (2005). 

 


 
 


Supplemental figures 

Figure S1. Schematics for ice/water/air (A) and ice/water/oil (B) contacts. θiwa and θiwo are water 
contact angles on ice/water/air and ice/water/oil interfaces, respectively.   

Figure S2. Comparison of cumulative freezing frequencies between normal and degassed DSC 
water at - 16 °C. “D_W/O seal”, “D_MO”, and “D_PO” represent degassed water without sealing, 
surface sealing with MO, and PO, respectively. n = 6, N = 60, NS: p > 0.05. (B) Degassing images 
for normal and degassed water with or without MO sealing. The red dash circles indicate air 
bubbles precipitated under vacuum.  

Figure S3. Representative images of DSC water of various volumes. (A) 30 μl droplets with or 
without MO sealing post 1-day DSC at - 16 °C. (B) 100 ml deionized (DI) water sealed by 16 ml 
PO post 100-day DSC at - 16 °C. All possible freezing events occur before Day-3, and 8 out of 
total 35 (n = 7, N = 35) bottles of water maintain unfrozen after 100-day storage.  

Figure S4. Vertical view of water surface in round-bottomed tubes sealed by MO of various 
volumes. The oil was stained by Oil Red O for enhanced contrast. Newton’s rings were observed 
due to the curvature of sealing oil near the tube wall. 

Supplemental videos 

Video S1. Ultrasonication for 1 ml DSC water sealed by MO. The water is supercooled at - 20 °C 
for 1 day and the ultrasonic frequency is 40 kHz.  

Video S2. Ultrasonication for 1 ml DSC water sealed by undecane (C11). The water is supercooled 
at - 20 °C for 1 day and the ultrasonic frequency is 40 kHz.  

Video S3. Ultrasonication for 1 ml DSC water sealed by 1-butanol (C4OH). The water is 
supercooled at - 20 °C for 1 day and the ultrasonic frequency is 40 kHz.  

 
 


Figure S1 

 


 

Figure S2 

 

 
 


Figure S3 

 

 

 
 


Figure S4 

 

 


