1

1

Analysis of Current Hysteresis in Graphene Field Effect Transistor

Yifan Yao1

Department of Material Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,

Urbana 61801, United States

Abstract 

In this report, the hysteresis behaviors of Poly-ethylenimine(PEI): LiClO4 and Poly-

ethylene-glycol(PEG): LiClO4 electrolyte gate and back gate Graphene-on-SiO2 FET 

(GFET) were analyzed by gate voltage—source-drain current modulation. It is shown that 

both the sweeping rate and the sweep range will cause hysteresis behaviors in the form of 

Dirac Point (Vdp) shifting or changes in the current. Different mechanisms including charge 

trapping and electrical double layer capacitive effect are proposed to explain the behavior 

qualitatively on both back gated and electrolyte gated FET and partially confirmed with 

the present experimental results. 

1 Email: yyao13@illinois.edu; Phone: 2179792996


2

2

1. Introduction

Graphene has been attracting a great amount of interest since its discovery and nowadays 

more efforts are made to utilize its unique electronic and mechanical properties, including the 

tunable band gap, high electron mobility, great mechanical robustness by integrating graphene-

based transistors. [1]. The density of states (DOS) of graphene is dependent on the fermi level, 

which can be modulated by the applied voltage and theoretically reaches zero at the Dirac point 

at which no gate-induced carriers are present. In the normal operation mode, when the gate 

voltage is equal to the Dirac point, the conductance will reach minimum under ideal conditions

[2]. However, a hysteresis effect will cause a shift in the Dirac point position and the 

conductance under forward gate voltage sweep and backward sweep. [3] This issue is of the 

great importance before we can fully understand the behavior of GFET although there is no 

universal agreement on the cause of such effect.

Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain its origin including charge trapping 

related to the surrounding environment. [4]. In the case of electrolyte gate GFET, an ionic double 

layer is formed to be the capacitor when applying a gate voltage [5]. The hysteresis behavior of 

the electrolyte gate GFET was therefore believed to be relevant to the constraint movements of 

ions in the polymer solution. [3]. In the present work, the current hysteresis of electrolyte gated 

transistor and back gated transistors were investigated with these mechanisms and compared to 

the experimental results of Graphene-on-SiO2 back gated FET with intrinsic/doped Graphene 

respectively and LiClO4 electrolyte gated FET in two different polymer solutions: PEI and PEG. 

New experiments are proposed to look further into the physical origin and expected to have more 

direct proof of the hysteresis hypothesis. 

2. Experimental Methods

2.1 Graphene Layer Wet Transfer: The graphene channel in Back Gated GFET was 

transferred from commercially available Cu/CVD Graphene/PMMA pieces. The Cu coil layer 

was etched by 1M ammonium persulfate solution for 15 minutes and Graphene/PMMA layer 

was bathed for 3 times in DI water, each with 5 minutes. The Graphene/PMMA was then 

transferred onto the pre-sonicated Si/SiO2 substrate and dried at room temperature. The PMMA 


3

3

layer was removed by dissolving in 1st acetone solution for 10 minutes and 2nd acetone solution 

for 1 hour. Graphene layer was retrieved on Si/SiO2 after degreasing and cleaning with PMMA 

removed.

2.2 Back Gated GFET Fabrication: Back Gated GFET was fabricated by depositing Ti-Au 

Electrode on the Graphene-on-SiO2/Si sample made in Method 1 by sputtering.

2.3 Polymer Electrolyte Solution Preparation: Both PEI: LiClO4 and PEG: LiClO4 were 

prepared at 3:1 weight ratio and sonicated for 5 minutes. 

2.4 Electrolyte Gated GFET Fabrication: Electrolyte Gated GFET was fabricated using the 

commercial Si/SiO2/Graphene samples. The source and drain contact was made by contacting 

indium wires (1’’ long) + electrical wires (3” long) onto 1mm droplet of 1:1 AB silver epoxy. 

Epoxied wires were cured at 60°C for 30 minutes. 

2.5 Electrical Characterization of Back Gated GFET: Back Gated FET was electrically 

characterized on a common two terminal probe station. Details in operating the station are not 

described here. After the characterization of the back gated device, 1mm droplet of commercial 

PEI was doped on the graphene channel. The doped device was measured after 10 minutes. 

2.6 Electrical Characterization of Electrolyte Gated GFET: Similar characterization was 

carried out on the electrolyte gated FET on an SMU. A droplet of (~1mm) PEG: LiClO4 from 

Method 3 was dropped between electrodes and a Pt wire was connected to the gate to carry out 

the measurement. PEG: LiClO4 was washed away with methanol, acetone and isopropanol in 

sequence. A measurement was carried out after dropping 1mm PEI: LiClO4 from Method 3 

similarly. 

3. Results & Discussion

In this report, the hysteresis behavior of Graphene field effect transistor (GFET) was 

analyzed by sweeping from a negative gate voltage to a positive gate voltage (a forward scan), 

immediately followed by a backward sweep. The mechanism of hysteresis was explored by 

varying the sweep range and the sweep rate and studied individually.


4

4

3.1 Graphene-on-SiO2 back gated GFET

The hysteresis behavior of the SiO2 back gated graphene transistor is shown in Figure 1. 

To characterize the hysteresis quantitatively under different sweep rates, either the loop area 

enclosed by the transfer curve or the change in current when the gate voltage is zero can be used 

for comparison since all voltage-current curves share similar shapes. From Figure 1(b), the loop 

area and the change in current matches well with each other, a good indicator that transfer curve 

shapes are similar for different sweep rates. From Figure 1(c) and 1(d) it can be seen when the 

sweep range increases from 20V to 80V, the hysteresis increases as well, which can be

characterized by the change in current when the gate voltage is zero since all forward currents 

under are at the similar magnitude. The positive correlation between the sweeping range and the 

hysteresis can be explained by the charge trapping mechanism [3]. Due to the defects pre-existed 

in the graphene film, there are defect sites that trap electrons and holes as their densities are 

modulated by the back-gate voltage. When the voltage sweeps in the positive regime, electrons

induced in the graphene will likely to be trapped at so-called ‘charge traps’ and when the voltage 

decreases, so the graphene will become more negative than it should be due to the only gate 

voltage modulation, theoretically pushing the charge neutrality point (CNP) in the more positive 

voltage direction under such sweep. The polarity of the charge trap will be reversed when the 

voltage sweeps into the negative regime. A simple model can be used to estimate the number of 

charges trapped:

𝑛 =

∆𝑉𝑑𝑝𝐶

2𝑒
𝐸𝑞𝑢. 1

which ∆𝑉𝑑𝑝 is the change in Dirac Point and C is the gate capacitance (calculations shown in 

Supporting Information). Both the hysteresis “direction” (CNP shifting direction) and magnitude

(current different between two sweeps under different sweep ranges) can be considered in this 

case. When the CNP is not shown in Figure 1 (possibly larger than 40V due to ambient doping)

[6, 5], the CNP shift is theoretically comparable to the upward shift of the current in the reverse 

sweep (from positive to negative voltage) when Vg is zero, which is agreed with the present 

experimental result. The linear relationship between the hysteresis and the sweep range might be 

explained by the hypothesis that the number of trap charges is relatively proportional to the 

electrical field applied to the graphene channel. 


5

5

Figure 1 (a): Conductance change vs. gate voltage at different sweeping rates from -40V to 40V
of Graphene-on-SiO2 back gated transistor (b): Difference in current without the back-gate 
voltage between the forward and the backward sweep and the ‘loop area’ enclosed the
conductance curve at each sweeping rate from (a). (c): Conductance change vs. gate voltage 
under different sweeping range at 3.77V/s sweep rate. (d): Change in current from (c) between 
backward and forward scan at no gate voltage. 

From Figure 1(a) and 1(b), there is very limited hysteresis at each sweeping rate from 

3.77V/s to 109.58V/s in the sweep range of -40V to 40V with almost no obvious relationship 

between the sweeping rate and the hysteresis. However, it can also be the result of two 

competing mechanisms: ambient doping and charge trapping. The effect of charge trapping is 

more obvious when graphene is doped by Poly-ethylenimine(PEI). In Figure 2(C) and 1(C), 

there is a negative correlation between the hysteresis created by charge trapping and the sweep 

rate. This relationship is also observed in other similar experiments and is attributed to the long

time scale of charge trapping. [3]. The conductance behavior at the sweep rate higher than 

100V/s is deviated from the inverse power relationship for un-doped graphene back gated device 

which can be explained by that when the hysteresis originated from the charge trapping is 

becoming less prominent as the sweep rate goes higher, other origins of the hysteresis will take

over such as ambient doping effect. [7]. It has also been shown the hysteresis from ambient 

doping can be effectively eliminated when a polymer electrolyte such as PEI and PEO are put on 

the graphene channel. [8], which is confirmed by our results.


6

6

3.2 PEI-Graphene-on-SiO2 back gated GFET

Other similar results can also be observed when the same back gated device is doped by 

PEI. Such hysteresis behavior is shown in Figure 2. The linear relationship between the sweep 

range and the hysteresis and the inverse power relationship is also shown in Figure 2(b). The 

agreement between the loop area and the change in drain current at Vg =0 V still indicates the 

similar transfer curve shape in Figure 2(a) for different rates. 

Figure 2: (a) Conductance change vs. gate voltage at different sweeping rates from -40V to 40V 
of the same device used in Figure 1 doped with PEI (b) Difference in current without the back-
gate voltage between forward and backward sweep and the ‘loop area’ enclosed the 
conductance curve at each sweeping rate from (a). (c) Conductance change vs. gate voltage 
under different sweeping range at 3.77V/s sweep rate. (d) Change in current from (c) between 
backward and forward scan at no gate voltage. 


7

7

3.3 PEI/PEG: LiClO4 electrolyte gated GFET

Other origins of the hysteresis behavior related to the polymer electrolyte gated graphene 

FET are also included. Shown in Figure 3 is the result of the PEI: LiClO4 electrolyte gated 

GFET, which was fabricated by Method 4. From Figure 3(a), a negative shift of DP is observed 

as the gate voltage sweeps from negative to positive and then to negative. At the sweeping rate of 

0.99V/s, Vdp is equal to 0V under the forward sweep and shifts to -0.56V under backward 

sweep. This phenomenon can be explained qualitatively. After applying a positive voltage in the 

electrolyte solution after the first sweep, the dipole oriented polymer molecules and solvated ions

will accumulate at the Graphene/electrolyte interface and form what is called an “Helmholtz

double layer” capacitance, inducing carriers (electrons) in the graphene. [9]. The capacitance can 

be calculated using Equation 2:

𝐶 =

𝜀0𝜀𝑟
𝐿𝑑𝑏
𝐸𝑞𝑢. 2

in which 𝜀𝑟 is the dialectic constant of PEI and 𝐿𝑑𝑏 is the Debye Length. [5]. 𝐿𝑑𝑏 is dependent on 

the electrolyte concentration (ionic strength), which cannot be accurately determined when 

formed complexes with polymer chains. [10] It can be approximated to be 11.9* 10-6F/cm-2

(calculation shown in Supporting Information) which agrees with the reported range as tens of 

10-6F/cm-2 [11] [12]. When sweeping backwards from a positive to a negative voltage, the 

Graphene/electrolyte interface will “remember” the ions accumulated in the first sweep and 

cause delay in the movement of these ions, thus creating a larger ion concentration at the 

interface in the reverse sweep than it should have at the same back gated voltage, which in turn 

will pushing the current upward in the positive regime and the Dirac point to the more negative 

regime. This “remembering” effect is associated with the limited ion mobility in PEI polymer

matrix. Assuming the concentration gradient of ions at the interface is steep enough that can be 

modeled as a plated capacitor, the number of ions that are “remembered” can be approximated

by Equation 1 in which ∆𝑉𝑑𝑝 is the change in Dirac Point and C is the electrolyte gated 

capacitance (calculations shown in Supporting Information). In Figure 3(b), the difference in

Dirac points between two sweeps is much larger as well as the enclosed area by the conductance 

curve with increasing sweep rates, indicating a positive correlation between the sweep rate and 

the hysteresis, which agrees with the capacitive gating hypothesis. It can be further deduced that 

the relaxation time of ions movement is comparable to the time scale of the testing sweep rates. 


8

8

When tuning the gate voltage, we are tuning the Fermi Level (Vf) (the carrier density). When Vf

is equal to the charge neutrality point (Vdp), the minimum conductance is reached when there is 

an equal number of electrons and holes in the graphene underneath. The conductance can be 

approximated by Equation 3:

𝜎 = 𝑛𝜇𝑛𝑒 + 𝑝𝜇𝑝𝑒
𝐸𝑞𝑢. 3

and is directly proportional to the total number of carriers. Comparing the charge neutrality point 

at different sweeping rates, the minimum conductance increases with increasing sweeping rates.

Figure 3: (a): Conductance change vs. gate voltage at different sweeping rates from -1.4V to 
1.4V of PEI: LiClO4 electrolyte gated GFET (b): Dirac Point shift between a backward and 
forward scan and the ‘loop area’ enclosed the conductance curve at each sweeping rate from 
(a). (c): Conductance change vs. gate voltage under different sweeping range at 0.99V/s sweep 
rate. (d): Change in current from (c) between backward and forward scan at no gate voltage.


9

9

This indirectly supports of the “remembering” effect since under the same positive voltage but 

with elevated rate, result in more carriers and higher conduction at the elevated sweeping rate at 

the charge neutrality point. From Figure 3(c) and (d), the Dirac point seems to be fixing at 0.14V 

and -0.56V regardless of the sweep range. Each conductance curve seems to follow the same 

trend although the difference of the drain current at zero gate voltage is slightly increased with

increasing sweeping range. Similar relationship is observed between the sweep range and the 

change in the current just like the one existed in back-gated devices, indicating that the charge 

trapping effect on the hysteresis might also be present in electrolyte gated device. 

. 

Figure 4: (a): Conductance change vs. gate voltage at different sweeping rates from -1.6V to 
1.6V of PEG: LiClO4 electrolyte gated GFET (b): Dirac Point shift between the backward and 
forward scan and the ‘loop area’ enclosed the conductance curve at each sweeping rate from 
(a). (c): Conductance change vs. gate voltage under different sweeping range at 0.99V/s sweep 
rate. (d): Change in current from (c) between backward and forward scan at no gate voltage.


10

10

All the above effects existed in PEI: LiClO4 electrolyte gated device are also observed in 

Poly-ethylene-glycol(PEG): LiClO4 electrolyte gated device, as shown in Figure 4, including but 

not limited to: (1) a negative shift of DP between the forward sweep and the backward sweep (2) 

a positive correlation between the sweep rate and the hysteresis like in Figure3(b) (3). A 

similarly positive correlation between the sweep range and the hysteresis. 

4. Conclusions 

The Charge Trapping and the double layer capacitive gating are two mechanisms that can 

cause hysteresis and are examined with the present studies. The charge trapping effect is 

originated from trapping sites that trap mobile carriers while the electrical double layer 

capacitance effect results from the limited electrolytic ion movement in the matrix of large 

polymers. Both effects can be approximated by the equation: 𝑛 = ∆𝑉𝑑𝑝𝐶/2𝑒., in which n is the 

trapped carriers in the charge trapping effect and the “delayed” ions in the capacitive gating 

effect. The charge trapping effect pushes the NP in the positive direction while the double layer 

capacitive gating effect pushes the NP in the negative direction under a forward and backward 

sweep, starting from a negative voltage to a positive voltage then to a negative voltage. 

Generally, faster sweep rates correspond to smaller hysteresis created by charge trapping and 

larger hysteresis created by the electrical double layer capacitance. A larger sweep range 

corresponds to a larger charge trapping as well. The hysteresis behavior of the back-gated device 

is dominated by the charge trapping mechanism (more prominent if the graphene is doped in 

PEI). However, the hysteresis behavior of the electrolyte gated device is the result of two 

competing mechanisms: both charge trapping and electrical double layer capacitance. 

New experiments can be proposed on looking further into the mechanisms of two effects 

and providing more quantitative analysis. For the double layer capacitive effect, the electrolyte 

mobility in the polymer solution can be the focus of new experiments. The movement of ions 

and molecules in a polymer matrix is influenced by the concentration gradient (ionic strength) 

and mobility. In particular, ionic mobility in a polymer can be affected by temperature under the 

same sweep conditions by the Arrhenius equation: 𝜇 = 𝜇0exp(−

𝐸

𝑅𝑇) in which E is the arbitrary 

activation energy. The mobility could be correlated to the delay of the concentration change and 


11

11

measured by the electrolyte cell capacitance charging effect [13]. With appropriate modeling of 

the electrical double layer based on Gouy-Chapman-Stern analysis [14], the excess carrier 

density induced in graphene could also be approximated. We can thus build the relationship 

between the temperature change and the hysteresis based on the mobility change. The mobility

also associates with the concentration (ionic strength) of the electrolyte ions because of the 

frictional force. A correlation can also be established between the ionic strength and the 

magnitude of hysteresis based on the mobility change of electrolyte ions. These proposed 

experiments are expected to provide a more direct way to prove the capacitive gating mechanism 

and a quantitative way to characterize its effect. [15]

5. References

[1] F. Schwierz et al., "Graphene transistors," Nature Nanotech., vol. 5, p. 487–496, 2010. 

[2] K.S.Novoselov et al., "Two-dimensional gas of massless Dirac fermions in graphene," Nature, vol. 

438, p. 197–200, 2005. 

[3] H.Wang et al., "Hyteresis of Electronic Transport in Graphene Transistors," ACS Nano, vol. 4, p. 

7221-7228, 2010. 

[4] J.H.Chen et al., Nature Physics, vol. 4, p. 377, 2008. 

[5] A.Das et al., Nature Nanotech, vol. 3, p. 210, 2008. 

[6] A.Piazza et al., "Graphene p-Type Doping and Stability by Thermal Treatments in Molecular Oxygen 

Controlled Atmosphere," J. Phys. Chem., vol. 119, p. 22718–22723, 2015. 

[7] J.M.Yun et al., "Complementary p- and n-Type Polymer Doping for Ambient Stable Graphene 

Inverter," ACS Nano, vol. 8, p. 650–656, 2014. 

[8] T.Ozel et al., "Polymer Electrolyte Gating of Carbon Nanotube Network Transistor," Nano Lett., vol. 

5, p. 905–911, 2005. 

[9] A.J.Bard et al., Electrochemical Methods, Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd Edition, New York: 

John Wiley Sons, 2001. 

[10] M.Salomon et al., "Molecular structure and dynamics of LiC104–polyethylene oxide-400 (dimethyl 

ether and diglycol systems) at 25 °C.," J. Phys. Chem, vol. 98, p. 8234–8244, 1994. 


12

12

[11] C.Lu et al., "Polymer electrolyte-gated carbon nanotube field-effect transistor," Nano Lett., vol. 4, 

p. 623–627, 2004. 

[12] L.Herlogsson et al., Adv. Mater., vol. 19, p. 97, 2007. 

[13] T.Niitani et al., "Synthesis of Li +  Ion Conductive PEO-PSt Block Copolymer Electrolyte with 

Microphase Separation Structure," ACS, vol. 8, p. 385-388, 2005. 

[14] O.Z.Stern et al., Electrochem., vol. 30, p. 508, 1924. 

[15] A.C.Ferrari et al., "Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying the properties of graphene," 

Nature Nanotech., vol. 8, p. 235–246, 2013. 

[16] K.Nagashio et al., "Electrical transport properties of graphene on SiO2 with specific surface 

structures," J. Appl. Phys., vol. 110, p. 024513, 2011. 


13

13

6. Appendix

6.1 Gate Capacitance Calculation:

For Back gated GFET:

𝐶 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑟

𝑡
= 3.9 ∗ 8.85 ∗ 10−12𝐹/𝑚

285𝑛𝑚
= 1.2 ∗ 10−8 𝐹

𝑐𝑚2
𝑒𝑞𝑢. 4

For PEI:LiClO4 Electrolyte Gated GFET:

1
𝐶 = 1

𝐶𝑞

+ 1

𝐶𝑒𝑙

𝑒𝑞𝑢. 5

1
𝐶 =
1

2 𝑢𝐹𝑐𝑚−2 + 𝐿𝑑𝑏

𝜀0𝜀𝑟

𝑒𝑞𝑢. 6

PEI:LiClO4 

𝐿𝑑𝑏 = ( 2𝑐𝑒2

𝜀𝜀0𝑘𝑇)

−(1

2)

= 13.33𝑛𝑚
𝑒𝑞𝑢. 7

𝐶 = (
1

2 𝑢𝐹𝑐𝑚−2 +
1

0.21𝑐𝑚−2)

−1

= 1.19 ∗ 10−5 𝐹 𝑐𝑚−2
𝑒𝑞𝑢. 8

PEG:LiClO4

𝐿𝑑𝑏 = ( 2𝑐𝑒2

𝜀𝜀0𝑘𝑇)

−(1

2)

= 14.98𝑛𝑚
𝑒𝑞𝑢. 9

𝐶 = (

1

2 𝑢𝐹𝑐𝑚−2 +

1

0.18 𝑢𝐹𝑐𝑚−2)

−1

= 1.15 ∗ 10−5𝐹/ 𝑐𝑚^2
𝑒𝑞𝑢. 10


14

14

6.2 Density of “remembered” ion calculation based on the parallel plate model:

(Use PEI: LiClO4 electrolyte gated GFET at the sweep rate of 0.99V/s as an example)

𝑛 =

∆𝑉𝑑𝑝𝐶

2𝑒
= 0.56𝑉 ∗ 1.19 ∗

10−5𝐹

𝑐𝑚2
2𝑒
= 3.33 ∗ 10−6𝑐𝑚−2
𝑒𝑞𝑢. 11

6.3 SEM Microscopic pictures of the back gated GFET: 

Figure 5: SEM pictures of the back gated GFET device at 1000x magnification(a); at 30x 
magnification(b)

6.4 the Field Effect Mobility of back gated device calculation:

The field effect mobility:

𝜇𝑓𝑒 = 𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑉𝑔

𝐿

𝑊𝑉𝑑𝐶𝐺

𝑒𝑞𝑢. 12

The field effect mobility vs. the gate voltage was plotted as follows for the intrinsic graphene 

back gated GFET  

a
b


15

15

Figure 6: (a) Field Effect Mobility vs. Vg plot of un-doped back gated Graphene GFET at the 
sweep rate of 29.98V/s. (b) Field Effect Mobility vs. Vg plot of PEI-doped back gated Graphene 
GFET at the sweep rate of 28.97V/s. This is extremely lower than the literature values of 6000-
10000 cm^2/V*s [16]

. 

a
b


