Leveraging Chaos for Wave-Based Analog Computation:
Demonstration with Indoor Wireless Communication Signals

Philipp del Hougne1, ∗ and Geoffroy Lerosey2

1Institut Langevin, CNRS UMR 7587, ESPCI Paris,
PSL Research University, 1 rue Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
2Greenerwave, ESPCI Paris Incubator PC’up, 6 rue Jean Calvin, 75005 Paris, France
(Dated: August 23, 2018)

In sight of fundamental thermal limits on further substantial performance improvements of mod-
ern digital computational processing units, wave-based analog computation is becoming an enticing
alternative. A wave, as it propagates through a carefully tailored medium, performs the desired com-
putational operation. Yet, the necessary designs are so intricate that experimental demonstrations
will necessitate further technological advances. Here, we show that, counterintuitively, the carefully
tailored medium can be replaced with a random medium, subject to an appropriate shaping of the
incident wave front. Using tunable metasurface reflect-arrays, we demonstrate our concept exper-
imentally in a chaotic microwave cavity.
We conclude that off-the-shelf wireless communication
infrastructure in combination with a simple reflect-array suffices to perform analog computation
with Wi-Fi waves reverberating in a room.
DOI:

I.
INTRODUCTION

The first steps in the history of computation were ana-
log mechanical devices designed for specific tasks such as
the Thomson brother’s Harmonic Analyzer to determine
an input’s Fourier representation [1].
With the dawn
of the digital age, electronic general-purpose processors
took over for good. For a long time, their Moore’s Law
march of exponential performance improvements made
any efforts to design specific-purpose devices redundant
[2].
Nowadays, the underlying approach of squeezing
more and more transistors into a unit chip area is con-
fronted with fundamental thermal limits: already today,
only a certain amount of transistors on a processor can
be powered at any given time to avoid a silicon meltdown
[3]. This so-called dark silicon problem recently sparked
renewed interest in specific-purpose units conceived to
efficiently meet specific computation needs [4, 5]. One
route pursued by all major technology companies are spe-
cialized hardware devices based on application-specific
integrated circuits or field programmable gate arrays, ca-
pable of performing linear operations like matrix-vector
multiplications very efficiently. Yet, at some point the
same thermal constraints will thwart further performance
improvements, too. There is hence a clear motivation to
identify fundamentally different computation paradigms.
One enticing idea is wave-based analog computation
(WBAC) which proposes to swap the electronic circuits
for materials with carefully tailored scattering properties
such that the computational operation is performed on
an incident wave front as it interacts with the material
— see Fig. 1(a).
Some examples of such materials performing certain
operations are well-known free-space optical components:

∗ philipp.delhougne@gmail.com

a lens yields the Fourier transform of an impinging wave
front [6, 7], but the setup remains very bulky. Recent
efforts on identifying appropriate materials for WBAC
can be summarized in three groups that bring about dif-
ferent challenges with respect to (re-)configurability and
fabrication practicality:

(i) Leverage a specific physical effect to perform one
specific operation enabled by that effect. A notable and
experimentally demonstrated example of this approach
used interference phenomena arising from surface plas-
mon excitation to perform spatial differentiation [8].
While this specific operation is certainly of high rele-
vance to high-throughput real-time image processing, it
depends on the physics of the leveraged effect and thus
inherently does not enable one to configure the device to
perform a desired operation.

(ii) Design a metamaterial block to perform one spe-
cific desired operation. A suitably designed metamaterial
block was numerically shown to enable the implemen-
tation of one desired transfer function associated with
one desired computational operation [9, 10]. While con-
ceptually appealing due to the significant miniaturiza-
tion potential, engineering such a complex structure of
meta-atoms in practice with sub-micrometer tolerances
remains a challenge to be mastered [11].
Even slight
fabrication imperfections would inhibit the device from
performing the desired operation. Moreover, once fabri-
cated, the device could not be reconfigured to perform a
different operation.

(iii) Program a coherent nanophotonic circuit to per-
form a desired operation.
Recent advances in silicon
photonics enable the fabrication of a mesh of interconn-
tected Mach-Zehnder interferometers, programmable via
phase shifters in the waveguide arms to implement arbi-
trary linear operations [12–16]. The ability to reconfig-
ure the performed matrix-vector multiplication and some
first experimental demonstrations reveal the promise held

arXiv:1804.03860v2  [physics.class-ph]  21 Aug 2018


2

by this emerging research area. Precise beamsplitters re-
quiring elaborate fabrication techniques and scalability
issues remain critical challenges.
The crux in approaches (ii) and (iii), which enable im-
plementing a desired operation, lies in intricate material
designs that are difficult (if not impossible, to date) to
fabricate.
Here, we propose to overcome any material
fabrication and (re-)configuration constraints by using a
medium with random instead of carefully tailored scat-
tering properties — at the much lower price of appropri-
ately shaping the input wave front before it interacts with
the random medium. In principle, our concept preserves
all the essential advantages brought about by WBAC,
in particular enhanced computation speed and power
efficiency, and proposes a way of enjoying them with-
out intricate fabrication procedures. We experimentally
demonstrate the validity of our concept in the microwave
domain using a chaotic cavity as random medium and
a simple phase-binary metasurface reflect-array to shape
the wave field. The fact that we only add a metasurface
to a setup emulating standard indoor wireless communi-
cation infrastructure shows the ease of implementing our
concept in practice, in sharp contrast to any of the cur-
rent aforementioned WBAC schemes. Then, exploiting
the low time cost of WBAC, we demonstrate a scaled-up
version under time-sequential operation. Finally, we dis-
cuss perspectives for practical implementations and how
they may compete with traditional electronic processors
in terms of speed and energy efficiency.

II.
OPERATION PRINCIPLE

In the present work, we focus on implementing linear
matrix-vector multiplications. As evidenced by substan-
tial industrial efforts to design electronic hardware accel-
erators (ASICs, FPGAs) specialized on such operations,
they are a key ingredient of many computational needs.
Artificial neural networks capable of deep learning rely
on “layers of neurons”, each of which consists of a linear
matrix-vector multiplication and a non-linear activation
function [17]. The heavy reliance on linear transforma-
tions is the computational bottleneck with standard elec-
tronic processors. More generally, many key operations
in physics and engineering can be expressed as linear op-
erations, such as the discrete Fourier transform that we
will use as example in the following. Despite our focus on
linear operations, our proposed approach could in princi-
ple be extended to performing non-linear operations, for
instance by using non-linear wave front shaping devices
[18].
At first sight, the complete scrambling of a wave front
as it propagates through a complex medium may seem
contrarious to our objective of performing computation
for which a very specific operation is to be carried out
on the impinging wave front [19]. Indeed, for a long time
the random secondary sources (scatterers or reflectors)
constituting a complex medium were considered undesir-

able and detrimental. Various novel techniques, notably
time reversal and wave front shaping (WFS), broke that
paradigm by leveraging the secondary sources as degrees
of freedom [20, 21]. Inspired by aberration corrections
with deformable mirrors in astronomy, WFS applies the
appropriate phase and/or amplitude modulation to each
segment of an impinging wave front such that after prop-
agation through the complex medium the desired out-
put wave front is obtained [21–23]. Initially conceived
to counteract the scrambling of a wave front in space
and/or time [21, 24–27], WFS later-on paved the path
towards harnessing a medium’s complexity, as in the case
of focusing beyond the Rayleigh limit achievable in ho-
mogeneous media [28–30]. Notably, WFS in complex me-
dia enabled the demonstration of programmable beam-
splitters, the investigation of complex quantum-walks as
well as custom-tailored mode sorting [31–33]. Moreover,
random projections through multiply scattering media
were recently shown to be a potentially powerful data
pre-processor, for instance to approximate kernels in ma-
chine learning [34].
A linear computation operation may be expressed as a
matrix G that is applied to an input vector X, yielding
the output vector Y = GX.
To illustrate our general
protocol, in Fig. 1(b) we consider the case of a 4 × 4 dis-
crete Fourier transform operation for concreteness. We
divide the incident wave front into four segments, A to
D, that will take the role of each of the four entries of
the input vector, in our example X = [0 0 1 1]. Each seg-
ment has the amplitude and phase of the corresponding
input vector entry. Similarly, we observe the wave field
after propagation through the medium at four indepen-
dent points (color-coded) that will take the role of the
output vector’s entries. Without any shaping, each wave
front segment will yield different random contributions
to each of the four observation points. Depending on the
discretization of the device used for WFS, each of these
four wave front segments may in fact cover several pixels
of the discretized WFS device, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Then, as shown in Fig. 2(a), each of the pixels will have
its own random contribution to each of the output points,
and the overall contribution of segment D is obtained by
stringing together the phasors from the contributions of
all pixels of which segment D consists. This resembles a
random walk in the complex Fresnel representation.
In a one-off initiation step, we first characterize the im-
pact of each pixel of the WFS device on the output wave
front, yielding its “impact matrix” (IM) H. The entry
Hi,j gives the gain between the input pixel indexed i and
the output observation point indexed j. The nature of
the IM depends on the system under consideration; in
the simplest case of a transmission geometry, as in the
schematic in Fig. 1 and standard optical WFS experi-
ments, the IM is simply the system’s transmission ma-
trix as in Ref. [24]. In any case does the IM provide an
open-loop characterization of the random medium, en-
abling one to identify numerically specific configurations
of the WFS device that satisfy specific objectives. In par-


3

(a)

Random Medium
Random Medium
Carefully Tailored Medium

Output Wave Front Y
Output Wave Front Y
Output Wave Front Y

Input Wave Front X
Input Wave Front X
Simple Plane Wave Front

Shaped Input Wave Front

Wave Front Shaping
Wave Front Shaping

Shaped Input Wave Front

A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D

A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D

(a)
(b)
(c)

FIG. 1. Schematic comparison of different paradigms for wave-based analog computation (WBAC), illustrated for a 4 × 4
discrete Fourier transform operation on input vector X = [0 0 1 1]. Each complex-valued vector entry is visualized as an arrow
in the complex plane. (a) The conventional approach performs the desired operation as the input wave front interacts with a
medium of carefully tailored scattering properties. (b) We propose to use any random medium instead of a carefully tailored
one — at the cost of appropriately shaping the input wave front before it interacts with the random medium. The shaping of
a wave front segment may include modulating its phase, as in this schematic, and/or its amplitude. (c) We further suggest a
modified version of (b) in which the wave front shaping step additional encodes the desired input vector X into the wave front
such that any impinging wave front, e.g. a simple plane wave, can be used. The wave front entering the random medium is
then the same as in (b).

ticular, by shaping the wave front segment, the random
walks seen in Fig. 2(a) can be converted into tamed walks
whose resultants mimic the corresponding entries of G, as
shown in Fig. 2(b) for segment D. In other words, WFS
enables one to force the contribution from each input en-
try to each output entry to be exactly the one required
by the desired operation G. Notice the key role played by
the random medium by enabling each input segment to
contribute to each output point — without the random
medium only diagonal matrices G could be implemented.
The shaped wave front for segment D has to simultane-
ously yield contributions with specific phases and ampli-
tudes to all four observation points, a constraint that is
much harder to satisfy than simple focusing which only
requires aligning the phasors in an arbitrary angular di-
rection at a single observation point. Moreover, note that

we do not tame the entire field at the observation points,
but the contributions from specific wave front segments
to the field at the observation points.
Identifying the
appropriate configurations for each segment of the WFS
device based on the measured IM is the second step of the
initiation procedure, and it is performed purely numeri-
cally. A key aspect about this initiation procedure is that
to perform a different operation G one does not require
any further measurements, one simply goes through the
numerical optimization once again.

Once a library of optimized configurations for each
wave front segment is identified, an impinging wave
front can be shaped such that its subsequent propaga-
tion through the complex medium carries out the desired
computational task at the speed of wave propagation, as
summarized in Fig. 1(b). This concept shifts the bur-


4

?

Im

Re
Re

Im

(b) Tamed contribution of segment D to observation points

(a) Contribution of segment D to observation points

Random walks

Tamed walks 

?

Im

Re
Re

Im

Impinging input wave front
divided into four segments.

FIG. 2. The impinging input wave front in Fig. 1(b) consists
of four segments taking the role of a four-element input vec-
tor. This figure illustrates the contribution of one of these
segments, D, to all four observation points after propagation
through the complex medium, contrasting instances without,
(a), and with, (b), wave front shaping of the impinging wave
front.
Each segment consists of nseg pixels, corresponding
to a discretized wave front shaping device, with nseg ≥ 1
in general.
(a) A plane wave entering a complex medium
gets completely scrambled. At each observation point, string-
ing together each pixel’s contribution yields a random walk
whose resultant (the collective contribution from segment D)
is indicated by a bold arrow. (b) The discretized wave front of
segment D can be shaped such that after propagation through
the complex medium the resultants at each observation point
mimic the entries of the corresponding row of G. The latter
are indicated by circles; for our example of a discrete Fourier
transform the forth row of G reads [1 − i − 1 i].

den from designing and fabricating the physical layer’s
scattering properties to identifying and imposing appro-
priate wave fronts. This is substantially simpler both in
terms of the optimization problem as well as the exper-
imental implementation. Instead of encoding the input
vector X into the impinging wave front, alternatively X
may be encoded directly into the configuration of the
WFS device such that a plane impinging wave front can
be used. This idea is visualized in Fig. 1(c). The un-
derlying thought is that most likely in order to have the
input vector encoded into the impinging wave front, some
WFS device outside the considered WBAC system was
employed.
Then, however, instead of using essentially

two WFS devices directly one after the other, one could
use a single WFS device to do both tasks. In Fig. 1(c)
we show how the WFS step simultaneously encodes the
input into the impinging plane wave front and adds the
modulation required given the random medium to per-
form the desired operation. Then, the wave front entering
the random medium is the same as in Fig. 1(b).

III.
DEMONSTRATION WITH INDOOR
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SIGNALS

Having outlined the general principle of operation, we
now proceed with an experimental demonstration that
seeks to stress (i) the ease of implementation in contrast
to hitherto existing WBAC proposals, and (ii) the wide
applicability to all types of waves and random media.
The first complex medium that comes to mind is usually
a multiply scattering one. In the microwave domain, ex-
amples thereof exist, such as cities or forests, but they
are highly unpractical for experiments.
Instead, cavi-
ties of irregular geometry lend themselves to practical,
well-controlled and stable setups, and are moreover very
commonplace.
Indeed, indoor environments constitute
cavities of low quality factor for the microwaves used in
wireless communication protocols such as Wi-Fi. Their
geometries are in general rather irregular, such that these
cavities may be labeled “random” or “chaotic” from the
wave’s perspective. The reflections off the irregular cav-
ity walls interfere and give rise to a speckle-like wave field
[35], very much like scattering events in multiply scatter-
ing optical media such as thin paint layers or biological
tissue [21, 36].
Furthermore, complex microwave cavi-
ties are leveraged in fundamental research on quantum
chaos [37] as well as in applications ranging from secu-
rity screening [38, 39] and biomedical imaging [40], via
sensing [41, 42] and wireless power transfer [43–46] to
electromagnetic compatibility tests [47].

A.
Shaping Cavity Green’s Functions

Despite the conceptual similarity between multiply
scattering media and chaotic cavities, there are impor-
tant nuances that we will discuss here to motivate our
subsequent course of action. A convenient way of prob-
ing the field in a cavity is to measure the Green’s func-
tion between two independent positions [48–51]. To get a
firmer grasp of a chaotic cavity’s physics, it is instructive
to express the transmitted field between two antennas in
terms of the modal contributions. Omitting for clarity
both details of the antenna coupling as well as the vec-
tor nature of the electromagnetic field, we can write the
Green’s function S between two points ri and rj as

S(ri, rj, f0) =

N
�

n=1

ψn(ri)ψn(rj)

4π2
c2 (f 2
0 − f 2n) + 2πif0Γ
,
(1)


5

where ψn and fn are eigenvector and eigenvalue of the
nth cavity mode that contributes to the Green’s func-
tion at the working frequency f0.
Γ is the (average)
modal line-width. An estimate of the number of modes
N overlapping at f0, this time accounting for the three-
dimensional and polarized nature of the field, can be ob-
tained from Weyl’s law [52–54]:

N = 8πf 3
0

c3
V
Q,
(2)

V and Q being the cavity’s volume and quality factor,
respectively. In a chaotic cavity, ψn can be modeled as
random variable, such that S(ri, rj, f0) can be interpreted
as a random walk of N steps in the complex plane — just
as illustrated in Fig. 2(a).
The crucial remaining question is: How can a cavity
Green’s function be shaped?
The concept of WFS in
complex media originally emerged in optics [21] but has
recently been transposed to the microwave domain us-
ing tunable metasurface reflect-arrays, with important
applications in telecommunication, imaging, sensing and
energy transfer [39–42, 45, 46, 55]. Different designs of
such reconfigurable metasurfaces have been discussed in
the literature [39, 56–60]; here, we use a simple phase-
binary device whose working principle is based on the
hybridization of resonances (see Ref. [59] and Section A
in Ref. [63] for further details).
We can electronically
configure the phase shift of the reflected wave for each of
the 88 metasurface elements to be 0 or π. Stated differ-
ently, each metasurface element can be programmed to
mimic a Dirichlet or a Neumann boundary condition.
By partially altering the cavity’s boundary conditions
with the tunable metasurface, we have some control over
the modal sum in Eq. 1 because we essentially modify
the cavity eigenmodes ψn.
The degree of control de-
pends both on the cavity’s modal overlap which fixes N
(see Eq. 2) and on the amount of metasurface elements,
yielding the capability of “effectively” controlling p out of
the N modes that contribute to a cavity Green’s function
at the working frequency [54]. As discussed in Ref. [54],
the ratio p/N defines distinct regimes: (i) if N > p, we
control effectively a subset of the contributing modes,
such that the random walk can be tamed partially; (ii)
if N ≈ p, we have full control over the modal sum and
can tame the walk at wish; (iii) if N ≪ 1 < p, the cav-
ity spectrum consists of discrete resonances that can be
created and shifted at wish.

B.
Choosing a convenient regime

Unlike the simple transmission geometries used in Sec-
tion II to illustrate our WBAC scheme, the physics of a
chaotic cavity is richer than captured by a simple, linear
transmission formalism. Here, the IM captures the im-
pact of each metasurface reflect-array pixel on a selection
of Green’s function measurements. Since the reverberat-
ing wave revisits each pixel of the WFS device multiple

times, the impact of a given pixel on the wave field is
correlated to some extent to the configuration of the re-
maining pixels: H is itself a function of the metasurface
reflect-array configuration. A pixel acts not like a single
but multiple (secondary) sources, due to reverberation.
In principle, the realm of machine learning with artifi-
cial neural networks [17] offers elegant ways of accurately
capturing the full IM including the long-range correla-
tions. However, having such a complete forward model
would not alter the fact that physically the contributions
of a given “input” group of pixels on the WFS device to
the “output” Green’s function measurements depend to
some extent on how the remaining pixels of the WFS de-
vice are currently configured. In other words, in a cavity
one cannot hope to be able to shape the contributions
of one wave front segment independently from the other
ones. What appears at first sight to be an insurmount-
able hurdle, can in fact be easily resolved by leveraging
the cavity’s chaotic nature.
First, we will deliberately measure only a first-order
approximation of H that ignores the long-range correla-
tions. That is, we neglect the dependence of a pixel’s
wave field impact on the configuration of the remaining
pixels, yielding a linear forward model. Second, we will
numerically identify a library of segment configurations
that appropriately tame the wave front for the desired
computational operation (see Section III D for the de-
tailed numerical procedure), supposing our first-order IM
is exact. Of course, the computation outcomes that we
expect based on our approximated IM, Ypred, will not be
exactly what we will measure, Ymeas, since we did not
account for the long-range correlations yet. The effect of
the latter on the jth entry of the computation output can
be interpreted as a random phasor δj: Y meas
j
= Y pred
j
+δj.
For a given realization, δj is a deterministic but seemingly
arbitrary random complex number that results in an in-
evitable inaccuracy of our computation outcome Y meas
j
.
A realization may be defined as one instance of the ex-
periment with some specific (irregular) cavity geometry.
A different realization will have the same global param-
eters (cavity volume, quality factor, . . . ) but a different
geometry and thus a different random δj. Therefore, we
can exploit the realization-dependence of δj to average
out the intrinsic inaccuracy: ⟨δj⟩realizations = 0, and thus
⟨Ymeas⟩realizations = Ypred. By ensemble averaging over
different realizations we are thus able to mitigate the ad-
verse effects of long-range correlations in the IM.
The importance of long-range correlations on the im-
pact of pixel i on the transmission measurement indexed
j is defined by two parameters that govern how likely it
is that a ray that interacts with pixel i also encounters
other pixels during its life-time: (i) the higher Q is, the
longer the ray’s life-time is and the more pixels other
than i it will encounter; (ii) the higher the amount of
pixels, the easier it is for the ray to encounter some of
the other pixels. It is instructive to think of an IM entry
Hi,j as consisting of static contributions from rays that
only interacted with pixel i and of variable contributions


6

from rays that interacted also with other pixels of the
metasurface reflect-array. Ultimately, we average out the
effect of the latter such that our approach works as long
as the former is non-zero. The impact of a given pixel of
the WFS device on the wave field must not completely
depend on how the other pixels are configured.
An ideal fit in sight of these considerations is thus
operating in the regime N > p in an electrically large
cavity of (relatively) low Q. Of course, reverberation is
crucial to ensure the cavity acts like a random medium;
but limiting Q to the order of 102 rather than 103 or
104 addresses (i). Simultaneously, since N will be large
under these conditions (see Eq. 2), one can fit a large
metasurface with many pixels into the cavity and still re-
spect (ii). One might speculate that as N becomes larger
than p, the metasurface completely dominates the wave-
field and the static cavity contribution to Hi,j vanishes
— ultimately, confirming this remains a topic for future
work. It is clear, however, that the limiting case of very-
high-Q, small-volume cavities in the regime N ≪ 1 < p
with discrete resonances is inappropriate for our scheme
[54, 61, 62].

C.
Experimental Setup

In sight of the above considerations, our experimen-
tal setup thus consists of an irregularly shaped cav-
ity with (relatively) low quality factor and the ability
to access different realizations for ensemble averaging.
In order to operate under stable, well-controlled condi-
tions, we work in a metallic cavity of irregular geome-
try (V = 1.01 × 0.86 × 1.28 m3 = 1.1 m3). By placing
absorbers on its walls, we limit to some extent the re-
verberation with the previously outlined motivation; the
resulting quality factor Q = 179 is comparable to the
one we measured in an office room. Given our working
frequency f0 = 2.65 GHz, there are thus N ≈ 106 over-
lapping modes. Our metasurface consisting of n = 88
elements can effectively control about p ≈ 2×(n/3) = 59
of these modes (see Section A in Ref. [63]). We are thus
operating in the first regime where N > p, under con-
ditions that are typical for an indoor environment.
A
schematic is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. S1 in Ref. [63] illus-
trates with experimental data that in our setup Hi,j is
indeed dominated by the static cavity contribution, as
desired.
We need as many independent single-frequency trans-
mission measurements as our output vector Y is supposed
to have entries. We choose to place antennas at arbitrary
positions inside the cavity that are at least half a wave-
length apart, which is an obvious option given the wave
field’s speckle-like nature with a correlation length on the
order of half a wavelength; alternatively, one may also use
a single pair of antennas and multiple working frequencies
that are sufficiently different [64]. In the realistic scenario
of indoor wireless communication systems, the channel
state information (CSI) between an access point and a

FIG. 3. Laboratory setup to test feasibility of analog com-
putation with Wi-Fi waves in an indoor room. About 6% of
a chaotic metallic cavity’s surface are covered with a meta-
surface reflect-array consisting of 88 pixels with tunable re-
flection coefficient (r = ±1); see Ref. [59] and Section A in
Ref. [63] for the detailed working principle. Electromagnetic
absorbers placed on the walls lower the cavity quality factor
to Q = 179, comparable to an indoor room. With a vector
network analyzer, we measure the transmission between four
simple monopole Wi-Fi antennas, mimicking channel state in-
formation between an access point and four mobile devices.
A mode-stirrer, rotated in steps of 12◦, enables ensemble av-
eraging over realizations of the experiment under different
(irregular) cavity geometries.

wireless device is exactly what we need: a complex-valued
transmission measurement between two points inside the
cavity. Modern multi-user telecommunication networks
routinely sound channels, for instance using beacon sig-
nals, for downlink beamforming [65]. CSI can be accessed
with off-the-shelf Intel 5300 cards, and has successfully
been extracted and used for instance as fingerprint for
object localization [66]. Green’s function measurements
for different pairs of ri and rj are thus readily available in
commonplace wireless communication infrastructure. In
our laboratory implementation, we mimic CSI between
wireless devices and a base station by transmission mea-
surements between independent monopole antennas with
a vector network analyzer.
Ensemble averaging is easily achieved in our experi-
ment since we can access a new realization either by ro-
tating a mode-stirrer by 12◦ (see Fig. 3) or by chang-
ing the operating frequency by more than a correlation
frequency (see Section A in Ref. [63]).
Both concepts
could of course be used in an analogous manner with
Wi-Fi in an indoor room. The constant motion of inhab-


7

itants naturally provides new realizations by physically
changing the cavity’s irregular geometry, analogous to
the mode-stirrer in our experiment. A single realization
would have to be carried out within the coherence time
of the medium, which is within reach in sight of real-time
switching of the PIN diodes controlling the reflect-array
with improved electronics [67]. Alternatively, using the
CSI between different pairs of access point and mobile
device (e.g. if there are many mobile devices in a room)
is another way to obtain independent realizations of the
experiment without relying on motion inside the room.

D.
Experimental Procedure

Measuring the impact matrix (IM). — The entry Hi,j
quantifies the impact of the reflect-array element indexed
i on the transmission between the pair of antennas in-
dexed j. We measure the IM using the Hadamard rather
than the canonical basis, following the procedure used in
Ref. [24]. The elements of the Hadamard basis being +1
or −1, this is a perfect match to our experiment where
we can access exactly these two values for each pixel’s re-
flection coefficient. Moreover, working in the Hadamard
basis has a favorable averaging effect as illustrated in the
Fig. S1 in Ref. [63] and benefits furthermore from an im-
proved signal-to-noise ratio.
One important difference to Ref. [24], however, is that
we only control a portion of the wave field.
As elab-
orated in the previous section, we operate in the first
regime where N > p and we effectively only control about
p/N ≈ 56% of the cavity modes. To successfully define an
IM we subtract from each transmission measurement Yj
the static cavity contribution Uj that cannot be altered
by the metasurface. This static contribution corresponds
to the uncontrolled cavity modes which hence resist aver-
aging over random reflect-array configurations. We thus
obtain Uj as ⟨Yj⟩random V, where V is a vector defining
the reflect-array configuration, and then we work with
Y′ = HV, where Y′ = Y − U as in Ref. [68]. Note that
this subtraction is only necessary for a cavity implemen-
tation of our proposed WBAC scheme; in transmission
geometries as in Fig. 1 there is typically no uncontrolled
contribution to the output wave front in any case, since
the entire incident wave front interacts with the WFS
device.
Numerical identification of wave front segment config-
urations. — Given the IM, we numerically identify the
reflect-array configurations for each wave front segment
that yield the desired tamed walks illustrated in Fig. 2(b).
Consider for concreteness once again the 4 × 4 example
given in Figs. 1 and 2. Let VD be the part of vector V
that belongs to segment D, let Y D
j
denote the contribu-
tion of segment D to the measurement Yj at observation
point j (that is, Y D
j
is a single complex-valued number),
and let HD,j be the corresponding part of the IM H that
links VD to Y D
j . In summary, Y D
j
= HD,jVD. Note that
selecting the members of segment D amongst all pixels

of the WFS device does not have to be done in a regular
manner as in our schematic in Fig. 2. In our experiment,
we make the selection randomly; a careful selection could
in fact be a further parameter of the optimization. The
objective is to find a VD, given HD,1 to HD,4, such that
simultaneously specific values of Y D
1
to Y D
4
are obtained.
This can be expressed as a single stacked equation,
[HD,1, HD,2, HD,3, HD,4]VD = [Y D
1 , Y D
2 , Y D
3 , Y D
4 ]. In the
case of perfect phase and amplitude control over each
pixel of the WFS device, the equation is easily solved by
calculating the pseudo-inverse of [HD,1, HD,2, HD,3, HD,4]
— provided each wave front segment is assigned a suffi-
cient number of pixels of the WFS device. Indeed, from
basic considerations about the singular value decomposi-
tion of this stacked matrix it becomes clear that we need
to assign at least N idealistic pixels to each wave front
segment in order to be able to calculate a meaningful
pseudo-inverse [69]. In our experimental setup, however,
the entries of V may only take the values of +1 or −1
due to our phase-binary only metasurface control over the
wave front. A plethora of methods exist to solve the ill-
posed problem resulting from this constraint [70]. Here
we opt for a home-made solver inspired by standard iter-
ative sequential optimization algorithms used in optical
WFS [71].
First, we define a normalization factor γ between the
entries of G and the target amplitudes of the tamed
walks.
We choose γ = n1/2
seg ⟨|Hi,j|⟩i,j, where nseg is
the number of pixels in a given wave front segment.
This choice corresponds to the expected value of the
resultant of a random walk of nseg steps of step size
⟨|Hi,j|⟩i,j.
Next, we define a cost function as CF =
⟨|γGD,j − HD,jVD|⟩j.
CF is thus the distance in the
complex plane between an entry of γG, say the entry
linking input segment D to observation point j, γGD,j,
and the corresponding value of HD,jVD, averaged over all
output points j. Starting with a random configuration
of VD, we test element by element if flipping its state
reduces CF in which case we update VD accordingly.
We run 20 loops over all elements. Finally, we repeat
the procedure with 250 different random initial VD and
select the overall best final VD yielding the lowest CF
as entry for the library. Note that this numerical proce-
dure has not been heavily optimized and more efficient
schemes could certainly be found [72, 73]. In any case,
whatever the numerical cost to identify the wave front
segment configurations, this is a one-off effort during the
initiation phase of our WBAC scheme.
Given the peculiarity of our chosen cavity implemen-
tation in which the WFS device is essentially inside the
propagation medium and its pixels are secondary sources,
it is convenient and most meaningful to adopt the WBAC
scheme from Fig. 1(c) in which the WFS device addition-
ally encodes the input vector X. In principle, addition-
ally encoding the input is a trivial step. However, in our
experiment, since we do not have perfect phase and am-
plitude control on the reflect-array, this is not straight-
forward. To encode an input vector entry α other than


8

-1

0

1

Im

(a) X = [1  1  0  1]

-1
0
1
Re

-1

0

1

Im

-1
0
1

Re

-1

0

1

Im

(b) X = [1 1 1 1]

-1
0
1
Re

-1

0

1

Im

-1
0
1

Re

-1

0

1

Im

(c) X = [1 0 0 1]

-1
0
1
Re

-1

0

1

Im

-1
0
1

Re

-1

0

1

Im

(d) X = [0 1 0 0]

-1
0
1
Re

-1

0

1

Im

-1
0
1

Re

25
50
75
100
125 150
Number of Realizations

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

Measured
Predicted

(e) Average Computation Error

Measured
Predicted
Exact

FIG. 4.
Experimentally obtained computation results for
the complex-valued 4 × 4 discrete Fourier transform opera-
tion. (a-d) Results for the different indicated input vectors
X, normalized such that Σj|Yj|2 = 1 for easy comparison.
The experimentally measured values, Ymeas (cross symbol),
are shown together with the theoretically expected results for
Y = GX, Yexact (circle symbol), as well as the results pre-
dicted by the measured Impact Matrix (IM), Ypred (star sym-
bol); cf. legend. (e) Dependence of the average computation
error, ϵ = ⟨|Y exact
j
− Y meas
j
|⟩j (green line), averaged over all
possible X, on the number of realizations over which the com-
putation outcome was averaged. We contrast this with the
average predicted error, ϵ′ = ⟨|Y exact
j
− Y pred
j
|⟩j (purple line),
where Ypred is the expected computation outcome assuming
the IM is exact.

unity into, for example VD, we thus identify a new con-
figuration for VD such that its contribution HD,jVD to
the observation point indexed j is αγGD,j, simultane-
ously for all j. In this Section, we restrict ourselves to
α ∈ {0, 1} which corresponds to a 1-bit input resolution.
We will consider a larger input size and resolution in Sec-
tion III F.

E.
Experimental Results

In Fig. 4(a-d) we present our experimentally obtained
computation results Y for the discrete Fourier transform
operation on four different input vectors X, based on
an ensemble average of Ymeas over 150 realizations (30
mode-stirrer positions, 5 independent working frequen-
cies). We observe an excellent agreement with the theo-
retically expected results, the average computation error
ϵ = ⟨|Y exact
j
− Y meas
j
|⟩j being 3.8% (averaged over all
possible input vectors X).
The dependence of ϵ on the number of realizations
displayed in Fig. 4(e) confirms that the inaccuracy due
to (consciously) neglecting the long-range correlations in
the IM can indeed be averaged out successfully by en-
semble averaging over different realizations.
A further
illustration of this effect based on experimental data is

provided in Fig. S2 of Ref. [63].

Incidentally, we note that ensemble averaging is also
extremely useful in case of very limited wave front con-
trol.
For instance, in our experiment each of the four
wave front segments is made up of only 22 phase-binary
pixels. As seen by the purple curve in Fig. 4(e), this is on
average not enough control to perfectly tame the contri-
butions from all input segments to all observation points.
For a single realization, an entry of the predicted com-
putation outcome Y pred
j
, which does not suffer from the
long-range correlations since it assumes the IM is exact,
is not exactly equal to the exact result Y exact
j
expected
for the operation. Once again, we can interpret this effect
of imperfect wave front taming as a random realization-
dependent phasor δ′
j: Y pred
j
= Y exact
j
+ δ′
j. By the same
token as before, ⟨δ′
j⟩realizations = 0; indeed, as shown by
the purple line in Fig. 4(e), ϵ′ = ⟨|Y exact
j
− Y pred
j
|⟩j is re-
duced from 8.3% to 0.7% by ensemble averaging. Hence,
the idea of ensemble averaging serves two purposes in our
case.

The presented results not only constitute a proof-of-
principle experimental implementation of our proposed
scheme for WBAC with a random medium, but allow us
moreover to conclude that it takes nothing but standard
indoor wireless communication infrastructure and a sim-
ple tunable metasurface to perform accurate analog com-
putation with reverberating microwaves. While we could
have used any complex-valued matrix for our demon-
stration, we deliberately selected the (discrete) Fourier
transform operation. Besides its key role in all areas of
physics and engineering, it also facilitates interesting in-
terpretations of our experimental results. Complex me-
dia in conjunction with WFS in optics, or time reversal
in acoustics, have repeatedly been described as “opaque
lens” or “scattering lens” in the literature [22, 74], allud-
ing to the most basic property of a traditional lens: it fo-
cuses light in geometrical optics. In our present work, we
use a complex medium to Fourier transform an imping-
ing wave front, such that it becomes possible to extend
the analogy from the ray picture to the properties of a
traditional lens in the realm of “wave” optics. While a
lens in optics is a standard component, transposed to the
microwave domain our concept unveils yet more of its in-
triguing properties: (i) lenses are not as widely-used; (ii)
reflect-array and antennas, mimicking input and output
of the Fourier transform, are not aligned in any way but
placed randomly and the medium carrying out the oper-
ation is around rather than between inputs and outputs.
Essentially, by configuring the reflect-array according to
the previously established library for a given input X,
we create a cavity geometry in which the transmission
between the selected antenna pairs corresponds to the
computation output Y.


9

F.
Scalability of Resolution and Operation Size

Typical concerns with WBAC schemes include ques-
tions about the achievable resolution and system size. In
the realm of artifical neural networks (ANNs) that con-
stitutes as aforementioned an important potential field of
application for WBAC, limited resolution is in fact by no
means an insurmountable barrier. The accuracy loss of
8-bit artificial neural networks in comparison with 32-bit
computers was shown to be only 0.4% on standard tasks
[75]; moreover, if the ANN has been specifically designed
for low resolution, it can achieve similar results with as
little as 1-bit or 2-bit resolution.
If we were to bluntly apply our previous procedure with
the same physical system to a significantly larger compu-
tational operation, identifying appropriate configurations
for each segment would become doubly more difficult: (i)
given the fixed reflect-array size, each wave front segment
would consist of even fewer pixels, further reducing the
available degrees of freedom; (ii) each segment configu-
ration would have to simultaneously satisfy even more
constraints, since there are also more observation points
due to the larger size of the output vector Y. Averaging
over more realizations could cushion these adverse effects
to some extent, but there are more elegant solutions.
In the following, we extend our previous experiment
with 1-bit input resolution and 4-entry input size to a
system with more than 4-bit input resolution and a 16-
entry input size — using exactly the same physical sys-
tem. To access a better resolution, we simply perform
the numerical optimization step outlined in Section III D
for a larger range of values of α. Note that this is only
necessary because of the phase-binary only control of our
metasurface reflect-array. To access a larger system size,
we exploit the extremely low time cost of WBAC. Indeed,
since the computation in our cavity implementation is
carried out as the stationary wave field is established, the
only potentially limiting factors are the field’s transient
duration and the duration of the measurement itself that
is required to read off the computation result. We simply
break our computational task down into several smaller
ones that fit our physical system’s size. For ANNs, rather
than processing an input signal such as an image instan-
taneously, it has already become common practice to feed
the input into the system via multiple patches one after
the other — even without the benefit of ultrafast compu-
tation times as in WBAC [76]. Here, we demonstrate a
time-sequential WBAC version that exploits the linear-
ity of the computation operation Y = GX in which the
entries of Y are independent from each other. Thereby,
we compute one entry of Y after the other, such that we
convert one N × N operation into N 1 × N operations
(see Fig. S3 in Ref. [63] for an illustration) that are per-
formed one after the other. This is possible thanks to
the reconfigurability of our wave-based analog computa-
tion unit — a fundamental advantage of our proposed
system over metamaterial computation units fabricated
for a single specific task.

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

i (input bit index)

Xi

i (input bit index)

Xi

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

Measured
Predicted
Exact

(a) 
(b) 

FIG. 5. Demonstration of sequential wave-based analog com-
putation. We recofigure the computation unit to compute one
output at a time, which allows us to tackle larger computa-
tional tasks. The figure shows the computed Fourier trans-
form of the silhouette of two Parisian monuments: (a) Eiffel
Tower and (b) Notre Dame. We display the experimentally
obtained results in the complex plane as well as in terms of the
intensities. The exact results are also indicated, see legend.

In principle, this idea enables the computation of a
subset of output entries simultaneously, in the following
one at a time, depending on the size of the desired opera-
tion and the size of the available physical system. Even if
we compute “only” one output entry at a time, the ran-
dom medium still plays a crucial role in mixing all the
tamed contributions from the different input segments
to that single output observation point; the numerical
optimization of wave front segment configurations dur-
ing the one-off initiation step of our WBAC scheme is
still more demanding than a simple focusing experiment,
since we still need to accurately mimic one entire row
of G. In other words, we still need to accurately tame
as many random walks as there are input entries, rather
than only aligning the steps of a single walk.
We present in Fig. 5 the experimentally obtained
Fourier transform of the silhouette of two Parisian mon-
uments. To faithfully reproduce the silhouettes, we used
an input resolution of more than 4-bits, clearly superior
to the 1-bit resolution from Fig. 4. We once again ensem-


10

ble averaged over 150 realizations of this 16×16 complex-
valued computation (see Section D in Ref. [63] for details
on G and further examples). The obtained results are
in good agreement with the exact ones, showing that the
Eiffel Tower creates a richer spectrum than Notre Dame
since it has more structural details.
Note that the presented multiplexing in time could in
principle also be implemented in space with N identi-
cal WBAC units. This might be of interest for optical
hardware accelerators to circumvent a potential upper
limit on computation power per system (limited degrees
of freedom in complex medium, limited number of pixels
on the WFS device) to maintain the ultrafast computa-
tion time.
WBAC also offers further exciting opportunities for
parallelization of computational tasks. One can for in-
stance imagine to operate our scheme at two or more
clearly distinct working frequencies within the same cav-
ity equipped with one metasuraces per working fre-
quency, each metasurface operating within a narrow band
around its corresponding working frequency. At a given
working frequencies, the other metasurfaces not operat-
ing at that working frequencies would simply act like a
metal wall without any modulating effect.

IV.
DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK

Practical, stable and efficient cavity implementation.
— The size of the discussed cavity implementation can
conveniently be scaled down by operating at a higher
frequency. For example, operating in the K-band around
20 GHz would reduce the volume of the previous experi-
ment by a factor of 10−3, yielding cavity dimensions that
can potentially even be integrated into data center racks.
Mode-stirring can conveniently be performed in an all-
electronic manner, by adding more metasurface pixels
dedicated to mode-stirring; putting these pixels into dif-
ferent random configurations yields different realizations
[77, 78]. This provides very fast access to more indepen-
dent configurations than a mechanical mode-stirrer. The
different realizations over which the computation out-
comes are averaged can be predefined such that all initi-
ation steps are performed before the actual computation
phase. The metasurface design can be upgraded, for in-
stance, for linear phase control with a varactor-populated
mushroom-structure as in Ref. [39]. The cavity consti-
tutes a very stable enclosure that is completely shielded
from the outside. The stability implies that once mea-
sured, the IM would not loose validity over time. The
shielding allows for a fantastic signal-to-noise ratio. The
very low noise level would almost eliminate any limits on
resolution caused by effective truncation errors originat-
ing from noise. Moreover, the low noise level is very fa-
vorable for high-speed low-power operation, as discussed
below.
Speed.
— The fundamental advantage in operation
speed over traditional processors originates from the fact

that a WBAC unit performs a task in one go that requires
many consecutive operations on a digital computer. For
instance, an N × N matrix multiplication that we per-
form in a single run requires in general O(N 2) digital
operations. Traditional computers, having clock rates on
the order of one GHz, can perform ∼ 109 operations per
second. In our cavity scheme, the limiting factor is the
time it takes for the wave field to reach equilibrium, on
the order of τ ∼ 1/∆fcorr ∼ 5 ns for the K-band version,
since measurements even at GHz rates are possible with
standard technology — aided by the low-noise nature of
the shielded cavity. Accounting for the need for ensemble
averaging, we think one entire computation can be per-
formed on the order of 1 µs. The actual averaging over
realizations could be performed directly on the detector,
similarly to a camera that integrates the incident light
over desired time intervals. Subtracting the constant cav-
ity contribution Uj from each observation point, given
prior calibration, could probably be integrated into the
measurement process, too, but in any case this is only of
O(N) complexity. Thus, we expect to be able to perform
the equivalent of N 2 × 106 digital operations per second.
Clearly, the larger N gets the higher is the advantage
of the WBAC scheme. The break-even is expected for
operation sizes on the order of N ∼ 30.

Energy efficiency. — A traditional computer uses at
least 100 pJ per operation [15, 79]. The power consumed
by our cavity WBAC scheme is dominated by the feed-
ing circuits of the metasurface pixels: 25 µW per pixel
(see Ref. [55] and Section E in Ref. [63] for further de-
tails). This number could be reduced by taking power
consumption as one of the design criteria of the metasur-
face. Using N 2 ×10−6 W as power needed to perform an
N × N operation then yields an estimated energy con-
sumption of 1 pJ per equivalent digital operation. Thus,
the scheme has the potential to compete or even outper-
form a traditional computer in terms of energy efficiency.

Perspectives in optics. — An optical implementation
of our scheme in a transmission geometry as in Fig. 1(b)
holds several promises, notably that the IM would not
have any long-range correlations (and thus no intrinsic
need for ensemble averaging), the operation speed in a
transmission geometry would be limited only by the de-
tection rate which can be on the order of 100 GHz with
commercially available devices [15], and the encoding of
the input vector would be outside the WBAC system
such that the latter would be completely passive during
a given computation, not consuming any energy. The lat-
ter implies that the advantage in energy efficiency over
an electronic computer would scale as N 2. Ultimately,
these promises will have to be traded off against less fa-
vorable noise levels, resulting effective truncation errors,
and the difficulty of accessing the computation outputs’
phase information.


11

V.
CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated experimentally that any ran-
dom medium can be employed as reconfigurable wave-
based analog computation unit, subject to appropriate
wave front shaping. Our proposal removes the hitherto
crux of implementing wave-based analog computation in
practice: the need for intricate metamaterial designs that
are difficult (if not impossible so far) to fabricate. More-
over, our unit is reconfigurable to perform a different
operation, without any additional calibration measure-
ments. Our experimental demonstration leveraging in-
frastructure analogous to standard wireless indoor com-
munication systems illustrates the applicability of our
principle to all types of wave phenomena and random
media, as well as the ease of practical implementation.

Our scheme’s practicality and reconfigurability may
play important roles in the renaissance of specific-
purpose computation, heralded in particular by the
rapidly expanding utilization of artificial neural net-
works, demanding high-speed low-power processing of big
data.
Reconfigurability of artificial neural networks is
key to enable transfer learning as well as to correct er-
rors of previous training phases [80]. Future versions of

our concept can be extended to performing non-linear op-
erations [18] and thereby become themselves a complete,
tailored hardware architecture for implementations of ar-
tificial neural networks [15, 34]. This may include cas-
cading several reconfigurable cavities, possibly connected
via non-linear elements. There may also be possibilities
to leverage the intrinsic IM inter-element long-range cor-
relations that are so far considered an obstacle. Further-
more, an exciting avenue for our concept is an imple-
mentation using optical multimode waveguides offering
a stable and energy-efficient random medium for which
wave front shaping has become a well-mastered technique
[81].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank S´ebastien Popoff and Laurent Daudet for
fruitful discussions.
P.d.H. acknowledges funding from
the French “Minist`ere de la D´efense, Direction G´en´erale
de l’Armement”.

The project was initiated, conceptualized, conducted
and written up by P.d.H. Both authors thoroughly dis-
cussed the project.

[1] D. R. Solli and B. Jalali, “Analog optical computing,”
Nat. Photonics 9, 704 (2015).
[2] G. E. Moore, “Cramming more components onto inte-
grated circuits,” Electronics 38, 114–117 (1965).
[3] H. Esmaeilzadeh, E. Blem, R. St. Amant, K. Sankar-
alingam,
and D. Burger, “Dark silicon and the end of
multicore scaling,” in 38th Annual International Sympo-
sium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) (IEEE, 2011) pp.
365–376.
[4] S. K. Esser, P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, A. S. Cassidy,
R. Appuswamy, A. Andreopoulos, D. J. Berg, J. L. McK-
instry, T. Melano, D. R. Barch, C. di Nolfo, P. Datta,
A. Amir, B. Taba, M. D. Flickner,
and D. S. Modha,
“Convolutional networks for fast, energy-efficient neuro-
morphic computing,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113,
11441–11446 (2016).
[5] A.
Graves,
G.
Wayne,
M.
Reynolds,
T.
Harley,
I. Danihelka, A. Grabska-Barwi´nska, S. G. Colmenarejo,
E. Grefenstette, T. Ramalho, J. Agapiou, et al., “Hybrid
computing using a neural network with dynamic external
memory,” Nature 538, 471 (2016).
[6] J. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics (McGraw-
hill, 1996).
[7] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani,
“Experimental realization of any discrete unitary opera-
tor,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 58 (1994).
[8] T. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Lou, H. Ye, M. Qiu, Z. Ruan, and
S. Fan, “Plasmonic computing of spatial differentiation,”
Nat. Commun. 8, 15391 (2017).
[9] A. Silva, F. Monticone, G. Castaldi, V. Galdi, A. Al`u,
and N. Engheta, “Performing mathematical operations
with metamaterials,” Science 343, 160–163 (2014).

[10] F. Monticone, N. M. Estakhri,
and A. Al`u, “Full con-
trol of nanoscale optical transmission with a composite
metascreen,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 203903 (2013).
[11] A. Sihvola, “Enabling optical analog computing with
metamaterials,” Science 343, 144–145 (2014).
[12] D. A. B. Miller, “Self-configuring universal linear optical
component,” Photon. Res. 1, 1–15 (2013).
[13] J. Carolan, C. Harrold, C. Sparrow, E. Mart´ın-L´opez,
N. J. Russell, J. W. Silverstone, P. J. Shadbolt, N. Mat-
suda, M. Oguma, M. Itoh, et al., “Universal linear op-
tics,” Science 349, 711–716 (2015).
[14] A. Ribeiro, A. Ruocco, L. Vanacker, and W. Bogaerts,
“Demonstration of a 4×4-port universal linear circuit,”
Optica 3, 1348–1357 (2016).
[15] Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-
Jones, M. Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle,
D. Englund,
and M. Soljaˇci´c, “Deep learning with co-
herent nanophotonic circuits,” Nat. Photonics 11, 441
(2017).
[16] D. A. B. Miller, “Silicon photonics: Meshing optics with
applications,” Nat. Photonics 11, 403 (2017).
[17] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learn-
ing (MIT Press, 2016).
[18] A. Li, S. Kim, Y. Luo, Y. Li, J. Long, and D. F. Sieven-
piper, “High-power transistor-based tunable and switch-
able metasurface absorber,” IEEE Trans. Microw. The-
ory Techn. 65, 2810–2818 (2017).
[19] I. Freund, “Looking through walls and around corners,”
Physica A 168, 49–65 (1990).
[20] M. Fink, “Time reversed acoustics,” Phys. Today 50, 34–
40 (1997).
[21] I. M. Vellekoop and A. P. Mosk, “Focusing coherent light


12

through opaque strongly scattering media,” Opt. Lett.
32, 2309–2311 (2007).
[22] A. P. Mosk, A. Lagendijk, G. Lerosey,
and M. Fink,
“Controlling waves in space and time for imaging and
focusing in complex media,” Nat. Photonics 6, 283–292
(2012).
[23] S. Rotter and S. Gigan, “Light fields in complex media:
Mesoscopic scattering meets wave control,” Rev. Mod.
Phys. 89, 015005 (2017).
[24] S. M. Popoff, G. Lerosey, R. Carminati, M. Fink, A. C.
Boccara, and S. Gigan, “Measuring the transmission ma-
trix in optics: an approach to the study and control of
light propagation in disordered media,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
104, 100601 (2010).
[25] J. Aulbach, B. Gjonaj, P. M. Johnson, A. P. Mosk,
and A. Lagendijk, “Control of light transmission through
opaque scattering media in space and time,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 106, 103901 (2011).
[26] O. Katz, E. Small, Y. Bromberg,
and Y. Silberberg,
“Focusing and compression of ultrashort pulses through
scattering media,” Nat. Photonics 5, 372–377 (2011).
[27] P. del Hougne, F. Lemoult, M. Fink,
and G. Lerosey,
“Spatiotemporal wave front shaping in a microwave cav-
ity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 134302 (2016).
[28] I. M. Vellekoop, A. Lagendijk,
and A. P. Mosk, “Ex-
ploiting disorder for perfect focusing,” Nat. Photonics 4,
320–322 (2010).
[29] Y. Choi, T. D. Yang, C. Fang-Yen, P. Kang, K. J. Lee,
R. R. Dasari, M. S. Feld,
and W. Choi, “Overcoming
the diffraction limit using multiple light scattering in a
highly disordered medium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 023902
(2011).
[30] J.-H. Park, C. Park, H. S. Yu, J. Park, S. Han, J. Shin,
S. H. Ko, K. T. Nam, Y.-H. Cho, and Y. K. Park, “Sub-
wavelength light focusing using random nanoparticles,”
Nat. Photonics 7, 454–458 (2013).
[31] S. R. Huisman, T. J. Huisman, T. A. W. Wolterink, A. P.
Mosk, and P. W. H. Pinkse, “Programmable multiport
optical circuits in opaque scattering materials,” Opt. Ex-
press 23, 3102–3116 (2015).
[32] H. Defienne, M. Barbieri, I. A. Walmsley, B. J. Smith,
and S. Gigan, “Two-photon quantum walk in a multi-
mode fiber,” Sci. Adv. 2, e1501054 (2016).
[33] R. Fickler, M. Ginoya,
and R. W. Boyd, “Custom-
tailored spatial mode sorting by controlled random scat-
tering,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 161108 (2017).
[34] A.
Saade,
F.
Caltagirone,
I.
Carron,
L.
Daudet,
A. Dr´emeau, S. Gigan, and F. Krzakala, “Random pro-
jections through multiple optical scattering:
Approxi-
mating kernels at the speed of light,” in IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP) (IEEE, 2016) pp. 6215–6219.
[35] S. H. Simon, A. L. Moustakas, M. Stoytchev, and H. Sa-
far, “Communication in a disordered world,” Phys. To-
day 54, 38–43 (2001).
[36] M. Kim, W. Choi, Y. Choi, C. Yoon,
and W. Choi,
“Transmission matrix of a scattering medium and its
applications in biophotonics,” Opt. Express 23, 12648–
12668 (2015).
[37] H.-J. St¨ockmann, Quantum Chaos:
An Introduction
(Cambridge University Press, 2007).
[38] J. N. Gollub, O. Yurduseven, K. P. Trofatter, D. Ar-
nitz, M. F. Imani, T. Sleasman, M. Boyarsky, A. Rose,
A. Pedross-Engel, H. Odabasi, et al., “Large metasurface

aperture for millimeter wave computational imaging at
the human-scale,” Sci. Rep. 7, 42650 (2017).
[39] T. Sleasman, M. F. Imani, J. N. Gollub, and D. R. Smith,
“Microwave imaging using a disordered cavity with a dy-
namically tunable impedance surface,” Phys. Rev. Ap-
plied 6, 054019 (2016).
[40] M. Asefi and J. LoVetri, “Use of field-perturbing elements
to increase nonredundant data for microwave imaging
systems,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn. (2017).
[41] P. del Hougne, M. F. Imani, T. Sleasman, J. N. Gol-
lub, M. Fink, G. Lerosey,
and D. R. Smith, “Dynamic
metasurface aperture as smart around-the-corner motion
detector,” Sci. Rep. 8 (2018).
[42] P. del Hougne, M. F. Imani, M. Fink, D. R. Smith, and
G. Lerosey, “Precise localization of multiple noncoopera-
tive objects in a disordered cavity by wave front shaping,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 063901 (2018).
[43] S. K. Hong, V. M. Mendez, T. Koch, W. S. Wall,
and
S. M. Anlage, “Nonlinear electromagnetic time reversal
in an open semireverberant system,” Phys. Rev. Applied
2, 044013 (2014).
[44] D. R. Smith, V. R. Gowda, O. Yurduseven, S. Larouche,
G. Lipworth, Y. Urzhumov,
and M. S. Reynolds, “An
analysis of beamed wireless power transfer in the fresnel
zone using a dynamic, metasurface aperture,” J. Appl.
Phys. 121, 014901 (2017).
[45] P. del Hougne, M. Fink, and G. Lerosey, “Shaping mi-
crowave fields using nonlinear unsolicited feedback: Ap-
plication to enhance energy harvesting,” Phys. Rev. Ap-
plied 8, 061001 (2017).
[46] V. R. Gowda, M. F. Imani, T. Sleasman, O. Yurdu-
seven,
and D. R. Smith, “Focusing microwaves in the
fresnel zone with a cavity-backed holographic metasur-
face,” IEEE Access 6, 12815–12824 (2018).
[47] David A Hill, Electromagnetic Fields in Cavities: Deter-
ministic and Statistical Theories, Vol. 35 (John Wiley &
Sons, 2009).
[48] J. Stein, H.-J. St¨ockmann,
and U. Stoffregen, “Mi-
crowave studies of billiard green functions and propaga-
tors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 53 (1995).
[49] J. Barth´elemy, O. Legrand, and F. Mortessagne, “Com-
plete s matrix in a microwave cavity at room tempera-
ture,” Phys. Rev. E 71, 016205 (2005).
[50] S. Hemmady, X. Zheng, T. M. Antonsen Jr, E. Ott, and
S. M. Anlage, “Universal statistics of the scattering co-
efficient of chaotic microwave cavities,” Phys. Rev. E 71,
056215 (2005).
[51] U. Kuhl, H.-J. St¨ockmann,
and R. Weaver, “Classical
wave experiments on chaotic scattering,” J. Phys. A 38,
10433 (2005).
[52] Hermann Weyl, “¨Uber die asymptotische Verteilung der
Eigenwerte,” Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der Wis-
senschaften zu G¨ottingen, Mathematisch-Physikalische
Klasse 1911, 110–117 (1911).
[53] Wolfgang Arendt, Robin Nittka, Wolfgang Peter,
and
Frank Steiner, Weyls law:
Spectral Properties of the
Laplacian in Mathematics and Physics (Wiley-VCH Ver-
lag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2009).
[54] M. Dupr´e, P. del Hougne, M. Fink, F. Lemoult,
and
G. Lerosey, “Wave-field shaping in cavities:
Waves
trapped in a box with controllable boundaries,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 017701 (2015).
[55] N. Kaina, M. Dupr´e, G. Lerosey, and M. Fink, “Shap-


13

ing complex microwave fields in reverberating media with
binary tunable metasurfaces,” Sci. Rep. 4 (2014).
[56] D. Sievenpiper, L. Zhang, R. F. J. Broas, N. G. Alex-
opolous,
and E. Yablonovitch, “High-impedance elec-
tromagnetic surfaces with a forbidden frequency band,”
IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn. 47, 2059–2074
(1999).
[57] D. F. Sievenpiper, J. H. Schaffner, H. J. Song, R. Y. Loo,
and G. Tangonan, “Two-dimensional beam steering using
an electrically tunable impedance surface,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag 51, 2713–2722 (2003).
[58] A. Sihvola, “Metamaterials in electromagnetics,” Meta-
materials 1, 2–11 (2007).
[59] N. Kaina, M. Dupr´e, M. Fink,
and G. Lerosey, “Hy-
bridized resonances to design tunable binary phase meta-
surface unit cells,” Opt. Express 22, 18881–18888 (2014).
[60] A. Li, S. Singh, and D. Sievenpiper, “Metasurfaces and
their applications,” Nanophotonics 7, 989–1011 (2018).
[61] P. W. Anderson, “Absence of diffusion in certain random
lattices,” Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 (1958).
[62] J. Wang and A. Z. Genack, “Transport through modes
in random media,” Nature 471, 345 (2011).
[63] See Supplemental Material.
[64] A. Derode, A. Tourin,
and M. Fink, “Random multi-
ple scattering of ultrasound. ii. is time reversal a self-
averaging process?” Phys. Rev. E 64, 036606 (2001).
[65] N. D. Sidiropoulos, T. N. Davidson,
and Z.-Q. Luo,
“Transmit beamforming for physical-layer multicasting,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process 54, 2239–2251 (2006).
[66] S. Sen, B. Radunovic, R. R. Choudhury, and T. Minka,
“You are facing the mona lisa: spot localization using
phy layer information,” in Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications,
and Services (ACM, 2012) pp. 183–196.
[67] H. Yang, X. Cao, F. Yang, J. Gao, S. Xu, M. Li, X. Chen,
Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng, and S. Li, “A programmable meta-
surface with dynamic polarization, scattering and focus-
ing control,” Sci. Rep. 6, 35692 (2016).
[68] P. del Hougne, B. Rajaei, L. Daudet,
and G. Lerosey,
“Intensity-only measurement of partially uncontrollable
transmission matrix:
demonstration with wave-field
shaping in a microwave cavity,” Opt. Express 24, 18631–
18641 (2016).
[69] Interestingly, a similar scaling law proportional to N 2 is
found for the number of components of a photonic circuit
consisting of beam-splitters to implement a desired N×N
linear operation [7, 15].
[70] A.
Dr´emeau,
A.
Liutkus,
D.
Martina,
O.
Katz,
C. Sch¨ulke, F. Krzakala, S. Gigan,
and L. Daudet,
“Reference-less measurement of the transmission ma-
trix of a highly scattering material using a dmd and
phase retrieval techniques,” Opt. Express 23, 11898–
11911 (2015).
[71] I. M. Vellekoop and A. P. Mosk, “Phase control algo-
rithms for focusing light through turbid media,” Opt.
Commun. 281, 3071–3080 (2008).
[72] D. Bertsimas and O. Nohadani, “Robust optimization
with simulated annealing,” J. Glob. Optim. 48, 323–334
(2010).
[73] J. Peurifoy, Y. Shen, L. Jing, Y. Yang, F. Cano-Renteria,
B. G. DeLacy, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Tegmark,
and
M. Soljaˇci´c, “Nanophotonic particle simulation and in-
verse design using artificial neural networks,” Sci. Adv.
4, eaar4206 (2018).

[74] E. G. van Putten, D. Akbulut, J. Bertolotti, W. L. Vos,
A. Lagendijk, and A. P. Mosk, “Scattering lens resolves
sub-100 nm structures with visible light,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 106, 193905 (2011).
[75] V. Sze, Y.-H. Chen, T.-J. Yang, and J. S. Emer, “Effi-
cient processing of deep neural networks: A tutorial and
survey,” Proc. IEEE 105, 2295–2329 (2017).
[76] Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long,
R. Girshick, S. Guadarrama,
and T. Darrell, “Caffe:
Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding,”
in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference
on Multimedia (ACM, 2014) pp. 675–678.
[77] J.-B. Gros, P. del Hougne,
and G. Lerosey, “Les
cavit´es micro-ondes reconfigurables:
Une nouvelle ap-
proche pour fabriquer des chambres r´everb´erantes chao-
tiques,” (2018), 19`eme Colloque International & Expo-
sition sur la Compatibilit´e ElectroMagn´etique.
[78] R. Serra, A. C. Marvin, F. Moglie, V. M. Primiani,
A. Cozza, L. R. Arnaut, Y. Huang, M. O. Hatfield,
M. Klingler, and F. Leferink, “Reverberation chambers `a
la carte: An overview of the different mode-stirring tech-
niques,” IEEE Electrmagn. Compat 6, 63–78 (2016).
[79] M. Horowitz, “1.1 computing’s energy problem (and
what we can do about it),” in Solid-State Circuits Con-
ference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC), 2014 IEEE
International (IEEE, 2014) pp. 10–14.
[80] L. Pratt and B. Jennings, “A survey of connectionist
network reuse through transfer,” in Learning to learn
(Springer, 1996) pp. 19–43.
[81] P. Ambichl, W. Xiong, Y. Bromberg, B. Redding, H. Cao,
and S. Rotter, “Super-and anti-principal-modes in mul-
timode waveguides,” Phys. Rev. X 7, 041053 (2017).


14

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

For the interested reader, here we provide numerous
additional details that complement the manuscript and
provide further illustrations. This document is organized
as follows:
A. Experimental Setup.
B. Long-Range Correlations in the Impact Matrix.
C. Ensemble Averaging over Realizations.
D. Time-Sequential WBAC Scheme.
E. Energy Efficiency.
F. Notation.

A.
Experimental Setup

Quality Factor and Correlation Frequency.
— Our
metallic cavity’s geometry is clearly irregular due to a few
irregularly shaped metallic objects glued to the walls as
well as the presence of the large mode-stirrer (see Fig. 3
in the main text). Pieces of electromagnetic absorbers
(10 × 10 × 5 cm3) are isotropically distributed across the
cavity’s walls, lowering its quality factor from 1023 to
179.
This is on the order of the quality factor of 234
that we have measured in an office room in our labora-
tory. We estimate Q as πf0/µ, where µ is the exponential
decay constant extracted from the envelope of the in-
verse Fourier transform of the experimentally measured
broadband Green’s function, averaged over 30 mode-
stirrer positions.
Our cavity’s correlation frequency is
thus ∆fcorr = f0/Q ≈ 15 MHz. Consequently we choose
five working frequencies (within the reflect-array’s oper-
ating band) that are separated by at least ∆fcorr in order
for them to constitute independent realizations.
Tunable Metasurface Reflect-Array. — The metasur-
face reflect-array consists of n = 88 functional elements
(8 of its 96 elements are broken) whose design is essen-
tially the one presented in Ref. [59]. However, each el-
ement has independent control over the two polariza-
tions of the electromagnetic field, rather than acting
only on one polarization as in Ref. [59].
We synchro-
nize each element’s horizontal and vertical polarization
configuration to simplify our experiment.
Each of our
monopole antennas picks up the field polarized along its
axis; since polarizations are mixed in a chaotic cavity
we have n = 88 controllable elements whose average im-
pact on the wave field is twice as much as it would be
if they controlled only one polarization. Thus, we effec-
tively control p ≈ 2 × (n/3) = 59 modes, based on the
result from Ref. [54] that a metasurface consisting of n
phase-binary pixels acting on a single polarization con-
trols about n/3 modes.

B.
Long-Range Correlations in the Impact Matrix

The impact matrix (IM) formalism links the vector V
describing the configuration of the reflect-array elements

to the measured transmissions Y via Y = HV [68]. Here
we illustrate the long-range correlations between IM en-
tries in our experimental setup. As the wave reverberates
inside the cavity, it revisits multiple times the reflect-
array such that the impact of reflect-array element i on
the transmission between the pair of antennas indexed j,
that is the entry Hi,j of the impact matrix H, depends
to some extent on the configuration of the reflect-array
elements other than i, too.
To visualize the long-range correlations, we measure
Hi,j in our experiment for a given realization with dif-
ferent configurations of the reflect-array elements other
than i. For notational ease, let Hhad
i,j
be the IM entry
measured in the Hadamard basis, as outlined in Sec-
tion III.D of the main text. To now obtain many mea-
surements of Hi,j, we work in the usual, canonical basis.
We define V+ and V− as being equal to the same random
phase-binary configuration V, except for the ith entry
that is fixed to be +1 or −1 for V+ and V−, respec-
tively.
By measuring the corresponding transmissions
Y+ and Y−, we can obtain an estimate of Hi,j as fol-
lows: Hcan
i,j
= (Y +
j
− Y −
j )/2. We repeat this 160 times
with different random vectors V, yielding 160 estimates
of Hcan
i,j . From those, we can further define an average
over the 160 estimates: Hav
i,j = ⟨Hcan
i,j ⟩. In Fig. S1 we dis-
play in the complex plane the experimentally measured
cloud of 160 points for Hcan
i,j , their average Hav
i,j as well
as Hhad
i,j .
The long-range correlations are clearly visualized by
the non-negligible radius of the blue cloud. The numer-
ical identification of the appropriate configuration for a
given wave front segment utilizes one value of Hi,j. Yet,
the actual value in the computation phase will depend on
how the reflect-array is configured then. Clearly, using
Hav
i,j in the numerical optimization is the best choice. It
is, however, very cumbersome to measure. The measure-
ment in the Hadamard basis that we opt for requires only
a single measurement per IM entry and has an averaging
effect because it employs all reflect-array elements.
It
therefore seems to be a good trade-off between measure-
ment duration and accuracy. The averaging over realiza-
tions is inevitable in any case in the cavity implementa-
tion of our scheme, but the further from Hav
i,j the value
used in the numerical optimization is, the more likely it
is that more realizations are needed to converge to the
exact computation results.
Finally, we note that in Ref. [68] a first-order approx-
imation of an IM in a similar system (low-Q irregularly-
shaped microwave cavity) was measured and successfully
used for focusing without ensemble averaging over real-
izations. This worked because said focusing experiment
only required a phase-binary decision in order to align
the contribution from each pixel of the WFS device with
the overall desired direction in the complex plane. As
seen in Fig. S1, in a cavity with high modal density and
N > p the cloud of possible Hi,j values usually remains
within one quadrant, here the upper right one. The fo-
cusing decision thus only requires a choice as to whether


15

FIG. S1. Visualization of impact matrix (IM) long-range cor-
relations. For a given cavity geometry, we show measurements
of the IM entry H34,1 linking the metasurface reflect-array el-
ement 34 to the transmission measurement indexed 1.
We
illustrate the cloud of values obtained from measurements in
the canonical basis as outlined above (blue dots), their average
(green circle) as well as the value measured in the Hadamard
basis (violet cross). We used the latter throughout the main
text. The measurements in the canonical basis are taken for
random configurations of the elements other than the one un-
der consideration, clearly showing that Hi,j significantly de-
pends on how the elements k ̸= i are configured.

we want some value in the upper right (element con-
figuration r = +1) or lower left (element configuration
r = −1) quadrant to maximize the length of the resul-
tant. In the present work, the optimization constraints
are significantly more challenging to satisfy: a specific
amplitude and phase has to be achieved with the tamed
walk, simultaneously at several observation points.

C.
Ensemble Averaging over Realizations

In Fig. S2, for the experiment of computing the Fourier
transform of the Eiffel Tower’s silhouette (see main text
Fig. 5(a)), we display for each output point the outcomes
of the 150 individual realizations (30 mode-stirrer posi-
tions, 5 independent working frequencies), as well as their
average and the exact value that are shown in Fig. 5(a).

Average over Realizations
Single Realization
Exact

FIG. S2. Visualization of the outcomes of the 150 individ-
ual realizations, as well as their average that is displayed in
Fig. 5(a) in the main text.

D.
Time-Sequential WBAC Scheme

In this section, we first visually illustrate the principle
of sequential WBAC explained in the main text. Then,
we provide the 16 × 16 complex-valued discrete Fourier
transform operation G that we implemented, correspond-
ing to Fig. 5 in the main text. Finally, we show some fur-
ther computation examples obtained with said operation
that we did not include in the main text for conciseness.

1.
Visual Illustration of Sequential WBAC

Here, we provide a visualization of how we can achieve
a much bigger effective computation unit than our fixed-
size physical system. Consider the general matrix for-
malism for an operation G as shown in Fig. S3(a). For
an M × N operation G, each output entry in Y is in
fact the product of the corresponding row of G, itself a
vector, and the input vector X. We can thus separately
compute each output entry in a 1 × N operation.
Since in the time-sequential scheme the resultants of
the complex walks (see Fig. 2 in the main text) have to
be tamed only for one observation point at any given
time, the optimization constraints are considerably re-
laxed (but still harder than simple focusing, see Sec-
tion III.F of the main text) such that it becomes possi-


16

FIG. S3. Visualization of the sequential WBAC scheme in-
troduced in the main text.
The output vector entries are
independent from each other (a) and may be computed one
after the other (b).

ble to implement larger operations with more inputs and
outputs than in a single-shot computation scheme. The
procedure is thus essentially looped over each of the out-
put vector entries, as schematically shown in Fig. S3(b).
Moreover, this means that we only need one transmission
measurement for the sequential version. Note that one
may in principle also compute more than one of the out-
put vector’s entries per loop to speed up the computation
time.

2.
The implemented 16 × 16 complex-valued operation G

The complex-valued 16×16 discrete Fourier transform
operation implemented to produce Fig. 5 of the main text
is

FIG. S4. Phase of G (see Eq. S1); the magnitude is unity for
all entries.

G =





1
1
1
1
· · ·
1
1
ωz
ω2
z
ω3
z
· · ·
ω(Z−1)
z
1
ω2
z
ω4
z
ω6
z
· · ·
ω2(Z−1)
z
1
ω3
z
ω6
z
ω9
z
· · ·
ω3(Z−1)
z
...
...
...
...
...
...
1 ω(Z−1)
z
ω2(Z−1)
z
ω3(Z−1)
z
· · · ω(Z−1)(Z−1)
z





,

(S1)

where ωz = exp
� 2πi

2z
�
is the zth root of unity and we
have z = Z = 16. The magnitudes of all entries of G are
unity, their phases are illustrated in Fig. S4.

3.
Further sample sequential computation results

In Fig. S5 we provide further examples of 16×16 com-
putations that we carried out with G as defined in Eq. S1
to complement the main text where two examples using
high-resolution input vectors X that correspond to the
silhouettes of famous Parisian monuments were shown.
In the following, we show results corresponding to some
specific input vectors that are interesting mathematically
(vectors with periodic entries, for instance). We display
the results both in the complex plane (left) and in terms
of the corresponding intensities (right). The results were
obtained by ensemble averaging over 150 realizations, like
the results in the main text.

E.
Energy Efficiency

For our cavity implementation, three factors poten-
tially dominating the energy consumption come to mind:
(i) generating the wave field, (ii) controlling the meta-
surface configuration with a micro-controller, and (iii)
the feeding circuit for the tunable elements in the meta-
surface. Given the fantastic signal-to-noise ratio in the
shielded cavity, low-power operation with emission of the
continuous wave at −20 dB or lower is certainly realis-
tic, implying that less than 10 µW are consumed for (i).
The micro-controllers do not consume more than a few
mW per hundreds of channels [55]. The power consumed
my the metasurface feeding circuit used in Ref. [55] is
25 µW/pixel, and thus, for instance, 12.5 mW for a sys-
tem with 500 pixels. Although the current through the
PIN diodes could be further reduced to lower the feeding
circuit’s power consumption at the price of more wave
attenuation on the metasurface, (iii) appears to be the
dominating factor when a large number of pixels is used.

F.
Notation

For reference and clarity’s sake, we summarize the no-
tation used throughout our main text and this supple-


17

mental material to denote matrices, vectors and numbers,
and to refer to specific entries.

• Matrices are typed in bold, non-italic face, e.g. H,
G.

• Vectors are typed in non-italic face, e.g. X, Y, V.

• Single numbers are typed in italic face, e.g. α, γ.

To refer to a specific vector entry, the subscript will
provide the relevant index information, e.g. Yj is the jth
entry of vector Y.
To refer to a specific matrix entry, the subscript will
provide row and column information separated by a
comma, e.g.
Hi,j is the entry in the ith row and jth
column of H (and hence a single number).
To refer to multiple specific entries of a vector, the
subscript will provide the relevant index information, e.g.
VD are the entries of vector V that form part of the group
of WFS device pixels labeled D. Note that VD is itself a
vector, hence it is typed in non-italic face.
To refer to multiple specific entries of a matrix, the
subscript will provide the relevant information, e.g. HD,j
are the entries found in the rows forming part of group
D and column j. Note that HD,j is itself a vector, hence
it is typed in non-italic face. Gj,: refers to the entire jth
row of G.
A subscript following ⟨. . . ⟩ indicates the quantity over
which the average is taken, e.g. ⟨Y⟩random V denotes the
average of Y over different random V.
Further information about a variable may be included
in a superscript, e.g. Ymeas,Ypred and Yexact refer to the
measurement, prediction and exact value of Y, respec-
tively. Moreover, we use Y D
j
to denote the contribution
from segment D to Yj.


18

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

X = [1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1]

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

X = [1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0]

(a)

(b)


19

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Y j|2

X = [0  0  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  0  1  1]

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

-1

0

1

-1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

X = [0  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  0  1  0  0  1  1  1  0]

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

(c)

(d)


20

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Y j|2

X = [0  0  1  0  1  1  0  1  0  0  1  1  1  0  0  1]

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
j (output bit index)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

|Yj|2

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

-1

-1

0

1

-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

(e)

FIG. S5. Five sample computations with the sequential wave-based analog computation scheme. We show the computation
results (crosses) and the exact values (circles) in the complex plane on the left and the corresponding intensities on the right.
The input vector X is indicated for each example.


