 

 
1

Parity transitions in the superconducting ground state of  

hybrid InSb-Al Coulomb islands 

 

Jie Shen1*†, Sebastian Heedt1*, Francesco Borsoi1*, Bernard van Heck2, Sasa Gazibegovic1,3, 

Roy L. M. Op het Veld1,3, Diana Car1,3, John A. Logan4, Mihir Pendharkar5, Senja J. J. 

Ramakers1, Guanzhong Wang1, Di Xu1, Daniël Bouman1, Attila Geresdi1, Chris J. Palmstrøm4,5, 

Erik P. A. M. Bakkers1,3 & Leo P. Kouwenhoven1,6†  

 

1QuTech and Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, 2600 GA Delft, 

The Netherlands. 

2Microsoft Quantum, Microsoft Station Q, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa 

Barbara, California 93106-6105, USA 

3Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, 

The Netherlands. 

4Materials Department, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 

93106, USA. 

5Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, 

California 93106, USA. 

6Microsoft Station Q at Delft University of Technology, 2600 GA Delft, The Netherlands. 

 

*These authors contributed equally to this work.  


 

 
2

†J.Shen-1@tudelft.nl, Leo.Kouwenhoven@Microsoft.com


 

 
3

Abstract 

The number of electrons in small metallic or semiconducting islands is quantized. When 

tunnelling is enabled via opaque barriers this number can change by an integer. In 

superconductors the addition is in units of two electron charges (2e), reflecting that the 

Cooper pair condensate must have an even parity. This ground state (GS) is foundational 

for all superconducting qubit devices. Here, we study a hybrid superconducting–

semiconducting island and find three typical GS evolutions in a parallel magnetic field: a 

robust 2e-periodic even-parity GS, a transition to a 2e-periodic odd-parity GS, and a 

transition from a 2e- to a 1e-periodic GS. The 2e-periodic odd-parity GS persistent in gate-

voltage occurs when a spin-resolved subgap state crosses zero energy. For our 1e-periodic 

GSs we explicitly show the origin being a single zero-energy state gapped from the 

continuum, i.e. compatible with an Andreev bound states stabilized at zero energy or the 

presence of Majorana zero modes.   

 

Introduction 

A superconductor can proximitize a semiconductor and open a gap in its energy spectrum. If 

the two materials are strongly coupled, the induced gap can be as large as the original gap in 

the superconductor. The two gaps respond differently to an applied magnetic field, e.g. 

when the Landé g-factors differ in the two materials. A large g-factor in the semiconductor 

can cause the induced gap to close long before the closing of the original gap. If, in addition, 

the semiconductor has strong spin-orbit interaction, the induced gap can re-open, signalling 

a transition to a topological superconducting phase [1,2]. This phase contains pairs of 


 

 
4

Majorana zero modes (MZMs) that can accommodate either zero or one fermion, and thus 

allows for both even- and odd-parity GSs [3,4]. 

 

When a conductor has a finite size, it forms an island restricting the charge to an integer 

times the elementary charge, e [5]. The resulting Coulomb blockade effects have been 

widely studied in metallic and superconducting islands, the latter often referred to as Cooper 

pair boxes [6,7]. A major breakthrough was the demonstration of charge quantization in 

units of 2e in aluminium (Al) islands [8-13], indicating that the even-parity superconducting 

GS was not poisoned by quasiparticles on the time scale of the measurement. The 2e 

quantization could be destroyed by subjecting the Al to an external magnetic field, B, which 

causes a transition to the metallic state with 1e charge quantization [10,11]. 

 

Hybrid superconducting-semiconducting islands have also shown a 2e charge quantization at 

low B-fields [14-16]. These observations imply that the low-energy spectrum in the 

semiconductor is completely proximitized with no Andreev bound states (ABSs) at low 

energies. Also, for these hybrid islands a B-field can cause a 2e to 1e transition [15,16]. A 

recent breakthrough demonstrated that under particular circumstances the 1e quantization 

is not due to the transition to the metallic state - but rather due to a topological 

superconducting phase [16]. These pioneering experiments used InAs as the semiconductor.  

 

Here, we harness the large g-factor (g ≈ 50) and the ballistic transport properties of InSb 

nanowires [17,18], and find additional B-field induced transitions, including a recurrence of a 

2e quantization at higher B-fields.  

 


 

 
5

Results 

Different B-field GS evolutions at controllable gate configurations 

Our device (Fig. 1a) consists of a hexagonal InSb nanowire with two of its facets covered by a 

thin epitaxial layer of Al (see ref. [19] for materials details). Two top gates (TG) can induce 

adjustable tunnel barriers separating the InSb-Al island from the two normal leads. The 

voltage, VPG, applied to the top plunger gate (PG), can be used to tune the charge on the 

island as well as the spatial charge density profile in the semiconductor. A bias voltage, Vb, is 

applied between source (S) and drain (D), yielding a current, I, that is measured in a dilution 

refrigerator at a base temperature of ~15mK. 

 

Fig. 1b shows the differential conductance, dI/dVb, versus Vb and the voltage applied to the 

tunnel gate at B = 0. The charge is fixed in the current-blockaded Coulomb diamonds (with 

mostly blue colour) with a periodicity in gate voltage corresponding to a charge increment of 

2e. For Vb > 120 µV the periodicity is halved to 1e, indicating the onset of single electron 

transport. Linecuts in the right panel show that dI/dVb can be enhanced as well as 

suppressed, even down to negative values (black colour). These are known features for 

hybrid islands and can be used to extract values for the charging energy, Ec = e2/2C ≈ 25 µeV 

and the lowest-energy subgap state, E0 = 50-90 µeV (Supplementary Fig. 2). The Al 

superconducting gap, = 220 µeV, is extracted from tunnelling spectroscopy measurement 

(Supplementary Fig. 3). 

 

To understand parity transitions induced by a B-field, we illustrate four different scenarios in 

Figs. 1c-f. We sketch a slow reduction of  for a B-field, 𝐵∥, along the nanowire axis (Figs. 1c-

e) and a rapid decrease of  for a perpendicular field, 𝐵⊥ (Fig. 1f). We consider a single 


 

 
6

lowest-energy subgap state (i.e. an ABS) with energy E0, which is two-fold spin-degenerate at 

B = 0 and becomes spin-split in a B-field. Fig. 1c sketches the case where E0 decreases very 

slowly with 𝐵∥, remaining above Ec such that the GS parity remains even. This translates to 

2e-periodic conductance oscillations for all 𝐵∥-fields (Fig. 1k). Note that conductance peaks 

occur when the lowest-energy parabolas cross. In Fig. 1g the lowest crossings are always 

between even-charge parabolas. These crossings, for instance at Ng = -1 and +1, are 2e-

periodic. The odd-charge parabolas remain above these lowest-energy crossings and thus do 

not participate in the low-energy transport.  

 

Fig. 1d sketches a second case where E0 varies more rapidly with 𝐵∥. When E0 crosses Ec the 

odd-charge parabolas pass the lowest-energy crossings of the even parabolas, thereby 

adding degeneracy points between even-charge and odd-charge parabolas (Fig. 1h). This 

results in alternating smaller and larger peak spacings, where the smaller valleys have odd-

parity for E0 > 0 and even-parity for E0 < 0. Note that an equal spacing with 1e-periodicity 

occurs when E0 = 0. At negative energies, when E0 crosses -Ec the 2e-periodicity is restored, 

however, now with an odd-parity GS. In terms of the charge parabolas this corresponds to 

odd-charge parabolas being always lower in energy than the even ones (red parabolas in Fig. 

1h). This case of 2e-periodicity for an odd-parity GS has not been reported before.   

 

In the third case we illustrate the possible consequence of strong spin-orbit interaction. The 

zero-energy crossing of the subgap state can now be followed by a transition to a topological 

phase containing MZMs rigidly fixed at E0 = 0 (Fig. 1e). (Note that the re-opening of the gap 

is not shown in Fig. 1e since only the lowest-energy subgap state is sketched.) As E0 

decreases below Ec, the peak spacing gradually evolves from 2e to 1e with alternating even- 


 

 
7

and odd-parity GSs (Figs. 1i and m). It is important to note that the even/odd degeneracy of 

the topological phase in bulk materials is lifted here by the charging energy [3,20]. This 

fundamental degeneracy is however visible by comparing the lowest energies for the even 

and odd parity GSs, which are both zero, albeit at different gate voltages. We note that ABSs 

confined by a smooth potential may also give rise to a similar phenomenon as sketched in 

Fig. 1e [21]. 

 

Finally, in the fourth case (Fig. 1f), the superconducting gap in Al closes at its critical 

perpendicular magnetic field (Figs. 1j and n). This transition to the normal state also causes 

equidistant 1e-periodic oscillations, which in the peak evolution is similar to the topological 

case. However, we show below that finite-bias spectroscopy is significantly different in these 

two cases.  

 

In Fig. 2, we present exemplary data for the four cases illustrated in Figs. 1k-n. Fig. 2a-d show 

four panels of dI/dVb measured at zero bias as a function of VPG and B-field (𝐵∥ or 𝐵⊥). The 

bottom row of panels shows representative linecuts at high B-fields. Fig. 2e-h show the 

corresponding peak spacings for even (𝑆e) and odd (𝑆o) GSs. These spacings are converted 

from gate voltage to energy via the gate lever arm and reflect the energy difference 

between even- and odd-parity states. In Fig. 2a the peaks are 2e-periodic with even-parity 

GS up to a field of ~0.9 T. This observation reflects that up to this B-field our Al thin film 

remains superconducting without any low-energy subgap state.  Above ~0.9 T the gap is 

significantly suppressed such that 1e-transport sets in [11].  

 


 

 
8

In Fig. 2b, the conductance peaks split into pairs around 0.11 T with alternating small and 

large spacings. These split peaks merge with neighbouring split peaks, leading to the 

recurrence of 2e-periodic oscillations, but strikingly with an odd-parity in the valleys (cf. Fig. 

1l). The parity transition is also illustrated in Fig. 2f by the single crossing between 𝑆e and 𝑆o. 

Similar to Fig. 2a, above 0.9 T the oscillation becomes 1e-periodic (see linecuts).  

 

For the case shown in Fig. 2c (cf. Fig. 1m), the 2e-periodicity gradually changes to uniform 

1e-periodicity above ~0.35 T. 𝑆e and 𝑆o exhibit slight but visible parity-changing oscillations 

up to 0.9 T, whose amplitude decreases with field. This case resembles the experiment of ref. 

[15] where the 1e oscillations are associated with MZMs. Additionally, we found that the 

peaks are alternating in height. To quantify this effect, we extract from the data an 

asymmetry parameter 𝛬 =

𝐺e→o

𝐺e→o+𝐺o→e, which amounts to 0.5 for peaks with equal heights 

[22]. Here, 𝐺e→o (𝐺o→e) is the peak height at an even-to-odd (odd-to-even) transition 

occurring upon increasing VPG. Fig. 2g shows that 𝛬 undergoes drastic oscillations around 0.5 

as 𝐵∥ is varied, and levels off at 0.5 above 0.9T. 

 

The data in Fig. 2d are taken for the same gate configuration as Fig. 2c but in a perpendicular 

B-field, which turns the Al into a normal state around 𝐵⊥ = 0.18 T (see also Supplementary 

Fig. 3). In the normal state the oscillations are 1e-periodic and both 𝛬 and 𝑆e/𝑆o are 

constant, in agreement with established expectations [6]. 

 

The four columns in Figs. 1 and 2 represent distinct phases at high B: an even-parity GS, an 

odd-parity GS, a superconducting phase of alternating even and odd parities due to a single 

state at zero energy, and a gapless normal phase of alternating even and odd parities. These 


 

 
9

distinct phases can be reached by varying VPG and thereby the spatial profile of the wave 

functions, which determines the coupling strength to Al and to the external magnetic field 

[23-25]. In Fig. 2a, a very negative VPG pushes the wave functions against and partly into the 

Al, leading to a robust-induced gap with weak sensitivity to the B-field, which indeed never 

induces a parity change. Fig. 2b, at more positive VPG, reflects the presence of a subgap state 

with larger weight in the InSb (as indicated by its estimated g-factor, g ≈ 7-15, see another 

example in Fig. 3f). In Fig. 2c, at even more positive VPG, the involved wave function has an 

even larger weight in the semiconductor, yielding a large g-factor of ~10, possibly 

augmented by orbital effects [26]. This leads to the appearance of robust zero-energy modes 

at B-fields much lower than the critical field of the thin Al shell. This VPG-dependent 2e- to 

1e-periodic transition has been repeated for another device, which is not depicted here. 

 

2e-periodic odd-parity GS  

Fig. 3 is dedicated to the new observation of a 2e-periodic, odd-parity GS. The combined 

system of a superconducting island weakly coupled to a quantum dot with an odd electron 

number can also have odd parity [27]. In our case all states are strongly hybridized with the 

superconductor and one bound state drops below - Ec, which causes the even-parity state to 

become an excited state above the odd-parity GS. (We describe different types of bound 

states in the Supplementary Part 5.) Fig. 3a-c show Coulomb diamond for the gate settings of 

Fig. 2b at three values of 𝐵∥. Fig. 3a at 𝐵∥ = 0 shows 2e-periodic diamonds with 1e and 2e 

linecuts shown at the bottom (similar data was presented in Fig. 1b). Fig. 3b at 𝐵∥ = 0.17 T 

corresponds to the even-odd regime. Note that the conductance near Vb = 0 is suppressed, 

indicating that the subgap state causing the even-to-odd transition is weakly coupled to at 

least one of the normal leads (see also linecuts). Fig. 3c at 𝐵∥ = 0.35 T shows again 2e-


 

 
10

periodic diamonds but now the GS inside the diamonds has an odd parity.  The diamond 

structure, including the presence of regions with negative dI/dVb, is very similar to the even-

parity GS diamonds, except for the shift in gate charge by 1e.  

 

Fig. 3f shows another example of the transition from the 2e-periodic even GS, via a region of 

even-odd spacings, to a 2e-periodic odd GS. Note again that the even-odd peak heights are 

significantly suppressed. These peaks correspond to a crossing of an even-parity parabola 

with an odd-parity parabola in Fig. 1h, where transport occurs via single electron tunnelling. 

In contrast, transport at the 2e-periodic peaks, both for even and odd GSs, occurs via 

Andreev reflection. The two cartoons (Fig. 3d and e) illustrate these different transport 

mechanisms.     

 

Isolated zero-energy modes and Coulomb valley oscillations 

Richer sequences of GS transitions as a function of magnetic field are also possible. For 

instance, the sketch in Fig. 4a illustrates the occurrence of multiple zero-energy crossings at 

low 𝐵∥ followed by the appearance of a stable zero-energy state at higher 𝐵∥. This type of 

behaviour is observed in Fig. 4b, showing large oscillations of 𝑆e and 𝑆o for 𝐵∥ < 0.6 T, and a 

stable 1e-periodicity for 𝐵∥ > 0.7 T (see Fig. 4c). Similarly, Fig. 4d also shows large oscillations 

of 𝑆e and 𝑆o below 0.6 T, followed by a region of almost equally-spaced peaks above 0.6 T 

(see Fig. 4e).  

 

The features at low 𝐵∥ (such as the position where the 2e-periodic peaks first split) can 

depend on the precise value of VPG. In contrast, the features at high 𝐵∥ are strikingly regular, 

with only a weak dependence on VPG. This suggests that the 1e-periodicity at high fields 


 

 
11

originates from a state which is remarkably robust against gate variations. Furthermore, we 

note how the alternation of the conductance peak heights, already seen in Fig. 2c, is clearly 

visible in Fig. 4e even in the 1e-periodic regime. The origin of these peak height oscillations 

lies in the difference between tunnelling amplitudes involving the electron and hole 

components of the subgap states [22]. It was recently proposed that in an idealized model 

for MZMs in a finite-length wire, the oscillations of 𝛬 should be correlated with the 

oscillations in 𝑆e and 𝑆o, i.e. that 𝛬 would be maximal or minimal when 𝑆e = 𝑆o and vice 

versa that |𝑆e - 𝑆o| would be maximal for 𝛬 = 0.5 [22]. In Fig. 4e, we find that the oscillations 

in 𝛬 are similar in number and period to the corresponding oscillations in 𝑆e and 𝑆o, indeed 

suggesting a possible connection between the two (another example is presented in 

Supplementary Figs. 8c-f). Fig. 4f shows finite-bias spectroscopy in the 1e-periodic regime of 

Fig. 4d, at a high parallel field 𝐵∥ = 0.7 T. This spectroscopy reveals that the marked 

asymmetry of the peak heights originates from a discrete state that is gapped from a 

continuum of states at higher bias. As a comparison, Fig. 4g shows that for Al in the normal 

state no discrete features are observed. These are important verifications that substantiate 

our conclusion that the scenario in Fig. 1e is the proper description of the 1e oscillations in 

the experimental figures (Figs. 2c and 4d) at high 𝐵∥.   

 

Discussion 

In summary, we have revealed distinct types of fermion parity transitions occurring as a 

function of magnetic field and gate voltages in a Coulomb-blockaded InSb-Al island. These 

transitions provide a complete picture of all the parity phases in mesoscopic Cooper pair 

boxes [28]. Among these, in a finite field we find a novel odd-parity phase with 2e periodicity 

in gate voltage. Additionally, we find 1e-periodic oscillations at high field originate from 


 

 
12

isolated zero-energy modes. The thorough understanding of the involved physics is 

important since such islands form the building blocks of future Majorana qubits [29-31].  

 

Methods 

Device fabrication.  

An isolated Al segment is formed by selectively shadowing the nanowire during Al 

evaporation. InSb-Al nanowires with double shadows (Supplementary Fig. 1) were 

transferred from the InP growth chip to a doped-Si/SiOx substrate using a mechanical 

nanomanipulator installed inside an SEM. Au is used as leads and top gates. A 30 nm 

dielectric of SiNx separates the nanowire from the top gates.  

 

Transport Measurements.  

The device is cooled down to ~15 mK in an Oxford dry dilution refrigerator. The effective 

electron temperature is estimated to be 20-50 mK. Conductance across the devices was 

measured using a standard low-frequency lock-in technique (amplitude is 5 μV). The voltage 

bias Vb = VS – VD is applied symmetrically between the two leads (VS = -VD = Vb/2). A magnetic 

field is applied using a 6-1-1 T vector magnet. The direction of the magnetic field is aligned 

carefully with respect to the nanowire axis (Supplementary Fig. 3). The sweeping rate of the 

datapoints is very slow and one VPG-dependent linetrace at fixed B in Fig. 2 takes a few 

minutes. We measure from 0 to 1T with 0.01T steps, bringing the measurement time for 

each panel to 3-4 hours. Because of this, we suffer from an ultra-slow drift that effectively 

changes the island potential. It is important to stress, however, that the slow drift affects the 

peak positions but not the peak spacings (since each trace only takes a few minutes to 


 

 
13

acquire). We extract subgap states and parity transitions from peak spacings and thus our 

conclusions are not affected by the ultra-slow drift. 

 

Data availability 

The figures are created from the row data. All data and the code used for peak fitting are 

available at http://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:e0ecafef-7f45-4475-b2f8-351c2af4a2b0 .  

 

Acknowledgements  

We gratefully acknowledge Joon Sue Lee, Daniel J. Pennachio and Borzoyeh Shojaei for help 

with superconductor/semiconductor fabrication and structural characterization, Petrus J. 

van Veldhoven for help with nanowire growth, and Kevin van Hoogdalem, Leonid Glazman 

and Roman Lutchyn for discussion of the data. This work has been supported by the 

European Research Council (ERC), the Dutch Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), the 

Office of Naval Research (ONR), the Laboratory for Physical Sciences and Microsoft 

Corporation Station Q. 

 

Author Contributions  

J.S. fabricated the devices. J.S., F.B. and S.J.J.R. performed the measurements. J.S., S.H., 

B.V.H. and L.P.K. analysed the data. G.W., D.X., D.B., and A.G. contributed to the discussion 

of data and the optimization of the fabrication recipe. S.G., R.L.M.O.H.V., D.C., J.A.L., M.P., 

C.J.P. and E.P.A.M.B. carried out the growth of materials. J.S., B.V.H., S.H., F.B. and L.P.K. co-

wrote the paper. All authors commented on the manuscript. 

 


 

 
14

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests.


 

 
15

References 

[1]  Lutchyn, R. M., Sau, J. D. & Das Sarma, S. Majorana fermions and a topological phase transition in 

semiconductor-superconductor heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010). 

[2]  Oreg, Y., Refael, G. & von Oppen, F. Helical liquids and Majorana bound states in quantum wires. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 105, 177002 (2010). 

[3]  Fu, L. Electron teleportation via Majorana bound states in a mesoscopic superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

104, 056402 (2010). 

[4]  Das Sarma, S., Freedman, M. & Nayak, C. Majorana zero modes and topological quantum computation. Npj 

Quantum Information 1, 15001 (2015). 

[5]  Kouwenhoven, L. P., et al. Electron transport in quantum dots. In: Mesoscopic electron transport. Springer, 

Dordrecht, 345, 105 (1997). 

[6]  Averin, D. V., & Nazarov, Y. V. Macroscopic quantum tunneling of charge and co-tunneling. In Single Charge 

Tunneling. Springer, Boston, MA, 294, 217 (1992) 

[7]  Tinkham, M. Introduction to superconductivity. 2nd Edition . McGraw-Hill, New York (1996) 

[8]  Geerligs, L. J., Anderegg, V. F., Romijn, J. et al. Single Cooper-pair tunneling in small-capacitance junctions. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 377 (1990). 

[9]  Tuominen, M. T., Hergenrother, J. M., Tighe, T. S. & Tinkham, M. Experimental evidence for parity-based 2e 

periodicity in a superconducting single-electron tunnelling transistor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1997 (1992). 

[10]  Tuominen, M. T., Hergenrother, J. M., Tighe, T. S. & Tinkham, M. Even-odd electron number effects in a 

small superconducting island: Magnetic-field dependence. Phys. Rev. B 47, 11599 (1993). 

[11]  Lu, J. G., Hergenrother, J. M., & Tinkham, M. Magnetic-field-induced crossover from 2e to e periodicity in 

the superconducting single-electron transistor. Phys. Rev. B 53, 3543 (1996). 

[12]  Eiles, T. M., Martinis, J. M. & Devoret, M. H. Even-odd asymmetry of a superconductor revealed by the 

Coulomb blockade of Andreev reflection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1862 (1993). 

[13]  Hekking, F. W. J., Glazman, L. I., Matveev, K. A. & Shekhter, R. I. Coulomb blockade of two-electron 

tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 4138 (1993). 

[14]  Higginbotham, A. P. et al. Parity lifetime of bound states in a proximitized semiconductor nanowire. Nat. 

Phys. 11, 1017 (2015). 


 

 
16

[15]  Albrecht, S. M. et al. Exponential protection of zero modes in Majorana islands. Nature 531, 206 (2016). 

[16]  Albrecht, S. M., et al. Transport signatures of quasiparticle poisoning in a Majorana island. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

118, 137701 (2017). 

[17]  Kammhuber, J. et al. Conductance quantization at zero magnetic field in InSb nanowires. Nano Lett. 16, 

3482 (2016). 

[18]  Zhang, H., et al. Ballistic superconductivity in semiconductor nanowires. Nat. Commun. 8, 16025 (2017). 

[19]  Gazibegovic, S. et al. Epitaxy of advanced nanowire quantum devices. Nature 548, 434438 (2017). 

[20]  Van Heck, B., Lutchyn, R. M., & Glazman, L. I. Conductance of a proximitized nanowire in the Coulomb 

blockade regime. Phys. Rev. B 93, 235431 (2016). 

[21]  Chiu, C. K., Sau, J. D. & Das Sarma, S. Conductance of a superconducting Coulomb-blockaded Majorana 

nanowire. Phys. Rev. B 96, 054504 (2017). 

[22]  Hansen, E. B., Danon, J., & Flensberg, K. Probing electron-hole components of subgap states in Coulomb 

blockaded Majorana islands. Phys. Rev. B 97, 041411 (2018). 

[23]  Antipov, A. E., et al. Effects of gate-induced electric fields on semiconductor Majorana nanowires. Phys. 

Rev. X 8, 031041 (2018). 

[24]  Woods, B. D., Stanescu, T. D., & Sarma, S. D. Effective theory approach to the Schrodinger-Poisson 

problem in semiconductor Majorana devices. Phys. Rev. B 98, 035428 (2018). 

[25]  Mikkelsen, A. E., Kotetes, P., Krogstrup, P., & Flensberg, K. Hybridization at superconductor-semiconductor 

interfaces in Majorana devices. Phys. Rev. X 8, 031040 (2018). 

[26]  Winkler, G. W. et al. Orbital Contributions to the Electron g Factor in Semiconductor Nanowires. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 119, 037701 (2017). 

[27]  Lee, E. J. H. et al. Spin-resolved Andreev levels and parity crossings in hybrid superconductor-

semiconductor nanostructures. Nat. Nanotech. 9, 79 (2014). 

[28]  Devoret, M. H., & Schoelkopf, R. J. Superconducting circuits for quantum information: an outlook. Science 

339, 1169 (2013).  

[29]  Karzig, T. et al. Scalable designs for quasiparticle poisoning-protected topological quantum computation 

with Majorana zero modes. Phys. Rev. B 95, 235305 (2017). 

[30]  Vijay, S. & Fu, L. Teleportation-based quantum information processing with Majorana zero modes. Phys. 

Rev. B 94, 235446 (2016). 


 

 
17

[31]  Plugge, S., Rasmussen, A., Egger, R. & Flensberg, K. Majorana box qubits. New J. Phys. 19, 012001 (2017). 

 
 


 

 
18

FIG. 1. Hybrid semiconducting-superconducting island and its energy spectrum. a, False-

colour scanning electron microscope image of the device consisting of an InSb nanowire 

(green) with an 800-900 nm long Al-shell (light-blue) covering the top facet and one side 

facet. Inset: schematic cross-section at the centre of the plunger gate (PG) indicated by the 

yellow line. The Si/SiOx substrate contains a global back gate that we keep at zero voltage. 

The InSb wire is contacted by Cr/Au leads (yellow) and then covered by a 30 nm thick 

dielectric layer of SiNx (light-grey). Ti/Au top gates (blue) that wrap around the wire allow for 

local electrostatic control of the electron density. Two gates are used to induce tunnel 

barriers (TG) and one plunger gate (PG) controls the electron number on the island. The 

scale bar indicates 500nm. b, dI/dVb versus tunnel gate voltage and Vb showing 2e-periodic 

Coulomb diamonds (one diamond is outlined by yellow dashed lines). The lower panel shows 

horizontal linecuts with 2e-periodic Coulomb oscillations at Vb = 0 (black trace) and 1e-

periodic oscillations at Vb = 150 μV (red trace). The panel on the right shows a vertical linecut 

through the Coulomb peak at the degeneracy point (blue trace) and through the centre of 

the Coulomb diamond (purple trace). Below are four scenarios for the B-dependence of a 

single Andreev level (c, d, e and f ), the resulting energies as a function of the induced charge, 

Ng, (g, h, i and j) and the Coulomb oscillations (k, l, m and n). In panels c-f, the grey regions 

represent the continuum of states above Δ. The coloured traces represent the energy, E0, of 

the lowest-energy subgap state. Panels g-j show the energies of the island with N excess 

electrons, E(Ng) = Ec (Ng - N)2 + pNE0, where Ng is the gate-induced charge, N is the electron 

occupancy number, and pN = 0 (1) for N = even (odd). Parabolas for N = even are shown in 

black, while parabolas for N = odd are shown in colours in correspondence to the colours in 

the other rows. Crossings in the lowest-energy parabolas correspond to Coulomb peaks as 


 

 
19

sketched in panels k-n, again with the same colour coding. Labels in the Coulomb valleys 

between the peaks indicate the GS parity being either even (e) or odd (o).  

 

FIG. 2. Four representative evolutions of Coulomb peaks, corresponding to the four 

columns (c-n) in Fig. 1. Top row panels: dI/dVb as a function of VPG and 𝐵∥ (a, b, c) or 𝐵⊥ (d). 

Below are typical linecuts at different B-fields indicated by the purple and green lines. (e, f, g, 

and h) Even and odd peak spacings, 𝑆e (red) and 𝑆o (blue) on the left axis, and peak height 

ratio, 𝛬 (black) on the right axis, versus B-field, for the valleys labelled e/o in a and b and for 

the average spacings in c and d, respectively. Here and in other figures, the linewidths of 𝑆e 

and 𝑆o curves correspond to 5 µeV, in accordance with the lock-in excitation energy. a, The 

2e-periodicity with even-parity valleys persists up to 0.9 T, above which quasiparticle 

poisoning occurs. b, The 2e-periodic peaks split at ~0.11 T and merge again at ~0.23 T. For 

𝐵∥ > 0.23 T, the oscillations are again 2e-periodic, but here the GS parity is odd, consistent 

with Fig. 1h. c, 2e-periodicity transitioning to uniform 1e-periodicity at 𝐵∥ ≈ 0.35 T , 

accompanied by peak spacing and peak height ratio oscillations up to 0.9 T (see also panel g). 

d, 2e-periodicity transitioning to 1e-periodicity at 𝐵⊥ = 0.18 T (the vertical dashed line), 

coinciding with the critical B-field of the Al layer (see Supplementary Fig. 3). Above the 

critical field, peak heights are constant (see linecuts) and the even/odd peak spacings are 

equal (h). A few common offsets in VPG are introduced to compensate the shifts in gate 

voltage, and the raw data are listed in Supplementary Fig. 4. 

 

FIG. 3. Transport via an odd-parity GS. (a-c) Coulomb diamonds for the gate settings in Fig. 

2b at different 𝐵∥. Below are linecuts at Vb = 0 (black trace) and Vb = 150 μV (red trace), 


 

 
20

respectively. f, Another example of an even- to odd- GS transition. The inset is a zoom-in of 

the even-odd regime with a different scale bar. The sketch in d illustrates the Cooper pair 

tunnelling process in both even- and odd- GS regimes (marked by green dashed lines in f), 

while e illustrates the single electron tunnelling process in the alternating even-odd parity GS 

regime (marked by yellow dashed lines in f).  

 

FIG. 4. Evolution of multiple subgap states. a, Schematic B-field dependence for the case of 

three subgap states with GS parity transitions at each zero-energy crossing. Dashed lines 

indicate level repulsion between different subgap states, leading to large oscillations of the 

lowest energy E0. b, One example of Coulomb peaks reflected by the scenario in panel a. The 

extracted peak spacings for the valleys labelled by e and o are shown below in c. The 

evolution of the peak spacings is compatible with the type of energy spectrum shown in a, 

characterized by large oscillations of E0. Note that the odd-parity GS around ~0.2 T develops 

a full 2e-periodicity. (The spacings near ~0.6 T are absent because the exact peak positions 

are unclear.) d, Another example of Coulomb oscillations with a pronounced B-field 

dependence. Extracted peak spacings and the height ratio are shown in e (averaged over the 

three periods in d). f, Coulomb diamonds at 𝐵∥ = 0.7 T along the VPG-range indicated by the 

yellow line in d. This bias spectroscopy reveals isolated zero-bias peaks at the charge-

degeneracy points that are separated from the continuum. As in Fig. 2c, neighbouring zero-

bias peaks have different heights (also visible in d at high 𝐵∥). g, Bias spectroscopy with Al in 

the normal state (𝐵⊥ = 0.3 T) where the isolated zero-bias peaks are absent. 


 

 
21

 

Figure 1 

 
 


 

 
22

 

Figure 2 

 
 


 

 
23

 

Figure 3 

 
 


 

 
24

 

Figure 4 

 
 


 

 
25

Supplementary Note 1. Growth of epitaxial InSb/Al nanowire islands 

 

Supplementary Figure 1. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of shadowed InSb/Al nanowires. The Al 
shell on the nanowires is coloured in light blue. a, InSb nanowires are grown in a metal-organic vapour-phase 
epitaxy (MOVPE) reactor from catalyst droplets (Au), positioned along etched trenches. First, InP stems are 
grown to facilitate the nucleation of InSb nanowires. After nanowire growth, hydrogen cleaning is used to 
remove the native oxide layer of the nanowires and Al is evaporated in a direction parallel to the trenches. The 
positioning of Au droplets together with the tilting of the Al evaporation direction with respect to the 
horizontal plane allows the shadowing of predefined sections on the nanowires. b, Zoomed-in SEM image of 
InSb nanowires with either one or two shadows. c, During the Al evaporation, two sacrificial nanowires at the 
bottom are used to shadow two short segments (~100 nm) on a third wire at the top. The island length, set by 
the separation between two shadows, varies between 0.2 and 1 μm. Note that this ‘shadow-growth’ 
mechanism avoids the need of etching the Al, leaving pristine nanowire facets on the junction regions. We 
create a hybrid superconducting-semiconductor island of Al-InSb by interrupting the Al shell in two narrow 
regions allowing local electrostatic gating of two semiconducting junctions. At these two regions tunnel barriers 
can be introduced by the top gates to confine the superconducting-semiconducting hybrid island. 

 

Supplementary Note 2. Extracting Ec and E0 from 2e-periodic Coulomb diamonds at zero 
magnetic field  

The energy parabolas in Supplementary Figure.2a illustrate that the degeneracies of the 
even-parity ground-state parabolas occur at Ec. In the Coulomb valley (at Ng = 0) the even-
parity parabolas cross at 4Ec (indicated by the yellow dot in Supplementary Figure.2a). In 
finite-bias Coulomb diamonds, the voltage drop at the top of the 2e-periodic Coulomb 
diamonds corresponds to 8Ec/e (dashed yellow diamond in Supplementary Figure.2b). As a 
result, Ec extracted from the yellow-dashed diamond in Fig. 1b of the main text is ~22 μeV. 
Over the entire gate range Ec varies between 22-27 μeV (see typical diamonds in 
Supplementary Figure.2c and d at different gate values). 

Above the degeneracy points of the GSs, the onset of quasiparticle transport causes a 
blockade of Andreev reflection and results in a region of negative differential conductance 
(NDC) starting from a threshold voltage bias VNDC ≈ 2(E0 - Ec)/e (see the blue arrows in 
Supplementary Figure.2a) [2]. For example, VNDC = 90 μV in Fig. 1b, so E0 ≈ 67 μeV. On the 
other hand, at finite bias, the onset of 1e-periodicity is due to single-particle transport via 
co-tunnelling events (see the red arrow in Supplementary Figure.2a), corresponding to 2E0/e 
[3]. In Fig. 1b, E0 extracted from the onset of 1e-periodicity is close to the number extracted 
from NDC in the same diamond (E0 ≈ 67 μeV). Over the entire gate range E0 varies between 
50 - 90 μeV (see diamonds in Supplementary Figure.2c and d). 


 

 
26

 

Supplementary Figure 2. Derivation of Ec and E0 from Coulomb diamonds. a, The energy level parabolas of the 
superconducting island. The black parabolas describe the charge states for even parity, and blue parabolas for 
odd parity. Odd parabolas are lifted by E0, consistent with E0 ≫ Ec in Fig. 1b. b, Finite-bias Coulomb diamonds 
for 1e (solid black diamonds) and 2e-periodicity (dashed yellow diamond). c and d, Coulomb diamonds for two 
different gate configurations. In the bottom panels, horizontal linecuts show the 2e (in black) versus 1e-
periodic (in red) conductance oscillations taken respectively at Vb = 0 μV and Vb = 250 μV (in c) / Vb = 200 μV (in 
d). In the right panels, vertical linecuts at different VPG voltages show the presence of NDC regions above the 
degeneracy point (blue linecuts) and conductance enhancement in the valley (red linecuts). For c, we estimate 
Ec ≈ 25 μeV, while the onset of NDC is found at Vb(NDC) ≈ 70 μV, so E0 ≈ 60 μeV. In d, Ec ≈ 22 μeV and Vb(NDC) ≈ 
70 μV, so E0 ≈ 57 μeV.  

 

Supplementary Note 3. Superconducting critical magnetic fields of the InSb/Al nanowire 
for three orientations  

We performed tunnelling spectroscopy at one of the two junctions as a function of the 
magnetic field strength in three directions: parallel to the nanowire 𝐵∥ (Supplementary 
Figure.3a), perpendicular to the substrate 𝐵out of plane (Supplementary Figure.3b) and 
perpendicular to the nanowire in the plane of the substrate 𝐵in plane (Supplementary 
Figure.3c). The local tunnel gate voltage is -1 V for this spectroscopy junction (the weak-
tunnelling regime). The voltages are +2 V for the other tunnel gate and the plunger gate to 
make sure the chemical potential is smooth for the entire island except at the local tunnel 
gate. When B is applied parallel to the nanowire (Supplementary Figure.3a), the hard 
superconducting gap persists up to 1.0 T, with Δ(𝐵∥ = 0) = 220 μeV and Δ(𝐵∥ = 0.8 T) = 90 μeV 
(the bottom panel in Supplementary Figure.3a). The gap closes completely at 𝐵∥

𝑐 ≥ 1 T, 

which is out of range for the employed 3D vector magnet.  

For the other two orientations, our device undergoes a transition to the normal state at 
𝐵out of plane

c
 ≈ 0.12 T and 𝐵in plane

c
 ≈ 0.18 T. In the main text, 𝐵⊥ means 𝐵in plane for simplicity. 


 

 
27

This observation is consistent with the SEM images of the device in Fig. 1a, showing the Al 
shell covering the top facet and one of the side facets of the nanowire.  

 

Supplementary Figure 3. Tunnelling spectroscopy at magnetic fields of different orientations. Top panels 
show dI/dVb tunnelling spectroscopy as a function of 𝐵∥ (a), 𝐵out of plane (b) and 𝐵in plane (c). Typical linecuts at 
selected B are shown in the bottom panels. The zero-bias dip above the critical magnet field in b and c are likely 
due to the confinement at the second junction.  

 

Supplementary Note 4. Raw data for dI/dVb as a function of VPG and 𝑩∥ 

 

Supplementary Figure 4. Raw data for dI/dVb as a function of VPG and 𝑩∥. a, b, and c correspond to Fig. 2b, Fig. 
4b and Fig. 4d in the main text, respectively. The plunger gate is sometimes drifting and gate-voltage jumps can 
occur because of charge trapping in the dielectric, so that raw dI/dVb data here are not always stable. However, 
the conductance peaks from different parity states are still easily identified. A few common offsets in VPG are 
introduced to compensate for the shifts in gate voltage. 


 

 
28

 

Supplementary Note 5. Comparison of the 2e-periodic odd-parity ground state with 
previous observations of fermion parity crossings 

The ground state fermion parity of a superconducting system can be changed by the Fermi-
level crossing of a spin-resolved subgap state. The subgap state causing the GS transition 
may, for instance, be bound to an impurity in a bulk superconductor, as in the case of Shiba-
Yu-Rusinov states [4]; or it may be an Andreev bound state in a Josephson junction (see [5] 
for instance). In our case, the fermion parity switch is due to a subgap state localized in the 
mesoscopic InSb/Al superconducting island. In this case, as discussed in the main text, when 
the energy gap for emptying the subgap state exceeds the charging energy of the island, the 
odd parity GS caused by the fermion parity switch is stable at all value of the induced charge 
of the island and the sequential process is Cooper pair tunnelling/Andreev reflection. This 
condition was not reached in previous studies of hybrid superconducting-semiconductor 
islands, which always observed either an even-parity GS or an alternation of even- and odd-
parity GS [6, 7]. Furthermore, our observation is also distinct from the parity transitions 
observed in semiconducting quantum dots proximitized by a superconducting lead [8], 
where the charging energy applies only to the semiconductor but not to the superconductor. 
In this case, reducing the strength of the proximity effect (by varying the coupling between 
the dot and the superconductor) may cause a change from even to odd parity in the ground 
state of the dot, but only at values of the induced charge which would favour an odd 
occupation of the dot in the absence of the superconducting lead. In other words, the effect 
does not require a change of the GS parity of the superconducting lead itself. 

 

Supplementary Note 6. Effect of parallel and perpendicular magnetic fields on the 
periodicity of Coulomb peaks 

For Figs. 2c and 4d of the main text, we just show typical Coulomb diamonds (Fig. 4f) at a 
specific value of 𝐵∥. The additional figures at different 𝐵∥ and 𝐵⊥ (presented in 
Supplementary Figure.6) demonstrate the robustness of the isolated zero-bias state at all 𝐵∥, 
as well as the obvious difference between the superconducting state at 𝐵∥ and the normal 
state at 𝐵⊥. Supplementary Figures.6a-c correspond to the same gate settings as Fig. 4d and 
Supplementary Figure.6d relates to Figs. 2c-d. The diamonds at different 𝐵∥ (Supplementary 
Figure.6b and the top two panels in Supplementary Figure.6d) show the consistence of the 
isolated zero-mode. The finite bias spectroscopy (Supplementary Figure.6a) at the 
degeneracy point of Fig. 4d, as well as Supplementary Figure.6b, proves there is a zero-
energy crossing at low 𝐵∥ and a sticking zero-energy state at high 𝐵∥, which fits the sketch in 
Fig. 4a. The normal transition in Supplementary Figure.6c shows equal peak spacings and 
heights, which is used to distinguish the normal and superconducting 1e-periodic Coulomb 
peaks. For figs. 2c and d, we can also see the isolated zero-mode for different 𝐵∥ and a 
continuum in the normal regime (Supplementary Figure.6d). 


 

 
29

 

Supplementary Figure 6. Zero-bias resonances at different 𝑩∥ and 𝑩⊥. a, b and c are measured for a similar 
gate-voltage regime as Fig. 4d. a, dI/dVb as a function of Vb and 𝐵∥ at VPG close to one degeneracy point in Fig. 
4d. A charge degeneracy point at first crosses the Fermi level at 𝐵∥ ≈ 0.2 T, while a more persistent zero-bias 
peak occurs for 𝐵∥ = 0.5 - 0.65 T. b, Coulomb diamonds at 𝐵∥ ≈ 0.4 T and 0.55 T. Both of them show a discrete 
state at the degeneracy points, isolated by an energy gap. 𝐺e→o and 𝐺o→e also show alternating amplitudes. c, 
Evolution of zero-bias conductance peaks with 𝐵⊥. The state becomes normal at 𝐵⊥ ≈ 0.18T (𝐵in plane

c
 in Fig. S3c), 

and the peak oscillations become 1e-periodic with equal peak heights. d, Coulomb diamonds at different 𝐵∥ 
and 𝐵⊥ at the same gate-voltage regime as Figs. 2c and 2d. Both of the top and middle panels at finite 𝐵∥ show 
a discrete level at the degeneracy points and alternating peak heights, whereas the diamonds in the normal 
regime in the bottom panel show normal 1e oscillations without isolated peaks at the charge degeneracy 
points.  

 

Supplementary Note 7. Fitting of the Coulomb resonances 

The Coulomb resonances are analysed by fitting all peaks simultaneously using an identical 
electron temperature 𝑇el that takes into account the temperature-broadening of the 
Coulomb resonances. A single resonance is described by a Breit-Wigner distribution [9, 10] 

𝐺BW (𝑉PG, 𝑉0, 𝐸) =

2𝑒2

ℎ

(ℎ𝛤 2
⁄ )2

(ℎ𝛤 2
⁄ )2+[𝑒𝛼(𝑉PG−𝑉0)−𝐸]2                                     (1) 

where 𝑉0 is the centre of the Coulomb peak and 𝛼 is the plunger gate lever arm. The line 
shape is thermally broadened according to [11] 

𝐺(𝑉PG, 𝑉0) ∝ ∫
𝐺BW(𝑉PG, 𝑉0, 𝐸) [−

𝜕𝑓(𝑇,𝐸)

𝜕𝐸
] 𝑑𝐸

∞
−∞
                                  (2) 

with the Fermi-Dirac distribution 𝑓(𝑇, 𝐸). Hence, the total fitting function is given by a sum 
over a number of these line shapes and the tunnel coupling to the leads 𝛤. The peak position 
𝑉0 and the peak height are individual fitting parameters for each resonance, while the 
electron temperature 𝑇el and a constant offset are used as common fitting parameters. 


 

 
30

In conclusion, by fitting the data as depicted exemplarily in Supplementary Figure.7a (blue) 
the fitted curve (green) describes the data very well and we find an electron temperature of 
about 20-50 mK and a typical tunnel coupling of about ℎ𝛤 = 5 µeV. 

As depicted in Fig. 4b (bottom panel) of the main text the Coulomb peak spacing of the even 
and odd valleys oscillates as a function of magnetic field. The oscillation amplitude is strongly 
reduced above 0.6 T. In Fig. 4b also the relative Coulomb peak height 𝛬 is shown averaged 
for the three pairs of Coulomb peaks in Supplementary Figure.6b. This quantity is given by 

𝛬 =

𝐺e→o

𝐺e→o+𝐺o→e                                                                  (3) 

where 𝐺e→o is the conductance peak height at resonance between an even and an odd parity 
Coulomb diamond and 𝐺o→e is the consecutive resonance between the odd and the next 
even parity Coulomb diamond [12]. Clearly, the relative peak height undergoes oscillations 
as well that extend also into the regime of stable 1e oscillations above 0.6 T. The fitting 
result for the data in Supplementary Figure.7b, which is used to extract the Coulomb peak 
spacings and peak heights, is depicted in Supplementary Figure.7c. 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 7. Fitting of the Coulomb resonances. a, Fitting of the zero-bias linecut at 𝐵∥ = 0.7 T 
from the data presented in Fig. 4d of the main text. b and c, Measurement (b) and fitting result (c) using 
𝐺sum = ∑ 𝐺(𝑉PG, 𝑉0,𝑖)
𝑖
, with 𝐺(𝑉PG, 𝑉0,𝑖) given by Supplementary Eq.(2), for the data presented in Fig. 4d of the 

main text. 

 

Supplementary Note 8. The relation between peak spacing and peak height ratio 

We observe that the oscillations in 𝛬 are similar in number and period to the corresponding 
oscillations in 𝑆e and 𝑆o (Supplementary Figure.8a, b and d), indeed suggesting a possible 
connection between the two.  


 

 
31

 

Supplementary Figure 8. Evolution of peak heights and spacings. Peak height ratio 𝛬 and peak pacings for 
even (𝑆𝑒) and odd (𝑆𝑜) parities as a function of 𝐵∥ extracted from Fig. 2c (shown in a), Fig. 4d (shown in b) and 
Fig. S8c (shown in d). For comparison, the green curve in a is extracted from the normal state data of Fig. 2d. e, 
Exemplary Coulomb oscillations for the data in c at different fields 𝐵∥ = 0.44 T (𝛬 ≈ 0.5), 0.60 T (𝛬 > 0.5), and 
0.80 T (𝛬 < 0.5) indicated by arrows. f, Coulomb diamonds at a large value of 𝛬 in c, indicating the isolated zero 
mode. g, Coulomb diamonds in the same gate-voltage regime as f, but measured in the normal state (𝐵⊥= 0.3 
T), showing the continuum at finite bias. 

 

Supplementary Information References 

[S1]  Gazibegovic, S. et al. Epitaxy of advanced nanowire quantum devices. Nature 548, 434438 (2017). 
[S2]  Hekking, F. W. J., Glazman, L. I., Matveev, K. A. & Shekhter, R. I. Coulomb blockade of two-electron 

tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 4138 (1993). 


 

 
32

[S3]  Nazarov, Y. V., & Blanter, Y. M. Quantum transport: introduction to nanoscience. Cambridge University 

Press (2009). 

[S4]  Balatsky, A. V., Vekhter, I., and Zhu, J. X. Impurity-induced states in conventional and unconventional 

superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 373 (2006). 

[S5]  Chang, W., Manucharyan, V. E., Jespersen, T. S., Nygard, J. and Marcus, C. M. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 217005 

(2013). 

[S6]  Higginbotham, A. P. et al. Parity lifetime of bound states in a proximitized semiconductor nanowire. Nat. 

Phys. 11, 1017 (2015). 

[S7]  Albrecht, S. M. et al. Exponential protection of zero modes in Majorana islands. Nature 531, 206 (2016). 
[S8]  Lee, E. J. H. et al. Spin-resolved Andreev levels and parity crossings in hybrid superconductor-

semiconductor nanostructures. Nat. Nanotech. 9, 79 (2014). 

[S9]  Breit, G. & Wigner, E. Capture of slow neutrons. Phys. Rev. 49, 519 (1936). 
[S10]  Beenakker, C. W. J. Theory of Coulomb-blockade oscillations in the conductance of a quantum dot. Phys. 

Rev. B 44, 1646 (1991). 

[S11]  Foxman, E. B. et al. Effects of quantum levels on transport through a Coulomb island. Phys. Rev. B 47, 

10020 (1993). 

[S12]  Hansen, E. B., Danon, J., & Flensberg, K. Probing electron-hole components of subgap states in Coulomb 

blockaded Majorana islands. Phys. Rev. B 97, 041411 (2018). 

 
 

 

 


