IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014
5445

Long Slot Ridged SIW Leaky Wave Antenna Design
Using Transverse Equivalent Technique

Alireza Mallahzadeh, Member, IEEE, and Sajad Mohammad-Ali-Nezhad

Abstract—A novel ridged SIW leaky-wave antenna (LWA) with
controllable side lobe level and low cross-polarization is proposed
and fabricated. Longitudinally continuous asymmetric ridges
beside SIW sidewalls provide an asymmetric field distribution
around the long slot centered on the upper plane of the structure,
in way that the slot can radiate. An accurate transverse equivalent
network analysis is presented for calculating the properties of
the proposed LWA. The wavenumbers of the leaky-mode are
calculated theoretically and numerically. The designed ridged
SIW LWA shows a good SLL and cross polarization. Measurement
results are also consistent with the simulation results.

Index Terms—Leaky wave antenna, ridged substrate integrated
waveguide (RSIW), transverse equivalent (TE).

I. INTRODUCTION
L
EAKY WAVE ANTENNAS (LWAs) exhibit many inter-
esting features in microwave and millimeter-wave appli-
cations. Advanced properties of LWAs are frequency scanning
capability, wide bandwidth and high directivity with a simple
feed network [1]–[3].
Various studies on LWAs have been reported. These inves-
tigations include the groove guide [4], [5], the stub loaded
rectangular waveguide (LWAs loaded with parallel plates) [6],
the nonradiative dielectric guide (NRD) technology [7]–[9],
microstrip LWAs [10], [11], half-mode microstrip LWAs [12],
a periodic version of the half-mode microstrip LWAs [13] and
the strip-loaded dielectric slab [14], [15]. Other LWAs, such
as the leaky-wave long slot antenna have also been proposed
[16]–[19]. Longitudinal straight leaky-wave long slot antennas
provide narrow elevation beamwidth, low profile, and high
power capacity.
The conventional straight slot antenna in which the aperture
field distribution is uniform has a poor side lobe level (SLL).
The desired far-field pattern can be achieved by changing the
width of the slot or its distance from the center. While properly
tapering the aperture distribution improves SLL, it can cause an
increase in cross-polarization [17]. Cross-polarization increases
in LWAs that lack a symmetrical aperture distribution, such as
those with curved slots. In LWA structures, parallel plate stubs

Manuscript received May 07, 2014; revised July 13, 2014; accepted August
20, 2014. Date of publication September 04, 2014; date of current version
October 28, 2014.
The
authors
are
with
the
Electrical
and
Electronic
Engineering
Department,
Shahed
University,
Tehran
1915713495,
Iran
(e-mail:
mallahzadeh@shahed.ac.ir; alinezhad@shahed.ac.ir).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2014.2353673

are used for decreasing the cross-polarization. Different mech-
anisms for cross-polarization reduction are discussed in [20].
In microwave and millimeter-wave applications, waveguide
devices are preferred to microstrip devices from the aspects of
power loss and power handling. However, waveguide manu-
facturing process is difficult and expensive. Recent investiga-
tions on substrate integrated waveguides (SIWs), suggest that
SIW properties are transitional between microstrip and dielec-
tric-filled waveguide properties. Significant advantages of SIW
devices are light weight, low cost, low loss and easy integration
with planar circuits [21], [22].
SIW LWAs have been the subject of many studies in recent
years [22]–[27] and structures such as those presented in [23]
and [26] have achieved the desired results using a simple struc-
ture. Various LWAs based on SIW have been proposed, of which
the leaky-wave long slot antenna based on SIW is presented in
[28]. A straight slot etched on the broadside of a meandering
SIW and a meandering slot etched on the broadside of a straight
SIW, are shown in [28] which has realized approximate values
of
dB and
-
dB, through
a simple structure design.
Since the slot is designed in a way to have a symmetrical
structure, straight slot LWAs based on SIW can improve the
cross-polarization level compared to other structures. By ta-
pering the leakage rate along the antenna length, the SLL can
be controlled, and it is desirable for the leaky-mode phase con-
stant to remain unchanged along all the antenna length, so that
all parts of the antenna aperture radiate at the same angle [1]. In
[29]–[31], a design procedure has been presented for creating a
two-dimensional graph based on the effects of different param-
eters of the structure on the phase constant and the leakage rate.
This graph can be used for creating a design with different
values and fixed
values. In [28], changing the distance of the
slot from the sidewall can vary both leakage rate and phase con-
stant and as a result the antenna design cannot realize a variable
leakage rate and a fixed phase constant. However based on the
results in [31], the antenna could be designed with a fixed phase
constant in order to obtain the desired radiation pattern.
The proposed antenna structure is an SIW long slot LWA. By
transversely varying the ridge located beside the SIW sidewalls,
a variable leakage rate and a fixed phase constant can be ob-
tained to realize the desired SLL. Since the slot is symmetrical,
a low cross-polarization is also achieved.
Different theoretical and numerical approaches have been
employed in computing the leaky-wave structures properties.
Magnetic field integral equation in [25] and [32], [33] and
method of moment in [17] and [34], [35] are commonly used
to analyze LWAs.

0018-926X © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.


5446
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Another method is an analytical procedure based on a trans-
verse equivalent network (TEN) for the LWA. This approach is
accurate and not time-consuming. This method is used to ana-
lyze slit asymmetric waveguides and versatile LWAs based on
stub-loaded rectangular waveguides in [6] and [36], [37]. Also
in [29], the method of moment is applied in conjunction with a
multimodal TEN.
In this paper, a dispersion relation is obtained from the res-
onance of the TEN. It has to be noted that the presented TEN
for the proposed structure is created based on the obtained re-
sults in [36]–[39]. A suitable and accurate TEN is derived and
the complex dispersion relation of the LWA is obtained.
The theoretical models and circuit models used to analyze
the proposed antenna are outlined in Section III. Section IV
presents simulation results of the HFSS software for the uni-
form long slot LWA and conformity between the leakage rate

and phase constant
resulted from the TEN models and
HFSS simulations is observed.
In Section V, the LWA is designed based on the curves in
Section IV in order to realize an optimum SLL and cross-polar-
ization. Section VI shows that measurement results are consis-
tent with the simulation results and theoretical analysis.

II. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION OF THE LWA
BASED ON RIDGED SIW (RSIW)

In order for the antenna to radiate, the slots should cut off the
current distribution on the surface of the SIW. In other words,
the field distribution on both sides of the slots should be unlike.
When the SIW is operating in the dominant mode, the electric
current is not cut off, if the slots are located in center of the upper
plane of the antenna and the fields on both sides of the slots are
symmetrical, thus the slots wouldn’t radiate. Whereas distanced
slots from the center of the upper plane of the SIW would make
radiation possible. Lack of symmetry in the structure would im-
prove the SLL, but on the other hand the field distribution in the
slot aperture increases the cross-polarization.
However if the slot is located in the center of the upper plane
of the SIW, and the field distribution in the SIW is controlled in
a way that provides the needed conditions, radiation would be
possible. In fact, instead of varying the slot position, the field
distribution inside the SIW is controlled. In this state the slot
can radiate while the cross-polarization is proper. By control-
ling slotted SIW antenna features, the required leakage rate and
consequently the proper SLL can be obtained.
To vary the symmetry of the field distribution inside the SIW,
a ridge can be placed alongside one of the SIW sidewalls. The
electric field at the ridge would be zero, and it would not be sym-
metrical with respect to the SIW center.
and
vary based on
the width and height of the ridge. Considering the fabrication
process, and avoiding an increase in the SIW layers, the height
of the ridge is assumed to be fixed, and the ridge is only trans-
versely varied. Transversal variation of the ridge would change
the field distribution inside the SIW and as a result
is varied,
but
will vary as well and consequently the desired radiation
pattern cannot be obtained. In order to eliminate this problem,
in the proposed antenna a ridge was used alongside each side-
wall of the SIW structure, instead of just one of the sidewalls, as
shown in Fig. 1. Again in this situation, having assumed a fixed

Fig. 1. Geometry of the RSIW LWA (a) top view, (b) middle view, and (c)
cross-section view.

Fig. 2. Electric field distribution in the cross-section of the proposed structure.

ridge height, using ridges with different widths can vary the field
distribution at the slot. Controlling the ridge width would result
in a variable
and a fixed
, which in turn would make the de-
sired SLL feasible.
To better understand the behavior of the SIW slot antenna, the
distribution of the electric field is shown in Fig. 2. It shows the
distribution of the electric field in the cross-section of the SIW
with asymmetric ridges and without the slot on the upper wall.
As can be seen, the electric field has been distributed asymmet-
rically. As a result the slot can radiate, though it is located in the
center of the upper plane of the RSIW.

III. DISPERSION RELATION OF THE LEAKY-MODE

The radiation mechanism of an LWA is defined by the
complex longitudinal propagation constant of the excited
leaky-wave mode in the antenna. The propagation constant is
formed by the phase constant
and the leakage rate
, as [1]

(1)

From the phase and leakage constants, the angle of max-
imum radiation from the broadside direction
and the 3-dB
beamwidth
can be determined as

(2)


MALLAHZADEH AND MOHAMMAD-ALI-NEZHAD: LONG SLOT RSIW LWA DESIGN USING TE TECHNIQUE
5447

Fig. 3. TEN of the RSIW long slot antenna.

(3)

Where
is the free-space wavelength and
is the length
of the LWA. Both
and
are in radians in (2) and (3). The
length of the antenna has been chosen so that 90% of the power
is radiated, while the remaining 10% is absorbed by a matched
load.

and
are known as a function of the antenna geometry and
frequency. From (2) and (3), it is understood that, all the antenna
properties can be determined easily by the obtained
and
.
Therefore the LWA can be designed to conform to the desired
parameters. Analytical expressions and simulation results that
provide such information are presented in Section IV.

IV. TRANSVERSE EQUIVALENT NETWORK

The theoretical method used to obtain the numerical values
proposed in this paper involves an analytical procedure based on
an accurate simple transverse equivalent network for the slotted
RSIW structure. The dispersion relation can be calculated by
the resonance of this simple TEN. In the TEN used here, the
higher order mode is not included. Simple TEN is faster than
the multimode TEN, however the multimode TEN has a more
accurate response. Since the simple TEN has some limitations,
these limitations are accounted for in the design of the proposed
structure so that the desired results can be achieved. For instance
the width of the ridges should not be too large to make the ridge
too close to the center of the SIW. These limitations are dis-
cussed in [38].
This TEN means that analytical expressions are possible in
simple closed forms. As a result, the propagation constant itself
is in a simple closed form permitting the numerical values to be
calculated quickly. This method has been developed in [6] and
[36]–[39] for analyzing LWA structures.
The top and middle layers of the proposed structure are shown
in Fig. 1. It can be seen that the structure consists of a substrate
integrated waveguide with double ridges along the sidewalls
and a long slot in the center of the upper plane of the SIW.
The TEN for proposed structure is given in Fig. 3. In order
to obtain the TEN of the RSIW antenna, the structure can be
divided as follows:
1) Left and right sides of the SIW with respect to the center
of the slot, where a ridge is located beside a sidewall. As an
example, the right side can be considered as two waveguides
(transmission lines), with two different heights and widths,
where (b-b2)*(ar2) are the dimensions of the first waveguide
(transmission line), and (b)*(a-ar2) are the dimensions of the
second waveguide [6]. Each one of these waveguides can be
assumed as a transmission line, connected by a transformer.

Fig. 4. Reduced network for the proposed TEN.

The transformer coefficient (nr:1) is also obtained based on
the impedances before and after the discontinuity [35]. The
discontinuity susceptance for the ridge can also be calculated
[36]. The left side of the RSIW can be dealt with similarly as
the right side. It is the asymmetric structure of the left and right
ridges which makes radiation possible.
2) A slot with a width of “W” on the upper plane of the RSIW
[37].
Each sidewall of the SIW, which is composed of vias, has
been considered as a single ideal continuous plate, and is shown
as a short circuit in the equivalent circuit.
The method used for creating the equivalent network is sim-
ilar to the method used in [6] for an LWA, with the central ele-
ment in the TEN representation.
The previously proposed TEN can be reduced to the simple
circuit shown in Fig. 4.
The transverse resonance equation has been derived from the
reduced network, where
and
are the total admittances
introduced by the left and right arms.
and
are obtained
by

(4)

(5)

(6)

where

(7)

and
are defined in the Appendix and can be re-
placed in these formulas by their corresponding definitions

(8)

The dispersion relation for the propagation behavior is ob-
tained by solving

(9)


5448
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. Simulated complex propagation constant for the perturbed
mode.

Equation (9) is the final form of the transverse resonance
equation. The numerical solution of (9) easily results in a simple
closed form equation for
and
for all geometrical parameters.

V. RESULTS FOR THE PROPAGATION BEHAVIOR OF THE
UNIFORM LWA BASED ON RSIW

Numerically solving (9) which is obtained from the TEN,
the normalized phase and leakage constants for the geometrical
parameters of the proposed antenna can be calculated. In this
section, using HFSS simulations,
and
for different antenna
dimensions and at different frequencies are obtained and com-
pared to the results obtained from the TEN, to figure out the
preciseness of this theoretical method. For calculating the an-
tenna radiation properties, [10] is used.

A. Variations of
and
Versus Frequency

LWA is based on the RSIW dominant mode
which is
perturbed by removing a slot from its upper plane. Therefore,
the dimensions of the RSIW based LWA must be selected for a
given frequency of operation.
Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows the variations of
and

versus frequency, the mentioned figures were created using
HFSS simulation and TEN. The results would suggest that
HFSS simulation results and that of TEN are well matched,
exhibiting the preciseness of the TEN method.
Using (3) results, beam direction from broadside

to forward end fire
can be obtained. Also using (2),
the 3-dB beamwidth can be calculated.
Looking at the curve for
, three separate frequency
ranges can be seen. At the highest range of frequencies, when
is above 12.5 GHz, the value of
exceeds unity, because the
guided wave is a surface wave (slow wave). At that frequency
range, it was found that
. In the second frequency
range, from about 8.5 GHz to 12.5 GHz, the guided wave is
above cutoff, which is a fast wave. The mode is leaky within
that range, and the value of
decreases as the frequency

Fig. 6. Leakage rate and beam angle variations versus the height of the ridge
at 10 GHz. (
mil).

increases. In the third frequency range which is below 8 GHz,
the mode goes below cutoff. The
value continues to
increase strongly, but this region cannot be used for antenna
applications, as the wave does not radiate and is reflected back
to the source.
The variations in the values of the beam angle and the
beamwidth as a function of frequency in the range above cutoff
can be computed with (2) and (3). The beam angle changes
quickly with frequency, making frequency scan in elevation
effective for LWAs. It is possible to cover essentially the whole
angular range from broadside to forward end fire by varying
the frequency around the central frequency of 10 GHz.
Good agreement is observed between TEN results and HFSS
simulations, therefore the TEN approach is validated.

B. Dependence of
and
on Geometrical Parameters

The angle of the maximum beam is obtained using the value
of the phase constant and the 3-dB beamwidth related to the
value of the leakage rate. Therefore, the behaviors of
and

vary as the dimensions of the proposed antenna are changed.
The four best candidates to vary in order to modify
and

are the relative slot width, W, the difference in the height of
the ridges, the distance between the ridges, and transversal ridge
changes, i.e., their distance from the sidewalls, as seen in Fig. 1.
Fig. 6 shows the variations of
and
when the height
of one of the ridges varies from 0 to b while the height of the
other ridge remains constant.
It is seen that varying b2/b1 changes both
and

simultaneously, increasing one while decreasing the other.
When b1 equals b2, making the structure symmetrical, radi-
ation from the slot stops and
.
Transversely modifying the ridges, the leakage rate can be
controlled within the range of zero to the maximum value. The
smooth leakage rate variation from the maximum value, in a


MALLAHZADEH AND MOHAMMAD-ALI-NEZHAD: LONG SLOT RSIW LWA DESIGN USING TE TECHNIQUE
5449

Fig. 7. Leakage rate and angle of beam varying the ar1 with constant offset of
the width of the ridges at 10 GHz. (
mil).

highly asymmetric location of the ridges, to zero radiation, with
fully symmetrical ridges can easily be seen.
In order to better illustrate the asymmetric radiation mecha-
nism, Fig. 7 shows the normalized phase and leakage constants
obtained from the perturbed mode simulations, as a function of
the transversal ridge changes ar1 and ar2 for a constant ridge
height of
mm. The frequency of analysis is
10 GHz. In this situation, the distance between the two ridges

is fixed and as a result ar2 decreases when
ar1 is increased. Consequently, in Fig. 7 when ar1 is known, the
corresponding ar2 can be found and this is possible due to the
fixed
and
with little changes.
The behavior of
and
as a function of the distance between
the ridges
is shown in Fig. 8. The value of
, varies
smoothly over a very wide range of values as
is changed. The
value of
slightly varies over this range, though it was ex-
pected to be better.
A 1.5-degree variation in beam angle, over the full range of
can easily be seen, whereas the beamwidth varies from zero
to a maximum value of about 2.30, which is not so large. The
beamwidth can vary in a quite large range while the beam angle
remains fully constant.

VI. DESIGN OF THE TAPERED ANTENNA FOR SLL REDUCTION

In order to control the SLL, the designer must be able to con-
trol the leakage rate from zero to a maximum value, and keep
the phase constant unchanged along the length of the tapered
antenna, so that all parts of the antenna aperture radiate at the
same angle. Therefore, the variation of the normalized phase
and leakage constants of the proposed antenna must be studied
as a function of different geometrical parameters of the designed
antenna at the operating frequency at which these parameters
can change the value of
while maintaining
unchanged.

Fig. 8. Leakage rate and beam angle variations versus the distance between
two ridges at 10 GHz. (
mil).

Fig. 9. Leaky-mode contour curve.

It was shown in the Section V, that varying b1 and b2,
and
ar1 and ar2, would vary both
and
, thus, none of them can
be used alone to access a desirable SLL. On the other hand, if
the ridge height variation is to be used for tapering, a multilayer
structure should be used, which makes the structure voluminous
and the layers are discontinued as the height varies, therefore
assuming
and ar1 and ar2 changes would be consid-
ered in the design procedure.
For this purpose, In [29]–[31], the procedure for creating a
graph is presented which can be used for determining the proper
dimensions of the designed structure in order to obtain different

values and fixed
values. Based on this graph the leaky-mode
contour curve plots shown in Fig. 9 are used. These curves were
obtained from HFSS simulations at 10 GHz, by computing the
leaky-mode complex propagation constant for
mm and

mm, and varying ar1 and ar2. The continuous
lines define the pointing angles and the dashed lines define con-
stant leakage rates.
The illumination amplitude function along the antenna aper-
ture has to follow a Taylor distribution with a
-dB SLL.
The required aperture distribution and the calculated radiation
pattern are reported in [28]. The variation of the leaky-mode


5450
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE I
THE VALUES OF AR1 AND AR2 FOR
DB AND

leakage rate along the antenna length
can be computed
from the illumination function (A(l)), according to (10) [1]

(10)

where
is the antenna efficiency which is determined by the
ratio between the amount of the power radiated along the an-
tenna length and the total power injected to the structure. Table I,
provides the values of ar1 and ar2 at different positions of an
antenna with a length of 13 wavelengths, for achieving the op-
timum aperture distribution, based on (10). In this case, at any
point of the aperture the radiation is in a fixed direction, and the
desired leakage rate helps to realize a proper SLL.

VII. MEASUREMENT RESULTS

The proposed RSIW based long slot LWA was fabricated on
a Rogers5880 substrate with
and
mm, for
each substrate, as shown in Fig. 11.
Feeding technique is an important part of the design that
influences the input impedance and characteristics of the an-
tenna. The microstrip feed is used in this structure to widen the
bandwidth of the transmission line to match the needs of the
proposed LWA. Simultaneous field matching and impedance
matching are important for a transition design. In this struc-
ture, for impedance matching between the microstrip line and
the SIW, the microstrip line has been tapered from the input
impedance of a coaxial cable with an impedance of 50 ohms to
the input impedance of the SIW. According to HFSS 70 ohms.
Also for field matching between the microstrip line and the
SIW, the microstrip line is located on the same plane as that of
the top of the SIW. The input and output matching structures
are the same as shown in Fig. 10(a). The s-parameters of the
input matching are shown in Fig. 10(b).

Fig. 10. Input matching structure of the proposed LWA (a) Geometry of the
proposed structure (unit: mm) and (b) S-parameters of the proposed structure.

Fig. 11. Fabricated antenna (a) top view and (b) bottom view.

The measured and simulated normalized copolarization and
cross-polarization radiation patterns at the frequencies of 9, 10,
and 11 GHz are plotted and compared in Fig. 12(a)–(c), respec-
tively. A good agreement is achieved between the measured and
the simulated radiation patterns. It can be seen that SLL reduc-
tion is maintained for different scanning angles. Table II, con-
tains values of gain and radiation efficiency of the proposed an-
tenna in frequencies of 9, 10, and 11 GHz.
The scattering parameter of the designed and tapered LWA
is plotted in Fig. 13. The measured
parameter is in a good
agreement with HFSS simulations. The measured reflections of
the proposed antenna are almost below
dB in the frequency
range of 8.5 to 12.5 GHz.

VIII. CONCLUSION

The new SIW long slot LWA is studied and realized with
controllable radiation properties. To decrease the cross-polar-
ization, the long slot was placed on the upper plane of the SIW.
The advantage of the proposed LWA is that the independent ar1
and ar2 parameters provide an unchanged
and a controllable

. Therefore, the proposed antenna can realize an optimum side
lobe level of less than
dB. A simple dispersion relation for
the proposed antenna which is solved numerically to yield its
complex dispersion behavior can be derived by the transverse
resonance network and the TEN method presented by Pariello


MALLAHZADEH AND MOHAMMAD-ALI-NEZHAD: LONG SLOT RSIW LWA DESIGN USING TE TECHNIQUE
5451

Fig. 12. Normalized radiation patterns for (a) 9 GHz, (b) 10 GHz, and
(c) 11 GHz.

TABLE II
GAIN AND EFFICIENCY OF THE PROPOSED ANTENNA

Fig. 13. Measured and simulated of S11.

and Olinear has been developed for the proposed structure. Also
the wavenumbers of these waves are calculated by HFSS sim-
ulations. In order to validate the TEN and HFSS simulation re-
sults, the proposed antenna operating at 10 GHz has been built

and measured, showing a very good agreement between theory
and experiments.

APPENDIX

For the equivalent network shown in Fig. 3 and also for the
(4)–(7) the different values for the admittances and transformer
coefficients are as

where
is the characteristic admittance of the SIW and

These equations are extracted from [6]. Also [39] is used for
obtaining
and
.

REFERENCES

[1] A. A. Oliner and R. C. Johnson, Leaky-Wave Antennas, Antenna En-
gineering Handbook, 3rd ed.
New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill,
1993, ch. 10.
[2] R. S. Elliott, “On the design of traveling-wave-fed longitudinal shunt
slot arrays,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. AP-7, no. 5, pp.
717–720, Sep. 1979.
[3] L. O. Goldstone and A. A. Oliner, “Leaky-wave antennas I: Rectan-
gular waveguides,” IRE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. AP-7, no. 4, pp.
307–319, Oct. 1959.


5452
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

[4] P. Lampariello and A. A. Oliner, “A new leaky-wave antenna for
millimeter waves using an asymmetric strip in groove guide—Part
I: Theory,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. AP-33, no. 12, pp.
1285–1294, Dec. 1985.
[5] Z. Ma and E. Yamashita, “Leakage characteristics of groove guide
having a conductor strip,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 42,
no. 10, pp. 1925–1931, Oct., 1994.
[6] P. Lampariello, F. Frezza, H. Shigesawa, M. Tsuji, and A. A. Oliner, “A
versatile leaky-wave antenna based on stub-loaded rectangular wave-
guide—Part I: Theory,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 46, no. 7,
pp. 1032–1041, Jul. 1998.
[7] A. Sanchez and A. A. Oliner, “A new leaky waveguide for millimeter
waves using nonradiative dielectric (NRD) waveguide–Part I: Accurate
theory,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. MTT-35, no. 8, pp.
737–747, Aug. 1987.
[8] S. J. Xu, X.-Y. Zeng, K. Wu, and K.-M. Luk, “Characteristics and de-
sign consideration of leaky-wave NRD-guides for use as millimeter-
wave antenna,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 46, no. 12, pp.
2450–2456, Dec. 1998.
[9] J. A. G. Malherbe, “A leaky-wave antenna in nonradiative dielectric
waveguide,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 36, no. 9, pp.
1231–1235, Sep. 1988.
[10] A. A. Oliner, “Leakage from higher modes on microstrip line with ap-
plication to antennas,” Radio Sci., vol. 22, pp. 907–912, Nov. 1987.
[11] Y.-D. Lin, J.-W. Sheen, and C.-K. Tzuang, “Analysis and design of
feeding structures for microstrip leaky wave antenna,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1540–1547, Sep. 1996.
[12] G. Zelinski, G. Thiele, M. Hastriter, M. Havrilla, and A. Terzuoli, “Half
width leaky wave antennas,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 1, no.
2, pp. 341–348, Apr. 2007.
[13] Y. Li, Q. Xue, E.-N. Yung, and Y. Long, “The periodic half-width mi-
crostrip leaky-wave antenna with a backward to forward scanning ca-
pability,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 963–966,
Mar. 2010.
[14] J. Jacobsen, “Analytical, numerical and experimental investigation
of guided waves on a periodically strip-loaded dielectric slab,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. AP-18, no. 3, pp. 379–387, May 1970.
[15] J. A. Encinar, “Mode-matching and point-matching techniques applied
to the analysis of metal-strip-loaded dielectric antennas,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1405–1412, Sep. 1990.
[16] G. S. Scharp, “Continuous Slot Antennas,” U.S. patent 4328502, May
1982.
[17] F. Whetten and C. A. Balanis, “Meandering long slot leaky-wave
antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 39, no. 11, pp.
1553–1559, Nov. 1991.
[18] J. W. Sheen and Y. D. Lin, “Propagation characteristics of the slotline
first higher order mode,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 46,
no. 11, pp. 1774–1781, Nov. 1998.
[19] R. S. Elliott, Antenna Theory and Design, revised ed.
Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE Press, 2003.
[20] J. L. Gómez and A. A. Melcón, “Radiation analysis in the space domain
of laterally-shielded planar transmission lines. Part II: Applications,”
Radio Sci., vol. 39, pp. 1–10, Jun. 2004, RS3006.
[21] F. Xu and K. Wu, “Guided-wave and leakage characteristics of sub-
strate integrated waveguide,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol.
53, no. 1, pp. 66–73, Jan. 2005.
[22] M. Bozzi, A. Georgiadis, and K. Wu, “Review of substrate-integrated
waveguide circuits and antennas,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol.
5, no. 8, pp. 909–920, Jun. 2011.
[23] A. J. Martinez-Ros, J. L. Gómez-Tornero, and G. Goussetis, “Planar
leaky-wave antenna with flexible control of the complex propaga-
tion constant,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 60, no. 3, pp.
1625–1630, Mar. 2012.
[24] F. Xu, K. Wu, and X. Zhang, “Periodic leaky-wave antenna for mil-
limeter wave applications based on substrate integrated waveguide,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 340–347, Feb. 2010.
[25] J. Liu, D. R. Jackson, and Y. Long, “Substrate integrated waveguide
(SIW) leaky-wave antenna with transverse slots,” IEEE Trans. An-
tennas Propag., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 20–29, Mar. 2012.
[26] A. J. Martinez-Ros, J. L. Gomez-Tornero, and G. Goussetis, “Holo-
graphic
pattern
synthesis
with
modulated
substrate
integrated
waveguide line-source leaky-wave antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 3466–3474, Jul. 2013.
[27] Y. Dong and T. Itoh, “Composite right/left-handed substrate integrated
waveguide and half mode substrate integrated waveguide leaky-wave
structures,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 767–775,
Mar. 2011.

[28] Y. J. Cheng, W. Hong, K. Wu, and Y. Fan, “Millimeter-wave substrate
integrated waveguide long slot leaky-wave antennas and two-dimen-
sional multibeam applications,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
59, no. 1, pp. 40–47, Jan. 2011.
[29] J. L. Gómez, A. de la Torre, D. Cañete, M. Gugliemi, and A. A. Melcón,
“Design of tapered leaky-wave antennas in hybrid waveguide-planar
technology for millimeter waveband applications,” IEEE Trans. An-
tennas Propag.: Special Issue on Antennas Propag. Applicat., vol. 53,
no. 8, pt. I, pp. 2563–2577, Aug. 2005.
[30] J. L. Gómez, J. Pascual, and A. A. Melcón, “A novel full-wave CAD
for the design of tapered leaky-wave antennas in hybrid waveguide
printed-circuit technology,” Int. J. RF Microw. Comput. Aided Eng.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 297–308, Jul. 2006.
[31] J. L. Gómez, G. Goussetis, A. Feresidis, and A. A. Melcón, “Con-
trol of Leaky-Mode propagation and radiation properties in hybrid di-
electric-waveguide printed-circuit technology: Experimental results,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3383–3390, Nov.
2006.
[32] J. Liu and Y. Long, “A full-wave numerical approach for analyzing
rectangular waveguides with periodic slots,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 3754–3762, Aug. 2012.
[33] J. Liu, X. Tang, Y. Li, and Y. Long, “Substrate integrated waveguide
leaky-wave antenna with H-shaped slots,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 3962–3967, Aug. 2012.
[34] J. Liu, D. R. Jackson, and Y. Long, “Modal analysis of dielectric-filled
rectangular waveguide with transverse slots,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 3194–3203, Sep. 2011.
[35] F. L. Whetten and C. A. Balanis, “Effects of a dielectric coating on
leaky-wave long-slot waveguide antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1166–1171, Aug. 1996.
[36] J. Joubert and J. A. G. Malherbe, “Moment method calculation of
the propagation constant for leaky-wave modes in slotted rectangular
waveguide,” in Proc. Inst. Electr. Eng. Microw. Antennas Propag.,
Dec. 1999, vol. 146, no. 6.
[37] P. Lampariello and A. A. Oliner, “New equivalent networks with
simple closed-form expressions for open and slit-coupled E-plane tee
junctions,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 41, no. 5, pp.
839–847, May 1993.
[38] F. Frezza, M. Guglielmi, and P. Lampariello, “Millimetre-wave leaky-
wave antennas based on slitted asymmetric ridge waveguides,” in Proc.
Inst. Electr. Eng. Microw. Antennas Propag., Jun. 1994, vol. 141, no.
3, pp. 175–180.
[39] J. R. Pyle, “The cutoff wavelength of the
mode in ridged rect-
angular waveguide of any aspect ratio,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. MTT-14, no. 4, pp. 175–183, Apr. 1966.
[40] A. A. Oliner, “Equivalent circuits for slots in rectangular waveguide,”
Aug. 1951, Rep. R-234, Microwave Research Institute, Polytechnic
Institute of Brooklyn, for the Air Force Cambridge Research Center,
under Contract AF19(122)-3.

Alireza Mallahzadeh (M’12) received the B.S. de-
gree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University
of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1999 and the M.S.
and the Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
Iran University of Science and Technology, in 2001
and 2006, respectively.
He is a member of academic staff, Faculty of En-
gineering, Shahed University, Tehran, Iran. He has
participated in many projects relative to antenna de-
sign, which resulted in fabricating different types of
antennas for various companies. Also, he is interested
in numerical modeling, and microwaves.

Sajad Mohammad-Ali-Nezhad received the B.Sc.
degree
in
electronic
engineering
from
Shahid
Chamran University, Ahwaz, Iran, in 2008, and the
M.Sc. degree in communication engineering from
Shahed University, Tehran, Iran, in 2010, where he
is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in
communication engineering.
His main areas of interest are leaky wave antenna,
printed circuit antennas, array antennas, phased array
antennas, MIMO antennas, RFID tag antenna, fre-
quency selective surface, electromagnetic compati-
bility, microwave filters and hybrids, and electromagnetic theory.

View publication stats
View publication stats


