1 
 

Anomalous Scaling Exponents of Capacitance –Voltage Characteristics   

Vikas Nandal and Pradeep R. Nair 

Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 

India-400076  

Email: nknandal@iitb.ac.in, prnair@ee.iitb.ac.in  

 

Abstract- Capacitance-Voltage (CV) measurements along 
with the Mott-Schottky (MS) analysis are widely used 
for characterization of material and device parameters. 
Using a simple analytical model, supported by detailed 
numerical simulations, here we predict that the 
capacitance of thin film devices scale as V-2 (V is the 
applied potential), instead of the often used V-0.5 
dependence 
of 
MS 
analysis 
– 
with 
significant 

implications towards extraction of parameters like 
doping density, built-in voltage, etc. Surprisingly, we 
find that the predicted trends are already hidden in 
multiple instances of existing literature. As such, our 
results constitute 
a fundamental contribution to 

semiconductor device physics and are directly applicable 
and immediately relevant to a broad range of 
optoelectronic devices like organic solar cells, perovskite 
based solar cells and LEDs, thin film a-Si devices, etc.   

Organic and hybrid materials based optoelectronic devices 
have attracted immense research focus due to their low 
processing cost,1,2 high flexibility,2–6 and excellent optical 
properties.7–9 Material and device characterization is one of 
the crucial steps towards identification of functional 
parameters that dictate the performance of electronic 
devices. Although widely used, the MS analysis,10 in this 
regard is strictly valid only for P+N or PN+ device 
architectures. Novel optoelectronic devices such as organic 
solar cells,11,12 perovskite based solar cells13–16 and LEDs,17–

19 thin film a-Si devices20,21 often employ carrier selective 
PIN based architectures.1,22–24 However, the capacitance-
voltage characteristics of such carrier selective PIN devices 
is not very well elucidated in the literature. Still, the MS 
analysis is widely used for such devices which could result 
in potentially erroneous extraction of critical parameters like 
the built-in voltage, effective doping density, and thus could 
negatively affect the co-optimization of fabrication and 
device architecture towards better performance. Therefore, it 
is imperative to build a theoretical platform to understand 
the 
CV 
characteristics 
of 
thin 
film 
PIN 
based 

optoelectronics devices. 

In this manuscript, we develop an analytical model for the 
CV characteristics of carrier selective PIN devices. In 
particular, we find that the capacitance is governed by the 
injected charge carriers from the respective contacts and 
scales as  𝑉−2 (in contrast to traditional 𝑉−0.5 relation). 
Interestingly, these analytical predictions are well supported 
by detailed numerical simulations. In addition, curiously, we 
find multiple instances of direct experimental evidence from 
literature which broadly supports the analytical predictions. 
Below, we first develop an analytical formalism for the CV 

of carrier selective devices and then validate it through 
numerical simulations and experimental data. 

 

Figure 1. Device schematic and energy band diagram of the MSM 
model system, with perovskite as the test material, at an applied 
voltage 𝑉 = 0.3 𝑉 at metal contact C1. Quasi-fermi level (𝐹𝑛, 𝐹𝑝) 
and electric field in active (Perovskite) layer is constant with 
position in the low bias regime (for 𝑉 < 𝑉𝑏𝑖) of carrier transport. 
Electrons and holes are injected from contact C2 and C1, 
respectively, inside perovskite with the applied voltage V. Electron 
density 𝑛2 = 𝑛(𝑙) (at Perovskite/C2 interface) and hole density 
𝑝1 = 𝑝(0) (at C1/Perovskite interface) are limited by electron 
(𝜙𝑛2) and hole (𝜙𝑝1) barrier, respectively. 

Analytical Model: The capacitance of a semiconductor 
device is a measure of response of charge carriers to a 
superimposed small sinusoidal signal (of a certain 
frequency) over a  particular DC voltage.10 As such, it is 
then expected that the CV of PIN devices to be influenced 
by (a) the depletion region in P and N regions, and (b) the 
charge stored in the intrinsic as well as quasi-neutral layers. 
The influence of (a) on CV characteristics is rather well 
anticipated by the MS analysis while that of (b) is not well 
appreciated. To this end, we first consider a metal-
semiconductor-metal (MSM) system such that the charge 
storage component due to the intrinsic layer is well 
elucidated. The analysis will then be extended to carrier 
selective PIN structures as well. The schematic of MSM 
systems is shown in Fig. 1. Here a semiconductor is 
sandwiched between two metal contacts C1 and C2. The 
workfunction of these contacts are so chosen that C1 injects 


2 
 

holes while C2 injects electrons to the semiconductor, 
respectively.  For MSM, the total capacitance is the parallel 
combination of geometric capacitance 𝐶𝑔 and charge storage 
capacitance 𝐶𝑑 (i.e., rate of change of stored charge with 
applied voltage). Hence, to develop CV model, we calculate 
𝐶𝑑 by quantifying the total stored charge (due to electrons 
and holes) at a particular voltage. For electrons, the 
transport in drift-diffusion formalism is given as 

𝐽𝑛 = 𝑞𝑛𝜇𝑛𝐸 + 𝑞𝐷𝑛

𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝑥  ,                          (1) 

where 𝐽𝑛 is electron current density, 𝑛 is electron density, 𝜇𝑛 
is electron mobility, 𝐸 is electric field, 𝐷𝑛 = 𝜇𝑛𝑘𝑇/𝑞 is 
diffusion 
constant 
for 
electrons, 
and 
𝑥 
is 
the 

location/position 
inside 
semiconductor. 
Under 
the 

assumption of constant electric field in the I layer, the 
electron density profile as a function of position  𝑛(𝑥) can 
be calculated by rearranging Eq. 1 and integrating both sides 
with appropriate boundary condition (𝑛(𝑙) = 𝑛2). Hence, 
we obtain electron density profile 𝑛(𝑥) as follows 

𝑛(𝑥) =
𝐽𝑛

𝑞𝜇𝑛𝐸 − ( 𝐽𝑛

𝑞𝜇𝑛𝐸 − 𝑛2)exp (− 𝑞𝐸(𝑥 − 𝑙)

𝑘𝑇
) .  (2) 

Here 𝑘 is Boltzmann’s constant, 𝑇 is the device temperature, 
𝑛2 is the electron density injected from contact C2 at 𝑥 = 𝑙, 
𝑙 is the thickness of semiconducting layer, and 𝐸 = (𝑉𝑏𝑖 −
𝑉)/𝑙 (𝑉𝑏𝑖 is the built-in voltage and 𝑉 is the applied bias). 
The total stored electron charge (𝑛𝑇), at a particular 
voltage 𝑉, can be obtained by integrating 𝑛(𝑥) across the 
thickness of semiconducting layer. Accordingly, for low 
bias regime (i.e. 𝑉 < 𝑉𝑏𝑖 ), we get a simplified expression of 
𝑛𝑇 in terms of V as 

𝑛𝑇 =
𝑛2𝑙𝑘𝑇

𝑞(𝑉𝑏𝑖 − 𝑉) ,                                (3) 

Replacing 𝑛2 = 𝑁𝑐exp (−𝜙𝑛2/𝑘𝑇), where, 𝑁𝑐 is conduction 
band effective density of states and 𝜙𝑛2 is injection barrier 
for electrons from metal contact C2 to semiconductor, the 

stored charge capacitance due to electrons (𝐶𝑛,𝑑 = 𝑞

𝑑𝑛𝑇
𝑑𝑉   ) 

is given as   

𝐶𝑛,𝑑 =

𝑁𝑐 exp (−𝜙𝑛2

𝑘𝑇 ) 𝑙𝑘𝑇

(𝑉𝑏𝑖 − 𝑉)2
 ,                  (4) 

 
Similar methodology can be used to obtain stored charge 
capacitance due to the response of holes (𝐶𝑝,𝑑) and is 
expressed as  

𝐶𝑝,𝑑 =

𝑁𝑣 exp (− 𝜙𝑝1

𝑘𝑇 ) 𝑙𝑘𝑇

(𝑉𝑏𝑖 − 𝑉)2
 .                     (5) 

 
Here, 𝑁𝑣 is valence band effective density of states and 𝜙𝑝1 
is injection barrier for holes from metal contact C1 to 
semiconductor. The total capacitance 𝐶𝑑 is due to the 
response of electrons and holes, and therefore, is the parallel 

combination of 𝐶𝑛,𝑑 and 𝐶𝑝,𝑑 (i.e. 𝐶𝑑 = 𝐶𝑛,𝑑 + 𝐶𝑝,𝑑). In 
contrast to traditional linearity between 1/𝐶2 and 𝑉, indeed, 
our model (shown in Eq. 4, 5) predicts linear relation 
between 1/𝐶0.5 and 𝑉 and hence can be used to estimate 𝑉𝑏𝑖 
. For asymmetrical injection barriers (i.e. 𝜙𝑛2 ≠ 𝜙𝑝1), the 
same method allows estimation of the properties of the 
contact that dominates carrier injection – which can be   
further probed through temperature dependent studies of CV 
characteristics.  
 
Model Validation: We performed detailed numerical 
simulations to validate the analytical model. For this, we 
consider intrinsic perovskite (with 𝐸𝑔=1.55 eV and 
thickness 𝑙 = 300 𝑛𝑚) as the test material with 𝜙𝑛2 =
𝜙𝑝1 = 0.3 𝑒𝑉 (see Fig. 1). Small signal analysis using self-
consistent solution of drift-diffusion and Poisson’s equation 
is used to obtain the CV characteristics.  

Fig. 2a shows the comparison of electron density variation 
with applied voltage as obtained from simulations and 
analytical expressions (given in Eq. 2). The results indicate 
that, in low bias regime (𝑉 < 𝑉𝑏𝑖), the electron density 
reduces exponentially with the distance from respective 
contacts. The integrated/total charge density variation with 
applied voltage is shown in Fig. 2b. It is evident from Fig. 
2a and 2b, in low bias regime (shown by green region in 
Fig. 2b), that the proposed model agrees very well with the 
numerical simulations.  

Fig. 2c shows the simulated CV characteristics of the 
modeled MSM device. We find that the capacitance 
saturates to geometrical capacitance 𝐶𝑔 = 𝜖/𝑙 in negative 
biasing regime. Here, 𝜖 and 𝑙 is the electrical permittivity 
and thickness of semiconducting layer, respectively. 
For 0 < 𝑉 < 𝑉𝑏𝑖, the capacitance increases with voltage as 
the stored charge in perovskite layer increases (as evident 
from Fig. 2a and 2b). For 𝑉 > 𝑉𝑏𝑖, the MSM device 
becomes dominated by semiconductor resistance and hence 
the capacitance decreases after reaching a peak.  We can 
extract the stored charge capacitance component as 𝐶𝑑 =
𝐶 − 𝐶𝑔, where 𝐶 is the total capacitance. Now, as suggested 
by CV model in Eq. 4 and 5, one can predict 𝑉𝑏𝑖 and the 
injected charge carriers density (𝑛2 and 𝑝1) from the 
intercept and slope of 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5  vs. 𝑉 plot, respectively. We 

find that the extracted carrier density (4.09 × 1014𝑐𝑚−3) 
closely matches with the input values of injected charge 
density (𝑛2 = 𝑝1 = 9 × 1014𝑐𝑚−3). In addition, Fig. 2d 
shows that the 𝑉𝑏𝑖 predictions from our model are in close 
agreement with the ideal values for a broad range of 𝑉𝑏𝑖. In 
contrast, MS analysis does not provide accurate results 
for 𝑉𝑏𝑖 and hence is not an appropriate characterization 
scheme for such devices. 

We further validated the CV model by extracting barrier for 
carrier injection from CV characteristics and comparing it 
with the input value. For this, we estimated CV 
characteristics (numerically) at different temperatures  


3 
 

 

Figure 2. Analytical model validation of CV characteristics by detailed numerical simulations of the MSM device. Comparison between 
analytical (line) and simulated (circle symbols) (a) electron density 𝑛(𝑥) at low voltages (𝑉 < 𝑉𝑏𝑖, arrow is in the direction of voltage 
increase) (b) integrated electron 𝑛𝑇 for the given range of applied voltages. (c) Simulated CV characteristic is plotted on the left axis, 
whereas, 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 or 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 (with symbols) is plotted on the right axis. Single linear fit (shown by black line) made on 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 plot 

suggest that our model is valid and is used to extract relevant parameters such as 𝑉𝑏𝑖. (d) Comparison between ideal and extracted 𝑉𝑏𝑖 
(using 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 and 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 plot) suggests that our model (𝐶 ∝ 𝑉−2) provides good estimates of 𝑉𝑏𝑖 as compared to traditional 

model (𝐶 ∝ 𝑉−0.5) for broad range of 𝑉𝑏𝑖. (e) 𝐶𝑑 − 𝑉 characteristics at different temperature 𝑇 (T=300 K to 380 K, in steps of 10 K and 
aligned with arrow direction). (f) Arrhenius plot at voltages 𝑉 (= −0.2,0.1,0.4 𝑉) where y axis represents log(𝐶𝑑/𝑇5/2) and x axis 
corresponds to 1/𝑘𝑇. The magnitude of slope of linear fit made on Arrhenius plot provides injection barrier 𝜙 at the contacts. The extracted 
barrier is independent of voltage and matches well with the input (0.3 eV). Analytical CV Model is well supported by numerical 
simulations in low bias regime (represented by green region R1 shown in panel b and c) and hence can be used to predict relevant 
parameters (𝑉𝑏𝑖, interface charge density). 

(𝑇 = 300 − 380 𝐾). The CV characteristics due to injected 
charge carriers after 𝐶𝑔 correction (i.e. 𝐶𝑑 = 𝐶 − 𝐶𝑔) are 
plotted in Fig. 2e. With the increase in temperature, the flux 
of injected charge carriers from respective contacts 
increases and thus the total charge stored inside perovskite 
layer increases. As a result, the capacitance increases with 
the rise in temperature at a particular voltage (Fig. 2e). 
Equations 4 and 5 indicate that 𝐶𝑑 ∝ 𝑁𝑘𝑇 exp (−

𝜙

𝑘𝑇), 

which is of the form of well-known Arrhenius equation (𝑦 ∝
exp (−𝑥/𝑘𝑇)) except that it has temperature dependent 
prefactor 𝑁𝑘𝑇. Here we consider that the effective density 
of 
states 
𝑁 ∝ 𝑇3/2 
(as 
generally 
expected 
in 

semiconductors10) and hence the prefactor 𝑁𝑘𝑇 ∝ 𝑇5/2. 
Correction of such temperature dependent prefactor is 
essential to obtain accurate results for 𝜙 from CV 
characteristics. Accordingly, Fig. 2f shows Arrhenius plots 
at different voltages with log (𝐶𝑑/𝑇5/2) as y axis and 1/𝑘𝑇 
as x axis. We extract 𝜙 from the magnitude of the slope of 
linear fits made on log(𝐶𝑑/𝑇5/2) vs. 1/𝑘𝑇 plots (obtained at 

different voltages). We find that the extracted value of 𝜙 is 
in close agreement with the input value of 0.3 eV. Our 
simulations indicate that the linearity in 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 

𝑉 characteristics is influenced by the presence of 
semiconductor doping/bulk traps. Detailed numerical 
simulations in this regard and CV characteristic of PIN 
devices are provided in supplementary materials. 

Experimental validation: So far, we showed that the 
proposed CV model is a convenient tool to extract the 
relevant parameters (𝑉𝑏𝑖, 𝑛2/𝑝1,𝜙) and the results are very 
well supported by numerical simulations. Given the 
simplicity of the analytical predictions and its close 
correlations with numerical simulations, we expect the 
trends from the analytical model to be reproduced in broad 
experimental results as well. To further investigate the 
claims of the analytical model, we collected several recent 
experimental data25–30 from literature (with different PIN 
based technologies and reported from multiple laboratories). 
The CV characteristics of those results are then plotted as 


4 
 

1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 (Mott- Schottky plot) and 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 in Fig. 3. 

Here 𝐶𝑑 = 𝐶 − 𝐶𝑔, where 𝐶𝑔 is the geometric capacitance 
and can be considered as the lowest value of capacitance in 
reverse bias regime. 

 

Figure 3. Experimental validation of the proposed model (i.e., 
 𝐶𝑑 ∝ 𝑉−2 , see equations 4 and 5). CV characteristics of six 
different experimental devices (a- ref 25; b-ref 26; c-ref 27; d- ref 
28; e- ref 29; f- ref 30) are represented in terms of 1/𝐶2 − 𝑉 
(Mott-Schottky, shown as red circles) and 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 − 𝑉 (shown as 

blue diamonds) plots. Note that each curve is normalized to the 
respective value at V=0. Mott-Schottky plots exhibit anomalous 
behavior with two different linear regimes, however, 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 − 𝑉 

plots exhibit single linear regime over a broad range of voltages – 
thus validating the analytical model.  

The results in Fig. 3 show several interesting trends. First, 
almost all of them shows linear trends in 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 − 𝑉 

characteristics in the low bias regime – a conclusive 
supporting evidence for the analytical model presented in 
this work. Further, the results in Fig. 3 indicate that Mott-
Schottky plots are, at the best, piece wise linear over rather 
small voltage ranges. Such a behavior indicates that the 
subsequent parameter extraction could be suspicious and in 
general the usage of MS analysis should be avoided.  In 
contrast, the linearity in low bias regime of  1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 − 𝑉 

characteristics extends over a broad range of voltage and 
hence allows unambiguous extraction of device parameters. 
These independent experimental results conclusively settle 
the debate of the voltage scaling exponents of CV 
characteristics. It is indeed V-0.5 (as we proposed) and not V-

2 (as understood so far in the community). The experimental 

support is remarkable given the fact the analytical model 
was developed for simple MSM structures while the 
experimental results were obtained using carrier selective 
PIN structures (see Supplementary materials for numerical 
simulations on CV of PIN structures). Further, we notice 
that for certain devices (see, Fig. 3c, e, &f), both  1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 −

𝑉 and 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 exhibit almost similar slopes. In the next 
section, through detailed numerical simulations indicate, we 
show that such a puzzling trend could arise due to the 
presence of unintentional doping or bulk traps.  

Effects of doping/trap density: Until now, we considered 
the CV characteristics of PIN device in the absence traps or 
dopants in the active material (see Figure S2, supplementary 
information). However, in practical devices, there could be 
scenarios where the active material contains defect states 
and/or dopant atoms. Therefore, it is imperative to 
incorporate doping or trap density into the model system 
and understand their effects on the linearity of 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 

plot. For this, we consider two cases:  (a) with acceptor type 
trap density 𝑁𝑡

𝐴𝐿 present at single energy level 𝐸𝑡 (with 

respect to valence band energy 𝐸𝑣), and e (b) with acceptor 
doping density 𝑁𝑎

𝐴𝐿 in active material. Detailed numerical 

simulations, with the incorporation of traps or doping 
density in PIN based device, are performed to obtain CV 
characteristics which are then plotted as 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs 𝑉 and 

1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 in figure 4. The material parameters used for 
numerical simulations are provided in Table S2 (see 
supplementary information).  

 

Figure 4. Influence of bulk traps/doping density on the linearity of 
1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 and 1/𝐶2 with voltage 𝑉. CV characteristics of PIN devices 

are plotted as 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 (in left panels) and 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 (in right 

panels) at different values of bulk trap (𝑁𝑡

𝐴𝐿 – panel a, b)/doping 

(𝑁𝑎

𝐴𝐿 − panel c, d) density. The results indicate that, in low bias 

regime, 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 plot changes from non-linear to linear with the 
increase in bulk trap/doping density, whereas, 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 plot 

remains linear for the given range of trap/doping density. Hence, 
our analytical model (𝐶 ∝ 𝑉−2) is valid for devices having given 
range of bulk traps/doping density, however, the traditional model 


5 
 

(𝐶 ∝ 𝑉−0.5) is only applicable for devices with high bulk 
trap/doping density.  
 
The results in figure 4 shows the effects of bulk trap/doping 
density on the curvature of 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs 𝑉 and 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 (MS 

analysis) plots. Interestingly, we find that the behavior of 
1/𝐶2 with applied voltage 𝑉 changes from non-linear to 
linear with increase in bulk trap density. This is mainly 
caused by the electrostatic effects (energy band profile 
changes from linear to non-linear) due to trapped charge 
carriers or ionized dopant atoms in the active material. 
Surprisingly, in contrast to MS analysis, the linear nature of 
1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 vs. 𝑉 plot is not significantly affected by the 

presence of bulk traps/dopant atoms. Indeed, our model 
(𝐶 ∝ 𝑉−2) is valid for wide variety of PIN based devices 
having different bulk traps/dopant atoms, whereas, the 
traditional model is valid for large values of trap/doping 
density. Further, similar to experimental trends in Figure 3, 
we notice that the slopes of CV characteristics (i.e., 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 

vs 𝑉 and 1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉) are nearly equal for certain bulk 
trap/doping densities. Such observations regarding slopes in 
different plots can provide the evidence of bulk trap/doping 
density in the active material. Hence, careful examination of 
degree of linearity in respective plots is imperative to obtain 
accurate estimation of concerned parameters from the 
analysis of CV characteristics. 
  
Conclusions: To summarize, we provided a theoretical 
platform with physical insights that could predict the scaling 
exponents of capacitance voltage characteristics of carrier 
selective PIN based optoelectronic devices.   Our analytical 
results indicate that CV characteristics show  linearity 
between 1/𝐶0.5 and 𝑉 in contrast to the traditional Mott-
Schottky analysis. Our CV model is well supported by 
detailed numerical simulation and by diverse experimental 
data. Based on these results, we recommend that every 
experimental report on C-V characteristics of thin film 
semiconductor devices should display both 1/𝐶𝑑

0.5 − 𝑉 and 

1/𝐶2 vs. 𝑉 for appropriate parameter extraction.  As such 
this study is relevant and influential for a broad class of 
optoelectronic devices. As such this study is relevant and 
influential for a broad class of optoelectronic devices with 
immediate relevance to experimentalists.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This article is based upon work supported under the US-
India Partnership to Advance Clean Energy-Research 
(PACE-R) for the Solar Energy Research Institute for India 
and the United States (SERIIUS), funded jointly by the U.S. 
Department of Energy (Office of Science, Office of Basic 
Energy Sciences, and Energy Efficiency and Renewable 
Energy, 
Solar 
Energy 
Technology 
Program, 
under 

Subcontract 
DE-AC36-08GO28308 
to 
the 
National 

Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado) and the 
Government of India, through the Department of Science 
and Technology under Subcontract IUSSTF/JCERDC-
SERIIUS/2012 dated 22nd November 2012. The authors also 
acknowledges Center of Excellence in Nanoelectronics 

(CEN) and National Center for Photovoltaic Research and 
Education (NCPRE), IIT Bombay for computational 
facilities. 

METHODS 

Through self-consistent solution of Poisson’s and continuity 
equation10 for electrons and holes, detailed numerical 
simulations were performed31 to analyze low frequency 
capacitance voltage characteristics of the modeled system. 
The details of material parameters used for numerical 
simulations of MSM and PIN device are provided in table 
S1 and S2, respectively (see supplementary material). 

SUPPORTING INFORMATION 

The supporting information is available free of charge on 
ACS publications website. 
 
The supporting information includes: Material parameters 
for numerical simulation of MSM and PIN device; Effects 
of doping/trap density on CV characteristics of MSM 
device; Validation of CV model for PIN device; 

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interest 

REFERENCES 

(1)  
Snaith, H. J. Perovskites: The Emergence of a New Era 
for Low-Cost, High- Efficiency Solar Cells. J. Phys. 
Chem. Lett. 2013, 4 (October), 3623–3630. 

(2)  
You, J.; Hong, Z.; Yang, Y. (Michael); Chen, Q.; Cai, M.; 
Song, T.-B.; Chen, C.-C.; Lu, S.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, H.; et al. 
Low-Temperature Solution-Processed Perovskite Solar 
Cells with High Efficiency and Flexibility. ACS Nano 
2014, 8 (2), 1674–1680. 

(3)  
Kaltenbrunner, M.; White, M. S.; Głowacki, E. D.; 
Sekitani, T.; Someya, T.; Sariciftci, N. S.; Bauer, S. 
Ultrathin and Lightweight Organic Solar Cells with High 
Flexibility. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 770. 

(4)  
Kim, T.; Kim, J.; Kang, T. E.; Lee, C.; Kang, H.; Shin, 
M.; Wang, C.; Ma, B.; Jeong, U.; Kim, T.; et al. Flexible , 
Highly Efficient All-Polymer Solar Cells. Nat. Commun. 
2015, 6 (May), 1–7. 

(5)  
You, J.; Hong, Z.; Yang, Y. M.; Chen, Q.; Cai, M.; Song, 
T.; Chen, C. Low-Temperature Solution-Processed 
Perovskite Solar Cells with High Efficiency and 
Flexibility. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (2), 1674–1680. 

(6)  
Carl, J. E.; Larsen-olsen, T. T.; Gevorgyan, S. A.; 
Andreasen, J. W.; Adams, J.; Li, N.; Machui, F.; 
Spyropoulos, G. D. Scalable, Ambient Atmosphere Roll-
to-Roll Manufacture of Encapsulated Large Area, Flexible 
Organic Tandem Solar Cell Modules. Energy Environ. 
Sci. 2014, 7 (9), 2925-2933. 

(7)  
Xing, G.; Mathews, N.; Sun, S.; Lim, S. S.; Lam, Y. M.; 
Grätzel, M.; Mhaisalkar, S.; Sum, T. C. Long-Range 
Balanced Electron- and Hole-Transport Lengths in 
Organic-Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3. Science 2013, 342 
(6156), 344–347. 

(8)  
Stranks, S. D.; Eperon, G. E.; Grancini, G.; Menelaou, C.; 
Alcocer, M. J. P.; Leijtens, T.; Herz, L. M.; Petrozza, A.; 
Snaith, H. J. Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 


6 
 

1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite 
Absorber. Science 2013, 342 (6156), 341-344. 

(9)  
Green, M. A.; Ho-Baillie, A.; Snaith, H. J. The 
Emergence of Perovskite Solar Cells. Nat. Photonics 
2014, 8 (7), 506–514. 

(10)  
Sze, S. M. Physics of Semiconductor Devices; Wiley-
Interscience publication; John Wiley & Sons, 1981. 

(11)  
Hou, J.; Inganäs, O.; Friend, R. H.; Gao, F. Organic Solar 
Cells Based on Non-Fullerene Acceptors. Nat. Mater. 
2018, 17, 119. 

(12)  
Yuan, Y.; Reece, T. J.; Sharma, P.; Poddar, S.; Ducharme, 
S.; Gruverman, A.; Yang, Y.; Huang, J. Efficiency 
Enhancement in Organic Solar Cells with Ferroelectric 
Polymers. Nat. Mater. 2011, 10, 296. 

(13)  
Jiang, Q.; Chu, Z.; Wang, P.; Yang, X.; Liu, H.; Wang, 
Y.; Yin, Z.; Wu, J.; Zhang, X.; You, J. Planar-Structure 
Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiency beyond 21%. Adv. 
Mater. 2017, 29 (46), 1703852. 

(14)  
Yang, D.; Zhou, X.; Yang, R.; Yang, Z.; Yu, W.; Wang, 
X.; Li, C.; Liu, S. (Frank); Chang, R. P. H. Surface 
Optimization 
to 
Eliminate 
Hysteresis 
for 
Record 

Efficiency Planar Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. 
Sci. 2016, 9 (10), 3071–3078. 

(15)  
Liu, M.; Johnston, M. B.; Snaith, H. J. Efficient Planar 
Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells by Vapour 
Deposition. Nature 2013, 501, 395. 

(16)  
Jiang, Q.; Zhang, L.; Wang, H.; Yang, X.; Meng, J.; Liu, 
H.; Yin, Z.; Wu, J.; Zhang, X.; You, J. Enhanced Electron 
Extraction Using SnO2 for High-Efficiency Planar-
Structure HC(NH2)2PbI3-Based Perovskite Solar Cells. 
Nat. Energy 2016, 2, 16177. 

(17)  
Cho, H.; Jeong, S.-H.; Park, M.-H.; Kim, Y.-H.; Wolf, C.; 
Lee, C.-L.; Heo, J. H.; Sadhanala, A.; Myoung, N.; Yoo, 
S.; et al. Overcoming the Electroluminescence Efficiency 
Limitations of Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes. Science 
2015, 350 (6265), 1222-1225. 

(18)  
Tan, Z.-K.; Moghaddam, R. S.; Lai, M. L.; Docampo, P.; 
Higler, R.; Deschler, F.; Price, M.; Sadhanala, A.; Pazos, 
L. M.; Credgington, D.; et al. Bright Light-Emitting 
Diodes Based on Organometal Halide Perovskite. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 687. 

(19)  
Zhang, L.; Yang, X.; Jiang, Q.; Wang, P.; Yin, Z.; Zhang, 
X.; Tan, H.; Yang, Y. (Michael); Wei, M.; Sutherland, B. 
R.; et al. Ultra-Bright and Highly Efficient Inorganic 
Based Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes. Nat. Commun. 
2017, 8, 15640. 

(20)  
Sai, H.; Matsui, T.; Matsubara, K. Key Points in the 
Latest Developments of High-Efficiency Thin-Film 
Silicon Solar Cells. Phys. status solidi 2017, 214 (12), 
1700544. 

(21)  
Lambertz, A.; Finger, F.; Schropp, R. E. I.; Rau, U.; 
Smirnov, V. Preparation and Measurement of Highly 
Efficient a-Si:H Single Junction Solar Cells and the 
Advantages of Μc-SiOx:H N-Layers. Prog. Photovoltaics 
Res. Appl. 2015, 23 (8), 939–948. 

(22)  
Maennig, B.; Drechsel, J.; Gebeyehu, D.; Simon, P.; 
Kozlowski, F.; Werner, A.; Li, F.; Grundmann, S.; 
Sonntag, S.; Koch, M.; et al. Organic P-I-N Solar Cells. 
Appl. Phys. A 2004, 79 (1), 1–14. 

(23)  
Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Bandiello, E.; Hutter, E. 
M.; Sessolo, M.; Lederer, K.; Blochwitz-Nimoth, J.; 
Bolink, H. J. Efficient Vacuum Deposited P-I-N and N-I-
P Perovskite Solar Cells Employing Doped Charge 
Transport Layers. Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9 (11), 
3456–3463. 

(24)  
Matsuo, Y.; Sato, Y.; Niinomi, T.; Soga, I.; Tanaka, H.; 
Nakamura, E. Columnar Structure in Bulk Heterojunction 
in Solution-Processable Three-Layered P-I-N Organic 

Photovoltaic 
Devices 
Using 
Tetrabenzoporphyrin 

Precursor and Silylmethyl[60]fullerene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009, 131 (44), 16048–16050. 

(25)  
Almora, O.; Aranda, C.; Mas-Marzá, E.; Garcia-
Belmonte, G. On Mott-Schottky Analysis Interpretation of 
Capacitance Measurements in Organometal Perovskite 
Solar Cells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 109 (17), 173903. 

(26)  
Wang, B.; Wong, K. Y.; Yang, S.; Chen, T. Crystallinity 
and Defect State Engineering in Organo-Lead Halide 
Perovskite for High-Efficiency Solar Cells. J. Mater. 
Chem. A 2016, 4 (10), 3806–3812. 

(27)  
Liu, Y.; Bag, M.; Renna, L. A.; Page, Z. A.; Kim, P.; 
Emrick, 
T.; 
Venkataraman, 
D.; 
Russell, 
T. 
P. 

Understanding 
Interface 
Engineering 
for 
High-

Performance Fullerene/Perovskite Planar Heterojunction 
Solar Cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6 (2), 1501606. 

(28)  
O’Malley, K. M.; Li, C.-Z.; Yip, H.-L.; Jen, A. K.-Y. 
Enhanced Open-Circuit Voltage in High Performance 
Polymer/Fullerene Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells by 
Cathode Modification with a C60 Surfactant. Adv. Energy 
Mater. 2012, 2 (1), 82–86. 

(29)  
Cheng, Y.; Li, H.-W.; Zhang, J.; Yang, Q.-D.; Liu, T.; 
Guan, Z.; Qing, J.; Lee, C.-S.; Tsang, S.-W. Spectroscopic 
Study on the Impact of Methylammonium Iodide Loading 
Time on the Electronic Properties in Perovskite Thin 
Films. J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4 (2), 561–567. 

(30)  
Guerrero, A.; You, J.; Aranda, C.; Kang, Y. S.; Garcia-
Belmonte, G.; Zhou, H.; Bisquert, J.; Yang, Y. Interfacial 
Degradation of Planar Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. 
ACS Nano 2016, 10 (1), 218–224. 

(31)       Synopsis, Sentaurus Device Simulation Tool, (2011). 
 


