Effective thermal conductivity of rectangular nanowires based on
phonon hydrodynamicsŌłŚ

M. Calvo-Schwarzw┬©alder1,2, M. G. HennessyŌĆĀ1, P. Torres3, T. G. Myers1,2, and
F. X. Alvarez3

1Centre de Recerca Matem`atica, Campus de Bellaterra, Edifici C, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona,
Spain
2Departament de Matem`atiques, Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
3Departament de F┬┤─▒sica, Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain

Abstract

A mathematical model is presented for thermal transport in nanowires with rectangular
cross sections.
Expressions for the effective thermal conductivity of the nanowire across a
range of temperatures and cross-sectional aspect ratios are obtained by solving the GuyerŌĆō
Krumhansl hydrodynamic equation for the thermal flux with a slip boundary condition. Our
results show that square nanowires transport thermal energy more efficiently than rectangular
nanowires due to optimal separation between the boundaries.
However, circular nanowires
are found to be even more efficient than square nanowires due to the lack of corners in the
cross section, which locally reduce the thermal flux and inhibit the conduction of heat. By
using a temperature-dependent slip coefficient, we show that the model is able to accurately
capture experimental data of the effective thermal conductivity obtained from Si nanowires,
demonstrating that phonon hydrodynamics is a powerful framework that can be applied in
nanosystems even at room temperature.

Keywords: Heat transfer, Nanotechnology, Thermal conductivity, GuyerŌĆōKrumhansl, Phonon
hydrodynamics

1
Introduction

Advances in manufacturing processes have brought us to the stage where reliable nanoscale devices
are now commonplace. However, in most current and predicted applications of nanostructures, there
is a strong concern over the management of heat [1]. One specific issue with heat removal is the
dramatic decrease of the thermal conductivity at the nanoscale in comparison to the bulk value [2ŌĆō
5]. This decrease can be rationalised in terms of the manner by which thermal energy is transported
across the macroscale and nanoscale. At the macroscale, heat transfer is a diffusive process driven
by frequent collisions between thermal energy carriers known as phonons. In contrast, the transport
of thermal energy across the nanoscale is a ballistic process driven by infrequent collisions between

ŌłŚPublished in Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2018.05.096
ŌĆĀCorresponding author: mhennessy@crm.cat

1

arXiv:1805.12401v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  3 Jun 2018


phonons.
As the size of a device approaches that of the phonon mean free path, the phonons
become more likely to collide with a boundary than with each other. This results in a conductivity
which is more strongly influenced by the scattering dynamics at the boundary than collisions in the
bulk. Consequently, thermal energy is transported less efficiently across the nanosystem, yielding
a decrease in the thermal conductivity from the bulk value of the material.
Developing mathematical models to aid in the understanding of heat flow has proved problem-
atic due to the breakdown of FourierŌĆÖs law at small time and length scales [6ŌĆō8]. With the aim of
accurately predicting the effective thermal conductivity (ETC) of nanosystems, a variety of theoret-
ical models of nanoscale heat transport have been proposed, either based on micro- and mesoscopic
approaches [9, 10] or from a macroscopic point of view [11ŌĆō18]. A popular approach is the phonon
hydrodynamics model [11ŌĆō17], which is based on the GuyerŌĆōKrumhansl (G-K) equation [19, 20].
This model was first presented to describe heat transfer in the so-called hydrodynamic regime,
where phonon flow behaves as a rarefied gas due to the dominance of normal scattering, i.e., scat-
tering which conserves quasi-momentum, over resistive scattering, which does not conserve phonon
quasi-momentum [19ŌĆō21]. It was originally believed that the hydrodynamic transport regime only
occurs at extremely low temperatures. However, recent ab initio calculations have demonstrated
that phonon hydrodynamics can be valid even at room temperature [22ŌĆō24]. As with many other
macroscopic models such as the thermomass model [18, 25] or the equation of phonon radiative
transfer [26], the G-K equation can derived from the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) [27]
or from the extended irreversible thermodynamics (EIT) framework [28]. Thus, the G-K equa-
tion provides a link between microscopic (kinetic) and macroscopic (continuum) models. Another
attractive feature of the phonon hydrodynamics model is that the governing equations are analo-
gous to those seen in viscous fluid mechanics, which provides an intuitive conceptual framework
for model development and interpretation. The analogy between the phonon hydrodynamics and
fluid dynamics models has prompted researchers to apply the well-known slip boundary condition
to thermal transport [11ŌĆō14]. In fact, it has been shown that this form of boundary condition
naturally arises from the discrete BTE [29] and from the EIT framework [21]. With the correct
choice of slip length, this approach was shown to provide excellent agreement with experimental
measurements of the ETC of silicon nanowires [11].
Aside from circular nanowires, studies employing the slip boundary condition are mainly con-
fined to two-dimensional thin-film geometries [12ŌĆō14].
Although the reduced dimensionality of
this geometry enables a simple, closed-form expression for the ETC to be obtained, it can only
be applied to nanowires with extremely small cross-sectional aspect ratios. However, rectangular
nanowires with aspect ratios as high as 0.64 have been reported in the literature [2]. Unlike the
thin-film geometry, the cross section of a rectangular nanowire will have two additional boundaries,
as well as four corners, that will be detrimental to thermal transport. Therefore, the geometry of
the rectangular cross section will play a key role in determining the ETC of the nanowire and have
practical consequences in terms of thermal regulation in nanodevices.
The purpose of the present study is to use the phonon hydrodynamic model with a slip bound-
ary condition to calculate the ETC in a rectangular nanowire, with the aim of gaining an improved
understanding of how finite cross-sectional geometries influence nanoscale heat transport. Of par-
ticular interest is determining the nanowire geometry that leads to the most efficient transport of
heat. Theoretical predictions of the ETC are compared against experimentally measured values.
We show that the model is able to accurately capture the experimental data across a wide range
of temperatures.

2


LŌłŚ
3

LŌłŚ
1

LŌłŚ
2

xŌłŚ

yŌłŚ
zŌłŚ

T ŌłŚ
0 + ŌłåT ŌłŚ

T ŌłŚ
0

Figure 1: The experimental setup consists of a rectangular nanowire of length LŌłŚ
3 and with a cross-
section of dimensions 2LŌłŚ
1 ├Ś 2LŌłŚ
2. The heat flux QŌłŚ is induced by a constant temperature difference
ŌłåT ŌłŚ > 0.

The paper is organised as follows. The model and boundary conditions are presented in Sec. 2
and expressions for the ETC are given in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4, the modelling results are discussed and
the theoretical predictions are compared against experimental data. The paper then concludes in
Sec. 5.

2
Mathematical model

We model the transport of thermal energy across a long nanowire with rectangular cross section
that is suspended in a vacuum; see Fig. 1. The length of the nanowire LŌłŚ
3 is assumed to be much
greater than both the half-width LŌłŚ
1 and half-height LŌłŚ
2 of the cross section. The ŌłŚ notation is used
to denote dimensional quantities. Without loss of generality, the cross section can be taken to be
wider than it is tall, LŌłŚ
2/LŌłŚ
1 < 1. Under these conditions, the cross-sectional aspect ratio Žå = LŌłŚ
2/LŌłŚ
1
and the longitudinal aspect ratio ŽĄ = LŌłŚ
2/LŌłŚ
3 satisfy ŽĄ Ōē¬ Žå < 1. The transverse coordinates xŌłŚ

and yŌłŚ denote points within a given cross section whereas the longitudinal coordinate zŌłŚ describes
distances along the length of the nanowire. The origin of the cross section (xŌłŚ, yŌłŚ) = (0, 0) is chosen
to coincide with the center of the rectangular face. The transport of heat is driven by a longitudinal
temperature gradient ŌłåT ŌłŚ > 0 that is imposed by fixing the temperature T ŌłŚ at the ends of the
nanowire to be T ŌłŚ = T ŌłŚ
0 + ŌłåT ŌłŚ at zŌłŚ = 0 and T ŌłŚ = T ŌłŚ
0 at zŌłŚ = LŌłŚ
3. The thermal flux is assumed
to be symmetric about the xŌłŚ = 0 and yŌłŚ = 0 planes.

2.1
Governing equations

The mathematical model consists of an equation representing conservation of thermal energy and
the G-K (or hydrodynamic) equation describing the evolution of the thermal flux.
Under the
steady-state assumption, the governing equations are

Ōłć ┬Ę QŌłŚ = 0,
(1a)

QŌłŚ = ŌłÆkŌłŚŌłćT ŌłŚ + ŌäōŌłŚ2Ōłć2QŌłŚ,
(1b)

where QŌłŚ = uŌłŚ╦åxŌłŚ + vŌłŚ╦åyŌłŚ + wŌłŚ╦åzŌłŚ is the thermal flux written in terms of Cartesian components,
kŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ) is the bulk thermal conductivity, and ŌäōŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ) is a non-local length related to the bulk phonon
mean free path (MFP), i.e., the mean distance between phonon-phonon collisions. In the original

3


equation derived by Guyer and Krumhansl, the parameter ŌäōŌłŚ represents the bulk MFP defined
as ŌäōŌłŚ2 = (vŌłŚ2
g Žä ŌłŚ
NŽä ŌłŚ
R)/5, where vŌłŚ
g is the phonon group velocity and Žä ŌłŚ
N and Žä ŌłŚ
R are the normal and
resistive mean free times, i.e., the mean times for normal and resistive scattering. Other researchers
have proposed alternative definitions for ŌäōŌłŚ, such as the geometric mean of the bulk MFP and a
local MFP, the latter of which decreases near a boundary [12]. We take ŌäōŌłŚ to be the non-local length
computed from the Kinetic Collective Model (KCM), which is an accurate approach for predicting
the thermal conductivity in a number of materials [30]. We refer to A for a more detailed description
of how ŌäōŌłŚ is obtained from the KCM.
For simplicity, the dependence of the parameters on the temperature will not be explicitly
written unless required by the context. The second term on the right-hand side of (1b) accounts
for non-local effects, i.e., phonon collisions.
The strong increase in the length scale ŌäōŌłŚ as the
temperature decreases can make non-local effects relevant in relatively large systems, including
those with dimensions exceeding the nanoscale [28, 31].
The size-dependent effective thermal conductivity (ETC) of the nanowire kŌłŚ
eff is defined as
in terms of the mean thermal flux through a cross section QŌłŚ and the longitudinal temperature
gradient ŌłéT ŌłŚ/ŌłézŌłŚ as

kŌłŚ
eff = ŌłÆ
QŌłŚ

ŌłéT ŌłŚ/ŌłézŌłŚ ,
QŌłŚ =
1

4LŌłŚ
1LŌłŚ
2

’┐Į LŌłŚ
2

ŌłÆLŌłŚ
2

’┐Į LŌłŚ
1

ŌłÆLŌłŚ
1
wŌłŚ dxŌłŚdyŌłŚ.
(2)

By construction, this is the only component that is not tangential to the cross-section. Therefore,
to compute the effective thermal conductivity of a rectangular slab, we need to find only the normal
component of the heat flux wŌłŚ.

2.2
Boundary conditions

The boundary conditions for the temperature at the endpoints of the nanowire are

T ŌłŚ = T ŌłŚ
0 + ŌłåT ŌłŚ,
at zŌłŚ = 0,
(3a)

T ŌłŚ = T ŌłŚ
0 ,
at zŌłŚ = LŌłŚ
3.
(3b)

Furthermore, it is sufficient to solve the equations in the region xŌłŚ, yŌłŚ Ōēź 0 due to the symmetry of the
system. The symmetry conditions at the interior boundaries (x = 0 or y = 0) are straightforward,

uŌłŚ = 0,
ŌłévŌłŚ

ŌłéxŌłŚ = 0,
ŌłéwŌłŚ

ŌłéxŌłŚ = 0,
at xŌłŚ = 0,
(4a)

ŌłéuŌłŚ

ŌłéyŌłŚ = 0,
vŌłŚ = 0,
ŌłéwŌłŚ

ŌłéyŌłŚ = 0,
at yŌłŚ = 0.
(4b)

At the exterior boundaries of the nanowire (xŌłŚ = LŌłŚ
1 or yŌłŚ = LŌłŚ
2) we impose two types of boundary
condition. The normal component of the flux is assumed to vanish to ensure that no energy is
lost during the heating process. For components of the flux that are tangential to the surface, we
impose slip conditions with a slip length ŌäōŌłŚ
s. The boundary conditions are therefore given by

uŌłŚ = 0,
vŌłŚ = ŌłÆŌäōŌłŚ
s
ŌłévŌłŚ

ŌłéxŌłŚ ,
wŌłŚ = ŌłÆŌäōŌłŚ
s
ŌłéwŌłŚ

ŌłéxŌłŚ ,
at xŌłŚ = LŌłŚ
1,
(4c)

uŌłŚ = ŌłÆŌäōŌłŚ
s
ŌłéuŌłŚ

ŌłéyŌłŚ ,
vŌłŚ = 0,
wŌłŚ = ŌłÆŌäōŌłŚ
s
ŌłéwŌłŚ

ŌłéyŌłŚ ,
at yŌłŚ = LŌłŚ
2.
(4d)

4


Microscopically, slip refers to the mean direction that phonons travel after they collide with a
boundary and are reflected. Non-zero slip implies that more phonons are reflected forwards than
backwards, corresponding to a positive value of the tangential flux at the boundary. A no-slip
condition implies that the same number of phonons are reflected forwards and backwards, leading
to the net tangential flux being zero at the boundary. Slip and no-slip correspond to specular and
diffuse modes of scattering, respectively. Thus, the use of slip conditions enables different scattering
modes to be captured in the model.
As previously done by other authors [11ŌĆō14, 32], we assume the slip length ŌäōŌłŚ
s is directly pro-
portional to the non-local length ŌäōŌłŚ and write ŌäōŌłŚ
s = CŌäōŌłŚ, where C is a dimensionless parameter that
contains information about the interactions between phonons and the boundary of the nanowire.
Various forms of C appear in the literature that account for diffusive and specular modes of phonon
scattering [12, 13], surface roughness [33], and temperature effects [11, 33]. Previous slip-based
models of heat flow focus on the case of two-dimensional thin films [12, 13, 33] or axisymmetric
cylindrical nanowires [11]. In both cases, the outer boundary where the slip condition is applied is
infinitely long and one dimensional, so the parameter C is independent of space. For the rectangu-
lar nanowires considered here, the parameter C is expected to depend on the in-plane transverse
coordinates xŌłŚ and yŌłŚ to account for the behaviour (e.g. increased scattering) of phonons near
corners [34]. Therefore, we will assume that C is function of the transverse coordinates as well as
the temperature so that C = C(xŌłŚ, yŌłŚ, T ŌłŚ), where xŌłŚ and yŌłŚ in this context correspond to points
on the boundary. Specific forms of C will be described below.

2.3
Reduction of the equations

The governing equations can be simplified by exploiting the long geometry of the nanowire and the
similarity between the steady G-K equation (1) and Stokes equations for incompressible viscous
flow. The reduction of the model is analogous to the lubrication approximation in fluid mechanics,
which is a common technique for simplifying the governing equations of a viscous fluid confined to
a thin-film geometry; see Ockendon and Ockendon [35] for details. We first introduce dimensionless
variables defined as x = xŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
1, y = yŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
2, z = zŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
3, T = (T ŌłŚ ŌłÆ T ŌłŚ
0 )/ŌłåT ŌłŚ, u = ŽåŽĄŌłÆ1uŌłŚ/wŌłŚ
0,
v = ŽĄŌłÆ1vŌłŚ/wŌłŚ
0, w = wŌłŚ/wŌłŚ
0 and k(T) = kŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ)/kŌłŚ
0, where kŌłŚ
0 = kŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ
0 ) is a reference value of the
bulk thermal conductivity and w0 = kŌłŚ
0ŌłåT ŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
3 corresponds to the classical value of the longi-
tudinal thermal flux. Using these dimensionless variables in the governing equations shows that
the transverse temperature gradients are small, ŌłéT/Ōłéx = O(ŽåŌłÆ2ŽĄ2) and ŌłéT/Ōłéy = O(ŽĄ2), and may
be neglected provided (ŽĄ/Žå)2 Ōē¬ 1. The classical Fourier flux, in dimensionless form, can then be
defined as wF = ŌłÆkdT/dz. By writing the dimensionless longitudinal component of the thermal
flux in terms of the Fourier flux as w(x, y, z) = wF (z)W(x, y), it can be shown that W satisfies

W ŌłÆ Kn2
’┐Į
Žå2 Ōłé2W

Ōłéx2 + Ōłé2W

Ōłéy2

’┐Į
= 1,
(5)

where small terms of O(ŽĄ2) and O(ŽåŌłÆ2ŽĄ2) have been neglected. The parameter Kn = ŌäōŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ)/LŌłŚ
2 is
the Knudsen number and determines the dominance of the non-local effects on the heat transport.

5


The corresponding boundary conditions are given by

ŌłéW
Ōłéx = 0,
at x = 0,
(6a)

ŌłéW
Ōłéy = 0,
at y = 0,
(6b)

W + ŽåCKn ŌłéW

Ōłéx = 0,
at x = 1,
(6c)

W + CKn ŌłéW

Ōłéy = 0,
at y = 1.
(6d)

The dimensionless ETC can be defined in terms of the flux W as

keff
k
=
’┐Į 1

0

’┐Į 1

0
W(x, y) dxdy.
(7)

The corresponding dimensional expression kŌłŚ
eff is obtained after multiplying keff with the previously
chosen scale kŌłŚ
0.

3
Computation of the effective thermal conductivity

When C depends on the transverse coordinates x and y, solutions to (5) and (6) in general must
be obtained using numerical methods. However, in this section, we present analytical expressions
for the ETC that are valid under specific limits and assumptions. We first consider the case of a
thin nanofilm, characterised by a nanowire with a small cross-sectional aspect ratio Žå. We then
compute a series expansion of the ETC in the case of spatially uniform slip coefficient C. Finally,
we examine the small- and large-Kn limits of the ETC for general slip coefficients.

3.1
The thin-film limit

For small cross-sectional aspect ratios, Žå Ōē¬ 1, the nanowire becomes a thin film. Taking Žå ŌåÆ 0
with ŽĄ Ōē¬ Žå in (5) leads to an ordinary differential equation that can be solved using standard
methods. The ETC can then be written as

keff
k
= 1 ŌłÆ
’┐Į 1

0

Kn tanh(1/Kn)

1 + C(x, 1) tanh(1/Kn) dx + O(Žå).
(8)

In the case of uniform slip coefficient, the leading-order contributions to (8) reduce to the expression
for the ETC of a thin film obtained by previous authors [12, 32]. The terms of order O(Žå) account
for small changes in the thermal flux due to interactions between phonons and the x = 1 boundary.
For the remainder of this section, we will focus on solutions to the problem in the case when Žå
is not small.

3.2
Spatially uniform slip length

Under the assumption that the constant C is independent of space, the boundary value problem
defined by (5) and (6) can be solved analytically by means of an eigenfunction expansion [36]. The

6


eigenfunctions are of the form ╬©n,m(x, y) = cos(╬Ęnx) cos(┬Ąmy), where the eigenvalues ╬Ęn and ┬Ąm
are respectively the nth and mth solutions of

cot(╬Ęn) = ŽåCKn╬Ęn,
cot(┬Ąm) = CKn┬Ąm.
(9)

The longitudinal flux can be written as

W(x, y) =
’┐Į

n,mŌēź0

c(╬Ęn)c(┬Ąm) cos(╬Ęnx) cos(┬Ąmy)

1 + Kn2(Žå2╬Ę2n + ┬Ą2m)
,
c(t) =
2 sin(t)

t + sin(t) cos(t).
(10)

By inserting (10) into (7) and integrating term by term, we find that

keff
k
=
’┐Į

n,mŌēź0

c(╬Ęn) sin(╬Ęn)c(┬Ąm) sin(┬Ąm)
╬Ęn┬Ąm(1 + Kn2(Žå2╬Ę2n + ┬Ą2m)),
(11)

which is valid for all values of the Knudsen number Kn. Furthermore, it can be shown that the
terms of the series decay as (nm)ŌłÆ2 and therefore only a small number of terms is required in
practice.

3.3
Asymptotic approximation for Kn Ōē¬ 1

Naively taking Kn ŌåÆ 0 in (5) shows that W(x, y) = 1. However, this solution does not satisfy the
slip conditions at x = 1 or y = 1, which implies there are thin boundary layers near these outer
boundaries. In fact, the problem for Kn Ōē¬ 1 can be broken down into four spatial regions: (i) the
bulk region away from the outer boundaries where W Ōēā 1; (ii) a boundary layer of width O(Kn)
near x = 1; (iii) a second boundary layer of width O(Kn) near y = 1; and (iv) a corner layer near
x = y = 1 where the two boundary layers overlap. In terms of the integral for the ETC given in
(7), region (i) gives the classical value of the ETC, since the flux in this region coincides with the
classical Fourier flux. Regions (ii) and (iii) give small O(Kn) corrections that account for phonon
collisions with the outer boundaries away from the corners. Region (iv) accounts for even smaller
O(Kn2) corrections due to corner effects. In the calculations below, we will neglect the corner layer
to obtain the first two terms in the small-Kn expansion of the ETC.
The solution in the boundary layer near x = 1 can be obtained by writing x = 1 ŌłÆ (ŽåKn)╦£x and
W(x, y) = ╦£W(╦£x, y). Using this scaling in (5)ŌĆō(6) and taking Kn ŌåÆ 0 gives the problem

╦£W ŌłÆ Ōłé2 ╦£W

Ōłé╦£x2 = 1,
(12a)

with boundary conditions

╦£W ŌłÆ C(1, y)Ōłé ╦£W

Ōłé╦£x = 0,
at ╦£x = 0,
(12b)

╦£W ŌåÆ 1,
as ╦£x ŌåÆ Ōł×.
(12c)

The solution to (12) is given by

╦£W(╦£x, y) = 1 ŌłÆ
exp(ŌłÆ╦£x)

1 + C(1, y).
(13)

7


A similar approach can be used to determine the solution in the boundary layer at y = 1. By
writing y = 1 ŌłÆ Kn ╦åy and W(x, y) = ╦åW(x, ╦åy) in (5)ŌĆō(6) and taking Kn ŌåÆ 0, it can be shown that
╦åW is given by

╦åW(x, ╦åy) = 1 ŌłÆ
exp(ŌłÆ╦åy)

1 + C(x, 1).
(14)

The composite asymptotic solution, which is a single expression that includes contributions from
each of the spatial regions (minus those from the corner layer), can be written as

W(x, y) = 1 ŌłÆ exp[ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ x)/(ŽåKn)]

1 + C(1, y)
ŌłÆ exp[ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ y)/Kn]

1 + C(x, 1)
.
(15)

Using (15) in (7) shows that the ETC is given by

keff
k
= 1 ŌłÆ Kn
’┐Į
Žå
’┐Į 1

0

dy

1 + C(1, y) +
’┐Į 1

0

dx

1 + C(x, 1)

’┐Į
+ O(Kn2).
(16)

If the slip length is spatially uniform, Eqn. (16) reduces to keff/k = 1ŌłÆKn(1+Žå)/(1+C)+O(Kn2).

3.4
Asymptotic approximation for Kn Ōē½ 1

The strong influence of boundary effects when the Knudsen number is large leads to a substantial
reduction in the thermal flux. As discussed in Calvo et al. [11], the flux scales like W = O(KnŌłÆ1)
in the limit as Kn ŌåÆ Ōł×. Thus, after writing W(x, y) = KnŌłÆ1 ┬»W(x, y) in (5)ŌĆō(6), the problem for
the rescaled flux ┬»W is given by

KnŌłÆ1 ┬»W ŌłÆ Kn
’┐Į
Žå2 Ōłé2 ┬»W

Ōłéx2 + Ōłé2 ┬»W

Ōłéy2

’┐Į
= 1,
(17)

subject to

Ōłé ┬»W
Ōłéx = 0,
at x = 0,
(18a)

Ōłé ┬»W
Ōłéy = 0,
at y = 0,
(18b)

┬»W + ŽåCKn Ōłé ┬»W

Ōłéx = 0,
at x = 1,
(18c)

┬»W + CKn Ōłé ┬»W

Ōłéy = 0,
at y = 1.
(18d)

By integrating the G-K equation (17) over the cross-sectional area and using the boundary condi-
tions (18), we find that

KnŌłÆ1
’┐Į 1

0

’┐Į 1

0
┬»W(x, y) dxdy +
’┐Į
Žå
’┐Į 1

0
CŌłÆ1(1, y) ┬»W(1, y) dy +
’┐Į 1

0
CŌłÆ1(x, 1) ┬»W(x, 1) dx
’┐Į
= 1.
(19)

Provided that C(x, y) Ōē½ KnŌłÆ1, taking Kn ŌåÆ Ōł× in (17)ŌĆō(18) shows that ┬»W is constant in space.
The integral relation in (19) then enables ┬»W and hence W to be easily determined. Therefore, we
have that

keff
k
= KnŌłÆ1
’┐Į
Žå
’┐Į 1

0
CŌłÆ1(1, y) dy +
’┐Į 1

0
CŌłÆ1(x, 1) dx
’┐ĮŌłÆ1
+ O(KnŌłÆ2)
(20)

8


(a) w/wF for Kn = 0.1
(b) w/wF for Kn = 10

10ŌłÆ2
10ŌłÆ1
100
101
102

Kn

10ŌłÆ2

10ŌłÆ1

100

keff/k

Numerical
Kn Ōē¬ 1
Kn Ōē½ 1

(c) keff/k

Figure 2: (a)ŌĆō(b): Contour maps of the normalised longitudinal thermal flux w/wF , where wF =
ŌłÆk dT/dx is the classical Fourier flux, for two values of the Knudsen number: Kn = 0.1 and
Kn = 10.
(c): The dependence of the normalised ETC keff/k on the Knudsen number.
The
asymptotic solution for Kn Ōē¬ 1 and Kn Ōē½ 1 is given by (16) and (20), respectively. In all panels,
Žå = 1 and C = 1.

as Kn ŌåÆ Ōł×. In the case of spatially uniform slip lengths, Eqn. (20) reduces to keff/k = CKnŌłÆ1/(1+
Žå) + O(KnŌłÆ2).

4
Results and discussion

We first examine how changes to the Knudsen number affect both the longitudinal thermal flux
and the ETC for fixed values of Žå = 1, corresponding to square nanowires, and C = 1. Panels (a)
and (b) of Figure 2 show contour maps of the normalised flux w/wF for two values of the Knudsen
number: Kn = 0.1 (Fig. 2 (a)) and Kn = 10 (Fig. 2 (b)). The corresponding normalised ETC,
keff/k, is shown as a function of the Knudsen number in Fig. 2 (c).
For small Knudsen numbers, the non-local length is much less than the cross-sectional dimen-
sions of the nanowire. Phonons in the bulk will frequently collide with each other, resulting in
diffusive transport of heat that is not strongly influenced by the finite geometry of the cross sec-
tion. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 2 (a), the normalised flux in the bulk is close to unity and thus
coincides with the diffusive Fourier flux. However, there is a region of ballistic transport near the
exterior boundaries of the nanowire, where phonon-boundary scattering becomes relevant. In this
ballistic region, there is a rapid decrease in the flux from its bulk value of approximately wF across
dimensional length scales of order ŌäōŌłŚ (or non-dimensional length scales of order Kn). Surprisingly,
the thermal flux does not tend to zero at the exterior boundaries, despite the fact that naively
taking Kn ŌåÆ 0 in the boundary conditions (6) appears to yield the no-slip condition. However,
the gradient of the flux scales like KnŌłÆ1 near the exterior boundaries, cancelling the Kn in the slip
coefficient and preventing the no-slip condition from being recovered in the small-Kn limit. This is
shown explicitly in Sec. 3.3.
Given that the non-classical, ballistic region of transport is confined to a thin boundary layer
when the Knudsen number is small, the ETC is well approximated by its classical value, keff/k Ōēā
1, for Kn Ōē¬ 1.
In fact, as shown in Sec. 3.3, the small O(Kn) correction in the asymptotic
approximation (16) accounts for the reduced heat transport that occurs in the boundary layers.

9


The asymptotic approximation (16) is plotted as circles in Fig. 2 (c) and is in excellent agreement
with the numerically computed curve (solid line) obtain from the full model.
For large Knudsen numbers, the non-local length greatly exceeds the dimensions of the cross
section. In this case, phonons frequently collide with the exterior boundary, leading to a substantial
reduction in the transport of thermal energy across the nanowire; see Fig. 2 (b). As discussed by
Calvo et al. [11] in the case of circular nanowires, the flux for large Knudsen numbers is of order
KnŌłÆ1. Furthermore, due to the large effective slip coefficient, the transverse gradients in the flux
are small, resulting in a roughly uniform thermal flux over the cross-sectional area. The greatly
reduced thermal transport in the large-Kn regime is reflected by the relatively low values of the
ETC, which is also proportional to KnŌłÆ1, as seen from the asymptotic result (20).
As noted
by previous authors [11, 13], the slip boundary condition is crucial for obtaining an ETC that
scales with KnŌłÆ1 for Kn Ōē½ 1 from the hydrodynamic model, which is required for agreement with
experimental data (see, for example, Ref. [37] or the data below). The asymptotic expression for
the ETC (20) is shown as the squares in Fig. 2 (c) and is in excellent agreement with the numerical
calculations.
Figures 2 (a) and (b) show that, regardless of the value of the Knudsen number, the thermal
flux attains its minimum value at the corner of the nanowire. This minimum is a consequence of
the imperfect slip that occurs at the boundaries, which leads to greater resistance to heat flow (i.e.
more phonon reflections) in the corners.
We now examine how changes to the cross-sectional geometry affect the ETC for a fixed value
of C = 1. Figure 3 (a) shows the ETC of a two-dimensional thin film (Žå ŌåÆ 0), a rectangular
nanowire (Žå = 1/2), and a square nanowire (Žå = 1). For comparison purposes, we also plot the
ETC for a circular nanowire obtained by Calvo et al. [11]. As the cross-sectional aspect ratio Žå
decreases from one to zero, the ETC increases for all values of the Knudsen number. To understand
the reason for this increase, it is helpful to recall that Žå is defined in terms of the dimensions of the
cross section as Žå = LŌłŚ
2/LŌłŚ
1 and the Knudsen number is defined as Kn = ŌäōŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
2. Thus, decreasing
Žå for fixed Kn is equivalent to increasing LŌłŚ
1 for fixed LŌłŚ
2. The consequential increase in cross-
sectional area essentially leads to the corners of the nanowire becoming further separated, thereby
reducing their negative impact on the thermal flux. In the case of a thin film (Žå ŌåÆ 0), there are
no corners to reduce the flux; hence, the ETC of a thin film is greater than the ETC of square
and rectangular nanowires.
Interestingly, however, the ETC of a circular nanowire, which has
no corners at all, is virtually identical to the ETC of a square nanowire. This similarity can be
rationalised in terms of the hydraulic diameter of the nanowires, defined as DŌłŚ = 4AŌłŚ/P ŌłŚ, where AŌłŚ

and P ŌłŚ are the (dimensional) cross-sectional area and perimeter, respectively. For the rectangular
nanowires considered here, we can write DŌłŚ
rect = 4LŌłŚ
2/(1 + Žå); for circular nanowires of radius RŌłŚ,
we find that DŌłŚ
circ = 2RŌłŚ. The hydraulic diameters of square and circular nanowires will be equal
if the half-height LŌłŚ
2 is the same as the radius RŌłŚ. It is also possible to introduce an equivalent
Knudsen number based on the hydraulic diameter, KnŌĆ▓ = 2ŌäōŌłŚ/DŌłŚ. Unlike the Knudsen number
Kn = ŌäōŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
2, the equivalent Knudsen number KnŌĆ▓ simultaneously captures the x and y dimensions
of the nanowire. For square and circular nanowires, the equivalent Knudsen numbers KnŌĆ▓ are the
same, and both are equal to the original Knudsen number Kn. Furthermore, by extending the
asymptotic analysis of Sec. 3.4 to nanowires of arbitrary cross section, we find that the ETC, in
the limit of large equivalent Knudsen number and constant slip coefficient C, can be written as

keff/k Ōł╝ (C/4)(DŌłŚ/ŌäōŌłŚ),
(21)

revealing that the limiting behaviour of the ETC is indeed the same for square and circular

10


10ŌłÆ2
10ŌłÆ1
100
101
102

Kn

10ŌłÆ2

10ŌłÆ1

100

keff/k

Thin film, Žå ŌåÆ 0
Rectangular, Žå = 0.5
Square, Žå = 1
Circular

(a)

10ŌłÆ2
10ŌłÆ1
100
101
102

K

10ŌłÆ3

10ŌłÆ2

10ŌłÆ1

100

keff/k

Rectangular, Žå = 0.1
Square, Žå = 1
Circular

(b)

Figure 3: The dependence of the normalised ETC keff/k on (a) the Knudsen number Kn and (b)
the effective Knudsen number K = ŌäōŌłŚ/
ŌłÜ

AŌłŚ for various cross-sectional aspect ratios Žå. Also shown
in the normalised ETC of a circular nanowire [11]. Fixed values of K correspond to fixed values of
the cross-sectional area AŌłŚ. In both panels a value of C = 1 was used.

nanowires.
Equation (21) shows that, regardless of the nanowire geometry, the ETC for large
Knudsen numbers is set by the non-local length and the hydraulic diameter.
To better understand the role of the nanowire geometry, we now investigate how the ETC varies
with Žå for fixed cross-sectional areas AŌłŚ = 4LŌłŚ
1LŌłŚ
2, keeping C = 1. In order to maintain a constant
area AŌłŚ in the dimensionless model, we need to account for how the Knudsen number Kn = ŌäōŌłŚ/LŌłŚ
2
varies with Žå through LŌłŚ
2. To do so, we first note that LŌłŚ
2 can be written as LŌłŚ
2 =
’┐Į

ŽåAŌłŚ/4. The
Knudsen number can then be written in terms of the aspect ratio Žå as Kn = (2/ŌłÜŽå)K, where
K = ŌäōŌłŚ/
ŌłÜ

AŌłŚ is an effective Knudsen number that is independent of the shape of the cross section
and which remains constant as Žå varies. Similar to the equivalent Knudsen number KnŌĆ▓, the effective
Knudsen number K also accounts for the full two-dimensional geometry of the nanowire rather than
the length along one particular dimension. Figure 3 (b) compares the ETC of a rectangular and a
square nanowire with Žå = 0.1 and Žå = 1, respectively, over a range of K. Contrary to the results
of Fig. 3 (a), here we see that for a fixed value of K, corresponding to a fixed area AŌłŚ, increases
in the cross-sectional aspect ratio Žå lead to increases in the ETC. This relationship stems from
the fact that as the aspect ratio Žå decreases, the exterior boundaries at yŌłŚ = ┬▒LŌłŚ
2 become closer
together and the bulk heat flow becomes dominated by phonon scattering at these surfaces. The
ETC of the circular nanowire is also shown in Fig. 3 (b) and is found to be slightly greater than the
square for all values of K due to the lack of corners. In plotting the ETC for the circular nanowire,
the Knudsen number has been written as Kn = ŌłÜŽĆ K. Thus, for a fixed cross-sectional area, the
circular nanowire is the most efficient transporter of thermal energy, with the thin film being the
worst.
The influence of the slip coefficient C on thermal transport has been discussed by Zhu et al. [12]
in the context of a thin film (Žå ŌåÆ 0) under the assumption that C is a constant. In summary,
larger values of C lead to less resistance to heat flow and thus to greater values of the thermal

11


10ŌłÆ2
10ŌłÆ1
100
101
102

Kn

10ŌłÆ2

10ŌłÆ1

100

keff/k

╬▓ = 0 (Constant C)
╬▓ = 2.0 (Increasing C)
╬▓ = ŌłÆ0.9 (Decreasing C)

Figure 4: The influence of non-uniform slip coefficients C on the normalised ETC keff/k of a square
nanowire (Žå = 1). Lines correspond to the ETC computed using the slip coefficient in (22). The
cases ╬▓ = 0, ╬▓ = 2, and ╬▓ = ŌłÆ0.9 correspond slip coefficients that are constant, increasing towards
a corner, and decreasing towards a corner. The upwards- and downwards-pointing triangles denote
the ETC computed using the equivalent slip coefficients (23a) and (23b), respectively.

flux and ETC. A distinguishing feature of rectangular nanowires is that the slip coefficient C may
depend on the boundary coordinates to account for the change in phonon behaviour near corners.
To explore this behaviour with our model, we consider a square nanowire (Žå = 1) and a simple
form of the slip coefficient given by

C(x, y) = ╬▒ + ╬▓(x2 + y2 ŌłÆ 1),
(22)

where ╬▒ and ╬▓ are constants that satisfy ╬▒ > 0 and, to ensure C remains positive, ╬▓ > ŌłÆ╬▒. The
parameter ╬▓ controls the curvature of the slip coefficient.
If ╬▓ < 0 (╬▓ > 0) then C decreases
(increases) towards a corner.
The lines in Fig. 4 represent numerical calculations of the ETC
using finite differences in the case of ╬▒ = 1.0 and ╬▓ = ŌłÆ0.9, 0, and 2.0. Slip coefficients that
decrease (increase) towards a corner lead to a corresponding decrease (increase) in the ETC, as these
amplify (counteract) the resistance to thermal transport occurring at the corners. Qualitatively,
the dependence of the ETC on the Knudsen number is similar to the case when the slip coefficient
is constant. This naturally leads to the question of whether it is possible to define an equivalent,
constant slip coefficient, Cequiv, that yields quantitatively similar results to the non-uniform slip
coefficient (22). One possibility for obtaining an equivalent slip coefficient is to match the limiting
behaviour of the ETC for large Knudsen numbers. From Sec. 3.4, the large-Kn behaviour of the ETC
for a constant slip coefficient in the case of a square nanowire is given by keff/k Ōł╝ (Cequiv/2)KnŌłÆ1.
By inserting the slip coefficient (22) into (20), performing the integration, and equating the result

12


to (Cequiv/2)KnŌłÆ1, we find an equivalent slip constant given by

Cequiv =
ŌłÜ╬▒╬▓

arctan
’┐Į’┐Į

╬▓/╬▒
’┐Į,
╬▓ > 0,
(23a)

Cequiv =

’┐Į

╬▒|╬▓|

arctanh
’┐Į’┐Į

|╬▓|/╬▒
’┐Į,
╬▓ < 0.
(23b)

The upwards- and downwards-pointing triangles in Fig. 4 show the ETC computed with the equiv-
alent slip coefficients given by (23a) and (23b), respectively. The quantitative agreement between
the ETCs computed using the equivalent and non-uniform slip conditions is remarkable. For ╬▒ = 1,
we find that Cequiv Ōēā 1.48 when ╬▓ = 2 and Cequiv Ōēā 0.52 when ╬▓ = ŌłÆ0.9. Thus, local increases
(decreases) in the slip coefficient due to corner effects are equivalent to increases (decreases) in the
bulk slip coefficient, highlighting the non-local nature of nanoscale heat transport.
To validate the model, we compare theoretical predictions of the ETC against experimental
measurements carried out using silicon wires by Inyushkin et al. [2]. The rectangular wires are of
dimension 2LŌłŚ
1 = 3.12 mm, 2LŌłŚ
2 = 2.00 mm, and LŌłŚ
3 = 20.5 mm. Although the wires are macroscopic
in size, they are held at temperatures for which their dimensions are much smaller than the MFP of
phonons. The longitudinal and cross-sectional aspect ratios of the wire are ŽĄ Ōēā 0.098 and Žå Ōēā 0.64,
respectively. Temperature gradients ranging from 0.01 K to 0.2 K were imposed across the length
of the wire. The temperature at the end point of the wire was held between 0.5 K and 293 K,
allowing both the hydrodynamic (low temperature) and diffusive (high temperature) regimes of
thermal transport to be explored. Numerically evaluating the theoretical ETC requires knowledge
of the temperature-dependent non-local length and the bulk thermal conductivity. These quantities
have been extracted from first-principle calculations based on the KCM framework [30] using open-
source code [38], as described in A.
The experimental measurements of the ETC, normalised by the bulk thermal conductivity, are
shown as circles in Fig. 5. Panels (a) and (b) of this figure plot the ETC as a function of the
temperature and Knudsen number, respectively. The inset shows the temperature dependence of
the Knudsen number, allowing Figs. 5 (a) and (b) to be connected. The Knudsen number is small
for temperatures exceeding 50 K (Kn Ōēā 0.013). Consequently, the experimental measurements of
the ETC coincide with the bulk thermal conductivity. However, as the temperature is decreased
below 50 K, the Knudsen number becomes order one in magnitude and the ETC begins to rapidly
decrease from its bulk value. The large-Kn regime is entered as the temperature falls below 10 K
(Kn Ōēā 400) and the measurements of the ETC follow the KnŌłÆ1 scaling that was derived from the
Kn Ōē½ 1 limit of the model.
We first attempt to capture the experimental data using the model with a constant slip co-
efficient.
Although this is the simplest choice available, it is also motivated by the discussion
surrounding Fig. 4, which argues that spatially non-uniform slip coefficients can yield quantita-
tively similar results. An estimate of the slip coefficient can be obtained by fitting the experimental
data points for Kn > 106 to the large-Kn limit of the ETC given by (20). This procedure produces
the value of C Ōēā 4. This value of C agrees with the results obtained using the Mathiessen rule
in previous works [30, 39]: in the limit Kn ŌåÆ Ōł× the effective thermal conductivity for a thin film
(Žå ŌåÆ 0) is kŌłŚ
eff Ōēł (2HŌłŚ/ŌäōŌłŚ)kŌłŚ, where HŌłŚ = 2LŌłŚ
2 is the thickness of the film. The dashed lines in the
main panels of Fig. 5 denote the theoretical prediction of the ETC using C = 4. The model pre-
diction is remarkably accurate for Knudsen numbers above 102 (T ŌłŚ < 10 K). The model also gives

13


1
10
50
100
300
T ŌłŚ (K)

10ŌłÆ6

10ŌłÆ4

10ŌłÆ2

100

kŌłŚ
eff/kŌłŚ

Exp. data
C = 4
C = C(T ŌłŚ)

1
10
50
300

10ŌłÆ4

100

104

108
Kn

(a)

10ŌłÆ4
10ŌłÆ2
100
102
104
106
108

Kn

10ŌłÆ6

10ŌłÆ4

10ŌłÆ2

100

kŌłŚ
eff/kŌłŚ

Experimental data
C = 4
C = C(T ŌłŚ)

(b)

Figure 5: Comparison experimental measurements (circles) of the ETC for rectangular wires [2]
with theoretical predictions computed using a constant C = 4 (dashed lines) and a temperature-
dependent C(T ŌłŚ) = 4 exp(ŌłÆT ŌłŚ/T ŌłŚ
c ) (solid lines) slip coefficients. The inset of panel (a) shows the
temperature dependence of the Knudsen number.

accurate predictions for Knudsen numbers below 10ŌłÆ2 (T ŌłŚ > 50 K), where the bulk thermal con-
ductivity is recovered and the value of the slip coefficient becomes irrelevant. The over-estimation
of the ETC by the model across intermediate values of the Knudsen number ranging from 10ŌłÆ2

to 102 (temperatures between 10 K and 50 K) is attributed to the assumption of a constant slip
coefficient, which is too large in this region. Evidently, the slip coefficient must begin to decrease as
the temperature increases. The temperature dependence of the slip coefficient can be rationalised
in terms of the dynamics of phonon-boundary scattering. As the temperature increases, diffuse
scattering becomes increasingly dominant over specular scattering [33], with specular scattering
becoming negligible at a critical temperature T ŌłŚ
c depending on the roughness of the nanowire and
phonon wavelength [40]. Diffuse scattering emits phonons in and against the direction of the tem-
perature gradient and therefore leads to a vanishing thermal flux at the exterior boundary of the
wire, which is captured by a slip coefficient that tends towards zero for temperatures T ŌłŚ exceeding
the critical value T ŌłŚ
c . Therefore, we propose a simple exponential form for the slip coefficient given
by C(T ŌłŚ) = 4 exp(ŌłÆT ŌłŚ/T ŌłŚ
c ). We treat Tc as a fitting parameter whose value will depend on the
physical and geometrical (roughness) characteristics of the nanowire. From a visual inspection of
Fig. 5 (a), noticeable differences between the experimental and theoretical predictions with C = 4
begin to occur when T ŌłŚ Ōēā 9 K, marking the temperature at which the slip coefficient begins to
decrease. Taking T ŌłŚ
c = 9 in the exponential form of C yields the ETC predictions given by the solid
lines in Fig. 5, which show a considerable improvement over the estimates with C = 4. The model
gives accurate predictions over nearly the entire temperature range; however, some errors do persist
for temperatures around 30 K. Refined estimates of the ETC can likely be obtained using a phys-
ical model for the slip coefficient that more accurately describes the nature of phonon-boundary
interactions. For now, we leave formulating such a model as a key area of future research.
The existing discrepancies of our model with respect to experimental data can also be un-
derstood from the Truncated L┬┤evy Flights (TLF) framework [41]. According to the TLF theory,

14


when the dominant characteristic length of the thermal transport is reduced (i.e., the phonon
MFP), phonon transport moves from the diffusive to ballistic (or hydrodynamic) regime through
a superdiffusive transport regime, which has an ETC that is smaller than the expected from the
simple diffusive-ballistic transition. Notice that here the analogy ballistic-hydrodynamic refers to
a transport regime dominated by a single characteristic length scale.
In silicon, when the temperature decreases below 50 K, phonons with a MFP larger than
Ōł╝3 mm (of the order of width and height of the slab) begin to appear. While at high temperature
(diffusive regime) those phonons do not have a significant contribution, at very low temperatures
(ballistic or hydrodynamic regime) they are removed from the model by the boundary conditions.
In the diffusive-ballistic transition around 7ŌĆō50 K, where these phonons can be important, the
present model over-estimates the experimental data, as a single characteristic non-local length in
the transport equation is not able to capture the superdiffusive transition.

5
Conclusion

We use a hydrodynamic model of thermal transport, based on the GuyerŌĆōKrumhansl equation,
with a slip boundary condition to calculate the ETC of rectangular nanowires.
An analytical
solution for the ETC is obtained in the case of a constant slip coefficient by writing the thermal
flux as an eigenfunction expansion. For spatially non-uniform slip coefficients, asymptotic methods
are employed to calculate the leading approximations valid for small and large Knudsen numbers.
An attractive feature of the asymptotic approach is that it can be straightforwardly applied to
nanowires with arbitrary cross section, enabling the ETC to be calculated with ease for a range of
geometries that might be non-trivial to implement using standard computational techniques.
A key advantage of the proposed model is that it is based on a minimal number of free param-
eters. Both the non-local length and the bulk thermal conductivity can be calculated as a function
of temperature using open-source software [38] and considered as known quantities. For sufficiently
small temperatures, the correct slip coefficient is approximately four, in accordance with previous
work [30, 39]. This enables the ETC predictions to be obtained without any fitting parameters in
this regime. To account for changes in the slip coefficient with increasing temperature, a simple
exponential form with a single fitting parameter is used. A comparison between experiment and
theory reveals that the model is able to accurately predict the ETC across a wide range of temper-
atures, which is particularly remarkable given the simple nature of the underlying model. Future
studies will focus on deriving an expression for the slip coefficient using a detailed physical model.
By writing the slip coefficient in terms of known physical quantities rather than fitting parameters,
the predictability of the proposed hydrodynamic model can be greatly improved, yielding accurate
estimates for the ETC across arbitrary temperature ranges and providing key insights into how
thermal energy will be distributed across nanosystems.

Acknowledgements

M. C. acknowledges that the research leading to these results has received funding from la Caixa
Foundation. M. H. acknowledges funding from the European UnionŌĆÖs Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under grant agreement No. 707658. P. T. and F. X. A. acknowledge the
financial support of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness under Grant Consolider

15


nanoTHERM CSD2010-00044, TEC2015-67462-C2-2-R (MINECO/FEDER), TEC2015-67462-C2-
1-R (MINECO/FEDER). T. G. M. acknowledges the support of a Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci┬┤on
grant MTM2017-82317-P. The authors have been partially funded by the CERCA Programme of
the Generalitat de Catalunya.

A
Calculation of the non-local length and bulk thermal conduc-
tivity

The values of bulk thermal conductivity kŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ) and non-local length ŌäōŌłŚ(T ŌłŚ), shown in Fig. 6, have
been obtained in the framework of the KCM. In this model, the thermal conductivity is split in
the well-known kinetic regime and a collective contribution emerged from momentum conserving
(normal) phonon collisions [19, 30]. The total thermal conductivity can be expressed thus as an
interpolation between the kinetic and collective contributions weighted by a switching factor ╬Ż(T ŌłŚ),
which accounts for the relative abundance of normal versus resistive (Umklapp and mass defect)
scattering rates:
kŌłŚ = ╬Ż ┬Ę kŌłŚ
col + (1 ŌłÆ ╬Ż) ┬Ę kŌłŚ
kin.
(24)

In the same line, the non-local length Ōäō, related with the phonon mean free paths, can be expressed
as an interpolation through ╬Ż between the collective limit derived by Guyer and Krumhansl [20]
and the kinetic one derived recently at first order [31],

ŌäōŌłŚ = ╬Ż ┬Ę ŌäōŌłŚ
col + (1 ŌłÆ ╬Ż) ┬Ę ŌäōŌłŚ
kin.
(25)

These two magnitudes calculated from first principles are the only ones required to solve the
hydrodynamic heat transport equation. For these calculations, an open-source code [38] has been
used.

1
10
50
100
300
T ŌłŚ (K)

102

104

106

108

kŌłŚ (W/m┬ĘK)

(a)

1
10
50
100
300
T ŌłŚ (K)

100

105

1010

1015

ŌäōŌłŚ (nm)

(b)

Figure 6: Bulk values of (a) the thermal conductivity kŌłŚ and (b) the non-local length ŌäōŌłŚ, both in
terms of the temperature T ŌłŚ obtained from the KCM framework.

16


References

[1] D. G. Cahill, W. K. Ford, K. E. Goodson, G. D. Mahan, A. Majumdar, H. J. Maris, R. Merlin,
and S. R. Phillpot, ŌĆ£Nanoscale thermal transport,ŌĆØ Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 93, no. 2,
pp. 793ŌĆō818, 2003.

[2] A. V. Inyushkin, A. N. Taldenkov, A. M. Gibin, A. V. Gusev, and H.-J. Pohl, ŌĆ£On the isotope
effect in thermal conductivity of silicon,ŌĆØ Physica Status Solidi (C), vol. 1, no. 11, pp. 2995ŌĆō
2998, 2004.

[3] D. Li, Y. Wu, P. Kim, L. Shi, P. Yang, and A. Majumdar, ŌĆ£Thermal conductivity of individual
silicon nanowires,ŌĆØ Applied Physics Letters, vol. 83, no. 14, pp. 2934ŌĆō2936, 2003.

[4] M. Ashenghi, Y. K. Leung, S. S. Wong, and K. E. Goodson, ŌĆ£Phonon-boundary scattering in
thin silicon layers,ŌĆØ Applied Physics Letters, vol. 71, no. 13, pp. 1798ŌĆō1800, 1997.

[5] W. Liu and M. Asheghi, ŌĆ£Phononboundary scattering in ultrathin single-crystal silicon layers,ŌĆØ
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 84, no. 19, pp. 3819ŌĆō3821, 2004.

[6] K. M. Hoogeboom-Pot, J. N. Hernandez-Charpak, X. Gu, T. D. Frazer, E. H. Anderson,
W. Chao, R. W. Falcone, R. Yang, M. M. Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn, and D. Nardi, ŌĆ£A new
regime of nanoscale thermal transport: Collective diffusion increases dissipation efficiency,ŌĆØ
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 112, no. 16, pp. 4846ŌĆō4851, 2015.

[7] J. A. Johnson, A. A. Maznev, J. Cuffe, J. K. Eliason, A. J. Minnich, T. Kehoe, C. M. So-
tomayor Torres, G. Chen, and K. A. Nelson, ŌĆ£Direct measurement of room-temperature non-
diffusive thermal transport over micron distances in a silicon membrane,ŌĆØ Physical Review
Letters, vol. 110, no. 2, p. 025901, 2013.

[8] C.-W. Chang, D. Okawa, H. Garcia, A. Majumdar, and A. Zettl, ŌĆ£Breakdown of FourierŌĆÖs law
in nanotube thermal conductors,ŌĆØ Physical Review Letters, vol. 101, no. 7, p. 075903, 2008.

[9] J. Callaway, ŌĆ£Model for lattice thermal conductivity at low temperatures,ŌĆØ Physical Review,
vol. 113, no. 4, p. 1046, 1959.

[10] M. G. Holland, ŌĆ£Analysis of lattice thermal conductivity,ŌĆØ Physical Review, vol. 132, no. 6,
p. 2461, 1963.

[11] M. Calvo-Schwarzw┬©alder, M. G. Hennessy, P. Torres, T. G. Myers, and F. X. Alvarez, ŌĆ£A slip-
based model for the size-dependent effective thermal conductivity of nanowires,ŌĆØ International
Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 91, pp. 57 ŌĆō 63, 2018.

[12] C.-Y. Zhu, W. You, and Z.-Y. Li, ŌĆ£Nonlocal effects and slip heat flow in nanolayers,ŌĆØ Scientific
Reports, vol. 7, p. 9568, 2017.

[13] F. X. Alvarez, D. Jou, and A. Sellitto, ŌĆ£Phonon hyrodynamics and phonon-boundary scattering
in nanosystems,ŌĆØ Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 105, no. 1, p. 014317, 2009.

[14] A. Sellitto, F. X. Alvarez, and D. Jou, ŌĆ£Geometrical dependence of thermal conductivity in
elliptical and rectangular nanowires,ŌĆØ International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 55,
no. 11, pp. 3114ŌĆō3120, 2012.

17


[15] F. X. Alvarez and D. Jou, ŌĆ£Memory and nonlocal effects in heat transport: From diffusive to
ballistic regimes,ŌĆØ Applied Physics Letters, vol. 90, no. 8, p. 083109, 2007.

[16] Y. Ma, ŌĆ£Size-dependent thermal conductivity in nanosystems based on non-Fourier heat trans-
fer,ŌĆØ Applied Physics Letters, vol. 101, p. 211905, 2012.

[17] Y. Dong, B.-Y. Cao, and Z.-Y. Guo, ŌĆ£Size dependent thermal conductivity of si nanosystems
based on phonon gas dynamics,ŌĆØ Physica E: Low-dimensional Systems and Nanostructures,
vol. 56, pp. 256ŌĆō262, 2014.

[18] D. Y. Tzou, ŌĆ£Nonlocal behaviour in phonon transport,ŌĆØ International Journal of Heat and
Mass Transfer, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 475ŌĆō481, 2011.

[19] R. A. Guyer and J. A. Krumhansl, ŌĆ£Solution of the Linearized Phonon Boltzmann Equation,ŌĆØ
Physical Review, vol. 148, no. 2, p. 766, 1966.

[20] R. A. Guyer and J. A. Krumhansl, ŌĆ£Thermal Conductivity, Second Sound, and Phonon Hy-
drodynamic Phenomena in Nonmetallic Crystals,ŌĆØ Physical Review, vol. 148, no. 2, p. 778,
1966.

[21] Y. Guo and M. Wang, ŌĆ£Phonon hydrodynamics and its applications in nanoscale heat trans-
port,ŌĆØ Physics Reports, vol. 595, pp. 1ŌĆō44, 2015.

[22] Y. Guo and M. Wang, ŌĆ£Phonon hydrodynamics for nanoscale heat transport at ordinary
temperatures,ŌĆØ Physical Review B, vol. 97, p. 035421, Jan 2018.

[23] S. Lee, D. Broido, K. Esfarjani, and G. Chen, ŌĆ£Hydrodynamic phonon transport in suspended
graphene,ŌĆØ Nature Communications, vol. 6, p. 6290, 2015.

[24] A. Ziabari, P. Torres, B. Vermeersch, Y. Xuan, X. Cartoix`a, A. Torell┬┤o, J.-H. Bahk, Y. R.
Koh, M. Parsa, P. D. Ye, F. X. Alvarez, and A. Shakouri, ŌĆ£Full-field thermal imaging of
quasiballistic crosstalk reduction in nanoscale devices,ŌĆØ Nature Communications, vol. 9, no. 1,
p. 255, 2018.

[25] Y. Dong, B.-Y. Cao, and Z.-Y. Guo, ŌĆ£Generalized heat conduction laws based on thermomass
theory and phonon hydrodynamics,ŌĆØ Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 110, no. 6, p. 063504,
2011.

[26] A. Majumdar, ŌĆ£Microscale heat conduction in dielectric films,ŌĆØ Journal of Heat Transfer,
vol. 115, no. 1, pp. 7ŌĆō16, 1993.

[27] L. Boltzmann, ŌĆ£Weitere Studien ┬©uber das W┬©armegleichgewicht unter Gasmolek┬©ulen,ŌĆØ Sitzungs-
berichte der Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien, vol. 66, no. II, pp. 275ŌĆō370, 1872.

[28] D. Jou, J. Casas-Vazquez, and G. Lebon, Extended Irreversible Thermodynamics. Springer,
2nd ed., 1996.

[29] M. Xu, ŌĆ£Slip boundary condition of heat flux in knudsen layers,ŌĆØ Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 470, no. 2161,
2014.

18


[30] P. Torres, A. Torell┬┤o, J. Bafaluy, J. Camacho, X. Cartoix`a, and F. X. Alvarez, ŌĆ£First principles
Kinetic-Collective thermal conductivity of semiconductors,ŌĆØ Physical Review B, vol. 95, no. 4,
p. 165407, 2017.

[31] P. Torres, Thermal transport in semiconductors: first principles and phonon hydrodynamics.
PhD thesis, Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, 2017.

[32] A. Sellitto, I. Carlomagno, and D. Jou, ŌĆ£Two-dimensional phonon hydrodynamics in narrow
strips,ŌĆØ Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, vol. 471, no. 2182, 2015.

[33] A. Sellitto, F. X. Alvarez, and D. Jou, ŌĆ£Temperature dependence of boundary conditions in
phonon hydrodynamics of smooth and rough nanowires,ŌĆØ Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 107,
no. 11, p. 114312, 2010.

[34] J. M. Ziman, Electrons and Phonons: The Theory of Transport Phenomena in Solids. Oxford
University Press, 2001.

[35] H. Ockendon and J. R. Ockendon, Viscous flow. Cambridge University Press, 1995.

[36] W. A. Ebert and E. M. Sparrow, ŌĆ£Slip flow in rectangular and annular ducts,ŌĆØ Journal of
Basic Engineering, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 1018ŌĆō1024, 1965.

[37] R. Berman, E. L. Foster, and J. M. Ziman, ŌĆ£Thermal conduction in artificial sapphire crystals
at low temperatures i. nearly perfect crystals,ŌĆØ Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 231, no. 1184, pp. 130ŌĆō144, 1955.

[38] P. Torres, Kinetic Collective Model: BTE-based hydrodynamic model for thermal transport,
2017 (accessed November 9, 2017).

[39] Z. M. Zhang, Nano/Microscale Heat Transfer. McGraw Hill Professional, 2007.

[40] M. Asheghi, M. Touzelbaev, K. Goodson, Y. Leung, and S. Wong, ŌĆ£Temperature-dependent
thermal conductivity of single-crystal silicon layers in SOI substrates,ŌĆØ Journal of Heat Trans-
fer, vol. 120, no. 1, pp. 30ŌĆō36, 1998.

[41] B. Vermeersch, J. Carrete, N. Mingo, and A. Shakouri, ŌĆ£Superdiffusive heat conduction in
semiconductor alloys. I. Theoretical foundations,ŌĆØ Physical Review B, vol. 91, p. 085202, 2015.

19


