Valley kink states and topological channel intersections in 

substrate-integrated photonic circuitry

Li Zhang1,2,#, Yihao Yang1,2,3,4, #,*, Mengjia He1,2, #,Hai-Xiao Wang5, #, Zhaoju Yang3, Erping Li1, 

Fei Gao1,2, Baile Zhang3,4, Ranjan Singh3,4, Jian-Hua Jiang5,*, and Hongsheng Chen1,2,*

1Key Lab. of Advanced Micro/Nano Electronic Devices & Smart Systems of Zhejiang, College of 

Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.

2State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, and The Electromagnetics Academy at 

Zhejiang University, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.

3Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, 

Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore.

4Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, The Photonics Institute, Nanyang Technological

University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore.

5Shool of Physical Science and Technology, & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano 

Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.

# These authors contributed equally to this work.

*yang.yihao@ntu.edu.sg
(Yihao 
Yang);
jianhuajiang@suda.edu.cn
(Jian-Hua 
Jiang); 

hansomchen@zju.edu.cn (Hongsheng Chen).


ABSTRACT

Valley degrees of freedom, providing a novel way to increase capacity and efficiency of

information processing, have become an important instrument for photonics. Experimental studies 

on photonic topological valley kink states at interfaces between regions with opposite 

valley-Chern numbers have attracted much attention, however, were restricted to zigzag-type 

interfaces, largely limiting their applications such as geometry-dependent topological channel 

intersections. Here, we experimentally demonstrate and manipulate valley kink states at generic 

interfaces in subwavelength substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. We verify the robustness of the 

kink states by measuring transmissions of the kink states through twisted interfaces and interfaces 

with disorders. Based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we realize several topological 

channel intersections where photonic transport paths are related to geometries of the intersections. 

In comparison to those in previous works, the present valley photonic crystals have subwavelength

thicknesses and excellent self-consistent electrical shielding, which are perfectly compatible with 

conventional substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. Our work opens a door to manipulate 

photonic valley pseudo-spins in substrate-integrated circuitry with robustness, easy access, and 

lightweight.


INTRODUCTION

Topological photonics, which studies topological states of photons, has attracted much

attention in the past decade[1-3]. Researches on topological photonics have shown emergence of 

various edge/surface states in topological photonic systems and their unique phenomenology, 

including 
chiral/helical 
edge 
propagation[4-12], 
pseudospin-momentum 
locking[5,13], 

topologically-protected refraction[14], and Fermi-arc surface states[15-17]. These properties have led 

to unprecedented applications in photonics such as backscattering-immune waveguides[7], robust 

delay lines[18], topological waveguide splitters[5, 19], and topological lasers[5, 19-22]. 

Recent studies have revealed a class of topological interface states that emerge at interfaces 

between regions with opposite valley-Chern numbers, also known as topological valley kink 

states[14, 19, 23-34]. The topological valley kink states have been proven to exist at generic interfaces, 

such as zigzag, armchair, and any combination of zigzag and armchair interfaces, in electronic[26, 

28, 30-32], magnonic[25], and elastic[27] systems. The valley kink states are robust against some 

disorders due to the bulk-edge correspondence, with their topological numbers characterized by 

the difference of the valley-Chern numbers across the interface[25, 31]. Such valley transport along

generic interfaces can also have many potential applications in photonics, such as topological

Mach-Zehnder interferometers[25], high-efficiency energy transport channels[26], and topological 

channel intersections[27, 30, 32]. However, previous experimental realizations of the photonic 

topological valley kink states were restricted to zigzag interfaces[14, 19, 24, 33-35], largely limiting the 

above applications. 

In this work, we demonstrate experimentally valley-polarized topological kink states at

generic interfaces in subwavelength substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. We verify the 

robustness of the topological kink states by measuring transmissions of kink states through twisted 

interfaces and interfaces with disorders. Based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we 

demonstrate topological channel intersections where photonic transport paths are determined by 

geometries of the intersections. Besides, in comparison to the previous valley photonic crystals 

(VPCs)[14, 19, 35], the proposed VPCs have subwavelength thicknesses and excellent self-consistent 

electrical shielding, which are perfectly compatible with conventional substrate-integrated 

photonic circuits[36]. The manipulation of valley kink states at will in substrate-integrated photonic 

circuitry paves the way for future valley photonics.


RESULTS

The designed VPC consists of a hexagonal-lattice of triangular scatterers placed in a copper 

parallel plate waveguide, which is loaded with a dielectric material with relative permittivity 2.4

(see Fig. 1b). The lattice constant is a =10.4 mm, and the conductivity of the copper is 5.7×107

S/m. A triangular scatterer consists of three via holes with diameter d0 =0.8 mm and height h =3.2 

mm, as well as a triangle copper patch with side length l =5.2 mm at the top. There is a gap with 

g0 =0.25 mm between the scatterers and the top metal cladding layer. The gap size g0 plays an 

important role in controlling the bandgap size (see Supplementary Note 1). The rotation angle θ is 

defined in Fig. 1b. In our experiments, the VPCs consist of two printed circuit boards (PCBs). The 

copper triangle patch and via holes are printed on the bottom PCB. The upper side of the top PCB 

is covered with a thin layer of copper. We then attach the bottom PCB to the top PCB with an 

adhesive (see Fig. 1a). In comparison to the previous VPCs[14, 19, 35], the present structure shows 

the merits of a subwavelength thickness (only 0.245
l , where 
l
is the wavelength in the 

loaded dielectric material) and excellent electromagnetic shielding, which are perfectly compatible 

with the standard substrate-integrated waveguide circuits. Besides, the loss tangent of the substrate 

used is around 0.001, and the copper behaves as a perfect electric conductor at low frequencies, 

therefore, the absorptive loss is low in our case, which has been verified in our numerical results 

(see Supplementary Note 2).

When the rotation angle is θ=0°, there are a pair of Dirac points at K and K’ points in the first 

Brillouin zone at a frequency of 14.39 GHz (see Fig. 1c). With a finite rotation angle θ, the 

symmetry of the photonic crystal is reduced from C3V to C3. Consequently, the pair of Dirac points 

are gapped out, resulting in a photonic bandgap controlled by the rotation angle θ. The photonic 

band structure for θ =30° is shown in Fig. 1c: a bandgap appears from 13.43 GHz to 15.12 GHz. 

The field patterns of the upper and lower bands at K and K’ points are shown in Fig. 1e, which 

demonstrates the Poynting vectors are related to photonic valley pseudo-spins. Note that all 

simulations in this work are performed in 3D using the realistic structures (see Supplementary 

Note 3).

The band topology around K valley can be described by an effective massive Dirac 

Hamiltonian[14, 19, 29, 33-35]. For instance, the Hamiltonian for the K valley is 


𝐻𝐾 = 𝜐(𝑞𝑥𝜎𝑥 + 𝑞𝑦𝜎𝑦) + 𝑚𝜎𝑧
(1)

where 𝜎𝑧 = ±1 represent 𝜑+ and 𝜑− states, respectively, which carry opposite valleys; 𝑞⃗ =

(𝑞𝑥,𝑞𝑦) is wavevector derivation from K point; and 𝑚 is an effective mass term determined by 

the bandgap size. In parallel, the band topology around K’ point is described by a different 

Hamiltonian, 𝐻𝐾′ = −𝐻𝐾, as guaranteed by the time-reversal symmetry preserved in our system.

These Hamiltonians indicate the nontrivial Berry curvatures around the K and K’ point. 

Integrating the Berry curvature around K (K’) valley gives a half-integer valley-Chern number 

𝐶𝐾 = sgn(m)/2 [14, 19, 29, 33-35]. First-principle numerical calculations of the Berry curvatures near 

the K and K’ valleys for our practical VPCs are presented in Supplementary Note 4.

The rotation angle θ controls the Dirac mass terms and the corresponding valley-Chern 

number (see Fig. 1d). The photonic band structure experiences phase transitions when θ crosses an 

integer time of 60°. Across an interface that consisting of two regions with opposite valley-Chern 

numbers, the difference of the valley-Chern numbers is ∆𝐶𝐾 = sgn(m) = ±1 for K and K’ 

valleys, respectively, giving rise to valley-polarized topological kink states according to the

bulk-edge correspondence[14, 25, 28, 29, 31].

To verify the above statements, we numerically calculate two elementary types of interfaces. 

The first type is the previously-studied zigzag interfaces[14, 19, 33-35] (see Figs. 2a-2b). The kink 

states at two different zigzag interfaces exhibit different spatial symmetries: mirror-symmetric 

(Fig. 2a) and anti-symmetric (Fig. 2b). The photonic band structure in Fig. 2c indicates that the 

propagating directions of the two topological kink states bounded to different valleys are exactly 

opposite, exhibiting “valley-locked” chirality.

The second type is armchair interfaces (Figs. 2d and 2e). The pair of kink states are bounded

to different valleys, and they propagate in opposite directions along the interface[25, 31]. We note 

that a tiny, avoided crossing bandgap appears at the crossing point (i.e., k=0) between two 

counter-propagating kink states[30,31], similar to the tiny bandgaps of the edge states in photonic 

topological insulators with C6 crystalline symmetry[4, 11, 12]. Besides, we also perform simulations 

of two additional interfaces different from the zigzag and armchair interfaces, each of which 

shows a pair of kink states bounded to the different valleys (Supplementary Note 5). 

It is well-known that conventional photonic crystal waveguides suffer considerable reflection 

loss when electromagnetic waves propagate through sharp bending corners[37]. In contrast, our 


experimental and numerical results indicate that the valley kink states host robust transport: 

electromagnetic waves propagating along the topological interfaces can turn around the sharp 

bending corners with negligible backscattering (see Fig. 3). Such robust transport is observed in 

our VPCs for both the zigzag and armchair interfaces (see Figs. 3a, 3b, 3d, and 3e). We further 

demonstrate the valley kink states in a photonic circuitry with the interconnection between zigzag 

and armchair interfaces (see Figs. 3c and 3f). The measured transmissions for all three samples are 

quantitatively analyzed in Fig. 3g and 3h. High transmissions of valley transport are observed for 

all photonic circuitry, whereas the counterpart of bulk mode is ultralow. Note that as the gap of the 

kink state dispersion at the armchair interface is so small that we do not observe obvious dips in

the transmission spectra for the armchair interface in the experiments. The electromagnetic

field-intensity profiles of the kink states near the output terminal are also measured (See 

Supplementary Note 6 for details), showing the kink states are confined around the interface. Most 

significantly, within the bandgap, the transmissions through various bending interfaces are close to 

the counterpart through the straight interfaces, indicating suppressed back-scattering and robust 

transport of the valley kink states (see Fig. 3g). Besides, we would like to mention that in both 

simulations and experiments, all interface terminations have been truncated to the zigzag type to 

suppress the reflections (See Supplementary Note 7 for details). Also, the out couplings of the

kink states from the VPCs to empty parallel waveguides for different types of terminations have 

been numerically studied. The results manifest that reflections are negligible at the zigzag 

terminations while considerable at the armchair terminations (See Supplementary Note 8 for 

details).

We further confirm the robust transport of topological kink state by introducing certain

disorders into VPCs around the interfaces. As shown in Fig. 4, valley kink states are robust against 

the randomly placed structure disorders (by flipping the rotation angles of the triangular scatterers, 

see Figs. 4a and 4c). One can see that the transmissions of the valley transport are very close in the 

cases with and without disorders. The field-intensity profiles manifest that the kink states in the 

“bus” waveguide couples to the disorder-induced cavities, and then the trapped electromagnetic 

wave finally couples back to the “bus” waveguide with negligible backscattering (Figs. 4b and 4d). 

This is because in the disorder-induced cavities, fields of the modes belonging to different valleys 

vary between negative and positive and overlap, and the variations tend to cancel each other out[29].


Besides, we perform additional simulations to demonstrate the robustness of the valley kink states 

against different kinds of disorders (see Supplementary Note 9).

Finally, based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we realize photonic 

geometry-dependent topological channel intersections, where energy transport paths are related to 

geometries of the intersections[27, 30, 32]. We design three different cross-shaped channel 

intersections (see Figs. 5a-5c). The first cross-shaped channel intersection consists solely of zigzag 

interfaces (Fig. 5a), where the corresponding valley-polarized topological kink states are marked

with red and blue arrows for different valleys. In the channels, electromagnetic waves travel only 

along the paths of the same valley degree of freedom. From our simulations (Figs. 5(d)-(e)), one 

can see that the valley kink states launched at port 1 (port 2) can only transport along path 2 and 

path 4 (path 1 and path 3) and are forbidden to travel along path 3 (path 4). We can understand the 

interesting phenomenon in the following way: when the kink state bounded to K valley is excited 

from port 1, it cannot couple to path 3 because the kink states at the two paths have different 

valley pseudo-spins. However, it can couple to path 2 and path 4, owing to the same valley 

pseudo-spins. 

Experiments are also conducted to demonstrate the geometry-dependent topological channel 

intersections. In the experiments, a source antenna is placed at port 1 (port 2) of the sample, 

whereas probe antennas are placed at the other three output terminals to detect kink states bounded 

to K (K’) valley. From Fig. 5(j), one can see that the transmissions S21 and S41 are much higher 

than S31 (see the upper panel), whereas the transmissions S12 and S32 are much higher than S42 

(see the lower panel), within the photonic bandgap frequency window. Similar phenomena have 

also been observed for a channel intersection with solely armchair interfaces (Figs. 5b, 5f-g, and 

5k) and that with both zigzag and armchair interfaces (Figs. 5c, 5h-i, and 5l) in our photonic 

crystal. These observations confirm that the valley degrees of freedom are bounded to the 

propagations of the topological kink states at each channel and the energy transport at the channel 

intersections are directly related to the geometries. Due to the impedance and mode mismatches 

between the excitation sources and the topological interfaces, the average measured transmission

is lower than 3 dB. To further improve the transmission efficiency, one can design smooth bridges 

between the excitation source and the topological interfaces, similar to the spoof surface plasmon 

polariton couplers [38].


CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSIONS

We thus experimentally demonstrate and manipulate topological valley kink states at generic 

interfaces in subwavelength substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. Such valley kink states are 

robust against some types of disorders and sharp bends, as we verified both experimentally and 

numerically. Based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we realize topological channel 

intersections where photonic transport paths are related to geometries of the intersections. 

Moreover, in comparison to
the previous VPCs, our substrate-integrated VPCs show 

subwavelength thicknesses and excellent self-consistent electrical shielding, which are perfectly 

compatible with the conventional substrate-integrated waveguide circuitry. The present design 

provides a possibility for a complete topological waveguide circuitry, including passive, active, or 

nonplanar components and even antennas, to be fabricated and integrated on the same substrate 

using standard printed circuits board techniques. Our studies add new freedom, namely, topology, 

beyond the conventional freedoms, i.e., wave-vector, phase,
and
polarization, to the 

substrate-integrated circuitry, and may work as an alternative integration platform with low cost, 

easy access, and light weight.

Supporting Information

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

Acknowledgments

Work at Zhejiang University was sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

under Grants No. 61625502, No. 61574127, and No. 61601408, the Top-Notch Young Talents 

Program of China, and the Innovation Joint Research Center for Cyber-Physical-Society System. 

Work at Soochow University is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

under Grant No. 11675116 and the Jiangsu distinguished professor funding. We thank Y. D. Chong 

at Nanyang Technological University for helpful discussions.

Conflict of Interests  


The authors declare no conflict of interests.

Keywords 

Topological photonics, topological channel intersections, substrate-integrated, valley kink states

REFERENCES

[1]
L. Lu, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljačić, Nat. Photonics 2014, 8, 821.

[2]
T. Ozawa, H. M. Price, A. Amo, N. Goldman, M. Hafezi, L. Lu, M. Rechtsman, D. Schuster, J. Simon, 

O. Zilberberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2018, 80, 015006 

[3]
A. B. Khanikaev, G. Shvets, Nat. Photonics 2017, 11, 763.

[4]
S. Yves, R. Fleury, T. Berthelot, M. Fink, F. Lemoult, G. Lerosey, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 16023.

[5]
X. Cheng, C. Jouvaud, X. Ni, S. H. Mousavi, A. Z. Genack, A. B. Khanikaev, Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 

542.

[6]
A. B. Khanikaev, S. H. Mousavi, W. K. Tse, M. Kargarian, A. H. MacDonald, G. Shvets, Nat. Mater.

2013, 12, 233.

[7]
Z. Wang, Y. Chong, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljacic, Nature 2009, 461, 772.

[8]
M. Hafezi, S. Mittal, J. Fan, A. Migdall, J. Taylor, Nat. Photonics 2013, 7, 1001.

[9]
T. Ma, A. B. Khanikaev, S. H. Mousavi, G. Shvets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 127401.

[10] Y. Poo, R. X. Wu, Z. Lin, Y. Yang, C. T. Chan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 093903.

[11] L. H. Wu, X. Hu, Phys Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 223901.

[12] S. Barik, A. Karasahin, C. Flower, T. Cai, H. Miyake, W. DeGottardi, M. Hafezi, E. Waks, Science

2018, 359, 666.

[13] Y. Yang, Z. Gao, H. Xue, L. Zhang, M. He, Z. Yang, R. Singh, Y. Chong, B. Zhang, H. Chen, Nature

2019, 565, 622.

[14] F. Gao, H. Xue, Z. Yang, K. Lai, Y. Yu, X. Lin, Y. Chong, G. Shvets, B. Zhang, Nat. Phys. 2017, 14, 140.

[15] B. Yang, Q. Guo, B. Tremain, L. E. Barr, W. Gao, H. Liu, B. Béri, Y. Xiang, D. Fan, A. P. Hibbins, Nat. 

Commun. 2017, 8, 97.

[16] J. Noh, S. Huang, D. Leykam, Y. D. Chong, K. P. Chen, Mikael C. Rechtsman, Nat. Phys. 2017, 13, 

611.

[17] B. Yang, Q. Guo, B. Tremain, R. Liu, L. E. Barr, Q. Yan, W. Gao, H. Liu, Y. Xiang, J. Chen, C. Fang, A. 

Hibbins, L. Lu, S. Zhang, Science 2018, 359, 1013.

[18] M. Hafezi, E. A. Demler, M. D. Lukin, J. M. Taylor, Nat. Phys. 2011, 7, 907.

[19] X. Wu, Y. Meng, J. Tian, Y. Huang, H. Xiang, D. Han, W. Wen, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1304.

[20] B. Bahari, A. Ndao, F. Vallini, A. El Amili, Y. Fainman, B. Kante, Science 2017, 358, 636.

[21] M. A. Bandres, S. Wittek, G. Harari, M. Parto, J. Ren, M. Segev, D. N. Christodoulides, M. 

Khajavikhan, Science 2018, 359, eaar4005.

[22] G. Harari, M. A. Bandres, Y. Lumer, M. C. Rechtsman, Y. D. Chong, M. Khajavikhan, D. N. 

Christodoulides, M. Segev, Science 2018, 359, eaar4003.

[23] J. Lu, C. Qiu, L. Ye, X. Fan, M. Ke, F. Zhang, Z. Liu, Nat. Phys. 2016, 13, 369.

[24] J. Noh, S. Huang, K. P. Chen, M. C. Rechtsman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 063902.

[25] Y. M. Li, J. Xiao, K. Chang, Nano. Lett. 2018, 18, 3032.


[26] Z. Qiao, J. Jung, Q. Niu, A. H. Macdonald, Nano. Lett. 2011, 11, 3453.

[27] M. Yan, J. Lu, F. Li, W. Deng, X. Huang, J. Ma, Z. Liu, Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 993.

[28] L. Ju, Z. Shi, N. Nair, Y. Lv, C. Jin, J. Velasco, Jr., C. Ojeda-Aristizabal, H. A. Bechtel, M. C. Martin, A. 

Zettl, J. Analytis, F. Wang, Nature 2015, 520, 650.

[29] T. Ma, G. Shvets, New J. Phys. 2016, 18, 025012.

[30] Z. Qiao, J. Jung, C. Lin, Y. Ren, A. H. MacDonald, Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 206601.

[31] Y. Ren, Z. Qiao, Q. Niu, Rep. Prog. Phys. 2016, 79, 066501.

[32] J. Li, R.-X. Zhang, Z. Yin, J. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Liu, J. Zhu, Science 2018, 362, 

1149.

[33] X.-T. He, E.-T. Liang, J.-J. Yuan, H.-Y. Qiu, X.-D. Chen, F.-L. Zhao, J.-W. Dong, Nat. Commun. 2019, 

10, 872.

[34] M. I. Shalaev, W. Walasik, A. Tsukernik, Y. Xu, N. M. Litchinitser, Nat. Nanotech. 2019, 14, 31.

[35] Z. Gao, Z. Yang, F. Gao, H. Xue, Y. Yang, J. Dong, B. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 201402.

[36] M. Bozzi, A. Georgiadis, K. Wu, IET Microw. Anten. P. 2011, 5, 909.

[37] A. Mekis, J. Chen, I. Kurland, S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 

3787.

[38] H. F. Ma, X. Shen, Q. Cheng, W. X. Jiang, T. J. Cui, Laser Photonics Rev. 2014, 8, 146.


Figure 1. Substrate-integrated VPCs with subwavelength thicknesses. a, Perspective-view photograph of the 

experimental sample. b, Side and top views of a unit cell with a rotation angle of 15°. The side view shows the 

details of the sample, and the top view shows the sample without the top PCB. In the top view, the red dashed 

triangle indicates the triangle scatterer with a rotation angle of 0°. The angle θ between the black and blue dashed 

lines represents the rotation angle. The yellow area represents the PEC structure, and the grey region represents the 

dielectric substrate. c, Band structures of the VPC with a rotation angle of 0° (black curve) and 30° (colored 

curves), respectively. d, Band edges and effective Dirac mass term at the K point as a function of the rotation angle 

θ. e, Field patterns of four eigenstates at band edges: K point (
+
and 
-
 ) and K’ point (
 +'
and 
 -'
). Black 

arrows represent Poynting vector distributions for each state.


Figure 2. Zigzag and armchair interfaces and valley-polarized topological kink states. a, b, Zigzag interfaces 

formed by VPCs with opposite rotation angles. The color profiles represent the electric field distributions of the 

valley kink states at the K’ point. c, Band structures of zigzag interfaces in a and b. Here, gray regions, dashed 

curve, and solid curve represent projected bulk bands and dispersions of interfaces in a and b, respectively. The red 

and blue curves indicate forward- and backward-propagating kink states, respectively. d, Armchair interfaces 

formed by VPCs with opposite rotation angles. The color profiles represent electric field distributions of 

topological kink states at K (upper) and K’ (lower) valleys. e, Band structures of the armchair interface in d. There 

is a tiny avoided crossing bandgap between two kink states (almost negligible in the present scale). Here, gray 

regions denote projected bulk bands, whereas red (blue) curves represent kink states of positive (negative) group 

velocities.


Figure 3. Experimental demonstration of robust transport of valley kink states through sharp bending paths. 

a-c, Scheme of sharply twisted topological interfaces. Twisted interfaces, with bending angles of 120°, 60°, and 

90°, contain zigzag, armchair and a combination of zigzag and armchair interfaces, respectively. The red zigzag 

curves represent the interfaces. The orange/green triangles represent the scatterers with positive/negative rotation 

angles. d-f, Simulated electric field intensity distributions corresponding to a-c, respectively. Here, we place a 

point source near the left (d and f) or upper (e) terminations. The green curves represent the energy flows. g, h, 

Measured transmission for bending interfaces, straight interfaces (red curves) and bulk modes (green curves) when 

sources are placed at zigzag/armchair interfaces (marked as zigzag/armchair excitation). Blue and red curves in g

represent transmissions of the valley kink states in a, c, respectively. The blue curve in h represents the 

transmission of the valley kink states in b. The yellow areas denote bandgaps.


Figure 4. Experimental demonstration of valley-polarized topological kink states through the interface with 

disorders. a, c, Schematic view of zigzag and armchair interfaces with disorders. The red curves represent the 

interfaces. The orange/green triangles represent the scatterers with positive/negative rotation angles. b, d, 

Simulated EZ field intensity distributions corresponding to a, c. Here, we place a point source near the left (b) or 

upper (d) termination. The green curves represent energy flows. e, f, Measured transmission for the interfaces with 

disorders, straight interfaces (red curves) and bulk modes (green curves) when sources are placed at 

zigzag/armchair interfaces (marked as zigzag/armchair excitation). The black/blue curve represents the 

transmission of kink states in the structure corresponding to the schematic of a/c. The yellow regions represent the 

bandgaps. 


Figure 5. Experimental demonstration of geometry-dependent topological channel intersections. a-c, 

Schematic illustration of topological channel intersections. The orange/green triangles represent the scatterers with 

positive/negative rotation angles. The red and blue arrows represent propagating directions of kink states carrying 

K and K’ valleys, respectively. d-i, Simulated EZ field intensity distributions when placing a point source at port 1 

and port 2, respectively. The green curves represent the energy flows. j-l, Measured normalized transmissions 

when placing the source antenna at port 1 and port 2, respectively. The solid curves represent the transmissions of 

the valley kink states, and the dashed curve denotes the bulk transmission. The yellow region represents the 

bandgaps. 


