 

1

The Effect of Ga+ ion beam irradiation on the optical 

properties of MAPbBr3 single crystals 

Vsevolod I. Yudin, Boris V. Stroganov, Vyacheslav A. Lovtsyus, Olga A. Lozhkina, Anna A. 

Murashkina, Alexei V. Emeline, Yury V. Kapitonov 

Saint-Petersburg State University, ul. Ulyanovskaya 1, Saint-Petersburg 198504, Russia 

Corresponding Author 

*yury.kapitonov@spbu.ru 

The effect of 30 keV Ga+ ion beam irradiation on the low-temperature photoluminescence from a 

single crystal of the hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite MAPbBr3 is presented for the first time. 

The irradiation leads to the suppression of the crystal's excitonic luminescence starting from the 

dose of 1014/cm2. However, its integral luminescence does not drop up to the doses of two orders 

of magnitude higher. Further increase of the irradiation dose starts to affect the integral 

luminescence and causes the crystal to sputter. The spatial resolution of modification by the ion 

beam found in the experiment is no worse than 50 μm. The theoretical resolution limit estimated 

by Monte-Carlo modeling using SRIM is three orders of magnitude lower. This work paves the 

way for the design of devices based on the spatial modulation of perovskite's excitonic properties 

or direct focused ion beam writing. 

TOC GRAPHICS 


 

2

  

 

KEYWORDS halide perovskite, ion beam irradiation, exciton, defect engineering, focused ion 

beam. 

In recent years halide perovskites draw attention of scientific community as a good candidate 

for solar cell absorber material reaching 20% conversion efficiency1. They also exhibit unique 

optical properties suitable for optoelectronics, laser technology, X-ray and Gamma-ray detection, 

optical imaging etc. For many uses perovskites in single crystalline form are needed since in 

such form they have the lowest inhomogeneous broadening of the exciton resonance. Such 

crystals of good quality could be grown using simple solution-processing techniques2. 

In order to make devices based on halide perovskite single crystals it is important to propose a 

method of spatial modulation of their optical properties, the best way at subwavelength 

dimensions. Recently it was shown that ion-beam irradiation of A3B5 quantum wells could lead 

to the modulation of only the desired exciton properties at ranges suitable for making diffractive 

optical elements3. In this work we study the effect of 30 keV Ga+ ion beam irradiation on the 


 

3

optical properties of the MAPbBr3 single crystal revealing possible route for defect engineering 

in this material. 

Solution grown MAPbBr3 single crystal was irradiated by uniform 300x300 mkm squares 

using 30 keV Ga+ ion beam (see Supplementary information for growth, sample characterization 

and irradiation details) with irradiation doses ranging from 1010 to 1017 1/cm2 (Fig.S2,a). SEM 

image (Fig.S1) shows that sample surface became rough starting from 1016 1/cm2 dose 

designating the transition to the surface sputtering regime. Same effect was observed for white 

light scattering in an optical microscope (Fig.S1). Square with 1017 1/cm2 dose appears black 

most probably indicating material decomposition accompanying sputtering.  At lower doses the 

main effect of irradiation is the generation of defects in the material. 

In order to address exciton properties the sample was cooled down to 4 K. Fig.1 shows PL 

spectra from non-irradiated and irradiated areas. One could see that in the pristine crystal PL 

shows spectrally-narrow (HWHM = 2.5 meV) exciton luminescence centered at E0 = 2.247 eV 

and broad defect-related recombination at lower energies. Ion beam irradiation leads to the 

suppression of the exciton signal, and for bigger doses – suppression of the integral PL signal. 

 


 

4

Figure 1. PL spectra at 4 K from non-irradiated (blue) and ion-irradiated areas. Spectrally 

narrow exciton emission and broad defect-related luminescence could be distinguished. 

In order to study these effects in more details PL mapping was carried out. Fig. 2, a shows scan 

of PL spectra along X axis through squares with different ion irradiation doses. Despite the non-

uniformity of the sample one could see that exciton emission energy remains unchanged through 

the sample, and only its intensity is affected by the ion irradiation. Fig. 2,b shows spectrally-

integrated PL signal which is determined mainly by the defect-related PL signal. Stability of 

exciton resonance energy over the sample makes it possible to carry out 2D PL map of the whole 

sample registered at exciton resonance (Fig. S2,a). Fig.S2, b shows integral PL intensity map. 

 

Figure 2. (a) Spatial scan of PL spectra along X axis at Y = 5.45 mm through squares with 

different ion irradiation doses (indicated above). Exciton and defect-related PL signal could be 

spectrally separated. (b) Spectrally-integrated PL from (a). 

Observed effects could be explained as follows. At doses below 1014 1/cm2 no ion irradiation 

effect is observed. It means that ion beam induced defects density is well below the background 


 

5

defect density. At 1014 and 1015 1/cm2 doses exciton signal is gradually suppressed due to the 

inelastic scattering of excitons on high density ion-induced defects. Nevertheless integral PL 

intensity remains constant indicating that radiation defects do not effectively participate in non-

radiative recombination of carriers. At even higher doses sample sputtering begins with 

prominent decrease of detected integral PL. This decrease is induced by surface layer 

degradation (which affects both pump light absorption and percent of PL signal escaping the 

sample), and possibly also by non-radiative recombination at defects. These findings are 

summarized in Fig.3. Dose dependency of the exciton PL shows exponential decay with dose 

with the characteristic decay dose D0 = 6·1015 1/cm2. 

 

Figure 3. Experimental dose dependency of the exciton PL intensity (a) and integral PL (b) 

averaged over exposed areas (dots). Exciton PL fit by exponential decay (solid line). 

Spatial resolution of PL maps was limited by 50 mkm laser spot diameter. Edges of PL profiles 

of exposed areas shows the same slope (Fig.S3), so the spatial resolution of the ion beam 

modification of the excitonic resonance is no worse that this value. In order to estimate 


 

6

theoretical limit of the spatial resolution a modelling of defects generation was carried out using 

Monte-Carlo method. For focused 30 keV Ga+ ion beam irradiation and MAPbBr3 target most 

vacancies are generated within the hemisphere of 50 nm radius. For lower ion beam energies this 

volume could be reduced further down to 10 nm hemisphere at 1 keV. In this case ion beam spot 

size on the target will be the main resolution limitation factor. Such a small interaction volume in 

contrast to the irradiation of Si and GaAs targets could be explained by stopping action of Pb 

ions in MAPbBr3. 

In this paper we have studied effect of 30 keV Ga+ ion beam irradiation on optical properties of 

a MAPbBr3 single crystal. Low temperature photoluminescence study of uniformly irradiated 

areas reveals that starting from 1014 1/cm2 ion dose exciton PL intensity is gradually suppressed 

without change of the integral PL intensity. Only at doses > 1016 1/cm2 integral intensity starts to 

drop together with the sample sputtering and possibly decomposition. This proves high radiation 

stability of this material with possibility to modulate resonant excitonic properties using 

moderate ion irradiation doses. Exciton resonance energy remains nearly unchanged through the 

irradiation which means that the main effect of the irradiation-generated effects is non-elastic 

scattering of excitons. Monte-Carlo modelling of the defect generation in the sample by ion 

beam irradiation shows very small interaction volumes definitely subwavelength in size. This 

observation has two main conclusions: 1. Ion beam irradiation with doses < 1016 1/cm2 could be 

used for creation of active diffractive optical elements, photonic crystals or metamaterials based 

on the exciton resonance modulation by introduction of additional structural defects. 2. 

Nanoscale-sized structures retaining resonant excitonic properties could be created from 

perovskite single crystals by direct focused-ion-beam (FIB) patterning followed by < 100 nm 


 

7

thin damaged layer removal by less destructive methods such as liquid etching or low-energy ion 

polishing. 

 

Supporting Information.  

The following files are available free of charge. 

Synthesis procedure and structure characterization of MAPbBr3 and experimental details of PL 

measurements. (PDF) 

 

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 


 

8

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Synthesis of samples was performed within the Project “Establishment of the Laboratory 

Photoactive Nanocomposite Materials” No. 14.Z50.31.0016 supported by a Mega-grant of the 

Government of the Russian Federation. Y.V.K. and O.A.L. acknowledge the Russian Science 

Foundation (Grant 17-72-10070) for financial support of ion beam irradiation and optical study. 

The work was carried out using equipment of the resource centers “Nanophotonics” and 

“Geomodel” of Saint-Petersburg State University. 

 


 

9

REFERENCES 

(1) Even, J.; Pedesseau, L.; Katan, C.; Kepenekian, M.; Lauret, J.-S.; Sapori, D.; Deleporte, 

E. Solid-State Physics Perspective on Hybrid Perovskite Semiconductor. J. Phys. Chem. 

C 2015, 119, 10161−10177. 

(2) O.A. Lozhkina, V.I. Yudin, A.A. Murashkina, V.V. Shilovskikh, V.G. Davydov, R. 

Kevorkyants, A.V. Emeline, Yu.V. Kapitonov, and D.W. Bahnemann, Low 

Inhomogeneous Broadening of Excitonic Resonance in MAPbBr3 Single Crystals, J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 302−305. 

(3) Yu. V. Kapitonov, P. Yu. Shapochkin, L. Yu. Beliaev, Yu. V. Petrov, Yu. P. Efimov, S. 

A. Eliseev, V. A. Lovtcius, V. V. Petrov, and V. V. Ovsyankin, Ion-beam-assisted spatial 

modulation of inhomogeneous broadening of a quantum well resonance: excitonic 

diffraction grating, Optics Letters 2016, 41, No.1 104. 

 


 

10

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

1. Growth and characterization 

MAPbBr3 single  crystals  were  synthesized  by  the  inverse temperature crystallization 

method from dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution. The solution of 1 mol/l of MABr and 1 mol/l 

of PbBr2 in DMSO was prepared, filtered, and kept in autoclave at 70º C for 4 hours. The single 

crystals were isolated. Structural characterization of the solution-grown single crystals was 

carried out using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Hitachi S-3400N by Energy-Dispersive 

X-ray (EDX) spectrometer Oxford Instruments X-Max 20 and Electron Backscatter  Diffraction 

(EBSD) using AZtecHKL Channel 5. 

2. Ion beam irradiation 

MAPbBr3 single crystal was irradiated by 30 keV Ga+ ion beam using Zeiss Crossbeam 

1540XB FIB-SEM. Irradiated areas were 300x300 mkm with 300 mkm spacing between them. 

Irradiated pattern is shown in Fig.S2,a. 

3. Optical study 

Irradiated sample was cooled down to 4 K by a closed-cycle helium cryostat Montana 

Cryostation. Sample was illuminated by a cw-laser with wavelength 450 nm focused by a lens in 

a 50-mkm spot. PL was collected by the same lens, filtered by an yellow filter from scattered 

laser light and recorded by a home-build spectrometer based on a monochromator and a CCD-

array detector. PL mapping was done by an automated scan of the lens along the X-axis by a 

motorized micrometer stage and manually along the Y-axis by a micrometer translation stage. 

4. Monte-Carlo modelling 

Monte-Carlo modelling was carried out using TRIM/SRIM software. MAPbBr3 target density 

was set as 3.582 g/cm3. Modelling was carried out on the 100x100 spatial array with 2 nm step. 

Ion beam spot at the target surface was set as 1 nm. Secondary cascades were taken into account. 

For each spatial bin a vacancy generation yield V (Vacancies/Angstrom*ion) was calculated. 

Calculation was carried out for incident ion energies 30, 15, 5 and 1 keV (Fig.S4). 


 

11

 

 

Figure S1. (Left) SEM image in secondary electrons mode. (Middle) White light reflection 

image (color image converted to the grayscale). Note the hardly visible 1015 and 1014 1/cm2 

squares. (Right) PL map taken at 4 K with excitation by 450 nm laser and detection by a camera 

with yellow glass filter removing scattered laser light. 

 


 

12

Figure S2. (a) Pattern irradiated by ions. 300x300 mkm squares are separated by 300 mkm. (b) 

PL intensity map for exciton resonance E0 = 2.247 eV (b) and integral PL intensity map (c). All 

three panels have the same spatial scale. Note the decrease of both resonant and integral PL for 

1016 and 1017 1/cm2 doses and decrease of solely resonant PL for 1015 and 1014 1/cm2 doses. 

 

 

Figure S3. Spatial resolution of the ion modification. Red line – exciton PL profile, blue line – 

irradiated 300 mkm pattern. 

 

Figure S4. Monte-Carlo modelling of the vacancy generation yield V in the case of Ga+ ion 

irradiation of MAPbBr3 target for ion energies 30, 15, 5 and 1 keV. Ion beam is incident from 

above at the point X = 0. 


