Electronic stopping for protons and α-particles from first principles electron dynamics: The case of 

silicon carbide

Dillon C. Yost and Yosuke Kanai*

Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27516, USA

(Dated: May 1, 2018)

We present the first-principles determination of electronic stopping power for protons and α-particles in a 

semiconductor material of great technological interest: silicon carbide.  The calculations are based on non-
equilibrium simulations of the electronic response to swift ions using real-time time-dependent density functional 
theory (RT-TDDFT).  We compare the results from this first-principles approach to those of the widely used linear 
response formalism and determine the ion velocity regime within which linear response treatments are appropriate. 
We also use the non-equilibrium electron densities in our simulations to quantitatively address the long-standing 
question of the velocity-dependent effective charge state of projectile ions in a material, due to its importance in 
linear response theory. We further examine the validity of the recently proposed centroid path approximation 
recently proposed for reducing the computational cost of acquiring stopping power curves from RT-TDDFT 
simulations.  

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.94.115107

I. INTRODUCTION

Understanding the stopping process of highly energetic ions 

in condensed matter systems has great implications in modern 
technologies ranging from nuclear fission/fusion reactors [1], to 
semiconductor devices for space missions [2], to cancer therapy 
based on ion beam radiation [3]. The kinetic energy of 
irradiating energetic ions is dissipated in a material in the 
stopping stage, a fundamental process in which deposited 
energy becomes available for inducing structural transitions 
through various mechanisms. Conceptually, the stopping stage 
is divided into two regimes, depending on the type of excitation 
produced [4]: At low ion velocities, the dominant effect is 
nuclear stopping, which primarily results in lattice excitations 
and nuclei displacements. At higher velocities (typically > keV), 
the relevant excitations are electronic, hence the term ‘electronic 
stopping’. The average rate of energy transfer from the ion to 
the target material is generally measured with respect to the unit 
distance of projectile ion movement, and this is referred to as 
stopping power.

Ever since the phenomenon of electronic stopping was 

discovered, a number of approximated analytical models have 
been developed: the classical Coulomb scattering formulas of 
Rutherford [5], Thomson [6], and Darwin [7], the quantum-
mechanical perturbation approach by Bethe [8], electron gas 
models by Fermi and Teller [9], and the dielectric formalism 
treatment by Lindhard (see [10-12] and references therein). 
Non-perturbative calculations (necessary to model, e.g., the 
Barkas effect [13] and so-called Z1 oscillations) of electronic 
stopping in the uniform electron gas started in the 1980s by 
Echenique and co-workers [14,15] with the advent of density 
functional calculations and their time-dependent counterparts
[16]. For historical reviews of theoretical approaches to 
electronic stopping see Refs. [17,18]. Today, perhaps the most 

widely used approach is the linear response formalism, 
originating with Bethe, but also used by Lindhard and others. In 
the framework of linear response theory (consequently, the 
projectile ion is assumed to have a fixed charge Z with no 
velocity dependence), the stopping power can be expressed in a 
mathematically closed form [19]:

𝑆(𝑣) =

&'()

𝒗) 𝐿(𝑣)
( 1 )

where v is the projectile ion velocity, and L(v) is a velocity-
dependent quantity called the stopping logarithm. This quantity
is given in terms of either mean excitation energy of the target 
material in Bethe theory [8], or as the energy/wave-vector 
dependent dielectric response function in Lindhard’s formula
[10,11]. Note that the mean excitation energy can be obtained 
from the optical limit of dielectric response function [20,21] or 
from 
electronic 
structure 
calculations 
[22,23], 
whereas 

Lindhard’s approach requires a full dielectric function:

𝐿 𝑣 =
1

2𝜋/
𝜔

12

3

𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑞
𝑞 𝐼𝑚
1

𝜀(𝑞, 𝜔)

:

3

 
         ( 2 ) 

where ε is the macroscopic dielectric function of frequency ω
and wavelength q.

In the last few decades, both rapidly advancing high-

performance computers and modern electronic structure 
methods have made it possible to obtain key parameters in the 
analytical models directly from first principles theory [24-27]. 
Parameter-free methods can go significantly beyond analytical 
models because they provide detailed information at the 
atomistic level, allowing one to study the specific influences of 
defects, surfaces, or even the nature of electronic excitations 


involved in the stopping process. However, a fully atomistic 
first-principles calculation of electronic stopping for a wide 
range of projectile velocities, especially around the maximum of 
the electronic stopping curve, has remained elusive. The 
possibility of quantitatively describing the interaction of 
projectile atoms with the electronic and ionic system of the host 
material entirely within first-principles calculations has come 
within reach [28,29]. These advances for realistic materials rely 
on 
non-perturbative, 
real-time, 
time-dependent 
density 

functional theory (RT-TDDFT) [16]. In a recent study [30], we 
demonstrated an accurate calculation of the electronic stopping 
power curve for protons and α-particles in a representative 
metallic 
system 
of 
aluminum, 
for 
which 
practical 

approximations within RT-TDDFT, such as the exchange-
correlation potential, are thought to be satisfactory.

In light of this encouraging result, we apply the 

methodology to the representative semiconductor material
silicon carbide (SiC). SiC has garnered attention for fusion and 
advanced fission energy applications due to its ability to retain 
important physical and chemical properties when exposed to 
extreme particle radiation [31-34].  Also, SiC has potential for 
use in semiconductor nuclear radiation detectors due to its 
ability to withstand radiation-induced damage better than 
conventional semiconductor materials such as silicon and 
germanium [35]. These applications make SiC a scientifically 
and technologically relevant case for studying electronic 
stopping in semiconductors. In addition to the non-empirical 
determination of the electronic stopping power for protons and 

α-particles from first-principles simulations, we address the 
long-standing question of the effective charge state of the 
projectile ion and the related issue of the extent to which a 
linear-response formalism can be applied over different velocity 
regimes.  Also, we examine the validity of the recently used 
centroid path approximation for calculating stopping power
[36,37]. 

II. THEORETICAL METHOD

The simulation methods employed in this work closely follow 
that described by Schleife et. al. [38,39] involving a real-time 
propagation approach within time-dependent density functional 
theory. For all simulations, the PBE exchange-correlation 
functional was used [40] within the adiabatic approximation 
[41,42]. In the current method, a plane-wave pseudopotential 
scheme is used in solving the time-dependent Kohn-Sham 
equations in which a real, swift ion (proton or α-particle) is 
responsible for the time-dependence of the external potential 
acting on the electronic system. Hamann-Schluter-Chiang-
Vanderbilt norm-conserving pseudo-potentials were used for all 
atoms [43], including the projectile ions. We employ our 
recently-developed, highly parallelized implementation of RT-
TDDFT [38,39] in the Qb@ll branch of the Qbox code [44,45].

In this work, we use a simulation cell consisting of 216 

atoms (864 electrons) in a cubic super-cell (lattice constant 4.36 
Å) of 3C-SiC, the zinc-blende polytope of silicon carbide. 
Despite the large simulation cell we employ, the electronic 
stopping power curve is not completely converged with respect 

FIG.   2.   Electronic   stopping   power   as   a   function   of   the   velocity   of   
an   α-­‐‑particle   projectile   in   3C-­‐‑SiC.      The   solid   black   curve   
represents   the   empirical   SRIM   model   [52].      The   dashed   black   
curve   represents   a   dielectric   formalism   [48]   calculation   with   an   
empirically   fitted   dielectric   function.   Red   circles   and   blue   
squares   show   experimental   data   for   α-­‐‑particles   over   two   
velocity   ranges   [53,54].      The   solid   green   curve   corresponds   to   
the   values   we   obtained   by   calculating   the   non-­‐‑equilibrium   
response   using   RT-­‐‑TDDFT.   The   error   bars   represent   standard   
deviations   for   the   path   distribution.   The   dashed   green   curve   
shows   the   RT-­‐‑TDDFT   results   with   an   added   finite   size   error   
correction.      

FIG.   1.   Electronic   stopping   power   as   a   function   of   the   velocity   of   a   
proton   projectile   in   3C-­‐‑SiC.      The   solid   black   curve   represents   the   
empirical   SRIM   model   [52].   The   dashed   black   curve   represents   a   
dielectric   formalism   calculation   with   an   empirically   fitted   
dielectric   function   [48].   Red   circles   and   blue   squares   show   
experimental   data   for   protons   and   deuterium   ions,   respectively   
[47].      The   pink   curve   represents   results   from   the   dielectric   
response   formalism   using   LR-­‐‑TDDFT   for   calculating   the   dielectric   
matrix   [26].      The   solid   green   curve   corresponds   to   the   values   we   
obtained   by   calculating   the   non-­‐‑equilibrium   response   using   RT-­‐‑
TDDFT.   The   error   bars   represent   standard   deviations   for   the   path   
distribution.   The   dashed   green   curve   shows   the   RT-­‐‑TDDFT   results   
with   an   added   finite   size   error   correction.      


to the simulation cell size. Unfortunately, it is not possible to 
achieve the strictest convergence at the present time because of 
the large computational cost associated with these RT-TDDFT 
simulations in obtaining the ensemble average. Instead, we used 
a representative projectile ion path (i.e. centroid path as 
discussed later) to estimate the finite size correction using a 
much larger simulation cell as discussed
in detail in 

Supplemental Material. For the remainder of the work, 
electronic stopping power curves are shown with and without 
the finite size error correction. The gamma point was used in 
sampling of the Brillouin zone, and it was found to be sufficient
for convergence by comparing with calculations with 4 k-points 
as shown in Supporting Information. A plane-wave energy 
cutoff of 50 Rydberg was used. In this work, we did not use a 
single, long, re-entering projectile path for obtaining an 
ensemble average as done previously for metallic systems [30]. 
Instead, we directly obtained the ensemble average using 10 
independent projectile ion paths that are determined via a 
random number generator, and there are no constraints on the 
impact parameters. Thus, there are rare instances in which the 
projectile ion penetrates into the pseudo-potential spheres of 
other atoms. The positions of all atoms, except the projectile 
ion, are held fixed in the simulation cell while the electronic 
system evolves in response to the time-dependent potential due 
to the projectile ion. The non-equilibrium simulations yield the 
electronic energy increase as a function of the projectile 
displacement for a specific ion velocity. We then apply a
baseline fitting with asymmetric least squares fitting proposed 
by Eilers et al. [46] in order to acquire a linear regression. This
slope represents the energy derivative that can be used to 
calculate the electronic stopping power via the following 
equation:

S v    =    

>? @(A;C)

>D
2   ,   
(3) 

where E is the time-dependent electronic energy and ρ(r;t) is the 
non-equilibrium electron density [30], and x is the projectile ion 
position.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Electronic stopping power for proton and α-particle

Janson and co-workers [47] conducted ion-implantation 

experiments to acquire low-velocity electronic stopping power 
for 1H and 2H ions using time-of-flight (TOF) techniques.  The 
experimental data shown in Figure 1. was obtained by removing 
the nuclear stopping power component from their experimental 
measurements. The analytical model by Heredia-Avalos and co-
workers [48] employs the dielectric response formulation using 
a Mermin-type dielectric function [49] together with a modified 
Brandt-Kitagawa model [50,51] for the effective charge state of 
the proton. The dielectric function was obtained by fitting to the 
experimental spectrum of the energy loss function in the optical 
limit (q = 0). Additionally, SRIM 2003 provides empirically 
fitted data from a combination of experimental results for 
electronic stopping in Si and C [52].  As can be seen in Figure 
1, the analytical model by Heredia-Avalos, et al. [48] and the 
SRIM model are in rather good agreement with each other, 
especially for higher velocities beyond the stopping power 
maximum.

As an alternative to using a model dielectric function, the 

dielectric formalism can be cast in terms of the microscopic 
dielectric function, which can be computed using modern first-
principles electronic structure calculations [24,25]. Recently, 
Shukri and co-workers [26] employed such a dielectric response 
formalism:

𝑆 𝑣 =

&'()

EFG2
𝐼𝑚 𝜀𝑮,𝑮

IJ (𝒒, 𝜔)

𝒗∙ 𝒒M𝑮

𝒒M𝑮 )
𝑮

N(
𝒒
( 4 )

where Nk is the number of k points used in the Brillouin zone,  
Ω is the volume of the unit cell, q is a lattice vector in the first 
Brillouin zone, G are reciprocal lattice vectors, 𝒗 is the ion 
velocity and the microscopic dielectric matrix was calculated 
using linear response TDDFT with the adiabatic local density 
approximation (ALDA). The energy dependence is given by 
𝜔 = 𝒗 ∙ 𝒒 + 𝑮 , and their result for the cubic 3C-SiC is also 
shown for comparison in Figure 1. 

In Figure 1, our RT-TDDFT simulation results for

protons in SiC are shown with and without the finite-size error 
correction as discussed in Theoretical Method section. Note that 
the correction becomes appreciable for the ion velocities beyond 
the stopping power peak. Our RT-TDDFT simulation results 
show good agreement with the available experimental data and 
the empirical models for the low-velocity regime (v < 1.5 a.u.). 
Additionally, the position and magnitude of the stopping power 
peak is in good agreement with the empirical models, showing
the stopping power maximum at v = ~1.5 a.u., which is close to 
the result by Heredia-Avalos, et al. [48]. However, for the 
higher velocities (v > 2 a.u.), the RT-TDDFT simulation results 

                  FIG.   3.         Ratio   of   the   calculated   electronic   stopping   power   for   
α-­‐‑particle   to   the   electronic   stopping   power   for   proton,   as   a   
function   of   the   projectile   ion   velocity.   The   dashed   line   indicates   
(Zα/ZH)2   =   4   one   would   obtain   using   linear   response   theory   by   
assuming   fully-­‐‑ionized   projectile   ions.   


yield stopping powers that are significantly lower (~50%) than 
those given by the empirical models even when the finite size 
error is taken into account.  The linear response formulation is 
expected to become more accurate with the increasing velocity, 
and the noticeable difference between our RT-TDDFT result 
and the linear response result using the TDDFT microscopic 
dielectric matrix [26] is notable even for the high velocity 
regime. Part of the disagreement between these two first-
principles approaches stem from the use of the PBE XC 
approximation in our RT-TDDFT simulations and the use of the
LDA XC approximation in calculating TDDFT microscopic 
dielectric matrix [26]. Indeed, when we calculate the electronic 
stopping power using LDA in RT-TDDFT simulations, the 
resulting stopping power is larger by as much as 18 % for the 
velocities above ~1.5 a.u. (see Supplemental Material). Another 
source of the disagreement might come from the neglect of core 
electron excitations in our RT-TDDFT simulations. From an 
earlier work on silicon [26], neglecting excitations of 2s and 2p 
electrons is likely to result in a slight underestimation even in 
SiC for velocities beyond the stopping power maximum, but not 
enough to fully explain the disagreement. Given that our RT-
TDDFT simulation uses the approximated finite-size error
correction and the linear response result by Shukri et al. uses an 
extrapolation 
scheme 
[26]
(because 
achieving 
strict

convergence is not possible at the present time), the observed 
disagreement, even for high velocity regimes, calls for a
systematic examination of both approaches in a future work. At 
the same time, we note that for a simpler metallic case of 
aluminum, these two first-principles approaches have been 
shown to agree quite well for the case of protons, as preciously 
discussed [26,30].

Figure 2. shows our RT-TDDFT simulation result in 

comparison with experimental measurements for α-particles. 
For α-particles, Zhang et al. used a TOF setup to determine 
electronic stopping power of He ions in SiC over a wide 
velocity range [53,54]. There is excellent agreement between 
our result and the experiments for the velocity range below the 
stopping power maximum. However, for higher velocities, our 
results are significantly lower than the experimental stopping 
power data even when the finite-size error is taken into account.
The disagreement with the experimental measurements is 
indicative of underlying approximations in RT-TDDFT
simulations, specifically the XC and adiabatic approximations.

Comparing the stopping power curves for these two 

different projectile ions, proton and α-particle, (Fig 1. and Fig 
2.), there is a shift in the stopping power curve maximum going 
from proton to α-particle: The peak of the proton stopping 
power curve is located at v = ~1.5 a.u., whereas the peak for the 
α-particle stopping power curve is at v = ~2.0 a.u.  Such a peak 
shift cannot be obtained by employing a linear response model. 
Within linear response theory, the stopping power has a 
quadratic dependence on the projectile ion charge since the 
stopping logarithm (Eq. 2) depends only on the target medium. 
Considering the proton and α-particle curves, the ratio 
Sα(v)/SH(v) = 4 represents the validity of the linear response 
theory at a specific velocity, assuming fully-ionized projectiles. 

The ratio, Sα(v)/SH(v), from our RT-TDDFT results is plotted in 
Figure 3. as a function of the ion velocity. The ratio of the 
stopping power curves for α-particles to that for protons
approaches 4 for velocities larger than v = ~3 a.u., which is well 
beyond the stopping power maxima for both protons and α-
particles. This corroborates the notion that additional higher-
order Z corrections and/or effective ion charge models are 
necessary for the linear response theory to correctly capture the 
stopping power maximum, despite the inconvenience associated 
with having more empirical parameters [55,56].

The observed difference in stopping power curves between

protons and α-particles is directly related to the difference in the 
non-adiabatic forces on the projectile ion [57], and it is 

FIG.   4.      Response-­‐‑normalized   density   differences,   Δ𝜌UIV   ,   
between   α-­‐‑particle   and   proton   partway   through   the   simulations.      
Blue   and   red   indicate   negative   and   positive   deviations,   
respectively,   from   the   induced   density   predicted   by   linear   
response   theory.      Volume   slices   parallel   to   the   projectile   ion   path   
are   shown.      For   clarity,   atoms   are   not   shown.   

FIG.   5.      Electronic   stopping   power   calculated   from   the   ensemble   
average   of   RT-­‐‑TDDFT   simulations   for   α-­‐‑particle   (darker   blue)   
and   proton   (darker   green)   in   SiC.      Calculation   results   using   the   
centroid   path   approximation   are   shown   for   α-­‐‑particle   (light   blue)   
and   proton   (light   green).      Shown   in   the   upper   right   corner   is   a   
schematic   indicating   the   centroid   path   in   3C-­‐‑SiC   relative   to   
atomic   positions   of   C   and   Si.   


informative to analyze
the spatial dependence of non-

equilibrium electron density beyond what is described by linear 
response theory. In the electronic stopping of ions, induced 
electron density is proportional to the electronic stopping power. 
To this end, the response-normalized density difference is 
calculated as follows:

Δ𝜌UIV 𝑡 =

@X C //I@Z C

@Z C
×100%
( 5 )

where 𝜌U 𝑡
and 𝜌V 𝑡
are the time-dependent electron 

densities for the α-particle and proton cases, respectively. The 
factor of 2 takes into account the fact that the induced electron 
density response is twice as large with α-particle within linear 
response theory. In plotting the response-normalized density 
difference, as in Figure 4, one can directly observe the 
deviations of linear response theory from the RT-TDDFT 
simulation results. Figure 4 shows Δ𝜌UIV 𝑡 at a representative 
instant of time for three different velocities, representing the 
low-velocity region (v = 0.25 a.u.), the velocity region near 
peak stopping power (v = 2.0 a.u.), and the high-velocity region 
(v = 5.0 a.u.). Green color in Figure 4 would represent the 
response of electron density that is consistent with linear 
response treatment. As can been seen, the density response for 
the α-particle case is much lesser in comparison for most 
regions except the immediate vicinity of the projectile ion.

B. Examining the centroid path approximation

The instantaneous energy loss rate of the projectile ion in a 

condensed matter system often depends strongly on the specific 
path taken by the ion and its proximity to atoms and bonds over 
the course of the trajectory. In order to obtain the electronic 
stopping power in real materials like SiC, an ensemble average 
over numerous projectile
paths needs to be taken until 

satisfactory convergence is reached. Unfortunately, numerous
expensive RT-TDDFT simulations are necessary to obtain an 
accurate ensemble average, making it a computationally
demanding
procedure. 
In 
an 
attempt 
to 
reduce 
this

computational expense
and still acquire accurate results, 

Ojanperä et al. [36] posited that for the case of a symmetric two-
dimensional system like graphene, a geometric centroid path 
could be used to approximate the ensemble average of projectile 
paths through the graphene surface. However, a thorough 
analysis of this approximation for different ion velocities and 
different materials has not been reported. In order to examine
how well this approach works for 3D crystalline materials, like 
SiC, over a wide velocity range, we compared the calculated 
electronic stopping power curves from the 3C-SiC centroid path 
to the ensemble average from 10 random paths. 

The centroid path was determined by considering a 2D 

orthographic perspective of one channel of 3C-SiC. This 
perspective is deconstructed into its irreducible representation 
consisting of a triangle with a silicon atom, a carbon atom, and 
the channeling point as vertices (see Figure 5). The centroid of 
this triangle is given by the intersection of the triangle’s three 
medians. Finally, the direction of the centroid path is given the 
path along the [001] crystal direction that passes through the 
centroid point. This procedure can easily be abstracted to other 
materials with symmetric crystal structures.  Figure 5. shows the 
centroid path from a 2D orthographic perspective of a 3C-SiC 
channel, where the ion path is through the centroid along the 
[001] direction.  

Figure 5. shows the stopping power curves from both the 

centroid path and the ensemble average of 10 random projectile 
paths. Except for some differences near the stopping power 
peak, the centroid path stopping power is in remarkably good
agreement with the ensemble average. This implies that the 

FIG.   7.   Ratio   of   mean   steady-­‐‑state   charge   (purple)   between   α-­‐‑

particle   and   proton   over   a   range   of   projectile   velocities.   The   green   
curve   corresponds   to   Zeff,   the   effective   scaling   factor   calculated   from   
the   stopping   power   ratios   between   α-­‐‑particle   and   proton.      Within   
linear   response   theory,   the   ratio   𝑍U 𝑍V
⁄
   yields   2   as   indicated   by   

dashed   line   if   fully-­‐‑ionized   projectiles   are   assumed.   

FIG.   6.   Velocity-­‐‑dependent   mean   steady-­‐‑state   charges,   𝑞_,   for   

α-­‐‑particle   (red)   and   proton   (blue)   in   SiC.      Error   bars   indicate   
standard   deviations   of   the   mean.         The   dependence   of   the   charge   
on   impact   parameters   is   shown   in   Supplemental   Material.      


electronic response along the centroid path is close to the 
average of the electronic responses in 3C-SiC. In recent RT-
TDDFT simulation work by Ullah et al. [58] a systematic 
investigation of impact parameters along channeling paths in 
bulk cubic Germanium showed that the electronic stopping 
power can be related to the average density along the trajectory.
Our results also support this finding, and they support the notion 
that the average electron density along the centroid path result 
in a stopping power that is in good agreement with the ensemble 
average of random paths. Thus, these results appear to support 
the proposition put forth by the empirical Bragg’s additivity rule 
that the electronic stopping power is mainly proportional to the 
average density of electrons [59]. However, the results also 
imply that this empirical rule becomes less acceptable near the 
peak of the stopping power curve (6.5% and 5.5% 
underestimations at the stopping power maximum for proton 
and α-particle, respectively). Shukri et al. [26] found that
Bragg’s additivity rule is only effectual at higher velocities (v > 
2 a.u.) for SiC, and that the deviation between Bragg’s rule 
stopping power and their calculated stopping power was as large 
as 15% for low to moderate ion velocities. It appears that the 
centroid path approximation is able to partly capture details of 
the chemical bonds in the target material (so-called “bond 
effects” [22]), which are completely missed when employing
Bragg’s additivity rule.

C. Effective charge state and Linear Response Theory

Within linear response theory, one starts by considering a 

particle with a fixed charge interacting with a material. A 
natural question is whether or not this fixed charge is different 
from the ion charge in vacuum, and also the extent to which the 
charge state depends on the inhomogeneous electron density in 
real materials. As early as the 1920s, experiments by Rutherford 
[60] showed the presence of singly-charged helium atoms in the 
beam of α-particles emerging from a penetrated material. Not 
only were singly charged He+ observed, but also it was found 
that the ratio of He+ to He2+ ions increases at lower ion 
velocities. Sequences of electron capture and loss events yield 
the mean steady-state charge, 𝑞, on the projectile ion [61,62]. 
The mean steady-state charge has a velocity-dependence, and it 
varies widely between solid and gaseous stopping media [63], 
with solids giving rise to more full ionization. In addition to this 
mass-density effect, the velocity dependence of the charge state 
has also been widely studied, and various theoretical 
descriptions exist in the literature. The commonly used Brandt-
Kitagawa theory [50,51], for example, models the charge state 
as a function of the scaled velocity based on the Thomas-Fermi 
model. Clearly, an important aspect in applying the linear 
response theory formalism for calculating stopping power is the 
question of whether the use of an effective charge for the swift 
ion can better represents the electronic stopping power curve.

As noted by other authors [64], terminological confusion 

with regards to the use of the “effective charge” of a projectile 
has pervaded literature due to the term’s two different 

definitions: The original concept of “effective charge” proposed 
by Bohr and others [61,65] referred to the real steady-state
charge of the ion (i.e., the 𝑞, mean steady-state charge value 
mentioned above).  It was not until later [66] that the same 
terminology was used to describe a related, but distinctively 
different concept: effective charge state for the projectile ion 
was then defined such that 𝑍`aa = 𝑆bcd 𝑆V

J// is satisfied.

The relation between these two quantities remains unclear, and
they cannot be assumed to be equivalent.  For low velocities, 
projectile ions are usually assumed to be nearly neutral, giving 
rise to the deduction that Zeff > 𝑞 for low velocities.  However, 
for high velocities, the relation has been widely debated, with 
some experiments on solid targets indicating Zeff > 𝑞, and 
experiments on gaseous targets indicating Zeff ≅ 𝑞 [62]. 

In principle, all necessary information for calculating the 

mean steady-state charge, 𝑞, on the projectile ion is contained in 
our RT-TDDFT simulations. However, a sensible partitioning 
scheme for non-equilibrium electron density is needed to 
quantify the electron charge belonging to the projectile ion. We 
presently employ the Voronoi analysis [67] using analysis code 
by Henkelman et al. [67]. Forty equally spaced electron density 
“snapshots” at different times were taken for each projectile 
velocity traveling along the centroid path in the RT-TDDFT 
simulations.  Next, induced electron densities were calculated
by subtracting the 3C-SiC ground state electron density from the 
non-equilibrium electron densities at the different times.  These 
induced electron densities give a spatial representation of where 
electron density is accumulating in the simulation cell, and 
where it is being depleted. Finally, the Voronoi analysis is 
performed on the induced electron densities to quantify the 
charge within the projectile ion’s Voronoi cell at different 
positions in the trajectory. While partitioning schemes based on 
electron density topology (e.g. Bader decomposition) are 
commonly used for the ground-state electronic density, the 
present problem lends itself better to the above approach using 
geometry-based Voronoi analysis [67] because its partitioning 
scheme satisfies two key criteria that are required for our 
analysis: First, the Voronoi partitioning criterion is not affected 
by the projectile ion velocity, which is necessary in order to 
have a consistent definition for all ion velocities. Second, the 
partitioning scheme approaches the correct limit (fully ionized 
projectile ion) in the high velocity limit. The Voronoi cell of a 
given atom is defined as the region of space closer to the given 
atom than to any other atom.  In crystalline materials, the 
Voronoi cell is equivalent to the Wigner-Seitz cell.  It is this 
geometric criterion that ensures that the size and shape of the 
ion’s Voronoi cell depends only on the position of the projectile 
ion, not its velocity.  Another advantage of Voronoi analysis is 
that it allows us to quantify the charge of the projectile ion 
throughout the entire trajectory. This can give insight into the 
dynamics of the charge capture and loss process, and it allows 
for the calculation of a mean steady-state charge. 

Figure 6. shows the mean steady-state charge of the 

projectile ion as a function of the ion velocity. As its velocity 
increases, the projectile approaches a fully ionized state (𝑞 = Z). 
The Voronoi partitioning scheme yields this known exact 


behavior in the limit of high velocities. For the lowest velocity 
simulated, v = 0.25 a.u., the ions do not approach complete 
neutrality.  Instead, the proton and α-particle approach ion 
charges of approximately +0.25 and +1.00, respectively.
Interestingly, a recent RT-TDDFT simulation work by Zhao et 
al. [37] on two-dimensional boron-nitride and graphene sheets 
also shows that the α-particle acquires only about one electron 
or fewer for low velocities.

Returning to the question of the relationship between the 

concepts of the effective charge, Zeff, and Bohr’s original 
definition of effective charge, 𝑞, it is interesting to examine the 
extent to which these two quantities become equivalent. Can 
scaling with the mean charge states rather than assuming fully 
ionized ion at all velocities remedy the shortcomings of linear 
response theory at low ion velocities? We examined 𝑞α/𝑞H from 
our simulations in comparison to the calculated 𝑆U 𝑆V

J//.

While the two quantities are in excellent agreement for higher 
ion velocities v ≥ 3 a.u., there is a significant qualitative 
difference for v < 3 a.u.
Even if other electron density 

partitioning schemes were considered, it is highly unlikely 
that 𝑞f /𝑞H would yield the behavior observed for 𝑆U 𝑆V

J//.

Thus, for the present case of SiC, a non-empirical determination 
of Zeff in the context of linear response theory for predicting the 
stopping power curves for low ion velocities would not be 
feasible unless additional higher order perturbations were taken 
into account.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we presented first-principles calculations of 

electronic stopping power in cubic silicon carbide (SiC) for 
protons
and 
α-particles, 
from 
non-equilibrium 
electron 

dynamics simulations based on
real-time time-dependent 

density functional theory (RT-TDDFT). We have shown that the 
centroid path approximation [36,37] accurately reproduces 
electronic stopping power values of the ensemble average, while 
the agreement is worse for the velocities near the stopping 
power maximum. We have also quantified the velocity-
dependent mean steady-state charges for protons and α-particles
in SiC to examine the extent to which a linear response 
treatment can be applied. Our results indicate that linear 
response theory should be applicable for velocities larger than ~ 
3 a.u. if the mean steady-state charges are used instead of 

assuming fully-ionized ions in SiC. While we have made 
significant progress toward an accurate determination of 
electronic stopping power and associated physical quantities, 
there remains much room for further investigation into the 
accuracy of first principles approaches. Our RT-TDDFT result 
and the linear response result by Shukri et al. [26] show a 
disagreement even for high velocities for the present case of the 
semiconductor SiC, and it calls for further examination of both 
approaches in a future work. This is at odds with the simpler 
case of aluminum for which
these two first-principles 

approaches agree [26,30].

An important approximation in the present study is the 

exchange-correlation (XC) potential [68] used in our RT-
TDDFT 
simulations. 
First, 
we 
adapted 
the
adiabatic 

approximation such that the XC potential depends only on the 
instantaneous electron density, neglecting any potential memory 
effects. By using time-dependent current DFT to calculate the 
linear part of the stopping power in the low ion velocity limit 
for a homogeneous electron gas (i.e. friction coefficient), 
Nazarov and co-workers [69] have shown that the adiabatic 
approximation results in a negligibly small error for ions of low-
Z elements like protons and α-particles. Second, the semi-local 
approximation, like GGA-PBE, used here for the XC potential 
could introduce non-negligible errors, especially since the 
dynamical charge transfer between the ion and target might be 
important. A future work will focus on exploring the 
dependence on XC approximation. The XC approximation can 
also be an important avenue of investigation for the threshold 
velocity at which the electronic stopping power diminishes [58]. 
Another more technical source of error is neglecting core 
electron excitations in our simulations. From an earlier work on 
silicon [26], error stemming from neglecting the excitations of 
2s and 2p electrons would contribute to the non-negligible 
underestimation of the electronic stopping power for v ≥ 2 a.u. 
The role of core electrons in the high velocity regime will be 
studied in a future work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge computational resources from the Argonne 
Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of 
Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC02-
06CH11357. This work is supported by the National Science 
Foundation 
under 
Grant 
No. 
CHE-1565714.

*ykanai@ad.unc.edu

[1]
G.   R.   Odette   and   B.   D.   Wirth,   in   Handbook   of   

materials   Modeling (Springer,   2005),   pp.   999.
[2]
H.   Zeller,   Microelectronics   reliability   37,   1711   

(1997).
[3]
O.   Obolensky,   E.   Surdutovich,   I.   Pshenichnov,   I.   

Mishustin,   
A.   
Solov’Yov,   
and   
W.   
Greiner,   
Nuclear   

Instruments   and   Methods   in   Physics   Research   Section   B:   

Beam   Interactions   with   Materials   and   Atoms   266,   1623   
(2008).
[4]
P.   Sigmund,   Bull.   Russ.   Acad.   Sci.   Phys.   72,   569   

(2008).
[5]
E.   Rutherford,   The   London,   Edinburgh,   and   Dublin   

Philosophical   Magazine   and   Journal   of   Science   21,   669   
(1911).


[6]
J.   J.   Thomson,   The   London,   Edinburgh,   and   Dublin   

Philosophical   Magazine   and   Journal   of   Science   23,   449   
(1912).
[7]
C.   G.   Darwin,   The   London,   Edinburgh,   and   Dublin   

Philosophical   Magazine   and   Journal   of   Science   23,   901   
(1912).
[8]
H.   Bethe,   Annalen   der   Physik   397,   325   (1930).

[9]
E.   Fermi   and   E.   Teller,   Physical   Review   72,   399   

(1947).
[10]
J.   Lindhard,   M.   Scharff,   and   H.   E.   Schiøtt,   Range   

concepts   and   heavy   ion   ranges   (Munksgaard,   1963).
[11]
J.   Lindhard   and   A.   Winther,   Stopping   power   of   

electron   gas   and   equipartition   rule   (Munksgaard,   1964).
[12]
I.   Nagy,   I.   Aldazabal,   and   M.   Glasser,   Journal   of   

Physics   B:   Atomic,   Molecular   and   Optical   Physics   45,   
095701   (2012).
[13]
W.   H.   Barkas,   Annual   Review   of   Nuclear   Science   15,   

67   (1965).
[14]
P.   Echenique,   R.   Nieminen,   J.   Ashley,   and   R.   Ritchie,   

Physical   Review   A   33,   897   (1986).
[15]
A.   Arnau,   M.   Pealba,   P.   Echenique,   F.   Flores,   and   R.   

Ritchie,   Physical   review   letters   65,   1024   (1990).
[16]
E.   Runge   and   E.   K.   Gross,   Physical   Review   Letters   

52,   997   (1984).
[17]
C.   Race,   D.   Mason,   M.   Finnis,   W.   Foulkes,   A.   

Horsfield,   and   A.   Sutton,   Reports   on   Progress   in   Physics   73,   
116501   (2010).
[18]
P.   Echenique,   F.   Flores,   and   R.   Ritchie,   Solid   State   

Physics   43,   229   (1990).
[19]
R.   Cabrera-­‐‑Trujillo   and   J.   R.   Sabin,   Advances   in   

Quantum   Chemistry   45,   1   (2004).
[20]
B.   J.   McParland,   in   Medical   Radiation   Dosimetry

(Springer,   2014),   pp.   405.
[21]
J.   R.   Sabin   and   J.   Oddershede,   Nuclear   Instruments   

and   Methods   in   Physics   Research   Section   B:   Beam   
Interactions   with   Materials   and   Atoms   44,   253   (1990).
[22]
J.   R.   Sabin   and   J.   Oddershede,   Nuclear   Instruments   

and   Methods   in   Physics   Research   Section   B:   Beam   
Interactions   with   Materials   and   Atoms   27,   280   (1987).
[23]
S.   P.   Sauer,   J.   R.   Sabin,   and   J.   Oddershede,   Nuclear   

Instruments   and   Methods   in   Physics   Research   Section   B:   
Beam   Interactions   with   Materials   and   Atoms   100,   458   
(1995).
[24]
I.   Campillo,   J.   Pitarke,   A.   Eguiluz,   and   A.   Garcı́a,   

Nuclear   Instruments   and   Methods   in   Physics   Research   
Section   B:   Beam   Interactions   with   Materials   and   Atoms   135,   
103   (1998).
[25]
R.   J.   Mathar,   J.   R.   Sabin,   and   S.   Trickey,   Nuclear   

Instruments   and   Methods   in   Physics   Research   Section   B:   
Beam   Interactions   with   Materials   and   Atoms   155,   249   
(1999).
[26]
A.   A.   Shukri,   F.   Bruneval,   and   L.   Reining,   Physical   

Review   B   93,   035128   (2016).
[27]
R.   J.   Mathar,   S.   B.   Trickey,   and   J.   R.   Sabin,   Advances   

in   Quantum   Chemistry   45,   277   (2004).

[28]
J.   Pruneda,   D.   Sánchez-­‐‑Portal,   A.   Arnau,   J.   Juaristi,   

and   E.   Artacho,   Physical   review   letters   99,   235501   (2007).
[29]
R.   Hatcher,   M.   Beck,   A.   Tackett,   and   S.   T.   Pantelides,   

Physical   review   letters   100,   103201   (2008).
[30]
A.   Schleife,   Y.   Kanai,   and   A.   A.   Correa,   Physical   

Review   B   91,   014306   (2015).
[31]
Y.   Katoh,   N.   Hashimoto,   S.   Kondo,   L.   L.   Snead,   and   A.   

Kohyama,   Journal   of   Nuclear   Materials   351,   228   (2006).
[32]
Y.   Katoh,   L.   L.   Snead,   C.   H.   Henager,   A.   Hasegawa,   A.   

Kohyama,   B.   Riccardi,   and   H.   Hegeman,   Journal   of   Nuclear   
Materials   367-­‐‑370,   659   (2007).
[33]
Y.   Katoh,   L.   L.   Snead,   I.   Szlufarska,   and   W.   J.   Weber,   

Current   Opinion   in   Solid   State   and   Materials   Science   16,   143   
(2012).
[34]
Y.   Zhang,   M.   Ishimaru,   T.   Varga,   T.   Oda,   C.   Hardiman,   

H.   Xue,   Y.   Katoh,   S.   Shannon,   and   W.   J.   Weber,   Physical   
Chemistry   Chemical   Physics   14,   13429   (2012).
[35]
F.   Ruddy,   A.   Dulloo,   J.   Seidel,   S.   Seshadri,   and   L.   

Rowland,   Nuclear   Science,   IEEE   Transactions   on   45,   536   
(1998).
[36]
A.   Ojanperä,   A.   V.   Krasheninnikov,   and   M.   Puska,   

Physical   Review   B   89,   035120   (2014).
[37]
S.   Zhao,   W.   Kang,   J.   Xue,   X.   Zhang,   and   P.   Zhang,   

Journal   of   Physics:   Condensed   Matter   27,   025401   (2014).
[38]
A.   Schleife,   E.   W.   Draeger,   V.   M.   Anisimov,   A.   A.   

Correa,   and   Y.   Kanai,   Computing   in   Science   &   Engineering   
16,   54   (2014).
[39]
A.   Schleife,   E.   W.   Draeger,   Y.   Kanai,   and   A.   A.   Correa,   

The   Journal   of   chemical   physics   137,   22A546   (2012).
[40]
J.   P.   Perdew,   K.   Burke,   and   M.   Ernzerhof,   Physical   

review   letters   77,   3865   (1996).
[41]
J.   P.   Perdew,   K.   Burke,   and   M.   Ernzerhof,   Phys   Rev   

Lett   77,   3865   (1996).
[42]
N.   T.   Maitra,   K.   Burke,   and   C.   Woodward,   Phys   Rev   

Lett   89 (2002).
[43]
D.   Vanderbilt,   Phys   Rev   B   32,   8412   (1985).

[44]
F.   Gygi,   Qbox:   a   large-­‐‑scale   parallel   implementation   

of   First-­‐‑Principles   Molecular   Dynamics,   2005.
[45]
E.   W.   Draeger   and   F.   Gygi,   Lawrence   Livermore   

National   Laboratory   Tech.   Report.      (2014).
[46]
P.   H.   Eilers   and   H.   F.   Boelens,   Leiden   University   

Medical   Centre   Report      (2005).
[47]
M.   S.   Janson,   M.   K.   Linnarsson,   A.   Hallén,   and   B.   G.   

Svensson,   Journal   of   applied   physics   96,   164   (2004).
[48]
S.   Heredia-­‐‑Avalos,   J.   C.   Moreno-­‐‑Marín,   I.   Abril,   and   R.   

Garcia-­‐‑Molina,   Nuclear   Instruments   and   Methods   in   Physics   
Research   Section   B:   Beam   Interactions   with   Materials   and   
Atoms   230,   118   (2005).
[49]
N.   D.   Mermin,   Physical   Review   B   1,   2362   (1970).

[50]
W.   Brandt   and   M.   Kitagawa,   Physical   Review   B   25,   

5631   (1982).
[51]
W.   Brandt,   Nuclear   Instruments   and   Methods   in   

Physics   Research   194,   13   (1982).


[52]
J.   F.   Ziegler,   Nuclear   instruments   and   methods   in   

physics   research   section   B:   Beam   interactions   with   
materials   and   atoms   219,   1027   (2004).
[53]
Y.   Zhang   and   W.   J.   Weber,   Applied   physics   letters   

83,   1665   (2003).
[54]
Y.   Zhang,   J.   Jensen,   G.   Possnert,   D.   A.   Grove,   I.-­‐‑T.   Bae,   

and   W.   J.   Weber,   Nuclear   Instruments   and   Methods   in   
Physics   Research   Section   B:   Beam   Interactions   with   
Materials   and   Atoms   261,   1180   (2007).
[55]
L.   
Porter,   
International   
journal   
of   
quantum   

chemistry   95,   504   (2003).
[56]
R.   Cabrera-­‐‑Trujillo,   J.   R.   Sabin,   and   J.   Oddershede,   

Physical   Review   A   68,   042902   (2003).
[57]
A.   A.   Correa,   J.   Kohanoff,   E.   Artacho,   D.   Sánchez-­‐‑

Portal,   and   A.   Caro,   Physical   review   letters   108,   213201   
(2012).
[58]
R.   Ullah,   F.   Corsetti,   D.   Sánchez-­‐‑Portal,   and   E.   

Artacho,   Physical   Review   B   91,   125203   (2015).
[59]
W.   H.   Bragg   and   R.   Kleeman,   The   London,   

Edinburgh,   and   Dublin   Philosophical   Magazine   and   Journal   
of   Science   10,   318   (1905).
[60]
E.   Rutherford,   Philosophical   Magazine   Series   6   47,   

277   (1924).

[61]
N.   Bohr,   The   penetration   of   atomic   particles   through   

matter   (I   kommission   hos   E.   Munksgaard,   1948),   Vol.   18.
[62]
H.-­‐‑D.   Betz,   Reviews   of   Modern   Physics   44,   465   

(1972).
[63]
N.   O.   Lassen,   Kgl.   Danske   Videnskab.   Selskab,   Mat.-­‐‑

fys.   Medd.   26 (1951).
[64]
N.   R.   Arista   and   A.   n.   F.   Lifschitz,   Advances   in   

Quantum   Chemistry   45,   47   (2004).
[65]
J.   Neufeld,   Physical   Review   96,   1470   (1954).

[66]
L.   C.   Northcliffe,   Studies   in   Penetration   of   Charged   

Particles   in   Matter   1133,   353   (1964).
[67]
G.   Henkelman,   A.   Arnaldsson,   and   H.   Jónsson,   

Computational   Materials   Science   36,   354   (2006).
[68]
C.   A.   Ullrich,   Time-­‐‑Dependent   Density-­‐‑Functional   

Theory,   Concepts   and   Applications   (Oxford   Graduate   Texts,   
2011).
[69]
V.   U.   Nazarov,   J.   M.   Pitarke,   Y.   Takada,   G.   Vignale,   

and   Y.   C.   Chang,   Physical   Review   B   76,   205103   (2007).


Supplemental Information for 

“Electronic Stopping for Protons and α-particles from First-Principles Electron Dynamics: The Case of 
Silicon Carbide “

by Dillon C. Yost and Yosuke Kanai

1. k-point sampling of Brillouin Zone.

Convergence of k-point sampling in Brillouin zone was checked using a proton traveling along the centroid 
path with a velocity of 2 a.u. in the 216-atom supercell. Using 4 Monkhorst-Pack k-points instead of a single 
Gamma-point sampling, the stopping power would be higher only by 2.3%. 

FIG. S1.  Total electronic energy (relative to the ground state energy) as a function of the proton projectile 
displacement from the initial position. Simulation results for gamma point only (black) and 4 Monkhorst-Pack 
k-points (red) are shown.  

2. Correcting for Finite Size Error

As discussed in the main text, despite the large simulation cell we employed (216 atoms - 864 electrons), there 
remains small, but non-negligible, finite size errors. At the same time, it is not currently possible to perform the 
ensemble trajectories using a larger simulation cell because of its very large computational cost. We estimated 
the finite size error by calculating the electronic stopping power for the representative centroid path (see main 
text) using a simulation cell that is twice as large in the perpendicular and parallel directions relative to the 
projectile ion trajectory as shown in Figure S2 and S3. In order to correct for the finite size errors as shown in 
Figures 1 and 2 (main text), a percentage difference (with respect to the original simulation cell) was obtained 
by averaging the stopping power curves for the two larger simulation cells. This velocity-dependent percentage 
deviation is then used to obtain the corrected values as shown as the dashed lines in Figure 1 and Figure 2
(main text).


FIG. S2.  Electronic stopping power for protons in SiC for three different simulation supercells: The standard 
cubic supercell containing 216 atoms (green), the supercell doubled (432 atoms) in the direction parallel to the 
projectile path (blue), and the supercell doubled (432 atoms) in the direction perpendicular to the projectile 
path (red).  

Figure S3.  Electronic stopping power for alpha-particles in SiC for three different simulation supercells: The 
standard cubic supercell containing 216 atoms (green), the supercell doubled (432 atoms) in the direction 
parallel to the projectile path (blue), and the supercell doubled (432 atoms) in the direction perpendicular to the 
projectile path (red). 

3. Comparison between PBE and LDA Exchange-Correlation Potentials


The linear response result by Shukri et. al. [9] is based on LDA exchange-correlation potential. We compared 
the electronic stopping powers using PBE and LDA exchange-correlation potentials in real-time TDDFT for 
the centroid path. The LDA yields the stopping power values that are as much as 18 % larger than the PBE 
results as shown in Figure S4.

FIG. S4. Electronic stopping powers of protons in SiC using PBE and LDA approximations in real-time 
TDDFT simulations. No corrections are applied for finite-size errors.

4. Charge fluctuations

Using the centroid path, we quantified how the instantaneous charge on the projectile ion changes along the 
trajectory as a function of ion velocity.

FIG. S5. Instantaneous charge on the projectile proton as a function of ion velocity and the projectile position, 
according to Voronoi partitioning scheme. 


FIG. S6. Instantaneous charge on the projectile α-particle as a function of ion velocity and the projectile 
position, according to Voronoi partitioning scheme. 


