Prussian Blue Modified Reduced Graphene Oxide as Support for Pt 

Nanoparticles: Development of Efficient Catalysts for Oxygen 

Electroreduction in Acid Medium. 

 

 

B. Zakrzewskaa, B. Dembinskaa, S. Zoladeka, I. Rutkowskaa, J. Żaka, L. Stobinskia,b, A. 

Małolepszyb, E. Negroc, V. Di Notoc, P.J. Kuleszaa, K. Miecznikowskia* 

 

 

aFaculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland 

bFaculty of Chemical and Process Engineering, Warsaw University of Technology, Warynskiego 

1, 00-645 Warsaw, Poland 

cDepartment of Industrial Engineering, Università degli Studi di Padova in Department of 

Chemical Sciences, Via Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova (PD), Italy 

 

 

 

 

Keywords:  oxygen reduction, chemically reduced graphene oxide, platinum nanoparticles, 

Prussian Blue, electrocatalysis 

 

 

 

___________ 

*Corresponding Author. Tel.: +48-22-5526340; Fax: +49-22-8225996; E-mail address: 

kmiecz@chem.uw.edu.pl 

  
 


 

Abstract 

 
Pt electrocatalytic nanoparticles were deposited onto hybrid carriers composed of reduced 

graphene oxide (rGO) – transition metal hexacyanoferrate (Prussian Blue – PB) and the resulting 

system’s electrochemical activity was investigated during oxygen reduction reaction in acidic 

solution. The Prussian Blue -utilizing and Pt nanoparticle-containing materials were characterized 

using transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and electrochemical diagnostic 

techniques such as cyclic voltammetry and rotating ring-disk voltammetry. Application of rGO 

carriers modified with Prussian Blue as matrices (supports) for Pt catalytic centers does not 

change practically the potential of electroreduction of oxygen in 0.5 mol dm-3 H2SO4 (under 

rotating disk voltammetric conditions) relative to the behavior of the analogous PB-free system. 

What is even more important that, due to the presence of the polynuclear cyanoferrate modifier, 

the amounts of the undesirable hydrogen peroxide intermediate are significantly decreased (at 

ring in the rotating ring-disk voltammetry). The results are consistent with the bifunctional 

mechanism in which oxygen reduction is initiated at Pt centers and the hydrogen peroxide 

intermediate is reductively decomposed at reactive PB-modified rGO supports. 

 
 


Introduction 

 

 
Proton Exchange Fuel Cells have been viewed as suitable power sources candidates for 

stationary and vehicle propulsion due to their high efficiency, high energy density and low 

temperature energy conversion. The reactions in fuel cells invariably involve oxygen reduction at 

the cathode side. It should be note that oxygen reduction reaction, in the context of energy, is the 

challenging reaction due to their rate limiting steps in the process of getting energy from fuel. 

The sluggish oxygen reduction has still a hugely affect on losing efficiency, the power output and 

lifetime of the fuel cells [1,2]. Pt-based catalysts, mostly applied and studied for their high 

efficiency with respect to other Pt-free catalysts in acid medium consist of Pt nanoparticles (NPs) 

supported onto different supports,.e.g., carbon, oxides and carbon/oxides composites. While great 

progress has been made, there are still issues to be concerned about. For instance: (i) low 

resistance of the Pt catalyst to poisoning (mainly to CO), (ii) hydrogen peroxide production at the 

cathode that degrades fuel cell membranes and (iii) methanol crossover that results in mixed 

potential.  

 
The use of a suitable supporting material enables a high dispersion of metal nanoparticles 

onto its surface, which is particularly important with expensive noble metal catalysts, such as Pt 

and Pd. The appropriate supporting materials should be characterized by the following features: 

high surface area, corrosion resistance, and a stable surface to prevent the nanoparticles’ 

agglomeration. A number of various supports have been extensively studied as high oxidation 

resistant materials, namely, graphitized carbon [3], conductive polymers [4] as well as conductive 

metal oxides such as (MnOx [5], TiO2 [6-8], CeOx [9], ZnO [10], WO3 [11-13], SnO2 [14] and 

NbO2 [15]). Carbon black (Vulcan XC-72) has been commonly used as a conventional 

supporting material for the Pt-based catalysts for fuel cell applications, due to its high surface 


area and conductivity, along with its low cost [16]. One drawback of the Vulcan support is that it 

is not very tolerant of fuel cell conditions, and is electrochemically oxidized to its surface oxides. 

In consequence, the oxidation process leads to the formation of large particles, resulting in a 

decrease in the fuel cell’s performance [17]. To avoid these problems, various kind of graphene 

materials have been introduced to replace carbon black (Vulcan) as supporting materials in 

electrocatalysis, due to their increased tolerance for carbon corrosion, and their excellent 

mechanical, electronic, and surface properties [18, 19].  

 
Such new catalysts also have to characterized by a minimum formation of H2O2 because 

free radicals that are produced from the breakdown of H2O2 have a detrimental effect on the 

polymer membranes – Nafions in fuel cell [20,21]. One of the methods to reduce the amount of 

hydrogen peroxide is to use Prussian Blue as the catalyst cathode additive [22,23]. In the 

literature has been many confirmation that PB has been an excellent electrocatalyst for hydrogen 

peroxide compared with the most conventional noble metals (e.g. Pt) or metal oxide materials 

[24-27]. Such properties of PB is connected with its analogy with the biological group of 

peroxidase, that are natural enzymes for the reduction of hydrogen peroxide, it has been called an 

artificial peroxidase [25]. Moreover, PB systems detect hydrogen peroxide at low applied 

potential (approx. 0.2 vs. RHE) what allow to enhance the immunity to interference (e.g. ascorbic 

acid, uric acid) as well as reduce its in the presence of oxygen, that is advantages in the contrast 

for Pt [24]. The kinetics of hydrogen peroxide reduction on PB-modified electrodes was 

investigated using a rotating disk electrode and in situ Raman spectroelectrochemical technique 

[26,27]. The Raman measurement showed that during reduction of hydrogen peroxide PB form 

exists in the layer even at potentials corresponding to the completely reduced form of PB and the 

process corresponded first-order reaction. Whereas, the result obtained from rotating disk 

electrode methodology exhibited two step reaction mechanism. The authors claim that first step is 


related with dissociative adsorption of hydrogen peroxide, where OH radicals are formed and the 

second step, the OH radicals are reduced to hydroxyl ions (one-electron process). The late step 

gets rate limiting factor in the presence of high concentration of peroxide and high pH.   

 
In the present work, we explore the ability of Prussian Blue structures to effectively 

decompose, i.e. reduce readily at fairly high potentials (in acid medium) hydrogen peroxide that 

typically appears as undesirable intermediate during reduction of oxygen in fuel cells. When 

Prussian Blue structures are combined with a catalyst of moderate activity, such as rGO 

supported Pt nanoparticles, a highly reactive composite system for the oxygen reduction is 

produced [28]. It is reasonable to expect that rGO modified with Prussian Blue and supported Pt 

acts as a bifunctional system, in which oxygen reduction is primarily induced at Pt catalytic 

centers, whereas reduction any hydrogen peroxide intermediate is further activated at the Prussian 

Blue matrix. The data obtained are discussed in relation to the beneficial effect of Prussian Blue 

on oxygen reduction reaction. Electrochemical testing of catalysts has been carried out using a 

rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) to show direct measurements of H2O2 production and yield 

an accurate assessment of the catalytic activity for ORR. Further, comparison has been made to 

the behavior of rGO-supported Pt nanoparticles under the analogous RRDE voltammetric 

conditions. 

 

Experimental 

 
All chemicals were commercial materials of the highest available purity and were used 

as 
received. 
In this study, a commercial graphite powder (ACROS ORGANICS) was used. 

Graphene 
oxide (GO) was prepared using modified Hummers method.  In this 
process, 
10 g 

of graphite powder was added to 230 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid (98 wt.%) and stirred for 


30 minutes. Next 4.7 g of sodium nitrate and 30 g of potassium permanganate were slowly added 

to the mixture and the temperature was kept below 10ºC in an ice bath. Then the mixture was 

slowly heated up to ~33ºC and was controlled so as not to exceed 35ºC for 2 hours under stirring. 

In the next step, 100 mL of water was added to the mixture and the temperature reached ~120ºC. 

Finally, the mixture was treated with 10 mL of H2O2 (30 wt.%). Obtained slurry was kept in an 

ultrasonic bath for 1 hour. For purification, the slurry was filtered using ceramic membranes with 

0,2 micron pore size 
and washed with deionized water in order to remove the by-products of 

the synthesis till the pH of the filtrate reached 6.5. Reduced graphene 
oxide (rGO) was obtained 

by adding 10 mL of 50% hydrazine water solution 
to 100 mL of 0,5 wt.% GO water dispersion. 

The mixture was heated up to 
100ºC and kept under stirring for 2h. After reduction, the product 

was filtered using polyethersulfone (PES) filter with 0,8 µm pore size. Solutions were prepared 

from triply-distilled subsequently-deionized water. They were deaerated (using argon) or 

saturated with oxygen for at least 20 min prior to the electrochemical experiment. Experiments 

were conducted at room temperature (20 ± 0.5 C).  

 
For the preparation of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) modified Prussian Blue and 

supported Pt (rGOPB/Pt) materials. The hybrid material (rGO modified PB) was produced as 

follows. A known amount of rGO (200 mg) was dispersed in 6 cm3 solution of Prussian Blue 

(that had been obtained by mixing a solution 2 mmol dm-3 K3[Fe(CN)6], 2 mmol dm-3 FeCl3, and 

50 mmol dm-3 EDTA). Formation of PB nanostructure on rGO occurred through the sol-gel 

aggregation aging process. After 24 h mixing the following suspension was centrifuged and dried 

at 300OC for 2 h. The obtained support hybrid material (PB-modified rGO) was used to 

fabricated Pt nanoparticles. 


In order to obtained platinum nanoparticles deposited on the surface of the rGO reduction 

or 
rGO/PB 
methods were used. For this purpose the appropriate 
amount of the platinum 

potassium hexachloroplatinate (K2PtCl6) salt was 
added to the 0.5g rGO or 
rGO/PB 
water 

dispersion under continuous magnetic stirring. After 15 min the 0.1M KOH was added to the 

mixture to increase the pH to 10. Nanoparticles of Pt were obtained by 
adding 10 mL of 1M 

sodium borohydride (NaBH4) water solution to the slurry and kept under stirring. After 1h the 20 

wt.% Pt/rGO  catalyst deposit was filtered using PES filter with 0,8 µm  pore size and washed 

with deionized  water. Their composition of the final material was as follows: Pt 20% and 

rGO/PB 80% (by mass). The diameters of PB-modified rGO supports Pt nanoparticles were 

approximately 20 and 2 nm, respectively. 

 
The electrochemical experiments were performed with CH Instruments (Austin, TX, 

USA) Model 750A workstation. A mercury/mercury sulfate electrode (Hg/Hg2SO4), which 

potential was 700 mV more positive relative to the Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE), was 

used as a reference electrode. All potentials are expressed against the reversible hydrogen 

electrode (RHE). 

 
Rotating disk electrode (RDE) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) voltammetric 

measurements were accomplished using a variable speed rotator (Pine Instruments, USA). The 

electrode assembly utilized a glassy carbon disk and a Pt ring. The electrodes were polished with 

successively finer grade aqueous alumina slurries (grain size, 5-0.05 μm) on a Buehler polishing 

cloth. In the RRDE measurements, the radius of the disk electrode was 2.5 mm, and the inner and 

outer radii of the ring electrode were 3.25 and 3.75 mm, respectively. The collection efficiency of 

the RRDE assembly was determined from the ratio of ring and disk currents (at various rotation 

rates) using the argon-saturated 0.005 mol dm-3 K3[Fe(CN)6] + 0.01 mol dm-3 K2SO4 solution 


[29-33]. Based on five independent experiments, it was found that, within the potential range 

considered here, and at rotation rates up to 2500 rpm, the experimental collection efficiency (N) 

remained unchanged and was equal to 0.39. During the RRDE measurements in oxygen saturated 

solutions, the potential of the ring electrode was kept at 1.2 V (vs. RHE). At this potential, the 

generated H2O2 is oxidized under diffusional control. All RRDE polarization curves were 

recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV s-1. Current densities were calculated with respect to the 

geometric surface area of the electrode. 

 
To produce an suspension of PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles, a known 

amount (5 mg) of the catalyst was dispersed in 1 ml of 2-propanol and Nafion (20% by weight) 

as solvent and binder, respectively. The following suspension was subjected to magnetic stirring 

for 24 h. As a rule, 2 µl aliquot of the appropriate suspension was introduced onto the surface of a 

glassy carbon disk electrode (geometric area, 0.2 cm2), and the suspension was air-dried at room 

temperature. Typical loadings of supports were in the range 10 μg cm-2. As a rule the catalytic 

films were activated by performing 25 full voltammetric potential cycles in the potential range 

from 0 to 1 V (at 50 mV s-1) until steady-state currents were observed. The systems were 

systematically characterized to obtain information on particle morphology, composition, and 

crystal structure by various techniques, such as High Resolution Transmission Electron 

Microscopy (HR-TEM), Energy Dispersion Spectroscopy (EDS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). 

The HR-TEM measurements were performed using an instrument with an accelerating voltage of 

200 keV with EDS analysis (Bruker Quantax 400, SEM-EDS). Samples for TEM measurements 

were prepared by depositing drops of diluted colloidal solutions of nanoparticles onto 400-mesh 

copper grids that supported a Formvar film (Agar Scientific); they were dried under ambient 

laboratory conditions (temperature, 22 
 1 °C) for 24 h prior to TEM analysis. The 


crystallographic phase analysis was carried out by XRD using a Bruker D8 Discover system 

operated with a Cu X-ray tube (1.5406 Å) and Vantec (linear) detector (k = 1.5406 Å). The lattice 

parameter value and particle size were obtained from the position and the full-width at half-

maximum (FWHM) of the (220) peak. 

Results and discussion 

The X-ray diffraction examination was performed to confirm the presence as well as to 

obtain the information about the crystalline structure of the proposed electrocatalysts. Figure 1 

displays the profiles of rGO_PB supported Pt nanoparticles, Pt/rGO and rGO_PB. Material 

exhibited diffraction peaks in the range 2θ = 24.5o, which were attributed to carbon-supported 

material with a (111) reflection plane for all samples; the PB and Pt reflections also arose in this 

[34].  In the case of both Pt/rGO and Pt/rGO_PB (Fig.1a and c), diffraction peaks at the 

corresponding diffraction angles (39.8, 46.3, 67.6, and 81.4) occurred, which were attributed to 

the (111), (200), (220), and (311) planes, characteristic of the respective crystalline faces of Pt 

(JCPDS No. 01-087-0646) and were decorated uniformly on the rGO surface. While for the 

rGO_PB and Pt/rGO_PB nanoparticles (Fig.1b and c), the other diffraction peaks appeared at 2θ 

= 38.5, 44.7, 65.1, and 78.4o (JCPDS No. 52-1907); these are associated with the (420), (422), 

(640), and (301) reflections respectively, thus validating the formation of Prussian Blue [35]. It 

can be observed that PB signals are narrow; this can be attributed to the good crystalline structure 

and due to the very broad size of the particles. To calculate the average particle size according to 

the Scherrer equation, the (220) reflections of Pt were used. The average Pt particle size obtained 

from XRD measurements for Pt/rGO and Pt/rGO_PB was of the order of 7-10 nm for both 

catalysts and is consistent with the results from HR-TEM experiments.   


The morphologies of the rGO_PB, Pt/rGO and Pt/rGO_PB were examined by HR-TEM 

(Fig.2). Figure 2 illustrates the transparent and pleated paper like structure of rGO nanosheets 

before successful decoration of Pt nanoparticles and PB structure. Fig. 2 displays dark Pt spots 

deposited on the reduce graphene oxide layers were spherical metal nanoparticles of similar sizes. 

The size of metal particles roughly estimated from HR-TEM images of ca. 7 nm, which is in god 

agreement with the XRD results. The inter-planar spacing 0.3940 nm (200) is attributed to Pt, 

which agree with literature values.  

Fig. 3 presents the cyclic voltammetric responses of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) 

supported Pt (curve a) and  PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (curve b) deposits on 

glassy carbon electrode recorded in the argon-saturated 0.5 mol dm-3 H2SO4. While the cyclic 

voltammogram of PB-free catalyst is characterized by a fairly flat background with the broad 

oxide reduction peak at the potential range from 0.2 V to 0.6V response (Fig.3a), the response of 

PB-modified rGO supported Pt system (Fig.3b) has yielded fairly high voltammetric currents at 

the whole potential range with the similar broad cathodic peak. In the case of PB-modified rGO 

supported Pt nanoparticles the presence of Prussian Blue active centers on carbon materials can 

be postulated as evidenced from higher voltammetric current with the PB surface at potentials 

lower than 0.15 V vs. RHE in comparison to PB-free catalysts.  

The representative RDE voltamograms recorded at different rotation rates (ranging from 

400 to 2500 rpm) for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at catalytic layers containing PB-

modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles are illustrated in Fig.4. As we can see, the RDE 

responses are fairly well-defined at any rotation rate studied but the mass-transport limited 

currents are not reached over the whole potential region explored. Similar electrochemical 

behavior for ORR was reported in literature for Pt/Vulcan catalysts [32]. Further, half-wave 


potentials for the reduction of oxygen at the system containing PB-modified rGO supported Pt 

nanoparticles are not shifted when compared to those characteristic of the PB-free system.  

In order to extract kinetic information, the RDE curves were analyzed using the Levich 

and Koutecki-Levich plots (Fig.5). When the dependencies (Levich type plots – not show) of the 

RDE current densities (measured at 0.7 V) have been plotted versus square root of rotation rates 

for electrodes covered with PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles, the deviation from 

linearity (i.e. from the ideal behavior characteristic of systems limited solely by convective 

diffusion of oxygen in solution) is observed, and it seems to be more pronounced at bare rather 

than PB-modified system (not show here). Apparently, the kinetic control is more pronounced, 

i.e. the catalytic reaction is slower or less effective in the case of bare rGO/Pt nanoparticles. The 

reciprocal values of the experimental currents are plotted vs. 
-1/2 (Koutecky-Levich plots) for 

different electrode potentials at 0.7 V (Fig.5) [11,12,32]. Such diagnosis is justified because 

charge (electron, proton) propagation within the catalytic film should be fast, and the oxygen 

reactant is expected to have easy access to the dispersed active sites (bare or PB-modified rGO 

supported Pt nanoparticles). With low amounts of Nafion used to bind the catalyst to the 

substrate, any potential limitations related to mass transport through mixed PB-Nafion layers on 

the measured current densities are considered as relatively negligible [36,37]. We assume that 

only such factors as transport of oxygen in solution or, at higher rotation rates, the dynamics of 

the chemical (catalytic) step (reaction) are rate determining. The reciprocal plots (Fig.5) have 

yielded non-zero intercepts clearly indicating kinetic limitations associated with the 

electrocatalytic film.  

 
RDE voltammetric limiting-current densities (jlim) can be expressed as follows [23,38]: 


L
O
film
j
C
nFAkC
j

1
1
1

2
lim

 

where jL is given by the Levich equation (in which the convective diffusion component is 

proportional to square root of rotation rate), k is the rate constant for the catalytic reaction in 

homogeneous units, Cfilm is the surface concentration of the electrocatalyst, and COx is the bulk 

concentration of oxygen (1.1 mmol dm-3 [39]). The symbols n and F stand for the number of 

electrons involved in the process (n = 4) and the Faraday constant. The kinetic parameters can be 

found from intercepts of the reciprocal plots (Fig.5). The estimated value of kCfilm, which is 

equivalent to the intrinsic rate of heterogeneous charge transfer, is  1 
 10-1 cm s-1 for the 

catalytic electroreduction (at 0.7 V) of oxygen at glassy carbon disks covered with PB-modified 

rGO supported Pt nanoparticles.  

In the context of electrocatalysts for cathode for fuel cells an important issue is the degree 

of formation of the hydrogen peroxide intermediate during ORR in the presence and absence of 

Prussian Blue. In this case we have performed rotating ring-disk electrode (RDDE) 

measurements in which the catalytic nanoparticles were deposited onto disk electrodes. The 

responses recorded (upon application of the oxidative potential of 1.2 V vs RHE) at the ring Pt 

electrode are consistent with the view that formation of hydrogen peroxide intermediate have 

significantly decreased following PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (Fig.6). This 

effect is particularly evident at potentials lower than 0.5 V where the Prussian Blue (PB) starts to 

be reduced to Prussian White that are capable of inducing reduction of H2O2 (to H2O).  The latter 

observation suggests direct involvement of Prussian Blue matrix in the decomposition of 

hydrogen peroxide intermediate and promoting effectively the almost 4-electron reduction of 


oxygen to water. A bifunctional mechanism, in which both Pt and PB are reactive, namely 

towards oxygen and hydrogen peroxide, respectively, is possible.  

More quantitative information, namely in the % amounts of H2O2 (X%H2O2), about the 

relative degrees of formation of hydrogen peroxide during the oxygen reduction under the RRDE 

voltammetric conditions has been obtained using the equation described earlier [32,40]: 

100

2

2
2
%

N

I

I

N

I

X

r

d

r

H O
 

where Ir is ring current, Id stands for disk current, and N is the collection efficiency. The 

results are plotted versus potential applied to disk electrode in Fig.7. At the electrode modified 

with PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (Curve b), the production of H2O2 is 

significantly lower in comparison to the same system without Prussian Blue (Curve a). At 

potentials lower than 0.55 V, the values of X%H2O2 are on the level 4 % for PB-modified rGO 

supported Pt nanoparticles. At potentials higher than 0.7 V, the oxygen reduction currents (at disk 

electrode) are not well-developed yet because the potentials are not sufficiently negative to drive 

effectively the oxygen reduction reaction; consequently, the values of X%H2O2 become somewhat 

higher. It should be remembered that the heterogeneous rate constant for the reduction of H2O2 at 

PB film on glassy carbon electrode is on the level 1x10-1 cm s-1. The latter value is comparable to 

that determined in the case of reduction of oxygen at Pt/rGO nanoparticles. This suggests that 

Prussian Blue matrix can be directly involved in the reductive decomposition of hydrogen 

peroxide intermediate and promoting effectively the almost 4-electron reduction of oxygen to 

water. 


The overall number of electrons exchanged per O2 molecule (n) was calculated as a function 

of the potential using the RRDE voltammetric data of Fig. 8 and using equation [41,42]:  

n  = 4Idisk / Idisk + Iring/N  

The corresponding number of transferred electron (n) per oxygen molecule involved in the 

oxygen reduction was estimated to be as follows: (A) 3.8–3.95, and (B) 3.9–3.95, for the oxygen 

reduction at Pt/rGO nanoparticles, and PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (Fig. 8). The 

results demonstrate that, while the approximately four-electron reduction mechanism (with small 

formation of H2O2 intermediate) is the dominating pathway for the oxygen reduction (in acid 

medium) at all two types of Pt-containing catalytic systems, utilization of the chemically-reduced 

graphene-oxide based supports produces the hybrid system exhibiting the relatively highest 

activity toward electroreduction of oxygen in acid medium (Fig. 8). 

Conclusions 

On the basis of our RRDE diagnostic experiments it can be concluded that modification of 

rGO (support material) with ultra-thin layers of Prussian Blue results in the activation of Pt 

towards oxygen reduction. The phenomenon can originate from the properties of PB and its 

ability to catalyze reduction of hydrogen peroxide intermediate. The production of hydrogen 

peroxide has been found to be relatively low as measured by RRDE. Specific interactions 

between PB and support material (reduced graphene oxide - rGO), though not documented as yet, 

cannot be either excluded. Further research is along this line.  

 

Acknowledgements 


This work was supported by the European Commission through the Graphene Flagship – Core1 

Project (GA-696656). The Polish side appreciates support from National Science Center (Poland) 

under Project  No. 2015/19/B/ST4/03758 

 

 

 
 


References 

1. G. Hoogers, Fuel cell technology handbook, CRC Press, 2003. 

2. A.F. Bruijn, G.J.M. Janssen, PEM fuel cell materials: cost, performance and durability, in: 
K.D. Kreuer (Ed.), Fuel Cells, Springer, New York, 2012, pp. 249-303. 

3. E. Antolini, Formation of carbon-supported PtM alloys for low temperature fuel cells: a 
review, Mater. Chem. Phys. 78 (2003) 563-573. 

4. B. Rajesh, K. Ravindranathan Thampi, J.M. Bonard, H.J. Mathieu, N. Xanthopoulos, B. 
Viswanathan, Electronically conducting hybrid material as high performance catalyst support for 
electrocatalytic application, J. Power Sources 141 (2005) 35-38. 

5. N.R. Elezovic, B.M. Babic, V.R. Radmilovic, L.M. Vracar, N.V. Krstajic, Synthesis and 
characterization of MoOx-Pt/C and TiOx-Pt/C nano-catalysts for oxygen reduction Electrochim. 
Acta 54 (2009) 2404-2409. 

6. L. Timperman, Y.J. Feng, W. Vogel, N. Alonso-Vante, Substrate effect on oxygen reduction 
electrocatalysis, Electrochim. Acta 55 (2010) 7558-7563. 

7. N.R. De Tacconi, C.R. Chenthamarakshan, K. Rajeshwar, W.Y. Lin, T.F. Carlson, L. Nikiel, 
W.A. Wampler, S. Sambandam, V. Ramani, Photocatalytically Generated Pt/C–TiO2 
Electrocatalysts with Enhanced Catalyst Dispersion for Improved Membrane Durability in 
Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc. 155 (2008) B1102-B1109. 

8. W. Vogel, L. Timperman, N. Alonso-Vante, Probing metal substrate interaction of Pt 
nanoparticles: Structural XRD analysis and oxygen reduction reaction, Applied Catalysis A 377 
(2010) 167-173. 

9. Y. Luo, L. Calvillo, C. Daiguebonne, M.K. Daletou, G. Granozzi, N. Alonso-Vante, A highly 
efficient and stable oxygen reduction reaction on Pt/CeOx/C electrocatalyst obtained via a 
sacrificial precursor based on a metal-organic framework, Appl. Catal. B: Environmental 189 
(2016) 39–50. 

10. B. Ruiz Camacho C. Morais, M.A. Valenzuela, N. Alonso-Vante, Enhancing oxygen 
reduction reaction activity and stability of platinum via oxide-carbon composites, Catal. Today 
202 (2013) 36– 43. 

11. P. Kulesza, K. Miecznikowski, B. Baranowska, M. Skunik, A. Kolary-Zurowska, A. Lewera, 
K. Karnicka, M. Chojak, I. Rutkowska, S. Fiechter, P. Bogdanoff, I. Dorbandt, G. Zehl, R. 
Hiesgen, E. Dirk, K. Nagabhushana, H. Boennemann, Electroreduction of oxygen at tungsten 
oxide modified carbon-supported RuSex nanoparticles, J. Appl. Electrochem. 37 (2007) 1439-
1446. 


12. A. Lewera, K. Miecznikowski, R. Hunger, A. Kolary-Zurowska, A. Wieckowski, P.J. 
Kulesza, Electronic-level interactions of tungsten oxide with unsupported Se/Ru electrocatalytic 
nanoparticles, Electrochim. Acta 55 (2010) 7603–7609. 

13. A. Lewera, L. Timperman, A. Roguska, N. Alonso-Vante, Metal-Support Interactions 
between Nanosized Pt and Metal Oxides (WO3 and TiO2) Studied Using X-ray Photoelectron 
Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C 115 (2011) 20153–20159. 

14. B. Seger, A. Kongkanand, K. Vinodgopal, P.V. Kamat, Platinum dispersed on silica 
nanoparticle as electrocatalyst for PEM fuel cell, J. Electroanal. Chem. 621 (2008) 198–204. 

15. K. Sasaki, L. Zhang, R.R. Adzic, Niobium oxide-supported platinum ultra-low amount 
electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 10 (2008) 159. 

16. E. Antolini, Carbon supports for low-temperature fuel cell catalysts, Appl. Catal. B 88,  
(2009) 1-24. 

17.  K.H. Kangasniemi, D.A. Condit, T.D. Jarvi, Characterization of Vulcan Electrochemically 
Oxidized under Simulated PEM Fuel Cell Conditions, J. Electrochem. Soc. 151 (2004) E125-
E132. 

18. S. Litster, G. McLean, PEM fuel cell electrodes, J. Power Sources 130 (2004) 61-76. 

19. D.A. Stevens, J.R. Dahn, Electrochemical Characterization of the Active Surface in Carbon-
Supported Platinum Electrocatalysts for PEM Fuel Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc. 150 (2003) A770-
A775. 

20. D.A. Schiraldi, Perfluorinated Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Durability, Polymer Reviews 
46 (2006) 315-327 

21. S.J. Hamrock, M.A. Yandrasits, Proton Exchange Membranes for Fuel Cell Applications, 
Polymer Reviews 46 (2006) 219-244 

22. P.J. Kulesza, L.R. Faulkner, Electrocatalytic Properties of Bifunctional Pt/W(VI,V) Oxide 
Microstructures Electrodeposited on Carbon Substrates, J. Electroanal. Chem. 259 (1989) 81-90 

23. P.J. Kulesza, B. Grzybowska, M.A. Malik, M.T. Galkowski, Tungsten Oxides as active 
supports for highly dispersed paltinum microcenters: electrocatalytic reactivity toward reduction 
of hydrogen peroxide and oxygen, J. Electrochem. Soc. 144 (1997) 1911-1917 

24. A.A. Karyakin, Electrochemical sensors, Biosensors and their Biomedical Applications, N.Y., 
2008, p. 411 


25. N.B. Li, J.H. Park, K. Park, S.J. Kwon, H. Shin, J. Kwak, Characterization and 
electrocatalytic properties of Prussian blue electrochemically deposited on nano-Au/PAMAM 
dendrimer-modified gold electrode, Biosensors and Bioelectronics 23 (2008) 1519–1526 

26. R. Araminaitė, R. Garjonytė, A. Malinauskas, Electrocatalytic reduction of hydrogen 
peroxide at Prussian blue modified electrodes: a RDE study Journal of Solid State 
Electrochemistry, 14, 2010, 149 – 155 

27. R. Mažeikienė, N. Gediminas; A. Malinauskas, Electrocatalytic reduction of hydrogen 
peroxide at Prussian blue modified electrode: An in situ Raman spectroelectrochemical study, 
Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 660, 2011, 140-146 

28. L. Cao, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, L. Lu, In situ Controllable Growth of Prussian Blue Nanocubes on 
Reduced 
Graphene 
Oxide: 
Facile 
Synthesis 
and 
Their 
Application 
as 
Enhanced 

Nanoelectrocatalyst for H2O2 Reduction, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2, 2010, 2339-
2346  

29. W. J. Albery, M.L. Hitchman, Ring-disc Electrodes, Clarendon Press, Oxford, (1971) 

30. A.J. Bard, L.R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., (2001)   

31. Z. Galus, Fundamentals of Electrochemical Analysis (2nd ed) Wiley, NY, (1994) 

32. V. Stamenkovic, T.J. Schmidt, P.N. Ross, N.M. Markovic, Surface segregation effects in 
electrocatalysis: kinetics of oxygen reduction reaction on polycrystalline Pt3Ni alloy surfaces, J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 554-555 (2003) 191-199 

33. M. Bron, p. Bogdanov, S. Fiechter, I. Dorbandt, M. Hilgendorff, H. Schleburg, H. Tributsch, 
Influence of selenium on the catalytic properties of ruthenium-based cluster catalysts for oxygen 
reduction, J. Electroanal. Chem. 500 (2001) 510-517 

34. L. Stobinski, B. Lesiak, A. Malolepszy, M. Mazurkiewicz, B. Mierzwa, J. Zemek, P. Jiricek, 
I. Bieloshapk, Graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide studied by the XRD, TEMand 
electron spectroscopy methods, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 195 
(2014) 145–154 

35. R. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. Gu, L. Tang, C. Li, Z. Zhang, One-pot green synthesis of Prussian 
blue nanocubes decorated reduced graphene oxide using mushroom extract for efficient 4-
nitrophenol reduction Analytica Chimica Acta 853 (2015) 579–587 

36. M. Watanabe, H. Igarashi, K. Yosioka, An experimental prediction of the preparation 
condition of Nafion-coated catalyst layers for PEFCs, Electrochim Acta 40 (1995) 329-334 

 


37. M. Chojak, A. Kolary-Zurowska, R. Wlodarczyk, K. Miecznikowski, K. Karnicka, B. Palys, 
R. Marassi, P.J. Kulesza, Modification of Pt nanoparticles with polyoxometallate monolayers: 
Competition between activation and blocking of reactive sites for the electrocatalytic oxygen 
reduction, Electrochim. Acta 52 (2007) 5574-5581 

38. P.J. Kulesza, K. Miecznikowski, B. Baranowska, M. Skutnik, S. Fiechter, P. Bogdanoff, I. 
Dorbandt, Tungsten oxide as Active Matrix for Dispersed Carbon-Supported RuSex 
Nanoparticles: Enhancement of the Electrocatalytic Oxygen Reduction, Electrochem. Comm. 8 
(2006) 904-908 

39. S. K. Zecevic, J.S. Wainright, M.H. Litt, S.Lj. Gojkovic, R.F. Savinell,  Kinetics of  O 2 
Reduction on a Pt Electrode Covered with a Thin Film of Solid Polymer Electrolyte , J. 
Electrochem. Soc. 144 (1997) 2973-2982 

40. N. Alonso-Vante, P. Bogdanoff, H. Tributsch, On the Origin of the Selectivity of Oxygen 
Reduction of Ruthenium-Containing Electrocatalysts in Methanol-Containing Electrolyte, J. 
Catal. 190 (2000) 240-246 

41. Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai, L. Qu, Nitrogen-Doped Graphene Quantum 
Dots with Oxygen-Rich Functional Groups, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 15-18.  

42. D.A. Slanac, W.G. Hardin, K.P. Johnston, K.J. Stevenson, Atomic Ensemble and Electronic 
Effects in Ag-Rich AgPd Nanoalloy Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction in Alkaline Media, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 9812-9815. 

 
 


Figure captions 

Fig.1. X-ray diffraction patterns for the Pt/rGO (a), rGO_PB (b), Pt/rGO_PB (c) electrocatalysts. 

Fig.2. Typical HR-TEM images of rGO_PB (a), Pt/rGO (b), Pt/rGO_PB (c) nanoparticle. 

Fig.3. Cyclic voltammetric characterization of (a) Pt/rGO nanoparticles and (b) Pt/rGO_PB 

nanoparticles (deposited on glassy carbon) recorded in deaerated 0.5 mol dm-3 H2SO4 electrolyte. 

Scan rate 50 mV s-1.   

Fig.4. RDE voltammetric responses of PB-modified rGO supported Pt catalyst nanoparticles 
recorded at 10 mV s-1 scan rate in oxygen saturated 0.5 mol dm-3 H2SO4 at different rotation rates 
(from 400 to 2500 rpm). 

Fig.5. Koutecky-Levich reciprocal plots (prepared using the data of Fig. 4) for the 
electroreduction of oxygen (at 0. 7 V) at catalytic layers (deposited on glassy carbon disks) 
containing PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (red) and Pt/rGO (blue). Loadings of Pt: 
10 µg cm-2. 

Fig.6. Current-potential RRDE curves for oxygen reduction recorded at (red curve) PB-modified 
rGO supported Pt nanoparticles, and (blue curve) rGO supported Pt nanoparticles. Scan rate 10 
mV s-1. Rotation rate, 1600 rpm. 

Fig.7. Fraction of hydrogen peroxide (X%H2O2) produced during electroreduction of oxygen under 
the conditions of RRDE voltammetric experiment. 

Fig.8. Numbers of transferred electrons (n) per oxygen molecule during electroreduction of 
oxygen under conditions of the RRDE voltammetric experiments as for Fig. 7. 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

Fig.2 

a

b

c








