An electron acceptor molecule in a nanomesh: F4TCNQ on h-BN/Rh(111)

Huanyao Cuna,b,∗, Ari Paavo Seitsonenc,1, Silvan Rotha,e, Silvio Decurtinsf, Shi-Xia Liuf, J¨urg Osterwaldera, Thomas
Grebera

aPhysik-Institut, Universit¨at Z¨urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
bInstitute of Bioengineering, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne, Route Cantonale, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
cD´epartement de Chimie, ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure, 24 rue Lhomond, F-75005 Paris, France
dInstitut f¨ur Chemie, Universit¨at Z¨urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
eInstitut de Physique, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne, Route Cantonale, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
fDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, Hochschulstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland

Abstract

The adsorption of molecules on surfaces affects the surface dipole and thus changes in the work function may be
expected. The effect in change of work function is particularly strong if charge between substrate and adsorbate is
involved. Here we report the deposition of a strong electron acceptor molecule, tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane
C12F4N4 (F4TCNQ) on a monolayer of hexagonal boron nitride nanomesh (h-BN on Rh(111)). The work function of the
F4TCNQ/h-BN/Rh system increases upon increasing molecular coverage. The magnitude of the effect indicates electron
transfer from the substrate to the F4TCNQ molecules. Density functional theory calculations confirm the work function
shift and predict doubly charged F4TCNQ2− in the nanomesh pores, where the h-BN is closest to the Rh substrate, and
to have the largest binding energy there. The preferred adsorption in the pores is conjectured from a series of ultraviolet
photoelectron spectroscopy data, where the σ bands in the pores are first attenuated. Scanning tunneling microscopy
measurements indicate that F4TCNQ molecules on the nanomesh are mobile at room temperature, as ”hopping” between
neighboring pores is observed.

Keywords:
electron acceptor, charge transfer, work function, h-BN, STM

Introduction

Electron transfer is an essential process that governs
many elementary processes in physics and chemistry. For
atomic or molecular adsorbates on metallic surfaces simple
arguments predict on whether charge is transferred from
the surface to the molecule or vice versa.
The relevant
quantities are the work function of the surface and on the
other hand the ionisation potential or electron affinity of
the atom or molecule: If the work function is larger than
the ionisation potential, an electron is transferred to the
metal substrate and the adsorbate charges positively. This
effect is well known and e.g. used for surface ionisation of
alkali metal atoms [1].
If the electron affinity is larger
than the work function, an electron is transferred to the
adsorbate from metal substrate [2].
In the case of sur-
face ionisation it was pointed out by Gurney [3] that the
quantum mechanical broadening of the adsorbate orbitals
lead to the situation where the charge transfer is not com-
plete and thus the electron tunnels back and forth between
adsorbate and substrate. Also, the distance dependent in-
teraction between substrate and adsorbate leads to a vari-
ation of the ionisation potential and the electron affinity,

∗Corresponding author
Email address: hycun1@physik.uzh.ch (Huanyao Cun)

and the charge transfer itself changes the work function of
the surface locally.
The charge transfer due to polarisation may be inferred
from the induced change in the surface dipole. If the ad-
sorbate density is known, the induced dipole may be deter-
mined from the Helmholtz equation that relates a change
of the work function ∆Φ with the areal density n or cov-
erage of the dipoles induced by the adsorbed species:

∆Φ = −e p n

ϵ0
(1)

where e is the elementary charge, p the induced dipole
parallel to the surface normal, and ϵ0 the vacuum permit-
tivity. From Eq. 1 we see that the work function decreases
if charge is transferred to the surface and oppositely in-
creases if charge is transferred to the molecule.
If the metal surface is covered with a single layer graphite
(graphene, g) [4, 5] or hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) [6],
the reactivity of the system changes. In particular, the
charge transfer time across the layer increases, and non-
adiabatic effects may be observed [7].
The high electron affinity of the tetrafluorotetracyanoquin-
odimethane C12F4N4 (F4TCNQ; see the chemical struc-
ture in Figure 1a) has made it to be a frequently em-
ployed electron acceptor molecule, with which anion for-
mation on surfaces may be studied.
Previously, Barja

Preprint submitted to Surface Science
March 8, 2021

arXiv:1805.09872v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  24 May 2018


et al.
reported self assembly of TCNQ (C12H4N4) and
F4TCNQ (C12F4N4) on the graphene/iridium system [8].
At low temperatures different adsorption geometries and
electronic properties, depending on where the molecules
were located in the g/Ir(111) unit cell [9].
The electron affinity of F4TCNQ is 5.2 eV [10] and ex-
ceeds the work function of the h-BN/Rh(111) nanomesh
[11] by 1.05 eV. Therefore we expect a complete electron
transfer onto the molecule, and the formation of an open
shell electronic system. This would open perspectives for
spintronics as it was put forward for the TCNQ/g/Ru(0001)
where long range magnetic order was found [12].
Here we report on F4TCNQ on the h-BN nanomesh on
Rh(111). We have investigated the system with photoe-
mission spectroscopy and scanning tunnelling microscopy
(STM) on the same preparations. Density functional the-
ory (DFT) calculations complement the picture and come
up with an unexpected prediction of structures with high
adsorption energy and transfer of more than one electron
onto the molecule.
The substrate in this study is the h-BN nanomesh on
Rh(111) [13]. It features a corrugated single layer of boron
nitride [14], where 13×13 BN units form a coincidence lat-
tice on 12×12 Rh units with the nearest neighbour dis-
tances (Figure 1b). The 12×12 unit cell is constituted by
2 nm pores, where the nitrogen atoms are close to on-top
Rh configuration, and where nitrogen lone pair bonding
occurs [15]. These pores are separated by ”wire” regions
where the interaction of the h-BN with the substrate is
weak. This pore-wire structure imposes strong lateral elec-
trical fields (dipole rings) that are due to variations of the
local electrostatic potential and that lead to to the self
assembly of molecules in the pores [11]. The electrostatic
landscape is such that negative charge is attracted to the
pores, and accordingly we expect F4TCNQ to first occupy
the pores.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1b displays STM images of the pristine h-BN
nanomesh on Rh(111) substrate with a superstructure lat-
tice constant of 3.2 nm (shown in the inset of Figure 1b).
In Figure 1c an STM image of the h-BN/Rh(111) nanomesh
after a small dose of F4TCNQ with less than 1 molecule
per nanomesh unit cell is shown, which corresponds to
the data point marked with green square in Figure 2a.
”Bright” protrusions and ”dark” depressions are imaged
with the periodicity of the nanomesh. This imaging con-
dition is obtained on a regular base after scanning the
surface for some time at room temperature. The picture
resembles the STM image of F4TCNQ on g/Ir(111), where
the protrusions have been assigned to the molecules [8].
The ratio between dark and bright pores and comparison
to the coverage as determined via the X-ray photoemis-
sion spectroscopy (XPS) and the work function shift of 80
meV that were measured on the same sample rather favors

Figure 1: F4TCNQ on h-BN/Rh(111) surface. (a) Ball and
stick model of F4TCNQ molecule (C12F4N4). (b) and (c) Scanning
tunnelling microscopy (STM) images at room temperature of pristine
h-BN nanomesh on Rh(111). Ut = -1.20 V, It = 0.50 nA (b) and
low coverage of F4TCNQ molecules on h-BN/Rh(111) surface. Ut
= 1.0 V, It = 0.3 nA (c). The right-bottom inset in (b) shows the
supercell of h-BN nanomesh with a lattice constant of 3.2 nm. The
wires appear bright and pores dark.

a picture where the dark pores correspond to pores that
are occupied with a molecule.
Figure 2 shows the work function of the F4TCNQ/h-
BN/Rh(111) system as obtained from the width of He Iα
excited normal emission ultraviolet photoemission spectra
(UPS) as a function of molecular coverage Θ. The cov-
erage, given in units of molecules per nanomesh unit cell
(mpu), has been determined from Mg Kα excited XPS in-
tensity ratios between the F 1s, the N 1s and the C 1s
peaks and the corresponding atomic photoemission cross
sections, as shown at a coverage of 7.8 mpu in Figure 2b-
2d. Accordingly we find a coverage of one F4TCNQ mpu
at an atomic F:N ratio of 4:173. Furthermore we note that
the splitting in the C 1s emission indicates the existence
of chemically different carbon species in the molecule.
As expected for an electron transfer to the molecules
the work function increases with coverage. Fitting the data
in Figure 2a to the function Φ = Φ0+∆Φ(1−exp(−Θ/Θ0))
we obtain the red line in Figure 2a and parameters Φ0 =
4.2 eV, ∆Φ = 2.07 eV, and Θ0 = 6.4 mpu. From this we
see that at coverages below 2 mpu the work function in-
creases linearly.
The work function shift is much more
pronounced than in the F4TCNQ/g/SiC system where
Chen et al. found an increase of 0.7 eV [16]. Given the
fact that the work function of g/SiC is similar to that
of h-BN/Rh(111) this is an indication that the binding of
F4TCNQ is different to h-BN on a metal from g on a semi-

2


Figure 2:
Work
function
and
XPS
of
F4TCNQ/h-
BN/Rh(111). (a) Work function increase with increasing cover-
age of F4TCNQ molecules. The black circles represent experimental
data points at different F4TCNQ molecular coverages, while the blue
square indicates the calculated work function at F4TCNQ coverage
of 1 molecule per unit cell. The green open square corresponds to
the STM data shown in Figure 1c.
The red line is the fit of an
exponential function as described in the text. (b)-(d) Mg Kα XPS
(ℏω = 1253.6 eV) spectra of F 1s (b), N 1s (c) and C 1s (d) before
(green) and after (red) dosing F4TCNQ on h-BN nanomesh (cov-
erge of 7.8 mpu). After adsorbing on h-BN surface, F4TCNQ shows
distinct feature on F 1s and C 1s core levels.

conductor. For 1 mpu we obtain a work function shift of
0.3 eV at room temperature, and in cooling the sample to
185 K the work function further increases by 50 meV. The
temperature dependent work function shift may be due
to a higher occupancy in the pores. These values can be
compared to the result from the DFT calculations, where
we obtain a value ∆ΦDFT,1 mpu of 0.19 eV as indicated
with the blue square in Figure 2a. We consider this a very
good agreement with experimental confirmation that at
low coverage F4TCNQ− anions are formed on the h-BN
nanomesh.
Figure 3 shows normal emission He Iα UPS excited va-
lence band photoemission data of F4TCNQ on h-BN/Rh(111)
as a function of the coverage Θ.
In Figure 3a a series
of UPS spectra at different F4TCNQ coverages from 0
to 4.3 mpu are shown.
The spectrum at Θ=0 mpu is
recorded after annealing the clean nanomesh. Afterwards
F4TCNQ has been evaporated successively and measured
with XPS and UPS after each evaporation. The spectra
are dominated by the well-known valence band pattern of
h-BN/Rh(111) with the Rh 4d valence band peak at 0.88
eV binding energy, and the split h-BN σ-band [14]: σα
that accounts for the electronic structure in the nanomesh
wires and σβ for that in the nanomesh pores [17].

Figure 3: He Iα normal emission ultraviolet photoemis-
sion spectrum (UPS) data of F4TCNQ/h-BN/Rh(111).
(a) A series of UPS spectra of F4TCNQ/h-BN/Rh(111) at different
coverages of F4TCNQ, showing that the σα and σβ bands shift upon
increasing of F4TCNQ molecules. The two black dashed lines are a
guide to the eye. (b) Comparison of UPS spectra of 0.4 molecule
per unit cell (mpu) (blue) and 1.0 mpu (red). The grey line is the
difference between these two spectra (1.0 mpu-0.4 mpu). In order
to better demonstrate the difference, the zero line is added, and the
data are scaled by a factor of 5. Clearly, the σα and σβ bands are
affected by adding more F4TCNQ molecules, where the σβ band de-
creases significantly. (c) Shift of peak positions of σα and σβ bands
with the increase of F4TCNQ molecules. The σα band shifts towards
lower binding energy, while the peak in the σβ band-region shifts to
higher binding energy.

Like it was first shown for naphthalocyanine on h-BN
nanomesh [14] and later for Xe on h-BN nanomesh [11],
adsorbates attenuate the photoemission signals from the
substrate, and since the signal from the pore, σβ is at-
tenuated before the signal from the wires σα, a higher
adsorption energy in the pores was concluded for naph-
thalocyanine and for 12 Xe atoms in the pores. Here we
observed the same trend: With increasing molecular cov-
erage the σβ intensity decreases before it does the same in
the the σα intensity. In Figure 3b the spectra of 0.4 mpu
and 1.0 mpu are compared, and the difference between
the two (1.0 mpu - 0.4 mpu) is displayed after scaling by a
factor of 5. The above-said is confirmed, in particular the
attenuation effect is also seen for the Rh substrate peaks.
The assignment of molecular orbitals is not possible
at these low coverages, photon energy and emission an-
gle. We observe, however, a shift in binding energy for the
boron nitride related σ bands. The sharpest feature in the
difference curve lies at the steep onset of the σα band at

3


4.39 eV binding energy and it is accompanied by a sharp
negative peak at 4.53 eV. This indicates a σα band shift
to lower binding energy with increasing coverage and is
remarkable since the majority of the molecules must oc-
cupy the pores, as implied by the attenuation of the σβ
intensity. The spectral weight near the broader σβ peak
appears to shift towards higher binding energies with in-
creasing coverage.
This may be related to the decrease
σβ intensity and the increase of F4TCNQ derived molec-
ular orbitals at around 7 eV binding energy. In Figure 3c
the binding energy positions of the σα band and the local
maximum near the σβ band are shown as a function of
the F4TCNQ coverage. For flat h-BN the sigma bands are
known to align with the vacuum level and to lead to the
”physisorption model” [6], where on the Rh(111) substrate
the σα band has the same offset of about 9 eV from the
vacuum level like on Ni, Pd and Pt. Therefore it is ex-
pected that with increasing work function the σα energy
rises. The fact that the rise of 14 meV per mpu does not
correspond to the 300 meV per mpu indicates again that
the vast majority of the F4TCNQ molecules are not ad-
sorbed on the wires. The shift in σβ band of -161 meV per
mpu may not be explained with the h-BN ”physisorption
model” of Nagashima et al. [6]. It rather indicates that the
F4TCNQ− molecules influence the boron and the nitrogen
atoms in the pore, and the above-mentioned photoemission
intensity redistribution between σα and F4TCNQ molec-
ular orbitals that may impose as well an apparent shift.
Figure 4 shows STM images of a sample at low cover-
age measured with variable temperature (VT-)STM sys-
tem. As mentioned above, low coverage of F4TCNQ/h-
BN/Rh(111) displays ”bright” and ”dark” features on the
h-BN surface at room temperature, which are confirmed
by two different instruments, i.e., electron spectroscopy for
chemical analysis (ESCA) Park Scientific (Figure 1c) and
VT-STM (Figure 4). Figures 4a-4f illustrate a sequence of
continuous scanning of the same area with same scanning
conditions, where the time intervals between the images is
125 s. The green and blue circles in each image indicate
the same positions individually in order to guide the eyes.
The 6 images evidently demonstrate F4TCNQ ”hopping”
on the h-BN surface at room temperature. For instance,
the ”dark” depressions marked with green and blue circles
in Figure 4d appear to be ”bright” protrusions in the Fig-
ure 4e, while the same positions show the ”dark” features
again in the subsequent Figure 4f. In order to demonstrate
more ”hopping” events and in a longer time interval, we
made a movie with 40 continuous STM images scanning
with same condition on the same area in the Support-
ing Information. This ”hopping” indicates high mobility
of F4TCNQ molecules on h-BN surface, which is simi-
lar to the case of F4TCNQ on g/Ir, where the F4TCNQ
molecules were reported to ”rotate” even at 77 K [8].
To better understand the experimental results, we car-
ried out DFT calculations.
Because the molecular or-
bitals (for example the highest occupied molecular orbital,
HOMO) preserve their character in the free molecule to a

Figure 4: F4TCNQ ”hopping” at low coverage below 1
molecule per unit cell. (a)-(f) A series of sequential STM im-
ages of F4TCNQ on h-BN/Rh(111) at low coverage of the same
area with the same scanning conditions show the F4TCNQ molecules
”hopping” (appear and disappear) on the surface at room temper-
ature. The green and blue circles represent the same positions in
every image to guide the eye. The time interval between two subse-
quent frames is 125 s. The contrast between dark and bright spots,
as derived from the histogram of the z-values in Panel (d), is 2.6 ˚A.
Ut = −1.0 V, It = 0.005 nA.

large extent, in the following we refer to those orbitals as
in the neutral gas-phase molecule, even whn the initial
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) gains elec-
trons, to simplify the discussion. The DFT results confirm
that the F4TCNQ molecules like to occupy the pore of
the h-BN nanomesh. The theory predicts the work func-
tion change and the charge transfer upon adsorption of
one mpu. In Figure 5 the two lowest energy structures in
the nanomesh pores are depicted. They are significantly
distinct to each other, in binding energy, charge trans-
fer, work function change and coordination to the beneath
h-BN. In reference to the charge transfer the two struc-
tures are labeled as ”1−” and ”2−”. Intriguingly, the work
function change of ”2−” is smaller than that of the ”1−”
structure, which must be related to the onset of covalent
chemisorptive bonds and gain of exchange energy in the
LUMO in ”2−”, which apparently superseeds the Coulomb
repulsion in the LUMO. On the other hand ”1−” is more
physisorptive with ionic and van der Waals bond character
and an open LUMO shell. The work function change of
0.19 eV per mpu of the lowest energy ”2−” structure fits
well to the experimental result of 0.3 eV. Though, from
the experiment we find no direct arguments on the charge
state of F4TCNQ on h-BN nanomesh. Rather, the high
DFT binding energy difference between molecules in the
pore and on the wire (see Table 1), would not suggest much
diffusion as we observe it at room temperature. We have
to speculate on how the detailed hopping mechanism as we
observe it (see Figure 4) operates: Possibly the STM imag-
ing process triggers hopping events. In Figure 5c and 5f

4


the orbital overlap O, or the projection of the Kohn-Sham
electronic states of the adsorption system on the molecular
orbitals of a single molecule (but in the geometry as ad-
sorbed) is shown for ”1−” and ”2−”. The orbital overlap
indicates at which energies the molecular orbitals reside
when adsorbed, and if there are large changes, for exam-
ple due to hybridisation. There are clearly defined states,
in particular the HOMO−1, HOMO and LUMO, and the
states above the LUMO are separated, like for the molecule
in the gas phase. The gas phase eigenvalues are indicated
with solid circles: Black for the occupied orbitals, and red
for unoccupied ones. The energy alignment between gas
phase and adsorbate system is arbitrary, and done to fit
the HOMO and LUMO reasonably well. In the structure
“F4TCNQ2−”, where the Bader charge of the molecule is
close to −2 e, the two fold degenerate, i.e. spin-degenerate
LUMO of the gas-phase molecule is clearly below the Fermi
energy, thus agreeing with the charge state ”2−”. Instead
the charge state of “F4TCNQ1−” seems to pin at the Fermi
level, indicating half filling.

Table 1:
Calculated work functions Φ in 5 different structures.
Binding energy Ebind in 4 different molecular conformations and
the Bader charges on the molecules qBader,molecule in the 3 single
molecule structures.

System
Ebind (eV)
Φ (eV)
qBader,molecule (e)

clean
—
4.20
—
1−
3.07
4.61
−1.34
2−
4.15
4.39
−1.89
wire
1.78
4.88
−0.40
dimer (pore)
3.64
4.88

In Table 1 we also show the binding energy for a F4TCNQ2−

dimer. It is significantly lower than that of two molecules
in two different pores. From this we expect single pore
occupancy to be the lowest energy structure at low cover-
ages.

Conclusions

In conclusion, combining controlled experimental pho-
toemission and scanning tunneling microscopy measure-
ments with density functional theory calculations, we demon-
strate electron transfer from h-BN/Rh(111) to F4TCNQ.
As negatively charged molecules (electron acceptors) co-
alesce on the surface, the work function of the system
increases.
Upon charging, the σα and σβ bands of h-
BN nanomesh shift towards lower and higher binding en-
ergy, respectively. The molecules occupy preferentially the
pores of the h-BN/Rh(111) nanomesh, though display mo-
bility and molecular ”hopping” on the h-BN surface at
room temperature. DFT results indicate that the lowest
energy structure is an anionic ”2−” species.
Our work

paves the way to tune the electronic and structural prop-
erties of two-dimensional materials by using adsorption of
organic molecules.

Methods

Experimental

The experiments were performed in two ultrahigh-vacuum
(UHV) systems with base pressure of 1×10−10 mbar. One
is a variable-temperature STM (Omicron VT-STM), and
the other is a user-modified Vacuum Generators ESCALAB 220 wit
a Mg Kα lab source at an energy of ℏω = 1253.6 eV,
with a monochromatized He Iα (ℏω = 21.2 eV) source
equipped with a room-temperature STM (Park Scientific)
that allows photoemission and STM measurements on the
same sample [18, 19]. The work function has been deter-
mined from the width of the He Iα photoemission spec-
trum recorded at a sample bias of -9 V. The STM mea-
surements were carried out with electrochemically etched
tungsten tips. All STM images were taken in constant-
current mode at room temperature. At negative tunneling
voltages Ut electrons are tunneling from the substrate to
the tip. The h-BN/Rh(111) samples were produced with
the standard recipe [13]. Particularly purified F4TCNQ
molecules were evaporated on h-BN/Rh(111) substrates
kept at room temperature using a Knudsen cell at 365 K.
Then the samples were transferred to the analysis cham-
bers for the photoemission or the STM measurements.

Theory

Calculations were performed using the Kohn-Sham DFT
formalism within the Gaussian plane wave (GPW) method
[20] as implemented in the QuickStep module [21] in the
CP2K program package [22].
The exchange-correlation
term was approximated with the rB86-vdW-DF2 exchange-
correlation functional [23] that explicitly includes the van
der Waals interactions. In the GPW scheme we used the
expansion of the molecular orbitals with Gaussian basis
functions [24], and the electron density is expressed with
a plane wave basis set up to 700 Ry with a relative cut-off
of 70 Ry. Dual-space pseudopotentials [25] were used to
describe the interaction of valence electrons with atomic
cores. We sampled the first Brillouin zone at Γ point only.
The theoretical lattice constant of Rh of 3.8147 ˚A was em-
ployed in the calculations.
The substrate was modelled
with four layers of Rh(111), of which the two lowest were
kept fixed at their bulk positions during the relaxation.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

5


Figure 5: DFT results of two different F4TCNQ structures in the h-BN/Rh(111) nanomesh pores. (a-c) The ”1−”
structure with one electron transfer. (a) Perspective view showing a floating molecule, (b) top view: The molecule is centered on top of the
h-BN nitrogen atom with on top of Rh coordination and (c) the orbital overlap O with the LUMO pinned at the Fermi level. (d-f) The
”2−” structure with two electrons transferred, that has a 26 % higher binding energy than ”1−”. (d) Perspective view, showing the covalent
bonding of two cyano (CN) groups to two boron atoms which get pulled off the h-BN layer. (e) Top view: The molecule is shifted away from
the pore center such that two CN-B bonds become operational and (f) the orbital overlap O, where the LUMO lies below the Fermi level.
Note that the distinct distortion of the molecules imposes a non-rigid shift of the molecular orbital energies. The solid circles in (c) and (f)
are the gas phase eigenvalues. Color code for atomic models: Boron orange, carbon black, fluorine pink, nitrogen green, rhodium whitish.

Acknowledgements

Financial support by the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation, by the EC under the Graphene Flagship (contract
no. CNECT-ICT-604391) is gratefully acknowledged. We
thank the Swiss National Supercomputer Centre (CSCS)
for the generous allocation of computer time within the
project uzh11.

References

[1] G. D. Alton, M. T. Johnson, G. D. Mills, A simple posi-
tive/negative surface ionization source, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys.
Res. A 328 (1993) 154–159.
[2] N. Koci´c, P. Weiderer, S. Keller, S. Decurtins, S.-X. Liu,
J. Repp, Periodic charging of individual molecules coupled to
the motion of an atomic force microscopy tip, Nano Lett. 15
(2015) 4406–4411.
[3] R. W. Gurney, Theory of electrical double layers in adsorbed
films, Phys. Rev. 47 (1935) 479–482.
[4] A. Nagashima, H. Itoh, T. Ichinokawa, C. Oshima, S. Otani,
Change in the electronic states of graphite overlayers depending
on thickness, Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994) 4756–4763.
[5] A. M. Shikin, D. Farias, K. H. Rieder, Phonon stiffening induced
by copper intercalation in monolayer graphite on Ni(111), Eu-
rophys. Lett. 44 (1998) 44–49.
[6] A. Nagashima, N. Tejima, Y. Gamou, T. Kawai, C. Oshima,
Electronic-structure of monolayer hexagonal boron-nitride ph-
ysisorbed on metal surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 3918–
3921.
[7] M. Muntwiler, W. Auw¨arter, A. P. Seitsonen, J. Osterwalder,
T. Greber, Rocking-motion-induced charging of C60 on h-
BN/Ni(111), Phys. Rev. B 71 (2005) 121402.

[8] S. Barja, M. Garnica, J. Jose Hinarejos, A. L. Vazquez de Parga,
N. Martin, R. Miranda, Self-organization of electron acceptor
molecules on graphene, Chem. Commun. 46 (2010) 8198–8200.
[9] A. Kumar, K. Banerjee, M. Dvorak, F. Schulz, A. Harju,
P. Rinke, P. Liljeroth, Charge-transfer-driven nonplanar adsorp-
tion of F4TCNQ molecules on epitaxial graphene, ACS Nano 11
(2017) 4960–4968.
[10] W. Gao, A. Kahn, Controlled p-doping of zinc phthalocyanine
by coevaporation with tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane: A
direct and inverse photoemission study, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79
(2001) 4040–4042.
[11] H. Dil, J. Lobo-Checa, R. Laskowski, P. Blaha, S. Berner, J. Os-
terwalder, T. Greber, Surface trapping of atoms and molecules
with dipole rings, Science 319 (2008) 1824–1826.
[12] M. Garnica, D. Stradi, S. Barja, F. Calleja, C. Diaz, M. Al-
cami, N. Martin, A. L. Vazquez de Parga, F. Martin, R. Mi-
randa, Long-range magnetic order in a purely organic 2D layer
adsorbed on epitaxial graphene, Nat. Phys. 9 (2013) 368–374.
[13] M. Corso, W. Auw¨arter, M. Muntwiler, A. Tamai, T. Greber,
J. Osterwalder, Boron nitride nanomesh, Science 303 (2004)
217–220.
[14] S. Berner, M. Corso, R. Widmer, O. Groening, R. Laskowski,
P. Blaha,
K. Schwarz,
A. Goriachko,
H. Over,
S. Gsell,
M. Schreck, H. Sachdev, T. Greber, J. Osterwalder, Boron ni-
tride nanomesh: Functionality from a corrugated monolayer,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 46 (2007) 5115–5119.
[15] M. T. Paffett, R. J. Simonson, P. Papin, R. T. Paine, Borazine
adsorption and decomposition at Pt(111) and Ru(001) surfaces,
Surf. Sci. 232 (1990) 286–296.
[16] W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao, A. T. S. Wee, Surface
transfer p-type doping of epitaxial graphene, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
129 (2007) 10418–10422.
[17] A. Goriachko, Y. He, M. Knapp, H. Over, M. Corso, T. Brug-
ger, S. Berner, J. Osterwalder, T. Greber, Self-assembly of a
hexagonal boron nitride nanomesh on Ru(0001), Langmuir 23
(2007) 2928–2931.
[18] T. Greber, O. Raetzo, T. J. Kreutz, P. Schwaller, W. Deich-

6


mann, E. Wetli, J. Osterwalder, A photoelectron spectrometer
for k-space mapping above the Fermi level, Rev. Sci. Instrum.
68 (1997) 4549–4554.
[19] W. Auw¨arter, M. Muntwiler, T. Greber, J. Osterwalder, Co on
h-BN/Ni(111): From island to island-chain formation and Co
intercalation, Surf. Sci. 511 (2002) 379–386.
[20] G. Lippert,
J. Hutter,
M. Parrinello,
The Gaussian and
augmented-plane-wave density functional method for ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations, Theor. Chem. Acc. 103 (1999)
124.
[21] J. VandeVondele,
M. Krack,
F. Mohamed,
M. Parrinello,
T. Chassaing, J. Hutter, Quickstep: Fast and accurate den-
sity functional calculations using a mixed Gaussian and plane
waves approach, Comput. Phys. Commun. 167 (2005) 103.
[22] CP2K Developers’ Group, 2018.
[23] I. Hamada, van der Waals density functional made accurate,
Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014) 121103.
[24] J. VandeVondele, J. Hutter, Gaussian basis sets for accurate
calculations on molecular systems in gas and condensed phases,
J. Chem. Phys. 127 (2007) 114105.
[25] S. Goedecker, M. Teter, J. Hutter, Separable dual-space Gaus-
sian pseudopotentials, Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996) 1703.

7


