Wireless whispering-gallery-mode sensor for thermal sensing and aerial 

mapping 

Xiangyi Xu1, Weijian Chen1, Guangming Zhao1, Yihang Li1, Chenyang Lu2 and Lan Yang1* 

1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 

 63130, USA 

2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 

 63130, USA 

*yang@seas.wustl.edu 

 

Internet of Things (IoT) [1, 2] employs a large number of spatially distributed wireless sen-

sors to monitor physical environments, e.g., temperature, humidity, and air pressure, have 

found wide applications including environmental monitoring [3], health care monitoring 

[4], smart cities [5] and precision agriculture [6]. A wireless sensor can collect, analyze, and 

transmit measurements of its environment [1, 2]. To date, wireless sensors used in IoT are 

predominately based on electronic devices that may suffer from electromagnetic interfer-

ence in many circumstances. Immune to the electromagnetic interference, optical sensors 

provide a significant advantage in harsh environments [7]. Furthermore, by introducing 

optical resonance to enhanced light-matter interactions, optical sensors based on resona-

tors exhibit small footprints, extreme sensitivity and versatile functionalities [8, 9], which 

can significantly enhance the capability and flexibility of wireless sensors. Here we provide 

the first demonstration of a wireless photonic sensor node based on whispering-gallery-

mode (WGM) optical resonators. The sensor node is controlled via a customized iOS app. 

Its performance was studied in two practical scenarios: (1) real-time measurement of air 

temperature over 12 hours and (2) aerial mapping of temperature distribution by a sensor 

node mounted on an unmanned drone. Our work demonstrates the capability of WGM op-

tical sensors in practical applications and may pave the way for large-scale deployments of 

WGM sensors in IoT. 

 

High-quality WGM optical resonators that confine light in a small volume via total internal re-

flection can significantly enhance light-matter interactions, which has benefited a number of ap-

plications including microlasers [10, 11], opto-mechanics [12, 13], and non-Hermitian optics [14, 


15, 16]. When subject to environmental changes, WGM resonators will experience changes in 

their spectral properties, e.g., frequency shift/split, linewidth broadening. Based on such mecha-

nisms, WGM resonators have been demonstrated for various sensing applications ranging from 

thermal sensor [17], humidity sensor [18], magnetometer [19] to nanoparticle/biomolecule detec-

tion [20] and atomic ion detection [21]. The successful laboratory demonstrations have encour-

aged and advanced the practical applications of WGM sensors. However, a system must address 

two open challenges to fully release the power of the resonator technology for practical applica-

tions: (1) the stability of the photonic resonator and its coupler such as fiber-taper waveguide, 

and (2) the miniaturization of bulky laboratory measurement systems. Several pioneering works 

along this direction have been demonstrated recently, e.g., WGM optical gyroscope [22] and 

phone-sized WGM sensing system [23], which integrate single WGM sensor together with its 

coupler, laser, photodetector, and associated control components into a portable device. The po-

tential of WGM sensors can be further exploited through the integration with wireless interfaces 

as parts of an IoT system.  

 

In this work, we demonstrated a wireless WGM sensor node that can be integrated into IoT. We 

also developed a customized iOS app for remote system control, collection and analysis of sens-

ing signals. Through this app, the spectral properties of WGM sensors can be monitored in real 

time. As the key elements in WSNs, sensor nodes should have the capability to collect sensing 

signals, perform signal analysis, and communicate with other sensor nodes or the gateway sensor 

node. The architecture of our wireless WGM sensor node is shown in Fig. 1(a), consisting of 

sensing module, microcontroller, Wi-Fi unit, and its power supply [23]. 

 

In the sensing module, a tunable single-mode distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) laser is used to 

probe a packaged WGM sensor [24, 25]; the output from the sensor is received by a photodiode 

detector. The operation of the DBR laser is controlled via its current driver and thermo-electric 

cooler (TEC). A transimpedance amplifier (TIA) circuit is associated with the photodiode detec-

tor and converts the photodiode current into voltage output with proper gain. An ARM Cortex-

M3 processor serves as the microcontroller with main functions of laser control (e.g., voltage, 

current, temperature) and acquisition of transmission spectra of the WGM sensor. The communi-

cation between the sensor node and smartphones is via the Wi-Fi unit. It helps to transmit the 


sensing signals and receive the commands from the customized app. By connecting the Wi-Fi 

unit to the internet, a worldwide, real-time control of this system can be realized. We also in-

clude a system monitor circuit in the mainboard that monitors the key parameters such as voltage 

of the power supply and the microcontroller, laser diode voltage/current/temperature. A full-

sized view of the mainboard is provided in Fig. 1(c). 

 

The sensor used in this system is a packaged WGM microtoroid resonator. It is fabricated by us-

ing UV curable low-index polymer to package a microtoroid together with its fiber-taper wave-

guide [24, 25]. Such a packaged WGM sensor has high quality factor and long-term stability. 

Light from the DBR laser with central wavelength of 976 nm and linewidth of 10 MHz is sent 

into the packaged WGM sensor and then received by the photodetector. The frequency of laser 

light can be tuned by adjusting the laser current and TEC temperature with tuning coefficients of 

0.002 nm/mA and 0.07 nm/°C, respectively. By applying a saw-tooth wave with amplitude of 40 

mA to the laser diode around a fixed central current, the frequency of laser light is linearly 

scanned to obtain the transmission spectrum of the WGM sensor.  

 

The interface of the customized iOS app is shown in Fig. 1(b). The app can monitor the key pa-

rameters of the system in real time, and remotely control the mainboard, such as setting the laser 

diode current and temperature, tuning the laser frequency. It can also receive the transmission 

spectra of the WGM sensor through the Wi-Fi unit, with a waveform update rate of 50 frames 

per second. In addition, through the integrated mathematical algorithm, the app can perform real-

time analysis such as measurement of resonance frequency, linewidth, and quality factor. De-

tailed information of this iOS app as well as a step-by-step guide is provided in supplementary 

material. 

 

We first characterized the spectral properties of the packaged WGM sensor by using the app. Its 

transmission spectrum is shown in Fig. 2(a), with a frequency spanning of 450 GHz. Multiple 

resonance modes with different resonance frequencies, quality factors and polarizations were ob-

served. The resonance mode with higher quality factor will help to resolve the smaller frequency 

shift, subsequently improving the sensing performance. The transmission spectrum of a high-

quality mode together with a Lorentzian fit is given in Fig. 2(b), with quality factor about 


4.2×105. To verify the stability of the whole system, the time trace of the linewidth of a reso-

nance mode was recorded for fifteen minutes. An average linewidth of 3.15 GHz together with a 

standard deviation of 0.03 GHz was observed, corresponding to standard deviation about 1.0%. 

 

With this wireless sensing system, we performed a 12-hour real-time measurement of air temper-

ature on Jun. 18th, 2017 in St. Louis, MO, USA. The whole system was mounted on the outside 

wall of a building. The packaged WGM sensor was in full contact with the surrounding air and 

was refrained from direct irradiance from sunlight. The optical fibers connecting the packaged 

sensor with the mainboard were carefully mounted to avoid polarization variations during the 

measurement. The variation of the resonance frequency induced by the air temperature change 

was monitored via the customized app. For comparison, we also mounted a commercial ther-

mometer together with the packaged sensor. Through a 12-h measurement, we acquired a plot of 

frequency shift of the selected resonance mode. As shown in Fig. 3, the resonance frequency 

shift of the packaged WGM sensor matches well with the results from the commercial thermom-

eter. 

 

Introducing mobility to wireless sensor nodes can improve the capability and flexibility of WSNs 

and helps to meet the needs of certain scenarios with complex dynamic changes [26]. Here we 

used an unmanned drone to carry the whole system to measure the temperature distribution in a 

selected area of a city park in St. Louis on June 1, 2017 (See Fig. 4(a)). A commercial thermom-

eter with Bluetooth connection was mounted together with the packaged WGM sensor for com-

parison. The flight path of the unmanned drone was shown in Fig. 4(b), with the starting and 

ending locations marked. When the drone flied from one measurement location to another, the 

resonance frequency of WGM sensor shifted due to the temperature variations. The variation of 

resonance frequency is shown in Fig. 4(b), where the temperature gradient can be clearly seen. 

The measurements match well with the results from commercial thermometer (Fig. 4(c)). A vid-

eo demo is provided in the supplementary material where the drone carrying the whole system 

flied from one location with higher temperature to another one with lower temperature. A reso-

nance frequency shift can be clearly observed from the customized app. 

 


In summary, we have demonstrated a wireless WGM sensor node and exploited it for the appli-

cations of thermal sensing and aerial mapping. A customized iOS app enables us to monitor and 

control the system parameters, acquire and analyze the sensing signals in real time. Two applica-

tion scenarios have been studied: one is to measure the temperature change at a fixed location; 

the other one is to have the system carried by an unmanned drone to measure the temperature 

distribution of a selected area. The successful demonstrations show the potential applications of 

our wireless WGM sensor node in IoT. It is also worth noting that our sensing system is not lim-

ited to thermal sensing. With proper design, the packaged WGM sensor can have various func-

tionalities, e.g., WGM magnetometer with high sensitivity and large bandwidth [19]. Another 

promising direction is to use a sensor array for monitoring multiple parameters simultaneously 

[27, 28].  

 

Competing financial interests 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by the ARO grant No. W911NF1710189. 

 

Author contributions 

L. Yang conceived the idea. X. Xu designed the hardware system and iOS software. W. Chen 

and X. Xu performed the sensing experiments with the help from Y. Li. G. Zhao fabricated the 

packaged WGM sensor. All authors contribute the analyzing and discussion of the experimental 

data. X. Xu, W. Chen, and L. Yang wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors. 

L.Y. supervised the project.  

 

References: 

 

1 Akyildiz IF, Su W, Sankarasubramaniam Y and Cayirci E. Wireless sensor networks: a sur-

vey. Computer Networks 2002; 38: 393-422. 

2 Yick J, Mukherjee B and Ghosal D. Wireless sensor network survey. Computer Networks 


2008; 52: 2292-2330. 

3 Mainwaring A, Polastre J, Szewczyk R, Culler D and Anderson J. Wireless sensor networks 

for habitat monitoring. In proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on wireless 

sensor networks and applications, pages 88-97. ACM press, Sept. 2002. 

4 J. Ko, C. Lu, M.B. Srivastava, J.A. Stankovic, A. Terzis and M. Welsh, Wireless Sensor 

Networks for Healthcare, Proceedings of the IEEE, 98(11): 1947 - 1960, November 2010. 

5 Zanella A, et al. Internet of Things for smart cities. IEEE Internet Things J. 2014; 1: 22–32. 

6 Kim Y, Evans RG and Iversen WM. Remote sensing and control of an irrigation system us-

ing a distributed wireless sensor network. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Meas-

urement 2008; 57: 1379-1387. 

7 Yang S, Zhou B, Sun T and Grattan KTV. A novel optical sensor platform designed for wire-

less sensor networks. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2013; 450: 012007. 

8 Vollmer F and Yang L. Label-free detection with high-Q microcavities: A review of biosens-

ing mechanisms for integrated devices. Nanophotonics 2012; 1: 267-291. 

9 Foreman MR, Swaim JD and Vollmer F. Whispering gallery mode sensors. Advances in Op-

tics and Photonics 2015; 7: 168-240. 

10 Yang L, Armani DK and Vahala KJ. Fiber-coupled erbium microlasers on a chip. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2003; 83: 825–826. 

11 Jiang X, et al. Free-space coupled, ultralow-threshold Raman lasing from a silica microcavity. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013; 103: 101102. 

12 Monifi F, et al. Optomechanically induced stochastic resonance and chaos transfer between 

optical fields. Nat. Photonics 2016; 10: 399–405. 

13 Kippenberg TJ, Vahala KJ. Cavity optomechanics: back-action at the mesoscale. Science 

2008; 321: 1172-1176. 

14 Peng B, Ozdemir SK, Lei F, et al. Parity-time-symmetric whispering-gallery microcavities. 

Nature Phys. 2014; 10: 394–398. 

15 Peng B, Ozdemir SK, Liertzer M, et al. Chiral modes and directional lasing at exceptional 

points. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016; 113: 6845–6850. 

16 Chen W, Ozdemir SK, Zhao G, Wiersig J and Yang L. Exceptional points enhance sensing in 

an optical microcavity. Nature 2017; 548: 192-196. 


17 Dong CH, He L, Xiao YF, Gaddam VR, Özdemir ŞK et al. Fabrication of high-Q polydime-

thylsiloxane optical microspheres for thermal sensing. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009; 94: 231119. 

18 Zhang J, et al. Roll up polymer/oxide/polymer nanomembranes as a hybrid optical microcav-

ity for humidity sensing. Nanoscale 2014; 6: 13646. 

19 Zhu J, Zhao G, Savukov I and Yang L. Polymer encapsulated microcavity optomechanical 

magnetometer. Sci. Rep. 2017; 7: 8896. 

20 Zhu J, et al. On-chip single nanoparticle detection and sizing by mode splitting in an ultra-

high-Q microresonator. Nat. Photon. 2010; 4: 46–49. 

21 Baaske MD and Vollmer F. Optical observation of single atomic ions interacting with plas-

monic nanorods in aqueous solution. Nat. Photon. 2016; 10, 733-739. 

22 Liang W, Ilchenko V, Eliyahu D, Dale E, Savchenkow, A et al. Whispering gallery mode 

optical gyroscope. In proceedings of 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Inertial Sensors 

and Systems, pp. 89-92, Feb. 22 (2016). 

23 Xu X, Jiang X, Zhao G, and Yang L. Phone-sized whispering-gallery microresonator sensing 

system. Opt. Express 2016; 24: 25905–25910. 

24 Monifi F, Ozdemir SK, Friedlein J, and Yang L. Encapsulation of a Fiber Taper Coupled Mi-

crotoroid Resonator in a Polymer Matrix. IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 2013; 25: 1458–1461. 

25 Zhao G, et al. Raman lasing and Fano lineshapes in a packaged fiber-coupled whispering-

gallery-mode microresonator. Science Bulletin 2017; 62: 875–878. 

26 Rezazadeh J, Moradi M and Ismail AS. Mobile wireless sensor networks overview. IJCCN 

International Journal of Computer Communications and Networks 2012; 2: 17-22. 

27 Kwon MS and Steier WH. Microring-resonator-based sensor measuring both the concentra-

tion and temperature of a solution. Opt. Express 2008; 16: 9372–9377. 

28 Liu P and Shi Y. Simultaneous measurement of refractive index and temperature using a dual 

polarization ring. Appl. Opt. 2016; 55: 3537–3541. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

Figure Captions 

 

Fig. 1. Wireless WGM sensing system. (a) Architecture of the wireless WGM sensing system. 

The light from a tunable single-mode distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) laser is used to probe a 

packaged whispering-gallery-mode sensor. The light coupled out of the sensor is sent to a photo-

detector with transmission amplifier (TIA). The ARM Cortex-M3 processor is responsible for 

controlling peripherals including laser current drive, thermo-electric cooler (TEC) controller, 

monitoring circuit and Wi-Fi unit. The sensing system is remotely controlled by an iOS app in a 

smartphone via the Wi-Fi unit. (b) Screenshot of the customized iOS app for wireless control of 

the sensing system. The system parameters, e.g., current, temperature, can be monitored and ad-

justed in real time. The transmission spectrum of the packaged sensor can also be acquired and 

analyzed in real time. (c) Photograph of the mainboard which integrates all the electronic com-

ponents shown in (a). The size of the mainboard is about 124mm × 67mm. 

 

Fig. 2. Characterization of the wireless sensing system. (a) Transmission spectrum of a pack-

aged WGM sensor with frequency spanning of 450 GHz. Multiple resonances modes with differ-

ent linewidths and polarizations can be obtained for sensing applications. (b) Transmission spec-

trum of a resonance mode (marked by a dashed box in (a)) with a Lorentzian fit. The quality fac-

tor is about 4.2×105. (c) Time trace of the linewidth of a resonance mode in the wireless sensing 

system. 

 

Fig. 3. Air temperature measurement. The wireless sensing system was deployed outdoors to 

monitor the variation of air temperature from 8:30 AM to 8:30 PM on June 18th, 2017 in St. Lou-

is, MO, USA. Red circles denote the frequency shift of the selected resonance mode versus time, 

and the blue squares are the measurements of temperature change by commercial thermometer. 

 


Fig. 4. Aerial mapping of temperature distribution. An unmanned drone was used to carry the 

wireless sensing system to measure the temperature distribution of a selected area in a city park 

of St. Louis. A commercial thermometer with Bluetooth connection was mounted together with 

the packaged sensor for comparison. (a) Photograph of an unmanned drone carrying the wireless 

sensing system (marked in the red dashed ellipse). (b) Frequency shift of the selected resonance 

mode when the drone flied in a selected loop where the starting and ending positions are marked. 

The resonance frequency at the starting position is set to be zero. The color bar represents the 

amount of frequency shift. The background image comes from Google Map. (c) Comparison of 

the measured frequency shift with the results from commercial thermometer. The increasing 

numbers denote the positions of measurements when the drone flied from the starting position to 

the ending position. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

FIGURES 

 

Fig. 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 

 


