_____________________________

a) Electronic mail:  alam@purdue.edu.

Ground sculpting to enhance vertical bifacial solar farm output

M. Ryyan Khan1, Enas Sakr2, Xingshu Sun2, Peter Bermel2, and Muhammad A. Alam2, a)

1Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, East West University, Dhaka, Bangladesh

2Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

The prospect of additional energy yield and improved reliability have increased commercial interest in bifacial solar 
modules. A number of recent publications have quantified the bifacial gain for several configurations. For example, a 
standalone, optimally-tilted bifacial panel placed over a flat ground (with 50% albedo) is expected to produce a 
bifacial energy gain of 30% (per module area). In contrast, for a panel array in a solar farm, self and mutual shading 
reduce the bifacial gain at the same tilt to 10-15% (per farm area). Bifacial gain is negligible for vertical arrays —
although the configuration is of significant interest, since it can prevent soiling. Here, we calculate the bifacial gain 
of a solar farm where vertical arrays have been placed over sculpted/patterned ground. We conclude that vertical
panels straddling (upward) triangle-shaped ground maximizes the energy output. For this optimum configuration, the 
bifacial gain can approach 50%, especially for regions with moderate to high cloudy conditions. The enhanced output, 
along with reduced soiling loss and lower cleaning cost of the ground sculpted vertical bifacial (GvBF) solar farm
could be of significant technological interest, especially in regions such as the Middle East and North Africa (MENA),
particularly susceptible to significant soiling losses. 

1. Introduction and background 

Monofacial panels are the most commonly used panel 

configuration in today’s photovoltaic (PV) industry. Recent 
trends, however, show a steady increase in the share of bifacial 
panels in the PV market, and ITRPV also predicts further 
increase in market share of bifacial PV over the next decade 
[1]. This prediction is not universally accepted, since bifacial 
PV is typically more expensive. Unless bifacial power gains
can offset additional module costs, the technology would have 
higher levelized cost of energy (LCOE).

Allowing light to be captured from both faces thereby 

creating a ‘bifacial’ panel dates back to the early 1980s [2]–[4].
Cuevas et al. [3] showed ~50% gain in bifacial output is 
possible, compared to a monofacial panel. However, this 
analysis requires a white painted ground and strategically 
placed white wall to obtain such high gains. A more recent 
detailed numerical analysis by Sun et al. [5] predicts that the 
optimally placed bifacial panel over a flat ground will have 
energy gain of only 10% for albedo of 25% (e.g., concrete). For 
artificially-treated ground with albedo 50% (e.g., white 
concrete), the bifacial gains can be 30%. These results agree 
with various independent calculations published in recent years
[6]–[10].  The bifacial gain, therefore, may not be as high as 
anticipated originally.

The analysis of large solar farms [11]–[14] based on bifacial 

panel arrays is even more complex due to mutual shading 
among the panels, as well as periodic shading on the ground
[15], [16]. Our recent work [16] showed that, for optimally 
designed farms, vertical bifacial solar farm produces 10-30% 
less energy compared to an optimum monofacial farm. 
Although tilting the bifacial module does improve the yield 
(~10%) [15], the attractive soiling-resistant property of vertical 
farm is lost. Lower soiling translates into longer cleaning 

cycles, better integrated energy yield, and lower cleaning cost.

Given the relatively small bifacial gain for vertical farms, 

one might consider resurrecting the ideas of Cuevas et al. (in 
the context of the solar farms) to improve the energy output of 
the bifacial solar farms. Recall that Cuevas et al. [3] obtained
high bifacial gains by increasing the backside reflection from a 
white vertical wall. This configuration may be viewed as a 
cleverly-designed low-concentration bifacial PV. Indeed, there 
have been several designs and studies focusing on low-
concentration conventional PV [17]–[19] and bifacial PV 
systems [20]–[22]. A recent study [22]
experimentally 

demonstrated a comparison between flat and parabolic 
reflectors for tilted bifacial panels. We should also be able to 
adapt these ideas of ground-sculpting to vertical bifacial farms. 

In this paper, we infuse the idea of low concentration PV

with vertical bifacial PV by artificially sculpting the ground to 
enhance albedo collection on the two faces of the panel. We 
have developed a model to analyze arbitrarily shaped ground 
between periodic arrays of vertical panels. The diurnal and 
seasonal variations of sun path and solar illumination are taken 
into account using our previously developed model [16]. Our 
analysis predicts that, among various configurations, ground 
mounted vertical bifacial PV with upward triangular ground 
shapes is optimal for maximizing annual energy yield. For an 
effective albedo reflectance of 𝑅𝐴~0.5, we observe that the 
designed bifacial PV farm always yields higher than a 
monofacial farm. In fact, at locations with low clearness index 
(higher diffused light), the bifacial gain is ~50%. While 
𝑅𝐴~50% can be seen for white concrete, artificially designed 
white roofing foils can have 𝑅𝐴 > 80% [23]. One must balance 
the additional gain with the additional cost of ground-sculpting
to assess the viability of the approach. 


2

2. Numerical model.

In our numerical model (see Fig. 2 for a summary), we obtain 

the irradiance information based on a NASA meteorological 
database [24]. The irradiance data and the panel array 
configuration is then used to find the light incident on the panel 
faces and the ground. Some of the light scattered from the 
ground is collected by the bifacial panel faces. An electrical 
model for the panel then calculates the energy output 
corresponding to the collected sunlight. The hourly output is 
integrated to predict the annual yield. The details of each of 
these calculation steps are discussed below.

2.1. Solar Data:

The daily average meteorological NASA data [24] is combined 
with the clear-sky model from Sandia [25] to calculate a time 
series of insolation information. For any given location on the 
world, we find minute-by-minute variation of Global 
Horizontal Irradiance (GHI or 𝐼𝐺𝐻𝐼), Direct Normal Irradiance 
(DNI or 𝐼𝑏), Diffused Horizontal Irradiance (DHI or 𝐼diff), solar 
azimuth angle 𝛾𝑆, and solar zenith angle 𝜃𝑍. More detailed 
description is provided in our prior publications [5], [16].

2.2. Panels and array configuration:

In this paper, we consider an array of vertically placed 

bifacial panels facing East-West (E-W). Conventionally, the 
ground is kept horizontal and flat. However, intuitively, we 
expect additional albedo reflection if the ground is sculpted. In 
general, the panels may be elevated over arbitrarily patterned
ground (as shown in Fig. 1 (a)). Since the vertical panel array
is periodic, the ground pattern should be periodic (and 
symmetric) as well. For example, Fig. 1(b)-(d) shows the flat 
ground, upward triangle, and downward triangle shaped 
ground between rows of panels. As we will see later, ground-
mounted (i.e., zero elevation) panels on upward triangle-
shaped ground
pattern (G2)
is
close to the optimal 

configuration. 

In early mornings and late afternoons, shadows cast by the 

sun are longer, which can create mutual shading between 
neighboring rows. Such non-uniform illumination may cause 
reverse breakdown in series-connected cells. We assume three 
bypass diodes sub-dividing the panel to minimize the adverse 
effect of non-uniform illumination [26].

2.3. Direct and diffused insolation collection (view factor 

method):

As the panels are E-W facing, it is straightforward to 

calculate the angle of incidence (AOI: 𝜃(𝐹) or 𝜃(𝐵)) between 
the direct solar beam and the front (or back) face of the panel
[16]. Assume that the panels are fixed at an elevation 𝑦0 from 
ground and arranged in array as shown in Fig. 3(a). If the 
reflection characteristics, efficiency under normally incident 
direct light, and efficiency under diffused light for front 

(𝑅(𝜃(𝐹)), 𝜂(𝐹), 𝜂diff

(𝐹)) and back surfaces are known, we can find 

the power generated per panel area at height 𝑧 as follows [16],

𝐼̂ 𝑃𝑉(𝑑𝑖𝑟)

(𝐹)
(𝑧) = [1 − 𝑅(𝜃(𝐹))]𝜂(𝐹)𝐼𝑏 cos 𝜃(𝐹) , 𝑧 > shadow
(1)

𝐼̂ 𝑃𝑉(𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓)

(𝐹)
(𝑧) = 𝜂diff

(𝐹) [𝐼diff × 𝐹𝑑𝑧−𝑠𝑘𝑦]
(2)

Here, 𝐹𝑑𝑧−𝑠𝑘𝑦 is the view factor from a point 𝑧 on the panel to 
the unobstructed part of the sky. The power output contribution 
from direct and diffused sunlight does not depend on the panel 
to ground distance, nor the shape or reflectivity of the ground 
(assuming that the ground is shaped such that it does not cast 
shadows on the panels).

In general, a view factor 𝐹𝐴−𝐵 represents the fraction of 

radiation collected by surface 𝐵 emitted from surface 𝐴. The 
expressions for the view factors used in this paper are 
straightforward and can be found in prior literature or textbooks
[16], [27].

Fig. 1: East-West facing vertical bifacial panel array are shown. (a) 
shows the general configuration with vertical panel array elevated 
above arbitrarily shaped periodic ground pattern. (b)-(d) shows the flat 
ground (G1), upward triangle (G2), and downward triangle (G3) 
shaped ground between the vertical panels, respectively. (e) 
Collection of albedo as a fraction of normally incident direct light is 
compared for the different ground shapes. 

(G3)

(G2)

(G2)

(G3)

(G1)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(e)

(d)

E
W


3

2.4. Albedo from diffused sunlight (view factor method):

To calculate the albedo collection from the diffused sunlight, 

we first find the amount of diffused sunlight collected on the 
sculpted ground under the PV array configuration. Then we can 
assume the light reflected by the ground as a source of light to 
be collected by the panels. The amount of diffuse illumination 
hitting segment Δ𝑠 on the sculpted ground can be written as:

𝐼Gnd:diff(𝑠) = 𝐼diff × 𝐹Δs−sky(𝑠)
(3)

Here, 𝐹Δs−sky(𝑠) is the view factor from the segment Δ𝑠 at 

position 𝑠 on the ground to the unobstructed part of the sky. We 
can now write the corresponding albedo collection on the 
panels (front face) as follows:

𝐼̂ 𝑃𝑉(𝐴𝑙𝑏:𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓)

(𝐹)
(𝑧) = 𝜂diff

(𝐹) ∑ [𝑅𝐴 𝐼Gnd:diff(𝑠)Δ𝑠 𝐹𝑑𝑧−Δ𝑠

(𝐹)
]

𝑠

(4)

Here, 𝐹𝑑𝑧−Δ𝑠

(𝐹)
is the view factor from position 𝑧 on the panel to 

the ground segment. The contribution from adjacent periods in 
the array is small; we therefore only consider the collection of 
light from ground to panels within the relevant period. 

2.5. Albedo from direct sunlight (radiosity method):

The configuration shown in Fig. 3(a) can in general have any 

arbitrarily sculpted ground—however, we restrict our analysis 
to cases when the sculpted ground does not cast any additional 
shadow on panels. Diffuse reflection from ground can be 
accounted for using view factor analysis. However, in presence 
of multiple diffuse surfaces, multiple reflections can occur. 
These multiple reflections can be accounted for using ray 
tracing [27]. The radiosity method is used to trace diffuse 
reflections from multiple surfaces in an enclosure. This 
technique has its basis in computing heat transfer between 
diffuse surfaces in an enclosure [27] as well as rendering 
images in computer graphics [28]. Here, we provide a brief 
summary of the method. The radiosity is defined as the total 
energy leaving a surface area with diffuse reflection property.  
In an enclosure, the radiosity 𝑏𝑖 of an element of index 𝑖 is 
computed using the following equation:

𝑏𝑖 = ∑ 𝜌𝑗𝑏𝑗𝐹𝑗𝑖

𝑗

+ 𝑒𝑖,
(5)

where 𝜌𝑗 is the diffuse reflection of each element. In (5), the 
initial reflection from an element of index 𝑖 is 𝑒𝑖 = 𝜌𝑖𝐻𝑖, where 
𝐻𝑖 is the initial solar irradiation received on the ground 
element. The view factor between surface elements 𝐹𝑗𝑖
accounts for multiple reflections between surfaces enclosed. 

In an enclosure with 𝑁 surface elements, (5) can be translated 

into the matrix equation

𝐵 = (𝑰 − 𝜌𝑭)−1𝐸,
(6)

where 𝐵𝑇 = [𝑏1 𝑏2 ⋯ 𝑏𝑁], 𝐸𝑇 = [𝑒1 𝑒2 ⋯ 𝑒𝑁]. The view 
factor matrix 𝑭 contains the mutual view factors between 
elements involved in the enclosure, with self-view factors 𝐹𝑖𝑖 =
0, since all the elements are assumed to be flat. 

It is worth mentioning that the radiosity computation in its 

form in (6) is computationally expensive in general. However, 
for the problem in hand, there exist a few number of involved 

Fig. 2: Calculation flow for determining the output of ground sculpted vertical bifacial PV (GvBF) farm. 


4

surfaces, each can be decomposed into a finite number of 
elements. The accuracy of the solution is well-maintained with 
a minimal number of segments, without the need to use the 
progressive refinement approach [29]. 

For the problem of an array of periodic vertical solar panels 

mounted on or elevated above the ground, we assume that the 
ground and the panels are infinitely extended in one direction. 
Thus, the corresponding view factors can be simply computed 
using the crossed-strings method [27]. A single panel is 
assigned a single index and zero reflectivity while the ground 
is decomposed into a number of segments having an albedo 
reflectivity 𝑅. Hence, the normalized fractional power received 
on a single panel due to direct albedo reflection is the first 
element of the vector 𝑃 = 𝑭𝐵. The calculation is performed 
for both the front and back surfaces of the panel. Hence, the 
power generated by reflected direct sunlight can be written as:

𝐼̂ 𝑃𝑉(𝐴𝑙𝑏:𝑑𝑖𝑟)

(𝐹)
(𝑧) = 𝜂diff

(𝐹) [𝐼dir × 𝑃(1)].
(7)

In principle, elevated panels above the ground surface can 

receive albedo light reflection from all exposed points on the 
ground. However, the view factors between a given panel and 
a ground segment will decrease considerably with the 
separation distance between them [30]. Hence, a good first 
order approximation is to consider two periods of the full array. 
This arrangement is depicted in the bottom left of Fig. 2.

The shadow of the panel on the ground changes with the solar 

elevation angle. Over the course of the day, only the portions 
of the ground that are exposed to sunlight are contributing to 
direct albedo reflection. In some situations, an adjacent panel 
or a sculpted ground segment can block a portion of the light 
reflected by the ground, thus reducing the view factor between 
ground segments and the panel. These situations are computed 
carefully in the model.  

Similar calculations will result in the illumination collection 

components for the back face as well. All the light collection 
components by the panel faces are now used to estimate hourly 
panel output (assuming 3-bypass diode per panel) based on the 
analytical approach in Ref. [26]. Instead of individual panel 
output, we focus on the farm yield (i.e., output per land area). 
The diurnal results are integrated to obtain monthly and annual 
farm yield.  

The model described above can calculate the albedo light 

collection from arbitrarily curved surface. The curved surface 
is of course symmetric around the center of the period due to 
the vertical panel array configuration. Therefore, as a first order 
estimate, using Hottel’s crossed string rule [27], we see that the 
curved surface can be replaced by two straight lines. For 
example, a periodic upward hemispherical ground pattern 
would be equivalent to the upward triangular ground pattern. 
That is why we will focus on triangular ground shapes for the 
rest of the paper.

3. Physical understanding

There are three questions that we want to answer: (i) Is there 

an optimum ground pattern? (ii) Given the pattern, what is the 
optimum period for the panel array? (iii) What improvement, if 
any, can we expect from the optimized panel array?

Consider the three ground patterns shown in Fig. 1(a)-(c): the 

flat ground, upward triangle, and downward triangle, labeled 
G1, G2, and G3, respectively. For a condition when the sun is 
exactly normal to the ground (e.g., noon at the equator), there 
is no shading on the ground from the direct light. In such a 
scenario, the albedo light collection as a fraction of the direct 
light is shown for various albedo values 𝑅𝐴. As expected, for 
the flat ground G1, the fractional albedo collection increases 
linearly with 𝑅𝐴. At 𝑅𝐴 = 1, the light collection is limited by 
the view factors from ground to sky, and panel face to ground. 
For the downward triangle G3, the fractional albedo collection 
is worse than G1 for 𝑅𝐴 < 1. This is because, a part of the light 
bounces between the ground facing each other—there is of 
course some loss at each bounce for 𝑅𝐴 < 1. Finally, the 
upward triangle G2 is shaped to reflect the light primarily 
towards the panel faces, and as seen in Fig. 1(d), G2 shows
> 15% increase in fractional albedo collection compared to the 
trivial flat ground G1.

Fig. 3: (a) Vertical bifacial panel array placed elevated 𝑦0 from an 
upward triangular ground. (b) Daily yield (pear land area) of the solar 
farm (with 𝑦0 = 0) as a function of ground triangle height 𝑟 and array 
period 𝑝. (c) Daily yield (per land area) is shown as a function of the 
panel elevation 𝑦0. The values of 𝑟 and period 𝑝 are co-optimized at 
each 𝑦0. The calculations are for Washington DC (Sept. 22). 

𝑦0

𝑟 = 0

𝑟 =    

𝑟 =    

(a)

(b)

(c)


5

Now that we know we want to choose the up-triangle ground 

shape for better output, we need to optimize the ‘ground 
sculpted vertical bifacial PV farm’ design. Given a specific 
panel size (width  = 1 m), the parameters that define this PV 
farm are: period of panel array 𝑝, panel elevation from ground 
𝑦0, and the height of the ground triangle 𝑟 as shown in Fig. 3(a). 

Fig. 3(b) shows the integrated output of a given day (Sep. 22) 

in Washington DC for 𝑦0 = 0. The line marked 𝑟 = 0
corresponds to the conventional flat ground consistent with our 
prior work [16]. The daily yield per land area has an optimum 
period 𝑝. For small 𝑝, mutual shading quickly degrades the 
output. And, at larger 𝑝, the panels miss a large fraction of light 
hitting the ground.

Next, as we increase the height 𝑟 of the triangular ground, 

essentially tilting the ground towards the panel, thereby 
steering the albedo light mostly towards the panel faces. As a 
result, we observe that the output increases as we increase 𝑟. 
However, if 𝑟 is increased beyond (h/2), the ground would cast 
a shadow on the panels and the output will reduce dramatically.
Therefore, for ground mounted panels (i.e., 𝑦0 = 0), the 
triangular ground height can at most be half the panel size, i.e., 
𝑟 =    —and, as discussed above, this will also result in the 
highest possible output with optimized period 𝑝. In general, we 
would choose 𝑟 = 𝑦0 +    for panels fixed at elevation 𝑦0.

Finally, we need to optimize 𝑦0. As we increase 𝑦0, the 

‘viewing angle’, i.e., view factor between a panel face and the 
illuminated part of the ground reduces, thereby reducing the 
albedo collection. Moreover, with increasing 𝑦0, larger portion 
of the ground is exposed to each other. This increases light 
scattering in between the ground faces (similar to the ground 
shape G3) and increases scattering loss on the ground. We can 
therefore conclude that, ground mounting (𝑦0 = 0) the panels 
are the best choice for this configuration. On the other hand, as 
seen in literature [6], [5], the standalone tilted bifacial panels 
collect more albedo light with increased 𝑦0. The monotonic 
decrease in output with 𝑦0 is specific to vertical bifacial panel 
array. Our explanation is also supported by a detailed 
numerical analysis shown in Fig. 3(c), indicating monotonous 
decrease in daily yield as 𝑦0 is increased. In this plot (𝑝, 𝑟)-pair 
is optimally chosen for each value of 𝑦0.

To summarize, we can set 𝑦0 = 0, 𝑟 =    and then 

optimize period 𝑝 to maximize yearly yield. The optimum 
value of 𝑝 will depend on the location on earth and the weather 
(i.e., clearness index).

4. Global energy yield 

Let us now focus specifically on various locations on earth 

at latitude  0∘N. At a given latitude, sunlight travels through 
the same thickness of atmosphere (air mass). This results in the 
same terrestrial insolation under a clear sky assumption. 
However, as the sky clearness is different at various longitudes, 
we observe variation in GHI, DNI, and DHI, even at same 
latitude. We compare the yearly yield of ground sculpted 

vertical bifacial PV farm (GvBF), conventional vertical bifacial 
PV farm (vBF), and optimally tilted monofacial PV farm in 
Fig. 4. We assume an extra 10% loss in output due to soiling 
for the tilted monofacial panels; in practice, the soiling loss can 
be considerably higher [31], [32]. 

The integrated annual yield of the various PV farms 

(optimized) are shown in Fig. 4(c). In all cases, output increases 
with annual mean clearness index 𝑘𝑇𝐴 as the input GHI is high
at higher 𝑘𝑇𝐴. For monofacial PV, we assume 10% output 
penalty due to higher soiling compared to vertical panels. There
is a 15% or more loss in output of vBF with typical ground 
albedo reflection 𝑅𝐴 = 0.3 (the earth’s average albedo) 
compared to the monofacial PV farm. Even if the albedo is 
increased to 𝑅𝐴 = 0.5 by covering the ground with artificial 
material, the vBF cannot exceed or match the monofacial farm.

The GvBF (with 𝑅𝐴 = 0.5) shows exceptional advantage 

over vBF as well as monofacial farm. As shown in Fig. 4(b), 
the GvBF shows up to 50% gain in output compared to 
monofacial farm, especially in cloudy regions (low 𝑘𝑇𝐴). A 
closer observation of earth’s map and Fig. 4(a) indicates that 
𝑘𝑇𝐴 > 0.6 occurs primarily over oceans. Therefore, at all 
locations of interest (i.e., land), GvBF yields higher output than 
monofacial farms.

Fig. 4: Annual yield of various monofacial and bifacial PV farm 
configurations as a function of clearness index (at latitude  0∘N) are
shown in (c). The vBF solar farms with flat ground and 𝑅𝐴 = 0.3 and 
0.5 are indicated as vBF-1 and vBF-2, respectively. The output gain 
observed in GvBF compared to other configurations are shown in (b). 
(a) shows the longitude locations corresponding to the clearness index 
values at latitude  0∘N. 

The ground pattern for the GvBF solar farm would be 

artificially sculpted, and the ground material may not 

GvBF vs. mono

GvBF vs. vBF-1

(a)

(b)

(c)


6

necessarily be natural (grass or sand).  Although we choose 
𝑅𝐴 = 0.5 for our artificial material, un-weathered white 
roofing membranes may have 𝑅𝐴~0.88 [23]. With time, this 
reflectance would decrease; however, 𝑅𝐴 = 0.5 could still be a 
conservative estimate with occasional maintenance [23].

5. Summary

In this work, we presented a numerical model for vertical 

bifacial panel arrays elevated to a specified height upon a 
strategically patterned ground. The model was applied to study 
the optimum elevation and ground shape for maximum annual 
yield. We predict that the optimum condition is achieved when 
the vertical panels of size  are placed on the ground (no 
elevation) with the ground sculpted to an upward triangle 
pattern with height    . Using a ground material designed to 
have an effective albedo reflection 𝑅𝐴 = 0.5, the optimal 
ground sculpted vertical bifacial PV farm (GvBF) yields more 
energy than the monofacial farm. In fact, compared to the 
optimum monofacial farm, the GvBF has 50% more annual 
energy output in regions with somewhat cloudy sky (𝑘𝑇𝐴 <
0. 5).

Here, we have focused on vertical bifacial panel arrays,

which can have much less soiling than tilted monofacial panels. 
In our analysis, we have assumed an extra 10% soiling loss for 
the tilted monofacial panels. This value is not absolute for all 
practical situations—it will vary with the local soiling rate as 
well as the cleaning cycle—and can be much worse. In the end, 
the integrated energy output along with bifacial versus 
monofacial panel costs, and the cleaning costs (integrated over 
the farm lifetime) will define the difference in the levelized cost 
of energy (LCOE). In our studies of energy yields, we found
that the proposed GvBF configuration will have significant 
advantages over the conventional monofacial farms, especially,
but not only, in moderately to highly-cloudy locations.   

Acknowledgement

We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Chris Deline from NREL, 

and Dr. Joshua S. Stein and Dr. Cliff Hansen from Sandia 
National Laboratories for helpful discussions. This work was 
partly supported by the National Science Foundation under 
Grant No. #1724728, and the Solar Energy Research Institute 
for India and the U.S. (SERIIUS) funded jointly by the U.S. 
Department of Energy subcontract DE AC36-08G028308 and 
the Government of India subcontract IUSSTF/JCERDC-
SERIIUS/2012. Support was also provided by the National 
Science Foundation Award EEC 1454315 – CAREER: 
Thermophotonics for Efficient Harvesting of Waste Heat as 
Electricity, the Department of Energy, under DOE Cooperative 
Agreement No. DE-EE0004946 (PVMI Bay Area PV 
Consortium), and the NCN-NEEDS program under Contract 
1227020-EEC.

References

[1]
“International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic Results 
2015, Seventh edition,” ITRPV, Oct. 2016.

[2]
A. Luque, A. Cuevas, and J. M. Ruiz, “Double-sided n+-p-n+ 
solar cell for bifacial concentration,” Sol. Cells, vol. 2, no. 2, 
pp. 151–166, Oct. 1980.

[3]
A. Cuevas, A. Luque, J. Eguren, and J. del Alamo, “50 Per cent 
more output power from an albedo-collecting flat panel using 
bifacial solar cells,” Sol. Energy, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 419–420, 
1982.

[4]
A. Luque, E. Lorenzo, G. Sala, and S. López-Romero, 
“Diffusing reflectors for bifacial photovoltaic panels,” Sol. 
Cells, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 277–292, Jan. 1985.

[5]
X. Sun, M. R. Khan, C. Deline, and M. A. Alam, “Optimization 
and performance of bifacial solar modules: A global 
perspective,” Appl. Energy, vol. 212, pp. 1601–1610, Feb. 
2018.

[6]
U. A. Yusufoglu, T. M. Pletzer, L. J. Koduvelikulathu, C. 
Comparotto, R. Kopecek, and H. Kurz, “Analysis of the Annual 
Performance of Bifacial Modules and Optimization Methods,” 
IEEE J. Photovolt., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 320–328, Jan. 2015.

[7]
J. Appelbaum and A. Aronescu, “View factors of photovoltaic 
collectors on Roof Tops,” J. Renew. Sustain. Energy, vol. 8, no. 
2, p. 025302, Mar. 2016.

[8]
G. J. M. Janssen, B. B. Van Aken, A. J. Carr, and A. A. Mewe, 
“Outdoor Performance of Bifacial Modules by Measurements 
and Modelling,” Energy Procedia, vol. 77, pp. 364–373, Aug. 
2015.

[9]
M. Lave, J. S. Stein, and L. Burnham, “Performance Results for 
the Prism Solar Installation at the New Mexico Regional Test 
Center: Field Data from February 15 - August 15, 2016,” 
Sandia National Laboratories., Albuquerque, NM, SAND2016-
9253, 2016.

[10] S. Guo, T. M. Walsh, and M. Peters, “Vertically mounted 

bifacial photovoltaic modules: A global analysis,” Energy, vol. 
61, pp. 447–454, Nov. 2013.

[11] D. Passias and B. Källbäck, “Shading effects in rows of solar 

cell panels,” Sol. Cells, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 281–291, Apr. 1984.

[12] J. Bany and J. Appelbaum, “The effect of shading on the design 

of a field of solar collectors,” Sol. Cells, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 201–
228, Apr. 1987.

[13] N. Y. Fathi and A. Samer, “View Factors of Flat Solar 

Collectors Array in Flat, Inclined, and Step-Like Solar Fields,” 
J. Sol. Energy Eng., vol. 138, no. 6, pp. 061005-061005–8, Sep. 
2016.

[14] J. Appelbaum, “View Factors to Grounds of Photovoltaic 

Collectors,” J. Sol. Energy Eng., vol. 138, no. 6, pp. 064501-
064501–6, Sep. 2016.

[15] J. Appelbaum, “Bifacial photovoltaic panels field,” Renew. 

Energy, vol. 85, pp. 338–343, Jan. 2016.

[16] M. R. Khan, A. Hanna, X. Sun, and M. A. Alam, “Vertical 

bifacial solar farms: Physics, design, and global optimization,” 
Appl. Energy, vol. 206, no. Supplement C, pp. 240–248, Nov. 
2017.

[17] S. Nann, “Potentials for tracking photovoltaic systems and V-

troughs in moderate climates,” Sol. Energy, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 
385–393, Jan. 1990.

[18] V. Poulek and M. Libra, “A new low-cost tracking ridge 

concentrator,” Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 
199–202, Mar. 2000.

[19] N. Sarmah and T. K. Mallick, “Design, fabrication and outdoor 

performance analysis of a low concentrating photovoltaic 
system,” Sol. Energy, vol. 112, pp. 361–372, Feb. 2015.


7

[20] A. W. Finkl, “Solar energy concentrator apparatus for bifacial 

photovoltaic cells,” US5538563 A, 23-Jul-1996.

[21] V. Poulek, A. Khudysh, and M. Libra, “Innovative low 

concentration PV systems with bifacial solar panels,” Sol. 
Energy, vol. 120, pp. 113–116, Oct. 2015.

[22] H. Nussbaumer et al., “Influence of Low Concentration on the 

Energy Harvest of PV Systems Using Bifacial Modules,” WIP, 
2016.

[23] “Calculating the additional energy yield of bifacial solar 

modules,” SolarWorld, White paper, 2016.

[24] POWER, “Surface meteorology and Solar Energy: A renewable 

energy resource web site   (release 6.0),” 2017. [Online]. 
Available: https://eosweb.larc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/sse/sse.cgi? 
[Accessed: 06-Jan-2017].

[25] PV Performance Modeling Collaborative | An Industry and 

National Laboratory collaborative to improve Photovoltaic 
Performance Modeling. 2016.

[26] C. Deline, A. Dobos, S. Janzou, J. Meydbray, and M. Donovan, 

“A simplified model of uniform shading in large photovoltaic 
arrays,” Sol. Energy, vol. 96, pp. 274–282, Oct. 2013.

[27] M. F. Modest, Radiative heat transfer, Third Edition. New 

York: Academic Press, 2013.

[28] C. M. Goral, K. E. Torrance, D. P. Greenberg, and B. Battaile, 

“Modeling the Interaction of Light Between Diffuse Surfaces,” 
SIGGRAPH Comput Graph, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 213–222, Jan. 
1984.

[29] M. F. Cohen, S. E. Chen, J. R. Wallace, and D. P. Greenberg, 

“A progressive refinement approach to fast radiosity image 
generation,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph., vol. 22, no. 4, 
pp. 75–84, 1988.

[30] J. Appelbaum, “Current mismatch in PV panels resulting from 

different locations of cells in the panel,” Sol. Energy, vol. 126, 
no. Supplement C, pp. 264–275, 2016.

[31] T. Sarver, A. Al-Qaraghuli, and L. L. Kazmerski, “A 

comprehensive review of the impact of dust on the use of solar 
energy: History, investigations, results, literature, and 
mitigation approaches,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 22, 
pp. 698–733, Jun. 2013.

[32] J. J. John, V. Rajasekar, S. Boppana, S. Chattopadhyay, A. 

Kottantharayil, and G. TamizhMani, “Quantification and 
Modeling of Spectral and Angular Losses of Naturally Soiled 
PV Modules,” IEEE J. Photovolt., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 1727–1734, 
Nov. 2015.


