 
 

1 

 

Tunneling spectroscopy of gate-induced superconductivity in MoS2 

Davide Costanzo1 *, Haijing Zhang1 *, Bojja Aditya Reddy1, Helmuth Berger2 and Alberto F. 

Morpurgo1 **. 

1DQMP and GAP, Université de Genève, 24 quai Ernest Ansermet, Geneva CH-1211, Switzerland. 

2Institut de Physique de la Matière Complexe, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne CH-

1015, Switzerland. 

 

*These two authors contributed equally to this work 

 

**e-mail: alberto.morpurgo@unige.ch 

The ability to gate-induce superconductivity by electrostatic charge accumulation is a 

recent breakthrough in physics and nano-electronics. With the exception of LaAlO3/SrTiO3 

interfaces, experiments on gate-induced superconductors have been largely confined to 

resistance 
measurements, 
which 
provide 
very 
limited 
information 
about 
the 

superconducting state. Here, we explore gate-induced superconductivity in MoS2 by 

performing tunneling spectroscopy to determine the energy-dependent density of states 

(DOS) for different levels of electron density n. In the superconducting state, the DOS is 

strongly suppressed at energy smaller than the gap, , which is maximum (  ~ 2 meV) for 

n of ~ 1014 cm-2 and decreases monotonously for larger n. A perpendicular magnetic field B 

generates states at E <  that fill the gap, but a 20% DOS suppression of superconducting 

origin unexpectedly persists much above the transport critical field. Conversely, an in-

plane field up to 10 T leaves the DOS entirely unchanged. Our measurements exclude that 

the superconducting state in MoS2 is fully gapped and reveal the presence of a DOS that 


 
 

2 

 

vanishes linearly with energy, the explanation of which requires going beyond a 

conventional, purely phonon-driven Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer mechanism. 

 

The observation of a transition to a zero-resistance state signals the occurrence of 

superconductivity but provides virtually no information about the microscopic nature of the 

superconducting state, whose determination is complex and requires the combination of multiple 

experimental probes. Among these, the use of tunneling spectroscopy to probe the energy-

dependent density of states (DOS) has traditionally played a central role. For instance, shortly 

after the appearance of the BCS paper on superconductivity1, Giaever’s measurements on Al, Sn 

and In tunnel junctions2 3 gave a clear experimental validation of the theory. Analogous 

experiments4 5 on Pb and Nb tunnel junctions demonstrated that the attractive interaction leading 

to electron pairing is phonon-mediated, and enabled the quantitative determination of the 

electron-phonon coupling strength6. More recently, tunneling spectroscopy has been 

systematically performed on high-Tc transition metal oxides7 and iron pnictides8 9 to explore 

their unconventional non s-wave nature. Here, we apply tunneling spectroscopy to investigate 

gate-induced superconductivity in the electron accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2 10.  

 

Starting with LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces11 12, the number of recently discovered material systems 

that allow superconductivity to be gate-induced has been steadily increasing10 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20. 

Several of these systems are van der Waals bonded layered compounds in which 

superconductivity has been induced using ionic liquid gated transistors10 14 16 17 18 19 20, among 

which MoS2 has attracted particular attention (see Fig. 1a). For instance, superconductivity 


 
 

3 

 

persists even when the MoS2 thickness is reduced down to an individual monolayer19 and is 

extremely robust against the application of an in-plane magnetic field21 22. Also, irrespective of 

the MoS2 thickness, superconductivity always occurs in the two-dimensional regime because the 

depth of the accumulation layer is limited by the electrostatic screening length ~ 1 nm21 22. 

However, no tunneling experiments have been performed so far because the accumulation layer 

is buried between the liquid gate and the MoS2 crystal and is difficult to access with a tunnel-

coupled probe. 

 

Heterostructure devices for tunneling spectroscopy 

 
To perform tunneling spectroscopy of gate-induced superconductivity, we exploit nano-

fabricated devices based on van der Waals heterostructures23, in the configuration schematically 

illustrated in Fig. 1b. The devices employ a graphene multilayer (typically 6-8 layer thick) as 

tunneling electrode, with the exfoliated MoS2 crystals (typically 6-10 layer thick) both hosting 

the gate-induced accumulation layer and acting as tunnel barrier. The ionic liquid covers the 

MoS2 multilayer as well as the gate consisting of a large area metallic pad, so that a positive gate 

bias results in the accumulation of electrons onto the MoS2 top surface. Under this condition, the 

band profile across the thickness of the MoS2 multilayer is schematically shown in Fig. 1c.  

Different device configurations have been tested –by covering the edges of MoS2 with a PMMA 

layer (Fig. 1d top) or leaving them exposed (Fig. 1d bottom)– to exclude that edge effects 

determine transport from the graphene multilayer to the accumulation layer (see supplementary 

information for more details).  

 


 
 

4 

 

The key advantage of the configuration shown in Fig. 1b is that it allows us to measure in-plane 

transport and to extract the DOS on a same device. The energy-resolved DOS is obtained from 

the voltage-dependent differential conductance measured by biasing one of the graphene strips 

relative to a contact attached to the top of the MoS2 layer. At low-temperature, the current 

injected “vertically” from a graphene electrode into the accumulation layer at the surface of 

MoS2 is carried by electrons tunneling through the un-doped part of the MoS2 multilayer (see 

Fig. 1c). That MoS2 multilayers can act as reliable tunnel barriers has been shown recently24, and 

here it is indicated by the temperature dependence of both the non-linear I-V curves (Fig. 1e) and 

of the zero-bias differential resistance (Fig. 1f). As T is lowered from room temperature, these 

quantities initially exhibit a thermally activated dependence (due to thermally assisted transport), 

followed by a saturation as T is decreased below ~70 K, confirming that at low temperature 

“vertical” transport is dominated by tunneling. In all devices studied saturation was seen to 

reproducibly occur between 60 and 100 K; the observed reproducibility suggests that this value 

is determined by the alignment of the Fermi level in the accumulation layer and the bottom of the 

conduction band in the undoped part of MoS2. 

 

Measuring the DOS in the superconducting state 

At the lowest temperature of our measurements (either 1.5 K or 250 mK, depending on the 

cryostat used), the “vertical” differential conductance exhibits a pronounced low-energy 

suppression, whose magnitude decreases as the temperature is increased, and disappears for 

𝑇  𝑇𝑐
 >
~
, the critical temperature determined by the resistive transition (defined as the temperature 

for which the measured resistance is 95% of the normal state value). This behavior, originating 

from the suppressed DOS in the superconducting state, is illustrated in Fig. 2 with data from two 


 
 

5 

 

devices gate-biased at different values of electron density n (inferred from Hall resistance 

measurements). Specifically, Fig. 2a shows the temperature dependence of the in-plane 

resistance at n = 1.5·1014 cm-2 from which Tc  is determined to be approximately 10 K, and Fig. 

2b shows the normalized bias-dependent tunneling conductance recorded for different values of 

𝑇 ≤ 10 𝐾 (the tunneling conductance is normalized by dividing it by the tunneling conductance 

measured at T just above Tc –see the inset of Fig. 2a and 2c). Analogous measurements 

performed at n = 5.1·1014 cm-2, shown in Fig. 2c and d, exhibit a virtually identical behavior, 

albeit with Tc ≅ 3.5 K.   

 

We measured the tunneling conductance of 5 devices cooled down multiple times with different 

applied gate voltage, to investigate accumulation layers with electron density in the range 

between n ~ 1·1014 cm-2 and n ~ 5·1014 cm-2. The measurements exhibit common features, 

already visible in Fig. 2b and d. The low-energy suppression in the DOS –observed in all devices 

investigated –is not complete and its energy dependence is not as pronounced as it would be 

expected from a fully gapped system. “Side-lobes” are typically seen at finite bias (at ~1.8 mV in 

Fig. 2b and ~0.3 mV in Fig. 2d), with an amplitude much less pronounced than the coherence 

peaks expected for conventional s-wave superconductors. In a few cases a double lobe structure 

was seen (as in Fig. 2d). Finally, any time measurements were performed at 𝑇  <  

~ 0.2 𝑇𝑐, kinks at 

sub-gap energy, symmetric around zero bias, could be clearly identified, as the ones pointed to 

by the purple arrows in Fig. 2b and 2d.  

 


 
 

6 

 

These features result from a systematic behavior that we identify by plotting quantities measured 

on devices gate-biased at different values of electron density n, as a function of reduced variables 

(eV/ and T/Tc). Fig. 3a shows the normalized tunneling conductance of devices covering the full 

range of electron densities, measured at T/Tc ≅ 0.2 (since Tc is different for different devices, the 

actual value of T/Tc may deviate from 0.2 by about 10-15%). It is clearly apparent that for eV/ 

≅ 1 large sample-to-sample fluctuations are present, with the amplitude of the “lobes” that can 

vary from very pronounced to nearly absent. For eV/ < 0.5, however, all curves exhibit an 

approximately linear dependence and virtually collapse on top of each other. Such a systematic 

low-bias behavior insensitive to the electron density n is confirmed by the V =0 V differential 

conductance plotted as a function of T/Tc (see Fig. 3b). Data points measured at all values of 

electron density follow a common trend, which for small T/Tc is linear, with the differential 

conductance extrapolating to zero for T/Tc → 0.    

 

The observed systematic trends rule out that the low-energy (i.e., 𝐸 < 0.5 ∆)   tunneling 

conductance is strongly affected by inhomogeneity in electron density, whose presence is 

virtually unavoidable in ionic liquid gated transistor at low temperature18 19. Indeed, 

measurements of the Hall resistance between different pairs of contacts on a same device show 

that the inhomogeneity in electron density is strongly device-dependent (see supplementary 

information). Therefore, any physical quantity whose behavior is critically determined by this 

inhomogeneity should also exhibit strong sample-to-sample fluctuations. Fig. 3a shows that 

sample-to-sample fluctuations affect the shape of the differential conductance for eV ~  (how 

pronounced the side lobes are, or whether one or two lobes are seen, depends on the sample) but 

not at low-bias. This conclusion is further supported by the common trend followed by  the V = 0 


 
 

7 

 

tunneling conductance of different devices shown in Fig. 3b, which confirms that charge density 

inhomogeneity does not have a dominant influence on the measured low-energy DOS. Finally, 

note that finding that the tunneling conductance extrapolates to zero for T/Tc → 0 (see Fig. 3b) 

implies that the vast majority of MoS2 is superconducting. This is an important conclusion 

because the non-vanishing resistance that is seen in some of the devices for T << Tc (see, e.g., 

Fig. 2c) may be taken as an indication that a large fraction of the accumulation layer remains in 

the normal state. The large suppression in the low-temperature tunneling conductance seen in 

Fig. 3b directly shows that this is not the case (see supplementary information for a more 

detailed discussion).  

 

Fig. 3c shows the evolution of Tc and with increasing n. The dependence of Tc extracted from 

the resistive transitions connects smoothly with data reported earlier by Iwasa’s group10, which 

reached up to n =1.5·1014 cm-2, and extends the study of gate-induced superconductivity to n > 

5·1014 cm-2. In this yet unexplored regime Tc decreases upon increasing electron density, indeed 

forming a well-defined dome. Finding a smooth connection with Iwasa’s group data is 

noteworthy, because it demonstrates quantitative consistency of independent observations of a 

same phenomenon, something that had not yet been reported for ionic liquid gated 

superconductivity (note also that finding a systematic evolution of Tc with n implies again that it 

is the average density that determines the critical temperature, and not the density fluctuations 

due to the inhomogeneity present in ionic liquid gated devices, consistently with the 

considerations made above). From the differential conductance we also extract Tc (which we 

define as the temperature at which a V = 0 suppression becomes visible beyond the noise) and 

the gap . Considering that the precise value of Tc depends somewhat on the definition used, the 


 
 

8 

 

agreement between the Tc values extracted from the differential conductance and from the 

resistive transitions is satisfactory, and shows the consistency of transport and tunneling data. 

The dependence of  on n follows that of Tc, albeit with larger fluctuations (see Fig. 3c - right 

axis). This is because the differential conductance at larger bias (i.e., eV ~ ), from which the 

value of  is obtained, is more strongly affected by inhomogeneity in electron density (see Fig. 

3a).  

 

Influence of magnetic field 

 

We discuss the evolution of the tunneling conductance in a magnetic field B, starting from the 

case of field applied perpendicularly to the MoS2 surface. The tunneling conductance of two 

different devices measured at increasing values of B is shown in Fig. 4a –with Fig. 4b showing 

the corresponding resistive transition– and Fig. 4c (the critical temperature and electron density 

for the two devices are respectively Tc ~10 K with n = 1.5 · 1014 cm-2, and Tc ~ 9 K with n = 1.8 

· 1014 cm-2). In the Tc ~ 10 K device, the magnetic field mainly causes the appearance of low-

energy states, affecting weakly the energy scale below which the DOS is suppressed –i.e., the 

gap (see Fig. 4a). We ascribe this effect to the vortices created in the superconductor, binding 

states at sub-gap energy 25. In the second device with lower Tc, the generation of low-energy 

states is accompanied by a more apparent gap suppression (see Fig. 4c). Irrespective of these 

details, a large suppression in the low-energy DOS persists in both cases well above the critical 

magnetic field inferred from the resistive transition (Bc, the value of B for which the resistance is 

95% of the value measured at high field). For instance, for the Tc ~10K device, the critical 

magnetic field extracted from the resistive transition is approximately 9 T, but a large 


 
 

9 

 

suppression in the low-bias tunneling conductance is still clearly visible at the largest field used 

in these measurements, B = 10 T. For the Tc ~ 9 K device, Bc is approximately 7 T, and a 

suppression in the low-energy tunneling conductance is still clearly seen at 14 T. The large-B 

suppression in the DOS disappears when T is raised above Tc (see Fig. 4d), demonstrating that 

the phenomenon is of superconducting origin. 

 

This unexpected behavior was observed in all devices investigated. The results are summarized 

in Fig. 4e by the plot of the relative suppression in the DOS as a function of B/Bc, which shows 

that a ~20% effect persists even when B≫Bc. In the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field, 

therefore, a resistive state occurs in which superconducting correlations are nevertheless still 

present. This directly implies that the magnetic field at which the resistive transition occurs does 

not correspond to the upper critical field Hc2 beyond which superconductivity is completely 

suppressed, as assumed in past work10 21 22. It follows that the value of superconducting 

coherence length 𝜉 extracted by interpreting the data using Ginzburg-Landau theory26 –i.e., the 

relation 𝐻𝑐2 =

Φ0
2𝜋𝜉2 – is not correct. If this relation is valid at all, our data would indicate that 𝜉 is 

much shorter than anticipated. However, since our observations are not expected within a 

conventional Ginzburg-Landau scheme, it will be essential to first understand the microscopic 

nature of the observed phenomenon –with coexisting finite resistivity and superconducting 

correlations– before making any quantitative estimate. Examples of possible scenarios that 

should be considered to understand our observations are the quantum metal state recently 

discussed in thin NbSe2 crystals27, or motion of flux quanta causing the superconducting phase 

stiffness to vanish26.  


 
 

10 

 

 

When the magnetic field is applied parallel to the MoS2 surface, the DOS remains unchanged. 

This is shown in Fig. 4f with data taken at T= 1.5 K, on one of the devices discussed earlier (see 

Fig. 2a and Fig. 4a), upon increasing the in-plane field from 0 to 10 T (the maximum in-plane 

field applied in our experiments). The insensitivity of the DOS is quite striking: it can be 

understood that the in-plane field does not affect the orbital degrees of freedom –since the 

accumulation layer is only 1.5 nm thick21 22 – but changes could still occur because B couples to 

the spin, and the Zeeman energy at 10 T is comparable to . The phenomenon may be attributed 

to the strong spin-orbit interaction (approximately 10 meV in the conduction band of MoS2 

28), 

which forces the spin to point perpendicular to the MoS2 and cause a so-called Ising 

superconducting state 21 22 29 30 (i.e., to influence the DOS, the Zeeman energy has to be 

comparable to the spin-orbit energy, which is significantly larger than ). So far, experimental 

evidence for Ising superconductivity was inferred from the small effect that an in-plane field has 

on the critical temperature, and from the correspondingly extrapolated very large in-plane critical 

field at low temperature21 22 (~ 60-80 T depending on the model chosen to extrapolate). 

Tunneling spectroscopy, however, provides more information because it shows directly that the 

in-plane magnetic field does not change the DOS anywhere on the Fermi surface.  

 

Conclusions 

The results of our tunneling spectroscopy measurements provide new information on the nature 

of the gate-induced superconducting state. In particular, finding that the low-bias (eV/  < 0.5) 

tunneling conductance measurements coincide when plotted as a function of eV/ irrespective of 


 
 

11 

 

the value of n (Fig. 3a), and that at V = 0 V all data falls on a same curve when plotted versus 

T/Tc (Fig. 3b),  show that the superconducting state is the same throughout the density range 

explored. Additionally, the dependence of the tunneling conductance on V and T consistently 

indicates that the low-energy DOS is linearly proportional to E, the distance in energy from EF, 

and vanishes at E = 0. Such a linear dependence is incompatible with the presence of a full gap, 

which would cause a much more pronounced sub-gap suppression of the tunneling conductance 

over a broader bias range 26 (in the supplementary information we show that attempts to fit the 

data starting from a fully gapped DOS are unsuccessful). The absence of a full gap excludes 

several potential candidate states, such  as s-wave superconductivity and an equal-sign two-band 

superconducting state (the same realized in MgB2

31

 
32

 
33 and possibly in NbSe2 

31

 
34

 
35, whose 

relevance for gated MoS2 may be suggested by the double gap structure observed in several 

devices; see Fig. 2d). Indeed, both these superconducting states possess a complete gap, with 

vanishing sub-gap DOS, even in the presence of considerable density of (non-magnetic) 

impurities 26. 

 

The observed low-energy DOS suggests that understanding the gate-induced superconducting 

state in MoS2 will require going beyond a conventional, purely phonon driven BCS mechanism. 

More work will be needed, and it is useful to look at theoretical studies analyzing gate-induced 

superconductivity in mono or bilayers of MoS2 (and in other semiconducting transition metal 

dichalcogenides) that have recently appeared in the literature 29 36 37 38 39 40 , to see if any of the 

proposed superconducting states could be taken as promising candidates. In this context, we find 

particularly interesting the proposed possibility of a so-called s± state36 (a two-band 

superconducting state with opposite sign of the order parameter in each band, thoroughly 


 
 

12 

 

investigated in the context of iron pnictide superconductors 41 42 43 44), or of a nodal phase that 

may occur in the presence of interactions favoring spin-triplet pairing if the pocket at the M-Γ 

line on the conduction band of MoS2 is populated 29. In the appropriate regimes, these states 

could account for at least some of our experimental observations, such as the linear energy 

dependence of the DOS for E << , the presence of kinks inside the gap, and the double-gap 

structure that we observed in some of the devices. Whether experimental conditions are 

compatible with a description in terms of either one of these states, however, is not yet clear and 

remains to be established. Irrespective of these considerations, what is really worth emphasizing 

is that our results demonstrate a strategy to perform tunneling spectroscopy on a gate-induced 

superconductor, and show a wealth of interesting new information not accessible in conventional 

transport measurements. The relevance of this result goes beyond the specific case of MoS2, as 

the experimental strategies demonstrated here can be applied to explore the gate-induced 

superconducting states recently discovered to occur in many other layered two-dimensional 

materials. 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 
 

13 

 

References  

 

1. 
Bardeen, J., Cooper, L. N. & Schrieffer, J. R. Theory of Superconductivity. Phys. Rev. 
108, 1175–1204 (1957). 

2. 
Giaever, I. Energy Gap in Superconductors Measured by Electron Tunneling. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 5, 147–148 (1960). 

3. 
Giaever, I. Electron Tunneling Between Two Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 464–
466 (1960). 

4. 
Giaever, I., Hart, H. R. & Megerle, K. Tunneling into Superconductors at Temperatures 
below 1K. Phys. Rev. 126, 941–948 (1962). 

5. 
McMillan, W. L. & Rowell, J. M. Lead Phonon Spectrum Calculated from 
Superconducting Density of States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 108–112 (1965). 

6. 
Parks, R. D. Superconductivity. (CRC press, 1969). 

7. 
Fischer, Ø., Kugler, M., Maggio-Aprile, I., Berthod, C. & Renner, C. Scanning tunneling 
spectroscopy of high-temperature superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353–419 (2007). 

8. 
Yin, Y., Zech, M., Williams, T. L. & Hoffman, J. E. Scanning tunneling microscopy and 
spectroscopy on iron-pnictides. Phys. C Supercond. 469, 535–544 (2009). 

9. 
Hanaguri, T., Niitaka, S., Kuroki, K. & Takagi, H. Unconventional s-Wave 
Superconductivity in Fe(Se,Te). Science. 328, 474–476 (2010). 

10. 
Ye, J. T. et al. Superconducting Dome in a Gate-Tuned Band Insulator. Science. 338, 
1193–1196 (2012). 

11. 
Caviglia, A. D. et al. Electric field control of the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface ground state. 
Nature 456, 624–627 (2008). 

12. 
Richter, C. et al. Interface superconductor with gap behaviour like a high-temperature 
superconductor. Nature 502, 528–531 (2013). 

13. 
Ueno, K. et al. Electric-field-induced superconductivity in an insulator. Nat. Mater. 7, 
855–858 (2008). 

14. 
Ye, J. T. et al. Liquid-gated interface superconductivity on an atomically flat film. Nat. 
Mater. 9, 125–128 (2010). 

15. 
Ueno, K. et al. Discovery of superconductivity in KTaO3 by electrostatic carrier doping. 
Nat. Nano. 6, 408–412 (2011). 

16. 
Taniguchi, K., Matsumoto, A., Shimotani, H. & Takagi, H. Electric-field-induced 
superconductivity at 9.4K in a layered transition metal disulphide MoS2. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
101, 42603 (2012). 

17. 
Shi, W. et al. Superconductivity Series in Transition Metal Dichalcogenides by Ionic 


 
 

14 

 

Gating. Sci. rep. 5, 12534 (2015). 

18. 
Jo, S., Costanzo, D., Berger, H. & Morpurgo, A. F. Electrostatically Induced 
Superconductivity at the Surface of WS2. Nano Lett. 15, 1197–1202 (2015). 

19. 
Costanzo, D., Jo, S., Berger, H. & Morpurgo, A. F. Gate-induced superconductivity in 
atomically thin MoS2 crystals. Nat. Nano. 11, 339–344 (2016). 

20. 
Li, L. J. et al. Controlling many-body states by the electric-field effect in a two-
dimensional material. Nature 529, 185–189 (2016). 

21. 
Lu, J. M. et al. Evidence for two-dimensional Ising superconductivity in gated MoS2. 
Science. 350, 1353–1357 (2015). 

22. 
Saito, Y. et al. Superconductivity protected by spin-valley locking in ion-gated MoS2. Nat. 
Phys. 12, 144–149 (2016). 

23. 
Geim, A. K. & Grigorieva, I. V. Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 499, 419–425 
(2013). 

24. 
Dvir, T. et al. Spectroscopy of bulk and few-layer superconducting NbSe2 with van der 
Waals tunnel junctions. Nat. Commun. 9, 598 (2018). 

25. 
de Gennes, P. G. Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys. (Advanced Books Classics, 
1989). 

26. 
Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity - 2nd edition. (Dover, 2004). 

27. 
Tsen, A. W. et al. Nature of the quantum metal in a two-dimensional crystalline 
superconductor. Nat. Phys. 12, 208–212 (2016). 

28. 
Cheiwchanchamnangij, T. & Lambrecht, W. R. L. Quasiparticle band structure calculation 
of monolayer, bilayer, and bulk MoS2. Phys. Rev. B 85, 205302 (2012). 

29. 
Yuan, N. F. Q., Mak, K. F. & Law, K. T. Possible Topological Superconducting Phases of 
MoS2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 97001 (2014). 

30. 
Xi, X. et al. Ising pairing in superconducting NbSe2 atomic layers. Nat. Phys. 12, 139–143 
(2016). 

31. 
Giubileo, F. et al. Two-Gap State Density in MgB2: A True Bulk Property Or A Proximity 
Effect? Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 177008 (2001). 

32. 
Iavarone, M. et al. Two-Band Superconductivity in MgB2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 187002 
(2002). 

33. 
Schmidt, H., Zasadzinski, J. F., Gray, K. E. & Hinks, D. G. Break-junction tunneling on 
MgB2. Phys. C Supercond. 385, 221–232 (2003). 

34. 
Boaknin, E. et al. Heat Conduction in the Vortex State of NbSe2: Evidence for Multiband 
Superconductivity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 117003 (2003). 

35. 
Noat, Y. et al. Quasiparticle spectra of 2H-NbSe2: Two-band superconductivity and the 
role of tunneling selectivity. Phys. Rev. B 92, 134510 (2015). 


 
 

15 

 

36. 
Roldán, R., Cappelluti, E. & Guinea, F. Interactions and superconductivity in heavily 
doped MoS2. Phys. Rev. B 88, 54515 (2013). 

37. 
Ge, Y. & Liu, A. Y. Phonon-mediated superconductivity in electron-doped single-layer 
MoS2: A first-principles prediction. Phys. Rev. B 87, 241408 (2013). 

38. 
Khezerlou, M. & Goudarzi, H. Transport properties of spin-triplet superconducting 
monolayer MoS2. Phys. Rev. B 93, 115406 (2016). 

39. 
Nakamura, Y. & Yanase, Y. Odd-parity superconductivity in bilayer transition metal 
dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B 96, 54501 (2017). 

40. 
Hsu, Y.-T., Vaezi, A., Fischer, M. H. & Kim, E.-A. Topological superconductivity in 
monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Commun. 8, 14985 (2017). 

41. 
Mazin, I. I. & Schmalian, J. Pairing symmetry and pairing state in ferropnictides: 
Theoretical overview. Phys. C Supercond. 469, 614–627 (2009). 

42. 
Mazin, I. I. Superconductivity gets an iron boost. Nature 464, 183–186 (2010). 

43. 
Hirschfeld, P. J., Korshunov, M. M. & Mazin, I. I. Gap symmetry and structure of Fe-
based superconductors. Reports Prog. Phys. 74, 124508 (2011). 

44. 
Bang, Y. & Stewart, G. R. Superconducting properties of the s+/- wave state: Fe-based 
superconductors. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 123003 (2017). 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 
 

16 

 

Acknowledgements 

We gratefully acknowledge A. Ferreira for continued technical support of the experiments. We 

are also very grateful to Prof. K.T. Law for extended, extremely useful discussions. Financial 

support from the Swiss National Science Foundation, the NCCR QSIT and the EU Graphene 

Flagship project is also very gratefully acknowledged. 

 

Author contributions 

D.C., H.Z., and B.A.R. fabricated the devices, and performed the electrical measurements. D.C. 

and H.Z. analyzed the data. H.B. provided high quality MoS2 crystals. A.F.M. conceived the 

experiment, directed the research and wrote the manuscript. All authors read the manuscript and 

gave comments. 

 

Competing financial interests 

The authors declare no competing financial interests.  

 

 

 
 


 
 

17 

 

 

Figure 
1. 
Nano-fabricated 
MoS2 
devices 
for 
tunneling 
spectroscopy 

measurements. (a) Example of a resistive transition demonstrating the occurrence of 
gate-induced superconductivity at the surface of MoS2. (b) Schematics of the devices 
used to perform tunneling spectroscopy. Multilayer graphene (MLG) strips on a Si/SiO2 
substrate act as tunneling electrodes. An exfoliated MoS2 crystal (typically 6-10 layer 
thick) is positioned across the strips and contacted with gold electrodes. The ionic liquid 
covers the structure, as well as a large Au pad acting as gate. When current is sent 
from a MLG strip to one of the gold contacts, the undoped part of MoS2 (shaded brown 
in the figure) acts as a barrier and electrons tunnel from MLG to the gate-induced 
accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2 (shaded pink in the figure). (c)  Band-diagram 
across the device thickness. The ionic liquid (IL) gate induced superconducting 
accumulation layer extends approximately 1-1.5 nm in depth; deeper in MoS2 the Fermi 
level is inside the gap, not far from the conduction band edge. (d) Optical microscope 
images of two devices (the bar is 10 µm). In the device on top, a layer of PMMA is used 
to cover the edges of the flake and define the active part of the device (region delimited 
by the white dashed line). The bottom device is not covered with PMMA. (e) The 
“Vertical” I-V curves, measured between a MLG electrode and one of the Au contacts, 
become T-independent below 70 K, indicating that transport is mediated by direct 
tunneling; also, the V=0 vertical resistance, thermally activated at high T, saturates for 
T< 70 K (f). 
 


 
 

18 

 

 

Figure 2. Temperature evolution of the bias-dependent tunneling conductance. 
Resistive transition (a) and temperature evolution of the normalized tunneling 
conductance (b) measured on a MoS2 accumulation layer with n = 1.5·1014 cm-2. The 
colored dots in (a) indicate the temperatures at which the dI/dV-V curves of the 
corresponding color in (b) are measured.  Panels (c) and (d) show the same 
measurements on another device, gate-biased at n = 5.1·1014 cm-2 (in (b) and (d) 
curves are offset for clarity). In all devices, a measurable suppression of the tunneling 
conductance starts to be observed in correspondence of the onset of the resistive 
transition. Upon cooling, the suppression increases, and typically reaches 70-90 % of 
the high-bias value, depending on the device and on the temperature reached in the 
measurements. The magnitude of the suppression does not correlate with the quality of 
the resistive transition (for instance, in (c) no R=0 Ω state is attained, but the 
suppression in dI/dV is more pronounced than in (b).  Side lobes are seen in nearly all 
the measured devices (pointed to by the brown arrows in (b) and (d)) and are used to 
determine the value of the gap Δ (see the vertical dashed lines in (b) and (d)). In all 
devices, a sub-gap kink in the dI/dV-V curve is clearly visible whenever T < 0.2 Tc 
(pointed to by the purple arrows in (b) and (d)). In some devices a second peak is 
visible which may correspond to a second superconducting gap (pointed to by the green 
arrows in (d)). The insets in (a) and (c) show the raw dI/dV data measured below and 
above Tc (the normalized dI/dV-V curves are obtained by taking their ratio). 


 
 

19 

 

 

Figure 3. Investigating the nature of the superconducting state in MoS2.  (a) 
Normalized tunneling conductance as a function of eV/∆, measured at the same value 
of  T/Tc = 0.2 for different values of electron density n in the range 1.2-5.1·1014 cm-2: all 
curves coincide at low bias irrespective of n. Also, throughout the entire range of 
investigated density, the V=0 V tunneling conductance plotted versus T/Tc exhibits a 
common trend (b), with all data falling on a same curve that extrapolates linearly to zero 
for small T. The dependence of Tc and Δ on n is shown in (c). The grey and red dots 
represent Tc obtained from resistive transitions in Ref. [10] and in our work, respectively. 
The green triangles represent Tc obtained from the tunneling conductance, defined as 
the temperature for which the DOS suppression exceeds the experimental noise. The 
blue squares represent the superconducting gap Δ (see right axis) determined from the 
position of the side lobes in the tunneling conductance measured at kT << Δ (vertical 
dashed lines in Fig. 2b and d). The inset shows the correlation between Δ and Tc 
obtained from the experimental data.  


 
 

20 

 

 

Figure 4. Magnetic field dependence of the tunneling density of states. (a) 
Evolution of the normalized differential conductance upon increasing the perpendicular 
magnetic field B, measured at T = 1.5 K on a device having n = 1.5·1014 cm-2 and Tc = 
10 K (curves offset for clarity). (b) Square resistance of the same device measured at 
T= 1.5 K as a function of B, showing a transition to the normal state resistance at B = 9 
T. In (a) a pronounced suppression of the low-bias tunneling conductance is still clearly 
visible at B = 10 T, above the critical field Bc inferred from transport measurements. (c)  
Evolution of the normalized differential conductance with increasing B measured at T = 
250 mK on another device (n = 1.8 · 1014 cm-2 and Tc = 9 K; curves offset for clarity), for 
which the resistive transition gives Bc = 9 T. A pronounced DOS suppression persists at 
B = 14 T and only disappears for T > Tc as shown in (d) by the dI/dV-V measurements 
performed at B = 14 T. (e) Suppression in the zero-bias tunneling conductance relative 
to the normal state value plotted for five different devices as a function of B/Bc (in all 
cases, for T/Tc < 0.15), showing that the suppression persists even for B >> Bc. (f) 
Normalized tunneling conductance as a function of bias measured at T = 1.5 K upon 
increasing the in-plane magnetic field from 0 to 10 T (for this device n = 1.5 · 1014 cm-2 
and Tc = 10 K). The in-plane magnetic field has no effect and leaves the DOS 
unchanged (the small variations around V = 0 can be accounted for by a few-degree 
misalignment of the field, resulting in a non-vanishing perpendicular component). 

 

 


 
S1 

 

Supplementary Information for the Article 

Tunneling spectroscopy of gate-induced superconductivity in MoS2  

Davide Costanzo1 *, Haijing Zhang1 *, Bojja Aditya Reddy1, Helmuth Berger2 and Alberto F. 

Morpurgo1**. 

 
*These two authors contributed equally to this work 

 
**e-mail: alberto.morpurgo@unige.ch 

 

This file includes: 

Supplementary Text 

Supplementary Fig. 1 

Supplementary Fig. 2 

Supplementary Fig. 3 

Supplementary Fig. 4 

Supplementary Fig. 5 

Supplementary Fig. 6 

Supplementary Fig. 7 

 
 


 
S2 

 

In the main text we have presented all the key experimental observations made in our tunneling 
spectroscopy experiments and in this supplementary information we address a variety of issues that 
could not be discussed in the main text in full detail. As for what regards more technical aspects, we 
describe the device fabrication, and comment extensively on specific parts that proved to be 
important to improve the spatial homogeneity of carrier density. We also provide the technical 
specifications of the cryogenic systems employed in the experiments and discuss details of the 
electrical measurements. In the second part we address a number of points relevant for the 
interpretation of our data. We compare the tunneling conductance to calculations based on the DOS 
expected for a fully gapped superconductor and show that they cannot reproduce our observations. 
We also discuss –and exclude– some possible artifacts that could a priori affect the results of our 
tunneling spectroscopy, namely the effect of “pinholes” that could be present in the part of MoS2 
acting as tunnel barrier. Finally, we show I-V curves of the accumulation layer that indicate the 2D 
nature of the superconducting state. 

 

1) Device fabrication 

The devices discussed in the main text, used to perform tunneling spectroscopy on the gate-induced 
superconducting accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2, were realized by a combination of 
conventional nano-fabrication techniques and of techniques that have been developed over the last 
few years to assemble so-called van der Waals heterostructures. The multilayer graphene (MLG) 
tunneling electrodes are defined by oxygen plasma etching of large flakes that are mechanically 
exfoliated from graphite onto a Si/SiO2 substrate. Fig. S1a shows an optical microscope image of a 
MLG flake with a PMMA mask defining the electrode geometry; Fig. S1b shows the result after 
etching and removing the PMMA mask. The electrodes prepared in this way were then thermally 
annealed at 300°C in an inert atmosphere to remove polymer residues from the MLG surface. 
Subsequently, MoS2 multilayers were exfoliated from a bulk crystal and their thickness estimated 
by their optical contrast and using atomic force microscopy. Typically, large-area MoS2 flakes 
consisting of 6-10 layers were selected and transferred onto the etched MLG strip with the aid of a 
micro-positioning system mounted under an optical microscope. This was done with either a 
PMMA membrane using a so-called wet-transfer technique1, or by employing a PPC polymer film 
to pick up the flakes from a Si/SiO2 substrate2. In either case, the resulting MLG-MoS2 
heterostructure was subsequently cleaned from polymer residues by annealing it at 300°C in H2/Ar 
(10:100 sccm). An optical microscope image of a device at this stage of the fabrication process is 
shown in Fig. S1c. Finally, two independent electron-beam lithography/metal evaporation/lift-off 
processes were done to attach metal contacts to both MoS2 and MLG (Au electrodes were used for 
MoS2 to minimize contact resistance; Ti/Au contacts were used for MLG, to maximize adhesion). 
In these same steps, a large Au pad acting as a gate electrode for the ionic liquid (DEME-TFSI, 
purchased from Kanto Corporation) was also deposited. The device was annealed once more at 200 
°C for 2h in a flow of H2/Ar (10:100 sccm) mixture, to reduce the contact resistance (at the high 
carrier density used in our investigations contact resistances were low and never posed particular 
problems).  


 
S3 

 

 

Figure S1 | Device fabrication: a, optical microscope image of an exfoliated MLG flake on a 
Si/SiO2 substrate covered by the PMMA mask defining the strips used as tunneling contacts. b, 
image of the same flake after etching in an oxygen plasma and removing the PMMA. Panel c 
and d show the device after having transferred the MoS2 multilayer, and attached metal contacts 
to MoS2 and MLG. 

 

 

2) Improving the homogeneity of carrier density at low-temperature 

In our earlier work on gate-induced superconductivity in WS2 3and MoS2 

4, we regularly found that 

at low temperature the gate-induced carrier density in different parts of a same device exhibited 
large inhomogeneity, which we could detect by using multiple pairs of probes to measure the Hall 
resistance in different locations. The phenomenon was caused by the local detaching of the frozen 
ionic liquid from the gated material, caused by mechanical stress generated upon cooling by the 
difference in the thermal expansion coefficient of the frozen liquid and of the substrate. Detaching 
of the frozen liquid also caused very large jumps in the resistance that we invariably observed when 
measuring the device resistance upon cooling from room temperature. Based on a multitude of 
transport measurements that we have done in the past on WS2 and MoS2 superconducting 
accumulation layers (Refs [3] and [4]), it appears that the liquid detaches along narrow lines, which 
can strongly affect the measured resistance (especially if they cross the entire width of the device) 
despite occupying a small fraction of the device surface. That is why it is seen that the temperature 
dependence of the resistance often depends strongly on the specific device measured (which is what 
other groups observe as well, as we gather from their publications; compare, e.g., Ref. [5], [6] and 
[7] ). 

As our work on tunneling spectroscopy progressed, we managed to improve the situation. 
Specifically, we succeeded in decreasing the carrier density inhomogeneity and in minimizing the 
detaching of the frozen liquid.  

a


 
S4 

 

        
 

Figure S2 | Optical microscope image of a device covered by a layer of PMMA, selectively 
removed only in the active region to be gated (i.e., a “PMMA window”), outlined by the white 
dashed line. 

 

We found that two specific aspects of the device configuration and fabrication process have an 
important influence. The first concerns a so-called “PMMA window” that we used in the past to 
define the active part of the device (see Fig. S2).  In the course of the present work we found that 
not using this PMMA window systematically improves the carrier density homogeneity and 
drastically reduces the resistance jumps that are seen upon cooling down the device.  

There are two possible reasons why removing the PMMA window has such a beneficial effect. The 
first is that confining the frozen liquid and making the substrate surface non-planar is a dominant 
cause of mechanical stress, whose relaxation causes the frozen liquid to detach from the surface. 
The second is that using a PMMA window impedes any successive thermal annealing process (or 
solvent cleaning process). It follows that a much larger density of polymeric residues is present on 
devices in which a PMMA window is used. As these residues can strongly affect adhesion to the 
substrate, their presence may be largely responsible for the detachment of the frozen liquid. Indeed, 
we have additional evidence (see here below) that the presence of polymeric residues on the 
substrate surface does play an important role.  

The second procedure that resulted in a drastic improvement in carrier density homogeneity is a so-
called atomic force microscope (AFM) cleaning process8, 9 of the MoS2 surface. The process 
consists in gently sweeping the surface to be cleaned with an AFM tip in contact mode, for an 
extended period of time. As it has been repeatedly documented for different van der Waals 
materials, it allows dragging out of the AFM scanning field all (or at least the great majority of) 
polymer residues deposited during the device fabrication, thus effectively cleaning the surface in the 
scanned area. The process is illustrated by the AFM images shown in Fig. S3. We found that in 
devices for which this cleaning procedure was used the density homogeneity was further enhanced 
and that at most small resistance jumps were seen during the device cool down.  

We can quantify the improvement in carrier density homogeneity resulting from these changes in 
the device configuration/fabrication process. In our earlier work on gate-induced superconductivity 
on WS2 and MoS2 variations in carrier density as large as a factor of 2 were rather regularly 
measured on gated flakes of ~20 m linear dimension. In the present work, instead, we routinely 
succeeded in achieving fluctuations smaller than 20% on the same devices size: larger density 
fluctuations were observed only rarely. This result corresponds to a one-order-of-magnitude 
improvement.  


 
S5 

 

 

Figure S3 | AFM cleaning is an effective and safe way to remove adsorbates and PMMA 
residues from MoS2 flakes. It consists in a sequence of AFM scans in contact mode done with 
moderate force, which result in the accumulation of adsorbed residues on the side of the AFM 
scanning field. The left panel is an optical microscope image of one of our devices. AFM images 
of the rectangular area delimited by the purple line are shown in the right panel, at different 
stages of the cleaning process. Gradually, all adsorbates are clustered together to form larger 
particles that eventually are pushed out of the scanning field. In the bottom image in the right 
panel virtually all these larger particles have been removed and what is still visible are so-called 
“bubbles” that form in the region where MoS2 is on top of one of the MLG strips (in the center 
of the image).  

Having explained in detail the differences between devices with and without PMMA window for 
what regards carrier density homogeneity, it is worth discussing other information that can be 
extracted from the comparison of the general behavior of these devices. The key observation is that 
the result of the tunneling spectroscopy measurements were virtually identical in the two types of 
devices. Specifically, the collapse of the low-energy part of tunneling conductance at low energy is 
the same for both type of devices (that is, Fig. 3a and 3b include data measured on devices with and 
without PMMA window). A first implication is that this comparison indicates that inhomogeneity 
in carrier density is not responsible for the sub-gap DOS observed in the tunneling spectroscopy 
measurements. That is simply because the tunneling conductance is the same irrespective of the 
device type, but the density inhomogeneity is much larger in devices with PMMA window. A 
second direct and important implication is that the tunneling conductance that we have measured 
cannot be due to transport at the edges of the MoS2 crystal, because in devices with PMMA window 
an extended region around the edges covered is not in contact with ionic liquid.  

 

 

 


 
S6 

 

3) Cryogenic set-ups and electrical measurements 

Different cryogenic systems have been used to perform the low-temperature electrical 
measurements discussed in the main text. The first is a variable temperature cryo-free Teslatron 
system (Oxford Instruments), equipped with a superconducting magnet allowing the application of 
fields up to 10 T, and reaching T = 1.5 K as lowest temperature. This system proved to be 
particularly convenient as it enables very slow and controlled device cooling. With a minimum 
temperature of T = 1.5 K this system gives enough energy resolution to perform spectroscopic 
measurements on devices at carrier densities close to optimal doping, having a critical temperature 
Tc ~ 9-10 K (i.e., not much lower than the maximum possible value for MoS2). However, to have 
the energy resolution needed to investigate devices with a smaller Tc –and hence a smaller 
superconducting gap – it is essential to perform measurements at sub-Kelvin temperatures. To this 
end, we used a Heliox 3He system (Oxford Instruments) operated in a He dewar equipped with a 14 
T superconducting magnet, enabling us to reach temperatures as low as T = 250 mK. In this case 
achieving very slow cooling proved to be more complex. Nevertheless, cooling rates that were 
sufficiently slow not to cause problems with the frozen liquid could be achieved by pumping all the 
exchange gas out of the Heliox insert, and by gradually lowering the insert itself without directly 
immersing it into liquid He.  

 

Figure S4  | Schematic top-view of a device used for tunneling spectroscopy measurements with 
the four-terminal  configuration used to measure the bias dependence tunneling conductance. 
This configuration removes from the measurements the possible influence of the series 
resistance due to either the MLG strip or to the interface between the gold electrodes and the 
MoS2 accumulation layer. 

In all cases, before cooling and/or performing any electrical measurement, devices were mounted in 
the cryostat and left under high vacuum for nearly a day, to ensure that all oxygen and humidity 
possibly present in the ionic liquid were removed. Only then a voltage was applied to the gate 
electrode and gradually increased through successive cycles, to reach the desired value (a procedure 
that also takes nearly a day). These precautions ensure the reversibility of the measurements and 
prevent chemical reactions between MoS2 and either oxygen/water or adsorbates present at the 
surface. After the device was gate biased and cooled down, the accumulated electron density was 
inferred from Hall resistance measurements performed on the different pairs of Hall probes that we 
attached on each device (Hall measurements were done at a temperature higher than the 
superconducting critical temperature). 


 
S7 

 

The differential conductance (dI/dV-V) measurements were performed in a current-biased four-
terminal configuration, using low-noise home-made electronics to add an ac and a dc current and to 
amplify the resulting voltage signal (see fig. S4). The ac part of the amplified voltage was measured 
synchronously with a Stanford SR830 lock-in amplifier; an Agilent 34401a digital multimeter was 
used for the DC component. The voltage to the gate electrode was applied using a K2400 source-
meter unit. Care was taken to apply the current and measure the voltage in a four-terminal 
configuration such as the one illustrated in Fig. S4, to eliminate from the measurements the effect of 
any series resistance possibly coming from either the MLG strip or to the interface between the gold 
electrodes and the MoS2 accumulation layer.   

For the different devices investigated, the low-temperature tunneling resistance (i.e., the resistance 
between the MLG strips and the gate-induced accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2) ranged 
between several kOhms and approximately 100 kOhms, depending mainly on the thickness of the 
MoS2 layer used and the area of the tunneling contact, with most typical values of the order of 10-
20 kOhms. The bias-dependence differential resistance did not depend on the absolute value of the 
tunneling resistance.  

 

4) Comparison of the tunneling conductance with predictions for a fully gapped 
superconductor. 

In the main text, we claimed that a fully gapped superconducting state cannot reproduce the data. 
Here we provide support to this statement by comparing the measured bias-dependent tunneling 
conductance with different models for conventional s-wave fully gapped superconductors, in the 
ideal homogenous case (part 4a), taking into account the presence of carrier density 
inhomogeneities (part 4b), or including the effect of finite quasi-particle lifetime  (part 4c).  

In all cases, the differential tunneling conductance is calculated directly from the conventional 
expression of the tunneling current10  : 

𝐼(𝑉) =

1

𝑒𝑅𝑁 ∫

𝑁𝑆(𝜀)

𝑁(0) × [𝑓(𝜀, 𝑇) − 𝑓(𝜀 + 𝑒𝑉, 𝑇)] ∙ 𝑑𝜀

∞
−∞
    

where 𝑁𝑆(𝜀) is the DOS in the superconducting state under consideration, 𝑁(0) the DOS at the 
Fermi energy in the normal state, 𝑓(𝐸) and 𝑓(𝐸 + 𝑒𝑉) are the Fermi-Dirac distributions in the 
electrodes on opposite sides of the tunnel barrier. Expanding 𝑓(𝐸 + 𝑒𝑉)  for small values of V 
(since 𝑒𝑉 ≪ 𝐸𝐹) and differentiating, we obtain: 

𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑉 (𝑉) =

1

𝑒𝑅𝑁 ∫

𝑁𝑆(𝜀)

𝑁(0) ×

−𝜕𝑓

𝜕𝑉 (𝜀 + 𝑒𝑉, 𝑇) ∙ 𝑑𝜀

∞
−∞
                                 (S1) 

a) Fully gapped state 

We start by considering a conventional s-wave superconductor, whose DOS is 𝑁𝑆(𝜀) = 0  if 
|𝜀| < ∆ and 𝑁𝑆(𝜀) = 𝑁(0)

|𝜀|

√𝜀2−∆2    if |𝜀| > ∆. With regard to the low-energy sub-gap tunneling 

conductance, identical considerations would apply to a two band superconductor with the same sign 
of the gap (such as MgB2). 

To compare with experiments, we consider the case of the device whose data are shown in Fig. 2b 
(and reproduced in Fig. S6a), for which the gap ∆ ≅1.5 meV. At a temperature of 1.5 K (kT = 0.13 
meV), the tunneling conductance calculated using Equation S1 is plotted in Fig. S5a. It is clear that 
the pronounced suppression of sub-gap tunneling conductance throughout a broad bias interval is 


 
S8 

 

not in agreement with the data. Therefore, considering a plain fully gapped state (such as in a s-
wave superconductor) cannot explain our observations. 

b) Fully gapped state with charge density inhomogeneity 

Inhomogeneity in carrier density could lead to an enhanced tunneling conductance if it was so large 
to cause the presence of non-superconducting regions (or of regions having a superconducting gap 
comparable to the lowest T reached in the experiments) in the accumulation layer at the MoS2 
surface. Here we show that an inhomogeneity in carrier density cannot reproduce our experimental 
results even if we assume that this inhomogeneity is much larger than that extracted from 
measurements of the Hall resistance in different parts of the device1.  

Our data (Fig. 3c of the main text) show that the superconducting gap decreases from about  = 2 
meV at n ~ 1014 cm-2 to about  = 0.35 meV for n ~ 5 ·1014 cm-2, and a linear interpolation between 
these values provide a good overall estimate for  (n) (i.e. the value of  for any value of n in this 
range). We estimate the effect of inhomogeneity in carrier density if we consider that in large-area 
tunnel junction such as the ones used in our experiments, regions with different n (and a 
correspondingly different gap  ) contribute “in parallel” to the total measured tunneling 
conductance. In other words, the tunneling conductance of a fully gapped superconducting state in 
the presence of carrier density inhomogeneity can be calculated using Equation S1 and averaging it 
over the distributions of values of the gap ∆ corresponding to the assumed density inhomogeneity.  

 

Figure S5 | Calculated bias dependence of the tunneling conductance expected for a fully 
gapped superconductor. Panel a shows the case expected for a homogeneous superconductor 
with  = 1.5 meV and T =1.5 K. The fully suppressed conductance is inconsistent with 
experimental obervations. Panel b and c include the effect of carrier density inhomogeneity that 
makes the gap position dependent. For the density dependence of the gap we used the values of 
(n) inferred from the measurements. The two curves correspond to two specific cases: the left 
panel to an average carrier denity n = 4 · 1014/cm2 with relative fluctuations of ±25%; in the 
right panel the average carrier density is n = 3 · 1014/cm2 and the relative fluctuations are chosen 
to be ±67% (much larger than what is found in the measurements). In both cases the temperature 
is chosen to be 250 mK. It is seen that despite the large density fluctuations, a virtually vanishing 
tunneling conductance is found for a broad interval of applied voltage around V=0, at odds with 
the experimental observations.  

 

1 We present this analysis as an additional confirmation, because –as we discussed in the main text– the 
scaling of the low-bias tunneling conductance in all devices when data are plotted versus reduced variables 
already provides clear evidence that electron density inhomogeneity does not play a relevant role at low 
energy.  


 
S9 

 

We have done the calculation for experimentally relevant conditions and seen that in all cases at the 
temperature of the measurements (250 mK) an exponential suppression should be observed for bias 
smaller than 0.3 meV. The results of the calculations are illustrated in Fig. S5 with two specific 
cases: n = 3 · 1014 cm-2 ± 2 · 1014 cm-2 (i.e., ± 67% fluctuations in carrier density, a much more 
“pessimistic” estimate than the value inferred from Hall resistance measurements) and n = 4·1014 
cm-2 ± 1·1014 cm-2 (corresponding to ± 25% fluctuations). We see that the density fluctuations 
smear the characteristic side lobes present at the gap, and lead to a more gradual decrease of the 
tunneling conductance for bias a little smaller than the gap, but do not lead to the finite low-bias 
tunneling conductance observed in the experiments.  

In short: charge density inhomogeneity affects strongly the tunneling conductance for large bias, eV 
~ , in agreement with what we see experimentally. However, in a fully gapped s-wave state with 
realistic parameter, density inhomogeneity cannot cause the behavior that we observe in the 
experiments, namely a tunneling conductance that depends linearly on bias and vanishes for V = 0 
at sufficiently low temperature, irrespective of the value of n. 

 

c) Fully gapped superconductor with finite quasiparticle lifetime  

An additional possibility to consider is a fully gapped superconductor with a finite quasiparticle 
lifetime, a situation which is often considered in the analysis of tunneling experiments and that is 
described phenomenologically by a parametrization of the DOS due to Dynes 11, namely 𝑁𝑆(𝜀) =

𝑁(0) × 𝑅𝑒 (

|𝜀+𝑖𝛤|

√(𝜀+𝑖𝛤)2−𝛥2) . Here, Γ is the energy corresponding to the quasiparticle decay rate: for 

this parametrization to be physically meaningful, Γ should be much smaller than  and should not 
increase upon lowering temperature 

 

 

Figure S6 The dotted lines in a and d are an attempt to reproduce experimental data with the 
Dynes parametrization of the DOS, to include finite quasiparticle lifetime effects. In a, where the 
agreement with data may seem acceptable, the curves have been calculated with the T-dependent 
values of  and  shown in b and c, which are unphysical ( ~  and increases upon 
lowering T). In d a constant value of   has been used.  


 

S10 

 

The dotted lines in Fig. S6 a and d show an attempt to use the Dynes function to reproduce the 
experimental data (the same shown in the main text in Fig. 2b and 2d). In Fig. S6a, the coherence 
peaks in the experimental data –even though shallow– are visible at low temperature; in Fig. S6d 
they are considerably more pronounced. One may think that in Fig. S6a the dotted line reproduces 
the data and their evolution with temperature in a reasonable way (albeit no sign of coherence peak 
is present in the calculated curves). However, by looking at Fig. S6 b and c –which shows the 
temperature dependence of the values of  and   used to calculate the theoretical in Fig. S6a – it is 
apparent that the choice of parameter is entirely unphysical:  increases with lowering temperature 
and  ~ . If we attempt to reproduce data of Fig. S6d in which the coherence peaks are more 
pronounced (such as in Fig. S6d) the situation is even worse, and we are forced to conclude that it is 
impossible to capture simultaneously the behavior observed experimentally for eV ~   and for  eV 
<< . If the value of   is chosen so that the coherence peaks are not entirely washed out, the low 
bias suppression of the tunneling conductance is much more pronounced than in the experiments; if 
 is chosen to reproduce the low-bias part of the curve, no sign of coherence peaks remains. 
Therefore, a fully gapped superconducting state does not reproduce the tunneling conductance even 
if we allow for finite lifetime quasiparticle effects. 

 

5) Excluding the effect of defects in the tunnel barrier 

From the normal state value of the measured tunneling conductance, using the known electronic 
properties of graphite, we can easily estimate the average transmission 〈𝑇〉 of electronic modes 
responsible for tunneling from the MLG electrode to the MoS2 accumulation layer. We find 
〈𝑇〉 ~ 10−3 − 3 · 10−5 depending on the specific device considered. Since 〈𝑇〉 ≪ 1 in all cases, our 
devices are always in the tunneling regime, as we assumed throughout the discussion in the main 
text. It could however happen that, owing to the presence of a defect in the MoS2 tunnel barrier (a 
pinhole) one or a few modes propagating from the MLG electrode to the MoS2 accumulation layer 
have a transmission probability 𝑇 much larger than the average, i.e. 𝑇 ≅ 1. Such modes would then 
give an entirely non-negligible contribution to the measured conductance that –having 𝑇 ≅ 1– 
would not be suppressed at sub-gap voltages (in fact it would likely be enhanced, because of 
Andreev reflection). One should then consider the possibility that the low-bias conductance that we 
measure originates from such an effect, and not from the absence of a full gap. 

Invoking pinholes in the tunnel barrier is not consistent with the observation that the low-bias 
tunneling conductance is the same in all devices when plotted as a function of eV/: defects such as 
pinholes are device specific and would not lead to precisely the same behavior in different devices. 
The effect of pinholes can also be excluded because the bias dependence of the conductance that we 
measure   is the same irrespective of the normal state resistance of the junction considered. Since 
the normal state resistance of our devices is not much smaller than the quantum of resistance 
𝑅𝑄 =

ℎ

𝑒2, the presence of even an individual highly transmitting mode would imply that this single 

mode dominates transport also in the normal state (i.e., not only in the sub-gap regime). Such a 
conclusion would not be consistent with the observed pronounced suppression of the low-bias 
differential conductance, which vanishes at low energy. We can be even more specific, because 
some of the devices that we measured have a normal state resistance 𝑅𝑁 ≅ 100 k(or even 
somewhat larger),  i.e. substantially higher than 𝑅𝑄. In these devices, even if all the measured 
conductance was attributed to an individual highly-transmitted mode caused by the presence of a 
pinhole, we would be forced to conclude that the transmission probability of that mode is at most 
𝑇~0.2  (or less). A transmission probability 𝑇~0.2 is already sufficiently low to be in the tunneling 


 

S11 

 

regime. That is: for the highest resistance devices no matter what assumption is made, we have to 
conclude that transport is in the tunneling regime.  

In summary, the behavior of the low-bias conductance that we observe experimentally cannot be 
accounted for by defects in the tunnel barrier causing the presence of highly transmitted modes 
propagating from MLG to the accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2.  

 

6) Manifestation of Berezinskĭi-Kosterlitz-Thouless superconductivity near Tc 

Due to the small electrostatic screening length at n ~ 1014 cm-2 (estimated to be approximately 1 nm) 
the superconducting state induced at the surface of ionic liquid gated MoS2 transistors is expected to 
have a two-dimensional (2D) nature irrespective of the thickness of the MoS2 crystal used. In 2D, 
although long-range order of the superconducting order parameter is not possible due to thermal 
fluctuations, quasi-long-range order can still occur, due to the so-called Berezinskĭi-Kosterlitz-
Thouless (BKT) mechanism. A BKT transition is characterized by a critical temperature (TBKT, 
lower than the mean field Tc) below which phase stiffness become finite and a supercurrent can be 
measured, despite the absence of long-range order.  

A BKT regime has different peculiar experimental manifestations. One of them is the power law 
dependence of the I-V characteristics, i.e. V ∝ Iα  , where  α = 1 for T well above TBKT, α = 3 for T 
= TBKT, and α > 3 for T < TBKT. This behavior has indeed been observed in our devices for 
temperatures below the onset temperature of superconductivity. This is shown in Fig. S7a, where I-
V curves measured on a MoS2 FET are plotted in a double logarithmic scale: the clearly visible 
linear regime extending over several orders of magnitude is indicative of a power law relation 
between I and V. The temperature dependence of the exponent, which corresponds to the slope α in 
the log-log plot, is shown in the inset of Fig. S7a. It can be seen that α increases upon lowering the 
temperature, as expected; α = 3 occurs for T=7.4 K, providing a first estimate of TBKT. 

The BKT nature of the transition is confirmed by looking at the temperature dependence of the 
resistance close to TBKT. BKT theory predicts 𝑅 = 𝑅0exp (−b𝑡−1/2 )  (𝑅0  and 𝑏  are material 
dependent parameters, and t = T/TBKT – 1), from which it is expected that [d(lnR)/dT]-2/3 varies 
linearly with T above TBKT, and that it extrapolates at 0 for T = TBKT. Fig. S7b shows that this is 
indeed the case. From the data TBKT is estimated to be 7.4 K, consistently with the value extracted 
from the exponent of the power law relation of the I-V curves. The consistency of these two 
measurements, confirms that the experimental behavior observed for T close to Tc conforms to that 
of 2D BKT superconductivity.  


 

S12 

 

 

Figure S7 | Berezinskĭi-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in superconducting MoS2. a, Double-
logarithmic plot of the I-V characteristics of a gate-induced superconducting MoS2 device at 
different temperatures near the transition. The observed linear behavior implies that V ∝ Iα. The 
solid black lines are linear fits to extract the exponent α. The inset shows that temperature 
dependence of α. TBKT   corresponds to the value of T for which α = 3, from which we infer TBKT 
= 7.4 K) b, Linear behavior of [d(lnR)/dT]-2/3 as a function of temperature. The extrapolation to 
zero (black solid line) provides an independent estimate of TBKT, which also gives 7.4 K.  

 
 


 

S13 

 

References 

1. 
Dean, C. R. et al. Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electronics. Nature 
Nanotech. 5, 722-726, doi:10.1038/nnano.2010.172 (2010). 

2. 
Wang, L. et al. One-dimensional electrical contact to a two-dimensional material. Science 
342, 614-617, doi:10.1126/science.1244358 (2013). 

3. 
Jo, S., Costanzo, D., Berger, H. & Morpurgo, A. F. Electrostatically induced 
superconductivity 
at 
the 
surface 
of 
WS2. 
Nano 
Letters 
15, 
1197-1202, 

doi:10.1021/nl504314c (2015). 

4. 
Costanzo, D., Jo, S., Berger, H. & Morpurgo, A. F. Gate-induced superconductivity in 
atomically thin MoS2 crystals. Nature Nanotech. 11, 339-344, doi:10.1038/nnano.2015.314 
(2016). 

5. 
Ye, J. T. et al. Superconducting dome in a gate-tuned band insulator. Science 338, 1193-
1196, doi:10.1126/science.1228006 (2012). 

6. 
Lu, J. M. et al. Evidence for two-dimensional Ising superconductivity in gated MoS2. 
Science 350, 1353-1357, doi:10.1126/science.aab2277 (2015). 

7. 
Saito, Y. et al. Superconductivity protected by spin-valley locking in ion-gated MoS2. 
Nature Phys. 12, 144-149, doi:10.1038/nphys3580 (2016). 

8. 
Goossens, A. M. et al. Mechanical cleaning of graphene. Applied Physics Letters 100, 
073110, doi:10.1063/1.3685504 (2012). 

9. 
Wang, Z. et al. Origin and magnitude of `designer' spin-orbit interaction in graphene on 
semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. X. 6, 041020 (2016). 

10. 
Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity 2nd edn  (Dover, 2004). 

11. 
Dynes, R. C., Narayanamurti, V. & Garno, J. P. Direct measurement of quasiparticle-
lifetime broadening in a strong-coupled superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1509-1512 
(1978). 

 


