 

1

Amplifier for scanning tunneling microscopy at MHz frequencies 

K.M. Bastiaans 1, T. Benschop1, D. Chatzopoulos1, D.H. Cho1, Q. Dong2, Y. Jin2, 

M.P. Allan1 

1 Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University, Niels Bohrweg 2, 2333 CA 

Leiden, The Netherlands  

2 Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, 

Univ. Paris-Saclay, C2N – Marcoussis, 91460 Marcoussis, France 

 

Conventional scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is limited to a bandwidth of 
circa 1kHz around DC. Here, we develop, build and test a novel amplifier circuit 
capable of measuring the tunneling current in the MHz regime while 
simultaneously performing conventional STM measurements. This is achieved 
with an amplifier circuit including a LC tank with a quality factor exceeding 600 
and a home-built, low-noise high electron mobility transistor (HEMT). The 
amplifier circuit functions while simultaneously scanning with atomic resolution 
in the tunneling regime, i.e. at junction resistances in the range of giga-ohms, 
and down towards point contact spectroscopy. To enable high signal-to-noise 
and meet all technical requirements for the inclusion in a commercial low 
temperature, ultra-high vacuum STM, we use superconducting cross-wound 
inductors and choose materials and circuit elements with low heat load. We 
demonstrate the high performance of the amplifier by spatially mapping the 
Poissonian noise of tunneling electrons on an atomically clean Au(111) surface. 
We also show differential conductance spectroscopy measurements at 3MHz, 
demonstrating 
superior 
performance 
over 
conventional 
spectroscopy 

techniques. Further, our technology could be used to perform impedance 
matched spin resonance and distinguish Majorana modes from more 
conventional edge states.  
 

 

I. Introduction & motivation 

Possible applications of scanning tunneling microscopy experiments in the MHz 
regime include high-frequency differential conductance measurements, 
scanning spin resonance experiments, and noise spectroscopy on the atomic 
scale. Conventionally, this is prevented in STM by the combination of a GOhm 
resistance of the tunnel junction and a capacitor from the cabling which form a 
low pass filter in the kHz regime.  In this paper, we build a matching circuit 
including superconducting inductors and a home-built HEMT that allows us to 
measure STM currents at MHz frequencies while remaining in tunneling and 
with atomic resolution. We demonstrate the amplifier’s superior performance 
for both scanning noise spectroscopy and MHz differential conductance 
measurements. 


 

2

 

We start with an introduction to noise spectroscopy. Measurements of 
electronic noise can yield information in mesoscopic systems that is not present 
in their time-averaged transport characteristics, including fractional charges in 
the quantum hall regime1,2, the doubling of charge in Andreev processes3, 
Coulomb interactions in quantum dots4–7 and the vanishing of noise in break 
junctions at the quantum conductance8. Generally, the quantity of interest is 
the Fano factor F which measures the deviation of the noise from the Poissonian 
noise of independent tunneling events of electrons, SP = 2eI, with e the electron 
charge and I the current9,10. The Fano factor is then defined as the ratio between 
measured (S) and Poissonian (SP) noise, F = S / SP. For an uncorrelated electronic 
liquid, one expects F = 1; but one can imagine systems where the charge of the 
carriers is not equal to the electron charge (𝑞 ≠ 𝑒) or where the electron flow 
is strongly correlated. In these cases, the Fano factor will not be equal to unity, 
i.e. the current noise will be smaller or larger than the Poissonian value even 
though the time-averaged value of the current will not be influenced. Resolving 
the noise with atomic precision might provide us with new information in 
systems with strong electronic correlations or charge aggregations that are not 
present in the mean current. This is our main motivation to combine noise 
measurement with scanning probe microscopy. 

As for the application of MHz differential conductance measurements, we use 
a lock-in amplifier as it is done conventionally, but with 3MHz instead of the 
more common 400Hz – 1kHz. The clear advantage is that in this way, one can 
perform the spectroscopy measurement in a frequency window where 1/f noise 
is much lower. In addition to this, we can clearly separate the high and low 
frequency signal, thus it is, for example, easier to measure in feedback. 

Bringing noise measurements to STM in the tunneling regime (Rjunction >~ 
1GOhm) comes with unique challenges, which prevented any atomic resolution 
noise measurement in the tunneling regime thus far. The high impedance of the 
tunnel junction, formed by the few angstroms vacuum gap between the STM 
tip and sample, is the critical obstacle. Together with the capacitance of the 
interfacing coax cable, the junction acts as a low pass filter only allowing 
transmission of signals in the small frequency range11. Moreover, conventional 
amplifiers used in STM also have a limited bandwidth due to a large feedback 
resistor and unavoidable parasitic capacitances12. This conventional STM 
circuitry limits the bandwidth to detect the tunneling current from DC to around 
1kHz (fig. 1a).  Possible solutions to this are bootstrapping the amplifier13–16, or 
impedance matching11. These enabled noise measurements in MOhm tunnel 
junctions11,13,17,18, but a GOhm impedance as it is present in many STM 
experiments still leads to prohibitive losses in the matching circuit.  


 

3

Here, we report on a new amplifier circuit that allows us to overcome these 
challenges. The requirements for our amplifier were: (i) the amplifier should not 
interfere with traditional STM measurements, (ii) it should work in the GOhm 
regime, (iii), it has to be possible to easily implement the amplifier in a 
commercial STM, (iv) it has to be compatible with UHV, implying low outgassing 
so that the system can be baked and ultra-high- (cryogenic) vacuum can be 
achieved.  

Our key figures of merit are: (i) the low noise of the circuit, (ii) the most efficient 
separation of high and low frequency signals, and (iii) the highest possible Q 
factor of the resonator for highest amplification at 3MHz. 

This article is structured as follows. Noise in a STM junction is discussed in 
section II. A block diagram of the newly developed system for noise-
spectroscopy measurements in STM is presented in section III, followed by a 
discussion on the requirements for implementing such techniques in STM. 
Section IV describes the realization of this new amplifier. A demonstration 
measurement on an Au(111) surface is presented in section V. Differential 
conductance measurements with MHz voltage modulation are discussed in 
section VI. 

 

II. Noise sources in STM 

We start by considering the types of unwanted noise present in a STM setup: 
mechanical noise, thermal (Johnson) noise, amplifier noise, and flicker (1/f) 
noise.  

They have distinguishable frequency dependences, as shown in figure 1a. First, 
flicker noise or 1/f noise, which is present in almost all electronic devices. The 
power spectral density of this low-frequency phenomenon is inversely 
proportional to the frequency and is related to slow resistance fluctuations 
modulated by temperature variations. Second, noise induced by mechanical 
vibrations transferred to the junction, where this mechanical noise is converted 
to current noise. Both noise sources are usually present in the range from DC to 
a few kHz, indicated by the blue shaded area in figure 1a. This emphasizes that 
the low frequency regime should be avoided and illustrates the disadvantages 
of the conventional STM bandwidth. 

At higher frequencies, the current fluctuations are dominated by thermal noise 
and shot noise, both of which are informative about the sample. In principle, 
both phenomena are frequency independent (white noise), and thus are also 
present at lower frequencies, where the total noise power is dominated by the 
other contributions. Thermal (also called Johnson) noise is the thermodynamic 


 

4

electronic noise in any conductor with a finite resistance R; its power spectral 
density is constant throughout the frequency spectrum, 𝑆 = 4𝑘𝐵𝑇, where 𝑘𝐵 is 
Boltzmann’s constant and is temperature. Since thermal noise in a conductor is 
proportional to temperature, it can be lowered by reducing the temperature. It 
can be distinguished from shot noise at zero current, where the latter vanishes.  

Our goal is thus to increase the bandwidth and move it to higher frequencies, 
all whilst retaining the conventional capabilities and staying in the tunneling 
regime. 

 

III. Amplifier and circuit  

III.a General idea 

To achieve the requirements and goals of section I while avoiding the unwanted 
noise sources described in section II, we develop a resonance circuit based 
amplifier including a resonator-based bias-tee.  

We follow the principle of amplifier circuits built for noise spectroscopy 
measurements in mesoscopic systems19–22 but we modify it to work for high 
junction resistances in the GOhm regime and to be compatible with STM. Figure 
1b shows a block diagram of the amplifier circuit combined with STM. First, a 
bias-tee (green) separates the low- and high-frequency signals coming from the 
STM junction. The low-frequency part is needed for the STM feedback loop, 
where the current is converted to a voltage by a transimpedance amplifier at 
room temperature. To separate the high frequency, one could use a bias-tee 
consisting of an inductor in one arm and a capacitor in the other one. However, 
as we still need a kHz bandwidth in the low frequency branch and as we want 
to minimize losses of the high frequency signal, we use a resonator based bias-
tee.  

The high-frequency part of the signal is then passed through the parallel RLC 
circuit (tank, indicated in purple fig. 1b), which converts current to voltage at 

the resonance frequency of the tank circuit 𝑓0 = (2𝜋√𝐿𝐶)

−1. The voltage over 

the tank circuit is detected by the gate of a high electron mobility transistor 
(HEMT, indicated in yellow fig, 1b) with very low input referred voltage23,24 and 
current noise, operating at the base temperature (T ~ 3.5 K) of the STM. Through 
the transimpedance of the HEMT, the voltage fluctuations at its gate are 
converted into current fluctuations. These are measured over a 50 Ω resistor to 
finalize the impedance transformation.  Note that while the voltage/current 
gain of the amplifier is of order unity, the gain of power is considerable. A 50 Ω 
coaxial line connects the amplifier circuit to a commercial 40dB current 


 

5

amplifier at room temperature.  Finally, the signal line is terminated by the 50 
Ω input impedance of the spectrum analyzer. 

  

III.b Circuit elements and printed circuit board design 

The heart of the circuit is built on a ceramic printed circuit board (Rogers Corp 
TMM10i, selected for the very low outgassing properties) as depicted in figure 
2 and described below. Figure 2a shows the circuit schematics of the amplifier. 
The board is located close to the STM head, at the base temperature of the 
liquid He 4 cryostat (Unisoku USM1500). Figure 2b shows a photograph of the 
board mounted on the STM. The tank circuit is covered with a superconducting 
Niobium shield (inset shows the tank circuit beneath). 

The input of the amplifier is connected to the STM tip via a coaxial cable (silver 
plated Cu mini-coax CW2040-3650F) with a total capacitance between inner 
and outer conductor of Cw=30pF. The bias-tee (indicated by green shading) and 
tank (purple shading) combination is formed by two home-built 
superconducting Niobium inductors L1= L2=66μH coupled by capacitors 
Cc=100pF (Murata GRM 0805-size surface mount). The low-frequency 
transmission of the bias-tee is shown in figure 3a, measured at low 
temperature. The flat transfer function in the frequency range of the Femto IV 
amplifier (1kHz, blue shaded are in figure 3a) ensures that this amplification 
scheme can be used for the STM feedback system. 

The resonance circuit is formed by the self-resonance of the superconducting 
Nb inductors in combination with the coaxial cable Cw, providing a resonance 
frequency of 3.009MHz. Parallel self-capacitances of the Nb inductors are also 
shown in figure 2a, C1=15pF and C2=15pF. The Niobium inductors are made by 
cross-winding annealed Nb wire of 100 μm in diameter around a customized 
ceramic (macor) core. We choose superconducting Nb inductors to enhance the 
quality factor of the resonator, increasing current-to-voltage amplification at 
resonance. At 4K, the Nb inductors show a high quality factor of Q=600, 50 times 
larger than similarly made Cu inductors (Q=12), see figure 3b. The Nb inductors 
are covered by a Nb shield to minimize Eddy current damping, ensuring the 
highest possible quality factor.  

The high-impedance part of the amplification scheme (tank circuit coupled to 
STM junction) is matched to the 50 Ω impedance of the spectrum analyzer by a 
home-built low-noise high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) made using 
molecular beam epitaxy. These specially designed HEMT’s can reach 
unprecedented low noise levels at 1 MHz with a noise voltage of 0.25nV/√𝐻𝑧 
and a noise current of 2.2fA/√𝐻𝑧 and under deep cryogenic conditions (≤ 4.2 K), 
and with an input capacitance of about 5pF23,24. In addition, components 
C3=10pF, R1=10 Ω and R4=10 Ω are placed close to the HEMT case to improve its 


 

6

stability.  

The operation point of the HEMT is determined by R2 and R3 and the supply 
voltage. Since we aim to have a very low power dissipation we choose R2=1kΩ 
to give a saturation current of the HEMT of a few tenths of mA. To ensure that 
the HEMT is in saturation we measured the drain current as function of drain-
source voltage at room temperature and 4K by varying the supply voltage, as 
depicted in figure 3c. In the following demonstration the HEMT is biased in 
saturation at V=0.5V.   

The voltage fluctuations in the 50 Ω line are amplified at room temperature by 
a +40dB current amplifier with an input current noise of 310 pV/√Hz (Femto 
HAS-X-1-40) and is finally terminated by the 50 Ω input impedance of a Zurich 
Instruments MFLI digital spectrum analyzer. The power spectral density 
measured at the input of the spectrum analyzer is plotted in figure 3d where 
the blue dots are the measured data points and the red curve represents a 
circuit diagram fit. 

 

V. Noise spectroscopy performance on atomically Au(111)   

To demonstrate the simultaneous use of the STM feedback system and noise 
sensitive measurements in the tunneling regime, we performed noise 
spectroscopy measurements on a gold on mica sample. We believe that the 
Au(111) surface is most ideal for characterizing our noise-sensitive 
measurement since the sample is metallic thus any electron correlations are 
negligible. Figure 4a depicts an atomic-resolution image of the Au(111) 
terminated surface on a 20nm field of view, the characteristic ‘herringbone’ 
reconstruction is clearly visible. 

In the same field of view we performed noise-spectroscopy measurements to 
resolve the current noise with atomic-scale resolution. Even though several 
topographic features can be observed, the spatially resolved noise map (figure 
4b) exhibits homogeneous contrast, as is expected for a classical uncorrelated 
flow of electrons between sample and tip. The 64x64 pixel noise map was 
acquired in circa 12 hours. 

The single point noise spectra (figure 4c) acquired at randomly chosen sites 
always show a linear increase of the noise with increasing current for a typical 
tunneling junction resistance (1GOhm). The linear increase of the noise is a 
unique characteristic of shot noise in the junction. 

 

VI. MHz differential conductance measurements 

A second application for our amplifier circuit is to measure differential 


 

7

conductance (dI/dV) which is proportional to the local density of states in a 
frequency range where 1/f noise is suppressed.  In conventional STM differential 
conductance measurements, a voltage modulation has to be applied in the DC-
1kHz range, now we can also perform dI/dV measurements at 3MHz. At this 
frequency, 1/f (and other) noise should be considerably lower, as we discussed 
in section II, figure 1a. Therefore, we expect that differential conductance 
measurements performed at 3MHz will show superior performance over 
conventional spectroscopic-imaging STM measurements. 

Figure 5a shows that we can resolve the 3MHz voltage modulation, applied to 
the sample, within the tank bandwidth; the sharp peak in figure 5a (0.5 mV 
modulation amplitude at 3.009MHz) is 6 orders of magnitude higher than the 
background. To verify that the signal to noise ratio of MHz differential 
conductance measurements is higher than state-of-the-art STM techniques, we 
will compare the two by the means of a demonstration measurement on a 
Pb(111) sample using a Pb-coated PtIr tip at 3.3K.  

First, we compare the differential conductance measured over a period of 10s 
in tunneling (6mV, 200pA) with the feedback disabled. In this way we can check 
the influence of slow (1/f) fluctuations on the differential conductance signal. 
Comparing the conventional dI/dV measurement (figure 5b) with the MHz 
measurement (figure 5c) reveals that the former is subject to much severe low-
frequency fluctuations than the latter. This directly translates into a higher 
quality dI/dV spectrum, as can be seen by comparing the 3MHz dI/dV spectrum 
(figure 5e) to the one measured at 887Hz (figure 5d).  

 

Conclusion & outlook 

We have built a low temperature, low noise amplifier to measure STM currents 
at 3MHz. We used two superconducting Nb inductors to form a bias-tee and 
tank resonator coupled to a home-built, low-noise HEMT which is essential for 
the impedance matching to 50 Ω coax cable. We demonstrated the 
performance of this amplifier by performing noise spectroscopy measurements 
on an Au(111) surface, showcasing simultaneous visualization of the surface 
topology and atomically resolved noise maps. We further demonstrated that 
the amplifier allows to measure differential conductance spectra at 3MHz 
where 1/f noise is strongly suppressed. 

We believe this newly developed technique will be useful for a variety of 
applications. Our immediate goal is to investigate many-body correlation effects 
in many quantum materials, including fluctuating stripes or orbital currents that 
have been proposed before25,26, Kondo effects27, or signature of Majorana 
modes28,29. Further, electron spin resonance often leads to periodic processes 
and equilibration times in the MHz to GHz regime30,31 . These can be measured 
impedance matched with the presented amplifier instead of measuring indirect 


 

8

effects on the DC current.  This could be further improved by guiding the 
microwave signal directly on the tip with coplanar waveguides, as suggested 
recently32. Finally, one could imagine that the thermal noise, introduced here as 
an unwanted noise source, could yield information about the sample via cross-
correlation noise33. 

 

Note: A very similar amplifier is reported by Massee et al.: “Atomic scale shot-
noise using broadband scanning tunnelling microscopy”. 

 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Ram Aluru, Marco Aprilli, Irene Battisti, Sander Blok, Kier Heeck, 
Maarten Leeuwenhoek, Freek Massee, Kees van Oosten, Tjerk Oosterkamp, 
Marcel Rost, Jan van Ruitenbeek and Gijsbert Verdoes for valuable discussions. 
This project was financially supported by the European Research Council (ERC 
StG SpinMelt) and by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research 
(NWO/OCW), as part of the Frontiers of Nanoscience program, as well as 
through Vidi (680-47-536) and Projectruimte (16PR1028) grants. 

 

 
 


 

9

References 

1. 
de-Picciotto, R. et al. Direct observation of a fractional charge. Nature 
389, 162 (1997). 

2. 
Saminadayar, L., Glattli, D. C., Jin, Y. & Etienne, B. Observation of the e/3 
fractionally charged laughlin quasiparticle. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2526 
(1997). 

3. 
Ronen, Y. et al. Charge of a quasiparticle in a superconductor. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 1743 (2016). 

4. 
Thielmann, A., Hettler, M. H., König, J. & Schön, G. Cotunneling current 
and shot noise in quantum dots. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 146806 (2005). 

5. 
Onac, E., Balestro, F., Trauzettel, B., Lodewijk, C. F. J. & Kouwenhoven, L. 
P. Shot-noise detection in a carbon nanotube quantum dot. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 96, 026803 (2006). 

6. 
Iannaccone, G., Lombardi, G., Macucci, M. & Pellegrini, B. Enhanced 
shot noise in resonant tunneling: theory and experiment. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 80, 1054 (1997). 

7. 
Oberholzer, S. et al. Shot noise by quantum scattering in chaotic 
cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2114 (2001). 

8. 
van den Brom, H. & van Ruitenbeek, J. Quantum Suppression of Shot 
Noise in Atom-Size Metallic Contacts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1526 (1999). 

9. 
Blanter, Y. & Büttiker, M. Shot noise in mesoscopic conductors. Phys. 
Rep. 336, 1 (2000). 

10. 
Blanter, Y. M. & Büttiker, M. Transition from sub-Poissonian to super-
Poissonian shot noise in resonant quantum wells. Phys. Rev. B 59, 10217 
(1999). 

11. 
Kemiktarak, U., Ndukum, T., Schwab, K. C. & Ekinci, K. L. Radio-
frequency scanning tunnelling microscopy. Nature 450, 85 (2007). 

12. 
Chen, C. J. Introduction to Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (Second 
Edition). Oxford Univ. Press (2008). 

13. 
Birk, H., Jong, M. De & Schönenberger, C. Shot-noise suppression in the 
single-electron tunneling regime. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1610 (1995). 

14. 
Birk, H., Oostveen, K. & Schönenberger, C. Preamplifier for electric‐
current noise measurements at low temperatures. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 67, 
2977 (1996). 

15. 
Rost, M. J. et al. Scanning probe microscopes go video rate and beyond. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76, 053710 (2005). 


 

10

16. 
Mamin, H. J., Birk, H., Wimmer, P. & Rugar, D. High-speed scanning 
tunneling microscopy: Principles and applications. J. Appl. Phys. 75, 161 
(1994). 

17. 
Burtzlaff, A., Weismann, A., Brandbyge, M. & Berndt, R. Shot Noise as a 
Probe of Spin-Polarized Transport through Single Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
114, 016602 (2015). 

18. 
Burtzlaff, A., Schneider, N. L., Weismann, A. & Berndt, R. Shot noise 
from single atom contacts in a scanning tunneling microscope. Surf. Sci. 
643, 10 (2016). 

19. 
DiCarlo, L. et al. System for measuring auto- and cross correlation of 
current noise at low temperatures. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 77, 073906 (2006). 

20. 
Arakawa, T., Nishihara, Y., Maeda, M., Norimoto, S. & Kobayashi, K. 
Cryogenic amplifier for shot noise measurement at 20 mK. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 103, 172104 (2013). 

21. 
Hashisaka, M. et al. Measurement for quantum shot noise in a quantum 
point contact at low temperatures. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 109, 012013 
(2008). 

22. 
Robinson,  A.M. & Talyanskii, V.I. Cryogenic amplifier for 1 MHz with a 
high input impedance using a commercial pseudomorphic high electron 
mobility transistor. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 75, 3169 (2004). 

23. 
Dong, Q. et al. Ultra-low noise high electron mobility transistors for 
high-impedance and low-frequency deep cryogenic readout electronics. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 013504 (2014). 

24. 
Jin, Y. et al. Ultra-low Noise CryoHEMTs for Cryogenic High-Impedance 
Readout Electronics : Results and Applications. ICSICT Conference 
proceedings (2016). 

25. 
Carlson, E. W., Dahmen, K. A., Fradkin, E. & Kivelson, S. A. Hysteresis 
and noise from electronic nematicity in high-temperature 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 097003 (2006). 

26. 
Kivelson, S. A. et al. How to detect fluctuating order in the high-
temperature superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 1201 (2003). 

27. 
Figgins, J. & Morr, D. K. Differential Conductance and Quantum 
Interference in Kondo Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 187202 (2010). 

28. 
Nadj-Perge, S. et al. Observation of Majorana fermions in ferromagnetic 
atomic chains on a superconductor. Science 346, 602 (2014). 

29. 
Golub, A. & Horovitz, B. Shot noise in a Majorana fermion chain. Phys. 
Rev. B. 83, 153415 (2011). 


 

11

30. 
Loth, S., Etzkorn, M., Lutz, C. P., Eigler, D. M. & Heinrich, A. J. 
Measurement of fast electron spin relaxation times with atomic 
resolution. Science 329, 1628 (2010). 

31. 
Baumann, S. et al. Electron paramagnetic resonance of individual atoms 
on a surface. Science 350, 417 (2015). 

32. 
Leeuwenhoek, M. et al. Nanofabricated tips as a platform for double-tip 
and device based scanning tunneling microscopy. arXiv:1712.08620 
(2017). 

33. 
Grabert, H. Dynamical Coulomb blockade of tunnel junctions driven by 
alternating voltages. Phys. Rev. B. 92, 245433 (2015). 

 

 
 


 

12

 

Figure 1. Noise in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). a. The different noise sources in STM 
and their frequency dependence are depicted in this schematic plot. At low frequencies 
mechanical and 1/f noise dominate (indicated by blue region), in this region conventional STM 
is sensitive. To measure shot noise in the tunnel junction we need to create a new bandwidth 
at high-frequency. Here thermal noise and shot noise are the most dominant noise sources, 
since they are independent of frequency.  b. Requirements for the newly built amplifier for 
combining STM and noise-spectroscopy. Crucial components are highlighted: i) the bias-tee 
(green) that separates the low and high frequency signals. ii) tank circuit (purple). iii) High 
electron mobility transistor (HEMT, indicated in yellow) to amplify the high-frequency signal. 
Both the low and high frequency signals have additional room temperature amplification and 
detection (white). 

 
 


 

13

 

Figure 2. Newly developed amplifier for scanning noise spectroscopy. a. Circuit diagram of the 
amplifier. The colored boxes (green, purple and yellow) highlight specific parts of the amplifier 
corresponding to fig. 1b. b. Photograph of the printed circuit board. The niobium inductors are 
covered by a niobium shield.  

 

Figure 3. a. Low-frequency signal used for the STM feedback system. The transparency is close 
to 1 and flat from DC up to 2kHz. Bandwidth of the FEMTO transimpedance amplifier (1kHz) is 
indicated by the shaded blue area. b. Transmission of a home-built copper (grey) and 
superconducting niobium (blue) inductor resonator circuit. The latter showing a much higher 
quality factor. c. Current-voltage characteristics of the high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) 
at 300K and LHe temperatures. d. Power spectral density measured in a small bandwidth around 
the resonance frequency of the tank circuit (3.009 MHz). Blue dots are measured data points, 
red curve corresponds to a circuit diagram fit. 


 

14

 

Figure 4. Benchmark of noise-sensitive measurements on a gold on mica sample. a. An 
atomically resolved STM topographic image of the Au(111) surface on a 20nm field of view, the 
‘herringbone’ reconstruction is clearly visible. (Setup conditions bias: 100mV, current set point: 
100pA). b. Spatially resolved noise map at 500mV, 500pA in the same field of view as Fig 4a, 
acquired in 12 hours. It shows homogenous Poissonian (Fano=1) noise at all locations. c. Single 
point noise spectrum acquired at a random location in Fig. 4b. The tunnel junction resistance is 
kept fixed to 1GOhm. 

 

Figure 5. MHz differential conductance. a. Power spectrum obtained around the resonance 
peak. The modulation signal for the lock-in measurement is applied at the resonance frequency 
(3.009 MHz). b. Differential conductance measured over time at 887 Hz. A voltage modulation 
of 0.5mV is used and feedback is disabled. c. Differential conductance measured over time at 
the resonance frequency (3.009 MHz) under similar conditions as figure 5b. d. Differential 
conductance spectrum obtained with a 0.5mV voltage modulation at 887 Hz on a Pb(111) 
surface at a base temperature of 3.3K. e. Differential conductance spectrum obtained at the 
resonance frequency (3.009 MHz) obtained under the same conditions as figure 5d. 


