1

Parameter free quantitative analysis of atom probe data by correlation 

functions: application to the precipitation in Al-Zn-Mg-Cu

Huan Zhao1, Baptiste Gault1, Dirk Ponge1, Dierk Raabe1, Frédéric De Geuser2,*

1 Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung, Max-Planck-Str. 1, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany 

2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, SIMaP, F-38000 Grenoble, France

Abstract: 
Atom probe tomography enables precise quantification of the composition of second phase 

particles from their early stages, leading to improved understanding of the thermodynamic and 

kinetic mechanisms of phase formation and quantify structure-property relationships. Here we 

demonstrate how approaches developed for  small-angle scattering can be adapted to atom probe 

tomography. By exploiting nearest-neighbor distributions and radial distribution function, we 

introduce a parameter free methodology to efficiently extract information such as particle size, 

composition, volume fraction, number density and inter-particle distance. We demonstrate the 

strength of this approach in the analysis of a precipitation-hardened model Al-Zn-Mg-Cu high-

strength lightweight alloy.


2

Al-Zn-Mg-(Cu) alloys of the 7XXX Al-alloys are precipitation-strengthened Al-alloys exhibiting 

high-strength and expected to play an important role for lightweight transportation. The 

precipitation sequence in the bulk of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys has been studied and is well 

established [1–3]: solid solution → GP zones→ metastable η’→ stable η (MgZn2). Atom probe 

tomography (APT) provides three-dimensional (3D), nanoscale analytical mapping of materials, 

and is uniquely positioned to measure the local chemical composition and 3D morphology of 

individual precipitates. However, early designs of the instruments had an angular field-of-view 

limited to less than 10 degrees and thus only small particle numbers would typically be 

intercepted and analyzed ̛[4], thereby limiting the possibility of deriving precisely important 

metallurgical measures e.g. precipitate size, particle spacing, composition, volume fraction, and 

number density. The significant increase in the field of view of the technique associated with 

modern microscope designs [5] often allow for hundreds or thousands of nanoparticles to be 

captured within a single dataset [6], which makes data extraction and processing tedious, and 

most often erroneous [7]. 

Over 50 years of theoretical developments in the small-angle scattering community have enabled 

the development of a complete formalism to fit experimental results with analytical functions to 

derive microstructural characteristics [8,9]. Here, we introduce a new methodology to process

radial distribution function (RDF)-based model fitting from atom probe data to provide complete 

characterization of both the precipitates and the matrix, without the need for any input 

parameters. Parameter-selection by various users is a key hurdle in ensuring reliability and 

reproducibility of data analysis as [10–13]. Our methodology makes use of widely available 

integral metrics, the distribution of distance to the first nearest-neighbor (1NN) and species-

specific RDF computed on the entire dataset, making use of all available information, and 


3

thereby improving statistics. We evidence the strength of this new approach through the analysis 

of the temporal evolution of the precipitates formed during aging of a model Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy.

An Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy was cast into a 200mm*190mm*40mm ingot in a vacuum induction 

furnace. The ingot was homogenized at 475 °C for 1.5 hours and water quenched followed by 

hot rolling at 450 °C to 3mm thickness and water quenched. Samples were then solution treated 

at 475 °C for an hour and quenched in water, immediately followed by an aging treatment at 

120oC for 30 minutes, 2 h and 24 h. An overaging step was performed on the 24h aged sample

by further aging for 6 h at 180°C. A specimen was also analyzed immediately after quench. It 

will be further called ‘as quenched’ even though it has in fact undergone roughly 6h of natural 

ageing before APT analysis which may have already caused some degree of clustering. Table 1 

summarizes the chemical composition measured by wet chemical analysis after homogenization. 

Table 1. Bulk chemical composition of a model Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy (in at%)

Alloy
Zn
Mg
Cu
Zr
Fe
Si
Al

(at %)
2.69
2.87
0.95
0.05
0.01
<0.01
balance

Specimens for APT measurement and analysis were prepared to investigate the precipitation in 

the bulk by using a two-stage electrochemical polishing protocol described in [14]. APT was 

performed in high-voltage pulsing mode with a pulse fraction of 20% at a repetition rate of 250 

kHz and at a base temperature of 50K in a Cameca Local Electrode Atom Probe (LEAP) 5000XS. 

The total voltage was increased to maintain an average detection rate of 1 evaporative event per 

100 pulses. Datasets containing 50-150 million ions were acquired for each aging state. Data 

reconstruction and analysis were performed using the Integrated Visualization and Analysis 


4

software (IVAS 3.6.14). The partial structural information from within the dataset allowed to 

calibrate the reconstructions parameters as described by Gault et al. [15]. 

The aging response was followed by Vickers hardness measurements using a 0.5 kg load. The 

values reported in Figure 1 are the average of 10 individual measurements. The hardness of the 

supersaturated solid solution state is 120±3 HV0.5. The hardness then progressively increases up 

to 24 hours, with a peak hardness of 185±5 HV0.5. The overaging step resulted in significant 

coarsening and a decrease in hardness down to 171±3 HV0.5. Representative datasets across the 

aging process are shown inset in Figure 1. Iso-surfaces encompassing regions in the 

reconstruction containing over 10at% Zn highlights the formation and coarsening of Zn-Mg-rich 

precipitates.


5

Figure 1: Evolution of the hardness as a function of aging time. Inset are atom maps to show the effect of nanostructures on the 
hardness. Al atoms are shown in grey and Zn atoms in dark cyan. The precipitates are visualized with 10 at% Zn iso-composition 
surface. Only part of the atoms maps are shown in order to obtain the same scale for clarity. The atom maps are to scale. 

From a typical dataset, two integral information can be obtained: the global composition and the 

matrix composition. The former is derived from counting the relative number of ions of each 

element within the mass spectrum. The latter can be derived from  the distribution of isolated 

atoms for the determination of the matrix composition (DIAM) method [16]. DIAM is based on 

the probability for each solute species to have no neighbor (i.e. to be isolated) at a given distance 

r, in comparison to that obtained from a random distribution of solutes. Both can be directly 

derived from the first nearest-neighbor distribution. 


6

For characterizing the precipitates present in the volume, we use radial distribution functions 

calculated with each solute of a specific species as the central atom. The calculation is then 

repeated for each species separately. The RDF 𝑛𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) is the number of atoms of species 𝑗 at a 

distance 𝑟 of an atom of species 𝑖. To speed up the calculation, the RDF is computed on a 

randomly-selected subset of atoms, which does not affect the results, since the RDF is 

normalized by the composition. Calculation of an RDF for one solute in a 40 million ions dataset 

was timed to take approx. 20 minutes, while it lasted only approx. 1 minute on a subsampled 

dataset (1 in 40 ions). Even though subsampling increases statistical noise for low counts and 

should be used with care, no significant effect was observed. 

The 𝑛𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) enable to compute the average composition 𝐶𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) of element 𝑗 at a distance 𝑟 of 

an element 𝑖:

𝐶𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) =
𝑛𝑖−𝑗(𝑟)

∑ 𝑛𝑖−𝑗(𝑟)
𝑗

(1)

We call 𝐶𝑖 the average composition of element 𝑖. In an isotropic system, 𝐶𝑖 ⋅ 𝐶𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) is the 

correlation (convolution) of the spatial composition of element 𝑖 and that of element 𝑗.

𝐶𝑖 ⋅ 𝐶𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) =< 𝐶𝑖(𝑟1⃗⃗⃗ ) ⋅ 𝐶𝑗(𝑟2⃗⃗⃗ ) > with 𝑟 = |𝑟2⃗⃗⃗ − 𝑟1⃗⃗⃗ | (2)

At large 𝑟 this convolution necessarily approaches 𝐶𝑖 ⋅ 𝐶𝑗. We can subtract this final value and 

introduce the 𝑖 − 𝑗 pair correlation function (PCF) 𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟):

𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) = 𝐶𝑖 ⋅ 𝐶𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) − 𝐶𝑖 ⋅ 𝐶𝑗 (3)

Where 𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) = 0 when there is no correlation, which is always true for large 𝑟. It can be re-

written:


7

𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) =< (𝐶𝑖(𝑟1⃗⃗⃗ ) − 𝐶𝑖) ⋅ (𝐶𝑗(𝑟2⃗⃗⃗ ) − 𝐶𝑗) > with r = |𝑟2⃗⃗⃗ − 𝑟1⃗⃗⃗ | (4)

or

𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) =< Δ𝐶𝑖(𝑟1⃗⃗⃗ )Δ𝐶𝑗(𝑟2⃗⃗⃗ ) > with 𝑟 = |𝑟2⃗⃗⃗ − 𝑟1⃗⃗⃗ | (5)

to highlight that only the fluctuation of composition Δ𝐶𝑖, i.e. the difference with the average, is 

relevant to the PCF. This correlation function is analogous to that introduced by Debye and 

Bueche [17] and which the basis of the small-angle scattering formalism. We can further 

introduce a normalized correlation function 𝛾𝑖−𝑗

0 (𝑟) by writing:

𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) = Δ𝐶𝑖Δ𝐶𝑗 ⋅ 𝛾𝑖−𝑗

0 (𝑟) (6)

where 𝛾𝑖−𝑗

0 (0) = 1 and 𝛾𝑖−𝑗

0
= 0 at large 𝑟. 𝛾𝑖−𝑗

0 (𝑟) is only dependant on the geometry of the 

objects. In particular, for 𝑖 = 𝑗, we have the auto-correlation:

𝛾𝑖−𝑖(𝑟) = Δ𝐶𝑖

2 ⋅ 𝛾𝑖−𝑖

0 (𝑟) (7)

From its definition, the value of 𝛾𝑖−𝑗 at the origin Δ𝐶𝑖

2 is the mean squared composition 

fluctuation, which directly depends on the quantity and composition of the objects. Contrasting 

with 𝛾𝑖−𝑖

0 (𝑟), Δ𝐶𝑖

2 is exclusively composition-based, it is essentially immune to typical APT 

reconstruction artefacts such as local magnification or preferential field evaporation caused by 

the difference in the electric field necessary to induce field evaporation for different species or 

phases [18,19]. In small-angle scattering, the separation of the geometry-based normalized 

correlation function and the mean squared fluctuation enables the measurement of the size of 

objects irrespective of their quantity or of the scaling of the measurement. In APT, especially for 


8

very small objects, the composition is likely more accurate, while 𝛾𝑖−𝑗

0
is likely more 

questionable.

We assume 2 phases of homogeneous composition in element 𝑖, i.e. precipitates composition 𝐶𝑝

𝑖

in a matrix of composition 𝐶𝑚

𝑖 . We further assume that both share the same atomic volume Ω. 

While this is never strictly true, the difference in atomic volumes between phases is usually small 

compared to the possible apparent density differences due to e.g. local magnifications [18]. In 

these conditions, we can write the precipitates volume fraction as:

𝑓𝑣 = 𝐶𝑖 − 𝐶𝑚

𝑖

𝐶𝑝

𝑖 − 𝐶𝑚

𝑖
(8)

which should be true for any 𝑖.

Within these assumptions we can calculate the average of the product of the composition

fluctuations:

Δ𝐶𝑖Δ𝐶𝑗 = 𝑓𝑣(1 − 𝑓𝑣)(𝐶𝑝

𝑖 − 𝐶𝑚

𝑖 )(𝐶𝑝

𝑗 − 𝐶𝑚

𝑗 ) (9)

In particular, for 𝑖 = 𝑗

Δ𝐶𝑖

2 = 𝑓𝑣(1 − 𝑓𝑣)(𝐶𝑝

𝑖 − 𝐶𝑚

𝑖 )

2 (10)

or

Δ𝐶𝑖

2 = (𝐶𝑝

𝑖 − 𝐶𝑖)(𝐶𝑖 − 𝐶𝑚

𝑖 ) (11)

The value of the pair correlation function at 𝑟 = 0, in combination with the matrix composition

obtained from DIAM, provides a mean to derive both the volume fraction and the precipitates 


9

composition, irrespective of the particles shape and without being affected by local 

magnification.

The normalized correction function 𝛾0(𝑟) can be calculated analytically for simple shapes. For a 

sphere of radius 𝑅, i.e. of homogeneous density and with a sharp interface with the matrix, it is 

given by [20,21]:

𝛾0

𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 (𝑟, 𝑅) = {

1 − 3𝑟

4𝑅 +
𝑟3

16𝑅3 (𝑟 ≤ 2𝑅)

0 (𝑟 > 2𝑅)
(12)

For a size distribution of spheres (e.g. normal, log-normal,…) this can be readily integrated

numerically. We have fitted all the experimental 𝛾𝑖−𝑗(𝑟) for all aging conditions independently, 

but with the same size for all 𝑖 − 𝑗 pairs. We use a lognormal distribution of spheres with a 20% 

dispersity. We also add a contribution of an excluded volume [22], which is a small correction to 

the PCF depending on the size and volume fraction which gives a negative contribution 

originating from the impossibility of having two precipitates on top of each other. This 

contribution essentially helps to reproduce the fact that some curves go through a negative 

minimum before reaching zero for larger 𝑟. In any case, the validity of the fitting model for 

𝛾0(𝑟) should be assessed in regard with the distortions due to local magnifications as well as 

with the validity of the chosen shape and size dispersion. Nevertheless, it provides a robust 

effective average size measured through all existing objects in the volume.

The results are a complete set of Δ𝐶𝑖

2 and 𝑅 for all times and 𝑖. The next step is to compute the 

𝐶𝑝

𝑖 from eq. (11) and 𝐶𝑝

𝐴𝑙 = 1 − 𝐶𝑝

𝑍𝑛 − 𝐶𝑝

𝑀𝑔 − 𝐶𝑝

𝐶𝑢. From these 𝐶𝑝 we can derive the volume 

fractions 𝑓𝑣 from eq. (10) which gives us a set of volume fractions calculated for each solute 

element.  Since we assume that there is a single type of object, we will reduce the uncertainty by 


10

fixing the volume fraction as the average of that computed from eq. (10) with Zn and Mg (the 

low content of Cu both on average and in the precipitates, makes the calculations noisy for this 

element). The mean diameter of the precipitates is obtained from the fit, but as mentioned above, 

is affected by possible local magnification artefacts. The number density is derived from the ratio 

of the volume fraction to the average volume. 

This combined DIAM and RDF-based protocol was applied to characterize the matrix 

composition and the precipitates evolution over the course of the aging process. Figure 2 (a–b) 

report the evolution of matrix composition as well as the composition measured in the entire 

dataset, as well as the precipitates composition over the course of the aging process. Figure 3 (a–

d) show the volume fraction of precipitates, their average radius, the number density, and the 

distance between precipitates roughly estimated as 𝑛𝑣

−3 . Since the solute content of the 

precipitates evolves with ageing, we chose to represent only the contribution of solutes to the 

volume fraction to better visualize the advancement of the reaction.

While Cu low composition may be more sensitive to noise and ranging issues, Zn and Mg global 

dataset composition should be essentially independent of aging time and equal to the nominal 

composition. While this is observed initially, the global composition in Zn, and to some extent in 

Mg, eventually drops to a lower value in the peak aged state, and more importantly so after over 

aging. This could only be attributed to a loss of solutes to grain boundaries or to often-reported 

instrumental issues related to the preferential field evaporation of specific solutes [23]. 

The results show a number density in the range of 1025 m-3 of solute-rich clusters approx. 1 nm in 

size form in the as-quenched state. This might be caused by the natural aging during sample 

preparation. The precipitates composition in the three solutes plateaus after 30 min to approx. 75 

at % Al, 13 at % Zn, 10 at% Mg and 2 at % Cu. Over the first 2 hours at 120°C aging, nearly 


11

spherical zones enriched in solutes form and develop into GP zones with a number density of 

1024–1025 m-3. In the peak aged condition, the precipitates’ composition does not reach that of the 

η’ phase and thus can be considered as GP zones. It should also be noted that within the 

precipitates, Cu remains in low composition and almost unchanged at 120°C aging, while 

exhibiting a strong increase in the overaging step. This likely originates from the low diffusivity 

of Cu, together with the solubility in the precipitates [24]. Since its content was stable from the 

beginning, however, it means that the very early clusters/GP zones are comparatively richer in 

Cu, which may indicate that Cu plays a significant role in GP zone nucleation. Significant 

coarsening is evidenced in the overaged state as revealed by the increase of precipitates radius, 

volume fraction and inter-precipitates distance. Only then does the composition of the 

precipitates reach a content compatible with η’. 


12

Figure 2: (a) evolution of the composition measured in the entire datasets (discs, the solid line is a guide to the eye) and the 
matrix composition (diamonds, the dashed line is a guide to the eye) for the different solutes as a function of aging time. (b) 
evolution of the precipitates composition (discs, the dashed line is a guide to the eye) for the different solutes as a function of 

aging time.

(a)

(b)


13

Figure 3: Evolution during the aging process of (a), the volume fraction of precipitates; (b), the precipitate radius; (c), volume 
density of precipitates; (d), average distance between precipitates. 

Our approach provides all the meaningful metallurgical information, similarly to what would 

usually be performed in small-angle scattering studies [25,26], except that here the composition 

of the objects can be directly determined. This information is necessary to develop mean-field 

models to explain the mechanical behavior of materials [27] but is rarely available directly from 

APT. The methodology we introduce here is parameter-free, versatile and can be applied to 

numerous systems, provided that the assumptions from the model are not invalidated. In cases 

where a large number of objects are imaged within the dataset, our alternative approach ensures 

the highest possible statistical significance of the results, as well as reproducibility of the results. 

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)


14

Acknowledgements

H. Zhao would like to acknowledge the Chinese Scholarship Council for the PhD scholarship 

granted to support this work. U. Tezins and A. Sturm are acknowledged for their support in the 

use of the atom probe and PFIB facility at MPIE. 

References

[1]
S.R. Ortner, C.R.M. Grovenor, B.A. Shollock, Scr. Metall. 22 (1988) 839–842.

[2]
G. Sha, A. Cerezo, in:, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, pp. 564–568.

[3]
G. Sha, A. Cerezo, Acta Mater. 52 (2004) 4503–4516.

[4]
M. Dumont, W. Lefebvre, B. Doisneau-Cottignies, A. Deschamps, Acta Mater. 53 (2005) 

2881–2892.

[5]
T.F. Kelly, T.T. Gribb, J.D. Olson, R.L. Martens, J.D. Shepard, S.A. Wiener, T.C. 

Kunicki, R.M. Ulfig, D.R. Lenz, E.M. Strennen, E. Oltman, J.H. Bunton, D.R. Strait, 

Microsc. Microanal. 10 (2004) 373–83.

[6]
S. Jiang, H. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Liu, H. Chen, M. Yao, B. Gault, D. Ponge, D. Raabe, A. 

Hirata, M. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Lu, Nature 544 (2017).

[7]
T.L. Martin, A. Radecka, L. Sun, T. Simm, D. Dye, K. Perkins, B. Gault, M.P. Moody, 

P.A.J. Bagot, Mater. Sci. Technol. (United Kingdom) 32 (2016) 232–241.

[8]
G. Porod, Kolloid-Zeitschrift 124 (1951) 83–114.

[9]
A. Guinier, Nature 142 (1938) 569–570.


15

[10]
D. Haley, P. Choi, D. Raabe, Ultramicroscopy (2015).

[11]
E.A. Marquis, J.M. Hyde, Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 69 (2010) 37–62.

[12] L.T. Stephenson, M.P. Moody, P. V Liddicoat, S.P. Ringer, Microsc. Microanal. 13 (2007) 

448–63.

[13]
L.T.L.T. Stephenson, M.P.M.P. Moody, B. Gault, S.P.S.P. Ringer, Philos. Mag. 93 (2013) 

975–989.

[14]
M.K. Miller, G.D.W. Smith, Atom Probe Microanalysis: Principles and Applications to 

Materials Problems, Materials Research Society, Pittsburg, PA, 1989.

[15] B. Gault, F. de Geuser, L.T.L.T. Stephenson, M.P.M.P. Moody, B.C.B.C. Muddle, S.P.S.P. 

Ringer, Microsc. Microanal. 14 (2008) 296–305.

[16]
F. De Geuser, W. Lefebvre, Microsc. Res. Tech. 74 (2011) 257–263.

[17]
P. Debye, A.M. Bueche, J. Appl. Phys. 20 (1949) 518–525.

[18]
F. Vurpillot, A. Bostel, D. Blavette, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76 (2000) 3127–3129.

[19]
D.J. Larson, B. Gault, B.P. Geiser, F. De Geuser, F. Vurpillot, Curr. Opin. Solid State 

Mater. Sci. 17 (2013) 236–247.

[20]
A. Guinier, G. Fournet, Small-Angle Scattering of X-Rays, Wiley, 1955.

[21] T. Philippe, F. De Geuser, S. Duguay, W. Lefebvre, O. Cojocaru-Miredin, G. Da Costa, D. 

Blavette, Ultramicroscopy 109 (2009) 1304–1309.

[22]
T. Kruglov, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 38 (2005) 716–720.

[23]
M.K. Miller, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 19 (1981) 57.


16

[24]
T. Marlaud, A. Deschamps, F. Bley, W. Lefebvre, B. Baroux, Acta Mater. 58 (2010) 

4814–4826.

[25]
A. Deschamps, C. Sigli, T. Mourey, F. de Geuser, W. Lefebvre, B. Davo, Acta Mater. 60 

(2012) 1917–1928.

[26]
A. Deschamps, F. De Geuser, Z. Horita, S. Lee, G. Renou, Acta Mater. 66 (2014) 105–

117.

[27]
Z. Guo, W. Sha, Mater. Trans. 43 (2002) 1273–1282.


