                                                                        Presented at the 9th International Conference on Industrial Tribology  
(ICIT-2017), December 6-9,2017, Kolkata, India 

1 
 

Ultrananocrystalline Diamond Film: Tribological Studies Against Metal and 
Ceramic Balls 
 
Revati Rani1, Niranjan Kumar1*  and I-Nan Lin2 

1Materials Science Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, HBNI, Kalpakkam 603102 
(INDIA) 
2Department of Physics, Tamkamg University, Tamsui 25137 (TAIWAN) 
 
Abstract 
In this present work, friction and wear behavior of UNCD thin film has been studied against three 
different sliding counterbodies i.e. Al2O3, SiC and steel balls. UNCD/steel sliding pair showed high 
friction coefficient in the beginning of the sliding process which decreased to the lower value after 
longer sliding passes. This behavior might be explained by oxidation mechanism. However, high 
friction value was observed in the case of UNCD/SiC and this was attributed to strong adhesive force 
acting across the sliding interfaces. Stable and low friction value was measured in UNCD/Al2O3 sliding 
combination. This was governed by chemically inert interfaces and graphite tribolayer formation. 
 
Introduction 
Carbon based thin films are important for tribological applications due to their tunable microstructure 
and chemical properties. Nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) and ultra-nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD) 
thin films showed improved friction and wear resistance properties [1-3]. Understanding the 
tribological behavior of UNCD thin films against ceramics and metal counterbodies are technically 
important for various industrial applications. In this present study, tribological properties of UNCD film 
has been evaluated against three different ceramic and metallic balls such as Al2O3, SiC and 100Cr6 
steel. Furthermore, detail characterizations have been carried out for the sliding combination of 
UNCD/Al2O3. Here, it is important to mention that tribolayer is one of the most significant aspects for 
the determination of friction and wear properties [2]. 
 
Experimental Section 
Film Deposition and Characterization 
The UNCD film was grown on mirror polished silicon (100) substrate in microwave plasma enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (MPECVD, 2.45 GHz 6’’ IPLAS-CYRANNUS) system. The UNCD film was 
deposited using CH4 (1%)/Ar plasma media with a microwave power delivery of 1200 W, a pressure 
of 120 Torr and a substrate temperature of 450˚C. The detailed deposition process is reported 
elsewhere [1].  
The surface topography and roughness of film were analyzed by atomic force microscope 
(AFM, Park XE-100). The chemical properties of the film were examined by the micro-Raman 
spectrometer (Andor SR-500i-C-R, wavelength 532 nm). The hardness and elastic modulus of film 
were evaluated by nanoindentation (Triboindenter TI 950, USA) coupled with Berkovich diamond 
indenter with a tip having a radius of curvature 150 nm. A maximum load of 6 mN and a loading-
unloading rate of 1.5 mN/minute were used. Rutherford Back Scattering technique with α particle 
(energy 3.8 MeV) as the projectile was used to have elemental analysis in UNCD film. The scattering 
angle was kept as 165º. 
Tribological testing on UNCD thin film has been carried out using ball-on-disc micro-
tribometer (CSM-Switzerland) working in linear reciprocating mode. The tribological properties of 
UNCD film have been studied against three different standard balls (diameter 6 mm). The 
standardized hardness value of Al2O3, SiC and 100Cr6 steel balls are 18 GPa, 26 GPa and 5 GPa, 
respectively. The normal constant load of 2 N, sliding speed of 4 cm/sec was used in each 
experiment. All tests were being run for the total sliding distance of 500 m which equals to 62,500 
numbers of sliding cycles. The data acquisition rate of 10 Hz and stroke length of 4 mm were used for 
all experiments. The tests were carried out in ambient (dry and unlubricated conditions). During the 
tribology test, in-situ electrical contact resistance (ECR) measurement was performed to describe the 
tribolayer formation in UNCD/Al2O3 sliding combination.  
The wear tracks and ball scars developed after tribology testing were examined using an 
optical microscope. Three-dimensional wear profiles in tracks were also obtained using 3D optical 
profilometer (Taylor Hobson). Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD, Bruker D8, Germany) was 
used for crystal structure analysis of UNCD film. For this measurement, incident angle of 6o, a step 
size of 0.1o and 2θ angular range of 30o to 80o was used. The same GIXRD measurement was carried 
out inside wear track also. 
 
Results and Discussion 
The topography of UNCD film showed homogeneous distribution of diamond particles (Fig. 1a). The 
roughness value of the film is ~9 nm. In Raman spectra, a broad peak is deconvoluted into five 


                                                                        Presented at the 9th International Conference on Industrial Tribology  
(ICIT-2017), December 6-9,2017, Kolkata, India 

2 
 

segments (Fig. 1b). ν1, ν2 and ν3 peaks are associated to transpolyacetylene (TPA) which indicate 
the presence of UNCD structure [4]. 
 

 
 
Other two peaks designated by G and D band correspond to graphite and an amorphous carbon 
phase. These phases are occupied by grain boundary of UNCD. RBS analysis indicates distinct 
signature of C and Si interfaces with film thickness 1.8 μm (Fig. 1c). Nano-indentation results showed 
elastic modulus and hardness values of 215 GPa and 23 GPa, respectively (Fig. 1d). The elastic 
recovery of the film was superior which showed less load-displacement hysteresis.  
 
The friction results of UNCD film sliding against Al2O3, SiC and 100Cr6 steel balls are shown in Fig. 
2a. Figure 2b shows in-situ electrical contact resistance (ECR) measurement in case of UNCD/Al2O3 
sliding system. Al2O3 ball being chemically inert showed low friction value while sliding against UNCD 
film [5]. In this case, friction coefficient ~0.05 is maintained throughout the whole sliding process of 
500 m after passing short run-in period of ~20 m. ECR measurement also follows the same trend as 
that of friction behavior. The trend of decrease in ECR is delayed as compared to friction coefficient. 
This could be associated with the sensitivity of the two different measurements i.e., ECR and friction 
coefficient. High friction at run-in regime is responsible to produce wear of the ball. This is shown in 
optical image (Fig. 3a).  
SiC ball is also chemically stable but C-C strong chemical bond formation with UNCD film 
across sliding interfaces is possible during the sliding process. This may enhance the friction value 
(average 0.26) and in the response, wear of the ball is significant (Fig. 3b). In the case of UNCD/steel 
sliding combination, initially, high friction value was observed which gradually decreased to ~0.1 (Fig. 
3c). Such frictional trend is associated with oxidation of sliding interfaces. In all three cases, wear of 
the film was negligible, indicating chemical and mechanical stability of the film. The sliding 
combination of UNCD/Al2O3 showed superior friction and wear resistance properties compared to 
other two. In this case, AFM and XRD analyses were performed inside the wear track. The results are 
shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, respectively.  
 

 

Fig. 
2- 
(a) 
Friction 
results of UNCD film 
sliding 
against 
Al2O3, 
SiC and steel balls and 
(b) 
in-situ 
ECR 
measurement for UNCD/ 
Al2O3 
sliding 
system; 
Tribology 
parameters: 
Load: 
2 
N, 
Sliding 
speed: 4 cm/sec, Sliding 
distance: 500m 

Fig. 1- (a) AFM image  
(b) Raman spectra  
(c) RBS spectra and 
(d) nano-indentation  
results of UNCD film 


                                                                        Presented at the 9th International Conference on Industrial Tribology  
(ICIT-2017), December 6-9,2017, Kolkata, India 

3 
 

 
 
In AFM analysis, locally secondary phase formation is clearly seen which is quite similar to few layer 
graphite with the height of ~3 nm (Fig. 4d). In our previous study, similar results were obtained for the 
sliding combination of UNCD/ZrO2 and this phase was identified as graphite tribolayer [2]. From XRD 
analysis, densification and crystalline purity of grain is supposed to occur due to stress confinement. 
This claim is supported by the enhancement of diamond (111) and (220) plane intensity in the wear 
track. Other peaks are related to non-diamond phase and it is out of the scope of present work. 
Moreover, the shift in these XRD peaks to lower 2θ is indicative towards tribo-induced stress in wear 
track. Graphitic tribolayer locally formed possibly due to this tribo-induced stress during sliding and 
thus the stable low friction value is observed in UNCD/Al2O3 sliding combination. 
 

  
 

  

Fig. 3- Wear track and 
ball scar optical images 
along with 3D profile of 
wear track against (a) 
Al2O3, (b) SiC and (c) 
steel ball, respectively; 
Tribology 
parameter: 
Load: 
2 
N, 
Sliding 
speed: 
4 
cm/sec, 
Sliding distance: 500m 
 

Fig. 4- (a) (b) and (c) AFM 
topography inside the wear 
track of UNCD/Al2O3 sliding 
case and (d) height profile at 
location mentioned by white 
line in panel (c); Tribology 
parameter of track: Load: 2 
N, Sliding speed: 4 cm/sec, 
Sliding distance: 500m 
 

Fig. 5- (a) XRD analysis of 
UNCD film and (b) inside the 
wear track of UNCD/Al2O3 
sliding combination; Tribology 
parameters of track: Load: 2 
N, Sliding speed: 4 cm/sec, 
Sliding distance: 500m 


                                                                        Presented at the 9th International Conference on Industrial Tribology  
(ICIT-2017), December 6-9,2017, Kolkata, India 

4 
 

Conclusions 
1. Tribological studies of this film were carried out against three different balls in ambient 
condition. 
2. In the beginning of sliding process, friction coefficient for UNCD/steel sliding system was high 
but it was gradually decreased to low value with sliding process. This was attributed to 
oxidation mechanism.  
3. High friction in UNCD/SiC system was governed by interfacial adhesion due to chemical bond 
formation.  
4. Ultralow friction value was observed in the sliding combination of UNCD/Al2O3. In this case, 
such improvement was caused by chemically inert interfaces and formation of graphitic 
tribolayer which was determined by AFM and ECR measurements. The chemical structure of 
such layer was confirmed earlier [2].  
5. The wear resistance of film was extremely high in all three cases with negligible wear loss. 
 
Acknowledgment 
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. K. Ganesan and Dr. S. K. Srivastava, IGCAR/Kalpakkam; 
Dr. D. Dinesh Kumar, Sathyabama University/Chennai; Mr. Pankaj Kr. Das, NIT/Agartala and Dr. S. 
Chakravarty, UGC-DAE CSR, Kalpakkam Node for various experimental helps. 
 
References 
[1] 
Rani R., Kumar N., Kozakov A. T., Googlev K. A., Sankaran K. J., Das P. K., Dash S., Tyagi 
A. K. and Lin I. N., "Superlubrication properties of ultrananocrystalline diamond film sliding against a 
zirconia ball," RSC Adv., vol. 5, pp. 100663-100673, 2015. 
[2] 
Rani R., Sankaran K. J., Panda K., Kumar N., Ganesan K., Chakravarty S., Lin I. N., 
“Tribofilm formation in ultrananocrystalline diamond film,” Diamond Relat. Mater., vol. 78, pp. 12–23, 
2017.  
[3] 
Dumpala R., Kumar N., Samji S. K., Dash S., Ramamoorthy B., Rao M. S. R., 
“Characterization of tribo-layer formed during sliding wear of SiC ball against nanocrystalline diamond 
coatings,” Mater. Charact., vol 95, pp. 252–258 2014. 
[4] 
Pfeiffer R., Kuzmany H., Knoll P., Bokova S., Salk N. and Gunther B., “Evidence for trans-
polyacetylene in nano-crystalline diamond films,” Diamond and Related Mater., vol 12, pp. 268–271, 
2003. 
[5] 
Radhika R., Kumar N., Kozakov A. T., Sankaran K. J., Dash S., Tyagi A. K., Tai N.-H., Lin I. 
N., “Role of transfer layer on tribological properties of nanocrystalline diamond nanowire film sliding 
against alumina allotropes,” Diamond and Related Mater., vol 48, pp. 6–18, 2014. 


