 
 

   1      1   

Title  
Vortex Ferroelectric Domains, Large-loop Weak Ferromagnetic 
Domains, and Their Decoupling in Hexagonal (Lu, Sc)FeO3 
 
Kai Du, Bin Gao, Yazhong Wang, Xianghan Xu, Jaewook Kim, Rongwei Hu, Fei-Ting Huang 
and Sang-Wook Cheong* 
 

Dr. K. Du, Dr. B. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Xu, Dr. J. W. Kim, Dr. R. Hu, Dr. F. Huang and Prof. S.-
W. Cheong*  
 
Rutgers Center for Emergent Materials and Department of Physics and Astronomy,  
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA 
 
* To whom the correspondence should be addressed. (E-mail: sangc@physics.rutgers.edu) 
 
Abstract 

The direct domain coupling of spontaneous ferroelectric polarization and net magnetic 

moment can result in giant magnetoelectric (ME) coupling, which is essential to achieve 

mutual control and practical applications of multiferroics. Recently, the possible bulk 

domain coupling, the mutual control of ferroelectricity (FE) and weak ferromagnetism 

(WFM) have been theoretically predicted in hexagonal LuFeO3. Here, we report the first 

successful growth of highly-cleavable Sc-stabilized hexagonal Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 (h-LSFO) 

single crystals, as well as the first visualization of their intrinsic cloverleaf pattern of 

vortex FE domains and large-loop WFM domains. The vortex FE domains are on the 

order of 0.1-1 μm in size. On the other hand, the loop WFM domains are ~100 μm in size, 

and there exists no interlocking of FE and WFM domain walls. These strongly manifest 

the decoupling between FE and WFM in h-LSFO. The domain decoupling can be 

explained as the consequence of the structure-mediated coupling between polarization 

and dominant in-plane antiferromagnetic spins according to the theoretical prediction, 

which reveals intriguing interplays between FE, WFM, and antiferromagnetic orders in 

h-LSFO. Our results also indicate that the magnetic topological charge tends to be 

identical to the structural topological charge. This could provide new insights into the 


 
 

   2      2   

induction of direct coupling between magnetism and ferroelectricity mediated by 

structural distortions, which will be useful for the future applications of multiferroics. 

 

Keywords: 

Multiferroics, Magnetoelectric coupling, Hexagonal ferrites, Weak ferromagnetism, Improper 

ferroelectricity 

 

Introduction 

Multiferroic materials, in which two or multiple ferroic orders coexist, have drawn a great 

deal of attentions due to their fundamental importance and potentials for the next generation 

devices 1–3. However, in most multiferroics, the magnetoelectric (ME) coupling strength is 

quite weak, especially in linear-ME materials 4, which limits their practical applications. 

Therefore, multiferroics with the direct domain coupling between spontaneous magnetization 

(M) and polarization (P) are highly sought after. The direct domain coupling can result in 

giant ME coupling, enabling the mutual control in the sense that flipping one of M or P can 

induce the flipping of the other. This direct domain coupling effect has been partially 

achieved, for example, at the hetero-interfaces of bilayer films. M in one film layer can be 

flipped by flipping P in the other film layer by electrical fields, however not the other way 

around 5. The similar situation has also been discovered in single-phase Dy0.7Tb0.3FeO3 and 

Dy0.75Gd0.25FeO3 where only the flipping of M by electrical fields is reported 6. Other 

examples in single-phase bulk systems are very limited. CoCr2O4 

7,8 and Mn2GeO4 

9 appear to 

be the only two single-phase materials that contain spontaneous M and magnetism-induced P, 

which can be flipped by the magnetic field. However, their P magnitude is tiny for any 

applications, and flipping P (thus, M) with electrical fields cannot be achieved due to the 

small magnitude of P.  Recently, a theoretical study suggests that the single-phase hexagonal 

LuFeO3 (h-LuFeO3) system may have the potential to realize this ideal effect with the direct 


 
 

   3      3   

domain coupling between its ferroelectricity (FE) and weak ferromagnetism (WFM) 10. Thus, 

it is of great importance to study experimentally the possibility of a direct domain coupling 

effect in h-LuFeO3, which is energy efficient and highly desirable for future applications. 

Meanwhile, the recent ME coupling study on h-LuFeO3/LuFe2O4 superlattices 11 demonstrates 

the capability of electrical field control of magnetism near the room temperature, which 

indicates h-LuFeO3 and its related compounds are promising for future applications. However, 

with little knowledge of the intrinsic ME coupling of h-LuFeO3 itself, a full understanding of 

the ME coupling in superlattices and other related materials is unrealistic. 

 

For the possible giant ME coupling, h-LuFeO3 systems in the P63cm polar structure (Figure 

1a) has attracted a significant research attentions, since this metastable hexagonal phase of its 

orthorhombic bulk form was reported to be stabilized in thin film form by epitaxial strain 12,13 

or in bulk by Sc or Mn doping 14–16.  Samples in both forms are believed to show similar 

physical properties despite different approaches used for the synthesis (see Supplementary 

Information, note 1 for details). They exhibit robust ferroelectricity well above room 

temperature, similar to the well-studied multiferroic hexagonal RMnO3 (h-RMnO3, R=rare 

earth) 17,18. Their improper ferroelectricity due to the structural instability is associated with 

the structural trimerization. The trimerization drives the FE transition from the non-polar 

P63/mmc to the polar P63cm structure and results in a two-up/one-down (or two-down/one-up) 

displacement of R-site ions, which, in turn, leads to ferroelectric polarization along the c axis.  

Note that alternating FE domains are clamped to the six structural vortex domains around one 

topological defect, forming an intriguing cloverleaf pattern in h-RMnO3 (ref. 19). Although 

magnetic domains in h-RMnO3 can be coupled with FE domains 20,21, there exists no bulk 

spontaneous M in h-RMnO3. 

 


 
 

   4      4   

Compared with h-RMnO3, the strong magnetic interaction between Fe3+ spins in h-LuFeO3 

induces a high antiferromagnetic ordering temperature (TN= 440 K in ref. 12, 170 K in ref. 13). 

Even though the exact TN is still under debate, the presence of net ferromagnetic moment 

along the c axis is evident below 160-170 K. The magnetic state below 160-170 K is 

confirmed in both theory and experiment to be the A2-dominant spin configuration (Figure 1b) 

10,15, which results in a significant canted-antiferromagnetic (or WFM) moment along the c 

axis. Both large spontaneous P and M do coexist below 160-170 K. More importantly, a 

theoretical study predicts the presence of a bulk linear ME coupling or even the direct 

coupling between polarization and WFM domains in h-LuFeO3 (ref. 10). Therefore, h-LuFeO3 

is a unique candidate where a direct mutual control of P and M domains can be explored. 

 

Results 

Despite all of these extensive investigations, the intrinsic FE domain structure in h-LuFeO3 is 

still unexplored, and the direct experimental study of the ME coupling in h-LuFeO3 is absent. 

One of the main reasons is the instability of the h-LuFeO3 phase at ambient synthesis 

conditions, which makes it challenging to synthesize bulk single crystals. Here, we report a 

successful growth of high-quality highly-cleavable h-Lu1-xScxFeO3 (nominal x=0.4) single 

crystals for the first time, using a floating zone technique and subsequent extensive annealing 

with different cooling rates (see Methods and Supplementary Information, note 2). The X-ray 

spectrum obtained using a PANalytical diffractometer (Figure 1c) is consistent with the pure 

h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 phase 14,16, and does not exhibit any measurable peak broadening or the 

presence of any second phases, indicating the high quality of crystals. Three 1 °C/h-cooled h-

Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 specimens (LSFO1-3) were prepared by mechanical cleaving to expose 

hexagonal a-b surfaces, and used for most of our scanning experiments. A large and flat 

surface of LSFO1 after cleaving is shown in Figure 1d, while an image of the whole as-grown 

crystal is shown in the inset. From room-temperature piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) 


 
 

   5      5   

studies, we have visualized a cloverleaf pattern of vortex FE domains in h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 for 

the first time, which is absent in epitaxial h-LuFeO3 thin films. Furthermore, low-temperature 

magnetic force microscopy (MFM) studies on the same surfaces suggest that WFM domains 

are distinct from FE domains in terms of the size and shape, and there exists no mutual 

locking between FE and WFM domain walls. These observations undoubtedly indicate a 

complete decoupling between FE and WFM. 

 

A. Ferroelectricity 

Figure 2a, 2b, and 2c are the PFM images of cleaved h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 surfaces with different 

cooling rates in the 1200 C-1400 C range, in which FE Curie temperature (TC) locates (see 

Supplementary Information, note 2). The fast-cooled sample (100 °C/h) shows small 

disordered FE domains on a ~100 nm scale (Figure 2a). Additional dark field transmission 

electron microscopy (DF-TEM) studies confirm that a 100 °C/h-cooled h-Lu0.5Sc0.5FeO3 

crystal also exhibits irregular-shape and disordered FE domains on a similar scale 

(Supplementary Information, Figure S1), possibly due to a large amount of 

chemical/structural disorders (e.g. partial edge dislocations 22 and large line defects 23 ). A 

cloverleaf pattern of vortex FE domains, similar to that in h-RMnO3 (ref. 19), is now visible 

in the 10 °C/h-cooled specimen (Figure 2b). A well-organized micron-size cloverleaf pattern 

of vortex FE domains (Figure 2c and 2d) is evident in the 1 °C/h-cooled LSFO1 (area A). We 

found that vortex FE domains distribute uniformly across the whole cleaved surface. For 

example, Figure 2f shows the PFM image of another area (area B, far away from area A) of 

LSFO1, resembling those of area A. These results demonstrate that the intrinsic FE domain 

structure in h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 is a topological vortex configuration, which is sensitive to 

chemical/structural disorders. Their relevant length scale can be systematically tuned by the 

cooling rate across the FE Curie temperature, which is in the range of 1400 °C-1200 °C. 

Although most of our samples have FE domains with +P and –P domains in 50/50 ratio, 


 
 

   6      6   

known as type-I domains, some cleaved samples closed to the surface of crystals do show 

type-II narrow domains (Figure S2) due to the self-poling effect during the annealing process, 

which is also commonly observed in h-RMnO3 compounds 24.  

 

We plotted the density of topological defects (vortices and antivortices) in PFM images vs. 

the cooling rate (Figure 2e). The h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 tends to show a much higher density of 

topological defects, compared with h-RMnO3 (e.g. ErMnO3 and TmMnO3, data obtained from 

ref. 25), even though it has a higher TC than, e.g., ErMnO3 (TC ≈1129 °C). Note that a higher- 

TC h-RMnO3 tends to exhibit a lower density of topological defects. The estimated linear 

slope of ~0.88 is significantly larger than the slope (~0.59) predicted by the Kibble-Zurek 

mechanism (KZM) in h-RMnO3 (ref. 25).  This discrepancy is likely due to the high density of 

chemical/structural disorders in fast-cooled h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3, which can be annealed away 

through the slow cooling at the high-temperature range. This disorder is probably related to 

the metastable nature of the hexagonal phase of LuFeO3, unlike the stable h-RMnO3 phase. 

Meanwhile, the poor R-Square value (~0.84) of the linear fitting in h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 (Figure 

2e) also suggests that the density of topological defects is likely affected by extrinsic effects 

such as pinning by structural defects. Therefore, the intrinsic slope of h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 needs 

to be further studied in the future, especially in the slowly-cooled range where the pinning 

effect by structural defects are minimized. We emphasize that we have observed the 

cloverleaf-pattern FE domains in h-LSFO, which has not been reported before, e.g., in 

epitaxial h-LuFeO3 thin films 12. Note that h-LuFeO3 films are typically synthesized at 

700 °C-900 °C, which is well below the TC. Thus, it is possible that films may have 

significant chemical/structural disorders, resulting in ultra-fine irregular FE domains or single 

FE domain due to surface boundary conditions.  

 


 
 

   7      7   

We obtained good polarization loops (Figure 2g) of another 1 °C/h-cooled specimen (LSFO2) 

using a Ferroelectric Material Test System (FMTS, Radiant), demonstrating the presence of 

switchable ferroelectric polarization. Complimentary polarization loops as a function of the 

frequency are also provided in the Supplementary Information Figure S3a. Their consistency 

and similarities at different frequencies suggest that the measured loops reflect their intrinsic 

polarizations without artifacts. The permittivity and the loss tangent as a function of 

frequency and temperature are shown in Figure S3b and S3c respectively. The low loss at the 

room temperature and its continuous drop at low temperatures indicate h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 is a 

good insulator. 

 

B. Magnetism 

The magnetic susceptibility of LSFO2 in magnetic fields along and perpendicular to the c axis 

(Figure 3a), measured by a Magnetic Property Measurement System (Quantum Design), 

demonstrate the existence of the canted antiferromagnetic (or WFM) moment along the c axis 

below 163 K, which is consistent with the presence of the A2 spin order.  A smooth reduction 

of magnetic susceptibility below 75 K upon cooling may indicate the presence of a spin 

reorientation transition away from the A2 spin order, which has been reported in 

Lu0.5Sc0.5FeO3 (ref. 15). This behavior is also evident in the M-H curves at 5 K and 130 K 

(Figure 3b). Thus, WFM domain structures were examined by a low-temperature MFM 

(Attocube) at the liquid nitrogen temperature (~78 K), where the A2 phase (thus, WFM 

moment) is dominant. Compared with the micron-size vortex FE domains, large loop-like 

WFM domains (Figure 3c) without any hint of cloverleaf cores are clearly observed in LSFO1 

(area C, Figure 3d). To further confirm the magnetic origin of these MFM contrasts, the 

specimen was warmed up to 200 K (above the A2-phase transition temperature of 163 K) and 

cooled back to 78 K. After this new thermal cycle, the WFM domain structure of the same 

area has completely changed (Figure 3e and 3f). For a clear view of WFM domain structure, a 


 
 

   8      8   

large-range mosaic MFM image around the area C is shown in Figure 3g. The vortex FE 

domains at the lower-left corner of Figure 3g, reproduced from Figure 2d, are distinct from 

the large WFM domains. The size of these WFM domains is roughly ~100 m, while FE 

domains are on the order of ~1 m. Furthermore, the WFM domain wall thickness is as large 

as 2-4 m (Figure S4), which is also distinct from the almost-atomically-sharp FE domain 

walls. 

 

Moreover, our in-situ PFM images at the room temperature (Figure S5a and S5b) and 78 K 

(Figure S5c and S5d) show an identical domain pattern at both temperatures. Considering that 

WFM domains change in different thermal cycles (Figure 3c and 3e) while FE domains 

should remain unchanged, we could confidently draw the conclusion that they are decoupled.  

 

C. ME coupling 

There are two and only two possible types of coupling among ferroelectric polarization, 

structural antiphases, and A2-type antiferromagnetic spins that have been theoretically 

proposed 10. They may result in different relationships among FE (P= ±P), WFM (Mc= ±Mc, 

magnetization along the c axis), and ME (c= ±c, ME coefficient along the c axis) domains, 

where P=c  Mc. First, note that within unit-cell translation, structural distortions such as 

oxygen distortions rotate |/3| across one FE domain wall, which is a structural antiphase 

boundary at the same time, so that the six domain structure in Figure 4 is a topological vortex. 

Now, in the first case (Figure 4a), in-plane spins rotate |Δ| = 2/3 across one FE domain 

wall. In this case, FE domains are directly coupled with WFM domains but decoupled from 

ME domains. So WFM domains and FE domains must exhibit an identical pattern. In the 

other case (Figure 4b), in-plane spins rotate |Δ| = /3 across one FE domain wall, which is 

in the same manner as structural distortions. So FE domains will be decoupled with WFM 


 
 

   9      9   

domains and coupled with ME domains. Our experimental findings clearly indicate the 

decoupling between FE and WFM domains (Figure 4b). It can be summarized in the cartoon 

of Figure 4c, obtained by combining Figure 2d and 3e. Note that similar PFM and MFM 

results have been reproduced in another cleaved crystal (LSFO3) of the same batch (Figure 

S6). Moreover, the similar magnetic susceptibility and PE loop can also be reproduced in 

different crystal pieces (Figure S7) that are cleaved from the same batch, which is an 

indication of uniform ferroelectric and magnetic properties within the batch. Figure 4d 

illustrates the zoom-in view of the dotted area in Figure 4c, and the 3D spin configurations of 

trimerized Fe3+ are drawn for each domain. Another evidence of this domain decoupling 

between FE and WFM is the absence of magnetoelectric current (or P switching) when Mc is 

switched by magnetic fields (see Figure S8 and Supplementary Information note 3 for details).  

 

Discussion 

Our results of decoupled FE and WFM domains can be understood in terms of magnetic 

domain wall energy. It is expected that the domain wall energy with the in-plane spin rotation 

of large |2/3| likely costs larger than that with the small |/3| rotation. This can also be 

understood in terms of topology. Structural distortions such as oxygen distortions all the way 

around one vortex (antivortex) core rotate by +(-)2, so the relevant structural topological 

charge (or the winding number, ns) of one vortex (antivortex) is +(-)1.  Similarly, magnetic 

topological charge (or the winding number, nm) for the in-plane spins of a vortex (antivortex) 

in the domain-decoupled case (Figure 4b) is +(-)1. On the other hand, nm is +(-)2 in the 

domain-coupled case (Figure 4a), which is different from ns and likely not favored 

topologically. As a consequence of this coupling between structural distortions and in-plane 

antiferromagnetic spins, the out-of-plane spins (WFM) are decoupled with FE domains as 

observed experimentally. Though a further experimental proof of this coupling is needed in 

the future, the statement above is still logically true as the coupling between structural 


 
 

   10      10   

distortions and in-plane antiferromagnetic spins is the only possibility based on theoretical 

predictions (ref. 10).  This is also consistent with the situation in YMnO3 where FE domains 

are found to be coupled to its in-plane antiferromagnetic domains 21. We want to emphasize 

that the spin-canting angle in h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3, estimated from the observed remnant 

magnetization (~ 0.01 /Fe), is tiny (< 1°). Therefore, antiferromagnetic in-plane spins are 

still dominant. So it is natural to have nm=ns, which leads to the decoupling between FE and 

WFM domains, since WFM is only a small out-of-plane spin component of the dominant in-

plane spins. 

 

In summary, we have found that the intrinsic FE domain structure of h-LSFO is of fine 

topological vortex configuration. In contrast, weak ferromagnetic domains are of a loop shape 

with a much larger size. The distinct sizes and shapes demonstrate the decoupling between 

ferroelectricity 
and 
out-of-plane 
weak 
ferromagnetism, 
even 
though 
in-plane 

antiferromagnetic spins likely correlate with structural modulations around topological 

vortices according to theoretical predictions. Our results indicate that the magnetic topological 

charge tends to be identical with the structural topological charge. This observation is 

consistent with the absence of any FE and WFM domain-coupled ME effects in h-LSFO. Our 

results provide new insights into induction of direct coupling between magnetism and 

ferroelectricity mediated through structural distortions, which will be useful for the future 

applications of multiferroics. 

 

Methods 

Crystal growth  

High-quality h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 single crystals were grown using a floating zone method under 

0.8 MPa O2 atmosphere. The feed rods were prepared using the standard solid-state reaction 

(ref. 14). The as-grown crystals were annealed at 1400 °C in air for 24 hours to enhance 


 
 

   11      11   

crystallinity, and then cooled down to 1200 °C with different cooling rates (100 °C/h, 10 °C/h 

and 1 °C/h). Afterward, they were cooled to room temperature at the same cooling rate of 

100 °C/h. Finally, they were further annealed under 20 MPa O2 pressure at 1000 °C in a high-

pressure oxygen furnace to remove any oxygen vacancies and thus enhance resistance. In 

similar h-RMnO3 compounds, it is well known that the topological vortex density can be 

symmetrically tuned by different cooling rates near their FE Curie temperatures (ref. 23). As 

different densities of vortex FE domains are observed in samples with different rates for the 

1200 °C-1400 °C cooling in this work, the FE Curie temperature of h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 is in the 

range of 1200 °C-1400 °C. 

 

PFM and MFM measurements 

For all the PFM measurements, AC 5V at 68 kHz was applied to a tip (a commercial 

conductive AFM tip) while sample backside is grounded. Before the MFM measurement, a 20 

nm gold film was sputtered onto the same cleaved surface of LSFO1 after PFM experiments 

to eliminate any electrostatic signal from FE domains during the MFM scanning (ref. 20). All 

the MFM images are obtained using a dual pass mode with a lift height of 50 nm. 

 

PE measurements 

PE loops were measured on a polished thin sample by the “PUND” method provide in the 

Ferroelectric Material Test System (RADIANT TECHNOLOGIES INC.). The remanent-only 

polarization hysteresis loop is finally derived. (Also see the reference in Supplementary 

information note 2) 

 

Data availability 

All relevant data are available from the authors upon request. 

 


 
 

   12      12   

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank M. Mostovoy for insightful discussions. This work was supported by 

the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative through Grant GBMF4413 to the 

Rutgers Center for Emergent Materials. 

 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

 

Contributions 

B. G.,K.D., X. X. and R.H. prepared the samples; F. H. performed the TEM investigation; Y. 

W. and J. K. measured P-E loops and magnetic properties; K. D. did PFM and MFM 

measurements; S. C. guided the project; K.D. and S. C. analysed the data and wrote the paper. 

 

Supplementary Information  

Supplementary information is available online or from the author. 

 

References 

1. 
Cheong, S.-W. & Mostovoy, M. Multiferroics: a magnetic twist for ferroelectricity. Nat. 

Mater. 6, 13–20 (2007). 

2. 
Ramesh, R. & Spaldin, N. A. Multiferroics: progress and prospects in thin films. Nat. 

Mater. 6, 21–29 (2007). 

3. 
Khomskii, D. Classifying multiferroics: mechanisms and effects. Physics (College. 

Park. Md). 2, 20 (2009). 

4. 
Tokunaga, Y. et al. Composite domain walls in a multiferroic perovskite ferrite. Nat. 

Mater. 8, 558–562 (2009). 

5. 
Heron, J. T. et al. Deterministic switching of ferromagnetism at room temperature 

using an electric field. Nature 516, 370–373 (2014). 


 
 

   13      13   

6. 
Tokunaga, Y., Taguchi, Y., Arima, T. & Tokura, Y. Electric-field-induced generation 

and reversal of ferromagnetic moment in ferrites. Nat. Phys. 8, 838–844 (2012). 

7. 
Yamasaki, Y. et al. Magnetic reversal of the ferroelectric polarization in a multiferroic 

spinel oxide. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 207204 (2006). 

8. 
Lawes, G. et al. Dielectric anomalies and spiral magnetic order in CoCr2O4. Phys. Rev. 

B 74, 24413 (2006). 

9. 
White, J. S. et al. Coupling of magnetic and ferroelectric hysteresis by a 

multicomponent magnetic structure in Mn2GeO4. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 77204 (2012). 

10. 
Das, H., Wysocki, A. L., Geng, Y., Wu, W. & Fennie, C. J. Bulk magnetoelectricity in 

the hexagonal manganites and ferrites. Nat. Commun. 5, 2998 (2014). 

11. 
Mundy, J. A. et al. Atomically engineered ferroic layers yield a room-temperature 

magnetoelectric multiferroic. Nature 537, 523–527 (2016). 

12. 
Wang, W. et al. Room-temperature multiferroic hexagonal LuFeO3 films. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 110, 237601 (2013). 

13. 
Disseler, S. M. et al. Magnetic structure and ordering of multiferroic hexagonal 

LuFeO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 217602 (2015). 

14. 
Masuno, A. et al. Weak ferromagnetic transition with a dielectric anomaly in 

hexagonal Lu0.5Sc0.5FeO3. Inorg. Chem. 52, 11889–11894 (2013). 

15. 
Disseler, S. M. et al. Multiferroicity in doped hexagonal LuFeO3. Phys. Rev. B 92, 

54435 (2015). 

16. 
Lin, L. et al. Hexagonal phase stabilization and magnetic orders of multiferroic 

Lu1−xScxFeO3. Phys. Rev. B 93, 75146 (2016). 

17. 
Abrahams, S. C. Ferroelectricity and structure in the YMnO3 family. Acta Crystallogr. 

B57, 485–490 (2001). 

18. 
Koehler, W. C., Yakel, H. L., Wollan, E. O. & Cable, J. W. A note on the magnetic 

structures of rare earth manganese oxides. Phys. Lett. 9, 93–95 (1964). 

19. 
Choi, T. et al. Insulating interlocked ferroelectric and structural antiphase domain walls 

in multiferroic YMnO3. Nat. Mater. 9, 253–258 (2010). 

20. 
Geng, Y., Lee, N., Choi, Y. J., Cheong, S.-W. & Wu, W. Collective magnetism at 

multiferroic vortex domain walls. Nano Lett. 12, 6055–6059 (2012). 


 
 

   14      14   

21. 
Fiebig, M., Lottermoser, T., Fröhlich, D., Goltsev, A. V. & Pisarev, R. V. Observation 

of coupled magnetic and electric domains. Nature 419, 818–820 (2002). 

22. 
Cheng, S. et al. Topologically allowed nonsixfold vortices in a sixfold multiferroic 

material: observation and classification. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 145501 (2017). 

23. 
Chae, S. C. et al. Direct observation of the proliferation of ferroelectric loop domains 

and vortex-antivortex pairs. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 167603 (2012). 

24. 
Wang, X., Huang, F.-T., Hu, R., Fan, F. & Cheong, S.-W. Self-poling with oxygen off-

stoichiometry in ferroelectric hexagonal manganites. APL Mater. 3, 41505 (2015). 

25. 
Lin, S.-Z. et al. Topological defects as relics of emergent continuous symmetry and 

Higgs condensation of disorder in ferroelectrics. Nat. Phys. 10, 970–977 (2014). 

 


 
 

   15      15   

Figure legends 

 

Figure 1: The structure of h-(Lu, Sc)FeO3. (a) Crystallographic structure of h-(Lu, Sc)FeO3 

in P63cm space group. Yellow balls indicate Lu or Sc atoms, while grey and blue balls stand 

for Fe and O atoms respectively. The black arrows show the displacement directions of Lu or 

Sc atoms with a two-down/one-up case. Trimerized Fe atoms are illustrated with green bonds.  

(b) 3D magnetic structure of h-(Lu, Sc)FeO3 in A2 phase, which enables the spin canting 

along the c axis. Ordered Fe spins in two adjacent layers are shown with red open arrows, and 

the Fe trimerization of Z=0 layer is labeled with green bonds.  (c) X-ray diffraction of the 

Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 single crystal ground powders which shows the pure hexagonal phase in 

P63cm space group. The refinement was done by Reitica with the simulated lattice constant 

a=5.879 Å and c= 11.695 Å, the standard deviation Rp=6.851, Rwp=10.62 and χ2=0.514 (d) 


 
 

   16      16   

Optical microscope image of a cleaved Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 surface (LSFO1). Scale bar is 200 m. 

The image of the whole crystal before cleaving is shown in the inset. 

 

 

 


 
 

   17      17   

Figure 2: The ferroelectricity and vortex ferroelectric domains of h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3. 

Room-temperature PFM images of cleaved surfaces of crystals after (a) 100 °C/h, (b) 10 °C/h 

and (c) 1 °C/h cooling in the 1400 C-1200 C temperature range. (d) The large-range PFM 

image of the area A of LSFO1 (the black dashed square corresponds to (c)). (e) The density of 

defects as a function of cooling rates. Error bars of the defect density for 1 °C/h, 10 °C/h, and 

100 °C/h cooling are  0.005 μm-2,  0.16 μm-2, and 0.4 μm-2 respectively. Data of ErMnO3 

and TmMnO3 is obtained from ref. 25. (f) PFM image of another area in LSFO1 (area B). (g) 

Room-temperature P-E loops of LSMO2 at 2702 Hz, which prove its robust and switchable 

ferroelectricity. Scale bars are 2 m in (a), (b) and (c), 5 m in (d) and (f). 

 

 

 


 
 

   18      18   

Figure 3: Magnetic properties and magnetic domains of h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3. (a) magnetic 

susceptibility of LSFO2 in 2 kOe (Hc; open squares, and H//c; red circles) as a function of 

temperature. (b) Out-of-plane magnetization (H//c) of LSFO2 as a function of magnetic field 

at 130 K (red circles) and 5 K (black triangles), and linear in-plane magnetization (Hc) at 5 

K (blue open squares). (c) MFM image and (d) corresponding topography of LSFO1 (area C) 

at 78 K. (e) MFM image and (f) its topography of the same area C at 78 K after a new thermal 

cycle. (g) Large-range MFM image collage around the area C, which is shown with the black 

dashed square. PFM image of LSFO1 (area A) is shown in the black square at the left-lower 

corner with the same scale for comparison. Large loop-shape WFM domains are clearly 

visible in ~100 m scale. Scale bars are 20 m. 

 

 


 
 

   19      19   

 

Figure 4: Magnetoelectric coupling of h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3. Possible in-plane magnetic 

structures of coupled (a) and decoupled (b) cases between FE and WFM domains. Blue (black) 

dashed lines show the FE (WFM) domain walls. Dark circles are Fe3+ ions, and the red open 

arrows illustrate their in-plane spins. Black arrows stand for the structural distortions of top-

apical oxygen ions. Trimerized Fe3+ ions are labeled with green bonds. The blue (+P, -Mc), 

yellow (+P, +Mc), orange (-P, +Mc) and purple (-P, -Mc) background colors represent the 4 

possible FE and WFM domain combinations. c is the ME coefficient along the c axis. The 

+ domain is chosen to be the same for clear comparison. Spins in dark grey triangle 

backgrounds are supposedly identical by unit-cell translations, rotate |ΔΦ| = 2/3 for (a) and 

|ΔΦ| = /3 for (b) across an FE domain wall. (c) Cartoon of real FE and WFM domain 

distributions drawn by combining Fig. 2d and 3e in the same scale. (d) Zoom-in cartoon of 


 
 

   20      20   

the black dotted area in (c), and the 3D cartoon of spin configurations for four different 

domains.  Spins are shown by the red open arrows, and other symbols remain the same as in 

(a) and (b), except that red (black) solid arrows are now the c-direction canted magnetic 

moments (electric polarizations).  The domain decoupled case of (b) corresponds to the 

experimental result of (c) or (d), which demonstrates decoupling between FE and WFM 

domains. 


 
 

   21      21   

Supplementary Information  
 
Title  
Vortex Ferroelectric Domains, Large-loop Weak Ferromagnetic 
Domains, and Their Decoupling in Hexagonal (Lu, Sc)FeO3 
 
Kai Du, Bin Gao, Yazhong Wang, Xianghan Xu, Jaewook Kim, Rongwei Hu, Feiting Huang 
and Sang-Wook Cheong* 
 
Rutgers Center for Emergent Materials and Department of Physics and Astronomy,  
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA 
 
* To whom the correspondence should be addressed. (E-mail: sangc@physics.rutgers.edu) 
 

Note 1: Difference between Sc-doped h-LuFeO3 and pure h-LuFeO3 

Hexagonal rare-earth ferrites (h-RFeO3) are metastable and do not exist under normal 

synthesis conditions, unlike the stable hexagonal rare-earth manganites. In order to stabilize 

the hexagonal phase experimentally, strain from small-ion doping into A-site for bulk crystals 

(e.g. h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3) or from the hexagonal substrate for thin films (e.g. h-LuFeO3/YSZ) are 

required. Generally, these two approaches apply strain to its original stable lattice and should 

give the similar effect in stabilizing the metastable hexagonal phase.  

 

Besides, strong theoretical and experimental evidence has illustrated that Sc-doped h-LuFeO3 

and pure h-LuFeO3 do share the similar ferroelectric and magnetic properties. Theoretically, 

DFT calculations have been conducted to the Sc-doped h-LuFeO3 in ref. 16 compared to the 

pure h-LuFeO3. It concludes that the Sc doping will not affect the ferroelectricity and 

magnetic properties, other than just helping to stabilize the hexagonal phase. A secondary 

effect of the small Sc doping is: Fe-Fe distance becomes closer, and thus their magnetic 

interaction becomes stronger, which is consistent with high magnetic transition temperatures 

of the Sc-doped h-LuFeO3. 

 


 
 

   22      22   

Experimentally, it is also true that our h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 has a slightly higher weak 

ferromagnetic transition temperature at 160 K-170 K, comparing to pure h-LuFeO3 thin films 

(140 K-150 K). Except for that small difference, bulk Sc-doped h-LuFeO3 shows similar 

magnetic properties to pure h-LuFeO3 thin films, based on the magnetic susceptibility and 

neutron diffraction study in ref. 13 and ref. 15. 

 

Therefore, h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 in this work should have the similar properties to theoretically 

studied pure h-LuFeO3, based on both first principle calculations and the experimental data. 

However, as mentioned later in the main text, our bulk h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 single crystals have 

much better quality so that it could enable us to further study their intrinsic FE domains and 

ME coupling, which is difficult to realize in pure h-LuFeO3 thin films. Thus, bulk Sc-doped 

h-LuFeO3 can be a better platform to explore the intrinsic properties and novel fundamental 

physics in the h-LuFeO3 system. 

 

Note 2: Crystal growth and preparations for measurements 

High-quality h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 single crystals were grown using a floating zone method under 

0.8 MPa O2 atmosphere. The feed rods were prepared using the standard solid-state reaction 

(ref. 14). The as-grown crystals were annealed at 1400 °C in air for 24 hours to enhance 

crystallinity, and then cooled down to 1200 °C with different cooling rates (100 °C/h, 10 °C/h 

and 1 °C/h). Afterward, they were cooled to room temperature at the same cooling rate of 

100 °C/h. Finally, they were further annealed under 20 MPa O2 pressure at 1000 °C in a high-

pressure oxygen furnace to remove any oxygen vacancies and thus enhance resistance. In 

similar h-RMnO3 compounds, it is well known that the topological vortex density can be 

symmetrically tuned by different cooling rates near their FE Curie temperatures (ref. 23). As 

different densities of vortex FE domains are observed in samples with different rates for the 


 
 

   23      23   

1200 °C-1400 °C cooling in this work, the FE Curie temperature of h-Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 is in the 

range of 1200 °C-1400 °C. 

 

For all the PFM measurements, AC 5V at 68 kHz was applied to a tip (a commercial 

conductive AFM tip) while sample backside is grounded. Before the MFM measurement, a 20 

nm gold film was sputtered onto the same cleaved surface of LSFO1 after PFM experiments 

to eliminate any electrostatic signal from FE domains during the MFM scanning (ref. 20). All 

the MFM images are obtained using a dual pass mode with a lift height of 50 nm. 

 

PE loops were measured on a polished thin sample by the “PUND” method 1 provide in the 

Ferroelectric Material Test System (RADIANT TECHNOLOGIES INC.). The remanent-only 

polarization hysteresis loop is finally derived.  

 
 

 

Figure S1: Dark field transmission electron microscopy (DF-TEM) image of the fast-

cooled (100 °C/h) Lu0.5Sc0.5FeO3. (a) The diffraction pattern of the (1-11) surface. (b) FE 

domain image using the Friedel pair breaking of the ⅓(−123) superlattice spot (labeled with 

green circle). Small disordered and irregular FE domains with highly-curved domain walls are 

visualized.  


 
 

   24      24   

 

Figure S2: Type-II narrow ferroelectric domains of Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 due to the self-poling 

effect. (a) PFM image of a cleaved surface closed to the surface of the crystal. (b) Cartoon of 

the type-II domains on a self-poled sample. Because of the oxygen gradient created near the 

sample surface during the annealing process, +P domains are poled to be dominant. –P 

domains contract and become narrow lines in shape.  


 
 

   25      25   

 

Figure S3: Ferroelectric and dielectric properties of Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3. (a) PE loops as a 

function of frequency. As there are no clear differences in PE loops with different frequencies, 

PE curves are from intrinsic polarizations other than leakage current contributions. (b) The 

real part of permittivity and the loss tangent as a function of frequency at the room 

temperature. (c) The real part of permittivity and the loss tangent as a function of temperature. 

The low loss at the room temperature and its continuous drop at low temperatures indicate the 

sample is a good insulator. 


 
 

   26      26   

 

Figure S4: WFM domain wall thickness. (a) MFM image and (b) the line-profile of the red 

dashed line of a hard disk sample. 150 nm-sized domains are well resolved in the MFM image, 

which indicates that the spacial resolution of MFM is better than 150 nm. (c) MFM image and 

(b) the line-profile of the red dashed line of LSFO1 (area C). The same tip and experimental 

set-up were used for both experiments, and the domain wall thickness estimated from the 

MFM line-profile in (d) (the width of the pronounced steep lines) is larger than 2 m. 


 
 

   27      27   

 

 

Figure S5: FE domains at diferent temperatures (a) Topography and (b) corresponding 

PFM image of LSFO3 (area C) at the room temperature. (c) Topography and (d) 

corresponding PFM image of LSFO3 (area C) at 78 K. Identical FE domains are observed. 

Tiny differences are due to the possible scanner distortions at different temperatures 


 
 

   28      28   

 

 

Figure S6: Magnetoelectric domain decoupling in another piece of cleaved h-

Lu0.6Sc0.4FeO3 (LSFO3). (a) Optical microscope image of the cleaved LSFO3.  The red scale 

bar is 100 m.  (b) Topography and (c) corresponding PFM image of LSFO3 (area A) at the 

room temperature.  (d) Topography and (e) corresponding MFM image of LSFO3 (area B)  at 

78 K. The black scale bar is 10 m.  FE and WFM domains form in very different length-

scales. 

 


 
 

   29      29   

 

Figure S7: Magnetic susceptibilities and PE loops of different crystal pieces cleaved 

from the same batch. (a) Magnetic susceptibilities.  (b) PE loops.  Reproducible data 

indicates the ferroelectric and magnetic properties are uniform for samples from the same 

batch. 

 


 
 

   30      30   

 

 

Figure S8: Current vs. magnetic fields of LSFO2 at 5 K. EHc. The measured current 

does not respond to the switching of magnetic fields and remains within the noise level. The 

sequence of the measurement was in the order of black, red, and green arrows. 


 
 

   31      31   

 

Note 3: Estimation of the sensitivity in current measurement with magnetic fields. 

We could estimate the minimum induced current (Imin) if a 180° polarization flipping happens 

when sweeping the field by having the following experimental parameters:  electrode contact 

area (S=0.00021 cm2), sweeping speed of magnetic fields (v=0.02 T/s), the saturated 

polarization according to PE loops (p=1 μC/cm2).  For the worst case, we assume the 

polarization flips during the whole field sweeping process (from 0 T to 9 T) which takes t= 9 

T/ (0.02 T/s) = 450 s. Then Imin= 2PS/t = 0.9 pA, which is at least 9 times of our current 

sensitivity (< 0.1 pA) in the measurement. Therefore, the absence of magnetoelectric current 

when sweeping magnetic fields is the strong evidence of the decoupling between WFM and 

FE domains. 

 

Note 4: Structural topological charge and magnetic topological charge  

A topological vortex concept is essential to understand the decoupling between FE and WFM 

domains. Here, structural distortions and spins of the identical sites by unit-cell translations 

(e.g. sites with darker grey triangle backgrounds in Figure 4a and 4b) need to be considered 

and compared. As the structural (e.g. oxygen) distortion directions (defined by the angle  in 

Figure 4) rotate 60° between two adjacent domains, the total around the merging point 

becomes 2which can define a topological charge (or the winding number ns) of 1. The 

sign of 2(or 1 of the topological charge) depends on the sense of rotation. For example, if 

vortices that rotate clockwise are defined to have +1 topological charges, then anti-vortices 

that rotate counter-clockwise have –1 topological charges. The details of these vortex domains 

as topological objects can be also found in ref. 19 and ref. 23. 

 

In addition, antiferromagnetic spins also rotate around a merging point, similar to what 

happens with structural distortions. Thus, magnetic domains can also be considered as a 


 
 

   32      32   

topological object and its magnetic topological charge is well defined 2. However, two spin 

configurations are possible: in one case, spins rotate by 60° between two adjacent domains 

(i.e. the magnetic topological charge nm of 1 around a merging point, Figure 4b), and spins 

rotate by 120° between two adjacent domains in the other case (i.e. the magnetic topological 

charge nm of 2 around a merging point, Figure 4a). Our MFM results are completely 

consistent with the former even though the theory proposed the possibility of both. This 

indicates that the magnetic topological charge (nm) tends to be identical with the structural 

topological charge (ns), which leads to the decoupling of FE and WFM domains. Therefore, 

we propose it is necessary to consider topological properties when ME coupling is studied in 

h-LuFeO3. 

 

References 

1. 
Feng, S. M. et al. Determination of the intrinsic ferroelectric polarization in 

orthorhombic HoMnO3. New J. Phys. 12, 073006 (2010).  

2. 
Artyukhin, S., Delaney, K. T., Spaldin, N. A. & Mostovoy, M. Landau theory of 

topological defects in multiferroic hexagonal manganites. Nat. Mater. 13, 42–49 (2014). 

 


