Adsorption of common solvent molecules on graphene and MoS2 from
first-principles
Urvesh Patil1 and Nuala M. Caffrey1

School of Physics and CRANN, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland

(Dated: 21 June 2018)

Solvents are an essential element in the production and processing of two-dimensional (2D) materials. For
example, the liquid phase exfoliation of layered materials requires a solvent to prevent the resulting monolay-
ers from re-aggregating, while solutions of functional atoms and molecules are routinely used to modify the
properties of the layers. It is generally assumed that these solvents do not interact strongly with the layer and
so their effects can be neglected. Yet experimental evidence has suggested that explicit atomic-scale interac-
tions between the solvent and layered material may play a crucial role in exfoliation and cause unintended
electronic changes in the layer. Little is known about the precise nature of the interaction between the solvent
molecules and the 2D layer. Here, we use density functional theory calculations to determine the adsorption
configuration and binding energy of a variety of common solvent molecules, both polar and non-polar, on two
of the most popular 2D materials, namely graphene and MoS2. We show that these molecules are physisorbed
on the surface with negligible charge transferred between them. We find that the adsorption strength of the
different molecules is independent of the polar nature of the solvent. However, we show the molecules induce
a significant charge rearrangement at the interface after adsorption as a result of polar bonds in the molecule.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Two dimensional (2D) layered materials have at-
tracted considerable attention since the discovery of
graphene, due to their potential for advanced techno-
logical applications.1–4 Yet before they can be incorpo-
rated into devices, fabrication on a cost-effective, indus-
trial scale must be achievable.
There are two general
approaches to the production of isolated 2D nanolayers,
namely ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’. Bottom-up meth-
ods comprise of those which synthesize the layered ma-
terial from atomic or molecular precursors and includes
chemical vapor deposition (CVD). While offering a high
degree of atomic control, bottom-up methods have gen-
erally a prohibitively high cost.5,6 Top-down methods in-
volve the extraction of individual layers from a parent
layered crystal. An example of this is the isolation of a
graphene monolayer from graphite by micro-mechanical
cleavage. While cleavage techniques have been optimized
to yield high quality 2D layers, they have a relatively low
yield.7 In contrast, the liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) of
layered materials is a scalable top-down method, capable
of producing industrial quantities of monolayers at a low
cost.8,9 Large shear forces, introduced in the presence of
a solvent through either sonication, high-shear mixing or
wet-ball milling, are used to overcome the van der Waal
interactions binding the layers together.10 The solvent
then stabilizes the resulting nanosheets, preventing their
aggregation or precipitation. Sheets with lateral sizes as
large as 5 µm have been produced using this method.11–14

The effectiveness of LPE is critically dependent on
the choice of solvent.9,14 The simplified rule-of-thumb
for solvation – that polar solvents dissolve polar solutes
and non-polar solvents dissolve non-polar solutes – is no
longer applicable. It was shown that matching the cohe-
sive energies of the solute and solvent via the Hildebrand
or Hansen solubility parameters can be a useful guiding

principle in the search for an optimal solvent.15 Yet this
principle cannot be applied universally; in some cases
the yield can be very low despite an excellent match be-
tween solute and solvent. For example, cyclopentanone
and dimethyl pthlate have very similar Hansen and Hilde-
brand parameters yet the former is one of the best sol-
vents for the exfoliation of graphite while the the latter
is one of the worst.16 The failure of these empirical solu-
bility models suggests that considering only macroscopic
solution thermodynamics is not sufficient to find good
solvents.17

Instead, explicit structural and electronic interactions
between the solvent molecules and the solute may play
an important role.
It has been suggested that solvent
molecules can act as a ‘wedge’, prising the layers apart at
the edges, thereby improving the efficiency of subsequent
exfoliation attempts.18,19 Mutual interactions may also
result in the confinement of the solvent molecules at the
surface or in interlayer spaces, resulting in changes in the
entropic contribution to exfoliation.20–23

As well as in LPE, solvents are used in a variety of dif-
ferent material processing and purification tasks.24–26 In
many cases, completely removing the solvent afterwards
can be difficult.
For example, N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
(NMP) is a typical solvent used in LPE and in other sol-
vent processing tasks, but due to its high boiling point
(202◦C) it can remain a persistent residue.27 It is gen-
erally assumed that such solvent molecules interact only
weakly with the layered materials and so their effects can
be neglected. However, this is not always the case and
given the atomic thickness and large surface area of 2D
layers, there may be unintended effects on the structural
and electronic properties of the layer. For example, Choi
et al. found that common solvents can transfer sufficient
charge to transition metal dichalcogenide layers to cause
measurable changes in their electrical and optical prop-
erties.28

arXiv:1806.07843v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Jun 2018


2

Very little is known about the nature of the interaction
between solvent molecules and 2D layered materials on
the atomic level. In this work, we use density functional
theory to systematically determine the ground state ad-
sorption configuration of a variety of solvent molecules
on two of the most widely studied 2D materials, namely
graphene and hexagonal MoS2. We choose six represen-
tative solvents from the polar protic (2-propanol), polar
aprotic (bendaldehyde, cyclopentanone and N-Methyl-2-
pyrrolidone (NMP)) and non-polar (toluene and chloro-
form) solvent families. These are shown in Fig. 1(a). We
determine their adsorption configuration and binding en-
ergy and show that these molecules are physisorbed on
the surface with little charge transfer between the two.
Despite this, a significant charge rearrangement occurs
at the interface due to an induced dipole interaction.

II.
COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

A.
Density Functional Theory

Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are per-
formed using the projected augmented wave (PAW)
method as implemented the vasp code.29–32 The Perdew-
Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE-PAW) potentials33,34 provided
with the package are used. The optimized optB86b-vdW
functional35–39 is used to approximate the exchange-
correlation functional and to account for van der Waals
(vdW) interactions.
This functional was previously
shown to provide accurate binding energies for both gas
phase clusters and bulk solids and for molecular adsorp-
tion on transition metal surfaces.40

In order to model the adsorption of isolated molecules,
a 3×5 orthorhombic unit cell of both graphene and MoS2
is used, as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). As a result, there
is a minimum distance of at least 10 ˚A between periodic
images of the molecules. Furthermore, a vacuum layer
of at least 15 ˚A is included in the direction normal to
the surface to ensure no spurious interactions between
repeating layers, and the dipole correction is applied.

The graphene (MoS2) Brillouin zone is sampled with a
5×5×1 (3×3×1) Monkhorst-Pack mesh41 to carry out
structural relaxations to a force tolerance of 0.02 eV/˚A.
All atoms in the unit cell are allowed to move, including
those of the substrate. The electronic properties are then
calculated using a k-point sampling of 11 × 11 × 1. In all
cases, a plane wave cutoff of 500 eV is used to converge
the basis set.

The determination of charge transfer depends sensi-
tively on how the charge density is assigned to each atom.
Here, we use both the Density Derived Electrostatic and
Chemical (DDEC) net atomic charges42 scheme as im-
plemented in the chargemol program and the Bader par-
titioning scheme.43,44

12.31  

12.80  

16.42  

15.80  

Mo

S

C

Toluene
Benzaldehyde
Cyclopentanone

2-propanol
NMP
Chloroform

(a)

(b)
(c)

FIG. 1.
(a) Geometry of the six solvent molecules consid-
ered in this study.
Top and side view of the (b) graphene
and (c) MoS2 supercell used in this work. The 12 irreducible
adsorption points are shown as black dots on the lattice.

B.
Mapping the Configuration Space

For multi-atom adsorbents, such as the molecules con-
sidered here, there is a large phase space of possible ad-
sorption configurations. In order to find the lowest en-
ergy binding site, we follow a process similar to ˚Akesson
et al.,45 extended to include molecular rotations. Note
that while the symmetry of the substrate is taken into ac-
count when creating the initial adsorption configurations,
nothing is assumed about the molecular symmetry.
The following workflow is used to determine the ground
state binding configuration: The individual components,
i.e., the molecule and the 2D layered material, are first
relaxed to determine their isolated structures. A uniform
grid is then defined at a typical binding height (3.5 ˚A)
above the surface of each material, as shown in Fig. 1(b)
and (c). The grid spacing is defined as d/2 where d is
the C–C or Mo–S bond length, projected in-plane. The
center of mass of each molecule is placed at each grid
point.
Due to the low adsorption concentration considered
here, each molecule will minimize its total energy by


3

maximising its total area of overlap with the surface, i.e.,
planar molecules adsorb flat against the substrate.46,47

With this restriction, molecular rotations, in steps of 5◦,
around an axis normal to the basal plane of the substrate
are considered. Out-of-plane rotations are also included.
Planar molecules such as benzaldehyde have only one in-
distinguishable out-of-plane rotation.
NMP, cyclopen-
tanone and toluene are non-planar with two possible ro-
tational configurations obtained by a 180◦ rotation out-
of-plane. Chloroform has four possible rotational config-
urations: two in which the H–C bond is perpendicular
to the plane of graphene, and another two in which the
H–C bond is at 60◦ to the plane.
Finally, 2-propanol
also has four possible rotational configurations: two ori-
entations in which the C–O bond is perpendicular to the
surface and another two in which it is parallel. A struc-
ture matching algorithm, as implemented in pymatgen,48

then reduces the total number of configurations.
The total energy of each of these configurations, with-
out relaxation, is calculated. The entire procedure is then
repeated for a sub-set of these configurations at a lower
height in steps of 0.25 ˚A until the lowest energy adsorp-
tion height is found. At this stage, a structural optimiza-
tion of all structures at local minima with total energies
within 0.05 eV of the global minimum is performed. The
configuratation with the lowest total energy after this
structural optimization is the ground state configuration.

III.
RESULTS

A.
Ground State Configurations

The solvent molecules are found to adsorb at an av-
erage binding height of 3.35 ˚A from the surface of both
graphene and MoS2. The binding heights are shown in
Fig. 2.
The smallest binding height is found for ben-
zaldehyde on graphene (3.00 ˚A), while the largest bind-
ing height of 3.56 ˚A is found for 2-propanol on graphene.
These heights are consistent with physisorption.45,47,49

toluene

benzaldehyde

cyclopentanone

2-propanol

NMP

chloroform

2.75

3.00

3.25

3.50

d (Å)

Graphene
MoS2

FIG. 2. The binding height of center of mass of the molecule
from the basal plane of the substrate.

The geometrically optimized minimum energy configu-
rations for each of the six solvent molecules adsorbed on
graphene are shown in the top panel of Fig. 3. Molecules
which contain a six-member ring are found to adsorb such
that every alternate atom of the carbon ring is on top

of a carbon atom in the graphene sheet, similar to the
AB-stacking of two adjacent carbon layers in a graphite
crystal.50 This is particularly evident for toluene and ben-
zaldehyde where small deviations from the perfect AB-
type stacking are dictated by the functional group at-
tached to the ring. The methyl group of toluene is ad-
sorbed at a ‘top’ position, i.e., on top of a graphene car-
bon atom, with the edge of the methyl group tripod fac-
ing the graphene lattice, in agreement with Borck et al.51

In contrast, the functional aldehyde (CHO) group of ben-
zaldehyde is adsorbed at a hollow position. This is due
to the different hybridizations of the carbon atoms in the
two functional groups – the carbon atom in the methyl
group is sp3 hybridized, whereas it is sp2 hybridized in
the CHO group.
As the aldehyde oxygen atom has a
partial negative charge, it prefers to adsorb close to a
graphene bridge site.
The carbon atoms in cyclopentanone are sp3 hy-
bridized with the exception of that bonded to oxygen,
which is sp2 hybridized. The three carbon atoms bonded
to hydrogen atoms which point towards the graphene
layer are located above hollow sites. The carbon atom
bonded to a hydrogen atom which points away from the
graphene layer is adsorbed above a carbon top site. The
remaining electropositive carbon atom is adsorbed on a
graphene top site, while the electronegative oxygen atom
is located close to a graphene bridge site.
Similarly,
the oxygen atom in 2-propanol adsorbs close to a bridge
site and all sp3 hybridized carbon atoms avoid the top
sites. It maximizes its surface contact area by adsorbing
such that the C–O bond is approximately parallel to the
graphene layer.
For the case of NMP, the electronegative oxygen and
nitrogen atoms dictate the orientation of adsorption by
adsorbing close to bridge sites. Fixing the adsorption po-
sition of these two atoms determines the orientation of
the rest of the molecule. Finally, for the case of chloro-
form, each of the chlorine atoms adsorbs close to a hollow
site, with the hydrogen pointing away from the layer in a
so-called “H-up” configuration. Note that this is a differ-
ent adsorption configuration to that found by ˚Akesson et
al. due to the more restrictive configuration space con-
sidered in that work.45 In all cases the deformation in
graphene substrate is less than 0.1 ˚A.
The geometrically optimized configurations of the
molecules adsorbed on MoS2 are shown in the bottom
panel of Fig. 3. In all cases, molecules with hydrogen
atoms which point towards the MoS2 surface prefer to
adsorb such that they are located in the hollow formed
by the sulfur atoms, i.e., directly on top of the metal
atoms. For benzaldehyde and toluene, the carbon ring
prefers to have alternate carbon atoms above the metal
atoms with the center of the ring directly above a sul-
fur atom.
Similarly, for cyclopentanone, the center of
the carbon ring prefers to adsorb directly above a sulfur
atom with the carbon atoms located either directly on
top of the molybdenum atoms or in the hollow of the
substrate hexagon. 2-propanol occupies the valley cre-


4

Toluene
Benzaldehyde
Cyclopentanone
2-propanol
NMP
Chloroform

FIG. 3. Top (bottom) panel: Side and top view of the lowest energy binding site of the solvent molecule on graphene (MoS2).

ated by the sulfur atoms, with the functionalized carbon
atom located on top of the metal atom. Note that this
is a 180◦ out-of-plane rotation with respect to the orien-
tation of the same molecule on graphene. For the case
of NMP, the electronegative oxygen atom is adsorbed on
top of the metal atom with the orientation of the rest
of the molecule dictated by the hydrogen atoms which
point towards the surface.
Finally, the hydrogen atom of chloroform also prefers
to adsorb in the valley created by the sulfur atoms, di-
rectly above the metal atom, so that the molecule is in a
“H-down” configuration. This is in contrast to its bind-
ing configuration on graphene where it adsorbs with the
hydrogen atom pointing away from the surface, i.e. “H-
up”. In all cases the deformation of MoS2 substrate after
solvent adsorption is negligible.

B.
Binding Energy

The binding energy between the layered material and
the adsorbed solvent molecule is defined as:

Eb = Emol+layer − Elayer − Emol

where Elayer is the total energy of the clean monolayer,
Emol is the total energy of the isolated molecule and
Emol+layer is the total energy of the combined system.
The binding energies of each solvent molecule adsorbed

toluene

benzaldehyde

cyclopentanone

2-propanol

NMP

chloroform

-0.16

-0.12

-0.08

-0.04

0.00

Eb / N (eV)

(b)
Graphene
MoS2

toluene

benzaldehyde

cyclopentanone

2-propanol

NMP

chloroform

-0.80

-0.60

-0.40

-0.20

0.00

Eb (eV)

(a)

FIG. 4. (a) Binding energy of each molecule on a graphene
(blue) and MoS2 (orange) substrate.
(b) Binding energies
normalized by the number of non hydrogen atoms, N, in the
molecule.

on both graphene and MoS2 are shown in Fig. 4(a). They
range between -0.4 eV and -0.79 eV per molecule. The
binding energy of each molecule differs by no more than
7% when adsorbed on graphene compared to MoS2. The
molecular binding energy rescaled by the total number of
atoms in that molecule, excluding hydrogen, N, is then


5

shown in Fig. 4(b). In all cases, the normalized bind-
ing energies lie in a narrow range between approximately
90 and 120 meV/atom, and with a difference of no more
than 5 meV/atom between individual molecules adsorbed
on graphene and MoS2. A similarly narrow range of nor-
malized binding energy was found for aromatic and con-
jugated compounds adsorbed on MoS247 and graphene52

and shown experimentally for acenes adsorbed on copper
surfaces.53 This is evidence of the dominance of the van
der Waals contribution to the binding energy and is sup-
ported by the fact that a positive binding energy is found
for all molecules adsorbed on both substrates when the
contribution from the vdW correction is excluded.

C.
Charge Transfer and Rearrangement

The magnitude of total charge transfer between the
molecules and both graphene and MoS2 is no more than
0.11e− per molecule as determined by both the Bader and
the DDEC methods. In some cases, these two methods do
not agree on the direction of the charge transfer. Given
the difficulties in partitioning space in order to assign
charge to the molecule or substrate, this magnitude of
the charge transfer may be considered essentially zero.

−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance from monolayer surface (Å)

0

20

40

60

Planar averaged charge 
 density (10−4 e/Å)

(a)
graphene
Toluene
Benzaldehyde
Cyclopentanone
2-Propanol
NMP
Chloroform

−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance from monolayer surface (Å)

0

10

20

Planar averaged charge 
 density (10−4 e/Å)

(b)
MoS2

FIG. 5.
Planar average of the charge density of each of the six
molecules adsorbed on (a) graphene and (b) MoS2 compared
to the pristine monolayers.
The vertical lines indicate the
positions of atoms in the monolayers.

Fig. 5 shows that there is a negligible difference in the
charge density located on the monolayers before and after
adsorption. From this we can conclude that the solvent
molecules are physisorbed on the 2D layers.
Notwithstanding the negligible charge transfer in-
volved, significant charge reorganization occurs on both

the molecule and the 2D layer as as result of their interac-
tion. To visualize this, we show in Fig. 6 a slice through
the charge density difference that occurs after molecular
adsorption on graphene and MoS2 at a height of 0.5 ˚A
above the plane of the monolayer. The charge density
difference is defined as:

∆ρ = ρmol+layer − ρmol − ρlayer

where ρmol+layer, ρmol and ρlayer are the charge densities
of the molecule adsorbed system, the isolated molecule
and the isolated layer, respectively. A charge rearrange-
ment reminiscent of image charges54 on a metal is found
to occur after molecular adsorption on graphene. As a re-
sult of their high polarizabilities,55 the substrate’s charge
density is modified by the polar bonds of the adsorbing
molecule. This can be seen as the response of the layer
to the net dipole of the molecule.
The molecule then
interacts with its image charge.
For the case of toluene, the small net molecular dipole
points towards the methyl group. As a result, a small
charge accumulation (red) is evident beneath the methyl
group and a charge depletion (blue) occurs beneath the
carbon ring. This dependence of the charge rearrange-
ment on the molecular dipole is particularly evident for
molecules with an electronegative oxygen atom, such
as benzaldehyde, cyclopentanone and NMP. In these
cases, charge depletion occurs beneath the oxygen atom,
whereas there is charge accumulation beneath the car-
bon ring. This is true for those molecules adsorbed on
both graphene and MoS2. Similarly, in 2-propanol the
net dipole points away from the oxygen atom. However,
the response of the 2D layer to 2-propanol depends on
the out-of-plane rotation of the molecule. For the case
of graphene, the molecule is adsorbed with the hydro-
gen atom, which is bound to the oxygen atom, pointing
towards the surface. This hydrogen atom has a partial
positive charge, and so results in charge accumulation in
the layer directly beneath it. When adsorbed on MoS2,
that hydrogen atom points away from the surface. The
charge depletion in the sulfur atoms of the substrate is
then as a result of the partial negative charge on the
oxygen atom.
Finally, for the case of chloroform ad-
sorption, the net dipole is perpendicular to the layers so
that the changes in charge density around the molecule
are symmetric. As the chlorine atoms have partial nega-
tive charges, charge depletion is evident directly beneath
them, whereas there is a charge accumulation beneath
the hydrogen atom which adsorbs on top of the metal
atom.

IV.
CONCLUSION

We have determined the adsorption configuration of
six common solvent molecules on the basal plane of
both graphene and MoS2 using first-principles calcula-
tions which take van der Waal interactions into account.
The calculated binding energies, adsorption heights and


6

x 10-4 e/ 2

x 10-4 e/ 2

Toluene
Benzaldehyde
Cyclopentanone
2-propanol
NMP
Chloroform

FIG. 6.
Top (bottom) panel: A slice through the charge density difference 0.5 ˚A above the graphene (MoS2) plane. Blue
represents electron density depletion and red represents an electron density accumulation. The arrows represent the in-plane
direction (but not magnitude) of the molecular dipole. The dipole of chloroform is perpendicular to the plane of the monolayer,
pointing towards (away from) the layer for the case of graphene (MoS2).

charge transfer all show that the solvent molecules are
physisorbed on graphene and MoS2, with only minor
variations in binding height and binding energy between
the different molecules and on the two different mono-
layers. For those molecules which contain a carbon ring,
the lowest energy adsorption configuration on graphene
is one in which a Bernal-like stacking arrangement of the
carbon atoms is achieved. Non-planar molecules which
have hydrogen atoms pointing towards the surface ad-
sorb such that those atoms are located in the hollow site
of the substrate lattice.
We find that the orientation
of both 2-propanol and chloroform are rotated by 180◦

when comparing adsorption on graphene and MoS2. Fi-
nally, despite negligible charge transfer between the sol-
vent and monolayers, there is a significant charge rear-
rangement within the substrate layers in response to the
partial charges on the atoms in the molecules, similar to
the creation of an image charge in metals.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This
work
was
supported
by
a
Science
Foun-
dation Ireland Starting Investigator Research Grant
(15/SIRG/3314).
Computational resources were pro-
vided by the supercomputer facilities at the Trinity Cen-
ter for High Performance Computing (TCHPC) and at
the Irish Center for High-End Computing (project tc-
phy091b, tcphy084c). The authors would like to thank
Dr. Thomas Archer for providing the “gollum” script, a
modified version of which was used to perform the high-
throughput calculations.

1W. Yang, L. Gan, H. Li, and T. Zhai, “Two-dimensional layered
nanomaterials for gas-sensing applications,” Inorg. Chem. Front.
3, 433 (2016).

2M. Chhowalla, D. Jena, and H. Zhang, “Two-dimensional semi-
conductors for transistors,” Nature Reviews Materials 1, 16052
(2016).

3E. G. da Silveira Firmiano, A. C. Rabelo, C. J. Dalmaschio, A. N.
Pinheiro, E. C. Pereira, W. H. Schreiner, and E. R. Leite, “Su-
percapacitor electrodes obtained by directly bonding 2D MoS2 on
reduced graphene oxide,” Advanced Energy Materials 4, 1301380
(2014).

4H. Hwang, H. Kim,
and J. Cho, “MoS2 nanoplates consisting
of disordered graphene-like layers for high rate lithium battery
anode materials,” Nano Letters 11, 4826 (2011).

5W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande, and
Y. H. Lee, “Recent development of two-dimensional transition
metal dichalcogenides and their applications,” Materials Today
20, 116 (2017).

6J. Yu, J. Li, W. Zhang, and H. Chang, “Synthesis of high quality
two-dimensional materials via chemical vapor deposition,” Chem.
Sci. 6, 6705 (2015).

7K. S. Novoselov, “Nobel lecture: Graphene: Materials in the
flatland,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 837 (2011).

8V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano, and
J. N. Coleman, “Liquid Exfoliation of Layered Materials,” Sci-
ence 340, 1226419 (2013).

9J. N. Coleman, “Liquid exfoliation of defect-free graphene,” Ac-
counts of Chemical Research 46, 14 (2013).

10H. Tao, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, Z. Sun, C. Yan, and J. Texter, “Scal-
able Exfoliation and Dispersion of Two-Dimensional Materials –
An Update,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19, 921 (2016).

11K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan,
A. O’Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Hig-
gins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moe-
bius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O’Brien, E. K.
McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J.
Pennycook, C. Downing, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi,
and J. N.
Coleman, “Scalable production of large quantities of defect-free
few-layer graphene by shear exfoliation in liquids,” Nature Ma-
terials 13, 624 (2014).


7

12U. Khan, A. O’Neill, H. Porwal, P. May, K. Nawaz,
and J. N.
Coleman, “Size selection of dispersed, exfoliated graphene flakes
by controlled centrifugation,” Carbon 50, 470 (2012).

13A. ONeill, U. Khan,
and J. N. Coleman, “Preparation of high
concentration dispersions of exfoliated MoS2 with increased flake
size,” Chemistry of Materials 24, 2414 (2012).

14J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King,
U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets,
S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S.
Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Done-
gan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls,
J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb,
P. D. Nellist, and V. Nicolosi, “Two-dimensional nanosheets pro-
duced by liquid exfoliation of layered materials,” Science 331, 568
(2011).

15S. D. Bergin, Z. Sun, D. Rickard, P. V. Streich, J. P. Hamilton,
and J. N. Coleman, “Multicomponent solubility parameters for
single-walled carbon nanotube- solvent mixtures,” ACS nano 3,
2340 (2009).

16Y. Hernandez, M. Lotya, D. Rickard, S. D. Bergin,
and J. N.
Coleman, “Measurement of multicomponent solubility param-
eters for graphene facilitates solvent discovery,” Langmuir 26,
3208 (2009).

17J. Shen, Y. He, J. Wu, C. Gao, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Y. Yang,
M. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou,
and P. M. Ajayan, “Liquid Phase
Exfoliation of Two-Dimensional Materials by Directly Probing
and Matching Surface Tension Components,” Nano Letters 15,
5449 (2015).

18J. Xu, D. K. Dang, V. T. Tran, X. Liu, J. S. Chung, S. H. Hur,
W. M. Choi, E. J. Kim, and P. A. Kohl, “Liquid-phase exfoliation
of graphene in organic solvents with addition of naphthalene,”
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 418, 37 (2014).

19V. Sresht, A. A. P´adua,
and D. Blankschtein, “Liquid-phase
exfoliation of phosphorene: design rules from molecular dynamics
simulations,” ACS nano 9, 8255 (2015).

20V. Arunachalam and S. Vasudevan, “Graphene–solvent interac-
tions in nonaqueous dispersions:
2D ROESY NMR measure-
ments and molecular dynamics simulations,” The Journal of
Physical Chemistry C 122, 1881 (2018).

21C. Maciel, E. E. Fileti, and R. Rivelino, “Assessing the solvation
mechanism of C60(OH)24 in aqueous solution,” Chemical Physics
Letters 507, 244 (2011).

22A. Govind Rajan, V. Sresht, A. A. Padua, M. S. Strano,
and
D. Blankschtein, “Dominance of dispersion interactions and en-
tropy over electrostatics in determining the wettability and fric-
tion of two-dimensional MoS2 surfaces,” ACS nano 10, 9145
(2016).

23C. A. Howard, H. Thompson, J. C. Wasse, and N. T. Skipper,
“Formation of giant solvation shells around fulleride anions in
liquid ammonia,” Journal of the American Chemical Society 126,
13228 (2004).

24P. L. Cullen, K. M. Cox, M. K. Bin Subhan, L. Picco, O. D.
Payton, D. J. Buckley, T. S. Miller, S. A. Hodge, N. T. Skipper,
V. Tileli, and C. A. Howard, “Ionic solutions of two-dimensional
materials,” Nature Chemistry 9, 244 (2017).

25F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kul-
mala, G.-W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso, P. J. Paul, D. Chu,
and A. C. Ferrari, “Inkjet-Printed Graphene Electronics,” ACS
Nano 6, 2992 (2012).

26F. Withers, H. Yang, L. Britnell, A. P. Rooney, E. Lewis, A. Fel-
ten, C. R. Woods, V. Sanchez Romaguera, T. Georgiou, A. Eck-
mann, Y. J. Kim, S. G. Yeates, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, K. S.
Novoselov, and C. Casiraghi, “Heterostructures Produced from
Nanosheet-Based Inks,” Nano Letters 14, 3987 (2014).

27E. P. Nguyen, B. J. Carey, T. Daeneke, J. Z. Ou, K. Latham,
S. Zhuiykov,
and K. Kalantar-zadeh, “Investigation of two-
solvent grinding-assisted liquid phase exfoliation of layered
MoS2,” Chemistry of Materials 27, 53 (2014).

28J. Choi, H. Y. Zhang, H. D. Du, and J. H. Choi, “Understanding
Solvent Effects on the Properties of Two-Dimensional Transition

Metal Dichalcogenides,” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 8,
8864 (2016).

29G. Kresse and J. Hafner, “Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid
metals,” Phys. Rev. B 47, 558 (1993).

30G. Kresse and J. Hafner, “Ab initio molecular-dynamics simula-
tion of the liquid-metal–amorphous-semiconductor transition in
germanium,” Phys. Rev. B 49, 14251 (1994).

31G. Kresse and J. Furthmller, “Efficiency of ab-initio total energy
calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave
basis set,” Computational Materials Science 6, 15 (1996).

32G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, “Efficient iterative schemes for
ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set,”
Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).

33P. E. Bl¨ochl, “Projector augmented-wave method,” Phys. Rev.
B 50, 17953 (1994).

34G. Kresse and D. Joubert, “From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to
the projector augmented-wave method,” Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758
(1999).

35J. c. v. Klimeˇs, D. R. Bowler,
and A. Michaelides, “Van der
waals density functionals applied to solids,” Phys. Rev. B 83,
195131 (2011).

36T. Thonhauser, V. R. Cooper, S. Li, A. Puzder, P. Hyldgaard,
and D. C. Langreth, “Van der waals density functional: Self-
consistent potential and the nature of the van der waals bond,”
Phys. Rev. B 76, 125112 (2007).

37J. Klime, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, “Chemical accuracy
for the van der waals density functional,” Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 22, 022201 (2010).

38G. Rom´an-P´erez and J. M. Soler, “Efficient implementation of
a van der waals density functional: Application to double-wall
carbon nanotubes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 096102 (2009).

39M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schr¨oder, D. C. Langreth,
and B. I.
Lundqvist, “Van der waals density functional for general geome-
tries,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 246401 (2004).

40J. Carrasco, W. Liu, A. Michaelides,
and A. Tkatchenko, “In-
sight into the description of van der waals forces for benzene
adsorption on transition metal (111) surfaces,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 140, 084704 (2014).

41H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, “Special points for brillouin-
zone integrations,” Phys. Rev. B 13, 5188 (1976).

42T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “Improved atoms-in-molecule charge
partitioning functional for simultaneously reproducing the elec-
trostatic potential and chemical states in periodic and nonperi-
odic materials,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation
8, 2844 (2012).

43M. Yu and D. R. Trinkle, “Accurate and efficient algorithm for
Bader charge integration,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 134,
64111 (2011).

44W. Tang, E. Sanville, and G. Henkelman, “A grid-based Bader
analysis algorithm without lattice bias,” Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 21, 84204 (2009).

45J. ˚Akesson, O. Sundborg, O. Wahlstr¨om,
and E. Schr¨oder, “A
van der Waals density functional study of chloroform and other
trihalomethanes on graphene,” Journal of Chemical Physics 137,
174702 (2012).

46S. Barja, M. Garnica, J. J. Hinarejos, A. L. de Parga, N. Mar-
tin,
and R. Miranda, “Self-organization of electron acceptor
molecules on graphene,” Chem. Commun. 46, 8198 (2010).

47P. G. Moses, J. J. Mortensen, B. I. Lundqvist, and J. K. Nørskov,
“Density functional study of the adsorption and van der waals
binding of aromatic and conjugated compounds on the basal
plane of MoS2,” Journal of Chemical Physics 130, 104709 (2009).

48S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher,
S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A. Persson,
and
G. Ceder, “Python materials genomics (pymatgen): A robust,
open-source python library for materials analysis,” Computa-
tional Materials Science 68, 314 (2013).

49Ø. Borck and E. Schr¨oder, “Methylbenzenes on graphene,” Sur-
face Science 664, 162 (2017).


8

50K. Yoshizawa, T. Kato, and T. Yamabe, “Interlayer interactions
in twodimensional systems: Second-order effects causing ABAB
stacking of layers in graphite,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
105, 2099 (1996).

51Ø. Borck and E. Schr¨oder, “Methylbenzenes on graphene,” Sur-
face Science 664, 162 (2017).

52S. D. Chakarova-K¨ack, A. Vojvodic, J. Kleis, P. Hyldgaard, and
E. Schr¨oder, “Binding of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and
graphene dimers in density functional theory,” New Journal of
Physics 12, 013017 (2010).

53S. Lukas, S. Vollmer, G. Witte,
and C. W¨oll, “Adsorption of
acenes on flat and vicinal Cu(111) surfaces: Step induced for-

mation of lateral order,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 114,
10123 (2001).

54S. Roychoudhury, C. Motta,
and S. Sanvito, “Charge trans-
fer energies of benzene physisorbed on a graphene sheet from
constrained density functional theory,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 045130
(2016).

55E. J. Santos, “Electric field effects on graphene materials,” in
Exotic Properties of Carbon Nanomatter (Springer, 2015) p. 383.


