Disentangling amplitude and phase dynamics of a charge density wave in a
photo-induced phase transition

Alfred Zong,1, ∗ Anshul Kogar,1, ∗ Ya-Qing Bie,1 Timm Rohwer,1, † Changmin Lee,1 Edoardo Baldini,1

Emre Erge¸cen,1 Mehmet B. Yilmaz,1 Byron Freelon,1, ‡ Edbert J. Sie,1, § Hengyun Zhou,1, ¶

Joshua Straquadine,2, 3, 4 Philip Walmsley,2, 3, 4 Pavel E. Dolgirev,5 Alexander V. Rozhkov,5, 6

Ian R. Fisher,2, 3, 4 Pablo Jarillo-Herrero,1 Boris V. Fine,5, 7 and Nuh Gedik1, ∗∗

1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Physics, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
2Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
3Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
4SIMES, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.
5Skolkovo Institute of Technology, Skolkovo Innovation Center, 3 Nobel Street, Moscow, 143026, Russia.
6Institute for Theoretical and Applied Electrodynamics,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 125412, Russia.
7Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Heidelberg, Philosophenweg 12, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(Dated: April 20, 2018)

Upon excitation with an intense ultrafast laser pulse, a symmetry-broken ground state can undergo
a non-equilibrium phase transition through pathways dissimilar from those in thermal equilibrium.
Determining the mechanism underlying these photo-induced phase transitions (PIPTs) has been a
long-standing issue in the study of condensed matter systems [1]. To this end, we investigate the
light-induced melting of a unidirectional charge density wave (CDW) material, LaTe3. Using a suite
of time-resolved probes, we independently track the amplitude and phase dynamics of the CDW. We
find that a quick (∼ 1 ps) recovery of the CDW amplitude is followed by a slower reestablishment of
phase coherence. This longer timescale is dictated by the presence of topological defects: long-range
order (LRO) is inhibited and is only restored when the defects annihilate. Our results provide a
framework for understanding other PIPTs by identifying the generation of defects as a governing
mechanism.

The understanding of equilibrium phase transitions
caused by spontaneous symmetry breaking is a hallmark
achievement of 20th-century physics. When these transi-
tions are induced by adiabatic cooling from a disordered
to an ordered phase, they are marked by a diverging cor-
relation length and correlation time of equilibrium fluctu-
ations at the transition temperature, Tc [2]. Much less is
understood about non-adiabatic transitions, or quenches,
where fluctuations are not expected to exhibit a diverg-
ing correlation length and time, preventing the onset of
LRO. This absence of critical behavior is often linked to
the creation of topological defects in the ordered phase.
The conventional framework for treating non-adiabatic
transitions, Kibble-Zurek theory [3, 4], suggests that as
the system is quenched through a phase transition from
a disordered state, topological defects are generated as
a result of the simultaneous emergence of the ordered

∗ These authors contributed equally.
† Present address: Center for Free-Electron Laser Science,
DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.
‡ Present address: University of Louisville, Department of
Physics and Astronomy, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.
§ Present address: Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materi-
als, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
¶ Present address: Department of Physics, Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
∗∗ gedik@mit.edu

phase in disconnected regions of space.
While such a
picture is supported by experiments, for example, in liq-
uid crystals [5, 6] and 3He [7, 8], it has so far seen only
limited experimental support in a broad new class of non-
adiabatic transitions induced in ordered systems by pho-
toexcitation [9, 10].
PIPTs
present
a
unique
platform
whereby
non-
adiabatic transitions can be studied. They have emerged
as an intense research field in recent decades [1] as a
consequence of the technological advances offered by ul-
trafast lasers. During these transitions, the initial state
appearing immediately after photoexcitation, from which
order recovers, is far from equilibrium. Moreover, topo-
logical defects in this case are not necessarily generated
through a complete melting of the broken symmetry
phase, but may also arise within the ordered state as
a result of spatially localized absorption of high-energy
photons.
Materials that exhibit a unidirectional incommensu-
rate CDW are well-suited for investigating PIPTs. Topo-
logical defects in these systems, such as dislocations, have
been classified theoretically [11, 12] and are thought to
play a negligible role in an equilibrium metal-to-CDW
transition [13].
Indeed, if a sample is adiabatically
cooled below Tc, a resolution-limited diffraction peak ap-
pears [14–16]. This observation indicates that the phase
coherence extends macroscopically without impedance
from topological defects, which, when present, reduce the
correlation length and disrupt LRO. By contrast, pre-

arXiv:1806.02766v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  7 Jun 2018


2

vious studies on PIPTs in unidirectional CDW systems
have hinted at the existence of topological defects [9, 10],
but more direct probes are needed to elucidate how their
presence affects the order parameter dynamics.
In this work, we use three different time-resolved
probes to gain insight into the light-driven phase tran-
sition kinetics (see Methods). In each probe, an incident
pump pulse perturbs or melts the CDW, and a delayed
probe pulse is utilized to measure the ensuing dynam-
ics of the relevant observable. We employ ultrafast elec-
tron diffraction (UED) to probe the long-range density
correlations [17], while using transient reflectivity and
time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (tr-
ARPES) to track the CDW gap amplitude [9, 18–22].
Transient reflectivity has the advantage that it possesses
the highest temporal resolution and signal-to-noise ra-
tio among the probes used, enabling us to additionally
investigate the coherent response from collective excita-
tions. The main benefit of tr-ARPES lies in its energy
and momentum resolution; hence, it can directly probe
the relevant gap dynamics. Each of the three techniques
provides a unique perspective, allowing us to gain a com-
prehensive view of the PIPT.
The material we choose to study is the unidirectional
CDW compound LaTe3.
It has a simple phase dia-
gram [16], providing a clean platform to explore the effect
of photoexcitation.
Its layered structure, whose b-axis
lies out-of-plane [23], makes it susceptible to CDW order
that forms below an estimated transition temperature of
∼ 670 K, with an associated gap of 2∆ ≈ 750 meV [24].
Because of a small in-plane anisotropy in the material,
the CDW forms solely along the crystallographic c-axis,
with an incommensurate wavevector q0 ≈ 2

7c∗, where c∗

is the reciprocal unit vector [25]. The high value of Tc
ensures that, in the course of the PIPT, the transient
lattice temperature is maintained below Tc despite laser
heating (Fig. S2 and Supplementary Note 2).
We first describe the UED experiments, which moni-
tor the structural modulation through the intensity and
width of diffraction peaks. These experiments, carried
out in a transmission geometry, are sensitive to both
the amplitude and phase coherence of the CDW [12, 26].
Figure 1(a) shows an equilibrium electron diffraction cut
along the (3 0 L) line at room temperature. Superlattice
peaks, characteristic of CDW formation, are indicated by
arrows, and signify the presence of LRO.
Following photoexcitation at t = 0, the integrated in-
tensity of the superlattice peak initially decreases within
∼ 1 ps (Fig. 1(b)), a timescale limited by the temporal
resolution of our setup [27]. The intensity then recov-
ers to a quasi-equilibrium value.
Meanwhile, the full-
width at half maximum (FWHM) also broadens by sev-
eral times its equilibrium value and subsequently nar-
rows (Fig. 1(b) insets and (c)). The peak broadening ob-
served here is a signature of a loss of LRO, which, in
turn, requires the appearance of topological defects in

high concentrations [17, 28], a non-trivial consequence
of the PIPT. In the example presented in Fig. 1(b), the
maximum value of the FWHM implies a CDW cor-
relation length of less than ∼ 10 crystallographic unit
cells (Fig. S5(a)). Based on these estimates and the as-
sumption that the defects are two-dimensional, we calcu-
late that for every two photons absorbed, approximately
one defect/anti-defect pair is created (see Supplementary
Note 6).
We next study how the time evolution of the super-
lattice peak changes with excitation density, F, shown in
Fig. 2(a), where F is quoted in terms of absorbed photons
per unit volume (see Supplementary Note 4). Beyond a
critical value, Fc ≈ 2.0 × 1020 cm−3, the CDW melts, as
the peak becomes indistinguishable from noise after pho-
toexcitation (Figs. 2(a) and S4(a)). We estimate that the
critical excitation density, Fc, corresponds to a defect ev-
ery ∼ 6 crystallographic unit cells, a length-scale below
which it is no longer appropriate to define the CDW with
the wavevector q0 ≈ 2

7c∗.
To understand how the CDW is reestablished after
photoexcitation, we focus on the recovery timescale of the
integrated intensity shown in Figs. 2(a) and 4(a). Most
significantly, the characteristic time it takes for the peak
to recover to quasi-equilibrium increases with excitation
density, reaching 5.5 ps for the largest value of F.
In
general, a transient reduction in the integrated intensity
can be caused by four different factors: (i) a suppres-
sion of the CDW amplitude; (ii) the excitation of phase
modes (phasons) [26, 29]; (iii) a decrease of out-of-plane
CDW correlation length [12], which we were not able to
access in the transmission geometry of our experiment;
and (iv) scattering from defect cores, which redistribute
intensity across the entire Brillouin zone [17]. The latter
two factors are controlled by the concentration of topo-
logical defects. The increased population of phasons orig-
inate partially from the temperature rise due to the laser
pulse, but can also stem from defect motion [9]. These
factors suggest that the dynamics of topological defects
may be intimately tied to the recovery of superlattice
peaks. On the experimental side, this link is based on
the following observation: the time evolution of the inte-
grated intensity closely tracks that of the CDW correla-
tion length (Figs. S5, 1(b), and Supplementary Note 6).
Therefore, we infer that it is the reestablishment of CDW
phase coherence that dictates the recovery timescale of
the superlattice peak.
The CDW amplitude – the first factor in the above
list – recovers on a quicker timescale than the phase co-
herence, as we demonstrate in the following.
For this
purpose, we examine the structural Bragg peaks. In the-
ory, their dynamics reflect the response of only the CDW
amplitude, whereas superlattice peaks additionally retain
information about the phase coherence [26]. In Fig. 1(b),
we show that when the CDW is suppressed, the Bragg
peak first intensifies; subsequently, it weakens due to the


3

Debye-Waller factor. This initial intensification signifies
a reduction of the CDW amplitude, as distorted atoms
return to their high symmetry positions. Significantly,
the Bragg peak enhancement disappears on a quicker
timescale than it takes for the superlattice peak to re-
gain its intensity (Fig. S6 and Supplementary Note 7),
suggesting that the CDW amplitude and phase coher-
ence recover at different rates.
To confirm this picture, we turn to transient reflec-
tivity and tr-ARPES measurements, which can probe
the fast evolution of CDW amplitude [9, 18–22] with a
finer temporal resolution (see Methods). In Fig. 2(b), we
present the transient reflectivity results where two com-
ponents in each trace are visible: an incoherent response
arising from the excitation and relaxation of quasiparti-
cles, and an oscillating coherent response predominantly
from the 2.2 THz CDW amplitude mode (AM)
[20].
From the coherent AM response, we determined that the
CDW melts at the critical excitation density, Fc, con-
sistent with the UED measurement (Fig. S4 and Supple-
mentary Note 5). However, the CDW recovery timescale,
extracted from the incoherent response, is much quicker
when compared to that of the UED superlattice peak
(Figs. 2(a)–(b) and 4(a)). As the incoherent response is
known to be a sensitive probe of the CDW gap size [9, 18–
20], we again infer that the amplitude recovers on a faster
timescale than the phase coherence.
To further investigate the amplitude restoration in
a momentum- and energy-resolved fashion, we use tr-
ARPES to probe the gap dynamics. Figure 3(a) shows
a segment of the Fermi surface excited with a density
above Fc. Following photoexcitation, spectral weight fills
in the gapped portions of the Fermi surface. In particu-
lar, Fig. 3(b) shows the time evolution of the momentum-
integrated intensity of a representative gapped region (or-
ange box in Fig. 3(a)), where the Fermi level, EF , lies
approximately at the center of the CDW gap [30]. The
gap size decreases and is subsequently restored to its
quasi-equilibrium value within a couple of picoseconds
(Fig. S7 and Supplementary Note 8). To characterize the
gap recovery more quantitatively, we plot in Fig. 3(c) the
time evolution of in-gap spectral weight obtained by in-
tegrating the intensity over an energy window of ±0.1 eV
around EF (orange box in Fig.3(b)). After fitting the re-
covery with an exponential decay, the time constant ob-
tained is less than 1.1 ps for all excitation densities mea-
sured, consistent with the transient reflectivity results
(Fig. 4(a)). We thus identify ∼ 1 ps as the characteris-
tic timescale for the restoration of the CDW amplitude,
whereas the phase coherence takes up to 5.5 ps to recover
at the highest excitation density measured (Fig. 4(a)).
Taken together, our investigations of LaTe3 are con-
sistent with the interpretation sketched in Fig. 4(b)–(e).
In this picture, the laser pulse excites energetic quasipar-
ticles, which through recombination, create topological
defects.
In the illustration, these defects are depicted

as CDW dislocations [11, 28, 29]. In the meantime, the
CDW gap and hence the amplitude of the CDW order pa-
rameter decreases, while the long-range phase coherence
is suppressed or destroyed (Fig. 4(c)). Within ∼ 1 ps, the
CDW amplitude recovers to quasi-equilibrium.
Mean-
while, the long-range phase coherence is not fully restored
(Fig. 4(d)). It takes several more picoseconds or longer,
depending on the excitation density, for the defects to
annihilate and for the CDW phase coherence to set in
(Fig. 4(e)).

An important implication of Fig. 4(a) is that the phase
coherence takes longer to recover with a higher concentra-
tion of topological defects (orange line). While pinpoint-
ing the exact reason behind this relationship requires a
detailed theoretical treatment, here we limit ourselves
to mentioning two possible mechanisms.
If the recov-
ery is determined by the annihilation of pairs of two-
dimensional topological defects, then the presence of a
large number of defects disturbs the coupling between
CDWs in adjacent planes. Hence, this renormalized out-
of-plane coupling reduces the restoring force that brings
together defect/anti-defect pairs.
A related possibility
is that larger concentrations of photo-induced defects
renormalize down the effective Tc [2] to a value close to
that of the laser-heated sample in UED (see Supplemen-
tary Note 2), and as a result, the restoration of the CDW
order exhibits critical slowing down associated with the
proximity to the renormalized Tc [2].

The synergy of the three time-resolved probes used in
this work has provided a uniquely comprehensive view
of the photo-induced phase transition in a symmetry-
broken state. Across the multiple techniques, a consis-
tent picture is obtained where a quick recovery of the
CDW amplitude is followed by a slower restoration of
phase coherence. Topological defects are preeminent in
this regard, inhibiting the reestablishment of LRO in the
non-equilibrium setting. A transition driven by photoex-
citation, where topological defects are generated with
photons in the ordered phase, therefore represents a dis-
tinctive framework under which non-adiabatic transitions
can be instigated.
These results pave the way to fu-
ture studies on non-equilibrium defect-mediated transi-
tions and the optical manipulation of topological defects
in other ordered states of matter.

[1] K. Nasu, ed., Photoinduced Phase Transitions (World
Scientific, 2004).

[2] N. Goldenfeld, Lectures on Phase Transitions and the
Renormalization Group (Addison-Wesley, 1992).

[3] T.W.B.
Kibble,
“Topology
of
cosmic
domains
and
strings,” J. of Phys. A 9, 1387–1398 (1976).

[4] W.H. Zurek, “Cosmological experiments in condensed
matter systems,” Phys. Rep. 276, 177–221 (1996).

[5] M.J. Bowick, L. Chandar, E.A. Schiff, and A.M. Srivas-


4

tava, “The cosmological Kibble mechanism in the labo-
ratory: string formation in liquid crystals,” Science 263,
943–945 (1994).

[6] I. Chuang, R. Durrer, N. Turok,
and B. Yurke, “Cos-
mology in the laboratory: defect dynamics in liquid crys-
tals,” Science 251, 1336–1342 (1991).

[7] V.M.H. Ruutu, V.B. Eltsov, A.J. Gill, T.W.B. Kibble,
M. Krusius, Y.G. Makhlin, B. Pla¸cais, G.E. Volovik, and
W. Xu, “Vortex formation in neutron-irradiated super-
fluid 3He as an analogue of cosmological defect forma-
tion,” Nature 382, 334–336 (1996).

[8] C. B¨auerle, Y.M. Bunkov, S.N. Fisher, H. Godfrin, and
G.R. Pickett, “Laboratory simulation of cosmic string
formation in the early universe using superfluid 3He,”
Nature 382, 332–334 (1996).

[9] R. Yusupov, T. Mertelj, V.V. Kabanov, S. Brazovskii,
P. Kusar, J.-H. Chu, I.R. Fisher, and D. Mihailovic, “Co-
herent dynamics of macroscopic electronic order through
a symmetry breaking transition,” Nature Phys. 6, 681–
684 (2010).

[10] T. Mertelj, P. Kusar, V.V. Kabanov, P. Giraldo-Gallo,
I.R. Fisher, and D. Mihailovic, “Incoherent topological
defect recombination dynamics in TbTe3,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110, 156401 (2013).

[11] P.A. Lee and T.M. Rice, “Electric field depinning of
charge density waves,” Phys. Rev. B 19, 3970 (1979).

[12] G. Gr¨uner, Density Waves in Solids (Addison-Welsley,
1994).

[13] M. Hoesch, A. Bosak, D. Chernyshov, H. Berger,
and
M. Krisch, “Giant Kohn anomaly and the phase tran-
sition in charge density wave ZrTe3,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
102, 086402 (2009).

[14] S. Girault, A.H. Moudden,
and J.P. Pouget, “Criti-
cal X-ray scattering at the Peierls transition of the blue
bronze,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 4430 (1989).

[15] M. Holt, P. Zschack, H. Hong, M.Y. Chou,
and T.-C.
Chiang, “X-ray studies of phonon softening in TiSe2,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3799 (2001).

[16] N. Ru, C.L. Condron, G.Y. Margulis, K.Y. Shin, J. Lave-
rock, S.B. Dugdale, M.F. Toney, and I.R. Fisher, “Effect
of chemical pressure on the charge density wave transi-
tion in rare-earth tritellurides RTe3,” Phys. Rev. B 77,
035114 (2008).

[17] B. Fultz and J. Howe, Transmission Electron Microscopy
and Diffractometry of Materials, 4th ed. (Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013).

[18] V.V. Kabanov, J. Demsar, B. Podobnik,
and D. Mi-
hailovic, “Quasiparticle relaxation dynamics in supercon-
ductors with different gap structures: theory and experi-
ments on YBa2Cu3O7−δ,” Phys. Rev. B 59, 1497 (1999).

[19] J. Demsar, K. Biljakovi´c,
and D. Mihailovic, “Single
particle and collective excitations in the one-dimensional
charge density wave solid K0.3MoO3 probed in real time
by femtosecond spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 800
(1999).

[20] R. V. Yusupov, T. Mertelj, J.-H. Chu, I. R. Fisher, and
D. Mihailovic, “Single-particle and collective mode cou-
plings associated with 1- and 2-directional electronic or-
dering in metallic RTe3 (R=Ho, Dy, Tb),” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 101, 246402 (2008).

[21] F. Schmitt, P.S. Kirchmann, U. Bovensiepen, R.G.
Moore, L. Rettig, M. Krenz, J.-H. Chu, N. Ru, L. Per-
fetti, D.H. Lu, M. Wolf, I.R. Fisher,
and Z.-X. Shen,
“Transient electronic structure and melting of a charge

density wave in TbTe3,” Science 321, 1649–1652 (2008).

[22] L. Rettig, R. Cort´es, J.-H. Chu, I.R. Fisher, F. Schmitt,
R.G. Moore, Z.-X. Shen, P.S. Kirchmann, M. Wolf, and
U. Bovensiepen, “Persistent order due to transiently en-
hanced nesting in an electronically excited charge density
wave,” Nature Comm. 7, 10459 (2016).

[23] N. Ru and I.R. Fisher, “Thermodynamic and transport
properties of YTe3, LaTe3, CeTe3,” Phys. Rev. B 73,
033101 (2006).

[24] B.F. Hu, B. Cheng, R.H. Yuan, T. Dong, and N.L. Wang,
“Coexistence and competition of multiple charge-density-
wave orders in rare-earth tritellurides,” Phys. Rev. B 90,
085105 (2014).

[25] E. DiMasi, M.C. Aronson, J.F. Mansfield, B. Foran, and
S. Lee, “Chemical pressure and charge-density waves in
rare-earth tritellurides,” Phys. Rev. B 52, 14516 (1995).

[26] A.W. Overhauser, “Observability of charge-density waves
by neutron diffraction,” Phys. Rev. B 3, 3173 (1971).

[27] R.G. Moore, W.S. Lee, P.S. Kirchman, Y.D. Chuang,
A.F. Kemper, M. Trigo, L. Patthey, D.H. Lu, O. Krupin,
M. Yi, D.A. Reis, D. Doering, P. Denes, W.F. Schlotter,
J.J. Turner, G. Hays, P. Hering, T. Benson, J.-H. Chu,
T.P. Devereaux, I.R. Fisher, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen,
“Ultrafast resonant soft X-ray diffraction dynamics of the
charge density wave in TbTe3,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 024304
(2016).

[28] S. Vogelgesang, G. Storeck, J.G. Horstmann, T. Diek-
mann, M. Sivis, S. Schramm, K. Rossnagel, S. Sch¨afer,
and C. Ropers, “Phase ordering of charge density waves
traced by ultrafast low-energy electron diffraction,” Na-
ture Phys. 14, 184–190 (2018).

[29] W.S. Lee, Y.D. Chuang, R.G. Moore, Y. Zhu, L. Patthey,
M. Trigo, D.H. Lu, P.S. Kirchmann, O. Krupin, M. Yi,
M. Langner, N. Huse, J.S. Robinson, Y. Chen, S.Y. Zhou,
G. Coslovich, B. Huber, D.A. Reis, R.A. Kaindl, R.W.
Schoenlein, D. Doering, P. Denes, W.F. Schlotter, J.J.
Turner, S.L. Johnson, M. F¨orst, T. Sasagawa, Y.F. Kung,
A.P. Sorini, A.F. Kemper, B. Moritz, T.P. Devereaux, D.-
H. Lee, Z.-X. Shen, and Z. Hussain, “Phase fluctuations
and the absence of topological defects in a photo-excited
charge-ordered nickelate,” Nature Comm. 3, 838 (2012).

[30] V. Brouet, W.L. Yang, X.J. Zhou, Z. Hussain, R.G.
Moore, R. He, D.H. Lu, Z.-X. Shen, J. Laverock, S.B.
Dugdale, N. Ru, and I.R. Fisher, “Angle-resolved pho-
toemission study of the evolution of band structure and
charge density wave properties in RTe3 (R=Y, La, Ce,
Sm, Gd, Tb, and Dy),” Phys. Rev. B 77, 235104 (2008).

[31] F. Frassetto, C. Cacho, C.A. Froud, I.C.E. Turcu, P. Vil-
loresi, W.A. Bryan, E. Springate,
and L. Poletto,
“Single-grating monochromator for extreme-ultraviolet
ultrashort pulses,” Opt. Express 19, 19169–19181 (2011).

METHODS

Sample preparation.
Single crystals of LaTe3 were
grown by slow cooling of a binary melt [23]. For the UED
measurement, LaTe3 was mechanically exfoliated to
thickness between 10 and 30 nm and then transferred to
a 10 nm thick silicon nitride TEM window in an inert gas
environment (see Fig. S1(a) and Supplementary Note 1).
For tr-ARPES and transient reflectivity measurements,


5

bulk single crystals were cleaved in ultrahigh vacuum
(< 1 × 10−10 torr) and in inert gas, respectively, to
expose a pristine surface.

Ultrafast electron diffraction. The 1038 nm (1.19 eV)
output of a commercial Yb:KGW regenerative amplifier
laser system (PHAROS SP-10-600-PP, Light Conver-
sion) operating at 250 kHz was split into pump and
probe branches. The pump branch was focused onto the
sample at room temperature, while the probe branch
was frequency quadrupled to 260 nm (4.78 eV) and
focused onto a gold-coated sapphire in high vacuum
(< 4 × 10−9 torr) to generate photoelectrons.
These
electrons were accelerated to 26 kV in a dc field and
focused with a solenoid before diffracting from LaTe3
in a transmission geometry, making visible the K = 0
diffraction plane.
Diffracted electrons were incident
on an aluminum-coated phosphor screen (P-46), whose
luminescence was recorded by a commercial intensified
charge-coupled device (iCCD PI-MAX II) operating
in shutter mode. A pulse picker was used to tune the
laser repetition rate from 0.5 to 250 kHz used in the
measurement.
The operating temporal resolution was
1 ps with 1000 to 4000 electrons per pulse.

Transient reflectivity. The 780 nm (1.59 eV) output
of a commercial Ti:sapphire regenerative amplifier laser
(Wyvern 500/1000, KMLabs) operating at 30 kHz was
split into pump and probe branches. The probe branch
was focused onto a sapphire crystal to generate a white
light continuum (500 to 700 nm). Both pump and probe
pulses were focused onto the sample surface, which was
held at room temperature, at near-normal incidence with
parallel polarization. The pump wavelength was 780 nm
(1.59 eV), while the probe wavelength was 690 nm
(1.80 eV). The reflected probe beam was directed to a
monochromator and photodiode for lock-in detection.
The overall temporal resolution, as determined from the
pump-probe cross-correlation, was 70 fs.

Time-resolved ARPES. The same laser system em-
ployed in UED measurements was used for tr-ARPES.
The pump branch was passed to a commercial optical
parametric amplifier (ORPHEUS, Light Conversion) to
generate a 720 nm (1.72 eV) output used to photoex-
cite the sample. The probe branch was first frequency-
tripled to 346 nm (3.58 eV) and then focused into a hollow
fiber filled with xenon gas (XUUS, KMLabs) to gener-
ate the 9th harmonic at 115 nm (10.75 eV). The result-
ing XUV pulse was passed through a custom-built grat-
ing monochromator (McPherson OP-XCT) to minimize
pulse width broadening and to enhance throughput effi-
ciency [31], before it was focused onto the sample, which
was held at 15 K for optimal resolution (see Supplemen-
tary Note 9). Photoelectrons were collected by a time-of-
flight detector (Scienta ARTOF 10k), which made simul-

taneous measurements of the energy and in-plane mo-
menta possible. The operating temporal resolution was
230 fs at a laser repetition rate of 250 kHz. The energy
resolution for the measurements was 50 meV.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We
acknowledge
helpful
discussions
with
S.
Bra-
zovskii, P.A. Lee, J. Ruhman, B. Skinner, A. Krikun,
W.H. Zurek, and D. Chowdhury. We acknowledge sup-
port from the U.S. Department of Energy, BES DMSE
(experimental setup and data acquisition), from the Gor-
don and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative
grant GBMF4540 (data analysis and manuscript writ-
ing), Army Research Office (equipment support for the
tr-ARPES), and the Skoltech NGP Program (Skoltech-
MIT joint project) (theory). Y.Q.B. and P.J.-H. acknowl-
edge support by the Center for Excitonics, an Energy
Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sci-
ences, under award No.
DESC0001088, as well as the
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative
through grant GBMF4541 (sample preparation and char-
acterization). Work at Stanford was supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sci-
ences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515 (sam-
ple growth and characterization). P.W. was supported
in part by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s
EPiQS Initiative through grant GBMF4414.
E.B. ac-
knowledges support by the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation under fellowship P2ELP2-172290.


6

FIG. 1. Time evolution of electron diffraction after photoexcitation. (a) Room temperature static electron diffraction
cut along the (3 0 L) line showing both structural Bragg peaks and CDW superlattice peaks. Superlattice peaks are indicated
by arrows. The line cut is obtained by integrating the colored strip shown below along the H direction. A full diffraction pattern
is shown in Fig. S1(b). (b) Time evolution of integrated intensities of the (4 0 0) Bragg peak and the (5 0 δ) superlattice peak
after photoexcitation with a femtosecond light pulse at an excitation density of 9.4 × 1019 cm−3 (see Supplementary Note 4).
Intensities are normalized to values before the arrival of the light pulse. Statistical error bars are smaller than the marker
size. (Insets) The time evolution of the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of the superlattice peak, normalized to values
before photoexcitation, showing significant broadening through the CDW transition. Error bars are fitting uncertainties. All
solid curves in (b) are fits to a phenomenological relaxation model (Supplementary Notes 3 and 7), while dashed lines in the
lower inset are extrapolated to regions where the peak vanishes. (c) Snapshots of the superlattice peak at selected time delays,
indicated by the triangles in (b). The transient broadening is isotropic along both H and L directions, and the line profiles
shown are along H, from which FWHMs are computed by fitting to a Lorentzian function (solid curves).


7

FIG. 2. Dependence of CDW diffraction intensity and optical reflectivity on excitation density. (a) Time evolution
of integrated intensity of the (5 0 δ) superlattice peak upon photoexcitation at different excitation densities. The color scale
is the same as used in (b). Solid curves are fits to a phenomenological relaxation model (Supplementary Note 3). The arrow
indicates the time delay at which the intensity is plotted against the excitation density in Fig. S4(a). (b) Transient reflectivity
as a function of delay time at different excitation densities. (Inset) Fourier transform of the oscillatory component measured
at an excitation density of 4.1 × 1019 cm−3 (see Supplementary Note 5).


8

FIG. 3. tr-ARPES spectra showing CDW gap dynamics. (a) (Top) Tight-binding plot of the normal-state Fermi surface
formed by the Te p-bands in the first Brillouin zone. A circle shows the probed part of the Fermi surface. An arrow marks the
CDW wavevector q0. (Bottom) A section of the Fermi surface through the photoexcitation process with an excitation density
of 3.31 × 1020 cm−3. Intensities are integrated over ±10 meV around EF . Cuts along the k|| line (yellow arrow) are shown in
Fig. S7(a)–(e). (b) The time evolution of the gapped region highlighted with the orange box drawn in the t = −1240 fs slice
of (a). (c) The tr-ARPES time evolution of the in-gap spectral weight obtained by integrating the intensity over ±0.1 eV, as
outlined by the orange box in (b). The three traces correspond to different excitation densities, all normalized between 0 and
1. Curves are fits to a single-exponential relaxation model (Supplementary Note 3).


9

FIG. 4. Summary of CDW recovery timescales and dynamics. (a) Characteristic recovery times across three probes as a
function of excitation density. The orange squares are taken from UED, the green from transient reflectivity and the white from
tr-ARPES. Error bars, when larger than the symbol size, denote fitting uncertainties. Lines are linear fits to the data where
the dashed segment denotes a linear extrapolation. (b)–(e) Schematic illustration of the CDW evolution after photoexcitation.
In each image, the unidirectional charge density modulation is depicted as stripes in real space. Stripe brightness indicates
the strength of the CDW amplitude and smearing represents phase excitations. A cartoon of the CDW diffraction peak is
presented in the lower left corner. ∆ and ξ denote CDW amplitude and correlation length, respectively; ∆0 and ξ0 are values at
equilibrium. (b) Before photoexcitation, the CDW amplitude is large and the CDW is long-range ordered. The corresponding
superlattice diffraction is represented by a narrow-width peak. (c) Following photoexcitation, the CDW amplitude is suppressed
and topological defects are formed. These effects lead to a reduction in the integrated intensity and a broadening of the peak
width. (d) After ∼1 ps, the CDW amplitude is largely restored, while defects persist. The diffraction peak remains broad
due to the presence of these topological defects. (e) Many defects annihilate at a further time delay though a non-zero defect
concentration remains. The superlattice peak significantly narrows as the phase coherence sets in.


10

FIG. S1. (a) Optical image of the UED sample on an amorphous silicon nitride membrane. (b) Full static electron diffraction
pattern of LaTe3, where the red dot marks the position of the undiffracted incident beam. Blue arrows mark the superlattice
peaks. The boxed region is shown in Fig. 1(a).

FIG. S2.
(a) Estimated steady-state temperature of the sample as a function of excitation density at a fixed 5 kHz laser
repetition rate. (b) Estimated steady-state temperature of the sample as a function of repetition rate at a fixed excitation
density of 9.4×1019 cm−3.


11

FIG. S3. (a) Time evolution of the integrated intensity of the (5 0 δ) superlattice peak at several laser repetition rates with a
fixed excitation density of 9.4 × 1019 cm−3. Each trace has been vertically offset by −0.15 for clarity. Solid curves are fits to a
single-exponential relaxation model (see Supplementary Note 3). (b) Recovery time constants extracted from the fits in (a).

FIG. S4. (a) The normalized (4 0 0) Bragg and (5 0 δ) superlattice peak integrated intensities at a time delay of t = 1.2 ps
(arrow in Fig. 2(a)) as a function of excitation density. Curves are guides to eye. (b) Normalized amplitude mode (AM) intensity
as a function of excitation density. The AM intensity, IAM, has been normalized against the maximum of the incoherent part,
Ipeak, in the transient reflectivity trace (see Supplementary Note 3). In both panels, yellow shaded regions denote the low
excitation regime where the CDW has yet to melt. Error bars are derived from fitting uncertainties.


12

FIG. S5. Time evolution of the integrated intensity of the (5 0 δ) CDW peak (blue curves), overlaid onto the evolution of
CDW correlation length (orange circles) obtained from the FWHM shown in the insets of Fig. 1(b). (a) and (b) correspond to
two excitation densities below and above the melting threshold, Fc ≈ 2.0 × 1020 cm−3. Missing circles in (b) from 1 to 4 ps
correspond to the time range where CDW peaks are indistinguishable from the background and the FWHM cannot be reliably
extracted from fittings. u.c., crystallographic unit cells.

FIG. S6. (a) Time evolution of the integrated intensity of the (4 0 0) Bragg peak at an excitation density of 3.77 × 1020 cm−3.
Blue and orange curves represent two fitted components that account for the change in the CDW amplitude and the Debye-
Waller factor, respectively. (b) Time evolution at different excitation densities, with fitted curves superimposed. Each trace
is vertically offset by −0.04 for clarity. (c) Loss of Bragg peak intensity due to the Debye-Waller factor, IDW, as a function
of excitation density (see Eq. (S6)). The solid line is a linear fit. (d) Recovery timescales extracted from Bragg peaks (blue
squares), compared with timescales from superlattice peaks (orange squares) reproduced from Fig. 4(a). The yellow-shaded
regions in (c) and (d) are the same as those in Fig. S4(a) and (b), where the CDW is only partially suppressed.


13

FIG. S7. (a)–(e) Time evolution of the band structure near the Fermi surface after photoexcitation. The momentum cut, k||,
is indicated in Fig. 3(a). In (a), circles mark the fitted band dispersion of Te 5pz (white) and 5py (red) bands, where an energy
gap ∆ = 0.36 ± 0.02 eV opens at the 5pz band and causes it to back-bend. (f) Reproduced from Fig. 3(b), but with fitted
positions of the upper CDW band edge marked by the white dots (see Supplementary Note 9). It uses a different color scale
from that in (a)–(e) for better visibility of the band above EF .

FIG. S8. Time evolution of normalized in-gap spectral weight taken at two different base temperatures and similar excitation
densities. The spectral weight is obtained by integrating the intensity over ±0.1 eV around EF , the orange box in Fig. 3(b).


