 

Detecting degeneracy and subtle broken-symmetry states of graphene 

at nanoscale 

Si-Yu Li1, Ya-Ning Ren1, Yi-Wen Liu1, Ming-Xing Chen2, Hua Jiang3, and Lin He1,* 

1Center for Advanced Quantum Studies, Department of Physics, Beijing Normal 

University, Beijing, 100875, People’s Republic of China 

2College of Physics and Information Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 

Hunan 410018, People’s Republic of China 

3College of Physics, Optoelectronics and Energy and Institute for Advanced Study, 

Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, People’s Republic of China 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.H. (e-mail: 
helin@bnu.edu.cn). 
 

Measuring degeneracy and broken-symmetry states of a system at nanoscale 

requires extremely high energy and spatial resolution, which has so far eluded 

direct observation. Here, we realize measurement of the degeneracy and subtle 

broken-symmetry states of graphene at nanoscale for the first time. By using edge-

free graphene quantum dots, we are able to measure valley splitting and valley-

contrasting spin splitting of graphene at the single-electron level. Our experiments 

detect large valley splitting around atomic defects of graphene due to the 

coexistence of sublattice symmetry breaking and time reversal symmetry breaking. 

Large valley-contrasting spin splitting induced by enhanced spin-orbit coupling 

around the defects is also observed. These results reveal unexplored exotic 

electronic states in graphene at nanoscale induced by the atomic defects.  

    

 

 


 

Knowing degeneracy and exact nature of broken-symmetry states of a system is a 

central problem in physics. It also plays a vital role in understanding electronic 

properties of materials. Owing to the two-dimensional nature of graphene’s structure 

and electrons, it is convenient to measure the degeneracy and exotic broken-symmetry 

states of graphene through a magneto-transport measurement of quantum Hall effect 

(QHE)1-7. As schematically shown in Fig. 1a and 1b, it is expected to observe quantum 

Hall conductance plateaus at values 4(n+1/2)e2/h in pristine graphene (n is integer, e is 

electron, and h is Planck’s constant). Here 4 directly reflects the four-fold, including 

double-spin and double-valley, degeneracy of graphene. If the degeneracy of graphene 

is lifted and broken-symmetry states emerge, there should be QHE plateau not at the 

values 4(n+1/2)e2/h (Fig. 1b shows one of the simplest case: the valley degeneracy is 

lifted in the zeroth Landau level)4-7. Therefore, the QHE provides a quite powerful 

method in detecting the degeneracy and broken-symmetry states of a system. However, 

the magneto-transport measurement lacks spatial resolution that limits its application at 

nanoscale. Atomic defects, such as single carbon vacancy8 and adatoms9, are almost 

unavoidable in graphene. An individual atomic defect could locally break the 

equivalence of two sublattices, which is expected to lift the degeneracies of graphene 

at nanoscale10,11. However, measuring the degeneracy and broken-symmetry electronic 

states around the atomic defects requires nanometer-scale spatial resolution, which is a 

key challenge to probe these interesting properties, leaving them unexplored in 

experiment up to now. Here, we realize the measurement of the degeneracy and subtle 

broken-symmetry states of graphene at the nanoscale. Giant valley splitting and valley-


 

contrasting spin splitting are directly detected around the atomic defects of graphene at 

the single-electron level.  

In our experiment, the measurement is realized by using a recently developed edge-

free graphene quantum dots (QDs)12,13, which can be generated by a combination of 

electrostatic and magnetic fields, as schematically shown in Fig. 1c and Fig. 1d. The 

magnetic fields quantize the continuous electronic spectrum of graphene into discrete 

Landau levels (LLs). The probing scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) tip, acting as 

a moveable top gate in the measurement14-17, shifts quasiparticles in the region beneath 

the tip into the gaps between the LLs of the adjacent regions. This leads to edge-free 

confinement in graphene and generates almost equally-spaced orbital states in the QDs. 

Because the confinement is achieved without resorting to physical edges, both the two-

fold valley and spin symmetries of the pristine graphene are preserved in the orbital 

states of the edge-free QDs12,13, as shown in Fig. 1e. In the STM measurements, a single 

excess electron on the graphene QD needs to overcome the electrostatic energy EC = 

e2/C, where C is capacitance of the QD and e is the charge of an electron18. Therefore, 

it is expected to observe a series of quadruplets of charging peaks in scanning tunneling 

spectroscopy (STS) spectrum of pristine graphene, as schematically shown in Fig. 1e. 

Such a result has been demonstrated explicitly in previous studies12,13 and also in our 

experiment, as shown in Fig. 2 and Figs. S1-S3. Each quadruplet belongs to a single 

orbital state of the edge-free QD and reflects the four-fold degeneracy of 

graphene12,13,19,20. When the degeneracy of graphene is partially lifted, for example, the 

valley degeneracy is lifted (Fig. 1f), then the quadruplet will split into two doublet. If 


 

the spin degeneracy in each valley is further lifted, then the four charging peaks of every 

quadruplet are no longer equally spaced (Fig. 1f). Therefore, it is convenient to know 

the degeneracy and measure the broken-symmetry states of graphene based on the four 

charging peaks of each quadruplet. By taking advantage of high spatial resolution of 

STM, our experiment, as shown subsequently, demonstrated that we can measure the 

degeneracy and broken-symmetry states of graphene at nanoscale. 

The edge-free graphene QD can be moved by moving the STM tip, which enables us 

to measure electronic properties at any chosen position in graphene. Therefore, we 

carried out measurements around atomic defects to explore effects of the atomic defects 

on the four charging peaks of the quadruplet. Figure 2 shows our experimental results 

obtained in a graphene monolayer with atomic defects (including single carbon vacancy 

and adatoms, see Fig. S4 for details of sample preparation and Fig. S5 for Landau 

quantization measurement of the sample). According to the STM image (Fig. 2a), the 

studied area can be roughly divided into two regions, as separated by the dashed curve. 

Region 1 is free of defect and we can clearly observe atomic lattice of graphene in it. 

In region 2, the main feature in the STM image is triangular 
3
3 30
R

 interference 

pattern, which is the characteristic feature of intervalley scattering induced by the 

atomic defects8,9,21 (see Fig. S6 for fast Fourier transform images of the two regions). 

Besides the single carbon vacancy (marked by blue arrow in Fig. 2a), as revealed in the 

STM image, we identify several other atomic defects in the region 2 in our STS map 

(marked by black arrows in Fig. 2b). These defects exhibit tip-gate-induced ionization 

and show similar features as that reported previously for adatoms on graphene22. 


 

Therefore, they are attributed to adatoms trapped beneath the graphene sheet. The 

adatoms trapped beneath graphene are most possibly hydrogen atoms. In previous 

studies, the hydrogen adsorbing on graphene could induce a localized state in graphene9, 

which was explicitly observed in our STS measurements (see Fig. S7). Moreover, the 

hydrogen atoms exist naturally in the sample synthesized by our method (they are 

generated in the dissociation process of both CH4 and H2 at high temperature) and they 

could intercalate graphene through defects in graphene23. The existence of both the 

single carbon vacancy and the hydrogen atoms results in large sublattice asymmetry of 

graphene (see Fig. S8) and, consequently, we observe clear triangular lattice in the STM 

image of the region 2. 

Figure 2c and 2d show STS spectra recorded in different magnetic fields in the 

regions 1 and 2. Our STS spectra reveal well-defined Landau quantization of massless 

Dirac fermions24-28, demonstrating explicitly that the topmost graphene sheet is 

electronically decoupling from the supporting substrate. Besides the well-defined LLs, 

we also observe quadruplets of charging peaks in the tunneling spectra, indicating the 

emergence of the edge-free graphene QD beneath the STM tip. According to our 

experiment, the first four charging peaks in the two regions exhibit quite different 

features. In the region 1, the four charging peaks are almost equally spaced. However, 

the quadruplets are obviously divided into two doublets in the spectra recorded in the 

region 2. The sublattice asymmetry in the region 2 breaks the inversion symmetry of 

graphene and lifts energy degeneracy of the A and B sublattices. In the quantum Hall 

regime, the broken symmetry of the graphene sublattices shifts the energies of the n = 


 

0 LL in the K and K′ valleys in opposite directions and, therefore, generates valley 

splitting in the n = 0 LL29. In our experiment, the first four charging peaks in Fig. 2c 

and 2d arise from the confinement of the n = 0 LL. When the valley degeneracy of 

graphene is lifted, every single quadruplet will be separated into two doublets, as 

schematically shown in Fig. 1f, and as demonstrated very recently in the edge-free 

graphene QDs on hexagonal boron nitride13. The above result indicates that the valley 

degeneracy in graphene is locally lifted in the region 2.  

To clearly show how the atomic defects affect the energy spacing between the four 

charging peaks of a confined orbital state, we measured E12, E23, and E34 (as 

defined in Fig. 1f) as a function of positions in the studied area shown in Fig. 2a. Figures 

2e-2g show our experimental result measured at B = 10 T (see Fig. S9 for the voltage 

maps of the four charging peaks at 10 T). In the region 1, the E12, E23, and E34 

exhibit similar slight spatial variation and the difference between them is quite small. 

However, in the region 2, the E23 shows a much strong spatial variation and becomes 

much larger than the E12 and E34. Such a result completely removes spatial variations 

of the EC as the origin of the observed features (the spatial variations of the EC will 

change the E12, E23, and E34 simultaneously). The E23 includes the charging 

energy EC, the Zeeman-like splitting EZ, and the valley splitting Ev, as schematically 

shown in Fig. 1f. The EC depends weakly on the recorded positions and will affect the 

E12, E23, and E34 simultaneously. The EZ is expected to be independent of the 

measured positions (EZ = gBB ~ 1.1 meV at B = 10 T with assuming the effective g-

factor g = 2). Therefore, the obvious increase of the E23 in the region 2 mainly reflects 


 

the valley splitting induced by the coexistence of the sublattice-symmetry breaking 

around the atomic defects and the magnetic fields.  

To qualitatively explore the spatial variation of the valley splitting, we plot the valley 

splitting Ev = E23 – Eadd as a function of positions in Fig. 3a. Here Eadd, including the 

EC and the EZ, is the averaged energy spacing in the quadruplet obtained in the region 

1 where the four charging peaks are almost equally spaced (see Fig. S10 for the 

measured Eadd as a function of magnetic fields). The maximum valley splitting at 10 T 

reaches about 43 meV. In literature, the valley splitting observed in the edge-free 

graphene QDs on hexagonal boron nitride is about 10 meV13 and the largest valley 

splitting reported so far, which is induced by the coexistence of strain-induced 

pseudomagnetic field and external magnetic field, is only about 26 meV30. According 

to our experimental result, the observed valley splitting is closely related to the atomic 

defects in the studied area and can spatially extend about 3-5 nm around the defects. 

Besides the predominantly valley splitting, we find that the energy spacings between 

two charging peaks of the two doublets, E12 and E34, are slightly different in the 

studied area (Fig. 2e and Fig. 2g). Such a result, which is unexpected and has never 

been reported previously in graphene, indicates that the spin splittings in the two valleys 

are not equal to each other, as schematically shown in Fig. 1f. To clearly show this 

phenomenon, we plot the spin splitting in the K valley 𝐸𝑠

𝐾= E12 – Eadd and in the K’ 

valley 𝐸𝑠

𝐾′= E34 – Eadd as a function of positions in the studied area in Fig. 3b and 3c. 

Obviously, the two figures exhibit quite different features and there is an obvious 

valley-contrasting spin splitting: the 𝐸𝑠

𝐾 is much larger than that in the K’ valley in the 


 

region 2. The maximum 𝐸𝑠

𝐾 reaches about 8 meV at 10 T, whereas it only about 2.5 

meV at 10 T in the K’ valley. The above experimental results are further confirmed in 

other different magnetic fields. Figure 4a and the upper panel of Fig. 4b summarize the 

maximum valley splitting and the maximum spin splitting in the two valleys obtained 

around the atomic defects as a function of magnetic fields, respectively. In the lower 

panel of Fig. 4b, we show the difference of the maximum spin splitting in the two 

valleys Es obtained in our experiment, which is about 5 meV and depends weakly on 

the magnetic fields. All the experiments clearly demonstrate the giant valley splitting 

and valley-contrasting spin splitting around the atomic defects of graphene. 

Our experimental observations can be understood within a theoretical framework that 

incorporates the effects of the sublattice-symmetry breaking and spin-orbit coupling 

(SOC) induced by the atomic defects in graphene10,11,31-35. In pristine graphene, the 

fourfold valley and spin degeneracy preserves and the large magnetic fields only 

slightly lift the fourfold degeneracy through Zeeman-like splitting, as shown in left 

panel of Fig. 4c. In such a case, the four charging peaks of every quadruplet are always 

equally spaced. The coexistence of the sublattice symmetry breaking and the large 

perpendicular magnetic fields will lift the valley degeneracy of the n = 0 LL in 

graphene10,11,29. This is especially the case around the atomic defects in our experiment. 

Therefore, every single quadruplet arising from the confinement of the n = 0 LL will be 

separated into two doublets (the middle panel of Fig. 4c), which is the predominant 

feature observed around the atomic defects (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). By further taking into 

account the enhanced SOC introduced by the hydrogen adatoms, the spin degeneracy 


 

of graphene is further lifted and the spin splittings in the two valleys could be 

different31-35, as schematically shown in the right panel of Fig. 4c.  

To qualitatively understand the observed valley splitting and valley-contrasting spin 

splitting, we carried out tight-binding calculations by taking into account of the 

sublattice-symmetry breaking, the SOC and the magnetic fields (see supplemental 

materials for details of calculations). Figure 4d shows the obtained energies of the LLs. 

In the n = 0 LL, the fourfold valley and spin degeneracy is lifted by the coexistence of 

the sublattice symmetry breaking and the SOC. Importantly, the SOC generates 

different spin splittings in the two valleys. As a consequence, we observe valley 

splitting and valley-contrasting spin splitting around the atomic defects. According to 

our experimental result and theoretical analysis, the SOC strengths induced by the 

atomic defects in the K and K’ valleys of the n = 0 LL are about 4 meV and 1.2 meV, 

respectively. The generated spin splittings at the Dirac points of the K and K’ valleys 

are about 8 meV and 2.4 meV, respectively, which are about 104 times larger than the 

expected SOC gap, ~ 810-4 meV, at the Dirac point of pristine graphene36,37. 

Theoretically, hydrogen atoms hybridize directly with a carbon atom of graphene could 

lead to a significant enhancement of the SOC, which is predicted to be about 7 meV38. 

Previous transport measurement in weakly hydrogenated graphene observed an 

enhanced SOC strength of 2.5 meV39. Therefore, the detected SOC strength induced by 

the hydrogen atoms in this work is quite reasonable. 

In summary, we realize the measurements of valley splitting and valley-contrasting 

spin splitting in graphene at the nanoscale and the single-electron level. Our experiment 


 

provides a general strategy to probe the degeneracy and nature of exotic broken-

symmetry states at nanoscale in graphene. This strategy is quite robust and could be 

extended to other two-dimensional systems.  

 

 

References: 

1. Castro Neto, A. H., Guinea, F., Peres, N. M. R., Novoselov, K. S. & Geim, A. K. 

The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109 (2009). 

2. Novoselov, K. S., Geim, A. K., Morozov, S. V., Jiang, D., Katsnelson, M. I., 

Grigorieva, I. V., Dubonos, S. V., Firsov, A. A. Two-dimensional gas of massless 

Dirac fermions in graphene. Nature 438, 197 (2005). 

3. Zhang, Y., Tan, Y.-W., Stormer, H. L., Kim, P. Experimental observation of the 

quantum Hall effect and Berry’s phase in graphene. Nature 438, 201 (2005). 

4. Du, X., Skachko, I., Duerr, F., Luican, A., Andrei, E. Y. Fractional quantum Hall 

effect and insulating phase of Dirac electrons in graphene. Nature 462, 192 (2009). 

5. Bolotin, K. I., Ghahari, F., Shulman, M. D., Stormer, H. L., Kim, P. Observation of 

the fractional quantum Hall effect in graphene. Nature 462, 196 (2009). 

6. Dean, C. R., Young, A. F., Cadden-Zimansky, P., Wang, L., Ren, H., Watanabe, K., 

Taniguchi, T., Kim, P., Hone, J., Shepard, K. L. Multicomponent fractional quantum 

Hall effect in graphene. Nature Phys. 7, 693 (2011). 

7. Feldman, B. E., Krauss, B., Smet, J. H., Yacoby, A. Unconventional sequence of 

fractional quantum Hall states in suspended graphene. Science 337, 1196 (2012). 

8. Zhang, Y., Li, S.-Y., Huang, H., Li, W.-T., Qiao, J.-B., Wang, W.-X., Yin, L.-J., 

Bai, K.-K., Duan, W., He, L. Scanning tunneling microscopy of the  magnetism of 

a single carbon vacancy in graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 166801 (2016). 

9. Gonzalez-Herrero, H., Gomez-Rodriguez, J. M., Mallet, P., Moaied, M., Palacios, 

J. J., Salgado, C., Ugeda, M. M., Veuillen, J.-Y., Yndurain, F., Brihuega, I. Atomic-

scale control of graphene magnetism by using hydrogen atoms. Science. 352, 437-

441 (2016). 

10. Xiao, D., Yao, W., Niu, Q. Valley-contrasting physics in graphene: magnetic 

moment and topological transport. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 236809 (2007). 

11. Cai, T., Yang, S. A., Li, X., Zhang, F., Shi, J., Yao, W., Niu, Q. Magnetic control 


 

of the valley degree of freedom of massive Dirac fermions with application to 

transition metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B 88, 115140 (2013). 

12. Freitag, N. M., Chizhova, L. A., Nemes-Incze, P., Woods, C. R., Gorbachev, R. V., 

Cao, Y., Geim, A. K., Novoselov, K. S., Burgdorfer, J., Libisch, F., Morgenstern, M. 

Electrostatically confined monolayer graphene quantum dots with orbital and valley 

splittings. Nano Lett. 16, 5798 (2016). 

13. Freitag, N. M., Reisch, T., Chizhova, L. A., Nemes-Incze, P., Holl, C., Woods, C. 

R., Gorbachev, R. V., Cao, Y., Geim, A. K., Novoselov, K. S., Burgdorfer, J., Libisch, 

F., Morgenstern, M. Large tunable valley splitting in edge-free graphene quantum 

dots on boron nitride. Nature Nano https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-018-0080-8 

(2018). 

14. Zhao, Y., et al. Creating and probing electron whispering-gallery modes in graphene. 

Science 348, 672 (2015). 

15. Jiang, Y., Mao, J., Moldovan, D., Masir, M. R., Li, G., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T., 

Peeters, F. M., Andrei, E. Y. Tuning a circular p-n junction in graphene from 

quantum confinement to optical guiding. Nature Nano. 12, 1045 (2016). 

16. Ghahari, F., Walkup, D., Gutierrez, C., Rodriguez-Nieva, J. F., Zhao, Y., Wyrick, J., 

Natterer, F. D., Cullen, W. G., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T., Levitov, L. S., Zhitenev, 

N. B., Stroscio, J. A. An on/off Berry phase swith in circular graphene resonators. 

Science 356, 845 (2017). 

17. Li, S.-Y., Liu, H., Qiao, J.-B., Jiang, H., He, L. Magnetic-field-controlled negative 

differential conductance in scanning tunneling spectroscopy of graphene npn 

junction resonators. Phys. Rev. B 97, 115442 (2018). 

18. Qiao, J.-B., Jiang, H., Liu, H., Yang, H., Yang, N., Qiao, K.-Y., He, L. Bound states 

in nanoscale graphene quantum dots in a continuous graphene sheet. Phys. Rev. B 

95, 081409(R) (2017). 

19. Jung, S., Rutter, G. M., Klimov, N. N., Newell, D. B., Calizo, I., Hight-Walker, A. 

R., Zhitenev, N. B., Stroscio, J. A. Evolution of microscopic localization in 

graphene in a magnetic field from scattering resonances to quantum dots. Nature 

Phys. 7, 245 (2011). 

20. Klimov, N. N., Jung, S., Zhu. S., Li, T., Wright, C. A., Solares, S. D., Newell, D. B., 

Zhitenev, N. B., Stroscio, J. A. Electromechanical properties of graphene 

drumheads. Science 336, 1557 (2012). 

21. Yan, H., et al. Electronic structures of graphene layers on a metal foil: The effect of 


 

atomic-scale defects. Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 143120 (2013). 

22. Brar, V. W., Decker, R., Solowan, H.-M., Wang, Y., Maserati, L., Chan, K. T., Lee, 

H., Girit, C. O., Zettl, A., Louie, S. G., Cohen, M. L., Crommie, M. F. Gate-

controlled ionization and screening of cobalt adatoms on a graphene surface. Nature 

Phys. 7, 43 (2011). 

23. Wang, W.-X., Wei, Y.-W., Li, S.-Y., Li, X., Wu, X., Feng, J., He, L. Imaging the 

dynamics of an individual hydrogen atom intercalated between two graphene sheets. 

Phys. Rev. B 97, 085407 (2018). 

24. Song, Y. J., Otte, A. F., Kuk, Y., Hu, Y., Torrance, D. B., First, P. N., de Heer, W. A., 

Min, H., Adam, S., Stiles, M. D., MacDonald, A. H., Stroscio, J. A. High-resolution 

tunneling spectroscopy of a graphene quartet. Nature 467, 185-189 (2010). 

25. Luican, A., Li, G., Reina, A., Kong, J., Nair, R. R., Novoselov, K. S., Geim, A. K., 

Andrei, E. Y. Single-Layer Behavior and Its Breakdown in Twisted Graphene 

Layers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 126802 (2011). 

26. Miller, D. L., Kubista, K. D., Rutter, G. M., Ruan, M., de Heer, W. A., First, P. N., 

Stroscio, J. A. Observing the quantization of zero mass carriers in graphene. Science 

324, 924 (2009). 

27. Yin, L.-J., Li, S.-Y., Qiao, J.-B., Nie, J,-C., He, L. Landau quantization in graphene 

monolayer, Bernal bilayer, and Bernal trilayer on graphite surface. Phys. Rev. B 91, 

115405 (2015). 

28. Li, S.-Y., Bai, K.-K., Zuo, W.-J., Liu, Y.-W., Fu, Z.-Q., Wang, W.-X., Zhang, Y., Yin, 

L.-J., Qiao, J.-B., He, L. Tunneling spectra of a quasifreestanding graphene 

monolayer. Phys. Rev. Appl. 9, 054031 (2018). 

29. Wang, W.-X., Yin, L.-J., Qiao, J.-B., Cai, T., Li, S.-Y., Dou, R.-F., Nie, J.-C., Wu, 

X., He, L. Atomic resolution imaging of the two-component Dirac-Landau levels 

in a gapped graphene monolayer. Phys. Rev. B 92, 165420 (2015). 

30. Li, S.-Y., Bai, K.-K., Yin, L.-J., Qiao, J.-B., Wang, W.-X., He, L. Observation of 

unconventional splitting of Landau levels in strained graphene. Phys. Rev. B 92, 

245302 (2015). 

31. Xiao, D., Liu, G.-B., Feng, W., Xu, X., Yao, W. Coupled spin and valley physics in 

monolayers of MoS2 and other Group-VI dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 

196802 (2012). 

32. Ding, J., Qiao, Z., Feng, W., Yao, Y., Niu, Q. Engineering quantum 

anomalous/valley Hall states in graphene via metal-atom adsorption: an ab-initio 


 

study. Phys. Rev. B 84, 195444 (2011). 

33. Weeks, C., Hu, J., Alicea, J., Franz, M., Wu, R. Engineering a robust quantum spin 

Hall state in graphene via adatom deposition. Phys. Rev. X 1, 021001 (2011).  

34. Hu, J., Alicea, J., Wu, R., Franz, M. Giant topological insulator gap in graphene 

with 5d adatoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 266801 (2012). 

35. Li, X., Zhang, F., Niu, Q. Unconventional quantum Hall effect and tunable spin Hall 

effect in Dirac materials: application to an isolated MoS2 trilayer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

110, 066803 (2013). 

36. Huertas-Hernando, D., Guinea, F., Brataas, A. Spin-orbit coupling in curved 

graphene, fullerenes, nanotubes, and nanotube caps. Phys. Rev. B 74, 155426 (2006). 

37. Yao, Y., Ye, F., Qi, X.-L., Zhang, S.-C., Fang, Z. Spin-orbit gap of graphene: First-

principles calculations. Phys. Rev. B 75, 041401(R) (2007). 

38. Catro Neto, A. H., Guinea, F. Impurity-induced spin-orbit coupling in graphene. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 026804 (2009). 

39. Balakrishnan, J., Koon, G. K. W., Jaiswal, M., Castro Neto, A. H., Ozyilmaz, B. 

Colossal enhancement of spin-orbit coupling in weakly hydrogenated graphene. 

Nature Phys. 9, 284 (2013). 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Ka Shen, Haiwen Liu, Zhe Yuan and Ji Feng for helpful discussion. This work 

was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 

11674029, 11422430, 11374035), the National Basic Research Program of China 

(Grants Nos. 2014CB920903, 2013CBA01603). L.H. also acknowledges support from 

the National Program for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals, support from “the 

Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities”, and support from “Chang 

Jiang Scholars Program”. 

 

 


 

 

Fig. 1. a. Schematic diagram showing the QHE. b. The expected Hall conductivity in 

the integer quantum Hall states in graphene monolayer. The valley degeneracy is lifted 

in the zeroth Landau level in the blue curve. c. Sketch of the STM experiment in the 

presence of magnetic fields. The graphene monolayer is divided into two regions: one 

is the graphene region beneath the STM tip (region I), the other is the surrounding 

graphene region (region II). d. Schematic image of the tip-induced edge-free GQDs. 

Tip-induced electrostatic potential leads to LL bending in the region I. The gaps 

between the LLs in the region II provide the confined gaps, resulting in the edge-free 

GQDs (region I). e. Top: Schematic confined energy levels in the edge-free GQD with 

two orbital levels. Bottom: Schematic for a sequence of charging peaks in the dI/dV 

spectra. e. Top: Schematic confined energy levels in the edge-free GQD. The orbital 

level 𝛼 = 1 exhibits the valley splitting 𝐸𝑣 and the spin splitting 𝐸𝑠

𝑘 , 𝐸𝑠

𝑘′  in K 

valley and 𝐾′ valley respectively. Bottom: Schematic for the corresponding charging 

peaks in dI/dV spectrum.  

  


 

 

Fig. 2. a. A 15 nm × 15 nm STM image (Vsample = 200 mV and I = 0.4 nA) of graphene 

monolayer with atomic defects. The black dashed line roughly separates the lower 

regions without intervalley scattering (region 1) and the upper region with intervalley 

scattering (region 2). b. STS (dI/dV) map recorded in the region marked by grey dashed 

frame in panel A at the fixed sample bias 617 mV (I = 0.4 nA). The arrows mark the 

positions of the atomic defects. c, d. STS spectra taken from the regions 1 and 2 in the 

graphene monolayer, respectively. The curves are offset on the Y axis for clarity and 

the LL indices are labeled by black numbers. Red numbers 1-4 mark the first four 

charging peaks. At negative voltage, some charging peaks are mixed with the LLs. e-g. 

15 × 15 nm2 energy maps for ∆𝐸12, ∆𝐸23, and ∆𝐸34 with the magnetic field 10 T 

recorded in the same area shown in Fig. 2A. The black dashed line is the boundary 

separating the region 1 and 2, as defined in panel a. 

 


 

 

Fig. 3. a-c. 15 × 15 nm2 energy maps for valley splitting 𝐸𝑣, spin splitting 𝐸𝑠

𝑘 in the 

K valley and spin splitting 𝐸𝑠

𝑘′ in the 𝐾′ valley in the same area as Fig. 2a with the 

magnetic field 10 T. The black dashed line is the boundary separating the region 1 and 

2.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 4. a. The maximum valley splitting 𝐸𝑣 obtained around the atomic defects with 

different magnetic fields. b. Upper panel: The maximum K-valley spin splitting 𝐸𝑠

𝑘 

and maximum 𝐾′-valley spin splitting 𝐸𝑠

𝑘′ obtained around the atomic defects with 

different magnetic fields. Lower panel: the difference ∆𝐸𝑠 between the maximum 𝐸𝑠

𝑘 

and the maximum 𝐸𝑠

𝑘′ obtained around the atomic defects as a function of magnetic 

fields. c. Left: in pristine graphene, the fourfold degeneracy is almost not lifted (the 

large magnetic fields only slightly lift them through Zeeman-like splitting). Middle: the 

valley degeneracy in n = 0 LL is lifted due to the sublattice-symmetry breaking. Right: 

the fourfold valley and spin degeneracy in the n = 0 LL is lifted because the coexistence 

of the sublattice symmetry breaking and the SOC. Moreover, the SOC generates valley-


 

contrasting spin splitting in the two valleys of graphene. d. Schematic image for the 

electron energies in different Landau levels considering the sublattice symmetry 

breaking and SOC in graphene. The dashed lines mark the Landau levels in pristine 

graphene monolayer. 


