1   

Neuromorphic   Time-­‐Dependent   Pattern   Classification   with   

Organic   Electrochemical   Transistor   Arrays.   

Sébastien Pecqueur1*, Maurizio Mastropasqua Talamo2, David Guérin1, Philippe Blanchard2, 

Jean Roncali2, Dominique Vuillaume1 and Fabien Alibart1* 

 

1 Institute of Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, 

Av. Poincaré, F-59652 Cedex, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France 

2 MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, 2 Bd. Lavoisier, F-49045 Angers, France 

* E-mail: sebastien.pecqueur@iemn.univ-lille1.fr; fabien.alibart@iemn.univ-lille1.fr

Based   on   bottom-­‐up   assembly   of   highly   variable   neural   cells   units,   the   nervous   

system   can   reach   unequalled   level   of   performances   with   respect   to   standard   

materials   and   devices   used   in   microelectronic.   Reproducing   these   basic   concepts   

in   hardware   could   potentially   revolutionize   materials   and   device   engineering   

which   are   used   for   information   processing.   Here,   we   present   an   innovative   

approach   that   relies   on   both   iono-­‐electronic   materials   and   intrinsic   device   

physics   to   show   pattern   classification   out   of   a   12-­‐unit   bio-­‐sensing   array.   We   use   

the   reservoir   computing   and   learning   concept   to   demonstrate   relevant   computing   

based   on   the   ionic   dynamics   in   400-­‐nm   channel-­‐length   organic   electrochemical   

transistor   (OECT).   We   show   that   this   approach   copes   efficiently   with   the   high   level   

of   variability   obtained   by   bottom-­‐up   fabrication   using   a   new   electropolymerizable   

polymer,   which   enables   iono-­‐electronic   device   functionality   and   material   stability   

in   the   electrolyte.   We   investigate   the   effect   of   the   array   size   and   variability   on   the   

performances   for   a   real-­‐time   classification   task   paving   the   way   to   new   embedded   

sensing   and   processing   approaches.   
   


2   

1.   Introduction   

In   biological   systems,   dynamical   and   complex   information   is   processed   efficiently   by   

highly   redundant   and   parallel   network   of   cells   while   standard   computing   systems   are   

quickly   reaching   their   limitations   for   equivalent   information   processing   tasks.   For   

instance,   at   the   opposite   to   top-­‐down   circuits   with   highly   uniform   devices   used   for   

general   purpose   computers,   bottom-­‐up   assembly   of   neural   cells   with   high   level   of   

variability,   can   process   auditory,   visual   or   olfactive   stimuli   and   generate   complex   actions   

very   efficiently.   Material   implementation   of   such   bio-­‐inspired   principles   for   sensing   and   

computing   has   been   a   stimulating   direction   that   has   reached   significant   milestones   with   

the   development   of   neuromorphic   sensors   (retina,   cochlea…)   and   circuits.[1]   While   

initially   relying   on   standard   silicon-­‐based   devices   (i.e.   CMOS),   emerging   materials   and   

devices   are   opening   new   avenues   for   neuromorphic   engineering   by   offering   new   basic   

mechanisms   for   emulating   biology   and   new   devices   and   circuits   concepts   to   build   

computing   systems.   Notably,   neuromorphic   systems   with   non-­‐volatile   memories   (and   

resistive   memory   in   particular)   have   been   the   focus   of   strong   research   efforts.[2]   

Here,   we   capitalize   on   organic   electro   chemical   transistors   (OECTs)   that   have   been   

recently   proposed   ubiquitously   as   basic   building   blocks   in   neuromorphic   computing   

applications[3]   (i.e.   memory   devices,   for   instance)   and   as   bio-­‐sensors   thanks   to   their   

intrinsic   sensitivity   to   ions.   For   example,   we   recently   reported   how   OECT   devices   can   be   

used   for   discriminating   ions   based   on   transient   responses   of   the   ionic   transistor   subject   

to   pulse   stimulation.[4]   While   this   paper   does   not   present   sensor   properties   assessment,   

we   build   on   this   intrinsic   feature   of   OECT   to   demonstrate   neuromorphic   computing   with   

potential   applications   in   bioelectronics   (see   below).   Based   on   an   array   of   organic   

electrochemical   transistors,   this   work   shows   how   sensing   and   processing   can   be   

realized   at   the   interface   with   an   analyte   by   taking   advantage   of   OECTs   intrinsic   physics   


3   

and   on   neuromorphic   concepts.   In   particular,   we   show   how   highly   variable   material   

engineering   routes   that   are   not   adapted   to   standard   information   processing   

technologies   (i.e.   relying   on   top-­‐down   fabrication   of   near-­‐ideal   components   and   circuits)   

can   be   turned   into   an   advantage   when   bio-­‐inspired   concepts   are   used   to   engineer   

computing   system.   

We   propose   an   adaptation   of   the   recent   proposition   of   reservoir   computing   (RC),[5,6]   to   

demonstrate   that   both   sensing   and   computing   can   be   obtained   from   the   intrinsic   

properties   of   a   transistor   array,   limiting   the   separation   between   these   two   elementary   

levels   (i.e.   sensing   and   computing).   On   the   one   hand,   from   the   neuromorphic   computing   

side,   RC   concept   has   been   developed   for   dynamical   signal   processing   (e.g.   speech   

recognition),[7]   and   use   the   idea   of   learning   from   a   simple   read-­‐out   layer   (i.e.   a   feed-­‐

forward   perceptron)   the   dynamics   associated   to   the   projection   of   a   given   stimuli   into   a   

complex   and   random   network   of   non-­‐linear   elements   (i.e.   neurons   or   nodes).   On   the   

other   hand,   from   the   sensing   perspective,   monitoring   and   analyzing   biological   activity   in   

medium   such   as   neural   cells   assembly   or   bloods   composition,   for   instance,   consist   in   

processing   dynamical   signals   and   would   strongly   benefit   from   the   RC   approach   to   

classify   such   dynamical   patterns   from   complex   and   poorly   define   biological   medium.   

Thus   developing   RC   strategies   to   process   information   out   of   an   ion-­‐sensitive   transistors   

network   could   open   new   perspectives   for   biological   sensors.   

The   key   elements   of   RC   are   (i)   non-­‐linearity   of   the   reservoir’s   nodes   (non-­‐linear   

conversion   from   input   signal   to   output   signal)   and   (ii)   a   fading   memory   effect   keeping   

the   history   of   the   stimuli   active   in   the   network   on   a   given   duration.   Material   

implementations   of   RC   have   been   proposed   recently   with   optical   or   magnetic   

oscillators.[8-­‐12]   For   both,   time   multiplexing   was   used   in   order   to   emulate   spatial   nodes   

in   the   network   from   one   single   non-­‐linear   element   and   memory   effect   was   associated   


4   

whether   to   a   feedback   loop   connection   or   to   the   transient   dynamics   of   the   non-­‐linear   

element.   Here,   we   propose   the   implementation   of   a   spatial   reservoir   composed   of   an   

array   of   OECTs   that   present   a   non-­‐linear   response   to   the   stimulus   propagating   in   an   

analyte   (an   input   voltage   applied   to   the   analyte   is   converted   into   a   resistance   state   of   the   

OECT.   The   memory   effect   is   associated   to   the   transient   dynamics   of   ions   penetrating   into   

the   OECT   with   a   given   relaxation   time   implementing   the   fading   memory.   We   show   in   

this   paper   that   this   spatial   reservoir   take   advantage   of   (i)   the   variability   in   the   OECTs   

array   inherent   to   the   bottom   up   fabrication   of   the   OECTs   using   a   newly   synthesized   

electropolymerizable   polymer,   (ii)   of   the   transient   dynamics   of   the   devices   for   an   

implicit   representation   of   time   and   (iii)   of   the   number   of   redundant   OECTs   to   

discriminate   simple   dynamical   patterns.   
   


5   

2.   Results   and   Discussion   

2.1.   Transient   dynamics   of   OECTs   as   implicit   time   representation   

Figure   1.   a,   Optical   micrographs   of   the   OECTs   array.   OECT   devices   are   three   terminal   
devices   with   spiral-­‐shape   S   and   D   electrodes   leading   to   a   large   channel   width   over   length   
ratio   (W/L=1100)   over   a   confined   area   (615   μm²).   The   gate   electrode   (not   represented)   is   
realized   with   macroscopic   metal   wire   contacting   the   electrolyte.   b,   After   electrode   
patterning,   the   organic   material,   Scanning   Electron   Microscope   images   of   three   different   
devices.   High   variability   in   the   electro-­‐polymerization   is   apparent   in   the   polymer   structure.   
c,   Transfer   characteristics   of   one   of   the   OECT   in   a   0.1   M   KCl(aq)   electrolyte,   displaying   the   p-­‐
type   accumulation-­‐mode   field-­‐effect   (inset:   TEDOT   monomer   used   for   the   semiconductor   
electrodeposition).   Blue   line:   drain   current,   green   line:   square-­‐root   of   drain   current,   black   
line:   gate   current,   showing   a   negligible   capacitive   contribution   in   the   overall   drain   current.   

   

   

The   OECT   array   (Figure   1a,   and   Methods)   consists   in   organic   electrochemical   

transistors   composed   of   electro-­‐polymerized,   glycol   crosslinked,   2-­‐(2-­‐thienyl)-­‐(3,4-­‐


6   

ethylenedioxythiophene)   (TEDOT)   molecules   (Figure   1   and   Supplementary   Figure   S1).   

Alternative   materials   based   on   glycol-­‐side-­‐chain   polythiophene   have   demonstrated   high   

performances   while   operating   in   accumulation   mode.[13,14]   We   used   the   monomer   

TEDOT   (Figure   1)   to   conceive,   after   electro-­‐polymerization,   a   new   polythiophene   

functionalized   with   ethylene   glycol   chains,   patterned   locally   on   each   OECT.   After   the   

polymer   electrodeposition   (see   Methods),   all   devices   showed   gate   modulation   of   source-­‐

drain   current   (Figure   1c),   despite   the   large   variability   of   the   material   morphology   

(Figure   1b).   The   polymer   formed   by   nucleating   first   on   the   source   and   drain   electrodes   

and   then   growing   and   covering   the   channel.   Such   bottom-­‐up   fabrication   did   not   resulted   

in   smooth   thin-­‐films,   but   rough   patches   of   polymer   grains   with   heights   of   about   2   μm,   

filling   the   Parylene   C   cavities.   Such   textured   surfaces   form   large   interfaces   with   the   

electrolyte   and   the   relation   between   the   aspects   of   the   patch   with   the   ion   dependent   

electrical   characteristics   will   be   discussed   further.   The   basic   mechanisms   of   OECT   is   

based   on   the   redox   doping/dedoping   of   the   organic   material.[15,16]   A   negative   gate   

voltage   (VG)   applies   to   the   0.1   M   KCl(aq)   (the   analyte)   forces   negative   ions   to   penetrate   

into   the   organic   material,   increasing   the   electronic   conductance   of   the   organic   layer   

(source   grounded   and   drain   potential   constant   VD=+100   mV).   When   VG   is   turned   off,   

ions   diffuse   back   to   the   electrolyte,   out   of   the   organic   material   that   recovers   its   high   

resistance   state.   Non-­‐linear   relationship   between   VG   and   device’s   resistance   is   evident   

from   Figure   1b.   In   addition,   slow   dynamics   of   ions   through   the   electrolyte/organic   

interface   is   apparent   in   the   hysteresis   loop   when   sweeping   VG   at   0.1   V/s.   Figure   2a   

presents   the   transient   response   of   an   OECT   to   a   sequence   of   pulses   with   increasing   

amplitude.   The   transient   behavior   of   the   OECT   is   used   to   implement   short-­‐term   memory   

effect   (Figure   2c),[17,18]   as   observed   in   biological   synapses   (Short-­‐Term   Plasticty).[19]   

When   the   OECT   is   stressed   with   a   train   of   pulses   of   constant   amplitude,   short-­‐term   


7   

facilitation   (increase   of   the   average   output   current   with   number   of   pulse)   is   

implemented.[3,17]   

   

Figure   2.   a,   Typical   response   of   the   OECT   to   a   gate   voltage   with   different   amplitudes   and   
constant   VD=+100mV.   Green   (blue)   dashed   line   shows   the   fitting   of   the   doping   (dedoping),   
transient   resulting   from   ions   injected   (removed)   to   (from)   the   organic   semiconductor   for   a   
step   voltage   of   0   to   -­‐900   mV   (-­‐900   mV   to   0   V).   b,   Characteristic   charge   and   discharge   time   
constants   for   the   full   array   of   12   OECTs   obtained   from   fitting   the   transient   current   in   (a)   
by   exponential   functions   (dashed   lines   in   (a)).   c,   Constant   gate   voltage   stimulation   
(-­‐900   mV,   200   ms   width)   with   variable   frequencies   showing   short-­‐term   facilitation.   Red   
dashed   lines   correspond   to   the   average   conductance   reach   in   steady-­‐state   showing   
frequency-­‐dependent   potentiation.   Short-­‐term   memory   effect   is   evidenced   by   the   single   
pulse   applied   25   seconds   after   the   potentiation.   Green   lines   are   guide   to   the   eyes   to   
evidence   the   stronger   potentiation/relaxation   ratio   after   higher   frequency   stimulation.   

   

This   short-­‐term   memory   effect   is   due   to   the   accumulation   of   ions   from   pulse   to   pulse   

and   on   the   unbalanced   relaxation   between   each   stimulation   resulting   in   higher   steady-­‐

state   mean   conductance   at   high   frequency   (larger   amount   of   ions   are   accumulated)   and   

lower   steady-­‐state   conductance   at   low   frequency   (lower   amount   of   ions   are   

accumulated).   In   each   case   in   Figure   2c,   a   single   control   pulse   is   applied   after   25   s   of   


8   

relaxation   to   evidence   the   short-­‐term   memory   effect.   The   absolute   value   of   the   current   

from   trial-­‐to-­‐trial   presents   some   variability   in   current   level   (evidenced   in   the   very   first   

pulse   when   the   OECT   was   previously   at   rest,   for   instance)   that   was   mostly   due   to   

concentration   control   of   the   electrolyte   micro-­‐drop   in   an   open   environment   and   to   the   

strong   effect   of   the   concentration   on   the   quantitative   response   of   the   OECT.   

Nevertheless,   the   qualitative   response   showing   higher   potentiation   at   higher   frequency   

with   respect   to   the   control   pulse   (green   lines   in   Figure   2c)   remained   consistent.   The   

transient   behavior   was   analyzed   by   fitting   the   charge/discharge   in   the   transient   drain   

current   characteristics   of   Figure   2a   with   a   single   exponential   function.   Characteristic   

times   with   a   large   dispersion   are   obtained   (Figure   2b),   inherent   to   the   bottom-­‐up   

fabrication   process   of   the   organic   material.   Characteristic   transient   times   in   an   OECT   

depend   on   the   electrical   resistance   of   the   polymer   and   the   resistance   and   capacitance   

values   of   the   electrolyte,[16]   affecting   the   device   behavior   under   pulse   modulation.[4]   

Since   the   polymer   and   electrolyte   resistances   as   well   as   the   device-­‐to-­‐electrolyte   

capacitance   are   intrinsically   function   of   the   thickness   of   the   polymer   materials   and   the   

areas   of   their   interfaces,   the   variability   of   polymer   morphology   (as   shown   in   Figure   1b)   

is   the   main   source   of   variability   of   the   measured   device   time   constants.   This   will   be   one   

central   element   that   we   exploit   in   the   following   for   the   implementation   of   RC.   

Characteristic   time   constants   for   charging   are   on   average   shorter   (from   1.08   to   13.7   s)   

than   discharging   (from   2.03   to   43.7   s).   The   level   of   memory   of   each   individual   device   can   

be   define   along   two   metrics:   (i)   τmean,   the   average   value   of   τdischarge   and   τcharge   and   (ii)   the   

τdischarge/τcharge   ratio.   When   τdischarge/τcharge   ≈   1   (equivalent   to   a   capacitor),   the   device   is   a   

purely   short-­‐term   memory.   When   τdischarge   /   τcharge   tends   to   higher   values,   the   memory   

moves   from   short-­‐term   to   long-­‐term   memory   (note   that   non-­‐volatile   memory   tends   to   

maximize   this   ratio   with   τdischarge   >   10   years   and   τcharge   <   1   ns).   Figure   S5   and   S6   


9   

represents   the   τdischarge/τcharge   ratio   and   τmean   showing   that   OECTs   devices   are   in   the   short   

term   regime   of   memory.   In   the   following,   this   short   term   memory   effect   will   be   used   to   

define   the   global   memory   of   our   system.   The   collection   of   τmean   available   in   our   system   

due   to   variability   will   be   used   to   reconstruct   a   memory   time   window.   This   characteristic   

memory   time   window   directly   determines   the   typical   duration   of   dynamical   patterns   

that   can   be   processed   by   the   reservoir   of   OECTs   (i.e.   a   device   can   keep   memory   of   its   

previous   history   on   a   time   window   of   up   to   tenths   of   seconds).   In   its   initial   version,   RC   

used   recurrent   connections   into   the   reservoir   to   implement   fading   memory   effect.   

Feedbacks   (i.e.   delays)   into   the   reservoir   ensure   that   signals   are   kept   for   a   given   time   

active   in   the   network.   Also,   strength   of   this   recurrent   connections   was   used   to   set   the   

reservoir   in   an   optimal   state   in   terms   of   sensitivity   to   input   signal   (i.e.   edge   of   chaotic   

regime).[20]   In   our   case,   the   reservoir   consists   in   a   purely   feed-­‐forward   network   (i.e.   no   

recurrent   connections)   and   fading   memory   effect   is   implemented   with   the   transient   

responses   of   OECTs   (more   precisely   by   the   collection   of   time   constant   from   each   

individual   OECT).   The   optimal   VG   range   of   operation   of   the   OECTs   is   defined   based   on   

the   device   ID(VG)   characteristics.   Too   large   voltage   biases   (>1.0   V)   might   lead   to   

irreversible   material   damage   by   water   electrolysis,[21]   hindering   the   stability   of   the   

electrochemical   system.   Too   small   voltages   result   in   too   weak   modulation   of   the   

conductance.   As   a   trade   of,   we   use   voltage   pulses   VG   of   -­‐900   mV.   Note   that   normally-­‐OFF   

OECT   (i.e.   intrinsic   semiconductor)   require   a   substantially   larger   gate   voltage   in   order   to   

achieve   a   reasonable   doping   of   the   channel   at   the   opposite   to   normally-­‐ON   OECT   (i.e.   

doped   semiconductor   such   as   PEDOT:PSS)   that   can   be   operated   at   ultra-­‐low   voltages.[3]   

   

   


10   

2.2.   Reservoir   computing:   dynamical   signal   processing   with   network   of   OECTs   

Various   Artificial   Neural   Networks   (ANNs)   approaches   have   been   proposed   so   far   for   

time-­‐dependent   pattern   classification   (speech,   for   example).   Recurrent   networks   or   

Time   Delay   Neural   Network   are   of   particular   interest   for   this   task   since   they   offer   the   

possibility   to   encode   the   time   signature   of   such   signals   explicitly.[22]   More   recently,   time-­‐

dependent   signals   processing   has   been   revitalized   with   the   RC   concept.   RC   is   based   on   

the   basic   idea   of   projecting   the   input   signal   on   the   nodes   of   a   large   dimensional   space   in   

order   to   separate   simple   features   from   the   input   signal.   These   simple   features   are   then   

used   to   classify   patterns   at   the   read-­‐out   layer   (i.e.   a   simple   perceptron   trained   with   

standard   learning   technics).   In   time-­‐multiplexed   RC   approaches   used   for   speech   

recognition,[8,11]   the   dimensionality   of   the   reservoir   is   ensured   by   the   virtual   neurons   (i.e.   

virtual   nodes)   that   hold   the   signature   of   the   signal   at   different   time   intervals.   

Reconstruction   on   the   read-­‐out   layer   of   the   time-­‐dependent   signals   out   of   these   virtual   

nodes   is   then   used   to   classify   patterns   (i.e.   speech   signals).   This   approach   corresponds   

to   an   explicit   representation   of   time   where   the   first   neuron   is   associated   to   the   first   time   

interval,   second   neuron   to   the   second   time   interval…   and   so   on.[22]   Here,   we   use   an   

implicit   representation   of   time   through   the   transient   dynamics   of   each   OECT   in   the   

network   (Figure   3a).   Due   to   the   variability   in   their   transient   responses   (Figure   2),   each   

OECT   will   keep   the   temporal   signature   of   the   signal   on   a   different   memory   window.   

Each   OECT   is   then   used   to   collect   different   features   from   the   reservoir   and   to   perform   

classification   at   the   read-­‐out   layer.      

To   test   this   concept,   we   designed   low   complexity   signals   consisting   in   square   waves   of   

constant   amplitude   -­‐900   mV   and   1   s   duration   applied   to   the   global   gate   with   variable   

frequencies.   The   two   signals   used   to   demonstrate   time-­‐dependent   signal   classification   

are   built   with   square-­‐type   and   triangle-­‐type   pulse-­‐frequency   modulation   between   0.3   


11   

and   0.8   Hz.[23]   If   classification   of   these   two   signals   is   trivial   when   one   have   access   to   the   

full   recording   over   a   complete   period   of   the   signals,   discrimination   of   the   two   signals   on   

a   restricted   time   interval   (typically   no   more   than   two   successive   pulses)   becomes   

impossible   without   some   memorization   of   the   past   events.   Here   we   show   that   the   RC   

concept   can   be   used   to   classify   in   real   time   these   signals   based   on   the   intrinsic   memory   

of   each   OECT   and   on   pre-­‐requisite   learning.   Figures   3b-­‐c   present   the   typical   response   of   

an   OECT   to   the   two   signals,   respectively.   Light   grey   lines   correspond   to   the   as   recorded   

signal.   The   blue   and   green   lines   correspond   to   the   average   current   response   in   each   time   

step.   

   

Figure   3.   a,   Schematic   of   the   experiment   and   analysis.   The   network   of   12   OECTs   is   used   to   
sense   the   response   of   the   electrolyte   to   the   global   gate   signal.   The   perceptron   is   
implemented   in   software   and   realize   signal   weighting,   summation   and   activation   function.   
b   and   c,   Typical   response   of   an   OECT   to   the   two   different   patterns   (square   and   triangle,   
respectively)   used   for   classification.   Black/grey   lines   are   the   raw   data   measurement   and   
blue/green   line   are   smoothed   signals   corresponding   to   the   average   current   value   sense   by   
the   device.   As   in   Fig.   2c,   highest   (lowest)   frequencies   tends   to   accumulate   more   (less)   ions   
in   the   organic   material   and   increase   (decrease)   the   mean   conductance   levels   of   the   OECT   
via   doping   effect.   d   and   e,   Response   of   the   12   OECTs   to   the   two   input   patterns   (square   type   
and   triangle   type,   respectively).   We   observe   variability   from   device   to   device   on   the   
modulation   amplitude   and   the   shape   of   the   mean   current.   Average   currents   of   OECT   #6   
and   #7   differ   of   about   two   orders   of   magnitude,   and   amplitude   of   the   current   modulations   
between   OECT   #1   and   #4   differ   of   about   one   order   of   magnitude.   

   


12   

Figures   3d-­‐e   present   the   responses   of   the   12   OECTs   in   the   array   to   the   same   signal   

applied   at   the   common   gate.   We   observe   variability   from   device   to   device   on   the   

modulation   amplitude   and   the   shape   of   the   mean   current.   The   observed   variability   on   

the   mean   current   is   not   only   due   to   the   τdischarge   and   τcharge   device   time   constants   

variability,   but   also   to   their   steady   state   current   and   its   current   modulation.   Both   of   

them   correlating   to   the   hole   conductivity   of   the   polymer   between   source   and   drain   

electrodes,   these   two   features   being   highly   influenced   by   the   polymer   morphology:   

Comparing   the   patches   morphology   (Figure   1b)   to   the   device   performances   (Figure   3d-­‐

e),   small-­‐island   morphological   features   of   the   OECT   5   seems   to   promote   poor   current   

modulation   (ion-­‐gating   poorly   influencing   the   conductive   region   of   the   channel),   and   a   

1-­‐electrode   nucleation   mode   (OECT   12)   seems   to   promote   the   average   drain   current   by   

a   factor   of   three   compared   to   a   2-­‐electrode   nucleation   mode   (OECT   11),   forming   no   

grain   boundary   in   the   middle   of   the   channel.   This   large   variability   represents   a   severe   

limitation   of   bottom-­‐up   fabrication   technics   that   RC   can   leverage   efficiently.   

Implementation   of   the   reservoir   target   classification   of   the   two   patterns   (square-­‐type   

and   triangle-­‐type)   with   a   simple   read-­‐out   equivalent   to   a   simple   perceptron   

implemented   here   in   software   (i.e.   one   neuron   with   m=12   weighted   input).   Output   

current   from   each   OECT   has   been   sampled   over   time   and   will   be   used   to   define   the   state   

of   the   reservoir   at   each   time   step,   for   a   given   location   into   the   reservoir.   The   collection   

of   outputs   from   the   array   of   OECTs   correspond   to   the   state   at   time   t   of   the   reservoir   in   

response   to   a   given   stimuli.   This   output   values   are   then   used   as   input   to   a   simple   

perceptron   in   charge   of   classification   through   learning   (i.e.   the   perceptron   function   is   

limited   to   signal   weighting,   summation   and   activation   function).   We   use   a   1   ms   sampling   

rate   of   the   signals.   For   each   time   step,   we   associate   a   given   vector   {Xi}(t)   of   dimension   

(1x12).   A   total   of   11750   vectors   are   recorded   from   each   pattern   composed   of   three   


13   

repetitions   of   one   period   of   square   (triangle,   respectively)   elementary   pattern.   Each   

vector   is   then   fed   to   a   simple   perceptron   with   m=12   weighted   inputs.   The   total   output   

Y(t)   from   the   perceptron   before   activation   function   at   time   t   is   then   

𝑌(𝑡) =  
!!!" 𝑤! ∙ 𝑋!(𝑡)
!!!
   
   
   
   
   
(1)   

with   wi   the   synaptic   weight   of   the   ith   input   line,   Xi(t)   the   current   value   at   time   t   of   

OECT   #i.   Vectors   {Xi}   belongings   to   the   triangle-­‐type   pattern   are   associated   to   class   “1”   

(i.e.   output   neuron   is   activated)   and   square-­‐type   pattern   to   class   ”0”   (i.e.   output   neuron   

is   not   activated).   The   activation   function   rule   of   the   output   neuron   is   then   

   
   
   
Output   =   “1”   if   Y(t)   >   Yth   

   
   
   
Output   =   “0”   if   Y(t)   <   Yth   

with   Yth   the   threshold   activation   value   (0.5   in   our   example)   chosen   based   on   the   

distribution   of   the   different   output   values.   We   define   the   training   vectors   (or   training   

examples)   by   choosing   randomly   n   vectors   from   each   pattern.   Training   protocol   is   

realized   with   pseudo-­‐inverse   learning   (i.e.   Moore   Penrose   operator)[24]   to   determine   the   

value   of   the   12   synaptic   weights   (Supplementary   Figure   S2).   Testing   is   realized   on   the   

full   set   of   vectors   (i.e.   11750)   from   the   two   classes.   Classification   performances   are   then   

calculated   as   the   percentage   of   errors   averaged   on   20   iterations   with   2n   training   vectors   

randomly   chosen   among   the   entire   set.   Figures   4a-­‐b   show   the   error   rate   as   a   function   of   

training   vectors   used   for   learning   the   synaptic   weights.   As   in   standard   learning   technics,   

more   examples   lead   to   better   performances.   With   more   than   n=300   vectors   (only   2.6%   

of   the   total   vectors   set),   the   system   reaches   classification   of   the   signal   with   an   error   rate   

at   the   order   of   0.001%.   


14   

   

Figure   4.   Error   rate   (i.e.   the   number   of   vectors   given   a   mistaken   recognition   over   the   total   
number   of   tested   vectors)   for   classification   of   the   two   patterns   as   a   function   of   number   of   
training   vectors   n   in   each   class.   Testing   is   performed   on   the   entire   vector   set   (11750   
vectors).   a,   linear   scale.   b,   logarithmic   scale.   

   

The   present   classification   task   is   a   toy   problem   and   any   quantitative   discussion   on   the   

error   rate   is   pointless.   The   important   aspect   here   is   to   show   that   the   system   after   

learning   can   classify   in   real   time   input   signals   since   the   only   operation   to   be   realized   out   

of   the   OECT   array   is   current   weighting,   summation   and   thresholding   (excluding   the   

learning   stage   which   require   a   significant   initial   computing   power   and   time).   Note   that   

we   used   the   average   value   of   current   that   can   be   easily   implemented   in   hardware   with   a   

simple   integration   circuitry.   

These   results   are   based   on   two   important   aspects.   (i)   The   number   of   OECTs   used   for   

pattern   classification   that   we   have   associated   to   the   number   of   features   collected   from   

the   reservoir.   (ii)   The   variability   from   device   to   device   that   affects   how   much   each   

feature   is   different   from   the   other.   For   instance,   two   identical   OECTs   will   provide   the   

same   feature   while   very   different   OECTs   will   provide   very   different   features   (i.e.   

different   transient   time   between   two   devices   will   provide   different   memory   window   

and   consequently,   different   type   of   features).   To   demonstrate   that   RC   takes   directly   


15   

advantage   of   both   number   of   features   and   variability   in   the   OECT   array,   we   realize   the   

same   classification   task   with   only   “partial”   arrays   of   m   OECTs,   with   1   ≤   m   ≤   12.   

2.3.   Influence   of   the   number   of   OECT   in   the   reservoir   

Performance   of   classification   should   be   directly   linked   to   the   number   of   features   

(associated   to   each   OECT)   used   to   classify   the   patterns.   To   test   this   hypothesis,   we   

evaluate   the   performances   of   the   reservoir,   degrading   it   on-­‐purpose   by   removing   

sequentially   OECTs   one   by   one.   Figures   5a-­‐b   present   the   error   rate   as   a   function   of   the   

number   of   training   vectors   n   when   one   OECT   is   removed   from   one   batch   to   the   other.   

   

Figure   5.   Error   rate   of   the   classification   task   when   the   OECTs’   array   is   progressively   
degraded   by   removing   sequentially   OECTs   one-­‐by-­‐one.   

   

A   minimum   of   three   OECTs   is   required   to   classify   patterns.   When   more   than   300   

training   vectors   are   used,   a   clear   relationship   between   number   of   OECTs   and   

performances   is   extracted   with   the   later   improving   exponentially   with   the   number   of   

OECT   used   to   classify   the   pattern.   Performances   of   classification   are   directly   linked   to   

the   number   of   OECT   used   to   compute   the   pattern   out   of   the   reservoir,   or   equivalently,   to   

the   number   of   features   used   to   describe   the   patterns.   Referring   to   the   general   idea   of   RC,   

increasing   the   number   of   OECT   in   the   network   corresponds   to   increasing   the   

dimensionality   of   the   space   used   to   project   the   input   signal.   The   expected   effect   is   


16   

consequently   to   ease   the   readout   layer   (i.e.   the   perceptron)   to   classify   the   patterns.   In   

this   sense,   more   OECTs   are   better   for   classifying   time-­‐dependent   signals.   Classification   

of   more   complex   patterns   (i.e.   patterns   with   higher   level   of   similarity,   for   example)   

should   require   more   OECTs   in   the   array.   We   notice   that   small   arrays   (m<6)   require   less   

training   vectors   to   reach   error   rate   of   about   10%.   In   agreement   with   theoretical   

prediction   from   ref.   [25],   this   effect   implies   that   for   a   relatively   small   number   of   training   

vectors,   it   exists   an   optimal   number   of   features   to   reach   the   best   accuracy.   In   other   

words,   it   shows   that   the   training   shall   be   adapted   to   the   size   of   the   OECT   array,   which   

should   be   adapted   to   the   task   complexity.   

2.4.   Influence   of   the   variability   in   the   reservoir   

Another   important   issue   is   to   know   what   type   of   features   could   lead   to   better   

performances.   Figure   6a   shows   the   error   rate   for   the   particular   case   of   6   OECTs   out   of   

12   when   all   combinations   (i.e.   924)   are   tested.   Figure   6a   clearly   shows   that   some   set   of   

OECTs   perform   better   than   other,   but   it   was   not   possible   to   extract   a   possible   empirical   

rule   correlating   the   error   rate   to   the   level   of   variability   in   transient   dynamics   and/or   

mean   current   level   (see   Supplementary   Figure   S4   for   details).   Nevertheless,   important   

insights   are   obtained   by   considering   the   average   performances   of   the   array   as   a   function   

of   number,   m,   of   OECTs.   Figures   6b-­‐c   show   the   error   rate   for   different   sizes   of   array   (m)   

obtained   with   n=3   (small   training   set)   and   n=300   (large   training   set)   training   vectors.   

Each   value   is   obtained   by   extracting   the   mean   error   rate   from   10   randomly   chosen   sets   

of   OECTs   (the   same   sets   for   both   n=3   and   300).   Figure   6b   confirms   theoretical   

prediction[25]   that   there   exists   an   optimal   error   rate   performance   for   a   finite   number   of   

training   vectors   n.   This   effect   attenuates   when   the   number   of   training   vectors   increase   

and   disappears   for   n>6   (Figure   6c)   where   performance   improves   monotonically   with   

the   number   of   features   when   n=300   (Supplementary   Figure   S3).   We   can   speculate   at   


17   

this   stage   that:   (i)   the   propose   concept   requires   variability.   One   or   two   OECTs   are   not   

enough   to   perform   classification   at   a   better   level   than   chance.   Since   the   output   of   each   

OECT   is   weighted   by   the   perceptron   (i.e.   corresponding   to   synaptic   weighting,   signal   

summation   and   activation   function),   12   OECTs   without   variability   and   providing   the   

same   response   would   be   strictly   equivalent   to   a   perceptron   with   a   single   weight.   This   

system,   equivalent   to   a   Boolean   logic   gate,   cannot   be   used   for   classification   task.   (ii)   The   

reservoir   concept   is   rather   resilient   to   the   nature   of   variability   presents   in   each   

individual   OECT   since   absolute   performance   as   a   function   of   m   is   larger   than   mean   

deviation   for   each   m   values   (see   error   bars   in   Figure   6b).   In   other   words,   the   number   of   

OECTs   seems   to   play   a   more   critical   role   on   performances   than   the   possible   effect   of   a   

particular   set   of   OECT   (i.e.   a   particular   set   of   features).   The   consequence   of   this   point   is   

to   consider   that   increasing   the   number   of   OECTs   allows   coping   with   uncontrolled   

variability.   More   insights   about   the   nature   of   variability   should   require   higher   OECTs’   

array   with   more   complex   input   patterns   in   order   to   extract   relevant   trends   between   

variability   and   performances.   


18   

   

Figure   6.   a,   Error   rate   of   the   classification   task   obtained   for   all   combination   possible   out   
of   the   12   OECTs   of   the   array   as   a   function   of   number   of   training   vectors.   Performances   for   
different   array   size   m   with   b   n=3   (b)   and   n=300   (c)   training   vectors.   Average   performances   
as   a   function   of   m   is   obtained   by   calculating   the   mean   value   and   deviation   on   10   randomly   
chosen   set   of   vectors   for   each   m   value   (vector   set   displayed   in   Supplementary   Table   S1).   


19   

3.   Conclusion   

We   demonstrated   in   this   study   that   despite   the   high   level   of   inherent   variability   in   our   

bottom-­‐up   ion-­‐sensing   devices,   we   successfully   discriminated   dynamic   patterns   out   of   

our   OECT   network   by   using   a   well-­‐established   neuromorphic   learning   algorithm.   This   

approach   could   be   applied   to   various   practical   cases   since   most   of   biological   processes   

such   as   electrical   activity   in   brain   cells   or   evolution   of   composition   in   physiological   

medium   belongs   to   the   class   of   dynamical   patterns.   We   showed   that   the   RC   approach   

can   efficiently   cope   with   many-­‐fold   variabilities   in   both   transistor   characteristic   time   

constants   and   non-­‐linear   current   levels   to   recognize   frequency-­‐modulated   pulsed   signal.   

Although   it   was   not   possible   to   correlate   the   dispersion   of   each   device   properties   with   

the   recognition   performance   of   the   OECT   array,   this   work   shows   that   neuromorphic   

sensing   takes   advantage   of   these   variabilities,   considered   as   drawbacks   for   standard   

sensing.   While   today’s   transistor   technologies   are   based   on   high   reproducibility   and   fast   

response,   we   point   out   the   potential   to   rethink   the   excellence   criteria   for   sensing   in   a   

neuromorphic   data   analysis   context,   and   open   up   possible   directions   for   future   sensing   

technologies   based   on   variability-­‐rich   materials,   grown   by   bottom   up   approaches.   

4.   Experimental   Section   

Monomer   Synthesis:   The   monomer   TEDOT   has   been   synthesized   by   

deprotection/functionalization   of   the   appropriately   protected   thiolate   groups   according   

to   the   already   published   method,[26]   and   will   be   described   elsewhere.   The   identity   and   

purity   of   TEDOT   were   confirmed   by   1H   and   13C   NMR   spectrometry   and   HR   mass   

spectrometry   giving   satisfactory   results:   Yellowish   oil.   1H   NMR   (300   MHz,   CDCl3,   

δ/ppm):   7.21   (d,   3J   =   5.3   Hz,   2H,   Hthioph),   7.03   (d,   3J   =   5.3   Hz,   2H,   Hthioph),   6.36   (s,   2H,   HEDOT   

Ar),   4.37   –   4.21   (m,   8H,   HEDOT   Alk),   3.63   –   3.51   (m,   16H),   2.98   (t,   J   =   7.1   Hz,   4H);   13C   

NMR   (76   MHz,   CDCl3,   δ/ppm):   141.32,   139.14,   134.73,   132.30,   126.13,   123.82,   110.85,   


20   

99.82,   70.78,   70.70,   70.46,   70.29,   65.17,   64.59,   35.74;   HRMS   (FAB,   m/z):   calculated   for   

C30H34O8S6:   714.0578;   found:   714.0581.   

Device   Fabrication:   The   fabrication   of   the   clusters   of   12   OECT   devices   was   based   on   

methods   already   reported   in   the   literature:[27,28]   We   first   patterned   on   a   Si/SiO2   

substrate   the   70   nm   Pt   source   and   drain   electrodes,   and   then   the   300   nm   Au   electrodes   

(with   a   10   nm   Ti   adhesion   layer)   by   e-­‐beam   lithography   and   lift-­‐off   using   a   PMMA/MAA   

resist.   Pt   was   chosen   as   a   metal   for   the   source   and   drain   electrodes   for   its   

electrochemical   stability,   while   gold   was   used   for   its   higher   conductivity   to   reduce   the   

resistance   of   the   transmission   lines   on   the   substrate.   After   UV-­‐O3   cleaning,   the   substrate   

was   functionalized   with   3-­‐acryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane   in   o-­‐xylene   (with   1%   acetic   

acid)   before   processing   a   2   μm   layer   of   Parylene   C   by   chemical   vapor   deposition,   as   a   

passivation   layer.   The   apertures   over   the   active   area   of   the   devices   were   realized   by   

lithography,   using   an   AZ40XT   resist   (from   MicroChem)   and   dry   etching   with   an   O2   

plasma.   The   polymeric   semiconductor   p(TEDOT)   was   deposited   sequentially   over   each   

device   by   electrodeposition,   using   the   source   and   the   drain   electrodes   as   working   

electrode,   a   hanging   Pt   wire   as   a   counter   electrode   and   an   Ag/0.01   M   AgNO3   reference   

electrode.   The   potentiostatic   electrodeposition   (perform   on   a   Solartron   Analytical   

ModuLab   2100A)   was   performed   at   1   V   vs.   Ag/Ag+   until   1   μC   over   each   electrode   was   

deposited,   using   a   10-­‐2   M   solution   of   TEDOT   in   acetonitrile   in   the   presence   of   0.1   M   of   

tetrabutylammonium   hexafluorophosphate   as   electrolyte.   The   patches   of   p(TEDOT)   

adhere   remarkably   on   the   device   upon   intense   rinsing   with   deionised   water   prior   the   

electrical   tests.   

Electrical   Characterization:   The   squared   voltage   inputs   were   applied   via   three   

Agilent   B1530A   waveform   generator   units.   All   measurements   were   performed   using   a   


21   

silver   wire   as   a   gate,   dipped   into   a   0.1   M   KCl(aq)   electrolyte.   Current-­‐voltage   curves   were   

measured   with   Agilent   B1530A.

Supporting   Information   

Supplementary   information   is   available   in   the   online   version   of   the   paper.   
Correspondence   and   request   for   materials   should   be   addressed   to   S.P.,   F.A.   

Acknowledgements   

We   acknowledge   financial   supports   from   the   EU:   H2020   FET-­‐OPEN   project   RECORD-­‐IT   
(#   GA   664786).   We   thank   the   French   National   Nanofabrication   Network   RENATECH   for   
financial   support   of   the   IEMN   clean-­‐room.   We   also   express   our   thanks   to   Christian   
Gamrat   (CEA,   Saclay)   for   fruitful   discussions.   

Conflic   of   Interest   

The   authors   declare   no   competing   financial   interests.   

Author   contributions   
S.P.   and   D.G.   fabricated   the   devices.   M.M.T.,   P.B.   J.R.   designed   and   synthesized   the   
electropolymerizable   polymer.   S.P.   performed   the   measurements   and   analyzed   the   data.   
S.P   and   F.A.   designed   and   performed   the   RC   training.   D.V.   managed   the   CNRS   side   of   the   
EU   RECORD-­‐IT   project.   S.P.,   F.A.   and   D.V.   wrote   the   paper.   All   the   authors   discussed   the   
results   and   contributed   to   correct   and   amend   the   paper.      

Keywords      

Biomimetics,   Conducting   Polymers,   Organic   Electronics   

[1]   P.   A.   Merolla,   J.   V.   Arthur,   R.   Alvarez-­‐Icaza,   A.   S.   Cassidy,   J.   Sawada,   F.   Akopyan,   B.   L.   
Jackson,   N.   Imam,   C.   Guo,   Y.   Nakamura,   B.   Brezzo,   I.   Vo,   S.   K.   Esser,   R.   Appuswamy,   B.   
Taba,   A.   Amir,   M.   D.   Flickner,   W.   P.   Risk,   R.   Manohar,   D.   S.   Modha,   Science   2014,   345,   668.   
[2]   S.   Yu,   Proc.   IEEE   2018,   106,   260.   
[3]   Y.   van   Burgt,   E.   Lubberman,   E.   J.   Fuller,   S.   T.   Keene,   G.   C.   Faria,   S.   Agarwal,   M.   J.   
Marinella,   A.   A.   Talin,   A.   Salleo,   Nat.   Mater.   2017,   16,   414.   
[4]   S.   Pecqueur,   D.   Guérin,   D.   Vuillaume,   F.   Alibart,   Org.   Electron.   2018,   57,   232.   
[5]   W.   Maass,   T.   Natschläger,   H.   Markram,   Neural   Comput.   2002,   14,   2531.   
[6]   H.   Jaeger,   Technical   Report   GMD   Report   148,   German   National   Research   Center   for   
Information   Technology,   (2001).   
[7]   M.   Lukoševičius,   H.   Jaeger,   Comput.   Sci.   Rev.   2009,   3,   127.   
[8]   L.   Appeltant,   M.   C.   Soriano,   G.   van   der   Sande,   J.   Danckaert,   S.   Massar,   J.   Dambre,   B.   
Schrauwen,   C.   R.   Mirasso,   I.   Fischer,   Nat.   Commun.   2011,   2,   468.   
[9]   Y.   Paquot,   F.   Dupont,   A.   Smerieri,   J.   Dambre,   B.   Schrauwen,   M.   Haelterman,   S.   Massar,   
Sci.   Rep.   2012,   2,   287.   
[10]   R.   Martinenghi,   S.   Rybalko,   M.   Jacquot,   Y.   K.   Chembo,   L.   Larger,   Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   2012,   
108,   244101.   


22   

[11]   J.   Torrejon,   M.   Riou,   F.   Abreu   Araujo,   S.   Tsunegi,   G.   Khalsa,   D.   Querlioz,   P.   Bortolotti,   
V.   Cros,   K.   Yakushiji,   A.   Fukushima,   H.   Kutoba,   S.   Yuasa,   M.   D.   Stiles,   J.   Grollier,   Nature   
2017,   547,   428.   
[12]   K.   Vandoorne,   P.   Mechet,   T.   van   Vaerenbergh,   M.   Fiers,   G.   Morthier,   D.   Verstraeten,   
B.   Schrauwen,   J.   Dambre,   P.   Bienstman,   Nat.   Commun.   2014,   5,   3541.   
[13]   C.   B.   Nielsen,   A.   Giovannitti,   D.-­‐T.   Sbircea,   E.   Bandiello,   M.   R.   Niazi,   D.   A.   Hanifi,   M.   
Sessolo,   A.   Amassian,   G.   G.   Malliaras,   J.   Rivnay,   I.   McCulloch,   J.   Am.   Chem.   Soc.   2016,   138,   
10252.   
[14]   A.   Giovannitti,   D.-­‐T.   Sbircea,   S.   Inal,   C.   B.   Nielsen,   E.   Bandiello,   D.   A.   Hanifi,   M.   Sessolo,   
G.   G.   Malliaras,   I.   McCulloch,   J.   Rivnay,   Proc.   Natl.   Acad.   Sci.   2016,   113,   12017.   
[15]   J.   T.   Mabeck,   J.   A.   DeFranco,   D.   A.   Bernards,   G.   G.   Malliaras,   Appl.   Phys.   Lett.   2005,   87,   
013503.   
[16]   D.   A.   Bernards,   G.   G.   Malliaras,   Adv.   Funct.   Mater.   2007,   17,   3538.   
[17]   P.   Gkoupidenis,   N.   Schaefer,   B.   Garlan,   G.   G.   Malliaras,   Adv.   Mater.   2015,   27,   7176.   
[18]   P.   Gkoupidenis,   N.   Schaefer,   X.   Strakosas,   J.   A.   Fairfield,   G.   G.   Malliaras,   Appl.   Phys.   
Lett.   2016,   107,   263302.   
[19]   H.   Markram,   D.   Pikus,   A.   Gupta,   M.   Tsodyks,   Neuropharmacology   1998,   37,   489.   
[20]   R.   Legenstein,   W.   Maass,   What   makes   a   dynamical   system   computationally   
powerful?   New   Directions   in   Statistical   Signal   Processing:   From   Systems   to   Brains   127–
154   (MIT   Press,   2007).   
[21]   P.   G.   Erlandsson,   N.   D.   Robinson,   Electrophoresis   2011,   32,   784.   
[22]   J.   L.   Elman,   Cognit.   Sci.   1990,   14,   179.   
[23]   J.   Torrejon,   M.   Riou,   F.   Abreu   Araujo,   S.   Tsunegi,   G.   Khalsa,   D.   Querlioz,   P.   Bortolotti,   
V.   Cros,   K.   Yakushiji,   A.   Fukushima,   H.   Kutoba,   S.   Yuasa,   M.   D.   Stiles,   J.   Grollier,   
arXiv:1701.07715   (v1).   
[24]   B.   Schrauwen,   D.   Verstraeten,   J.   Van   Campenhout,   In   Proceedings   of   the   15th   
European   Symposium   on   Artificial   Neural   Networks   (ESANN'2007).   471-­‐482   (2007).   
[25]   G.   Hughes,   IEEE   Trans.   Inf.   Theory   1968,   14,   55.   
[26]   T.-­‐K.   Tran,   Q.   Bricaud,   M.   Oçafrain,   P.   Blanchard,   J.   Roncali,   S.   Lenfant,   S.   Godey,   D.   
Vuillaume,   D.   Rondeau,   Chem.   Eur.   J.   2011,   17,   5628.   
[27]   M.   Sessolo,   D.   Khodagholy,   J.   Rivnay,   F.   Maddalena,   M.   Gleyzes,   E.   Steidl,   B.   Buisson,   
G.G.   Malliaras,   Adv.   Mater.   2013,   25,   2135.   
[28]   S.   Pecqueur,   S.   Lenfant,   D.   Guérin,   F.   Alibart,   D.   Vuillaume,   Sensors   2017,   17,   570.


23   

 

   

ToC   

Hardware   reservoir-­‐computing   realized   with   an   array   of   micro   organic   electrochemical   
transistors.   Demonstration   of   the   possibility   to   classify   frequency-­‐modulated   voltage-­‐
pulse   patterns   and   the   possibility   to   scope   with   the   rich   morphological   variability   of   the   
12   electropolymerized   semiconducting   devices   on   which   the   gate   input   is   projected.   
      
   


24   

Neuromorphic   Time-­‐Dependent   Pattern   Classification   with   

Organic   Electrochemical   Transistor   Arrays.   

Supplementary   Information   

Sébastien Pecqueur1*, Maurizio Mastropasqua Talamo2, David Guérin1, Philippe Blanchard2,  

Jean Roncali2, Dominique Vuillaume1 and Fabien Alibart1* 

 

1 Institute of Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, 

Av. Poincaré, F-59652 Cedex, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France 

2 MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, 2 Bd. Lavoisier, F-49045 Angers, France 

* E-mail: sebastien.pecqueur@iemn.univ-lille1.fr; fabien.alibart@iemn.univ-lille1.fr


25   

 
 
 
Device   fabrication   

   

Figure   S1.   Strategy   to   prepare   the   concentric   spiral-­‐like   source   and   drain   electrode   
geometry:   a,   The   spiral-­‐like   interdigitated   electrodes   we   designed   from   concentric   rings   
(ring   width   W   =   1   μm;   interspace   L   =   0.4   μm).   b,   After   splitting   the   concentric   rings   into   
two   halves   and   c,   translating   them   along   the   cut   axis   by   W+L,   one   obtain   this   C2   symmetry   
for   which   the   channel   length   L   is   controlled   over   the   whole   structure.   d,   Both   spiral   
electrodes   are   contacted   on   each   side   of   the   active   area   to   supply   the   voltage   VS   and   VD.   In   
the   squared   box,   a   schematic   of   the   electrical   setup   for   operating   the   OECTs.   
   


26   

Pseudoinverse   Learning   (PIL)   algorithm   

We   picked   up   randomly   (using   the   rand()   function   of   Microsoft®   ExcelTM)   2n   

vectors   of   m   transistors   outputs   for   training:   n   from   the   group   of   outputs   for   a   “square”   
signal   and   n   from   the   group   of   outputs   for   a   “triangle”   one.   

We   defined   the   training   matrix   X={xij},   i   from   1   to   m   and   j   from   1   to   2n   and   the   

2n-­‐dimensional   vector   Y={yi},   such   as   for   each   i   from   1   to   2n,   yi=0   if   “triangle”   or   1   if   
“square”.   

We   looked   for   the   weight   vector   W={wi}   by   computing   X+=(Xt·X)-­‐1·Xt,   

pseudoinverse   matrix   of   X,   in   order   to   find   W=X+·Y.   
We   evaluated   yi={xi}t·W   for   every   m-­‐dimensional   vectors   acquired   during   both   “triangle”   
and   “square”   stimulation:   If   yi<0.5,   we   assumed   the   algorithm   recognized   a   triangle   
while   if   yi>0.5,   it   recognized   a   square.   We   evaluated   the   error   rate   by   averaging   a   
minimum   of   20   iterations   of   this   algorithm   for   each   data   point.   

   

Figure   S2.   Illustrative   example   of   one   iteration   for   m=12   and   n=12   (error   rate:   1.12%).   12   
training   vectors   randomly   picked   from   the   square   data   set   (a)   and   the   triangle   data   set   (b).   
The   picked   up   vectors   are   marked   with   a   vertical   lines,   overlapped   with   12   white   open   
circles.   The   blue   zone   in   (a)   shows   the   vectors   which   were   mistaken   in   the   test.   c,   The   
distribution   of   the   2x11750   tested   vectors,   displaying   two   populations   centered   on   0   and   1.   


27   

Table   S1.   List   of   the   10   randomly   chosen   vectors   for   each   m   case,   related   to   the   study   
displayed   in   Figures   6b   and   6c:   

m   
1   
2   
3   
4   
5   
6   
7   
8   

1   
9   
4;5   
11;6;7   2;10;3;12   9;6;3;2;10   
3;6;5;11;9;2   
4;5;3;8;9;7;12   
11;6;7;2;3;8;1;12   

2   
7   
5;3   
7;5;6   
7;2;5;12   
2;4;1;7;5   
12;5;7;8;10;3   
5;3;11;2;8;7;9   
7;5;6;10;11;8;12;2   

3   
10   5;8   
6;3;10   10;8;5;6   
11;10;1;8;6   
7;10;1;12;2;4   
5;8;3;6;2;12;4   
6;3;10;2;8;9;5;11   

4   
2   
5;10   
6;4;3   
1;8;3;5   
8;12;9;10;11   1;2;8;4;11;6   
5;10;8;7;1;11;2   
6;4;3;9;2;11;8;5   

5   
7   
12;2   
7;11;5   10;9;3;1   
5;8;10;1;4   
7;5;2;4;8;11   
12;2;10;1;9;3;11   7;11;5;2;9;3;6;8   

6   
3   
10;2   
10;3;8   9;8;10;11   4;5;9;7;11   
3;4;5;2;8;9   
10;2;6;7;1;11;12   10;3;8;1;6;11;9;7   

7   
8   
11;1   
10;1;2   11;7;10;8   11;8;6;7;12   
8;7;3;9;6;11   
11;1;8;6;10;7;12   10;1;2;5;4;9;12;8   

8   
7   
6;2   
3;2;8   
6;10;2;7   
11;3;9;6;1   
7;10;1;4;5;9   
6;2;3;12;1;4;9   
3;2;8;12;1;5;9;10   

9   
12   12;11   1;6;9   
12;2;6;7   
3;4;12;1;9   
12;4;8;11;10;3   12;11;3;2;10;9;6   1;6;9;11;5;3;4;8   

10   1   
2;5   
7;2;10   1;10;3;2   
3;1;8;12;2   
1;4;12;8;5;3   
2;5;1;12;7;8;9   
7;2;10;12;1;5;8;4   

   

m   
9   
10   
11   
12   

1   
2;10;3;12;4;7;9;6;5   
9;6;3;2;10;4;12;8;7;1   
3;6;5;11;9;2;4;10;12;8;7   5;11;9;6;4;3;7;8;2;1;10;12   

2   
7;2;5;12;3;6;8;11;4   
2;4;1;7;5;12;3;10;9;6   
12;5;7;8;10;3;9;4;1;6;2   
9;3;4;12;8;1;10;6;5;11;7;2   

3   
10;8;5;6;11;1;3;12;2   11;10;1;8;6;4;7;5;9;12   7;10;1;12;2;4;6;8;9;11;3   4;6;5;1;9;12;3;8;2;10;7;11   

4   
1;8;3;5;11;10;12;9;4   8;12;9;10;11;2;3;1;7;5   1;2;8;4;11;6;5;10;7;3;9   
11;5;10;2;8;1;7;3;4;6;12;9   

5   
10;9;3;1;11;5;7;8;4   
5;8;10;1;4;6;3;7;12;9   
1;10;3;6;8;12;7;4;5;9;2   
5;1;3;12;6;9;8;2;7;4;11;10   

6   
9;8;10;11;5;1;12;2;6   4;5;9;7;11;1;8;6;12;3   
3;6;12;10;11;5;4;1;2;7;8   1;11;8;9;4;5;12;3;2;6;7;10   

7   
11;7;10;8;9;2;12;4;1   11;8;6;7;12;5;9;1;10;2   6;3;8;2;1;10;4;9;7;11;5   
4;5;8;6;2;3;12;11;1;7;9;10   

8   
6;10;2;7;11;1;3;12;5   11;3;9;6;1;5;2;12;4;8   
2;6;4;3;7;10;9;12;1;11;5   11;5;8;12;9;7;6;10;2;1;4;3   

9   
12;2;6;7;4;11;10;9;3   3;4;12;1;9;10;7;2;11;6   8;9;2;10;7;6;4;5;1;3;12   
10;1;7;3;11;2;9;12;5;8;4;6   

10   1;10;3;2;5;9;12;7;11   3;1;8;12;2;9;11;6;7;4   
9;10;4;7;6;1;5;2;3;8;12   
4;8;11;9;12;6;5;3;10;1;7;2   

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure   S3.   Averaged   performances   for   different   array   size   m   and   training   vectors   n.   
Average   performances   as   a   function   of   m   is   obtained   by   calculating   the   mean   value   and   
deviation   on   10   randomly   chosen   set   of   vectors   for   each   m   value   (Table   S1).   a,   linear   scale.   
b,   logarithmic   scale.   
   


28   

   

Figure   S4.   In   the   blue   frame,   the   4   sets   of   6   transistors   with   show   the   highest   error   rate   in   
the   study   plotted   in   Figure   6a.   In   the   green   frame,   the   4   sets   of   6   transistors   with   show   the   
lowest   error   rate   in   the   study   plotted   in   Figure   6a.   From   this   data,   it   does   not   appear   
possible   to   distinguish   what   kind   of   variability   promotes   the   most   optimal   performances   in   
the   transistors   network.   
   
   
   
   
   


29   

   

Figure   S5.   Statistics   for   τdischarge   /   τcharge.   The   distribution   indicates   a   clear   short-­‐term   
memory   effect   (see   main   text)   with   τdischarge   /   τcharge   <20.   Note   that   the   two   devices   with   
longer   term   memory   are   device   #5   and   #1   and   can   lead   to   both   ideal   classification   or   poor   
classification   for   n>300   training   vectors   (see   examples   in   Figure   S4).   Based   on   the   given   
distribution   of   τdischarge/τcharge   ratio,   it   was   not   possible   to   extract   some   consistent   
dependency   between   variability   in   τdischarge/τcharge      and   the   classification   accuracy.      
Order   of   devices   from   small   to   high   ratio:   #9,   #4,   #7,   #8,   #12,   #6,   #3,   #10,   #11,   #5,   #1   
Note   that   one   device   (#8)   had   very   short-­‐time   constant   that   cannot   be   evaluated   with   the   
sampling   rate   used   in   our   protocol.   
   
   


30   

   

Figure   S6.   Order   of   devices   from   short   τmean   to   longer   τmean:   #6,   #7,   #8,   #12,   #3,   #11,   #10,   
#4,   #9,   #1,   and   #5.   Note   that   one   device   (#8)   had   very   short-­‐time   constant   that   cannot   be   
evaluated   with   the   sampling   rate   used   in   our   protocol.   
   
   
   
   

   

Figure   S7.   Typical   response   for   the   two   different   patterns   (triangle   for   figure   a.   and   
square   for   figure   b.)   of   an   OECT   before   the   electrodeposition   of   the   TEDOT   monomer   (i.e.   
the   naked   source   and   drain   electrodes   covered   by   the   electrolyte),   showing   no   signal   due   to   
capacitive   coupling   and   testifying   of   the   genuine   properties   of   the   device   due   to   the   
p(TEDOT).   


