1

This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-
00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the 
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States 
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 
federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan 
(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).  

 

 

Uncovering electron scattering mechanisms in NiFeCoCrMn 

derived concentrated solid solution and high entropy alloys 

 

Sai Mu1, German. D. Samolyuk1, Sebastian. Wimmer2, Maria C. Troparevsky1, Suffian N. 

Khan1, Sergiy Mankovsky2, Hubert Ebert2, George M. Stocks1* 

 

1  Materials Science & Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 

37831, USA  

2  Department of Chemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, D-81377 München, Germany 
 

Keywords: disordered alloy; electron scattering; KKR-CPA; density functional theory 

 
 
 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

Sai Mu, Material Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Lab, P. O. Box 2008, 

Oak Ridge, TN, 38831-6114 (tel: 402-890-9490) (sai.mu1986321@gmail.com)  

G. M. Stocks, Material Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Lab, P. O. Box 

2008, Oak Ridge, TN, 38831-6114 (stocksgm@ornl.gov) 


2

Abstract 

Whilst it has long been known that disorder profoundly affects transport properties, recent 

measurements on a series of solid solution 3d-transition metal alloys reveal two orders of 

magnitude variations in the residual resistivity. Using ab-initio methods, we demonstrate that, 

while the carrier density of all alloys is as high as in normal metals, the electron mean-free-path 

can vary from ~10 Å (strong scattering limit) to ~103 Å (weak scattering limit). Here, we 

delineate the underlying electron scattering mechanisms responsible for this disparate behavior. 

While site-diagonal, spin dependent, potential scattering is always dominant, for alloys 

containing only Fe, Co, and Ni the majority spin channel experiences negligible disorder 

scattering, thereby providing a short circuit, while for Cr/Mn containing alloys both spin 

channels experience strong disorder scattering due to an electron filling effect. Somewhat 

surprisingly, other scattering mechanisms – including displacement, or size effect, scattering 

which has been shown to strongly correlate with such diverse properties as yield strength – are 

found to be relatively weak in most cases�  
 


3

Introduction    

Electrical resistivity is one of the most fundamental properties of materials. At the coarsest level, 

it distinguishes between metals, semi-conductors and insulators. As such, it provides a window 

into the properties of the electron glue responsible for cohesion. In metals and alloys the electrical 

resistivity is directly related to the mean free path, λe[εF], (alternatively the lifetime, τe[εF]) of 

electrons at the Fermi energy. In a pure crystalline metal at absolute zero of temperature (T = 0 K), 

Bloch states are eigenstates of the system, λe[εF] and τe[εF] are infinite, and the resistivity vanishes. 

In disordered solid solution alloys, the chemical disorder that results from the random distribution 

of the alloying elements on the underlying crystalline lattice induces electron scattering and finite 

λe[εF] and τe[εF] even at absolute zero. As a result, the T = 0 K resistivity, or residual resistivity 

r0, is finite and its precise value provides a direct measure of the disorder induced changes in the 

underlying electronic structure.  

   In a general N-component solid solution alloy the chemical disorder, as measured by the ideal 

entropy of mixing, is maximal at equiatomic composition and increases with the number of 

components. Equiatomic High Entropy Alloys (HEA), are exemplars of such maximally 

disordered alloys in that they are comprised of N≥5 components yet unexpectedly form highly 

stable, single-phase, disordered solid-solutions on a simple crystal lattice. The first single-phase 

HEA, NiFeCoCrMn, was synthesized by Cantor et al.1,2 in 2004. Since then HEAs have become 

a subject of intense scientific and technological interest3–6. In 2014, Wu et al.7, showed that 

alloying the elements of Cantor’s alloy (supplemented with Pd) yields a series of 2-, 3-, 4- 


4

component equiatomic fcc solid solutions: NiPd, NiCo, NiFe, NiFeCo, NiCoCr, NiCoMn, 

NiCrCoMn, NiFeCoMn and NiFeCoCr. This set of alloys combined with NiFeCoCrMn and 

NiFeCoCrPd (here collectively referred to as Cantor-Wu alloys), constitute a rich playground for 

comprehensive studies of the role of maximal disorder on the properties of multi-component alloys 

by controlling both the number (increasing configurational entropy) and types (chemical 

specificity) of alloying elements4,5,8. 

   Of interest here are the results of recent residual resistivity measurements5,8 of a subset of 

Cantor-Wu alloys that show, rather than increasing monotonically with increasing numbers of 

components, values of r0 break into two subgroups of low (r0 <10 µW•cm) and high (r0 >75 

µW•cm) resistivity alloys. In addition, two entropically identical alloys, NiCoFe (r0 = 1.7µW•cm) 

and NiCoCr (r0 =92.7 µW•cm), fall into different resistivity groupings. Remarkably, the least and 

most resistive alloys differ by almost two orders of magnitude, r0(NiCo)=1.3µW•cm; 

r0(NiFeCoCrPd)=124.8µW•cm. Interestingly, the low resistivity group have r0 values typical of 

dilute weak scattering alloys in which there are clearly defined host (solvent) and impurity (solute) 

elements. In such alloys, r0 arises from the scattering of a low Fermi energy DOS of nearly-free-

electron sp-states with large λe[εF] and r0 generally obeys both Nordheim’s relation (r0∝c((1-c); 

where c is impurity concentration)9 and Linde’s “law” (r0∝(DZ)2; where DZ is the valence 

difference between host and impurity atoms)10. (see Ref.11 for a discussion) This, despite the fact 

that, in equiatomic alloys, the concept of host and impurity elements is lost and the Fermi energy 

falls in the high density of state (DOS) d-bands5. At the other extreme, high-r0 NiFeCoCrPd is 


5

close to the Mott-Ioffe-Regel (MIR) limit12,13, which is characterized by a λe[εF] value comparable 

to the lattice spacing12,14,15. Combined, these observations suggest that, although the Cantor-Wu 

alloys are highly crystalline and have uniformly high Fermi energy carrier densities, λe[εF] can be 

controlled, from ~10 Å to ~103Å, by the specifics of the number and types of alloying elements. 

Furthermore, distinct from many other metallic materials with high resistivity, the disorder-

induced short λe[εF] of highly resistive Cantor-Wu alloys does not require strong electron 

correlation as in incoherent metals16–18, large atomic displacements associated with very high 

temperatures, or complete loss of translational symmetry as in quasicrystals19. As such the Cantor-

Wu alloys provide a unique opportunity for uncovering the underlying scattering mechanisms that 

give such disparate and non-monotonic behavior in 3d-transition metal alloys that form on well-

defined, in this case fcc, crystalline lattices.  

   Here, we report the first calculations of the residual resistivity of the full set of Cantor-Wu 

alloys using state-of-the-art ab initio transport theory for disordered alloys. Consistent with 

experiment, we find that the calculated r0 break into high-r0 (alloys involving Mn/Cr elements) 

and low-r0 (the others) sets. We show that it is the magnitude of the spin-dependent site-diagonal 

potential scattering that makes the dominant contribution to r0 and gives rise to this remarkable 

difference in r0 between the two sets. We explicitly evaluate effects of disorder that go beyond 

those captured by conventional CPA – local lattice displacements, the distribution of both the 

magnitude and orientation of the local magnetic moments. Surprisingly, we find that the scattering 

from local lattice distortions as well as the site-to-site variations in local moment magnitude and 


6

orientation are relatively weak in most alloys. This despite the fact that one of these, lattice 

displacements, has been shown to strongly correlate with such a seemingly unrelated property as 

yield strength. 

Results and Discussions 

   In solid solution alloys, all electron scattering ultimately results from the disorder-induced site-

to-site potential fluctuations. However, to understand the fundamentals of the scattering 

mechanisms, it is useful to divide the total scattering according to a number of distinguishable sub-

mechanisms. Single-site electron scattering can be thought of as resulting from the site-to-site 

variation (d) in the local potential due to the random distribution of elements. In the presence of 

magnetism, conduction electrons experience an additional inhomogeneous exchange field (DExch), 

which further increases the site-disorder and is different in separate spin channels. In the following, 

we shall refer to site-diagonal disorder as being the combined effects of [d, DExch]. The single-site 

picture is further modified by including the effects of displacement scattering caused by relaxation 

of the atoms away from their ideal lattice sites due to the fact that every atom is surrounded by a 

different configuration of other atoms. Moreover, additional magnetic scattering can arise from 

fluctuations about the species-dependent single-site average in both the size of the local moments 

and how they couple amongst themselves – ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, mixed 

ferro/antiferro, non-collinear, non-coplanar … 

   Site-diagonal disorder. – Using the conventional spin-polarized KKR-CPA method, we 

explore the effect of site-diagonal disorder, i.e. [ds, DExch], on the electronic structure and r0 in 


7

Cantor-Wu alloys. Figure 1 compares the calculated r0 with the measured values5,8. From the 

figure, there are three clear conclusions. Firstly, consistent with the experiments, the calculated 

values of r0 separate into two groups: low-r0 alloys (NiPd, NiCo, NiFe, NiFeCo), having r0 < 10 

µW•cm and high-r0 alloys (the others). This finding is independent of the particular exchange 

correlation functional used. Secondly, while the calculated value of r0 including only site-

diagonal disorder, underestimates r0, the contribution from site-diagonal disorder is dominant 

across all Cantor-Wu alloys. Thirdly, the magnitude of r0 correlates with the types of alloying 

elements. In particular, for alloys containing only the Ni, Fe, Co, that have nearly-filled 3d-

bands, r0 is low. While for alloys containing both Ni, Fe, Co, and Cr, Mn, whose d bands are 

approximately half-filled, r0 is large. Notably, the latter set of alloys are also characterized by 

mixed exchange coupling between the local moments of Ni, Fe, Co (ferromagnetic) and Cr, Mn 

(antiferromagnetic) while the former exhibit only ferromagnetic coupling.  

The underlying reason for the breakdown into two distinct resistivity groups can be 

understood in terms of disorder smearing of the Fermi surface. Figure 2 (a) shows the spin-

resolved Fermi surfaces of four selected Cantor-Wu alloys – two each from the low-r0 and high-

r0 group. While the minority-spin Fermi surfaces exhibit large disorder smearing for all of the 

alloys, the majority-spin channels are very different in the two classes. In particular, the 

majority-spin Fermi surfaces for NiCo and NiFeCo remain very sharp which corresponds to a 

long λe[εF]. As a result, the majority spin channel acts as a short circuit for electron conduction 

resulting in an overall low resistivity. On the contrary, the majority-spin Fermi surfaces of 

NiFeCoCr and NiFeCoCrMn alloys are washed out with the consequence that the λe[εF] in both 


8

spin channels is very short and thus r0 is high. In the absence of a direct calculation of the 

residual resistivities, it has been previously noted that the transport properties of the Cantor-Wu 

alloys qualitatively reflect the large differences in disorder smearing of the Fermi energy Bloch 

spectral functions5,8, that are driven by differences in magnetic (FM versus mixed FM/AFM) 

coupling – an conclusion that turns out to be inadequate and even misleading. Notably, NiCoCr 

also has a very smeared Femi energy Bloch spectral function, and correspondingly high r0, 

despite being robustly nonmagnetic20. 

   Figure 2 (b) shows a cartoon of the underlying spin-resolved partial DOS of the alloying 

elements Ni, Co, Fe, Cr that illustrates why the spin-resolved Fermi surface smearing is so 

different in the two alloy groups. Within the KKR-CPA, the strength of the disorder scattering 

can be characterized by the ratio of two important energy scales: the energy separation (δ) 

between the band centers of different species a.k.a “band center mismatch” and the overall band 

width (W)21. In transition metals, the most relevant band center is simply the d-scattering 

resonance (ed) of the single-site potential, while W encapsulates the spread of the d-bands due to 

hybridization. These energy scales are illustrated in Fig. 2 (b). If δ/W << 1, the disorder 

scattering is weak, and the electron bands are well-defined. However, if δ/W ~ 1, disorder 

scattering is strong, leading to large disorder broadening (smearing) of the energy bands. For 

magnetic alloys, the electrons propagate and are scattered in two separate and independent spin 

channels22 – neglecting the spin-mixing contribution. The spin-mixing arising from spin-orbit 

coupling however affects r0 and brings about the anisotropic magnetoresistance as shown by 


9

Banhart et al.23. As a result, the above argument applies to each spin channel independently, 

distinguished by subscript s =­ and ¯ for spin-up and spin-down.    

   For alloys containing only Fe, Co and Ni, the majority-spin 3d band centers are aligned due 

to minimization of the kinetic energy. As a result, δ↑ between all atom pairs is small and thus 

δ­/W­ is always in the weak scattering regime. Because, different local moments form on 

different species and they couple ferromagnetically, the additional exchange splitting (DExch) 

which is proportional to the size of the local moment – with proportionality constant ~ 1eV/µB, 

leads to a large band center mismatch (δ↓) in the minority-spin channel and consequent large 

disorder scattering (δ¯/W¯~1) (see Fig. 2(b)). A similar argument has been applied in Ni35Fe6524, 

and NiCo25. As a result, while the majority-spin Fermi surface is well-defined and λe[εF] is long, 

minority-spin channel electron transport is “blocked” by the strong disorder smearing of the 

Fermi surface. On the other hand, when alloying with lower band filling Cr, the band center in 

both channels is shifted towards the Fermi energy in order to realize charge neutrality. As a 

consequence, δ is large in both spin channels (large disorder scattering), thereby washing out the 

Fermi surface. In addition, the moments on Cr can couple either ferromagnetically or 

antiferromagnetically, further modifying δ. However, this does not substantially diminish δ, and 

thus δ/W remains in the strong scattering regime. Similar arguments also apply to Mn. It is worth 

noting that r0 is high only if strong disorder scattering is present at the Fermi energy. For 

example, strong disorder scattering in NiPd notwithstanding, r0 is low (r0= 2.19 µW•cm) 

because the Fermi surface is mainly of sp character and large disorder scattering of d electrons 

does not pollute the Fermi surface in either spin channel. (see the Fermi surface in the 


10

Supplementary Information, Section 5(D), Fig. S7). Whilst, these kinds of arguments are well 

known24,26–28, the way they operate in this class of alloys is particularly startling.   

   As noted previously, while the calculated r0 of NiCo, NiFeCo, NiFeCoCr agree 

quantitatively with the experiments5,8 (see Fig. 1), r0 is still underestimated by a substantial 

fraction, particularly in NiFe, NiPd and also in some high-r0 alloys such as NiCoCr, 

NiFeCoCrMn and NiFeCoCrPd. To shed light on this underestimation of r0, we explore the 

effects of other scattering mechanisms – displacement scattering, magnetic scattering – beyond 

the single-site approximation. The supercell method is employed to explore the effect of site-to-

site atomic displacement and the complex magnetic effect. (see the Method section) Figure 3 (a) 

illustrates the supercell of NiFeCoCrMn alloy with different species randomly distributed. The 

direction and length of the black arrows on each site indicate the orientation and magnitude of 

each local moment, respectively.  

   Displacement scattering. – Recently, atomic displacements have been shown to correlate 

with yield strength29, suggesting the root mean square (rms) atomic displacements as a descriptor 

of the mechanical properties of Cantor-Wu alloys. Given that all materials properties ultimately 

originate from the electronic structure, studying the effect of displacement scattering on the 

electronic transport provides a window into their importance as a scattering mechanism – albeit 

only at the Fermi energy. 

Based on fully relaxed supercell calculations, the statistics of the magnitude of the atomic 

displacements – resolved by species – are shown in Fig. 3 (c) for selected Cantor-Wu alloys (see 

the Supplementary Information, Section 3, Fig. S2 for other alloys). As seen in the NiFeCo 


11

ternary alloy, atomic displacements (Du) on all species are small with Du(Ni) < Du(Co) < Du(Fe). 

This is consistent with the elements having similar atomic size and electronegativities. On the 

other hand, for alloys involving Cr and/or Mn, the atomic displacements on Cr and Mn are much 

larger. Again, consistent with expected larger size mismatch and charge transfer effects. As such, 

species-dependent displacements become more pronounced towards the left side of the 3d-

transition metal elements in the periodic table. Moreover, if alloying with Pd –as in NiPd and 

NiFeCoCrPd alloys, atomic displacements on all species are large due to size-mismatch between 

3d and 4d elements (see Review article30 for the size-mismatch effect). Notably, the statistics of 

the angular dependence of the displacements appears to be random (see Fig. 3 (b) for an 

illustration in NiFe alloy).  

   Assuming that the site-to-site variation of both magnitude and the orientation of the atomic 

displacements are uncorrelated, their effects on the electronic structure and r0 can be assessed by 

the alloy analogy model (AAM)31. The results are shown in Figure 4 (a). In most alloys the 

enhancement of r0 due to local displacements is rather small because the atomic displacements (of 

most alloys) are only a small fraction of the interatomic spacing. The exceptions are NiPd and 

NiFeCoCrPd alloys whose atomic displacements are large for all component species (see Fig. 3 

(c)). For NiPd, the resulting displacement-enhanced resistivity is in good agreement with 

experiment. While for NiFeCoCrPd the inclusion of displacement scattering increases r0 by ~12%, 

the actual r0 is still underestimated. Therefore, the overall effect of displacement scattering in most 

alloys is small. Thus, the reasons for the general underestimation of r0 by single-site theory alone 

must be sought elsewhere. Furthermore, this finding makes the strong correlation between the rms 


12

displacements and yield strength all the more interesting; perhaps, suggesting the existence of a 

more fundamental descriptor, rooted in the (common) underlying electronic structure. 

   Magnetism beyond the single-site approximation. – Unlike in the KKR-CPA treatment of 

magnetism which deals with species-dependent single-site averaged magnetic moment, in the 

real alloys, the local moments of each species take on a distribution of values and can possibly 

point along arbitrary directions. In Fig. 3 (d) we show that species-resolved local moment 

distributions for selected Cantor-Wu alloys, obtained using the supercell method, with moments 

constrained to be co-linear. For the local moment distribution in other alloys, see Supplementary 

Information, Section 4(A), Fig. S3. It is noteworthy that, although supercell calculations yield a 

distribution of local moments, the species-dependent averaged local moments turn out to be 

consistent with those obtained from KKR-CPA. (see the Supplementary Information, Section 

4(B), Tab. S2) 

   For alloys considered here, several features of the local moment patterns can be found. 

Firstly, the local moments in low-r0 alloys are ferromagnetically coupled and display only a 

small variation in the size of the moments. In high-r0 alloys with Cr, the magnitudes of Cr 

moments vary widely from negative (antiferromagnetically aligned) to positive 

(ferromagnetically aligned). In contrast to Cr, the magnitudes of Mn moments fall into two well-

defined groups, large positive and large negative. This suggests that large on-site Hund's 

exchange promotes the formation of local moments on Mn, while the interatomic exchange 

interaction between Mn atoms is antiferromagnetic. The antiferromagnetic coupling associated 

with Cr and Mn can be attributed to the approximately half-filled d bands32–34. Clearly, the 


13

complicated magnetic configurations just described have the potential to induce significant 

additional electron scattering beyond that included in the KKR-CPA22,35–37.  

   Using NiFe as an example, where r0 is underestimated (rCalc0 =3.3 versus rExp0 =10.3 

µW•cm), we first evaluate the effect of having a distribution of the local moment sizes. Based on 

supercell calculations, we find a Fe moment distribution that has a 0.2 µB broadening. To mimic 

these moment fluctuations using CPA, we discretize the Fe moment distribution into three types, 

having moments m0 and m0±0.1µB (where m0 is the average Fe moment), through scaling of the 

spin part of the exchange-correlation functional. Unsurprisingly, r0 only increases by 0.3 

µW•cm, indicating the r0 is insensitive to such longitudinal spin fluctuations.  

   Taking NiCoMn and NiFeCoCrMn alloys as examples, it is noted that supercell calculations 

find two well-separated Mn moment distributions with opposite orientations and roughly similar 

amounts of Mn­ (~ 65%-35%) and Mn¯ (~ 35%-65%) moments as the ground state. Due to the 

very localized nature of the Mn local moments such states can also be described within the KKR-

CPA approach in a manner analogous to disordered local moment state (DLM)38,39 previously 

used to describe paramagnetic Fe. Rather than investigate all possible ratios of Mn­ and Mn¯, we 

focus the system having equal concentrations as an approximated representative of the state 

having maximal “Mn-moment” disorder – we denote this state as DLM-Mn. Similarly, another 

collinear magnetic state with 100% Mn¯, and one fully DLM state (DLM on all species) are also 

found to be stable solutions. Table 1 lists the CPA total energies for the three states. As expected, 

the DLM-Mn state of NiCoMn is the ground state. Moreover, the DLM-Mn state of NiCoMn 

gives ±2.2 µB for the local moment of Mn­ and Mn¯, which is consistent with the averaged Mn­ 


14

and Mn¯ moments (~ ±2.3 µB) obtained from the supercell calculation. However, the Mn 

moment within the AFM state is only -0.7 µB, further casting suspicion on 100% Mn¯ as 

representative of Mn containing Cantor-Wu alloys. Further justification of the efficacy of the 

DLM-Mn state can be obtained by comparing the species-resolved DOS with the supercell and 

studying stability of the Heisenberg interactions40. For r0, we find its value depends sensitively 

on the assumed magnetic state – r0 is lowest in the AFM state and increases by ~50% in the 

DLM-Mn ground state. Unfortunately, the experimental value has not yet been measured. The 

reason for the different r0 behavior can be easily traced to the underlying electronic structure: the 

AFM state exhibits a relatively sharp Fermi surface in the minority-spin channel while the Fermi 

surface in both spin channels smears out for the DLM-Mn state (see the Supplementary 

Information, Section 5(B), Fig. S6). In contrast to NiCoMn, it turns out the AFM and DLM-Mn 

states in NiFeCoCrMn alloy are not only close in energy but their r0 are insensitive to which 

state is considered because the electron scattering by magnetic-driven disorder is already almost 

saturated.    

   So far, r0 has been calculated assuming collinear spin configurations. However, spin 

noncollinearity is also possible, particularly in Mn- and/or Cr- containing alloys due to the 

geometric frustration of antiferromagnetism on a triangular lattice (as the (111) plane of the fcc 

lattice)41–43, oscillating exchange interactions as a function of distance28,44, and spin-orbit 

interaction. For example, NiFeCoCrMn alloy is found to have a spin glass state both 

experimentally45 and theoretically46.  


15

In principle, the spin noncollinearity can be dealt with straightforwardly from the spin 

noncollinear calculations based on the supercell method. However, such calculations for 

supercell size sufficient to gain good statistics of distributions of spin orientations are extremely 

demanding and remain a research project in their own right. Such calculations are made 

particularly difficult by the need not only treat the spin noncollinearity but also include the spin-

orbit interactions – particularly for Pd-containing Cantor-Wu alloys, making them beyond the 

scope of this paper.  

Without such a sophisticated evaluation of the spin noncollinearity at zero temperature 

(probability distribution of the spin orientations for each species), here we calculate the 

maximum contribution to the residual resistivity (r0) that can arise from spin disorder. To assess 

this, we again employ the AAM by using a discrete set of random and uncorrelated spin 

moments that are distributed uniformly in space, where the magnitude of the species-dependent 

local moments are obtained from CPA ground state31. Notably, spin noncollinearity in low-r0 

alloys is negligibly small, as verified by fully relativistic supercell calculations. Therefore, we 

only explore the effect of full spin disorder in the high-r0 alloys. The resulting resistivities, 

which can be viewed as the maximum effect of spin disorder on r0, are shown in Fig. 4 (b). A 

sizable r0 enhancement, as large as 10 µW•cm, is observed in NiFeCoCr, NiFeCoMn, and 

NiFeCoCrPd. Therefore, the full spin disorder produces a modest increase of r0 in high-r0 

alloys.  

   Notwithstanding the overall improved agreement with the measurement resulting from 

inclusion of the additional scattering mechanisms discussed above, the remaining moderate 


16

underestimation of r0 in some alloys (NiFe, NiCoCr, NiFeCoCrMn, NiFeCoCrPd) requires 

consideration of other possible theoretical shortcomings. The three most obvious being: going 

beyond the single-site treatment of disorder; inclusion of any possible (but currently mostly 

unknown except for NiFe47) short range order (SRO); consideration of additional electron 

correlation effects, beyond LDA. For binary alloys where the first two effects have been 

considered their impact on r0 has been found to be small48,49(with specific exceptions, e.g., in K-

state alloys50). However, it is not clear whether the impacts of the first two effects in the Cantor-

Wu alloys are also small. Specifically, the specific heat measurements of Cr-containing Cantor-

Wu alloys51 show a K-state transition at 800-1000 K, which is usually attributed to the order-

disorder transition52–54. Although the effects of SRO on r0 are clearly worthy investigating, 

accounting for them requires treatments of multisite scattering processes that go beyond the 

single-site approximation – e.g. nonlocal CPA (see Review article55 and references therein) – and 

are beyond current capabilities. In principle the investigation of additional Coulomb correlation 

effects on r0 could be addressed by a combination of KKR-CPA and Dynamical Mean Field 

Theory56, however, it is beyond the scope of the present work.  

   In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the abnormal and disparate electronic transport in 

Cantor-Wu alloys at zero temperature is dominated by electron scattering arising from site-to-site 

potential disorder. In particular, it is found that Cr and/or Mn produce strong disorder scattering 

as a result of the proximity of the d-scattering resonance to the Fermi energy which results from 

their reduced band filling. Additionally, other electron scattering mechanisms are explored 

explicitly and shown to be small in most alloys with the exception of: NiPd and NiFeCoCrPd, 


17

where the effect of displacement scattering is large; NiCoMn, where the DLM-Mn ground state 

significantly raises r0; and NiFeCoCrMn/NiFeCoCrPd, where the effect of spin-noncollinearity 

is large. A profound understanding of the electronic transport in disordered alloys not only 

provides insights on the Fermi surface, but also on the overall effects of disorder throughout the 

occupied d-bands. As such it sheds light on the bonding mechanisms responsible for many of the 

exotic properties of HEAs, such as mechanical4,57, and radiation response5 properties. Here it is 

notable that while the effect of displacement scattering on r0 is small, the highly unusual solid 

solution strength in several of Cantor-Wu alloys has been correlated with the magnitude of 

displacement fluctuations29. Resolving this apparent dichotomy is clearly a challenge worthy 

further investigation. 

Method  

Our calculations employ the ab-initio spin-polarized fully relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker 

Green’s function method58,59, combined with the Coherent Potential Approximation60 (hereafter 

referred to as KKR-CPA) – as implemented in the Munich SPR-KKR package61,62 – to calculate 

the effect of disorder on the electronic structure and residual resistivity. The CPA method is a 

self-consistent theory of the effects of substitutional disorder on the configurationally averaged 

single-site properties of alloys. As such it includes, the effect of [d, DExch] on electronic band 

structure and quasiparticle lifetime on the same ab-initio footing. The conductivity tensor is 

calculated by using the linear response Kubo-Greenwood formula63,64 for the configurational 

averaged state, described by the CPA65:  


18

"#$ =

ℏ

'() +,-< j0

#1234(67)j9

$1234(67) >;, 

where <0

# denotes the µ-component of the current density operator j for species a with 

concentration =0 and G+(eF) is the retarded Green’s function at the Fermi energy. Within the 

KKR-CPA calculations, the local density approximation (LDA)66 is employed for exchange and 

correlation. The sensitivity of the results to the exchange-correlation functional is discussed in 

the Supplementary Information, Section 2, Fig. S1. To study the effect of displacement scattering 

and spin disorder on r0, we used the so-called alloy analogy model (AAM) to perform the 

configurational average over a discrete set of species-resolved atomic displacements and local 

moment orientations31. To obtain the statistics of the atomic displacements and local moments, 

we performed standard supercell calculations for a 256-atom special quasi-random structure 

(SQS)67 using the projector augmented wave method (PAW)68 as implemented in the Vienna ab-

initio simulation package (VASP)69. (see the Supplementary Information, Section 1)  

 

Data availability 

The authors declare that the data supporting this study are available from the corresponding author 

upon request.   

 

Acknowledgements This work is supported by the Energy Dissipation and Defect Evolution 

(EDDE) center, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U. S. Department of Energy, 

Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under contract number DE-AC05-00OR22725. SM 

acknowledges fruitful discussions with K. D. Belashchenko, B. C. Sales and K. Jin. SW, SM, and 


19

HE would like to thank the DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) for financial support 

within the priority program SPP 1538 and the collaborative research centers 689 and 1277.  

Author contributions: G.M.S conceived this research; S. M. carried out the first-principles 

calculations and analyzed the results with G.M.S., G.D.S, and S.W.; S.M. and G.M.S wrote the 

paper, and all authors participated in the discussions and contributed to finalize the paper. 

Additional information 

Supplementary information accompanies the paper on the npj Computational Materials 

website 

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.  

References  

1. 
Cantor, B., Chang, I. T. H., Knight, P. & Vincent, A. J. B. Microstructural development in 

equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 375, 213–218 (2004). 

2. 
Cantor, B. Stable and metastable multicomponent alloys. in Annales de chimie 32, 245–256 

(2007). 

3. 
Miracle, D. B. & Senkov, O. N. A critical review of high entropy alloys and related concepts. 

Acta Mater. 122, 448–511 (2017). 

4. 
Gludovatz, B. et al. A fracture-resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications. 

Science (80-. ). 345, 1153–1158 (2014). 

5. 
Zhang, Y. et al. Influence of chemical disorder on energy dissipation and defect evolution 


20

in concentrated solid solution alloys. Nat. Commun. 6, 8736 (2015). 

6. 
Diao, H. Y., Feng, R., Dahmen, K. A. & Liaw, P. K. Fundamental deformation behavior in 

high-entropy alloys: An overview. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 21, 252–266 (2017). 

7. 
Wu, Z., Bei, H., Otto, F., Pharr, G. M. & George, E. P. Recovery, recrystallization, grain 

growth and phase stability of a family of FCC-structured multi-component equiatomic solid 

solution alloys. Intermetallics 46, 131–140 (2014). 

8. 
Jin, K. et al. Tailoring the physical properties of Ni-based single-phase equiatomic alloys 

by modifying the chemical complexity. Sci. Rep. 6, 20159 (2016). 

9. 
Nordheim, L. The electron theory of metals. Ann. Phys. 9, 607 (1931). 

10. 
Linde, J. O. Elektrische Eigenschaften verdünnter Mischkristallegierungen III. Widerstand 

von Kupfer- und Goldlegierungen. Gesetzmäßigkeiten der Widerstandserhöhungen. Ann. 

Phys. 15, 219 (1932). 

11. 
Swihart, J. C., Butler, W. H., Stocks, G. M., Nicholson, D. M. & Ward, R. C. First-principles 

calculation of the residual electrical resistivity of random alloys. Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1181 

(1986). 

12. 
Ioffe, A. F. & Regel, A. R. Non-crystalline, amorphous and liquid electronic semiconductors. 

Prog. Semicond 4, 237–291 (1960). 

13. 
Mott, N. F. Conduction in non-crystalline systems-09-the minimum metallic conductivity. 

Philos. Mag. 26, 1015–1026 (1972). 

14. 
Mooij, J. H. Electrical conduction in concentrated disordered transition metal alloys. Phys. 

status solidi 17, 521–530 (1973). 


21

15. 
Gunnarsson, O., Calandra, M. & Han, J. E. Colloquium: Saturation of electrical resistivity. 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 1085 (2003). 

16. 
Emery, V. J. & Kivelson, S. A. Superconductivity in Bad Metals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3253–

3256 (1995). 

17. 
Hussey, N. E., Takenaka, K. & Takagi, H. Universality of the Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit in 

metals. Philos. Mag. 84, 2847–2864 (2004). 

18. 
Hartnoll, S. A. Theory of universal incoherent metallic transport. Nat. Phys. 11, 54 (2015). 

19. 
Pierce, F. S., Poon, S. J. & Guo, Q. Electron localization in metallic quasicrystals. Science 

261, 737–9 (1993). 

20. 
Sales, B. C. et al. Quantum critical behavior in a concentrated ternary solid solution. Sci. 

Rep. 6, 26179 (2016). 

21. 
Stocks, G. M., Williams, R. W. & Faulkner, J. S. Densities of states in Cu-Rich Ni-Cu alloys 

by the coherent-potential approximation: Comparisons with rigid-band and virtual-crystal 

approximation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 253–256 (1971). 

22. 
Mott, N. F. Electrons in transition metals. Adv. Phys. 13, 325–422 (1964). 

23. 
Banhart, J., Vernes, A. & Ebert, H. Spin-orbit interaction and spontaneous galvanomagnetic 

effects in ferromagnetic alloys. Solid State Commun. 98, 129–132 (1996). 

24. 
Johnson, D. D., Pinski, F. J. & Stocks, G. M. Self-consistent electronic structure of 

disordered Fe0.65Ni0.35. J. Appl. Phys. 57, 3018–3020 (1985). 

25. 
Samolyuk, G. D., Béland, L. K., Stocks, G. M. & Stoller, R. E. Electron--phonon coupling 

in Ni-based binary alloys with application to displacement cascade modeling. J. Phys. 


22

Condens. Matter 28, 175501 (2016). 

26. 
Pettifor, D. G. Theory of energy bands and related properties of 4d transition metals. I. Band 

parameters and their volume dependence. J. Phys. F Met. Phys. 7, 613 (1977). 

27. 
Staunton, J. B. The electronic structure of magnetic transition metallic materials. Reports 

Prog. Phys. 57, 1289 (1994). 

28. 
Kübler, J. Theory of Itinerant Electron Magnetism. (2000). 

29. 
Okamoto, N. L., Yuge, K., Tanaka, K., Inui, H. & George, E. P. Atomic displacement in the 

CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy--A scaling factor to predict solid solution strengthening. 

AIP Adv. 6, 125008 (2016). 

30. 
Van De Walle, A. & Ceder, G. The effect of lattice vibrations on substitutional alloy 

thermodynamics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 11 (2002). 

31. 
Ebert, H. et al. Calculating linear-response functions for finite temperatures on the basis of 

the alloy analogy model. Phys. Rev. B 91, 165132 (2015). 

32. 
Moriya, T. Ferro-and Antiferromagnetism of Transition Metals and Alloys. Prog. Theor. 

Phys. 33, 157–183 (1965). 

33. 
Hamada, N. Calculation of a Local-Environment Effect on the Atomic Magnetic Moment 

in Ferromagnetic Ni--Cu Alloys. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 50, 77–82 (1981). 

34. 
Heine, V. & Samson, J. H. Magnetic, chemical and structural ordering in transition metals. 

J. Phys. F Met. Phys. 13, 2155 (1983). 

35. 
Dorleijn, J. W. F. & Miedema, A. R. A quantitative investigation of the two current 

conduction in nickel alloys. J. Phys. F Met. Phys. 5, 487 (1975). 


23

36. 
Fert, A. & Campbell, I. A. Electrical resistivity of ferromagnetic nickel and iron based alloys. 

J. Phys. F Met. Phys. 6, 849 (1976). 

37. 
Shi, S., Wysocki, A. L. & Belashchenko, K. D. Magnetism of chromia from first-principles 

calculations. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 79, (2009). 

38. 
Oguchi, T., Terakura, K. & Hamada, N. Magnetism of iron above the Curie temperature. J. 

Phys. F Met. Phys. 13, 145 (1983). 

39. 
Gyorffy, B. L., Pindor, A. J., Staunton, J., Stocks, G. M. & Winter, H. A first-principles 

theory of ferromagnetic phase transitions in metals. J. Phys. F Met. Phys. 15, 1337 (1985). 

40. 
Mu, S. et al. Importance of magnetic signatures of medium-entropy NiCoMn alloy on 

thermodynamics and transport (unpublished). (2018). 

41. 
Wannier, G. H. Antiferromagnetism. the triangular ising net. Phys. Rev. 79, 357 (1950). 

42. 
Vannimenus, J. & Toulouse, G. Theory of the frustration effect. II. Ising spins on a square 

lattice. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 10, L537 (1977). 

43. 
Hobbs, D., Hafner, J. & Spišák, D. Understanding the complex metallic element Mn. I. 

Crystalline and noncollinear magnetic structure of $α$-Mn. Phys. Rev. B 68, 14407 (2003). 

44. 
Mohn, P., Schwarz, K., Uhl, M. & Kübler, J. Spin-glass precursors in bcc-manganese. Solid 

State Commun. 102, 729–733 (1997). 

45. 
Schneeweiss, O. et al. Magnetic properties of the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy. Phys. 

Rev. B 96, 14437 (2017). 

46. 
Yin, J., Eisenbach, M. & Stocks, G. M. (unpublished). (2018). 

47. 
Jiang, X., Ice, G. E., Sparks, C. J., Robertson, L. & Zschack, P. Local atomic order and 


24

individual pair displacements of Fe 46.5 Ni 53.5 and Fe 22.5 Ni 77.5 from diffuse x-ray 

scattering studies. Phys. Rev. B 54, 3211 (1996). 

48. 
Lowitzer, S., Koedderitzsch, D., Ebert, H. & Staunton, J. B. Electronic transport in 

ferromagnetic alloys and the Slater-Pauling curve. Phys. Rev. B 79, 115109 (2009). 

49. 
Lowitzer, S. et al. An ab initio investigation of how residual resistivity can decrease when 

an alloy is deformed. EPL 92, 37009 (2010). 

50. 
Thomas, H. Über Widerstandslegierungen. Zeitschrift für Phys. 129, 219–232 (1951). 

51. 
Jin, K. et al. Thermophysical properties of Ni-containing single-phase concentrated solid 

solution alloys. Mater. Des. 117, 185–192 (2017). 

52. 
Pawel, R. E. & Stansbury, E. E. Specific heat contributions of the ferromagnetic transition 

in nickel and nickel-copper alloys. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 26, 757–765 (1965). 

53. 
Kroeger, D. M., Koch, C. C., Scarbrough, J. O. & McKamey, C. G. Effects of short-range 

order on electronic properties of Zr-Ni glasses as seen from low-temperature specific heat. 

Phys. Rev. B 29, 1199 (1984). 

54. 
Kim, S., Kuk, I. H. & Kim, J. S. Order--disorder reaction in Alloy 600. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 

279, 142–148 (2000). 

55. 
Rowlands, D. A. Short-range correlations in disordered systems: Nonlocal coherent-

potential approximation. Reports Prog. Phys. 72, 086501 (2009). 

56. 
Minár, J. et al. Multiple-scattering formalism for correlated systems: A KKR-DMFT 

approach. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 72, 045125 (2005). 

57. 
Gludovatz, B. et al. Exceptional damage-tolerance of a medium-entropy alloy CrCoNi at 


25

cryogenic temperatures. Nat. Commun. 7, 10602 (2016). 

58. 
Korringa, J. On the calculation of the energy of a Bloch wave in a metal. Physica 13, 392–

400 (1947). 

59. 
Kohn, W. & Rostoker, N. Solution of the schrödinger equation in periodic lattices with an 

application to metallic lithium. Phys. Rev. 94, 1111–1120 (1954). 

60. 
Soven, P. Coherent-potential model of substitutional disordered alloys. Phys. Rev. 156, 809 

(1967). 

61. 
The Munich SPR-KKR package. version 7.7, H. Ebert et al. http://olymp.cup.uni-

muenchen.de/ak/ebert/SPRKKR (2017). 

62. 
Ebert, H., Ködderitzsch, D. & Minár, J. Calculating condensed matter properties using the 

KKR-Green’s function method—recent developments and applications. Reports Prog. Phys. 

74, 096501 (2011). 

63. 
Kubo, R. Statistical’Mechanical Theory of Irreversible Processes. I. General Theory and 

Simple Applications to Magnetic and Conduction Problems. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 12, 570–

586 (1957). 

64. 
Greenwood, D. A. The Boltzmann equation in the theory of electrical conduction in metals. 

Proc. Phys. Soc. 71, 585–596 (1958). 

65. 
Butler, W. H. Theory of electronic transport in random alloys: Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker 

coherent-potential approximation. Phys. Rev. B 31, 3260 (1985). 

66. 
Perdew, J. P. & Zunger, A. Self-interaction correction to density-functional approximations 

for many-electron systems. Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048–5079 (1981). 


26

67. 
Zunger, A., Wei, S.-H., Ferreira, L. G. & Bernard, J. E. Special quasirandom structures. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 353 (1990). 

68. 
Blöchl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). 

69. 
Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and 

semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 15–50 (1996). 

 
 


27

Figures 

 

Figure 1 Residual resistivity of Cantor-Wu alloys due to site-diagonal disorder (SDD) (blue bars), 

compared with experimental data (red bars). 


28

 

Figure 2 (a) Fermi surface (G-X-W plane) in NiCo, NiFeCo, NiFeCoCr, and NiFeCoCrMn alloys 

(given in arbitrary units). Majority- and Minority- spin channels are distinguished using ­ and ¯; 

(b) Magnetic origin of the energy scales for disorder scattering: Simplified depiction of the species-

resolved DOS in NiFeCoCr, in which esd denotes the 3d band centers for spin s(s = ­ or ¯). The 


29

band center mismatch ds is defined as max{esd (i)}-min{esd (i)} with i denoting different species. 

The exchange splitting is denoted as DExch:= e¯d -e­d. 

 

 

Figure 3 (a) A 256-atom supercell of NiFeCoCrMn with the arrows denoting the local moments. 

(b) The atomic displacements – with arrows denoting displacement vector away from the ideal 

positions – on both Ni (green sphere) and Fe (blue sphere) species in a 256-atom supercell of NiFe. 

Displacement (c) and local moment (d) distributions of each species in NiFeCo, NiCoMn, 

NiFeCoCrMn, and NiFeCoCrPd, calculated from a 256-atom supercell. The arrows in the moment 


30

statistics of NiCoMn and NiFeCoCrMn label the local moment for each species in different states.  

 

 

Figure 4 (a) Effect of displacement scattering (DS) on r0 in Cantor-Wu alloys; (b) Effect of 

additional spin disorder (SD) on r0 of high-r0 alloys.  

 
 

Tables:    

Table 1 The total energies (Etot, meV/site) and residual resistivity (r0, µW•cm) for the multiple magnetic states in 

NiCoMn and NiFeCoCrMn from KKR-CPA.  

Alloys 
NiCoMn 
NiFeCoCrMn 

States 
Etot 
r0 
Etot 
r0 

AFM-Mn 
22.5 
46.7 
0 
61.0 

DLM 
15.7 
66.7 
4.2 
62.1 

DLM-Mn 
0 
72.0 
0.12 
65.7 

 


