Full field electron spectromicroscopy applied to ferroelectric materials

N. Barrett,1, a) J. E. Rault,1 J. L. Wang,1 C. Mathieu,1 A. Locatelli,2 T. O. Mentes,2 M. A. Ni˜no,3 S. Fusil,4 M.
Bibes,5 A. Barth´el´emy,5 D. Sando,5 W. Ren,6, 7 S. Prosandeev,6 L. Bellaiche,6 B. Vilquin,8 A. Petraru,9 I. P.
Krug,10 and C. M. Schneider10

1)IRAMIS/SPCSI/LENSIS, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2)Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., Basovizza, Trieste 34149, Italy
3)Instituto Madrileo de Estudios Avanzados en Nanociencia (IMDEA-Nanociencia), Campus de Cantoblanco,
Cantoblanco s/n 28049 Madrid, Spain
4)Universit´e d’Evry-Val d’Essonne, Boulevard Fran¸cois Mitterrand, 91025 Evry cedex,
France
5)Unit´e Mixte de Physique CNRS/Thales, 1 Av. Augustin Fresnel, Campus de l’Ecole Polytechnique,
91767 Palaiseau, France
6)Physics Department, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701,
USA
7)Department of Physics, Shanghai University, 99 Shangda Road, Shanghai 200444,
China
8)Universit´e de Lyon, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Institut des Nanotechnologies de Lyon, F- 69134 Ecully cedex,
France
9)Nanoelektronik, Technische Fakult¨at, Christian-Albrechts-Universit¨at zu Kiel, D-24143 Kiel,
Germany
10)Peter Gr¨unberg Institute (PGI-6) and JARA-FIT, Research Center J¨ulich, D-52425 J¨ulich,
Germany

(Dated: 14 June 2018)

The application of PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy (PEEM) and Low Energy Electron Microscopy
(LEEM) techniques to the study of the electronic and chemical structure of ferroelectric materials is re-
viewed.
Electron optics in both techniques gives spatial resolution of a few tens of nanometres.
PEEM
images photoelectrons whereas LEEM images reflected and elastically backscattered electrons. Both PEEM
and LEEM can be used in direct and reciprocal space imaging. Together, they provide access to surface
charge, work function, topography, chemical mapping, surface crystallinity and band structure. Examples of
applications for the study of ferroelectric thin films and single crystals are presented.

PACS numbers: 77.80.-e 68.37.Xy 77.55.-g
Keywords: Ferroelectrics, PEEM, LEEM

I.
INTRODUCTION

The aim of this overview is to introduce and illustrate
the use of full field spectromicroscopy techniques such as
PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy (PEEM) and Low
Energy Electron Microscopy (LEEM) to study the elec-
tronic and chemical structure of ferroelectric (FE) ma-
terials. Particular emphasis will be given to the study
of thin films and their electrical boundary conditions.
The term spectromicroscopy is used to stress that these
techniques yield spectroscopic and microscopic informa-
tion simultaneously.
This is to be distinguished from
microspectroscopy which, in order to obtain spatial in-
formation over similar fields of view, relies on scanning a
microfocussed beam, whose size defines the spatial reso-
lution, over the surface. This article is not intended to be
an exhaustive review, nor is it aimed at PEEM or LEEM
specialists. Rather, we hope to give scientists working on
ferroic systems a better idea of the variety of informa-
tion which may be obtained using spectromicroscopy on

a)Electronic mail: nick.barrett@cea.fr

domain structured materials.
In the last two decades, three main breakthroughs have
led to intense research into ferroelectrics and more gen-
erally ferroic materials.
On a theoretical level, Cohen
showed that the ferroelectric stability depends on a bal-
ance between long and short range forces.1 Vanderbilt
and King-Smith developed the modern theory of polar-
ization using a Berry phase approach which allowed the
description of the change in polarization as a displace-
ment of the centre of charge of the Wannier functions.2

Nowadays, approaches using effective Hamiltonians and
in some cases kinetic Monte-Carlo methods are starting
to bridge the gap between the 100 atom systems of first
principles calculations and experimentally observed do-
mains sizes.3 In experiment the widespread use of Piezo
response Force Microscopy (PFM) in air, controlled at-
mosphere and now increasingly under vacuum, allows
nanoscale domain writing and measurement of both lat-
eral and perpendicular piezo coefficients.4,5 Finally, on a
technological level, advances in epitaxial thin film growth
have allowed the production of high quality, single crys-
tal epitaxial thin films, suitable for ferroelectric based
devices. Varying the substrate lattice parameter allows
strain engineering which can significantly change val-

arXiv:1806.04849v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  13 Jun 2018


2

ues of remanent polarization, coercive field or the Curie
temperature.6,7 In fundamental research, two deposition
methods are favoured, Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)
for near perfect layer by layer growth and Pulsed Laser-
assisted Deposition (PLD) for its flexibility and control
of oxygen stoichiometry.
The new physics emerging from two-dimensional films
in the limit of a few unit cells has a host of exciting
applications.
Understanding the ferroelectric proper-
ties of such engineered thin film systems requires tak-
ing into account not only the material but also its inter-
faces with electrodes, substrates or atmosphere; in other
words, the electrical boundary conditions.8 In the case
of a thin film these can even determine the ferroelec-
tric polarization stability.
For example, Junquera and
Ghosez showed that the depolarizing field could place
a lower limit on the film thickness capable of support-
ing a stable polarization.9 The question of the interface
is also a key issue in realizing multiferroic heterostruc-
tures, demonstrating magnetoelectric coupling allowing
electrical control of the magnetization or, inversely, mag-
netic control of the polarization.10 Hybridization between
filled d orbitals responsible for magnetization and empty
d orbitals in the ferroelectric oxide may be one path to
such coupling. Several coupling mechanisms have been
identified and these can be quite complex. For example,
recent results suggest that even the charge ordering of
a magnetic layer can be modulated by the polarization
state of an adjacent ferroelectric.11 Since these are collec-
tive electron phenomena, high resolution spectroscopy is
necessary to untangle the electronic structure responsible
for such phenomena. Thus, experimental tools which can
contribute to a full understanding of the surface and near
surface electronic and chemical structure are desirable, if
possible with spatial resolution suitable for investigating
individual domains or even phenomena localized at do-
main walls.
Near-field techniques such as PFM or scanning sur-
face potential microscopy (SSPM) occupy a prime po-
sition in the investigation of ferroelectric domain struc-
ture. Like all techniques they require careful use, and
attention must be paid to the role of adsorbates and
to interactions between the tip and the surface in con-
tact mode.
However, they cannot probe the full elec-
tron structure and chemistry of ferroelectric surfaces. In
view of this, and given the increasing number of fields
of applications of engineered ferroelectric systems (for
example in promoting chemisorption12, in catalysis13 or
for photovoltaics14), complementary experimental tech-
niques are required to understand these complex systems.
Early examples of PEEM applied to ferroelectrics studied
adsorbate induced variations in the electron affinity.15,16

Full field electron microscopy, covering PEEM, LEEM
and Mirror Electron Microscopy (MEM), has recently
started to provide interesting data on FE surfaces. As a
result, it appears opportune to review the physics which
can be revealed by the use of these techniques. It is im-
portant to note that PEEM may also be performed in

X-Ray absorption mode (XAS) by measuring the elec-
tron yield from the sample as a function of the incident
photon energy. Mainly because of the high intensity this
technique is better established and has already been used
to study ferroic systems.
The Scholl group in Berke-
ley have pioneered the application of X-ray absorption
PEEM for the study of ferroics.17 They demonstrated
the use of X-ray magnetic circular dichro¨ısm (XMCD)
PEEM as a powerful method to image magnetic domain
ordering.18 The present review concentrates on LEEM
and on photoemission based PEEM to probe the surface
electronic structure, particularly relevant for the study
of ferroelectrics.
In section II the principles behind PEEM and LEEM
will be presented with an emphasis on the photoemis-
sion process underlying PEEM based methods. The main
part of this review consists of the different case studies
in section III. The five examples of studies of ferroelec-
tric surfaces which can be carried out using PEEM and
LEEM are not meant to be exhaustive, but rather give
an idea of the rich information obtainable using spectro-
microscopy. The first example illustrates the relationship
between the work function as measured in PEEM and the
surface polarization charge.
The following two studies
look at screening by surface carbon and photogenerated
electron-hole pairs. The fourth example illustrates how
PEEM and MEM-LEEM can be used to estimate the
polarization of ultra-thin, tunneling regime films. The
last example demonstrates the measurement of the full
2D band structure parallel to the surface of a single, mi-
cron sized in-plane ferroelectric domain. Indeed, there
is much more to be done, both in terms of quantifica-
tion but also in fully exploiting the spectral information
available. Section IV discusses both the advantages and
present limitations/drawbacks of LEEM and PEEM for
studies of FE systems. A short outlook completes the
overview in section V.

II.
SPECTROMICROSCOPY

PEEM and LEEM are two distinct, surface imaging
techniques; however, they are also extremely complemen-
tary.
Not only are the electron optics of the imaging
column often very similar, if not identical, the spatial
resolution is often comparable. However, in the case of
PEEM the fundamental process is the photoelectric ef-
fect, i.e. photon in and electron out, whereas in the case
of LEEM the probe is a collimated electron beam and
the elastically reflected or backscattered electrons are de-
tected. LEEM is therefore an electron in and electron out
process. The information contained in PEEM and LEEM
can be very different and the combined use of both tech-
niques provides extremely rich information.
Both systems have been used in the examples given
in this review. Recent reviews provide more extensive
technical details.19–21 Here, we just describe the main
characteristics of each design.
The first PEEM exper-


3

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

FIG. 1.
(color online) (a) Layout of a LEEM/PEEM instrument (LEEM III, Elmitec GmbH) with magnetic lenses.
The
sector field separates the incoming electron beam from the reflected or backscattered electrons. The sample bias adjusts the
electron start voltage. TL, FL and IL are the transfer, field and intermediate lens of the imaging column. In PEEM mode, an
energy analyzer is used just before the last projective lenses. (b) Layout of an energy-filtered PEEM with electrostatic lenses
(NanoESCA, Omicron Nanotechnology GmbH). The double hemispherical analyzer and the low electron energy in the PEEM
column optimizes transmission and gives a lateral resolution independent of the spectroscopic resolution. (c,d) Photographs of
typical instruments represented in (a) and (b). In (d) 1, 2 and 3 are the positions for direct PEEM, small area spectroscopy
and spectroscopic imaging, 4 and 5 are the sample position and the double hemispherical analyzer.

iment was reported by a German physicist, Br¨uche, in
the 1930s.22 However, the real rise of LEEM and PEEM
started with the use of more sophisticated, low energy
electron lenses in ultra-high vacuum and the pioneering
work by Telieps and Bauer in the 1980s.23 The second
qualitative step was the advent of dedicated synchrotron
radiation sources, capable of delivering a high brilliance
photon beam onto the sample, making sub-micron scale
PEEM imaging possible in a reasonable amount of time.
First, we outline the two main designs of low energy
electron optics. Then we present the different imaging
techniques used for the case studies presented in this re-
view.

A.
Electron optics

Two basic design concepts exist in low energy elec-
tron microscopes. In both cases there is a high extractor
field, typically 12 to 24 kV, between the sample and the
objective lens. Thanks to this field, high electron take-

off angles from the sample surface can be collected and
imaged through the electron optics. In the first design
(Fig. 1(a)), a very high voltage (20 kV) is applied to the
sample, thus the electrons have a high kinetic energy in
the electron optics imaging column, which is composed
of magnetic lenses. The main manufacturers are Elmitec
and SPECS GmbH. In the second (Fig. 1(b)), the sample
is biased close to ground potential and after extraction by
a high voltage the electrons are decelerated in the electro-
static lens system. The main manufacturer is Omicron
Nanotechnology.

1.
Magnetic lenses

The magnetic lens design provides an instrument suit-
able for both LEEM and PEEM. To do LEEM a sector
field produced by magnetic lenses uses the Lorentz force
to separate an incident electron beam formed in an illumi-
nation column from the reflected or backscattered beam.
Thus, the optical axes of both the incident beam and the


4

backscattered electrons are perpendicular to the sample
surface. The sector angles are either 120◦ or 180◦. TL,
FL and IL are the transfer, field and intermediate lens of
the imaging column. finally projective lens magnify the
image onto the detector. To do PEEM, the illumination
column is not used and a photon beam is incident directly
on the sample surface. The imaging column is identical
for both LEEM and PEEM. A schematic is shown in
Fig. 1(a).
In PEEM, the high electron kinetic energy
is particularly useful for high magnification, providing
that the light source uses micro-focusing optics and that
the sample can withstand high photon brilliance. The
electrons are close to the optical axis, making aberration
correction and thus ultimate spatial resolution possible.
However, when energy analysis is also required, the elec-
trons undergo a strong retarding voltage before enter-
ing the analyzer with a significant loss in transmission
and space-charge can be a limitation.
The best spec-
troscopic resolution is 0.25-0.30 eV. To perform energy-
filtered PEEM with this set-up, a hemispherical energy
analyzer is added just before the projective lenses, a set-
up called a spectroscopic LEEM.21 Figure. 1(c) shows a
typical LEEM-PEEM instrument with magnetic lenses.

2.
Electrostatic lenses

The electrostatic lens design (Fig. 1(b)) can only be
used for PEEM since a sector field is impossible to
implement.24 However, the electrons in the PEEM imag-
ing column have only moderate kinetic energy meaning
a much higher phase space entering the energy analyzer,
and thus a much higher transmission. The near ground
potential of the sample is a considerable advantage if one
needs to apply potentials to the sample, for example to
switch the ferroelectric polarization.
Furthermore, the
use of a double hemispherical analyzer allows low pass
energies and hence high spectroscopic resolution without
degrading the spatial resolution. The risk of radiation
damage from intense photon beams is reduced and space
charge is less of a limitation because it is possible to use
lower incident flux.
Figure. 1(d) shows a PEEM with
a double hemispherical analyser and electrostatic lenses.
Positions 1, 2 and 3 show the detector positions for direct
imaging without energy filtering, small area X-ray pho-
toelectron spectroscopy and spectroscopic imaging. The
sample is at position 4 and 5 indicates the double hemi-
spherical analyzer.

B.
PEEM

When a photon of energy hν is incident on a sample,
all of the electrons whose binding energy is smaller than
hν can undergo a transition from their initial state. For
an electron to be photoemitted from the material and
detected, it must overcome the work function, Φ, the

potential barrier to be overcome to extract the photo-
electron.
The photoemission process is represented schemati-
cally in Fig. 2. To know the electronic and chemical struc-
ture of a material one has to deduce the initial state of
the electronc (left hand side of Fig. 2) from the measured
photoemission spectrum (right hand side of Fig. 2). In
the solid, electrons occupy discrete, localized states (core
levels) or more delocalized states (valence band, and for
metals, the conduction band). The binding energy is spe-
cific to the emitting atom and is a sensitive signature of
the local chemical and electronic environment. The va-
lence electrons are responsible for the electronic structure
and reflect the insulating, semiconducting or metallic na-
ture of the material. It is also the valence electrons, and
for conducting samples, the states at the Fermi level,
which determine many key properties for technological
applications, such as electron transport, magnetization,
spin polarization, or electron-electron correlation. Thus,
from a photoelectron spectrum, knowledge of the work
function φ (φ = EF − E0, where EF is the Fermi level
and E0 the vacuum level)and the photon energy allows
deduction of the initial states of the analyzed electrons.25

FIG. 2. (color online) Schematic energy levels in a photoemis-
sion experiment. The initial state (left) is excited by a photon
hν, giving the final state as measured by the spectrometer
(right). The work function, φ, is the difference between the
local vacuum level and the sample Fermi energy, E0 − EF.


5

Since the beginning of X-ray Photoelectron Spec-
troscopy (XPS) with Siegbahn’s Nobel Prize winning
work in the late 1950’s,26 XPS has evolved into a stan-
dard technique for acquiring chemical and elemental in-
formation of surfaces25,27. Although first attempts in ac-
quiring lateral information with XPS started more than
20 years ago, these techniques have not, as yet, achieved
widespread use. Laboratory imaging XPS are slow and
spatial resolution is typically ≃ 10−20µm for reasonable
acquisition times. Photoemission microscopes [10,11] im-
prove this figure by some two orders of magnitude in
the laboratory and three orders of magnitude using syn-
chrotron radiation. A typical field of view (FoV), not to
be confused with the lateral resolution, is several tens of
microns. However, a direct consequence of the high lat-
eral resolution is a considerably reduced overall transmis-
sion of the electron optical system. Thus, the use of these
instruments for laboratory experiments may be limited
to low energy applications in the Ultra-violet Photoelec-
tron Spectroscopy (UPS) range. This disadvantage can
be overcome by using high brilliance undulator beamlines
at the synchrotron for imaging XPS experiments.
PEEM can be performed just with electron optics and
a 2D detector, recording the secondary electron current.
Early PEEM work has been carried out using such a sys-
tem. Today, still many PEEM experiments focussing on
absorption spectroscopy measure the electron yield and
do not require an energy analyser.
By adding an en-
ergy filter to the electron optics, the image of the sam-
ple surface in the FoV is obtained at a well-defined elec-
tron kinetic energy.
The same 2D detection system is
used to provide an image of the microscopic field of view.
Such a spectromicroscopy set-up is shown schematically
in Fig. 3(a).
The energy filter allows selected regions
of the photoemission spectrum to be imaged.
Energy
regions of interest such as the photoemission threshold,
core level and valence band regions are highlighted by the
shaded rectangles in Fig. 3(b). There is a slight variation
in energy, called non-isochromaticity, along the vertical
axis, corresponding to the dispersive plane of the ana-
lyzer, but this is usually small, typically a fraction of an
electron-volt, and is accounted for in data analysis.
In energy-filtered operation, image stacks are recorded
by scanning the sample voltage with fixed analyzer pass
energy and automatic refocusing of the objective lens.
The three-dimensional data stack, I(x, y, E), therefore
contains in each image-pixel microscopic and spectro-
scopic information, and can be analyzed off-line by stan-
dard data reduction techniques, e.g. removal of photoe-
mission background or principal component analysis to
reduce the noise in core level images.28 The data sets are
easily exploited by choosing any region of interest and
extracting the corresponding I(E) curve.
Using the electrostatic lens design, the sample is ref-
erenced to ground, thus with knowledge of the analyser
work function, the onset of the photoemission spectrum
at low energy is precisely the work function of the sam-
ple surface.29,30 In the magnetic lens design, the energy

is referenced to the electron source work function.

C.
k-PEEM

The standard method for measuring the dispersion re-
lations of the band structure is Angular Resolved Photo-
Electron Spectroscopy (ARPES). In ARPES, the energy-
resolved photoelectron intensity distribution is usually
measured as a function of angle along a high symmetry
direction of the crystal. Conservation of the component
of the electron wave vector parallel to the sample surface
allows one to map out the dispersion relations as a func-
tion of the initial state wave-vector. In practical units
the wave vector is given by kparallel = 0.512√EKsinθ,
where EK is the photoelectron kinetic energy and θ the
photoelectron emission angle with respect to the surface
normal. In order to map the dispersion relations over the
full Brillouin zone the sample must be rotated through
180◦ resulting in long acquisition times. In PEEM, the
high extractor field collects the photoelectron emission
over a wide angular range. By using a suitable transfer
lens the diffraction plane (close to the back-focal plane)
of the PEEM can be imaged.
Imaging the diffraction
plane in PEEM produces an angular intensity map for all
azimuths simultaneously. Energy-filtering transforms the
angular distribution into a map of photoelectron intensity
as a function of wave-vector parallel to the surface, i.e. a
horizontal, constant energy cut in reciprocal space. This
technique is known as k-resolved PhotoEmission Electron
Microscopy (k-PEEM). For example, the Fermi surface
can be acquired in a single-shot experiment.31 For a typ-
ical PEEM settings, the reciprocal space dimension of the
image is ±2.5˚A−1. Thus, this technique allows visualiza-
tion of the full 2D structure of the electron dispersion
relations from micron sized regions or domains, see, for
example, a recent study of few-layer graphene on SiC.32

An important variant of reciprocal space imaging is the
use of an aperture in an intermediate image plane which
allows one to perform direct µ-ARPES on micron scale
regions.33 As in real space PEEM described above, the
data sets are also three dimensional, I(kx, ky, E).

D.
MEM

In MEM the incident electrons are retarded to a few
volts, called the start voltage (SV) by the high sample
bias.
At very low SV, electrons are reflected by the
potential above the surface (MEM), whereas at higher
values they penetrate the sample and are backscattered
(LEEM). Mirror electron microscopy (MEM) using a low
energy electron microscope, allows non-contact, full-field
imaging of the surface topography and potential with 12-
15 nm spatial resolution. The transition from the reflec-
tion of the electrons to the back scattering regime, the
MEM-LEEM transition, images the electrostatic poten-
tial above the surface.
MEM contrast is therefore re-


6

∆∆∆∆x
Detector 2D

Microscope
(PEEM)

∆∆∆∆E

hνννν

secondary
electrons

core
levels
valence 
band

spectral width = hνννν - Φ
ΦΦ
Φ

Kinetic energy (eV)
Threshold
(a)
(b)

FIG. 3. (color online) (a) Schematic of a spectromicroscopy experiment. Electron optics conserve the provenance of the electrons
in the sample field of view. The energy analyzer filters the kinetic energy, giving a spectroscopic image of the photoemission
on the 2D detector. (b) Typical photoemission spectrum. The shaded rectangles highlight the high intensity photoemission
threshold at low kinetic energy, the core level region and the valence band. In PEEM the kinetic energy is referenced with
respect to the Fermi level of the sample holder.

lated to work function differences and it is an ideal tool
to probe, for example, surface charge differences in do-
mains with a polarization component perpendicular to
the surface, pointing either inwards (P−) or outwards
(P+).
At the surface, an in-plane electric field will be created
at the boundary between oppositely polarized domains
due to the fixed charge. Depending on the width of the
space charge region around the domain wall, this field
can attain values significant with respect to the extrac-
tor field, deviating the reflected electrons in a direction
parallel to the surface. The deviation due to the built-in
field at a pn junction has already been used in emission
microscopy.34,35 Thus MEM can be used to study the full
surface electrical topography.
The first demonstration of MEM to probe the surface
potential of differently polarized ferroelectric domains
was reported by Spivak et al. using an extremely simple
electron lens and single crystal BaTiO3.36 Cherifi et al.
reported polarization induced contrast in thin, epitaxial
BiFeO3 (BFO) films with PFM written domains.37 One
of the main challenges is the quantification of the surface
charge from the measurement of the surface potential,
since the latter decreases away from the surface.

E.
LEEM

LEEM images surfaces using elastically backscattered
low energy electrons.
For single crystal systems both
real and reciprocal space information is available. The
low kinetic energy makes LEEM, like photoemission, in-
trinsically sensitive to the surface and near surface re-
gion. LEEM gives information not only on the surface
morphology, but it is also sensitive to the electronic and

crystal structure. In-situ crystal growth or even surface
diffusion processes can be monitored. Furthermore, by
scanning the start voltage, the empty states in the con-
duction band are probed. This has been used to explore
quantum oscillations in the back-scattered electron sig-
nal for 2D systems. The results can be directly inter-
preted in terms of the conduction band structure, for
example on few-layer graphene.38 Finally, if the focal or
diffraction plane is imaged in LEEM, then one obtains
a µ-LEED image of the sample surface.39 The datasets
are in the form of 3D stacks: I(x, y, SV ) for LEEM and
MEM; I(kx, ky, SV ) for µ-LEED.

III.
APPLICATIONS

In this section we present five studies of FE systems
using full field electron spectromicroscopy.
The first
study was done using a NanoESCA installed at the
TEMPO beamline at the SOLEIL synchrotron (Saint
Aubin, France).
The screening study of PZT and the
band structure of BTO were performed at the Nanospec-
troscopy beamline at the Elettra synchrotron (Trieste,
Italy) using a spectroscopic LEEM. The photogenerated
charge screening study was carried out using a labora-
tory instrument at the CEA Saclay (France). The study
of the thickness dependence of the polarization in BiFeO3
used a NanoESCA instrument at the Omicron Nanotech-
nology premises in Taunusstein(Germany) and the CEA
Saclay laboratory instrument.


7

FIG. 4. (color online) (a) Energy-filtered, threshold image of a BaTiO3 (BTO)(001) single crystal showing three main intensity
levels, E − EF = 3.85 eV. (b) Threshold spectra as extracted from the (solid) rectangles in (a). (c) Photoemission threshold
map obtained using a pixel-by-pixel fit to the threshold spectra.

A.
Polar domain contrast

The first example shows an unpublished example of
how energy-filtered PEEM can be used to identify differ-
ently polarized domains at the surface of a ferroelectric.
The sample was a BaTiO3 (001) single crystal. Before
introduction into the vacuum system the sample under-
went a short exposure (∼10 minutes) in air at room tem-
perature to a UV lamp. The UV radiation creates ozone
which reacts with the sample surface cleaning it of most
organic contamination. An insulator charges during pho-
toemission therefore the sample was then annealed under
vacuum at 700◦C producing oxygen vacancies to provide
sufficient conductivity whilst maintaining the ferroelec-
tric phase. This is also sufficient to remove any resid-
ual surface carbon.40 The left hand image of Fig. 4 is
taken at a kinetic energy of 3.85 eV, measured with re-
spect to the metallic sample holder, with a 34 µm FoV
and 95 eV photon energy using synchrotron radiation.
There are three main levels of intensity at a given energy.
At higher kinetic energy there is contrast inversion (not
shown), indicating spatially resolved work function vari-
ations. Scanning the full threshold spectrum gives a 3D
dataset. The threshold spectra for the regions of interest
indicated by the rectangles are shown in Fig. 4(b). They
show the characteristic, sharp rising edge of the photoe-
mission spectrum and the broader, secondary electron
peak. Three distinct photoemission thresholds are ob-
served. Performing a pixel by pixel analysis, fitting the
shape of each threshold spectrum independently gives the
threshold map shown in Fig. 4(c). The values correspond
to domains (in order of decreasing threshold) with polar-
ization pointing out from the surface into vacuum, along
the surface and into the surface. Thus, energy-filtered
PEEM can accurately map the distribution of polar do-
mains at the surface.

Domain recognition by PEEM has recently been used
to demonstrate the existence of polar domains in a BTO
single crystal well above the the bulk Curie temperature
and has been linked to a stabilization of the tetragonal
distortion by an ionic surface relaxation.41

B.
Adsorbate screening

FIG. 5. (color online) (top) electron reflectivity curves from
PFM written P+ and P− domains in as-received PZT. (bot-
tom) Same after annealing in oxygen. The inset shows the P+

(inner), P−(outer) PFM written squares and the surround-
ing unwritten imprint area. The MEM-LEEM transition is
taken as the midpoint in the drop in reflectivity. The FoV is
about 15 µm.42 Reprinted with permission from Appl. Phys.
Lett. 97, 222903 (2010). Copyright 2010 American Institute
of Physics.

Surface polarization charge in FE materials can be
screened by a variety of mechanisms: intrinsic (charge
carriers or defects in the bulk), extrinsic (chemical en-


8

vironment or adsorbates),43 domain ordering, or even a
combination of the above. For example, chemisorption
of (OH)− and protons can lead to important changes
in the electrical boundary conditions44 and water film
can play an active role in domain switching.45 Krug et
al. studied the effect of surface carbon contamination on
the surface charge screening of PFM written micron-scale
domains in PZT.42 A (001)-oriented PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3
(PZT) layer was grown by high pressure sputtering on
a conducting SrRuO3 (SRO) back electrode which it-
self was deposited on SrTiO3(001) single crystal sub-
strate. The PZT stoichiometry was chosen near the mor-
photropic phase boundary to assure a maximum piezo-
electric response.46 The layer thickness of 30 nm was be-
low the threshold for strain relaxation, ensuring a low
defect density and a high polarization normal to the sam-
ple plane. The outer square of (10x10) µm2 was written
by a positive bias of +5 V creating a negative image
charge below the surface and thus a P− state (inward
directed polarization).
The polarity of an inner (5x5)
µm2 square was reversed by a -5 V bias (P+). The exte-
rior, i.e., unwritten sample area, exhibited a net positive
polarity, probably due to a FE imprint in the film af-
ter growth and cooling to room temperature. The PZT
layer was covered with a platinum mask with open fields
to facilitate the location of the FE domains.
In addi-
tion, the mask provided energy calibration of the pho-
toemission spectra with respect to the Pt 4f peaks and
the Fermi level.
Energy-filtered XPEEM at the C 1s
core level was used to check the level of surface contami-
nation. Then, the MEM-LEEM transition was measured
before and after cleaning by in-situ annealing in oxygen
(4.8 × 10−5mbar at 400◦C for three hours).
The elec-
tron reflectivity curves for the P+, P− and as grown
areas are shown in Fig. 5.
Before cleaning in oxygen
the contrast in the electron reflectivity is low, consis-
tent with the high surface carbon concentration, mea-
sured by XPEEM, which provides partial screening of
the surface charge.
The reduced surface potential dif-
ference is ascribed to carbon contamination, screening
the contrast expected from written domains with oppo-
site polarization. After oxygen annealing, clear contrast
appears, reflecting a surface potential difference between
the P+ and P− domains. As can be seen from Fig. 5, the
MEM-LEEM transition happens at lower start voltage
for the P+ (inner) than for the P− (outer) sample area,
reflecting the fact that the surface potential is higher for
the P+ polarity than for P−. The increased contrast on
the clean surface is supported by DFT calculations of a
nine-layer PbO/TiO2 stack (without adsorbates) in an
external electric field. The stabilized out-of-plane polar-
ization leads to a positive (negative) energy shift of the
surface band structure for P+ (P−). Assuming constant
electron affinity, the MEM-LEEM transition should then
be shifted to lower (higher) start voltages, in qualitative
agreement with experiment.42

FIG. 6. (color online) Reflectivity curves before (solid sym-
bols) and after (open symbols) exposure of a BTO(001) single
crystal to UV light. Insets: MEM image before (upper right)
and after (bottom left) exposure to UV light.47 Reprinted
with permission from Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 092902 (2012).
Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics.

C.
Screening by photogenerated charge carriers

In this example, the screening by mobile charge carri-
ers was studied.47 A BTO(001) single crystal was ozone
cleaned before annealing at 700◦C for 3 hours at a base
pressure of 1 × 10−9 mbar to remove residual contami-
nation such as H2O or CO2 and to create sufficient oxy-
gen vacancies to avoid charging during measurements.
The sample was transferred under vacuum for the MEM-
LEEM analysis. A 254 nm UV lamp illuminated the sur-
face with 20mW/cm2 power flux to create electron-hole
pairs.
The right hand inset of Fig. 6 is a MEM image from the
clean sample at a start voltage of -1.8V in a 40 µm FoV.
Two intensity levels are observed corresponding to differ-
ent electrostatic potentials above the surface. The inten-
sity contrast inverses as the start voltage is increased. We
identify the two regions as P+ and P− polarized domains
(see below). The electron reflectivity of the two domains
as a function of start voltage, measured with respect to
the reflected intensity at -5 V, is plotted in the main
part of Fig. 6 (full symbols). The MEM-LEEM transi-
tion is the midpoint of the decrease in the reflectivity
curve. For the clean surface, the MEM-LEEM transition
shift is 400 mV. Such a large value is attributed to op-
posite polarizations perpendicular to the surface, point-
ing either outwards (P+) or inwards (P−). It cannot be
due to domains with different magnitudes oriented in the
same direction because they do not screen the depolariz-
ing field. A SSPM/PFM study by Shao et al. reported
a 150 - 200 mV shift between c+ and c− domains; how-
ever, their data were acquired in air and the potential
contrast was probably attenuated by adsorbates.48 After
a few tens of seconds of exposure to UV light, the shift
in the MEM-LEEM transition between the two domains
is strongly reduced, reaching a steady state value of 90


9

FIG. 7. (color online) (a) Time dependence of intensity con-
trast due to screening by UV-generated electron-hole pairs
(b) Time dependence of intensity contrast after UV light is
switched off. (c) Schematic showing the drift of photogener-
ated charge carriers in an out of plane polarized ferroelectric
slab.47 Reprinted with permission from Appl.
Phys.
Lett.
101, 092902 (2012).
Copyright 2012 American Institute of
Physics.

mV after 200 s.
The reflectivity curves after UV exposure are plotted as
open symbols in Fig. 6. The photoemission intensity due
to the UV illumination is also detected, however, it was
more than three orders of magnitude lower than that of
the MEM-LEEM signal and can be neglected. As can be
seen in the left hand inset of Fig. 6, the domain structure
is unchanged by the UV illumination but the contrast is
weakened. When the UV light is switched off, the con-
trast reverts to the original value, although at a slower
rate. The experiment is repeatable without altering the
domain structure. The average value of the MEM-LEEM
transition shifts by ∆Voff,on = 0.46 V to lower start volt-
age when illumination is switched on. UV illumination
creates not only electron-hole pairs in the material but
also induces photoemission from the material. The lat-
ter gives rise to a separate effect with respect to the sur-
face charge screening and the photoemission positively
charges the surface. The absolute MEM-LEEM transi-
tion shift of each domain is therefore consistent with an
equal 155 mV change in P+ (P−) surface potential by
electron (hole) screening. The shift in the MEM-LEEM
transition measures potential change perpendicular to
the surface, therefore, in the case of in-plane polarization
only a photoemission induced shift to lower start volt-
age would be expected with no offset due to screening by
electron-hole pairs.
To study the surface charge dynamics, we recorded
fixed start voltage (-1.8 V) MEM images at 1 frame
per second under UV illumination.
The time depen-
dence of the domain intensity contrast, defined by ∆I =

I(P+) − I(P−), when the UV light is switched on and
off is plotted in Fig. 7(a) and (b). Fitting ∆I using a
simple rate equation, ∆I = A + Bexp(−t/τ), gives time
constants τon = 41.3 s for light-on and τoff = 104.2 s for
light-off processes. These values are several times larger
than those found by Shao et al.48 with a lower power UV
lamp. However, the BTO has been vacuum annealed at
700◦C creating oxygen vacancies which can act as charge
traps49 increasing the time constant.
UV illumination
generates electron-hole pairs near the surface because of
the large photo-excitation cross section. Under the in-
ternal polarization field, electrons (holes) drift to the
P+(P−) surface and some are trapped in vacant trap
states as illustrated in Fig. 7(c). Thus, a space-charge
field opposing the polarization field increases until equal
to the polarization field or until the rate of electron-hole
pair generation equals that of recombination. When the
light is switched off, the trapped carriers are thermally
activated and diffuse along the concentration gradient to
eventually recombine.48 The spatial redistribution and
retrapping of photocarriers give the observed exponen-
tial decays.47

This analysis assumes that the screening by the pho-
togenerated charge only results in a rigid shift of the re-
flectivity curve and linearity between the MEM-LEEM
transition shift and the intensity contrast. The former is
clearly a good assumption, while the latter is an approx-
imation. A more refined analysis requires knowledge of
the relationship between the transition shift and inten-
sity difference at constant SV or, ideally, the acquisition
of reflectivity curves during the screening process.

D.
Polarization of ultra-thin films

A major issue for prospective nanoscale,
strain-
engineered ferroelectric applications is the decrease of
the remanent polarization of ultra-thin films.
Fer-
roelectric capacitors for example may exhibit a crit-
ical thickness.50,51 Lichtensteiger et al.52 have shown
that the decrease in remanent polarization of PbTiO3
(PTO) thin films between 20 and 2.4 nm on Nb-doped
STO substrates follows that of the tetragonality (ratio
of the out-of-plane to in-plane lattice parameter c/a).
On La0.67Sr0.33TiO3 (LSMO) PTO polydomains were
formed below 10 nm with high tetragonality.53 The
formation of a polydomain state has been suggested
for SRO/PZT/SRO capacitors with Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 thick-
nesses below 15 nm.54 Pertsev and Kohlstedt showed the
importance of misfit strain for the critical thickness of the
monodomain-polydomain stability for PTO and BTO.55

Direct electrical measurements of the polarization-field
(P(E)) loop in ultrathin ferroelectric films are a chal-
lenge because of leakage current for thicknesses below a
few tens of nm.56 They become impossible in the tun-
neling regime for ultra-thin films (5 nm or less) which,
furthermore, is of the same order as the critical thick-
ness estimated from Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire(LGD)


10

1.5

1.0

0.5

E (eV)

(a)

P
+P
-

4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8

WorkFunction (eV)

P
+P
-

(b)

0.4

0.2

0.0

∆φF (eV)

0.4

0.2

0.0

∆E (eV)

(c)

1.0

0.5

0.0

Pz/Pmax

10
100
Thickness (nm)

(d)

FIG. 8. (color online) (a) MEM-LEEM transition map ob-
tained by a pixel by pixel analysis of the 3D dataset (b) PEEM
threshold spectra from PFM-polarized P+ and P− domains
in epitaxial BFO. (c) Thickness dependence of the MEM-
LEEM transition (red squares) and the photoemission thresh-
old (black circles) contrasts as measured by MEM-LEEM and
PEEM, respectively. (d) Pz/Pmax calculated from PEEM (red
squares) and MEM-LEEM (black circles). Red curve is fit to
PEEM/LEEM data with heff = 5.6 nm. Blue diamonds are
Pz/Pmax values used for numerical simulations.
Reprinted
with permission from Rault et al.59 Copyright 2012 Ameri-
can Physical Society.

elastic theory for polarization stability.57,58

Rault et al.59 have studied the polarization thickness
dependence of strained BiFeO3 (BFO) films with con-
stant tetragonality.
Films in the range 3.6 to 70 nm
were studied. Polarized domains were written using PFM
and both the work function and electron reflectivity were
measured using PEEM and MEM-LEEM. Contrast in the
MEM-LEEM transition and the photoemission thresh-
old is clearly observed in Fig. 8(a) and (b). These are
not images but MEM-LEEM transition and photoemis-
sion threshold maps. They are obtained by fitting the
electron reflectivity or threshold spectrum pixel by pixel
across the field of view and the plotting the values on a
false color scale. The FoV is 40 and 33 µm, respectively.
The benchmark was a 70 nm film whose polarization was
measured by classic P-E loop. The polarization of the
thinner films can then be estimated from contrast with
respect to those of the 70 nm film.
The P+/P− domain contrasts fall to zero, as shown
in Fig. 8(c), below a critical thickness of 7-8 nm. This
compares well with the value of 5.6 nm obtained from the
3D LGD model once the BFO/bottom electrode interface
layer thickness is taken into account. The fall in the film
polarization is shown in Fig. 8(d) together with the fit
using the 3D LDG theory and a critical thickness of 5.6
nm. Effective Hamiltonian calculations showed that this

rapid decrease is due to the stronger depolarizing field,
forcing a phase transition from a single to a more sta-
ble stripe domain state, explaining why the tetragonality
remains constant at the high value of 1.05 while the av-
erage domain polarization drops to zero. However, these
stripes are predicted to be only a few nanometres wide
and are therefore smaller than the typical lateral resolu-
tion available.59 Aberration corrected LEEM, discussed
below, may be able to image directly such a transition.
Nevertheless, this example shows that PEEM-LEEM can
be used to estimate polarization in micron scale domains
even for films in the tunneling regime.

E.
Band structure

Measuring the dispersion relations of the electronic
bands in oxides is notoriously difficult even with highly
ordered samples because of charging under photoemis-
sion. The few examples of angle-resolved photoelectron
spectroscopy studies of oxides in the literature concern
either metallic oxides, such as niobium doped SrTiO360

or insulating oxides such as SrTiO3 with a metallic 2D
electron gas at the surface.61,62 The final example illus-
trates the use of reciprocal space PEEM, k-PEEM, to
obtain the full 2D band structure of a single ferroelectric
domain. The sample preparation followed the ozone pro-
tocol and in-situ vacuum annealing at 700◦C described
previously in order to obtain a clean surface with suffi-
cient oxygen vacancies to avoid substantial charging. The
instrument was adjusted so that a single in-plane domain
filled the field of view. The transfer lens of the optics
was then used to obtain an energy filtered image of the
back focal plane. The sample azimuth was determined
by the µ-LEED mode showing that the domain has a
1 × 1 surface structure. This calibrates the dimensions
and orientation of the reciprocal space image. Then, the
undulator beam was switched on for PEEM. By scanning
the photoelectron kinetic energy for incident photon en-
ergy of 52 eV, constant energy cuts in reciprocal space
were obtained from the top to the bottom of the valence
band. These are shown as 2nd derivative maps of the
intensity as a function of electron wave-vector parallel to
the surface in Fig. 9(c) These are preliminary results and
a fuller version will be published.
The integrated intensity (Fig. 9(b)) is typical of BTO
as obtained by ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy;
however, the constant energy cuts in reciprocal space
(Fig. 9(c)) reveal the rich band structure of BTO. Be-
tween 7.7 and 8.2 eV in particular there is a horizontal
mirror plane but no vertical mirror plane in the Bril-
louin zone.
This may be spectroscopic evidence that
the imaged domain is indeed in-plane polarized, i.e. the
tetragonal distortion is parallel to the surface inducing
the asymmetry in the band structure. We note that typ-
ical ARPES explores only a single high symmetry direc-
tion, for example ΓX, whereas in k-PEEM the 3D dataset
allows simultaneous exploration of the electron bands for


11

FIG. 9. (color online) (a) Schematic of the Brillouin zone for BTO(001). (b) Integrated photoemission intensity measured from
a single in-plane domain. The sample holder Fermi level is at 48.75 eV. The wave-vector resolved constant energy cuts were
acquired in the shaded region (c) k-resolved constant energy cuts in reciprocal space through the valence band (shaded area in
(b)) showing the rich band structure.

all kparallel wave-vectors. It is therefore possible to ex-
plore the details of the electronic band structure, for ex-
ample wave function symmetry across the Brillouin zone,
in a single ferroelectric domain. At present the minimum
FoV is about 1-2 µm, limited by the electron optics.

IV.
ADVANTAGES AND LIMITS

A.
Perspectives for ferroelectrics

Spectromicroscopy is a full field technique, thus no
scanning of the sample is necessary. The relatively large
fields of view with respect to a typical PFM image will
often allow simultaneous visualization of many domains.
Dynamical experiments of domain ordering are therefore
possible. Both PEEM and MEM/LEEM are non-contact
techniques, avoiding possible unwanted tip-surface inter-
actions of near field methods such as PFM and Con-
ductive Atomic Force Microscopy (CAFM). The spectro-
scopic capability obtained by energy-filtering in PEEM
gives direct access to the initial states of the electrons.
Thus a full description of the electronic and chemical
structure is possible. PEEM may be performed with a
variety of lights sources: in the laboratory, with lasers or

with synchrotron radiation. The use of synchrotron ra-
diation allows tuning of the photon energy: optimization
of the photoelectron yield, adjustment of the electron ki-
netic energy, thus the depth sensitivity. Most undulator
beamlines allow variable polarization, thus circularly po-
larized light can be used to perform X-ray magnetic circu-
lar dichroism based PEEM to study ferromagnetic states,
whereas linear dichroism allows study of the ferroelectric
distortion, for example at the Ti L2,3 edge.63 Finally, the
wave-vector resolution afforded in the k-PEEM mode al-
lows immediate visualization of the dispersion relations
in the surface plane.

B.
Surface preparation

PEEM and LEEM experiments must be carried out
in ultra high vacuum (UHV), mainly to avoid arcing be-
tween the sample and the objective lens, which would
create high instantaneous currents, potentially damag-
ing to the sample. However, an UHV environment has
the advantage that it is possible to study relatively clean
surfaces, free of extrinsic adsorbates like water which are
inevitably present in air based experiments and which
can dramatically change the electrical boundary condi-
tions.
Controlled surface preparation is therefore cru-


12

cial. Traditional surface science techniques such as ion
beam sputtering to clean the surface are excluded be-
cause of the damage they cause to the surface structure.
Careful annealing in 10−5 − 10−6 mbar oxygen environ-
ment may be sufficient to clean the sample surface in-
situ.64 We have developed a protocol of ex-situ cleaning
using a rapid exposure to ozone, immediately prior to
introducing the sample into the UHV system. However,
without doubt, the very best method would be to assem-
ble the growth (PLD/MBE), characterization (PFM) and
PEEM/LEEM analysis tools in the same UHV system,
with in-situ transfer. A second important problem is the
insulating nature of ferroelectric materials. Some way is
necessary to avoid or at least reduce charging either by
electrons or as a result of photoemission. In the case of
electron charging in LEEM, one solution proposed has
been to combine two electron beams of widely different
energies. At low energy, the sample is negatively charged
whereas at higher energies the number of secondary elec-
trons created is such that the sample charges positively.
In principle it is therefore possible to find an equilib-
rium position of zero charge. Another possibility is to
anneal samples to create sufficient oxygen vacancies to
make the sample less insulating. Each oxygen vacancy
frees two electrons which reduce, in the case of BTO, two
Ti4+ ions to Ti3+. However, care must be taken not to
overdope the sample. A recent theoretical study of BTO
suggests that beyond a doping limit of 1.36 × 1021cm−3

a tetragonal to cubic phase transition occurs.65

C.
Lateral resolution and depth sensitivity

There are several contributions to the limits in spatial
resolution of PEEM and LEEM. In PEEM, the most fre-
quently encountered problem is simply the signal level. In
many cases it is the transmission of the detector (PEEM
optics, energy filter) which reduces the statistics and is
often responsible for the practical spatial resolution.66

This is one of the reasons for preferring more intense syn-
chrotron radiation sources. By reducing the photoelec-
tron kinetic energy the transmission of the PEEM system
can also be increased, furthermore the photoionization
cross-section can be optimized by adjusting the photon
energy. The key point is to increase the ratio of useful to
total photoelectrons entering the PEEM optics. In this
respect, successful aberration correction would signifi-
cantly improve instrumental transmission.67 In LEEM,
counting statistics are rarely a problem because of the
high intensity, monochromatic incident electron beam.
The second limitation to the spatial resolution comes
from imperfections in the electron lenses, giving rise to
chromatic and spherical aberrations.19 High electron en-
ergies or smaller fields of view can reduce these, but in
the latter case intensity can become a problem. Some at-
tempts at aberration correction have been made, notably
for electron optics systems based on magnetic lenses,
however, as yet, aberration correction has only been

proven in LEEM and routine use remains challenging.68

The typical lateral resolution in energy-filtered PEEM
of core levels is of the order of 100 nm. This improves
to 50 nm for measurements of the work function, mainly
due to the much higher signal. In LEEM, 20 nm is a
routine value. Although generally worse than the spatial
resolution obtainable in PFM, individual domains can
still easily be imaged and studied. Directly visualizing
domain walls, typically a few nm wide, is not possible in
PEEM and LEEM, however, the space charge region cre-
ated at charged domain walls may be resolved. Indeed,
the photoemission threshold map in Fig. 8(b) shows ev-
idence of space charge at the boundary between P+ and
P− domains.
One might think that the high extractor field, typi-
cally 100 kV/cm, could switch the polarization in thin
films. We have never observed this for a wide variety of
ferroelectric materials in both single crystal and thin film
forms. The geometry of the sample holder means that all
of the sample is at the same potential (close to ground
in the case of an electrostatic PEEM), thus the potential
difference across a film due to the extractor field is zero.
As in XPS, the moderate photoelectron kinetic ener-
gies used in PEEM limit the depth sensitivity to a few
nm.
PEEM is particularly sensitive to surface chem-
istry and electronic structure. If one wishes to extend
the method to the study of buried, heterogeneous in-
terfaces, for example between an electrode and a ferro-
electric, higher energy photons will be necessary. This
is extremely demanding for PEEM because of the rapid
decrease of the instrumental transmission function with
electron energy. Nevertheless, some hard X-ray PEEM
has been performed;20 and the use of sensitive, event
counting detector systems now make this a real possi-
bility.

D.
Beam effects

High intensity undulator radiation can also have a
number of unwanted effects. The incident photon beam
results in high rates of electron-hole pair creation.69 This
may be useful if one wants to study screening phenomena
like in the example given above47 or to study the chem-
istry of catalysis. On the other hand, if longer acquisition
times are required for a study of core level binding en-
ergies, electron-hole pairs can screen surface charge and
thus the internal field, resulting in a shift in the measured
binding energies.69 This problem has to be assessed for
each sample. For example, thin film samples can some-
times be sufficiently conductive to easily evacuate photo-
generated charge.
Despite the desirability of high intensity photon beams,
one cannot indefinitely increase the photon brilliance in
the microscope field of view. Locatelli et al. have shown
that beyond 1013 photons/s, space charge effects occur
either at the sample surface or near the first cross-over
point of the electron optics, distorting the image.67 For-


13

tunately, most synchrotron beamlines are just below this
threshold, but when using micro-focusing care must be
taken.
Sample charging due to the emission of photoelectrons
in PEEM, or due to the injection of electrons from the
LEEM can also distort images or cause spectacular spec-
tral shifts, particularly for highly stoichiometric, insulat-
ing samples, i.e. with few defects, oxygen vacancies or
for single crystals. Again the seriousness of the problem
must be assessed in each case. One possibility is to care-
fully anneal in vacuum single crystal samples as we have
done for BTO(001) to create sufficient oxygen vacancies
whilst maintaining the ferroelectric phase. Another way
to overcome charging is to heat the sample during mea-
surement, providing that this does not modify, for exam-
ple, the ferroelectric phase being studied.
Finally, direct beam damage must also be considered.
The highest intensity and hard X-ray beamlines can de-
liver incident beam currents of the order of 1 nA. In high
vacuum the energy transferred to the sample can easily
give rise to reduction of cation species. Elements such as
Pb in PZT or Bi in BFO are particularly susceptible to
metallization.

V.
OUTLOOK

Most synchrotrons now offer PEEM instrumentation;
however, access is not always straightforward because of
the high demand for beam time. Furthermore, proposals
to study ferroelectrics are intrinsically more complex be-
cause of the insulating nature of the materials involved
and their high sensitivity to intense undulator radiation.
The use of laboratory based PEEM, for example with UV
lamps or focused He I/II discharge sources may therefore
be an interesting alternative. Laboratory based lasers,
particularly if frequency doubled and used in the 2 or
3 photon mode may also be an extremely good alterna-
tive light source. However, laser based PEEM requires
careful attention to average and peak power outputs. In
general, high repetition rates (MHz) are mandatory in or-
der to avoid space charge effects in the PEEM optics.70

Femtosecond lasers could be used to study, for example,
domain switching, where the switching times of the local
atomic distortions are on the scale of the nanosecond.
It has been accepted to a large extent that the po-
larization state gives rise to a rigid shift in the electron
bands, similar to the effect of doping in semiconductors.
However, there is no reason why this must always be the
case. In BTO, the distortion around the TiO6 octahe-
dra is principally responsible for the soft phonon mode
associated with the ferroelectric state. In PZT it is the
movement of the Pb atoms which makes the biggest con-
tribution, i.e. the type A cation rather than the B-cation.
The work on dynamical charge, notably by Ghosez,71 em-
phasizes that the measurable quantity is the change in
polarization associated with an atomic distortion. Thus
rather than discussing the effective valence state of an ion

one should think in terms of dynamical charge tensors.
These can be quite large, and very different from one
atom to another and one orbital to another. A study of
the change in the core level binding energies with polar-
ization should therefore yield precious data on dynamical
charge tensors.
Reciprocal space PEEM, k-PEEM, could become an
extremely powerful tool since much of the research of
magnetoelectric coupling is starting to focus on orbital
overlaps11 or hybridization72 at the interface between a
magnetic and ferroelectric material. More generally, such
a technique could provide valuable experimental data to
compare with first principles calculations of, for exam-
ple, the electronic structure of a ferroelectric domain in
contact with a metal electrode.73

Magnetoelectric coupling between a ferromagnetic and
a ferroelectic could be directly imaged by a combi-
nation of X-ray absorption and photoemission PEEM.
The growing interest in the use of multiferroic materials
for spintronics74 means that spin polarized PEEM and
LEEM are exciting prospects.75,76 Spin polarized LEEM
can probe both in and out of plane magnetization by
means of the spin dependent exchange scattering.77

A final direction of research which will benefit from
PEEM and LEEM techniques is the behavior and the
characterization of structures on device scales.
Using
suitable, customized sample holders, it is possible to wire
up for example a single microscopic capacitor and, using
the high spatial resolution study its response to current
or voltage.18 The use of hard X-rays could provide ac-
cess to the chemistry and electronic structure of both
electrode/ferroelectric interfaces in asymmetric, micro-
scopic capacitors.78 Nanoscale control of domain walls in
structured ferroelectric films is now leading to new ap-
plications in catalysis or photovoltaics.79 By the addition
of suitable electrodes and contacts, device responses on
the microscopic scale could be studied using spectromi-
croscopy under different electrical conditions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank K. Winkler and B. Kr¨omker (Omicron Nan-
otechnology) for support of some of the PEEM measure-
ments, D. Martinotti for technical assistance with the
LEEM experiments at the CEA-Saclay and E. Jacquet,
C. Carr´et´ero and H. B´ea for help in sample preparation
at CNRS/Thal`es. We acknowledge Elettra and SOLEIL
for provision of synchrotron radiation and the Nanospec-
troscopy and TEMPO beamline staff for support. This
work was supported by the French National Research
Agency (ANR) projects Surf-FER, M´elo¨ıc, Multidolls
and Nomilops. C. M. benefited from a grant of the CEA
Nanosciences programme.
J. R. is funded by a CEA
PhD grant.
W. R. acknowledges the Eastern Scholar
Professorship at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Educa-
tion, Shanghai Municipal Education Commission, and
support from National Natural Science Foundation of


14

China under Grant No. 11274222. L. B. thanks the fi-
nancial support of ARO Grant No. W911NF-12-1-0085,
and ONR Grants No. N00014-11-1-0384, N00014-12-1-
1034 and No. N00014-08-1-091. L.B. also acknowledges
NSF DMR-1066158 and DMR-0701558, and Department
of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under con-
tract ER-46612 for discussions with scientists sponsored
by these grants.

1R. E. Cohen, Nature 358, 136 (1992).
2R. D. King-Smith and D. Vanderbilt, 47, 1651 (1993).
3S. Prosandeev, D. Wang, W. Ren, J. ´I˜niguez, and L. Bellaiche,
Advanced Functional Materials , DOI: 10.1002/adfm.201201467
(2012).
4S. V. Kalinin, A. N. Morozovska, L. Q. Chen,
and B. J. Ro-
driguez, Reports on Progress in Physics 73, 056502 (2010).
5I. Infante, S. Lisenkov, B. Dup´e, M. Bibes, S. Fusil, E. Jacquet,
G. Geneste, S. Petit, A. Courtial, J. Juraszek, L. Bellaiche,
A. Barth´el´emy,
and B. Dkhil, Physical Review Letters 105,
057601 (2010).
6D. G. Schlom, L.-Q. Chen, C.-B. Eom, K. M. Rabe, S. K. Streif-
fer,
and J.-M. Triscone, Annual Review of Materials Research
37, 589 (2007).
7K. J. Choi, M. Biegalski, Y. L. Li, A. Sharan, J. Schubert,
R. Uecker, P. Reiche, Y. B. Chen, X. Q. Pan, V. Gopalan, L.-Q.
Chen, D. G. Schlom, and C. B. Eom, Science 306, 1005 (2004).
8M. Dawber, K. M. Rabe, and J. F. Scott, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77,
1083 (2005).
9J. Junquera and P. Ghosez, Nature 422, 506 (2003).
10R. Ramesh and N. A. Spaldin, Nature Materials 6, 21 (2007).
11C. A. F. Vaz, J. Hoffman, Y. Segal, J. W. Reiner, R. D. Grober,
Z. Zhang, C. H. Ahn, and F. J. Walker, Physical Review Letters
104, 127202 (2010).
12D. Li, M. H. Zhao, J. Garra, A. M. Kolpak, A. M. Rappe, D. A.
Bonnell, and J. M. Vohs, Nature Materials 7, 473 (2008).
13J. L. Giocondi and G. S. Rohrer, J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 8275
(2001).
14J.
Seidel,
D.
Fu,
S.-Y.
Yang,
E.
Alarcon-Llado,
J.
Wu,
R. Ramesh, and J. Ager, Physical Review Letters 107, 126805
(2011).
15W.-C. Yang, B. J. Rodriguez, a. Gruverman,
and R. J. Ne-
manich, Applied Physics Letters 85, 2316 (2004).
16U. Lev, S. Heun, A. Locatelli,
and E. Zolotoyabko, Ultrami-
croscopy 104, 169 (2005).
17T. Zhao, A. Scholl, F. Zavaliche, K. Lee, M. Barry, A. Doran,
M. P. Cruz, Y. H. Chu, C. Ederer, N. A. Spaldin, R. R. Das,
D. M. Kim, S. H. Baek, C. B. Eom,
and R. Ramesh, Nature
Materials 5, 823 (2006).
18J. Heron, M. Trassin, K. Ashraf, M. Gajek, Q. He, S. Yang,
D. Nikonov, Y.-H. Chu, S. Salahuddin, and R. Ramesh, Physical
Review Letters 107, 1 (2011).
19M. Escher, K. Winkler, O. Renault,
and N. Barrett, Journal
of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 178-179, 303
(2010).
20C. Schneider, C. Wiemann, M. Patt, V. Feyer, L. Plucinski,
I. Krug, M. Escher, N. Weber, M. Merkel, O. Renault,
and
N. Barrett, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phe-
nomena (2012), 10.1016/j.elspec.2012.08.003.
21A. Locatelli and E. Bauer, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
20, 093002 (2008).
22E. Br¨uche, Z. f. Physik 448, 448 (1933).
23W. Telieps and E. Bauer, Ultramicroscopy 17, 57 (1985).
24M. Escher, N. Weber, M. Merkel, C. Ziethen, P. Bernhard,
G. Sch¨onhense, S. Schmidt, F. Forster, F. Reinert, B. Kr¨omker,
and D. Funnemann, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 17,
S1329 (2005).
25S. H¨ufner, S. Schmidt, and F. Reinert, Nuclear Instruments and
Methods A 547, 8 (2005).

26C. Nordling, E. Sokolowski, and K. Siegbahn, Phys. Rev. 105,
1676 (1957).
27D. Briggs, Surface Analysis by Auger and X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy, edited by D. Briggs and J. T. Grant (IM Publica,
2003).
28J. Walton and N. Fairley, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and
Related Phenomena 148, 29 (2005).
29A. Bailly, O. Renault, N. Barrett, L. F. Zagonel, P. Gentile,
N. Pauc, F. Dhalluin, T. Baron, A. Chabli, J. C. Cezar,
and
N. B. Brookes, Nano letters 8, 3709 (2008).
30L. F. Zagonel, M. B¨aurer, A. Bailly, O. Renault, M. Hoffmann,
S.-J. Shih, D. Cockayne,
and N. Barrett, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter. 21, 314013 (2009).
31B. Kr¨omker, M. Escher, D. Funnemann, D. Hartung, H. Engel-
hard,
and J. Kirschner, Review of Scientific Instruments 79,
053702 (2008).
32C. Mathieu, N. Barrett, J. Rault, Y. Y. Mi, B. Zhang, W. A.
de Heer, C. Berger, E. H. Conrad, and O. Renault, Phys. Rev.
B 83, 235436 (2011).
33T. O. Mente? and A. Locatelli, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy
and Related Phenomena , 10.1016/j.elspec.2012.07.007 (2012).
34S. A. Nepijko, N. N. Sedov, G. Sch¨onhense,
and M. Escher,
Journal of microscopy 206, 132 (2002).
35S. A. Nepijko, A. Gloskovskii, N. N. Sedov, and G. Sch¨onhense,
Journal of Microscopy 211, 89 (2003).
36G. V. Spivak and S. Zheludev, Kristallografiya 4, 115 (1959).
37S. Cherifi, R. Hertel, S. Fusil, H. B´ea, K. Bouzehouane, J. Allibe,
M. Bibes,
and A. Barth´el´emy, Physica Status Solidi (RRL) -
Rapid Research Letters 4, 22 (2010).
38H. Hibino, H. Kageshima, F. Maeda, M. Nagase, Y. Kobayashi,
and H. Yamaguchi, Phys. Rev. B 77, 75413 (2008).
39M. S. Altman, Journal of physics. Condensed matter : an Insti-
tute of Physics journal 22, 084017 (2010).
40F. Chen, R. Schafranek, A. Wachau, S. Zhukov, J. Glaum,
T. Granzow, H. von Seggern, and A. Klein, Journal of Applied
Physics 108, 104106 (2010).
41A. H¨ofer, M. Fechner, K. Duncker, M. H¨olzer, I. Mertig,
and
W. Widdra, Physical Review Letters 108, 087602 (2012).
42I. Krug, N. Barrett, A. Petraru, A. Locatelli, T. O. Mentes, M. A.
Nin?o, K. Rahmanizadeh, G. Bihlmayer, and C. M. Schneider,
Applied Physics Letters 97, 222903 (2010).
43D. D. Fong et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 127601 (2006).
44J. Shin, V. B. Nascimento, G. Geneste, J. Rundgren, E. W. Plum-
mer, B. Dkhil, S. V. Kalinin, and A. P. Baddorf, Nano Letters
9, 3720 (2009).
45A. Bruge?re, S. Gidon,
and B. Gautier, Journal of Applied
Physics 110, 052016 (2011).
46J. Rodr´ıguez Contreras, H. Kohlstedt, A. Petraru, A. Gerber,
B. Hermanns, H. Haselier, N. Nagarajan, J. Schubert, U. Poppe,
C. Buchal, and R. Waser, Journal of Crystal Growth 277, 210
(2005).
47J. L. Wang, B. Vilquin, and N. Barrett, Applied Physics Letters
101, 092902 (2012).
48R. Shao, M. P. Nikiforov,
and D. A. Bonnell, Applied Physics
Letters 89, 112904 (2006).
49A. C. Papageorgiou, N. S. Beglitis, C. L. Pang, G. Teobaldi,
G. Cabailh, Q. Chen, A. J. Fisher, W. A. Hofer, and G. Thorn-
ton, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 2391
(2010).
50D. Kim, J. Jo, Y. Kim, Y. Chang, J. Lee, J.-G. Yoon, T. Song,
and T. Noh, Physical Review Letters 95, 237602 (2005).
51A. Petraru, H. Kohlstedt, U. Poppe, R. Waser, A. Solbach,
U. Klemradt, J. Schubert, W. Zander,
and N. A. Pertsev, Ap-
plied Physics Letters 93, 072902 (2008).
52C. Lichtensteiger, J.-M. Triscone, J. Junquera,
and P. Ghosez,
Physical Review Letters 94, 047603 (2005).
53C. Lichtensteiger, M. Dawber, N. Stucki, J.-M. Triscone, J. Hoff-
man, J.-B. Yau, C. H. Ahn, L. Despont,
and P. Aebi, Applied
Physics Letters 90, 052907 (2007).
54V. Nagarajan, J. Junquera, J. Q. He, C. L. Jia, R. Waser, K. Lee,


15

Y. K. Kim, S. Baik, T. Zhao, R. Ramesh, P. Ghosez, and K. M.
Rabe, Journal of Applied Physics 100, 051609 (2006).
55N. Pertsev and H. Kohlstedt, Physical Review Letters 98, 257603
(2007).
56H. B´ea, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane, M. Bibes, M. Sirena, G. Her-
ranz, E. Jacquet, J.-P. Contour,
and A. Barth´el´emy, Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics 45, L187 (2006).
57A. Bratkovsky and A. Levanyuk, Physical Review Letters 84,
3177 (2000).
58P. Maksymovych, M. Huijben, M. Pan, S. Jesse, N. Balke, Y.-
H. Chu, H. Chang, A. Borisevich, A. Baddorf, G. Rijnders,
D. Blank, R. Ramesh,
and S. Kalinin, Physical Review B 85,
014119 (2012).
59J. Rault, W. Ren, S. Prosandeev, S. Lisenkov, D. Sando, S. Fusil,
M. Bibes, A. Barth´el´emy, L. Bellaiche, and N. Barrett, Physical
Review Letters 109, 267601 (2012).
60M. Takizawa, K. Maekawa, H. Wadati, T. Yoshida, a. Fujimori,
H. Kumigashira, and M. Oshima, Physical Review B 79, 113103
(2009).
61W. Meevasana, P. D. C. King, R. H. He, S.-K. Mo, M. Hashimoto,
A. Tamai, P. Songsiriritthigul, F. Baumberger, and Z.-X. Shen,
Nature materials 10, 114 (2011).
62A.
F.
Santander-Syro,
O.
Copie,
T.
Kondo,
F.
Fortuna,
S. Pailh`es, R. Weht, X. G. Qiu, F. Bertran, A. Nicolaou,
A. Taleb-Ibrahimi, P. Le F`evre, G. Herranz, M. Bibes, N. Reyren,
Y. Apertet, P. Lecoeur, A. Barth´el´emy,
and M. J. Rozenberg,
Nature 469, 189 (2011).
63E. Arenholz, G. van der Laan, A. Fraile-Rodr´ıguez, P. Yu, Q. He,
and R. Ramesh, Physical Review B 82, 140103 (2010).
64R. Schafranek, S. Payan, M. Maglione,
and A. Klein, Physical
Review B 77, 30 (2008).
65Y. Iwazaki, T. Suzuki, Y. Mizuno,
and S. Tsuneyuki, Physical
Review B 86, 214103 (2012).
66A. Bailly, O. Renault, N. Barrett, T. Desrues, D. Mariolle, L. F.
Zagonel, and M. Escher, Journal of Physics. Condensed Matter

21, 314002 (2009).
67A. Locatelli, T. O. Mente?, M. A. Ni˜no, and E. Bauer, Ultrami-
croscopy 111, 1447 (2011).
68R. M. Tromp, J. B. Hannon, A. W. Ellis, W. Wan, A. Berghaus,
and O. Schaff, Ultramicroscopy 110, 852 (2010).
69C.-L. Wu, P.-W. Lee, Y.-C. Chen, L.-Y. Chang, C.-H. Chen, C.-
W. Liang, P. Yu, Q. He, R. Ramesh,
and Y.-H. Chu, Physical
Review B 83, 020103 (2011).
70N. M. Buckanie, J. G¨ohre, P. Zhou, D. von der Linde, M. Horn-
von Hoegen, and F.-J. Meyer Zu Heringdorf, Journal of Physics.
Condensed Matter 21, 314003 (2009).
71P. Ghosez, J. Michenaud, and X. Gonze, Physical Review B 58,
6224 (1998).
72M. Niranjan, J. Velev, C.-G. Duan, S. Jaswal, and E. Tsymbal,
Physical Review B 78, 104405 (2008).
73M. Stengel, P. Aguado-Puente, N. Spaldin,
and J. Junquera,
Physical Review B 83, 235112 (2011).
74J. Allibe, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane, C. Daumont, D. Sando,
E. Jacquet, C. Deranlot, M. Bibes,
and A. Barth´el´emy, Nano
letters 12, 1141 (2012).
75F. Kronast, J. Schlichting, F. Radu, S. Mishra, T. Noll,
and
H. D¨urr, Surface and Interface Analysis 42, 1532 (2010).
76M. Suzuki, M. Hashimoto, T. Yasue, T. Koshikawa, Y. Naka-
gawa, T. Konomi, A. Mano, N. Yamamoto, M. Kuwahara, M. Ya-
mamoto, S. Okumi, T. Nakanishi, X. Jin, T. Ujihara, Y. Takeda,
T. Kohashi, T. Ohshima, T. Saka, T. Kato,
and H. Horinaka,
Applied Physics Express 3, 026601 (2010).
77K. Man, R. Zdyb, S. Huang, T. Leung, C. Chan, E. Bauer, and
M. Altman, Physical Review B 67, 184402 (2003).
78C. Wiemann, M. Patt, S. Cramm, M. Escher, M. Merkel,
A. Gloskovskii, S. Thiess, W. Drube, and C. M. Schneider, Ap-
plied Physics Letters 100, 223106 (2012).
79S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C.-H. Yang, M. D.
Rossell, P. Yu, Y.-H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager, L. W. Martin,
and R. Ramesh, Nature nanotechnology 5, 143 (2010).


