Effect of Variation of Different Nano filler on Structural, Electrical, Dielectric and Transport Properties of 

Blend Polymer Nanocomposites  

 

Anil Arya1, Mohd Sadiq2,1, A. L. Sharma1* 

1Centre for Physical Sciences, Central University of Punjab, Bathinda-151001, Punjab, INDIA 

2Department of Physics, A R S D College, Delhi -11021, India 

Corresponding Author E-mail: alsharmaiitkgp@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

In the present work, the effect of different nanofiller (BaTiO3, CeO2, Er2O3 or TiO2) on blend solid polymer electrolyte 

comprising of PEO and PVC complexed with bulky LiPF6 have been explored. The XRD analysis confirms the 

polymer nanocomposite formation. FTIR provides evidence of interaction among the functional groups of the polymer 

with the ions and the nanofiller in terms of shifting and changing peak profile. The highest ionic conductivity is 

~2.3×10-5 S cm-1 with a wide electrochemical stability window of ~3.5 V for 10 wt. % Er2O3. The real and imaginary 

part of dielectric permittivity follows the identical trend of the decreasing value with increase in the frequency. The 

particle size and the dielectric constant shows an abnormal trend with different nanofiller. The ac conductivity follows 

the universal power law. An effective mechanism has been proposed to understand the nanofiller interaction with 

cation coordinated polymer in the investigated system. 

Introduction 

The demand of miniaturized power supply with desirable properties in electrochemical devices has been rapidly 

increased since last two decades. Out of a large number of electrochemical energy storage devices, rechargeable 

lithium ion batteries are most intensively studied for portable electronic gadgets. The frequent use of those devices 

gears the researchers toward the remarkable development of secondary rechargeable battery with high capacity, light 

weight and lower cost in contrast to primary batteries. As, the electrolyte is an essential component in lithium ion 

battery as it separates both electrodes (anode and cathode), controls the number of charge carriers and permits their 

movement during charging/discharging process. Ionically conducting polymer system with polymer as 

separator/electrolyte are of intense interest due to their multiple applications, including super capacitors, fuel cell, 

solar cells, electro chromic windows, and Li ion batteries [1-4] The desirable electrolyte for any application in energy 

storage/conversion devices must have (a) high ionic conductivity; (b) electrochemical stability window (>4 V); (c) 

low melting point; (d) high boiling point; (e) high chemical stability; (f) nontoxicity; (g) low cost and good 

compatibility with electrodes. Solid polymer electrolyte (SPEs) plays a dual role as an electrolyte as well as a separator 

which keeps both electrodes separate and avoids the user from using a spacer as in liquid electrolyte system.  

The first report on ionic conduction was given by P. V. Wright [5] and Fenton et al [6] in 1973 and it was concluded 

that polymer host dissolved with an alkali metal salt results in an ionic conductive system. The first application of 

novel polymer electrolyte in batteries was announced by Armand and his co-workers in 1978 [7]. Most devices are 

based on liquid/gel polymer electrolytes due to their high ionic conductivity (10-3-10-2 Scm-1) and compatible with 


electrodes. But poor mechanical strength, freezing at low temperature, leakage and flammable nature limits their 

application in commercial use. This motivates the researchers toward better replacement of liquid polymer electrolyte 

with a solvent free polymer electrolyte having high ionic conductivity, leak proof, flexibility, wide electrochemical 

window, good mechanical strength, light weight and ease of preparation [8-10]. Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) 

fulfill all above requirements and have attracted researchers globally towards development for their potential 

application in portable electronics and electrochemical devices [11]. 

The commonly used host polymer for preparation of polymer nanocomposite films (PNCs) is PEO [12], PAN [13], 

PMMA [14], PEMA [15] and PVC [16]. Out of aforesaid host polymers, polyethylene oxide (PEO) is undoubtedly 

the best host polymer used as SPEs with strong, unstrained C-O, C-C, C-H bonds and it has high dielectric constant, 

easy availability, and high ionic conductivity in amorphous phase, low glass transition temperature, high flexibility, 

and good dimensional and chemical stability. But PEO possesses low ionic conductivity due to the presence of 

crystalline domains when complexed with alkalis salts. There are various techniques for improving the amorphous 

phase, electrical and mechanical properties of SPEs like crosslinking/blending of two or more polymers and the 

addition of nanofiller/plasticizer in the polymer electrolyte. The blending of one polymer with another is a promising 

approach as it provides in hand the unique and superior tunable properties for application than single polymer [17-

18]. Also, the easy control and modulation of properties can be achieved by varying the composition of the individual 

polymer [19-20].  

PEO has high molecular weight and ionic conductivity of the order of 10-7 S cm-1 because of the lone pair of electrons 

in its backbone with a lithium salt. The low conductivity of pure PEO is due to semi crystalline nature at ambient 

temperature which restricts the ion motion. But above the melting temperature crystalline to amorphous region 

transition occurs which enhances the conductivity. The movement of charge carriers (cation/anion) occurs in 

amorphous phase supported by the segmental motion of polymer host. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is chosen as a 

secondary polymer, it acts as a mechanical stiffener in the electrolyte due to its immiscibility. The use of PVC as the 

blend is attributed mainly to the presence of lone pair electrons at the chlorine atom where the inorganic salts can be 

solvated.  The addition of salt in polymer matrix enhances the conductivity via interaction with polymer host. The low 

lattice energy salt with small polarizing cation and the large anion of delocalized charge is chosen in order to meet the 

desirable requirement.  LiPF6 is a better choice among the tried alkali salt due to larger anion size (~2.8 Å), weak Li+-

--PF6− interactions, low ion pair formation ability, good solubility, highly electropositivety, flame retardant, low cost 

and good environmental impact [21, 22]. The larger anion size supports the faster ion dissociation via strong columbic 

interaction forces between oppositely charged ions. The addition of nanofiller in SPEs is the preeminent approach to 

improve the electrical, thermal and mechanical properties as reported by many researchers [12, 23-24]. Generally 

nanofiller reduce the crystallinity of polymers and amorphous phase formation increases the ionic conductivity by 

penetrating into polymer matrix [25]. The addition of filler destructs the dense packing and crosslinking density of 

polymer by retarding the recrystallization affinity of polymer which provides the favorable conduction path for ion 

migration on the surface of nanofiller. The presence of ceramic fillers in PNCs effects the polymer dipole orientation, 

which provides flexible polymer segmental chain motion as well as dissociation of ion pairs due to the surface charge 

on the ceramic filler [26].  


Incorporation of the nanofiller helps in inhibiting the recrystallization of the polymer and decrease the glass transition 

temperature of the composite polymer electrolyte and hence enhanced conductivity is achieved [27]. The enhancement 

of ionic conductivity is attributed to Lewis acid-base type interactions of conductive species with the surface group of 

the nanofiller which decrease the polymer reorganization tendency and modifies the polymer chain arrangement. In 

addition, nanofiller also supports ion dissociation and enhance the ion migration by providing additional conducting 

pathways within host polymer matrix [28-29]. Figure 1 shows the molecular structures of the materials. So, in regards 

to enhancement in properties the particle size and dielectric constant of the nanofiller plays the crucial role.  

 The present paper report is mainly concerned with the effect of various nanofiller having a different particle size and 

the dielectric constant on the polymer blend electrolyte. To obtain the insights in the above said parameters different 

characterization techniques such as; X-Ray diffraction, FTIR, FESEM, Impedance study are performed. The 

impedance data is transformed into the dielectric data to understand the effect of the dielectric constant of nanofiller 

in enhancing the overall dielectric constant of the whole polymer matrix. Also, the ionic transference number and the 

electrochemical stability window was obtained using i-t characterization technique and the linear sweep voltammetry 

respectively.  

Experimental 

Materials 

The SPEs system involved the use of poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly (vinyl chloride) (PVC) with average 

molecular weights of 1×106 (Sigma Aldrich), and 6×104 respectively. LiPF6 was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. 

Titanium oxide (TiO2), Barium Titanate (BaTiO3), Cerium oxide (CeO2) and Erbium oxide (Er2O3) were acquired 

from Sigma Aldrich. Anhydrous tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as solvent purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Table 1 

shows the particle size and crystalline size for the investigated nanofiller in the present system. 

Preparation of solid polymer electrolyte 

All the solid polymer electrolyte (SPEs) samples were prepared using universal solution cast technique. A snapshot 

of the technique is shown in the flowchart (Fig 2). The PEO is used as host polymer and PVC as blend polymer in 

constant ratio 50:50. LiPF6 was chosen as salt in constant ratio [Ö]:[Li+] of 8:1 (eq. 1) and various nanofiller BaTiO3, 

TiO2, CeO2 and Er2O3 with 10 wt. % constant concentration w.r.t host polymer PEO.  

Ö

Li+ = No.of monomer unit in half a gram of PEO

No. of LiPF6 molecular in half a gram of salt × wt.of PEO was taken 

wt. of salt taken
         (1) 

 
The preparation of SPEs involves the dissolution of PEO, PVC in tetrahydrofuran (THF) solvent at 40 °C and then 

polymer solutions were mixed/stirred for several hours to form the polymer matrix of electrolyte system. After 

complete dissolution of the polymer, an appropriate amount of LiPF6 was added to the polymer blend matrix and the 

mixture was stirred continually for good polymer salt complex system for 12 hr. Later in polymer salt complex various 

nanofiller is added in polymer salt system and were stirred up to 8 hr. in order to obtain a homogeneous solution. The 

final solution was sonicated for 30 minutes, then poured in glass petri dishes and left for drying by solvent evaporation 

at room temperature in a vacuum oven. The resultant films formed were kept for further characterization. The samples 

are designated as PP (pure polymer blend), PPL (pure polymer with LiPF6 salt), PPLB (with BaTiO3 nanofiller), PPLC 


(with CeO2 nanofiller), PPLE (with Er2O3 nanofiller), PPLT (with TiO2 nanofiller). Some most intrinsic properties of 

various procured nanofiller are also tabulated in table 1.  

Characterization  

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses 

X-ray diffraction (XRD) is the most useful method for the determination of crystal structure and crystallinity of the 

materials. The X-ray diffraction studies were performed with 2θ ranging from 10° to 50°. The X-ray source is Cu-Kα 

radiation with wavelength λ=1.54 Å.  

Field Emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) analysis 

Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was used to characterize the morphology of the solid polymer 

electrolytes using Carl Zeiss product. Films were gold coated and examined under high vacuum. 

Fourier transforms infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy 

FTIR spectroscopy was carried out on all solid polymer electrolyte films using the Bruker Tensor 27 (Model: NEXUS 

–870)) in absorbance mode over the wavenumber region from 600 to 4000 cm-1 with a resolution of 4 cm-1. 

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) 

Impedance measurements of the solid polymer electrolyte films were carried out using CHI 760 Electrochemical 

Analyzer over a frequency range between 1 Hz to1 MHz at room temperature.  Each sample was sandwiched between 

two stainless steel (SS) electrodes and an AC signal of 50 mV was applied for measurement. The intercept between 

the semi-circle at high frequency and tilted spike at low frequency were taken as the bulk resistance (Rb). The ionic 

conductivity (σ) value was obtained using equation 2: 

𝜎𝑑𝑐 = 1

𝑅𝑏

𝑡
𝐴         (2) 

Where t is thickness (cm) of polymer film, Rb is bulk resistance () and A is area (cm2) of working electrode.  

Ionic Transference number 

The stainless steel/polymer electrolyte/stainless steel (SS|PE|SS) symmetric cells were used in the transference number 

measurements similar to those described in the preceding paragraph. Ion transference numbers of the solid polymer 

electrolytes were determined by DC Polarization technique using equation 3 & 4: 

𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (𝐼𝑡 − 𝐼𝑒

𝐼𝑡

) × 100          (3) 

and 

𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑡𝑒 = 1              (4) 

It and Ie are the total and residual current respectively 

Voltage Stability 

The voltage stability of solid polymer electrolyte films was obtained using the linear sweep Voltammetry technique, 

and cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed at a scan rate of 10 mV/s in CHI 760. 

Dielectric analysis 

The real (Z′) and imaginary (Z′′) parts of the complex impedance were used to express the real (ε′), imaginary (ε”) 

parts of permittivity, ac conductivity and real and imaginary part of the modulus (M).  


Results and discussion 

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis 

The XRD patterns of the pure polymer blend (PP) and PPL, PPLB, PPLC, PPLE, PPLT are depicted in Figure 3. XRD 

pattern of pure PEO-PVC film shows two sharp partially crystalline peaks at 2θ =14.01° and 16.81°. The addition of 

salt to the pure polymer blend shows shifting in peaks to 14.05° and 16.87°. Besides these crystalline peaks, the broad 

hump between 12° and 18° is also observed, and it arises from the dominant amorphous phase of the PVC [30]. Two 

signature peaks are observed corresponding to PEO one with low intensity at 2θ =18.34° and 23.66° which get shifted 

with the addition of salt to 18.70° and absence of second peak suggesting suppression of crystallinity in polymer 

matrix due to the strong interaction of lithium ion with polymer blend. The indexing of two peaks is reported to be 

[120] at 18.34° and [032]+[112] at 23.66° [31]. 

The LiPF6 exhibits two strong peaks at 21°−26° and minor peaks at 42°, 51°, 57° [32]. The absence of these peak in 

the polymer salt system evidences the complete dissociation of salt in the polymer matrix. The interaction of cation 

with the ether group of PEO separates the cation and anion which enhances the amorphous content. The above 

examination shows the presence of multiphase character consisting of both crystalline and amorphous nature [33-34]. 

Further addition of nanofiller may alter the polymer amorphous content due to the formation of the cation-nanofiller 

and the polymer nanofiller interaction.  

The addition of nanofiller in polymer salt matrix indicated backwards shift in PVC and PEO peaks toward lower angle 

side (2θ =13.88°, 16.68°) confirming the effect of nanofiller on PS complex. The addition of nanofiller has brought 

noticeable changes in the peaks with a shift in position and broadening. The shift of PEO peak toward lower angle 

side on the addition of Barium Titanate nanofiller suggests an increase in d-spacing of host PEO. This provides direct 

evidence of the presence of strong interaction between nanofiller and polymer salt complex. Figure 3b shows the peaks 

for BaTiO3 at 2θ =32.08°, 33.67°, 36.47°, 39.18°, 43.44° and 46.81° indexed as [110/101], [001/100], [110], [111], 

[200] and [201] respectively [35-36]. The addition of CeO2 nanofiller confirms the polycrystalline nature of the SPEs 

and high intensity peaks were observed at 33.80°, 47.90° respective to the [200], [220] crystal planes [37]. The XRD 

spectra of Er2O3 doped nanofiller shows the signature of poor crystallization peak of nanofiller at 46.65° indexed as 

[440]. Other peaks are at 32.0°, 36.81° indexed as [400] and [400] [38]. The TiO2 nanofiller added SPE is shown in 

Fig 3 b indicated as PPLT. XRD pattern exhibits lower intensity peaks at 25.52°, 31.38°, 34.05°, 37.26°, 41.27°, 

42.43°, 46.23°, 48.99° respective to [101], [121], [003], [004], [111], [221], [032] and [200] planes [39-40]. It is 

concluded form the above that the characteristics peak of the nanofiller are in good agreement with the previously 

reports and the less intense peak indicates the semi-crystalline nature of nanofiller. The d-spacing between the 

diffraction planes was obtained using the Bragg’s formula 2dsin=nλ and interchain separation (R) using the equation 

R=5λ/8sin and determined values are shown in Table 2. The average crystalline was determined by Debye Scherrer’s 

equation L=0.94λ/βcos and the BaTiO3, CeO2, Er2O3 and TiO2 have size 12.56, 4.07, 8.40 and 5.24 nm. All the 

nanofiller dispersed system shows the characteristics peak of nanofiller which indicates the formation of ion-dipolar 

complexes due to ion-polymer-nanofiller interactions. From the different structural properties of nanofiller it is 

expected that their effect on the structural and electrical properties will be different. From the Table 2 it can be noticed 


that the d-spacing value varies slightly with the addition of different nanofiller while the interchain separation shows 

noticeable change and maximum for the Er2O3 nanofiller. 

Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) analysis 

Surface morphology studies were carried out by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) to investigate 

the effect of nanofiller content on PEO-PVC based solid polymer electrolyte. FESEM micrographs of different 

nanofiller doped SPEs are represented in Fig 4. The FESEM image of pure blend polymer shows rough surface 

morphology with disturbed smoothness suggesting the presence of crystallinity in the polymer matrix (Fig 4 a). The 

absence of any sharp interface between PEO and PVC polymer suggests good compatibility between both polymers. 

Further addition of salt in the pure polymer matrix changes the texture and a smooth surface with small pores are 

obtained which is an indication of complete dissolution of salt in blend polymer.  It reveals the formation of complex 

and is in good agreement with XRD analysis. 

The surface morphology of blend polymer after addition of salt is shown in Fig 4 b. Further addition of nanofiller 

modifies the surface morphology and texture. The smooth morphology for the erbium oxide nanofiller based SPE 

associated with the enhancement of amorphous phase. The presence of white spots on the surface of the polymer films 

indicates the uniform and homogenous distribution of erbium oxide nanofiller in the whole polymer salt matrix (Figure 

4 c). No phase separation is visible in this micrograph suggesting the rapid transport of ions without the presence of 

any blocking phase [41]. This type of nature suggests the presence of strong interaction between polymer, salt and 

nanofiller. The addition of Barium Titanate nanofiller changes shape from spherical to rectangular particles.  Figure 4 

(e) shows a morphology which may be attributed to the formation of TiO2 rich polymer/salt aggregates. A phase 

separation occurs here which hinders the ion transport due to phase blockage of ions (Figure 4 c & d) and a less ion 

transport is expected here which leads to a lower value of conductivity as discussed in later section.  

On the other hand, Fig. 5 shows the EDX elemental analysis of pure polymer and nanofiller doped solid polymer 

electrolytes. The Y-axis shows the counts (number of X-rays received and processed by the detector) and the X-axis 

shows the energy level of those counts. This result can be used as evidence to confirm the existence of nanofiller in 

the electrolyte membrane after the stirring, mixing and drying processes. 

Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Analysis 

FTIR spectroscopy was used for investigating the microscopic details of SPEs and was expected to provide 

interactions such as polymer ion interaction, ion-ion interaction and polymer ion filler interaction. Figure 6 shows the 

FTIR spectra in absorbance mode of SPE films in the wavenumber region (600-3000 cm-1) and band assignment of 

experimentally observed bands are given in Table 3. The PEO-PVC spectrum shows various absorption bands as a 

fingerprint in the energy region between 600 and 1500 cm-1 (Figure 6). The characteristic absorption modes observed 

in the FTIR spectrum at the wavenumbers  ~732 , ~842, ~950, ~1048 , ~ 1113, ~ 1244 ,~ 1351,~ 1432, ~ 1468, ~2884 

and ~2939 cm-1 are attributed to C-Clst., 𝑣𝑠(PF6−), (C-O-C)st., ν(COC)sτ(CH2)s,w(CH2)s, δ(CH2)s, δ(CH2)a, ν(CH2)s 

and ν(CH2)a respectively [42-43]. The peaks appearing near 720 cm-1 corresponds to the C-Cl stretching mode and at 

1048 cm-1assigned to (C-O-C) stretching mode of PVC [44]. The effect of the nanofiller on the peak pattern in terms 

of asymmetry and peak position has been recorded in the Table 3. The signature peak of host polymer PEO near 1113 

cm-1 is attributed to C-O-C symmetric stretching mode concerning ether oxygen of PEO and provides direct evidence 


of complexion regarding band shifting on addition of salt. So, the anion peak can be used to investigate the effect of 

nanofiller on the environment of the cation. Table 3 shows the shift, peak broadening in C-O-C band occurring and is 

strong evidence of cation coordination (Li+) with ether group of PEO.. Any interaction of (PF6-) anion changes its 

symmetry from Oh point group to C3ʋ or C2ʋ. These features and changes in absorption mode of polymer matrix reflect 

their imprint in FTIR spectrum between 600 cm-1 to 1500 cm-1. Also, the complexation of salt with the polymer blend 

leads changes in polymer backbone due to coordination of cation with polymer host. Further, addition of nanofiller in 

polymer salt matrix also plays an active role in polymer-ion and polymer-ion-nanofiller interactions in SPEs due to 

surface group of nanofiller with acid base interactions. 

Polymer-ion interaction 

FTIR spectral absorption modes of the host polymer (PEO) shows clear evidence of interaction of electron donor 

group of the polymer chain with cation. The shift in the position of COC stretching mode at 1048 and 1113 cm-1 

towards lower wavenumber side confirms the presence of strong interaction with salt (Table 3). The vibrational mode 

responsible for the mode at 1111 cm-1 is due to stretching COC of host polymer (Fig 6). Besides, the absorption peaks 

at 1244 cm−1 show an opposite trend with a shift towards the higher wavenumber side. Also, the wagging mode of 

host polymer at 1351 cm-1 shifts toward lower wavenumber side on the addition of salt. Peak near 1280 cm-1 

corresponding to twisting asymmetric CH2 mode disappears on complexation of a polymer blend with salt. Scissoring 

peak of polymer blend near 1460 cm-1 in undisturbed on the addition of salt in a polymer matrix (Figure 7).  The above 

analysis shows changes in intensity, shape and peak which strongly evidence the complex formation of a polymer 

blend with salt via polymer-ion interaction. 

Figure 8(a–e) shows the spectral pattern of hexafluorophosphate (PF6-) group in the solid polymer electrolyte films 

observed in the wavenumber region 820-870 cm-1. The investigation of peak profile of PF6- a band with octahedral 

symmetry (Oh) of polymer salt system (Fig 8 a) suggests the presence of asymmetry in the characteristic band with 

maxima at 842 cm-1 corresponding to ʋ3(t1u) mode [32, 45-46]. This may be attributed to the distortion due to bending 

vibration of P-F bond produced by the ion-ion (Li+ and PF6−) interactions, and it may be confirmed regarding the 

simultaneous presence of free ions/ion pairs by deconvoluting PF6− vibrational mode. Any possible coordination of 

PF6−group with cation usually results in lowering of the PF6− group symmetry from Oh point group to C3ʋ or C2ʋ 

depending on the nature of the coordination that PF6– group possesses (tridentate/bidentate) with cations (Li+) and 

other such active sites having Lewis acid character. However, the greater difference in charge between Li+ and F atoms 

(0.3968) in the C3ʋ structure suggests a stronger coordination than in C2ʋ structure (0.3772). Nanofiller addition in the 

polymer salt matrix may lead to an interaction of fillers with the anions (PF6−) and changes are evidenced in terms of 

the shift in peak. Ion filler interaction is also investigated in next section for more detailed interaction in the various 

systems.  

The free FP6− anion has 15 vibration modes and can be represented as: 

г = 𝑎1𝑔 + 𝑒𝑔 + 2𝑡1𝑢 + 𝑡2𝑔 + 𝑡2𝑢 

Of these modes, ʋ1(a1g), ʋ2(eg) and ʋ5(t2g) are Raman active, ʋ3(t1u) and ʋ4(t1u) are IR active, while the t2u is inactive 

where ʋ1 = 741, ʋ2 = 567, ʋ3 = 838, ʋ4 = 558 and ʋ5 = 470 cm−1 [47]. 

ion-ion interaction 


The effect of various nanofiller on the vibrational mode of PF6–  mode is visible in Fig 8 (b-e). The peak shows a 

change in shape, position and intensity with the addition of nanofiller. The plot shows no major change in the peak of 

PF6– mode on the addition of nanofiller but for erbium oxide nanofiller shift in peak is clearly visible suggesting the 

interaction of the ion with the nanofiller due to large surface area. This causes a change in free anion area of the 

nanofiller based system as compared to the polymer salt system. This change in the free anion area, the peak position 

is attributed to the interaction between nanofiller and PF6– anion evidenced by deconvoluting the hexafluorophosphate 

(PF6-) anion band confirming the presence of free ions and ion pairs. 

The typical vibrational mode of  PF6- anion in SPEs films have been observed in wavenumber region ~830-850 cm-1 

and this shows asymmetry in peak as clearly visible in PS film (Figure 9 a). This peak asymmetry in ʋ3(t1u) mode is 

the result of a loss in degeneracy from octahedral symmetry (Oh) to C3ʋ arising due to simultaneous presence of more 

than two components i.e. free ion, ion pairs. So to study above degeneracy and presence of both ions, deconvolution 

of PF6- peak is done using Peak Fit (V 4.02) software using Voigt Amp profile. The best fit is said to be measured by 

the correlation coefficient (r2). A quantitative estimation of fraction free ion and ion pair in the deconvoluted pattern 

is obtained using equation 5 & 6: 

𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒 𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑜𝑓 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎
 (5) 

and 

𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑜𝑓 𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎
(6) 

The deconvoluted pattern of SPE films with different filler concentration is shown in figure 9. The deconvoluted 

pattern appearing in PS film shows two distinct peaks one is at lower wavenumber and another at high wavenumber. 

It is fairly known that peak at lower wavenumber is attributed to free ions and at higher wavenumber is due to ion 

pairs [29]. In the case of polymer salt film without nanofiller (Figure 9; PPL) free ion peak is at 839 cm-1 and ion pair 

at 842 cm-1 which is the result of peak asymmetry. The deconvoluted pattern for SPEs shown in Figure 9 depicts the 

changing profile of free ion and ion pair peak in terms of change in position and area with a change in the type of 

nanofiller. A relative comparison of corresponding free ion area and ion pair area is summarized in Table 4. As listed 

there is relatively higher free ion area (57.07 %) for Er2O3 dispersed nanofiller as compared to polymer salt (50.58), 

BaTiO3 (51.90 %), CeO2 (54.45 %). This increase in area may be attributed to separation of more Li ion from PF6– 

anion which leads to release of more free charge carriers and it shows the presence of enough interaction of nanofiller 

erbium oxide with salt supporting more dissociation of salt [48-49]. 

Polymer- ion-nanofiller interaction 

For the pure PEO polymer broad band observed between 2840 cm-1 and 2980 cm-1 is attributed to 

symmetric/asymmetric stretching mode of CH2. However, band splitting is seen as in figure 10 into two bands one 

near 2880 cm -1 and another 2910 cm -1 corresponding to symmetric CH2 stretching (ν(CH2)s), asymmetric CH2 

stretching (ν(CH2)a) respectively. On addition of salt, both symmetric and asymmetric stretching mode alters their 

position indicating evidences the interaction of salt with polymer host. The deconvolution of the peak is done to get 


the original peaks in given wavenumber range by Voigt Amp fit. Fig 10 shows the presence of two peaks for stretching 

mode. Further, the addition of nanofiller shows a change in band position of stretching mode in terms of the shift in 

wavenumber. The increase in peak area for erbium oxide based SPE suggests the enhancement in conductivity 

provides by the stretching of the polymer chain. For titanium oxide based SPE reduction in peak area suggests the less 

stretching in the chain and hence shows a reduction in conductivity. So above study concludes that stretching of CH2 

group was interrupted by the addition of nanofiller in the polymer salt matrix. 

This shift in band position shows the effect of nanofiller and presence of various interactions between polymer, salt 

and nanofiller in solid polymer electrolytes. Generally, these interactions impact strongly the dissociation of salt which 

results may improve free ions and results in faster ion dynamics in polymer nanocomposite films. This is further 

studied in the following section and is correlated with electrical properties.  

Complex impedance spectroscopy analysis 

Complex impedance spectroscopy is a useful technique in analysing the electrode electrolyte interface properties in 

determining equivalent circuit and circuit parameters. For pure polymer blend semicircle nature of curve is obtained 

with a diameter Rb extending along the real axis from the origin as in Figure 11. The log-log presentation of these 

complex impedance plot is represented for better clarity and comparison of the different impedance plots in a single 

plot. It can be noticed that the semi-circular arcs are distorted but logarithmic plots are superior in various aspects 

[50]. Figure 11 shows typical complex impedance spectra (log-log - plot) of salt containing polymer blend/PNC films 

sandwiched between two stainless steel electrodes corresponding to the bulk impedance of sample. It is well known 

that high frequency response tells information about properties of an electrolyte such as bulk resistance and the low 

frequency response carries information about the electrode/electrolyte interface. The arc at low frequency side 

represents double layer capacitance due to the migration of ions at low frequency at electrode/electrolyte interface and 

the disappearance of high-frequency semicircle reveals that total conductivity is mainly due to the lithium ions. The 

double layer capacitive effect is due to the non-faradic process occurring at the interface of SPE films and stainless 

steel electrode. It also indicates the inhomogeneous nature of the electrode–electrolyte interface 

The identical trend is obtained for all nanofiller dispersed polymer electrolyte films. In ideal situations, the impedance 

plot in low-frequency regions is expected to show straight line parallel to the imaginary axis. However, the double-

layer capacitive effect resulting as result of the blocking electrodes results in a semi-circular arc. The intersection of 

impedance spectra with the real axis represents bulk electrolyte resistance (Rb) for transportation of Li ions.  At low 

frequencies, there is sufficient time to accumulate the space charge across the electrode electrolyte interface that results 

in an enormous increase in the measured capacitance [51-53]. This type of behaviour proposes that migration of ions 

occurs via free volume available in solid polymer electrolytes and is represented by a resistor. The low-frequency 

response of CIS pattern remains almost identical for the SPE films irrespective of different filler and results from the 

accumulation of space charge carriers at the interface of the ionically conducting SPE films and stainless steel blocking 

electrode.  

An electrical equivalent circuit shows a parallel combination of constant phase element (CPE) and a resistance 

connected in series with another constant phase element (CPE). Former one represents the bulk properties of solid 

polymer electrolyte sample and later one double layer between electrode/electrolyte interfaces (as shown in inset). 


The presence of a CPE in the material sample reveals the multiphase character comprising of a microstructure having 

both crystalline, amorphous and a mixture of the two phases in the PS complex film [17, 54]. Constant phase element 

indicates the value of capacitance and n1 represents the deviation from ideal semi-circular behaviour and n2 is the 

slope of low frequency spike [55]. From the fitting pattern of CIS (Figure 11) it is observed that the fitted (solid line) 

and experimental pattern is in good agreement with each other that validate the authenticity of the investigation. 

Change in fitting parameters with various nanofiller shows a change in electrical properties due to their different 

particle size and Scherer length as evidence from the XRD. The parameters given in Table 4 provide evidence for a 

change in the sample electrical response with change in nanofiller in the SPE films. The model of the electrical 

equivalent circuit remains identical in a pattern for the SPE and PS films with essential difference in the values of bulk 

resistance (Rb), constant phase elements Q1 and Q2 and their exponent’s n1 and n2, respectively as recorded in Table 

5. 

Electrical conductivity 

The ionic conductivity is one of the most important performance measures for SPEs and furthermore, a proper analysis 

of ionic conductivity data can reveal details about the conduction mechanism. The electrical conductivity of the SPEs 

films has been calculated from the complex impedance spectrum given in equation 2. The intercept of the high 

frequency semi-circular arc or spike with the real axis gives an estimate of the bulk d. c. resistance (Rb) [56]. The ionic 

conductivity of pure polymer blend was 6.4×10-10 S cm-1. The electrical conductivity increases with the addition of 

salt due to the availability of ions for migration. Further, the addition of nanofiller enhances the salt dissociation and 

continues increase is seen. The highest ionic conductivity was 2.3×10-5 S cm-1 for erbium oxide nanofiller and almost 

five order greater than pure polymer blend and corresponds to the complete dissociation of salt in evidenced by the 

FTIR spectra. Besides with addition of TiO2 nanofiller conductivity decreases which is consistent with the reduction 

of dissociated free ions calculated by deconvolution of FTIR spectra and also the agglomeration of particles restrict 

the ion migration as noticed in the in FESEM micrograph [57]. The typical conductivity variation with different 

nanofiller agrees well with the filler dependent changes in the fraction of the free anion in the PSPEs system.  

Although the nanofiller content was kept constant (10 wt. %) in this study but from their different particle size and 

dielectric constant value it is expected that it may affect the polymer salt matrix differently. Although the dielectric 

constant is higher (~1700) for the BaTiO3 the large contrast in the dielectric constant of the polymer and nanofiller 

results in the inhomogeneity of the polymer nanocomposite matrix and that does not enhance the conductivity so much 

which shows a negative effect. The dielectric constant of Er2O3 is lowest (~12) among all but has highest ionic 

conductive that may be due to homogeneity in the electric field of both polymer and nanofiller owing to the small 

difference in the dielectric constant [32, 58]. The lower dielectric constant value supports the complete dispersion of 

nanofiller properly with the polymer salt matrix and can play its effective role in the enhancement of the ionic 

conductivity while the high dielectric constant nanofiller is unable to show its effectiveness in enhancing the 

conductivity and may be due to agglomeration of nanofiller. So, the overall high dielectric constant of the polymer 

nanocomposite is desirable for the fast ion transport [59]. Further insight into understanding the overall dielectric 

constant will be provided by the dielectric spectroscopy study which will be explored in detail in next section.  


An excellent correlation of maxima in the fraction of free ion variation and conductivity with nanofiller content is in 

support of our scheme (Figure 12 (a, b)). The ionic conductivity of an electrolyte is related to the number of the charge 

carriers (n), ionic charge (q), and ion mobility (μ ) in the electrolyte expressed as follows (eqn 7):  

                                                                𝜎 = 𝑛𝑞𝜇                                        (7) 

Where n is a fraction of free ion involved in ionic transport, q is ionic charge and µ (ion mobility) is strongly influenced 

by polymer chain segmental mobility. As q and µ are constant for a particular matrix so conductivity only depends on 

the number of free charge carriers as studied in followed section [60]. Further, to support the present results various 

important transport parameters are calculated and correlated with ionic conductivity as in the following section. 

Correlation of free ions area (%), ionic conductivity, number density (n), mobility (𝜇), diffusion coefficient (D) and 

viscosity (𝜂) 

The desirable property of a solid polymer electrolyte is high ionic conductivity (σ) which is directly linked with 

number density (n), mobility (𝜇) of charge carriers and diffusion coefficient (D) for any plastic separator stands for 

electrolyte cum separator. Transport of lithium ions gives rise to conduction on the application of external potential. 

As from conductivity results it is observed that conductivity increases with addition of salt in pure polymer blend and 

further addition of nanofiller leads to enhancement with maxima for erbium oxide nanofiller. This enhancement in 

conductivity may be attributed to the increase of mobility or number density of charge carriers [61]. The mobility ((𝜇) 

of ions represents the degree of ease with which ions pass through media when an external electrical field is applied, 

and the diffusivity (D) represents the ease with which ions pass through media under a concentration gradient [62]. 

Both parameters depend on the number of free charges as ion pair formation or association may reduce the above 

number and mobility. As diffusivity is quite tedious to calculate experimentally, so impedance study directly provides 

this value using ionic conductivity. So it becomes important to study the number density of mobile ions and their 

mobility for performance and development of a good solid polymer electrolyte. Here the above parameters are 

calculated using the FTIR spectroscopy as proposed by Arof et al., [63].  

The variation in conductivity can be related to the number density (n), mobility (𝜇) and diffusion coefficient (D) of 

charge carriers in the electrolyte. Diffusion is said to occur when ion jumps from one site to neighbouring coordinating 

site by exchange of position. FTIR deconvolution was done to determine the percentage area of free ion and ion pair 

and the areas are plotted as a function of various nanofiller (Figure 12). The area of free ions increases with addition 

of nanofiller and is highest for erbium oxide nanofiller. The number density (n), mobility (𝜇), diffusion coefficient 

(D) and viscosity (𝜂) of the mobile ions were calculated using following eqn (8 a-d): 

{
 
 
 

 
 
 𝑛 = 𝑀 × 𝑁𝐴

𝑉𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙

× 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 (%)      (8 𝑎) 

𝜇 = 𝜎

𝑛𝑒                 (8 𝑏)

𝐷 = 𝜇𝑘𝐵𝑇

𝑒
                       (8 𝑐)

𝜂 = 𝑘𝐵𝑇

6𝜋𝑟𝐷                       (8 𝑑)

 


In eqn (8 a), M is the number of moles of salt used in each electrolyte, NA is Avogadro’s number (6.02×1023 mol-1), 

VTotal is the total volume of the solid polymer electrolyte, and 𝜎 is dc conductivity. In eqn (8 b), e is the electric charge 

(1.602×10-19 C), 𝑘𝐵 is the Boltzmann constant (1.38× 10-23 J K-1) and T is the absolute temperature in eqn (8 c).  𝜂 is 

viscosity in eqn (8 d) and r is radius of diffusing species (0.6 Å for Li). Table 6 lists the values of VTotal, free ions (%), 

n, 𝜇, D obtained using the FTIR method [63]. It is observed that the ionic conductivity is closely related to the number 

density of mobile charge carriers. Figure 12 reveals the one-to-one correspondence between free ion area (%), ionic 

conductivity (σ), charge carrier number density (n), charge carrier mobility (𝜇), diffusion coefficient (D) and viscosity 

(𝜂). The trend in variation in free ions area (%), n, 𝜇 and D is almost similar. It can be concluded that erbium oxide 

doped polymer electrolyte increased the dissociation of salt resulting in an increased number density of mobile ions, 

formed more amorphous phases leading to an increased ionic mobility and the diffusion coefficient of the mobile ions. 

The reduction in viscosity further supports our achievement of highest conductivity and number of free ions for erbium 

oxide nano filler based solid polymer electrolyte [64]. Above results are strongly in favour of desirable SPEs for 

energy storage devices with the evidence provided by the FTIR and impedance analysis. Further to get the 

understanding of the dielectric constant and the particle size of the nanofiller dielectric analysis is performed in the 

following section.  

Dielectric Spectroscopy Analysis 

Dielectric analysis of solid polymer electrolyte materials is desirable to investigate in detail the transport of ion and 

are explained in terms of the real and imaginary parts of complex permittivity (ε∗). The complex dielectric permittivity 

(real part of dielectric permittivity ε′ and imaginary part of dielectric permittivity ε′′) is plotted against the frequency 

in the range 1 Hz to 1 MHz for different nanofiller. The dielectric permittivity describes the polarizing ability of a 

material in the presence of an applied external electric field. As permittivity is a function of frequency so it is a 

complex quantity shown below (eq 9): 

ε∗ = ε′ − 𝑗ε′′  (9) 

The real part of dielectric permittivity (ε′) is proportional to the capacitance and measures the alignment of dipoles, 

whereas the imaginary part of dielectric permittivity (ε′′) is proportional to conductance and represents the energy 

required to align the dipoles. Here ε' is related to the stored energy within the medium and ε" to the dielectric energy 

loss of energy within the medium. The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric permittivity are evaluated using the 

impedance data by eqn 10 a & b : 

{  

  ε′ =
−𝑍"

𝜔𝐶𝑜(𝑍′2 + 𝑍′′2)           (10 𝑎)

ε′′ =
𝑍′

𝜔𝐶𝑜(𝑍′2 + 𝑍′′2)              (10 𝑏)

 

where Co (=εrA/t) is the vacuum capacitance, εr is the permittivity of free space and ω is the angular frequency.  

The complex dielectric permittivity (dielectric constant ε′ and dielectric loss ε′′) as a function of frequency with 

different nanofiller in log-log scale are shown in Figure 13. The value of ε′ & ε′′ at low frequencies is three to four 


time higher than the value at high frequency. This increase in low frequency window indicates the dominance of 

electrode polarization (EP) effect due to the accumulation of the long path travelled charge carriers near electrodes 

[65-66]. This results into the three to four order increase in the dielectric permittivity value as compared to the pure 

polymer blend. Further, both the ε′ & ε′′ value shows dispersion with an increase of frequency above 1 kHz which 

may be attributed to the bulk dielectric properties of the investigated materials (low frequency window). A close look 

at Figure 13 a indicates that the all the dielectric spectra for pure polymer and polymer salt with different nanofiller 

are following the identical trend. But, the value of dielectric constant increases with the addition of nanofiller as 

compared to polymer salt complex and may be attributed to the release of more number of charge carriers as evidenced 

by the FTIR analysis. As after the dispersion of the nanofiller of different particle size and dielectric constant various 

possible interactions influence the dielectric constant. The highest dielectric constant or the maximum dielectric 

polarization was for the polymer salt complex dispersed with the Er2O3 nanofiller and  follows the trend, Er2O3> TiO2> 

BaTiO3> CeO2> no filler (polymer salt)> pure polymer blend. The polymer-ion-nanofiller interaction as evidenced by 

the FTIR weakens the polymer-ion and ion-ion interactions. This alteration enhances the polarization ability of the 

whole polymer matrix which leads to high dielectric constant. Now, in the high frequency window both ε′ & ε′′ exhibits 

the dispersion and is attributed to the bulk dielectric properties of the present system. 

The dielectric analysis was explored further in terms of the particle size and dielectric permittivity. In the present 

investigation, although the nanofiller content was fixed at 10 wt. % but they possess different particle size and 

dielectric constant. As the dielectric constant of the whole polymer matrix was three to four orders higher than the 

pure polymer salt system at a low frequency that indicates that the nanofiller strongly affects the polymer chain 

arrangement. The dielectric constant values are plotted against the crystalline size and the εr. From the figure 14 a it is 

observed that the both L and εr shows an atypical trend with the dielectric constant. The dielectric constant was higher 

for the Er2O3 nanofiller while its crystalline size is almost half than of BaTiO3 which has a high dielectric constant 

(Figure 14 b). It can be concluded that beside the particle size and the ion-nanofiller interaction some other factor also 

modifies the polymer chain arrangement and hence the interaction. Figure 14 b shows that there is a decrease of the 

dielectric constant ε′ for the BaTiO3 and that may be associated with the large contrast in the dielectric constant of the 

polymer and nanofiller which leads to inhomogeneity in the polymer matrix. The dielectric constant of whole polymer 

matrix was also plotted against the particle size (Figure 14 c). It may be noticed that, although the particle size of the 

Er2O3 and BaTiO3 are almost same, both effects the polymer matrix in a different way.  

The low frequency response is coined by electrode polarization (EP) effect which is due to the formation of electric 

double layer capacitances due to free charge build up at the electrolyte/electrode interface. While the higher frequency 

region prevents the dipole structures to get sufficient time for fast response in changing ac electric field and hence 

there is a decrease in a number of dipoles which contribute to EP. This prevents the diffusion of ions in the direction 

of the field and results in a decrease in dielectric constant (ε′). Figure 13 b shows the large value of dielectric loss (ε′′) 

towards low frequency region and may be attributed to the accumulation of free charge carrier at electrode/electrolyte 

interface because in this region charge carriers get sufficient time to accumulate at electrode/electrolyte interface and 

contribute to large dielectric loss [67]. The overall dielectric constant is higher for the polymer salt complex dispersed 

with the erbium oxide nanofiller. 


Modulus Spectroscopy analysis 

Figure 15 a & b shows the electric modulus (real part M′ and loss M") spectra of the PEO-PVC blend-based electrolyte 

films prepared through solution casting methods. These spectra are commonly plotted and analyzed for the solid 

dielectric materials, as they are free from the contribution of electrode polarization effect at low frequencies, and also 

independent of the type of electrodes material, and the adsorbed impurities in the sample [68]. 

In case of ionic conductors, at low frequency region EP is reflected by a significant increase in the dielectric loss i.e.ε"  

spectrum. At low frequency side of spectra low value of 𝑀′ is observed and a non-linear behavior is seen with increase 

in the frequency. At low frequencies the observed values of dielectric permittivity do not refer to the bulk of the 

material; this is related to the so-called “interfacial polarization” dominant in these composites polymeric materials. 

To avoid contributing of the interfacial polarization, the modulus formalism can be used for analyses of the dielectric 

behavior of solid polymer electrolytes and is represented in terms of complex modulus (𝑀∗) which is an inverse of 

the complex permittivity (ε∗) calculated using the formula shown below (equation 11 a & b): 

{

𝑀∗ = 𝑀′ + 𝑖 𝑀"                              (11 𝑎)

𝑀∗ = 1

ε∗ =
𝜖′

ε′2 + ε"2 + 𝑖
𝜖"

ε′2 + ε"2              (11 𝑏)

 

Where 𝑀′ and 𝑀" are the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric modulus.  

At low frequency imaginary part of modulus, spectra show zero value which indicates the negligible electrode 

polarization due to lack of restoring forces leading the mobility of charge carriers under the action of an induced 

electric field and supports the long-range mobility of charge carriers [69-70]. Later with an increase in frequency value 

of 𝑀" increases and maximum at high frequency contributed by bulk properties of SPEs. A peak is observed in pure 

polymer blend sample and peak shifts to high frequency with the addition of salt (Fig 15 b). After addition of nanofiller 

clear peak is not visible but variation in graph conforms the presence of peak at high frequency side as compared to 

salt doped polymer electrolyte (Fig 15 b). The presence of long tail in all SPEs at low frequencies is attributed to their 

large capacitance values associated with the electrodes. Shift of peak towards high frequency side suggests decrease 

in relaxation time (𝜏0) which directly supports our idea of enhancement in conductivity and mobility of charge carriers.   

ac conductivity analysis 

The AC electrical measurements (AC conductivity) of PEO/PVC based solid polymer electrolyte were obtained at a 

frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz at room temperature. The frequency variation of real part of conductivity is 

shown in Figure 16. A common feature in polymeric electrolytes shows that ac conductivity increases with increasing 

the applied frequency due to fast ion migration. It may also attribute to increase the absorbed energy which leads to 

increase in a number of the charge carriers leads to charge build up. The frequency dependent real part of conductivity 

shows three distinct regions, firstly low frequency dispersion region then frequency independent plateau region and 

followed by a high frequency dispersive region. The low-conductivity value at the low frequency dispersion region is 

related to the accumulation of ions (electrode polarisation) due to the slow periodic reversal of the electric field and 

commonly occurs in solid polymer electrolyte materials. This region disappears with an increase in frequency. The 


intermediate region at slightly higher frequency corresponds to the frequency independent plateau region from which 

the room temperature dc conductivity can be obtained which is the result of long range diffusion of ions. At last the 

high frequency dispersion region occurs corresponding to a bulk relaxation phenomenon due to short range ion 

transport associated with ac conductivity. Pure polymer and polymer salt system shows all the three regions. All 

system shows a shift in both intermediate frequency region and high frequency region towards high frequency. For 

the high conductive system, high frequency dispersion region corresponding to bulk relaxation phenomena falls 

outside the measured frequency range and hence could not be observed. The dc conduction is attributed to random 

hopping of ions between localized states, while the cause of AC conduction is correlated ion hopping in high 

frequencies region. This observation is indicative of complex ion transport process possibly due to the combined effect 

of space charge polarization (electrode polarization at the electrode electrolyte interface) at low frequency followed 

by long-range ion migration at high frequency [60, 66]. AC conductivity is calculated by equation 12: 

𝜎𝑎𝑐 = 𝜔ε𝑜ε" = 𝜔ε𝑜ε′ tan 𝛿    (12) 

Where 𝜔 is the angular frequency, εo is the dielectric permittivity of the free space and ε"represents the dielectric loss. 

The conductivity for pure polymer blend is very low as observed in figure 16 (a) and is due to EP effect causing a 

decrease in a number of free charge carriers. The addition of salt shifts the curve toward high frequency region which 

is evidenced by an increase in conductivity. Also, the different slope for all system shows varying strength of interface 

polarisation effect. The electrode polarization contribution in conductivity is clearly observed by the strong dispersive 

effect which is typical to a fast ion conductor and saturation limit of electrode polarization effect, evidence change in 

the mechanism of ion migration. This particular corresponding threshold frequency of transition shows the dc limit or 

long-range migration. Two types of phenomena long-range conduction due to the migration of free cations and anions 

in polymer nanocomposites and preferred site hopping conduction through the polymer hetero sites are responsible 

for ac conductivity in solid polymer electrolytes [71]. The high frequency region is visible in pure polymer blend and 

polymer salt system while for another sample it falls outside the measured frequency range.  The high frequency 

region in both systems follows well known Jonscher’s power law (JPL) given by en. 13 

𝜎′ = 𝜎𝑑𝑐 + 𝐴ω𝑛    (13) 

𝜎′and 𝜎𝑑𝑐 are the AC and DC conductivities of electrolyte, while A and n are the frequency independent Arrhenius 

constant and the power law exponent, respectively. Basically, ion migration at low frequency is faster and jump from 

one available site (ether group) to another in the host polymer matrix when the frequency is lower than the hopping 

frequency (ωp). The low frequency results in long relaxation time, and ion contribution is seen in dc conductivity.  

Two competing hopping processes are observed at high frequency: (i) jumping of ion back to its initial position 

(correlated forward–backward–forward), i.e., unsuccessful hopping and (ii) the neighbourhood ions become relaxed 

with respect to the ion’s position (the ions stay in the new site), i.e., successful hopping [72]. The increase in number 

of successful hopping (ω>ωp) results in a more dispersive ac conductivity at higher frequency region [73]. When 

frequency exceeds ωp, σ' increases proportionally on, where n < 1. Low chi-squared value of order of 10-13 suggests 

best JPL fit for the experimental results and fitted values are shown in inset (Figures 16 b & c).  The frequency-


dependent region fitting provides an estimate of the pre-exponential factor (A) and fractional exponent (n). Value of 

n between 0.5 and 1 suggests that SPE system is a pure ionic conductor. The power law behaviour is universal property 

of materials.  The 𝜎𝑑𝑐 (dc conductivity) value obtained from JPL fitting for pure polymer and polymer salt system is 

2.08×10-10 S cm-1, 4.66×10-7 S cm-1 and is in good agreement with value obtained using the bulk resistance (Rb) from 

impedance plot given as; 6.40×10-10  S cm-1 and 7.10×10-7 S cm-1 respectively. 

Capacitive behaviour analysis 

The real and imaginary part of capacitance is calculated using the following equation 14 a-b. 

𝐶′

{  

  𝐶′(𝑤) = −
𝑍"(𝑤)

𝑤|𝑍(𝑤)|2                              (14 𝑎)

𝐶"(𝑤) =
𝑍′(𝑤)

𝑤|𝑍(𝑤)|2              (14 𝑏)

 

Where, Z′ and Z″ are the real and imaginary part of the impedance, ω is the frequency. Here, C′ corresponds to the 

static capacitance of the system corresponding to electrode/electrolyte interface when measured at low frequency 

alternating current and C″ corresponds to dielectric losses in the form of energy dispersion of the electrolyte. The 

variation of real and imaginary parts of the capacitance with the frequency for different nanofiller is shown in Fig. 17.  

For systems under study, the value of capacitance at lower frequency changes with salt concentration and is highest 

for best conducting sample, i.e.  With the increase in frequency, C′ sharply decreases with a saturation region above 

10 kHz. The high value of capacitance at low frequency may be attributed to the contribution of more free ion in the 

system while at high frequency only the ions at electrode/electrolyte surface contribute [73]. The sharp peak in the 

graph of the frequency dependent imaginary C″ corresponds to the energy dissipation and plot of imaginary C vs 

frequency is shown in Fig. 17. C″ passes through a maximum at a particular frequency (fo) which corresponds to the 

minimum time (τo) required to discharge all the energy from the device with an efficiency >50%, called for the 

dielectric relaxation time. The presence of a peak at low frequency is seen in Fig 17. While in other samples peak can 

be achieved at the further low frequency.  

Ionic transference number 

For SPEs to be used in rechargeable battery applications, the principal charge carriers should be ions, and the fractional 

contribution of ionic conductivity to the total conductivity should be as close to unity as possible while the fractional 

contribution of the electronic conductivity should be negligibly small (close to zero). Therefore, it is necessary to 

determine the transference number due to ions and electrons. The transference number of an ion is the fraction of the 

total current that is carried by the respective ion across a given medium. The total effective ionic transference number 

of SPEs has been studied by separation of ion and electronic contribution. Variation of current as a function of time 

for the PS film and SPE films with different filler at room temperature are recorded as shown in Figure 18. 

The current decays immediately and asymptotically approach steady state. The pattern shows two current one is initial 

current known as total current (it) and after that there is a sharp drop in the value of current with the passage of time. 

After some time current get a saturated and same trend of constant current is obtained for all the samples. The two 

processes of migration of ions under the influence of an external field and diffusion due to concentration gradients are 

hostile, and therefore after sufficiently long time, an establishment of steady state is reached. Initially in SPE 


membrane high current is attributed to migration of both electrons and ions while current after cell polarization due to 

blocking electrodes (SS) is attributed to movement of electrons only, known as residual electronic current (ie). The 

initial decrease in current until the saturation state is primarily due to the formation of the passivation layer on 

electrodes. Now, a concentration gradient of ions develops and opposes the applied current by diffusion of ions. As 

the polarization builds up because of the applied voltage, the ions were blocked at the blocking electrode thereby 

blocking the ionic current (iion), and the final current comprises only the electronic current (ie). A large transference 

number also indicates a reduction in concentration polarization [49]. The estimated value of the ionic transport number 

(tion) using experimental data of it and ie by the eq. (3 & 4) and is given in Table 7. Further ionic and electronic 

conductivity contribution is calculated using transport number using equation 15-17. 

𝑖𝑡 = 𝑖𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐  (15) 

The ionic transference number has also been used to estimate ionic and electronic contributions to the electrical 

conductivity. 

Therefore 

𝜎𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑐 = 𝜎𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 × 𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛        (16) 

𝜎𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑐 = 𝜎𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 × 𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑐     (17) 

The transport number values clearly indicate that the SPE samples are a chiefly ionic conductor with tion≈

0.95 negligible contribution from electron and may be sufficient to fulfil the requirement of solid state electrochemical 

cells. The ionic conductivity and electronic conductivity are also in correlation with electrical conductivity value. 

Voltage stability 

The working voltage or electrochemically stability window of the SPEs membranes has been studied by observing the 

variation of current and voltage (I & V) using LSV technique (Figure 19) for PS films and SPE films with nanofiller. 

The irreversible onset of the current determines the electrolyte breakdown voltage, which reveals the electrochemical 

stability of the system where no oxidation or reduction takes place. It indicates a gradual increase in the magnitude of 

current with the rise in the applied voltage across the cells. Initially there is almost constant current through the 

electrodes, while after that with an increase of voltage applied across cell configuration there is a slow increase in 

current and at some voltage beyond some limit abrupt change occurs in current which gives the voltage window of 

the membrane. The voltage value is obtained by the extrapolating point of intersection of two extrapolated lines of the 

high-voltage linear current trace and the low-voltage zero current trace parallel to the X-axis. PS complex sample 

seems to influence the oxidation kinetics in the cell. The addition of filler in PS films gives a safe operating range with 

the majority of the lithium battery electrode couples. During the LSV, the working electrode is polarized and the onset 

of the current may be taken as the decomposition voltage of the given polymer electrolyte. Further, the absence of 

negative current also indicates that there was no decomposition on the working stainless steel electrode [74-75]. A 

comparison of this with PS film and indicates an enhancement in voltage window in comparison to TiO2, CeO2, 

BaTiO3 with a maximum value of ~3.5 V for Er2O3 nanofiller. The broadness in stability window may be due to the 

addition of filler in PS films. As filler attachment with PEO chain occurs and makes SPE film to have high 

decomposition potential.  


In addition, the electrochemical stability window was investigated by the cyclic voltammetry analysis also between 

voltage range -2.5 V to + 2.5 V. To achieve high energy density (E = CV2/2), the high value of capacity (decided by 

electrode material) and working voltage (depends upon stability window of the electrolyte) are required. Since E 

depends upon the square of the voltage, hence it becomes an essential and desirable parameter for material 

development and application purpose [76]. The electrochemical stability window has been found to be approx. 4 V 

for all the samples and is highest for erbium oxide doped polymer nanocomposite (Figure 20 e). 

 

Scheme 

To understand the individual role of the polymer, salt and the nanofiller a scheme is proposed (Figure 21) that will 

enable the clear understanding of the enhanced electrical and dielectrical parameters. The polymer host used in the 

present investigation is PEO and it consists of an electron donor rich group (ether group). When the salt is dissolved 

in the polymer blend then the salt get dissociated in the cation and anion. Further dissociated cation seems to be 

coordinated with ether group and anion with methylene group of the of host polymer chain. This coulombic interaction 

separated the ion pairs in Li+----PF6-. Since, the cation is Lewis acid so it has strong tendency to attach with the Lewis 

base which in the present scenario is the ether group of the polymer chain. This cation gets coordinated with the ether 

group while anion gets attached with methylene group in the polymer backbone. Here, methylene having H group acts 

as Lewis acid and get coordinated with the anion via hydrogen bonding. Now, the creation of new coordinating sites 

and breaking of previous takes place that leads to migration of the cation via the polymer chain. Also, the coordinating 

interaction of the cation with polymer chain modifies the polymer chain arrangement and disorder is produced that 

evidences the increase in the polymer chain flexibility. The enhanced flexibility is an indication of the enhanced 

conductivity and the fast segmental motion of polymer chain provide a path for ion transport. 

Now, the dispersion of nanofiller in the polymer salt matrix is done and various interaction such as polymer-ion and 

ion-ion are influenced while some new interaction comes into picture such as polymer-ion-nanofiller, polymer-

nanofiller. The presence of the above interaction changes the previous interaction occurring in the polymer salt 

complex. As, nanosize fillers are used in the present system that directly leads to an enhanced surface area of the 

interaction. Also, the nanofiller is having the surface group on the outer surface that welcomes the new inclusion of 

new interactions. The negative charge is due to the oxygen of the surface group and this is beneficial for the faster ion 

migration. As oxygen is a Lewis base so cation has the possibility to interact with this alongwith the ether group of 

the oxygen. There may be competition between the surface group and the ether group for interacting with the cation. 

This makes the polymer matrix unstable and the more disturbance in the arrangement of the polymer chain enhance 

the free volume required for on migration or it can be said that amorphous phase gets improved that is necessary for 

a fast ionic conductor. Since, the coordinating sites are crucial for the ion migration so now cation get additional sites 

which make the swim of cation at a faster rate as earlier. The nanofiller addition provides a conductive path to the 

cation that supports the smooth transport and takes part in conduction. As, all nanofiller have a different particle size 

and the dielectric constant so they interact in a different manner with the polymer salt system. But, the overall 

contribution of all nanofiller is to modify the structure of the polymer chain and provide additional coordinating sites 

so that cation may easily jump from one to another coordinating site.  


Conclusions 

Free standing polymer nanocomposite films comprising of (PEO−PVC)+LiPF6 with 10 wt. % nanofiller (BaTiO3, 

CeO2, Er2O3 & TiO2) have been prepared through solution cast technique. X-Ray diffraction results confirm the 

polymer nanocomposite formation. The FTIR study indicated clear evidence for polymer–ion, ion–ion, and polymer–

ion–nanofiller interaction. The deconvoluted pattern of anion peak (PF6-) evidences maximum number of free ion for 

Er2O3 nanofiller. Impedance spectroscopy results provide evidence of bulk conduction as the major electrical transport 

process and the highest conductivity is ~2.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 for 10 wt. % Er2O3. Ion transport number (~0.99) results 

indicate the SPE films to be predominantly ionic with broad voltage stability window (~ 3.5 V). The number density 

(n), mobility (𝜇), diffusion coefficient (D) and viscosity (η) of the nanofiller doped samples were found to increase 

with nanofiller up to erbium oxide and beyond this for titanium oxide doped, values of these three parameters 

decreased. The dielectric spectroscopy provides crucial information of increase in three to four order of the dielectric 

constant as compared to nanofiller free polymer salt matrix and decrease with increase of frequency with highest at 

low frequency window due to electrode polarization effect. Finally, a scheme is proposed to supports the experimental 

evidences and facilitate easy understanding of the role of nanofiller. 

 

Acknowledgement 

One of the authors acknowledges CUPB for financial support and partial financial support from UGC Startup Grant 

(GP-41). The author is also thankful to Mr. Dinesh Kumar research scholar in School of Materials Science & 

Technology at Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi for support in XRD characterization. 

 

References: 

[1] Arora P, Zhang Z (2004) Battery separators. Chemical reviews 104(10):4419-4462. 

[2] Goren A, Costa CM, Machiavello MT, Cintora-Juarez D, Nunes-Pereira J, Tirado JL, Silva MM, Ribelles 

JG, Lanceros-Mendez S (2015) Effect of the degree of porosity on the performance of poly (vinylidene 

fluoride-trifluoroethylene)/poly (ethylene oxide) blend membranes for lithium-ion battery separators. 

Solid State Ionics 280:1-9. 

[3] Armand M, Tarascon JM (2008) Building better batteries. Nature 451(7179):652-657. 

[4] Sadiq M, Sharma AL, Arya A (2016) Optimization of Free standing Polymer Electrolytes films for 

Lithium ion batteries application. Integrated Research Advances 3(1):16-20. 

[5] Wright PV (1975) Electrical conductivity in ionic complexes of poly (ethylene oxide). British Polymer 

Journal 7(5):319-327. 

[6] Fenton DE, Parker JM, Wright PV (1973) Complexes of alkali metal ions with poly (ethylene oxide). 

Polymer 14(11):589. 

[7] Armand M (1983) Polymer solid electrolytes-an overview. Solid State Ionics 9:745-754. 


[8] Stephan AM (2006) Review on gel polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries. European Polymer Journal 

42(1):21-42.  

[9] Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2013) Plastic separators with improved properties for portable power device 

applications. Ionics 19(5):795-809. 

[10] Ngai KS, Ramesh S, Ramesh K, Juan JC (2016) A review of polymer electrolytes: fundamental, 

approaches and applications. Ionics 22(8):1259-1279. 

[11] Lockwood DJ (2005) Nanostructure Science and Technology. Springer. 

[12] Pitawala HM, Dissanayake MA, Seneviratne VA (2007) Combined effect of Al2O3 nano-fillers and EC 

plasticizer on ionic conductivity enhancement in the solid polymer electrolyte (PEO)9LiTf. Solid State 

Ionics 178(13):885-888. 

[13] Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2010) Improvement in voltage, thermal, mechanical stability and ion transport 

properties in polymer‐ clay nanocomposites. Journal of applied polymer science 118(5):2743-2753. 

[14] Shukla N, Thakur AK (2009) Role of salt concentration on conductivity optimization and structural phase 

separation in a solid polymer electrolyte based on PMMA-LiClO4. Ionics 15(3):357-367. 

[15] Rajendran S, Prabhu MR (2010) Effect of different plasticizer on structural and electrical properties of 

PEMA-based polymer electrolytes. Journal of applied electrochemistry 40(2):327-332. 

[16] Rahman MY, Ahmad A, Wahab SA (2009) Electrical properties of a solid polymeric electrolyte of PVC–

ZnO–LiClO4. Ionics 15(2):221-225. 

[17] Bhatt C, Swaroop R, Arya A, Sharma AL (2015) Effect of Nano-Filler on the Properties of Polymer 

Nanocomposite Films of PEO/PAN Complexed with NaPF6. Journal of Materials Science and 

Engineering B 5(11-12):418-434. 

[18] Lee L, Park SJ, Kim S (2013) Effect of nano-sized barium titanate addition on PEO/PVDF blend-based 

composite polymer electrolytes. Solid State Ionics 234:19-24. 

[19] Arya A, Sharma AL (2016) Conductivity and Stability Properties of Solid Polymer Electrolyte Based on 

PEO-PAN+ LiPF6 for Energy Storage. Applied Science Letters 2(2):72-75. 

[20] Ramesh S, Winie T, Arof AK (2007) Investigation of mechanical properties of polyvinyl chloride–

polyethylene oxide (PVC–PEO) based polymer electrolytes for lithium polymer cells. European polymer 

journal 43(5):1963-1968. 

[21] Arya A, Sharma S, Sharma A L, Kumar D, Sadiq M (2016) Structural and Dielectric Behavior of Blend 

Polymer Electrolyte based on PEO-PAN + LiPF6. Asian Journal of Engineering and Applied Technology 

5(1):4-7. 

[22] Younesi R, Veith GM, Johansson P, Edström K, Vegge T (2015) Lithium salts for advanced lithium 

batteries: Li–metal, Li–O2, and Li–S. Energy & Environmental Science 8(7):1905-1922. 

[23] Trang TT, Lee DK, Kim JH (2013) Enhancing the ionic transport of PEO-based composite polymer 

electrolyte by addition of TiO2 nanofiller for quasi-solid state dye-sensitized solar cells. Metals and 

Materials International 19(6):1369-1372. 


[24] Sun HY, Sohn HJ, Yamamoto O, Takeda Y, Imanishi N (1999) Enhanced Lithium‐ Ion Transport in 

PEO‐ Based Composite Polymer Electrolytes with Ferroelectric BaTiO3. Journal of the Electrochemical 

Society 146(5):1672-1676. 

[25] Agrawal RC, Pandey GP (2008) Solid polymer electrolytes: materials designing and all-solid-state battery 

applications: an overview. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 41(22):223001. 

[26] Ali TM, Padmanathan N, Selladurai S (2015) Effect of nanofiller CeO2 on structural, conductivity, and 

dielectric behaviors of plasticized blend nanocomposite polymer electrolyte. Ionics 21(3):829-840. 

[27] Yap YL, You AH, Teo LL, Hanapei H (2013) Inorganic filler sizes effect on ionic conductivity in 

polyethylene oxide (PEO) composite polymer electrolyte. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci.8:2154-2163. 

[28] Marcinek M, Bac A, Lipka P, Zaleska A, Zukowska G, Borkowska R, Wieczorek W (2000) Effect of 

Filler Surface Group on Ionic Interactions in PEG−LiClO4−Al2O3 Composite Polyether Electrolytes. J 

PhysChem B 104:11088–11093. 

[29] Wieczorek W, Florjanczyk Z, Stevens JR (1995) Composite polyether based solid electrolytes. 

ElectrochimActa 40(13–14):2251–2258. 

[30] Ramesh S, Arof AK (2001) Structural, thermal and electrochemical cell characteristics of poly (vinyl 

chloride)-based polymer electrolytes. Journal of power sources 99(1):41-47. 

[31] Mihaylova MD, Krestev VP, Kresteva MN, Amzil A, Berlinova IV (2001)  Amphiphilic graft copolymers 

with poly (oxy ethylene) side chains: supermolecular structure in solid state: I. WAXS studies. European 

polymer journal 37(2):233-239. 

[32] Liu J W, Li X H, Wang Z X, Guo H J, Peng W J, Zhang Y H, Hu Q Y (2010) Preparation and 

characterization of lithium hexafluorophosphate for lithium-ion battery electrolyte. Transactions of 

Nonferrous Metals Society of China 20(2): 344-348. 

[33] Appetecchi GB, Henderson W, Villano P, Berrettoni M, Passerini S (2001) PEO-LiN (SO2CF2CF3)2 

Polymer Electrolytes: I. XRD, DSC, and Ionic Conductivity Characterization. Journal of the 

Electrochemical Society148(10):A1171-A1178. 

[34] Mohapatra SR, Thakur AK, Choudhary RNP (2009) Effect of nanoscopic confinement on improvement 

in ion conduction and stability properties of an intercalated polymer nanocomposite electrolyte for energy 

storage applications. Journal of Power Sources 191(2):601-613. 

[35] Wodecka-Duś B, Czekaj D (2009) Fabbrication and dielectricproperties of donor doped BaTiO3 ceramics. 

Archives of Metallurgy and Materials 54:923-933. 

[36] Sarkar B, Chakrabarti K, Das K, De SK (2012) Optical and ferroelectric properties of ruthenium-doped 

BaTiO3 nanocubes. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 45(50):505304. 

[37] Liu YH, Zuo JC, Ren XF, Yong L (2014) Synthesis and character of cerium oxide (CeO2) nanoparticles 

by the precipitation method. Metalurgija 53(4):463-465. 

[38] Abu-Zied BM, Hussein MA, Asiri AM (2016) Synthesis, Characterization and Electrical Conductivity of 

Nano-Crystalline Erbium Sesquioxide by the Precipitation Method and Subsequent Calcination. 

International Journal of Electrochemical Science 11(8):7182-7197. 


[39] Thamaphat K, Limsuwan P, Ngotawornchai B (2008) Phase characterization of TiO2 powder by XRD 

and TEM. Kasetsart J.(Nat. Sci.) 42(5):357-361. 

[40] Anandgaonker P, Kulkarni G, Gaikwad S, Rajbhoj A (2014) Nanocrystalline titanium dioxide catalyst for 

the synthesis of azlactones. Chinese Journal of Catalysis 35(2):196-200. 

[41] Ramesh S, Liew CW, Morris E, Durairaj R (2010) Effect of PVC on ionic conductivity, crystallographic 

structural, morphological and thermal characterizations in PMMA–PVC blend-based polymer 

electrolytes. ThermochimicaActa 511(1):140-146. 

[42] Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2011) Polymer matrix–clay interaction mediated mechanism of electrical 

transport in exfoliated and intercalated polymer nanocomposites. Journal of materials science 46(6):1916-

1931. 

[43] Arya A, Sharma AL, Sharma S, Sadiq M (2016) Role of low salt concentration on electrical conductivity 

in blend polymeric films. Journal of Integrated Science and Technology 4(1):17-20. 

[44] Mohapatra SR, Thakur AK, Choudhary RNP (2009) Vibrational spectroscopy analysis of ion conduction 

mechanism in dispersed phase polymer nanocomposites. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer 

Physics 47(1):60-71. 

[45] Reddeppa N, Sharma AK, Rao VN, Chen W (2014) AC conduction mechanism and battery discharge 

characteristics of (PVC/PEO) polyblend films complexed with potassium chloride. Measurement 47:33-

41. 

[46] Vignarooban K, Dissanayake M A K L, Albinsson I, Mellander B E (2014) Effect of TiO2 nano-filler and 

EC plasticizer on electrical and thermal properties of poly (ethylene oxide)(PEO) based solid polymer 

electrolytes. Solid State Ionics 266:25-28. 

[47] Xuan X, Wang J, Wang H (2005) Theoretical insights into PF6− and its alkali metal ion pairs: geometries 

and vibrational frequencies. ElectrochimicaActa 50(20):4196-4201. 

[48] Arya A, Sharma S, Sharma AL (2015) Improved electrical properties of free standing blend polymer for 

renewable energy resources. In DAE Solid State Physics Symposium, Vol. 1731, No. 1, p. 110034 AIP 

Publishing. 

[49] Arya A, Sharma AL (2017) Polymer electrolytes for lithium ion batteries: a critical study. Ionics 

23(3):497-540. 

[50] Tang R, Jiang C, Qian W, Jian J, Zhang X, Wang H, Yang H (2015) Dielectric relaxation, resonance and 

scaling behaviors in Sr3Co2Fe24O41 hexaferrite. Sci. Rep. 5:13645.  

[51] Thakur AK, Pradhan DK, Samantaray BK, Choudhary RNP (2006) Studies on an ionically conducting 

polymer nanocomposite. Journal of power sources 159(1):272-276. 

[52]  Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2010) Polymer–ion–clay interaction based model for ion conduction in 

intercalation-type polymer nanocomposite. Ionics 16(4):339-350. 

[53] Macdonald JR (1992) Impedance spectroscopy. Annals of biomedical engineering 20(3):289-305. 

[54] Pradhan DK, Samantaray BK, Choudhary RNP, Thakur AK (2005) Effect of plasticizer on structure 

property relationship in composite polymer electrolytes. Journal of power sources 139(1):384-393. 


[55] Scrosati B, Croce F, Persi L (2000) Impedance spectroscopy study of PEO‐ based nanocomposite 

polymer electrolytes. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 147(5):1718-1721. 

[56] Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2013) High ionic conductivity and desirable stability properties of PNC for 

renewable energy applications. In Solid State Physics: Proceedings Of The 57th DAE Solid State Physics 

Symposium, Vol. 1512, No. 1, pp. 954-955 AIP Publishing. 

[57] Shukla N, Thakur AK (2011) Enhancement in electrical and stability properties of amorphous polymer 

based nanocomposite electrolyte. Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids 357(22):3689-3701. 

[58] Hu W, Zhang S N, Niu X, Liu C, Pei Q (2014) An aluminum nanoparticle–acrylate copolymer 

nanocomposite as a dielectric elastomer with a high dielectric constant. Journal of Materials Chemistry 

C 2(9):1658-1666. 

[59] Wang J, Guan F, Cui L, Pan J, Wang Q, Zhu L (2014) Achieving high electric energy storage in a polymer 

nanocomposite at low filling ratios using a highly polarizable phthalocyanine interphase. Journal of 

Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics 52(24):1669-1680. 

[60] Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2015) Relaxation behavior in clay-reinforced polymer nanocomposites. Ionics 

21(6):1561-1575. 

[61] Bandara TM, Dissanayake MA, Albinsson I, Mellander BE (2011) Mobile charge carrier concentration 

and mobility of a polymer electrolyte containing PEO and Pr4N+I− using electrical and dielectric 

measurements. Solid State Ionics. 189(1):63-68. 

[62] Park M, Zhang X, Chung M, Less GB, Sastry AM (2010) A review of conduction phenomena in Li-ion 

batteries. Journal of Power Sources 95(24):7904-7929. 

[63] Arof AK, Amirudin S, Yusof SZ, Noor IM (2014) A method based on impedance spectroscopy to 

determine transport properties of polymer electrolytes. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16(5):1856-

1867. 

[64] Rahaman MH, Khandaker MU, Khan ZR, Kufian MZ, Noor IS, Arof AK (2014) Effect of gamma 

irradiation on poly (vinyledenedifluoride)–lithium bis (oxalato) borate electrolyte. Physical Chemistry 

Chemical Physics 16(23):11527-11537. 

[65] Elashmawi IS, Gaabour LH. Raman (2015) morphology and electrical behavior of nanocomposites based 

on PEO/PVDF with multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Results in Physics 5:105-110. 

[66]  Sadiq M, Arya A, Sharma AL (2017) Dielectric Study of Polymer Nanocomposite Films for Energy 

Storage Applications. In Recent Trends in Materials and Devices 178:389-396. 

[67] Sunitha VR, Radhakrishnan S (2016) Impedance and dielectric studies of nanocomposite polymer 

electrolyte systems using MMT and ferroelectric fillers. Ionics 22: 2437. (doi:10.1007/s11581-016-1784) 

[68] Choudhary S, Sengwa RJ (2015) Structural and dielectric studies of amorphous and semicrystalline 

polymers blend-based nanocomposite electrolytes. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 132:41311 (1-12).(doi: 

10.1002/app.41311) 


[69] Li W, Xing Y, Wu Y, Wang J, Chen L, Yang G, Tang B (2015) Study the effect of ion-complex on the 

properties of composite gel polymer electrolyte based on Electrospun PVdF nanofibrous membrane. 

Electrochimica Acta 151:289-296. 

[70] Hema M, Tamilselvi P (2016) Lithium ion conducting PVA: PVdF polymer electrolytes doped with nano 

SiO2 and TiO2 filler. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 96:42-48. 

[71] Sharma AL, Thakur AK (2011) AC conductivity and relaxation behavior in ion conducting polymer 

nanocomposite. Ionics 17(2):135-143. 

[72] Shukla N, Thakur AK, Shukla A, Marx DT (2014) Ion conduction mechanism in solid polymer 

electrolyte: An applicability of almond-west formalism. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci 9:7644-7659. 

[73] Biswal M, Banerjee A, Deo M, Ogale S (2013) From dead leaves to high energy density supercapacitors. 

Energy & Environmental Science 6(4):1249-1259. 

[74] Nancy AC, Suthanthiraraj SA (2017) Effect of Al2O3 nanofiller on the electrical, thermal and structural 

properties of PEO:PPG based nanocomposite polymer electrolyte. Ionics 23(6):1439-1449. 

[75] Sharma AL, Shukla N, Thakur AK (2008) Studies on structure property relationship in a polymer–clay 

nanocomposite film based on (PAN)8LiClO4. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics 

46(23):2577-2592. 

[76] Yadav M, Kumar M, Tiwari T, Srivastava N (2016) Wheat starch+ NaI: a high conducting environment 

friendly electrolyte system for energy devices. Ionics. (doi:10.1007/s11581-016-1930-8) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure Caption 

Figure 1. Molecular structures of the constituents. 


Figure 2. Flow chart of solution cast technique 

Figure 3.  XRD pattern of (a) PEO-PVC main peaks of (PEO-PVC)-LiPF6 + 10 wt.% nanofiller based SPEs films in 

range 2θ =10° and 30°  and (b) major nanofiller peaks in range 2θ =30° and 50°. 

Figure 4. FESEM micrographs of (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT 

Figure 5. EDX elemental analysis pattern of (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT electrolyte 

membranes. 

Figure 6. FTIR spectrum of SPE films comprising of (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT 

 Figure 7. Evidences of polymer-ion-nanofiller interaction by changes in profile of wagging mode of CH2 based on 

(a)PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, and (f) PPLT. 

Figure 8. Effect of nanofiller concentration on the changes in the absorption band profile of PF6−vibrational mode in 

(a) PPL, (b) PPLB, (c) PPLC, (d) PPLE, and (e) PPLT. 

Figure 9. Typical deconvoluted pattern of hexaflorophospahte (PF6-) band at ϑ=840 cm-1 showing contribution of 

free ion and ion pair in (a) PPL, (b) PPLB, (c) PPLC and (d) PPLE. 

Figure 10.Evidence of polymer-ion-nanofiller interaction by change in spectral band profile of symmetric/asymmetric 

mode of CH2based on (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT. 

Figure 11.Complex impedance plot of SPE films (a) PP (b) PPL (c) PPLB (d) PPLC (e) PPLE (f) PPLT. 

Figure 12. Plot of variation in free ions area (%), ionic conductivity (σ), charge carrier number density (n), charge 

carrier mobility (𝜇), diffusion coefficient (D) and viscosity (η) obtained from FTIR method. 

Figure 13. Variation of real (ε′) and imaginary part (ε′′) of dielectric constant with frequency for (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) 

PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT. 

Figure 14. Variation of ε′ (at 10 kHz) against the crystalline size, dielectric permittivity and the particle size of the 

various nanofiller. 

Figure 15. Frequency dependent real part 𝑀′ and loss 𝑀" of complex electric modulus for (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, 

(d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT. 

Figure 16. Variation of A.C. conductivity as a function of frequency for (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) 

PPLE and (f) PPLT. 

Figure 17. Variation of C′ and C″ with frequency for (a) PP, (b) PPL, (c) PPLB, (d) PPLC, (e) PPLE, (f) PPLT. 

Figure 18. Ion transference number of SPE films (a) PPLB, (b) PPLC, (c) PPLE, and (d) PPLT with PPL in inset. 

Figure 19. Linear Sweep Voltammetry of SPE films (a) PPLB, (b) PPLC, (c) PPLE and (d) PPLT with PPL in inset. 

Figure 20. Cyclic voltamogram of (a)PP, (b) PPLB, (c) PPLC, (d) PPLE and (e) PPLT.  

Figure 21. Proposed interaction scheme in the polymer nanocomposite matrix. 

Table Caption 

 


Table 1. Particle size and crystalline size of the BaTiO3. CeO2, Er2O3 and TiO2 nanofiller used in the present system 
for preparation of polymer nanocomposites. 

 

Table 2. Values of 2 (degree), d-spacing (nm) and R (Å) of pure PEO-PVC and polymer salt with BaTiO3, CeO2, 

Er2O3 and TiO2 for (120) diffraction peak. 

 

Table 3.FTIR band identification and assignment in SPE films (a) PP (b) PPL (c) PPLB (d) PPLC (e) PPLE (f) PPLT 

Table 4.Peak position of deconvoluted free ion and ion pair peak of SPE film  

Table 5.Fitted Parameters of Nonlinear Least Squares (NLS) Fit of the samples comprising of SPE films 

Table 6. The values of VTotal, free ions (%), n, 𝜇, D, 𝜂 obtained using the FTIR method. 

Table 7. Ionic Transference Number, Electronic and Ionic conductivity for various nanofiller based solid polymer 

electrolytes 

 

 

 

 


