Page 1 of 24 
 

Processing of dense bio-inspired ceramics with deliberate microtexture 

 

Hortense Le Ferrand1, Florian Bouville1,*, André R. Studart 1,* 

 

1 Complex Materials, Department of Materials, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 

*florian.bouville@mat.ethz.ch, *andre.studart@mat.ethz.ch 

        

Abstract 

 

The architectures of biological hard materials reveal finely tailored complex assemblies of 

mineral crystals. Numerous recent studies associate the design of these local assemblies with 

impressive macroscopic response. Reproducing such exquisite control in technical ceramics 

conflicts with commonly used processing methods. Here, we circumvent this issue by combining 

the recently developed Magnetically-Assisted Slip Casting (MASC) technique with the well-

established process of Templated Grain Growth (TGG). MASC enables the local control over the 

orientation of platelets dispersed among smaller isotropic particles. After a high temperature 

pressure-less treatment, the grains of the final ceramic follow the same orientation of the initial 

platelets. This combination allows us to produce 95 % dense alumina part with a grain orientation 

following any deliberate orientation. We successfully fabricated microstructures inspired from 

biological materials with ceramics that present periodically varying patterns with a programmable 

pitch of a few tens of microns. We confirmed the capacity of the process to tailor local 

mechanical properties through local grains orientation using micro-indentation. This micrometer 

scale control over the local mechanical properties could be applied to adapt ceramic structures to 

complex loads using this inexpensive and scalable process. In systems where functional properties 

also depend on anisotropic grain orientation, the principle presented here could enable the 

creation of new multifunctional ceramics.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Page 2 of 24 
 

Introduction 

  

Ceramics are ubiquitous in extreme environments due to their ability to sustain 

harsh chemicals and high temperatures while being mechanically loaded. As for most 

polycrystalline materials, the mechanical response of dense ceramics is strongly correlated 

to their internal grain structure (1, 2). Generally, ceramics with submicron sized grains are 

harder and stronger but less tough than ceramics with larger grains (3–6). In addition, the 

presence of anisotropy in the form of elongated inclusions or grains has been found to 

enable crack deflection mechanisms and therefore to increase the energy needed to 

propagate a crack through the material (7, 8). Functional properties coming from the 

crystalline lattice, for instance piezoelectricity, also depends strongly on grain orientation 

(9). Controlling the size, shape and orientation of the grains is thus a prerequisite for the 

fabrication of dense ceramics adapted to their specific use. Traditionally, this is achieved 

by optimizing the high temperature sintering step that transforms an assembly of particles 

into a dense part through mass transport. The resulting particle’s rearrangement and 

change in size depend highly on the particle’s chemical composition, homogeneity, size, 

aspect ratio and global packing, along with the heating rate, atmosphere and the final 

sintering temperature. Without deliberately promoting the formation of oriented 

microstructures, the ceramics obtained through conventional sintering will present 

isotropic grains or randomly oriented elongated crystals. To fabricate a dense ceramic with 

anisotropic mechanical response or local variations in hardness, strength or toughness, it is 

thus required to purposely control the orientation of the grains within the sintered ceramic 

structure. 

Deliberately textured dense ceramics can be obtained by methods that combine 

control over particle orientation and densification. The term texture refers here to a 

preferred orientation of grains in a particular direction in the material. Spherical particles 

with anisotropic magnetic susceptibility in their crystallographic structure can be oriented 

during casting using ultra high magnetic fields of 10 T, resulting in a textured ceramic 

after sintering (10). To avoid the use of such powerful magnets, anisotropic particles have 

been used as starting materials and aligned by tape-casting (9), electric fields (11, 12) or 

via ice-templating followed or not by hot pressing (13–15). Another approach is to use the 

preferential crystallographic orientation of these anisotropic templates to grow oriented 

larger grain structures during the sintering, a method called templated grain growth (TGG) 


Page 3 of 24 
 

(16). Despite how complex these synthetic microstructures appear to be, they pale in 

comparison to natural ones. One particularly interesting natural structure, called Bouligand 

structure, consists of layers of aligned mineral needles that are progressively rotated with 

respect to their neighbor, forming a periodic pattern. This assembly is recurrently found in 

the endoskeletons and exoskeletons of mammals and invertebrates (17, 18) and is closely 

related to outstanding mechanical performance with unprecedented impact resistance (19–

21). The fabrication of such exquisite variation in local texture has been recently achieved 

in composite materials up to 50 vol% mineral content using additive manufacturing 

methods based on 3D printing (22–25) or magnetic alignment with slip-casting (MASC) 

(26).  

These latest efforts to bring complex heterogeneous texture into polymer/ceramic 

composites have not yet reached dense ceramics. The major hurdle is the necessary 

uniaxial pressing step used for densification that inevitably erases the microstructure. A 

recent study successfully oriented large anisotropic alumina microplatelets in a suspension 

of small alumina nanoparticles using low magnetic fields, but the gelling reaction used to 

maintain the particles in place does not allow for a local control of their orientation (27). 

Tailoring the texture at the micrometer scale to explore the effect of local tuning of the 

properties therefore calls for new processing strategies. 

 
In this study, we present a scalable and programmable bottom-up method to 

fabricate 95% dense ceramics with unprecedented microtexture resulting in unusual 

control over the local mechanical properties. The technique combines magnetically-

assisted slip casting (MASC) to enable the fabrication of periodic microstructures with 

sub-millimeter pitches, with pressure-less densification by templated grain growth (TGG). 

The process can be computer-controlled to fabricate periodic textures, offers possibilities 

of 3D shaping and flexibility in final grain size. Building up periodic microstructures 

inspired from biological hard materials could provide avenues for technical ceramics with 

locally tailored response or impact-resistance properties. Beyond mechanics, the process 

can be extended to locally tune other grain-size dependent functions such as thermal 

conductivity, optical properties or piezoelectric response. 

 

 

 

 

 


Page 4 of 24 
 

Processing path for the densification of alumina ceramics with controlled texture 

 

  
A combination of two processes, magnetically-assisted slip-casting and templated 

grain growth, was used for the densification of alumina ceramics with controlled texture 

(Fig. 1). Programmed microstructures of anisotropic particles are enabled by the first 

process (26), whereas the second allows to grow grains with crystallographic orientation 

and shape that follow the one of the anisotropic particles (16).  

  
Figure 1A describes the five steps of the process. Prior to assembly, anisotropic 

alumina microplatelets, the template particles, of 8 µm diameter on average, are 

functionalized with 0.1 vol% of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles. These 

decorated particles then exhibit ultra-high magnetic response (28) and can be manipulated 

using magnetic field as low as a few millitesla. Additionally, this very low amount of 

surface modification maintains the overall positive surface charge of the platelets when 

dispersed in acidic pH (27), and therefore enables efficient de-agglomeration with 

positively charged nanoparticles at high solid loading using a rotary ball-mill. The 

colloidal suspension used for the assembly contains 50 vol% solid with magnetized 

platelets and alumina nanoparticles of 180 nm diameter at a ratio 10:90. In the liquid 

suspension obtained after dispersion, the magnetized platelets align under the rotating 

magnetic field generated by a magnet rotating at a frequency of 1 to 3 Hz and with 

approximately 50 mT strength at the area of the alignment (29). When this suspension is 

casted onto a porous mold, typically made of gypsum, the suction of the liquid through the 

pores locally increases the concentration of particles at the surface of the mold. This 

phenomenon jams the particles together, both platelets and nanoparticles, in their position 

and thus fixes the orientation provided by the magnetic field. After complete drying of the 

assembled powders, the consolidated body can be removed from the mold and sintered at 

1600°C for 1h. This yields a 95 ± 1% dense ceramic with a microstructure where 

elongated grains have the same orientation as the magnetically-oriented templates.  

  
Since powder sintering is driven by the diminution of the particle surface, the 

smaller particle with a larger specific surface will present faster sintering kinetics than the 

large template. Consequently, the atoms from the small particles will diffuse at high 

temperature along the crystallographic planes of the larger particles, increasing the 

templates’ dimensions at the expense of the small particles (11). The diffusion is further 

facilitated by the presence of doping atoms at the surface of the large particles, in this case 

iron (30). However, the template grain growth reflects the expected driving force for grain 


Page 5 of 24 
 

growth where the smaller dimensions of the templates diffuse and sinter faster then their 

length. This difference in kinetics translates into a higher growth of the grain along the 

thickness of the templates, with nearly 570% increase in size in the thickness compared 

with only 25% in the length. Indeed, in the conditions selected for this study, the final 

alumina grains obtained have an aspect ratio of 5 with an average diameter of 10 µm and 

thickness of 2 µm. Using liquid phase sintering by the addition of other dopants like silica, 

calcium, magnesium or titanium could be used to further vary the grain sizes and aspect 

ratio and final density through liquid phase sintering (16).  

  
Using this bottom-up approach based on MASC and TGG, we can produce dense 

alumina ceramics with a texture directly resulting from the magnetic alignment of the 

templates. Since no pressing is required for the densification, it is possible to exploit the 

full potential of magnetic manipulation: its ability to orient anisotropic platelets at along 

any direction in space. 

 

Texture orientation at any deliberate angle 

 

Applying rotating magnetic fields with a well-defined direction of alignment, 95% 

dense and textured alumina ceramics were fabricated with any desired texture orientation 

(Fig. 2). This texture direction is defined in the following by the angle φ  between the 

normal to the basal plane of the grain and the horizontal.  

The electron micrographs of fractured surfaces of the ceramics obtained using 

template alignment directions at various angles 
 confirm the development of the texture 

in so far unachievable directions (Fig. 2A). The 2D-Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (2D-

SAXS) pattern presented in Figure 2B was obtained on an area of 20 µm per 20 µm on a 

sample with vertically aligned grains as pictured in the electron micrograph φ =0° (Fig. 

2B). It exhibits sharp and intense interference maxima at ± 9° from the horizontal and two 

less intense interference maxima at ± 64° and ± 52°. Interference patterns appear at 90° 

from the orientation of the physical object they originate from, so the primary maxima of 

the pattern can be attributed to scattering of vertically aligned entities. Since SAXS probes 

features between 2 and 300 nm, it is probable that it is the interfaces along the long axis of 

the grains or the elongated pores located there that are causing the scattering. With similar 

reasoning, it is also probable that the two other maxima come from the short edges of the 

φ


Page 6 of 24 
 

grains. These short edges typically have angles of around 45° with respect to the grain 

long axis, as highlighted in yellow in the micrograph in figure 2B.  

The surface of the templates obtained by molten salt synthesis corresponds to the 

crystallographic basal plane of miller indices (00l). After the sintering, the grains obtained 

also exhibit a corresponding preferred crystallographic orientation along this group of 

plane, the most intense one being the (0012) measured by X-Ray diffraction (Fig. S1). The 

position of the (0012) reflections on a polished cross-section of a sintered sample was also 

used to quantify the grain degree of misalignment. During these experiments, the sample 

is lying flat on a stage while the incident X-rays are in theta-2theta position to obtain the 

(0012) plane reflection, at a 2-theta angle of 90.7° for α -alumina. The sample is then 

rocked around its axis by an angle -40° < ω < 40° while the reflected intensity is recorded. 

The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the rocking curve is thus a direct measure of 

the grain orientation quality (Fig. 2C) (31). Grain misalignment measured by image 

analysis of scanning electron micrographs gives similar FWHM and therefore was used 

for the characterization of the misalignment at angles φ inaccessible to a XRD setup, as 

well as for images from the literature (Fig. 2D). The misalignment in horizontally textured 

dense ceramics (φ =90°) is 10°, a value similar to the one obtained by other methods such 

as tape-casting (11), layer-by-layer deposition (32) or magnetic alignment in polymer (33) 

and lie within the range of the misalignment of the nacreous layer of seashells (Fig. S2), 

the closest biological material in terms of microstructure from our sample. Ice-templating 

followed by pressure-assisted sintering can also produce dense and textured ceramics, but 

with a higher misalignment, in the range of 20° (13). However, the uniqueness of the 

MASC-TGG method presented here is its ability to provide ceramic materials with 

similarly high degree of alignment control but at any given angles. To illustrate this, we 

measured the degree of misalignment in ceramics with a texture oriented at angles φ of 0, 

13, 45 and 78°. In these specimens, the grain misalignment is comprised between 15 and 

25°, the lower value obtained for φ = 0°. The lower alignment obtained for φ equals to 13, 

45, and 78° could arise from both gravity or from the flow of liquid during the drying and 

could be improved by further optimizing the casting conditions (34).  

Bulk ceramics with precise control of their texture direction adds tailored 

anisotropy to the traditional TGG process. In addition, the jamming front position is 

moving inside the suspension during the slip-casting by MASC. Taking advantage of this 

particularity, periodic microstructures in porous particle assemblies have been obtained by 


Page 7 of 24 
 

varying the rotating magnetic field orientation during the casting (26). Applying this 

principle to our suspension will thus enable the fabrication of dense ceramics with locally 

controlled texture. 

 

Fabrication of periodically textured ceramic 

 

During the slip casting, a step-wise rotation of the magnetic alignment direction 

with respect to the sample produces a colloidal assembly with periodic orientations of the 

template particles. After sintering, this assembly converts into a dense ceramic with a 

periodic orientation of its constitutive grains. As a proof-of-concept, we prepared ceramics 

with vertical orientations of the grains, rotating in the perpendicular direction at chosen 

angles (Fig. 3).  

The setup used to produce these periodic assemblies consists in a permanent 

magnet rotating around a horizontal axis, and a porous casting mold that will receive the 

sample placed below the magnet, on a stepper motor. The magnetic field produced by the 

rotating magnet will align the template particles vertically (φ = 0°) while the stepper motor 

will rotate the sample in-plane by a chosen angle θR at every defined time interval τ (Fig. 

3A). The gypsum support of the sample will slowly remove water and concentrate the 

particles until they jam, fixing the templates’ orientation. During a rotation of the stepper 

motor of an angle θR, the templates above the jamming front stay within the alignment 

plane defined by the rotating magnet while the jammed templates rotate by the same angle 

θR. The sequence of sample rotations as the jamming front grows in the sample produces 

eventually a periodic layered structure. In this particular case, it reproduces the Bouligand 

structure (Fig. 3B).  

After the sintering at 1600°C, during which the templated grain growth occurs, the 

sample presents a grain orientation that periodically varies along the z-direction. This 

periodic change in grain orientation is revealed on the sample polished cross-section (Fig. 

3C). The brighter bands on the images correspond to layers where the basal planes of the 

grains are facing the observer, whereas the darker bands correspond to layers where the 

short edges of the grains are directed towards the observer. As the process is based on slip-

casting, the sample’s macroscopic shape is directly the imprint of the mold, giving a large 

degree of freedom in the final morphology. More importantly, the shape of the jamming 

front in the suspension is also related to the mold surface topography, which translates in 


Page 8 of 24 
 

our process into the conformation of the textured grains layers with the mold surface as 

well (Fig. 3D). In addition, the overall size of the casted sample is solely depending on the 

size of the mold and on the area where the magnetic field is strong enough to orient the 

templates. In this study, we fabricated discs of 25 mm diameter and 5 mm in thickness 

using only a 100 mm2 neodymium magnet.  

A closer investigation of the microstructure with a SEM allows the appreciation of 

the grains alignment within each period (Fig. 3E). In opposition with the bilayer structures 

containing only one perpendicular rotation of vertical platelets that morph during sintering 

due to perpendicular directions of shrinkage (27), the ceramics prepared here did not 

exhibit any relevant shrinkage nor noticeable macroscopic distortions after sintering. The 

dimensions of each layer, below 100 µm, and the total thickness of the sample, roughly 5 

mm, should account for the inability of one layer to stress the whole structure. As a result, 

no crack or wrapping developed. However, the local tilting of the platelets observed in the 

SEM image in figure 3E could be the result from these internal stresses. 

Furthermore, when the jammed layer increases in thickness during the casting, it 

opposes a larger pressure drop upon water removal. As a consequence, the jamming front 

speed decreases with time, and directly affects the pitch of the periodic structures in a 

predictable fashion. Indeed, the jamming front line at a position z is expressed by:  

𝑡 𝑧 = 𝐴𝑧!, with 𝐴 =

!"

!!Δ!,  
Eq. 1

 

where η is the viscosity of the liquid, R is the hydrostatic resistance of the cast layer and J 

is the ratio between the volume of cast layer and of the extracted liquid (26). In this 

system, A=119 s.mm-2 (Fig. S3). In this case, the dependence of the platelets alignment 

direction around the z-axis, defined as the angle 𝜃, with time t, is described by the 

following equation: 

𝜃 𝑡 = 
 𝜃! 𝐻(𝑡 − 𝑚𝜏)
!!
!!!
, 𝑚 ∈ ℕ 
Eq. 2 

where H is the Heaviside step function and m an integer. For this function, the period Τ of 

the temporal variation of the angle 𝜃 is given by 𝜋𝜏 𝜃!. Combining Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 gives 

the relation for the local texture orientation as a function of the position 𝑧 from the mold 

surface: 

𝜃 𝑧 =
𝜃!

!
!!!
 𝐻(𝑧 −

!"

! ), 𝑚 ∈ ℕ 
Eq. 3 

This implies that the nth complete rotation of the templates from 𝜃 = 0 to 𝜃 = 𝜋, which 

corresponds to one pitch, will occur at distances 𝑧! from the surface given by: 


Page 9 of 24 
 

𝑧! =
𝑚𝜏 𝐴 for m values equal to 𝑛 𝜋 𝜃!   
Eq. 4

 

Consequently, if the time interval τ between each rotation is maintained constant, the pitch 

p = zn-zn-1 of the structure decreases.   

Furthermore, the pitch p of a microstructure with 𝜃! = 90° is expressed by the following 

equation as demonstrated in ref (26):  

𝑝!" =

!

!!"                                                                                                                         Eq. 5 

then for 𝜃! < 90°, the pitch of the microstructure can be expressed directly as a function 

of this reference pitch 𝑝!": 

𝑝!! =

!!

!! 𝑝!"                                                                                                                    Eq. 6  

We measured the pitch in four samples produced with a time interval τ = 30 s but 

with θR equal to 5°, 11°, 45°, and 90°. The results are plotted in Fig. 3F along with the 

decreasing pitch as predicted from Eq. 5 & 6. The pitch of the structures follows the 

prediction and decreases from a few millimetres to a few hundreds of microns as the angle 

𝜃! increases from 5° to 90°.  

 
MASC-TGG therefore allows the creation of ceramics with periodically varying 

texture. The range of possible texture patterns is infinite as 𝜏 and the platelets alignment 

angle can be varied simultaneously. The control of the mold shape and topography opens 

the possibility to alter the texture not only in the z-direction but also in the (x-y) plane. 

With 10 µm-long grains, the ultimate smallest variation in the texture is thus also 10 µm, 

with virtually no limit on the largest variation.  

Since the grain dimensions influence the mechanic properties of dense ceramics, 

monotextured samples should present anisotropic properties whereas the periodically-

textured specimen should exhibit analogous oscillations in local mechanical response. 

 

Locally controlled mechanical properties 

 

To quantify the influence of the local variation of texture in dense ceramics on 

their local mechanical properties, we measured the Young’s modulus and Vickers 

hardness of a monotextured MASC-TGG sample at different angles ψ, defined as the 

angle between the grain long axis and the testing direction, and compared these values 

with the periodic variation in hardness with the pitch of the periodic sample (Figure 4).  


Page 10 of 24 
 

The Young’s modulus, measured with an acoustic pulse-echo method, and the 

materials hardness, measured with a Vickers indenter at a load of 5 N, are plotted as a 

function of ψ in figure 4A. The Young’s modulus follows a Voigt type rule of mixture: 

 𝐸 =
𝐸!

!𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜓! + 𝐸!"

!𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜓!,                                                                         Eq. 7 

with E0 = 120 +/- 20 GPa and E90 = 25 +/- 10 GPa. The Young’s modulus of a sapphire 

monocrystal is 10% higher along the crystallographic c-axis (415 GPa) than along the a or 

b-axis (385 GPa) (35, 36). However, the difference between E0 and E90 follows an 

opposite trend, with the highest value obtained perpendicular to the c-axis. The difference 

cannot be explained by the intrinsic crystallographic anisotropy and is probably due to the 

presence of the 4.9 vol% of elongated pores and grain boundaries that also follows the 

texture obtained by TGG.  

The sample’s Vickers hardness similarly depends on the grain orientation and 

varies from H0 = 11 +/- 4 GPa to H90 = 3 +/- 1 GPa when ψ varies from 0° and 90°. This 

hardness follows a Reuss type of rule of mixture: 

 𝐻 = 1/

!"#$!

!!! +

!!"#!

!!"! ,                                                                                      Eq. 8 

which indicates that the softer damaging mechanism dictates the hardness of the sample. 

The larger number of grain boundaries and pores along the loading direction when ψ = 

90° are probably providing an easy damaging mechanism. Polymer composites reinforced 

with alumina platelets exhibit similar trends with 𝐻! > 𝐻!" and 𝐸! > 𝐸!". For example, 

a polyurethane reinforced with 20 vol% of alumina platelets has mechanical properties of 

0.25 and 0.19 GPa for H0 and H90 respectively, and 1.25 and 0.75 GPa for E0 and E90, 

respectively (28).  

The measurement of monotextured samples proves that the mechanical properties 

of the ceramic depend on the testing direction with respect to the grain orientation. A 

periodically textured sample should thus present periodically varying mechanical 

properties as well. To demonstrate this, we performed in situ microindentation in an 

scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a Berkovitch indenter at a load of 1 N on a 

sample with a Bouligand structure of pitch 150 µm (Fig. 4B). Prior to indentation, the 

sample was polished via ion beam to obtain an almost atomically flat surface. However, 

the atomic re-deposition during the ion milling partially filled the pores, making the grain 

orientation identification more difficult. The microhardness values are indeed varying with 

the grain orientation, with values ranging from 𝐻!

!"#$% = 18 𝐺𝑃𝑎 to 𝐻!"

!"#$% = 8 𝐺𝑃𝑎. 


Page 11 of 24 
 

The microhardness values are 60% to 260% higher than the macrohardness ones, for ψ = 

0° and 90° respectively. This increase in material hardness as the indent imprint, thus the 

volume probed, is getting smaller is commonly observed in polycrystalline alumina (37). 

The size-dependence of the hardness is associated with a lower number of grain 

boundaries in the volume tested. The different shape of the indenter could also be 

responsible for a part of the difference between the macro and micro hardness. 

Nevertheless, the general trend with 𝐻! > 𝐻!" is also observed. The oscillations in the 

hardness are visible as expected from the grain orientation angles variations. The SEM 

observation of the microindents further illustrates the significant role of the grain 

boundaries in activating plastic deformation mechanisms (Fig. 4C). The indentation 

performed with ψ = 90° show more severe damages, with grain debonding and sliding, 

compare to the indentation performed at ψ = 0°. Cracks propagating at the interfaces 

between the grains are highlighted in yellow in both cases. 

With the fabrication method developed, local variations in mechanical properties 

that directly depend upon grains’ orientations can be incorporated into a 95 % dense 

alumina ceramic at the micrometer level. MASC-TGG therefore uniquely provides 

ceramics with locally tailored hardness or elastic modulus. 

 

 

Discussion  

 

The method presented here enables the creation of 95% dense alumina ceramics 

with a deliberate orientation of the constitutive grains by combining magnetically assisted 

slip-casting and templated grain growth. A composition compatible with TGG was used 

during MASC to fully enable the specificities from both techniques: the possibility to 

program local orientation of anisotropic particles in bulk 3D shapes from MASC and the 

ability to densify the assembly without pressure while producing highly aligned grains 

from TGG.  

The alignment of the grains is almost as good as in ceramics prepared by tape 

casting, the state-of-the-art method, with a Full-Width at Half Maximum of the grain 

orientation distribution of 10°. But MASC-TGG is the only method that can achieve a 

similar control over arbitrary alignment directions.  

The control of the local texture is translated into a local anisotropic mechanical 

response, both in elasticity and in hardness. Samples made with a periodically varying 


Page 12 of 24 
 

grain orientation present an analogous variation of the local hardness. These variations can 

be further modulated by adapting the grain size and aspect ratio through the sintering 

conditions and the addition of dopants. 

To conclude, the combined use of MASC and TGG opens the possibility for 

locally programming the grain orientation in ceramic materials and thus to deliberately 

tune their local mechanical properties. These local variations of mechanical response are 

expected to translate into unusual macroscopic behavior as found in biological samples, 

through various phenomena such as crack arrest and twisting. With the increasing number 

of studies revealing the unique and exquisite microstructures of hard biological 

composites and minerals, often associated with outstanding properties, MASC-TGG 

finally provides tools to further explore how biological design principles could be 

transposed into ceramics. Further development of the process can be foreseen, such as the 

tailoring the final microstructure in terms of grain size and aspect ratio, density and local 

orientation. In addition, the scalability and the lesser efforts of the fabrication should be 

emphasized. Because it hinges on slip casting and pressure less sintering, two already 

industrial-scaled processes, MASC-TGG could be directly used for the fabrication in 

series of unusual ceramics. This local texturing can also be exploited beyond mechanics. 

Virtually any property that depends on the presence of a preferred orientation can be 

locally controlled with this technique and imply effective repercussions on the bulk 

macroscopic functionalities.  

 

Materials and Methods 

 

Magnetic functionalization of the template particles. Anisotropic alumina platelets 

(Ronaflair White sapphire, Merck, Germany), used as the template particles for the grain 

growth, were magnetized following the procedure published elsewhere (28). 

 

Preparation of the suspension for casting. The isotropic alumina nanopowder (TM-

DAR, Taimei, Japan, average particle size 180 nm) was first dispersed in deionized water 

at 50 vol% solid loading and maintained at pH 4 (HCl 1 mM, Sigma Aldrich, Germany). 

Mechanical vibrations and addition of small amounts at each time were required to reach 

this high solid loading. After de-agglomerating overnight using ball-milling with 3- and 5-

mm diameter alumina balls, magnetized platelets were added to the suspension to achieve 


Page 13 of 24 
 

the ratio nanoparticles:platelets of 90:10. Deionized water was added to adjust the total 

solid content back to 50 vol%. Before casting, the suspension was ultrasonicated (UP200S, 

Dr Hielscher) for a few minutes only at a power of 20% to ensure good dispersion, quickly 

degassed under vacuum, and kept under magnetic stirring until use. Due to the sensitivity 

to drying of highly concentrated suspensions, the recipient should be kept closed when not 

in used. 

 

Casting. The porous molds were prepared in advance using gypsum (Boesner, 

Switzerland). These molds were cast and dried at 60°C at least one day. For cylindrical 

specimens, the gypsum was made flat by passing a razor blade at the surface. For 

specimen with a surface topography, the gypsum piece was scratched and cut until the 

desired surface was obtained. A plastic tube was then attached on top of the gypsum and 

maintained using parafilm foil to prevent leakage. This mold was then fixed on top of a 

stepper motor (Conrad, Switzerland) and positioned as close as possible to a neodymium 

magnet (Supermagnete, Switzerland) in an area where the magnetic field strength was at 

least 50 mT. The magnet was attached to a mixer that rotated at a frequency of 1 Hz at 

least. For periodically-textured specimen, the stepper motor was controlled by a LabView 

program sending a step function with tunable frequency and amplitude to tune the time 𝜏 

and the angle step 𝜃!. After complete removal of the water through the pores of the mold, 

which typically takes 3 hours, the mold with the sample was dryed overnight before 

unmolding. 

 

Sintering. The dried samples were sintered in air in a furnace (Nabertherm, Switzerland) 

with a dwell time of 1 hour, a heating rate of 2.5 °C min−1 with the cooling left 

unregulated. Except for the study of the grain growth, the sintering temperature used was 

1600°C.  

 

Characterization of the microstructure. The density of the sintered specimen was 

measured using a conventional Archimedes set-up in water. To ensure efficient water 

infiltration through the pores, vacuum was applied for a few hours. The grain sizes where 

determined in the samples with horizontal alignment. Cross-sections were polished, debris 

removed in an ultrasonic bath, coated with 5 nm of platinum and observed by scanning-

electron microscopy (LEO 1530, Zeiss, Germany). Image analysis using Image J was used 

to measure the grain sizes over at least 100 grains per specimen. For the periodic 


Page 14 of 24 
 

specimen, brittle fracture of the cross-section were directly sputtered and visualized in 

SEM to reveal the local 3D orientation of the grains as shown in Figure 3E. Small angle 

X-ray scattering measurements were performed at the coherent beamline (cSAXS) at the 

Swiss Light Source (Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland). The X-ray wavelength of 0.1 

nm was obtained from a double-crystal Si (111) monochromator and focused using the 

bendable monochromator crystal and high-order mirror. 2D diffraction patterns were 

recorded with the PILATUS 2M detector at a distance of 2.1489 m and an exposure time 

of 
1s. 
The 
analysis 
of 
the 
data 
was 
performed 
using 
sasfit 

(https://kur.web.psi.ch/sans1/SANSSoft/sasfit.html). 

 

Determination of the misalignment. Two complementary methods where employed to 

characterize the angle misalignment. First, fractured surfaces of monotextured aluminas 

were sputtered with platinum and observed in SEM. The Image J plugin Monogenic J (38) 

(http://bigwww.epfl.ch/demo/monogenic/) was used to assign a color to each dark edge in 

the images, in this case the grain interfaces. These colored images where then used as 

input into a Matlab program to associate each color with the relevant angle (details in the 

Supplementary Materials). For each orientation, at least 3 images at different locations in 

the specimen and containing a large number of grains (>100) were analysed and this for 2 

samples. The same method was directly applied on SEM images available in the literature 

and on SEM images from a fracture surface of an Abalone shell. Second, X-ray rocking 

curves were recorded. They were obtained on polished samples with an Empyrean 

diffractometer (PANalytical, Germany) in reflection using the Kα radiation from Cu at a 

wavelength of 0.15418 nm and around the (0012) crystallographic plane. The software 

TexturePlus was used to remove the beam divergence effect on the data. 

 

Measure of the pitch in function of the thickness. The pitch of the various structures in 

function of the thickness was measured based on optical micrographs taken with incident 

light. The pictures where then converted to grey scale using Image J and direct 

measurement was done with the same software. The theoretical fits for the pitch were done 

using the equations 5 & 6. 

 

Mechanical characterisation. Macroindentation was performed using a Vickers indenter 

(MXT-a, Wolpert, Germany). The values were averaged over 10 measurements. The 

elastic modulus was measured using the ultrasonic method in pulse echo in reflection at 5 


Page 15 of 24 
 

MHz (longitudinal probe V1091 5MHz, shear probe V157-RM 5MHz, couplant SWC-

Shear Wave Couplant, 072PR-20-E, General Pulser Receiver, Controltech, Switzerland) 

on discs of 3-mm thickness L and polished to ensure flat surface. The time-of-flight tof 

was recorded using an oscilloscope. The Young’s modulus was calculated using 

𝐸 = 𝜌𝑉!

! !!!

!!!!!!

!!

!!!!! , with 𝜌 the density, and 𝑉! and 𝑉! the longitudinal and transverse wave 

velocity, respectively, and 𝑉 =

!!

!"#. In-situ micro indentation was performed using the 

Alemnis SEM indenter (Alemnis, Switzerland) with a Berkovitch tip at 1N force and using 

a LabView-controlled position. The ceramic sample was initially fixed on the SEM stub 

and polished using broad-ion-beam (Hitachi IM4000, Japan) for 2.5 hours (6kV, deviation 

angle C3, Argon) to ensure a very flat surface. 

 

 

References and Notes 

 

1.  
J. Wang, M. Rainforth, R. Stevens, S. Meriani, C. Palmonari, Eds. (Springer Netherlands, 

Dordrecht, 1989), pp. 337–366. 

2.  
R. W. Davidge, R. C. Bradt, D. P. H. Hasselman, F. F. Lange, Eds. (Springer US, Boston, 

MA, 1974), pp. 447–468. 

3.  
R. W. Rice, Grain size and porosity dependence of ceramic fracture energy and toughness 

at 22C. J. Mater. Sci. 31, 1969–1983 (1996). 

4.  
T. Koyama, A. Nishiyama, K. Niihara, Effect of grain morphology and grain size on the 

mechanical properties of Al2O3 ceramics. J. Mater. Sci. 29, 3949–3954 (1994). 

5.  
B. M. Moshtaghioun, D. Gomez-Garcia, A. Dominguez-Rodriguez, R. I. Todd, Grain size 

dependence of hardness and fracture toughness in pure near fully-dense boron carbide 

ceramics. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 36, 1829–1834 (2016). 

6.  
M. Trunec, Effect of grain size on mechanical properties of 3Y-TZP ceramics, 165–171 

(2008). 

7.  
R. W. Steinbrech, Toughening mechanisms for ceramic materials. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 10, 

131–142 (1992). 

8.  
Y.-C. Chiang, Crack deflection by rod-shaped inclusions. J. Mater. Sci. 27, 68–76 (1992). 

9.  
H. Watanabe, T. Kimura, T. Yamaguchi, Particle Orientation During Tape Casting in the 

Fabrication of Grain-Oriented Bismuth Titanate. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 72, 289–293 (1989). 

10.  
T. S. Suzuki, T. Uchikoshi, Y. Sakka, Control of texture in alumina by colloidal processing 


Page 16 of 24 
 

in a strong magnetic field. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 7, 356–364 (2006). 

11.  
R. J. Pavlacka, G. L. Messing, Processing and mechanical response of highly textured 

Al2O3. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 30, 2917–2925 (2010). 

12.  
L. Zhang, J. Vleugels, O. Van Der Biest, Fabrication of textured alumina by orienting 

template particles during electrophoretic deposition. 30, 1195–1202 (2010). 

13.  
F. Bouville et al., Strong, tough and stiff bioinspired ceramics from brittle constituents. 

Nat. Mater. 13, 508–14 (2014). 

14.  
F. Bouville et al., Templated Grain Growth in Macroporous Materials. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 

97, 1736–1742 (2014). 

15.  
P. M. Hunger, A. E. Donius, U. G. K. Wegst, Platelets self-assemble into porous nacre 

during freeze casting. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 19, 87–93 (2013). 

16.  
M. M. Seabaugh, I. H. Kerscht, G. L. Messing, Texture Development by Templated Grain 

Growth in Liquid Phase Sintered alpha-Alumina. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 80, 1181–1188 

(1997). 

17.  
S. Amini et al., Textured fluorapatite bonded to calcium sulphate strengthen stomatopod 

raptorial appendages. Nat. Commun. 5, 3187 (2014). 

18.  
S. E. Naleway, M. M. Porter, J. McKittrick, M. A. Meyers, Structural Design Elements in 

Biological Materials: Application to Bioinspiration. Adv. Mater. 27, 5455–5476 (2015). 

19.  
N. Guarín-Zapata, J. Gomez, N. Yaraghi, D. Kisailus, P. D. Zavattieri, Shear wave filtering 

in naturally-occurring Bouligand structures. Acta Biomater., 1–10 (2015). 

20.  
D. Carnelli et al., Orientation and size-dependent mechanical modulation within individual 

secondary osteons in cortical bone tissue. J. R. Soc. Int. 10 (2013). 

21.  
A. Miserez et al., Effects of Laminate Architecture on Fracture Resistance of Sponge 

Biosilica: Lessons from Nature. Adv. Funct. Mater. 18, 1241–1248 (2008). 

22.  
D. Kokkinis, M. Schaffner, A. R. Studart, Multimaterial magnetically assisted 3D printing 

of composite materials. Nat. Commun. 6, 8643 (2015). 

23.  
J. J. Martin, B. E. Fiore, R. M. Erb, Designing bioinspired composite reinforcement 

architectures via 3D magnetic printing. Nat. Commun. 6, 8641 (2015). 

24.  
E. Feilden et al., 3D Printing Bioinspired Ceramic Composites. Sci. Rep. 7, 13759 (2017). 

25.  
J. R. Raney et al., Rotational 3D printing of damage-tolerant composites with 

programmable mechanics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 201715157 (2018). 

26.  
H. Le Ferrand, F. Bouville, T. P. Niebel, A. R. Studart, Magnetically assisted slip casting 

of bioinspired heterogeneous composites. Nat. Mater. 14, 1172–1179 (2015). 

27.  
F. L. Bargardi, H. Le Ferrand, R. Libanori, A. R. Studart, Bio-inspired self-shaping 


Page 17 of 24 
 

ceramics. Nat. Commun. 7, 13912 (2016). 

28.  
R. M. Erb, R. Libanori, N. Rothfuchs, A. R. Studart, Composites Reinforced in Three 

Dimensions by Using Low Magnetic Fields. Science. 335, 199–204 (2012). 

29.  
R. M. Erb, J. Segmehl, M. Schaffner, A. R. Studart, Temporal response of magnetically 

labeled platelets under dynamic magnetic fields. Soft Matter. 9, 498–505 (2013). 

30.  
E. Suvaci, K.-S. OH and G. L. Messing, Kinetics of template growth in alumina during the 

process of templated grain growth (TGG), Acta mater. 49, 2075-2081 (2001). 

31.  
M. D. Vaudin, M. W. Rupich, M. Jowett, G. N. Riley, J. F. Bingert, A method for 

crystallographic texture investigations using standard x-ray equipment. J. Mater. Res. 13, 

2910–2919 (1998). 

32.  
L. J. Bonderer, A. R. Studart, J. Woltersdorf, E. Pippel, L. J. Gauckler, Strong and ductile 

platelet-reinforced polymer films inspired by nature: Microstructure and mechanical 

properties. J. Mater. Res. 24, 2741–2754 (2009). 

33.  
R. Libanori, R. M. Erb, A. R. Studart, Mechanics of platelet-reinforced composites 

assembled using mechanical and magnetic stimuli. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 5, 10794–

10805 (2013). 

34.  
H. Le Ferrand, F. Bouville, A. R. Studart, Design principles for textured multi-layered 

composites using magnetically assisted slip-casting. Preprint ArXiv (2018). 

35.  
M. De Jong et al., Charting the complete elastic properties of inorganic crystalline 

compounds. Sci. Data. 2, 1–13 (2015). 

36.  
B. Bernstein, B. Bernstein, Elastic constants of synthetic sapphire at 27 C. J. Appl. Phys. 

34, 169 (1963). 

37.  
A. Krell, in Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings (1988), vol. 29, pp. 159–168. 

38.  
M. Unser, D. Sage, D. Van De Ville, Multiresolution Monogenic Signal Analysis Using the 

Riesz – Laplace Wavelet Transform. 18, 2402–2418 (2009). 

 

Acknowledgments 

 

General: We acknowledge Marianne Liebi, Ofer Hirsch, Sebastian Krödel and Jeffrey 

Wheeler for their help with the experiments and discussion and Tobias Niebel for 

providing electron micrographs of natural nacre. We thank the microscopy center of 

ETHZ, ScopeM, for access to the broad ion beam facilities. Funding: The work was 

supported by internal funding from ETH Zürich and from the Swiss National Science 

Foundation (grant 200020_146509). Author contributions: H.L.F and F.B. designed the 


Page 18 of 24 
 

research, H.L.F performed the experiments and H.L.F. and F.B. prepared the manuscript. 

H.L.F, F.B. and A.R.S discussed the results and their implications and revised the 

manuscript. 
 


Page 19 of 24 
 

 

 

Fig. 1. Pressure-less densification of alumina ceramics with magnetically-controlled 

texture orientation. A) Schematics and electron micrographs at the different stages of the 

process, namely initial dispersion of magnetic alumina template particles and alumina 

nanoparticles in acidic conditions, magnetic orientation of the templates, consolidation of 

their orientation by solvent removal through the pores of a porous mold, solvent 

evaporation and after template thermal grain growth by sintering at 1600°C. The last two 

micrographs are cross-sections of fractured surfaces. B) Evolution of the dimensions of the 

platelets and nanoparticles with the temperature during the entire process along with the 

mineral content (in grey). The schematics highlight the growth of the initial template 

particles into large anisotropic grains. 

 


Page 20 of 24 
 

 

Fig. 2. Texture control along arbitrary directions. A) Electron micrographs of fractured 

surfaces of dense monotextured alumina with various texture directions, defined by the 

angle φ  (°) representing the angle of the normal of the grain with the horizontal. B) Small-

Angle X-ray scattering pattern of a monotextured sample with φ =0° as in the electron 

micrograph where the short edges of the grains are highlighted in yellow. C) Rocking 

curve of monotextured specimen with φ =90° and with φ =45°. D) Grain misalignment 

using the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) as shown in (C) for monotextured dense 

ceramics as prepared in this study (MASC-TGG, black circle measured by image analysis 

and black square with rocking curve), using tape-casting (11), layer-by-layer process (32) 

or freeze casting (13) and compared with the natural nacre from an Abalone seashell (see 

Fig. S2). 

 
 


Page 21 of 24 
 

 

 

Figure 3: Fabrication and control of the pitch of periodically textured ceramics by 

MASC-TGG. A) Setup used to obtain a periodic ceramic with vertical orientation of 

grains. The step rotating motor turns the sample by an angle θR at each step while a 

rotating permanent magnet aligns the template particles vertically. B) Schematics of layer-

by-layer texture pile-up during the growth of the jamming front during MASC. Optical 

micrographs of the final dense ceramic featuring the periodic layering (C) and the 

conformation of the periodic structure on the sample’s surface topology (D). E) Electron 

micrographs showing the periodic microstructure of the grain orientation and the 

definition of the pitch on a sample made with a θR = 90° and a time interval τ = 30 s. F) 

Optical measurement of the influence of the angle θR imposed during the casting on the 

pitch of the final structure, lines have been fitted according to equations 5 & 6. 

 
 


Page 22 of 24 
 

 

Figure 4: Texture-dependent mechanical properties of monotextured and 

periodically textured samples prepared by MASC-TGG. A) Dependence of the 

Young’s modulus E (top) and Vickers macro hardness H (bottom), performed at a load of 

5 N, as a function of the angle ψ between the testing direction and the grains’ long axis 

direction. B) Micro-indentation series at 1 N along a pitch of a periodically textured 

MASC-TGG. The angles of the grains are estimated according to the pitch and measured 

optically by reflection. C) The electron micrographs show the series of indents (pink) 

along the pitch of the periodically varying microstructure placed as in the insert, with close 

view on the different types of damage (yellow arrows) made at an angle of ψ = 0° and ψ = 

90°. 

 

 
 


Page 23 of 24 
 

Supplementary Materials 

 

 
 

Figure S1: X ray scattering of an MASC-TGG alumina ceramic with horizontal 

alignment (𝝓 = 𝟎°).  

 

 

Figure S2: Electron micrograph of a fractured surface of an Abalone seashell. 

 

 

Figure S3: Kinetics of the jamming front during MASC. (A) the thickness of the 

jammed deposit, traditionally called cake thickness, from the surface of the porous mold in 


Page 24 of 24 
 

function of the casting time (black dots) and the fit of the experimental data according to 

equation 1 (grey line). (B) Cake thickness in function of the square root of the time used to 

determine the kinetics growth parameter A by linear regression. 

 

 

Matlab code used after the plugin Monogenic to obtain the interfaces angles 

distribution: 

 

% Open image RGB stack from MonogenicJ, named here “Orientation2” 

    im = Orientation2; 

    [sy sx] = size(im) ; 

    totallength = sy*sx; 

     

    % transform the matrix into one single line 

    vect = reshape(im, [1,totallength]); 

     

    %tabulate : gives in the first column the value, in second column the 

    %count and in the third the percentage 

     

    tbl = tabulate(vect); 

    long = 237; 

    %always put 255 before 

 

     % plots the distribution (value in degree - percentage) 

    for k=1:long 

        value(k)=(tbl(k,1)*pi/long)-pi/2; 

        valued(k)=value(k)*180/pi; 

        per(k)=tbl(k,3); 

    end 

     

    plot(valued,per) 

f = fit(valued.',per.','gauss2') 

plot(f,valued,per) 

 


