arXiv:1807.00777v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  2 Jul 2018

Comment on ”Evidence for absence of metallic surface
states in BiO2-terminated BaBiO3 thin films”

D. Rubia,b, A. M. Lloisa,b, V. L. Vildosolaa,b

aDepartamento de Materia Condensada , GIyA, CNEA and Instituto de Nanociencia y
Tecnolog´ıa, 1650 San Mart´ın, Buenos Aires, Argentina
bConsejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıficas y T´ecnicas (CONICET), Argentina

Abstract

In a recent work by Ji Seop Oh et al., BaBiO3(001) thin films were grown on
SrTiO3 by Pulsed Laser Deposition. It was argued that the films are BiO2-
terminated from the modelling of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
experiments. The authors claim, in opposition to previous theoretical predic-
tions, that there are no metallic surface states on their films.
In this short
comment we question that the authors have enough evidence to make such a
claim, as we consider that the large mismatch between SrTiO3 and BaBiO3
and the lack of control of their fabrication process with reflection high energy
electron diffraction could unlikely give high quality films with a single BiO2-
termination, which is one of the requisites for the stabilization of these surface
metallic states.

Keywords:
BaBiO3, 2DEG

Ji Seop Oh et al.
have recently studied the electronic structure of (001)
oriented epitaxial BaBiO3 (BBO) thin films grown on SrTiO3 (STO) single
crystals [1]. The films were grown by means of the Pulsed Laser Deposition
(PLD) technique. They claim, based on the modelling of in-situ angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), that their films are BiO2-terminated. A
similar claim was previously done by Gozar et al. [2]. According to the the-
oretical work by Vildosola et al. [3], a (001) BiO2-termination should trigger
the appearance of a metallic 2D electron gas (2DEG) at the surface. In Vil-
dosola’s et al. work, ab-initio calculations show that the two outermost layers
of the BiO2-terminated surface turn cubic-like and metallic, while the inner
ones remain in the insulating monoclinic state that the system presents in its
bulk form. On the other hand, the surface metallization is not predicted for
the BaO-termination. Ji Seop Oh et al. find, instead, a surface band structure
inconsistent with a metallic state, and claim that the aforementioned theoretical
work is inaccurate [1].
We consider that the claim of Ji Seop Oh et al. (and previously by Gozar
et al. [2] ) about the single BiO2 termination of their films can be seriously put
into question due to several reasons that we describe below.

Preprint submitted to CAP
July 3, 2018


First, the lattice mismatch between BBO and STO (∼12%) is unusually
large to allow high quality, single terminated, epitaxial films of BBO. Indeed, it
has been shown that the structure of the BBO films on STO is similar to the
bulk material [2], indicating the presence of a strong strain relaxation mecha-
nism during the first growth states. This mechanism has been recently unveiled
by Zapf et al. [4], who have shown by high resolution transmission electron mi-
croscopy that strain relaxation occurs at the BBO/STO interface through the
formation of an ultrathin layer of a different phase that accommodates the large
misfit between both structures, allowing the BBO film formed on top of that
layer to be unstrained. Importantly, the BBO films develop crystallographic
domains, with typical sizes of 10-40nm, and antiphase boundaries. In these ex-
tended defects, a lattice shift of half unit cell is found between adjacent grains
in the direction perpendicular to the substrate. This indicates that a single
atomic termination for BBO films grown on STO is hardly achievable. To cir-
cumvent this problem, substrates with lower mismatch such as LaLuO3 should
be used[5], or buffers with intermediate cell parameters should be sandwiched
between STO and BBO, in order to allow an efficient strain accommodation,
avoiding the formation of extended defects. The latter strategy was followed in
Ref. 6.
Second, the standard procedure to obtain a desired atomic termination for an
ABO3 perovskite grown by PLD on TiO2-terminated STO is by using reflection
high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) assisted deposition. In particular, the
growth conditions should be optimized in order to get a layer-by-layer growth
mechanism, and the RHEED intensity oscillations allows to control the film
termination (either BO2 or AO). In their paper, Ji Seop Oh et al. do not report
a growth process assisted by RHEED, so that we consider that it is highly
unlikely to obtain a BBO single termination without this high control of the
deposition process. In addition, they did not complement their studies with a
BaO-terminated film, as one would expect. Based on these considerations, we
think that the modelling of the ARPES data is not enough evidence to claim that
the fabricated BBO films are BiO2-terminated and that the measured surface
band structure by Ji Seop Oh et al. does not correspond to the single BiO2-
terminated (001) surface.
Finally, we would like to criticize the authors claim saying that the absence
of a metallic surface state could be attributed to the oversimplified theoreti-
cal calculation, which fails to give an accurate estimation of the band gap in
BBO. It is true, as the authors say, that the theoretical value of the band gap
depends strongly on the approximation done in the exchange-correlation func-
tional. BBO is not an exception of this rule. This effect was studied in detailed
in Ref. 7 and confirmed by some of us in the Supplementary Material of Ref.
3. In addition, the authors claim that the theoretical gap values of Ref. 3 were
much smaller than the lower bound of 1.9 eV they obtained from the ARPES
spectra. Here, the authors should distinguish between the direct optical gap
(Eg) that, for bulk BBO, is around 2 eV, and the smaller indirect gap, Ei.
While the experimental value of Eg is quite well accounted by several function-
als used in the above mentioned theoretical works (regarding bulk BBO), there

2


is some dispersion in the reported experimental values of Ei, ranging from 0.2 to
1.1 eV. The functional used both in Ref. 3 and Ref. 7 give values of Ei that lie
well within that range except for the simplest local and semilocal functionals as
LDA[8] or GGA[9]. In any case, we want to remark that in Ref. 3 it was demon-
strated that the predicted appearance of metallic states at the BiO2-terminated
surface is independent of the value of the band gap and it is robust against the
functional used in the DFT calculation.
In summary, we consider that the conclusions of the work by Ji Seop Oh et
al. are inaccurate, as the chosen STO substrate is not the appropriate to obtain
high quality single terminated BBO films due to the large mismatch between
both structures. The experimental validation of the mechanism theoretically
proposed by Vildosola et al. waits for the band structure characterization of
highly controlled BiO2-terminated BBO films grown on lower mismatch sub-
strates.
The authors acknowledge finantial support from ANPCyT. In particular, D.
Rubi and A. M. Llois are supported by PICT-2016-0867. D. Rubi also thanks
support from PICT 2017-1836 while A. M. Llois from PICT-2014-1555. Finally,
V. Vildosola thanks PICT 2015 0869 and PICTE 2014 134.

References

[1] J. S. Oh, M. Kim, G. Kim, H. G. Lee, H. K. Yoo, S. Sinn, Y. J. Chang,
M. Han, C. Jozwiak, A. Bostwick, E. Rotenberg, H.-D. Kim, T. W. Noh,
Evidence for absence of metallic surface states in bio2-terminated babio3
thin films, Current Applied Physics 18 (6) (2018) 658.

[2] A. Gozar, G. Logvenov, V. Y. Butko, I. Bozovic, Surface structure analysis
of atomically smooth BaBio3 films, Phys. Rev. B 75 (2007) 201402.

[3] V. Vildosola, F. G¨uller, A. M. Llois, Mechanism to generate a two-
dimensional electron gas at the surface of the charge-ordered semiconductor
babio3, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 206805.

[4] M. Zapf, M. Stbinger, L. Jin, M. Kamp, F. Pfaff, A. Lubk, B. Bchner,
M. Sing, R. Claessen, Domain matching epitaxy of babio3 on srtio3 with
structurally modified interface, Applied Physics Letters 112 (14) (2018)
141601.

[5] D. T. Harris, N. Campbell, R. Uecker, M. Br¨utzam, D. G. Schlom,
A. Levchenko, M. S. Rzchowski, C.-B. Eom, Superconductivity-localization
interplay and fluctuation magnetoresistance in epitaxial bapb1−xbixo3 thin
films, Phys. Rev. Materials 2 (2018) 041801.

[6] H. G. Lee, R. Kim, J. Kim, M. Kim, T. H. Kim, S. Lee, T. W. Noh,
Anisotropic suppression of octahedral breathing distortion with the fully
strained babio3/baceo3 heterointerface, APL Materials 6 (1) (2018) 016107.

3


[7] C. Franchini, A. Sanna, M. Marsman, G. Kresse, Structural, vibrational,
and quasiparticle properties of the peierls semiconductor babio3: A hybrid
functional and self-consistent gw+vertex-corrections study, Phys. Rev. B 81
(2010) 085213.

[8] J. P. Perdew, Y. Wang, Accurate and simple analytic representation of the
electron-gas correlation energy, Phys. Rev. B 45 (1992) 13244.

[9] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation
Made Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (18) (1996) 3865.

4


