Invited manuscript for Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science, Elsevier 

Final version accepted for publication 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cossms.2018.05.004 

 
1

Current developments of nanoscale insight into 

corrosion protection by passive oxide films 

 

Vincent Maurice, Philippe Marcus 

 

PSL Research University, CNRS - Chimie ParisTech,  

Institut de Recherche de Chimie Paris / Physical Chemistry of 

Surfaces Group 

11 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France 

 

 

Correspondence:  

V. Maurice 
E-mail: vincent.maurice@chimieparistech.psl.eu 
Tel: +33(0)144278025 
Fax: +33(0)146340753 

P. Marcus 
E-mail : philippe.marcus@chimieparistech.psl.eu 
Tel: +33(0)144276738 
Fax: +33(0)146340753 

 


 

 
2

Abstract 

Oxide passive films are a key for the durability of metals and alloys components as well 

as a central issue in corrosion science and engineering. Herein, we discuss current 

developments of the nanometer and sub-nanometer scale knowledge of the barrier properties 

and adsorption properties of passive oxide films brought by recent model experimental and 

theoretical investigations. The discussed aspects include (i) the chromium enrichment and its 

homogeneity at the nanoscale in passive films formed on Cr-bearing alloys such as stainless 

steel, (ii) the corrosion properties of grain boundaries in early intergranular corrosion before 

penetration and propagation in the grain boundary network, and (iii) the interaction of organic 

inhibitor molecules with incompletely passivated metallic surfaces. In all three cases, key 

issues are highlighted and future developments that we consider as most relevant are 

identified.  

 

Keywords 

Corrosion protection; Passive films; Oxide layers; Grain boundaries; Organic inhibitors; 

Nanometer scale; Surface analysis; DFT 

 


 

 
3

1. Introduction 

Passive films provide the best of all means for corrosion protection of metallic 

materials. Thus passivity is a key for the durability of metals and alloys components, and a 

central issue in corrosion science and engineering. Passive films are oxides of the metal 

substrate, self-forming at the surface in aqueous environment and hydroxylated mostly in 

their outer part. The surface oxides are either thermodynamically stable or dissolve so slowly 

that they form an effective and well adherent barrier, most commonly only a few nanometers 

thick, between a corrosive environment and the substrate. Passive films are self-healing and 

may reform when locally degraded or removed by breakdown [1-8]. Self-healing is poisoned 

in the presence of aggressive anions (e.g. chlorides) which promotes the initiation of localized 

corrosion and thereby limits the durability of the self-protection provided to metallic materials 

[9-13]. 

Our current nanometer and sub-nanometer scale knowledge of the barrier properties of 

passive oxide films has been brought by combining a surface science approach employing 

single-crystal substrates with the application of surface analytical methods such as Scanning 

Tunneling Microscopy (STM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Grazing Incidence X-

ray Diffraction (GIXD) for characterizing the nanoscale morphology and the atomic structure 

of passive films produced under electrochemical control. Even when grown on single-crystal 

substrates, passive films are polycrystalline at the nanoscale, as a result of a high density of 

sites for oxide nucleation in their initial stages of formation, and textured with grains of 

nanometric lateral dimensions adopting a preferential crystallographic orientation. Ex situ as 

well as in situ measurements have demonstrated a crystalline atomic structure of the grains for 

passive films on metals such as copper [14-20], nickel [21-31], iron [32-39] and cobalt [40-

42], and depending on the passivating conditions on chromium [43,44] and Cr-containing 

alloys like stainless steel [45-52] and nickel-based alloys [53]. The intergranular regions in 


 

 
4

between the nanograins may not form ordered grain boundaries with well-defined 

crystallographic character, in particular under non stationary conditions during the growth 

process. They act as preferential sites for local failure by passivity breakdown and the 

nanoscale initiation of localized corrosion [10,54-57]. 

Progress in our understanding of the atomic scale mechanisms by which the interaction 

of passive films with aggressive chlorides may lead to passivity breakdown has been brought 

by combining STM experiments with atomistic modeling using quantum chemical 

calculations. Density Functional Theory (DFT) modeling [58-60] suggested, in agreement 

with in situ STM data of dissolution in the passive state in the absence or presence of 

chlorides in the electrolyte [54-56], that the passive film may breakdown by a thinning 

mechanism promoted by chloride adsorption at step edges with formation of chloride- or 

hydroxychloride-containing dissolving metal complexes. For surface step edges of the passive 

film saturated by Cl adsorption, a penetration-induced mechanism of passivity breakdown 

may become prevalent. Reactive Molecular Dynamics (MD) calculations suggested that 

chloride ions preferentially interact with passive film surfaces that are deficient in oxygen 

[61,62]. 

In this article, we discuss current developments of the nanometer and sub-nanometer 

scale knowledge of the barrier properties and adsorption properties of passive oxide films 

brought by model experimental and theoretical investigations. Selected aspects that we think 

of paramount importance and insufficiently addressed until now are covered. Firstly, we 

discuss the deviation from homogeneity at the nanoscale of the chromium enrichment in 

passive films formed on Cr-bearing alloys such as stainless steel, a key issue for the durability 

of the self-protection of stainless metallic alloys in general. Secondly, we address the 

passivation property of grain boundaries of a metal emerging at the surface, also a key issue 

since most technical materials are polycrystals that expose a grain boundary network to the 


 

 
5

environment and primarily degrade by intergranular corrosion initiated at the nanoscale. 

Thirdly, we comment on recent data on the interaction of passivated metallic surfaces with 

organic inhibitor molecules, a high relevant issue in corrosion protection since inhibitors can 

be a major mean of protection in environmental conditions in which self-protection by 

passivation is incomplete and partially effective. Organic coatings and their adhesive 

interaction with oxide surfaces are beyond the scope of this paper since in this case corrosion 

protection is provided by the deposition of fully covering coatings and not by the self-

protection behaviour of the metallic material by a passive film. 

 

2. Chromium enrichment in passive films on stainless steels  

Stainless steels and stainless alloys (e.g. nickel base alloys) are highly important 

technological materials owing their widespread use to the formation of markedly Cr(III)-

enriched passive oxide layers, 1 to 3 nm thick at room temperature depending on passivation 

conditions and providing the high resistance to corrosion [1,2-8]. The chromium enrichment 

of the surface oxide formed in the passive range results from a small dissolution rate of Cr(III) 

compared to Fe(II)/Fe(III) oxides, with a difference even more effective for Cr enrichment in 

acid aqueous environment. Electrochemical overpotential for passivation and ageing time 

have been reported to markedly impact the crystallization of the passive film atomic structure 

as measured by STM on ferritic Fe-22Cr [47] and austenitic Fe-18Cr-13Ni [49,51] single-

crystal alloys, and on Fe-Cr [45,46] and 304 stainless steels [48] sputter-deposited films, and 

concomitantly their dehydroxylation as measured by X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy 

(XPS) [47,49]. This is also the case on pure Cr [43,44]. The 2D atomic lattice observed by 

STM, an example is shown in Figure 1, was reported hexagonal with a parameter in the range 

0.28-0.32 nm independently of the different substrates [45-49,51] and of the overall high Cr 

enrichment measured by XPS in the passive films [47,49]. It was attributed to the close-


 

 
6

packed plane of the O sub-lattice of the Cr(III)-enriched nanocrystals developing in the oxide 

film concomitantly todehydroxylation promoted by aging time and increasing passivation 

potential.  

[INSERT Figure 1] 

The similitude of the observed atomic lattice on the different pure Cr and stainless steel 

substrates is interesting. It suggests that the same O sub-lattice may host varying Cr(III) 

contents with no significant change measured by STM and, consequently, that the Cr(III) 

enrichment of the passive film on a given sample may not be homogeneous and vary locally 

as a result of inhomogeneities in the passivation process. This view is supported by the 

structural data compiled from Refs [63-,66] in Table 1 for chromium oxide (-Cr2O3), iron 

oxides (FeO, Fe3O4, - or -Fe2O3), nickel oxide (NiO) and mixed oxides (FeCr2O4, 

NiCr2O4). These oxides all have an O sub-lattice with a common hexagonal arrangement and 

anion nearest neighbor distance of 0.29-0.30 nm in the close packed planes, and it is only the 

distribution of the metal cations in this sub-lattice that specifies a given oxide structure. 

The most recent nanoscale STM [51,52] and AFM [67] studies performed on stainless 

steel support this idea that the Cr enrichment in the passive film is not locally uniform. The 

STM images presented in Figure 2 displays the topography of a FeCrNiMo(100) single-

crystal alloy surface passivated in sulfuric acid aqueous solution [52]. The terrace and step 

topography of the stainless steel substrate is clearly observed with a covering oxide film 

presenting a granular morphology at the nanoscale (Figure 2(a)). The lateral size of the grains 

was found to increase from 5.3 ± 0.9 nm for the native air-formed oxide film to 11.5 ± 2.6 nm 

after passivation by a potential step at 0.5 V/SHE in the middle of the passive range. In the 

absence of marked variation of the oxide film thickness, it was concluded that the initial 

surface oxide grains undergo a coalescence phenomenon accompanying the Cr enrichment 

induced by electrochemical passivation. Indeed, the overall oxide composition also changed 


 

 
7

during passivation with transient dissolution leading to higher Cr(III) enrichment as measured 

by XPS [52]: the Cr(III) and Fe(II)-Fe(III) cation fractions vary from 57 to 67% and from 41 

to 29%, respectively. 

[INSERT Figure 2] 

The substrate terraces observed in Figure 2(a) also display local depressions with a 

penetration depth that increase from 1.02 ± 0.20 nm before electrochemical passivation to 

2.27 ± 0.25 nm after polarization at 0.5 V/SHE, a value that exceeds the thickness of 1.9 nm 

measured for this passive oxide film [52]. These local topography variations are caused by 

substrate dissolution that competes transiently with oxide transformation during passivation. 

Hence dissolution as observed locally by STM can be concluded to be a marker of the surface 

regions of the passivated surface where the surface oxide was initially the least Cr-enriched. 

The surface topography obtained after passivation also reveals that transient dissolution 

is not homogeneous at the nanoscale since it preferentially occurs on the terraces rather than 

at the step edges of the substrate. This is confirmed in Figure 2(b), showing a typical in situ 

EC-STM image recorded in the pre-passive range at -0.14 V/SHE, i.e. under polarization 

conditions promoting transient dissolution by decreasing the overpotential for formation of 

the passive oxide. In these conditions, depressions developed on the terraces and reached a 

penetration depth of 3.59 ± 0.66 nm after 72 min of polarization, deeper than those produced 

in Figure 2(a) after 120 min of polarization at higher overpotential (0.5 V/SHE). The 

preferential location of dissolution on the terraces may appear in contradiction with the 

nanoscale mechanism of active dissolution of metals taking place preferentially at step edges 

in the absence of a passivating oxide [68-70]. The difference arises from the competing 

passivation by Cr enrichment of the oxide film, most likely favored at step edges and thus 

promoting the protection of these substrate sites. Dissolution is then re-located on the 

substrate sites where the protection provided by the oxide film is less effective because of a 


 

 
8

lower local Cr-enrichment on the oxide film. Preferential passivation at step edges and 

roughening of substrate terraces by transient dissolution were also observed in situ for 

FeCrNi(100) passivated in similar conditions [51]. The fact that the terraces themselves do 

not dissolve homogenously but rather locally as evidenced in Figure 2(b) also shows that 

there are local sites on the terraces where the protection against dissolution fails to be 

effective due to local discontinuities in the Cr content of the oxide film. 

The conductive AFM data presented in Figure 3 confirm that the passive film formed on 

stainless steel can be inhomogeneous at the nanoscale. They were obtained on 316L samples 

passivated in simulated PWR (pressurized water reactor) environment (pressurized water at 

325°C) [67]. In these conditions of exposure at higher temperature, the passive film grows 

thicker (~5 nm after a 2 min exposure) and develop larger nanograins (29.1 ± 2.4 nm) than 

when formed at room temperature (Figure 3(a,c)). The grown oxide film is also less Cr(III)-

enriched because of formation at near neutral pH and consists of a Cr(III)-rich inner barrier 

layer mixed with Fe(II,III) species and a mostly Fe(II,III)-rich outer layer.  

[INSERT Figure 3] 

Conductive AFM was applied to map the electrical resistance of the oxide film and 

thereby the homogeneity of its barrier properties. It was found that local electrical resistance 

measured on the oxide grains spread over ~1 order of magnitude with larger variations 

reaching 2–3 orders of magnitude observed locally (Figure 3(c,d)). The outer layer of the 

passive film being mostly constituted of Fe(II,III) oxide of low resistivity, the measured 

variations of the local resistance were assigned to the inhomogeneity of the resistivity of the 

Cr(III)-rich inner layer of the oxide film and its related composition. The grains having the 

highest resistance (resistivity) would consist of nearly pure Cr(III) (Cr2O3) oxide while those 

having a lower resistance (resistivity) would consist of Fe(II)-containing mixed (e.g. FeCr2O4) 

oxides, thus supporting the idea that the Cr enrichment varies between the nanograins 


 

 
9

themselves. Nanoscale variations of the surface electrical properties were also observed by 

conductive AFM on stainless steel fibers and assigned to the inhomogeneity of the resistivity, 

and thus barrier properties, of the air-formed surface oxide [71] 

These studies show that passive oxide films formed on stainless steel in different 

environmental conditions exhibit a nanogranular morphology including intergranular sites, 

and that the local Cr(III) enrichment may vary depending on the coordination sites (steps vs. 

terraces) of the substrate and also between the oxide nanograins themselves. This provides 

new nanoscale insight to understand the local occurrence of passivity breakdown on Cr-

bearing alloys. The less Cr(III)-enriched nanograins of the passive film, and even more the 

intergranular sites between such grains [10], are suggested to be the most susceptible to local 

breakdown owing to preferential iron dissolution in the passive state. Self-healing implies that 

the local composition in chromium in the modified alloy layer underneath the surface oxide in 

the breakdown sites remains high enough for local effective repassivation. Consequently, the 

local mechanisms by which metallic Cr is consumed in the topmost layers of the alloy by 

initial oxidation in ambient conditions and subsequently upon electrochemical passivation can 

be seen key issues for the nanoscale initiation of localized corrosion.  

In our opinion, future developments on these aspects should include the detailed 

characterization by in situ spectroscopic and microscopic methods of the mechanisms of early 

oxidation of model stainless steel surfaces initially oxide-free in conditions simulating the 

formation of air-formed native oxides. The alterations of oxide films of well-controlled Cr 

enrichment prepared by oxidation under UHV (ultra high vacuum) environment by 

electrochemical polarization in varying overpotential conditions should also be studied. This 

requires to combine UHV facilities for surface preparation and characterization with in situ 

electrochemical testing of the corrosion properties and characterization of the corrosion-

induced alterations and to ensure minimum or no alteration during transfer between UHV and 


 

 
10

liquid. Such studies would provide new comprehensive nanoscale knowledge that would 

serve as basis for designing surface treatments of stainless steels and stainless alloys for 

improved resistance to initiation of localized corrosion. 

 

3. Early stage intergranular corrosion  

Most technical metallic materials are polycrystals that expose to the environment a 

grain boundary network joining grains of different crystallographic orientations. Being 

microstructural defects that can have high energy depending on their structure, grain 

boundaries impact many properties of polycrystalline materials including their corrosion 

resistance [72,73]. Intergranular corrosion is a largely encountered form of localized corrosion 

for metals and alloys in the active state, i.e. when no or poorly protective passive films are 

formed, depending on the environmental conditions. Intergranular corrosion also occurs in the 

presence of a well passivating oxide film, for example in intergranular stress corrosion 

cracking [74]. With the development of nanocrystalline metallic materials [75], typically with 

a grain size lower than 100 nm and that have distinct properties from their coarse grains 

counterparts owing to the extremely fine grain size and the large volume fraction of 

interfaces, grain boundaries and triple junctions become surface sites of the uppermost 

importance for the corrosion resistance. Besides, the understanding of the early intergranular 

corrosion, i.e. in its initiation stage before it penetrates the sub-surface and propagates in the 

grain boundary network, becomes a requirement to control the degradation of materials of 

nanoscale dimensions (e.g. metallic interconnects for microelectronics). 

Intergranular corrosion as observed by sub-surface penetrating attack of the grain 

boundary network has been shown to be intimately related to the crystallographic character 

and energy of the grain boundaries [72,74,76-90]. Low angle grain boundaries, having a 

misorientation angle < 15° and described by a network of misorientation dislocations (i.e 


 

 
11

steps) in the grain boundary plane, are considered as resistant to intergranular corrosion 

because of their lower energy compared to large angle grain boundaries. Among the large 

angle grain boundaries, coincidence site lattice (CSL) boundaries, labeled Σn with 1/n 

defining the density of lattice sites in common in the two grains, have been reported to better 

resist degradation than random boundaries, especially the low  ones with a high density of 

common lattice sites [72,77,79,82,83,84,86]. Among the low  CSLs, only Σ3 boundaries, 

which are the twins most commonly encountered in fcc materials, would better resist to 

intergranular corrosion [72,80,83,84,86], in particular the 3 coherent twins with in theory no 

deviation of the GB plane from the exact CSL {111} orientation [74,84]. 

Recent studies performed by EC-STM on high purity microcrystalline copper have 

demonstrated the possibility to investigate in situ at the nanoscale the initial stages of 

intergranular corrosion before penetration in the sub-surface region and propagation in the GB 

network [91] as well as the passivation properties [92,93] of grain boundaries emerging at the 

surface. A prerequisite to investigate the effect of the GB crystallographic character is the 

production of a high purity material, allowing us to exclude the segregation of impurities at 

grain boundaries that could impact the intergranular corrosion behavior. This was achieved in 

these studies using high purity cast electrolytic tough pitch (ETP-) Cu with trace 

contamination confirmed to be below the detection limit of Time-Of-Flight Secondary Ion 

Mass Spectrometry and cryogenic rolled and post-annealed at relatively low temperature 

(200°C) so as to limit grain boundary segregation and to keep a grain size compatible with the 

limited field of view of STM (10 × 10 µm2). 

[INSERT Figure 4] 

The EC-STM data presented in Figure 4 were obtained in situ on the oxide-free 

microcrystalline copper surface in chloridric acid aqueous solution [91]. They show that 

performing cycles of anodic dissolution in the absence of any surface oxide reveals a grain 


 

 
12

boundary type-dependent corrosion behavior, and thus how insightful the approach is to better 

understand early intergranular corrosion at the nanoscale. Two straight grain boundaries 

(marked by arrows) can be seen together with several curved grain boundaries, and their 

evolution after anodic dissolution is highlighted by comparative cross section analysis. A 

marked local attack is observed for the curved grain boundary (Figure 4d). The magnitude of 

intergranular corrosion is determined by both the depth penetration at the grain boundary and 

the dissolution at the surface of the grains that form the grain boundary. In this case, the depth 

penetration of ~2 nm, equivalent to ~10  Cu monolayers, was much higher than that (~0.1 nm) 

measured electrochemically over the whole electrode area from anodic charge transfer, 

showing that dissolution proceeds essentially at grain boundaries in the tested conditions. At 

the two straight grain boundaries, there is no indication of intergranular corrosion since both 

profiles are similar (Figure 4c). Electron back scatter diffraction (EBSD) analysis of the 

samples allowed to assign the straight grain boundaries to the category of coherent twins 

whereas the curved grain boundaries were either of random high angle type or non-coherent 

CSL (including Σ3s) boundaries. 

These results obtained on microcrystalline copper in the active state of dissolution show 

that the initiation of intergranular corrosion measured at the nanoscale at grain boundaries 

emerging at the surface is dependent on the grain boundary character like observed in the sub-

surface penetrating and propagation stages [72,74,80,83,84,86]. This original work was 

however limited by the absence of detailed characterization of the GB crystallographic 

character of the local sites where corrosion could be measured at the nanoscale. Current 

methodological developments to overcome this limitation include micro-marking of the 

surface by indentation with the STM tip after EC-STM analysis and subsequent repositioning 

of the EBSD analysis in the micro-marked local area [94]. The results obtained with this 

combined ECSTM/EBSD local approach show that, among the boundaries that could be 


 

 
13

locally analyzed, the surface-emerging random high angle boundaries are prone to nanoscale 

initiation of localized corrosion as well as 9 boundaries with a deviation of 0.6° from the 

exact CSL orientation. For 3 coincidence boundaries, the behavior of the emergence is found 

dependent on the deviation of the GB plane from the exact CSL orientation. Significant 

initiation of localized dissolution was observed for a deviation of 1.7° and above, whereas 

resistance to GB attack was observed for a deviation of 1° or less. It is thus shown that, in the 

early stages where only a few equivalent monolayers of material may corrode at the grain 

boundary emergences, increasing the density of steps (i.e. misorientation dislocations) in the 

coincidence plane of the boundary induces a transition from resistant to susceptible corrosion 

behavior. This transition is dependent on the CSL type. 

Concerning the passive state, the passivation properties of grain boundaries emerging at 

the surface could be studied also on microcrystalline copper to get new insight onto grain 

boundary effects on the competition between irreversible consumption of the metal by 

dissolution and reversible consumption to form the passive film [92,93]. The adopted 

methodology included local examination by EC-STM of the surface in three distinct states: (i) 

the metallic state as obtained after cathodic reduction of the air-formed native oxide film, (ii) 

the Cu(I) or Cu(I)/Cu(II) passive state obtained by potentiostatic polarization in sodium 

hydroxide alkaline aqueous solutions and (iii) the metallic state obtained after cathodic 

reduction of the passive film. The results for the Cu(I) passive state are presented in Figure 5 

[93].  

[INSERT Figure 5] 

The EC-STM image shows several curved grain boundaries and straight grain 

boundaries. The curve boundaries were assigned to either random or CSL (Σ3 incoherent 

twins or other Σn) boundaries and the straight grain boundaries to coherent twins. Different 

sites, marked 1 to 13, were selected for local analysis by line profile analysis of the depth of 


 

 
14

the intergranular surface region and its variation in the metallic, passivated and reduced 

surface states. The results compiled in Figure 5b show that the intergranular local 

topographical behavior is characterized by a decrease of the depth of the intergranular region 

after passivation for all sites, and a reversible variation after reduction of the passive film. 

This behavior suggests that locally (i.e. in the grain boundary region) a thicker Cu(I) passive 

film is formed than on the adjacent grains and that it is reversibly decomposed after 

electrochemical reduction, leaving the depth of the initial intergranular region (quasi) 

unchanged. The measured intergranular depth decrease was larger after passivation at the 

curved boundaries, suggesting the formation of a thicker Cu(I) passive film in the boundaries 

of random type.  

A model of variation of the surface and interface levels at grains and grain boundaries in 

the studied metallic, passivated and reduced surface states was developed to exploit such local 

STM data together with the macroscopic electrochemical data obtained by cyclic voltammetry 

(CV) in terms of equivalent thickness of copper reversibly and irreversibly consumed at 

grains and grain boundaries [92,93]. The results are compiled in Figure 6a for the local grain 

boundary sites identified in Figure 5a. They show that the thickness of the Cu(I) passive film 

was systematically found larger at the selected grain boundary sites than macroscopically 

measured in average on grains by CV. These data also confirmed that the Cu(I) passive film is 

thicker at random boundaries than at coherent twins as inferred from the line profiles (Figure 

5b). Consistently, the thickness of metallic copper reversibly consumed to form the passive 

film (
Cu(R)
) is also larger at grain boundaries than on grains. Concerning the equivalent 

thickness of metallic copper irreversibly consumed (
Cu(IR)
), i.e. dissolved, during passivation, 

the average value of 0.14 nm corresponding to a fraction of a monolayer of metallic copper 

was obtained for grains, from the macroscopic CV data.. For grain boundaries, the calculated 

values do not exceed that on grains. The slightly negative values obtained for some of the 


 

 
15

measured sites suggests that not all metallic copper reversibly consumed and entering the 

passive film was taken into account by the model. It could be concluded from these data that 

no copper is preferentially dissolved in the intergranular regions for Cu(I) passivation. 

In the case of Cu(I)/Cu(II) passivation (Figure 6b) [92,93], the passive film was found 

thicker at random boundaries than at coherent twin boundaries like for the Cu(I) passive film. 

However, it was not found systematically thicker at grain boundaries than on grains, in 

contrast with the Cu(I) passive film. Preferential transient dissolution was observed in the 

intergranular regions during passivation, as shown by larger values of the equivalent thickness 

of metallic copper irreversibly consumed at grain boundaries compared to grains. A grain 

boundary crystallographic character-dependent behavior was observed with random 

boundaries dissolving more than coherent twins during passivation, in agreement with the 

behavior observed for active dissolution, i.e. in the absence of formation of a passive film 

[91]. 

These studies reveal how insightful the application of in situ EC-STM can be to 

investigate at the nanoscale and locally the initial stages of intergranular corrosion before sub-

surface penetration and propagation in the GB network. Further developments should include 

combined EC-STM/EBSD characterization of the local passivation behavior of emerging 

grains boundaries in order to refine the characterization of the relationship between local 

passivation properties and grain boundary structure. Future work should include the effect of 

corrosive species (e.g. chloride) on the local passivation properties of different types of grain 

boundaries as well as the effect of corrosion inhibitor molecules (e.g. BTAH for copper) on 

the intergranular corrosion initiation in the active state and in the passive state. 

 


 

 
16

4. Atomistic modeling of corrosion protection on passivated surfaces by organic 

molecules 

Molecular additives, inorganic or organic, are commonly introduced as inhibitors in the 

environment for decreasing the rate of the corrosion processes of materials in conditions in 

which passivation is dysfunctional. In order to be efficient, the inhibitor molecule must adsorb 

on the material surface, the adsorption must be strong, stronger than that of the corroding 

species, and ideally a barrier layer should form isolating the metal substrate from the 

environment and it should not be displaced by solvent molecules and/or aggressive species.  

On the macroscopic scale, organic corrosion inhibitors are mostly studied 

experimentally with information gathered during sample immersion and/or after immersion to 

bring insight into the effectiveness of different chemicals. However, the relevant scale to 

understand the inhibiting effect and to seek details for a better design of new and 

environmental-friendly inhibition systems is the molecular scale that requires a realistic 

model approach. Experimental studies of corrosion inhibition are numerous [95-99] but the 

development of atomistic theoretical investigations is more recent [100,101]. Computational 

model studies bring detailed information on the atomic and sub-atomic scale on the 

adsorption of the organic inhibitor molecule from the structural, energetic and electronic point 

of views. They can also be used to screen much more systems and effects than it can be done 

experimentally, however with the disadvantage of lacking counterpart model studies 

performed experimentally at the same scale. Even for the benzotriazole/Cu system, the most 

studied both experimentally [102-109] and computationally [110-113] with model 

approaches, experiments and modeling have not succeeded in describing the system with the 

same degree of complexity. Atomistic DFT modeling has addressed the effects of the 

molecule coverage, its deprotonation, the coordination of the metal surface atoms, the 

presence of surface metal adatoms, the competitive adsorption of water, and the type of 


 

 
17

method used for computation while experimental model studies at the molecular scale have 

only discussed the effect of the molecule coverage on the structure and adsorption strength of 

the adsorbed phases [108,109], and the displacement of the adsorbed molecular layer by 

aggressive species [102,104].  

The role played by the surface oxide film formed on passivated copper on the 

adsorption of benzotriazole (BTAH) has been recently studied by atomistic DFT modeling on 

(111)-oriented Cu2O surfaces [110-112]. Copper oxides are indeed formed on copper exposed 

to aqueous solution and do not dissolve at pH > 5, which results in surface passivation by 

(111)-oriented Cu2O oxide films on (111)-oriented copper in the Cu(I) oxidation range 

[16,17,18,20]. It was found that, like on oxide-free metallic copper, the benzotriazole 

molecules binds to the Cu sites of the Cu2O surface via the triazole group and its N atoms 

(Figure 7) [111]. The protonated BTAH molecule forms up to two bonds with Cu atoms 

(Figure 7(a,b,c,f,g)) and deprotonated BTA at least two (Figure 7(d,e,h,i)). There is relatively 

strong H-bonding for BTAH to one O of the oxide surface. Another common feature with 

metallic copper is that the deprotonated BTA binds markedly stronger to the oxide surface 

than BTAH and that bond strength increases when involving Cu sites that are coordinatively 

unsaturated. BTA binding energy is -2.8 eV/molecule when coordinatively unsaturated Cu 

sites of stoichiometric Cu2O(111) are involved (Figure 7(h,i)) against about -1.9 eV/molecule 

when only involving the coordinatively saturated sites of non-stoichiometric Cu2O(111) (i.e. 

without Cu unsaturated termination) (Figure 7(d,e)). For BTAH, these values are -1.5 and -0.4 

eV/molecule, respectively. The energetic deficiency of the Cu unsaturated termination of 

stoichiometric Cu2O(111) was calculated to be overcompensated by the bonding of 

benzotriazole. Van der Waals interactions were implemented with PBE-D’ functionals in DFT 

to better include dispersion forces in the optimization of protonated and deprotonated 

adsorbates and to better account for coverage effects. As a result, the adsorbed structures were 


 

 
18

stabilized by about 0.3-0.4 eV mol-1 on average and the relative stability trends were 

unchanged (Figure 7). 

[INSERT Figure 7] 

Comparing the stability trends of the adsorbed molecules shows that the protonated 

BTAH molecule binds markedly stronger to Cu sites of reduced coordination on Cu2O than 

on metallic copper, whereas this trend is reversed for the deprotonated BTA molecule. BTA 

bonding to the oxide requires coordinatively unsaturated sites in order to be comparably 

strong to the bonding to the coordinatively saturated sites on the metal. However, under-

coordinated Cu sites on close-packed metallic surfaces or Cu sites of more open Cu(hkl) form 

stronger bonds to BTA than coordinatively unsaturated Cu sites on Cu2O.  

The effects of surface hydroxylation, relevant of the oxide/liquid water interface, were 

also modelled [112]. It was found that BTA binds considerably stronger to the hydroxylated 

Cu2O surface (-3.8 eV/molecule) than to the anhydrous surface when involving Cu sites that 

are coordinatively unsaturated whereas the bond strength is similar (about -1.0 eV/molecule) 

for BTAH, showing that deprotonation is promoted by surface hydroxylation of the oxide. 

Benzotriazole forms more stable hydrogen bonds with the surface hydroxyls than with the O 

ions of the anhydrous surface which was assigned to the higher configurational flexibility of 

the surface OH groups. The deprotonation of the BTAH molecule leads to the formation of a 

water molecule on the hydroxylated surface in contrast to a hydroxyl group on the anhydrous 

surface. 

Based on these results, we rationalize the efficiency of the BTAH inhibitor depending 

on pH of the aqueous solution and on the potential at the interface as follows. Protonated 

BTAH is the major form of benzotriazole at neutral and acidic pH since the molecule has a 

pKa constant of 8.2 [111]. In acidic conditions (pH < 5), benzotriazole is known as a less 

effective inhibitor than in alkaline conditions and copper does not grow a stable and 


 

 
19

protective surface oxide. The lower efficiency of benzotriazole can be explained by the DFT 

results that show that the protonated BTAH molecule has a lower adsorption energy than its 

deprotonated BTA variant and thus a higher probability for desorption. As a result, the barrier 

layer formed by the adsorbed molecules may become locally defective where the molecules 

were the less strongly bonded initially, and this local failure cannot be compensated by the 

formation of a passivating surface oxide thus leaving unprotected site for corrosive attack. In 

neutral or alkaline conditions (pH >5), passivating Cu oxide films grow in the anodic 

oxidation range. At potentials below the Nernst oxidation potential, the oxide-free metallic 

surface may be covered by the deprotonated BTA, more strongly adsorbed according to the 

DFT data, if pH is alkaline enough (> 8). At the Nernst oxidation potential, the growth of the 

passive oxide film can be expected to be poisoned or even blocked by the strongly adsorbed 

BTA layer. However, if this layer has barrier defects due for instance to weaker bonding of 

BTAH for 5 < pH < 8, Cu oxide may grow locally to form oxide patches covered by BTAH 

that can be strongly adsorbed according to DFT. In these conditions, the efficiency of the 

inhibitor results from its capacity to strongly adsorbed different variants according to the 

oxidized or metallic local state of the surface and to local pH conditions. However, the 

boundary between oxide patches and metallic areas exposes an oxide/metal interface where 

the inhibitor may be less or not effective if no variant of the molecule strongly adsorbs, which 

remains to be investigated with appropriate model approaches. At higher oversaturation 

potential for anodic oxidation, the strongly adsorbed BTA on the metallic surface is displaced 

and anodic oxides will form unless their growth is poisoned by aggressive species like Cl. The 

efficiency of the inhibitor is then dependent on its role on the competitive adsorption between 

Cl and H2O/OH, the latter being the oxygen reactant for oxide growth in neutral/alkaline 

conditions. This also remains to be studied by realistic modeling of competitive adsorption 

processes. 


 

 
20

Another approach to the DFT modeling of the effect of inhibitor organic molecules on 

the corrosion properties of metallic surface is to consider their role on the residual reactivity 

of passivated surfaces in open circuit potential (OCP) conditions. Indeed, in the absence of 

any applied potential, the anodic oxidation reactions at the origin of the corrosion processes 

are electrically balanced by cathodic reduction reactions. In neutral aqueous environment, the 

dominant cathodic reaction is the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Controlling this reaction 

is also a mean of corrosion protection, including for passivated surfaces. Atomistic DFT 

modeling has recently been applied to study this reaction in the presence of a model passive 

oxide film [114] and the inhibiting effect of adsorbed organic molecules has been discussed 

[115]. The work was performed on a (111)-oriented Al surface covered by an ultrathin oxide 

film (-Al2O3) of varying thickness and exposing an hydroxylated AlOOH surface developed 

as a realistic model of the passive film formed in neutral solution on Al and Al alloys. Figure 

8a shows the ultrathin variant of the model where the oxide film is ~0.2 nm thick and consists 

of two layer of oxygen atoms. Periodic DFT including dispersion forces (PBE-D) was used 

for simulation. 

In the absence of adsorbed organic molecule [114], it was found that electron transfer 

takes place both from the metal/oxide interface and the oxide surface to the adsorbed O2 

molecule. The hydroxyl groups at the oxide surface were found to stabilize the surface by 

eliminating the Al surface states and to allow the reduced O2- species to transform into 

hydrogen peroxide in a non‐activated process by proton capture. A series of two‐electron 

mechanisms followed to further reduce H2O2 to two water molecules. These reactions were 

found to take place only when the inner alumina layer was ultrathin (0.2 nm in the studied 

model). As soon as a thicker Al2O3 inner layer of the surface oxide developed (for a 

calculated film thickness of about 1 nm), it was found that the electronic transfer from the 

metal/oxide interface to the oxygen molecule approaching the hydroxylated surface of the 


 

 
21

oxide was shut down and the oxide-covered surface became unreactive towards oxygen 

reduction. Thus, although a surface oxide layer can be expected to have a protective character 

against the cathodic reduction of O2, it was shown in this work that O2 reduction is not 

inhibited when the oxide film is ultrathin. The ultrathin oxide layer represents a possible 

model for incomplete passivation in conditions where the passive film dissolves as can be 

expected for amphoretic alumina in acidic or alkaline aqueous environment. 

[INSERT Figure 8] 

The effect of the adsorption of an organic inhibitor molecule and its ability to form a 

dense, continuous layer on the ultrathin oxide film surface and be protective against O2 

reduction was studied with gallic acid [115]. Among carboxylates, gallic acid (Figure 8b), 

reported to have an inhibiting effect on Al [116] and steel [117], was selected since it is the 

smallest molecule in the family of tannins which are green inhibitor candidates. A two-step 

strategy was used for the optimization of (i) a compact layer of free molecules adopting the 

registry of the model passivated surface and (ii) the bonding of this molecular layer to the 

hydroxylated surface of the oxide ultrathin film as detailed in [115]. It was found that the 

organic molecule is preferentially adsorbed in a monodentate way by ligand exchange, with 

an adsorption energy of 2.3 eV/molecule, and form a dense adsorbed layer with a density of 

3.6 molecules/nm2 (Figure 8c). The electronic analysis showed that covalent bonding was at 

the origin of the surface stabilization due to mixing of the O 2p orbitals of the COOH moiety 

of the molecule with the Al 2p orbitals forming the valence band of the oxide surface (Figure 

8e). The metallic character of the ultrathin surface oxide observed in the absence of gallic acid 

was lost in the presence of the adsorbed dense layer with the oxide recovering a semi-

conducting character as revealed by a marked decreased of the density of states of the oxide in 

the gap at the Fermi level (Figure 8d) [115]. Permittivity calculations based on charge 

analysis showed that a huge drop from a value of 109 in the absence of adsorbed gallic acid to 


 

 
22

4 for the adsorbed system (a value of 9 was calculated for bulk alumina), confirming the 

much more insulating character of the surface covered by the dense adsorbed layer. These 

results suggest that adsorption of an inhibitor molecule would enable a passivating alumina 

film to recover its insulating properties at defective zones where it would be thinner, thus 

“healing” the defective site.  

The dense adsorbed organic layer was confirmed to form an efficient barrier against 

electron transfer to dioxygen, as shown by the analysis of the O-O distance in the O2 molecule 

and of electronic transfer. In the absence of adsorbed gallic acid, the O−O bond length 

spontaneously increased when the dioxygen molecule was at the vicinity of the surface, due to 

the transfer of one electron from the metal layers underneath the oxide film to the molecule. 

The charged OO- molecule then attracted a proton from the surface to form a OOH adduct. 

With the dense adsorbed layer of gallic acid, the O-O distance in the dioxygen molecule was 

found unchanged (0.127 nm) and the charge transfer was only 0.32 electron per O2 molecule.  

No OOH adduct was formed. This altered behavior of the adsorbed system suggests good 

inhibition of the cathodic reaction by the adsorbed layer.  

These studies show how powerful the application of DFT modeling can be to rationalize 

the mechanisms by which adsorbed organic molecules can inhibit the corrosion of 

incompletely passivated metal surfaces. The data simulating the adsorption of benzotriazole 

on copper show the capability of the molecule to efficiently comply with oxidized as well as 

metallic states of the surface and to provide strong bonding in the protonated BTAH and 

deprotonated BTA form, respectively, with stronger bonding to unsaturated (i.e. defect) Cu 

sites both on Cu2O oxide surfaces and on Cu metal. Still, one lacks similar studies on surfaces 

partially oxidized and exposing oxide/metal interfaces The data simulating the adsorption of 

gallic acid on passivated aluminium show that it is essential to take into account the presence 

of a surface oxide of finite thickness, and not only the surface of the bulk oxide, to properly 


 

 
23

describe inhibition on passivated surfaces. It comes out of these studies that adhesion of the 

organic molecule and stabilization of the electronic levels of the passivated surface can result 

at least partly from strong anchoring of the adsorbed organic molecule to the surface due to 

covalent bonding. In the presence of the dense layer of adsorbed molecules, the electronic 

states of the ultrathin oxide can become similar to those of the thicker oxide, inhibiting 

electronic transfer and thus cathodic corrosion processes. It is our opinion that future 

developments of DFT simulation for the detailed understanding of corrosion inhibition 

brought by organic molecules should consider surfaces exposing oxide/metal interfaces as 

well as oxide films of varying thickness in order to better account for the effects of 

incomplete passivation.  

 

5. Conclusion 

Three aspects that are, in our opinion, of paramount importance for the development of 

the nanoscale and sub-nanoscale understanding of the corrosion and corrosion protection 

mechanisms of metallic materials by oxide passive films have been discussed. The discussion 

was based on recent data obtained from model experimental studies, including local surface 

analysis by scanning probe microscopies, and atomistic modeling and simulation performed 

by DFT. 

The discussed data on the passivation of stainless steel show that the Cr enrichment of 

the passive film may not be homogeneous at the nanoscale and vary between the oxide 

nanograins constituting the barrier layer of the passive film. This new nanoscale insight 

implies that the local mechanisms by which metallic Cr is consumed in the topmost layers of 

the alloy by initial oxidation and subsequently upon electrochemical passivation are key 

factors for passivity breakdown and self-healing, and for the initiation of localized corrosion. 

In our opinion, future work should include the detailed characterization of these mechanisms 


 

 
24

by in situ spectroscopic and microscopic methods on appropriately designed model systems. 

This approach will provide new comprehensive knowledge that can be used for the desihn of 

novel surface treatments for improved resistance to initiation of localized corrosion of 

stainless steel. 

The discussed data on early intergranular corrosion of microcrystalline copper show that 

nanoscale insight into the relationship between grain boundary crystallographic character and 

local corrosion properties in the active or passive state can by seek by combining surface in 

situ analysis and microstructural analysis. The data show that 3 coherent twins also resist the 

initiation of intergranular corrosion, the initiation being here the stage that precedes sub-

surface penetration and propagation in the grain boundary network. Future work, aiming at 

improving the design of corrosion resistant grain boundary engineered materials, should 

include the effect of corrosive species such as chlorides on the local passivation properties of 

different types of grain boundaries as well as the effect of corrosion inhibitor molecules on 

the intergranular corrosion initiation in both the active state and the passive state. 

The discussed data on the DFT modeling of corrosion inhibition by adsorbed organic 

molecules of the corrosion of incompletely passivated metal surfaces show the necessity for 

the molecule to efficiently comply with and strongly bond to surfaces in the oxidized as well 

as metallic states. They also show that it is essential to take into account the presence of a 

surface oxide of finite thickness, and not only the surface of the bulk oxide, to properly 

describe corrosion inhibition of passivated surfaces. In addition to oxide films of varying 

thickness or a thick oxide layer, future work by DFT modeling should also include partially 

oxidized metal interfaces in order to better account for the effects of incomplete passivation.  

 


 

 
25

Acknowledgments 

This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the 

European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC Advanced Grant 

“CIMNAS” No 741123). 

 

References

[1] P. Marcus, Surface science approach to corrosion phenomena, Electrochim. Acta 43 
(1998) 109-118. 

[2] D.D. Macdonald, Passivity - the key to our metals-based civilization, Pure Appl. Chem. 71 
(1999) 951-978. 

[3] P. Schmuki, From Bacon to barriers: a review on the passivity of metals and alloys, J. 
Solid State Electrochem. 6 (2002) 145-154. 

[4] C.O.A. Olsson, D. Landolt, Passive films on stainless steels—chemistry, structure and 
growth, Electrochim. Acta 48 (2003) 1093-1104. 

[5] H.-H. Strehblow, V. Maurice, P. Marcus, Passivity of Metals. In: Marcus P, editor. 
Corrosion Mechanisms in Theory and Practice. 3rd edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis; 
2011: pp. 235-326. 

[6] P. Marcus, V. Maurice, Oxide Passive Films and Corrosion Protection. In: Pacchioni G, 
Valeri S, editors. Oxide Ultrathin Films. Science and Technology. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH 
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; 2012: pp. 119-144. 

[7] V. Maurice, P. Marcus, Passive films at the nanoscale, Electrochim. Acta 84 (2012) 129-
138. 

[8] H.-H. Strehblow, Passivity of Metals Studied by Surface Analytical Methods, a Review, 
Electrochim. Acta 212 (2016) 630–648. 

[9] G.S.Frankel, Pitting corrosion of metals a review of the critical factors, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 145 (1998) 2186-2198. 

[10] P. Marcus, H.-H. Strehblow, V. Maurice, Localized corrosion (pitting): A model of 
passivity breakdown including the role of the oxide layer nanostructure, Corrosion Sci. 50 
(2008) 2698-2704. 

[11] H.-H. Strehblow, P. Marcus, Mechanisms of Pitting Corrosion. In: Marcus P, editor. 
Corrosion Mechanisms in Theory and Practice. 3rd edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis; 
2011: pp. 349-393. 

[12] J. Soltis J, Passivity breakdown, pit initiation and propagation of pits in metallic 
materials–review, Corrosion Sci. 90 (2015) 5-22. 

 

 


 

 
26

 

 

[13] G.S.Frankel, T. Li, J.R. Scully, Localized Corrosion: Passive Film Breakdown vs Pit 
Growth Stability, J. Electrochem. Soc. 164 (2017) C180-C181. 

[14] N. Ikemiya, T. Kubo S. Hara, In situ AFM observations of oxide film formation on 
Cu(111) and Cu (100) surfaces under aqueous alkaline solutions, Surf. Sci. 323 (1995) 81-90. 

[15] V. Maurice, H.-H. Strehblow, P. Marcus, In situ STM study of the initial stages of 
oxidation of Cu (111) in aqueous solution, Surf. Sci. 458 (2000) 185-194. 

[16] J. Kunze, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, H.-H. Strehblow, P. Marcus, In situ scanning 
tunneling microscopy study of the anodic oxidation of Cu (111) in 0.1 M NaoH, J. Phys. 
Chem. B 105 (2001) 4263-4269.  

[17] H.-H. Strehblow, V. Maurice, P. Marcus, Initial and later stages of anodic oxide 
formation on Cu, chemical aspects, structure and electronic properties, Electrochimica Acta 
46 (2001) 3755–3766. 

[18] J. Kunze, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, H.-H. Strehblow, P. Marcus, In situ STM study of the 
effect of chlorides on the initial stages of anodic oxidation of Cu (111) in alkaline solutions, 
Electrochim. Acta 48 (2003) 1157-1167. 

[19] J. Kunze, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, H.-H. Strehblow, P. Marcus, In situ STM study of the 
anodic oxidation of Cu (001) in 0.1 M NaOH, J. Electroanal. Chem. 554 (2003) 113-125. 

[20] J. Kunze, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, H.-H. Strehblow, P. Marcus, In situ STM study of the 
duplex passive films formed on Cu (111) and Cu (001) in 0.1 M NaOH, Corrosion Sci. 46 
(2004) 245-264. 

[21] V. Maurice, H. Talah, P. Marcus, Ex situ STM imaging with atomic resolution of Ni 
(111) electrodes passivated in sulfuric acid, Surf. Sci. 284 (1993) L431-L436.  

[22] V. Maurice, H. Talah, P. Marcus, A scanning tunneling microscopy study of the structure 
of thin oxide films grown on Ni (111) single-crystal surfaces by anodic polarization in acid 
electrolyte, Surf. Sci. 304 (1994) 98-108. 

[23] S.L.Yau, F.R. Fan, T.P. Moffat. A.J. Bard. In situ Scanning Tunneling Microscopy of 
Ni(100) in 1 M NaOH,  J. Phys. Chem. 98 (1994) 5493-5499.  

[24] T. Suzuki, T. Yamada, K. Itaya, In situ Electrochemical Scanning Tunneling Microscopy 
of Ni(111), Ni(100), and Sulfur-Modified Ni(100) in Acidic Solution, J. Phys. Chem. 100 
(1996) 8954-8961. 

[25] D. Zuili, V. Maurice, P. Marcus, Surface structure of nickel in acid solution studied by in 
situ scanning tunneling microscopy, J. Electrochem. Soc. 147 (2000) 1393-1400. 

[26] O.M. Magnussen, J. Scherer, B.M. Ocko, R.J. Behm, In situ X-ray Scattering Study of 
the Passive Film on Ni(111) in Sulfuric Acid Solution, J. Phys. Chem. B 104 (2000) 1222-
1226. 

[27] N. Hirai, H. Okada, S. Hara, In-situ Electrochemical Atomic Force Microscopy with 
Atomic Resolution of Ni(110) in Neutral and Alkaline Aqueous Solution. Transaction JIM 44 
(2003) 727-730. 

[28] J. Scherer, B.M. Ocko, O.M. Magnussen, Structure, dissolution, and passivation of 
Ni(111) electrodes in sulfuric acid solution: an in situ STM, X-ray scattering, and 
electrochemical study, Electrochim. Acta 48 (2003) 1169-1191. 


 

 
27

 

 

[29] M. Nakamura, N. Ikemiya, A. Iwasaki, Y. Suzuki, M. Ito, Surface structures at the initial 
stages in passive film formation on Ni(1 1 1) electrodes in acidic electrolytes,  J. Electroanal. 
Chem. 566 (2004) 385-391. 

[30] A. Seyeux, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, P. Marcus, In situ scanning tunnelling microscopic 
study of the initial stages of growth and of the structure of the passive film on Ni (111) in 1 
mM NaOH (aq), J. Solid State Electrochem. 9 (2005) 337-346. 

[31] A. Seyeux, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, P. Marcus, In situ STM study of the effect of 
chloride on passive film on nickel in alkaline solution, J. Electrochem. Soc. 153 (2006) B453-
B463. 

[32] R.C. Bhardwaj, A. Gonzalez-Martin, J.O’M. Bockris, In situ Scanning Tunneling 
Microscopy Studies on Passivation of Polycrystalline Iron in Borate Buffer, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 138 (1991) 1901-1908. 

[33] M.P. Ryan, R.C Newman, G.E Thompson, An STM Study of the Passive Film Formed 
on Iron in Borate Buffer Solution, J. Electrochem. Soc. 142 (1995) L177-L179. 

[34] M.F Toney, A.J. Davenport, L.J Oblonsky, M.P. Ryan, C.M. Vitus, Atomic Structure of 
the Passive Oxide Film Formed on Iron,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 4282. 

[35] J. Li, D.J. Meier, An AFM study of the properties of passive films on iron surfaces, J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 454 (1998) 53-58. 

[36] A.J. Davenport, L.J Oblonsky, M.P. Ryan, M.F Toney, The Structure of the Passive Film 
That Forms on Iron in Aqueous Environments, J. Electrochem. Soc. 147 (2000) 2162-2173. 

[37] I. Diez-Pérez, P. Gorostiza, F. Sanz, C. Müller, First Stages of Electrochemical Growth 
of the Passive Film on Iron, J. Electrochem. Soc. 148 (2001) B307-B313. 

[38] E.E. Rees, M.P. Ryan, D.S. MacPhail, An STM Study of the Nanocrystalline Structure of 
the Passive Film on Iron. Electrochem, Solid-State Lett. 5 (2002) B21-B23. 

[39] H. Deng, H. Nanjo, P. Quian, A. Santosa, I. Ishikawa, Y. Kurata, Potential dependence 
of surface crystal structure of iron passive films in borate buffer solution, Electrochim. Acta 
52 (2007) 4272-4277. 

[40] S. Ando, T. Suzuki, K. Itaya, In situ electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy of 
Co(0001) single-crystal electrodes in acidic solution, J. Electroanal. Chem. 431 (1997) 277-
284. 

[41] A. Foelske, J. Kunze, H.-H. Strehblow, Initial stages of hydroxide formation and its 
reduction on Co(0001) studied by in situ STM and XPS in 0.1 M NaOH, Surf. Sci. 554 (2004) 
10-24. 

[42] F. Reikowski, F. Maroun, N.Di, P. Allongue, M. Ruge, J. Stettner, O.M. Magnussen, In 
situ surface X-ray diffraction study of ultrathin epitaxial Co films on Au(111) in alkaline 
solution, Electrochim. Acta 197 (2016) 273-281. 

[43] V. Maurice, W. Yang, P. Marcus, XPS and STM Investigation of the Passive Film 
Formed on Cr (110) Single‐Crystal Surfaces, J. Electrochem. Soc. 141 (1994) 3016-3027. 

[44] D. Zuili, V.  Maurice, P. Marcus, In situ scanning tunneling microscopy study of the 
structure of the hydroxylated anodic oxide film formed on Cr (110) single-crystal surfaces, J. 
Phys. Chem. B 103 (1999) 7896-7905. 


 

 
28

 

 

[45] M.P. Ryan, R.C Newman, G.E Thompson, A scanning tunnelling microscopy study of 
structure and structural relaxation in passive oxide films on Fe-Cr alloys,  Philosophical Mag. 
B 70 (1994) 241-251. 

[46] M.P. Ryan, R.C Newman, G.E Thompson, Atomically Resolved STM of Oxide Film 
Structures on Fe‐Cr Alloys during Passivation in Sulfuric Acid Solution, J. Electrochem. Soc. 
141 (1994) L164-L165. 

[47] Maurice V, Yang W, Marcus P. XPS and STM Study of Passive Films Formed on Fe‐
22Cr (110) Single‐Crystal Surface. J. Electrochem. Soc. 143 (1996) 1182-1200. 

[48] H. Nanjo, R.C Newman, N. Sanada, Atomic images of 304SS surface after 
electrochemical treatments, Appl. Surf. Sci. 121 (1997) 253-256. 

[49] V. Maurice, W. Yang, P. Marcus, X‐Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy and Scanning 
Tunneling Microscopy Study of Passive Films Formed on (100) Fe‐18Cr‐13Ni Single‐Crystal 
Surfaces, J. Electrochem. Soc. 145 (1998) 909-920. 

[50] V. Vignal, J.-M. Olive, D. Desjardins, Effect of molybdenum on passivity of stainless 
steelsin chloride media using ex situ near field microscopy observations, Corrosion Sci. 41 
(1999) 969-884. 

[51] T. Massoud, V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, P. Marcus, Nanoscale morphology and atomic 
structure of passive films on stainless steel, J. Electrochem. Soc. 160 (2013) C232-C238.  

[52] V. Maurice, H. Peng, L.H. Klein, A. Seyeux, S. Zanna, P. Marcus, Effects of 
molybdenum on the composition and nanoscale morphology of passivated austenitic stainless 
steel surfaces,  Faraday Discussions 180 (2015) 151-170. 

[53] A. Machet, A. Galtayries, S. Zanna, L.H. Klein, V. Maurice, P. Jolivet, M. Foucault, P. 
Combrade, P. Scott, P. Marcus, XPS and STM study of the growth and structure of passive 
films in high temperature water on a nickel-base alloy, Electrochim. Acta 49 (2004) 3957-
3964. 

[54] V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, P. Marcus, Atomic structure of metastable pits formed on nickel. 
Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 4 (2001) B1-B3. 

[55] V. Maurice, L.H. Klein, P. Marcus, Atomic‐scale investigation of the localized corrosion 
of passivated nickel surfaces, Surf. Interf. Anal. 34 (2002) 139-143. 

[56] V. Maurice, T. Nakamura, H. Peng, L.H. Klein, A. Seyeux, S. Zanna, P. Marcus, Initial 
stages of localised corrosion by pitting of passivated nickel surfaces studied by STM and 
AFM, In: Oltra R, Maurice V, Akid R, Marcus, P, editors. Local Probe Techniques for 
Corrosion Research. EFC Publications N° 45. Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing Ltd; 2007: 
pp. 71-83. 

[57] A. Seyeux, V. Maurice, P. Marcus, Breakdown kinetics at nanostructure defects of 
passive films. Electrochem, Solid State Lett. 12 (2009) C25-C27. 

[58] A. Bouzoubaa, B. Diawara, V. Maurice, C. Minot, P. Marcus, Ab initio study of the 
interaction of chlorides with defect-free hydroxylated NiO surfaces, Corrosion Science 51 
(2009) 941-948. 

[59] A. Bouzoubaa, B. Diawara, V. Maurice, C. Minot, P. Marcus, Ab initio modelling of 
localized corrosion: Study of the role of surface steps in the interaction of chlorides with 
passivated nickel surfaces, Corrosion Science 51 (2009) 2174-2182. 


 

 
29

 

 

[60] A. Bouzoubaa, D. Costa, B. Diawara, N. Audiffen, P. Marcus, Insight of DFT and 
atomistic thermodynamics on the adsorption and insertion of halides onto the hydroxylated 
NiO (111) surface, Corrosion Sci. 52 (2010) 2643-2652. 

[61] B. Jeon, S.K.R.S. Sankaranarayanan, A.C.T. Van Duin, S. Ramanathan. Reactive 
Molecular Dynamics Study of Chloride Ion Interaction with Copper Oxide Surfaces in 
Aqueous Media, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 4 (2012) 1225-1232. 

[62] B. Narayanan, S.A. Deshmukh, S.K.R.S. Sankaranarayanan, S. Ramanathan, Strong 
correlations between structural order and passive state at water–copper oxide interfaces, 
Electrochim. Acta 179 (2015) 386–393. 

[63] R.E. Newnham, Y.M. de Haan, Refinement of the α Al2O3, Ti2O3, V2O3 and Cr2O3 
Structures, Z. Kristallogr. 117 (1962) 235. 

[64] R.M. Cornell, U. Schwertmann, The Iron Oxides: Structure, Properties, Reactions, 
Occurrences and Uses, Wiley-VCH, 2003. 

[65] L.C. Bartel, B. Morosin, Exchange Striction in NiO, Phys. Rev. B3 (1971) 1039. 

[66] M.G. Brik, A. Suchocki, A. Kamińska, Lattice Parameters and Stability of the Spinel 
Compounds in Relation to the Ionic Radii and Electronegativities of Constituting Chemical 
Elements, Inorg. Chem. 53 (2014) 5088-5099. 

[67] T. Massoud, V. Maurice, F. Wiame, L.H. Klein, A. Seyeux, P. Marcus P. Nanostructure 
and local properties of oxide layers grown on stainless steel in simulated pressurized water 
reactor environment,  Corrosion Sci. 84 (2014) 198-203. 

[68] D.W. Suggs, A.J Bard, Scanning Tunneling Microscopic Study with Atomic Resolution 
of the Dissolution of Cu(100) Electrodes in Aqueous Chloride Media, J. Phys. Chem. 99 
(1995) 8349-8355. 

[69] O.M. Magnussen, M.R Vogt, J. Scherer, R.J. Behm. Double-layer structure, corrosion 
and corrosion inhibition of copper in aqueous solution, Appl Phys A 66 (1998) S447-S451. 

[70] P. Broekmann, M. Anastasescu, A. Spaenig, W. Lisowski, K. Wandelt, Atomic structures 
and dynamics of a Cu(100) electrode in dilute hydrobromic acid: An in situ STM study,  J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 500 (2001) 241-254. 

[71] J. Yin, C. D’Haese, B. Nysten. Surface electrical properties of stainless steel fibres: An 
AFM-based study, Appl. Surf. Sci. 330 (2015) 65-73. 

[72] S.H. Kim, U. Erb, K.T. Aust, G. Palumbo, Grain boundary character distribution and 
intergranular corrosion behaviour in high purity aluminium, Scr. Mater. 44 (2001) 835–839. 

[73] M.T. Woldemedhin, D. Raabe, A.W. Hassel, Grain boundary electrochemistry of B-type 
Nb-Ti alloy using a scanning droplet cell, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 208 (2011) 1246-1251. 

[74] V.Y. Gerrtsman, S.M. Gruemer, Study of grain boundary character along intergranular 
stress corrosion crack paths in austenitic alloys,  Acta Mater 49 (2001) 1589–1598. 

[75] B.V. Mahesh, R.K. Singh Raman, Role of nanostructure in electrochemical corrosion and 
high temperature corrosion: A review, Metall. Mater Trans. A 45A (2014) 5799-5822. 

[76] J. Mieluch, M. Smialowski, The Behaviour of Grain Boundaries in Iron During Anodic 
Polarization in Ammonium Nitrate Solution, Corros. Sci. 4 (1964) 237−243.  

[77] P. Lin, G. Palumbo, U. Erb, K.T. Aust, Influence of grain boundary character distribution 
on sensitization and intergranular corrosion of alloy 600, Scripta Metallurgica et Materiala 33 
(1995) 1387-1392. 


 

 
30

 

 

[78] H. Miyamoto, K. Yoshimura, T. Mimaki, M. Yamashita, Behavior of Intergranular 

Corrosion of 〈0 1 1〉 Tilt Grain Boundaries of Pure Copper Bicrystals, Corros. Sci. 44 
(2002) 1835-1846. 

[79] M. Shimada, H. Kokawa, Z.J. Wang, Y.S. Sato, I. Karibe, Optimization of grain 
boundary character distribution for intergranular corrosion resistant 304 stainless steel by twin 
induced grain boundary engineering, Acta Materialia 50 (2002) 2331–2341. 

[80] E.M. Lehockey, A.M. Brennenstuhl, I. Thompson, On the relationship between grain 
boundary connectivity, coincident site lattice boundaries, and intergranular stress corrosion 
cracking, Corros. Sci. 46 (2004) 2383-2404. 

[81] V. Randle, 'Special' Boundaries and Grain Boundary Plane Engineering, Scr. Mater. 54 
(2006) 1011–1015. 

[82] S. Xia, B. Zhou, W. Chen, Effect of single-step strain and annealing on grain boundary 
character distribution and intergranular corrosion in Alloy 690, J Mater Sci 43 (2008) 2990–
3000. 

[83] R. Jones, V. Randle, Sensitisation behaviour of grain boundary engineered austenitic 
stainless steel, Materials Science and Engineering A 527 (2010) 4275–4280. 

[84] CL Changliang, S.Xi, H. Li, TG. Liu, BX. Zhou, WJ. Chen, N. Wang, Ning, Improving 
the intergranular corrosion resistance of 304 stainless steel by grain boundary network 
control, Corros. Sci. 53 (2011) 1880-1886. 

[85] C. Luo, X. Zhou, G.E. Thompson, A.E. Hughes, Observations of intergranular corrosion 
in AA2024-T351: The influence of grain stored energy, Corros. Sci. 61 (2012) 35-44. 

[86] Sunil Kumar B., Balla Sai Prasad, Vivekanand Kain, Jayanth Reddy, Methods for 
making alloy 600 resistant to sensitization and intergranular corrosion, Corros. Sci. 70 (2013) 
55-61. 

[87] Y. Takehara, H. Fujiwara, H Miyamoto, "Special" to "general" transition of intergranular 
corrosion in Sigma 3{111} grain boundary with gradually changed misorientation, Corros. 
Sci. 77 (2013) 171-175. 

[88] A. Stratulat, J.A. Duff, T.J. Marrow, T. James, Grain boundary structure and 
intergranular stress corrosion crack initiation in high temperature water of a thermally 
sensitised austenitic stainless steel, observed in situ, Corros. Sci. 85 (2014) 428-435. 

[89] E. Martinez-Lombardia, Y. Gonzalez-Garcia, L. Lapeire, I. De Graeve, K. Verbeken, L. 
Kestens, J. Mol, H. Terryn, Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy to Study the Effect of 
Crystallographic Orientation on the Electrochemical Activity of Pure Copper, Electrochim. 
Acta 116 (2014) 89−96. 

[90] N. Srinivasan, V. Kain, N. Birbilis, K.V. Mani Krishna, S. Shekhawat, I. Samajdar, Near 
boundary gradient zone and sensitization control in austenitic stainless steel, Corros. Sci. 100 
(2015) 544-555. 

[91] E. Martinez-Lombardia, L. Lapeire, V.Maurice, I. De Graeve, K. Verbeken, L.H Klein, L. 
Kestens, P. Marcus, H. Terryn, In situ scanning tunneling microscopy study of the 
intergranular corrosion of copper, Electrochem. Com. 41 (2014) 1-4. 

[92] H. Chen, V. Maurice, L. H. Klein, K. Verbeken, H. Terryn, P. Marcus, Grain boundary 
passivation studied by in situ scanning tunneling microscopy on microcrystalline copper, J. 
Solid State Electrochem. 19 (2015) 3501-3509. 


 

 
31

 

 

[93] H. Chen, M. Bettayeb, V. Maurice, L. H. Klein, K. Verbeken, H. Terryn, P. Marcus, 
Local passivation of metals at grain boundaries: In situ scanning tunneling microscopy study 
on copper, Corrosion Sci. 111 (2016) 659-666. 

[94] M. Bettayeb, V. Maurice, L. H. Klein, K. Verbeken, H. Terryn, P. Marcus, to be 
published. 

[95] W. Schwenk, Corrosion control by organic inhibitors, In: Leidheiser H; editor. NACE, 
Houston, TX, 1981:p. 103. 

[96] M.M. Antonijevic, M.B. Petrovic, Copper corrosion inhibitors. A review, Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci; 3 (2008) 1-28. 

[97] P.B Raja, M.G.Sethuraman, Natural products as corrosion inhibitor for metals in 
corrosive media – A review, Materials Lett. 62 (2008) 113-116.  

[98] M. Rohwerder, G. Grundmeier, Corrosion prevention by adsorbed organic monolayers 
and ultrathin plasma polymer films. In: Marcus P, editor. Corrosion Mechanisms in Theory 
and Practice. 3rd edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis; 2011: pp. 617-667. 

[99] G. Gece, Drugs: A review of promising novel corrosion inhibitors, Corrosion Sci. 53 
(2011) 3873-3898. 

[100] G. Gece, The use of quantum chemical methods in corrosion inhibitor studies, 
Corrosion Sci. 50 (2008) 2981-2992. 

[101] D. Costa, P. Marcus, Adsorption of organic inhibitor molecules on metal and oxidized 
surfaces studied by atomistic theoretical methods. In: Taylor CD, Marcus P, editors. 
Molecular Modeling of Corrosion Processes – Scientific Development and Engineering 
Applications. John Wiley & Sons; 2015: 125-131. 

[102] M.R. Vogt, W. Polewska, O.M. Magnussen, R.J Behm, In situ STM Study of (100) Cu 
Electrodes in Sulfuric Acid Solution in the Presence of Benzotriazole Adsorption, Cu 
Corrosion, and Cu Deposition, J Electrochem Soc. 144 (1997) L113-L116. 

[103] M.R Vogt, R.J Nichols, O.M. Magnussen, R.J Behm, Benzotriazole adsorption and 
inhibition of Cu (100) corrosion in HCl: A combined in situ STM and in situ FTIR 
spectroscopy study, J Phys Chem B 102 (1998) 5859-5865. 

[104] W. Polewska, M.R. Vogt, O.M. Magnussen, R.J Behm, In situ STM study of Cu (111) 
surface structure and corrosion in pure and benzotriazole-containing sulfuric acid solution, J 
Phys Chem B 103 (1999) 10440-10451. 

[105] M. Sugimasa, L.-J. Wan, J. Inukai, K. Itaya K, Adlayers of Benzotriazole on Cu 
(110),(100), and (111) in HClO4 Solution In situ Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Study, J 
Electrochem Soc 149 (2002) E367-E373. 

[106] M.M.Antonijevic, M.B. Petrovic, Copper corrosion inhibitors. A review, Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci. 3 (2008) 1-28. 

[107] M.Finsgar, I. Milosev, Inhibition of copper corrosion by 1,2,3- benzotriazole. A review. 
Corrosion Sci. 52 (2010) 2737-2749. 

[108] F. Grillo, D.W. Tee, S.M. Francis, H.Früchtl, N.V. Richardson, Initial Stages of 
Benzotriazole Adsorption on the Cu(111) Surface, Nanoscale 5 (2013) 5269−5273. 

[109] F. Grillo, D.W. Tee, S.M. Francis, H.Früchtl, N.V. Richardson, Passivation of Copper: 
Benzotriazole Films on Cu(111), J Phys Chem C 118 (2014) 8667-8675. 


 

 
32

 

 

[110] Y. Jiang, J.B Adams, D. Sun, Benzotriazole Adsorption on Cu2O(111) Surfaces:  A 
First-Principles Study. J. Phys. Chem. B 108 (2004) 12851–12857. 

[111] A. Kokalj, S. Peljhan, Density Functional Theory Study of Adsorption of Benzotriazole 
on Cu2O Surfaces, J Phys Chem C 119 (2015) 11625-11635. 

[112] A. Kokalj, Ab initio modeling of the bonding of benzotriazole corrosion inhibitor to 
reduced and oxidized copper surfaces, Faraday Discussions 180 (2015) 415-438. 

[113] C. Gattinoni, A. Michaelides, Understanding corrosion inhibition with van der Waals 
DFT methods: the case of benzotriazole, Faraday Discussions 180 (2015) 439-458. 

[114] D. Costa, T. Ribeiro, F. Mercuri, G. Pacchioni, P. Marcus, Atomistic Modeling of 
Corrosion Resistance: A First Principles Study of O2 Reduction on the Al(111) Surface 
Covered with a Thin Hydroxylated Alumina Film, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 1 (2014) 1300072. 

[115] D. Costa, T. Ribeiro, P. Cornette, P. Marcus. DFT Modeling of Corrosion Inhibition by 
Organic Molecules: Carboxylates as Inhibitors of Aluminum Corrosion,  J. Phys. Chem. C 
120 (2016) 28607–28616. 

[116] B. Muller, S. Kubitzki, Corrosion Inhibition of Aluminium Pigments by Esters of Gallic 
Acid, Mater. Corros. 48 (1997) 755−758.  

[117] I.B. Obot, A. Madhankumar, Enhanced Corrosion Inhibition Effect of Tannic Acid in 
the Presence of Gallic Acid at Mild steel/HCl Acid Solution Interface, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 25 
(2015) 105−111. 


 

 
33

Figure captions 

Figure 1. Atomic structure as observed in situ by EC-STM on Fe-l8Cr-l3Ni(100) under 

polarization in the passive range at 0.5 V/SHE in 0.5 M H2SO4(aq). The atomic lattice 

terminating the grains of the passive oxide film is hexagonal as shown by the inset. Adapted 

from [51]. 

 

Figure 2. Nanoscale morphology of the Fe-l7Cr-l4.5Ni-2.3Mo(100) stainless steel surface 

passivated in 0.05 M H2SO4(aq) as observed by STM after polarization at 0.5 V/SHE (a) and 

by EC-STM under polarization at -0.14 V/SHE. The passive oxide film has a nanogranular 

morphology resolved in (b) (some grains are pointed) and covering the substrate terraces and 

step edges (marked by dashed lines). Substrate terraces display depressions (some are circled 

in (a) and (b)) evidencing local protection failure caused by competing transient dissolution 

during passivation. Polarization in the pre-passive range in (b) causes the growth of the 

depressions by sustained transient dissolution. Substrate step edges (marked by dashed lines) 

are more corrosion resistant owing to preferential local Cr enrichment of the passive film. (a) 

Adapted from [52]. 

 

Figure 3. Nanoscale morphology (a) and electrical resistance map (c) as observed by current 

sensing AFM of the passive oxide film formed on 316L stainless steel exposed 2 min to 

simulated pressurized water reactor environment (water at 325°C). Height (b) and resistance 

(d) profiles along the green and white arrows in (a) and (c), respectively. Reproduced from 

[67]. 

 

Figure 4. Intergranular active dissolution as observed in situ by EC-STM on microcrystalline 

copper in 1 mM HCl(aq.). Topographic images before (a) and after (b) anodic dissolution and 


 

 
34

height profiles along line 1 (c) and line 2 (d). The arrows mark coherent twin grain boundaries 

and the rectangle marks a random grain boundary. Reproduced from [91]. 

 

Figure 5. Intergranular passivation as studied in situ by EC-STM on microcrystalline copper 

in 0.1 M NaOH(aq.). (a) Topographic STM image of the analyzed local area. The local sites 

selected for GB depth analysis across random and coherent twin boundaries are marked 1 to 4 

and 5 to 13, respectively. (b) Bar graph of the GB depth measured in the metallic, passivated 

and reduced surface states at the marked selected sites in (a). Adapted from [93]. 

 

Figure 6. Bar graphs for the Cu(I) (a) and Cu(I/Cu(II) (b) passivation properties measured at 

grain surfacess (G) and at random (RGB) and coherent twin (CTGB) grain boundaries of 

microcrystalline copper in 0.1 M NaOH(aq.). The thickness of the passive film is displayed as 

the sum of the thickness of copper reversibly consumed by the passivation/reduction 

treatment (𝛿𝐶𝑢(𝑅)), the thickness of metallic copper irreversibly consumed (i.e. dissolved) 

during passivation (𝛿𝐶𝑢(𝐼𝑅)), and the rise of surface level caused by passivation (∆𝑧𝑃𝑎𝑠𝑠). 

Adapted from [93]. 

 

Figure 7. DFT optimized structures and binding energies of molecularly adsorbed 

benzotriazole BTAH (left) and deprotonated BTA (right) on (111)-oriented Cu2O: (a-e) 

bonding to the non-stoichiometric termination without the Cu unsaturated sites (labelled 

CUS), (f-i) bonding to the coordinatively saturated sites (labelled CSA) and CUS sites of the  

stoichiometric termination. H-bonding forms between BTAH and surface oxygen (b,c,f,g). 

Binding energies (eV/molecule) as calculated with PBE and PBE-D’ functionals are given as 

plain and bracketed values, respectively. Reproduced from [111]. 

 


 

 
35

Figure 8. DFT optimized structures and projected density of states (DOS) of molecularly 

adsorbed gallic acid on model passivated Al(111) surface. (a) Model of the ultrathin (0.2 nm) 

supported oxide film on Al(111). Topmost surface is hydroxylated. (b) Gallic acid molecule. 

(c) Dense adsorbed layer formed by the molecule on the supported oxide film. (d) Projected 

DOS of the oxide layer without (dotted line) and with (plain line) adsorbed layer. (e) 

Projected DOS of the adsorbed molecule COO function (gray line) and oxide layer (plain 

line). Zero energy level is set at the metal Fermi level. Adapted from [115]. 

 

 


 

 
36

Tables 

Table 1. Structure type and lattice constants of various Cr-, Fe- and/or Ni-containing oxide 

compounds and of their oxygen sub-lattice, and orientation and nearest neighbor distance in 

the closed packed plane of the oxygen sub-lattice. 

Oxide
Ref.

Oxide 

compound

O sub-lattice

O close packed 

plane

-Cr2O3
63

Corundum

a = 0.496 nm 

c = 1.360 nm

hcp

aO = 0.496 nm

cO = 1.360 nm

(0001)

0.286 nm

FeO
64

Rock salt

a = 0.430 nm

cfc

aO = 0.430 nm

{111}

0.304 nm

Fe3O4
64

Inverse spinel

a = 0.839 nm

cfc

aO = 0.420 nm

{111}

0.297 nm

-Fe2O3
64

Corundum

a = 0.504 nm 

c = 1.375 nm

hcp

aO = 0.504 nm

cO = 1.375 nm

(0001)

0.291 nm

-Fe2O3
64

Defect spinel

a = 0.835 nm

cfc

aO = 0.417 nm

{111}

0.295 nm

NiO
65

Rock salt

a = 0.418 nm

cfc

aO = 0.418 nm

{111}

0.295 nm

FeCr2O4
66

Spinel

a = 0.838 nm

cfc

aO = 0.419 nm

{111}

0.296 nm

NiCr2O4
66

Spinel

a = 0.832 nm

cfc

aO = 0.417 nm

{111}

0.294 nm

 

 

 


 

 
37

Figure 1 

 

 

 

 


 

 
38

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 


 

 
39

Figure 3 

 

 

 

 


 

 
40

Figure 3 

 

 

 

 


 

 
41

Figure 5 

 

 

 

 


 

 
42

Figure 6 

 

 

 

 


 

 
43

Figure 7 

 

 

 

 


 

 
44

Figure 8 

 

 

 

 


