1 

 

High-Performance Hybrid Silicon and Lithium 
Niobate Mach–Zehnder Modulators for 100 
Gbit/s and Beyond 
Mingbo He1, Mengyue Xu1, Yuxuan Ren2, Jian Jian1, Ziliang Ruan2, Yongsheng Xu2, Shengqian Gao1, 
Shihao Sun1, Xueqin Wen2, Lidan Zhou1, Lin Liu1, Changjian Guo2, Hui Chen1, Siyuan Yu1, Liu Liu2, 

and Xinlun Cai1 

1 State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies and School of Physics and Engineering, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. 
2Centre for Optical and Electromagnetic Research, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information 
Materials and Technology, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, Sci. Bldg. No. 5, South China 
Normal University, Higher-Education Mega-Center, Guangzhou 510006, China. 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to X. C. (caixlun5@mail.sysu.edu.cn) or to L.L. 
(email: liu.liu@coer-scnu.org).  

 

Optical modulators are at the heart of optical communication links. Ideally, they should 
feature low insertion loss, low drive voltage, large modulation bandwidth, high linearity, 
compact footprint and low manufacturing cost. Unfortunately, these criteria have only been 
achieved on separate occasions. Based on a Silicon and Lithium Niobate hybrid integration 
platform, we demonstrate Mach–Zehnder modulators that simultaneously fulfill these criteria. 
The presented device exhibits an insertion loss of 2.5 dB, voltage-length product of 2.2 
V∙cm, high linearity, electro-optic bandwidth of at least 70 GHz and modulation rates up to 
112 Gbit/s. The high-performance modulator is realized by seamless integration of high-
contrast waveguide based on Lithium Niobate - the most mature modulator material - with 
compact, low-loss silicon circuits. The hybrid platform demonstrated here allows for the 
combination of “best-in-breed” active and passive components, opening up new avenues for 
enabling future high-speed, energy efficient and cost-effective optical communication 
networks. 


2 

 

Global data traffic has witnessed continuous growth over the past three decades due to the 
insatiable demand of modern society1. This rapid expansion is placing a serious challenge on 
the transceivers in all levels of optical networks, i.e., how to significantly increase data rates 
while reducing energy consumption and cost2,3. To address this challenge, silicon photonics 
on the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform has emerged as the leading technology due to the 
possibility of low-cost and high-volume production of photonic integrated circuits (PICs) in 
CMOS foundries4-8.  

Optical modulators are key components serving as the information encoding engines from 

the electrical domain to the optical domain5. Optical modulation in silicon mainly relies on 
free-carrier dispersion effect9-14. Unfortunately, free-carrier dispersion is intrinsically 
absorptive and nonlinear, which degrades the optical modulation amplitude (OMA) and may 
lead to signal distortions when using advanced modulation formats. 

Tremendous efforts have been made towards realizing high-performance optical 

modulators in various material platforms15-26. Among them, Lithium Niobate (LN) remains a 
preferred material due to its excellent electro-optic (EO) modulation properties originating 
from Pockels effect27-28. LN modulators show unrivaled results for the generation of high-
baud-rate multilevel signals and are still the best choice for ultra-long-haul links29. 
Conventional LN modulators are formed by low-index-contrast waveguides with weak optical 
confinement and the microwave electrodes must be placed far away from the optical 
waveguide to minimize absorption losses, which leads to an increased drive voltage. As a 
result, conventional LN modulators are bulky in size and low in modulation efficiency (Vπ 
L>10 V∙cm). Recently, LN membranes on insulator (LNOI) has emerged as a promising 
platform to form waveguide devices with good confinement29-40, and LNOI modulators with a 
low drive voltage and ultra-high EO bandwidth have been recently demonstrated39,41-42. 

An alternative approach, i.e., hybrid integration of LN membranes onto SOI PICs, has 

also attracted considerable interests43-44. The hybrid silicon/LN material system combines the 
scalability of silicon photonics with excellent modulation performance of LN. A few 
demonstrations of hybrid Si/LN optical modulators have been reported, and they all rely on a 
supermode waveguide structure consisting of an unpatterned LN membrane on top of a 
silicon waveguide. This structure is designed to support a distributed optical mode that resides 
in both the LN and the underlying silicon waveguide, i.e. only part of the modal power 
overlaps with the LN region, which compromises the modulation efficiency. In fact, the 
hybrid Si/LN optical modulators demonstrated so far show either low EO bandwidth or high 
operation voltage. 

Here, we demonstrate hybrid Si/LN Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZMs) that employ two 

layers of hybrid integrated waveguides and vertical adiabatic couplers (VACs). The VACs 
transfer the optical power fully, rather than partially, between the silicon waveguide and LN 
membrane waveguide. This approach efficiently utilizes the LN membrane and overcomes 
the trade-off in the previous approaches. The proposed devices show a large EO bandwidth, 
high modulation efficiency, low on-chip insertion loss and high linearity. On-off keying 
(OOK) modulation up to 100 Gbit/s and four-level pulse amplitude modulation (PAM-4) up 
to 112 Gbit/s are successfully demonstrated. 

Results 

Design of Hybrid Silicon and LN MZMs. The devices were fabricated based on 
benzocyclobuten (BCB) adhesive die-to-wafer bonding and LN dry etching techniques. Fig. 
1(a) shows the schematic view of the present Si/LN hybrid MZM, consisting of two 
waveguide layers and VACs. The top waveguides, formed by dry-etching of an X-cut LN 
membrane, serves as phase modulators where EO interactions (Pockels effect) occur. The 
bottom SOI circuit supports all other passive functions, consisting of two 3 dB multimode 


3 

 

interference (MMI) couplers that split and combine the optical power, and two grating 
couplers for off-chip coupling. The VACs, which were formed by silicon inverse tapers and 
superimposed LN waveguides, serve as interfaces to couple light up and down between the 
two layers. This hybrid integration architecture offers two distinct advantages. Firstly, since 
the task of routing light across the chip is placed on the underlying silicon waveguides, only 
simple, straight waveguides need to be fabricated in LN membrane. This allows for a more 
compact device footprint and greater flexibility in the LN waveguide design, compared with 
that of devices based on the pure LNOI platform. Secondly, the VACs, together with the dry-
etched LN waveguide design, facilitate high overlap between the optical modes and active 
material, as well as good optical confinement in LN waveguide. This enables more efficient 
utilization of the LN active region, in contrast to other hybrid Si/LN hybrid devices with 
unpatterned LN membrane. The schematic of the cross-section of the hybrid waveguide is 
illustrated in Fig. 1(b). 

 

Figure 1 Structure of the hybrid Si/LN MZM. (a) Schematic of the structure of the whole 
circuit. (b) Schematic of the cross-section of the hybrid waveguide. (c) Scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) image of the metal electrodes and the optical waveguide. (d) SEM image 
of the cross-section of the LN waveguide.  (e) Schematic of the VAC. (f) SEM images of the 
cross-sections of the VAC at different positions, and calculated mode distributions associated 
with the cross-sections. 

 

The LN waveguide is the most critical part of the present device and has to be optimized 

to achieve high modulation efficiency and low optical loss. The fabricated waveguides have a 
top width of w = 1 μm, a slab thickness of s=420 nm, a rib height of h = 180 nm and a 
sidewall angle of 60 degrees (Fig. 1(c)). The lithography and etching processes were 
optimized to yield smooth sidewalls and the LN waveguide features a measured propagation 
loss of 0.98 dB/cm (Supplementary Section III). The gap between the waveguides and 

MMI

G

S

G

Grating Coupler

LN waveguide

(a)
(b)

C

A
B

(e)
(f)

500 nm

θ

θ = 60°

500 nm

LN

BCB

Si Waveguide

500 nm

2 μm

(c)

500 nm

LN                  

Si

t
ws
wg

w

s

h

Au

LN

BCB

SiO2

C
A
B

(d)


4 

 

electrodes was set to 2.75 μm. These parameters are designed to achieve good balance 
between the modulation efficiency and optical losses (including both metal absorption and 
sidewall scattering loss) (Supplementary Section I). The electrodes are configured in a 
ground-signal-ground (GSG) form, where the two LN waveguides lie in the two gaps between 
the ground and signal metals. To achieve large EO bandwidth, the electrodes are operated in a 
traveling wave manner and optimized for impedance matching, as well as velocity matching 
of the microwave and light signals (Supplementary Section II). The thickness of electrode 
was set to 600 nm, and the widths of signal and ground electrodes were designed to 19.5 μm 
and 30 μm, respectively (Fig. 1(d)). 

The VAC is another important part of the device (Fig. 1(e)) and must be optimized for 

high efficiency. The width of the silicon waveguide tapers from 500 nm to 80 nm over a 
length of 150 μm, while the width of the LN waveguide remains constant at 1 μm. The 
thickness of the BCB is ~300 nm (i.e., the gap between the bottom of the LN waveguide and 
the top of the silicon waveguide is 80 nm), which is sufficiently robust with respect to the 
variations induced by the fabrication processes. The measured coupling efficiency of the 
VAC is > 97% (loss of ~0.19 dB per VAC) (Supplementary Section III). It should be noted 
that simulation indicates that the silicon taper tip width can be as large as 200 nm with 
negligible degradation in coupling efficiency, which means the present design is compatible 
with standard mass production processes (Supplementary Section III). Fig. 1(f) presents snap-
shots of the optical intensity patterns for various cross-sections of the VAC, which illustrates 
the process of mode transfer. 

 

Figure 2 Static EO Performance. (a) Normalized optical transmission of the 3-mm and 5-
mm device as a function of the applied voltage, showing Vπ of 4.5 V and 5.1 V, respectively. 
(b) Measured spectral response of the MZM biased at quadrature, indicating broadband 
operation of the device. 

Static EO Performance. Fabricated MZM devices with arm lengths of 3 mm and 5 mm were 
measured in detail. The devices are driven in a push-pull configuration, so that applied 
voltage induces a positive phase shift in one arm and a negative phase shift in the other. Fig. 
2(a) shows the half-wave voltage measurements for both devices with a 100-kHz triangular 
voltage sweep, and the half-wave voltages Vπ for the 3-mm and 5-mm devices are 7.4 V and 
5.1 V, corresponding to voltage–length products of 2.2 V∙cm and 2.5∙V cm, respectively. The 
inset of Fig. 2 (a) shows the optical transmission on a logarithmic scale, indicating a 
measured extinction ratio of > 40 dB for the 3-mm device. Fig. 2(b) shows the measured 
spectral response of the MZM biased at quadrature, indicating broadband operation of the 
device in the whole C-band. The Vπ value of the present device can be further reduced by 

(a)
(b)


5 

 

simply increasing the device length, as an LNOI modulator with Vπ=1.4 V was recently 
achieved with a device length of 2 cm39. For the proposed Si/LN hybrid modulator, Vπ of 
about 1 V is expected with a similar length. This would enable driverless modulation from 
direct CMOS output without compromising the extinction ratio. In addition, a device with 
such a length can also fit in some common transceiver packages like QSFP (Quad Small 
Form-factor Pluggable) and can be adopted for future 400G applications 45. 

(b)

(a)

(d)

(c)

 

Figure 3 EO Bandwidth and Linearity. (a) Experimental setup for measuring the EO 
bandwidth. VNA, vector network analyzer; EDFA, erbium-doped fiber amplifier; BPF, band-
pass filter; PD, photodetector; PC, polarization controller. (b) EO bandwidths (S21 parameter) 
of MZMs with lengths of 3 mm and 5mm. The 3-dB bandwidths of both devices are beyond 
the measurement limit of the VNA (70 GHz). (c) Experimental setup for measuring the IMD3 
SFDR. (d) RF output power of the fundamental and IMD3 components as a function of RF 
input power for our device at 1 GHz and 10 GHz, and for a commercially available LN MZM 
at 1 GHz. The noise floor is in 1 Hz bandwidth, limited by the RF spectral analyzer. 

EO Bandwidth and Linearity. We then characterized the small signal EO bandwidth (S21 
parameter) of the fabricated devices using the setup shown in Fig. 3(a). The measured 3-dB 
EO bandwidths of both devices are > 70 GHz, which is beyond the measurement limits of our 
vector network analyzer (VNA). The measured EO bandwidth is much higher than that of 
pure silicon-based modulators. We believe that the EO bandwidth of the present device could 
be extended beyond 100 GHz by further optimizing the travelling-wave electrode 
(Supplementary Section II). 

To characterize the linearity of the present device, we further examine the third order 

intermodulation (IMD3) spurious free dynamic range (SFDR) performance of the 3-mm 
device using the setup shown in Fig. 3 (c). To provide a comparative study, we also measured 
the IMD3 SFDR of a commercially available LN MZM (Fujitsu FTM7937EZ) with the same 
measurement system. Both devices are biased at quadrature and the optical power reaching 


6 

 

the photodetector after pre-amplification is kept at 0 dBm. For our device, the measured 
IMD3 SFDR is 99.6 dB Hz2/3 at 1 GHz, which is slightly better than that achieved by the 
commercial LN MZM (94.9 dB Hz2/3). At 10 GHz, the measured SFDR decreases slightly to 
95.2 dB Hz2/3, mainly due to a higher noise floor of the measurement system. The SFDR 
value can be increased further by increasing the received optical power.  

Figure 4 Data Transmission Testing. (a) Experimental setup for measuring the eye diagram. 
AWG, arbitrary waveform generator. (b-e) Optical eye diagrams for OOK signal at data rates 
of 56 Gb/s, 72 Gb/s, 84 Gb/s, and 100 Gb/s. The dynamic extinction ratios are 11.8 dB, 6.0 
dB, 5.5 dB and 5.0 dB, respectively. (f-g) Measured PAM-4 modulation optical eye diagrams 
at 28 GBaud (50Gb/s) and 56 GBaud (112Gb/s). (h) Measured curves of BER versus the 
received optical power for 28 GBaud (56 Gb/s) and 56 GBaud (112 Gb/s) PAM-4 signal. 

 

Data Transmission Testing. Next, we evaluated the performance of the 3-mm device for 
high-speed digital data transmission, as depicted in Fig. 4 (a). First, the OOK modulations 
were applied to the device. Fig. 4 (b-e) summarizes the optical eye diagrams at 56, 72, 84 and 
100 Gb/s. The measured extinction ratios are 11.8, 6.0, 5.5 and 5.0 dB, respectively. It is 

56 Gb/s OOK 

72 Gb/s OOK

84 Gb/s OOK 

100 Gb/s OOK 

56 Gb/s PAM-4 (28 Gbaud) 

112 Gb/s PAM-4 (56 Gbaud) 

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(a)


7 

 

noteworthy that at 100 Gb/s the whole measurement system is already limited by the 
bandwidth of the RF probe and cables. PAM-4 modulation experiments were also carried out 
with the same experimental setup. The optical PAM-4 eye-diagrams at 28 GBaud and 56 
GBaud are shown in Fig. 4 (f-g). The back to back (B2B) bit-error rate (BER) curves at both 
PAM-4 data rates, shown in Fig. 4 (h), decrease linearly as the received optical power before 
pre-amplification increases. No error floor is observed in the measured power range, and the 
error rates are also well below the hard-FEC limit of 3.8×10-3. 

Discussion 

As presented above, the hybrid Si/LN MZMs demonstrated here can achieve excellent optical 
modulation characteristics, while maintaining key advantages of SOI photonic circuits. LN 
active waveguides can be bonded and fabricated with lithographic precision and alignment 
accuracy in a back-end process after the SOI fabrication. This manufacturing procedure is 
highly scalable and fully CMOS-compatible. Therefore, our approach potentially provides a 
new generation of compact, high performance optical modulators for telecommunications and 
data-interconnects.  

It should be noted that approaches of combining silicon with other materials exhibiting 

Pockels effects, such as organic materials and barium titanate (BTO), have also been reported. 
In Tab. 1, we compare the performance of the present device with state-of-the-art, including 
silicon-organic-hybrid (SOH) MZMs, SOH plasmonic MZMs, and BTO/Si plasmonic MZMs. 
Here, we focus on MZMs with either large EO bandwidth or high operation speed, and results 
of pure silicon modulators operating in carrier depletion mode are also included as a 
benchmark. As shown in Tab. 1, the present device in this work is the only one, on which low 
Vπ and low insertion loss are achieved simultaneously. In particular, the insertion loss of the 
present device is much lower than that of all others, and to the best of our knowledge, this is 
the lowest insertion loss ever achieved in optical modulators operating above 40Gbit/s on 
silicon. The demonstrated Vπ of the present device is also promising, which is only surpassed 
by the SOH modulator with a much higher insertion loss. As discussed above, the Vπ can be 
further engineered to be about 1 V while keeping an insertion loss of less than 4 dB. A low Vπ 
is critical for a travelling-wave type of modulator, since the energy consumption per bit is 
proportional to the square of the driving voltage. For the data transmission experiments in 
Fig.4, the energy consumption of the present device of 3 mm length is estimated about 700 
fJ/bit (see Supplementary Section II). By increasing the device length, it is possible to push 
the energy consumption down to about 40 fJ/bit while still keeping a bandwidth > 40 GHz. It 
has been recently proved that tens of aJ/bit energy consumption can be achieved for LN thin 
film modulators although at a compromised BER39. We believe that a similar performance 
can be expected for the present Si/LN hybrid device, since the cross-section structures of the 
phase shifter section are very similar for the two cases. Another approach for decreasing the 
energy consumption is to use a resonant device with lumped electrodes instead of a travelling-
wave design32,35, but the working wavelength band, in this case, is limited. 

The underlying silicon waveguides not only route light with low losses across the chip, 

but also allow integration of the present modulator with the complete suite of silicon photonic 
components. This makes the proposed Si/LN platform highly desirable for new emerging 
applications. For instance, future integrated microwave photonic (MWP) systems would 
require on-chip linear modulators featuring high-fidelity electronic-to-optical conversion. The 
present device is ideal for this scenario and can be envisaged to be co-integrated with passive 
SOI structures, such as Bragg gratings or micro-resonators, to form sophisticated integrated 
MWP circuits. Another possible application area could be linear optical quantum computing 
(LOQC)50. LOQC relies on universal quantum gates which could be implemented by adding 
auxiliary photons and by using rapid, time-of-flight feedforward. In practice, a feedforward 


8 

 

step requires large-scale, low loss, rapidly reconfigurable (in GHz range) optical circuits 
capable of low-noise pure phase modulation – requirements that are attainable on our 
platform. The present platform is also amenable to further integration with lasers and 
detectors, as well as high-speed electronic drivers based on CMOS technology, offering fully 
integrated solutions for future terabit-per-second datacom and interconnect applications. The 
fabrication process can also be adapted for materials such as Si3N4, which enables ultra-low 
loss PICs and potential platform for exploring nonlinear optical processes. 

 

Table 1 Comparison of several performance metrics for hybrid silicon MZM 

Loss
Vπ
EO Bandwidth
OOK Data Rate
The Length of 

Modulation

Area

SOI10
5.4 dB
7 V
58 GHz
90 Gb/s
2mm

SOH20
11 dB
22 V
>100 GHz
N.A.
0.5mm

SOH46
>11 dB*
0.9 V
25 GHz
100 Gb/s
1.1mm

SOH
Plasmonic47
12 dB
>40 V**
>65 GHz
40 Gb/s
29μm

Si/BTO
Plasmonic48
30 dB***
25 V
>100 GHz
72 Gb/s
10μm

Si/BTO49
3.3dB****
20V
800MHz
300Mb/s
0.75mm

This Work
2.5 dB
5.1 V
>70 GHz
100 Gb/s
5mm

* The value is calculated from 20 dB fiber-to-fiber loss and 9 dB off-chip coupling loss. 

** The value is calculated from the reported VπL of 1.3 Vmm and length of 29 μm. 

*** The value is calculated from propagation loss of 2 dB/µm with 10 µm length, and 10 dB loss for two 
photonic-plasmonic converters. 

****The value is calculated from propagation loss of 44 dB/cm with 0.75 mm length. 

 

Methods 

Fabrication: A standard SOI processing including e-beam lithography (EBL) and dry etching 
processes was used to fabricate the grating coupler, 3dB MMIs, and silicon inverse tapers. An 
LNOI sample with silicon substrate was flip-bonded to the SOI wafer using BCB adhesive 
bonding process. The substrate of the LNOI was removed by mechanical grinding and dry 
etching. Afterwards, Hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ, FOX-16 by Dow Corning) was spin-
coated on the LN thin film for EBL. The waveguide patterns were transferred into LN with 
optimized argon plasma etching in inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching system. The 
physical etching by argon plasma results in a sidewall angle of ~60°. Finally, the travelling 
wave electrodes were patterned through a liftoff process. 

Dynamic measurement: The setup for EO bandwidth, linearity, and data transmission 
measurements are shown in Fig. 3 and 4, respectively. The electrical signal is fed to the 
device electrode through a 67GHz-bandwidth RF probe (GGB 67A). A second RF probe (not 
shown) is also attached to the end of the travelling-wave electrode, and a 50  termination is 
applied to the second probe for impedance matching. For the optical signal, light from a 
tunable laser is coupled into and collected from the SOI grating couplers using single mode 


9 

 

fibers. A polarization controller is used to ensure TE input polarization. The received optical 
signal is pre-amplified and filtered through an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and a 
band-pass filter (BPF) before detection. A VNA is used for bandwidth measurement, and the 
frequency response of the PD (XPDV4120R) is deducted from the measured S21 response. 
For linearity measurement, the input electrical signal consists of a DC bias and two RF tones 
with frequencies separated by 10MHz and centered at the desired frequency. An RF spectrum 
analyzer is used to analyze frequency components of the received electrical signal. For data 
transmission measurement, an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Micram) with 100Gs/s 
sampling rate is used to generate the electrical signals. A 50 GHz broadband amplifier (SHF 
807) with output saturation Vpp of 4 V is used to amplifier the driving signal to the modulator 
together with a DC bias. For OOK eye diagram measurements, the modulator is biased at a 
voltage a little lower than the quadrature point to achieve better ERs. For PAM-4 eye diagram 
measurements, the modulator is biased at the quadrature point and the levels of the driving 
signals are deducted from an inverse trigonometric function in order to compensate the 
typical sinusoid response of the MZI. Digital low-pass filters are also applied to limit the 
signal bandwidth. For the bit-error rate measurements, the detected signal is sampled by a 
real-time oscilloscope (Tektronics DPO73304), and analyzed using an off-line DSP, including 
resampling, equalization, and symbol decision (see Supplementary Section IV). 

 

Author contributions 

X.C. developed the idea. X.C. and L.L. conceived device design. M.H., J.J. carried out the LN 
fabrication. M.H., S.G., H.C., L.Z., L.L., and S.S. carried out the silicon fabrication. M.H. and 
Y.R. carried out the bonding process. M.X., Z.R., Y.X., X.W., C.G., carried out the 
measurement. L.L. and X.C. carried out the data analysis. All authors contributed to the 
writing. X.C. finalized the paper. S.Y., L.L., and X.C. supervised the project. 

 

References 
1. Cisco. Cisco visual networking index: Forecast and methodology, 2015–2020 (2016). 
2. Tkach, R. W. Scaling Optical Communications for the Next Decade and Beyond. Bell Labs 

Tech. J. 14, 3-10 (2010). 

3. Kilper, D. C. & Rastegarfar. Energy challenges in optical access and aggregation networks. 

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A. 374, 20140435 (2016). 

4. Miller, D. Device requirements for optical interconnects to CMOS silicon chips. In 

Photonics in Switching. PMB3 (OSA, Monterey, 2010). 

5. Reed, G. T., Mashanovich, G., Gardes, F. Y. & Thomson, D. J. Silicon optical modulators. 

Nat. Photon. 4, 518 (2010). 

6. Heck, M. J. et al. Hybrid silicon photonics for optical interconnects. IEEE J. Sel. Top. 

Quantum Electron. 17, 333-346 (2011). 

7. Bogaerts, W. et al. Nanophotonic waveguides in silicon-on-insulator fabricated with CMOS 

technology. J. Lightwave Technol. 23, 401-412 (2005). 

8. Sun, C. et al. Single-chip microprocessor that communicates directly using light. Nature 

528, 534-538 (2015). 

9. Xu, Q., Schmidt, B., Pradhan, S. & Lipson, M. J. Micrometre-scale silicon electro-optic 

modulator. Nature 435, 325-327 (2005). 

10. Li, M. et al. Silicon intensity Mach–Zehnder modulator for single lane 100 Gb/s 

applications. Photon. Research 6, 109-116 (2018). 

11. Ding, R. et al. High-speed silicon modulator with slow-wave electrodes and fully 

independent differential drive. J. Lightwave Technol. 32, 2240-2247 (2014). 

12. Dong, P. et al. Monolithic silicon photonic integrated circuits for compact 100+ Gb/s 


10 

 

coherent optical receivers and transmitters. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 20, 150-
157 (2014). 

13. Samani, A. et al. Experimental parametric study of 128 Gb/s PAM-4 transmission system 

using a multi-electrode silicon photonic Mach Zehnder modulator. Opt. Express 25, 13252-
13262 (2017). 

14. Timurdogan, E. et al. An ultralow power athermal silicon modulator. Nat. Commun. 5, 

4008 (2014). 

15. Xiong, C. et al. Aluminum nitride as a new material for chip-scale optomechanics and 

nonlinear optics. New J. Phys. 14, 20 (2012) 

16. Zhang, C. et al. Ultralinear heterogeneously integrated ring-assisted Mach–Zehnder 

interferometer modulator on silicon. Optica 3, 1483-1488 (2016). 

17. Tang, Y. et al. 50 Gb/s hybrid silicon traveling-wave electroabsorption modulator. Opt. 

Express 19, 5811-5816 (2011). 

18. Haffner, C. et al. All-plasmonic Mach–Zehnder modulator enabling optical high-speed 

communication at the microscale. Nat. Photon. 9, 525-528 (2015). 

19. Haffner, C. et al. Low-loss plasmon-assisted electro-optic modulator. Nature 556, 483-486  

(2018). 

20. Alloatti, L. et al. 100 GHz silicon–organic hybrid modulator. Light Sci. Appl. 3, e173 

(2014). 

21. Lee, M. et al. Broadband Modulation of Light by Using an Electro-Optic Polymer. 

Science 298, 1401-1403 (2002). 

22. Han, J.-H. et al. Efficient low-loss InGaAsP/Si hybrid MOS optical modulator. Nat. 

Photon. 11, 486-490 (2017). 

23. Kikuchi, N., Yamada, E., Shibata, Y. & Ishii, H. High-speed InP-based Mach-Zehnder 

modulator for advanced modulation formats. In Compound Semiconductor Integrated 
Circuit Symposium (CSICS) 1-4 (IEEE, La Jolla, 2012). 

24. Phare, C. T., Lee, Y. H. D., Cardenas, J. & Lipson, M. Graphene electro-optic modulator 

with 30 GHz bandwidth. Nat. Photon. 9, 511-514 (2015). 

25. Liu, M. et al. A graphene-based broadband optical modulator. Nature 474, 64-67 (2011). 
26. Sorianello, V. et al. Graphene–silicon phase modulators with gigahertz bandwidth. Nat. 

Photon. 12, 40 (2018). 

27. Chen, A. Broadband Optical Modulators: Science, Technology, and Applications (CRC 

Press, Boca Raton, 2011) 

28. Wooten, E. L. et al. A review of lithium niobate modulators for fiber-optic 

communications systems. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron 6, 69–82 (2000). 

29. Raybon, G. et al. Single Carrier High Symbol Rate Transmitter for Data Rates up to 1.0 

Tb/s. In Optical Fiber Communication Conference. Th3A.2 (OSA, Anaheim, 2016). 

30. Janner, D., Tulli, D., García-Granda, M., Belmonte, M. & Pruneri, V. Micro-structured 

integrated electro-optic LiNbO3 modulators. Laser Photon. Rev. 3, 301-313 (2009). 

31. Poberaj, G., Hu, H., Sohler, W. & Günter, P. Lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) for 

micro-photonic devices. Laser Photon. Rev. 6, 488-503 (2012) 

32. Guarino, A., Poberaj, G., Rezzonico, D., Degl’Innocenti, R. & Günter, P. Electro–optically 

tunable microring resonators in lithium niobate. Nat. Photon. 1, 407 (2007). 

33. Jin, S., Xu, L., Zhang, H. & Li, Y. LiNbO3 thin-film modulators using silicon nitride 

surface ridge waveguides. IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 28, 736-739 (2016). 

34. Rao, A. et al. High-performance and linear thin-film lithium niobate Mach–Zehnder 

modulators on silicon up to 50 GHz. Opt. Lett. 41, 5700-5703 (2016). 

35. Wang, J. et al. High-Q lithium niobate microdisk resonators on a chip for efficient electro-

optic modulation. Opt. Exp. 23, 23072-23078 (2015). 

36. Cai, L., Kang, Y. & Hu, H. Electric-optical property of the proton exchanged phase 

modulator in single-crystal lithium niobate thin film. Opt. Exp. 24, 4640-4647 (2016). 


11 

 

37. Chang, L. et al. Thin film wavelength converters for photonic integrated circuits. Optica 3, 

531-535 (2016). 

38. Chang, L. et al. Heterogeneous integration of lithium niobate and silicon nitride 

waveguides for wafer-scale photonic integrated circuits on silicon. Opt. Lett. 42, 803-806 
(2017). 

39. Wang, C. et al. Integrated lithium niobate electro-optic modulators operating at CMOS-

compatible voltages. Nature 562, 101-104 (2018). 

40. Boes, A., Corcoran, B., Chang, L., Bowers, J. & Mitchell, A. Status and Potential of 

Lithium Niobate on Insulator (LNOI) for Photonic Integrated Circuits. Laser Photon. Rev. 
12, 1700256 (2018). 

41. Mercante, A. J. et al. Thin film lithium niobate electro-optic modulator with terahertz 

operating bandwidth. Opt. Exp. 26, 14810-14816 (2018). 

42. Rao, A. & Fathpour, S. Compact lithium niobate electrooptic modulators. IEEE Journal 

of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 24, 1-14 (2018). 

43. Chen, L., Xu, Q., Wood, M. G. & Reano, R. M. Hybrid silicon and lithium niobate 

electro-optical ring modulator. Optica 1, 112-118 (2014). 

44. Weigel, P. O. et al. Bonded thin film lithium niobate modulator on a silicon photonics 

platform exceeding 100 GHz 3-dB electrical modulation bandwidth. Opt. Exp. 26, 23728-
23739 (2018). 

45. QSFP-DD Hardware Specification for QSFP Double Density 8X Pluggable Transceiver - 

Rev. 4.0, http://www.qsfp-dd.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/QSFP-DD-Hardware-
rev4p0-9-12-18-clean. 

46. Wolf, S. et al. Silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) Mach-Zehnder modulators for 100 Gbit/s on-

off keying. Sci. Rep. 8, 2598 (2018). 

47. Melikyan, A. et al. High-speed plasmonic phase modulators. Nat. Photon. 8, 229 (2014). 
48. A. Messner, et al. Integrated Ferroelectric BaTiO3/Si Plasmonic Modulator for 100 Gbit/s 

and Beyond. In Optical Fiber Communication Conference M2I.6 (OSA, San Diego, 2018). 

49. Xiong, C. et al. Active silicon integrated nanophotonics: ferroelectric BaTiO3 devices. 

Nano Lett. 14, 1419-1425 (2014). 

50. Kok, P. et al. Linear optical quantum computing with photonic qubits. Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 

135 (2007). 

 

Competing Interests The authors have declared that no competing interests exist


12 

 

Supplementary Information 

High Performance Hybrid Silicon and Lithium Niobate Mach–Zehnder 
Modulators for 100 Gbit/s and Beyond 

 

Mingbo He1, Mengyue Xu1, Yuxuan Ren2, Jian Jian1, Ziliang Ruan2, Yongsheng Xu2, Shengqian Gao1, 
Shihao Sun1, Xueqin Wen2, Lidan Zhou1, Lin Liu1, Changjian Guo2, Hui Chen1, Siyuan Yu1, Liu Liu2 

and Xinlun Cai1 

1 State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies and School of Physics and Engineering, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. 
2 Centre for Optical and Electromagnetic Research, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information 
Materials and Technology, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, Sci. Bldg. No. 5, South China 
Normal University, Higher-Education Mega-Center, Guangzhou 510006, China. 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to X. C. (caixlun5@mail.sysu.edu.cn) or to L.L. 
(email: liu.liu@coer-scnu.org).  

I Design of LN waveguide 

It is essential that an LN phase modulator should have a low 
 and optical loss. The 

optical loss comes from two parts: the metal-induced absorption and sidewall scattering loss. 
In general, there is an inherent compromise between optical confinement and scattering loss 
from side-wall roughness. To maximize the modulation efficiency, a strong optical 
confinement, i.e., a deeply etched waveguide, is desired, because strong optical confinement 
facilitates a small electrode gap and low operation voltage. On the other hand, a waveguide 
that is too deeply etched will result in strong scattering from sidewall roughness, and the 
optical loss will also increase. In this section, we show how to optimize waveguide 
parameters for a low 
, and discuss the design considerations. 

In order to calculate the 
, firstly, the electric field distribution (Ez) are computed in 

a commercial software (COMSOL Multiphysics). The distribution of the electric field of the 
present device (w=1μm and etch depth h=180nm) with an applied voltage of 1 V is shown in 
Fig. S1 (a). Then, we calculate the change of LN refractive index 
, which is caused by the 

applied voltage, according to the formula: 

                                 (1) 

where Ez is the in-plane component of the electrical field in the LN waveguide, ne is the LN 
refractive index and r33 is the electro-optic coefficient of LN. 

Next, we calculate the distribution of the refractive index of the LN waveguide and use it 

in an optical mode solver (Lumerical Mode Solution) to find the fundamental TE mode at a 
wavelength of λ0=1550nm. We define the effective refractive index change 
 as the 

difference between the effective refractive index of the fundamental TE mode with and 

without the applied voltage. 
 is the length at which the phase change reaches π/2 


13 

 

with an applied voltage of 1 V. Here, the phase change of π/2, instead of π, is used in the 
calculation, because the push-pull configuration in our device allows producing a π -
phase shift between the two arms with only π/2 with opposite polarity in each arm. 
Therefore, 
 can be expressed as: 

                            (2) 

Figure S1. (a) A cross-sectional view of the simulated optical TE mode profile and the 
electric field (shown by arrows) between the two electrodes in this work. (b) Calculated 
 

figures and mode losses induced by the metal absorption at difference h and g. The color map 
is for 
 (
) and the black contour lines are for mode losses (dB/cm). The white 

circles indicate the positions for the lowest 
 on each contour line. The white star 

indicates the structural parameters used in the experiments of the main text. 

The etching depth (the rib height of the LN waveguide) h and the gap between the metal 

electrode and LN waveguide g are crucial parameters for the optical performance of the 
present structure. Fig. S1 (b) shows the calculated 
 figures and mode losses induced by 

(a)

w
g

h

s

(b)


14 

 

the metal absorption at difference h and g. Intuitively, as the metal electrodes are put closer to 
the waveguide, the metal absorption would increase and 
 would decrease. On the other 

hand, as the etching depth becomes deeper, the absorption loss would decrease due to a better 
lateral confinement for the optical mode, while 
 would increase since the field residing 

in the LN material becomes less in this case. The above analyses are confirmed by the 
simulation data shown in Fig. S1(b). Furthermore, for each fixed metal absorption loss value, 
there exists an optimal set of structural parameters for the lowest 
. This conclusion is 

helpful for designing the present waveguide and electrode structure at a certain acceptable 
mode loss. It should be noted that only the metal absorption loss was analyzed here. Losses 
induced by other sources like sidewall roughness were not included. Actually, it is difficult to 
theoretical calculate the scattering loss from the sidewall roughness. Vast number of devices 
would be required in order to get a statistic map of the scattering losses related to structural 
parameters. This is under further investigation. Nevertheless, it can be believed that a shallow 
etched waveguide would present a lower scattering loss from the sidewall roughness. 
Therefore, in the experiments of the main text, we set the etching depth h of 180 nm for the 
fabricated device. The gap g is set 2.75m. In this case, the calculated 
 

and the metal induced absorption loss is below 0.3 dB/cm. It is not the lowest 
 value at 

the same loss level (the lowest 
 is obtained around h=300nm), but not too far off. 

 

II Design of Travelling Wave Electrodes and Energy Efficiency 

 

Figure S2. Schematic structure of the coplanar line waveguide in the arms of the 
present device. 


15 

 

 

Figure S3. (a) Signal electrode width ws, (b) RF attenuation m, and (c) RF effective 
mode index nm of the coplanar waveguide at different electrode thicknesses t, while 
the real part of the characteristic impedance Z0 is kept at 50. The structural 
parameters adopted in the experiments discussed in the main text is marked in (a) as 
a circle. The group index of the optical mode is marked as a red dash-dotted line in 
(c). 

 

The modulation performance of the present LN/Si modulator is analyzed in this 

section. It is known that the performance of a travelling wave modulator is related to 
the impedance of RF waveguide, the losses of the RF signal, and the propagation 
speed of optical and RF signals. Fig. S2 shows the cross-sectional structure at the 
arms of the MZM. For the RF signal, it is basically a coplanar line waveguide. 
Adopting the optical waveguide design from Sec. I in this document, some of the 
structural parameters are defined as hSiO=3 m, hBCB=300 nm, hLN=420 nm, and 
w+2g=6.5m. We analyze the characteristics of the present coplanar line structure 
for different metal thicknesses t. For each metal thickness t, the width ws of the signal 
metal is first adjusted to ensure the characteristic impedance Z0 of the waveguide to 
be 50  at a frequency of 50 GHz. This relation is shown in Fig. S3(a). As expected, 
a thick metal would require a narrow signal metal to achieve impedance matching. 
Then, for each combination of t and ws, the RF effective mode index nm and RF 
attenuation m of the waveguide are further analyzed as shown in Fig. S3(b) & 3(c). 
For the optical mode, the group index no of the hybrid LN waveguide is about 2.21, 


16 

 

which is also marked in Fig. S3(b). Thanks to the LN membrane structure and the 
hybrid integration process, the propagation speed of the optical and RF signals is 
well matched in the present device. The index mismatch is below 6% for all the 
structural parameters considered in Fig. S3. This is in contrast to the ordinary bulk 
LN modulator [S1]. For the RF attenuation, one can find that a thick metal favors a low 
loss RF waveguide. The decreasing of the RF attenuation saturates when the metal 
thickness t is larger than 1m, which is also the preferred region for the metal 
thickness in order to achieve the ultimate performance of the present modulator. The 
structures adopted in the experiments discussed in the main text is also marked in Fig. 
S3(a). Apparently, the adopted structural parameters are not the optimum concerning 
the impedance matching and RF attenuation. The overall modulation frequency 
response m() of a travelling wave modulator can be expressed as [S2]:  

, 

where,  is the angular frequency of the RF signal, 
 is the 

impedance seen at the entrance of the electrode, L=3mm is the length of the electrode, 

 is the RF propagation constant, and 

. Here, the impedances of the source 

and load are all assumed 50 . The RF mode properties and the frequency responses 
of two different structures, one for the structure adopted in the experiments (t=0.6m 
and ws=19.5m) and the other for a further optimized structure (t=1.1m and 
ws=15.5m), are plotted in Fig. S4. For a short device length of 3 mm, the 
experimented structure shows a similar frequency response to that of the optimized 
structure. Both of them give a 3-dB bandwidth well beyond 100GHz. In order to 
further decreasing the driving voltage of the present modulator, one can further 
lengthen the device. According to a simulated 
=2.46
, a 
 of 1.9 V can be 

obtained for a device with 13-mm long MZI arms. At such a device length, the 
experimented structure would only present a 3-dB bandwidth of 26 GHz. On the 
other hand, the bandwidth of the optimized structure can reach > 40 GHz, which can 
support 56 Gbaud PAM-4 data transmission.  

The energy consumption of a travelling wave modulator can be estimated as 

(Vpp/2)2/(B×50) [S3], where Vpp is the peak-peak voltage of the driving signal and B is 
the bit rate. 50  load is assumed here. For the data transmission discussed in Fig. 4 
of the main text, Vpp of 4 V is obtained after the RF amplifier, which is about half of 
the Vπ for the measured device (3 mm long). We can then calculate an energy 
consumption of 714 fJ/bit at B=112 Gb/s. According to the simulation in Fig. S4, a 
13mm long device can give a Vπ of 1.9 V and ensure a bandwidth > 40GHz. 


17 

 

Assuming the same driving strength (Vpp to Vπ ratio) as the 3-mm long device, i.e., 
950 mV Vpp, and the same data rate, the energy consumption of the present device 
can be optimized to 40 fJ/bit. 

 



Figure S4. (a) Characteristic impedance Z0, (b) RF attenuation m, (c) RF effective 
mode index nm, and (d) overall modulation response m() of the present modulator 
with t=0.6 m and ws=19.5 m (dashed lines) and t=1.1m and ws=15.5m (solid 
lines). In (d), black lines are for 3mm long MZI arm length and blue lines are for 
13mm. The red dash-dotted line marks -3dB position. In (c), the group index of the 
optical mode is marked as a red dash-dotted line. 

 

III Loss Measurement 

To measure the propagation loss of the LN waveguide and the coupling 

efficiency of VAC, we designed and fabricated a series of meandering waveguide 
patterns containing silicon U-shaped bends, VACs and LN waveguides, as depicted 
in Fig. S5. The cross-section of LN waveguide is kept the same as the present 
modulator ( w= 1 μm and h= 180 nm). 


18 

 

Two grating couplers with 400-μm long linear tapers are used for off-chip 

coupling. Tapered waveguides are used to connect the grating couplers and single-
mode silicon waveguides (500-nm wide). The loss of the grating couplers and the 
associated tapers are calibrated by the reference structures co-fabricated with the 
meandering waveguide patterns. Each meandering pattern is of the same number of 
U-shaped bends and VACs but with different lengths for LN waveguides for cut-
back measurements. The number of the VACs is 62, and the lengths of LN 
waveguides are designed to be 0.62 cm, 1.86 cm, and 4.34 cm, respectively. The U-
shaped bends are Euler bends with a minimum radius of 15 m[S4], for which the 
bending loss is negligible. We use a cut-back approach to extract the propagation loss 
of the LN waveguide and the coupling efficiency of VACs. Fig. S6 shows the 
measured insertion losses of meandering waveguides with different lengths showing 
a linear propagation loss of 0.98 dB/cm. The coupling efficiency of VAC can be 
obtained from the intercept of the fitted curve and the Y-axis, and is estimated to be 
8.02/62 = 0.13 dB (62 is the number of VACs in the pattern). 

 

Figure S5. (a) Schematic diagram for measuring the insertion loss of LN waveguide 
and the coupling efficiency of VACs using cut-back method. (b) Microscope picture 
of the fabricated device 


19 

 

 

Figure S6. Measured insertion losses of LN waveguides with different lengths. The coupling 
efficiency of VACs can be calculated from the intercept of the fitted curve and the Y-axis.  

 

We have also simulated the coupling efficiency of VACs against the width of 

the tip, and the result indicates that the width of the tip can be increased to be more 
than 200 nm with negligible degradation in coupling efficiency as shown in Fig. S7 
(a). This means our design is compatible with standard CMOS tools. We have also 
simulated the influence of the alignment error on the coupling efficiency of VACs. 
As depicted in Fig. S7 (b), the alignment error can be as large as 300 nm, which is 
also compatible with standard lithography tools. 

 

Figure S7. (a) Simulated coupling efficiency of VACs against the width of the silicon 
tip (b) Influence of the alignment error on the coupling efficiency of VACs 

 

IV DSP process for PAM-4 measurement. 


20 

 

The DSP procedures used for offline processing of the received signals are 

depicted in Fig. S8. After sampled by a real-time oscilloscope (100-Gsa/s sampling 
rate, 33-GHz analog bandwidth), the received signal is firstly resampled to 2 
samples/symbol (SPS). A feed-forward timing phase recovery algorithm [S5, S6] is then 
used to correct the timing error of the signal and generate an output signal with 1-
SPS that sampled at the optimal sampling point. After timing phase recovery, a feed 
forward least mean square (LMS) equalizer with up to 31 taps is used for signal 
equalization. It can be seen from Fig. S9 that for 28-GBaud PAM-4 signals a 7-tap 
LMS is sufficient to get a satisfactory BER result, while for 56-GBaud signals the 
length of taps needed increases to 31, mainly due to the insufficient bandwidth of the 
real-time oscilloscope. Hard decision and error counting are then performed for BER 
evaluation. Note that all these DSP procedures are commonly used in commercial 
PAM-4 chipsets for short reach optical interconnect applications, with very low 
complexity [S7, S8]. 

 

Resample to 2 
samples/symbol

Timing phase

Recovery

Least mean 
square (LMS) 

Equalization

Decision +

error counting

100 Gsa/s
2 sps
1 sps
1 sps

 

Figure S8. DSP block diagram for the received signals. sps: samples per symbol. 

 

Figure S9. BER as a function of the number of taps used for LMS equalization. 


21 

 

[S1] Wooten, E. L. et al. A review of lithium niobate modulators for fiber-optic 
communications systems. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 6, 69-82 (2000). 

[S2] Ghione, G. Semiconductor devices for high-speed optoelectronics. (Oxford 
Univ. Press, Oxford, 2009). 

[S3] Wang, C. et al. Integrated lithium niobate electro-optic modulators operating at 
CMOS-compatible voltages. Nature 562, 101-104 (2018). 

[S4] Cherchi, M., Ylinen, S., Harjanne, M., Kapulainen, M. & Aalto, T. Dramatic 
size reduction of waveguide bends on a micron-scale silicon photonic platform. Opt. 
Express 21, 17814-17823 (2013). 

[S5] Lee, S. J. A new non-data-aided feedforward symbol timing estimator using two 
samples per symbol. IEEE Commun. Lett. 6, 205-207 (2002). 

[S6] Yi, L., Huang, L., Liu, J. & Guo, C. Timing Phase Synchronization for Short-
Reach Optical Direct Detected Systems Using Nyquist & FTN Signaling. In Asia 
Communications and Photonics Conference. AS3C. 4 (OSA, Wuhan, 2016). 

[S7] Chang, Y. F. Link performance investigation of industry first 100G PAM4 IC 
chipset with real-time DSP for data center connectivity. In Optical Fiber 
Communication Conference. Th1G. 2 (OSA, Anaheim, 2016). 

[S8] Chiuchiarelli, A. et al. Single wavelength 100G real-time transmission for high-
speed data center communications. In Optical Fiber Communications Conference and 
Exhibition (OFC), 1-3 (OSA, Los Angeles, 2017). 

 


