 
  
 

1 
 

Ultra-Broadband Terahertz Perfect Absorber based on 
Doped Silicon 

Ankit Vora 

Dept. of Elec. & Comp. Eng. 

Michigan Tech. Univ. 
Houghton, MI, USA 

avora@mtu.edu 

 

Satyadhar Joshi 

Grad. School of Tech. 

Touro College 

New York, NY, USA 

 
 

Arun Matai 

Dept. of Elec. & Comm. Eng. 

Acropolis Tech. Campus 

Indore, MP, INDIA 

 
 

Abstract— The requirement for metamaterial perfect 
absorbers (MPA) based on doped semiconductors is steadily 
increasing due to the available matured fabrication and 
simulation technology. There is a particular interest in 
developing terahertz (THz) perfect absorbers using doped 
semiconductors 
for 
achieving 
characteristics 
such 
as 
polarization-independence, 
wide-angle, 
and 
broadband 
absorption. We report MPA based on patterned arrays of 
tapered micro-cylindrical structures of doped silicon to enable 
them with broadband, wide-angle, and polarization-independent 
response. In this work, we modeled the MPA structures using 
COMSOL Multiphysics® to evaluate its electromagnetic wave 
response using the software's RF Module running in parallel on a 
Beowulf cluster. We evaluated the doped silicon MPA structures 
for its response in the frequency spectrum of 0.1 to 5.0 THz for 
transverse magnetic and transverse electric polarizations at the 
normal and oblique incidence up to 75 degrees. This proposed 
doped silicon MPA was found to support a perfect absorption for 
a wide frequency spectrum from 1.7 to 3.9 THz along with 
insensitivity towards polarization and incident angles up to 60°. 
The execution of MPA on simplified Beowulf cluster significantly 
reduced the simulations time by the orders of magnitude 
compared to the sequential simulations. 

Keywords— metamaterial perfect absorber; silicon perfect 
absorber; terahertz perfect absorber; Beowulf cluster 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

In the past decade, metamaterials have been explored to a 
great extent due to their phenomenal ability to manipulate 
light. Metamaterials are judiciously engineered structures of 
optical materials capable of responding to any region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum and support optical properties such 
as cloaking, polarization-independence, wide-angle, and 
broadband optical response for a diverse list of applications 
[1-2]. The necessity for metamaterial perfect absorbers 
operating in the terahertz (THz) part of the frequency 
spectrum is increasing for cloaking, sensors, and imaging 
applications. Silicon is becoming a preferred candidate for 
THz based perfect absorbers being able to respond to a wide 
spectrum of electromagnetic radiation by varying the doping 
concentration and available matured fabrication technology 
[3]. Doped silicon has proven to exhibit surface plasmon 
polaritons and subsequently localized surface plasmon 
resonances through periodic structures and consequently 

behaves as an excellent lossy material in the THz range. 
Microfabrication of silicon-based devices is ubiquitous and 
extensively explored. Thus, the infrastructure present at both 
the simulation and fabrication level makes designing THz 
material with desired electromagnetic property convenient [4].  

As the most elementary design, one-dimensional (1-D) 
absorbers are simple to fabricate but their response is typically 
polarization and incident-angle dependent, whereas two-
dimensional designs are more promising when it comes to 
performance, but they are still sensitive to the polarization and 
the incident angle of the electromagnetic radiation. On the 
other hand, three-dimensional (3-D) absorbers can not only 
provide a true polarization and incident-angle independent 
response, but they are also consistent with current 
microfabrication technology. In our previous work [5-12], we 
extensively studied patterned arrays of silver nano-cylinders 
for improving the conversion efficiency of hydrogenated 
amorphous silicon solar cells. These nano cylinders endowed 
the solar cells with multi-resonant, polarization-independent, 
and wide-angle response. This concept can also be extended to 
THz absorbers using patterned micro-cylinders which can aid 
in superior broadband absorption characteristics. Furthermore, 
including tapered cylinder design can drastically improve the 
absorption characteristics. 

In this work, we have explored 3-D absorbers based on 
doped silicon MPAs using periodic arrays of tapered 
cylindrical structures [13]. Absorption inside the doped silicon 
MPA structures can be tuned for a frequency spectrum by 
varying the doping concentration and changing the physical 
parameters of the MPA structures. However, due to the 
complex design of the proposed structures, sequential 
evaluation and optimization becomes challenging both 
temporally as well as computationally. Therefore, in order to 
estimate the performance of the proposed doped silicon MPA 
structures, we implemented the simulation model on a 
Beowulf cluster running COMSOL Multiphysics in parallel. 
In this work, we have demonstrated the superior performance 
of the doped silicon MPA structures portraying wideband, 
wide-angle, and polarization insensitive response of the 
proposed design. 


 
  
 

2 
 

II. METHODS 

The complex permittivity of the doped silicon is portrayed 
by the Drude model [14] using the equation: 

2

2
p
i

ω
ε
ε
ω
γω
= ∞
−
+

 
(1) 

where ε∞ = 11.7 is the free space dielectric constant of the 
intrinsic silicon, ωp is the plasma frequency, and γ is the 
carrier scattering rate. The plasma frequency and the carrier 
scattering rate are a function of carrier concentration and 
mobility of the doped silicon, which can be experimentally 
measured through Hall effect analysis. In this paper, we 
choose ωp = 2π × 5.22 THz and γ = 2π × 1.32 THz for doped 
silicon MPA modeling as reported in [14].  

This particular geometry of tapered cylindrical structures 
was selected due to its top structure axial isotropy that leads to 
a polarization independent and broadband optical response [5]. 
The structure of our doped silicon MPA are schematically 
shown in Fig. 1(a), and the unit cell of this doped silicon MPA 
is shown in Fig. 1(b). The entire structure was modeled using 
heavily doped silicon. In this paper, the doped silicon MPA is 
modeled using tapered cylinders of the height (hc) 140 μm, the 
bottom width (rb) of 90 μm, the top width (rt) of 40 μm, and 
periodically spaced with period (p) 100 μm. The thickness of 
the substrate (hb) under the tapered cylindrical structures is 
fixed at 200 μm which are large enough to eliminate 
transmission losses. 

Optical responses of the doped silicon-based MPA 
structures were obtained by modeling its unit cell in RF 
module of COMSOL Multiphysics v5.3b in the frequency 
domain. Floquet boundary conditions were employed for the 
side faces of the unit cell. For the top face, excitation port was 
deployed with diffraction to include the influence of the 
scattered waves, and for the bottom face, an output port was 
employed. The excitation port and the output port were 
suspended in a thin column of air in the model.  The S11 and 
S21 parameters were employed to calculate the frequency 
dependent absorbance, A(ω), transmittance, T(ω), and 
reflectance, R(ω), for the transverse magnetic (TM) and the 
transverse electric (TE) incident waves.  

( )

( )
( )

( )
( )

2

21

2

11

( ) 
 

 
 

 
 1- ( ) -

T
S

R
S

A
T
R

ω
ω

ω
ω

ω
ω
ω

=

=

=

  
(2) 

The model was simulated for a frequency spectrum of 0.1 to 
5.0 THz and an oblique incidence of 0 to 75°. For qualitative 
analysis, the power dissipated in the entire structure was also 
studied using the inbuilt function power loss density in 
COMSOL Multiphysics RF module. 

COMSOL was executed parallelly using distributed-
memory parallel operations. The simulations were executed on 
2 Intel Xeon E5 processors with 16 cores running at 2.50 GHz 
and 64 GB of RAM for each processor. COMSOL has an 

inbuilt support for message passing interface (MPI) which 
enables distributed computations in parallel. Hence, COMSOL 
was set up to run on a Beowulf cluster with COMSOL’s 
inbuilt cluster computing features. 

 

Fig 1. (a) The MPA structures based on doped silicon (b) The unit cell of 
doped silicon MPA structures with geometric parameters.  

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The optical response of the doped silicon MPA for normal 
and oblique incidence is shown in Fig. 2, and Fig. 3 
respectively. For comparison we also simulated a bare silicon 
substrate having identical optical properties and thickness (340 
μm). Near perfect absorption has been observed for a broad 
frequency spectrum ranging from 1.7 to 3.9 THz for our 
proposed doped silicon MPA structures. This optical 
absorption was found to be uniform for both normal as well as 
oblique angles of incidence. Besides that, MPA structures 
exhibited insensitivity towards polarization and incidence 
angles up to 60° for both TM and TE polarizations. This bare 
silicon substrate is strongly absorbing in the 1.8 to 4.9 THz 
region of the spectrum; however, the maximum absorbance in 
the case of the bare silicon substrate is 76% compared to 
almost perfect absorbance for the doped silicon MPA 
structures. It is evident from the Fig. 2 that the doped silicon 
MPA outperforms the bare silicon substrate for all parts of the 
spectrum, especially in the region of 1.0 to 4.5 THz where 
absorbance is greater than 95% because of the broad multi-
resonant response. 

The optical response of doped silicon MPA has several 
resonant peaks which need to be examined to understand the 
physical 
mechanism 
responsible 
for 
such 
broadband 
absorption. We analyzed the magnetic field distribution (Fig. 
4) at all the peaks in optical response of the doped silicon 
MPA, i.e., at resonant frequencies: 1.0 THz, 1.8 THz, 2.7 
THz, and 3.7 THz. The underlying mechanism for near unity 
broadband perfect absorption was found to be a combination 
of Fabry-Perot resonance, mode-matching resonance, and air-
cavity mode based on the analysis of field distribution and 
power density inside MPA structures. 

 For the low-frequency peaks, the incident magnetic field 
is mainly concentrated in the air cavities formed between the 
adjacent silicon tapered cylinders as evident from Fig. 4 (a) 
and (b). We also calculated the power loss density inside the 
doped MPA structures and from Fig 4 (e) and (f) it can be 
further confirmed that the loss is concentrated at the bottom 
corner of silicon groove since the incident waves are guided to 


 

3 
 

the substrate. Also, for the absorption peaks at 1.0 and 1.8 
THz, the incident wave is mode-matched with the top layer of 
silicon, and hence most of the electromagnetic power is 
consumed by the top layer of silicon as evident from Fig. 4 (e) 
and (f). Therefore, the peaks at these resonant frequencies can 
be attributed to air cavity mode and mode matching 
resonances. The doped silicon metasurfaces also provide 
impedance matching condition to the free space for both TM 
and TE polarizations and thus enabling efficient coupling and 
the high absorption coefficient of silicon also assist in 
improving the absorption along the direction of wave 
propagation. We also analyzed the magnetic field distribution 
at resonant frequencies 2.7 and 3.7 THz, Fig. 4 (c) and (d), and 
this analysis reveals the presence of Fabry-Perot like 
resonance inside the doped MPA structures which is similar to 
the field distribution as reported in [5] and [15]. 

 

Fig. 2 Absorbance in doped silicon MPA and doped silicon wafer for normal 
incidence 

 

Fig. 3 Absorbance in doped silicon MPA for oblique incident waves for TE 
and TM polarizations 

The proposed doped silicon MPA structures are not only 
superior in performance compared to the bare silicon substrate 
but also have an advantage of ease of fabrication and scaling 
with the current microfabrication technology. Secondly, this 
structure can be fabricated in a very few steps and 
consequently decrease the overall fabrication cost. This design 

can be integrated with applications ranging from sensors, THz 
imaging, perfect-absorbers, biomedical, and cloaking. 

 

Fig. 4 The field distribution in the doped silicon MPA structures (magnetic, 
Hy) (a-d), and the power density in the doped silicon MPA structures (e-h) at 
resonant frequencies: {1.0, 1.8, 2.7, 3.7} THz 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

In summary, we discussed the MPAs based on patterned 
arrays of tapered cylindrical structures of heavily doped 
silicon. This doped silicon MPA supports characteristics such 
as wideband, wide-angle, and polarization insensitive response 
suitable for applications such as sensors, imaging, radar 
cloaking, etc. The design of this structure is within the 
permissible limits of the current microfabrication technology. 
This terahertz absorber supports near-perfect absorption for a 
broad spectrum of 1.7 to 3.9 THz for a wide incidence angle 
up to 60°. This doped MPA structure was modeled in 
COMSOL Multiphysics in RF module running on a Beowulf 
cluster for reducing the overall simulation time. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We thank Jay Jagannath Das and Himanshu Kothari for 
insightful discussions. 

 


 
  
 

4 
 

REFERENCES 

 

[1] C. M. Watts, X. Liu, and W. J. Padilla, “Metamaterial electromagnetic 
wave absorbers,” Adv. Mater., vol. 24, no. 23, 2012.  

[2] N. I. Landy, S. Sajuyigbe, J. J. Mock, D. R. Smith, and W. J. Padilla, 
“Perfect metamaterial absorber,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 100, p. 207402, 
2008. 

[3] Y. Z. Cheng et al., “Ultrabroadband plasmonic absorber for terahertz 
waves,” Adv. Opt. Mater., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 376–380, 2015. 

[4] M. Pu et al., “Engineering heavily doped silicon for broadband absorber 
in the terahertz regime,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 23, p. 25513, 2012. 

[5] A. Vora, J. Gwamuri, J. M. Pearce, P. L. Bergstrom, and D. Güney, 
“Multi-resonant silver nano-disk patterned thin film hydrogenated 
amorphous 
silicon 
solar 
cells 
for 
Staebler-Wronski 
effect 
compensation,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 116, no. 9, 093103, 2014. 

[6] A. Vora, J. Gwamuri, N. Pala, A. Kulkarni, J. M. Pearce, and D. Ö. 
Güney, “Exchanging Ohmic Losses in Metamaterial Absorbers with 
Useful Optical Absorption for Photovoltaics,” Sci. Rep., vol. 4, 4901, 
2014. 

[7] J. Gwamuri et al., “Limitations of ultra-thin transparent conducting 
oxides for integration into plasmonic-enhanced thin-film solar 
photovoltaic devices,” Mater. Renew. Sustain. Energy, vol. 4, no. 3, 12, 
2015. 

[8] J. Gwamuri, A. Vora, J. Mayandi, D. Güney, P. L. Bergstrom, and J. M. 
Pearce, “A new method of preparing highly conductive ultra-thin indium 

tin oxide for plasmonic-enhanced thin film solar photovoltaic devices,” 
Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 149, pp. 250–257, 2016. 

[9] W. Adams, A. Vora, J. Gwamuri, J. M. Pearce, and D. Ö. Güney, 
“Controlling optical absorption in metamaterial absorbers for plasmonic 
solar cells,” Proc. SPIE 9546, Active Photonic Materials VII, 95461M, 
2015. 

[10] A. Kulkarni, D. Guney, and A. Vora, “Optical Absorption in Nano-
Structures : Classical and Quantum Models,” ISRN Nanomater., vol. 
2013, 504341, 2013. 

[11] A. Vora, “Increasing Solar Energy Conversion Efficiency in Thin Film 
Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon Solar Cells With Patterned Plasmonic 
Silver Nano-Disk,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Michigan 
Technological University, Houghton, MI, 2015. 

[12] J. Rozario, A. H. Vora, S. K. Debnath, M. J. M. Pathak, and J. M. 
Pearce, “The effects of dispatch strategy on electrical performance of 
amorphous silicon-based solar photovoltaic-thermal systems,” Renew. 
Energy, vol. 68, pp. 459–465, 2014. 

[13] A. Vora, S. Joshi, and D. O. Guney, “Broadband and broad-angle 
polarization-independent metasurface for radar cross section reduction,” 
COMSOL Conference 2017 - Boston, Boston, Oct-2017. 

[14] S. Yin et al., “High-performance terahertz wave absorbers made of 
silicon-based metamaterials,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1–5, 
2015. 

[15] V. V. Varadan and L. Ji, “Optical metastructures for trapping light in 
thin Si solar cells,” in Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic 
Specialists Conference, 2010, pp. 1057–1059. 

 


