1 

Preparation and physical properties of soft magnetic 
nickel-cobalt nanowires with modulated diameters 

Sebastian Bochmann,a Dirk Döhler,a Beatrix Trapp,b Michal Stano,b 

Olivier Fruchart,b,c Julien Bachmanna,d,* 

a Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Inorganic Chemistry, 

Egerlandstrasse 1, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

b Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Inst NEEL, 

38000 Grenoble, France 

c Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, Grenoble INP, INAC-Spintec, 

38000 Grenoble, France 

d Institute of Chemistry, Saint Petersburg State University, 26 Universitetskii Prospect, 

Saint Petersburg, Petergof 198504, Russia 

Abstract 

We establish a method to produce cylindrical magnetic nanowires displaying several segments, 

with a large versatility in terms of segment diameter and length. It is based on electroplating in 

alumina templates, the latter being prepared by several steps of anodization, wet etching and atomic 

layer deposition to produce, widen or shrink pores, respectively. We propose an analytical model 

to analyze the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetization loops of dense assemblies of 

multisegmented wires. The model considers inter-wires dipolar fields, end-domain curling and 

predicts the switching field of individual wires with no adjustable parameter. Its ingredients are 

crucial to extract reliable parameters from the fitting of loops, such as magnetization or the porosity 

of the array. 

Keywords 

Nanowires, modulation, nanomagnetism, galvanic plating, electrodeposition, nickel-cobalt 


2 

Introduction 

The continuously decreasing size of magnetic bits in hard disk drives has reached a dimension 

close to the fundamental superparamagnetic limit, which corresponds to the minimal volume of 

particles, or “grains”, of a certain material needed to maintain a stable magnetic moment.1 In 

parallel, magnetic random access memory (MRAM) is shifting from a concept to commercial 

devices combining the access speed and compactness of a solid-state device with the non-volatility 

of magnetic materials. Still, this remains a two-dimensional technology and as such faces 

technological and fundamental limitations. One possibility to overcome this ceiling and increase 

the areal storage density beyond 1 Tbit/in² is to turn to a three-dimensional storage platform. This 

is addressed by the concept of the racetrack memory by Parkin et al., in which bits are stored as 

series of domain walls in dense arrays of tall, 'vertical' wires of magnetic material.2,3 For the sake 

of simple and inexpensive implementation, there should be only one read/write cell per wire, 

located for example at the wafer surface. This requires that domain walls be set in motion along 

the wire, or “track”, in order to bring the individual bits outside of the matrix. This could in 

principle be achieved by spin transfer torque created by the spin polarization of conduction 

electrons.4–7 One major challenge in this respect is the controlled motion of magnetic domain walls 

in a digital manner to predefined positions along the wire. Otherwise, after a series of individual 

motions in a smooth, unstructured wire, the spread of wall mobility may cause domain walls to 

meet, interact, and possibly annihilate each other.8 Creating pinning sites along the wire length is 

a strategy to digitize it by defining a finite number of well-identified domain wall positions. These 

sites can be experimentally realized by a modulation of the material composition and properties,9 

or by a modulation in the wire structure, such as the diameter.8 In planar systems, 'notched' strips 

produced by standard lithographic methods have indeed exhibited successful pinning of domain 

walls in motion.10 However, a transfer of this concept to a three-dimensional system is yet to be 

demonstrated. 

Individual tools needed towards this goal are available from the literature. Straights wires are 

routinely prepared by electrodeposition of a magnetic metal in an appropriate template, such as 

'anodic' alumina.11 The synthesis of anodic alumina templates with diameter modulations has been 

demonstrated, as well, using periodic oscillations of the anodization voltage (or current density). 

However, those systems feature gradual diameter changes instead of abrupt ones (which is 


3 

deleterious for domain wall pinning), and limited freedom for separating modulations along the 

pore length.12–15 A similar system of 'anodic' pore arrays featuring a small number of well-defined, 

abrupt changes has been obtained by the combination of successive “mild” and “hard” 

anodization.16 The limitation of this system is that the diameters of the individual segments cannot 

be tuned at will, since the interpore distance of mild and hard anodization must be adjusted to each 

other to avoid instabilities. 

In this paper, we present a preparative method for generating parallel arrays of magnetic nanowires 

featuring abrupt changes in diameter at well-defined positions along their length and arbitrarily 

defined values of the diameters. This is achieved by the combination of several steps involving the 

anodization of aluminum (in mild conditions), isotropic pore widening, and atomic layer deposition 

(ALD). Subsequently, we perform electrodeposition of the modulated magnetic nanowires. The 

magnetization hysteresis of our samples, measured as ensembles of macroscopic size, displays a 

complex behavior related to the distribution of wire segment lengths, diameters, and dipolar 

interactions. We propose a model able to reproduce both the hysteretic and reversible parts of these 

loops, from which accurate geometric and magnetic material parameters can be extracted. 

 

Results and Discussion 

1. Preparation of modulated wires 

The anodization of aluminum enables the experimentalist to generate parallel arrays of straight 

pores perpendicular to the surface, with well-defined diameters that can be set to values between 

20 nm and 400 nm and pore lengths between 0.5 µm and 100 µm.17 Anodized aluminum has been 

abundantly used as a template for further elaboration of nanowires and nanotubes by galvanic and 

other methods.18 While the ratio of pore diameter versus pitch cannot be varied much through 

anodization, the pore diameter can be adjusted after growth by an isotropic wet chemical etching 

step.18,19 Conversely, atomic layer deposition (ALD) can be used to reduce the diameter of the 

template’s pores after growth, or confer them with specific chemical or physical properties.20–24 

Atomic layer deposition is a thin film deposition technique from the gas phase, which is uniquely 

suited to coating three-dimensional structures, including deep pores with high aspect ratio.25,26 


4 

 

Figure 1. Sketch of the preparative procedure devised.  

We combine these methods to generate modulated magnetic wires as sketched in Figure 1. After 

the first, sacrificial anodization step (a-b) used to generate the order, a first segment grown in 1% 

phosphoric acid electrolyte for 4 h exhibits a pore diameter of 150 nm and length of approximately 

10 µm (c) according to standard procedures.19 The pore is then submitted to isotropic widening in 


5 

10% phosphoric acid (d) to reach a diameter chosen here to be 400 nm, for example. A second 

anodization is performed under the same conditions (e), yielding a second segment with the natural 

diameter of 150 nm. The resulting pore structure featuring two distinct diameters is then coated 

with 5 nm SiO2 via ALD (f).27 If this coating is sufficiently thin, a third anodization can be 

performed to grow a third segment (g).28 After removing the remaining metallic aluminum 

substrate and the Al2O3 barrier layer at the lower pore extremity (h), the diameter of the third 

segment can finally be increased by an isotropic etching step, for instance to match the first segment 

at 400 nm, whereas the first and second segments are protected by the chemically inert nature of 

the SiO2 layer. 

 

Figure 2. Scanning electron micrograph of a modulated template obtained with the 
method presented in Figure 1, with segment diameters of 400 nm, 150 nm and 400 nm. 
The false-color image is obtained from a combination of secondary and backscattered 
electron signals. 

Figure 2 shows the template structure obtained by this procedure. The pores are straight and 

parallel, the segments have a homogeneous length, and the transitions between distinct diameter 


6 

values are abrupt. Note that our procedure is very flexible, in that each geometric parameter of the 

modulated structure (that is, each segment length and diameter) can be adjusted individually and 

independently of the others. For example, the diameter of the third segment can be either increased 

by pore widening, or reduced by Al2O3 ALD. The length of each segment can be adjusted by the 

anodization duration. If anodization is performed in 0.3 M oxalic acid (instead of 1% phosphoric 

acid), the initial pore diameter is 40 nm (instead of 150 nm) and can be widened to 90 nm (instead 

of 400 nm).11 

 

Figure 3. Scanning electron micrograph of a bundle of modulated NiCo wires (“nano-
q-tips”) isolated from the template, in false colors (combination of secondary and 
backscattered electron signals). NiCo appears pink, the polished Cu substrate dark 
green, and short Au stubs from the electrical contact neon green. 

In the next step, an electrical contact is defined on one side of the alumina template by sputter-

coating (i). We deposit 6 nm aluminum metal (as an adhesion layer) followed by 50 nm gold. This 

thin layer is then augmented by galvanic plating, performed in a two-electrode setup under –2.50 V 

in a K[Au(CN)2] electrolyte. The thick galvanic layer closes the pore extremities completely, and 

results in a short (1 µm long) Au stub inside the pores.9,29 The sample is then exposed with the 

open pore extremity to an electrolytic solution containing cobalt and nickel. Soft magnetic Ni60Co40 

alloy nanowires are then grown (k) in the modulated pores from the gold contact in a three-

electrode configuration under –1.10 V vs. Ag/AgCl.30 The resulting wires may optionally be 

removed from the template with chromic acid (l). Figure 3 highlights how the diameter 

modulations of the template are reproduced in the galvanic wires with high fidelity. The 


7 

characteristic shape suggests the nickname ‘nano-q-tips’ for such modulated wires. Backscattered 

electron contrast allows for differentiation between the long, modulated Ni60Co40 wires (pink) and 

a few broken off Au stubs (neon green). 

As mentioned above, the diameter of each segment can be adjusted very precisely. Figure 3 

displays a rather extreme diameter “contrast” of 400/150/400 nm, but shorter durations of the 

isotropic pore widening steps allow one to generate more modest contrasts, for example the 

200/150/200 nm sample presented in Figure 4a. Alternatively, performing the anodization steps in 

oxalic acid electrolyte instead of phosphoric acid enable one to work with smaller diameters. 

Figure 4b displays an excerpt of one such wire of the type 70/40/70 nm. This range of diameters 

is of interest in the magnetic realm since it is on the order of ten times typical magnetic exchange 

lengths, so that several topologies of domain walls may be expected.31 

 

Figure 4. (a) Scanning electron micrograph of an isolated NiCo “nano-q-tip” with 
modest diameter contrast between segments of 200 nm, 150 nm, and 200 nm. 
(b) Transmission electron micrograph of a “nano-q-tip” isolated from pores grown in 
oxalic acid instead of phosphoric acid: The diameters are 70 nm, 40 nm, and 70 nm. 

2. Geometry of the diameter modulations 

The diameter reduction between first and second segment and the diameter increase between 

second and third segment result in distinct pore profiles (Figure 5). This is due to the distinct 

experimental procedures for diameter decrease and increase, as sketched in Figure 5c and 5d. At 


8 

the diameter reduction, the hemispherical extremity of a wide pore concentrates the electric field 

at the start of the subsequent anodization, so that the second segment continues straight from its 

lower extremity. This second segment immediately recovers its natural, narrower diameter, but 

does not affect the gradual, approximately hemispherical profile left at the end of the first segment. 

In contrast to this, the diameter increase occurs abruptly given that the hemispherical end of the 

narrow pore is lost completely upon growth of the next segment. The isotropic pore widening 

performed as the last preparative step finds an abrupt etch stop defined by the SiO2 layer. 

 

Figure 5. Transitions between two different pore diameters: Scanning electron 
micrographs highlighting the geometric difference between the gradual, conical 
diameter reduction from 200 nm to 150 nm (a) and the abrupt diameter increase from 
150 nm to 200 nm (b). The corresponding anodization procedure for diameter decrease 
(c) and increase (d) is sketched. 

Wires grown inside the modulated template exhibit the same geometric properties as the template 

(Figure 6). They exhibit diameter transitions with two distinct geometries: a smoother one obtained 

upon diameter reduction of the template pores stands in stark contrast to the abrupt one yielded by 

pores submitted to a diameter increase. 


9 

 

Figure 6. Transitions between two different wire diameters: (a) Gradual, conical 
diameter reduction; (b) Abrupt diameter increase. 

 

3. Experimental magnetic properties of modulated wires 

Magnetic nanowires display highly anisotropic magnetic properties, as the magnetization of soft 

magnetic materials tends to align along the long dimensions of an object.32 When homogeneously 

magnetized wires are submitted to an external field oriented antiparallel to the magnetization, its 

reversal implies the formation of a magnetic domain wall, which nucleates at one extremity and 

then travels to the other. Its energy of formation, and thereby the reversal field measured 

experimentally, is strongly dependent on the wire diameter.18 More important in our case, the 

dipolar interactions are expected to be different within the three parts, leading to a different slanting 

of the loops, which is the dominant feature in such dense arrays.33 Thus, our modulated wires may 

be expected to reverse their magnetization in steps for individual segments, and to exhibit a stable 

domain boundary in a range of external fields bounded by the two distinct values of switching 

fields for each diameter. 

Figure 7 presents magnetic hysteresis loops recorded on a sample consisting of an ordered array 

of modulated NiCo nanowires embedded in their alumina matrix. The lengths of the thick, narrow 


10 

and thick segments are 10 µm, 13 µm, and 10 µm, respectively. The comparison of curves recorded 

with the wires oriented parallel and perpendicular to the applied field highlights the anisotropy of 

the sample. More interestingly, the loop exhibits kinks in the parallel configuration, which define 

a segment of curve with large slope (near zero field) distinct from the rest of the reversal, happening 

with a lower slope over a broad field window between approximately ‒40 kA/m and +40 kA/m. 

 

Figure 7. Magnetic (SQUID) hysteresis loops recorded on a sample of NiCo wires with 
diameters 400 nm (10 µm) / 150 nm (13 µm) /400 nm (10 µm) at room temperature 
with field applied parallel to the wires’ long axis (top) perpendicular to it (bottom). The 
three parts with different slopes in the former curve are attributed to the distinct 
switching behavior of segments of different diameters. 


11 

With this in mind, we may attribute the magnetization change occurring around zero field to the 

magnetic reversal of the central, narrow segments, which are subject to a lower internal field, 

whereas the thicker extremities reverse more gradually. This interpretation is confirmed 

experimentally when three sample are compared which differ from each other solely by the length 

of the central segment (Figure 8). When this segment is varied from 3 µm to 9 µm and 13 µm, the 

steep section of hysteresis becomes more and more prevalent. This corresponds to the increase in 

the total magnetic moment of this segment associated with the increase in its length. 

 

Figure 8. SQUID magnetic hysteresis loops presented as first derivatives 
(susceptibility) of three samples of modulated NiCo wires, with the field applied 
parallel to their long axis. The red, green and blue curves correspond to central (thin) 
segment lengths of 3 µm (green), 9 µm (red) and 13 µm (blue), respectively. 

The distinct switching fields of the three segments can be utilized to trap magnetic domain 

walls at or near diameter modulations. Figure 9 displays the morphology and magnetic stray 

fields of an isolated nanowire, recorded by atomic force and magnetic force microscopies, 

respectively. The wire was prepared by an oscillatory quasistatic demagnetization procedure 

performed from 1 T, with magnetic field applied out-of-plane (oop), i.e. perpendicular to the 

wire axis. The MFM micrograph shows the presence of contrast (stray field) at the modulations, 

as expected because the change of wire area implies that the excess induction gives rise to stray 

field. More interestingly, however, it displays a feature located near one modulation, which we 

can confidently attribute to a domain wall given that the two wire extremities have the same 

contrast (possible only if the wire consists of two domains of opposite direction). In most wires 


12 

we evidence one or more such domain walls. This shows the effectiveness of the trimodulated 

wires to confine domain walls in a well-defined area, suitable for further investigations. 

 

Figure 9. Demonstration of a magnetic domain wall pinned near a modulation. A wire 
isolated from the matrix displays three 10-µm long segments of distinct diameters (40 
/ 30 / 40 nm) in atomic force microscopy (AFM, top). The corresponding magnetic 
force microscopy (MFM) image (lower panel) shows the presence of magnetic stray 
fields at the wire extremities and diameter modulations, as expected, but also at a point 
situated approximately 1.5 µm from one modulation. That this stray field is caused by 
the presence of a domain boundary is proven by the head-to-head magnetization 
expressed by the other contrast points. 

4. Modeling magnetic properties of modulated wires 

a. Arrays of wires 

A global hysteresis loop is the basic characterization for a magnetic material. Even though one may 

in the end use local properties of single objects, a global hysteresis loop may inform about intrinsic 

properties such as material magnetization and sample geometry, having an impact on dipolar 

interactions. For instance, for a soft magnetic material, magnetization may be derived if the 

geometry of the system is known, through demagnetizing coefficients. In practice, this is more 

reliably achieved along hard-axis loops, which do not depend on hysteretic effects. Figure 10 

shows hysteresis loops of macroscopic arrays of trisegmented wires with two geometries: the 

central segment of diameter 120 nm and length either 3 µm or 13 µm, embedded between two 

segments of diameter 420 nm and length 6 µm each, all this with pitch 490 nm. We name in-

plane (ip) the situation where the magnetic field is applied parallel to the membrane (i.e. across the 

axis of the wires), and out-of-plane (oop) the situation where the magnetic field is applied 

perpendicular to the membrane (i.e. along the axis of the wires). The pinpoint dipole approximation 


13 

can obviously not be used to describe long wires in a dense array, as proposed in the early days of 

nanomagnetism.34 Yet, there exist simple models to fit hysteresis loops in the case of straight 

nanowires considered uniformly magnetized, as first proposed by Wang et al33, and later 

refined.19,20 In short, the ip loops may be fitted with high confidence as no hysteretic event is 

involved, so that the analytical and exact coherent rotation model is perfectly relevant. From the 

fitting of the loop, 𝑀s  may be extracted if 𝑝  is known, or the reverse. Using as fixed input the 

geometric parameters determined accurately by SEM, the resulting magnetization from the best fit 

is 862 kA/m (1.08 T in induction units). This is in perfect agreement with CoNi alloys of the present 

composition, CoNi being suitable for a linear interpolation on the Slater-Pauling curve.35 

(a)
(b)

Figure 10. Hysteresis loops of samples with thick / narrow / thick segments of 
(a) 6 µm / 3 µm / 6 µm and (b) 6 µm / 13 µm / 6 µm, recorded along the in-
plane (blue) and out-of-plane (red) directions. Experiments are shown with open 
symbols. The dotted line stands for the simple model based on uniformly magnetized 
wires, while the continuous line represents the curling model. The modelling 
parameters are: magnetization 862 kA/m; pitch 490 nm; narrow segment with 
diameter 120 nm and switching field 20 mT; broad segment with diameter 410 mT 
and switching field 5 mT.

The case of oop loops is more complex to tackle, and cannot be done so exactly, as hysteresis is 

involved. The wires are assumed to switch through nucleation at a wire end, and fast propagation 

of a domain wall. Each wire is ascribed the same individual switching field 𝐻c, however the global 

loop is slanted as inter-wire interactions induce a dipolar contribution to the magnetic field felt by 

each wire. The dipolar field can be computed by considering the top and bottom charges on both 


14 

sides of the membrane.33 The saturation field is 𝐻c + 𝐻p. 𝐻p = γ𝑝𝑀s, with γ ≳

1

2 is a 

phenomenological parameters comprised between 0.5 and 1, taking into account nucleation 

effects (see Annex). For the ip direction, coherent and reversible rotation of magnetization occurs, 

coercivity and remanence are zero, and saturation field is 𝑀s [(1 − 𝑝)/2].  

Two complications arise here. First, we need to consider multiple segments. Second, the larger 

diameter of the outer segments, which gives rise to large intra-wire dipolar fields, threatens the 

validity of the hypothesis of uniform magnetization, and may possibly be responsible for the slow 

saturation of the loops (Figure 10), as previously reported especially for rather short wires.36 No 

analytical model has been proposed to describe either of these two aspects. We will now address 

them in two steps and obtain a model describing such complex arrays with a remarkable accuracy. 

Let us first discuss a way to deal with the diameter modulations. In our case, the outer segments 

have a larger diameter, thus we expect nucleation to occur at rather low field.37 Second, the 

modulations are sharp and very significant in diameter, so that we expect pinning of domain walls 

before propagation into the central low-diameter segment.38 Thus, in practice it is as if the central 

segment switches on its own under the effect of external plus all internal magnetostatic fields, albeit 

with a switching field smaller than an isolated wire due to the facilitated nucleation through 

injection of a domain wall into the wire (Figure 11a). Thus, the behavior of the array of 

trimodulated wires should be similar to the one of three independent arrays described by the model 

mentioned above for straight wires, each characterized by a distinct demagnetizing field. Indeed, a 

uniformly magnetized slab with infinite lateral dimensions (one of the three arrays, considered in 

the mean field as a medium with magnetization 𝑝𝑀s) gives rise to no stray field outside the slab, 

whatever the direction of magnetization (Figure 11b). So, it is as if this slab was independent. The 

resulting equations for hysteresis loops are provided in Annex. The dotted lines in Figure 10 show 

the outcome of this first model compared with the present experimental data. The geometric 

parameters (length and diameter of the various segments) are fixed in the model, as determined 

with scanning electron microscopy. Magnetization is also fixed to the value 862 kA/m determined 

from the ip loops. Only the two coercive fields are let free to best adjust the experiments. The 

general shape of the loop is reproduced, however the match is not perfect: the slope is slightly 

lower in the model than in the experiments. This residual imperfection will be lifted by the second 

part of the model, described below. 


15 

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 11. Schematic illustration of processes implemented in the modeling. 
(a) Nucleation at the end of the thick segments, followed by injection of a domain 
wall into the narrow segments. (b) Magnetic charges arising from each layer, 
responsible for a demagnetizing field in this sole layer. (c) Curling domain ends in 
thick segments.

In this second stage, we consider deviations from uniform magnetization. Non-uniform 

distributions of magnetization arise at wire ends, since they spread the magnetic charges and thus 

decrease magnetostatic energy. Above a diameter of typically seven times the dipolar exchange 

length (40 to 50 nm in our case), these deviations take the form of curling around the wire axis, in 

the case of a perfect geometry.39,40 These so-called domain ends may be viewed as half a domain 

wall (Figure 11). In a previous publication,41 we proposed an analytical model to predict the width 

of domain walls in cylindrical nanowires, based on the balance of exchange and dipolar energies. 

Although we estimated these energies in a handwaving fashion, the model was successful, e.g. 

reproducing the variation of wall width with the square of the wire diameter beyond typically 

100 nm found via numerical simulation. Considering domain ends as half a domain wall, here we 

extend this model to include the Zeeman energy from the magnetic field, be it external or 

dipolar (see Annex). This field tends to compress the domain end when it is parallel to the 

magnetization in the body of the wire, and to stretch it when antiparallel. Thus, the curling model 

provides three features. First, it rounds off the hysteresis loop edges because magnetization in the 


16 

domain ends is no longer strictly parallel to the applied field. Second, it brings an extra 

susceptibility contribution to hysteresis loops, through the compression/stretching of the domain 

ends. Third, it predicts the nucleation field, defined for the divergence of the width of the domain 

end for a given value of the applied field.  

(a)
(b)

Figure 12. (a) Hysteresis loops predicted by the analytical curling model for various 
diameters, with no adjustable parameter. The fixed parameters are: magnetization 
862 kA/m, exchange stiffness 1.5 ∙ 10−11 J/m, wire length 1 µm. (b) Hysteresis 
loops of trisegmented wires with diameters 200 nm / 150 nm / 200 nm, segment 
length 10 µm each, and pitch 410 nm, both ip (blue) and oop (red). Symbols show 
experiments, fitted with a line by the curling model with magnetization as the sole 
adjustable parameter, yielding 822 kA/m.

Thus, the model predicts the hysteresis loop of any wire with given length and diameter, both in 

rounding and switching value, in the absence of any adjustable parameter (Figure 12a). Note that 

curling domain ends should have no impact on ip loops, as the saturation field for a single curling 

wire or uniformly magnetized wire is 𝑀s/ 2, in both cases. Curves for the refined model are shown 

as continuous lines on Figure 11. The agreement with experiments is improved, despite having 

now no adjustable parameter. Note the rounding at large field and the increased susceptibility at 

low field, resulting from the compression and the stretching of domain ends, respectively. Thus, 

while more refined techniques can be applied such as first-order reversal curves (FORC) and the 

Preisach model,42 our model shows that the accurate analysis of a single hysteresis loop remains 

important to provide a quick feedback on material parameters.Figure 12b shows hysteresis loops 

for a sample with very different geometry, namely tri-segmented with diameters 200 nm, 150 nm, 


17 

and 200 nm, and segment length 10 µm for all three parts. The model perfectly fits these loops with 

again no adjustable parameter except for a refinement of magnetization. This demonstrates that it 

is a robust model, suitable for very different geometries. 

 

Figure 13. Magnetic force microscopy of a single Co40Ni60 wire with diameter 200 nm, 
freed from the membrane and supported on a Si surface. (a) Domain ends versus 
longitudinal applied field. The height of all images is 1000 nm. The opposite contrast 
on either side of the wire arises from the tilt of the tip axis and oscillation direction, 
with respect to the normal to the supporting surface43, (b) Length of end domains as 
determined from the MFM images as full-width at half-maximum. (c) Scaling of 
experimental data shown in b, following Eq.(3). 

b. Single wires 

Here, we report on the magnetic microscopy of single wires, to support experimentally the claims 

of the curling model introduced previously. We imaged the length L of curling domain ends, 


18 

identified from the distribution of charges along the wire axis, as a function of the longitudinal 

applied field favoring magnetization in the wire (Figure 13a-b). As expected, L decreases with 

increasing applied field. Plotting the left-hand side 1/L2 scaling law of Eq.(3), shows a linear 

variation with the applied field (Figure 13c), although the intercept with the y axis is slightly 

below 1. This supports the validity of the curling model. 

Conclusions 

The results presented in this paper establish a preparative strategy for the generation of smooth, 

cylindrical magnetic nanowires featuring well-defined modulations of diameter along their length, 

with for instance two segments of broad diameter encompassing one segment with narrower 

diameter. This design allows magnetic domain walls to be kept in the system upon quasistatic 

demagnetization with an oscillatory magnetic field applied across the axis of the wire. This 

provides a model system for studying domain walls, such as their inner structure.44 Suitably 

designed modulations should provide energy barriers confining the domain wall in the central 

segment, which should prove useful for the investigation of domain wall mobility under magnetic 

field or spin-polarized conduction electrons current, without annihilating the domain wall at the 

end of the wire. Besides, we provide a simple yet robust analytical model fitting the in-plane and 

out-of-plane hysteresis loops of modulated arrays, taking into account demagnetizing field and 

curling effects and with no adjustable parameters. The model can be used reliably to extract 

geometric and/or material parameters, such as magnetization. 


19 

ANNEX 

We gather here technical aspects related to the model for hysteresis loops, and the means for its 

implementation.  

a. Modelling hysteresis loops for arrays of straight wires 

Along the oop direction, the saturation field related to inter-wire dipolar interactions is the oop 

demagnetizing field for a saturated sample: 𝑝𝑀s with 𝑝 =

π

2√3 (

d

D)

2
 the filling factor of the 

membrane, which is easily derived from considering the magnetic charges on both sides of the 

membrane, in a mean field approach.33 Yet, the maximum interaction field relevant for hysteresis 

loops can be modeled as 𝐻p = γ𝑝𝑀s, with γ ≳

1

2 a phenomenological parameter taking into account 

nucleation effects, where mostly the charges from the membrane side opposite to that where 

nucleation occurs are relevant, due to a projection effect of the charges on the same side.20 The in-

plane direction is characterized by the gradual rotation of magnetization from wire axis to ip. The 

resulting loop is derived from the balance between the intra-wire demagnetizing field 

−(𝑀s/2) sin𝜃, and the inter-wire field 𝑝(𝑀𝑠/2) sin 𝜃, considering the Lorentz cavity around each 

wire, with 𝜃 the angle between magnetization and wire axis. Thus, the ip saturation field of the 

loop is 𝑀s [(1 − 𝑝)/2].  

b. Modelling hysteresis loops with curling 

Here we extend an earlier model,41 developed to derive a scaling law for the domain wall width in 

cylindrical nanowires, to the present case of end domains in the presence of an axial external field. 

In short, we consider a progressive curling state over a distance L (Figure 11c), and evaluate in a 

quite crude fashion exchange, Zeeman and magnetostatic energy. Although the validity of the 

estimation of the latter term is rather inaccurate for end domains much longer than the wire 

diameter, this approximation allows a first insight into the phenomenon at play. One can obtain a 

total energy such as: 

 
𝐸t ≈ 10𝐿𝐴 +

𝜖

3 𝐿𝑑2𝜇0𝑀s𝐻 + 𝑘2𝐾d

𝑑4

𝐿 ln (

𝐿

𝑑)  
Eq(1) 


20 

The first term is exchange energy, the second one is Zeeman energy, and the third one is dipolar 

energy. k is a phenomenological scaling constant introduced to compensate the crude 

approximation for the dipolar energy, whose value is determined by fitting the domain wall width 

determined by simulation: 𝑘 ≈ 0.18. The length of the curling domain end is found by minimizing 

the above against L. Thanks to the slow variation of the logarithm function, one has: 

 
𝐿 ≈

𝑘

√10

𝑑2

Δd

1

√1+ 𝜖

30( 𝑑

Δ𝑍)

2 
Eq(2) 

Δd = √2𝐴/(𝜇0𝑀s2) is the dipolar exchange length, and ΔZ = √𝐴/(𝜇0𝑀s𝐻) is the field-dependent 

Zeeman exchange length. The above may also be written in the form of a scaling law versus a 

linear variation of applied field: 

 

𝑘2𝑑4

10𝐿2Δd

2 ≈ 1 +

𝜖𝜇0𝑀s𝐻𝑑2

30𝐴
 
Eq(3) 

The linearity of this scaling law is checked from the value of L determined experimentally. 

c. Implementation 

We use slanted functions to adjust the hysteresis loops, reflecting interaction fields. We define 

𝑚sl(𝐻, 𝐻0) as the symmetric slanted non-hysteretic function saturating at 𝐻0, i.e., a linear function. 

For an array of single segments, considered along the oop direction in a mean-field approach, the 

loop with rising field reads 𝑚sl(𝐻 − 𝐻c, γ𝑝𝑀s), while the one for decreasing field reads 𝑚sl(𝐻 +

𝐻c, γ𝑝𝑀s). These functions, combined with the proper interaction fields discussed in the main text, 

are implemented in Wavemetrics IGOR procedures. 
 
 


21 

Acknowledgements 

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Community's Seventh 

Framework Program under Grant No. 309589 (M3d).  

References 

(1) Piramanayagam, S. N.; Srinivasan, K. Recording media research for future hard disk drives. 

Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 2009, 321, 485–494. 

(2) Parkin, S. S. P.; Hayashi, M.; Thomas, L. Magnetic domain-wall racetrack memory. Science 

(New York, N.Y.) 2008, 320, 190–194. 

(3) Parkin, S.; Yang, S.-H. Memory on the racetrack. Nature nanotechnology 2015, 10, 195–198. 

(4) Petit, D.?e.; Jausovec, A.-V.; Read, D.; Cowburn, R. P. Domain wall pinning and potential 

landscapes created by constrictions and protrusions in ferromagnetic nanowires. Journal of Applied 

Physics 2008, 103, 114307. 

(5) Lewis, E. R.; Petit, D.; Thevenard, L.; Jausovec, A. V.; O’Brien, L.; Read, D. E.; Cowburn, R. 

P. Magnetic domain wall pinning by a curved conduit. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95, 152505. 

(6) Grollier, J.; Boulenc, P.; Cros, V.; Hamzi, A.; Vaur?s, A.; Fert, A.; Faini, G. Switching a spin 

valve back and forth by current-induced domain wall motion. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2003, 83, 509–511. 

(7) Vernier, N.; Allwood, D. A.; Atkinson, D.; Cooke, M. D.; Cowburn, R. P. Domain wall 

propagation in magnetic nanowires by spin-polarized current injection. Europhys. Lett. 2004, 65, 

526–532. 

(8) Da Col, S.; Jamet, S.; Stano, M.; Trapp, B.; Le Denmat, S.; Cagnon, L.; Toussaint, J. C.; 

Fruchart, O. Nucleation, imaging, and motion of magnetic domain walls in cylindrical nanowires. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 109, 62406. 

(9) Bochmann, S.; Fernandez-Pacheco, A.; Mačković, M.; Neff, A.; Siefermann, K. R.; Spiecker, 

E.; Cowburn, R. P.; Bachmann, J. Systematic tuning of segmented magnetic nanowires into three-

dimensional arrays of ‘bits’. RSC Adv. 2017, 7, 37627–37635. 


22 

(10) Hayashi, M.; Thomas, L.; Rettner, C.; Moriya, R.; Jiang, X.; Parkin, S. S. P. Dependence of 

current and field driven depinning of domain walls on their structure and chirality in permalloy 

nanowires. Physical review letters 2006, 97, 207205. 

(11) Nielsch, K.; Choi, J.; Schwirn, K.; Wehrspohn, R. B.; G?sele, U. Self-ordering Regimes of 

Porous Alumina: ? The 10 Porosity Rule. Nano Lett. 2002, 2, 677–680. 

(12) Losic, D.; Lillo, M. Porous Alumina with Shaped Pore Geometries and Complex Pore 

Architectures Fabricated by Cyclic Anodization. Small 2009, 5, 1392–1397. 

(13) Santos, A.; Forment?n, P.; Pallar?s, J.; Ferr?-Borrull, J.; Marsal, L.?s. F. Structural 

engineering of nanoporous anodic alumina funnels with high aspect ratio. Journal of 

Electroanalytical Chemistry 2011, 655, 73–78. 

(14) Wang, B.; Fei, G. T.; Wang, M.; Kong, M. G.; Zhang, L. D. Preparation of photonic crystals 

made of air pores in anodic alumina. Nanotechnology 2007, 18, 365601. 

(15) Krishnan, R.; Thompson, C.?V. Monodomain High-Aspect-Ratio 2D and 3D Ordered Porous 

Alumina Structures with Independently Controlled Pore Spacing and Diameter. Adv. Mater. 2007, 

19, 988–992. 

(16) Pitzschel, K.; Bachmann, J.; Martens, S.; Montero-Moreno, J. M.; Kimling, J.; Meier, G.; 

Escrig, J.; Nielsch, K.; Görlitz, D. Magnetic reversal of cylindrical nickel nanowires with 

modulated diameters. Journal of Applied Physics 2011, 109, 33907. 

(17) Masuda, H.; Fukuda, K. Ordered metal nanohole arrays made by a two-step replication of 

honeycomb structures of anodic alumina. Science (New York, N.Y.) 1995, 268, 1466–1468. 

(18) Nielsch, K.; Wehrspohn, R. B.; Barthel, J.; Kirschner, J.; G?sele, U.; Fischer, S. F.; 

Kronm?ller, H. Hexagonally ordered 100 nm period nickel nanowire arrays. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001, 

79, 1360–1362. 

(19) Gemmer, J.; Hinrichsen, Y.; Abel, A.; Bachmann, J. Systematic catalytic current enhancement 

for the oxidation of water at nanostructured iron(III) oxide electrodes. Journal of Catalysis 2012, 

290, 220–224. 


23 

(20) Da Col, S.; Darques, M.; Fruchart, O.; Cagnon, L. Reduction of magnetostatic interactions in 

self-organized arrays of nickel nanowires using atomic layer deposition. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 

98, 112501. 

(21) Haschke, S.; Wu, Y.; Bashouti, M.; Christiansen, S.; Bachmann, J. Engineering Nanoporous 

Iron(III) Oxide into an Effective Water Oxidation Electrode. ChemCatChem 2015, 7, 2455–2459. 

(22) Wu, Y.; Assaud, L.; Kryschi, C.; Capon, B.; Detavernier, C.; Santinacci, L.; Bachmann, J. 

Antimony sulfide as a light absorber in highly ordered, coaxial nanocylindrical arrays: Preparation 

and integration into a photovoltaic device. J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 5971–5981. 

(23) Assaud, L.; Monyoncho, E.; Pitzschel, K.; Allagui, A.; Petit, M.; Hanbücken, M.; Baranova, 

E. A.; Santinacci, L. 3D-nanoarchitectured Pd/Ni catalysts prepared by atomic layer deposition for 

the electrooxidation of formic acid. Beilstein journal of nanotechnology 2014, 5, 162–172. 

(24) Katz, M. J.; Riha, S. C.; Jeong, N. C.; Martinson, A. B.F.; Farha, O. K.; Hupp, J. T. Toward 

solar fuels: Water splitting with sunlight and ?rust?? Coordination Chemistry Reviews 2012, 256, 

2521–2529. 

(25) George, S. M. Atomic layer deposition: An overview. Chemical reviews 2010, 110, 111–131. 

(26) Miikkulainen, V.; Leskel, M.; Ritala, M.; Puurunen, R. L. Crystallinity of inorganic films 

grown by atomic layer deposition: Overview and general trends. Journal of Applied Physics 2013, 

113, 21301. 

(27) Bachmann, J.; Zierold, R.; Chong, Y. T.; Hauert, R.; Sturm, C.; Schmidt-Grund, R.; 

Rheinländer, B.; Grundmann, M.; Gösele, U.; Nielsch, K. A practical, self-catalytic, atomic layer 

deposition of silicon dioxide. Angewandte Chemie (International ed. in English) 2008, 47, 6177–

6179. 

(28) Bae, C.; Zierold, R.; Montero Moreno, J. M.; Kim, H.; Shin, H.; Bachmann, J.; Nielsch, K. 

Multisegmented nanotubes by surface-selective atomic layer deposition. J. Mater. Chem. C 2013, 

1, 621–625. 


24 

(29) Haschke, S.; Pankin, D.; Petrov, Y.; Bochmann, S.; Manshina, A.; Bachmann, J. Design Rules 

for Oxygen Evolution Catalysis at Porous Iron Oxide Electrodes: A 1000-Fold Current Density 

Increase. ChemSusChem 2017, 10, 3644–3651. 

(30) David R. Lide. Handbook of Chemistry & Physics, 73rd Edition; CRC Press: Boca Raton, 

1992. 

(31) Magnetic Nano- and Microwires; Elsevier, 2015. 

(32) Park, B. C.; Kim, Y. K. Synthesis, microstructure, and physical properties of metallic barcode 

nanowires. Met. Mater. Int. 2017, 23, 413–425. 

(33) Wang, T.; Wang, Y.; Fu, Y.; Hasegawa, T.; Oshima, H.; Itoh, K.; Nishio, K.; Masuda, H.; Li, 

F. S.; Saito, H. et al. Magnetic behavior in an ordered Co nanorod array. Nanotechnology 2008, 

19, 455703. 

(34) Fodor, P. S.; Tsoi, G. M.; Wenger, L. E. Modeling of hysteresis and magnetization curves for 

hexagonally ordered electrodeposited nanowires. Journal of Applied Physics 2003, 93, 7438–7440. 

(35) O'Handley, R. C. Modern magnetic materials: Principles and applications; Wiley: New York, 

NY, 2000. 

(36) Salem, M. S.; Sergelius, P.; Corona, R. M.; Escrig, J.; Görlitz, D.; Nielsch, K. Magnetic 

properties of cylindrical diameter modulated Ni80Fe20 nanowires: Interaction and coercive fields. 

Nanoscale 2013, 5, 3941–3947. 

(37) Zeng, H.; Skomski, R.; Menon, L.; Liu, Y.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Sellmyer, D. J. Structure and 

magnetic properties of ferromagnetic nanowires in self-assembled arrays. Phys. Rev. B 2002, 65, 

R4875. 

(38) Allende, S.; Altbir, D.; Nielsch, K. Magnetic cylindrical nanowires with single modulated 

diameter. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 80, 47. 

(39) Zeng, H.; Zheng, M.; Skomski, R.; Sellmyer, D. J.; Liu, Y.; Menon, L.; Bandyopadhyay, S. 

Magnetic properties of self-assembled Co nanowires of varying length and diameter. Journal of 

Applied Physics 2000, 87, 4718–4720. 


25 

(40) Arrott, A. S.; Heinrich, B.; Templeton, T. L.; Aharoni, A. Micromagnetics of curling 

configurations in magnetically soft cylinders. Journal of Applied Physics 1979, 50, 2387–2389. 

(41) Jamet, S.; Rougemaille, N.; Toussaint, J. C.; Fruchart, O. Head-to-head domain walls in one-

dimensional nanostructures. Magnetic Nano- and Microwires; Elsevier, 2015; pp 783–811. 

(42) Rotaru, A.; Lim, J.-H.; Lenormand, D.; Diaconu, A.; Wiley, J. B.; Postolache, P.; Stancu, A.; 

Spinu, L. Interactions and reversal-field memory in complex magnetic nanowire arrays. Phys. Rev. 

B 2011, 84, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.84.134431. 

(43) Ciuta, G.; Dumas-Bouchiat, F.; Dempsey, N. M.; Fruchart, O. Some Aspects of Magnetic 

Force Microscopy of Hard Magnetic Films. IEEE Trans. Magn. 2016, 52, 1–8. 

(44) Da Col, S.; Jamet, S.; Rougemaille, N.; Locatelli, A.; Mentes, T. O.; Burgos, B. S.; Afid, R.; 

Darques, M.; Cagnon, L.; Toussaint, J. C. et al. Observation of Bloch-point domain walls in 

cylindrical magnetic nanowires. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 101. 


