Ni-P coatings electroplating — A review
Part I: Pure Ni-P alloy

Aleksandra LELEVI ´C

H2020-MSCA-ITN-2016 SOLUTION
Artia Nanoengineering & Consulting
Athens, Greece
a.lelevic@artianano.com
lelevic.aleksandra@gmail.com

July 13, 2018

Abstract

In the electroplating industry Ni-P coatings are extensively employed owing to their excellent
properties which enable substrate protection against corrosion and wear. Depending on their composi-
tion and structure, as-plated deposits demonstrate good mechanical, tribological and electrochemical
features, catalytic activity but also beneficial magnetic characteristics. With subsequent thermal treat-
ment hardness of Ni-P metal-metalloid system can approach or be even higher than that of hard Cr
coatings. The purpose of this paper is to provide a general survey of the research work dealing with the
electrodeposition of Ni-P binary alloy coatings. Proposed phosphorus incorporation mechanisms, Ni-P
alloy microstructure before and after thermal treatment, its mechanical, tribological, corrosion, catalytic
and magnetic properties are considered, so are the key process variables influencing phosphorus
content in the deposits and the roles of the main electrolytic bath constituents. Findings on the merits of
employing pulse plating and fabrication of unconventional (layered and functionally graded) structures
are succinctly explored.

1
Introduction

In the modern world billions of dollars per year
are lost due to machinery overhaul or complete
breakdown related to material structural failures
induced by progressive corrosion, wear, fatigue
and rupture. Surface degradation impacts a large
number of industrial sectors and can account for
up to 3-4% of the Gross Domestic Product in de-
veloped economies [1, 2]. One way to address and
diminish issues related to material deterioration is
to impart on its surface a coating that will mitigate
the influence of the surrounding environment and
of the working conditions and prolong the service
life of the equipment.
For the deposition of coatings a variety of tech-
niques exist that can be mechanical, physical, chem-
ical and electrochemical in nature [3]. Among them,
simple electroplating offers many advantages [4–6].

It involves a process that takes place in the low cost
electrolysis cell, in an aqueous solution, at normal
pressure and at relatively low temperature, which
makes it ideal for the industrial scaling up [7–9].
Particular appeal of electroplating is in the possibil-
ity of customizing appearance and properties of the
coating by modifying the composition of the electro-
plating bath and/or the electroplating conditions
and producing a wide range of metallic materials
from metals and simple alloys to compositionally
modulated systems and composites. Deposition
rates in the order of several tens of micrometers per
hour can be routinely achieved [10].
In terms of types of coatings fabricated through
electroplating, in aerospace, automotive and gen-
eral engineering industry functional Cr coatings
are very widely employed owing to their remark-
able combination of properties which include: high
hardness, good corrosion, wear and heat resistance

arXiv:1807.04693v1  [physics.app-ph]  24 Jun 2018


and low friction coefficient [7]. However, the most
common commercial Cr electrodeposition process
employs an aqueous bath that contains hexavalent
Cr. This ion is suspected to be a carcinogenic agent
which in combination with its strong oxidizing na-
ture imposes serious human health and environ-
mental concerns [11]. As a consequence, the use
of hexavalent Cr has been limited by the European
Union Restriction of Hazardous Substances Direc-
tive [12]. In addition, the typical wetting agent-
PFOS (perfluoro-octanesulfonic acid) employed in
Cr electroplating to reduce the danger of the pro-
cess through minimizing the misting generated
during plating is being prohibited due to its ex-
ceptional stability which presents a problem for
the environment [7]. In the light of all mentioned,
attention is focused on finding alternatives to Cr
while maintaining the request for excellent func-
tional properties of the fabricated deposits.
It has been reported by many authors that cer-
tain binary, ternary or quaternary alloy coatings
may present a suitable replacement for hard Cr
and may possess an interesting combination of
features that can culminate even in a possible im-
provement in terms of performance characteristics
[13–16]. Amongst binary alloys Ni-P has attracted
a lot of attention. Vast number of studies have
been conducted which prove that coatings based
on Ni-P with careful tailoring of composition and
structure can offer smart and adaptive solutions
to a wide range of environmental and working
conditions [17, 18]. Compared to Cr coatings ob-
tained from hexavalent Cr baths, effluents resulting
from Ni electroplating process have conventional,
simpler treatment, such as for example processes
called Clean Technologies (based on electrodialy-
sis) [19]. Ni-P coatings exhibit many interesting
features. They are, depending on the electroplating
conditions and the applied post-treatment, charac-
terized by: optimal mechanical properties, good
wear and corrosion resistance, electro-catalytic ac-
tivity and favourable tribological features. With
proper customization of composition and structure
and subsequent thermal treatment hardness of Ni-
P electrodeposits can approach or surpass that of
hard Cr coatings [20]. Ni-P alloy electrodeposits
find applications as protective, functional and deco-
rative coatings primarily in automotive, aerospace
and general engineering industries. Notable are
the applications of Ni-P in the fabrication of dec-
orative coatings in automotive industry, high pre-
cision parts, diffusion barriers, catalytic coatings

for hydrogen evolution, thin film magnetic discs,
microgalvanics, etc. [21].
In order to attain the uttermost enhancement
of the Ni-P deposit beneficial properties it is
paramount to control the coating’s composition and
its microstructure. This can be achieved through al-
tering electroplating bath composition, deposition
conditions and by applying appropriate alloy post-
treatment. To go beyond the limits of the properties
that can be achieved for this binary alloy system,
co-deposition of nano, sub-micron or micron size
particles and fabrication of composite coatings is
the centre of attention of the modern electroplat-
ing research and innovation efforts. While classical
industrial demands on hard, homogeneous, wear
resistant coatings and corrosion protection are still
valid, added capacities in terms of: chemical sta-
bility, bio-compatibility, microstructured surfaces
and functional coatings (lubricant, magnetic) are
in high demand. This is where the production of
composites but also compositionally modulated
coatings, characterized by variable configuration
across their thickness, can offer new possibilities
and new combinations of properties that can be
adapted to almost any need and satisfy the increas-
ing demands on multi-functionality.

2
Electroplating
benefits
and
prospects

Conventional electroplating possesses many advan-
tages in terms of versatility, ease of use and cost
effectiveness. The technique has many assets when
compared to physical methods such as magnetron
sputtering and chemical methods such as chemi-
cal vapour deposition. Physical vapour deposition
is a high cost line-of-sight process with possibly
poor throwing power, while in chemical vapour
deposition high operating temperatures may cause
substrate softening [3, 22]. Heat resistance of the
substrate may very much limit the choice of the
deposition technique, in particular for metals such
as Al, Cu, Mg for which maximum deposition tem-
perature is about 100 ◦C. Disadvantages of elec-
troplating include mainly problems with current
efficiency, throwing power, substrate adhesion and
coating uniformity [3].
In his work Dini [23] performed a comparison
of coatings fabricated by various deposition tech-
niques (PVD, CVD, PS and EP) on the bases of a
wide range of properties, namely: structure, poros-

2


ity, density, stress, corrosion, adhesion, tribology,
fatigue, thermal conductivity, etc. His findings indi-
cated that no coating technology provides superior
results in terms of all considered parameters. The
choice of coating technique must in fact be made
by taking into consideration a number of factors,
such as: substrate compatibility, adhesion, porosity,
possibility of repair or re-coating, inter-diffusion,
effect of thermal cycling, resistance to wear and
corrosion, whilst simultaneously establishing a sen-
sible balance between the obtained benefits and the
incurred costs.
Electroplating possesses advantages over tradi-
tional electroless plating also, in terms of providing
a higher deposition rate in a simpler electrolyte
and the added benefit of the possibility to control
deposit’s composition and microstructure by chang-
ing the applied current waveform and electroplat-
ing conditions [4, 5, 24]. Thick deposits are easily
achieved through electroplating. Amorphous Ni-P
alloys can be electroplated up to mm thickness on
widely differing substrates [17]. However, it is still
necessary to work on improving the electroplated
deposits’ uniformity and on maximizing the pro-
cess efficiency when compared to electroless plat-
ing. By definition, electroless process must be meta-
stable to ensure deposition. Plating in electroless
mode is characterized by solution instability, slow
deposition rate (generally around 10 µm h−1, acidic
electroless baths can plate at about 25 µm h−1), high
temperatures of operation (85 ◦C min for acceptable
deposition rate), difficulties with barrel plating of
small parts and high cost of the operation which
is approximately 5 to 10 times higher than for elec-
trodeposition [25]. Nevertheless, electroless plating
has excellent throwing power and the advantage
of producing deposits of uniform thickness partic-
ularly on components with complex shapes [26].
In order to achieve the latter in case of electroplat-
ing an intricate system of internal anodes and/or
shielding is necessary due to the non-uniform cur-
rent distribution characterizing this process. Ni-P
deposits fabricated by electroless deposition are
also reported to be harder and to possess better
corrosion resistance compared to those obtained
through electrodeposition [17].
Electroplating is quite a mature technique and
although widely applied in industry since the end
of the 19th century, currently it is exhibiting stag-
nancy in terms of growth owing to the lack of
technological innovations. However, according to
several global market studies, electroplating is to

demonstrate an expansion, predominantly in the
Asia-Pacific excluding Japan region (APEJ). In the
market report titled “Electroplating Market: Global
Industry Analysis and Opportunity Assessment,
2016–2026” [27], Future Market Insights foresee
that the global electroplating market is expected
to expand at a compound annual growth rate of
3.7% by the end of 2026 reaching worth of US$
21 Bn. APEJ will be according to them the fastest
growing region and the Automotive and Electri-
cal & Electronics segments are estimated to collec-
tively hold about 65% of the total value share of
the global electroplating market. On the basis of
metal type, owing to the growth of the Electrical &
Electronics industry segments, copper and nickel
are expected to gain significant basis points. As
major growth drivers Future Market Insights iden-
tify applications across a diverse set of industries
and expected eminent growth in the Asia Pacific
region, while the biggest challenges according to
them will be the rise of stern laws and stringent
environmental regulations, decelerated economic
growth in mature markets or markets in a state of
equilibrium and the growing popularity of electro-
less nickel plating.

3
Ni-P alloy electroplating

3.1
Phosphorus co-deposition mecha-
nism

Ni-P electroplating is predominantly performed in
an aqueous electrolytic bath that contains Ni+2 ions
as a source of nickel and a phosphorus oxyacid (or
its salt) which acts as a source of phosphorus. Elec-
trodeposition process is being driven by the electric
current passing between the anode and the cathode
(plating substrate) [26]. Standard reduction poten-
tials for Ni (-0.25 V) and for P (-0.28 V) are near
to each other facilitating their easy co-deposition.
Earlier reviews that deal with the electrodeposition
of Ni-P alloy and its composites were devised by
Berkh and Zahavi [18] and by Daly and Barry [17].
Two mechanisms are generally proposed in or-
der to elucidate the process of phosphorus incorpo-
ration during Ni-P alloy electrodeposition, namely:
direct and indirect mechanism.
In the direct mechanism it is proposed that Ni+2

ions and phosphorus oxyacid are directly reduced
to Ni and P atoms which then form a NixP solid
solution. According to Brenner [28] who first sug-
gested this mechanism, phosphorus oxyacid is re-

3


duced directly to phosphorus and phosphorus is
co-deposited with nickel owing to the polarization
involved in the deposition of nickel assisting the
deposition of phosphorus (induced co-deposition).
The main argument against the direct deposition
mechanism is the claimed impossibility of obtain-
ing phosphorus in aqueous solutions through elec-
trochemical methods in the absence of metal ions
[29].
According to the indirect mechanism, first pro-
posed by Fedotev and Vyacheslavov [30] and sub-
sequently by Ratzker et al. [31], phosphorus oxy-
acid is initially reduced to phosphine (PH3) in the
presence of H+ ions, formed PH3 is then oxidized
to P in the presence of Ni+2 ions, while Ni+2 is si-
multaneously reduced to Ni. Zeller and Landau
[32] supported the hypothesis of PH3 formation
and suggested its subsequent reaction with Ni+2

producing Ni-P, H+ and a series of phosphorous
oxyacids.
Figure 1 gives an overview of the assumed half
reactions describing phosphorus incorporation ac-
cording to both proposed routes, direct and indi-
rect.

Figure 1: Half reactions relevant to incorporation of phosphorus
into Ni-P alloys. Reprinted with permission from [17]. Copy-
right (2003) Taylor & Francis.

Occurrence of indirect mechanism has been cor-
roborated by authors who have reported to have
detected phosphine [33–35].
Harris and Dang
[33] quantified by chemical analysis PH3 produced
during Ni-P electrodeposition. Formation of this
species was also identified by Crousier et al. [29]
who performed a cyclic voltammetry study. Zeng
and Zhou [36] obtained Raman spectra during Ni-P
electrodeposition that indicated the formation of
Ni(PH3)n intermediate species. According to the
authors, this intermediate was then oxidized by
Ni+2 with the consequent formation of the alloy.
Saitou et al. [34] generated analytical solutions
of kinetic equations for the reactions describing
the phosphorus co-deposition according to both ad-
vocated mechanisms. The results predicted depen-
dence of the phosphorous content in Ni-P electrode-
posits on current density (Figure 2). Phosphorous
content, as measured by the electron probe micro-
analyzer (EPMA), was found to decrease with the
increase in current density which was in agreement
with the solution of kinetic equations correspond-
ing to the indirect mechanism of phosphorus co-
deposition.
Morikawa and colleagues [37] studied the elec-
trodeposition of Ni-P from a citrate bath. Bind-
ing energy data obtained from X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) indicated the direct reduction of
H2PHO3 to P, implying direct deposition of nickel-
phosphide. Detection of phosphine by authors of
previous studies Morikawa et al. explained with
the possibility of partial reaction of phosphorus
atoms on the electrode surface with hydrogen at
low pH values, which in their case was negligible
owing to high pH value of the employed citrate
bath.

Figure 2: Schematic diagram of phosphorous concentration vs.
current density derived from rate equations for the indirect
and direct mechanism. Reprinted with permission from [34].
Copyright (2003) Electrochemical Society, Inc.

4


Ordine and coworkers [35] found kinetics of
phosphorus incorporation to be strongly affected by
the electrolytic solution pH value. They employed
interfacial pH measurements, cathodic polariza-
tion curves and electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy and observed different mechanisms of Ni
and Ni-P electrodeposition at different degrees of
solution acidity in the presence of NaH2PO2·H2O
in the electroplating bath.
Sotskaya and Dolgikh [38] conducted electro-
chemical investigation of the kinetics regarding ca-
thodic reduction of hypophosphite anion. Their re-
sults indicated that phosphorus formation proceeds
via two parallel routes: electrochemical and chemi-
cal, whose realization depends on the nature of the
employed metal catalyst. According to them atomic
phosphorus is formed as a result of the cathodic re-
duction of hypophosphite ion. They observed also
that the Ni-P alloy electro-synthesis takes place in
the region of potentials, which does not correspond
to the electro-reduction of hypophosphite anion,
thus they concluded that a chemical disproportion-
ation reaction of hypophosphite occurs in this case
[39].
Bredael et al. [40] proposed that two mecha-
nisms are involved in the formation of Ni-P elec-
trodeposits, one that is active at low current effi-
ciency and leads to formation of amorphous de-
posits and the other dominating at high current
efficiencies and leading to formation of crystalline
ones. Such a claim was corroborated by polariza-
tion measurements in which a change of slope of
the polarization curve was observed, this at the
average current density corresponding to the tran-
sition from amorphous to crystalline structure.
One can infer that making an attempt to delin-
eate the phosphorus co-deposition process with Ni
constitutes a significant endeavour. Disagreements
exists on whether direct or indirect mechanism can
be assumed, with most of the authors supporting
the latter. Additionally, indications exist that phos-
phorus incorporation is not completely straightfor-
ward and that several different mechanisms might
govern its co-deposition depending on the process
conditions. In the origin of the incurred difficulties
lie the large number of factors directing and influ-
encing the deposition process and many different
approaches applied to define their nature and mag-
nitude, all in various electroplating environments.

3.2
Electrolytic bath composition

The properties of the electrodeposited Ni-P coat-
ings depend greatly on the composition of the em-
ployed electrolytic bath. The majority of nickel
plating solutions are based on the ‘Watts’ formula-
tion developed by Professor Oliver P. Watts in 1916
[41] owing to its simplicity and low cost. Modi-
fied Watts electrolyte for Ni-P plating combines the
traditional nickel sulfate, nickel chloride and boric
acid with a phosphorus oxyacid which is a source
of phosphorus. Modified Watts bath containing
sodium hypophosphite as a phosphorus source has
also been reported in many works [35, 36, 42–44].
Other than sulfate electrolyte, several other kinds
of Ni-P aqueous electroplating baths exist, contin-
gent on the nickel source nature mostly used are
sulfamate and sulfonate ones.
Nickel source–Most of the studies dedicated to
nickel and nickel alloys electrodeposition have
been restricted to simple sulfate containing or on
Watts baths. A wide range of coatings can be de-
posited from these versatile and stable electrolytes,
thus they still remain a basis for electroplating Ni-
based coatings [45].
Sulfamate baths are employed primarily for the
purposes of high speed plating and electroform-
ing. Nickel sulfamate possesses high solubility in
aqueous solutions, thus higher nickel concentra-
tion can be achieved compared to other nickel elec-
trolytes which facilitates higher plating rates [46,
47]. Ni-P deposits obtained from sulfamate baths
exhibit lower internal stress, good ductility and
enable higher current efficiency [4, 47, 48]. Stress
values of electrodeposits fabricated from sulfamate,
sulfate and Watts baths are reported to be approxi-
mately 30, 180 and 250 MPa, respectively [48]. Nev-
ertheless, several issues need to be addressed when
a nickel sulfamate bath is used. Sulfamate ion is
stable in neutral or slightly alkaline solutions, how-
ever because of the nickel hydroxide precipitation
these solutions are not used at pH values greater
than 5. Sulfamate hydrolysis reaction has been
found to proceed at an increased rate at lower pH
values and at higher temperatures, thus sulfamate
baths need to be operated at lower temperatures
and higher pH values than Watts-type nickel plat-
ing solutions. pH values less than 3.0 and temper-
atures above 70 ◦C ought to be avoided as nickel
sulfamate can hydrolyze to its less soluble form-
nickel ammonium sulfate [46, 47]. Incorporation of
ammonium and sulfate ions in the deposit can lead
to the internal tensile stress augmentation. Sulfa-

5


mate ion additionally tends to decompose at the
anode; at insoluble anodes such as platinum and at
passive nickel oxide electrodes, and its decomposi-
tion can result in intermediate species which may
affect the quality of the electrodeposited coatings
[46, 47]. However, nickel sulfamate solutions are
preferred in some cases over nickel sulfate solutions
because of the superior mechanical properties of
the fabricated coatings, high rates of deposition and
lower influence of variations in pH and current den-
sity on the deposit’s quality [49]. Figure 3 shows
the comparison of phosphorus content, current effi-
ciency and stress in the obtained Ni-P deposits as
a function of phosphorous acid concentration, for
the sulfate and sulfamate electrolytes.
Another interesting electrolyte for Ni-P alloy
electroplating is the one containing methanesul-
fonate or methanesulfonic acid. Sknar et al. [50]
found the effect of reducing kinetic difficulties of
the Ni-P alloy electrodeposition to be more pro-
nounced when using methanesulfonate than when
employing sulfate electrolyte. This is owing to
weaker buffering properties and lower stability of
nickel acido-complexes of methanesulfonate which
contribute to the increase of concentration of the
present electroactive species. Alloys obtained from
sulfate baths possess higher phosphorus content
which is explained by the elevated acidity in the
near electrode layer due to stronger buffering prop-
erties of the sulfate electrolyte [39]. Methanesul-
fonic acid has good electrolytic conductivity and
is capable of dissolving many metals as well as
acting as a useful medium for dispersion of solids
prior to electrophoretic coating. A diverse range
of surface coatings and films are available from
methanesulfonic acid electrolytes [51]. Compared
with known nickel plating baths, such as Watts
bath, methanesulfonate bath can be considered to
enable higher current density and result in higher
throwing power. Maximum nickel deposition rates
can be achieved with deposits having low poros-
ity, low internal stress and high ductility [51]. This
organic acid may be considered as a ‘green’ elec-
trolyte since it possesses few environmental, stor-
age, transport or disposal problems being readily
biodegradable. Additionally, methanesulfonic acid
exhibits high solubility for metal salts such as those
of Pb and Ag, which are soluble only in a limited
number of acid electrolytes [52].
Phosphorus source–Source of phosphorus in the
Ni-P electroplating bath is typically a phosphorus
oxyacid or its salt. There exist mainly two kinds of

electrolyte systems for Ni-P electroplating: the one
containing phosphorous acid and the other contain-
ing hypophosphite. Generally, the quality of Ni-
P deposits electroplated from electrolyte contain-
ing hypophosphite is changeable because the de-
posits darken when electroplating time gets longer
or current density becomes higher, while the Ni-
P deposits electroplated from electrolyte contain-
ing phosphorous acid are smooth and bright [5].
However, as reported, phosphine is more readily
produced from hypophosphite than from phospho-
rous acid owing to the rate of reduction of H3PO3
being the limiting factor in the phosphorous co-
deposition in this case [18].
Anode dissolution–If used as a contributing
source of Ni in the bath, nickel chloride has two ma-
jor functions: it appreciably increases solution con-
ductivity thereby reducing voltage requirements
and it is important in obtaining satisfactory dis-
solution of nickel anodes [53, 54]. Due to the in-
crease in solution conductivity, plating thickness
and cathodic current efficiency are reported to in-
crease with the increase of chloride concentration
[44]. In the chloride electrolytes activity of Ni+2

ions is higher than in sulfate electrolyte and metal
deposition potential is lower [55, 56]. However, de-
posits obtained from chloride electrolytes with high
chloride concentrations are reported to possess dif-
ferent texture and higher internal stress compared
to those obtained from sulfate ones [56]. It is possi-
ble to operate with zero chloride in the bath if sulfur
activated nickel anodes are used under appropriate
operating conditions, nonetheless a low concentra-
tion of nickel chloride (min 5 g L−1) is generally rec-
ommended so as to provide reasonable insurance
of satisfactory anode performance [57]. Alterna-
tively, nickel bromide that does not increase stress
as much as chloride may be used.
Buffering–As most authors claim, boric acid lim-
its the effects on the solution pH value resulting
from the discharge of hydrogen ions and simpli-
fies pH control [58]. However, many studies show
that the beneficial influence of boric acid on Ni elec-
trodeposition is somewhat complicated and that its
effect stems further from simple buffering, extend-
ing to its impact on deposit’s crystallographic struc-
ture, morphology, brightness, adhesion, etc. [56].
Presence of boron in the bath waste is nonetheless
reported to be harmful for the environment. Since
the enforcement of Water Pollution Control Act in
Japan [59] the imposed national minimum effluent
standards have greatly influenced the electroplat-

6


(a) Phosphorus content vs C(H3PO3)
(b) Current efficiency vs C(H3PO3)
(c) Stress in the deposit vs C(H3PO3)

Figure 3: Comparison of stated parameters’ values versus H3PO3 concentration for the cases of Ni-P alloy electrodeposition from
sulfamate and sulfate baths. Reprinted with permission from [48]. Copyright (2003) Electrochemical Society, Inc.

ing industry. Thus, it became necessary to find
more environmentally friendly solutions for the
electrodeposition of nickel and its alloys.
One of the possible alternatives is proposed in
the terms of substituting boric acid with citric acid.
This species can complex free nickel ions in the so-
lution influencing the deposition rate but also acts
as a buffering agent [60]. Doi et al. [61] found that
the properties of Ni electrodeposits and resulting
cathode current efficiency depend on the employed
citrate bath pH. Electroplating resulted in high cath-
ode current efficiency and hard deposits exhibiting
crystal structure of nearly random orientation in
case of the bath pH value being between 4 and 6,
while when the pH value was 3.5 or less current ef-
ficiency was lower and hardness of the obtained de-
posits decreased. Dadvand and colleagues [44] re-
ported electrodeposition of Ni-P from a citrate bath
containing sodium chloride, citric acid, nickel sul-
fate, ammonia and sodium hypophosphite. They
found cathode current efficiency in low current
density regions to be twice higher compared to
the one achieved when employing modified Watts
bath. Additionally, obtained deposits exhibited
more uniform plating thickness. Even though com-
plexes form between nickel and citrate ions and
citrate ions as such can adsorb on the cathode sur-
face, block active sights for Ni+2 discharge process
and thus decrease the plating thickness, authors of
the mentioned work estimated that this effect was
small for citric acid concentrations below 20 g L−1.
Morikawa and colleagues [37] employed Ni-citrate
bath and obtained uniform and bright Ni-P elec-
trodeposits with high throwing power. H3PO3 was
added in excess so as to generate a large amount
of P atoms on the Ni electrode. Thus according to
them, the bath composition was such that it satis-

fied the requirement necessary to form nickel phos-
phide with a stoichiometric composition equivalent
to Ni3P in a wide range of current densities. Phos-
phorus content in the deposits was found to be
constant around 25 at.% in a broad range of plating
conditions.
When it comes to the environmental impact ex-
erted by the electroplating process from either of
the two baths: the one containing boric or the other
containing citric acid, findings are quite contradic-
tory. Takuma et al. [59] applied a life cycle as-
sessment method to demarcate the extent of their
influence in terms of human toxicity and ecotoxi-
city. Results indicated that the newly developed
citrate plating bath exerts higher environmental im-
pact compared to the traditional Watts electrolyte,
this owing to the release of nickel chelated with
citric acid whose harmful influence overshadows
the benefit of reduced boron emissions achieved by
substituting boric acid in the electroplating bath.
In the Brenner type sulfate bath [28, 62], pH
buffering is achieved generally by employing phos-
phoric acid (H3PO4) whose slight excess can more-
over aid in the H3PO3 oxidation prevention [63].
Pillai and colleagues [63] investigated electrode-
position of Ni-P alloy from a Brenner type bath
containing both phosphorous and phosphoric acid.
Their observation was that a 100% nickel coating
without any phosphorous incorporation was ob-
tained when the plating was carried out in the ab-
sence of H3PO3 indicating that phosphorous acid
is the only electrochemically active phosphorous
species which acts as a phosphorous source in the
given solution.
Electroplating baths containing phosphorus
and/or phosphoric acid can be very acidic, hence
typically partial neutralization is necessary in or-

7


der to increase the pH value of the solution up to
an optimum value [62]. For this purpose different
alkaline compounds can be employed, i.e.: potas-
sium or sodium carbonate, potassium or sodium
hydroxide, ammonia. Dadvand et al. [44] advo-
cated the benefits of using ammonia for bath neu-
tralization, as carbonate salts decrease the solution
conductivity and alkali metal hydroxides promote
the formation of nickel hydroxide complexes.
Additives–Electrolyte additives are another cru-
cial factor in the Ni-P electroplating process. They
can be incorporated in the electrolytic solution in
order to influence grain growth and crystallites ori-
entation, to suppress undesirable secondary reac-
tions, to promote the co-deposition of alloys, dis-
solution of metals, etc. Additives can be grouped
according to their main purpose as: carriers, surface
wetters, inhibitors or levellers, auxiliary brighten-
ers, buffers, conductive electrolytes and chemical
complexants [64]. It is important to keep in mind
that these species are also incorporated in the coat-
ing during its deposition, hence they may produce
various adverse effects on the deposit’s properties,
for example decrease corrosion resistance and ex-
acerbate mechanical properties. As such, their use
should be carefully optimized.
Grain refiners/carriers are usually aromatic or-
ganic compounds that contain sulfur whose co-
deposition with nickel inhibits its grain growth.
Most commonly employed grain refiner in Ni-P
electrodeposition is saccharin. This species is re-
ported to effectively reduce the internal stress of
the fabricated deposits [65], however its use comes
with the concerns related to deterioration of the
corrosion resistance due to incorporation of sulfur
in the growing deposit [66]. Saccharin is reported
to prompt the decrease in the phosphorus content
in the coating and to bring an improvement in cur-
rent efficiency [67, 68]. This is related to occupa-
tion of cathode surface active centres by saccha-
rin molecules and its conversion which consumes
available hydrogen, hence restricts the phospho-
rous co-deposition [68].
It is known that properties of Ni electrodeposits
depend on their crystallographic structure. Ni (100)
soft-mode texture is associated with deposits that
possess maximum ductility, minimum hardness
and internal stress [69]. Textural modifications of
this matrix can be induced by the introduction of
certain additives [68]. Mixed crystal orientation
can be achieved allowing to fabricate deposits with
controlled properties.

Table 1 gives an overview of the proposed com-
positions of the aqueous baths for Ni-P alloy elec-
troplating.
Applied deposition conditions and
achieved phosphorus content where this informa-
tion was available are stated along with some basic
observations.
Non-aqueous baths–All mentioned traditional Ni-
P electroplating baths are corrosive and their use
possesses a drawback in terms of generating toxic
effluents. As an alternative to conventional elec-
troplating solutions, You and colleagues [70] have
proposed Ni-P electrodeposition from a bath con-
taining choline chloride:ethylene glycol (1:2 molar
ratio) deep eutectic solvent (DES) and NiCl2·6H2O
and NaH2PO2·H2O as nickel and phosphorous
sources, respectively. DESs are formed from mix-
tures of Lewis or Brønsted acids and bases and
can contain a variety of anionic and/or cationic
species. Employing ionic liquids in electroplating
is beneficial owing to them being less corrosive,
possessing a wider electrochemical window and
exhibiting lower hydrogen evolution when com-
pared to aqueous baths. As such they can present a
suitable alternative for traditional plating solutions
[71]. Disadvantages of DESs however include their
lower electrical conductivity, metal salts solubility
and higher viscosity in comparison with aqueous
electrolytes.
It has been proposed that environmental issues
related to the use of aqueous baths in Nickel elec-
troplating can be mitigated also by performing elec-
trodeposition in a supercritical CO2 fluid [80, 81].
Chuang and colleagues [82] studied the properties
and the electrodeposition behaviour of Ni-P coat-
ings in emulsified supercritical CO2 in the presence
of suitable surfactants. They observed improved
hardness, wear resistance and surface quality of the
obtained coatings compared to deposits fabricated
from conventional aqueous electroplating solutions.
However, current efficiency from supercritical CO2
bath was lower.

3.3
Current efficiency

In accordance with both proposed phosphorus in-
corporation mechanisms, direct or indirect, concur-
rent reduction of protons at the surface of the grow-
ing deposit layer is necessary for the co-deposition
of phosphorus with nickel (Figure 1). However,
subsequent recombination of formed Hads limits
the amount of phosphorus that can be deposited.
Thus, surface H+ concentration affects both the
phosphorus content and the cathode current effi-

8


Table 1: Proposed bath compositions and deposition conditions for Ni-P alloy electroplating from sulfate, sulfamate and sulfonate
baths according to various literature sources. Obtained phosphorus content is stated where applicable and some basic observations
are noted. (jd-current density, t-temperature, ε-duty cycle, f-frequency, CE-cathode current efficiency)

Reference
Bath composition
Deposition conditions
Phosphorus content
Additional information

I: NiSO4·6H2O 330 g L−1
pH 1.7-3.0
NiCl2·6H2O 45 g L−1
63 ◦C
H3BO3 30 g L−1
2-5 A dm−2
2-3 %P
H3PO3 0.225-2.25 g L−1

Non-pitting agent 0.15 g L−1

Durney, 1984 [72]
II: NiSO4·6H2O 150 g L−1
pH 0.5-1.0
NiCl2·6H2O 45 g L−1
85 ◦C
H3PO4 50 g L−1
2-5 A dm−2
12-15%P
H3PO3 40 g L−1

NiSO4·6H2O 150 g L−1
Maximum P content from baths
NiCl2·6H2O 45 g L−1 and:
I,II,III and IV is achieved for
following conditions:
I: H3PO4 50 g L−1
80 and 90 ◦C
I:35 wt.%P for 40 g L−1

H3PO3 0-40 g L−1
<10 A dm−2
H3PO3 and 80 ◦C (CE∼25%)

Narayan and
II: H3PO4 0-200 g L−1
80 and 90 ◦C
up to 35 wt.%P
II:∼20 wt.%P for 125 g L−1

Mungole, 1985 [73]
H3PO3 20 g L−1
<10 A dm−2
H3PO4 and 80 ◦C (CE∼50%)

III: H3PO4 50 g L−1
90 ◦C
III:∼30 wt.%P for 12 g L−1

H3PO3 20 g L−1
<10 A dm−2
carbonate (CE∼70%)
NiCO3·NiOH2·4H2O 0-15 g L−1

IV: H3PO4 50 g L−1
70-90 ◦C
IV:30 wt.%P for 5 A dm−2

H3PO3 20 g L−1
5-40 A dm−2
and 70 ◦C (CE∼25%)

NiSO4·6H2O 150 g L−1
pH 0.43-1.0
Transition to amorphous
Bredael et al., 1993 [40]
NiCl2·6H2O 50 g L−1
60 ◦C
up to 20 wt.%P
structure at ≥12 wt.% P
H3PO4 42.5 g L−1
2-150 A dm−2

H3PO3 3-70 g L−1
RDE 750 rev/min

NiSO4 0.38M
pH 1.5-4.5
Maximum P content 25 at.%
NiCl2 0.13M
30-90 ◦C
0-25 at.%P
for ∼ 0.5M H3PO3, at 60 ◦C,
Morikawa et al., 1996 [37]
H3BO3 0.49M
1-30 A dm−2
3 A dm−2 and pH 3.5
Citric acid 0.5M
(CE∼25%);
H3PO3 0-2M
For H3PO3 >0.5M P levels off

9


Reference
Bath composition
Deposition conditions
Phosphorus content
Additional information

NiSO4·6H2O 330 g L−1
pH 1.0 and 4.0
13-28 at.%P (pH 1.0
Composition control by
Hu and Bai, 2001 [42]
NiCl2 45 g L−1
20 and 50 ◦C
, NaH2PO2·H2O 1M)
simultaneous change
Hu and Bai, 2003 [74]
H3BO3 37 g L−1
5 and 25 A dm−2
4-12 at.%P (pH 4.0
of t and jd; Amorphous
NaH2PO2·H2O 0.5 and 1M
200 and 400 rev/min
, NaH2PO2·H2O 0.5M)
structure for ≥12 at.%P

NiSO4·6H2O 150 g L−1
pH 1.8
Primary nucleation of Ni
NiCl2·6H2O 45 g L−1
55 ◦C
27 at.%P
followed by Ni-P formation;
Kurowski et al., 2002 [75]
H3PO4 50 g L−1
-420 mV (SHE)
Growth driven by
NiCO3 40 g L−1
surface diffusion of
H3PO3 40 g L−1
Ni and P species

NiCl2·6H2O 0.2M
pH 3.3
10 at.%P for 4M NH4Cl
Li et al., 2003 [76]
NaH2PO2·H2 0.1M
25 ◦C
2-10 at.%P
(CE∼60%)
NH4Cl 0.5-4M
5-50 A dm−2

NiSO4·6H2O 137 g L−1
pH 1.5
Nanocrystalline deposit;
NiCO3 36.5 g L−1
70 ◦C
0.5-2.5 wt.%P
Maximum hardness (990HV)
Jeong et al., 2003 [77]
H3PO3 2-3 g L−1
1-3 A dm−2
and wear resistance after
Saccharin 5 g L−1
Magnetic stirring
heat treatment at 370 ◦C
SLS 0.1 g L−1

Ni(SO3NH2)2·4H2O
pH 1.0-2.5
Maximum P content 14 wt.%
(Ni+2 90 g L−1)
50 ◦C
2-12 wt.%P
for ε=0.1 and f>100Hz
Lin et al., 2006 [4]
NiCl2·6H2O 3 g L−1
jp 8 A dm−2
(CE∼ 80%);
Chen et al., 2010 [65]
H3BO3 40 g L−1
10-500 Hz
Deposit still crystalline;
H3PO3 10 g L−1
ε 0.1-0.5
Compressive internal stress
SDS 0.4 g L−1
Air bubbling
(-40 MPa)

NiSO4·6H2O 240 g L−1
pH 0.8-1.8
Maximum P content
NiCl2·6H2O 28 g L−1
45 and 75 ◦C
up to 10 wt.%P
for higher H3PO3
Yuan et al., 2007 [5]
H3BO3 30 g L−1
4 and 10 A dm−2
concentration and
H3PO3 2 and 8 g L−1
Magnetic stirring
lower pH values
150 and 550 rev/min

Ni(SO3NH2)2·4H2O
pH 1.5-3.5
Maximum P content
(Ni+2 96 g L−1)
45 ◦C
for higher H3PO3
Chang et al., 2008 [78]
NiCl2·6H2O 4 g L−1
2 A dm−2
1-4.5 wt.%P
concentration and
H3BO3 32 g L−1
Air bubbling
lower pH values
H3PO3 0-4 g L−1
(CE∼ 70%)
Wetting agent 0.3 mL L−1

10


Reference
Bath composition
Deposition conditions
Phosphorus content
Additional information

NiSO4·6H2O 170 or 330 g L−1
pH 0.5-3.0
Schlesinger and
NiCl2·6H2O 35-55 g L−1
60-95 ◦C
Paunovic, 2010 [7]
H3BO3 0 or 40 g L−1
2-5 A dm−2

H3PO4 50 or 0 g L−1

H3PO3 2-40 g L−1

NiSO4·7H2O 150 g L−1
pH∼1.5
P content decreases with
NiCl2·6H2O 45 g L−1
50-80 ◦C
0-20 wt.%P
H3PO3 concentration decrease
H3PO4 0-40 g L−1
5-30 A dm−2
and increase of jd and t
Pillai et al.,2012 [63]
H3PO3 0-20 g L−1
(up to 15 g L−1H3PO3);
SLS 0.25 g L−1
Deposit amorphous for ≥9 wt.%P;
Hardness 8.57 GPa (4-7 wt.%P),
after annealing at 400 ◦C
maximal hardness (12 GPa)

NiSO4·6H2O 0.65M
pH 1.5
Transformation to crystalline
NiCl2·6H2O 0.75M
10.6 at.%P
at 500-600 ◦C;
Nava et al., 2013 [20]
H3BO3 0.15M
3 A dm−2
Annealed deposit hardness
NaCl 2M
990 HV
H3PO3 0.1M

NiSO4·6H2O 0.2M
pH 3.0-4.0
at surface:
Soft magnetic character,
H3BO3 0.005M
70 ◦C
∼8-12 at.%P
plating conditions dependant;
Alleg et al., 2016 [79]
NaH2PO2·H2O 0.1M
-1.3 to -1 V
across depth:
Deposits mixtures of
Saccharin 0.005M
∼4-6 at.%P
Ni(P) solid solutions and
NaCl 0.7M
amorphous or Ni2P phase

I: Ni(CH3SO2)2 1M
pH 3.0
Max P content for 0.12M
NaCl 0.3M
60 ◦C
NaH2PO2 and 2 A dm−2:
NaH2PO2 0.03-0.12M
2-7 A dm−2
∼8 (I) and ∼13 wt.%P (II);
Sknar et al., 2017 [50]
up to 13 wt.%P
II: NiSO4 1M
P content higher from
NaCl 0.3M
sulfate bath;
H3BO3 0.7M
Internal stress and hardness
NaH2PO2 0.03-0.12M
better from sulfamate

11


ciency whose magnitude can never reach values
close to 100% as long as the phosphorus is co-
deposited with nickel.
Cathode current efficiency of Ni-P electroplat-
ing is primarily affected by the electrolytic bath
composition, plating regime, applied current den-
sity, temperature, bath pH value and agitation rate.
Ross et al. [83] found that the current efficiency
decreases as the deposit’s phosphorus content in-
creases and that it depends on the rotation speed
of the cathode. In the case of rotating-disc elec-
trode (RDE), maximum efficiency was attained for
low phosphorus plating solutions and low rotation
speeds. In general, electrodeposition of high phos-
phorus Ni-P coatings proceeds at a lower current ef-
ficiency than the electrodeposition of low phospho-
rus ones [4, 40]. Naryan and Mungole [73] found
that the current efficiency decreases with increasing
H3PO3 concentration and decreasing temperature
of the sulfate electroplating bath. Similarly, Seo
and colleagues [48] observed that with increasing
H3PO3 concentration in the sulfamate bath, phos-
phorus content in the deposit increases, current
efficiency decreases and stress in the obtained de-
posits augments. Morikawa [37] observed that in
citrate bath current efficiency exhibits a maximum
at intermediate H3PO3 concentrations.
Cathode current efficiency in Ni-P electroplat-
ing is generally found to increase with the increase
of current density [25, 84, 85], bath temperature [18]
and its pH value [18, 86]. Luke [25] found that the
cathode current efficiency does not vary apprecia-
bly with current density in the higher range (above
∼20 A dm−2) but increases with the increase of cur-
rent density at its lower values. Similar trend was
observed by Toth-Kadar et al. [85]. Li et al. [76]
found cathode current efficiency to be lower for a
larger total current density. This is owing to the
discharge reaction of H+ ions which results in the
evolution of hydrogen gas bubbles. This reaction
shares a larger portion of the electrodeposition cur-
rent at higher total current densities.
In general, reactions involved in the conversion
of phosphorus in the solution into phosphorus in
the deposit can be interpreted differently and thus
the discrepancies in elaborating cathode current
efficiency behaviour may arise.
Cathode current efficiency of Ni-P alloy elec-
trodeposition can be as reported significantly im-
proved by employing pulse instead of direct cur-
rent plating [4]. Benefits of using pulse plating for
Ni-P deposits fabrication are explored in Section 6.

As mentioned in the previous section, certain
additives such as saccharin are found to improve
the current efficiency of Ni-P electrodeposition [68].
In Ni-P electroplating, anodes are usually made
of nickel and current efficiency of nickel dissolu-
tion in additive free solution is approximately 100%
(small percentage of the current is consumed on
the discharge of hydrogen ions from water). Hence
there exists a difference in cathode and anode ef-
ficiency which leads to nickel ions build up in the
solution and its pH value increase. This problem
can be solved by solution drag-out [87] and by the
use of soluble and inert anodes connected to dif-
ferent power supplies, while the current to each
is controlled in order to compensate for the low
cathode efficiency and incurred drag-out losses [7,
25].

3.4
Crystallographic structure

Ni-P electrodeposits’ crystallographic structure is
strongly influenced by their phosphorus content
and the employed deposition conditions. Incor-
poration of even small amounts of phosphorous
in the nickel lattice substantially refines the nickel
grains. In the case of low-phosphorus Ni-P elec-
trodeposits, obtained XRD patterns reveal a set of
diffraction peaks corresponding to face-centred cu-
bic (f.c.c.) nickel, i.e.: (111), (200), (220), (311), (222)
[88]. Presence of these textures is an indication
of crystallinity of the low-phosphorus coatings in
which case a material is a supersaturated solution
of phosphorus in f.c.c. nickel [83]. As the phos-
phorus content in Ni-P deposits increases, (111)
reflection becomes broader while others disappear,
as it can be seen on Figure 4. This is indicative
of nickel crystalline structure losing its long-range
order due to the increased difficulty of more phos-
phorus atoms accommodating into the nickel lat-
tice. Co-deposition of phosphorus in octahedral
interstial sites of f.c.c. nickel inhibits the surface
diffusion of Ni atoms and the subsequent crystal
growth [17]. As the phosphorus content in the de-
posit increases the nucleation becomes dominant
over nucleus growth and when the critical phos-
phorus content is exceeded amorphous structure
characterized by a short range order of only few
atomic distances is obtained. More colony-like mor-
phology is achieved where each colony consists of
numerous grains with smaller grain size thereby
making the coating brighter and smoother in ap-
pearance [63]. Figure 5 shows SEM photographs of
Ni-P deposits with varying phosphorus contents.

12


Figure 4: XRD patterns of polycrystalline Ni and nanocrystalline
Ni-P coatings. Reprinted with permission from [77]. Copyright
(2003) Elsevier.

At high-phosphorus content XRD pattern of a
Ni-P electrodeposit exhibits only a diffuse broad
peak. Hence, an increase in phosphorus content
converts the microstructure of Ni-P alloys from
crystalline to amorphous, which results in the de-
creased ductility and the increased corrosion re-
sistance. It has been hypothesized that adsorbed
hydrogen blocks the surface and prevents regular
crystal growth, hence playing a crucial factor in ob-
taining N-P deposits with amorphous structure,
however amorphous deposits can be fabricated
with high current efficiencies and low hydrogen
evolution thus indicating that the adsorbed hydro-
gen does not play a major role [17].
Bredael et al. [89] observed significant broaden-
ing of the (111) XRD peak for Ni-P deposits contain-
ing more than 9 wt.% of phosphorus. However they
stated that the observed effect, other than being a
sign of the structure becoming amorphous, can also
originate from a crystalline material with very fine
grains (1nm) and may be due to non-uniform in-
ternal stresses and stacking faults. Hence, as they
asserted, it is not possible to exactly distinguish
between amorphous and microcrystalline structure
based only on XRD patterns. Nonetheless, conven-
tionally Ni-P deposits with more than 9 wt.% of

phosphorus are entitled X-ray amorphous.
Owing to the variations of the pH value at the
electrode-solution interface inherent to the Ni-P
electroplating process, phosphorus content varies
across Ni-P deposit thickness, hence its composi-
tion and microstructure are not homogeneous (Sec-
tion 7). Alkaline solutions are more influenced by
the pH variations compared to acidic ones, thus
electrodeposits produced in this environment are
often characterized by a lamellar structure [79].
Ni-P electrodeposits can be grouped in three cat-
egories, alloys with: low (1-5 wt.%), medium (5-8
wt.%) and high (above 9 wt.%) phosphorus content
[17]. Microstructure-wise, it is possible to fabricate
polycrystalline, microcrystalline, nanocrystalline or
fully amorphous Ni-P deposits through electroplat-
ing.
Pillai et al. [63] found the structure of Ni-P alloy
to undergo transition from crystalline to nanocrys-
talline and become amorphous at phosphorus con-
tents above 9.14 wt.%. Bredael and coworkers [40]
fabricated Ni-P electrodeposits with phosphorus
contents ranging from 0 to 18.0 wt.% and a uni-
form composition profile across the samples. They
observed that for phosphorus contents above 12
wt.% the as-plated Ni-P coatings were amorphous,
whereas below this threshold value, which was in-
dependent of the plating parameters, crystalline
Ni-P coatings were obtained. In a subsequent work
Bredael and colleagues [89] conducted a study with
the goal to exactly identify the percentage of phos-
phorus at which the transition from crystalline to
amorphous structure takes place. They found that
the border between these two states can be found
at phosphorus contents between 11.6 and 13.1 wt.%
P, with the structure being fully amorphous at P
contents ≥13.1 wt.%. Although there is no full con-
sensus many authors agree that the phase transition
of Ni-P happens over a wide range of wt.% of P
and not abruptly at a specific phosphorus content
[63]. Lin et al. [4] found that not only phosphorus
content influences the crystallographic structure
of Ni-P electrodeposits. At the same phosphorus
percentage substituting direct current deposition
by pulse current plating can result in preserving
crystalline structure even at phosphorus contents
higher than a critical value. Contrary, phospho-
rus content at which transition from crystalline to
amorphous structure occurs has been reported to
decrease in the presence of certain additives, such
as saccharin for example [17].
In general, discrepancies which exist in the lit-

13


erature related to the structural transitions of Ni-
P electrodeposits can be attributed to the lack of
appropriate techniques that would allow to make
a proper differentiation between different crystal-
lographic structures.
Additionally, Ni-P alloys
are frequently not straightforward amorphous or
crystalline but they represent a mixture of several
phases. This can be owing to the low solubility of
phosphorus into the nickel lattice. Namely, often
Ni-P deposits contain more of the alloying element
(P) than what the f.c.c. Ni matrix can dissolve, thus
the surplus must separate out resulting in regions
that have a different concentration of phosphorus,
different lattice parameters and different crystal-
lite sizes. Vafaei-Makhsoos et al. [90] found alloys
with 3.8 and 6.7 wt.% of P to be solid solutions
composed of micrometer-sized grains. However,
amorphous alloys (11.7 and 13 wt.% P) were not ho-
mogeneous on a microscale and films contained mi-
crocrystalline regions. Ni-P electrodeposits display-
ing a structure that represents a mixture of solid
Ni(P) solutions and amorphous or nanocrystalline
phases have been reported [79].
Microstructure of Ni-P electrodeposits under-
goes a transformation if they are exposed to a sub-
sequent thermal treatment. This aspect is further
elaborated in Section 5.
Suitable structure of the electroplated Ni-P al-
loy depends on the desired features of the fabri-
cated deposit. Crystalline materials are tradition-
ally interesting on account of their exceptional me-
chanical properties. Amorphous materials are very
appealing owing to the isotropy of their proper-
ties and them lacking disadvantages characteristic
for crystalline ones, namely the presence of crystal
boundaries, lattice defects, segregation, etc. [91].
Amorphous Ni-P electrodeposits are reported to
possess better corrosion resistance when compared
to crystalline deposits. However, transition to amor-
phous structure and consequent decrease of the
grain size causes deterioration in mechanical prop-
erties which is termed an inverse Hall-Petch ef-
fect [92]. Its onset is related to the increase of the
volume fraction of the triple junctions relative to
the volume fraction of the grain boundaries which
exerts a detrimental effect on coating’s hardness
[93]. Jeong et al. [94] produced Ni-P electrode-
posits with grain size of less than 10 nm, thereby
achieving hardness values that fall into the range of
the inverse Hall–Petch behaviour. Recently exten-
sively reported are the results testifying even better
mechanical properties of nanocrystalline materials

(Figure 9) when compared to both coarse-grained
and amorphous ones [10, 64, 95, 96]. The main
feature, which makes nanocrystalline materials dis-
tinct from the other two mentioned groups, is the
existence of a larger number of atoms disposed at
interfaces, as grain boundaries and triple junctions.
These interfaces are considered to be involved in
the deformation mechanism occurring in the mate-
rial. It is postulated that for nanocrystalline materi-
als dislocations inside the grains hardly occur and
that other plastic deformation mechanisms, such
as grain boundary diffusion and sliding, grain ro-
tation and a viscous flow of interfaces take place
[88].

3.5
Variables influencing phosphorus
content

Phosphorus content of Ni-P electrodeposits report-
edly depends on many factors, dominantly on the
concentration of the phosphorus donor in the bath,
temperature, pH, current density, waveform in the
case of pulse current deposition, agitation rate and
the presence of additives. Thus, phosphorus quan-
tity can be controlled by altering the electroplat-
ing bath composition and the employed deposition
conditions.
In the 1950s, Brenner [28] found that the amount
of phosphorus incorporated in the Ni-P alloy in-
creases with the increase of phosphorus acid con-
tent in the bath and with the decrease of the current
density. However, too high H3PO3 concentration
leads to deterioration of the current efficiency ow-
ing to more cathodic charges being spent on the
reduction of protons. Additionally, proton reduc-
tion results in the atomic and molecular forms of
hydrogen, both of which can be incorporated in
the deposit imposing inauspicious effects on its
properties and increasing its internal stress [97].
Chang et al. [78] found that for the same content of
H3PO3, phosphorous content can be increased by
decreasing electrolytic bath pH value on account
of the consequent increase of the concentration of
non-dissociated phosphorous acid molecules in the
electrolyte. This effect is however weakened at very
low phosphorus acid concentrations on account of
diffusion becoming the rate-controlling process.
Yuan and coworkers [5] conducted a study on
the preparation of amorphous-nanocrystalline Ni-P
electrodeposits from a Brenner type plating bath.
Their goal was to interrogate the key electroplating
factors and their influence on the deposit’s phos-

14


Figure 5: SEM photographs of Ni-P deposits with P contents of (a) 0, (b) 4, (c) 8, (d) 12, (e) 17, (f) 20, (g) 24 and (h) 28 at.%. Reprinted
with permission from [74]. Copyright (2003) Elsevier.

phorus content. Effects of: temperature, current
density, pH, H3PO3 concentration and agitation
rate were investigated in the orthogonal experimen-
tal design study. Findings indicated that only pH
value and H3PO3 concentration and their interac-
tion are the key variables affecting phosphorus con-
tent in the deposit. Figure 6 shows contour plots
for the constant phosphorus content versus Ni-P
electroplating pH and H3PO3 concentration.
Hu and Bai [42] employed modified Watts Ni
bath and similarly investigated the influence of the
main electroplating variables, namely: temperature,
current density, pH, NaH2PO2·H2O concentration
and agitation rate on the phosphorus content in the
fabricated Ni-P deposits. By using experimental
strategies such as: fractional factorial design, path
of steepest ascent and central composite design cou-
pled with response surface methodology they came
to the conclusion that the predominant factors af-
fecting phosphorus content are temperature and

current density of the electroplating with strong
interactive effect between current density and pH.
Figure 7 shows contour plots for the constant phos-
phorus content versus Ni-P electroplating tempera-
ture and current density.

Figure 6: Contour plots for the constant phosphorus content (P
wt.%) of Ni-P deposits against the electroplating pH (XC) and
H3PO3 concentration (XD). Reprinted with permission from [5].
Copyright (2007) Elsevier.

15


Figure 7: Contour plots for the constant phosphorus content (P
at.%) of Ni-P deposits against the electroplating temperature
(xA) and current density (xB). Reprinted with permission from
[42]. Copyright (2001) Elsevier.

Figure 8: Literature results on phosphorus content vs current
density (up to 40 A dm−2). Reprinted with permission from [40].
Copyright (1993) Elsevier.

Recurring trend of gradual decrease of phos-
phorous content with the increase of the applied
current density is observed in the work of many
authors, however a large scatter between the data
points of different authors can be perceived (Figure
8) [40].
Bredael and coworkers [40] observed, in their
study of Ni-P electrodeposition on a rotating-disc
electrode, a steep transition from high to low phos-
phorus content with increasing local current den-
sity, while the literature data according to them do
not show such a steep transition owing to the gen-
eral approach where average current densities are
used. In the bath where phosphorous acid is the
only electrochemically active phosphorus species,
dependence of the phosphorus content on the cur-

rent density can be explained in terms of slow dif-
fusivity of the large phosphorus acid ions com-
pared with Ni+2 ions [40]. Pillai et al.[63] found
that at higher H3PO3 concentration in the bath (≥
15 g L−1) phosphorus content in the coating is in-
dependent of current density. However, at low
phosphorous acid amounts in the bath, the decreas-
ing trend of phosphorus content in the coating with
increasing current density was evident. Thus, they
concluded that the observed scatter in the results
presented by different authors, when it comes to the
influence of current density on phosphorus content,
can be mainly due to the different bath composi-
tions used. In their study, an increase in the con-
centration of H3PO4 resulted in no significant effect
on the phosphorus content in the coating although
the rate of deposition decreased continuously. An
increase in the plating temperature (from 50 ◦C to
80 ◦C) resulted in the decrease of the amount of
phosphorous incorporated in the coating and in
the increase of the deposition rate. Naryan and
Mungole [73] observed contrary to the previously
mentioned study a slight increase of the phospho-
rus amount in the coating up to H3PO4 concentra-
tions of 125 g L−1 and a slight decrease with further
increase in H3PO4 concentration, all at the bath tem-
perature of 80 ◦C. At 90 ◦C an increase in the H3PO4
concentration generally produced a slight decrease
in the phosphorus content in the coating. Naryan
and Mungole additionally found that at low H3PO3
concentrations, more phosphorus was deposited
at 90 ◦C than at 80 ◦C, but at H3PO3 contents in ex-
cess of 25 g L−1 more phosphorus was deposited
at lower temperature. Sadeghi [21] employed hy-
pophosphite as a phosphorous source and found
that increasing its concentration and decreasing the
current density (1-4 A dm−2) both caused higher
phosphorous contents in the fabricated Ni-P de-
posits. However, the content of phosphorus in the
deposits electroplated from the baths containing
very low phosphorus source amounts did not vary
appreciably with the current density. Deposits ob-
tained from the baths containing up to 10 g L−1 of
NaH2PO2 exhibited a decrease in the content of
phosphorus as the current density was raised.
The increase in temperature has been observed
to cause a decrease in phosphorus content in gen-
eral. However, too low temperature leads to unsat-
isfactory current efficiency and plating rate, thus a
compromise is needed. Temperatures from around
50 ◦C to 70 ◦C are generally adopted as acceptable
for optimal feasibility of the Ni-P electroplating

16


process.
Phosphorus content in the deposit has been re-
ported to be influenced by the presence of certain
additives in the electroplating bath. Increase of the
saccharin concentration was found to induce the
decrease of phosphorus content [17, 67, 68].
Influence of the pulse plating on Ni-P alloy
structure and composition will be further elabo-
rated in Section 6.

4
Properties of the electroplated
Ni-P alloys

4.1
Mechanical, tribological and corro-
sion properties

Alloying nickel with phosphorus via electroplating
effectuates many improvements of its properties:
increased hardness (≳500 HV as-plated Ni-P), wear
and corrosion resistance, decreased coefficient of
friction (0.4-0.7 as-plated Ni-P), but also transition
towards paramagnetic features. Overall, proper-
ties and functional behaviour of Ni-P electrode-
posits depend on their composition and microstruc-
ture. Ni-P coatings with low phosphorus content
demonstrate high hardness and good wear resis-
tance, while coatings with higher phosphorus con-
tent exhibit good corrosion resistance but poor me-
chanical properties owing to the transition towards
amorphous structure. Amorphous Ni-P deposits
are generally brittle and possess low ductility. At
the same phosphorus content, microstructure of
the deposit can be modified by altering the depo-
sition conditions. Applying pulse plating instead
of direct current plating can help to preserve Ni-P
crystalline structure even at higher incorporated
phosphorus quantities, thus good mechanical prop-
erties characteristic for low-phosphorus deposits
can be maintained [4].
Initially, microhardness of the alloy increases
with phosphorus content augmentation at very low
phosphorous amounts, while further enhancement
of phosphorous quantity leads to hardness deteri-
oration [18]. Figure 9 shows the evolution of the
material’s hardness with the change in its grain
size. Nava et al. [20] found that the wear volume
of Ni-P electrodeposits is inversely proportional
to the microhardness of the deposits. They per-
ceived also that nanocrystalline Ni-P coatings, with
phosphorus content of 2-8 %, exhibit significantly
higher wear resistance compared to coatings with

higher phosphorus content. Pillai et al. [63] ob-
served that Ni-P electrodeposits with phosphorus
content in the range of 4-7 wt.% exhibit good micro-
hardness (7.74–8.57 GPa) and the microhardness of
these alloys increases up to 12 GPa by annealing
at 400 ◦C during 1 h. Yuan and colleagues [5] re-
ported that nanocrystalline composites with phos-
phorus content 5-9 wt.% demonstrate better corro-
sion resistance than that of microcrystalline Ni-P
deposits, and better abrasion resistance than that of
amorphous Ni-P deposits. Therefore, under certain
work conditions, when a compromise is needed in
terms of obtaining both corrosion resistance and
favourable mechanical properties, nanocrystalline
deposits could present an optimal choice.
Another way to ensure good mechanical and
electrochemical properties is to design multilayered
or graded coatings. For example, a duplex coating
that consists of an inner layer having high phospho-
rus content and an outer layer with low phosphorus
content presents a structure that combines advan-
tageous features characteristic for each of the two
compositions [14, 15, 98]. Fabricating graded struc-
tures can also help to improve coating‘s adhesion
on the substrate owing to the gradual structure evo-
lution across layer thickness and the lack of abrupt
interfaces (Section 7).
Adhesion of the coating on the substrate’s sur-
face is critical for all possible functional applica-
tions. Ni-P electrodeposits exhibit good adhesion
on a range of widely differing substrates (brass, soft
steel, copper, etc.). However, stainless steel for ex-
ample can be problematic owing to the formation
of a passive oxide layer which prevents Ni-P coat-
ing from sticking to its surface. Conventional way
of addressing this issue is to apply on the substrate
surface a Wood’s or another nickel strike before
Ni-P electroplating [99]. Being highly acidic it dis-
solves the oxide and concurrently forms a thin layer
of nickel on the stainless steel surface.
Published data offer diverse information regard-
ing corrosion characteristics of Ni-P alloy, particu-
larly about the nature of its anodic dissolution, abil-
ity to passivate and pitting susceptibility. Corrosion
resistance of Ni-P coatings is much better than in
the case of pure Ni [18]. In chloride containing and
slightly acidic environments Ni-P electrodeposits
demonstrate lower corrosion resistance when com-
pared to neutral or slightly alkaline settings [100].

17


Figure 9: Hardness of a material as a function of its grain size
[64].

Amorphous and crystalline deposits have been
found to exhibit different corrosion behaviour [17].
Generally the weight loss of Ni-P deposits in corro-
sive solutions decreases with the increase of their
phosphorus content [101]. Splinter and cowork-
ers [102] reported the preferential dissolution of Ni
on the surface of the Ni-P coating and the surface
with the enriched P content after corrosion. They
asserted that the formation of Ni3(PO4)2 film on
the surface impedes the speed of corrosion. Addi-
tionally, their study demonstrated that the corro-
sion behaviour of nanocrystalline Ni-P alloys with
lower phosphorus contents (1.4 wt.% and 1.9 wt.%)
in 0.1M H2SO4 approaches that of amorphous Ni-P
electrodeposits (6.2 wt.% P). X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy revealed that neither the nanocrys-
talline (1.9 wt.% P, grain size 8.4 nm) nor the amor-
phous (6.2 wt.% P) Ni-P alloys formed a passive
layer in this environment. Diegle et al. [103] re-
ported that the addition of phosphorus improves
the corrosion resistance of nickel owing to the re-
action with water in which hypophosphite ions
are formed. These ions prevent further dissolu-
tion of nickel through chemical passivation. Kro-
likovski and Butkiewicz [104] determined that the
behaviour of Ni-P alloys is similar in neutral solu-
tions under open circuit potential. However, under
conditions of anodic polarization amorphous al-
loys exhibit dissolution suppression while in case
of crystalline alloys intensive dissolution occurs.

4.2
Internal stress

Well controlled internal stress is a very important
criteria for successful fabrication and use of protec-
tive Ni-P coatings. Compressive stresses are advan-
tageous in mechanical structures under load, since
they tend to inhibit crack formation and growth,
they rise strength and hardness of the coating [21].
Factors influencing stress are many [47]. Among

them, the choice of the electroplating bath com-
position can very much aid in obtaining deposits
with low values of this quantity. Baudrand [47]
fabricated electrodeposits from a sulfamate bath
without the presence of additives with stress value
of approximately 30 MPa, while the minimal value
of stress for deposits obtained from a Watts bath
was 180 MPa.
The amount of phosphorus, hence crystallo-
graphic structure, of the Ni-P electrodeposit in-
fluences its stress value. Lin et al. [97] studied
Ni-P electrodeposition from a sulfamate bath con-
taining no additives. They observed that amor-
phous Ni-P deposits exhibit lower internal stresses
compared to crystalline ones. The internal stress
and the amount of adsorbed hydrogen exhibited
a maximum at intermediate phosphorus contents
suggesting that hydrogen incorporation and subse-
quent escape play an important role when it comes
to the internal stress of the Ni-P electrodeposits.
Nonetheless, high phosphorus content character-
istic for amorphous Ni-P alloys comes with lower
cathode current efficiency, thus conditions must be
carefully optimized in order to secure optimal fea-
sibility of the process along with desired properties
of the obtained deposits.
Certain organic additives are known to induce a
reduction of the internal stress of the Ni-P deposits.
A grain refiner saccharin is typically employed for
this purpose, inducing compressive internal stress
[10, 17, 46, 105]. Nevertheless, additives contain-
ing sulfur can cause deterioration in the corrosion
resistance of the fabricated coatings hence their ap-
plication must be carefully optimized [66].
Another possibility to reduce stress of a Ni-P
electrodeposit is to apply a low temperature heat
treatment that would help to desorb hydrogen
present in the coating [17].
Employing pulse current instead of direct cur-
rent deposition is reported to be beneficial for stress
reduction. Chen et al. [65] fabricated Ni-P deposits
with high phosphorus contents and low internal
stresses, ranging from tensile to compressive, with
high current efficiency by using pulse current in a
nickel sulfamate bath without the addition of any
stress reducers.

4.3
Magnetic properties

Nickel is a typical ferromagnetic material, while
magnetic properties of the Ni-P alloy present a func-
tion of its composition and preparation technique
[106]. Magnetic moment and Curie temperature are

18


Figure 10: SEM images of wear track of Ni-P coatings, heat treated at different temperatures after sliding against AISI 8620 ball in
air: a) without heat treatment, b) 200, c) 300, d) 400, e) 500, f) 600 ◦C. Reprinted with permission from [20]. Copyright (2013) ESG.

found to decrease with the introduction of phospho-
rus into Ni matrix [107]. According to Weiss theory,
nickel exhibits ferromagnetic properties owing to
quantum-mechanical exchange forces which cause
the spins of vicinal Ni atoms to be parallel [108].
The introduction of phosphorus into nickel matrix
enlarges the separation between Ni atoms and with
the increase of interatomic distance exchange forces
decrease rapidly. Stated effect renders the transi-
tion from ferromagnetic to paramagnetic properties
[109].
Bakonyi et al. [106] performed a study of the
magnetic properties of Ni100-xPx alloys fabricated
by employing various techniques. For electrode-
posited alloys the composition range studied was
11≳x≲23. Throughout the whole concentration
range magnetic inhomogeneities were observed.
Alloys were found to exhibit paramagnetism at
x≳17. Hu and Bai [74] observed that the ferromag-
netic property of Ni was transformed into param-
agnetism at phosphorus content of 17 at.% . They
corroborated that the magnetic properties of Ni-P
alloys are a function of their phosphorus content.
In a subsequent study [110], they demonstrated
that the paramagnetic Ni-P deposits become fer-
romagnetic after thermal treatment at 400 ◦C ow-
ing to Ni and Ni3P phases separation. Knyazev
and colleagues [6] performed magnetization mea-

surements and differential scanning calorimetry
analysis of the Ni-P alloys obtained via electrode-
position. Their results indicated that the untreated
alloys with phosphorus contents exceeding 12 at.%
were paramagnetic, owing to the lack of exchange
interactions due to fluctuations in chemical com-
position and the formation of a network of phos-
phorus rich paramagnetic domains. Amorphous
Ni-P alloys that were originally paramagnetic were
rendered ferromagnetic through thermal treatment
that also led to their devitrification. Dhanapal et
al. [109] studied the influence of phosphorus con-
tent, employed duty cycle and current density on
the magnetic properties of Ni-P alloy fabricated by
pulse current deposition. They observed satura-
tion magnetization dependence on the phosphorus
content. At low phosphorus amounts saturation
magnetization value of the obtained deposits was
high. Increasing the duty cycle resulted in the in-
crease of soft ferromagnetic nature of the Ni-P alloy
and decrease of the coercivity and retentivity val-
ues.

4.4
Catalytic activity

Ni-P alloy is known to exhibit catalytic activity fore-
most in water splitting reaction. This presents a
very important feature especially in the light of to-

19


day’s rapidly increasing energy demands and pro-
gressive exhaustion of fossil fuels resources. Cat-
alysts (platinum and ruthenium) conventionally
employed to reduce the large overpotentials for hy-
drogen and oxygen evolution reactions (HER and
OER respectively) are fairly scarce and their use not
feasible when it comes to incurred costs, thus suit-
able alternatives are in high demand. Nickel is a
very popular electrode material owing to its reason-
ably high hydrogen generation activity, availability
as well as its low cost [111]. Although Ni as a cata-
lyst does not perform as well as steel from the view-
point of its electro-catalytic activity, it possess an
excellent resistance to corrosion in hot concentrated
alkaline solutions [112]. Issues encountered when
employing this metal as cathode material are its low
catalytic activity or low resistance to intermittent
electrolysis, however alloying nickel with other ele-
ments (P, Mo, etc.) can aid in mitigating these issues
[112, 113]. According to Paseka [114], the reason for
the improvement of nickel activity in HER achieved
through alloying it with phosphorus is the augmen-
tation of the amount of amorphous phase surround-
ing the Ni crystals. Alloys containing amorphous
phase which is able to dissolve large amounts of
hydrogen possess high internal stress which con-
tributes to their good electro-catalytic activity.
Hu and Bai [115] conducted a study in order
to interrogate the effects of key electroplating vari-
ables on the hydrogen evolution activity of Ni-P
deposits. By employing fractional factorial design,
path of steepest ascent and central composite de-
sign, they found that the key factors influencing
catalytic activity of Ni-P electrodeposits include:
temperature, pH and NaH2PO2·H2O concentra-
tion and their interactions. The models they de-
veloped indicated that the alloy containing 7 at.%
of P should exhibit maximal electro-catalytic activ-
ity. In the subsequent study [74], they experimen-
tally found deposit with 8 at.% of P to be the best
electrode material for HER. They attributed this
deposit’s highest specific activity to its largest true
surface area and hence its maximum roughness.
Wei et al. [116] investigated catalytic activity of
Ni-P in HER both experimentally and theoretically.
Alloys that contain 10,8 at.% P were found to per-
form the best. In order to elaborate the influence
of phosphorus content in Ni-P amorphous alloys
on their catalytic activity they employed density-
functional theory and front molecular orbital theory.
Obtained results indicated that alloys with phos-
phorus content anywhere from 9.1 at.% to 14.3 at.%

should exhibit optimal activity for the whole HER.
Paseka [114] found that the alloy deposited at 65 ◦C
demonstrates worse catalytic activity than alloys
deposited at temperatures ≤ 53 ◦C. He asserted
that this is owing to the presence of larger amounts
of adsorbed hydrogen in alloys fabricated at lower
temperatures, which contributes to their higher in-
ternal stresses. According to Paseka, catalytic ac-
tivity also depends on the deposit’s thickness and
exhibits an increase as deposit grows. Thick de-
posits possess great catalytic activity owing to their
high internal stress, however their mechanical in-
stability presents a problem and thickness increase
will be beneficial only up to a critical width of coat-
ing at which it will suffer a final failure. In the study
by Li et al. [76] it was determined that at low bath
temperatures high NH4Cl content in combination
with low NaH2PO2 concentration can contribute to
creating thick films (6-8 at.% of phosphorus) with
optimum catalytic activity even at high current den-
sities. However, ammonia concentration must be
chosen carefully because exceeding the ammonia
concentration above the certain limit can negatively
affect the cathode current efficiency, hence decrease
the plating rate [44]. Bai and Hu [110] observed that
for Ni-P electrodeposits with P content from 0 to 28
at.% the ability of catalysing hydrogen evolution
decreases with increasing annealing temperature,
concluding that annealed deposits are not suitable
for HER.
Elias et al. [117] studied the efficiency of elec-
trodeposited Ni-P for both HER and OER in alka-
line media. They found that the alloy thin films
with 9.0 wt.% of P and 4.2 wt.% of P are the
best electrode materials for HER and OER. Re-
cently Tang and coworkers [118] reported a room-
temperature electrodeposition of Ni-P nanoparticle
film on Ni foam which acts as a bifunctonal water-
splitting catalyst in strongly alkaline media with
very small overpotentials for HER and OER: 80 mV
and 309 mV, respectively.
As an alternative to alkaline media in which wa-
ter electrolysis systems are simple but demonstrate
low efficiency and high energy consumption, Lu
et al. [119] interrogated electrocatalytic activity of
Ni based alloys in acidic media. They observed a
decrease of catalytic activity with the increase of
phosphorus content which they attributed to mov-
ing away from the optimal electronic configuration
with phosphorus incorporation but additionally to
the decrease of the number of grain boundaries
which present active sights for HER. Contrary, au-

20


thors of [120] claimed that increasing the phospho-
rus content, even past contents that can be achieved
through conventional electrodeposition would im-
part exceptional catalytic properties to these sys-
tems for applications in acidic media and hence
very high phosphorus contents ought to be benefi-
cial.

5
Thermal treatment of electro-
plated Ni-P alloy

With subsequent heat treatment the hardness of
Ni-P electrodeposits increases substantially. This
phenomenon is caused by the precipitation of the
crystalline phases. Most studies report detecting a
mixture of Ni3P and f.c.c. nickel as a final product
of the thermal treatment [20].
The annealing temperature under which crys-
tallization occurs depends on the phosphorous con-
tent in the deposit as well as on the heating rate
[121]. Phase transformation temperatures of the
deposits increase with increasing heating rate and
decreasing phosphorus content [110, 121]. Contin-
ued heating at temperatures higher than the tran-
sition temperature leads to a decrease of hardness
owing to the subsequent recrystallization and grain
coarsening [18, 122, 123]. The degree of loss of hard-
ness is higher for deposits having lower phospho-
rus content on account of more pronounced grain
growth and coarsening of Ni phase compared to
Ni3P phase [122]. Transition from amorphous to
crystalline state is followed by a thermal contrac-
tion phenomena due to higher density of crystalline
structure when compared to amorphous one, the
amplitude of contraction being higher at higher
phosphorus contents [105].
Nava et al. [20] fabricated Ni-P electrodeposits
containing 10.6 at.% of P which exhibited maxi-
mum hardness (990 HV) after thermal treatment at
500 ◦C (comparable to the hardness of hard Cr coat-
ings ∼1000 HV). Obtained deposits demonstrated
also the lowest wear rate as indicated by the SEM
images of their wear track patterns that exhibited
the narrowest width and shallowest plough lines
(Figure 10). A linear relationship was detected be-
tween the hardness and the wear resistance of the
heat treated Ni-P alloy coatings. Corrosion resis-
tance of the deposits deteriorated upon annealing
owing to the formation of cracked structure in the
thermally treated coatings, which promoted local-
ized corrosion. Bai and Hu [110] found crystalliza-

tion for Ni-P deposits containing ≤ 24 at.% of P to
occur at 400 ◦C, while deposits with 28 at.% demon-
strated a phase transformation at 200 ◦C. Addition-
ally, phosphorus content in the deposits decreased
with increasing the annealing temperature owing
to the replacement of phosphorus by the oxygen
from the air.
Habazaki et al. [124] conducted a study in or-
der to interrogate the effect of annealing on the
microstructure and the corrosion behaviour of the
electrodeposited amorphous Ni-P alloys. Obtained
results indicated that Ni-P alloys with 19.2 at.%
phosphorus crystallize directly to f.c.c. Ni and Ni3P
phases. High phosphorus alloys (≥ 24.6 at.% P)
were first crystallized to a metastable single phase
and then decomposed to Ni3P. Crystallization of
alloys with the intermediate P content (19.2 at.%
< P < 24.6 at.%) resulted first in a mixture of f.c.c.
Ni, Ni3P and the metastable phase. The precipita-
tion of f.c.c. Ni in the amorphous phase occurred
for Ni-16.7P alloy before complete crystallization.
Annealing decreased corrosion resistance for alloys
containing ≤22.7 at.% P owing to the formation
of phosphorus deficient f.c.c. Ni phase. Keong et
al. [121] similarly reported that amorphous coat-
ings with high phosphorus content follow a se-
quence of transformations during annealing and
form metastable phases, such as Ni2P and Ni12P5
before forming stable Ni3P and f.c.c. Ni phases.
Zoikis et al. [125] observed crystallization of the
amorphous Ni-P electrodeposit into Ni and Ni3P
phases after annealing at ∼ 400 ◦C. The presence
of Ni2P phase after thermal treatment above 330 ◦C
was detected. Ni2P phase formation was also re-
ported in [43].
Jeong et al. [77] reported the increase of hard-
ness and abrasive wear resistance after heat treat-
ment for nanocrystalline Ni-P coatings, with Taber
abrasive wear resistance being linearly propor-
tional to the hardness of the coatings. Heat treat-
ment causes also the elastic modulus of the deposit
to increase significantly according to the authors of
[63]. When maximum hardness is achieved upon
annealing fracture toughness exhibits the lowest
value [126].
Chang et al.
[127] argued that significant
strengthening by annealing for electrodeposited
Ni-P alloys with low phosphorus content and
nanocrystalline grains is not induced by the pre-
cipitation of Ni3P phase. The increase in hardness
upon annealing is according to them a result of
grain boundaries relaxation, phosphorus segrega-

21


tion, reduction of interior defects with the possible
contribution from the increase of density owing to
degassing of hydrogen.
Opting for subsequent Ni-P alloy thermal treat-
ment and accordingly choosing the suitable heat
treatment temperature, finally depend very much
on the employed substrate nature and the intended
process complexity.

6
Application of pulse plating
for Ni-P alloy fabrication

Constant direct current is the most commonly ap-
plied regime in which metallic coatings are elec-
trodeposited. However, in recent years the use
of pulsed, alternating currents is exhibiting an in-
crease. This is owing to number of findings that
demonstrate that pulse current (PC) exerts a benefi-
cial influence on the structure and properties of the
fabricated deposits. Among others, comprehensive
reviews on pulse and pulse reversed plating are
composed by Devaraj and Seshadri [128] and by
Chandrasekar and Pushpavanam [129].
Development of modern electronics has granted
a great flexibility in programming of the applied
modulated current waveforms, with trains of
pulses that can be programmed to have very com-
plex sequences and forms.

Figure 11: Typical pulse-current waveform.

Rectanglular waves are the easiest waveforms
to produce [130]. They have been demonstrated to
produce a higher nucleation rate of the grains com-
pared to triangular waveform [131]. Typical wave-
forms employed in pulse plating include: cathodic
pulse followed by a period without current (or an
anodic pulse), direct current (DC) with superim-
posed modulations, duplex pulse, pulse-on-pulse,
cathodic pulses followed by anodic pulses (pulse
reverse current-PRC), superimposing periodic re-

verse on high frequency pulse, modified sine-wave
pulses and square-wave pulses [129].
During electroplating, a negatively charged
layer is formed around the cathode as the process
advances. When performing DC deposition, this
layer charges to a definite thickness and prevents
ions from reaching the substrate. In a simple form
of PC electrodeposition, where cathodic pulse is
alternatively switched on and off, when the output
is turned off this layer discharges which allows eas-
ier transport of ions from the bulk of the solution
[129]. Additionally, during plating high current
density areas in the bath become more depleted of
ions compared to low current density areas. Dur-
ing time when the current is off ions migrate to the
depleted areas and when subsequent current pulse
occurs more evenly distributed ions are available
for deposition onto the part [129]. In the absence
of current, small grains are recrystallized owing to
their higher surface energy which makes them less
thermodynamically stable than large grains, hydro-
gen is also desorbed decreasing the internal stress
of the obtained deposits. In general, PC plating
results in finer grain deposits exhibiting improved
properties, including hardness, roughness, poros-
ity, wear resistance, etc. Pulse plating can reduce
additive requirements substantially [128, 129].
Pulsed current results in metal deposition at the
same rate as direct current provided that the aver-
age pulse current is equal to the mean direct current
of DC electrodeposition [64, 129].
In PC plating, choice of the applied waveform
is critical and care must be taken to appropriately
optimize all parameters (peak current, duty cycle,
frequency, pulse shape, etc.). In his work Pearson
[130] explores the benefits and the limits of the PC
electrodeposition technique. He asserts that very
low duty cycles are not feasible, because in order
to produce the same average deposition rate as for
DC, as duty cycle is reduced the pulse peak cur-
rent needs to be increased. In practical applications,
too high peak current densities are seldom viable
due to limitations of rectifiers capacities. On the
other hand, as duty cycle is increased the process
begins to approach direct current deposition, thus
a compromise must be made. When it comes to
the frequency, practical maximum frequency which
can be applied is limited by the capacitance of the
double layer at the interface between the plating
electrolyte and the article being plated. If the fre-
quency is very high, the double layer does not have
enough time to fully charge during the pulse and

22


the process begins to resemble DC deposition [130].
Maximum useful frequency is around 500 Hz for
most applications. However, higher frequencies
can be used where very high peak current densities
are employed because the double layer charge and
discharge times become shorter as the peak current
density is increased.
In pulse reversed current technique (PRC) an-
odic pulse is introduced into the plating cycle. PRC
has the same effect of replenishing the diffusion
layer as PC does. It results in dissolution of the
protrusions on the metal surface ensuring a more
uniform deposition through elimination of the dis-
crepancies between high and low current density
areas and increases coating thickness uniformity
[129]. PRC plated amorphous Ni-P deposits are
reported to exhibit better ductility owing to the ab-
sence of voids and to consist of layers with different
amorphous structures [132].
It has been reported that the application of PC
deposition results in the increase in limiting current
density [129]. However according to Pearson [130]
total thickness of the diffusion layer is equivalent
to that obtained when plating in DC regime, owing
to this the use of PC has very little effect on the
limiting current density.
In Ni electrodeposition, pulse plating is exten-
sively employed and studied [133–135]. Pavlatou
et al. [69] investigated the use of pulse current in or-
der to interrupt the columnar growth of the nickel
grains and to produce more compact and thus more
corrosion resistant coatings.
In Ni-P electroplating, pulse plating also pos-
sesses several advantages over DC plating. Lin and
coworkers [4] studied Ni-P alloy deposition in a
PC regime from a sulfamate bath. They established
that compared with DC plating, current efficiency
associated with high phosphorus content deposits
can be improved by applying pulse current having
low duty cycle, high frequency, and proper peak
current density. It was demonstrated that after ap-
plying the same total charge associated with DC
and PC waveforms of different duty cycles, a more
uniform concentration profile is maintained for PC
than for DC deposition, particularly with the PC
having small duty cycles. By employing 0.1 duty
cycle with frequencies exceeding 100 Hz deposits
with 14 wt.% of P were plated with an efficiency of
around 80%. Low duty cycles and high frequencies
are beneficial in terms of maintaining more stable
surface proton concentration distribution inhibit-
ing alloy composition modulations induced by pH

value variations. Additionally, unlike DC-plated
Ni-P deposits that might become amorphous when
their phosphorus content exceeds a critical value,
pulse-plated deposit with 14 wt.% phosphorus still
consisted of equiaxed crystalline grains. This is in
agreement with the study done by Chen et al. [65]
who concluded that a reduction in duty cycle from
0.5 to 0.1 simultaneously increases phosphorus con-
tent and grain size of the deposits. They found that
Ni-P deposits with high P content can be achieved
with high current efficiencies by employing pulse
plating and that the obtained deposits exhibit lower
internal stress than the DC-plated coatings. Pulse-
plated deposits were also consistently harder than
the DC-plated ones.

Figure 12: Deposit phosphorus content as a function of the peak
current density, pulse frequency, and duty cycle. Reprinted with
permission from [4]. Copyright (2006) Electrochemical Society,
Inc.

Figure 13: Dependence of current efficiency on the deposit phos-
phorus content. Reprinted with permission from [4]. Copyright
(2006) Electrochemical Society, Inc.

23


7
Compositionally
modulated
Ni-P electrodeposits

In DC plating ways of improving deposit properties
include microstructure manipulation by varying de-
position conditions or alloying in which case a two-
component deposit is formulated by employing an
appropriate bath formulation. However, techno-
logical development imposes the demand for coat-
ings that combine favourable properties of different
metals, a task unachievable solely by employing in-
dividual components neither their resultant alloys.
In this case compositionally modulated (function-
ally graded or multi-layered) coatings present them
selves as a remarkable opportunity owing to the
possibility of engineering coatings fitting a wide
range of requirements in terms of functional prop-
erties.
In nickel electroplating, production of multi-
layer coatings consisting of films of bright and semi
bright nickel (60-75% of the total nickel thickness)
is traditionally employed to improve deposits’ cor-
rosion resistance. Preferential corrosion in the elec-
trochemically more active upper bright nickel layer
and propagation of the corrosion in the lamellar
direction protects the columnar lower layer of semi-
bright nickel through retarded pitting attack pene-
tration [57].
In the number of applications including the use
of coatings for thermal, wear or corrosion protec-
tion and microelectronics, the mismatch in prop-
erties at the interface between the coating and the
substrate can cause stress concentration that could
result in the failure of the interface. Employing
functionally graded materials (FGMs) [136–138]
which are characterized by a position-dependent
chemical composition, microstructure or atomic or-
der [15] and by a subtle gradient of their proper-
ties along the coating thickness is reported to help
in reducing the stress usually incurred due to the
abrupt composition change when going from sub-
strate toward deposit and decreasing the danger of
its delamination.
A non-uniform, graded [14] or layered distribu-
tion [139, 140] relative to the phosphorus content
along the coating thickness or a grain size gradi-
ent [141, 142] are deemed to be beneficial also for
imparting favourable properties to Ni-P deposits.
Phosphorus content in Ni-P electrodeposits in-
herently varies with layer thickness. pH at the
electrode-solution interface rises concomitantly
with the discharge of hydrogen. After escape of

a cohort of hydrogen bubbles from the cathode
resultant enhanced convection increases the interfa-
cial proton concentration. Interfacial pH variations
cause the variations in the deposit phosphorus con-
tent as electroplating continues [97]. Crousier et al.
[29, 143] confirmed that Ni-P electrodeposits con-
sist alternately of layers having varying phospho-
rus contents. Sadeghi [21] observed that the forma-
tion of layers with different phosphorus amounts
occurs more readily for alloys with low or medium
phosphorus content and at higher current densi-
ties. A homogeneous deposit can be fabricated and
stratification avoided by enhancing mass transport
to the cathode surface or by employing pulse plat-
ing [97]. Additionally, oscillations in pH value are
damped out as coating grows in thickness and elec-
troplating continues [17]. However variations in
phosphorus content can be sometimes intentionally
induced in order to produce composition modula-
tion in fabricated Ni-P electrodeposits. With careful
optimization this approach can result in a signifi-
cant improvement of features when compared to
conventional homogeneous Ni-P electrodeposits.
Layered crystalline/amorphous Ni-P alloys are for
example reported to exhibit higher tensile strength,
moduli of elasticity and improved corrosion resis-
tance [143].
It is known that Ni-P deposits with low phos-
phorus content exhibit high hardness and good
wear resistance but poor corrosion resistance, con-
versely high phosphorus coatings exhibit good cor-
rosion resistance but poor mechanical properties.
Developing multilayer coatings can be an effective
way to obtain deposits characterized by both op-
timal mechanical and electrochemical properties.
For example, a duplex coating with an outer layer
having a low phosphorus content and an inner
layer with high phosphorus content is a good way
to ensure corrosion stability in the contact with
surrounding environment and in the same time
favourable mechanical properties [98].
Techniques in order to produce layered Ni-P
electrodeposits include either using two baths with
different phosphorus source contents or a single
electroplating bath in which case electrochemical
methods are employed in order to achieve compo-
sition modulation (changing cathodic current or
potential).
In the dual-bath electrodeposition technique,
the item to be electroplated is moved between two
plating baths of arbitrary composition and a layer
is plated from each electrolyte in cycles. First multi-

24


Figure 14: Diagram showing the mechanism of increased corrosion protection in the case of multilayer Ni-P coating (left), compared
to monolayer Ni-P coating (right). It demonstrates that the time required for the corroding medium to reach the substrate by
penetrating through the multilayer coating (T1) is much greater than that for the monolayer coating (T2). Reprinted with permission
from [147]. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.

layer deposition by employing dual bath technique
was reported by Blum for Ni(24 µm)/Cu(24 µm)
as early as 1921 [144]. This approach is mechani-
cally complex compared to the single-bath method
and carries a risk of contamination during the sub-
strate transfer [83]. Historically, first realization
of single-bath electrodeposition was reported by
Brenner and Pommer in 1948 who produced mul-
tilayered coatings CuBi(∼µm)/BiCu(∼µm) by al-
ternately switching the deposition current between
low and high value [145]. Single bath method is
efficient, versatile and technologically simple. A
review of both dual-bath and single-bath electrode-
position methods is compiled by Ross [146].
When
employing
single
bath
deposition
method pulsed current is a useful tool to achieve
the desired composition modulation. Early attempt
with two-pulse plating was reported by Girard
[148] for the electrodeposition of permalloy films
with a composition as close as possible to the zero-
magnetostriction (Ni81Fe19) ensuring the smallest
magnetic coercive force.
In the realm of compositionally modulated Ni-
P electrodeposits, Goldman and coworkers [86]
demonstrated a method to fabricate Ni/Ni-P films,
with wavelengths between 2.1 and 4.0 nm and an
average phosphorus content around 12 at.%, by
alternating electrodeposition in two baths of dif-
ferent composition. Ross et al. [83] revealed a
dual bath electrodeposition technique for the pro-
duction of thin-film metal multilayers in which
substrate was suspended above nozzles of elec-
trolyte and rotated by a motor. Specific steps were

taken, including washing and drying the substrate
with N2, in order to mitigate problems related to
cross-contamination between electrolytes. Multi-
layered films of Ni/NiPx, NiPx/NiPy, Cu/Ni, and
Co/NiPx were fabricated with a range of repeated
lengths. Ni/NiPx and NiPx/NiPy multilayers ex-
hibited the highest quality, with repeat lengths as
low as 19 Å and up to three orders of reflection
in low angle X-ray scans. NiPx/NiPy multilayers
were fabricated over a wide range of compositions
and with crystalline or amorphous structure. Prob-
lems were encountered with other compositions,
in case of Cu/Ni and Cu/Co systems due to gal-
vanic coupling as well as contamination and in case
of Co/Ni-P owing to non-uniformity of Co nucle-
ation.
Wang et al. [14] described electrodeposition and
investigated properties of Ni-P deposits having a
varying phosphorus content in the direction of the
coating thickness. Single bath method was applied
and composition gradient was achieved through
varying current density (5-30 A dm−2). The wear re-
sistance of the fabricated Ni-P electrodeposits was
approximately two times grater than that of the
ungraded Ni-P deposits. Beneficial wear proper-
ties of the obtained deposits were attributed to the
inhibition of formation and propagation of through-
thickness cracks during the wear process owing to
their graded structure. Heat treated coatings ex-
hibited low friction coefficient and hardness that
was close to the one of hard Cr coatings. In an-
other study, Wang and colleagues [15] examined
corrosion resistance of the developed Ni-P gradi-

25


ent deposits and their tribological behaviour un-
der the oil-lubricated conditions. Deposits heat
treated at 400 ◦C exhibited two orders of magni-
tude better corrosion resistance than hard Cr coat-
ings (Figure 15). The best corrosion resistance was
found for deposits heat-treated at 200 ◦C, which
was attributed to the preserved amorphous struc-
ture and the stress relaxation at this temperature.
Heat-treated coatings exhibited relatively higher
wear rate and friction coefficients than hard Cr de-
posits under oil-lubricated wear conditions.

Figure 15: Potentiodynamic polarization curves obtained for
Ni-P graded deposits and hard Cr coatings, measured in 10 wt.%
HCl solution. Reprinted with permission from [15]. Copyright
(2006) Elsevier.

Elias et al. [147] fabricated multilayer Ni-P al-
loy coatings for better corrosion protection of mild
steel by employing cyclic modulation of the cath-
ode current density. Achieved improvement in the
corrosion protection of fabricated multilayer Ni-P
alloy coatings was attributed to the large number of
interfaces between layers of alloys having different
composition and phase structures, at which corro-
sion propagates laterally until the interface breaks
down (Figure 14). This mechanism systematically
slows down corrosion and improves the coatings
stability. Corrosion protection efficiency of multi-
layer coatings was found to increase with the num-
ber of layers, however only up to a certain point
(300 layers). At very high layer numbers corrosion
resistance deteriorated owing to the lack of distinct
interfaces between individual films (approaching a
monolayer structure). However, not only the num-
ber of layers but also their composition determined
the performance of fabricated deposits.
Multilayers of Ni-P with other metals or alloys
can be engineered also in order to ensure opti-
mal functional performance in demanding envi-
ronments.

Improved corrosion properties of multilayers
of Ni-P/Zn-Ni, when compared to pure Ni-P and
Zn-Ni alloys, was detected by Liu and colleagues
[149]. According to them, this was due to the cor-
rosion of the sacrificial sublayers of Zn-Ni which
extends in the direction parallel to the substrate
surface. Continued corrosion generation through
the subsequent sublayers overall slows down the
corrosion reaching the substrate and an eventual
material brake down. Bahadormanesh and Ghor-
bani [150] recently devised a single bath deposi-
tion method for electrodeposition of Ni-P/Zn-Ni
compositionally modulated multilayer coatings. At
low current densities Ni–P was deposited, while
at higher current densities Zn–Ni alloy containing
3.2 wt.% P was obtained. It was observed that
the Ni–P/Zn–Ni compositionally modulated multi-
layer coatings were sacrificial to the steel substrate.
Bozzini and colleagues [100] fabricated Ni-P
and Sn multilayer amorphous deposits (layer thick-
ness 0.1 µm to 0.5 µm) by employing a dual bath
electrodeposition technique in order to explore the
possibility of improving the Ni-P deposits passi-
vation behaviour. They investigated anodic be-
haviour of obtained coatings in acidic chloride so-
lution. Current densities at the passivation plateau,
were in the range of 2 µA cm−2 to 5 µA cm−2 for Ni-
P/Sn multi layers, in comparison to a passivation
current density of 45 µA cm−2 for Ni-P coatings
with similar phosphorus content. They found that
the present interfaces improve considerably the pas-
sivation behaviour provided that the incorporated
Sn layers are thin enough.

8
Conclusion

Ni-P protective coatings can be electrodeposited
with a wide range of crystallographic structures.
Deposits extending from fully crystalline to amor-
phous ones can be easily fabricated. Properties of
the obtained coatings very much depend on the
deposition conditions and their phosphorous con-
tent. Applied post treatment, such as alloy heating,
can bring significant improvement of its overall me-
chanical, tribological and electrochemical proper-
ties. Designing unconventional structures, such as
graded or multilayered ones, can also with proper
optimization give rise to substantial deposits’ char-
acteristics amelioration.
However, even though technology of Ni-P elec-
troplating is quite mature, there are still many un-
knowns and numerous issues still remain to be

26


addressed. Phosphorus incorporation mechanism
is still a matter of great disagreement. Factors influ-
encing phosphorus content of the deposit are many
and with the plethora of variables characterizing
Ni-P electroplating process and poor definition of
certain process parameters it is not easy to estab-
lish clearly the key influencers, manner and the
extent of their impact. Up-scaling of the electroplat-
ing procedure induces new process variables and
more attention in research needs to be bestowed
on feasibility study of method transferral to larger
scales and its robustness. Current density distri-
bution is a parameter that is often poorly defined.
Ageing of the electrolytic baths is not addressed in
many of the research works. Additionally, distin-
guishing between different Ni-P microstructures
and establishing a point of transition from one state
to another is still a matter of some difficulty.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the European Union’s
Horizon2020 research and innovation programme
SOLUTION, under grant agreement No. 721642.

References

[1]
G. E. TOTTEN and H. LIANG, eds. Surface modification
and mechanisms: friction, stress, and reaction engineering.
CRC Press, 2004, p. 800 (cit. on p. 1).

[2]
Y. QIN, ed. Micromanufacturing Engineering and
Technology, Second Edition. William Andrew Publishing,
2015, p. 858 (cit. on p. 1).

[3]
P. SIDKY and M. HOCKING. “Review of inorganic
coatings and coating processes for reducing wear and
corrosion”. In: British Corrosion Journal 34.3 (1999),
pp. 171–183. DOI: 10.1179/000705999101500815
(cit. on pp. 1, 2).

[4]
C. S. LIN, C. Y. LEE, F. J. CHEN, C. T. CHIEN, P. L. LIN,
and W. C. CHUNG. “Electrodeposition of
Nickel-Phosphorus Alloy from Sulfamate Baths with
Improved Current Efficiency”. In: Journal of The
Electrochemical Society 153.6 (2006), pp. C387–C392. DOI:
10.1149/1.2186798 (cit. on pp. 1, 3, 5, 10, 12, 13, 17,
23).

[5]
X. YUAN, D. SUN, H. YU, H. MENG, Z. FAN, and
X. WANG. “Preparation of amorphous-nanocrystalline
composite structured Ni-P electrodeposits”. In: Surface
and Coatings Technology 202.2 (2007), pp. 294–300. DOI:
10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.05.040 (cit. on pp. 1, 3, 6,
10, 14, 15, 17).

[6]
A. V. KNYAZEV, L. A. FISHGOIT, P. A. CHERNAVSKII,
V. A. SAFONOV, and S. E. FILIPPOVA. “Magnetic
properties of electrodeposited amorphous
nickel–phosphorus alloys”. In: Russian Journal of
Electrochemistry 53.3 (2017), pp. 270–274. DOI:
10.1134/S1023193517030090 (cit. on pp. 1, 19).

[7]
M. SCHLESINGER and M. PAUNOVIC, eds. Modern
Electroplating: Fifth Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2011.
DOI: 10.1002/9780470602638 (cit. on pp. 1, 2, 11, 12).

[8]
N. KANANI. Electroplating. Elsevier, 2004. DOI:
10.1016/B978-1-85617-451-0.X5000-3 (cit. on p. 1).

[9]
F. NASIRPOURI. Electrodeposition of Nanostructured
Materials. Springer, 2017, p. 325. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-44920-3 (cit. on p. 1).

[10]
L. P. BICELLI, B. BOZZINI, C. MELE, and L. D’URZO. “A
review of nanostructural aspects of metal
electrodeposition”. In: International Journal of
Electrochemical Science 3.4 (2008), pp. 356–408. DOI:
10.1.1.655.5201 (cit. on pp. 1, 14, 18).

[11]
M. LIPPMANN. Environmental Toxicants: Human
Exposures and Their Health Effects: Third Edition. Ed. by
M. LIPPMANN. John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2009, p. 1168.
DOI: 10.1002/9780470442890 (cit. on p. 2).

[12]
The RoHS Directive. URL: http://ec.europa.eu/envir
onment/waste/rohs_eee/index_en.htm (cit. on p. 2).

[13]
C. MA, S. C. WANG, L. P. WANG, F. C. WALSH, and
R. J. WOOD. “The electrodeposition and characterisation
of low-friction and wear-resistant Co-Ni-P coatings”. In:
Surface and Coatings Technology 235 (2013), pp. 495–505.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2013.08.009 (cit. on p. 2).

[14]
L. WANG, Y. GAO, Q. XUE, H. LIU, and T. XU. “A novel
electrodeposited Ni-P gradient deposit for replacement
of conventional hard chromium”. In: Surface and
Coatings Technology 200.12-13 (2006), pp. 3719–3726. DOI:
10.1016/j.surfcoat.2004.10.016 (cit. on pp. 2, 17,
24, 25).

[15]
L. WANG, Y. GAO, T. XU, and Q. XUE. “Corrosion
resistance and lubricated sliding wear behaviour of
novel Ni-P graded alloys as an alternative to hard Cr
deposits”. In: Applied Surface Science 252.20 (2006),
pp. 7361–7372. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2005.08.040
(cit. on pp. 2, 17, 24–26).

[16]
X. ZHANG, J. QIN, M. K. DAS, R. HAO, H. ZHONG,
A. THUEPLOY, S. LIMPANART,
Y. BOONYONGMANEERAT, M. MA, and R. LIU.
“Co-electrodeposition of hard Ni-W/diamond
nanocomposite coatings”. In: Scientific Reports
6.November 2014 (2016), pp. 1–11. DOI:
10.1038/srep22285 (cit. on p. 2).

[17]
B. P. DALY and F. J. BARRY. “Electrochemical nickel –
phosphorus alloy formation”. In: International Materials
Reviews 48.5 (2003), pp. 326–338. DOI:
10.1179/095066003225008482 (cit. on pp. 2–4, 12, 13,
17, 18, 24).

[18]
O. BERKH and J. ZAHAVI. “Electrodeposition and
properties of Ni-P alloys and their composites-A
literature survey”. In: Corrosion Reviews 14.3-4 (1996),
pp. 323–342. DOI: 10.1515/CORRREV.1996.14.3-4.323
(cit. on pp. 2, 3, 6, 12, 17, 21).

27


[19]
R. F. DALLA COSTA, C. W. KLEIN, A. M. BERNARDES,
J. Z. FERREIRA, and J. ZOPPAS FERREIRA. “Evaluation
of the electrodialysis process for the treatment of metal
finishing wastewater”. In: Journal of the Brazilian
Chemical Society 13.4 (2002), pp. 540–547. DOI:
10.1590/S0103-50532002000400021 (cit. on p. 2).

[20]
D. NAVA, C. E. DÁVALOS, A. MARTÍNEZ-HERNÁNDEZ,
F. MANRÍQUEZ, Y. MEAS, R. ORTEGA-BORGES,
J. J. PÉREZ-BUENO, and G. TREJO. “Effects of heat
treatment on the tribological and corrosion properties
of electrodeposited Ni-P alloys”. In: International Journal
of Electrochemical Science 8.2 (2013), pp. 2670–2681
(cit. on pp. 2, 11, 17, 19, 21).

[21]
A. SADEGHI. “Microstructure evolution and
strengthening mechanism in Ni-based composite
coatings”. PhD thesis. Technische Universität Chemnitz,
2016, p. 128 (cit. on pp. 2, 16, 18, 24).

[22]
T. W. SCHARF and S. V. PRASAD. “Solid lubricants: A
review”. In: Journal of Materials Science 48.2 (2013),
pp. 511–531. DOI: 10.1007/s10853-012-7038-2
(cit. on p. 2).

[23]
J. W. DINI. “Properties of coatings: Comparisons of
electroplated, physical vapor deposited, chemical vapor
deposited, and plasma sprayed coatings”. In: Materials
and Manufacturing Processes 12.3 (1997), pp. 437–472.
DOI: 10.1080/10426919708935157 (cit. on p. 2).

[24]
L. SHI, C. SUN, and W. LIU. “Electrodeposited
nickel-cobalt composite coating containing MoS2”. In:
Applied Surface Science 254.21 (2008), pp. 6880–6885. DOI:
10.1016/j.apsusc.2008.04.089 (cit. on p. 3).

[25]
D. A. LUKE. “Nickel-phosphorus electrodeposits”. In:
Transactions of the IMF 64.1 (1986), pp. 99–104. DOI:
10.1080/00202967.1986.11870744 (cit. on pp. 3, 12).

[26]
KANANI.N. Electroplating-Basic Principles, Processes and
Practice. Elsevier Science, 2005, p. 353 (cit. on p. 3).

[27]
Electroplating Market:Global Industry Analysis and
Opportunity Assessment, 2016-2026. URL:
https://www.futuremarketinsights.com/reports
/electroplating-market (cit. on p. 3).

[28]
A. BRENNER. Electrodeposition of Alloys: Principles and
Practice. Vol. 1. Academic Press, 1963, p. 734. DOI:
10.1016/B978-1-4831-9807-1.50001-5 (cit. on pp. 3,
7, 14).

[29]
J. CROUSIER, Z. HANANE, and J.-P. CROUSIER.
“Electrodeposition of NiP amorphous alloys. A
multilayer structure”. In: Thin Solid Films 248.1 (1994),
pp. 51–56. DOI: 10.1016/0040-6090(94)90210-0
(cit. on pp. 4, 24).

[30]
N. FEDOTEV and P. VYACHESLAVOV. In: Tr. Leningr.
Tekhnol. Inst. im. Lensoveta 53 (1959), p. 30 (cit. on p. 4).

[31]
M. RATZKER, D. S. LASHMORE, and K. W. PRATT.
“Electrodeposition and corrosion performance of
nickel-phosphorus amorphous alloys”. In: Plating And
Surface Finishing 73.9 (1986), pp. 74–82 (cit. on p. 4).

[32]
R. L. ZELLER and U. LANDAU. “Electrodeposition of
Ni-P amorphous alloys - Observations supporting the
indirect mechanism of phosphorus incorporation”. In:
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 139.12 (1992),
pp. 3464–3469. DOI: 10.1149/1.2069100 (cit. on p. 4).

[33]
T. M. HARRIS and Q. D. DANG. “the Mechanism of
Phosphorus Incorporation During the Electrodeposition
of Nickel-Phosphorus Alloys”. In: Journal of the
Electrochemical Society 140.1 (1993), pp. 81–83. DOI:
10.1149/1.2056114 (cit. on p. 4).

[34]
M. SAITOU, Y. OKUDAIRA, and W. OSHIKAWA.
“Amorphous Structures and Kinetics of Phosphorous
Incorporation in Electrodeposited Ni-P Thin Films”. In:
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 150.3 (2003),
pp. C140–C143. DOI: 10.1149/1.1545459 (cit. on p. 4).

[35]
A. P. ORDINE, S. L. DÍAZ, I. C. P. MARGARIT,
O. E. BARCIA, and O. R. MATTOS. “Electrochemical
study on Ni-P electrodeposition”. In: Electrochimica Acta
51.8-9 (2006), pp. 1480–1486. DOI:
10.1016/j.electacta.2005.02.129 (cit. on pp. 4, 5).

[36]
Y. ZENG and S. ZHOU. “In situ surface Raman study of
the phosphorus incorporation mechanism during
electrodeposition of Ni-P alloys”. In: Journal of
Electroanalytical Chemistry 469.1 (1999), pp. 79–83. DOI:
10.1016/S0022-0728(99)00179-5 (cit. on pp. 4, 5).

[37]
T. MORIKAWA, T. NAKADE, M. YOKOI, Y. FUKUMOTO,
and C. IWAKURA. “Electrodeposition of Ni-P alloys
from Ni-citrate bath”. In: Electrochimica Acta 42.1 (1997),
pp. 115–118. DOI: 10.1016/0013-4686(96)00173-9
(cit. on pp. 4, 7, 9, 12).

[38]
N. V. SOTSKAYA and O. V. DOLGIKH. “Kinetics of
cathodic reduction of hypophosphite anions in aqueous
solutions”. In: Russian Journal of Electrochemistry 41.12
(2005), pp. 1336–1340. DOI:
10.1007/s11175-005-0223-8 (cit. on p. 5).

[39]
O. SAVCHUK, Y. SKNAR, I. SKNAR, A. CHEREMYSINOVA,
and Y. KOZLOV. “Examining the effect of
electrosynthesis conditions on the Ni-P alloy
composition”. In: Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise
Technologies 4.6 (88) (2017), pp. 41–46. DOI:
10.15587/1729-4061.2017.106900 (cit. on pp. 5, 6).

[40]
E. BREDAEL, J. CELIS, and J. ROOS. “NiP
electrodeposition on a rotating-disc electrode and in a
jet cell: relationship between plating parameters and
structural characteristics”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 58.1 (1993), pp. 63–71. DOI:
10.1016/0257-8972(93)90175-N (cit. on pp. 5, 9, 12,
13, 16).

[41]
O. P. WATTS. In: Trans. Am. Electrochem. Soc. 29 (1916),
pp. 395–403 (cit. on p. 5).

[42]
C. C. HU and A. BAI. “Composition control of
electroplated nickel-phosphorus deposits”. In: Surface
and Coatings Technology 137.2-3 (2001), pp. 181–187. DOI:
10.1016/S0257-8972(00)01117-8 (cit. on pp. 5, 10, 15,
16).

[43]
N. SPYRELLIS, E. A. PAVLATOU, S. SPANOU, and
A. ZOIKIS-KARATHANASIS. “Nickel and
nickel-phosphorous matrix composite electrocoatings”.
In: Transactions of Nonferrous Metals Society of China 19.4
(2009), pp. 800–804. DOI:
10.1016/S1003-6326(08)60353-2 (cit. on pp. 5, 21).

[44]
M. DADVAND, N. DADVAND, and G. J. KIPOUROS.
“Electrodeposition of nickel-phosphorus from a highly
conductive citrate bath for wire bonding applications”.
In: Canadian Metallurgical Quarterly 55.1 (2016), pp. 1–12.
DOI: 10.1179/1879139515Y.0000000029 (cit. on
pp. 5–8, 20).

28


[45]
S. WANG, N. ZHOU, and F. C. WALSH. “Diverse
electrodeposits from modified acid sulphate (Watts
nickel) baths”. In: Transactions of the IMF 94.5 (2016),
pp. 274–282. DOI: 10.1080/00202967.2016.1208383
(cit. on p. 5).

[46]
G. A. DI BARI. “Electrodeposition of Nickel”. In: Modern
Electroplating. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2011, pp. 79–114.
DOI: 10.1002/9780470602638.ch3 (cit. on pp. 5, 6, 18).

[47]
D. BAUDRAND. “Nickel sulfamate plating, its mystique
and practicality”. In: Metal Finishing 94.7 (1996),
pp. 15–18. DOI: 10.1016/0026-0576(96)81353-5
(cit. on pp. 5, 6, 18).

[48]
M. H. SEO, J. S. KIM, W. S. HWANG, D. J. KIM,
S. S. HWANG, and B. S. CHUN. “Characteristics of Ni-P
alloy electrodeposited from a sulfamate bath”. In:
Surface and Coatings Technology 176.2 (2004), pp. 135–140.
DOI: 10.1016/S0257-8972(03)00661-3 (cit. on pp. 5,
7, 12).

[49]
N. MARTYAK. Electroplating of low-stress nickel. CA
Patent 2236933 A1. Dec. 1998 (cit. on p. 6).

[50]
Y. E. SKNAR, O. SAVCHUK, and I. SKNAR.
“Characteristics of electrodeposition of Ni and Ni-P
alloys from methanesulfonate electrolytes”. In: Applied
Surface Science 423 (2017), pp. 340–348. DOI:
10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.06.146 (cit. on pp. 6, 11).

[51]
F. C. WALSH and C. PONCE DE LEÓN. “Versatile
electrochemical coatings and surface layers from
aqueous methanesulfonic acid”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 259.PC (2014), pp. 676–697. DOI:
10.1016/j.surfcoat.2014.10.010 (cit. on p. 6).

[52]
M. D. GERNON, M. WU, T. BUSZTA, and P. JANNEY.
“Environmental benefits of methanesulfonic acid”. In:
Green Chemistry 1.3 (1999), pp. 127–140. DOI:
10.1039/a900157c (cit. on p. 6).

[53]
B. MACDOUGALL. “Effect of Chloride Ion on the
Localized Breakdown of Nickel Oxide Films”. In:
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 126.6 (1979),
pp. 919–925. DOI: 10.1149/1.2129194 (cit. on p. 6).

[54]
E. ABD EL AAL, W. ZAKRIA, A. DIAB, and S. ABD EL
HALEEM. “Anodic Dissolution of Nickel in Acidic
Chloride Solutions”. In: Journal of Materials Engineering
and Performance 12.2 (2003), pp. 172–178. DOI:
10.1361/105994903770343312 (cit. on p. 6).

[55]
D. MOCKUTE, R. BUTKIENE, and O. NIVINSKIENE.
“Effect of chloride ions on the behavior of saccharin,
N-methylsaccharin, and 2-butyne-1,4-diol during
electrodeposition of nickel from acid electrolytes”. In:
Russian Journal of Electrochemistry 37.4 (2001),
pp. 376–381. DOI: 10.1023/A:1016673922524 (cit. on
p. 6).

[56]
E. DÁVALOS, R. LÓPEZ, H. RUIZ, A. MÉNDEZ,
R. ANTAÑO-LÓPEZ, and G. TREJO. “Study of the role of
boric acid during the electrochemical deposition of Ni
in a sulfamate bath”. In: International Journal of
Electrochemical Science 8.7 (2013), pp. 9785–9800 (cit. on
p. 6).

[57]
I. ROSE and C. WHITTINGTON. Nickel plating handbook.
Tech. rep. Nickel Institute, 2014 (cit. on pp. 6, 24).

[58]
J. JI, W. C. COOPER, D. B. DREISINGER, and E. PETERS.
“Surface pH measurements during nickel
electrodeposition”. In: Journal of Applied Electrochemistry
25.7 (1995), pp. 642–650. DOI: 10.1007/BF00241925
(cit. on p. 6).

[59]
Y. TAKUMA, H. SUGIMORI, E. ANDO, K. MIZUMOTO,
and K. TAHARA. “Comparison of the environmental
impact of the conventional nickel electroplating and the
new nickel electroplating”. In: International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment (2017), pp. 1–15. DOI:
10.1007/s11367-017-1375-y (cit. on pp. 6, 7).

[60]
T. DOI, K. MIZUMOTO, M. KAYASHIMA, and
S.-i. TANAKA. “Nickel Electroplating Bath Using Citric
Acid.” In: Journal of the Surface Finishing Society of Japan
52.6 (2001), pp. 462–466. DOI: 10.4139/sfj.52.462
(cit. on p. 7).

[61]
T. DOI, K. MIZUMOTO, S. TANAKA, and T. YAMASHITA.
“Effect of bath pH on Nickel Citrate electroplating bath”.
In: Metal Finishing 102.6 (2004), pp. 104–111. DOI:
10.1016/S0026-0576(04)82610-2 (cit. on p. 7).

[62]
A. BRENNER, D. COUCH, and E. WILLIAMS.
“Electrodeposition of Alloys of Phosphorous with
Nickel or Cobalt”. In: Journal of Research of the National
Bureau of Standards 44 (1950), pp. 109–122 (cit. on pp. 7,
8).

[63]
A. M. PILLAI, A. RAJENDRA, and A. K. SHARMA.
“Electrodeposited nickel-phosphorous (Ni-P) alloy
coating: an in-depth study of its preparation, properties,
and structural transitions”. In: Journal of Coatings
Technology and Research 9.6 (2012), pp. 785–797. DOI:
10.1007/s11998-012-9411-0 (cit. on pp. 7, 11–13, 16,
17, 21).

[64]
C. LOW and F. WALSH. “Multifunctional
nanostructured metallic coatings by electrodeposition”.
In: Multifunctional Materials for Tribological Applications.
Ed. by R. J. K. WOOD. Vol. 4. Pan Stanford, 2015.
Chap. 7, pp. 227–258. DOI: 10.1201/b18311-8 (cit. on
pp. 8, 14, 18, 22).

[65]
F. J. CHEN, Y. N. PAN, C. Y. LEE, and C. S. LIN. “Internal
Stress Control of Nickel-Phosphorus Electrodeposits
Using Pulse Currents”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical
Society 157.3 (2010), pp. D154–D158. DOI:
10.1149/1.3285108 (cit. on pp. 8, 10, 18, 23).

[66]
T. OSAKA, M. TAKAI, Y. SOGAWA, T. MOMMA, and
K. OHASHI. “Influence of Crystalline Structure and
Sulfur Inclusion on Corrosion Properties of
Electrodeposited CoNiFe Soft Magnetic Films”. In:
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 146.6 (1999),
pp. 2092–2096. DOI: 10.1149/1.1391896 (cit. on pp. 8,
18).

[67]
W. E. HANSAL, G. SANDULACHE, R. MANN, and
P. LEISNER. “Pulse-electrodeposited NiP-SiC composite
coatings”. In: Electrochimica Acta 114 (2013), pp. 851–858.
DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2013.08.182 (cit. on
pp. 8, 17).

[68]
A. ZOIKIS-KARATHANASIS,
T. MILICKOVIC-KOSANOVIC, and I. DELIGKIOZI.
“Effect of organic additives in the structure and
functional properties of Ni-P composite coatings
reinforced by nano-SiC and MWCNT”. In: 10th
Pan-Hellenic Scientific Congress of Chemical Engineering,
Patra. 2015 (cit. on pp. 8, 12, 17).

29


[69]
E. A. PAVLATOU, M. STROUMBOULI, P. GYFTOU, and
N. SPYRELLIS. “Hardening effect induced by
incorporation of SiC particles in nickel electrodeposits”.
In: Journal of Applied Electrochemistry 36.4 (2006),
pp. 385–394. DOI: 10.1007/s10800-005-9082-y
(cit. on pp. 8, 23).

[70]
Y. YOU, C. GU, X. WANG, and J. TU. “Electrochemical
Synthesis and Characterization of Ni-P Alloy Coatings
from Eutectic-Based Ionic Liquid”. In: Journal of the
Electrochemical Society 159.11 (2012), pp. D642–D648.
DOI: 10.1149/2.012211jes (cit. on p. 8).

[71]
K. NEUROHR, L. POGANY, B. G. TOTH, A. REVESZ,
I. BAKONYI, and L. PETER. “Electrodeposition of Ni
from Various Non-Aqueous Media: The Case of
Alcoholic Solutions”. In: Journal of the Electrochemical
Society 162.7 (2015), pp. D256–D264. DOI:
10.1149/2.0381507jes (cit. on p. 8).

[72]
L. DURNEY. Electroplating Engineering Handbook. 1st ed.
Springer US, 1984, pp. 441–447 (cit. on p. 9).

[73]
R. NARAYAN and M. MUNGOLE. “Electrodeposition of
Ni-P alloy coatings”. In: Surface Technology 24.3 (1985),
pp. 233–239. DOI: 10.1016/0376-4583(85)90073-1
(cit. on pp. 9, 12, 16).

[74]
C.-c. HU and A. BAI. “Influences of the phosphorus
content on physicochemical properties of
nickel-phosphorus deposits”. In: Materials Chemistry and
Physics 77.1 (2003), pp. 215–225. DOI:
10.1016/S0254-0584(01)00592-2 (cit. on pp. 10, 15,
19, 20).

[75]
A. KUROWSKI, J. SCHULTZE, and G. STAIKOV. “Initial
stages of Ni-P electrodeposition: growth morphology
and composition of deposits”. In: Electrochemistry
Communications 4.7 (2002), pp. 565–569. DOI:
10.1016/S1388-2481(02)00372-7 (cit. on p. 10).

[76]
L. LI, Y. ZHANG, S. DENG, and Y. CHEN. “Effect of
ammonium on low-temperature electrodeposition of
Ni-P alloys”. In: Materials Letters 57.22-23 (2003),
pp. 3444–3448. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-577X(03)00097-1
(cit. on pp. 10, 12, 20).

[77]
D. H. JEONG, U. ERB, K. T. AUST, and G. PALUMBO.
“The relationship between hardness and abrasive wear
resistance of electrodeposited nanocrystalline Ni-P
coatings”. In: Scripta Materialia 48.8 (2003),
pp. 1067–1072. DOI: 10.1016/S1359-6462(02)00633-4
(cit. on pp. 10, 13, 21).

[78]
L. CHANG, C.-H. CHEN, and H. FANG.
“Electrodeposition of Ni-P Alloys From a Sulfamate
Electrolyte Relationship Between Bath pH and
Structural Characteristics”. In: Journal of The
Electrochemical Society 155.1 (2008), pp. D57–D61. DOI:
10.1149/1.2803516 (cit. on pp. 10, 14).

[79]
S. ALLEG, A. BOUSSAHA, W. TEBIB, M. ZERGOUG, and
J. J. SU ˇNOL. “Microstructure and Magnetic Properties of
NiP Alloys”. In: Journal of Superconductivity and Novel
Magnetism 29.4 (2016), pp. 1001–1011. DOI:
10.1007/s10948-016-3397-2 (cit. on pp. 11, 13, 14).

[80]
H. YOSHIDA, M. SONE, A. MIZUSHIMA, K. ABE,
X. T. TAO, S. ICHIHARA, and S. MIYATA. “Electroplating
of Nanostructured Nickel in Emulsion of Supercritical
Carbon Dioxide in Electrolyte Solution”. In: Chemistry
Letters 31.11 (2002), pp. 1086–1087. DOI:
10.1246/cl.2002.1086 (cit. on p. 8).

[81]
H. YOSHIDA, M. SONE, A. MIZUSHIMA, H. YAN,
H. WAKABAYASHI, K. ABE, X. T. TAO, S. ICHIHARA, and
S. MIYATA. “Application of emulsion of dense carbon
dioxide in electroplating solution with nonionic
surfactants for nickel electroplating”. In: Surface and
Coatings Technology 173.2-3 (2003), pp. 285–292. DOI:
10.1016/S0257-8972(03)00734-5 (cit. on p. 8).

[82]
Y.-C. CHUANG, S.-T. CHUNG, S.-Y. CHIU, C.-Y. LI, and
W.-T. TSAI. “Effect of surfactant on the electrodeposition
of Ni-P coating in emulsified supercritical CO2 baths”.
In: Thin Solid Films 529 (2013), pp. 322–326. DOI:
10.1016/j.tsf.2012.05.039 (cit. on p. 8).

[83]
C. A. ROSS, L. M. GOLDMAN, and F. SPAEPEN. “An
Electrodeposition Technique for Producing Multilayers
of Nickel-Phosphorus and Other Alloys”. In: Journal of
the Electrochemical Society 140.1 (1993), pp. 91–98. DOI:
10.1149/1.2056116 (cit. on pp. 12, 25).

[84]
C. LOW, R. WILLS, and F. WALSH. “Electrodeposition of
composite coatings containing nanoparticles in a metal
deposit”. In: Surface and Coatings Technology 201.1-2
(2006), pp. 371–383. DOI:
10.1016/j.surfcoat.2005.11.123 (cit. on p. 12).

[85]
E. TOTH-KADAR, I. BAKONYI, A. SOLYOM, J. HERING,
G. KONCZOS, and F. PAVLYAK. “Preparation and
characterization of electrodeposited amorphous Ni-P
alloys”. In: Surface and Coatings Technology 31.1 (1987),
pp. 31–43. DOI: 10.1016/0257-8972(87)90151-4
(cit. on p. 12).

[86]
L. M. GOLDMAN, B. BLANPAIN, and F. SPAEPEN. “Short
wavelength compositionally modulated Ni/Ni-P films
prepared by electrodeposition”. In: Journal of Applied
Physics 60.4 (1986), pp. 1374–1376. DOI:
10.1063/1.337313 (cit. on pp. 12, 25).

[87]
G. A. DI BARI. “Nickel plating”. In: Metal Finishing 99
(2001), pp. 270–288. DOI:
10.1016/S0026-0576(01)85285-5 (cit. on p. 12).

[88]
I. APACHITEI and J. DUSZCZYK. “Autocatalytic nickel
coatings on aluminium with improved abrasive wear
resistance”. In: Surface and Coatings Technology 132.1
(2000), pp. 89–98. DOI:
10.1016/S0257-8972(00)00864-1 (cit. on pp. 12, 14).

[89]
E. BREDAEL, B. BLANPAIN, J. P. CELIS, and J. R. ROOS.
“On the Amorphous and Crystalline State of
Electrodeposited Nickel-Phosphorus Coatings”. In:
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 141.1 (1994),
pp. 294–299. DOI: 10.1149/1.2054703 (cit. on p. 13).

[90]
E. VAFAEI-MAKHSOOS, E. L. THOMAS, and L. E. TOTH.
“Electron microscopy of crystalline and amorphous
Ni-P electrodeposited films: In-situ crystallization of an
amorphous solid”. In: Metallurgical Transactions A 9.10
(1978), pp. 1449–1460. DOI: 10.1007/BF02661817
(cit. on p. 14).

[91]
F. ZHAOHENG. “Electrodeposition of amorphous Ni-P
alloy coatings”. In: Transactions of Nonferrous Metals
Society of China (English Edition) 7.3 (1997), pp. 148–151
(cit. on p. 14).

[92]
J. SCHIØTZ, T. VEGGE, F. D. DI TOLLA, and
K. W. JACOBSEN. “Atomic-scale simulations of the
mechanical deformation of nanocrystalline metals”. In:
Physical Review B 60.17 (1999), pp. 11971–11983. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevB.60.11971. arXiv: 9902165
[cond-mat] (cit. on p. 14).

30


[93]
G. PALUMBO, U. ERB, and K. AUST. “Triple line
disclination effects on the mechanical behaviour of
materials”. In: Scripta Metallurgica et Materialia 24.12
(1990), pp. 2347–2350. DOI:
10.1016/0956-716X(90)90091-T (cit. on p. 14).

[94]
D. JEONG, U. ERB, G. PALUMBO, and K. AUST. “Effect
of Heat Treatment on the Wear Properties of
Electrodeposited Nanocrystalline Ni-P Coatings”. In:
Journal of Metastable and Nanocrystalline Materials 15-16
(2003), pp. 635–642. DOI:
10.4028/www.scientific.net/JMNM.15-16.635
(cit. on p. 14).

[95]
I. GURRAPPA and L. BINDER. “Electrodeposition of
nanostructured coatings and their characterization-A
review”. In: Science and Technology of Advanced Materials
9.4 (2008), p. 043001. DOI:
10.1088/1468-6996/9/4/043001 (cit. on p. 14).

[96]
S. ACHANTA, D. DREES, and J. P. CELIS. “Nanocoatings
for tribological applications”. In: Nanocoatings and
Ultra-Thin Films: Technologies and Applications.
Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2011. Chap. 12,
pp. 355–396. DOI:
10.1016/B978-1-84569-812-6.50012-9 (cit. on
p. 14).

[97]
C. S. LIN, C. Y. LEE, F. J. CHEN, and W. C. LI.
“Structural Evolution and Internal Stress of
Nickel-Phosphorus Electrodeposits”. In: Journal of The
Electrochemical Society 152.6 (2005), p. C370. DOI:
10.1149/1.1901064 (cit. on pp. 14, 18, 24).

[98]
H. LUO, X. WANG, S. GAO, C. DONG, and X. LI.
“Synthesis of a duplex Ni-P-YSZ/Ni-P nanocomposite
coating and investigation of its performance”. In:
Surface and Coatings Technology 311 (2017), pp. 70–79.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2016.12.075 (cit. on pp. 17,
24).

[99]
J. DINI and H. JOHNSON. Plating on some difficult-to-plate
metals and alloys. Tech. rep. Albuquerque, NM, and
Livermore, CA (United States): Sandia National
Laboratories (SNL), 1980, p. 28. DOI: 10.2172/5472921
(cit. on p. 17).

[100]
B. BOZZINI, P. L. CAVALLOTTI, J.-P. CELIS, and
A. FANIGLIULO. “Anodic behaviour of amorphous
NiP/tin multilayers in an acidic chloride solution”. In:
Corrosion Science 45.6 (2003), pp. 1161–1171. DOI:
10.1016/S0010-938X(02)00221-4 (cit. on pp. 17, 26).

[101]
A. BAI, P.-Y. CHUANG, and C.-C. HU. “The corrosion
behavior of Ni-P deposits with high phosphorous
contents in brine media”. In: Materials Chemistry and
Physics 82.1 (2003), pp. 93–100. DOI:
10.1016/S0254-0584(03)00193-7 (cit. on p. 18).

[102]
S. J. SPLINTER, R. ROFAGHA, N. S. MCINTYRE, and
U. ERB. “XPS Characterization of the Corrosion Films
Formed on Nanocrystalline Ni-P Alloys in Sulphuric
Acid”. In: Surface and Interface Analysis 24.3 (1996),
pp. 181–186. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9918(199603
)24:3<181::AID-SIA92>3.0.CO;2-N (cit. on p. 18).

[103]
R. B. DIEGLE, N. R. SORENSEN, C. R. CLAYTON,
M. A. HELFAND, and Y. C. YU. “An XPS Investigation
into the Passivity of an Amorphous Ni-20P Alloy”. In:
Journal of the Electrochemical Society 135.5 (1988),
pp. 1085–1092. DOI: 10.1149/1.2095880 (cit. on p. 18).

[104]
A. KRÓLIKOWSKI and P. BUTKIEWICZ. “Anodic
behavior of NiP alloys studied by impedance
spectroscopy”. In: Electrochimica Acta 38.14 (1993),
pp. 1979–1983. DOI: 10.1016/0013-4686(93)80327-V
(cit. on p. 18).

[105]
J.-P. BONINO, S. BRUET-HOTELLAZ, C. BORIES,
P. POUDEROUX, and A. ROUSSET. “Thermal stability of
electrodeposited Ni-P alloys”. In: Journal of Applied
Electrochemistry 27.10 (1997), pp. 1193–1197. DOI:
10.1023/A:1018423701791 (cit. on pp. 18, 21).

[106]
I. BAKONYI, A. BURGSTALLER, W. SOCHER,
J. VOITLÄNDER, E. TÓTH-KÁDÁR, A. LOVAS, H. EBERT,
E. WACHTEL, N. WILLMANN, and H. H. LIEBERMANN.
“Magnetic properties of electrodeposited,
melt-quenched, and liquid Ni-P alloys”. In: Physical
Review B 47.22 (1993), pp. 14961–14976. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevB.47.14961 (cit. on pp. 18, 19).

[107]
P. A. ALBERT, Z. KOVAC, H. R. LILIENTHAL,
T. R. MCGUIRE, and Y. NAKAMURA. “Effect of
Phosphorus on the Magnetization of Nickel”. In: Journal
of Applied Physics 38.3 (1967), pp. 1258–1259. DOI:
10.1063/1.1709568 (cit. on p. 19).

[108]
B. D. CULLITY and C. D. GRAHAM. Introduction to
magnetic materials. Vol. 12. 3. IEEE/Wiley, 2009, p. 544.
arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3 (cit. on p. 19).

[109]
K. DHANAPAL, V. NARAYANAN, and A. STEPHEN.
“Effect of phosphorus on magnetic property of Ni-P
alloy synthesized using pulsed electrodeposition”. In:
Materials Chemistry and Physics 166 (2015), pp. 153–159.
DOI: 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2015.09.039 (cit. on
p. 19).

[110]
A. BAI and C.-C. HU. “Effects of annealing
temperatures on the physicochemical properties of
nickel-phosphorus deposits”. In: Materials Chemistry and
Physics 79.1 (2003), pp. 49–57. DOI:
10.1016/S0254-0584(02)00455-8 (cit. on pp. 19–21).

[111]
K. ZENG and D. ZHANG. “Recent progress in alkaline
water electrolysis for hydrogen production and
applications”. In: Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science 36.3 (2010), pp. 307–326. DOI:
10.1016/j.pecs.2009.11.002 (cit. on p. 20).

[112]
F. SAFIZADEH, E. GHALI, and G. HOULACHI.
“Electrocatalysis developments for hydrogen evolution
reaction in alkaline solutions - A Review”. In:
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 40.1 (2015),
pp. 256–274. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.10.109
(cit. on p. 20).

[113]
H. EZAKI, M. MORINAGA, and S. WATANABE.
“Hydrogen overpotential for transition metals and
alloys, and its interpretation using an electronic model”.
In: Electrochimica Acta 38.4 (1993), pp. 557–564. DOI:
10.1016/0013-4686(93)85012-N (cit. on p. 20).

[114]
I. PASEKA. “Hydrogen evolution reaction on Ni-P alloys:
The internal stress and the activities of electrodes”. In:
Electrochimica Acta 53.13 (2008), pp. 4537–4543. DOI:
10.1016/j.electacta.2008.01.045 (cit. on p. 20).

[115]
C.-C. HU and A. BAI. “Optimization of hydrogen
evolving activity on nickel-phosphorus deposits using
experimental strategies”. In: Journal of Applied
Electrochemistry 31.5 (2001), pp. 565–572. DOI:
10.1023/A:1017525507665 (cit. on p. 20).

31


[116]
Z. WEI, A. YAN, Y. FENG, L. LI, C. SUN, Z. SHAO, and
P. SHEN. “Study of hydrogen evolution reaction on Ni-P
amorphous alloy in the light of experimental and
quantum chemistry”. In: Electrochemistry
Communications 9.11 (2007), pp. 2709–2715. DOI:
10.1016/j.elecom.2007.09.006 (cit. on p. 20).

[117]
L. ELIAS, V. H. DAMLE, and A. C. HEGDE.
“Electrodeposited Ni-P alloy thin films for alkaline
water splitting reaction”. In: IOP Conference Series:
Materials Science and Engineering 149.1 (2016), p. 012179.
DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/149/1/012179 (cit. on p. 20).

[118]
C. TANG, A. M. ASIRI, Y. LUO, and X. SUN.
“Electrodeposited Ni-P Alloy Nanoparticle Films for
Efficiently Catalyzing Hydrogen- and
Oxygen-Evolution Reactions”. In: ChemNanoMat 1.8
(2015), pp. 558–561. DOI: 10.1002/cnma.201500163
(cit. on p. 20).

[119]
G. LU, P. EVANS, and G. ZANGARI. “Electrocatalytic
Properties of Ni-Based Alloys Toward Hydrogen
Evolution Reaction in Acid Media”. In: Journal of The
Electrochemical Society 150.5 (2003), A551–A557. DOI:
10.1149/1.1561629 (cit. on p. 20).

[120]
A. R. J. KUCERNAK and V. N. NARANAMMALPURAM
SUNDARAM. “Nickel phosphide: the effect of
phosphorus content on hydrogen evolution activity and
corrosion resistance in acidic medium”. In: J. Mater.
Chem. A 2.41 (2014), pp. 17435–17445. DOI:
10.1039/C4TA03468F (cit. on p. 21).

[121]
K. KEONG, W. SHA, and S. MALINOV. “Crystallisation
kinetics and phase transformation behaviour of
electroless nickel-phosphorus deposits with high
phosphorus content”. In: Journal of Alloys and
Compounds 334.1-2 (2002), pp. 192–199. DOI:
10.1016/S0925-8388(01)01798-4 (cit. on p. 21).

[122]
K. KEONG, W. SHA, and S. MALINOV. “Hardness
evolution of electroless nickel-phosphorus deposits
with thermal processing”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 168.2-3 (2003), pp. 263–274. DOI:
10.1016/S0257-8972(03)00209-3 (cit. on p. 21).

[123]
I. APACHITEI, F. TICHELAAR, J. DUSZCZYK, and
L. KATGERMAN. “The effect of heat treatment on the
structure and abrasive wear resistance of autocatalytic
NiP and NiP-SiC coatings”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 149.2-3 (2002), pp. 263–278. DOI:
10.1016/S0257-8972(01)01492-X (cit. on p. 21).

[124]
H. HABAZAKI, Y.-P. LU, A. KAWASHIMA, K. ASAMI,
and K. HASHIMOTO. “The effects of structural
relaxation and crystallization on the corrosion behavior
of electrodeposited amorphous Ni-P alloys”. In:
Corrosion Science 32.11 (1991), pp. 1227–1235. DOI:
10.1016/0010-938X(91)90134-B (cit. on p. 21).

[125]
A. ZOIKIS-KARATHANASIS, E. A. PAVLATOU, and
N. SPYRELLIS. “Pulse electrodeposition of Ni-P matrix
composite coatings reinforced by SiC particles”. In:
Journal of Alloys and Compounds 494.1-2 (2010),
pp. 396–403. DOI: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.01.057
(cit. on p. 21).

[126]
A. YONEZU, M. NIWA, J. YE, and X. CHEN. “Contact
fracture mechanism of electroplated Ni-P coating upon
stainless steel substrate”. In: Materials Science and
Engineering A 563 (2013), pp. 184–192. DOI:
10.1016/j.msea.2012.11.054 (cit. on p. 21).

[127]
L. CHANG, P. W. KAO, and C. H. CHEN. “Strengthening
mechanisms in electrodeposited Ni-P alloys with
nanocrystalline grains”. In: Scripta Materialia 56.8 (2007),
pp. 713–716. DOI:
10.1016/j.scriptamat.2006.12.036 (cit. on p. 21).

[128]
G. DEVARAJ, S. GURUVIAH, and S. SESHADRI. “Pulse
plating”. In: Materials Chemistry and Physics 25.5 (1990),
pp. 439–461. DOI: 10.1016/0254-0584(90)90111-M
(cit. on p. 22).

[129]
M. S. CHANDRASEKAR and M. PUSHPAVANAM. “Pulse
and pulse reverse plating-Conceptual, advantages and
applications”. In: Electrochimica Acta 53.8 (2008),
pp. 3313–3322. DOI:
10.1016/j.electacta.2007.11.054 (cit. on pp. 22,
23).

[130]
T. PEARSON and J. K. DENNIS. “Facts and fiction about
pulse plating”. In: Transactions of the Institute of Metal
Finishing 69.3 (1991), pp. 75–79. DOI:
10.1080/00202967.1991.11870897 (cit. on pp. 22, 23).

[131]
F. HU and K. C. CHAN. “Deposition behaviour and
morphology of Ni-SiC electro-composites under
triangular waveform”. In: Applied Surface Science 243.1-4
(2005), pp. 251–258. DOI:
10.1016/j.apsusc.2004.09.068 (cit. on p. 22).

[132]
R. L. ZELLER and U. LANDAU. “Electrodeposition of
Ductile Ni-P Amorphous Alloys Using
Periodic-Reverse Current”. In: Journal of The
Electrochemical Society 138.4 (1991), pp. 1010–1017. DOI:
10.1149/1.2085707 (cit. on p. 23).

[133]
C. KOLLIA, N. SPYRELLIS, J. AMBLARD, M. FROMENT,
and G. MAURIN. “Nickel plating by pulse electrolysis:
textural and microstructural modifications due to
adsorption/desorption phenomena”. In: Journal of
Applied Electrochemistry 20.6 (1990), pp. 1025–1032. DOI:
10.1007/BF01019584 (cit. on p. 23).

[134]
C. KOLLIA and N. SPYRELLIS. “Microhardness and
roughness in nickel electrodeposition under pulse
reversed current conditions”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 58.2 (1993), pp. 101–105. DOI:
10.1016/0257-8972(93)90180-V (cit. on p. 23).

[135]
C. KOLLIA, Z. LOIZOS, and N. SPYRELLIS. “Influence of
pulse reversed current technique on the crystalline
orientation and surface morphology of nickel
electrodeposits”. In: Surface and Coatings Technology
45.1-3 (1991), pp. 155–160. DOI:
10.1016/0257-8972(91)90218-L (cit. on p. 23).

[136]
N. ZHAO, P. Y. QIU, and L. L. CAO. “Development and
Application of Functionally Graded Material”. In:
Advanced Materials Research 562-564 (2012), pp. 371–375.
DOI:
10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.562-564.371
(cit. on p. 24).

[137]
G. UDUPA, S. S. RAO, and K. GANGADHARAN.
“Functionally Graded Composite Materials: An
Overview”. In: Procedia Materials Science 5 (2014),
pp. 1291–1299. DOI: 10.1016/j.mspro.2014.07.442
(cit. on p. 24).

[138]
M. NIINO and S. MAEDA. “Recent development status
of functionally gradient materials.” In: ISIJ International
30.9 (1990), pp. 699–703. DOI:
10.2355/isijinternational.30.699 (cit. on p. 24).

32


[139]
Y. D. GAMBURG. “Electrodeposition of Alloys with
Composition Modulated over Their Thickness: A
Review”. In: Russian Journal of Electrochemistry 37.6
(2001), pp. 585–590. DOI: 10.1023/A:1016662316553
(cit. on p. 24).

[140]
S. ROY. “Electrochemical Fabrication of Nanostructured,
Compositionally Modulated Metal Multilayers
(CMMMs)”. In: Electrochemistry at the Nanoscale.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2009, pp. 349–376.
DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-73582-5_9 (cit. on p. 24).

[141]
L. QIN, J. XU, J. LIAN, Z. JIANG, and Q. JIANG. “A novel
electrodeposited nanostructured Ni coatingwith grain
size gradient distribution”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 203.1-2 (2008), pp. 142–147. DOI:
10.1016/j.surfcoat.2008.08.044 (cit. on p. 24).

[142]
C. GU, J. LIAN, and Q. JIANG. “Layered nanostructured
Ni with modulated hardness fabricated by
surfactant-assistant electrodeposition”. In: Scripta
Materialia 57.3 (2007), pp. 233–236. DOI:
10.1016/j.scriptamat.2007.04.005 (cit. on p. 24).

[143]
J. CROUSIER, Z. HANANE, and J.-P. CROUSIER. “A cyclic
voltammetry study of the NiP electrodeposition”. In:
Electrochimica Acta 38.2-3 (1993), pp. 261–266. DOI:
10.1016/0013-4686(93)85137-N (cit. on p. 24).

[144]
W. BLUM. “The Structure and Properties of Alternately
Deposited Metals”. In: Trans. Am. Electrochem. Soc. 40
(1921), pp. 307–320 (cit. on p. 25).

[145]
A. BRENNER and A. M. POMMER. “Production of a
diffraction grating by depositing copper-bismuth alloy”.
In: National Bureau of Standards (1948) (cit. on p. 25).

[146]
C. A. ROSS. “Electrodeposited Multilayer Thin Films”.
In: Annual Review of Materials Science 24.1 (1994),
pp. 159–188. DOI:
10.1146/annurev.ms.24.080194.001111 (cit. on
p. 25).

[147]
L. ELIAS, K. U. BHAT, and A. C. HEGDE. “Development
of nanolaminated multilayer Ni–P alloy coatings for
better corrosion protection”. In: RSC Adv. 6.40 (2016),
pp. 34005–34013. DOI: 10.1039/C6RA01547F (cit. on
pp. 25, 26).

[148]
R. GIRARD. “The Electrodeposition of Thin Magnetic
Permalloy Films”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 38.3
(1967), pp. 1423–1430. DOI: 10.1063/1.1709651 (cit. on
p. 25).

[149]
J. H. LIU, J. L. CHEN, Z. LIU, M. YU, and S. M. LI.
“Fabrication of Zn-Ni/Ni-P compositionally modulated
multilayer coatings”. In: Materials and Corrosion 64.4
(2013), pp. 335–340. DOI: 10.1002/maco.201106140
(cit. on p. 26).

[150]
B. BAHADORMANESH and M. GHORBANI.
“Electrodeposition of Zn-Ni-P compositionally
modulated multilayer coatings: An attempt to deposit
Ni-P and Zn-Ni alloys from a single bath”. In:
Electrochemistry Communications 81 (2017), pp. 93–96.
DOI: 10.1016/j.elecom.2017.06.002 (cit. on p. 26).

33


