Probing pair-breaking mechanisms in proximity-induced hybrid 

superconducting interfaces  

 

S. Mohapatra, S. Mathimalar, S. Chaudhary, K. V. Raman 

 

Centre for Interdisciplinary Sciences, 

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Hyderabad 500107, India 

 
Corresponding author: kvraman@tifrh.res.in 
 
Abstract 
 
Understanding depairing effects in a hybrid-superconducting interface utilizing high 
spin-orbit materials such as topological insulators or 1D semiconducting nanowires is 
becoming an important research topic in the study of proximity-induced 
superconductivity. Experimentally, proximity-induced superconductivity is found to 
suppress at much lower magnetic fields compared to the superconducting layer without 
a good understanding of its cause. Here, we provide a phenomenological tool to 
characterize different pair-breaking mechanisms, the ones that break or preserve time 
reversal symmetry, and show how they affect the differential tunneling conductance 
response. Importantly, we probe the properties of the SC layer at the hybrid interface 
and observe conductance peak pinning at zero bias in a larger field range with eventual 
signs of weak peak splitting. Further, the effect of varying the spin-orbit scattering and 
the Lande g-factor in tuning the conductance peaks show interesting trends. 
 
Recent studies of proximity induced superconductivity (PIS) at the interface between 
a s-wave superconductor (SC) and a topological material (TM), such as 3-
Dimensional (3-D) topological insulators (TI)1, 2-D TI layers2 or 1-D high spin-orbit 
(SO) semiconducting nanowires3 is laying a new scientific foundation bed for the 
exploration of conceptually rich condensed matter phenomena, especially in the quest 
for topological superconductivity. Here, the PIS is known to lead to three important 
consequences. Firstly, it leads to suppression of superconductivity in the SC layer, 
giving rise to a reduced superconducting gap (Δr) near the interface compared to the 
bulk of SC (Δo)4 (Fig. 1a). Secondly, and more interestingly, it induces 
superconducting correlations in the adjacent layer, with the pair potential dropping 
discontinuously across the interface,5. This induced condensate pair potential, Δi, then 
decay with a characteristic length determined by the strength of decoherence or 
depairing properties of the induced layer. Such a behavior at such hybrid interfaces 
using TMs has been experimentally observed using angle resolved photoemission 
spectroscopy (ARPES) and point contact spectroscopy6,7. Lastly, the microscopic 
nature of the PIS condensate pairs may differ from the singlet s-wave pairing 
observed in the bulk of SC films. For example, in the case of ferromagnetic films in 
proximity to the SC layer, formation of triplet pairing is reported that is already 
contributing to the field of superconducting spintronics8. However, in the case of 
TMs, currently, very little is understood about the superconducting nature of these 
PIS states. In this regard, Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK)9 formalism that 
considers anisotropic pairing potential with different orbital symmetries has been 
widely used to fit the differential conductance measurements using tunneling and 
point contact spectroscopy6,7,10. Here, the BTK model uses a phenomenological 
Dyne’s parameter11, 𝛾, to incorporate depairing effects caused by finite lifetime of the 
quasiparticle excitations. However, it is expected that in TMs, these condensates can 


experience other forms of depairing effects: one that preserves time-reversal 
symmetry (TRS) such as spin-orbit (SO) scattering which contributes to depairing 
only in presence of applied magnetic field and one that breaks TRS in zero field such 
as orbital depairing and magnetic impurity scattering. Thus, the BTK model does not 
provide a complete microscopic picture in such systems where such depairing effects 
may contribute differently to suppression of superconductivity. 
 
In the PIS study with TMs, experimental visualization of topological 
superconductivity to realize Majorana modes as zero-energy quasiparticle excitations 
in differential tunneling conductance spectroscopy has been widely attempted10,12,13. 
This is primarily predicted in materials where the bulk spin-orbit strongly mixes the 
two spin sub-bands giving rise to a topological band with a superconducting gap1,3. 
This gap, in an increasing applied magnetic field, is expected to close and cause band 
inversion, subsequently leading to a topological gap opening which supports zero 
energy Majorana modes12. In many experimental results, a ‘rigid’ zero bias peak is 
often observed, associated to the Majorana modes, that does not get affected over a 
large range of external stimulus such as applied magnetic field or gate voltage10,12. 
Such a response is shown to be very different from the other mechanisms that also 
give rise to a zero energy quasi-particle excitations such as Kondo peak, Andreev 
bound states, reflectionless tunneling and weak antilocalization. Thus, many of these 
reports have made a major advancement in our understanding of topological 
superconductivity; however, they have also left open some interesting questions 
regarding the device’s conductance response to the above external stimulus. For 
example, in some studies12, with the increase in magnetic field, the ZBCP is observed 
before gap closing which then disappear without any signs of topological gap 
opening. Instead, the ZBCP is found to weakly split into two peaks before the PIS is 
completely suppressed. Also, the PIS states are observed to disappear at small fields. 
For example, in the bilayer study of NbSe2/Bi2Se3 films, the induced 
superconductivity disappears at just 0.03T compared to a 4T field needed to destroy 
superconductivity in the NbSe2 layer6,7. Therefore, probing the properties of such 
hybrid SC/TM interfaces may allow a better understanding of PIS that is stable at 
higher magnetic fields.  
 
In this article, we focus our attention on two aspects of the hybrid SC/TM interfaces. 
Firstly, how does the property of the SC film, driving the PIS state, gets affected due 
to the proximity effect. Secondly, can the response of the induced quasiparticle 
excitations be explained using a model better than the BTK formalism that can 
capture the microscopic origin of the various pair-breaking mechanisms responsible 
for the stronger suppression of induced superconductivity. In this regard, a systematic 
experimental study to characterize such hybrid interfaces is missing. We therefore 
focus on a device geometry as shown in Figure 1a in a strong tunnel barrier regime, 
neglecting any contributions due to Andreev bound states, Kondo or weak-anti-
localization to the differential conductance. To explore such devices, we adopt a 
theoretical framework in modeling the effective quasiparticle density of states by 
using the Green’s function approach developed first by Maki14,15 and later generalized 
to model s-wave SC films with thickness lower than the penetration depth. This is 
done by considering separate Green’s function for spin-up and spin-down 
superconducting electrons in an external Zeeman field, with the inclusion of 
impurities (magnetic and spin-orbit) as scattering centers within the SC 
region16,17,18,19. Ref. [19] provides a detailed analysis of the Green function formalism, 


giving us the following form of the quasiparticle density of states (𝜌) for the spin-
down (↓) and spin-up (↑) states: 
 

𝜌↓↑ 𝐸 =  𝜌!

2 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝐸 𝑅𝑒
𝑢±

𝑢±! − 1 ! !                                   − 𝐸𝑞. 1 

 
where 𝜌! is the normal density of states, E is the energy with respect to Fermi level, 
and 𝑢± are the complex energy functions for the spin down(+) and spin-up states(-) 
represented as: 

𝑢± =

(!!! !

! ϒ)∓!!

!
 ! 

!!±

!(!!!±! )! ! ∓ !!"

!!!!!

! !!!∓! ! !  ± !!"

!!!!!

! !!!∓! ! !     − 𝐸𝑞. 2 

 
Here, Δ is the superconducting energy gap, 𝜁, bso, dsf are the parameters related 
(inversely) to the orbital depairing, spin-orbit and spin-flip scattering lifetimes16,17, 
respectively, and the Zeeman energy (2𝐸!) is given by 𝑔!""𝜇!𝐻 with 𝐻 as the 
applied magnetic field in the plane of the SC film and 𝑔!"" as the effective Lande g-
factor. It is important to note that density of states in equation (1) reduces to the 
theoretical form of BCS density of states in the absence of the above four depairing 
effects and Zeeman field. Numerical methods to solve the above coupled complex 
equations is known to be non-trivial due to the singularities at |𝑢±|=1 20 and due to the 
inability to generate an analytical closed-form solution21. Limited attempts have been 
made earlier to solve the above set of coupled non-linear complex functions with only 
the orbital depairing and spin-orbit terms by using the Fermi liquid approaches under 
the dirty limit20,22. We extend similar approach to linearize the full form of the above 
coupled complex energy functions in equation 2 to successfully determine the 
physical solution of 𝑢± for real values of the density of states. This leads to a set of 
four linearized equations given by: 
 

(𝐸 − 𝑖 𝐸

𝐸 ϒ)𝑦! +  𝑦! + 𝑦!𝑒!

! −  !

! !!!!!!!!!!!!  ! 

!!!"

!
 !!!!!!!!!!!!

= 0  

(𝐸 − 𝑖 𝐸

𝐸 ϒ)𝑦! +  𝑦! − 𝑦! +  !

! !!!!!!!!!  ! !!!"

!
 !!!!!!!!! = 0  

𝑦!

! − 𝑦!

!𝛥! +  𝑦!

!𝑒!

! −  𝑦!

!𝑒!

!𝛥! +  𝜋! = 0 

𝑦!𝑦! + 𝑦!𝑦!𝛥! = 0, 

 

 
 
 
 
 

   -   Eq. 3 

where 𝑦!;  𝑖 ∊ 1,4 , represents the four complex variable related to the complex 
energy functions by the following expression: 
 

𝑦! ± 𝑒𝑧𝑦! = −𝜋𝑢±(1 − 𝑢±

!)!! ! 

𝛥 𝑦! ∓ 𝑒!𝑦! = 𝜋(1 − 𝑢±

!)!! !, 

 

 

- Eq. 4 

This procedure of arriving at solution to Eq. 2 results in 8 sets of complex solutions, 
seven of which are discarded due to triviality (e.g. 0 or negative value of density of 
states from Eq. 1). The differential tunneling conductance for the device structure in 
Figure 1a is then determined at any finite temperature using the above solution of the 
quasi-particle density of states. Figure 2 shows such a conductance map at 30mK with 
increasing strength of the four interfacial pair breaking mechanisms in zero and 


applied magnetic field; each of which show a characteristic response. Here, the SC 
film thickness is considered to be smaller than the penetration depth, leading to 
Zeeman splitting of the quasi-particle states in applied magnetic field23. Firstly, we 
observe that reducing the quasiparticle lifetime (i.e. increasing 𝜁), leads to emergence 
of states within the gap (dark blue, representing a hard gap, fading to lighter shades at 
zero voltage bias), which may be associated to soft gap or gapless superconductivity. 
Furthermore, they lead to broadening of the conductance peak. Next, the orbital 
depairing is observed to only broaden the conductance peaks, while the spin-
scattering causes both- broadening of the peaks and spins flipping that strongly 
suppress superconductivity with the emergence of weak gapless superconductivity. In 
contrast, the device conductance response to an increasing spin-orbit scattering, which 
preserves TRS, shows an interesting trend. Here, no effect is observed on the device 
conductance in zero field. However, in the presence of a magnetic field, it contributes 
to a weak peak broadening while maintaining a hard gap. Further, due to stronger 
spin-mixing, it counteracts the effect of Zeeman field on the quasiparticle states, 
making it harder to achieve the spin-splitting (in Figure 2h, the red feature shows a 
negative slope). Understanding the contributions from each depairing term hence 
provides a comprehensive and powerful methodology to fit experimental data to 
extract important microscopic information about the superconducting properties of the 
interface layers. 
 
In the context of an SC/TM hybrid interface, the effect of the spin-orbit interaction 
and Zeeman field on the properties of the quasiparticle excitations in the SC and TM 
layers may require careful analysis. In the case of TM layer, contributions from a bulk 
spin-orbit coupling or Rashba spin-orbit coupling is expected to give rise to a 
topological electronic band structure, confirmed from ARPES studies6. However, due 
to stronger suppression of induced superconductivity at low applied magnetic field, 
there is still no clear evidence of topological gap opening in transport measurements 
(for SC/TM/I/NM device geometry as shown in Figure 1b). Our model, as a fitting 
routine, can therefore help resolve the dominant depairing contributions affecting 
these PIS state, a study that is yet to be explored. Regarding the SC layer, very little is 
experimentally probed (using TM/SC/I/NM device geometry in Figure 1b) about its 
properties due to the proximity with the TM layer. Firstly, since the superconducting 
condensates leak into the TM layer, we expect depairing effects, attributed mostly to 
spin-orbit scattering, to suppress superconductivity. Further, in the case of 1-D 
semiconducting nanowires as TM layers, the SC condensates may experience a larger 
value of geff

24,25 that offer significant Zeeman interaction energy at relatively low 

magnetic 
fields 
that, 
interestingly, 
are 
not 
strong 
enough 
to 
suppress 

superconductivity in the SC layer. Additionally, proximity effect and/or interface 
structural disorder may also substantially enhance the value of penetration depth 
(more than 200 nm)26,27 causing Zeeman-splitting of the quasiparticle density of states 
in thicker SC films.  
 
In the subsequent study, we devote our attention to investigate the superconducting 
properties of the SC layer by simulating the differential conductance response (see 
Fig. 3) of the NM/I/SC/TM device in Figure 1b with increasing in-plane Zeeman field 
for two different depairing terms, 𝛾 and bso (see Fig. S1 for 𝜁, dsf). We assume a geff of 
10. Although, as discussed above, the dependence of ∆ on the magnetic field is more 
complex, we here assume ∆ to decrease by a second order transition as ∆(𝐻) =
 ∆(0)(1 − (𝐻/𝐻!)!)!/!, where 𝐻! is the critical magnetic field and ∆(0) is the zero 


field SC gap. Maki and Tsuneto14 had shown that in the absence of depairing 
contributions, below the bulk critical temperature, the transition from a 
superconducting to normal state (due to magnetic field) moves from a second order to 
first order at a particular transition temperature.  However, the presence of strong 
depairing mechanisms can significantly reduce this transition temperature or perhaps 
also completely suppress them leading to only second-order transitions at low 
temperatures21. Similar responses have been observed experimentally10, but require 
further experimental verifications. 

Figure 3a & 3c shows that with increasing Zeeman field, the device’s zero bias 
conductance gradually shift from a hard gap to a soft gap and finally to a peak 
prevailing over a finite field range (~100mT, 0.7T to 0.8T in Fig. 3a, ~0.8T to 0.9T in 
Fig. 3c) until the ZBCP eventually splits. Further, the energy position of higher 
energy conductance peak is observed to increase initially and later fall down with 
applied magnetic field until the critical field. We further observe, as shown in figure 
3b, that increasing 𝛾 leads to disappearance of ‘hard gap’ (even in zero field) and, due 
to the difficulty in resolving the ZBCP splitting, makes the ZBCP exist over a larger 
field range (~200mT, ~ 0.7T to 0.9T). An increase in SO scattering also enhances the 
field range (~200mT, ~ 0.9T to 1.0T) for the observation of ZBCP as it makes 
Zeeman splitting harder to achieve. However it has one distinction compared to the 
other depairing terms; it retains the ‘hard gap’ at lower fields (Fig. 3c & d). Some of 
these characteristic responses are also seen in experiments, however with the interest 
in probing the response of induced superconductivity. Therefore, our analysis calls for 
careful scrutiny in interpretation of experimental studies using differential tunneling 
conductance measurements. We would like to emphasize that for Zeeman energy 
(primarily due to large 𝑔!"") approaching ∆, our model assumes the ground state of 
the interface state to have a homogeneous order parameter. Transition to in-
homogeneous superconducting state, such as Fulde, Ferrell, Larkin and Ovchinnikov 
(FFLO) states28 is not considered since these states are very sensitive to disorder and 
are expected to occur only in very clean systems21.  

Next, we probe the ZBCP state in applied field and simulate the response of the SC 
layer in the hybrid SC/TM interface to the modulations in bso. Experimentally, gate 
voltage modulation may also indirectly affect the strength of the SO scattering 
potential due to the adjacent TM layer (see Figure 1b). Figure 4a shows the variation 
in the differential conductance contour taken at an applied field of 0.85T. 
Interestingly, we observe the ZBCP (and its weak splitting) to gradually disappear, 
with the reappearance of soft gap and eventually a hard gap. Additionally, recent 
work in 1-D nanowire systems has suggested a strong anisotropy of 𝑔!"" depending 
on the direction of the applied magnetic field with respect to the nanowire axis29. 
Furthermore, it is proposed that the gate voltage modulation can also affect the value 
of 𝑔!"". Hence, in figure 4b, we model such a scenario by varying the value of 𝑔!"" 
from 2 (lower limit as in bulk SC) to 10 that may be caused by leakage of SC 
condensates in the nanowire. Interestingly, we observe a similar trend of 
disappearance of the ZBCP with reducing 𝑔!"", leading to angular or gate-modulation 
dependence, primarily due to lower Zeeman energy that reduces the spin splitting of 
the quasiparticle states. Thus our model, provide a good fitting tool with a focus on 
understanding the microscopy origin of depairing effects that limit superconductivity 
in the SC and TM layers of the hybrid superconducting interface. We expect such a 
fitting routine to help understand a number of exotic interface studies including the 


interface proximity study using ferromagnetic insulator where magnetic impurity 
governed depairing effects (parameter dsf) may play a dominant role. 
 
In conclusion, our work highlights the distinct characteristic response of different 
depairing interactions to differential conductance measurements in presence of 
external stimulus. Further, it is known that SO mechanisms can lead to exotic 
behaviors, such as the possibility of co-existence of superconductivity and magnetism 
at these interfaces. Our model can also study such a phenomena, i.e. co-existence of 
proximity induced superconductivity and ferromagnetism, by considering an internal 
exchange field acting on the SC condensates30 (see Fig. S4). Future developments in 
the presented model approach to incorporate these depairing effects, within a unified 
formalism covering barrier-less to weak-barrier conductance for point contact 
spectroscopy measurements, will advance our understanding of PIS in these new 
classes of hybrid interfaces.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
KVR acknowledges TIFR, SERB Ramanujan and Early Career research grant for 
funding. SM acknowledges SERB NPDF fellowship. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Figures 
 
Figure 1. 
 

 

 
Figure 1: Schematic showing the spatial variation of superconducting pair potential at 
the hybrid SC/TM interface (a) SC order parameter (Δ) reduces from its bulk value, Δ0, to a 
reduced value, Δr, at the hybrid interface, followed by a discontinuous jump to Δi and decay 
into the TM layer. Such interface effects happen in the length scales of the coherence length 
(𝜉). (b) Device configuration probing the quasiparticle response in the TM and the SC layer 
separately by measuring differential conductance through the two circuitry: (i) NM/I/SC/TM, 
and (ii) NM/I/TM tunnel junctions. Here, the SC layer thickness is smaller than 𝜉. Tunneling 
conductance of the devices show a conductance peak at ±|Δ| associated either to Δr or Δi. 
 
Figure 2. 

 

 
Figure 2: Simulated normalized differential conductance (dI/dV, shown as colorplots in 
arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of an TM/SC/I/NM device structure for the different 
pair breaking parameters, (a) and (b) for Dyne’s parameter, 𝛾, (c) and (d) for orbital 
depairing, ζ, (e) and (f) for spin-scattering, dsf, (g) and (h) for spin-orbit scattering, bso, in zero 
magnetic field (top plots) and an applied magnetic field of 300 mT (bottom plots). 
Superimposed dI/dV line plots (solid line) represent the differential conductance at the 
parameter values corresponding to the horizontal line cuts (dashed line). For each subfigure, 
values of other depairing parameters are kept at 0.01, Δ(0) = 0.3meV, geff  = 10 and T = 30mK. 

(a) 

Δ0 

Δr 

SC 
nSC 

Δi (x) 

ξSC 
ξnSC 

x

-Δ 
Vdc  

dI/dV  

Δ 

(b) 

TM 

Δr 

|Δi |min 

Vdc 

Vdc+Vac  

Vdc+Vac  

Insulator (I) 
Gate 
Superconductor(SC) 
Normal Metal (NM) 


 
 
Figure 3. 

 

 
Figure 3: Simulated normalized differential conductance (dI/dV, shown as colorplots in 
arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of an TM/SC/I/NM device for varying applied 
magnetic field with geff =10, Δ(0) = 0.3meV, Hc = 1T & T = 30mK, plotted for increasing 
depairing contributions of Dyne’s parameter (a & b) and spin-orbit scattering (c & d). With 
increasing field, hard gap (dark blue) moves to a soft gap (light blue) and eventually to a 
ZBCP (red). In (a) and (c) splitting of ZBCP is visible at higher fields, which cannot be 
resolved with the increase in depairing contributions (b & d). Superimposed dI/dV line plots 
(solid line) represent the dI/dV at the field values corresponding to the horizontal line cuts 
(dashed line). 
 
Figure 4. 
 

 

 
Figure 4: Simulated normalized differential conductance (dI/dV, shown as colorplots in 
arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of an TM/SC/I/NM device with (a) increasing strength 
of spin-orbit scattering, bso, with geff =10, H=0.85T, Δ(0) = 0.3meV, Hc=1T & T=30mK and 
(b) increasing value of effective Lande g-factor, geff; with H=0.85T, Δ(0) = 0.3meV, Hc=1T & 
T=30mK. In (a), with increasing bso, ZBCP disappears and a hard gap appears at higher bso 
(see Figure S2). In (b), ZBCP appears with increase in geff for a given applied field of 0.85T.  
 
 


References: 
                                                        
[1] Liang Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008). 
[2] V. S. Pribiag, A. J. A. Beukman, F. Qu, M. C. Cassidy, C. Charpentier, W. 
Wegscheider & L. P. Kouwenhoven, Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 593 (2015). 
[3] R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010) 
[4] F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1321 (2005). 
[5] J. Clarke, J. Phys. Colloques 29, C2-3 (1968). 
[6] S-Y Xu et al., Nat. Phys. 10, 943 (2014). 
[7] W. Dai, A. Richardella, R. Du, W. Zhao, X. Liu, C. X. Liu, S-H. Huang, R. Sankar, F. 
Chou, N. Samarth and Q. Li, Sci. Rep. 7, 7631 (2017). 
[8] Jacob Linder & Jason W. A. Robinson, Nat. Phys. 11, 307 (2015). 
[9] G.E. Blonder, M. Tinkham, and T. M. Klapwijk, Phy. Rev. B 25, 4515 (1982). 
[10] A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum and H. Shtrikman, Nat. Phys. 8, 887 
(2012). 
[11] R. C. Dynes, V. Narayanamurti, and J.P. Garno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1509 (1978). 
[12] V. Mourik,

 
K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov,

 
S. R. Plissard,

 
E. P. A. M. Bakkers,

 
L. P. 

Kouwenhoven, Science 336, 1003 (2012). 
[13] M. T. Deng,

 
C. L. Yu,

 
G. Y. Huang,

 
M. Larsson,

 
P. Caroff,

 
and H. Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 12, 

6414 (2012). 
[14] K.Maki and T. Tsuento, Prog. Theor. Phys. 31, 945 (1964). 
[15] K. Maki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 32, 29 (1964). 
[16] P. Fulde and K. Maki, Phys. Rev. 141, 275 (1966). 
[17] Ronald C. Bruno and Brian B. Schwartz, Phy. Rev. B, 8 3161 (1973). 
[18] A. A. Abrikosov and L. P. Gorkov, Zh. Eksperim. i. Teor. Fiz. 35,  1558 (1958) [Sov. 
Phys.-JEPT 8,1090(1959). 
[19] P. Fulde, Advances in Physics, 22, 667 (1973). 
[20] D. C. Worledge and T. H. Geballe, Phys. Rev. B 62, 447 (2000). 
[21] F. S. Bergeret, M. Silaev, P. Virtanen, T. T. Heikkila, arXiv:1706.08245v3. 
[22] J. A. X. Alexander, T. P. Orlando, D. Rainer, and P. M. Tedrow, Phys. Rev. B 31, 5811 
(1985). 
[23] R. Meservey and P. M. Tedrow,  Phys. Rep. 238, 173 (1994). 
[24] G. W. Winkler, D. Varjas, R. Skolasinski, A. A. Soluyanov, M. Troyer, and M. Wimmer, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 037701 (2017). 
[25] S. M. Albrecht, A. P. Higginbotham, M. Madsen, F. Kuemmeth, T. S. Jespersen, J. 
Nygård, P. Krogstrup, and C. M. Marcus, Nature (London) 531, 206 (2016).   
[26] Katrin Steinberg, Marc Scheffler, and Martin Dressel, Phys. Rev. B 77, 214517 (2008). 
[27] A. I. Gubin, K. S. Il’in, S. A. Vitusevich, M. Siegel, and N. Klein, Phys. Rev. B 72, 
064503 (2005). 
[28] Fulde, P, and R. A. Ferrell, Phys. Rev. 135, A550 (1964); Larkin, A I, and Yuri N. 
Ovchinnikov, Sov. Phys. JETP 20, 762 (1965). 
[29] G. W. Winkler, D. Varjas, R. Skolasinski, A. A. Soluyanov, M. Troyer, and M. Wimmer, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 037701 (2017). 
[30] X. Hao, J. S. Moodera, and R. Meservey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1342 (1991). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 


                                                                                                                                                               

Supplementary material for  

Probing pair-breaking mechanisms in proximity-induced hybrid 

superconducting interfaces 

 

S. Mohapatra, S. Mathimalar, S. Chaudhary, K. V. Raman 

Centre for Interdisciplinary Sciences, 

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Hyderabad 500107, India 

 
 
1. Calculating differential tunneling conductance 

 

The real solution for the quasiparticle density of states determined above is used to 
calculate the differential tunneling conductance by taking the convolution of the 
density of states with the Fermi-Dirac function. Assuming the density of states in the 
region of NM to be constant, the expression for the differential conductance is given 
by: 
 

𝐺(𝑉) ∝

!"

!" ! ∝ 

!

!"
𝑁! 𝐸

!
!!
𝑓 𝐸 − 𝑓(𝐸 − 𝑒𝑉)}𝑑𝐸, 
(1) 

 
where V is the applied bias, 𝑁! is the quasiparticle density of states, 𝑓 𝐸, 𝑇 =
1
1 + exp (𝐸 − 𝐸!)/𝑘!𝑇 , being the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at a 

temperature T and energy E with 𝑘! as the Boltzman constant and 𝐸! as the Fermi 
level. Equation (6) can be simplified to: 
  

𝐺 𝑉 ∝ 𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑉 !

∝ 
𝑁! 𝐸

!

!!

𝑑
𝑑𝑉 𝑓 𝐸 − 𝑓(𝐸 − 𝑒𝑉)}𝑑𝐸 . 
 
(2) 

 
The above expression it is used to calculate the differential conductance at any 
arbitrary value of temperature. The above term reduces to the quasiparticle density of 
states at very low temperatures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


                                                                                                                                                               
2. Additional figures 
 
I. Variation in differential conductance to modulations in orbital depairing and 
spin-scattering interactions 

 

Figure S1Error! Main Document Only.: Simulated normalized differential conductance 
(dI/dV, shown as colorplot in arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of TM/SC/I/NM device 
for varying applied magnetic field with geff =10 at T=30mK is plotted for increasing depairing 
contributions of orbital depairing parameter (i & ii) and spin scattering parameter (iii & iv). 
Superimposed dI/dV line plots (solid line) represent the dI/dV at the field values 
corresponding to the horizontal line cuts (dashed line). 
 
II. Observation of hard gap at large spin-orbit strengths 

 

Figure S2: Simulated normalized differential conductance (dI/dV, shown as colorplots in 
arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of an TM/SC/I/NM device with increasing strength of 
spin-orbit scattering, bso, with geff =10 at T=30mK, taken at 0.85T for a range of bso = 0.08-
0.25. The appearance of hard gap at higher values of spin-orbit scattering parameter is evident 
from the above figure.  


                                                                                                                                                               
III. Temperature variation showing ZBCP, observed at low temperature, 
disappearing with the increase in the device temperature 

 

Figure S3: Simulated normalized differential conductance (dI/dV, shown as colorplots in 
arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of an TM/SC/I/NM device with increasing temperature 
is plotted for an applied magnetic field of 730 mT, with geff =10. Superimposed dI/dV line 
plots (solid line) represent the dI/dV at the temperature values corresponding to the horizontal 
line cuts (dashed line). The suppression of the ZBCP at increased temperature ranges is 
clearly visible. 

IV. Modeling co-existence of proximity induced superconductivity and 
ferromagnetism by considering an interface exchange field causing Zeeman 
splitting in zero applied magnetic field. 

 

Figure S4: Simulated normalized differential conductance (dI/dV, shown as colorplot in 
arbitrary units) vs applied bias voltage of TM/SC/I/NM device for varying applied magnetic 
field with geff =10 at T=30mK and at an internal magnetic field, Hi =0.4 T, is plotted for 
increasing depairing contributions from Dyne’s parameter, ϒ (i & ii), spin-orbit scattering 
parameter, bso (iii & iv), orbital depairing parameter, ζ (iii & iv) and spin scattering parameter, 
dsf (vii & viii). Superimposed dI/dV line plots (solid line) represent the dI/dV at the field 
values corresponding to the horizontal line cuts (dashed line). For each of the subfigures, Δ(0) 
= 0.3 meV. Evidently, the formation of the ZBCP and its splitting take place at relatively 


                                                                                                                                                               
lower applied magnetic field, more significantly for smaller depairing parameters, due to the 
presence of an internal magnetic field. The Zeeman splitting in the absence of applied field is 
clear from the contrast in the colorplots. 
 


