Polymer Nanocomposites: synthesis and characterization 

Anil Arya, A. L. Sharma* 

Department of Physical Sciences, Central University of Punjab, Bathinda-151001, Punjab INDIA 

*Corresponding Author: alsharma@cup.edu.in 

Abstract 

This chapter deals with the fundamental properties of polymer nanocomposites (PNC) and their characteristics that 

play a significant role in deciding their capability for the advanced energy storage device. The various synthesization 

methods used for the preparation of the polymer electrolytes are described followed by the characterization techniques 

used for the analysis. The properties of the polymer host, salt, nanofiller, ionic liquid, plasticizer and 

nanoclay/nanorod/nanowire are described. Various ion transport mechanism with different nanoparticle dispersion in 

polymer electrolytes are highlighted. The various important results are summarized and a pathway is built to fulfill 

the dream of the future renewable source of energy that is economical and environmental benign. Chapter motivation 

is focused on the investigation of the role of polymer host, aspect ratio, surface area, nanoparticle shape and size in 

terms of boosting the electrolytic/electrochemical properties of PNC. It will certainly help in order to open new doors 

toward the development of the advanced polymeric materials with overall balancing property for enhancement of the 

fast solid state ionic conductor which would be revolutionized the energy storage/conversion device technology.  

1. Introduction 

In the world, the most of the energy demand (~75 %) of human beings is till now fulfilled by the non-renewable energy 

resources that include oils, coal, natural gas etc. They are sufficient to provide us energy for a long period but two 

major drawbacks are associated with them are lack of time and pollution. The combustion of these non-renewable 

sources of energy has fired the much increase in the CO2 emission (32190 Metric Ton per year) and one day that will 

cross the global point above which it would become difficult to sustain life on earth. Further, the natural disasters such 

as storms, floods lead to collapsing of the buildings and public as well government property and it leads to the energy 

blackout. So, it becomes important to resolve this issue and best alternative is focused. It can be summarized in one 

line that the environmental change lead by it is affecting our lives and become a necessity to look at some other 

efficient alternative energy resources. The best appropriate alternative which seems to be feasible is the use of 

renewable energy such as solar energy, wind energy, hydro energy, electrochemical energy and nuclear energy.  In 

last three decades, SONY commercialized its lithium-ion battery in 1991 and a lot of research is being done till 2016 

(25th anniversary of LIB introduction) to replace this non-renewable sources with a renewable one. First time Prof. 

Michel Armand in 1970 formulated the idea of the intercalation compounds and highlighted the ion migration in 

between electrodes (rocking chair battery. The battery is now the crucial part of the portable consumer electronics and 

its demand is supposed to rise in the coming future. Beside this, the lithium-ion-batteries will also be replaced in 

electric vehicles such as cars, buses, and trains to fight against the pollution. So, the many companies are in frontrunner 

in boosting the e-mobility and plug-in vehicles (Figure 1 a). This is an environmentally friendly and safe source that 

can be used for a longer period [1-5].  


 

Figure 1. (a) World’s Top 10 Plug-In Car Manufacturers – 2017 March (data source: EV Sales Blog) [6], (b) History 
of development of secondary batteries in view of energy density [7] (c) BNEF lithium-ion battery price survey, 2010-
16 ($/kWh) [8] and (d) The world's largest grid-scale battery - the Hornsdale Power Reserve battery [9]. 
 
Figure 1 b shows the growth of the commercial secondary batteries from 1950 to 2010 increased by about 3 Wh kg-1  

per year on average (shown in the dashed line). Dash line shows the progress of last 80 years and the solid line 

represents the development of Li-ion batteries in last 20 years. This demonstrates that the present energy density (210 

Whkg-1) will reach up to the target energy densities 500 Wh kg-1 and 700 Wh kg-1 will be realized in years of 2110 

and 2177 respectively. Further another step has been taken to enhance the utilization of the Lithium-ion battery by 

lowering the prices of the LIB (Figure 1 c).  

So, to fulfill the demand of the renewable source of energy, in 2015 first time Tesla disclosed the stationary storage 

products for homes that boosted the demand for the batteries. The first step toward the renewable energy source is 

completed in November 2017, Tesla has completed the construction of the world’s biggest lithium-ion battery (LIB) 

with 100 MW capacity just outside the South Australian city of Jamestown for South Australia (Figure 1 d). It will 

deliver power to the 30,000 homes for about an hour [6-9]. It opened the doors of the future affordable renewable 

energy source with a lot of possibilities that will revolutionize the energy sector. Another remarkable point with this 

battery was highlighted in a statement by the Elon Musk, “You can essentially charge up the battery packs when you 

have excess power when the cost of production is very low and then discharge it when the cost of power production 

is high, and this effectively lowers the average cost to the end customer”.  


A battery is a very catchy system where, separator/electrolyte is sandwiched between the two different counter 

electrodes (i) cathode (positive electrode), (ii) anode (negative electrode). The separator/electrolyte provide the path 

for shuttling of the ion between the electrodes while electrons move via the external circuit. The cathode is generally 

made of the metal oxide (LiCoO2, LiCoMnO2) and the anode of graphite. During discharge, the ions flow from the 

anode to the cathode (oxidation at the anode; loss of electrons) through the electrolyte and separator; while during the 

charging process, charge reverses the direction and the ions flow from the cathode to the anode (reduction of the 

cathode; a gain of electrons) [10]. Figure 2 demonstrates the operation of a Lithium-ion battery and its components 

cathode, anode & electrolyte. The role of the electrolyte is to physically separate both electrodes and provides medium 

for ion migration. 

 

Figure 2.  Schematic illustration of the first Li-ion battery (LiCoO2/Li+ electrolyte/graphite). With permission from 

Ref. [10] Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 

A lot of research is going on the development of both cathode and anodes that may provide large energy density and 

power density without affecting its stability or cycle life. Beside them, electrolyte is a more interesting candidate as it 

is placed in between the electrodes and it remains always in the active state either it is discharging or charging process.  

The electrolyte is the heart of the battery and plays a key role in the operation of a battery. Now, a day’s most of the 

battery systems are based on the liquid electrolyte. Although the battery possesses high ionic conductivity but, poor 

mechanical strength and the stability prevents its use in the commercial applications. Another critical drawback is the 

dendrite growth formation that leads to short-circuiting of the battery. Another issue is the capacity fading and the 

narrow safety window due to the liquid electrolyte. So, to overcome all issues faced by the liquid electrolyte based 

storage system, the most attractive approach which is adopted now days is the use of solid polymer electrolyte (SPE). 

It prevents the use of separate casing for the electrolyte and it plays a dual role that automatically reduces both cost 

and weight. Another fundamental advantage with the SPE is that the dendrite growth formation could be minimized 

at practical level due to good interface contact with the electrodes [11]. SPE is superior in comparison to both liquid 

polymer electrolyte and the gel polymer electrolyte in many aspects such as stability, flexibility, shape variation, 

safety, and the cost. Although the SPE is a suitable candidate as an alternative to the conventional electrolyte still 

some drawback exists there. Another crucial point is the ease of the preparation. It involves the dissolution of host 


polymer having an electron rich group (polar group) and the salt with bulky anion dissolves in the solvent. The host 

polymer provides the coordinating sites that favor the fast ion migration and further supported by the segmental motion 

of the polymer chains. The segmental motion of the polymer chain is linked with the flexibility of the polymer chain, 

as it pushes the ion from one site to next and mobility is enhanced. The most important one is the low ionic conductivity 

as compared to the desire for the practical applications and another one is the mechanical stability.  So, a new type of 

solid-state advanced material needs to be a development which can provide us the desirable conductivity value for 

practical applications (~10-3 S cm-1) [12-13].  

Nowadays, due to increased demand for the Li-ion batteries globally, it becomes important to develop new 

technologies which can provide the safe and advanced energy storage system. As the nanoparticles (nanofiller, 

nanorod, nanowire) attractive candidate for developing all components of the battery. One important point to be 

noticed here that the nanomaterial have possibilities to fulfill the dream of the energy storage system with high energy 

density and the power density. As it is well known that the shape of the nanoparticle influence strongly all properties.   

Figure 3 depicts that the next generation energy storage system probably the battery must be of a smaller size with 

improved performances so that the empty space in the energy storage devices can be fulfilled [14].  

 

Figure 3. The illustration to a demonstration that future Li-ion batteries should be light and small without any 
compromise on energy and power. With permission from Ref. [14] Copyright © 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 

 

A number of reviews are published till now with a focus on different types of polymer electrolytes [15-19]. Song et 

al., highlighted the advantages and characteristics of gel polymer electrolyte for lithium-ion batteries. The chapter 

covered the four plasticized systems with main focus on, i.e., poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN), 

poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF) based electrolytes [20]. Stephan et al., 

chapter was focused toward the state-of-art of polymer electrolytes in view of their electrochemical and physical 

properties for the applications in lithium batteries with main focus on the polymer poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), 

poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF) and 

poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoro propylene) (PVdF-HFP) as electrolytes. The cycling behavior of 

LiMn2O4/polymer electrolyte (PE)/Li cells is also described [21]. Another review by Zhang et al., covered the 

separators used in liquid electrolyte Li-ion batteries. The classification of separators was done on basis of the structure 


and composition of the membranes followed by a discussion on the manufacture, characteristics, performance and 

modifications of the separators [22]. Stephan et al., discussed the composite polymer electrolytes (CPE) with the main 

focus on electrochemical and physical properties for the applications in lithium batteries. The polymer host discussed 

were poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and 

poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF) [23]. The above reviews mostly covered the gel and liquid polymer electrolytes with 

the main focus on the properties of the polymer electrolytes. To the best of our knowledge, no review articles with the 

main focus on the shape of the nanofiller in polymer electrolyte have been systematically concluded till now. Polymer 

nanocomposites are basically the solid polymer electrolytes which are a two-phase system, the first phase acts as host 

matrix in which different nanoparticles are dispersed [24]. The polymer nanocomposite enables us to develop polymer 

electrolyte with improved mechanical, thermal properties, voltage stability window and electrochemical properties.  

In this Chapter, a brief summary of polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) with nanoparticles of various shape are 

summarized in detail. First, the status of the LIB technology in the current practical applications is described and 

followed by the working principle of the battery. Then we discussed the characteristics of the polymer electrolytes 

and the properties of the constituents used, i.e. polymer host, salt, ionic liquid, plasticizer, nanoclay, nanofiller, 

nanorod, and nanowire. Then the preparation methods and the common characterization techniques used to identify 

the suitability of the polymer nanocomposites are discussed followed by the factors influenced by the addition of 

different nanoparticle. Finally, we have summarized the recent key developments done till now in the field of the solid 

polymer electrolytes.  

2. Polymer Electrolytes 

In energy storage devices polymer electrolyte plays the dual role of both electrolytes as well separator and is 

sandwiched between the electrodes. So, the polymer host which is to be used have some special characteristics that 

make its candidature stronger as compared to other. The polymer electrolytes are classified into three type, (i) gel 

polymer electrolytes: an organic solvent is added in the polymer matrix, (ii) solid polymer electrolyte: polymer matrix 

acts as host matrix and provides coordinating sites for cation migration, no organic solvent required, and (iii) composite 

polymer electrolyte: here nanoparticle is dispersed in the polymer salt matrix, also known as polymer nanocomposites. 

Figure 4 depicts the properties that are influenced by the addition of the nanoparticle and the synthesization techniques. 

These properties are linked with one another. The ionic conductivity is linked to the glass transition temperature and 

hence the flexibility. As ion transport in the polymer, electrolytes is supposed via the amorphous phase so crystallinity 

associated with the polymer matrix is minimized by altering the polymer chain rearrangement. The cation transference 

number and ion transference number are crucial for getting insights of applicability of any system for the battery. As 

during fabrication battery’s system is under the stress so, it needs to be focused along with the electrical properties 

[12, 15, 19]. There are various synthesization approaches for solid polymer electrolytes. The properties of the polymer 

nanocomposites are also affected by the preparation method.  


 

Figure 4. Representation of the properties required for the suitable polymer electrolyte and the synthesization 

techniques. 

As from three decades, a lot of research has been done on the salt/ionic liquid/plasticizer based polymer electrolytes. 

Although there was a desirable enhancement in the electrical parameters, poor mechanical strength limits their use in 

commercial applications. So, their alternative was developed and incorporation of nanoparticle was adopted as the 

most fascinating approach to develop the advanced polymer electrolytes. The suitable nanoparticle adopted were 

nanofiller, nanoclay and reported enhancement in the electrical as well as thermal/mechanical properties. As 

nanoparticle shape plays an effective role due to the interconnection of the electrical properties of the nanoparticle 

shape and surface group. Recently research is focused toward the development of nanoparticle with the high specific 

surface area. The two approaches were adopted one is the addition of nanorod and another is the addition of nanowire. 

Both are effective nanoparticle as a long continues continuous path is created that is beneficial for achieving fast ion 

transport.  

 

Figure 5. Approaches adopted for the modification of the polymer electrolyte and the progress made till now. 

The various approaches used for enhancement of the properties to fulfill the criteria of a solid state ionic conductor 

are displayed in Figure 5 (From left to right). As the various constituents play a different role in enhancing the electrical 

properties, thermal properties, and mechanical properties. Table 1 shows the important characteristics that are the 

deciding factor for selection of appropriate material for preparation of advanced polymer electrolyte. 


Table 1. Characteristics of constituents of polymer electrolytes. With permission from Ref. [10] Copyright © 2017 

IOP Publishing 

 

Polymer Host
Plasticizer

•
Provide fast segmental motion of 
polymer chain

•
Low glass transition temperature

•
High molecular weight

•
Low Viscosity

•
High degradation temperature

•
High Dielectric Constant

•
Must have electron donor groups 

•
Low Melting Point

•
High Boiling Point

•
High dielectric constant

•
Low viscosity

•
Easily Available

•
Economic

•
Inert to both electrodes

•
Good Safety and Nontoxic Nature

Solvent
Nanofiller

•
Abundant in Nature

•
Non Aqueous in Nature

•
Low Melting Point 

•
Low Viscosity

•
Large Flash Point

•
High Dielectric Constant

•
Good Solubility for Polymer and Salt

•
High Polarity 

•
Low Melting and High Boiling Point 

•
Safe and Nontoxic

•
Environmental friendly and cost effective

•
Inert to All Cell Components. 

•
Act as Lewis Acid for Interaction with 
Polymer 

•
High 
Dielectric 
Constant 
for 
better 

dissociation of salt

Salt
Nanoclay

•
Low Lattice Energy for More 
Availability of Free Ions

•
High Ionic Conductivity

•
High Mobility

•
Broad Voltage Stability Window

•
Low Ion Pair Formation at High 
Content

•
Large Anion Size

•
Small Cation size for fast migration 
between the electrodes

•
High 
Thermal 
and 
Chemical 

Stability

•
Large Ion Transference Number

•
Inert Towards Cell Components  

•
Layered/unique structure with high aspect 
ratio (∼1000). 

•
Complex rheological behavior

•
Amorphous 
behavior 
with 
acid 
base 

properties

•
Greater ability for intercalation and swelling

•
Increase solubility of salts

•
High swelling index (water and polar 
solvents)

•
High cation exchange capacity (CEC) (∼80 
meq/100 g) 

•
High external/internal surface area (∼31.82 
m2 g−1)

•
Appropriate interlayer charge (∼0.55)

•
Adjustable hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance

Ionic Liquid
Nanorod/Nanowire/Nanobelt

•
Good Thermal stability

•
Wide electrochemical stability

•
Low Melting Point 

•
Low viscosity for fast transport

•
Negligible Volatility

•
Non-flammability 

•
Negligible Vapor Pressure

•
High Ionic Conductivity

•
High Polarity 

•
High Dielectric Constant

•
High specific surface area

•
High aspect ratio

•
Long continuous path

•
Easily alignment perpendicular to electrodes

•
Oxygen vacancies on the surface for cation

•
Less agglomeration at high content

•
High thermal stability

•
Better chemical stability

•
Long cycle stability


Polymer nanocomposites 

Polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) are the recently adopted composite polymer electrolyte in the electrolyte community 

due to various advantages such as high safety, inflammable nature, high reliability and broad thermal/voltage stability. 

The synthesization of the composite polymer electrolyte include the addition of a salt in the host polymer matrix and 

a nanoparticle. The most critical requirement with the PNC is the formation of the amorphous content that will improve 

the electrode/electrolyte interface [12, 18]. The increased amorphous content also improves the use of full electrode 

material during cell operation. The two parameters ionic conductivity and the cation transference number are generally 

observed for deciding the electrolyte in energy storage/conversion devices. The conductivity enhancement can be done 

by various approaches, the addition of nanofiller, nanoclay, nanorod, nanowire. The main characteristics are that the 

nanoparticle must have high surface area and oxygen vacancies. The former one results in the formation of a long 

continue conducting path for cation migration while later one provides additional coordinating sites for the cation. In 

case of nanoclay, the polymer chains get intercalated inside the clay galleries and this increases the interchain 

separation as well as gallery spacing. This increase in both parameters leads to overall enhancement in the 

conductivity. Beside the nanofiller, nanoclay now nanorod/nanowire are attractive candidates being used for the 

preparation of the polymer nanocomposite. The two advantage with them is the formation of a long conductive 

continuous network and the oxygen vacancies for ion migration. Then one fundamental requirement is that the for 

ideal electrolyte cation transference number must be unity. So, the man approach is the mobilization of the anion to 

prevent the concentration polarization at the electrodes. The anion may be covalently bonded to the polymer backbone 

or some anion acceptors may be used.  

3. Materials and methodology 

3.1. Preparation Methods 

The preparation of the polymer nanocomposites is done by various methods, such as, Solution Cast Technique, In Situ 

Polymerization Technique Melt Intercalation Technique, Spin Coating Technique, Hot Press Technique, and Dip 

Coating Technique.  

Solution Cast Technique 

It is the traditional method due to its ease of fabrication and produces polymer film from various thicknesses (50-300 

μm). First of all the specified amount of the polymer host is dissolved in the appropriate solvent by continues stirring. 

Then the appropriate salt content is added to the homogenous polymer matrix and again stirred till a homogenous and 

transparent solution is obtained.  Now, to prepare the polymer nanocomposite, firstly the nanoparticle is added in a 

solvent and ultra-sonication is performed for better dispersion. Then the obtained solution is added to the polymer salt 

solution and stirred till a homogenous solution is obtained. Finally, the viscous solution is cast in the petri dish and 

kept at room temperature for evaporation of the solvent. Then kept in a vacuum oven to completely remove the residual 

solvent and film is peeled off from petri-dish [13]. The obtained film is kept in a desiccator with silica gel for further 

characterization and prevention from the moisture. For high-quality film, the solvent must be free from water content 

and should dissolve the polymer, salt, and nanoparticle [25].  

Spin Coating 


This method is almost identical to the solution cast technique. The key advantages of spin coating technique are 

simplicity and relative ease of preparation and produce uniform films from a few nanometers to a few microns in 

thickness.  In this technique, a small amount of solution is dropped on a substrate and kept on the spin coater which 

can be rotated at desired sped. The centripetal acceleration spreads the mixture on a substrate and followed by heating 

to evaporate the solvent. One point that must be taken care of is that the substrate spinning axis must be perpendicular 

to the substrate which is to be coated. The thickness of the film is influenced by, (i) viscosity of mixture, (ii) 

concentration of mixture, (iii) speed of rotation, and (iv) spin time. However, this method is advantageous only for 

low viscosity mixture not for too high viscosity mixture. For a gel mixture, the spin coater rotation is not enough to 

spread the mixture droplet to form thin film [26-27]. 

Hot Press Technique 

Hot press technique is a unique technique with features: low cost, solvent-free, a good film with dense materials and 

is a fast method. The set-up consists of weighing cylinder, heating chamber, basement, (d) temperature controller. 

Firstly, the polymer, salt, nanoparticle are grounded in the agate pestle for the required time. Then the obtained mixture 

is heated (close to melting temperature of polymer) and the obtained slurry is sandwiched between the stainless steel 

(SS blocks. Then pressure controlled system presses the slurry and obtained film is used for further characterizations 

[28-29]. 

Dip Coating 

The Dip Coating unique feature is that it enables us to obtain high-quality film on both side of the substrate and is 

low-cost technique. First of all the chosen substrate is dipped in the solvent [30]. The three-step process occurs, 

immersion, then deposition & drainage, followed by evaporation of the solvent. In immersion, the substrate is 

immersed in solution at a desired speed that provides sufficient time for coating. In the next step deposition & drainage, 

the substrate remains dipped in the solvent for sufficient time (dwell time) to enable interaction of the substrate with 

a solvent. Now, the substrate is pulled out slowly at a constant speed that leads to the formation of a thin film on the 

substrate. The in the final step evaporation, the solvent is evaporated and the substrate may be heated to completely 

remove the extra solvent. The thickness and quality of the film can be controlled by the speed of removal and density 

of the solution.  

Melt Intercalation Technique 

This is an important technique due to advantages such as; environment-friendly, cost-effective and no need of solvent. 

One point to be noted is that for better dispersion of nanoparticle, the optimization of thermal properties need to be 

performed as, the high temperature may alter the surface properties of the nanoparticle and may degrade it.  First of 

all, the annealing of the polymer matrix is done at high temperatures, then nanoparticle is added, followed by kneading 

the composite to achieve uniform distribution. In conclusion, the surface modification of clay/nanofiller, compatibility 

of filler with host polymer and processing conditions affects the dispersion of nanoparticle [31-32].  

3.2. Characterization techniques 

A battery assembly consists of three components, cathode, anode and electrolyte/separator. The solid polymer 

electrolyte (polymer nanocomposite) is sandwiched between the two electrodes and plays the dual role of both 

electrolytes (for ion migration) as well as a separator (for physical separation of electrodes to prevent short-circuit).  


So, the electrolyte plays a key role during operation of the battery. So, keeping in mind the desirable device for 

practical application there are some requirements or performance parameters that need to be measured experimentally 

in any polymer electrolyte cum separator [33].  

Fourier Transform infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR) 

The salt dissociation capability of the polymer host plays an important role in deciding the suitable polymer electrolyte 

with balanced properties. The polymer host must have the high dissolution capability to boost the salt dissociation 

into cation and anion and to fulfill the purpose of the fast ionic conductor. The dissociation capability of the host 

polymer is indicated by the presence of the polar group of polymer (−O−, C ≡ N−, C = O, ) and how strongly it gets 

coordinated with the cation. Another important point is the less tendency of the chain reorganization so that complete 

polymer chain can effectively participate in separating the cation and anion. Further the supportive role is played by 

the salt in deciding the overall solvation ability. The salt must have bulky anion as they have low lattice energy and 

supports in overcoming the coulombic interaction between ions. The mutual dissolution ability of the polymer and 

salt lead to the cation migration via the segmental motion of the polymer chains. Beside the polymer chain and the 

salt solvent also influence the dissolution ability of the all participating species. The solvent must have the high 

dielectric constant and the high dipole moment so that the ion association can be hindered. The overall effect of the 

three key players is the effective number of free ion carriers for transport and elimination of the ion pair as they do 

not participate in the conduction. So, to achieve the balanced properties the suitable combination of the polymer, salt 

and the solvent is a vital requirement for the fast ionic conductor. The properties of the individual polymer, salt and 

the solvent are discussed in the forthcoming section.  

Complex Impedance Spectroscopy (CIS) 

As ionic conduction decides the performance of an energy storage system. The ionic conductivity depends on the 

molecular weight of the polymer, cation/anion size, and viscosity of polymer chains.  The polymer electrolyte, 

therefore, must possess high ionic conductivity and prevent the flow of the electrons hence the negligible electronic 

conductivity. As the migration of anions may affect the battery performance so its migration is avoided during the 

design of any polymer electrolyte system. The main strategy is to immobilize the anion and the only cation dominates 

in the conduction. The ionic conductivity of any polymer electrolyte system (σ) is linked with two parameters; a 

number of free charge carriers and ion mobility (equation 1). 

𝜎 = ∑ 𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑖𝜇𝑖          (1) 

Here, Here, ni represents the effective number of charge carriers of type i; qi is the charge of the charge carriers, and 

𝜇𝑖 is the mobility. 

An important factor that influences the ionic conductivity is the activation energy. This is the minimum energy that is 

required for ion migration and is obtained from the conductivity vs. temperature plot [34]. Activation energy decreases 

with the increase of the temperature. Generally, it is supposed that the crystalline phase dominates below the melting 

temperature while the amorphous phase is effective above the melting temperature. So, both the regions are examined 

by two conduction mechanisms dependent on temperature, (i) Arrhenius behavior and (ii) Vogel-Tammann-Fulcher 

(VTF) behavior. The Arrhenius equation describes the relation between log 𝜎 and T-1, as shown in Eq. (2) 


𝜎 = 𝜎𝑜 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− 𝐸𝑎

𝑘𝑇)          (2) 

Here, Ea is the activation energy, which can be calculated from the nonlinear least-squares fitting of the data from 

plots of log 𝜎 vs. T-1. For polymer electrolytes, plots of 𝜎 vs. T-1 are typically nonlinear, indicating that the conductivity 

mechanism involves an ionic hopping motion coupled with the relaxation and/or segmental motion of the polymeric 

chains. 

The VTF equation can be derived from the quasi-thermodynamic models with the free volume and configurational 

entropy, and its behavior can be related coupled motion with the segmental motion. This can be expressed by equation 

3. 

𝜎 = 𝜎𝑜𝑇−1/2 exp (−
𝐵

𝑇 − 𝑇𝑜

)         (3) 

Here, 𝜎𝑜 is the pre-exponential factor, which is related to the number of charge carriers ni, B is the pseudo activation 

energy of the conductivity, and To is the reference temperature associated with the ideal glass transition temperature 

(Zero mobility temperature). For practical aspects, the high ionic conductivity of the order of 10-2-10-3 S cm-1 is 

required and electronic conductivity of the order of 10-6-10-10 S cm-1.   This enhances the charging/discharging rate 

and cyclic stability. 

Table 2. Definition and comparison of the laws governing the transport phenomena in polymer electrolytes. With 
permission from Ref. [35] Copyright ©1997 Elsevier. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i-t characteristics (Transference Number) 

It is one of essential parameters that must be close to the unity (~1) for a good ionic conductor and function of the 

ionic conductivity. One main drawback associated with the polymer electrolytes is concentration polarization (CP) on 

the electrode interface which hinders the ion migration during cell operation. This affects the overall performance of 

the device and observed in terms of the low energy density and power density.  So, the main strategy to reduce the CP 

is to immobilize the anion and keep only the active species as the main hero of the charge transport scenario. This 

fulfills the idea of the single state ionic conductor.  So, the large value of the cation transference number also plays an 

effective role in the enhancement of the fundamental property that is ionic conductivity. Two approaches are adopted 

for immobilizing the anion.  One approach suggests the anion interaction with the hydrogen of the polymer backbone 

(hydrogen bond formation) another is the introduction of the anon receptors. Generally, there are two terms here, 

cation transference number and ion transference number.  

 

Arrhenius
VOGEL-TAMMAN-FULCHER  
(VTF)

WLF (WILLIAMS, LANDEL & 
FERRY)

Expression
𝜎 = 𝜎𝑜 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− 𝐸𝑎

𝑘𝑇)
𝜎 = 𝜎𝑜𝑇−1/2 exp (−
𝐵

𝑇 − 𝑇𝑜

)
𝜎 = 𝜎𝑜 exp (− (𝐶1(𝑇 − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓)

𝐶2 + T − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓

)

Typical Values
−
𝜎𝑜 = 0.4 S cm-1, B=2.210-3 K-1, 
To=210, KTg-50

𝐶1 = 17.4, 𝐶2 = 52 𝐾, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 = 𝑇𝑔 =
240 𝐾

Derived From
𝑘 = a 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− 𝐸𝑎

𝑘𝑇)
Variation of viscosity with T

 T1/2 exp (−
B

T − To

)

Scaling factor 𝑎𝑇for relaxation:

𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑎𝑇) = − (𝐶1(𝑇 − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓)

𝐶2 + T − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓

Valid Relations 
Needed

y=mx+c
𝐷 =

𝑘𝑇

6𝜋r Stokes-Einstein
𝜎 =

𝑍𝑒2

𝑘𝑇 𝐷 Nernst-Einstein

Correspondance
VTFWLF

To0 to in VTF
Neglect T1/2 prefactor in 𝜎𝑜 from 
VTF C1C2=B

𝐶2 = 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓 − 𝑇𝑜


 

 

Table 3. Definition and comparison of the transference number in polymer electrolytes 

Cation transference number
Ion transference number

Expression
tcation = (Is(V − IoRo)

Io(V − IsRs))
tion = (1 − Ie

It

)

Symbol 
Depiction

V is the applied dc voltage for sample polarization, Io and Is are 

the currents before and after polarization, Ro and Rs are the 
initial and steady-state resistance of the passivation layers

It, is total initial current due to ions and electrons 

contribution and Ie is residual current due to electrons 

contribution only

Value
~1
~100 %

 

Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) 

Glass transition temperature (Tg) is one of the most fundamental properties of the polymer electrolytes that is directly 

linked to the electrochemical properties. It is influenced by the polymer chain arrangement, crystallinity, viscosity, 

polymer interactions or polarity and molecular weight of the polymers. As most of the polymers are crystalline in 

nature. The ionic conduction in case of the polymers is supposed to occur via the amorphous phase and segmental 

motion of the polymer chains which is further linked with the flexibility of chains. This flexibility criterion is specified 

by the glass transition temperature (Tg) value. It is defined as a transition temperature at which any system goes from 

rigid to rubbery/viscous phase. Below Tg, there is no ion migration or chain are not moving. While above the Tg there 

is a drastic change in the intrinsic properties (density, specific heat, mechanical modulus, mechanical energy 

absorption, their dielectric and acoustical equivalents) of the polymer that supports the fast segmental motion or less 

viscosity [36].  The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurement is performed to measure the Tg and it also 

provides the melting and crystallinity of the used material. The lower value of the Tg indicates enhanced flexibility for 

the polymer matrix. This increase in flexibility improved the ion swimming rate between electrodes with the 

coordinating sites of the polymer chains. So, the main strategy for lowering the value of the Tg is to alter the polymer 

chain arrangement and disruption of the covalent bonding between the polymer chains. This can be done by the 

addition of nanofiller, plasticizer, nanoclay etc. Generally, the addition of the above said particles increase the free 

volume available for the ion migration and this makes faster ion migration. 

Crystallinity 

The ordering of the polymer chain (long range and short range) affects the ion migration in a polymer electrolyte. As, 

long range order is associated with the crystallinity which in case of the polymer electrolyte’s must be lower for faster 

ion migration. So, the crystallinity of any system provides sufficient information regarding the material and how it 

will play its role during the ion transport. The crystallinity of any polymer material is obtained by the X-ray diffraction 

(XRD) and the Differentials scanning calorimetry (DSC). It needs to be mentioned here that the amorphous content 

supports the fast ion migration in case of the polymer electrolytes. The amorphous content is achieved by disrupting 

the crystalline arrangement of the polymer chains. The best approach is the addition of the nanofiller and alters the 

arrangement by the Lewis acid-base interaction with polymer chains. The intercalation of the polymer chains in the 

clay gallery also lowers the crystallinity. This increases the free volume available for the ion migration as now 

segmental motion of the polymer chains becomes faster and ion jump faster from one coordinating site to another. 


The amorphous content can be visualized by the Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), 

Transmissions electron microscope (TEM) and atomic force microscope (AFM).   

Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) 

For fulfilling the requirement of polymer electrolyte for the application aspects it must have a broad electrochemical 

stability window (ESW) and depends on the stability of individual cation/anion.  It is defined as the difference between 

the potentials of the oxidation reaction and reduction reaction. As one characteristic a polymer electrolyte must possess 

is that it must be inert toward both electrodes. For this, the oxidation potential must be higher than the embedding 

potential of cation (Li+) in the cathode and the reduction potential must be lower than that of lithium metal in the 

anode. The desirable range of the ESW is ~4-5 V and is enough for the commercialized systems.  

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) 

Thermal stability of a battery device is important to avoid the material decomposition and explosion during cell 

operation. So, the thermal stability is investigated by TGA to check the safety window of a polymer electrolyte. As, 

different material have different decomposition temperature range and for long-term cycle stability all material must 

lie beyond the decomposition range. So, for the safe working of the battery system, the thermal stability must be large. 

The approaches for the enhancement of the thermals stability is the addition of nanoparticles in the polymer matrix.  

Stress-Strain curve  

During the commercialization of the battery or any energy storage device, one important property is the mechanical 

stability. So, the along with high cation transference number and the ionic conductivity it must have mechanical 

property sufficient enough for long term cycle stability. The mechanical stability is measured by the stress-strain curve 

in terms of the modulus, stress, and strain. As during the cell packaging the polymer electrolyte is sandwiched between 

the two electrodes so, it must have the capability to sustain the pressure applied. The polymer electrolyte having poor 

mechanical strength may short-circuit the electrodes during cell operation. So, the material must be flexible by nature 

and brittleness is avoided. It must have inherent characteristics that may absorb the small internal shocks and does not 

affect the electrodes. There are various strategies that are adopted for the enhancement of the modulus, stress, and 

strain. The most suitable and the attractive approaches are the dispersion of the nanofiller, nanoclay and nanoparticle 

it high aspect ratio such as nanorod, nanowire, nanotube.  Here these nanoparticles may play the role of the crosslinking 

center and overall enhancement in the mechanical property of the complete polymer matrix is achieved.   

4. Recent Updates 

4.1.  Nanofiller dispersed polymer nanocomposites 

There are various reports toward the addition of the different nanofiller in the polymer matrix for improving the 

electrical, thermal and mechanical properties. Generally, all nanofiller addition suppresses the crystallinity and 

crosslinking alters the polymer chain arrangement. Another effective point is that nanofiller supports salt dissociation 

via Lewis acid-base interactions and provides additional conducting sites for ion transport. But still, there is lack of 

availability of a polymer matrix with enhanced amorphous content and weak polymer-nanofiller interaction results in 

nanofiller agglomeration. So, Lin et al., [37] reported the preparation of (PEO)−monodispersed ultrafine SiO2 

(MUSiO2) composite polymer electrolyte (PEO-MUSiO2 CPE) via in situ hydrolysis of tetraethyl orthosilicate(TEOS) 

in PEO solution. Basically, advantage with the in situ hydrolysis is that the polymer-nanofiller interaction is more 


effective in suppressing the crystallinity by linking the polymer chains with the nanofiller surface. Two possible 

dominant interactions exist here, (i) between the hydroxyl groups at the ends of PEO chains with the surface of SiO2, 

(ii) wrapping and embedding of PEO chains inside SiO2 spheres. 

TEM image evidence that the higher polymer density was for the in situ prepared composites as compared to ex-situ 

and indicates the presence of strong interaction between the polymers a nanofiller (Figure 6 d-f). Further, XRD also 

evidences the superior evidence of reduction of crystallinity as compared to the ex situ synthesis (Figure 6 j). Further 

FTIR and DSC also evidence the reduction of crystallinity by in situ synthesis. One reason is disruption of the polymer 

chain reorganization tendency due to the interaction between MUSiO2 spheres and polymer chains. Another reason 

is improved surface area due to uniformity in size and distribution.  

 

Figure 6. Characterizations of in situ CPE. (a−f) TEM images of in situ PEO-MUSiO2 composite with different sizes 
of ∼12 nm (a, d), ∼ 30 nm (b,e), and ∼45 nm (c, f). PEO was stained with 0.1% phosphotungstic acid to show better 
contrast. (g−i) SEM images of as-synthesized correspondingMUSiO2 spheres (without PEO) with various sizes of 
∼12 nm (g), ∼ 30 nm (h), and ∼45 nm (i). (j) Comparison on XRD spectra of pure PEO(A), ceramic-free SPE (B), 
PEO-fumed SiO2 CPE (C), ex situ CPE (D), and in situ CPE (E). (k−n) FT-IR spectra at 610−645 cm−1 and 
corresponding Gaussian−Lorentzian fitting of the ClO4− absorbance for ceramic-free PEO SPE (k), PEO-fumed SiO2 
CPE (l), ex situ CPE (m), and in situ CPE (n). With permission from Ref. [37] Copyright © 2016 American Chemical 
Society. 


Another remarkable evidence is increased number of free ion charge carriers (left to right) in figure 6 k-n. The degree 

of dissociation of salt was higher for the sample synthesized by in situ synthesis following the relation in situ (98.1 

%) > ex situ (92.8 %) > PEO-fumed SiO2 CPE (87.4%) > ceramic-free SPE (85.0%). This was attributed to the 

simultaneous achievement of two parameters, uniform distribution of SiO2 and increased the segmental motion of 

polymer chains. The ionic conductivity also shows enhancement for polymer electrolyte synthesized by in situ and is 

in the range 10-4-10-5 S cm-1 (at ambient temperature) and 1.2×10-3 S cm-1 (at 60 oC). Further, the electrochemical 

stability window was improved for in situ synthesis (> 5.5 V) as compared to ex-situ synthesis (~4.7 V) and may be 

due to the strong adsorption effect on anion for in situ synthesis [38]. Further the rate capability test of solid-state 

battery (LFP/CPE/Li) displays double capacity retention for in situ synthesis (120 mAh/g at 90 oC and 100 mAh/g at 

60 oC) as compared to ex situ (65 mAh/g), while for ceramic free it was 50 mAh/g. For in situ cycle stability was 

achieved and after 80 cycle capacity delivered was 105 mAh/g. After 80 cycles decrease was observed due to the poor 

interface stability and dendrite growth may occur. 

Pal et al., [39] reported the PMMA-LiClO4 based polymer nanocomposite electrolyte with TiO2 as nanofiller using 

solution cast technique. XRD diffractograms depict complete dissociation of the salt and PMMA peak broadens with 

the addition of nanofiller. The addition of 1 wt. % TiO2 evidences the optimum enhancement of the amorphous content. 

Further TEM analysis evidences the non-uniform distribution and clustering, with no effect on particle size with 

nanofiller loading.  

 


Figure 7. (a) Charge-discharge profile at C/16 of graphite/plasticized PMMA-LiClO4-1 wt% TiO2/LiCoO2 lithium ion 
polymer coin cell at 25 oC. (b) Cycling performance of plasticized PMMA-LiClO4-1 wt% TiO2 electrolyte at C/16 at 
25 oC. With permission from Ref. [39] Copyright © 2018 Elsevier. 
 
The changes in the peak of pure PMMA (1732, 1492, 1444, 1385, 1192, 1150, 988, 966, 844 and 756 cm-1, C=O 

asymmetric stretching of the carbonyl group, –CH2 scissoring, O-CH3 bending, -CH2 twisting, C-O-C bending, 

carboxylic acid ester group, C-C symmetric stretching, -CH2 wagging, -CH2 asymmetric rocking and –CH2 rocking) 

with addition of the salt and nanofiller in FTIR spectra confirms the presence of polymer-ion, ion-ion interactions. 

Also, the number of free charge carriers were more for low clay content and attributed to the cation interaction with 

electron rich group of PMMA.  DSC analysis shows a decrease of the Tg with the addition of nanofiller while at high 

nanofiller content increase is due to nanofiller cluster formation. TGA analysis shows thermal stability up to 250 oC 

and is in the desirable range for application purpose. The solid-state battery configuration with PMMA-LiClO4- 1 wt% 

TiO2 as electrolyte shows the discharge capacity of 123 mAh/g for the 1st cycle and 136 mAh/g for 1st charging cycle 

with coulombic efficiency 100 % (Figure 7). 

As a lot of reports are available by addition of nonporous inorganic nanofiller but mesoporous nanoparticle may be 

vital alternative and may fulfill the dream of single ion conductor. So, the suppression of crystallinity along with 

immobilization of anion are simultaneously resolved by introducing the bulky imide group. Liang et al., [40] prepared 

the PEO-PMMA based polymer nanocomposites with two salts (LiClO4 or LiTFSI) and nano-Al2O3 was used as 

nanofiller by solution cast technique. FESEM analysis showed the more uniform dispersion for PEO-PMMA-

LiTFSIAl2O3 and a more even surface morphology which evidences the lowering of the interfacial resistance. Fig. 8 

a shows the impedance spectrum for the polymer-based electrolyte prepared at room temperature. The conductivity 

was increased with the nanofiller addition and is about 9.39×10-7 S cm-1. This increase in the conductivity was due to 

the increased salt dissociation and increased flexibility. The thermal stability displayed by the TGA graph was above 

300 oC and was improved after addition of the nanofiller. Also, the higher stability was shown with LiTFSI salt as 

compared to the LiClO4. The temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity follows Arrhenius behavior and 

activation energy decreases from the 20.10 kJ/mol to 10.96 kJ/mol. The voltage stability window of the prepared 

system was up to 4.9 V. Further mechanical analysis was analyzed from the stress-strain curves. The tensile strength 

was 2.84 MPa (PEO-PMMA-LiClO4-Al2O3) with an elongation-at-break value at 31.7 %. While for PEOPMMA-

LiTFSI-Al2O3 electrolyte the tensile strength increased to 3.26 MPa (elongation-at-break value at 11.7%.) and is 

higher than the PEO-PMMA-LiTFSI (tensile strength= 2.78 MPa, elongation-at-break value at 9.5%).  

Kim et al., [41] reported the preparation of polymer nanocomposite using the functionalized mesoporous silica 

(FMSTFSISPE) nanoparticles (av. size 50 nm) with PEO as host matrix. The prepared films were transparent and 

display smooth surface morphology with optimum content 30 wt. %. DSC analysis evidences the single glass transition 

temperature and absence of melting peak suggest its use in a wide range. Also, for 1 wt. % loading it shows a 

comparatively better effect in suppressing the crystallinity as compared to nanofiller and may be due to the uniform 

distribution which lowers the reorganization of polymer chains. AT high content increase in the Tg was observed and 

was attributed to the formation of temporary crosslinking due to the high surface area and mobility reduces. The 

highest ionic conductivity was ~10-3 S cm-1 (At 25 oC) for 30 wt % FMS-TFSISPE (Ea=26 kJ/mol) and was 10 times 

higher as compared to desirable limit (Fig 8 b). This was improved than the nonporous silica which displays 


conductivity ∼ 2×10−5 S cm-1 (At 25 oC) (Ea=34 kJ/mol). Also, the Li+ transference number (tLi+) was ∼0.9 and 

evidences the single-ion conductive matrix. This increase in conductivity and tLi+ with the mesoporous silica and 

porous nature along with large charge carriers overall supports the fast ion conduction. Further mechanical properties 

were improved and modulus was 3×104 Pa for 30 wt % FMS-TFSISPE and follows a relative trend with Tg. One 

attention-grabbing point was that both modulus and conductivity were improved simultaneously. It was concluded 

that the well-ordered mesoporous channel (high surface area and high pore volume) in the FMS-TFSISPE 

nanoparticles are superior’s candidate for fulfilling the criteria of single ion conductor where anion is in an 

immobilized state in the pore wall. 

 

Figure 8. (a) Impedance spectrum for the SS/PEO-PMMA-lithium salt (EO/Li+ = 20)/SS cell at room temperature. 
With permission from Ref. [40] Copyright © 2015 Elsevier. (b) Temperature dependence of the ionic conductivities 
σDC of the nanohybrid electrolyte series (FMS-TFSISPE-PEO, filled symbols) with increasing amount of FMS-
TFSISPE nanoparticles, ΦNP, compared with σDC of the nonporous silica nanoparticles-based electrolytes (SiO2-
TFSISPE30-PEO, open symbols) (σDC at 298 K vs ΦNP in the inset). With permission from Ref. [41] Copyright © 
2017 American Chemical Society. 
 
Tang et al., [42] reported the preparation of polymer nanocomposite by dispersing the hybrid nanofiller 

(montmorillonite clay−CNT hybrid fillers) into PEO-LIClO4 matrix. XRD analysis demonstrates the disruption of the 

crystallinity with the addition of nanofiller and may be due to the alteration in polymer chain arrangement. The FTIR 

evidenced the presence of strong interaction between the polymer matrix and cation and addition of hybrid nanofiller 

support in the smooth migration of the cation. The FTIR deconvolution evidence that for 10 wt. Clay-CNT highest 

number of free charged were available for condition (Figure 9 a). This increase may be due to the negative surface 

charge layer on CNT and ether group which increases the salt dissociation rate (Figure 9 b). Another aspect is that 

there may be an increase of free volume due to less possibility of chain reorganization. This increase in free volume 

is linked with faster ion mobility as evidenced by the impedance analysis in terms of conductivity. The highest ionic 

conductivity was 2.07×10-5 S cm-1 for the optimum 10 wt. % Clay-CNT and with further increase hybrid nanofiller 

aggregation occurs which lowers the conductivity value. The mechanical strength and elongation were also much 

higher as compared to pure PEO. This may be attributed to the principal characteristics of the hybrid nanofiller, (i) 


high aspect ratio and (ii) rough surface. Both parameters lead to an improved interface between the polymer and 

nanofiller and hence the improved mechanical property.  

 

Figure 9. (a) Fraction of dissociated salt ions (ClO4− anions) based on FTIR analysis of pure and filled PEO electrolyte. 
(b) Schematics of the interactions between clay, carbon nanotubes, polymer chains, and lithium salt ions. With 
permission from Ref. [42] Copyright Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) DSC results for the 
electrolyte membranes. With permission from Ref. [43] Copyright Copyright © 2016 Elsevier., (d) Linear sweep 
voltammograms of SS/PEO-LiTFSI/Li (solid line) and SS/PEO-MIL-53(Al)-LiTFSI/Li (dotted line) batteries at 80 
oC (black) and 120 oC (red). The electrolytes were swept in the potential range from 2.5 V to 6.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) at a 
rate of 10 mV s-1. With permission from Ref. [44] Copyright © 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 

Zhao et al., [43] reported the preparation of the composite polymer electrolyte based on PEO- LiTFSI, and 

Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5 (PO4)3 (LAGP) as nanofiller.  The highest ionic conductivity was 6.76 × 10−4 S cm−1 (at 60 °C) for 

LAGP-I and it also has smaller particle size. Further DSC analysis shows the lowering of the glass transition 

temperature and melting temperature (-42 oC and 52.8 oC) this indicates that the increased amorphous content favors 

faster ion transport (Figure 9 c). The cation transference number was > 0.36 and is attributed to the anion blockage. 


Fillers also plays the role of the crosslinking network and increase the cation transference number by providing 

additional conducting pathways. The voltage stability window was 5.3 V for 20 wt. % LAGP-I. The electrochemical 

analysis of the LiFePO4/PEO-20% LAGP-I/Li cell demonstrates capacities of 166, 155, 143 and 108 mAh g−1 at 

current rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 and 1C, respectively with  capacity retention of cell 44% (after 50 cycles).  

Zhu et al., [44] reported the preparation of solid polymer electrolyte using the Metal-organic framework aluminum 

1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (MIL-53(Al)) is used as a filler with PEO as host polymer and LiTFSI (EO : Li ratio=10, 

15, 20, 25) as salt. SEM analysis suggests the uniform surface and morphology was unaltered with cylindrical particles. 

The ionic conductivity was 10 wt. % MIL-53 (Al) content for EO:Li ratio of 15 : 1 with value 1.62×10-5 S cm-1 (at 30 

oC) and 9.71×10-4 S cm-1 (at 80 oC). This was also further supported by the lowering of phase transition temperature 

from 56.9 oC to 50.3 oC with the addition of MIL-53(Al) and this enhances the amorphous content and hence the 

improved conductivity. The Li+ transference number was increased from 0.252 to 0.343 with MIL-53(Al) addition 

and may be due to the formation of the metal-organic framework which enhances the ion mobility. Then the zeta 

electric potential measurement shows the pH about 7 and it indicates that the MIL-53(Al) particles have strong Lewis 

acidic properties. This helps in the salt dissociation while anion is coordinated with the Lewis acidic surface of the 

nanoparticle. The overall effect is the disruption of the crystalline nature and improved ionic conductivity. The 

electrochemical stability window of the polymer electrolyte was 5.31 V at 80 oC and 5.10 V at 120 oC with nanoparticle 

and is larger than the nanoparticle free system which shows 5.15 V at 80 oC and 4.99 V at 120 oC (Figure 9 d). The 

thermal stability analysis evidences the thermal stability of about 200 oC with the first degradation beginning from 

195 oC (decomposition of PEO) followed by degradation at 375 oC (decomposition of LiTFSI) [45]. Also, the 

mechanical properties were enhanced with nanoparticle addition and may be due to the formation of crossing-linking 

centers for PEO. Then the cyclic performance of the solid-state battery (LiFePO4/PEO-MIL-53(Al)-LiTFSI/Li) was 

tested and the initial discharge capacity was 127.1 mAhg-1 (at 5 C and 80 oC) and 136.4 mA h g-1 at 120 oC. After the 

300 cycles, the discharge capacity was 116.0 mAh g-1 at 80 oC and 129.2 mA h g-1 at 120 oC.  Even after 14 cycles the 

retention ratios of 52.4 % and 61.3 %, respectively were achieved at 80 oC and 120 oC. 

Vignabooran et al., [46] reported the preparation of the composite polymer electrolyte based on PEO-LiTf-EC-TiO2. 

The purpose of this research was to study the combined effect of the plasticizer and the nanofiller, as both plays 

influence the polymer matrix in a different manner. The highest ionic conductivity was 4.9×10-5 S cm-1 for the 10 wt. 

% TiO2 (at 30 oC, Ea=78.8 kJ/mol) and was attributed to the Lewis acid base character of the nanofiller surface. The 

nano filler surface affects in two ways, one is a reduction of the polymer recrystallization tendency and another is an 

increase of salt dissociation or lowering in ion pairing. Both simultaneously supports the fast ion migration. Further 

addition of the EC increases the conductivity upto 1.6×10-4 S cm-1 for the 50 wt. % EC (at 30 oC, Ea=57.5 kJ/mol). 

Further DSC analysis supports the enhancement in the conductivity as both glass transition temperature (-46 oC to -

50 oC) and the melting temperature (60 oC to 50 oC) show decrease in the signal temperature with addition of the EC 

in TiO2 based polymer matrix.  

Another report by Klongkan et al., [47] investigated the effect of PEG-DOP plasticizer and Al2O3 nanofiller on the 

PEO-LiCF3SO3 based polymer matrix. DSC spectra’s shows the decrease of the crystallinity from 37.31 % (PEO-15 

wt.%LiCF3SO3) to 23.11 % (PEO-15 wt.% LiCF3SO3-20 wt.%DOP) and 18.61 % (PEO-15 wt.%LiCF3SO3-20 


wt.%Al2O3). The decrease in crystallinity on the addition of salt was due to the cation coordination with the PEO and 

it alters the polymer chain arrangement, hence the increased segmental mobility. Addition of nanofiller increases 

slightly the Tg and Tm and that may be due to the crosslinking of the polymer chain while crystallinity reduction is 

observed [48]. The ionic conductivity increases from the 1.00×10-6 S cm-1 to 7.60×10-4 S cm-1 (PEO-15 wt. % 

LiCF3SO3-20 wt.% DOP) and 8.64×10-5 S cm-1 (PEO-15 wt.% LiCF3SO3-20 wt.%Al2O3). This increase in the 

conductivity was attributed to increased amorphous phase with the addition of the nanofiller and the plasticizer. The 

further mechanical analysis supports the both DSC and the conductivity data. The stress at maximum load, percentage 

strain at maximum load and Young’s modulus are 4.4 MPa, 3351% and 15MPa, respectively for the polymer matrix 

(PEO-15 wt% LiCF3SO3). This decrease was attributed to the disruption of the polymer chains sliding. Further 

addition of the DOP also lowers the mechanical properties and that may be attributed to the effective role of the 

plasticizer which lowers the friction (increase the mobility) and it lowers the mechanical properties [49-50].  

Another report using the hybrid nanofiller was by Polu et al., [51] and it was based on the effect of polyhedral 

oligomeric silsesquioxane-polyethylene glycol (POSS-PEG(n = 4)) nanofiller on the physicochemical and 

electrochemical properties of PEO-LiDFOB based nanocomposite solid polymer electrolyte. FESEM micrographs 

depict the change of morphology from rough (of PEO) to smoother on the addition of nanoparticle and may be 

associated with the complete dissociation of both salt and nanofiller.  XRD analysis confirms the insertion of nanofiller 

in the polymer salt matrix and enhancement of amorphous content is achieved. Further DSC analysis confirmed the 

increased amorphous content and fast segmental motion. The highest ionic conductivity was 7.28×10-5 S cm-1 for 40 

wt. % of the nanoparticle.  

 

Figure 10. (a) TGA heating traces 0 wt. % and 40 wt. % POSS-PEG doped PEO12:LiDFOB electrolyte membranes 

and (b) Stress–strain curves of PEO12:LiDFOB and PEO12:LiDFOB:40 wt. % POSS-PEG polymer electrolyte 

membranes. With permission from Ref. [51], Copyright © 2017 Elsevier. 

This increase may be attributed to the increased free charge carriers and the increased segmental motion of polymer 

chains. The increase in temperature increases the polymer flexibility and hence the increased conductivity that was 

evidenced by the reduction of activation energy from 0.594 eV to 0.433 eV with 40 wt. % nanoparticle. The 


electrochemical stability window of the prepared system was up to 4.7 V and is in the desirable range. The thermal 

stability window of the prepared PNC was ~200 oC (Figure 10 a). The stress-strain curve evidences the increase of 

stress from 0.076 to 0.099 MPa and elongation break from 472 to 516 %. This may be due to the key role of nanofiller 

as a crosslinking center (Figure 10 b).  The electrochemical analysis of the cell (Li/PEO:LiDFOB:x wt% POSS-PEG(x 

= 0 and 40)/LCO-CBL) shows initial capacity up to 187 mAh/g (for 0 wt. % nanofiller is 158 mAh/g) and after 50 

cycle discharge capacity was 143 mAh/g (for 0 wt. % nanofiller is 122 mAh/g) with coulombic efficiency of 99 % at 

25th cycle.. 

Another report by Wang et al., [52] explored the role of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5 (PO4)3 (LAGP) on the PEO (LiTFSI) in the 

suppression of Li dendrite growth. XRD evidences the decrease of the crystallinity. Figure 11 a shows the process for 

the cell fabrication. Figure 11 b shows the ion transport mechanism on the addition of LAGP (for two system) and the 

preferred path is a path having low activation energy. The voltage stability window was broader (~5.12 V) as compared 

to pure PEO. The electrochemical performance was investigated for the cell composition Li-PEO (LiTFSI)/ LAGP-

PEO1/LiMFP within the voltage 2.5−4.5 V (@0.2 C, At 50 oC) as shown in Figure 11 c. The initial discharge capacity 

was 161.7 mAh g−1 (Coulombic efficiency of 92.4%) and after 10 cycles the Coulombic efficiency was above 99%. 

Figure 11 d shows the rate discharge performance of the Li-PEO-500000- (LiTFSI)/LAGP-PEO1/LiMFP cell at 50 

°C (@ 0.1 C, 0.2 C, 0.5 c & 1.0 C). Even at a high rate (1.0 C) the discharge capacity was 115 mAh g−1. Figure 11 e 

show the CV, which confirms the reversible process of Li+ extraction and insertion.  The oxidation peaks at 3.6 and 

4.23 V (attributed to Fe2+ to Fe3+ and Mn2+ to Mn3+) and the reduction peaks at 3.5 and 3.96 V ( Attributed to the 

reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ and Mn3+ to Mn2+) agrees well with the charge−discharge plateaus as shown in Figure 11 c.  

 

Figure 11. (a) All-solid-state Li-PEO (LiTFSI)/LAGP-PEO (LiTFSI)/LiMFP cells, (b) ) Li+ ion transport 

mechanism in the composite solid electrolyte with different contents of PEO (LiTFSI): (b-1) LAGP-PEO1, 

(b-3) LAGP-PEO5, (c) Charge/discharge curves. (d) Rate performance of Li-PEO-500000(LiTFSI)/LAGP-


PEO1/LiMFP cell (cutoff voltage: 2.5−4.5 V, 50 °C). (e) CV curve of LiMFP at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 

in 2.5−4.75 V at 50 °C. With permission from Ref. [52] Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 

Arya et al., [53] investigated the effect of various nanofiller (BaTiO3, CeO2, Er2O3, TiO2) on the PEO-PVC blend 

polymer electrolyte. The XRD analysis confirms the polymer nanocomposite formation. FTIR provides evidence of 

interaction among the functional groups of the polymer with the ions and the nanofiller in terms of shifting and change 

of the peak profile. The highest ionic conductivity is 2.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 with a wide electrochemical stability window 

of ~ 3.5 V for 10 wt. % Er2O3. Figure 12 shows the proposed ion transport mechanism.  It depicts that the anion is 

going to coordinate with the polymer backbone while cation with the ether group of the polymer chain. Nanofiller 

with the surface group also helps in the salt dissociation and polymer-ion-nanofiller interaction enhances the overall 

ion transport. Also, the coordinating interaction of the cation with the polymer chain modifies the polymer chain 

arrangement and disorder is produced that evidences the increase in the polymer chain flexibility. The enhanced 

flexibility is an indication of the enhanced conductivity, and the fast segmental motion of the polymer chain provides 

a path for ion transport. 

 

Figure 12. Proposed interaction scheme in the polymer nanocomposite matrix. With permission from Ref. [53] 

Copyright © 2017 Springer. 

4.2. Nanoclay dispersed polymer nanocomposites 

As studied earlier that the nanofiller enhances the possibility of interaction between polymer-ion via the Lewis-Acid-

Base interactions. It alters the polymer chain arrangement and the more free volume is available for the ion transport. 

Another important role is played by the surface group of the nanofiller and it leads to the formation of the conductive 

continuous network. The overall enhancement is of the amorphous content that is beneficial for a fast solid state ionic 


conductor. But with nanofiller one issue is still there that is of dual ion conduction. So, an alternative is the use of 

nanoclay instead of the nanofiller.  

One important step before using the clay is its modification in which the covalent bonding between the clay layers is 

disrupted by the introduction of the surfactants or hydrophobic functional moieties. This increases the dispersion of 

nanoclay and overall aim is to increase the basal spacing so that polymer chain can be intercalated easily (Figure 13 

a). Two approaches are shown in Figure 13 b, (i) ion-dipole method, (ii) ion-exchange reaction [54-55].  

Nanoclay has two advantages, one it blocks the anion migration inside clay galleries (the only cation is available for 

conduction) and another is that as polymer chain is intercalated inside the clay galleries so the polymer recrystallization 

tendency or crystallinity is reduced. Both the above properties lead to enhancement of the ion transport and hence the 

ionic conductivity. The high cation exchange capacity of the clay supports the intercalation and swelling of the 

polymer chains.  

 

Figure 13. (i) Schematic diagram showing clay modification and intercalation of polymer to form polymer 

nanocomposites. With permission from Ref. [56] Copyright © 2015 Elsevier. (ii) Principles of modification of clay 

minerals and (iii) (The level of intercalation/exfoliation of nanofiller in a polymeric matrix. With permission from 

Ref. [55] Copyright © 2010 Springer. 

The combined effect of them increases the dispersion of the nanoclay with the polymer matrix. By monitoring the 

separation of layers (basal spacing; d001) four types of polymer nanocomposites with nanoclay are obtained (Figure 

13 b) [56-58].  

(i) 
If there is no change in the basal spacing with the addition of clay and clay layers remains outside then 

the PNC is conventional PNC.  


(ii) 
If the basal spacing increases with nanoclay and clay layers are stacked with polymer chain intercalated 

between layers then it is called intercalated PNC. This type of the PNC leads to building up of the nano-

metric channels for cation transport and disrupts the recrystallization tendency of the polymer chains.  

(iii) 
If the clay layers are completely in the disordered state as well as the polymer chains then the PNC is 

exfoliated PNC. This type of PNC lowers the ion-pairing effect.  

(iv) 
If the long molecular chains get intercalated inside the two or more clay galleries then it is called 

flocculated type PNC.  

Beside this, the nanoclay such as halloysite nanotube (HN), montmorillonite (MMT) clay are gaining more intention 

in the formation of the polymer nanocomposites and main influence is on the thermal, electrical and the mechanical 

properties. The interaction mechanism behind the nanoclay is the formation of the electrostatic interactions between 

the charges present on the nanoclay surface and the electron rich group of the host polymer.  This interaction disrupts 

the weak dipolar and van der Waals forces between clay sheets. As, now polymer get intercalated between the clay 

sheets and prevents the direct impact on the polymer on heating and hence the improved properties are achieved [59-

65]. 

In the formation of the PNC preparation method plays an effective role in altering the chain arrangement. So, 

Dhatarwal et al., [66] reported the preparation of the polymer nanocomposites (PNC) solid polymer electrolyte based 

on PEO-PMMA-LiBF4+ 10 wt. % EC and  3 wt. % MMT clay by solution-cast (SC) and the ultrasonic-microwave 

irradiated (US–MW) solution-cast methods. XRD analysis suggests the complete dissolution of the salt as there was 

no peak corresponding to the salt (2θ = 26.33°) (Figure 14). Pure MMT shows the peak at 2θ = 7.03° (001; plane) and 

is also observed in the PNC prepare by SC technique along with two main peaks of PEO (2θ =19.43° and 2θ = 23.57°,).  

 

Figure 14. XRD patterns of MMT nanopowder and (PEO–PMMA)–LiBF4–10 wt. % EC–3 wt. % MMT films 

prepared by SC and US–MW methods. With permission from Ref. [66] Copyright © 2017 Elsevier. 

Further for the PNC, the MMT peak shifts toward lower angle by more than 2° as compared to that of the pristine 

MMT and increase of the d-spacing is evidence the formation of the intercalated structure.  The SC methods display 


the high intensity of MMT while US-MW methods show a diffused peak with low intensity. The former one is 

evidence of the intercalated structure while later one is an indication of the exfoliated structures [67]. It was concluded 

that the increased basal spacing, crystallite size, and the relative intensities were increased for the PNC prepared by 

the US-MW method. Further, from the impedance spectra, it was founded that the conductivity was more for the 

intercalated type PNC and supports faster ion migration as compared to the exfoliated type PNC and hopping 

mechanism seems to be followed as indicated by the value of n. So, the preparation methods influence the ion mobility 

and intercalated type is more beneficial as compared to the exfoliated type which hinders the ion migration.  

Erceg et al., [32] prepared the composite polymer electrolyte based on poly(ethylene oxide)/lithium montmorillonite 

(PEO/LiMMT) by melt intercalation technique. The small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) evidenced the increase of 

the interlayer spacing due to polymer chain intercalation inside the clay galleries with a maximum of about 1.88 nm 

while the interlayer distance was 0.93 nm (maximum). DSC analysis displays the powering of the melting temperature 

and indicates the disruption of the crystallinity after addition of clay (76.1 % to 37.1 %).  FTIR spectrum evidences 

the broadening in the spectrum in region 3000 and 2750 cm−1, and 1500 cm-1 to 2000 cm-1 while some new peaks were 

observed after clay addition. It confirms the existence of a crystalline phase and gets broadened with clay addition 

indicating the change of the crystallinity. The highest ionic conductivity was 2.8×10-6 S cm-1 for 40 wt. % clay content 

and may be due to the proper dispersion of nanoclay while at higher content self-aggregation of clay layers trap the 

cation and hence the lowering of the ion mobility.  

Sengwa et al., [68] prepared the solid polymer nanocomposite electrolytes (SPNEs) based on poly(methyl 

methacrylate) (PMMA) and lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) with varying concentration of montmorillonite (MMT) clay 

by solution casting and high intensity ultrasonic assisted solution casting methods. XRD analysis evidences the 

complete dissociation of the salt and the exfoliation of clay was attributed to the interactions of polymer salt complex 

(C=O---Li+) with the MMT Nanosheets surfaces.  Impedance analysis suggested that the current carriers are ions 

which govern the total electrical conductivity of these electrolytes with value about 10-5 S cm-1. Figure 15 a displays 

the impedance of the sample prepared by the solution cast method. The proposed mechanism supports the 

enhancement of the conductivity with the addition of clay. Figure15 b shows the cation coordination with the C=O in 

PMMA–LiClO4 domain while anion is somewhere in the polymer backbone as an un-coordinated form. Figure 15 c 

displays the cation coordination with the MMT domain and exfoliated structure is observed. Figure 15 d demonstrates 

the PMMA----Li+----MMT interactions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 15. (a) Complex impedance plane plots (Z″ vs. Z’ ) of PMMA-LiClO4–x wt. % MMT films prepared by solution 

cast (SC) method and Schematic illustration of PMMA–LiClO4–MMT interactions: (b) C=O---Li+ complexes, (c) 

Li+---MMT complexes and (d) C=O---Li+ ---MMT complexes. With permission from Ref. [68] Copyright © 2014 

Elsevier. 

Lin et al., [69] reported the preparation of nanocomposite using halloysite nanotube (HNT; 10–50 nm outer diameter 

and 5–20 nm inner diameter, with a length of 50–1000 nm) clay in PEO-LiTFSI based polymer matrix.  The highest 

ionic conductivity was 1.11×10-4 S cm-1, 1.34×10-3 S cm-1, 2.14×10-3 S cm-1 at 25, 60 and 100 °C respectively for 10 

% HNT (Figure 16 b). This increase of the conductivity was evidences further by the optical images which show the 

decrease of crystal size with the addition of HNT (Al2Si2O5(OH)4). The Li+ transference number was also increased 

from 0.25 to 0.40 on the addition of HNT. The voltage stability window of the composite polymer electrolyte was 

6.35 at 25 oC and decreased to 4.78 V at 100 oC (Figure 16 c). Figure 16 b explores the increase of conductivity with 

the addition of HNT. The HNT has two face surfaces; one has a -Si-O-Si- silica tetrahedral sheet and another has -Al-

OH groups from the octahedral sheet known as outer and inner surface respectively (Figure 16 a). The presence of 

opposite charge on the HNT surface separates the ion pairs and cation get associated with the negatively charges silica 

surface (-Si-O-Si-) while the anion get associated with the inner surface (-Al-OH). Also, the electron-rich ether group 

of PEO interacts with the cation and 3 D network formed here supports the ion migration. The overall impact is the 


disruption of the crystalline phase due to the reduction of the crystallinity and hence the low ion pair formation. One 

another point mentioned here was that HNT helps in improving the mechanical property with uniform surface. Also, 

the Zeta potential measurements show increase from negative to positive and this evidences that adsorption of ions on 

the HNT surface. The thermal stability window was ~400 oC. The stress after addition of HNT increase from 1.25 

MPa to 2.28 MPa with 400 % strain and displays good flexibility of the investigated polymer matrix. The initial 

discharge capacity of the cell was 1350 mAh g−1 and with an average value of 745 ± 21 mAh g−1 in the 100 

discharge/charge cycles, with 87% retention. While at 100 oC the initial discharge capacity was 1493 mAh g−1 and 

was 386 mAh g−1 after the 400 discharge/charge cycles. It was concluded here that the natural HNT clay mineral 

provides the desirable energy density at low cost with improved safety.  

 

Figure 16. (a) Preparation of HNT modified flexible electrolyte and mechanism of HNT addition for enhanced ionic 
conductivity. The halloysite nanotube, LiTFSI and PEO are mixed in the solvent to form a uniform electrolyte solution. 
The solution is cast in an argon atmosphere to produce a flexible electrolyte thin film, and Lithium ion transport for 
HNT nanocomposite electrolytes. (b) Ionic conductivities of the PEO+LiTFSI+HNT films with different HNT 


contents at EO:Li=15:1 as a function of temperature, inset is the phase transition temperature as a function of HNT 
content obtained after fitting. (c Linear sweep voltammetry Li/PEO+LiTFSI+HNT/SS cells at 25 °C and 100 °C, and 
Li/PEO+LiTFSI/SS cells at 100 °C at a rate of 10 mV s−1. With permission from Ref. [69] Copyright © 2017 Elsevier. 

Gomari et al., [70] reported the preparation of nanocomposite solid polymer electrolyte based on poly(ethylene) oxide 

(PEO) and lithium perchlorate salt (LiClO4) with pristine graphene (GnP) or polyethylene glycol-grafted graphene 

(FGnP). From FESEM analysis of the nanocomposite, it was concluded that the rough surface of the pristine PEO 

changes to smooth on the addition of GnP/FGnP and suggests the better dispersion of both. Another reason behind 

this may be the presence of the hydrogen interactions between the electron rich group of host polymer and PEG groups 

of FGnP.  XRD analysis evidences the decrease of the crystallinity with the addition of GnP and more decrease was 

observed for the FGnP based polymer nanocomposite. Further evidence provided by the DSC analysis demonstrates 

no change in the glass transition/melting temperature with a dispersion of GnP addition while FGnP dispersion 

displays shift toward lower temperature of both glass transition/melting temperature. This may be associated with the 

better dispersion of the FGnP as compared to the GnP which enables sufficient interactions with the PEO. The 

lowering of the Tg indicates an increase of ion mobility or polymer flexibility owing to the increased free volume. The 

Polarized optical microscopy also supports the both XRD and DSC results as suppression of spherulitic growth in the 

presence of graphene nanosheets were obtained as compared to PEO. Further deconvolution of the anion peak in the 

FTIR spectra confirmed the increase of free charge carriers with FGnP which participate in conduction and was 

attributed to the interaction of PEO as well as additional coordinating sites provided by PEG. The ionic conductivity 

was 8.19×10-6 S cm-1 for 0.1 % GnP and 2.53×10-5 S cm-1 for 0.5 % FGnP. The increase in the conductivity was 

associated with the additional coordinating sites provided by the PEG and an ion conduction channel formation 

supports the faster segmental motion.  The stress-strain curve reports the increase of stiffness and was 74% and 83% 

increase for GnP and FGnP at 0.5 wt %, respectively.  

Kim et al., [71] reported the preparation of the polymer composite electrolyte based on the poly(ethylene oxide) 

(PEO)-LiClO4 and different content of the lithium montmorillonite (Li-MMT) clay. The absence of the Na peak in 

EDS spectra evidences the de-intercalation of Na and the intercalation of the Li-ion. XRD analysis suggested the 

decrease of the interlayer spacing from 32.43 to 25.66 Å with increase of the clay content from 10 to 25 wt.% and 

evidences the difficult for polymer intercalation in the clay gallery. Further for 20 wt. % of nanoclay content 

fundamental peak of PEO is broadened and intensity is reduced. It, evidences the decrease of the crystallinity value. 

This was further supported by the DSC data which demonstrates the shift of the melting peak toward lower temperature 

(for pure PEO 65.4 oC to 52.2 oC) and decrease of crystallinity with lowest for 20 wt. % clay content (for pure PEO 

53.97 % to 37.73 %). Figure 17 a depicts the DSC results with different clay content. The thermal stability of the PCE 

was up to 200 oC. The highest ionic conductivity was obtained for the 20 wt. % clay content and is about 5.3 × 10−6 S 

cm-1. Further, the temperature variation of the conductivity follows the Arrhenius behavior and activation energy 

decreases with the addition of clay content (0.70 to 0.19 eV, below 60 oC). The cation transference number (tLi+) was 

0.55 and this high value of cation transference number was attributed to the poor interaction of cation with ether group 

of PEO owing to the clay interaction with ether group. 


 

Figure 17. (a) DSC curves of (a) pure PEO and PCEs containing (b) 0%, (c) 2%, (d) 5%, (e) 10%, (f) 15%, (g) 20%, 
and (h) 25% of Li-MMT. With permission from Ref. [71] Copyright © 2007 Elsevier., (b) AC impedance behaviors 
of polymer electrolytes based on casting PVDF/ PVA/MMT CSPE. With permission from Ref. [72] Copyright © 2016 
Elsevier.and (c) Thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) plots of polymer–salt complex (PS) and polymer based 
nanocomposite (PNCE) films having different clay concentration compared with TGA pattern of pure PEO (inset). 
With permission from Ref. [73] Copyright © 2009 Elsevier. 
Ma et al., [72] prepared the composite solid polymer electrolyte (CSPE) based on montmorillonite (MMT) nano-clay 

fillers, lithium-bis(trifluoromethanelsulfonyl) (LiTFSI), polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF) and polyvinyl alcohol 

(PVA) copolymer by the casting method. FESEM analysis evidences the porous structure that will be beneficial for 

the cation transport. Further, the addition of MMT to blend polymer matrix lowers the crystallinity and indicates the 

increased amorphous content.  The ionic conductivity also increases with the addition of MMT and highest 

conductivity was 4.31×10-4 S/cm for 4 wt. % clay content. The increase in the conductivity value was due to the high 

surface area of the nanoclay which increase in the free volume and the amorphous content. These together leads to 

smoother ion transport and hence the high ionic conductivity. The activation energy value decreases with the addition 

of MMT from 26.46 kJ to 16.22 kJ and evidences the faster ion migration. The cation transference number increased 

from 0.29 to 0.40 with the addition of the MMT (Figure 17 b). The displacement load curve evidenced the increase of 

the tensile strength from 1.17 MPa to 2.24 MPa with the addition of clay and is attributed to the improved the stability. 

The Li/CSPE/LiFePO4 cells show pretty high specific discharge capacity above 123 mAh/g-1 along with a coulombic 

efficiency of 97.1% after 100 cycles. 


Mohapatra et al., [73] reported the preparation of the PEO-LiClO4 based composite polymer electrolyte with organo-

modified montmorillonite clay using solution cast technique. XRD analysis evidenced the complex formation and 

shift in the peak of the hots matrix shows the effective role played by clay. The decrease of the peak intensity evidences 

the reduction of the crystallinity due to the polymer and the nanoclay interaction. The d-spacing was almost same in 

all the systems while the crystallite size decreases and clay gallery width was maximum for the 10 wt. % clay content 

(9 Å). Further, the polymer salt intercalation in the clay galleries was evidenced and was due to the dipolar interaction. 

It was concluded from the XRD that the prepared PNCE films have a multiphase combination of crystalline and 

amorphous PS phases, an amorphous phase boundary, crystalline clay and amorphous PS inside the clay galleries at 

the interface of the clay layers and PS matrix. Further TEM analysis provides strong evidence of the intercalation 

along with exfoliation at low clay content. At very high clay content (>20 wt. %) clay cluster formation was reported. 

DSC analysis displayed the lowering of the glass transition temperature (Tg) owing to the enhanced flexibility assisted 

by intercalation on nanocomposite formation. The highest ionic conductivity was 6.48×10-5 S/cm for 10 wt. % clay 

content (at 30 oC). TGA analysis shows the thermal stability of the composite polymer electrolyte up to 300 oC and 

is sufficient for the application purpose (Figure 17 c). The cation transference number was 0.50 at 2 wt. % clay content. 

And voltage stability window was about 3 V. The thermal stability was improved after the polymer chain intercalation 

inside clay galleries. This may be attributed to the barrier role played by clay layers which prevent the decomposition 

of the polymer salt complex.  Another reason may be the catalytic effect in which the clay layers accumulated all heat 

and prevents the decomposition of the polymer slats system.  

Sharma et al., [74] reported the preparation of the polymer nanocomposites based on (PAN)8LiCF3SO3 -x wt 

%DMMT. From XRD analysis the increase in the interlayer spacing and the clay gallery width was observed. This 

increase was attributed to the polymer chain intercalation in the clay nanometric clay galleries.  The ionic conductivity 

was highest for the 7.5 wt. % clay content and is about 6.8×10-3 S cm-1. The ion transference number was close to 

unity and evidence the dominance of the ionic nature of the electrolyte. The cation transference number was 0.67 and 

is an indication of proper dissociation of the salt after polymer chain intercalation inside clay galleries. The voltage 

stability window was 5.6 V and thermal stability window was approx. 200 oC. 

Moreno et al., [75] prepared the polymer nanocomposite based on the PEO (with molecular weight 600,000 and 

4,000,000)-bentonite. XRD analysis demonstrated the absence of peak associated with the bentonite confirmed the 

polymer intercalation inside clay galleries. Figure 18 shows the tensile stress-strain curves for PEO Mw 600,000 SPE 

films. The Young’s modulus and the tensile strength (MPa) of the PEO/PEO@bentonite-Li+ were 325 32.5 MPa and 

7.5  0.75 MPa, while the PEO/bentonite-Li+ was 247  24.7 MPa and 2.9  0.29 MPa. Compared with the 

PEO/bentonite-Li+, the ionic conductivity of the PEO/PEO@bentonite-Li+ increased from 3.89 × 10-8 to 1.81 × 10-7 S 

cm-1 at 25 oC. It can be seen that the mechanical properties improved after addition of the 3 wt. % bentonite.  


 

Figure 18. Tensile stress-strain behavior of films of PEO and SPEs with bentonite-Li+ and PEO@bentonite-Li+ with 

PEO Mw 600,000. With permission from Ref. [75] Copyright © 2011 Elsevier. 

Zhang et al., [76] reported the preparation of solid polymer electrolyte comprising of PEO, LiTFSI, and MMT. The 

XRD analysis evidences the increase of the interlayer spacing that confirms the polymer intercalation and hence 

increases of the amorphous content. The highest ionic conductivity was 3.22× 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C for 10 wt. % MMT 

and cation transport number (tLi+ ) was 0.45.  

 

Figure 19. a Initial CV profiles of all solid-state Li/S cell at 60 °C; the measurement is conducted at a scan rate of 

0.1 mV s−1 in the voltage range of 1.0 to 3.0 V vs. Li+/Li; b Charge/discharge profiles (at 0.1 C) of all solid-state 


Li/S cell at 60 °C; c Cycle performance (at 0.1 C) of all-solid-state Li/S cell at 60 °C; d Rate capability of all-solid-

state Li/S cell at 60 °C. With permission from Ref. [76] Copyright © 2014 Springer nature. 

The voltage stability window of the optimized electrolyte was 4 V. The cyclic voltammograms (CV) of the cell shows 

good electrochemical stability in the operating range (Figure 19 a). The galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling tests 

in Figure 19 b, shows the specific capacity of 998 mAh g−1 (@ 1st discharge at 0.1 C) and a reversible capacity of 591 

mAh g−1 (For 2nd cycle). Figure 19 c shows the initial increase in capacity which indicates the gradual activation of 

the electrochemical properties of polymer electrolyte electrochemical and is attributed to the cation dynamics in the 

polymer matrix.  Even, after 100 cycles a high reversible specific discharge capacity (634 mAh g−1) with 63.5 % 

capacity retention is noticed. Figure 19 d displays the rate capability of cells (@ 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5 C) and is sufficient 

for the fabricated cell. 

4.3.  Nanorod/Nanowire dispersed polymer nanocomposites 

As a lot of reports are available on the dispersion of nanofiller in the polymer electrolyte matrix which provides in 

hand the superior properties as compared to the micro fillers. There are three fundamental mechanisms which dominate 

here, (i) creation of percolation pathways, (ii) reduction of polymer reorganization tendency and (iii) aspect ratio or 

shape of the nanoparticle. As nanofiller surface have acidic and basic sites which play an effective role in the ion 

transport or mobility in case of polymer electrolytes. These sites support the formation of conducting pathways for 

the ion transport. These paths are termed as percolation pathways. As the nanofiller surface groups alter the existing 

interaction between the polymer chains and the polymer ion. This lowers the chain reorganization tendency and 

provides smoother in transport. Another key role is played by the aspect ratio of the nanoparticle. As it is well known 

that the nanofiller have a high aspect ratio as compared to the micro fillers and the aspect ratio is in inverse relation 

with the percolation threshold. Also, the optimum or critical concentration is lower for the nanoparticles with high 

aspect ratio due to increased size distribution [77-81].  

The mechanism behind the improved conductivity on the addition of nanofiller highlights the interaction electron rich 

group of host polymer with the surface group of nanofiller. This supports the salt dissociation and more free charge 

carriers are available for conduction. Another important role played by nanofiller is the disruption of the 

recrystallization tendency of the polymer chain arrangement and hence the amorphous content is increase which favors 

the smoother and faster ion migration.  So, the percolation pathways created by the nanofiller are beneficial for the 

faster ion transport. It can be concluded from here that the larger the percolation path, faster will be the ion migration 

due to the long continuous path. This will depend on the coordinating sites (acidic/basic) available to favor the ion 

mobility and sufficient salt dissociation. Another remarkable point here is that the suitable control over the acidic/basic 

sites of nanofiller can lead to the improved electrical properties. Also, the alignment of the nanorod and nanowire is 

important as aligned nanoparticle parallel to the electrodes limit the perpendicular ion migration.  The nanoparticles 

with the different aspect ratio and shape also alter the mechanical properties that are further altered by the alignment 

of nanorod/nanowire/nanotube. 

Beyond the active/passive nanoparticle, one another attractive approach is the use of 1 D nanofiller for enhancing the 

electrical properties. So, regarding this Liu et al., [78] reported the dispersion of LLTO (Li0.33La0.557TiO3) nanowire 

in the PAN-LiClO4 based polymer salt matrix. XRD analysis provides no alteration in the peak of pure PAN with the 


addition of nanowire and SEM micrograph displays the uniform distribution of NW and are fully embedded in the 

polymer matrix evidenced by TEM (Figure 20 a-f). The highest ionic conductivity was 2.4×10-4 S cm-1 (15 wt. % 

LLTO) and is three orders higher than the polymer salt matrix without NW. AT high NW content lowering of 

conductivity is observed and may be associated with the aggregation of NW and incomplete dissolution of polymer 

with NW. Further, the dehydration temperature was correlated with the crystallinity and it was concluded that the 

disruption of the crystallinity was not the dominant factor for enhancement of the conductivity and is also confirmed 

by the XRD. This enhancement in the conductivity was explained with the oxygen vacancy-rich surface of the 

nanowire. These vacancies help in the salt dissociation and oxygen vacancy helps in smoother ion migration and hence 

the faster ion mobility. The voltage stability window was increased from 4.8 V (for NW free) to 5.5 V (wt. 10 wt. % 

NW). 

 

Figure 20. Phase structure and morphology of the composite electrolytes with various contents of LLTO nanowires. 
(a) XRD patterns of the composite electrolytes with various LLTO concentrations of 5−20 wt %. SEM images for the 
composite electrolytes with (b) 10 wt %, (c) 15 wt %, and (d) 20 wt % nanowire fillers. (e) TEM image and (f) HRTEM 
image of the composite electrolyte with 15 wt % nanowires, respectively. In panel f, the upper inset is the HRTEM 
image for LLTO nanowire, and the bottom one illustrates the individual grain of the nanowires embedded in PAN 
matrix. With permission from Ref. [78] Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
So, keeping this in the mind Do et al., [79] prepared the nanorod (-Fe2O3 nanofiller with aspect ratio 7),) so that the 

desired improvement can be achieved at low critical concentration. For better comparison both nanoparticle (NP; 

Diameter 20-30 nm) and nanorod (NR; Diameter 10-20 nm) were dispersed separately. As nanorod has a higher aspect 

ratio which is associated with the longer percolation paths available for the conduction. Figure 21 a & b depicts the 

FESEM image of NR (Average length and diameter of 105 ± 32 and 16 ± 5.4 nm, Aspect ratio 6.6) and NP with 

average diameter 29 ± 11 nm.  The ionic conductivity variation with the temperature suggests that the maximum 

conductivity was achieved with NR even at a lower content than the NP (Figure 21 c & d). This may be attributed to 

the formation of a sufficient number of conducting pathways at low concentration owing to the high aspect ratio of 


NR as compared to NP.  Also, at high concentration, there is a decrease of conductivity and that may be due to the 

formation of ion traps because of rods aligned in parallel with the electrodes. Above the melting temperature, the 

enhancement in the conductivity was obtained. From, DSC results it was concluded that the nanofiller does not affect 

the polymer chain flexibility as no change in glass transition temperature (Tg) was evidenced. This was explained 

using the activation energy concept and is due to suppression of the crystallinity as evaluated form the melting peak. 

It was concluded that the recrystallization tendency is more for the NR (1 wt. %) due to more inter-particle interaction 

as compared to the NP. This leads to more aggregation of NR as compared to NP. So, here it was explained on the 

basis of the length of conducting pathways of NR. 

 

Figure 21. Scanning electron micrographs of (a) -Fe2O3 nanorods (NR) with average length 105 ± 32 nm and average 
diameter 16 ± 5.4 nm and (b) -Fe2O3 nanoparticles (NP) with average diameter 29 ± 11 nm. The error represents one 
standard deviation from the mean and Ionic conductivity versus temperature for PEO/LiClO4 SPEs filled with (c) -
Fe2O3 NPs and (d) -Fe2O3 NRs. The symbols represent the average of two measurements, and error represents the 
largest and smallest measured values. With permission from Ref. [79] Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
 


Another effective approach is to create the positively charged oxygen vacancies on the 1 D nanofiller surface which 

acts as Lewis acid sites in the composite polymer electrolyte matrix. Liu et al., [80] reported the Y2O3-doped ZrO2 

(YSZ) nanowire (1 D NW; av. diameter 55 nm) addition in the PAN−LiClO4 polymer electrolyte (Figure 22 a). The 

motto behind the use of nanowire was the formation of effective percolation network across a long distance. SEM 

micrograph of after the NW dispersion demonstrates the smooth morphology and evidence uniform distribution of 

nanowire in the host polymer matrix. The ionic conductivity was improved from 2.98×10-6 S cm-1 (YSZ nanoparticle) 

to 1.07×10-5 S cm-1 (7 YSZ nanowire) (Figure 22 b). This increase was due to the formation of continuous pathways 

with nanowire dispersion having oxygen vacancies (Figure 22 c). This helps in migration of more cations participating 

in the conduction.  Further evidence was obtained from the FTIR deconvolution pattern of the anion (ClO4-) and it 

displays lowest ion pair for 7 YSZ and hence the highest ionic conductivity. This was in correlation with the increased 

Li+ ion transference number from 0.27 to 0.56. From TGA analysis a correlation of ionic conductivity was built with 

dehydration temperature and lower the dehydration temperature higher will be the conductivity and lower crystallinity. 

The voltage stability window was increased as compared to the polymer salt matrix.  

 

Figure 22. Schematic illustration for the synthesis of the solid composite polymer electrolyte. Electrospinning set up 
for the preparation of the YSZ nanowires, together with a TEM image of calcined nanowires. PAN, LiClO4 and YSZ 
nanowires constitute the composite polymer electrolyte. Electrical properties of the composite polymer electrolyte 


filled with the YSZ nanowires. (b) Experimental and fitting impedance spectra for the composite electrolyte with YSZ 
nanowires at different measuring temperatures and equivalent circuit. (c) Schematic illustration for Li-ion transport in 
the composite polymer electrolytes with nanoparticle and nanowire fillers. The positive-charged oxygen vacancies on 
the surfaces of the fillers act as Lewis acid sites that can interact strongly with anions and release Li-ions. A continuous 
fast conduction pathway can be seen for nanowires rather than nanoparticles. With permission from Ref. [80] 
Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 

Although the ionic conductivity was enhanced after the dispersion of the nanowire compared to nanoparticle but, one 

possibility still arise there that may affect the ion migration or restrict the effective role of nanowire/nanorod in the 

polymer matrix. As in the previous reports, the random distribution of the nanowire is investigated, but here if the 

nanowire is aligned parallel to the electrodes then they may show the negative effect by blocking the perpendicular 

ion migration. So, the alignment of the nanorod/nanowire may play and elective role in enhancing the conductivity 

further (Figure 23 a-d).  

So, a recent report by Liu wt al., [81] investigated the effect of alignment of the nanowire (LLTO ; Li0.33La0.557TiO3) 

in the three orientation (0o  5o, 45o  9 o and 90 o  8 o) w.r.t of electrodes in a PAN-LiClO4 based polymer matrix. 

SEM analysis depicts that the NW are well embedded in the polymer matrix with an average spacing of 5 m (Figure 

23 e-g). The ionic conductivity of randomly aligned NW was 5.40×10-6 S cm-1 and is higher than dispersed with the 

nanoparticle. Further when the NW were aligned with 0o orientation then conductivity was increased to 6.05×10-5 S 

cm-1.  

 


Figure 23. The comparison of possible Li-ion conduction pathways. a–c, Li-ion conduction pathways in composite 
polymer electrolytes with nanoparticles (a), random nanowires (b) and aligned nanowires (c). Compared with isolated 
nanoparticles, random nanowires could supply a more continuous fast conduction pathway for Li ion. Compared with 
random nanowires, aligned nanowires are free of crossing junctions. d, The surface region of inorganic nanoparticles 
(NPs) and nanowires (NWs) acts as an expressway for Li-ion conduction. e–g, SEM images of the aligned nanowires 
at orientations of 0 o (e), 45 o  (f) and 90 o  (g). The inset in Figure d is a SEM image at high magnification for the 
aligned nanowires. With permission from Ref. [81] Copyright © 2017 Springer Nature.  
 
This enhancement in the conductivity may be due to the absence of the crossing junctions as in the nanoparticle and 

aligned NW. For orientation angle 45o conductivity decreases to 2.24×10-5 S cm-1 and is due to more continuous length 

along electrodes as compared to the 0o. While for the 90o orientation the conductivity was 1.78×10-7 S cm-1 and is due 

to the parallel alignment of NW with electrodes. Also, the electronic conductivity was of the order of 10-11 S cm-1 and 

is negligible as compared to the ionic conductivity. The dispersion of the nanowire may also increase the polymer 

chain segmental motion and that was evidenced by the increased Li+ transference number from 0.27 to 0.42. Further, 

the faster relaxation was confirmed by plotting the imaginary part of impedance and peak shifts toward high-frequency 

evidence the same. To further verify the experimental conductivity data simulation using the Comsol Multiphysics' 

(Comsol) numerical analysis of the current distribution was performed and is in good agreement with experimental 

data.  

Another report by the Zhang et al., [82] demonstrates the synthetization of the composite gel polymer electrolytes by 

adding SiO2 nanowires into a P(VDF-HFP) matrix. FESEM analysis concludes that the synthesized nanowire are 

flexible and of high purity with the diameter and length of the SiO2 as <50 nm and ∼1 µm, respectively. FTIR was 

performed to check the nanorod formation and it shows the main absorption bands asymmetric bending mode of –Si–

O–Si, symmetric bending mode of –Si–O–Si, bending mode of –O–Si–O and the bending mode of the –Si–OH. 

FESEM analysis of the composite matrix suggests the effective role in modifying the surface morphology of pure 

polymer which are favorable for cation transport. Also, the presence of pores suggests the absorption of more 

electrolyte and hence the more ionic conductivity. FTIR spectrum confirms the interaction between the Si atoms of 

SiO2 and F atoms of P(VDF-HFP) chain which helps in ion migration. TGA plot reveals the improved thermal stability 

(427 oC) as compared to the pure polymer (384 oC) and is due to the interaction between the host polymer matrix and 

the Si nanowire. Further DSC analysis shows the reduction in the crystallinity on the addition of nanowire and may 

be due to the lowering of polymer chain reorganization tendency and enhanced amorphous content. The stress-strain 

curve shows increased tensile strength from 18.3 MPa (zero % nanowire) to 27.3 MPa for composite polymer 

electrolyte with 10 wt. % nanowire and is owing to the interaction between the polymer matrix and SiO2 nanowire. 

This may be due to the increased chain flexibility on addition of nanowire which makes it capable of bear high stress 

and is in agreement with the FTIR. The ionic conductivity was increased by one order and is 1.08×10-3 S cm-1 (at 30 

oC) and may be due to the weakening of the interaction of cation with the fluorine of host polymer matrix. Also, the 

porous structure as evidenced in FESEM provides some additional conducting pathways in same volume favorable 

for ion transport and space charge region build up occurs due to the more free charge carriers availability. At, high 

content the interpenetrating networks are formed due to the overlapped space charge regions and hence the ion 

conducting pathways. Also, the transference number of Li+ was increased from 0.23 to 0.70 on the addition of 

nanowire and may be due to the increased number of free ions via the dual interaction of acidic sites with fluorine of 


polymer host as well as an anion (PF6-). The electrochemical stability window of the synthesized composite polymer 

electrolyte was 4.8 V and no effect of a surface group of the nanofiller was observed on the stability window.  

Another report based on Mg2B2O5 nanowires (Av. diameter ~270 nm) with PEO-LiTFSI was reported by Sheng et al., 

[83]. The advantages with Mg2B2O5 NWs are the hardness of 15.4 GPa and Young’s modulus of 125.8 GPa [84]. The 

highest ionic conductivity was 1.53 × 10−4 S cm−1 (@40 °C) and 3.7 × 10−4 S cm−1 (@50 °C) for 10 wt. % Mg2B2O5 

nanowires. The enhancement was attributed to the coordination interaction of anion (TFSI-) with Mg2B2O5 nanowires 

and it enhances the salt dissociation which increases the number of lithium ions for migration (Figure 24 a). Another 

reason may be the reduction of the crystallinity and reorganization tendency after incorporation of NW which 

promotes faster segmental motion as evidenced by the XRD and DSC analysis. The lithium transference number (tLi+) 

was 0.44 and is much higher as compared to pure PEO which (tLi+ =0.19). The voltage stability window was 4.7 V and 

is superior to NW free system which shows 4.25 V.  

 


Figure 24. (a) Schematics of lithium ion migration in Mg2B2O5 enhanced composite SSEs, (b) Typical 

charge−discharge curves of LiFePO4/Li SSLIBs using PEO-LiTFSI-10 wt % Mg2B2O5 electrolyte at 50 °C. (c) Rate 

performance of LiFePO4/Li SSLIBs using SSEs with and without Mg2B2O5 at 50 °C. (d) EIS spectra of battery using 

SSEs with and without Mg2B2O5 at 50 °C. (e) Cycling performance of LiFePO4/Li SSLIBs with PEO-LiTFSI-10 wt 

% Mg2B2O5 electrolyte at 1.0 C and 50 °C. The inset is a digital photograph of LEDs lightened by SSLIBs. With 

permission from Ref. [83] Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. 

The maximum strength was 2.29 MPa and mechanical properties were improved after addition of NW. The prepared 

system shows excellent flame-retardant performance. Figure 25 b-e shows the electrochemical performance of Li-ion 

battery assembled using PEO-LiTFSI- Mg2B2O5. The discharge and charge voltage plateaus are around 3.35 and 3.50 

V (@ 0.2 C) and over-potential between charge-discharge plateau increases with the increase of current density (Figure 

24 b). Figure 24 c shows the performance with NW and without NW. The polymer electrolyte system with NW 

displays the specific discharge capacity of about 158 (@0.2 C), 140 (@0.4 c), 124 (@0.8 C), 117 (@1.0 C), and 72 

mAh g−1 (@2.0 C), while without NW the specific discharge capacity are 139 (@0.2 C), 121 (@0.4 c), 92 (@0.8 C), 

75 (@1.0 C), and 37 mAh g−1 (@2.0 C). It concluded that addition of NW increases the cyclic stability and capacity 

independent of current rate. Figure 24 d shows the impedance study of the battery with and without NW. Addition of 

NW reduces both charge-transfer resistance (Rct) and the ohmic resistance (Ro) which indicates the increase of ionic 

conductivity with NW. Figure 24 e shows the stable specific capacity nearly 120 mAh g−1 in 230 discharge−charge 

cycles (@ 1.0 C, 50 oC) with a Coulombic efficiency of 100%. The inset in the Figure 25 e shows a lightening LED 

with present battery (Shape of “I”). 

4.4. Separator Development: Commercial and Patents 

As the electrolyte/separator is the key component of the battery. The first commercialized battery produced in 1991 

by SONY Cooperation, comprised a porous plastic film soaked typically in LiPF6 dissolved in a mixture of 

EC/EMC/DEC. The role of the separator is to provide path to ions, (i) cathode to the anode during charging, and (ii) 

anode to cathode during discharging. Table 4 summarizes the various manufacturers and composition of the separator 

and Table 5 (information available on their site) summarizes the properties of commercial separators. 

Table 4. (a) Major Manufacturers of Lithium-Ion Battery Separators along with Their Typical Products. With 

permission from Ref. [85] Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. 

Manufacturer
Structure
Composition
Process
Trade name

Asahi Kasai
Single layer
PE
wet
HiPore

Celgard LLC
single layer
PP, PE
Dry
Celgard

multilayer
PP/PE/PP
Dry
Celgard

PVdF coated
PVdF, PP, PE, PP/PE/PP
Dry
Celgard

Entek Membranes
single layer
PE
Wet
Teklon

Mitsui Chemical
single layer
PE
Wet
-

Nitto Denko
single layer
PE
Wet

DSM
single layer
PE
Wet
Solupur

Tonen
single layer
PE
Wet
Setela

Ube Industries
multi-layer
PP/PE/PP
dry
U-pore

Targary
-
PE/PP
wet
NAATBat

Daramic
-
PE
-

Dry Lyte
-
Solid Polymer Electrolyte
SEEO

Nanomyte®SE-50
Self-standing
(Amorphous)

Polymer-Ceramic Composite 
Material with Lithium Salt

In  acetonitrile
NEI Co.


NANOMYTE® H-polymer
Self-standing
(Amorphous)

PEO-based polymer electrolyte 

with lithium salt

In  acetonitrile
NEI Co.

Ionic Materials
Polymer Electrolyte
Ionic mat. Inc.

 

Table 5. Typical Properties of Some Commercial Microporous Membranes 

Property 
Company



Thickness 
(average)

Basis 
Weight
(g/m2)

Porosit

y

Air 

Permeability

Tensile Strength
Tensile 

Elongation 

at Break

Puncture 
Resistance

Thermal Shrinkage @ 

120 C, 1 hr.

ENTEK 
20 µm
10.5 
43 %
300 sec
MD > 1,000 kg/cm2
TD - 750 kg/cm2

MD - 90%
TD - 300%

550 g
MD - <10%
TD - <3%

ENTEK 

EPX

12 µm
5.5 
54%
65 sec
MD > 1,000 kg/cm2
TD - 800 kg/cm2

MD - 90%
TD - 230%

300 g
MD - <12%
TD - <7%

EPENTEK 

EPH
16 µm

8.4 

47%

150 sec
MD > 1,000 kg/cm2
TD - 700 kg/cm2

MD - 80%
TD - 250%

430 g
MD - <10%
TD - <4%

 
The separator must provide smooth ion migration and should be as thin as possible with lightweight, and must prevent 

electronic conduction. The most crucial point is that separator must have good compatibility, less thickness (< 25 m) 

with the electrodes and possess desirable mechanical, electrochemical and stability (thermal/voltage) properties [85-

86]. Table 6 summarizes the selected patents in polymer electrolytes. 

Table 6. Some available patents on electrolytes.  

 

Inventor
Polymer Used
Patent No.
Year
Conductivity

Bauer et al
LiClO4 in a 400 MW PEG
4,654,279
1987
4×10−4 S/cm at 25° 

C

Kuzhikalail M et al
PAN, EC, PC and LiPF6/LiAsF6
5510209
1995
OCV:2.85 V

Nitash Pervez Balsara et al
Block copolymer
US 8,889,301 B2
2014
1×10-4 S cm at 25°C

Wunder et al
PEO- POSS-phenyl7(BF3Li)3
9680182 B2
2017
1×10-4 S cm at 

25°C. (for O/Li=14)

Michael A. Zimmerman
PPS, PPO, PEEK, PPA
2017/0018781 

A1

2017
1×10-5 S/cm (At 

RT)

Russell Clayton Pratt et al
perfluoropolyether electrolytes 

terminated with urethane

9923245
2018
3.6 × 10−5 (@40 oC)
1.1 × 10−4 (@80 oC)

Mohit Singh et al
Ceramic electrolyte
20110281173
2018
Stability upto 500 

cycles

Summary and Conclusions 

This chapter highlighted the recent updates on the solid PNCs with a nanoparticle of different shape and specific 

surface area. The development of solid polymer electrolyte as an alternative to liquid/gel polymer electrolyte has been 

focused by researchers all over the world. From last three decades the nanoparticles have gained attention for 

preparation of the solid polymer electrolyte for the energy storage systems. Amongst the various nanoparticles used 

for dispersion in the polymer matrix, nanoclay, active/passive nanofiller have been most studied. The nanofiller and 

nanoclay improved the overall properties of the polymer electrolytes. The nanofiller enhanced the electrical properties 

along with mechanical properties depending on the preparation method, dispersion, surface group interaction with 

polymer chains, surface area and dielectric constant. The Lewis aid base interaction mechanism was elaborated for 


the understanding the cation transport. The serious drawback with nano filler was that at high concentration it is not 

able to play its effective role in enhancing the properties may be due to the possibility of aggregation. Also, the lack 

of a continuous path for cation limits the enhancement in the rate of ion transport.  In order to resolve the issue of 

agglomeration search of new nanoparticle ended with the nanoclay. The advantage with the nanoclay is that 

percolation threshold is lower as compared to nano filler and it fit for the elimination of most detrimental factor i.e. 

concentration polarization. It may consider as the first step toward the realization of single ion solid polymer 

electrolyte (PNC). As the specific surface area plays an effective role in enhancing the electrical and transport 

properties along with mechanical properties. So, the research was focused toward the use of nanoparticle with the high 

specific surface area and sufficient oxygen vacancies that promotes the faster ion transport. This lead the development 

of nanorod, nanowire as the dispersive element in the solid polymer electrolytes. One remarkable advantage with the 

nanorod was that a long continues path was available for ion migration. This provides the smoother ion migration 

between the electrodes along with improved mechanical and thermal properties. The nanowire dispersion is the recent 

advancement in solid polymer electrolytes. The oxygen vacancies on the nanowire surface provide additional sites to 

the ion for a long time. This enhances the ionic conductivity and thermal/mechanical properties. But, one barrier was 

the random alignment of the nanowire that hinders the ion migration. This was solved by the alignment of the nanowire 

and it provides continues path to the ion between the electrodes without any constraint. The electrochemical cells 

fabricated using the nanorod, nanowire promises their launch at a commercial level.  

Acknowledgments: The author thanks the Central University of Punjab for providing fellowship. 

References 

1. Li, W., Liu, J., & Zhao, D. (2016). Mesoporous materials for energy conversion and storage devices. Nature 

Reviews Materials, 1, 16023. 

2. Armand, M., & Tarascon, J. M. (2008). Building better batteries. Nature, 451(7179), 652-657.  
3. Lin, X., Salari, M., Arava, L. M. R., Ajayan, P. M., & Grinstaff, M. W. (2016). High temperature electrical 

energy storage: advances, challenges, and frontiers. Chemical Society Reviews, 45(21), 5848-5887.  

4. Yang, Z., Zhang, J., Kintner-Meyer, M. C., Lu, X., Choi, D., Lemmon, J. P., & Liu, J. (2011). Electrochemical 

energy storage for green grid. Chemical reviews, 111(5), 3577-3613.  

5. Arya, A., Sharma, A. L. (2016) Conductivity and stability properties of solid polymer electrolyte based on 

PEO-PAN+LiPF6 for energy storage. Applied Science Letters 2, 72-75. 

6. https://insideevs.com/volkswagens-transform-2025-plan-calls-for-automaker-to-be-1-for-evs/ 
7. Zu, C. X., & Li, H. (2011). Thermodynamic analysis on energy densities of batteries. Energy & 

Environmental Science, 4(8), 2614-2624. 

8. https://about.bnef.com/blog/lithium-ion-battery-costs-squeezed-margins-new-business-models/ 
9. https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/tesla-fulfills-australia-battery-bet-whats-that-mean-industry 
10. Goodenough, J. B., & Park, K. S. (2013). The Li-ion rechargeable battery: a perspective. Journal of the 

American Chemical Society, 135(4), 1167-1176. 

11. Cheng, X. B., Zhang, R., Zhao, C. Z., & Zhang, Q. (2017). Toward safe lithium metal anode in rechargeable 

batteries: a review. Chemical reviews, 117(15), 10403-10473. 

12. Arya, A., Sharma, A. L. (2017) Polymer electrolytes for lithium ion batteries: a critical study. Ionics 23, 497-

540. 

13. Arya, A., & Sharma, A. L. (2018). Optimization of salt concentration and explanation of two peak percolation 

in blend solid polymer nanocomposite films. Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry, 1-21. 

14. Deng, D. (2015). Li‐ ion batteries: basics, progress, and challenges. Energy Science & Engineering, 3(5), 

385-418. 


15. Hallinan Jr, D. T., & Balsara, N. P. (2013). Polymer electrolytes. Annual review of materials research, 43, 

503-525. 

16. Ngai, K. S., Ramesh, S., Ramesh, K., & Juan, J. C. (2016). A review of polymer electrolytes: fundamental, 

approaches and applications. Ionics, 22(8), 1259-1279. 

17. Miller III, T. F., Wang, Z. G., Coates, G. W., & Balsara, N. P. (2017). Designing Polymer Electrolytes for 

Safe and High Capacity Rechargeable Lithium Batteries. Accounts of Chemical Research, 50(3), 590-593. 

18. Bhattacharya, M. (2016). Polymer nanocomposites—A comparison between carbon nanotubes, graphene, 

and clay as nanofillers. Materials, 9(4), 262. 

19. Arya, A., Sharma, A. L. (2017) Insights into the use of polyethylene oxide in energy storage/conversion 

devices: A critical review. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 50 (44), 443002. 

20. Song, J. Y., Wang, Y. Y., & Wan, C. C. (1999). Review of gel-type polymer electrolytes for lithium-ion 

batteries. Journal of Power Sources, 77(2), 183-197. 

21. Stephan, A. M. (2006). Review on gel polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries. European polymer 

journal, 42 (1), 21-42.  

22. Zhang, S. S. (2007). A review on the separators of liquid electrolyte Li-ion batteries. Journal of Power 

Sources, 164(1), 351-364.  

23. Stephan, A. M., & Nahm, K. S. (2006). Review on composite polymer electrolytes for lithium 

batteries. Polymer, 47(16), 5952-5964. 

24. S. Austin Suthanthiraraj1 & M. Johnsi Nanocomposite polymer electrolytes Ionics (2017) 23:2531–2542 
25. Karuppasamy, K., Antony, R., Alwin, S., Balakumar, S., & Sahaya Shajan, X. (2015). A Review on PEO 

Based Solid Polymer Electrolytes (SPEs) Complexed with LiX (X= Tf, BOB) for Rechargeable Lithium Ion 
Batteries. In Materials Science Forum (Vol. 807, pp. 41-63).     

26. Park, C. H., Park, M., Yoo, S. I., & Joo, S. K. (2006). A spin-coated solid polymer electrolyte for all-solid-

state rechargeable thin-film lithium polymer batteries. Journal of power sources, 158(2), 1442-1446. 

27. Krebs, F. C. (2009). Fabrication and processing of polymer solar cells: a review of printing and coating 

techniques. Solar energy materials and solar cells, 93(4), 394-412.  

28. Wilson, M. S., & Gottesfeld, S. (1992). Thin-film catalyst layers for polymer electrolyte fuel cell 

electrodes. Journal of applied electrochemistry, 22(1), 1-7.  

29. Agrawal, R. C., & Chandra, A. (2007). Ion transport and electrochemical cell performance studies on hot-

press-synthesized Ag+ ion conducting electroactive polymeric membranes:(1− x) PEO: x [0.7 (0.75 AgI: 
0.25 AgCl): 0.3 MI]. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 40(22), 7024. 

30. Brinker, C. J., & Hurd, A. J. (1994). Fundamentals of sol-gel dip-coating. Journal de Physique III, 4(7), 

1231-1242. 

31. Pavlidou, S., & Papaspyrides, C. D. (2008). A review on polymer–layered silicate nanocomposites. Progress 

in polymer science, 33(12), 1119-1198.. 

32. Erceg, M., Jozić, D., Banovac, I., Perinović, S., & Bernstorff, S. (2014). Preparation and characterization of 

melt intercalated poly (ethylene oxide)/lithium montmorillonite nanocomposites. Thermochimica Acta, 579, 
86-92. 

33. Sharma, A. L., & Thakur, A. K. (2013). Plastic separators with improved properties for portable power device 

applications. Ionics, 19(5), 795-809. 

34. Kumar, P. P., & Yashonath, S. (2006). Ionic conduction in the solid state. Journal of Chemical 

Sciences, 118(1), 135-154. 

35. Baril, D., Michot, C., & Armand, M. (1997). Electrochemistry of liquids vs. solids: polymer 

electrolytes. Solid State Ionics, 94 (1-4), 35-47. 

36. Zhang, Q., Liu, K., Ding, F., & Liu, X. (2016) Recent advances in solid polymer electrolytes for lithium 

batteries. Nano Research, 1-36. 

37. Lin, D., Liu, W., Liu, Y., Lee, H. R., Hsu, P. C., Liu, K., & Cui, Y. (2015). The high ionic conductivity of 

composite solid polymer electrolyte via in situ syntheses of monodispersed SiO2 nanospheres in poly 
(ethylene oxide). Nano letters, 16(1), 459-465. 

38. Park, C. H., Kim, D. W., Prakash, J., & Sun, Y. K. (2003). Electrochemical stability and conductivity 

enhancement of composite polymer electrolytes. Solid State Ionics, 159(1), 111-119. 


39. Pal, P., & Ghosh, A. (2017). Influence of TiO2 nano-particles on charge carrier transport and cell 

performance of PMMA-LiClO4 based nano-composite electrolytes. Electrochimica Acta. 

40. Liang, B., Tang, S., Jiang, Q., Chen, C., Chen, X., Li, S., & Yan, X. (2015). Preparation and characterization 

of PEO-PMMA polymer composite electrolytes doped with nano-Al 2 O 3. Electrochimica Acta, 169, 334-
341. 

41. Kim, Y., Kwon, S. J., Jang, H. K., Jung, B. M., Lee, S. B., & Choi, U. H. (2017). High Ion Conducting 

Nanohybrid Solid Polymer Electrolytes via Single-Ion Conducting Mesoporous Organosilica in Poly 
(ethylene oxide). Chemistry of Materials, 29(10), 4401-4410.  

42. Tang, C., Hackenberg, K., Fu, Q., Ajayan, P. M., & Ardebili, H. (2012). High ion conducting polymer 

nanocomposite electrolytes using hybrid nanofillers. Nano letters, 12(3), 1152-1156. 

43. Zhao, Y., Huang, Z., Chen, S., Chen, B., Yang, J., Zhang, Q., ... & Xu, X. (2016). A promising PEO/LAGP 

hybrid electrolyte prepared by a simple method for all-solid-state lithium batteries. Solid State Ionics, 295, 
65-71 

44. Zhu, K., Liu, Y., & Liu, J. (2014). A fast charging/discharging all-solid-state lithium ion battery based on 

PEO-MIL-53 (Al)-LiTFSI thin film electrolyte. RSC Advances, 4(80), 42278-42284 

45. Shodai, T., Owens, B. B., Ohtsuka, H., & Yamaki, J. I. (1994). Thermal Stability of the Polymer Electrolyte 

(PEO)8LiCF3SO3. Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 141(11), 2978-2981.  

46. Vignarooban, K., Dissanayake, M. A. K. L., Albinsson, I., & Mellander, B. E. (2014). Effect of TiO2 nano-

filler and EC plasticizer on electrical and thermal properties of poly (ethylene oxide)(PEO) based solid 
polymer electrolytes. Solid State Ionics, 266, 25-28.  

47. Klongkan, S., & Pumchusak, J. (2015). Effects of nano alumina and plasticizers on morphology, ionic 

conductivity, 
thermal 
and 
mechanical 
properties 
of 
PEO-LiCF3SO3 
solid 
polymer 

electrolyte. Electrochimica Acta, 161, 171-176 

48. Kumar, Y., Hashmi, S. A., & Pandey, G. P. (2011). Lithium ion transport and ion–polymer interaction in 

PEO based polymer electrolyte plasticized with ionic liquid. Solid State Ionics, 201(1), 73-80. 

49. N. Gondaliya, D.K. Kanchan, P. Sharma, Effect of a plasticizer on a solid polymer electrolyte, Society of 

Plastics Engineers Plastics Research Online 10.2417/spepro.004646. 

50.  S. Ahmed, M. Mehmood, R. Iqbal, Influence of dioctyl phthalate (DOP) on the mechanical, optical and 

thermal properties of formulations for the industrial manufacture of radiation sterilizable medical 
disposables, Radiation Physics and Chemistry 79 (2010) 339–342 

51. Polu, A. R., Rhee, H. W., Reddy, M. J. K., Shanmugharaj, A. M., Ryu, S. H., & Kim, D. K. (2017). Effect 

of POSS-PEG hybrid nanoparticles on cycling performance of polyether-LiDFOB based solid polymer 
electrolytes for all solid-state Li-ion battery applications. Journal of Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry, 45, 68-77. 

52. Wang, C., Yang, Y., Liu, X., Zhong, H., Xu, H., Xu, Z., ... & Ding, F. (2017). Suppression of lithium dendrite 

formation by using LAGP-PEO (LiTFSI) composite solid electrolyte and lithium metal anode modified by 
PEO (LiTFSI) in all-solid-state lithium batteries. ACS applied materials & interfaces, 9(15), 13694-13702 

53. Arya, A, Sharma, A. L. (2017) Effect of variation of different nanofillers on structural, electrical, dielectric, 

and 
transport 
properties 
of 
blend 
polymer 
nanocomposites 

DOI: 10.1007/s11581-017-2364-7. 

54. Sharma, A. L., & Thakur, A. K. (2011). Polymer matrix–clay interaction mediated mechanism of electrical 

transport in exfoliated and intercalated polymer nanocomposites. Journal of materials science, 46(6), 1916-
1931.  

55. Kubišovß, H., MěřÝnskß, D., & Svoboda, P. (2010). PP/clay nanocomposite: optimization of mixing 

conditions with respect to mechanical properties. Polymer bulletin, 65(5), 533-541 

56. Kotal, M., & Bhowmick, A. K. (2015). Polymer nanocomposites from modified clays: Recent advances and 

challenges. Progress in Polymer Science, 51, 127-187. 

57. Polymer-clay nanocomposites, ed. T. J. Pinnavaia and G. W. Beall, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, 

2000. 

58. Chen, B., Evans, J. R., Greenwell, H. C., Boulet, P., Coveney, P. V., Bowden, A. A., & Whiting, A. (2008). 

A critical appraisal of polymer–clay nanocomposites. Chemical Society Reviews, 37(3), 568-594.  


59. Choudhary, S., & Sengwa, R. J. (2014). Intercalated clay structures and amorphous behavior of solution cast 

and melt pressed poly (ethylene oxide)–clay nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 131(4). 
doi: 10.1002/app.39898  

60. Sengwa, R. J., & Choudhary, S. (2014). Structural characterization of hydrophilic polymer 

blends/montmorillonite clay nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 131(16). doi: 
10.1002/app.40617 

61. Fan, L., Nan, C. W., & Dang, Z. (2002). Effect of modified montmorillonites on the ionic conductivity of 

(PEO)16LiClO4 electrolytes. Electrochimica acta, 47(21), 3541-3544.  

62. Shukla, N., & Thakur, A. K. (2010). Ion transport model in exfoliated and intercalated polymer–clay 

nanocomposites. solid state Ionics, 181(19), 921-932.  

63. Dam, T., Karan, N. K., Thomas, R., Pradhan, D. K., & Katiyar, R. S. (2015). Observation of ionic transport 

and 
ion-coordinated 
segmental 
motions 
in 
composite 
(polymer-salt-clay) 
solid 
polymer 

electrolyte. Ionics, 21(2), 401-410. 

64. Fu, X., Yu, D., Zhou, J., Li, S., Gao, X., Han, Y., ... & Wang, B. (2016). Inorganic and organic hybrid solid 

electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries. Cryst Eng Comm, 18(23), 4236-4258. 

65. Sharma, A. L., Shukla, N., & Thakur, A. K. (2008). Studies on structure property relationship in a polymer–

clay nanocomposite film based on (PAN)8LiClO4. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer 
Physics, 46(23), 2577-2592. 

66. Dhatarwal, P., Sengwa, R. J., & Choudhary, S. (2017). Effect of intercalated and exfoliated montmorillonite 

clay on the structural, dielectric and electrical properties of plasticized nanocomposite solid polymer 
electrolytes. Composites Communications, 5, 1-7. 

67. Sengwa, R. J., Choudhary, S., & Dhatarwal, P. (2015). Influences of ultrasonic-and microwave-irradiated 

preparation methods on the structural and dielectric properties of (PEO–PMMA)–LiCF3SO3–x wt% MMT 
nanocomposite electrolytes. Ionics, 21(1), 95-109  

68. Sengwa, R. J., & Choudhary, S. (2014). Dielectric properties and fluctuating relaxation processes of poly 

(methyl methacrylate) based polymeric nanocomposite electrolytes. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of 
Solids, 75(6), 765-774. 

69. Lin, Y., Wang, X., Liu, J., & Miller, J. D. (2017). Natural halloysite nano-clay electrolyte for advanced all-

solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries. Nano Energy, 31, 478-485. 

70. Gomari, S., Esfandeh, M., & Ghasemi, I. (2017). All-solid-state flexible nanocomposite polymer electrolytes 

based on poly (ethylene oxide): Lithium perchlorate using functionalized graphene. Solid State Ionics, 303, 
37-46. 

71. Kim, S., & Park, S. J. (2007). Preparation and ion-conducting behaviors of poly (ethylene oxide)-composite 

electrolytes containing lithium montmorillonite. Solid State Ionics, 178(13), 973-979. 

72. Ma, Y., Li, L. B., Gao, G. X., Yang, X. Y., & You, Y. (2016). Effect of montmorillonite on the ionic 

conductivity and electrochemical properties of a composite solid polymer electrolyte based on 
polyvinylidenedifluoride/polyvinyl alcohol matrix for lithium ion batteries. Electrochimica Acta, 187, 535-
542 

73. Mohapatra, S. R., Thakur, A. K., & Choudhary, R. N. P. (2009). Effect of nanoscopic confinement on 

improvement in ion conduction and stability properties of an intercalated polymer nanocomposite electrolyte 
for energy storage applications. Journal of Power Sources, 191(2), 601-613 

74. Sharma, A. L., & Thakur, A. K. (2010). Improvement in voltage, thermal, mechanical stability and ion 

transport properties in polymer‐ clay nanocomposites. Journal of applied polymer science, 118(5), 2743-
2753. 

75. Moreno, M., Quijada, R., Santa Ana, M. A., Benavente, E., Gomez-Romero, P., & González, G. (2011). 

Electrical 
and 
mechanical 
properties 
of 
poly 
(ethylene 
oxide)/intercalated 
clay 
polymer 

electrolyte. Electrochimica Acta, 58, 112-118. 

76. Zhang, Y., Zhao, Y., Gosselink, D., & Chen, P. (2015). Synthesis of poly (ethylene-oxide)/nanoclay solid 

polymer electrolyte for all solid-state lithium/sulfur battery. Ionics, 21(2), 381-385 

77. Celzard, A., McRae, E., Deleuze, C., Dufort, M., Furdin, G., & Marêché, J. F. (1996). Critical concentration 

in percolating systems containing a high-aspect-ratio filler. Physical Review B, 53(10), 6209. 


78. Liu, W., Liu, N., Sun, J., Hsu, P. C., Li, Y., Lee, H. W., & Cui, Y. (2015). Ionic conductivity enhancement 

of polymer electrolytes with ceramic nanowire fillers. Nano letters, 15(4), 2740-2745. 

79. Do, N. S. T., Schaetzl, D. M., Dey, B., Seabaugh, A. C., & Fullerton-Shirey, S. K. (2012). Influence of Fe2O3 

nanofiller shape on the conductivity and thermal properties of solid polymer electrolytes: nanorods versus 
nanospheres. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 116(40), 21216-21223. 

80. Liu, W., Lin, D., Sun, J., Zhou, G., & Cui, Y. (2016). Improved lithium ionic conductivity in composite 

polymer electrolytes with oxide-ion conducting nanowires. ACS nano, 10(12), 11407-11413 

81. Liu, W., Lee, S. W., Lin, D., Shi, F., Wang, S., Sendek, A. D., & Cui, Y. (2017). Enhancing ionic conductivity 

in composite polymer electrolytes with well-aligned ceramic nanowires. Nature Energy, 2, 17035.. 

82. Zhang, P., Yang, L. C., Li, L. L., Ding, M. L., Wu, Y. P., & Holze, R. (2011). Enhanced electrochemical and 

mechanical properties of P (VDF-HFP)-based composite polymer electrolytes with SiO2 nanowires. Journal 
of membrane science, 379(1), 80-85. 

83. Sheng, O., Jin, C., Luo, J., Yuan, H., Huang, H., Gan, Y., ... & Tao, X. (2018). Mg2B2O5 Nanowire Enabled 

Multifunctional Solid-State Electrolytes with High Ionic Conductivity, Excellent Mechanical Properties, and 
Flame-Retardant Performance. Nano letters, DOI: DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b00659. 

84. Tao, X., & Li, X. (2008). Catalyst-free synthesis, structural, and mechanical characterization of twinned 

Mg2B2O5 nanowires. Nano letters, 8(2), 505-510. 

85. Arora, P., & Zhang, Z. (2004). Battery separators. Chemical reviews, 104(10), 4419-4462. 
86. Zhang, S. S. (2007). A review on the separators of liquid electrolyte Li-ion batteries. Journal of Power 

Sources, 164(1), 351-364. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


