Revealing the 3D Structure of Graphene Defects

Christoph Hofer1, Christian Kramberger1, Mohammad Reza Ahmadpour

Monazam1, Clemens Mangler1, Andreas Mittelberger1, Giacomo Argentero1,

Jani Kotakoski1, and Jannik C. Meyer1

1Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Boltzmanngasse 5, A-1090, Vienna,

Austria

Abstract

We demonstrate insights into the three-dimensional structure of defects in graphene,

in particular grain boundaries, obtained via a new approach from two transmission elec-

tron microscopy images recorded at different angles. The structure is obtained through

an optimization process where both the atomic positions as well as the simulated imaging

parameters are iteratively changed until the best possible match to the experimental im-

ages is found. We first demonstrate that this method works using an embedded defect in

graphene that allows direct comparison to the computationally predicted three-dimensional

shape. We then applied the method to a set of grain boundary structures with misorienta-

tion angles nearly spanning the whole available range (2.6 − 29.8◦). The measured height

variations at the boundaries reveal a strong correlation with the misorientation angle with

lower angles resulting in stronger corrugation and larger kink angles. Our results allow for

the first time a direct comparison with theoretical predictions for the corrugation at grain

boundaries and we show that the measured kink angles are significantly smaller than the

largest predicted ones.

Identifying the position of every atom in a sample is the ultimate goal of structural charac-

terization. Although transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has already reached the spatial

resolution to allow resolving all atomic distances[1, 2], it only provides two-dimensional (2D)

1

arXiv:1807.00677v1  [physics.app-ph]  2 Jul 2018


projections of the sample regardless of their actual three-dimensional (3D) shape. While com-

puter tomography can retrieve the 3D structure from a set of 2D projections, down to atomic

resolution [3–7], it requires high electron doses which is problematic for structures susceptible

to electron-beam-induced structural changes. This is because in absence of any additional in-

formation, the number of projections required to obtain a uniform resolution in all dimensions

is approximately the sample size divided by the resolution [8], which reaches typically tens or

hundreds of projections for bulk samples.

Defects in graphene, the 2D allotrope of carbon, are expected to corrugate the structure.

Such corrugations have been studied previously through simulations [9–12] and their existence

has also been indirectly inferred from high resolution TEM images [13][14]. However, since

graphene defects frequently change their configuration under electron irradiation even at mod-

erate acceleration voltages [15–20], recording an entire tomographic series to image the 3D

structure of graphene defects at atomic resolution would be very challenging. The 3D struc-

ture of defect free graphene has been analyzed on the basis a of defocus series [21] and the

structure of clustered divacancies has been extracted from atom contrast variations in a singe

image [22]. However, this approach requires that the intensity of each atom can be measured

without being affected in any way by the intensity of the neighboring atoms, which is difficult

to avoid in presence of residual aberrations, finite resolution, and very short projected distances

in non-flat structures. The polynomial fit of the atom positions as done in Ref [22] relaxes this

requirement, but then it also does not reveal the position of individual atoms, but only averages

of local height. In this way, it is not suited for the analysis of structures with sharp kinks or

significant height differences between neighboring atoms, as revealed in this work. Our ap-

proach does not introduce such geometrical constraints and the results show that indeed the 3D

configurations are more complex than the smooth height variations around defects that could be

revealed previously.

Here, we show that it is possible to obtain the 3D shape of defected graphene directly al-

ready from two experimental images obtained at different tilt angles. We first demonstrate our

approach with an embedded graphene defect, for which the corrugated structure obtained from

the experimental data can be directly compared with the one obtained computationally through

energy optimization. Then, we move on to study the corrugations caused by grain boundaries

in polycrystalline graphene. Importantly, both grain boundaries themselves as well as corruga-

tions even in the absense of defects have been shown to significantly influence the properties of

2


graphene [23, 24], making this an important subject to study.

We start our experiment by looking for a defect in graphene grown via chemical vapor depo-

sition (CVD; see Methods for details) using scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)

medium-angle annular dark field (MAADF) imaging. In order to avoid electron irradiation-

induced changes in the atomic structure [25], the electron dose at the defect is minimized by

recording as few atomic-resolution images as possible of the area of interest. After a defect is

found and one atomic resolution image is acquired, we record a few images of the surrounding

area at larger fields of view in order to find the same location after the sample has been tilted.

While tilting, we track the sample to stay in the vicinity of the defect, and when the necessary

tilt angle has been reached, we zoom in again and record the second atomic-resolution expo-

sure. Even with this approach, the atomic structure at the defect often changes between the

two recorded atomic-resolution images. However, it is also possible to obtain pairs of images

of different defect structures where the atomic structure remained unchanged. Areas covered

by contamination in each image have been masked in order not to confuse the reconstruction

algorithm and the images have been high-pass filtered. An example is shown in Figure 1.

The first task for our reconstruction algorithm is the identification of individual atoms within

each of the experimental images. This is achieved through an iterative process, where a model

structure is compared at each step with the experimental image through image simulation (see

Methods). Initially, the model contains no atoms. At each step, an atom is either added, its

position is adjusted, or it is removed from the model. This is carried out by selecting a random

position and either adding an atom there, or if there is an atom within a distance of rcut ≤ 0.5 ˚A

moving this atom there. If after this two atoms are too close to each other (within rnbr ≤ 1 ˚A),

the atom pair is replaced by just one atom. After each adjustment, a simulated STEM-MAADF

image is created based on the model, and the difference between the simulated image and the

experimental image is calculated as σ =
�N
i=1(Iexp
i
− Isim
i
)2, where the sum runs over all N

pixels in the image and Iexp
i
and Isim
i
are the intensities of pixel i in the experimental and the

simulated image, respectively. At each step, the change in the structure is only accepted if it

results in reducing σ from the previous step. Since the match between the experimental and the

simulated images depends not only on the exact atomic structure but also on the exact electron

aberrations during the experiment (which can change between two images and need to be used

as input parameters for the image simulation), they are also adjusted with a similar stochastic

process. An image sequence showing one optimization process is shown in the Supplemental

3


Figure 1: (a) Schematic illustration showing the sample at two different tilts (β1 and β2) that

result in two different views of the sample (View 1 and View 2). (b) Filtered STEM-MAADF

image of a graphene grain boundary at nominally zero sample tilt (β = 0◦). (c) STEM-MAADF

image of the same grain boundary at a nominal tilt of ca. β = 20◦. The white areas correspond

to contaminated areas that have been cut out from the images. Scale bars are 0.5 nm. The

experimental images have been processed with a high pass filter to remove long range intensity

variations. Raw images are shown in the supplementary information.

4


Material (Video 1) and the evolution of σ as a function of the number of steps is shown in

Figure 2. At the end of this optimization process, σ approaches a value close to zero and the

difference image is dominated by noise.

Next, the topology needs to be established in order to allow identifying the same atom in

each of the model structures. In our approach, this process is automated through the imple-

mentation of just a few rules. Firstly, two neighboring atoms need to be close enough (within

2 ˚A) to allow bonding. Secondly, no more than three neighbous are allowed for each individual

atom. Finally, the formation of three-membered carbon rings is prohibited. These rules are

based on the obsersavation of previous atomic-resolution studies of the structure of sp2-bonded

defective carbon networks [15, 26] and appear to work extremely well. The agreement is easily

confirmed visually by comparing the experimental image to the established network (see Fig-

ure 2c) . Subsequently, identifying the same atoms in each of the images is possible based on

their location in the network.

After the atoms have been identified, those that appear in both images (excluding image

edges) are used as the basis for a new model which will be further optimized, now including also

the third dimension. One of the 2D models is chosen arbitrarily for the initial positions of the

atoms, and the optimization is continued considering both experimental views simultaneously

(taking into account the tilt between the models). During this phase atoms are no longer neither

added nor removed. Initially, the optimization takes only into account the model structures,

minimizing the difference between the projected positions of the new 3D model and those of the

2D models developed during the previous optimization phase. After this process has converged

(see Figure 3a), the optimization is continued based on the error in simulated STEM-MAADF

images as compared to the experimental ones. The convergence behaviour of this optimization

phase is shown in Figure 3b. The model structures, simulated STEM-MAADF images and the

error with respect to the experimental images are shown at three different stages of the process

in Figure 3c. The yellow dashed line shows the area which is included in the model (edge

atoms are excluded, but retained as background in the simulated image so that no discontinuity

appears at the edge). Of course, the simulation of the first (untilted) model (View 1 in Figure 3c)

fits perfectly to the corresponding experimental image (this was the starting configuration), but

there is a high discrepancy between the experimental image and the simulation of the second

(tilted) model (View 2). The situation improves quickly during the optimization process until

at the end the difference between the experimental images and the simulated ones is dominated

5


Figure 2: Error minimization through the optimization algorithm for one image. (a) Simulated

image and the calculated error for each image pixel at six different stages (i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi)

during the process. The corresponding optimization steps are marked with arrows in panel (b).

(b) The calculated error σ as a function of the number of iterations. The black data points

correspond to the optimization of the atomic structure and the red ones to the optimization of

the aberration coefficients used in the image simulation. (c) Overlay of the resulting 2D model

and the experimental image, shown for a small section as indicated in the last frame of panel a.

6


by noise.

In order to validate our approach and estimate its accuracy, we test it using a computation-

ally obtained structure and simulated STEM images for realistic conditions including noise as

expected for our experimental dose. For this purpose we use a defect configuration that was also

observed experimentally, but with its 3D configuration obtained by energy minimization (see

Methods). Since this defect contains two extra atoms compared to an ideal graphene lattice, it

displays a significant out of plane distortion and hence is ideally suited for the validation. The

reconstruction from the simulated data agrees with the original model with a mean out-of-plane

deviation of 0.183 ˚A and a mean in-plane deviation of 0.053 ˚A. Details of this test are given in

the supplementary information. As expected, the out-of-plane error is larger than the in-plane

error, since the effect of noise is amplified by the limited tilt angle between the two images.

Next, we use the two experimentally obtained STEM images of this structure. Figure 4

shows the experimental reconstruction (a) and for comparison the energy minimized structure

(b). The top views, the lineprofiles and the side views show and excellent match between the

two. The structure displays a particularly strong distortion around the two atoms that are fur-

thest from the plane, and which can be identified as a carbon ad-dimer integrated into the defect.

Additionally, we tested our method with a small rotated grain (flower defect [27, 28]), which

is flat according to both, computational analysis (energy minimization) and 3D reconstruction

from experimental data. For the latter structure, we could also calculate the out-of-plane stan-

dard deviation of the coordinates. In this case, the deviation is 0.31 ˚A, which is slighly higher

than the error obtained from the simulated data as discussed above.

Since a total of four images could be obtained from one particular grain boundary (GB), we

further test the method by performing multiple reconstructions from different pairs of images.

All of the reconstructed GBs show very similar tendencies to an out-of-plane deformation at the

defect locations (see supplementary information). The consistent results are another confirma-

tion for the reliability of our method.

After establishing the reliability of the method for resolving the 3D structure, we move

onto the analysis of graphene grain boundaries. GBs are a challenge for computational tech-

niques, because they join together two crystalline grains with different orientations, hence they

can neither trivially be incorporated into a periodic super cell required for most computational

techniques nor can their effect on the surrounding graphene lattice be easily estimated with

calculations using non-periodic structures since often only a short piece of a GB is visible in

7


Figure 3: Evolution during the 3D optimization. (a) Difference between the projected atomic

positions of the optimized 3D model and those in the flat models obtained during the previous

optimization step. (b) Total error in the simulated STEM-MAADF images based on the 3D

model, as compared to the experimental images. (c) Perspective views of the atomic struc-

tures (atoms of non-hexagonal rings in the grain boundary highlighted by color), simulated

STEM-MAADF images for both tilt angles (View 1 and View 2), and the error for each pixel as

compared to the experimental images. The area included in the 3D optimization is marked by

the yellow dashed lines overlaid on the simulated images. The corresponding iteration steps for

each case (i, ii, and iii) are marked in panels (a) and (b).

8


Figure 4: 3D structure of an embedded defect with a rotated grain and an ad-dimer. (a) Struc-

ture obtained through experimental reconstruction from STEM-MAADF images. (b) Structure

obtained computationally through energy minimization. The line profiles under the top views

in both panels include all atoms between the two horizontal black lines. At the bottom, a per-

spective view of the structure is shown (only color coded bonds are shown).

9


Figure 5: Atomic structures of two representative grain boundaries in graphene with small

misorientation angles (θ) of (a) ca. 2◦ and (b) ca. 8◦. From top to bottom, in each case: (1)

Top view of the structure, with the z coordinate coded by color; (2) A side view of the atoms

between the two green dashed lines, revealing height variations along the grain boundary (solid

line shows an average); (3) A side view of the entire structure, viewed along the grain boundary

in order to reveal the kink angle; (4) Perspective view of the structure (only bonds are shown,

color coded for z position). Also indicated in (a) are the definitions of the maximum corrugation

(∆z, peak to peak of the height variation along the grain boundary), the height variation (σz,

standard deviation) and the kink angle (α, inclination between the two graphene sheets).

10


Figure 6: Atomic structures of two representative grain boundaries in graphene with large mis-

orientation angles (θ) of (a) ca. 23.6◦ and (b) almost 30◦. The data is displayed in the same way

as in Figure 5a.

11


atomic resolution images. We present results for several GBs spanning misorientation angles

θ ∈ [2◦, 30◦]. In Figure 5, the 3D structure of two representative grain boundaries with small

misorientation angles (θ = 2◦ and θ = 8◦, respectively) and in Figure 6, the 3D structure of

two representative grain boundaries with large misorientation angles (θ = 24◦ and θ = 30◦,

respectively) are shown. Three additional structures can be found in the supplementary infor-

mation. For each structure, we show the top view colored based on the z-coordinate of each

atom as well as two line profiles: one along the y-axis that contains all atoms in the structure

and another along the x-axis that is limited to a narrow strip of atoms located within ca. 1 nm

around the GB. From the line profiles, we also calculate the maximum corrugation (∆z), height

variation (σz), defined as the standard deviation of the out-of-plane coordinate of the atoms in

the structure from the mean value and the kink angle (α) which is measured across the grain

boundary. For an optical impression of the structure, we also show a perspective view of the

bonds with the same color code as in the top view.

When each of the structural characteristics are plotted as a function of the misorientation

angle (θ) (Figure 7), it becomes clear that they all depend strongly on θ. While the trend is

most clear for the small- and high-angle grain boundaries, the intermediate data points display

some scatter reflecting the large structural variability in these grain boundaries. Remarkably,

the lowest measured kink angle is only α ≈ 0.7◦ for a GB with θ ≈ 30◦, whereas the highest

one is nearly 40◦ for a GB with θ ≈ 2.6◦. This variation is lower than what has been predicted

based on density functional tight binding calculations [29]; the largest calculated angles were

up to 85◦ with no clear correlation to the misorientation angle. This discrepancy is likely a con-

sequence of the fact that the theoretical models were created by forcing two straight graphene

edges to join, whereas during actual growth nothing prevents the carbon atoms from forming

more meandering structures [20, 30–32] that help in reducing the stress at the GB. In another

theoretical work [9], it was predicted that small angle grain boundaries should show a pro-

nounced tendency for buckling, whereas large angle grain boundaries tend to be flat. Although

also this work was limited to straight GBs (and also formed of regular arrays of dislocations),

this prediction is in good agreement with our experimental result. We indeed find that smaller

θ predicts higher corrugation (up to ∆z ≈ 4 ˚A and σz ≈ 1.8 ˚A), whereas the GBs with θ ∼ 30◦

tend to be significantly flatter (with ∆z ≈ 1.5 ˚A and σz ≈ 0.5 ˚A). These values reflect the

fact that small-angle GBs contain isolated non-hexagonal rings as well as short segments where

the hexagonal lattices of both grains are directly connected, leading to significant local strain

12


a
b
c

ϑ (°)
ϑ (°)
ϑ (°)

α (°)

σz (Å)

Δz (Å)

Figure 7: Kink angle (α), height variation (σz) and maximum corrugation (∆z) for different

grain boundaries as functions of the misorientation angle (θ). The lines are linear fits to the

data, which serve as guides to the eye.

that must be released through buckling [9, 33]. This is particularly clear in Fig. 5a, where an

essentially isolated dislocation core in a grain boundary with only 2.6◦ misorientation angle is

observed.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a new approach to determine the 3D structure of defec-

tive graphene at the atomic resolution from only two scanning transmission electron microscopy

images taken at different sample tilts (with a respective difference of ca. 20◦). We first showed

an embedded defect for which the results could be directly compared to the structure obtained

through energy minimization. The comparison revealed excellent agreement, except for small

local height variations due to noise in the experimentally obtained structure. We then applied

the method to a set of grain boundary structures with misorientation angles nearly spanning the

whole available range (2.6 − 29.8◦). The measured height variations at the boundaries reveal

a strong correlation with the misorientation angle with lower angles resulting in stronger cor-

rugation and larger kink angle (slope difference for the graphene grains on the different sides

of the boundary). The largest measured kink angle was almost 40◦ for a GB with 2.6◦ mis-

orientation. As far as we know, our results allow for the first time a direct comparison with

theoretical predictions for the corrugation at grain boundaries. The measured kink angles are

significantly smaller than the largest predicted ones [29], probably due to artificial constraints

in the theoretical models being different from the experimental reality. However, our results

do qualitatively agree with the prediction that smaller misorientation leads to higher overall

corrugation at the boundary [9]. Our results both open the way toward detailed study of the

complete morphology of two-dimensional materials, including the often disregarded third di-

13


mension, and can already be used for tailoring graphene growth towards application utilizing

the revealed differences in corrugations of polycrystalline samples with different misorientation

angles between the graphene grains.

Methods

Samples—For our experiments, we studied chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown graphene.

We used commercially available graphene on TEM grids (Graphenea on Quantifoil R2/4), as

well as self-grown CVD samples transferred to Quantifoil 0.6/1 grids. In order to have a high

defect density in our samples, we kept the growth temperature low (T = 960 ◦C), the flow rate

high (SF = 100 sccm) and the annealing time as short as possible by starting the growth when

the growth temperature is reached. As precursor, we used ethane which further increases the

nucleation density.

Microscopy—Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) experiments were con-

ducted using a Nion UltraSTEM100, operated at 60 kV acceleration voltage. Typically, our

atomic-resolution images were recorded with 512 × 512 pixels for a field of view of 8 nm and

dwell time of 32 µs per pixel using the medium angle annular dark field (MAADF) detector.

Conjugent gradient energy minimization—In order to study the strain adaptation in each

of the defects, a supercell of pristine graphene with the size of 72×62 nm consisisting of

173,000 atoms was created and the defect structure is incorporated into this supercell. LCBOP

[34] was used as the long-range bond-order potential for carbon to describe the pair interac-

tions. All calculations were performed with Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel

Simulator code [35, 36]. The total potential energy was minimized by relaxing atoms until the

forces were below 10−3 eV/ ˚A and the strain at the borders of the graphene flake was negligible

(pressure below 1 atmosphere).

STEM image simulation—Instead a multislice algorithm, which is typically used for quan-

titative STEM-simulations, we used a simplified method which works for single layer materials

and is much faster. We approximate the potential of the 2D lattice by a zero-filled image with

non-zero pixel values on the atomic positions. The simulation is obtained by convoluting this

image with a (potentially aberrated) electron probe (see supplementary information for more

details).

14


Supporting Information

The Supporting Information contains details of the STEM simulation method, additional anal-

ysis of the 3D accuracy, additional grain boundary models and a complete set of raw and pro-

cessed images. References [37] and [38] are cited in the supplement.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the European Research Council Starting Grant no. 336453- PICO-

MAT. M.R.A.M, G.A. and J.K. acknowledge support from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF)

through project I3181-N26.

References

[1] C. Colliex, “Seeing and measuring with electrons: Transmission electron microscopy to-

day and tomorrow An introduction,” Comptes Rendus Phys., vol. 15, pp. 101–109, feb

2014.

[2] O. Krivanek, N. Dellby, and A. Lupini, “Towards sub- ˚A electron beams,” Ultrami-

croscopy, vol. 78, pp. 1–11, jun 1999.

[3] S. Bals, B. Goris, T. Altantzis, H. Heidari, S. Van Aert, and G. Van Tendeloo, “Seeing and

measuring in 3D with electrons,” Comptes Rendus Phys., vol. 15, pp. 140–150, feb 2014.

[4] J. Miao, P. Ercius, and S. J. L. Billinge, “Atomic electron tomography: 3D structures

without crystals,” Science (80-. )., vol. 353, p. aaf2157, sep 2016.

[5] M. Weyland and P. A. Midgley, “Electron tomography,” Mater. Today, vol. 7, pp. 32–40,

dec 2004.

[6] R. Xu, C.-C. Chen, L. Wu, M. C. Scott, W. Theis, C. Ophus, M. Bartels, Y. Yang,

H. Ramezani-Dakhel, M. R. Sawaya, H. Heinz, L. D. Marks, P. Ercius, and J. Miao,

“Three-dimensional coordinates of individual atoms in materials revealed by electron to-

mography,” Nat. Mater., vol. 14, pp. 1099–1103, sep 2015.

15


[7] Y. Yang, C.-C. Chen, M. C. Scott, C. Ophus, R. Xu, A. Pryor, L. Wu, F. Sun, W. Theis,

J. Zhou, M. Eisenbach, P. R. C. Kent, R. F. Sabirianov, H. Zeng, P. Ercius, and J. Miao,

“Deciphering chemical order/disorder and material properties at the single-atom level,”

Nature, vol. 542, pp. 75–79, feb 2017.

[8] A. C. Kak, M. Slaney, and IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society., Principles

of computerized tomographic imaging. New York: IEEE Press, 1988.

[9] O. V. Yazyev and S. G. Louie, “Topological defects in graphene: Dislocations and grain

boundaries,” Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., vol. 81, no. 19, pp. 1–7, 2010.

[10] T.-h. Liu, G. Gajewski, C.-W. Pao, and C.-C. Chang, “Structure, energy, and structural

transformations of graphene grain boundaries from atomistic simulations,” Carbon N. Y.,

vol. 49, pp. 2306–2317, jun 2011.

[11] J. Kotakoski, F. R. Eder, and J. C. Meyer, “Atomic structure and energetics of large vacan-

cies in graphene,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 89, p. 201406, may 2014.

[12] A. Shekhawat and R. O. Ritchie, “Toughness and strength of nanocrystalline graphene,”

Nat. Commun., vol. 7, p. 10546, jan 2016.

[13] J. H. Warner, Y. Fan, A. W. Robertson, K. He, E. Yoon, and G. D. Lee, “Rippling Graphene

at the Nanoscale through Dislocation Addition,” Nano Lett., vol. 13, pp. 4937–4944, oct

2013.

[14] O. Lehtinen, N. Vats, G. Algara-Siller, P. Knyrim, and U. Kaiser, “Implantation and

Atomic-Scale Investigation of Self-Interstitials in Graphene,” Nano Lett., vol. 15, pp. 235–

241, jan 2015.

[15] J. Kotakoski, A. V. Krasheninnikov, U. Kaiser, and J. C. Meyer, “From Point Defects in

Graphene to Two-Dimensional Amorphous Carbon,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 106, p. 105505,

mar 2011.

[16] J. C. Meyer, F. Eder, S. Kurasch, V. Skakalova, J. Kotakoski, H. J. Park, S. Roth,

A. Chuvilin, S. Eyhusen, G. Benner, A. V. Krasheninnikov, and U. Kaiser, “Accurate mea-

surement of electron beam induced displacement cross sections for single-layer graphene,”

Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 108, no. 19, p. 196102, 2012.

16


[17] T. Susi, C. Hofer, G. Argentero, G. T. Leuthner, T. J. Pennycook, C. Mangler, J. C. Meyer,

and J. Kotakoski, “Isotope analysis in the transmission electron microscope,” Nat. Com-

mun., vol. 7, p. 13040, 2016.

[18] J. Kotakoski, C. Mangler, and J. C. Meyer, “Imaging atomic-level random walk of a point

defect in graphene,” Nat. Commun., vol. 5, p. 3991, may 2014.

[19] T. Susi, J. Kotakoski, D. Kepaptsoglou, C. Mangler, T. C. Lovejoy, O. L. Krivanek, R. Zan,

U. Bangert, P. Ayala, J. C. Meyer, and Q. Ramasse, “SiliconCarbon Bond Inversions

Driven by 60-keV Electrons in Graphene,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 113, p. 115501, sep 2014.

[20] S. Kurasch, J. Kotakoski, O. Lehtinen, V. Skakalova, J. Smet, C. E. Krill, A. V.

Krasheninnikov, and U. Kaiser, “Atom-by-atom observation of grain boundary migration

in graphene,” Nano Lett., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 3168–3173, 2012.

[21] D. V. Dyck, J. R. Jinschek, and F.-R. Chen, “’Big Bang’ tomography as a new route to

atomic-resolution electron tomography,” Nature, vol. 486, no. 7402, pp. 243–246, 2012.

[22] L.-G. Chen, J. Warner, A. I. Kirkland, F.-R. Chen, and D. Van Dyck, “Snapshot 3D Elec-

tron Imaging of Structural Dynamics,” Sci. Rep., vol. 7, p. 10839, dec 2017.

[23] A. Rossi, S. Piccinin, V. Pellegrini, S. de Gironcoli, and V. Tozzini, “Nano-Scale Corruga-

tions in Graphene: A Density Functional Theory Study of Structure, Electronic Properties

and Hydrogenation,” J. Phys. Chem. C, vol. 119, pp. 7900–7910, apr 2015.

[24] V. Atanasov and A. Saxena, “Tuning the electronic properties of corrugated graphene:

Confinement, curvature, and band-gap opening,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 81, p. 205409, may

2010.

[25] J. Kotakoski, J. C. Meyer, S. Kurasch, D. Santos-Cottin, U. Kaiser, and A. V. Krashenin-

nikov, “Stone-Wales-type transformations in carbon nanostructures driven by electron ir-

radiation,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 83, p. 245420, jun 2011.

[26] F. R. Eder, J. Kotakoski, U. Kaiser, and J. C. Meyer, “A journey from order to disorder

- atom by atom transformation from graphene to a 2D carbon glass.,” Sci. Rep., vol. 4,

p. 4060, feb 2014.

17


[27] H. J. Park, V. Sk´akalov´a, J. Meyer, D. S. Lee, T. Iwasaki, C. Bumby, U. Kaiser, and

S. Roth, “Growth and properties of chemically modified graphene,” Phys. status solidi,

vol. 247, pp. 2915–2919, dec 2010.

[28] E. Cockayne, G. M. Rutter, N. P. Guisinger, J. N. Crain, P. N. First, and J. A. Stroscio,

“Grain boundary loops in graphene,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 83, p. 195425, may 2011.

[29] S. Malola, H. H¨akkinen, and P. Koskinen, “Structural, chemical, and dynamical trends in

graphene grain boundaries,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 81, p. 165447, apr 2010.

[30] P. Y. Huang, C. S. Ruiz-Vargas, A. M. van der Zande, W. S. Whitney, M. P. Levendorf,

J. W. Kevek, S. Garg, J. S. Alden, C. J. Hustedt, Y. Zhu, J. Park, P. L. McEuen, and D. A.

Muller, “Grains and grain boundaries in single-layer graphene atomic patchwork quilts,”

Nature, vol. 469, no. 7330, pp. 389–392, 2011.

[31] K. Kim, Z. Lee, W. Regan, C. Kisielowski, M. F. Crommie, and A. Zettl, “Grain Boundary

Mapping in Polycrystalline Graphene,” ACS Nano, vol. 5, pp. 2142–2146, mar 2011.

[32] J. Kotakoski and J. C. Meyer, “Mechanical properties of polycrystalline graphene based on

a realistic atomistic model,” Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., vol. 85, no. 19,

p. 195447, 2012.

[33] Y. Liu and B. I. Yakobson, “Cones, Pringles, and Grain Boundary Landscapes in Graphene

Topology,” Nano Lett., vol. 10, pp. 2178–2183, jun 2010.

[34] J. H. Los and A. Fasolino, “Intrinsic long-range bond-order potential for carbon: Perfor-

mance in Monte Carlo simulations of graphitization,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 68, p. 24107, jul

2003.

[35] S. Plimpton, “Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics,” J. Comput.

Phys., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 1995.

[36] S. J. Plimpton and A. P. Thompson, “Computational aspects of many-body potentials,”

MRS Bull., vol. 37, no. 05, pp. 513–521, 2012.

[37] C. Koch, Determination of core structure periodicity and point defect density along dislo-

cations. PhD thesis, Arizona State University, 2002.

18


[38] E. J. Kirkland, Advanced computing in electron microscopy. New York: Springer US,

2 ed., 2010.

19


