1 

 

Energy harvesting from a bio cell 

Authors: L. Catacuzzeno1, F. Orfei2, A. Di Michele2, L. Sforna3, F. Franciolini1, L. Gammaitoni2 

Affiliations:  

1Dipartimento di Chimica, Biologia e Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi di Perugia - via 
Pascoli, I-06123 Perugia, Italy 

2NiPS Laboratory, Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia, Università degli Studi di Perugia - via 
Pascoli, I-06123 Perugia, Italy 

3Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università degli Studi di Perugia - Via Gambuli, 1, 
I-06132 Perugia, Italy 

 

Corresponding author: Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
L. 
Catacuzzeno 
(luigi.catacuzzeno@unipg.it) 
and 
L. 
Gammaitoni 

(luca.gammaitoni@nipslab.org). 
 
 

 
 


2 

 

Keywords 

Energy Harvesting 
Biological cell 
Autonomous devices 
Nano joule 
 

Abstract 

This work shows experimentally how electrical energy can be harvested directly from cell 

membrane potential and used to power a wireless communication. The experiment is 

performed by exploiting the membrane potential of Xenopus oocytes taken from female 

frogs. Electrical potential energy of the membrane is transferred to a capacitor connected to 

the cell via a proper electrical circuit. Once the capacitor has reached the planned amount of 

energy, the circuit is disconnected from the cell and the stored energy is used to power a 

radio frequency communication that carries bio-sensed information to a distanced receiving 

circuit. Our result shows that electrical energy can be harvested directly from biological 

cells and used for a number of purposes, including wireless communication of sensed 

biological quantities to a remote receiving hub. 

 
 


3 

 

Introduction 

In a popular movie from the sixties (Fantastic voyage, 20th Century Fox), a miniaturized 

submarine connects to human lung alveoli to replenish its accidentally emptied oxygen 

reservoir, thus advancing the idea that untethered micro devices could navigate inside the 

body while scavenging resources from biological components.  

In present day, micro robotics is considered to have a potential impact in bioengineering 

and in healthcare. Existing small-scale robots, however, still show limited mobility and 

reduced communication capabilities due to a number of reasons, chief among them the 

difficulty to solve the powering problem. The majority of centimetre-scale medical implant 

devices[1], considered for sensing and single-cell manipulation[2], targeted drug 

delivery[3] and minimally invasive surgery[4], are powered by batteries[5] that have 

several unwanted features, such as limited lifetime and energy capacity, impacting size and 

toxicity for the living organism[6]. In the case of micro robots (sub-centimetre-scale), if we 

exclude externally actuated and guided devices, self propelled devices for bioengineering 

applications have been designed to take advantage of local chemical gradients[7], parasitic 

transport techniques[8] or bubble propulsions[9]. Exploiting cut-edge integrated circuit 

technology and optimizing energy harvesting processes[10], it may be soon possible to scale 

down the power absorbed by these implanted devices to the point that they can be powered 

solely by the energy harvested from the biological environment[11]. Sources include 

chemical energy (as generated by enzymatic reactions), mechanical energy (vibrations, 

liquid flow) and thermal energy (exploiting temperature gradients). However, energy 

harvested from these sources is not promptly available for communication and transduction 

mechanisms are required to convert it into electrical energy for radio signal transmission 

purposes.  For this reason an interesting energy source to pay attention to, is the electrical 

potential existing in living organisms. Electrical potential energy in higher organisms has 

been recently extracted from the cochlea in the inner ear of guinea pig, exploiting the 70–

100 mV existing across the thin wall between the endolymph fluid in the cochlear duct and 

the perilymph [12]. The cochlear organ is however present only in the inner ear, so that a 

more general approach to powering microdevices from the environment requires a more 

generally available body energy source.  

Here we propose to use a source of energy ubiquitously present inside a living organism: 

the potential difference existing across the plasma membrane of electrically-polarized cells. 

Each cell of a living organism is surrounded by a plasma membrane bilayer selectively 

permeable to ions, due to the presence of passive and active transport proteins for their 


4 

 

passage. Some of these proteins (pumps) move ions against their electrochemical gradient, 

by using ATP (active transport). Others (channels) let ions flow passively through their 

central pore. The interplay of these transports ultimately results in an electrical potential 

across the membrane, which in the case of neurons and skeletal muscle fibres reaches the 

range 70-90 mV, negative inside[13]. The membrane effectively acts as a biologic battery 

whose electrical potential is actively stabilized by ion channels and Na/K pumps.  

 
 


5 

 

Results 

Here we present the results obtained according to the following scheme: we begin with 

assessing the maximum power that can be extracted from a single cell. Subsequently we 

show that electrical energy can be harvested from a cell and stored in a proper capacitor. 

Finally we show that the energy harvested from the cell and stored in the capacitor can be 

used to transmit a radio signal to a nearby receiver. 

In order to assess the maximum electrical power that can be extracted from a bio cell, we 

performed a number of simulations (see Supplementary material - “Model and 

simulations”), which showed that, while cells with typical dimensions (5-20 µm in 

diameter) were predicted to release a very small power (in the order of picowatts), cells of 

larger dimensions, such as skeletal muscle fibres, could provide a power of several 

nanowatts (Supplementary material - Fig. S1D,E), well within the requirement of currently 

available wireless sensor nodes [14].  

We verified experimentally this prediction using as test cell the large, round-shaped, 

Xenopus oocyte (egg cell from frog Xenopus laevis), which has a diameter of about 1 mm, and 

expected power output comparable to the skeletal muscle fibre (Supplementary material -  

Fig. S1F). The large dimension of these cells also allows to easily insert the harvesting 

electrode and two voltage-clamp electrodes to record the electrical properties of the cell 

(Fig. 1B) that are used to assess the harvested power. Initially we measured the current-

voltage (I-V) relationship, with the harvesting electrode disconnected from ground, by 

applying voltage steps from -80 to +60 mV (in 10 mV steps) from a holding potential of 0 

mV (squares in Fig. 1C). Subsequently, the I-V was measured after the harvesting electrode 

had been connected to ground, and the resulting current going through it (Ih) had 

depolarized the oocyte to a new steady-state level (Vm[g], circles in Fig. 1C). The difference 

between the two I-Vs at the resting membrane potential reached by the grounded oocyte 

during energy delivery provides the current passing through the electrode, Ih[g] which 

multiplied by Vm[g] (Ih[g]*Vm[g]) gives the power delivered by the oocyte. Using this approach 

we obtained a mean harvested power of approximately 1.1 nW (Fig. 1D, left), well in 

agreement with our model (Supplementary material - Fig. S1F). As shown in Fig. 1D (right), 

the membrane potential reached by the oocyte upon grounding the harvesting electrode, 

which dictates the level of harvesting power, is relatively low (Vm[g] = ∼-20 mV) and 

approximately half the initial oocyte resting potential Vm.  

This electric potential value, however, is expected to be significantly higher in cells with a 

high resting K permeability. In oocytes overexpressing inward rectifier K (Kir 4.1) channels, 


6 

 

which displayed a resting membrane potential close to -90 mV, we obtained a ∼4-fold 

working potential and a ∼20-fold harvested power as compared to naïve oocytes (Fig. 1F, 

inset and 1G). 

Given the relatively small power that can be harvested from a single cell, energy must be 

accumulated 
over 
time 
in 
order 
to 
reach 
the 
amount 
needed 
to 
drive 
a 

biosensor/transmitting device. We therefore performed experiments aimed at determining 

the ability of Xenopus oocytes to perform as a power supply, to charge small-size capacitors 

connected in parallel to it (Fig. 2A). In Fig. 2B we present a typical voltage trace where, after 

the impalement of the oocyte (first arrow), a capacitor was inserted in parallel with the cell 

(second arrow). Right after the connection of the capacitor, the potential instantly reached 

values close to 0 mV, and then slowly hyperpolarized with exponential time course, during 

the capacitor charging process. From the level of hyperpolarization reached and the value of 

the capacitance, we assessed the energy stored in the capacitor at the end of the charging 

process. This protocol was implemented using capacitors of variable size (0.1, 0.2, and 1 

mF). In addition, the charging ability of the 1 mF capacitor was assessed in control 

conditions (Normal Frog Ringer as extracellular solution) or in presence of a Normal Frog 

Ringer in which we added 10 mM glucose. Under these conditions we expected the cell to 

metabolize the available glucose through the glycolytic pathway and increase its energy 

content in terms of available ATP. As a consequence, the cell should display a stronger 

ability to preserve the intracellular vs extracellular ionic gradients, and maintain a 

hyperpolarized membrane potential during energy harvesting. As shown in Fig. 2C, on 

increasing the capacitance value, the measured voltage across the capacitor tends to 

decrease, thus indicating that the oocyte cell behaviour departs from that of an ideal power 

supply. This is likely caused by the limited nutrient supply to the cell in our recording 

conditions, given that a higher voltage is reached when 10 mM extracellular glucose is 

added. In Fig. 2D we present the accumulated energy for the different cases. We finally 

inspected the ability of the oocyte to charge a capacitor several times in temporal 

succession, and found that the energy stored decreased during repeated charging rounds, 

even in presence of extracellular glucose (Fig. 2E,F).  

Finally, we demonstrate that the energy extracted from a single Xenopus oocyte and stored 

in the capacitor can be used to transmit a radio signal to a nearby receiver. More specifically 

we used the harvested energy to generate a current through an LRC circuit, whose magnetic 

field was able to induce an electromotive force in a nearby (few centimetres) coil/antenna 

connected to an oscilloscope (Fig. 3A). As shown in Fig. 3B, at the beginning of the 

experiment the microelectrode was inserted into an oocyte bathed in Normal Frog Ringer 


7 

 

plus 10 mM glucose, and a negative resting potential of about -60 mV could be read. A 1 mF 

capacitor was then connected to the oocyte and after the charging process, it was 

disconnected from the cell and connected to an LRC circuit, where it induced a damped 

sinusoidal current, capable of generating a clearly detectable signal in the coil/antenna of 

the receiver (Fig. 3C). The resulting signal was fitted with an exponentially decaying 

sinusoidal function (Fig. 3D) and the best fit parameters, obtained from eleven repeated 

experiments, are presented in Fig. 3E as a function of the capacitor voltage at the end of the 

charging process. As expected, while the frequency (ω) and the damping factor (γ) remained 

constant, the initial amplitude of the signal (As) shows an approximately linear relation with 

the capacitor voltage, thus convening information of the cell resting potential. 

 

Conclusions 

We believe that the demonstrated possibility to harvest electrical energy directly from bio 

cells and use it to power wireless communications represents a new enabling technology 

that will foster the design of a novel class of micro devices aimed at interacting directly with 

biological components inside living organisms, with endless possibility for future 

biotechnological applications. 

 

Experimental Methods 

Electrophysiology. Xenopus oocytes were either prepared as previously described [16] or 

purchased by Ecocyte Bioscience (Dortmund, Germany). Two electrode voltage-clamp 

(TEVC) recordings were performed from oocytes at RT (22 °C), 1–10 days after isolation, by 

using a GeneClamp 500 amplifier (Axon Instruments, Foster City, CA) interfaced to a PC 

with an ITC-16 interface (Instrutech Corporation, Longmont, CO). Membrane potential 

measurements were performed by using an EPC-10 patch-clamp amplifier (HEKA 

Instruments, Lambrecht/Pfalz, Germany) interfaced to a PC, using a single intracellular 

electrode. Intracellular electrodes always consisted in Ag/AgCl wires inserted into heat-

pulled glass capillaries containing 3 M KCl, having a resistance higher than 1 MΩ when 

tested in Normal Ringer solution. The correct recording configuration was achieved by 

using micromanipulators (Narishige, Cambridge, United Kingdom). The standard recording 

solution (Normal Ringer) was purchased from Ecocyte Bioscience. Recordings were filtered 

at 2 kHz and acquired at 5 kHz with Pulse software and analysed with PulseFit (HEKA, 

Germany).  


8 

 

Expression of Kir4.1 channels. Oocytes were injected with 50 nl human Kir4.1 mRNAs and 

stored at 16 °C in fresh ND96 medium containing (in mmol/L): NaCl 96, KCl 2, MgCl2 1, 

CaCl2 1.8, Hepes 5, gentamicin 50 μg/ml (Sigma, Italy). mRNA concentrations were 

quantified by electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining and by spectrophotometric 

analysis. 

  
 

 

References 

1.  
Sitti, M. Miniature devices: voyage of the microrobots. Nature 458, 1121–1122 

(2009). 

2.  
Ceylan, H., Giltinan, J., Kozielski, K. & Sitti, M. Mobile microrobots for bioengineering 

applications. Lab. Chip 17, 1705–1724 (2017). 

3. 
Sitti, M., Ceylan, H., Hu, W., Giltinan, J.,  Turan, M., Yim, S. & Diller, E. Biomedical 

applications of untethered mobile milli/microrobots. Proc. IEEE 103, 205–224 (2015). 

4.  
Nelson, B. J., Kaliakatsos, I. K. & Abbott, J. J. Microrobots for minimally invasive 

medicine. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 12, 55–85 (2010). 

5.  
Sitti, M. Mobile Microrobotics (MIT Press, 2017). 

6.  
Turner, AP. Biosensors: sense and sensibility. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 3184-3196 (2013). 

7. 
Bechinger, C., Di Leonardo, R., Löwen, H., Reichhardt, C., Volpe G., & Volpe, G. Active 

particles in complex and crowded environments. Rev. Mod. Phys. 88, 045006 (2016).  

8. 
Carlsen, R. W. & Sitti, M. Bio-hybrid cell-based actuators for microsystems. Small 10, 

3831–3851 (2014). 

9. 
Li, J., Rozen, I. & Wang, J. Rocket Science at the Nanoscale. ACS Nano 10, 5619–5634 

(2016). 

10.  
Gammaitoni, L., Chiuchiú, D., Madami, M. & Carlotti, G. Towards zero-power ICT. 

Nanotechnology 26, 319501 (2015). 

11. 
Piguet, C. in Low-power electronics design Chapter 45 (CRC Press, 2005). 

12.  
Mercier, P.P., Lysaght, A.C., Bandyopadhyay, S., Chandrakasan, A.P., Stankovic, K.M. 

Energy extraction from the biologic battery in the inner ear. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 1240-
12433 (2012). 

13. 
Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K. & Walter, P. in Molecular  

biology of the cell Chapter 11 (Garland Science, 2002). 

14. 
Morimura, H., Oshima, S., Matsunaga, K., Shimamura, T., & Harada, M. Ultra-low-

power circuit techniques for mm-size wireless sensor nodes with energy harvesting. IEICE 
Electronics Express 11.20 (2014): 20142009-20142009. 

15.  
 XPPAUT Software code. See http://www.math.pitt.edu/~bard/xpp/xpp.html.  


9 

 

16 
 Sforna, L., D'Adamo, M.C., Servettini, I., Guglielmi, L., Pessia, M., Franciolini, F., 

Catacuzzeno, L. Expression and function of a CP339,818-sensitive K⁺ current in a 
subpopulation of putative nociceptive neurons from adult mouse trigeminal ganglia. J 
Neurophysiol. 113:2653-65 (2015). 
 
 

 

Acknowledgements  

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the European Commission 
(H2020, Grant agreement no: 611004, ICT- Energy) and ONRG grant N00014-11-1-0695 
and Dr. M.C. D’Adamo for providing the human Kir4.1 mRNA. 

 

 

Data availability statement 

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding 
authors upon request. 

 

 

Competing Financial Interest statement 

The authors declare no competing financial interests.  

 

 
 


10 

 

 

 

Figure 1. A) Schematic drawing of a cell expressing Na, K, and Cl channels and Na/K ATPases. The 
cell has been impaled with a harvesting electrode connected to a load resistance and grounded in the 
same bath containing the cell. B) Photograph showing a Xenopus oocyte impaled with two glass 
electrodes used to voltage clamp the cell and a third one to extract energy from the cell when 
connected to ground. C) Current voltage relations obtained before (black) and after (red) grounding 
the harvesting electrode. D) Mean harvested power (left), and membrane potential (right) assessed 
in four oocytes before (gray) and after grounding (red). The power was assessed as the product of 
the steady-state membrane potential read after grounding the harvesting electrode and the current 
through the harvesting electrode at this potential. E) Families of membrane currents recorded from a 
Xenopus oocyte expressing Kir4.1 channels, in response to voltage steps from -120 to +20 mV 
(step=10 mV) from a holding potential of -80 mV, before and after grounding the harvesting 
electrode. F) Current voltage relationships (I-V) obtained from the current traces shown in panel E. 
Inset: Mean membrane potential from six Kir4.1-expressing oocytes before and after grounding. G) 
Mean harvested power assessed in six oocytes as the product of the resting membrane potential read 
after grounding and the current through the harvesting electrode at this potential. For comparison 
the mean power harvested in uninjected (endogenous) oocytes (from panel D) is also shown. 


11 

 

 

 

Figure 2. A) Schematic representation of the circuit used to charge a capacitor with the energy 
deriving from the oocyte membrane potential. B) Representative trace showing the oocyte 
membrane potential upon cell impalement (first arrow) and following connection to a 1 mF capacitor 
in parallel with the cell (second arrow). The charging process of the capacitor and its exponential 
time course are also illustrated. C) Plot of the charging voltage (VC) across the capacitor as a function 
of its capacitance. Notice that the 1 mF capacitance has been tested in either Normal Ringer (white) 
or Normal Ringer plus 10 mM glucose (grey). D) Energy stored in the capacitor at the end of the 
charging process, assessed for the four different conditions tested. The stored energy was assessed as 
E = ½ C⋅V2. The times required to charge the capacitor to half-maximal voltage amplitude were: 0.1 
mF, 193±49 s; 0.2 mF, 300±45 s; 1 mF in Normal Ringer, 432±152 s; 1 mF in Normal Ringer plus 10 
mM glucose, 285±139 s. E) Representative voltage trace showing the impalement of a cell and the 
charge of a 0.2 mF capacitor 5 times in succession. F) Plot of the mean charging voltage reached in 
the 5 successive charging processes in experiments similar to that shown in A (n=5). The first voltage 
value represents the resting membrane potential of the oocyte soon after the impalement. 


12 

 

 

 

Figure 3. A) Schematic representation of the circuit used to charge a capacitor with the energy 
deriving from the oocyte membrane potential, and transmit a wireless signal. B) Time course of the 
oocyte membrane potential upon cell impalement, connection to a 1 mF capacitor, capacitor 
discharge and signal emission that is captured via electromagnetic induction by the receiver. Notice 
that these experiments were performed with 10 mM glucose added to the Normal Ringer. C) Typical 
signal detected at few centimetre distance by an electromagnetic induction sensor. D) Representative 
quantitative analysis of the signals detected. The exponentially-damped sine wave signal was fitted 
with the general equation Vs = As·exp(-γt)·sin(ωt), where As is the amplitude of the oscillating part, γ 
is the decay constant of the exponential, and ω is the angular frequency of the sine wave. E) Plots 
illustrating the relation between the fitting parameters and voltage. As expected, the decay time 
constant, γ, and the angular frequency of the sine wave, ω, are both voltage independent, whereas the 
amplitude of the sine wave at time zero displays a linear dependence on voltage. 

 
 


13 

 

 

Supplementary material 

Model and simulations 

Our model considered a cell expressing Na/K ATPases and ion channels selective for Na, K 

and Cl ions (Fig. S1A). A harvesting electrode was inserted into the cell, and grounded in the 

same solution bathing the extracellular membrane. In series with the harvesting electrode 

was a load resistance RL. The extracellular solution contained Na, K, and Cl ions at their 

physiological concentrations [Na]o, [K]o, and [Cl]o, respectively, and the electroneutrality 

condition implied that  𝑁𝑎 ! + 𝐾 ! = 𝐶𝑙 !. The intracellular solution contained Na, K, 

and Cl ions, in addition to impermeant monovalent anions A, mostly representing 

macromolecular anionic groups, at concentration  [Na]i, [K]i, [Cl]i, and [A]i, respectively.  In 

the intracellular compartment the electroneutrality condition was also respected: 𝑁𝑎 ! +

 𝐾 ! = 𝐶𝑙 ! + 𝐴 !. The electrical behaviour of the cell may be represented as an electrical 

circuit where a capacitor is in parallel with several resistances and a current source (Fig. 

S1B). The capacitor represents the phospholipid membrane, the resistances represent the 

various pathways for ion passage through ion channels and for current passage through the 

load resistance, and the current source is generated by the activity of the Na/K ATPases. As 

for the above described electrical circuit, also in the cell membrane the sum of the ionic 

currents passing through the various pathways must cancel out (principle of charge 

conservation). 

𝑖!" + 𝑖! + 𝑖!" + 𝑖! + 𝑖!" + 𝑖!"  = 0 
 
 
 
(1) 

Here 𝑖!", 𝑖!, and 𝑖!" represent the currents generated by Na, K, and Cl ions passing through 

their respective ion channels. These currents may be modeled through the Goldman-

Hodgkin-Katz relationship: 

𝑖!  =

!!
!  

(!!!)!

! !  𝑉! 

[!]!! ! ! !!!!! !!

! !

!! !!!!! !!

! !

;  𝑛 = 𝑁𝑎, 𝐾, 𝐶𝑙 
 
 
(2) 

that in the physiological condition, where 

!!! !!

! !
≪ 1, may be approximated to: 

𝑖!  = 𝑔! [𝑛]! (𝑉! − 𝐸!);   𝑛 = 𝑁𝑎, 𝐾, 𝐶𝑙  
 
 
(3) 

Here 𝑃! is the channel permeability to ion n, 𝑧! is the ion n valence, F is the Faraday 

constant, R is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, 𝑉! is the membrane 

potential difference (inside minus outside), [n]i/o are the intracellular/extracellular 

concentrations of ion n, 𝑔! =  

!!
!  

(!!!)!

! !    is the macroscopic conductance of the ion channel 

selective to ion n, 𝐴  is the cell model membrane surface and 𝐸! =

! !

!! !  𝑙𝑛

[!]!
[!]!  is the 

equilibrium potential for ion n. 


14 

 

 

 

Fig. S1. A) Schematic drawing of a cell expressing Na, K, and Cl channels and Na/K ATPases. The cell 
has been impaled with a harvesting electrode connected to a load resistance and grounded in the 
same bath containing the cell. B) Equivalent electrical circuit of the cell shown on the left. gNa, gK, 
and gCl represent the conductances provided by the respective ion channels, each in series with a 
battery set at the equilibrium potential of the ion. The Na/K ATPase contributes as a current source, 
and the membrane phospholipid bilayer of the membrane will contribute as a capacitance Cm. The 
energy harvesting pathway is here represented by the load resistance RL. C) Simulation of the 
membrane voltage and harvested power dynamics when the load resistance associated to the 
harvesting electrode changes from 1000 to 3 GΩ. Parameters were as in the neuron model (Table 1). 
D) Plots of the steady state voltage, harvested power and intracellular ionic concentrations vs load 


15 

 

resistance, obtained from simulations similar to that shown in panel A. E) Simulations performed 
with cell dimensions typical of skeletal muscle cells (diameter of 100 µm and length of 0.5 to 2 cm). 
The panels show plots of the membrane voltage (top) or harvested power (bottom) as a function of 
the load resistance connected to the harvesting electrode. The effect of varying the muscle length is 
also shown. F) Simulations of the power harvested with cell dimensions and parameters typical of 
Xenopus oocytes. The effect of varying the K conductance and density of Na/K pumps is shown.  

 

𝑖! represents the net current passing through the Na/K ATPases. This transporter, at each 

cycle, promotes the passage of three Na ions outside and 2 K ions inside the cell, thus 

generating a current equivalent to the passage of one positive charge outside. For our 

purposes 𝑖! may be modeled by the following equation: 

𝑖! =

!

!!

!!

 !" !

!  
 
 
 
 
(4) 

where 𝜌 is the maximal Na/K ATPase pump current density, and 𝑘! is the affinity of the 

pump for intracellular Na ions. 

 𝑖!" represent the current passing through the harvesting electrode, obeying to Ohm’s law 

𝑖!" =

!!
!! !. Finally 𝑖!"  represents the current charging the capacitor and creating an 

electrical potential difference 

𝑖!" =

!! !!!

!"
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 

Where 𝐶!  is the specific membrane capacitance of the cell membrane. Substituting eqn. (2)-

(5) into eqn (1), and making the quasi steady-state assumption for membrane potential 

relaxation 

 !!!

!" = 0, valid because the relaxation time for the membrane potential is much 

shorter than the ion equilibration time (see below), we obtain the following equation for the 

membrane potential difference: 

𝑉! =

!!" !" ! !!"!!! ! !!!!!!" !" ! !!"!!!

!!" !" ! !!! ! !!!!" !" !!
!

! !!

              
 
 
(6) 

In our model the intracellular concentrations of Na, K, and Cl vary with time because of the 

passage of these ions through ion channels and transporters expressed in the cell 

plasmamembrane. In addition, it is assumed that the harvesting electrode, while injecting a 

current inside the cell, increases the intracellular proton concentration (this will occur for 

electrodes such as platinum or iridium, that catalyze the reaction 2H2O-> 4e + 4H++O2).  

Excess protons will then be exchanged for external Na ions by the activity of the Na/H 

counter-transporter. This process will result in an increase of a Na ion for each electron 

passing through the harvesting electrode. 


16 

 

Taking into account all the above sources of intracellular ion changes, we can write down 

the following differential equations for the intracellular moles of ions: 

𝑑𝑛!"

𝑑𝑡
= 𝛾 −𝐼!" − 3 𝐼! − 𝐼!"  

!!!
!" = 𝛾 −𝐼! + 2 𝐼!   
 
 
 
     (7) 

𝑑𝑛!"
𝑑𝑡 = 𝛾 𝐼!" 

Where 𝛾 = 𝐴 𝐹, 𝑛!", 𝑛!, and 𝑛!" are the intracellular moles of Na, K, and Cl, respectively.  

Finally, since the plasmamembrane is highly permeable to water (much more than to ions), 

the cell will adjust its volume in order to preserve the iso-osmolarity condition 

𝑂𝑠𝑚! = 𝑂𝑠𝑚!"  
 
 
 
(8) 

Where 𝑂𝑠𝑚! = 𝑛!" + 𝑛! + 𝑛!" + 𝑛!
𝑉𝑜𝑙 is the intracellular osmlolarity, 𝑉𝑜𝑙 is the cell 

volume, 𝑂𝑠𝑚! = [𝑁𝑎]! + [𝐾]! + [𝐶𝑙]!  is the extracellular osmolarity, giving 

𝑉𝑜𝑙 = 𝑛!" + 𝑛! + 𝑛!" + 𝑛!
𝑂𝑠𝑚!"  
 
(9) 

From the intracellular ion moles and cell volume we can finally assess the intracellular ion 

concentrations as: 

[𝑁𝑎]! = 𝑛!" 𝑉𝑜𝑙 ,  [𝐾]! = 𝑛! 𝑉𝑜𝑙 ,  [𝐶𝑙]! = 𝑛!" 𝑉𝑜𝑙 
 
 
(10) 

Parameters used for the three cell models are given in Table1 and the solution of the set of 

differential equations (7) was obtained with xppaut [15]. 

We first performed simulations using parameters typical of a neuron, whose cell body was 

assumed to be spherical with a radius of 7 µm.  As you can see from the results presented in 

Fig. 4C, when the load resistance is lowered from a very large value (>100 GΩ)  to few GΩ 

(from 1000 GΩ to 3 GΩ), a current began to pass through the harvesting electrode, thus 

generating a power. This current, however, tends to depolarize the resting potential of the 

cell and change the internal ion concentrations (this latter relevant only in small size cells), 

processes that limit the power recovered at steady state.  For this reason the relationship of 

the harvested power as a function of the load resistance had a bell shape, with a maximum 

power of 1 pW at around 2 GΩ of load resistance. Although the trend is towards a 

continuous reduction in the energy required to power biosensors, 1 pW appears to be a 

value too low to even hypothesize that a neuron may in the near future become a plausible 

source of energy, even for ultralow power devices. 


17 

 

 

Table 1 - Model parameters 

Parameter 
Description 
Neuron model 
Skeletal Muscle model 
Oocyte model 

Dimension 
Cell radius (R) 
R=7 µm (1) 
R=50 µm, variable length (7) 
R=0.5 mm (11) 

CS 
Specific membrane capacitance 
0.01 pF/µm2 (6) 
0.01 pF/µm2 (6) 
0.01 pF/µm2 (6) 

gKS 
Specific K channel conductance 
3.8*10-6 nS/(mM µm2) (1) 
2.33*10-5 nS/(mM µm2) (5) 
2.2*10-6 nS/(mM µm2) 
(9) 

gNaS 
Specific Na channel conductance 
2.5*10-5 nS/(mM µm2) (1) 
8*10-7 nS/(mM µm2) (5) 
2*10-5 nS/(mM µm2) (9)  

gClS 
Specific Cl channel conductance 
1*10-4 nS/(mM µm2) (1) 
1*10-4 nS/(mM µm2) (5) 
5.4*10-7 nS/(mM µm2) 
(10) 

RL 
Load resistance 
variable 
variable 
variable 

ρ 
Maximal turnover rate of Na/K 
ATPase 

0.018 pA/µm2  (1) 
0.07 pA/µm2 (4) 
0.024 pA/µm2 (8) 

[K]O 
Extracellular K concentration 
3 mM (2) 
3 mM (2) 
3 mM (12) 

[Na]O 
Extracellular Na concentration 
142 mM (2) 
142 mM (2) 
118 mM (12) 

[Cl]O 
Extracellular Cl concentration 
145 mM (2) 
145 mM (2) 
120 mM (12) 

nAAi 
Intracellular impermeable anions  
0.189  pmol (3) 
10,140 pmol (3) 
7.41*104  pmol (3) 

 

(1)  From Wei et al., 2004;  reasonable starting values of [Na]i =10 mM, [Cl]i = 10 mM, and [K]i = 132 
mM were considered in the parameter conversions of conductances 
(2)  Typical extracellular solution for a mammalian cell 
(3) Chosen to neutralize the intracellular solutions, by considering the starting values used for 
intracellular ion concentrations in the simulation ([Na]i =10 mM, [Cl]i = 10 mM, and [K]i = 132 mM in 
the mammalian cell model) 
(4)  Based on Plesner and Plesner, 1981, and Clausen, 2003. 
(5)  Based on Pedersen et al., 1981, and Dulhunty, 1979 
(6) Hille, B. (2001) Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes. 3rd Edition, Sinauer Associates Inc., 
Sunderland. 
(7)  Based on Hegarty and Hooper, 1971 
(8)  Based on the estimated Na/K pump current of 34 nA (Costa et al., 1989) and considering a [Na]I of 
10 mM (Sobczak et al., 2010) 
(9)  Settled by considering that in our model INa and IK should be equal to 3 and 2 times the Na/K pump 
current, at a resting membrane potential of -45 mV (Kusano et al., 1982) 
(10)  Based on Costa et al., 1989) 
(11)  Based on Sobczak et al., 2010) 
(12)  Typical extracellular solution for amphibian cells 
 

References reported in the Table: 

Plesner L, Plesner IW. The steady-state kinetic mechanism of ATP hydrolysis catalyzed by 

membrane-bound (Na+ + K+)-ATPase from ox brain. I. Substrate identity. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
1981 May 6;643(2):449-62. 

Clausen T. Na+-K+ pump regulation and skeletal muscle contractility. Physiol Rev. 2003 

Oct;83(4):1269-324.  

Hegarty PV and Hooper AC. Sarcomere length and fibre diameter distributions in four different 

mouse skeletal muscles. J. Anat. 1971. 110, 2, pp. 249-257 

Sobczak K, Bangel-Ruland N, Leier G, Weber WM. Endogenous transport systems in the Xenopus 

laevis oocyte plasma membrane. Methods. 2010 May;51(1):183-9.  

Costa PF, Emilio MG, Fernandes PL, Ferreira HG, Ferreira KG. Determination of  ionic permeability 

coefficients of the plasma membrane of Xenopus laevis oocytes  under voltage clamp. J Physiol. 
1989 Jun;413:199-211. 

Kusano K, Miledi R, Stinnakre J. Cholinergic and catecholaminergic receptors in the Xenopus oocyte 

membrane. J Physiol. 1982 Jul;328:143-70.  


18 

 

 
 
 We then turned our attention to the large, cylinder-shaped skeletal muscle cells, with a 100 

µm diameter and length that may reach several centimetres – that is, a volume 3-5 orders of 

magnitude of neuronal cells. The large dimensions of these cells confer a larger electrical 

capacitance (i.e. the capacitance is proportional to the surface of the plasmamembrane) and 

thus a higher ability to accumulate energy, since 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 =

!

!  𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑥 (𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒)!. 

Other properties make these cells appropriate as energy harvester: their diffuse presence in 

the human body, their large ATP content they use to contract, and their high 

transmembrane potential.  As shown in Fig 4E, our simulation results indicate that a skeletal 

muscle cell is able to provide an electrical power of several nanowatts, and linearly 

dependent on the length of the muscle fibre. 

In this study we experimentally tested the prediction that a biological cell may be used to 

harvest electrical energy by  using as cell model the large Xenopus oocytes that can be easily 

taken from female frogs. These cells are round shaped with a very large diameter (about 1 

mm), and a plasma membrane area approximately corresponding to that of a skeletal 

muscle fibre of 5 cm length. These cells do not have the same surface density of Na/K pumps 

and hyperpolarized membrane potential of a skeletal muscle fibre, yet a relatively high 

harvested power is expected. This is shown by the black trace in Fig. S1F of Supplementary 

material, showing that an oocyte with its endogenous channels and transporters may give 

back a power of about 1 nW.  Xenopus oocytes have the additional advantage to be easily 

used to express ion channels and transporters, to verify whether the harvested power 

increases accordingly. The coloured curves in Fig. S1F of Supplementary material show that 

the simulated harvested power may increase several folds for model oocytes 

overexpressing K channels or Na/K pumps. The increase in harvested power in oocytes 

expressing more K channels may be explained by considering that K efflux results in 

increased membrane potential difference (i.e. the membrane potential becomes more 

hyperpolarized), and the squared power dependence of the accumulated energy on 

membrane potential. 


