1 

 

 

 

Reliable Determination of Contact Angle from the Height and Volume of 

Sessile Drops 

 

Fred Behroozi* 

Department of Physics, University of Northern Iowa, Cedar Falls, IA 50614, USA 

 

Peter S. Behroozi 

Department of Astronomy, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ  85721, USA 

 

ABSTRACT 

Contact angle is an important parameter in characterizing the wetting properties of fluids.  The 

most common methods for measuring the contact angle is to measure it directly from the profile 

curve of a sessile drop, a method with certain inherent drawbacks. Here we describe an 

alternative method that uses the height and volume of a sessile drop as constraints to construct its 

profile by numerical integration of its two governing differential equations.  The integration 

yields, self consistently, the average value of the contact angle along the entire contact line as 

well as the footprint radius of the drop and its crown radius of curvature.  As a test case, the new 

method is used to obtain the contact angle of pure water on two different substrates, Teflon and 

Lucite.  For each substrate, four drops ranging in volume from 10 μl to 40 μl are used. The 

computed contact angles are consistent across the four different drop sizes for each substrate and 

are in agreement with typical literature values.  

------------------------------------------------------------- 

* behroozi@uni.edu  
 


2 

 

I. 
INTRODUCTION 

The surface wetting properties of fluids are characterized by measurement of the contact angle1-6.  

Of the several methods for measuring the contact angle7-10, the most common is to measure it 

directly from the profile curve of a sessile drop11-13.  This method is convenient since, to a good 

approximation, the contact angle is independent of the drop size14 for smooth and clean 

substrates. 

 However, measurement of contact angle from the drop profile suffers from several well-known 

drawbacks15-18.   Chief among these is the fact that this measurement method gives the contact 

angle at one point of the contact line.  The contact angle, however, may differ from point to point 

due to variations in local surface conditions16, 17.   In addition some uncertainty is inherent in 

choosing the direction of the tangent line at the contact point18.   

Historically, the first commercial apparatus for measuring contact angle from the drop profile 

was invented by William Zisman, who attached a specially designed microscope to a platform 

and used it to measure the contact angle of a drop directly from its optical image19.    

In current practice, digital cameras are used to capture the drop profile, and proprietary fitting 

routines are employed to obtain the contact angle from the profile curve20-23.  Often, multiple 

drop images are used to increase the reliability of the measurement. 

An older method for measuring the contact angle was based on the observation that the height of 

a sessile drop, on a horizontal substrate, approaches a maximum as its volume is increased.  In 

1870 the German physicist Georg Hermann Quincke (1834–1924) derived a simple but 

approximate equation, now known as the Quincke relation, to give the contact angle θc as a 

function of the height h for large drops24, 25,  

 
              

      

   .     
 
 
 
 
(1)                                                        

In Eq. 1, g stands for the acceleration of gravity, ρ is density, and σ is the surface tension.  The 

Quincke relation was in use26 through the early decades of the 20th century, but it gradually 

disappeared from chemistry and physics textbooks by the 1960s.  We note, however, that the  

 


3 

 

 

Quincke relation has appeared anew in a recent text27.  Elsewhere we have reviewed the Quincke 

relation in its historical context along with a new derivation that exposes its limitations28.   

The profile curve of a sessile drop is governed by a second order nonlinear differential equation 

which is easily derived by the application of the Young-Laplace capillary equation.  This 

equation may be reduced to two coupled first order equations that are rather more convenient to 

work with.  Even though there are no closed-form solutions of these nonlinear equations, several 

attempts have been made to obtain approximate solutions for the profile curve by using various 

perturbation methods29-31.   

The most mathematically rigorous of these attempts32 result in several algebraic parametric 

equations of the form x(φ,ε) and y(φ,ε) where x and y are the reduced coordinates, φ is the angle 

of the profile curve with the horizontal, and ε is the perturbation parameter. In practice, the 

approximate solutions have not been of much use in obtaining reliable values of the contact 

angle. 

Here we describe a more practical and reliable alternative for determination of the contact angle 

from sessile drops.  In Section II, we first derive the exact algebraic expression that gives the 

contact angle in terms of the drop parameters (crown radius of curvature, surface tension, mass, 

footprint radius, and height).  However, this equation is not of much use in practice because 

measurement of the crown radius of curvature for a small drop is fraught with uncertainty.  

Furthermore, while the height and volume of the drop have unique values, the footprint radius 

may depend on the direction of measurement.  

The differential equations governing the drop profile are derived directly by considering the 

equilibrium conditions for an infinitesimal surface belt encircling the drop.  Next we describe the 

procedure for computing a reliable value of the contact angle by numerical integration of these 

equations without the need to know the crown radius of curvature.  Measurement of the height 

and volume of the drop suffices to construct the unique profile of the drop. The integration 

routine also gives the drop footprint radius and its crown radius of curvature.   


4 

 

The main advantage of our method is that with only two unique and easily measured drop 

parameters, height and volume, we arrive at a much more reliable value of the contact angle—

that is, its average along the entire contact line.    In practice, the drop volume is conveniently 

measured by using a precision syringe or a sensitive scale.  The drop height may be determined 

accurately from its digital image taken next to a fine scale or by a more sophisticated tool such as 

a modern cathetometer.   

In Section III, we describe our procedure for measuring the volume and height of several small 

water drops, ranging in size from 10 μl to 40 μl, on Teflon and Lucite substrates.   The 

computational procedure is described in Section IV, where the height and volume data are used 

as constraints to construct the drop profile and compute the contact angle.  The integration 

routine is simple enough to be performed on an Excel spreadsheet.  The computed values 

(contact angle, footprint radius, and crown radius) are given for the four drop sizes in two tables, 

one for each of the two substrates.  For comparison, we also provide the contact angle values 

measured directly from drop images.  Furthermore, the computed drop parameters (footprint 

radius and crown radius of curvature) plus the measured data (volume and height) are used in the 

exact drop equation to check the veracity and consistency of the numerical integration. Section V 

is used to discuss the results and to offer some concluding remarks. 

 

 

 

II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

A. 
Equilibrium Equation 

Figure 1 shows a small sessile drop of mass M, density ρ, surface tension σ, and height h.  The 

crown radius of curvature is r0, and the footprint radius is R.  Consider the equilibrium conditions 

for the shaded upper section of the drop.   

 

 


5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1 
The profile of a sessile drop on a surface.  The hydrostatic and surface tension 

forces acting on the upper section of the drop (the shaded region) are shown. The 

gravitational force on the shaded region is not shown to avoid clutter. 

 

The Young-Laplace relation gives the pressure difference    across the surface of a liquid 

element in terms of its principal radii of curvature r1 and r2, and surface tension σ,    

 
      

 

   

 

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
 

Therefore the pressure acting on the base of the shaded section in Fig. 1 is,  

 
p = 2 σ /r0 + ρgy, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 

where, the first term on the right hand side of Eq.3 is due to the differential pressure at the crown 

and the second term is the hydrostatic pressure.  Note that the two principal radii of curvature at 

the apex are degenerate and equal to r0. 

Furthermore, if the mass of the shaded section is m and its base has radius x, then the equilibrium 

of forces in the vertical direction leads to, 

 
mg + (σ sin θ)2πx = p πx2. 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 

 

p 

θ 

σ 
θc 

R 

r0 

y 

σ 

X 


6 

 

Combining  Eqs. 3 and 4, we have, 

 
2 σ /r0 = mg/ πx2 +2(σ sin θ)/x – ρgy. 
 
 
 
(5) 

Clearly, the shaded section of the drop may be extended down to include the entire drop in which 

case Eq. 5 takes the form, 

 
2 σ /r0 = Mg/ πR2 +2(σ sin θc)/R – ρgh. 
 
 
 
(6) 

Therefore, 

 
                                         
 
 
(7) 

Equation 7 gives the contact angle θc in terms of the volume, height, crown radius, and footprint 

radius of the drop.  Of these parameters, the crown radius of curvature r0 is the parameter whose 

measurement introduces the greatest uncertainty.  In practice, this measurement is nearly as 

prone to error as a direct measurement of the contact angle from the drop profile.  Therefore Eq. 

7 does not provide a practical alternative to direct measurement of the contact angle.  However, it 

does provide a convenient check on any numerical computation as will be shown later. 

 

 

B. 
Governing Differential Equations 

We note that the profile curve of a sessile drop cannot be expressed by an analytic expression26.  

However, the profile curve may be constructed for a drop of known volume and height by 

numerical integration of the governing differential equations of the profile.   Once the drop 

profile is constructed the contact angle is determined.   

 


7 

 

 

Fig. 2  The profile of a sessile drop resting on a flat surface.  The crown radius of 

curvature is r0, the height is h, and the footprint radius is R. The surface 

band of infinitesimal width, encircling the drop and shown between dashed 

lines, is in equilibrium under the action of surface tension forces and the 

internal pressure. 

 

The governing differential equations are easily derived.  Figure 2 shows a small drop with a 

crown radius of curvature r0, height h, and footprint radius R.  Consider a surface band of 

infinitesimal width and radius x encircling the drop. The equilibrium of forces acting on the 

surface band, in the vertical direction, requires, 

 
 

  

                                            .  
(8) 

Noting that in the limit of     , 

                                  , 
 
 
 
 
 
(9) 

Eq. 8 simplifies to,   

 

  

          

 

                  ,                            
(10) 

r0 

θc 

θ 

R 

σ 

 σ 

h 

X 

p
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

p
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


8 

 

or 

  

    

      

   

          

       . 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 

Furthermore, noting that along the profile curve, dy/dx = tan θ, we may immediately write, 

 

  

    

      

   

          

       . 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 

Equations 11 and 12 constitute the two parametric differential equations which govern the drop 

profile.  An auxiliary equation gives the volume of the drop, 

 
       
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 

 

C. 
Computational Procedure 

The two differential equations may be integrated numerically, starting from the drop apex (θ=0), 

to obtain x(θ), y(θ), and the profile curve y(x) when the parameters ro, σ, and ρ are known.   

However, even when ro is known, to find θc one must terminate the integration at the end point 

of the profile curve which requires knowing the value of one of the three global drop parameters 

(volume, height, or footprint radius).   

As mentioned earlier, the value of the crown radius of curvature is not typically known.  

However, as described below, only two of the three global parameters suffice to construct the 

profile curve y(x) and determine r0, and θc.  For example, if the input data consist of drop height 

h, and volume V, one begins the numerical integration at the crown with θ = x = y = 0, and with 

an initial choice for r0 = h.  The integration is stopped when y = h, and the computed value of the 

volume Vc (by Eq. 13) is compared with the measured volume V.   The initial value for r0 is then 

adjusted up if      , or down if       for the next round of integration. The process is 

repeated until      when      within a preset tolerance.    

We note that any two of the three global parameters (volume, height, and footprint) suffice to 

specify the drop geometry completely.  So if the volume of the drop is not known, the measured 


9 

 

values of its height h and footprint radius R may be used as constraints in the numerical 

integration to obtain the other three parameters, V, r0, and θc.   

When the contact angle is less than 45 degrees, the volume and footprint radius are better suited 

as the input data.  In this case, one begins the numerical integration at the apex and proceeds with 

an initial choice of r0 = R.  The integration is stopped when x = R and the computed volume Vc is 

compared with V.  The initial value for r0 is then adjusted up if the value of Vc <V, and down if 

Vc >V.   The process is repeated until x ≈ R when Vc   V within a preset tolerance.   

 

 

III. 
EXPERIMENTAL 

Figure 3 shows the images of four pairs of water drops on Teflon for visual comparison.  From 

left to right, the drop volume (in each pair), is 40 μl, 30 μl, 20 μl, and 10 μl. The drops are 

photographed next to a scale with fine divisions of 1/64” to show their relative heights. 

 

 

 

Fig. 3       Four pairs of drops are shown on a Teflon substrate.  The drop volume in 

each pair, from left to right, are 40 μl, 30 μl, 20 μl, and 10 μl. The fine scale 

divisions are in 1/64 of an inch.  


10 

 

 

To measure the height of individual drops, each drop was deposited on a clean and smooth 

substrate (Teflon or Lucite) by a calibrated syringe and digitally photographed next to the fine 

scale.  Before final measurements the drops were gently shaken to assume their equilibrium 

configurations.  In our simple set up the height measurement is only accurate to          .  

Use of a finer scale and a higher resolution camera would enhance the accuracy of the height 

measurement.  Our aim here is to provide typical input data for a case study of the proposed 

computational approach.  For pure water we have used a surface tension       dyne/cm and a 

density     g /cm3 in our computation.   

 

 

 

IV. 
COMPUTATIONAL REULTS  

Equations 11, 12, and 13, may be integrated by any numerical technique; as explained in 

Appendix A, we use the midpoint method beginning at the apex and incrementing the angle θ to 

compute y, x and V stepwise along the profile curve.  Note that at the starting point where θ = 0, 

we also have x = 0, and y = 0.   Therefore, referring to Eqs. 11, and 12, the values of dy/dθ, and 

dx/dθ are indeterminate at the apex.  Employing L'Hospital's rule, we find that dy/dθ = 0, and 

dx/dθ = ro at the apex.  

In addition to the contact angle, the integration also provides, self consistently, the footprint 

radius of the drop (x at y=h) and the radius of curvature at its apex.  The following tables list our 

input data (volume and height) as well as the computed values (contact angle, footprint radius, 

and the apex radius of curvature) for water drops, ranging in volume from 40 μl to 10 μl, on two 

substrates, Teflon, and Lucite. 

 

 

 

 


11 

 

TEFLON:  
 
 

Volume 
Height 
Crown Radius 
Footprint Radius 
Contact Angle 

(measured) 
(measured) 
(computed) 
(computed) 
(computed) 

                            
            
            
    o) 

40.0 μl 
0.300 cm 
0.268 cm 
0.207 cm 
129o 

30.0 μl  
0.280 cm 
0.235 cm 
0.183 cm 
 
130o 

20.0 μl  
0.250 cm 
0.198 cm 
0.156 cm 
128o 

10.0 μl 
0.205 cm 
0.150 cm 
0.120 cm 
127o 

 

LUCITE: 

Volume 
Height 
Crown Radius Footprint Radius Contact Angle 

(measured) (measured) 
(computed) 
(computed) 
(computed) 

                            
            
            
    o) 

40.0 μl 
0.195 cm 
0.430 cm 
0.330 cm 
69o 

30.0 μl  
0.180 cm 
0.375 cm 
0.297 cm 
 
69o 

20.0 μl  
0.160 cm 
0.310 cm 
0.257 cm 
69o 

10.0 μl 
0.130 cm 
0.235 cm 
0.203 cm 
68o 

 

For comparison, we give the experimental values of contact angle measured from the drop 

profile33, 

 
 
Water on Teflon: 
 
 
θc = 130° ± 5° 

 
 
Water on Lucite: 
 
 
θc = 70° ± 2° 


12 

 

The computed drop parameters (footprint radius and crown radius of curvature) plus the 

measured data (volume and height) may be used in Eq. 7 to evaluate the contact angle.  We have 

performed this task with the data as recorded in the above tables for all the eight drops.  As 

expected, for each drop the contact angle evaluated from Eq. 7 is identical to the computed value 

within a rounding error.  

 

V. 
DISCUSSION 

The new method offers a convenient and reliable technique for measuring the contact angle.  The 

convenience is due to the relative ease of measuring the height and volume of a drop compared 

with the problems encountered in measuring the contact angle directly. The reliability stems 

from the fact that the equilibrium condition for the drop as expressed in Eq. 7, shows the intimate 

relation of the global parameters (h, V, and R) with the intrinsic ones (          ).  The primary 

limit to reliability is the measurement error on the drop height.  For the range of drops considered 

here, we find that a relative error ε on the drop height translates to relative errors of 1.3 ε – 1.7 ε 

on the contact angle.  With a modern digital camera (3-4k pixels per dimension), a macro lens, 

and software to correct residual lens distortions, relative errors of <0.5% in the contact angle are 

possible.  The volume accuracy gives a secondary limit on reliability; for fluids that can 

evaporate, the use of a sensitive scale may help reduce systematic biases. 

The computational method outlined here uses as input two of the three global parameters of the 

drop.  So the resulting value of the contact angle is a global average and reflects the condition 

along the entire contact line of the liquid /solid interface.  Consequently, local rough spots or 

surface defects do not significantly affect the outcome.   

For large drops, the height approaches a maximum value asymptotically as the volume is 

increased, rendering the height data insensitive to volume changes.  Similarly for small contact 

angles, measurement of the drop height suffers from large relative uncertainty.  In both of these 

cases, the volume and footprint radius should be used as input data for the computation.  Indeed, 

a simple, useful extension of our method would be to couple it with a Markov Chain Monte 

Carlo algorithm so that all three quantities (volume, footprint radius, and height) could be used 

simultaneously to constrain the range of allowed contact angles. 


13 

 

We mention in passing that when three global parameters are available as input data in the 

numerical integration one can obtain both the contact angle    as well as the surface tension  .  

In practice, the volume  and height   of a sessile drop can be measured reliably and thus 

constitute two of the three measured global parameters. When the contact angle is greater than 

90o, the equatorial radius     is the best choice for the third parameter. And when the contact 

angle is less than 90o, the footprint radius R is used as the third parameter.  In either case, 

integration of the governing differential equations with trial values of the apex radius of 

curvature    and surface tension   generate an initial theoretical profile curve.  The difference 

between the theoretical volume, height, and equatorial radius (or footprint radius) with their 

experimental counterparts is then used to update the trial values of surface tension and apex 

radius of curvature.  By using a two-dimensional fitting routine the procedure is iterated until the 

best fitting values for the apex radius of curvature and surface tension are found which in turn 

provide the contact angle.  However, since the footprint radius of a drop varies from point to 

point along the contact line due to local surface defects, its measured value is necessarily 

uncertain.  Consequently, the computed values of surface tension and contact angle by this 

method reflect this uncertainty.     

In contrast, when the surface tension is known, determining the contact angle from the height 

and volume of small drops is relatively simple and free from most of the errors and uncertainties 

associated with direct measurement of the contact angle from the drop image. Indeed, when the 

volume and height of a sessile drop is measured accurately, the method described in this paper 

yields a very reliable value of the contact angle because the computed value reflects the global 

average of the contact angle along the entire solid/liquid/vapor contact line. 


14 

 

APPENDIX A: CODE IMPLEMENTATION 

Here, we describe the code used to solve Eqs. 11-13 for the contact angle given the drop height 

and volume.  For a given guess for the crown radius of curvature (r0), we can integrate Eqs. 11 

and 12 using the midpoint method starting from θ=0.  E.g., for x(θ): 

                        

   

where evaluating      

  

   requires approximating     

  

   and     

  

  : 

      

           

        

      

           

        

An identical operation is applied simultaneously to calculate y(θ).  The boundary conditions are 

that x(0)=y(0)=0, and, as noted in Section III,          and        .  The volume V(θ) is 

then calculated using the midpoint method applied to Eq. 13.  The integration is terminated when 

y(θ) reaches the drop height h; the angle at which this happens is by definition the contact angle 

θc.  This yields a method to calculate the drop volume as a function of r0 and h, as well as the 

contact angle as a function of r0 and h.  We then use the Newton-Rhapson method to solve for 

the value of r0 (if it exists) that satisfies the equation 

                     

Finally, this value of r0 is used as above to determine the implied contact angle θc.  The footprint 

radius R—i.e., x(θc)—may then be used to verify the solution via Eq. 7.  Even with    

       , this process takes <0.01 sec on a modern computer.  Our implementation is available 

at: https://bitbucket.org/pbehroozi/contactangle/src . 

 

 

 


15 

 

REFERENCES 

1.  D. E. Sullivan, “Surface tension and contact angle of a liquid–solid interface,” J. Chem. Phys. 
74, 2604-2615 (1981).  

2.  Robert J Good, “Contact angle, wetting, and adhesion: a critical review,” Journal of Adhesion 
Science and Technology 6, 1269-1302 (1992). 

3.  E. L. Decker, B. Frank, Y. Suo and S. Garoff, “Physics of contact angle measurement,” 
Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 156, 177-189 (1999).  

4.  D. Y. Kwok and A. W. Neumann, “Contact angle measurement and contact angle 
interpretation,” Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 81, 167-249 (1999). 

5.  Lichao Gao and Thomas J. McCarthy, “Wetting 101o,” Langmuir 25, 14105-14115 (2009).  

6.  Contact Angle, Wettability and Adhesion, Vol. 6, Edited by K. L. Mittal, (Koninklijke Brill 
NV, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2009). 

7.  Lander, L.M., Siewierski, L.M., Brittain, W.J. and Vogler, E.A., “A systematic comparison of 
contact angle methods,” Langmuir 9, 2237-2239 (1993).   

8.  A. Kalantarian, R. David and A. W. Neumann, “Methodology for High Accuracy Contact 
Angle Measurement”, Langmuir 25, 14146–14154 (2009). 

9.  Hung, Y.-L., Chang, Y.-Y., Wang, M.-J. & Lin, S.-Y. “A simple method for measuring the 
superhydrophobic contact angle with high accuracy”, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 81, 65105 (2010). 
 
10. Tingyi “Leo” Liu and Chang-Jin “CJ” Kim, “Contact Angle Measurement of Small Capillary 
Length Liquid in Super-repelled State”, Scientific Reports 7: 740 (2017). 
 
11.  Dimitrov, A.S., Kralchevsky, P.A., Nikolov, A.D., Noshi, H. and Matsumoto, M., “Contact 
angle measurements with sessile drops and bubbles,” Journal of colloid and interface science 
145, 279-282 (1991).   

12.  Chini, S. F. & Amirfazli, A. “A method for measuring contact angle of asymmetric and 
symmetric drops”, Colloids Surf. Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 388, 29–37 (2011). 
 
13.  Jimin Park, et al. “Direct and accurate measurement of size dependent wetting behaviors for 
sessile water droplets”, Scientific Reports 5:18150 (2015). 
 
14.  Jaroslaw Drelich, Jan D. Miller, and Jan Hupka, “The Effect of Drop Size on Contact Angle 
over a Wide Range of Drop Volumes,” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 155, 379-385 
(1993). 


16 

 

15.  Jaroslaw Drelich, and Jan D. Miller, “The Effect of Solid Surface Heterogeneity and 
Roughness on the Contact Angle/Drop (Bubble) Size Relationship,” Journal of Colloid and 
Interface Science 164, 252-259 (1994).  

16.  S. Srinivasan, G. H. McKinley, and R. E. Cohen, “Assessing the accuracy of contact angle 
measurements for sessile drops on liquid-repellent surfaces,” Langmuir 27, 13582–13589 (2011). 
  
17.  Erbil, H.Y., “The debate on the dependence of apparent contact angles on drop contact area 
or three-phase contact line: A review,” Surface Science Reports 69, 325-365 (2014). 

18.  Extrand, C.W., “Uncertainty in contact angle measurements from the tangent method,” 
Journal of Adhesion Science and Technology 30, 1597-1601 (2016). 

19.  W. A. Zisman, “Relation of the Equilibrium Contact Angle to Liquid and Solid 
Constitution,” Advances in Chemistry 43, 1–51 (1964). 

20.   .I. del R  o, and A.W. Neumann “Axisymmetric Drop Shape Analysis: Computational 
Methods for the Measurement of Interfacial Properties from the Shape and Dimensions of 
Pendant and Sessile Drops,” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 196, 136–147 (1997).  
 
21. Cabezas, M. G., Bateni, A., Montanero, J. M. & Neumann, A. W. “Determination of Surface 
Tension and Contact Angle from the Shapes of Axisymmetric Fluid Interfaces without Use of 
Apex Coordinates”, Langmuir 22, 10053–10060 (2006). 
 
22.  Stalder, A.F., Melchior, T., Müller, M., Sage, D., Blu, T. and Unser, “Low-bond 
axisymmetric drop shape analysis for surface tension and contact angle measurements of sessile 
drops,” Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 364, 72-81 (2010). 

23.  Ehsan Atefi, J. Adin Mann Jr., and Hossein Tavana, “A Robust Polynomial Fitting 
Approach for Contact Angle Measurements”, Langmuir 29, 5677–5688 (2013). 

24.  G. H. Quincke, “Ueber Capillaritats-Erscheinungen an der gemeinschaftlichen Oberflche 
von Flüssigkeiten,” Ann. Phys. Chem. 139, 1–89 (1870). 

25.  W. F. Magie, “The contact angle of liquids and solids,” Philos. Mag. 26, 162–183 (1888). 

26.  J. H. Poynting and J. J. Thomson, “A University Text-book of Physics,” in Properties of 
Matter, 14th ed. (Revised by G.W. Todd) (Griffin, London, 1947), Vol. 1, pp. 191–193. 

27.  P. G. de Gennes, F. Brochard-Wyart, and D. Quere, Capillarity and Wetting Phenomena: 
Drops, Bubbles, Pearls, Waves (Springer, New York, 2004), pp. 35–37. 

28.  F. Behroozi, “Determination of Contact Angle from the Maximum Height of Enlarged 
Drops on Solid Surfaces,” Am. J. Phys. 80, 284-288 (2012).  


17 

 

29.  A. K. Chesters, An analytical solution for the profile and volume of a small drop or bubble 
symmetrical about a vertical axis”, J. Fluid Mech. 81, 609-624 (1977). 

30.  M. E. R. Shanahan, “An approximate theory describing the profile of a sessile drop”, J. 
Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 78, 2701-2710 (1982). 

31.  M. E. R. Shanahan, “Profile and contact angle of small sessile drops. A more general 
approximate solution”, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. I, 80, 37-45 (1984). 

32.  Stephen B. G. M. O'Brien and Ben H. A. A. van den Brule, “Shape of a Small Sessile Drop 
and the Determination of Contact Angle”, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 87(10), 1579-1583 
(1991). 

33.  F. Behroozi, K. Macomber, J. A. Dostal, C. H. Behroozi, and B. Lambert, “The Profile of a 
Dew Drop,” Am. J. Phys. 64, 1120-1125 (1996).  

 
 

 

 

 

 
 


