Bismuth and Antimony Based Oxyhalides and Chalcohalides as 

Potential Optoelectronic Materials

Zhao Ran1,†, Xinjiang Wang1,†, Yuwei Li2, Dongwen Yang1, Xin-Gang Zhao1, Koushik 

Biswas3, David J. Singh2,*, and Lijun Zhang1,*

1Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials of MOE, State Key Laboratory of Superhard 
Materials, and College of Materials Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China

2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211-7010 

USA

3Department of Chemistry and Physics, Arkansas State University, State University, AR

72467, USA

†These authors contributed equally.

*Address correspondence to: singhdj@missouri.edu or lijun_zhang@jlu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT

In the last decade the ns2 cations (e.g., Pb2+ and Sn2+) based halides have emerged 

as one of the most exciting new classes of optoelectronic materials, as exemplified by

for instance hybrid perovskite solar absorbers. These materials not only exhibit 

unprecedented performance in some cases, but they also appear to break new ground

with their unexpected properties, such as extreme tolerance to defects. However, 

because of the relatively recent emergence of this class of materials, there remain many 

yet to be fully explored compounds. Here we assess a series of bismuth/antimony 

oxyhalides and chalcohalides using consistent first principles methods to ascertain their 

properties and obtain trends. Based on these calculations, we identify a subset 

consisting of three types of compounds that may be promising as solar absorbers, 

transparent conductors, and radiation detectors. Their electronic structure, connection 

to the crystal geometry, and impact on band-edge dispersion and carrier effective mass 

are discussed.


INTRODUCTION

Halides containing high-Z ns2 cations (with electron configurations of [d10]s2p0, 

e.g., Tl+, Pb2+ and Bi3+) have been found to possess unexpectedly good carrier transport 

properties. Depending on specific optical band gaps and other features of the band 

structure, they can be useful optoelectronic materials for various applications such as 

radiation detection, solar cells, etc.1-6 For instance, PbI2 and some Tl-based halides have 

shown excellent performance as semiconductor radiation detectors, in which carriers 

generated by γ- or X-ray radiation can be efficiently collected over millimeter or even

longer distances.1–4 Meanwhile solar cells based on Pb-based organic-inorganic hybrid

halide perovskites have achieved power conversion efficiency well above 20%.5,6 The 

prototypical material, CH3NH3PbI3 is exceptional in having an extremely large 

dielectric constant on the border of ferroelectricity, suitable band gap for solar absorber 

application and low hole and electron effective masses.7-14 The physical mechanisms

underlying these optoelectronic halide materials, are not yet fully established, but can

at least in part be attributed to the unique chemistry of the ns2 lone-pair state. Factors 

that have been discussed include formation of defects with lower charge states, high 

dielectric constants, and shallow defect levels among others.7-15 Assessment can be 

made experimentally using time resolved experiments for carrier lifetimes.14

In these compounds the cation-s state moves down in energy (forming the lone-

pair state), separating from the cation-p states (due to the Mass-Darwin effect), so that

there is substantial charge transfer only from the cation-p to anion-p states, rather than 

the cation-s to anion-p states. Thus, the valence bands are mainly formed by anti-

bonding combinations of cation-s and anion-p states; the conduction bands are 

dominated by the spatially extended cation-p states, hybridizing also in the anti-bonding 

pattern with the anion-p states. This leads to simultaneously dispersive valence and 

conduction bands (favorable to high mobility), and defect tolerance. Furthermore, the

resulting significant cross-band-gap hybridization gives rise to enhanced Born effective 

charges, analogous to classical ferroelectric materials, such as BaTiO3. This enhances 

the dielectric constant, which effectively screens defects and is beneficial for carrier

transport.15,16


In addition to the ns2 cations containing halides, the corresponding oxyhalides and 

chalcohalides have been also considered as optoelectronic materials. In 2012, 

experimental studies by Hahn et al. found BiSI and BiSeI to be n-type, with high 

absorption coefficients.17,18 However, devices based on BiSI have up to now shown 

poor performances.18 Ganose et al., based on density functional calculations, attributed

the poor performance in the reported BiSI-based devices to band misalignments and 

suggested alternative device architectures.19 Theoretical studies of Bi(III) chalco-

halides have suggested n-BiSeBr, p-BiSI, and p-BiSeI as photovoltaic materials, 

BiSeBr and BiSI as room-temperature radiation detection materials, and BiOBr as a p-

type transparent conducting material.10

The purpose of this paper is to explore these compounds more broadly seeking 

identification of new optoelectronic compounds and trends. Specifically, we assess a 

series of bismuth/antimony oxyhalides and chalcohalides. It is important to note the 

rich diversity of chemical compositions and geometrical structures in this class of 

compounds, which supports the notion that interesting properties are yet to be 

discovered in them. The compound-intrinsic properties (e.g. thermodynamic stability, 

electronic structure, effective masses of electron/hole and optical absorption) of 36 

relatively simple compounds obtained from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database

(ICSD) have been systematically investigated through density functional calculations. 

Based on the results, we found a series of candidates suitable for optoelectronic 

applications, including two types of compounds (BiSeCl/Br/I and Bi3Se4Br) as 

potential solar absorber materials, three types of compounds (Bi3Se4Br, BiSeCl/Br/I 

and BiOI) as potential radiation detection materials, and three types of compounds

(BiOCl/Br, SbOF, and Sb4O5Cl2/Br2) as potential p-type transparent conducting 

materials. 

RESULTS

Properties of the 36 Bi/Sb oxyhalides and chalcohalides

The calculated HSE+SOC band gaps of representative compounds are listed in 


Table I, compared with available experimental results. One sees that the calculated gap 

values are in very good agreement with corresponding experimental data for most of 

the compounds except the tellurides, where the band gaps are overestimated compared 

to experiment with the HSE functional. In the following, we only consider the 

oxyhalides and chalcohalides not containing Te. It may also be noted that besides 

increasing the band gap relative to PBE+SOC, HSE+SOC calculations may lead to 

different band dispersions, for example changes in the band curvatures and effective 

masses. We calculated HSE+SOC band structures to compare with PBE+SOC for some 

compounds, specifically the compounds that we identify as potential solar absorbers. 

As seen (Supplementary Fig. S1), while there are small differences, these changes are 

minor for the compounds studied.

The calculated formation energies, band
gaps and effective masses
of 

electrons/holes for the 36 Bi and Sb based compounds are given in Fig. 1 and 

Supplementary Table S1. Here, the formation energy is defined as the energy difference 

between a compound and its constituent elemental solids. It is seen that all the 

compounds possess negative formation energies (upper panel in Fig. 1), indicating that 

they are stable against decomposition to constituent elemental solids, as expected, 

considering that they are experimentally known compounds. Generally, the stabilities 

of the compounds increase as the halogens change from I to F or the chalcogens change

form Te to O. This is the trend of increasing anion electronegativity, and therefore 

increasing electronegativity difference between anions and cations, which normally 

leads to increasing stability
for ionic compounds.
We also calculated the 

thermodynamic stability of the first category of compounds (BiSe/Cl/Br/I and Bi2Se4Br) 

with respect to competing phases, including structural optimization with inclusion of 

the van der Waals interaction based on the optB86 functional35 (important for the 

structure of the binaries) and find marginal stability against decomposition into binaries 

(Supplementary Table S2).

As shown in the middle panel of Fig. 1, the calculated band gaps of these Bi and 

Sb based compounds cover a wide range from ~1 to ~5 eV. There is a general trend of 


increasing band gap with increasing electronegativity difference between constituent 

cations and anions, as indicated in Fig. 2(a). There is also a clear trend in the bond

valence sum (BVS)36 plot shown in Fig. 2(c), where the band gaps increase as the BVS

values of Bi or Sb approach their the nominal valence of three, reflecting more ideal 

bonding geometries.

The effective masses of electrons and holes of these compounds are shown in the 

lower panel of Fig. 1. In most cases the electron effective masses are lower than those 

of holes, but there is no obvious relationship between the effective masses, and the 

electronegativity difference [Fig. 2(b)] or the cation BVS [Fig. 2(d)]. Strikingly, many 

of these compounds possess electron or hole effective masses lower than or around the 

rest mass of electrons (m0), indicating the possibility of good carrier mobility. The large 

span of the band gaps along with low electron or hole effective masses suggests

opportunities for various optoelectronic applications based on compounds in this class.

The calculated dielectric constants, as obtained from PBE calculations, are also 

large for almost all of the compounds as shown in Fig. 3 (with the explicit numbers in 

Supplementary Table S3). Note that the main contributions to the dielectric constants 

are from the lattice, reflecting the mechanism discussed above. These high dielectric 

constants are then expected to lead to screening of defect potentials and suppression of 

point defect scattering. 

Suitable optical band gap is a primary prerequisite for specific optoelectronic 

applications, e.g. gaps in range 1.0-1.7 eV are optimum for solar absorber materials. A 

larger gap, greater than 1.5 eV is essential for room-temperature radiation detection 

applications in order to minimize noise due to thermally generated carriers. Band gaps 

near to or larger than 3 eV are needed for transparent conducting materials. In addition, 

small effective mass of electrons or holes is also necessary for good carrier mobility.

These two compound properties enable us to identify candidates as potential 

optoelectronic materials, which then deserve further theoretical or experimental studies 

concerning their dopability, dielectric and other properties.


Potential solar absorbers

Four out of 36 compounds (BiSeCl, BiSeBr, BiSeI and Bi3Se4Br) are found to 

possess optical band gaps in range of ~1.0-1.7 eV and electron or hole effective masses 

lower than m0. The band gaps and average carrier effective masses of the four 

compounds are given in histogram in Fig. 4(a). There are two distinct crystal structures 

in this set of four compounds: BiSeCl, BiSeBr and BiSeI possess a crystal structure of 

space group Pnma (No. 62), and Bi3Se4Br with space group C2/m (No. 12).

The iso-structural compounds, BiSeCl, BiSeBr and BiSeI have similar electronic 

properties, including similar optical band gaps of approximately 1.47-1.48 eV, and 

similar transport effective masses of ~0.53-0.57 m0 and ~2.19-2.98 m0, for electrons 

and holes, respectively. This reflects the dominant role of the chalcogen in the upper

valence band electronic structures. For comparison the cubic phase of CH3NH3PbI3 has 

reported effective masses of 0.35 m0 and 0.31 m0 for electrons and holes, respectively.7

As a representative, the crystal structure, band structure and partial density of states 

(DOS) of BiSeCl are shown in Fig. 4(b). The crystal structure has chains of atoms 

running along the c-axis. The band structure shows an indirect band gap with the 

conduction band minimum (CBM) located at  and valence band maximum (VBM)

along the -Z direction. The conduction bands are highly dispersive both parallel (-Z

direction) and perpendicular (-X and -Y direction) to the chain direction (kz), since 

they are mainly derived from the spatially extended Bi-p states. The valence bands are

dispersive in direction parallel to the atomic chains (-Z direction) but less so

perpendicular (-X and -Y direction) to the chain. This is due to the weak Se-Se inter-

chain coupling compared with that of intra-chain coupling. The shortest inter-chain Se-

Se distance is 4.32 Å, which is larger than intra-chain Se-Se distance of 3.81 Å. We 

note that a prior density functional investigation10 also indicated that BiSeBr and BiSeI

may have potential as a solar absorber materials consistent with the present results. The

band structures are given in Supplementary Fig. S2. Within these three compounds the

halogen p states take an increasing role in the VBM as the halogen atomic number 

increases from Cl to I. For BiSeI, the nearest inter-chain I-I distance is slightly shorter 


than the intra-chain distances, indicating a stronger inter-chain I-I coupling. This is 

reflected in the band structure. Thus, the valence bands of BiSeI are dispersive in 

direction both parallel and perpendicular to the atomic chains (Supplementary Fig. S2).

Bi3Se4Br is another candidate absorber identified in the present calculations. In 

contrast to the three compounds discussed above, it possesses simultaneously low 

electron and hole effective masses of 0.71 and 1.20 m0, respectively, indicating efficient 

transport of both electrons and holes. The crystal structure of Bi3Se4Br is depicted in 

the insert of Fig. 4(c). It also has atomic chains, in this case along the b axis. The 

calculated band structure shown in Fig. 4(c) indicates an indirect band gap (~1.69 eV)

with the CBM at k point along the -M direction and VBM along the N-Z direction. As 

expected, not only the valance bands but also the conduction bands are dispersive. The 

partial DOS [Fig. 4(c)] shows that the valence band is dominated by anion p states, as 

expected. These hybridize with Bi 6s orbital to form antibonding states, responsible for 

the dispersive valence bands. The conduction band is primarily derived from Bi 6p

states. 

We note that due to matrix elements and selection rules the magnitude of the 

electronic gap is not always indicative of strong absorption that is needed for solar 

applications, and calculations of absorption spectra are needed to assess their potential 

use in solar cells. The calculated absorption spectra for the four potential solar absorbers

show strong absorptions near the band gap (Fig. 4(d); note that these are direct (vertical) 

transitions so absorption onset is slightly above the indirect gap), consistent with high 

solar-energy capture efficiency.

Potential semiconductors for room-temperature radiation detection

Seven (BiSCl, BiSBr, BiSI, BiOI, Bi3Se4Br, SbSI and SbSeI) of the 36 compounds

show optical band gaps in range between 1.5-2.2 eV as well as electron or hole effective 

masses lower than m0. These are then potentially useful as room-temperature radiation 

detection materials as far as this screen is concerned. Since heavy atoms (high Z) are

necessary for efficient absorption of high energy radiation, five Bi based compounds 


are favorable, whose band gaps and carrier effective masses are shown in Fig. 5(a). 

Among the five compounds, Bi3Se4Br has been discussed above.

BiSCl, BiSBr and BiSI adopt the same chain-like crystal structure as BiSeCl/Br/I 

with space group Pnma (No. 62). The band structure and partial DOS of BiSCl are

shown in Fig. 5(b) as a representative, while those of BiSBr and BiSI are given in

Supplementary Fig. S3. Generally, the band structures of BiSCl/Br/I are similar to those 

of BiSeCl/Br/I, except that the former have larger band gaps. This is attributable to the 

deeper S-p states as compared with Se-p states (recall the chalcogen p VBM character). 

Within this group of compounds, the valence bands are mainly composed of anion p

states (S-p and halogen-p). The contributions from halogen-p states near the VBM 

increase as the halogen ion changes from Cl to I. In addition, there are also antibonding

contributions from the Bi-s states. Despite this, the valence bands are still relatively flat 

leading to large hole effective masses, typically larger than m0. The conduction bands

are always dominated by the spatially extended Bi-p states, leading to low electron 

effective masses, less than m0. The disparity between electron and hole effective mass 

may not be a prohibitive condition for radiation detection applications, as these devices 

are often designed to collect only one type of charge carrier.

BiOI is another candidate for radiation detection identified in this study. It 

crystallizes to a layered tetragonal structure of space group P4/nmm (No. 129). As 

depicted in the insert of Fig. 5(c), each Bi is coordinated by four O atoms, while each 

O has four 4 Bi neighbors, forming Bi-O layers. Each Bi-O layer is sandwiched by two

iodine layers, stacking along the c-axis. The band structure of BiOI is shown in Fig. 

5(c). It has an indirect band gap. The CBM is at  point, while the VBM is at a k point 

along the Z-R direction. The states near VBM are dominated by I-p states, while the 

states near CBM mainly derive from Bi-p states [Fig. 5(c)]. The inter- and intra-layer 

I-I distances are 4.89 and 4.03 Å, indicating a weak inter-layer interaction. This is 

responsible for the rather flat valence bands perpendicular to the atomic layers (-Z and 

X-R directions). However, both valence and conduction bands along the Z-R are

dispersive due to the strong interactions within the atomic layers. Remarkably, it 


possesses simultaneously low electron and hole effective masses, which raises the 

possibility of high mobility-lifetime (µτ) product for both type of charge carriers – a

desirable characteristic for efficient charge collection and energy resolution in 

semiconductor detectors.

It is known that high dielectric constants are favorable for long carrier lifetime,

large diffusion length, and the higher µτ values via effective screening of charged

defects. The calculated static dielectric constants (st, the high-frequency limit resulted 

from electronic polarization) for the five potential radiation detection materials are 

shown in Fig. 5(d) (see also Fig. 3; numerical values in Table S3). As seen all the 

materials exhibit rather large st above 30, in spite of their sizable band gaps.

Compounds as potential transparent conductors

For transparent conducting materials, we focus on finding p-type (hole conducting) 

examples, since these are rather scarce compared to n-type.37-41 In addition to large band 

gap (> 3 eV), low hole effective mass is a prerequisite since good conductivity is needed. 

While not reflecting a strictly intrinsic property, it should also be emphasized that 

successful development of a transparent conductor requires doping. This is a necessary 

criterion for a transparent conductor. The difficulty in doping most oxides p-type has 

been an important challenge in this field.38 It has been overcome through specific 

chemistries, such has that of monovalent Cu and divalent Sn, and through particularly 

stable crystal structures such as that of BaSnO3.37-40 Five compounds (BiOCl, BiOBr, 

SbOF, Sb4O5Cl2 and Sb4O5Br2, Fig. 6) are found to possess optical band gaps larger 

than 3 eV as well as reasonable hole effective masses (below 1.5 m0 expect for BiOBr 

with ~1.7 m0). These may be potential transparent conducting materials, if they can be 

doped. All of them contain oxygen as the chalcogen, reflecting the fact that the high 

electronegativity of O is favorable for a large band gap.

BiOCl and BiOBr possess the same crystal structure of space group P4/nmm (No. 

129) as that of BiOI. The band structures and partial DOS of BiOCl are shown in Fig. 

6(b), and those of BiOBr are shown in Supplementary Fig. S4. Their band structures 


display similar features as that of BiOI, partially reflecting the fact that these 

compounds adopt the same crystal structure. However, the band gap increases as the

halogen ion changes from I to Cl because of the lowering of the halogen p states, 

following the electronegativity. Moreover, the dispersion of the relatively flat 

conduction bands along -Z (perpendicular to the atomic layers) also changes when 

going from I to Cl, leading to a shift in the CBM from  to Z point. The VBMs of the 

three compounds are always along the Z-R direction (parallel to the atomic layers). Due 

the strong intra-layer halogen-halogen coupling, the valence bands are highly 

dispersive along Z-R direction, leading to low hole effective masses.

SbOF has a chain-like structure with space group Pnma (No. 62). The atomic 

chains extend along the b axis [inset of Fig. 6(c)]. Although it has the same symmetry 

as the BiSeCl/Br/I and BiSCl/Br/I compounds discussed earlier, the bonding pattern in 

SbOF is distinct. The Sb-O bonds in SbOF are almost in the plane of the atomic chains, 

while the Bi-Se/S bonds are not. The band structure and partial DOS of SbOF are shown 

in Fig. 6(c). It has an indirect band gap of 3.95 eV with VBM at  and CBM at Y. The 

VBM is dominated by O-2p states. Since the nearest inter-chain O-O distance (4.77 Å) 

is much larger than that of intra-chain distance (2.47 Å), the inter-chain O-O coupling 

is rather weak. This is responsible for the flat valance bands in direction perpendicular 

to the chain (-X). However, the valence bands are highly dispersive along the chain

direction (-Y) due to the strong intra-chain interactions. 

Sb4O5Cl2 and Sb4O5Br2 adopt same layered structure with space group P21/c (No. 

14) and atomic layers stacked along a axis. Among these, Sb4O5Br2 was previously

suggested as p-type transparent conducting material based on density functional 

calculations.39 The band structures of the two compounds shown in Fig. 6(d) (Sb4O5Br2)

and Supplementary Fig. S5 (Sb4O5Cl2) are very similar. Both have indirect band gaps, 

VBM at  and CBM at Z. Interestingly, although they have a layered structure, the 

valence bands are dispersive in direction perpendicular to the atomic layers (-Z 

direction). As seen in the DOS [Fig. 6(d)], the states near the VBM are dominated by 

halogen p states. The intra-layer halogen-halogen distances (5.10 and 5.13 Å for 


Sb4O5Cl2 and Sb4O5Br2, respectively) are much larger than those of interlayer ones 

(4.47 and 4.39 Å for Sb4O5Cl2 and Sb4O5Br2, respectively). This leads to strong 

interlayer halogen-halogen interactions and explains the dispersive valence bands in the 

-Z direction. 

DISCUSSION

Motivated by recent results on halide semiconductors, and theoretical arguments 

about the origin of their performance, we selected a group of 36 chalcohalides and 

oxyhalides containing ns2 Bi3+ or Sb3+ cation. Density functional results for band gap, 

effective mass of electrons and holes, and optical absorption are reported. BiSeCl/Br/I 

and Bi3Se4Br are found to possess optical band gaps of 1.47-1.69 eV and low electron 

or hole effective masses. They are promising solar absorber materials. Bi3Se4Br, 

BiSCl/Br/I and BiOI have band gaps in the range 1.69-2.08 eV, and low effective mass 

of electrons or holes, suitable for use as room-temperature radiation detection materials. 

BiOCl/Br, SbOF, and Sb4O5Cl2/Br2 have larger band gaps (>3.0 eV) and low hole

effective mass, which makes them potential candidates as p-type transparent conducting 

materials. This suggests further study of the identified materials to assess other 

properties relevant to applications, such as dopability in the case of transparent 

conductors, and the possibility for obtaining high resistivity in the case of 

semiconductors for radiation detection.

There are several common themes in the electronic structure of the identified

compounds. The band gap is controlled by positions of the anion p-states which form 

the valence bands. The Bi or Sb s-states hybridize in antibonding combinations with 

halogen-p and chalcogen-p states near respective VBMs favoring high dispersion and 

lower hole effective mass. The CBM of the compounds is formed primarily from Bi or 

Sb p-states. There is also a tendency towards cross-gap hybridization between the cation 

p- and anion p-states (band structure and DOS Figs. 3, 4, and 5). Cross-gap 

hybridization indicates covalency in the otherwise ionic materials, and possibility of 

large Born effective charge and static dielectric constant. The identified compounds do 

as a result have high dielectric constants. These large static dielectric constants are 


favorable for effective screening of charged defects and high mobility. Despite the 

complex chain or layered structures of these compounds, the valence and conduction 

band dispersion is a consequence of hybridization among the anion or cation p-states,

favoring low carrier effective mass. The current work proposes a promising series of Bi 

and Sb based oxyhalides and chalcohalides, which may be appropriate for various

optoelectronic applications. Further theoretical and experimental investigations will be 

necessary to ascertain their dopability, defect and dielectric behavior, the possibility of 

obtaining high resistivity for radiation detection, as well as device-level properties.

METHODS

All calculations are performed within the framework of density functional theory 

(DFT) using plane-wave pseudopotential method as implemented in the VASP code.42

The electron-ion interaction is described by means of projector-augmented wave 

pseudopotentials.42,43 Valence electron configurations of ns2np3 for Sb/Bi, ns2np4

O/S/Se/Te and ns2np5 for F/Cl/Br/I are employed along with the Perdew-Burke-

Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (PBE-GGA).44 A plane-wave basis set 

with an energy cutoff of 500 eV and the Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh with grid 

spacing of ~2π× 0.03 Å-1 are used for total energy minimization and ground-state 

electronic structure calculations. Once the basic properties were obtained in this way, 

we then calculated electronic structures using the hybrid Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof 

(HSE)45 functional, with the standard 25% non-local Fock exchange. Spin–orbit 

coupling (SOC) is included. This is important for these heavy p-electron element 

containing compounds. The carrier effective mass (m*) tensors for transport are directly 

calculated using the BoltzTraP code.46 For this purpose, the PBE+SOC eigenvalues on 

a dense k-point grid (2π×0.015 Å-1 or less), with a carrier concentration of 1018 cm-3

and temperature of 300 K. This takes into account effects of non-parabolicity, 

anisotropy of bands, multiple bands, and other band structure effects, to obtain a single 

effective mass tensor for carrier transport. The quoted average values are from the 

direction average of the inverse transport effective mass. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (under Grant Nos. 61722403 and 11674121), National Key 

Research 
and 
Development 
Program 
of 
China 
(under 
Grants 
No. 

2016YFB0201204), Program for JLU Science and Technology Innovative 

Research Team, and the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts in China. 

Work at the University of Missouri was supported by the Department of Energy 

through the S3TEC Energy Frontier Research Center, award DE-SC0001299.

KB acknowledges support from US Department of Homeland Security under 

Grant Award Number, 2014-DN-077-ARI075. Part of the calculations was 

performed at the High Performance Computing Center of Jilin University.

COMPETING INTERESTS

We declare that we have no competing interests in regard to this work.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

XR, XW, YL, DY and XGZ performed calculations. KB contributed to the 

analysis and discussion for radiation detection materials. DJS and LZ analysed 

results and wrote the draft. All authors contributed to writing the final 

manuscript. XR and XW contributed equally.


REFERENCES

1
Nikl, M. Scintillation detectors for x-rays, Meas. Sci. Technol. 17, R37–R54

(2006).

2
Street, R.A., Ready, S.E., Van Schuylenbergh, K., Ho, J., Boyce, J.B., Nylen, P., 

Shah, K., Melekhov, L. & Hermon, H. Comparison of PbI2 and HgI2 for direct 

detection active matrix x-ray image sensors. J. Appl. Phys. 91, 3345–3355 (2002).

3
Nguyen, S.L., Malliakas, C.D., Peters, J.A., Liu, Z., Im, J., Zhao, L., Sebastian 

M.,, Jin, H., Li, H., Johnsen, S., Wessels, B.W., Freeman, A.J. & Kanatzidis, M.G.

Photoconductivity in Tl6SI4: a novel semiconductor for hard radiation detection.

Chem. Mater. 25, 2868–2877 (2013).

4
Johnsen, S., Liu, Z., Peters, J.A., Song, J.H., Nguyen, S., Malliakas, C.D., Jin, 

H., Freeman, A.J., Wessels B.W. & Kanatzidis, M.G. Thallium chalcogenides for 

x-ray and -ray detection. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 10030–10033 (2011).

5
Kojima, A., Teshima, K., Shirai, Y. & Miyasaka, T. Organometal halide 

perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc.

131, 6050–6051 (2009).

6
Jeon, N.J., Noh, J.H., Yang, W.S., Kim, Y.C., Ryu, S., Seo, J. & Seok, S.I.

Compositional engineering of perovskite materials for high-performance solar 

cells. Nature 517, 476–480 (2015).

7
Yin, W.J., Yang, J.H., Kang, J.,Yan, Y. & Wei, S.H. Hallide perovskite materials 

for solar cells: a theoretical review. J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 8926 (2015).

8.
Rohm, H., Leonhard, T., Hoffmann, M.J. & Colsmann, A. Ferroelectric domains 

in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite thin-films. Energy Env. Sci. 10, 950

(2017).

9
Wei, S.H. & Zunger, A. Electronic and structural anomalies in lead 

chalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B 55, 13605–13610 (1997).

10
Shi, H., Ming, W. & Du, M.H. Bismuth chalcogenides and oxyhalides as 


optoelectronic materials. Phys. Rev. B 93, 104108 (2016).

11
Du,
M.H. Efficient carrier
transport in halide perovskites: theoretical 

perspectives. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 9091 (2014).

12
Brandt, R.E., Stevanovic, V., Ginley, D.S. & Buonassisi, T. Identifying defect-

tolderant semiconductors with high minority-carrier lifetimes: beyond hybrid 

lead halide perovskites. MRS Commun. 5, 265 (2015).

13
Fabini, D.H., Labram, J.G., Lehner, A.J., Bechtel, J.S., Evans, H.A., Van der Ven 

A., Wudl, F., Chabinyc, M.L.
& Seshadri,
R.
Main-Group Halide 

Semiconductors Derived from Perovskite: Distinguishing Chemical, Structural, 

and Electronic Aspects. Inorg. Chem. 56, 11 (2017).

14
Brandt, R.E., Poindexter, J.R., Gorai, P., Kurchin, R.C., Hoye, R.L.Z., Nienhaus,

L, Wilson, M.W.B., Polizzotti, J.A., Sereika, R., Zaltauskas, R., Lee, L.C.,

MacManus-Driscol, J.L., Bawendi, M., Stephanivic, V. & Buonassisi, T.

Searching for defect-tolerant photovoltaic materials: combined theoretical and 

experimental screening. Chem. Mater. 29, 4667 (2017).

15
Du, M.H. & Singh, D.J. Enhanced Born charge and proximity to ferroelectricity 

in thallium halides. Phys. Rev. B 81, 144114 (2010).

16
Sun, J. & Singh, D.J. Electronic properties, screening and efficient carrier 

transport in NaSbS2. Phys. Rev. Appl. 7, 024015 (2017).

17
Hahn, N.T., Hoang, S., Self, J.L. & Mullins, C.B. Spray pyrolysis deposition and 

photoelectrochemical properties of n-type BiOI nanoplatelet thin films. ACS 

Nano 6, 7712–7722 (2012).

18
Hahn, N.T., Rettie, A.J.E., Beal, S.K., Fullon, R.R. & Mullins, C.B., n-BiSI Thin 

Films: Selenium Doping and Solar Cell Behavior. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 24878–

24886 (2012).

19
Ganose, A.M., Butler, K.T., Walsh, A. & Scanlon, D.O. Relativistic electronic 

structure and band alignment of BiSI and BiSeI: candidate photovoltaic materials.


J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 2060–2068 (2016).

20
Kan, Y., Teng, F., Yang, Y., Xu, J. & Yang, L. Direct conversion mechanism from 

BiOCl nanosheets to BiOF, Bi7F11O5 and BiF3 in the presence of a fluorine 

resource. RSC Adv. 6, 63347–63357 (2016).

21
Li, G.S., Jiang, B., Xiao, S.N., Lian, Z.C., Zhang, D.Q., Yu, J.C. & Li, H.X. An 

efficient dye-sensitized BiOCl photocatalyst for air and water purification under 

visible light irradiation. Environ. Sci. Proc. Impacts 16, 1975 (2014).

22
An, H., Du, Y., Wang, T., Wang, C., Hao, W. &. Zhang, J. Photocatalytic 

properties of BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I). Rare Met. 27, 243–250 (2008).

23
Yang, L., Huang, J., Cao, L., Shi, L.,Yu, Q., Kong X. & Jie, Y. pH-regulated 

template-free assembly of Sb4O5Cl2 hollow microsphere crystallites with self-

narrowed bandgap and optimized photocatalytic performance. Sci. Rep. 6, 27765

(2016).

24
Chen, H.L., Lee, W.W., Chung, W.H., Lin, H.P., Chen, Y.J., Jiang, Y.R., Lin, W.Y. 

& Chen, C.C. Controlled hydrothermal synthesis of bismuth oxybromides and 

their photocatalytic properties. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 45, 1892–1909 (2014).

25
Wang, W., Huang, F. & Lin, X. xBiOI – (1−x)BiOCl as efficient visible-light-

driven photocatalysts Scr. Mater. 56, 669–672 (2007).

26
Chepur, D.V., Bercha, D.M., Turyanitsa, I.D. & Slivka, V.Y. Peculiarities of the 

Energy Spectrum and Edge Absorption in the Chain Compounds AVBVICVII. 

Phys. Stat. Sol (b) 30, 461–468 (1968).

27
Jin, M.S., Park, K.H., Kim, H.G., Choe, S.H., Park, B.S., Hyun, S.C. & Kim,

W.T. Optical properties of undoped and Co-doped SbSBr and BiSBr single 

crystals. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 10, 1167 (1995).

28
Hyun, S.C., Kim, Y.G., Kim, M.Y., Koh, J.D., Park, B.S. & Kim, W.T. Optical 

properties of undoped and chromium-doped VA-VIA-VIIA single crystals. J. 

Mater. Sci. 30, 6113–6117 (1995).


29
Fong, C.Y., Perlov, C. & Wooten, F. Electronic properties of BiSeI and BiSeBr.

J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 15, 2605 (1982).

30
Park, S.A., Kim, M.Y., Lim, J.Y., Park, B.S., Koh, J.D. & Kim, W.T. Optical 

properties of undoped and V-doped VA-VIA-VIIA single crystals. Phys. stat. sol.

(b) 187, 253–260 (1995).

31
Akrap, A.,Teyssier, J., Magrez, A., Bugnon, P., Berger, H., Kuzmenko, A.B. &

van der Marel, D. Optical properties of BiTeBr and BiTeCl. Phys. Rev. B 90, 

035201 (2014).

32
Chen, Y.L., Kanou, M., Liu, Z.K., Zhang, H.J., Sobota, J.A., Leuenberger, D., S., 

Mo, K., Zhou, B., Yang, S.L., Kirchmann, P.S., Lu, D.H., Moore, R.G., Hussain, 

Z., Shen, Z.X., Qi, X.L. & Sasagawa, T. Discovery of a single topological Dirac 

fermion in the strong inversion asymmetric compound BiTeCl. Nat. Phys. 9, 

704–708 (2013).

33
Ishizaka, K., Bahramy, M.S., Murakawa, H., Sakano, M., Shimojima, T., Sonobe, 

T., Koizumi, K., Shin, S., Miyahara, H., Kimura, A., Miyamoto, K., Okuda, T., 

Namatame, H., Taniguchi, M., Arita, R., Nagaosa, N., Kobayashi, K., Murakami, 

Y., Kumai, R., Kaneko, Y., Onose, Y. & Tokura, Y. Giant Rashba-type spin 

splitting in bulk BiTeI. Nat. Mater. 10, 521–526 (2011).

34
Kichambare, P. & Sharon, M. Preparation, characterization and physical 

properties of mixed Sb1-xBixTeI. Solid State Ionics 103, 155–159 (1997).

35
Klimes, J., Bowler, D.R. &Michaelides, A. Chemical accuracy for the van der 

Waals density functional. J. Phys.: Condens. Mat. 22, 022201 (2010).

36
Brown, I.D. & Altermatt, D. Bond-valence parameters obtained from a 

systematic analysis of the inorganic crystal structure database. Acta Cryst. B41, 

244 (1985).

37
Kawazoe, H., Yanagi, H., Ueda, K. & Hosono, H. Transparent p-type conducting 

oxides: design and fabrication of p-n heterojunctions. MRS Bull. 25 (8) 28 (2000).


38
Kawazoe, H., Yasukawa, M., Hyodo, H., Kurita, M., Yanagi, H. & Hosono, H.

P-type electrical conduction in transparent thin films of CuAlO2. Nature 389, 

939 (1997).

39.
Kim, H.K., Kim, U., Park, C., Kwon, H., & Char, K. Thermally stable pn 

junctions based on a single transparent perovskite semiconductor BaSnO3. APL 

Mater. 4, 056105 (2016).

40
Li, Y., Sun, J. & Singh, D.J. Infrared absorption and visible transparency in 

heavily doped p-type BaSnO3. Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 051904 (2017).

41
Hautier, G., Miglio, A., Ceder, G., Rignanese, G.-M. & Gonze, X. Identification 

and design principles of low hole effective mass p-type transparent conducting 

oxides. Nat. Commun. 4, 2292 (2013).

42
Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy 

calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169–11186 (1996).

43
Blöchl, P.E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953–17979

(1994).

44
Perdew, J.P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation 

Made Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996).

45
Krukau, A.V., Vydrov, O.A., Izmaylov, A.F. & Scuseria, G.E Influence of the 

exchange screening parameter on the performance of screened hybrid 

functionals, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 224106 (2006).

46
Madsen, G.K.H. & Singh, D.J. BoltzTraP. A code for calculating band-structure 

dependent quantities. Comput. Phys. Commun. 175, 67–71 (2006).


Table I. Calculated and experimental band gaps (Refs. 18, 20-34) of some 

representative compounds considered in the current work.

Material

Band gap(eV)

HSE+SOC

Exp.

Direct
Indirect

BiOF
3.94
-
4.0120

BiOCl
3.80
3.29
3.32,20 3.20,21 3 .4422

Sb4O5Cl2
3.95
3.50
3.3023

BiOBr
3.09
2.86
2.85,24 2.7622

BiOI
2.08
1.90
1.92,25 1.8522

BiSCl
1.98
-
1.9326

BiSBr
1.89
-
1.9527

BiSI
1.87
1.66
1.57,18 1.59228

BiSeBr
1.48
1.45
1.5429

BiSeI
1.48
1.32
1.29,30 1.32,29 1.28528

BiTeCl
1.33
1.20
0.77,31 ~0.832

BiTeI
1.09
0.90
0.3833

SbTeI
1.29
1.20
0.73,34 1.2826


Figure 1. Formation energies per atom (upper panel), band gaps (middle panel) and 
effective masses of electron and hole (lower panel) for the 31 Bi and Sb based 
compounds. The formation energy is defined as energy difference between the 
compound and constituent elemental solids. Red, green and blue shaded areas in the 
middle panel indicate band gap ranges of 1.0-1.7, 1.5-2.2 and >3 eV, respectively. Gray 
shaded area in the lower panel indicates effective masses lower than the rest mass of 
electron (m0).


Figure 2. (a) Band gaps, (b) hole and electron effective masses as a function of average
electronegativity discrepancy between anions and cations for the 31 Bi and Sb based 
compounds; (c) Band gaps, (d) effective masses of electron and hole as a function of
bond valence sum of the cations.


Figure 3. Calculated dielectric constants (ε) of the considered bismuth/antimony 
oxyhalides and chalcohalides. We show total static dielectric constant (εst) and the 
component from phonon contribution (εphonon). Note that these compounds have 
generally high dielectric constants, mostly due to large phonon contributions.


Figure 4. (a) Histogram of HSE+SOC band gaps, effective masses of electron and hole 
for BiSeCl, BiSeBr, BiSeI and Bi3Se4Br. (b) Crystal structure, band structure and partial 
density of states (DOS) of BiSeCl. (c) Crystal structure, band structure and partial DOS 
of Bi3Se4Br. (d) Absorption spectra of BiSeCl, BiSeBr, BiSeI and Bi3Se4Br. 


Figure 5. (a) Histogram of HSE+SOC band gaps, effective masses of electron and hole 
for BiOI, BiSCl, BiSBr, BiSI and Bi3Se4Br. (b) Crystal structure, band structure and 
partial DOS of BiSCl. (c) Crystal structure, band structure and partial DOS of BiOI. (d) 
Phonon contribution to, and total static dielectric constant (εst = ε∞+εphonon) for BiSCl, 
BiSBr, BiSI, BiOI, and Bi3Se4Br.


Figure 6. (a) Histogram of HSE+SOC band gaps, effective masses of electron and hole 
for BiOCl, BiOBr, SbOF, Sb4O5Cl2 and Sb4O5Br2. (b) Crystal structure, band structures 
and partial DOS of BiOCl. (c) Crystal structure, band structure and partial DOS of SbOF. 
(d) Crystal structure, band structure and partial DOS of Sb4O5Br2. (e) Calculated
absorption spectra of BiOBr, BiOCl, Sb4O5Br2, Sb4O5Cl2 and SbOF. 


Supplementary Information

Bismuth and antimony-based oxyhalides and chalcohalides as potential 

optoelectronic materials

Zhao Ran1,†, Xinjiang Wang1,†, Yuwei Li2, Dongwen Yang1, Xin-Gang Zhao1, Koushik 

Biswas3, David J. Singh2,*, and Lijun Zhang1,*

1Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials of MOE, State Key Laboratory of Superhard 
Materials, and College of Materials Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China

2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211-7010 

USA

3Department of Chemistry and Physics, Arkansas State University, State University, AR

72467, USA

†These authors contributed equally.

*Address correspondence to: singhdj@missouri.edu or lijun_zhang@jlu.edu.cn

Table S1. Space group, electronic band gaps, effective masses of carriers and formation 
energy ∆𝐻𝑓 of the 31 bismuth/antimony oxyhalides and chalcohalides considered in 
the current work. For the effective masses, the “*” means a very large number.


Table S2: Stability calculation for the formation energy of BiSeCl/Br/I and Bi3Se4Br 
with structural optimization including van der Waals interactions based on the optB86 
functional.


Table S3. Calculated total static dielectric constant (εst), the high-frequency limit of 
dielectric constant (ε∞) and the component from phonon contribution (εphonon ) for the 
31 bismuth/antimony oxyhalides and chalcohalides.


Figure S1. Band structure comparison of HSE+SOC (left) and PBE+SOC (right) 
calculations for BiSeCl (a, b), BiSeBr (c,d), BiSeI (e,f) and Bi3Se4Br (g,h). The 
positions of the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) 
are shown for all compounds.


Figure S2. Band structures and partial electronic density of states of (a) BiSeBr and (b) 
BiSeI.


Figure S3. Band structures and partial electronic density of states of (a) BiSBr and (b) 
BiSI.


Figure S4. Band structures and partial electronic density of states of BiOBr.


Figure S5. Band structures and partial electronic density of states of Sb4O5Cl2.


