Optimization of photonic crystal nanocavities

based on deep learning

Takashi Asano* and Susumu Noda

Department of Electronic Science and Engineering, Kyoto University,

Kyoto 615-8510 Japan

*Corresponding author: tasano@kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

An approach to optimizing the Q factors of two-dimensional photonic crystal (2D-PC) nanocavities based 
on deep learning is proposed and demonstrated. We prepare a dataset consisting of 1000 nanocavities 
generated by randomly displacing the positions of many air holes of a base nanocavity and their Q factors 
calculated by a first-principle method. We train a four-layer neural network including a convolutional 
layer to recognize the relationship between the air holes’ displacements and the Q factors using the 
prepared dataset. After the training, the neural network becomes able to estimate the Q factors from 
the air holes’ displacements with an error of 13% in standard deviation. Crucially, the trained neural 
network can estimate the gradient of the Q factor with respect to the air holes’ displacements very 
quickly based on back-propagation. A nanocavity structure with an extremely high Q factor of 1.58  109

is successfully obtained by optimizing the positions of 50 air holes over ~106 iterations, having taken
advantage of the very fast evaluation of the gradient in high-dimensional parameter space. The obtained 
Q factor is more than one order of magnitude higher than that of the base cavity and more than twice 
that of the highest Q factors reported so far for cavities with similar modal volumes. This approach can 
optimize 2D-PC structures over a parameter space of a size unfeasibly large for previous optimization 
methods based solely on direct calculations. We believe this approach is also useful for improving other 
optical characteristics.

1. INTRODUCTION

Photonic nanocavities based on artificial defects in two-dimensional (2D) photonic crystal (PC) slabs 

have realized high quality (Q) factors from ~ thousand [1], tens of thousands [2], hundreds of thousands 
[3], millions [4-9], to more than ten million [10] together with small modal volumes (Vcav) of the order of 
one cubic wavelength or less. A higher Q factor increases the storage time of photons and light-matter 
interaction time, and a smaller Vcav enhances the light matter interaction strength and decreases the 
footprint. There have been various efforts to increase the Q factors and/or Q/V of 2D-PC slab nanocavities 
both in theory and experiments [2–16]. The developed PC nanocavities have been used for various 
applications including ultracompact channel add/drop devices [1], nano-lasers [17], laser arrays for 
sensing [18], strongly coupled light-matter systems in solids [19,20], ultra-low-power consumption optical 
bi-stable systems [21], ultracompact and low-threshold all-Si Raman lasers [22], and photonic buffer 
memories [23-25]. However, further improvement is desirable for the realization of more advanced 
applications.

The fundamental design principle to increase the designed Q factor (Qdes) of 2D-PC nanocavities is well 

known: the wavevevtor components of the cavity electro-magnetic field within the light cone should be 
decreased as much as possible to reduce the radiation loss [11]. Many design methods including Gaussian 
envelope approaches [2,3], analytic inverse problem approaches [12,13], genetic algorithms [14], and 
leaky position visualization [15]. have been proposed to obtain a higher Qdes while keeping a small Vcav. 
For example, a five-step heterostructure nanocavity comprising a defect waveguide with lattice constant 


modulation analytically designed to realize a Gaussian envelope function for the mode field was reported 
to have a Qdes of 7108 and a Vcav of 1.3 cubic wavelength in the material (/n)3 with an assistance of leaky 
mode visualization technique [12]. In addition, a two-step heterostructure nanocavity with a Qdes of 
1.4108 and a Vcav of 1.3 (/n)3 was reported [9], where the positions of the eight air holes near the center 
of the cavity were tuned based on the leaky position visualization method [15]. Recently, the L4/3 cavity, 
in which positions of 22 air holes were tuned, was reported to have a Qdes of 2.1107 and a Vcav of 0.32 
(/n)3 [16]. Although these approaches were successful, there still remain numbers of unused design 
freedoms in PC nanocavities, which are difficult to fully utilize due to the large cost to calculate the 
gradient of the Q factor in the high dimensional structural parameter space in each step of structural 
optimization. 

In this paper, we propose an approach to optimize 2D-PC nanocavities based on deep learning of the 

relationship between the nanocavities’ structures and their Q factors. We prepare a dataset consisting of 
1000 different nanocavities whose air hole’s positions are randomly but symmetrically displaced. Their Q
factors are calculated by a first-principle method where multiple parallel computation techniques can be 
fully utilized to reduce the computation time. Next, we train a four-layer artificial neural network (NN) 
including a convolutional layer using the dataset to recognize the relationship between the air hole 
displacement patterns and their Q factors. The trained NN becomes able to predict the gradient of the Q
factor with respect to the air holes’ displacements at a speed extremely faster than the first-principle 
calculation. This is used to optimize the displacements of many air holes (50) for large number of 
repetitions (>1,000,000). This optimization method demonstrates a very high Q factor that exceeds one 
billion.

2. FRAMEWORK

In general, automatic structural optimization with respect to target characteristic value(s) requires at 

least three steps; (a) select a set of parameters that represents the structure to be optimized, (b) calculate 
the gradient of the target characteristic value(s) with respect to the structural parameters, and (c) modify 
the structural parameters based on the calculated gradient. (b) and (c) are repeated until the target value(s) 
saturates. In step (a), selecting all parameters that have a strong correlation with the target characteristic(s) 
is important. In step (b), fast evaluation of the gradient is required to ensure enough repetition of the 
optimization. However, it is difficult to fulfill these requirements when the structures to be optimized have 
large degrees of freedom and requires a large computation cost for the evaluation of the gradient. 

This situation applies to Q factor optimization in 2D-PC nanocavities, and we utilize a deep neural 

network (DNN) [26] to resolve these requirements. A DNN implements a complex non-linear function 
that associates a fixed-size input to a fixed size output through multiple units connected from layer to layer 
by linear and nonlinear operations. Because a DNN contains a large numbers of internal adjustable 
parameters (such as connection weights and biases) for tuning, it can approximate various input-output 
relationships once the internal parameters are properly tuned using many sets of example input-output data 
(training data). In particular, a DNN that contains convolutional layer(s), called a convolutional network 
(CNN), is very effective for learning the spatial features of input data [27]. Because such a CNN is 
effective for image processing [28], it is considered useful to learn the relationship between the structure 
of 2D-PC nanocavities and their Q factors. Once we obtain a properly trained CNN using a dataset 
prepared by first-principle calculations, the gradient of the Q factor with respect to the structural 
parameters can be estimated much faster than the direct calculations. Therefore, optimization of numbers 
of parameters can be repeated many times to fully exert the potential of 2D-PC structures, which is 
impossible by the method solely based on a direct calculation owing to the exponential increase of the 
computation cost with the increase of the dimension of the structural parameters. Our strategy is 
summarized as follows:


(I)
Select a base cavity structure to be optimized.  

(II)
Select the type of structural parameter to be optimized. (e.g. air hole position, air hole size, air 
hole shape) 

(III)
Generate many 2D-PC nanocavities from the base structure by randomly fluctuating all 
structural parameters selected in (II) in an area much larger than the cavity field.

(IV)
Calculate the Q factors of the nanocavities prepared in (I) by a first principle method, where 
many structures can be calculated separately in multiple parallel fashion to reduce the 
computation time.

(V)
Prepare an NN to learn the relationship between the structural parameters and the Q factors.

(VI)
Train the NN by the relationship between the subset of the parameters selected from (III) and 
the Q factors calculated in (IV). 

(VII) Find the best set of parameters that minimizes the error between the Q factors predicted by the 

NN and those calculated by the first principle method. 

(VIII) Starting from an initial cavity structure, gradually change the structural parameters selected in 

(VII) using the gradient of the Q factor with respect to the parameters predicted by the trained 
NN many times until the Q factor saturates. 

(IX)
Check the true Q factor of the optimized structure obtained in (VIII) by the first principle 
calculation.

3. RESULTS

In the followings, we describe the optimization of a two-step heterostructure nanocavity as an example.

Figure 1 (a) shows the structure of the base nanocavity [step (I)], which is a two-step heterostructure 
nanocavity made of silicon slab with a thickness of 220 nm. The radii of air holes are 110 nm, and a line 
defect waveguide is formed by filling a row of air holes. The base lattice constant a is 410 nm, and those 
around the center of the nanocavity are modulated by 3 nm in two steps as shown in the figure to confine 
light by the mode gap effect [3]. Eight air holes shown in the figure were shifted from their original 
positions by an order of a/1000 through a manual tuning process based on the leaky position visualization 
technique [15]. This manual tuning process increased the Q factor of the nanocavity from 50 million 
(before tuning) to 140 million (after tuning) [10], but Vcav was almost unchanged [~1.3 (/n)3].


Fig. 1.  Heterostructure two-dimensional photonic crystal nanocavity used as base structure for 
structural optimization. Circles indicate air holes with radii of 110nm formed in Si slab 
(refractive index n = 3.46) with thickness of 220 nm. Base lattice constant a is 410 nm and 
lattice constants are modulated by 3 nm in x direction in two-steps at center of nanocavity. 
Displacements of air holes from lattice positions are illustrated by vector arrows, where eight 
air holes are manually shifted by <1 nm. Electric field (Ey) distribution of fundamental resonant 
mode is plotted in color. Theoretical Q factor of structure (QFDTD) is 1.37108, and modal 
volume is 1.3 cubic wavelengths in material.

A. Preparation of Dataset for Learning

In step (II), we selected the displacements of the air holes as the parameters to be optimized. This is 

because the displacement of the air holes can be implemented in the fabrication process more accurately 
than other parameters such as the air hole radii or shapes. The air holes’ positions can be accurately 
controlled by the electron beam writing process, while their radii and shapes are largely influenced by an 
etching process that is more difficult to control. In step (III), we added random displacements to all air 
holes in the x and y directions in such a way that the symmetry of the structure was maintained. We 
maintained the symmetry because an asymmetry of a PC cavity increases the radiation loss [11]. The 
induced random displacements obeyed a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of a/1000. This 
magnitude of the fluctuation was determined from the experience of the manual optimization mentioned 
above [10]. We generated 1000 randomly fluctuated nanocavity structures using procedure. 

In step (IV), we calculated the electromagnetic field and the Q factors of the fundamental resonant mode 

of the 1000 structures using the three-dimensional (3D) finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. A 
histogram of the calculated Q factors (QFDTD) is plotted in Fig. 2, and examples of the generated cavity 
structures are shown in Fig. 3 with their electric fields (Ey) and QFDTD. It is seen in Fig. 2 that QFDTD
distributed in a range of almost two-orders of magnitudes, from ~106 to more than 3  108, but was mainly 
concentrated in the region below ~3  107. In addition, there is a steep drop at the lower-Q side of the peak. 
We thought that this nonuniform distribution of QFDTD is relatively difficult to be learned by an NN [26], 
and transformed QFDTD to log10(QFDTD) as shown in Fig. 2 (b), which shows a more uniform distribution 
similar to the Gaussian distribution. As a result, we used the relationships between the air hole’s 
displacement patterns and log10(QFDTD)s of the 1000 prepared structures as the dataset for the machine 
learning in step (VI).  


Fig. 2.  (a) Histogram of Q factors calculated by 3D-FDTD method (QFDTD) for 1000 
nanocavities generated  by randomly displacing positions of air holes of base shown in Fig. 1, 
where distribution of random displacement follows Gaussian distribution with standard 
deviation of 1/1000 lattice constant. (b) Histogram of log10(QFDTD). 

Fig. 3.  (a) –(d) Examples of randomly generated cavity structures and their Q factors calculated 
by 3D-FDTD method (QFDTD). Displacements of air holes are indicated by black arrows. 
Electric field (Ey) distribution of fundamental resonant mode is plotted in color.


B. Configuration of Neural Network

Figure 4 shows the configuration of the neural network prepared in step (V). The input data were a set 

of displacement vectors 𝑑⃗ij of air holes [from the positions of a base cavity (I)] in an Nx (a)× Ny (rows) 
area around the center of the nanocavity that is normalized by the unit of a/1000, where i and j are the 
discrete x and y coordinate of the air holes. The first layer was a convolutional layer [27] in which 𝑑⃗ij in a 
local area of the input are summarized into one unit in the next layer by element-wise multiplication with 

a weight matrix of size  Nfw (holes)× Nfh (rows) (called  filter), and summation. By iteratively shifting the 
application area of this operation, where the amount of the shift is defined as stride, the input is convoluted 
with the filter to be summarized into a feature map. We used 50 filters of size 3 × 5 (×2channels: x and y
displacements) so that the second layer contained 50 different summaries (feature maps) of the input, 
where the strides in the x and y directions were 1 and 2, respectively. 

The second layer was fully connected to the third layer with 200 units through a rectified linear unit 

(ReLU [29]) and Affine transformation (multiplication with a weight matrix followed by summation with 
a bias vector). The third layer was fully connected to the fourth layer with 50 units through ReLU, random 
information selection units (Dropout [30]), and Affine transformation. Finally, the information in the 
fourth layer was summarized into the one output unit through ReLU and Affine transformation. This 
output unit was supposed to predict log10(QFDTD).

Fig. 4.  Configuration of neural network prepared to learn relationship between displacements 
of air holes and Q factors. 


C. Training of Neural Network

1. Loss function

In step (VI), we trained this neural network using 900 data among the 1000 prepared in steps (III and 

IV), and left the remaining 100 data as test datasets. A test dataset is necessary to avoid overfitting, which
is a situation in which an NN is too optimized to the training examples so that it cannot predict meaningful 
answers for the other input. It is important to maximize the generalization ability of an NN, which is an 
ability to predict meaningful answers to new inputs it has never seen during the training. Therefore, the 
generalization ability of an NN should be checked by using a test dataset at intervals [26]. For the training, 
we set the loss function L as

𝑳 = |𝑶𝒖𝒕𝒑𝒖𝒕 − 𝒍𝒐𝒈𝟏𝟎 𝑸𝑭𝑫𝑻𝑫|𝟐 +

𝟏

𝟐 𝝀 ∑ 𝒘𝒊

𝟐

𝒊
.
(1)

The first term of Eq. (1) represents the deviation from the true answer. The second term was introduced 

to penalize large connection weights 𝑤𝑖 in the network, where the summation is taken over all the weights 
in the network. This additional term is effective to prevent the overfitting (the weight decay method [31]), 
and λ is the control parameter (we used  λ = 0.001). We randomly selected one set of “𝑑⃗𝑖𝑗 pattern”-
“log10(QFDTD)” from the training dataset, and gradually changed the internal parameters of the NN to 
reduce L (stochastic gradient method [26]) based on the gradient of L with respect to the internal 
parameters, which was obtained by the back-propagation method [32]. We also applied the Momentum 
optimization method to speed up the convergence [33], where the learning rate and the momentum decay 
rate were set as 0.001 and 0.9, respectively. The learning step was repeated until L of the test dataset 
converges. The accuracy of the prediction was evaluated as the standard deviations of the output 
[=log10(QNN)] from the true answer [log10(QFDTD)] for the test dataset (𝜎test) and training dataset (𝜎train). 
These values were further converted into more comprehensive average prediction errors of the Q values 
(EQ) by the following equation:

𝑬𝑸𝒕𝒆𝒔𝒕(𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏) = (𝟏𝟎𝝈𝒕𝒆𝒔𝒕(𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏) − 𝟏𝟎−𝝈𝒕𝒆𝒔𝒕(𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏))/𝟐
(2)

This definition means that 68.27% of QNN‘s are statistically distributed within (1 EQ)× QFDTD’s

2. Example of training

An example of a learning curve [iteration of learning (optimization) v.s. prediction error] is shown in 

Fig. 5 (a), where input area size (Nx, Ny)=(10, 5).  It is seen in the figure that EQ for the training and test 
datasets are initially more than 80%, but decrease to less than 20% after ~2000 learning iterations. It is 
natural that EQtest is always larger than EQtrain because the NN has never learned the test dataset. 
Nevertheless, the minimum EQtest became as small as ~16% within 2105 iterations. The correlation 
between QFDTD and QNN for the training and test datasets (for the case with minimum EQtest) is shown in 
Fig. 5 (b) and (c), respectively. A good correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.92 is obtained even 
for the test dataset. This result demonstrates successful achievement of the generalization ability, at least 
within the parameter space in which the prepared structure distributed (dimensions: 10  5  2, range of 
each displacement: ~a/1000). We noticed that the correlation is better for the lower-Q region, and the 
deviation from QFDTD increases in the higher-Q region. This is because the numbers of training datasets 
are much smaller in the higher-Q region compared to the lower Q region as shown in Fig. 2.

3. Dependence on input area size

Next, we trained the NN by changing the input area size (Nx, Ny), and plotted the minimum EQtest

(obtained during 1 million iterations of the learning steps) as a function of Nx and Ny in Fig 6.  It is seen in 
the figure that the prediction error is higher than 60% when (Nx, Ny) is as small as (2, 5). The prediction 
error decreases as the input area size increases, and the case with (Nx, Ny) = (13, 5) shows the minimum 
prediction error of ~13%, where the correlation coefficients between QFDTD and QNN for the test and 


training datasets  were 0.96 and 0.99, respectively. However, the error increases again for a larger input 
area size. It is considered that the learning process was disturbed when the air holes’ displacements that 
have small correlations with QFDTD were input to the NN because they acted as noise for the learning 
process. This provides a hint: Fig. 6 allows us to pick up the structural parameters that have strong 
correlations with the target value, that is, the parameters that are most effective in the optimization process. 
In this case, we decided to optimize the displacement of airholes in areas with (Nx,Ny) = (13,5) in step 
(VII).

Fig. 5.  Result of training for case where input air hole area (Nx, Ny) = (10, 5). (a) Learning 
curve. (b), (c) Correlation between QFDTD and prediction by neural network (QNN) for  test and 
training dataset, respectively.

Fig. 6.  Dependence of prediction error of Q for test dataset on input air hole area size (Nx,Ny).


D. Structural Optimization by Trained Neural Network

1. Loss function

In step (VII), we performed a structural optimization of the nanocavity using the gradient method, where 

the gradient was calculated by the trained NN. More precisely, we took the advantage of the error back 
propagation method [32] to enable a high-speed calculation of the gradient. The back-propagation method 
is extremely effective to calculate the gradient of the loss with respect to the internal parameters of an NN, 
which were already used in the training process (VI). This method can be also used obtain the gradient of 
loss with respect to the input parameters (i.e., the air holes’ displacements) rapidly. We set the

loss 𝐿′ as |log10 𝑄𝑁𝑁𝑊 − log10 𝑄𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡|

2, and calculated the gradient of 𝐿′ with respect to 𝑑⃗i,j using the 

same framework used for the training process, where 𝑄𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 was set to a very high constant value (1010). 
We also added an artificial loss to penalize large displacements to constrain the air holes from moving far 
away from the parameter space that the NN learned in step (VI), where the prediction error was small:

𝑳′ = |𝒍𝒐𝒈𝟏𝟎 𝑸𝑵𝑵𝑾 − 𝒍𝒐𝒈𝟏𝟎 𝑸𝒕𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕|

𝟐 +

𝟏

𝟐 𝝀′ ∑ |𝒅⃗⃗⃗𝒊,𝒋|

𝟐,
𝒊,𝒋
(3)

where λ′ is a control parameter. Then, we changed the structure (𝑑⃗i,j) step by step to reduce the loss L’ 
based on the Momentum [33] method:

𝒅⃗⃗⃗𝒊,𝒋

𝒏+𝟏 = 𝒅⃗⃗⃗𝒊,𝒋

𝒏 + 𝒗⃗⃗⃗𝒊,𝒋

𝒏
(4-1)

𝒗⃗⃗⃗𝒊,𝒋

𝒏+𝟏 = 𝜸𝒗⃗⃗⃗𝒊,𝒋

𝒏 − 𝒐𝒓𝜵𝑳′ (4-2)

where 𝑑⃗𝑖,𝑗

𝑛 and 𝑣⃗𝑖,𝑗

𝑛 are the displacement and momentum of the air hole at position i,j in the n-th step (𝑣⃗𝑖𝑗

0 =

0), 𝛾 is a control parameter called the momentum damping factor (=0.9), and 𝑜𝑟 is the optimization rate 
(=1  10-5). This process is iterated 106 times. 

2.Optimization curve

Figure 7 shows the evolution of QNN during the optimization for various λ’s from 0.01 to 1, where the 

initial structure 𝑑⃗𝑖,𝑗

0 was set to the structure that had the highest QFDTD [=3.8108, Fig. 3 (a)] among the 

1000 randomly prepared structures in step (III-IV). We also optimized the structure using λ′ = 0.001, but 
the obtained result was identical to the case with λ′ = 0.01. It is seen in the figure that QNN increased from 
the original value after optimization in the cases with λ′ ≤ 0.1. QNN slightly decreased from the original 
value after optimization in the cases with λ′ ≥ 0.5. This is considered because the high additional loss of 

1/2λ′|𝑑⃗𝑖,𝑗 |

2inhibited large deformation from the original structure (Fig. 1). Please note that the origin of 

𝑑⃗i,j is the structure shown in Fig. 1, not the initial structure [Fig. 3 (a)]. We also carried out the optimization 
process with a completely different randomly created initial structure (denoted as fluc46398753) with λ′ =
0.05. The result is plotted in Fig. 7 as indicated by the brown solid line. The initial QNN of this structure
is as low as 1107, but increased to 4.84108 after optimization. The final QNN is almost the same as the 
case started from the structure in Fig. 3 (a) with λ = 0.05, and the obtained structures were also almost 
identical [see Fig. 8 (b) and (f)].


Fig. 7.  Evolution of QNN during the optimization process for different displacement constraint 
parameter λ′. 

3.Validation by FDTD

In step (IX), we calculated the Q factors of the structures obtained in step (VIII) by the 3D-FDTD 

method. The results are summarized in Fig. 8, where the structure after optimization, QFDTD, QNN, electric 
field distribution (Ey), and cavity modal volume (Vcav) are shown. It is seen in the figure that an extremely 
high QFDTD of 1.58109 was obtained with λ′ = 0.1 [Fig. 8(c)]. This QFDTD is one order of magnitude 
higher than the manually optimized two-step heterostructure nanocavity (QFDTD =1.37108, Fig. 1), and 
more than twice of the highest QFDTD of the 2D-PC nanocavity reported so far (QFDTD = 7  108 [11]). The 
successful achievement of such an extremely high QFDTD demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed 
optimization method, where large degrees of freedom of the 2D-PC structure were effectively utilized, as 
can be seen from a comparison between Fig. 1 and Fig. 8. 


Fig. 8. Optimized structures and their Q factors, electric field distributions (Ey), and modal 
volumes (Vcav).


4. DISCUSSION

It is seen in Fig. 8(c) that QNN is less than 1/3 of QFDTD. This is understood from the response of the 

trained NN shown in Fig. 5 (b) and (c), where QNN tends to be lower than QFDTD as QFDTD increases. As 
discussed before, the number of data with QFDTD > 1108 is rare (40 samples among 1000), and there are 
many data with lower QFDTD (Fig. 2) so that the prediction tends to be low for high QFDTD structures. 
Nevertheless, the fact that the structure optimized by this method has a larger QFDTD than the initial 
structure indicates that the direction of the gradient of QFDTD with respect to the air holes’ displacements 
were properly evaluated by the trained NN.

It is also interesting that the highest QFDTD was achieved by constraining the magnitude of the airholes’ 

displacements to some extent by increasing λ′ in the loss function L’ [Eq. (3))]. In Fig. 8(a) to (c), QFDTD
increases from 4.48  108 to 1.58  109 as λ′ increases from 0.01 to 0.1, and the corresponding air holes’ 
displacements decreases. The reason why the structure in Fig. 8(c) shows a much larger QFDTD than that 
of Fig. 8(a) is because the accuracy of the Q prediction becomes lower as displacements of the air holes 
move away from the center of the parameter space that the NN has learned (i.e. 𝑑⃗i,j=0). For the case with 
λ′ >0.5, the magnitudes of the displacements are too constraint to obtain the highest QFDTD, but QFDTD‘s > 
1.39109 were still realized.

Finally, we compare Fig. 8 (b) and (f). Although the initial structures for these two cases are completely 

different (not shown, but can be seen from the large difference between the initial QNN‘s shown in Fig. 7), 
the final optimized structures and their QFDTD’sare almost the same. This result indicates that the structures 
obtained by this method are globally optimized at least within and near the parameter space that the NN
learned.

5. CONCLUSION

We have proposed and demonstrated a novel approach to optimize 2D-PC nanocavities based on deep 

learning of the relationship between the nanocavities’ structures and their Q factors. We have successfully 
trained a neural network consisting of a convolutional layer and three fully connected layers using 1000 
randomly generated nanocavities and their Q factors. After the training, the convolutional neural network 
has become able to predict the Q factors from the displacement patterns of air holes with an error of 13% 
in standard deviation. Structural optimization has been carried out by estimating the gradient of Q with 
respect to the air holes’ displacements using the trained neural network. A nanocavity structure with an 
extremely high theoretical Q factor of 1.58  109, which is 10 times larger than that of the manually 
optimized base structure, and more than twice the highest Q factor ever reported for 2D-PC cavities with 
similar modal volumes, has been successfully obtained. We attribute our unprecedentedly high Q factor 
to the ability of our method to optimize the nanocavity over a parameter space of a size unfeasibly large 
for previous methods based solely on direct calculations. We believe this approach is effective for the 
optimization of various types of 2D-PC nanocavity structures, not only for increasing Q factors but also 
for improving other target characteristics.

Funding. This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI (15H03993) and the New Energy and 
Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO).

Acknowledgment. The authors would like to thank Mr. Koki Saito for his helpful textbook on deep 
learning written in Japanese (Deep learning from scratch, O’Reilly Japan). 


REFERENCES
1. S. Noda, A. Chutinan, and M. Imada, “Trapping and emission of photons by a single defect in a photonic 

bandgap structure,” Nature 407, 608–610 (2000). 

2. Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda, “High-Q photonic nanocavity in a two-dimensional photonic 

crystal,” Nature 425, 944-947 (2003). 

3. B. S. Song, S. Noda, T. Asano, and Y. Akahane, “Ultra-high-Q photonic double-heterostructure nanocavity, 

“ Nat. Mater. 4, 207-210 (2005). 

4. T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda, “Analysis of the experimental Q factors (~ 1 million) of photonic crystal 

nanocavities,” Opt. Express 14(5), 1996–2002 (2006).

5. E. Kuramochi, M. Notomi, S. Mitsugi, A. Shinya, T. Tanabe, and T. Watanabe, “Ultrahigh- Q photonic crystal 

nanocavities realized by the local width modulation of a line defect,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 041112 (2006). 

6. Y. Takahashi, H. Hagino, Y. Tanaka, B. S. Song, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “High-Q nanocavity with a 2-ns photon 

lifetime,“ Opt. Exp. 15, 17206 (2007).

7. E. Kuramochi, H. Taniyama, T. Tanabe, A. Shinya, and M. Notomi, “Ultrahigh-Q two-dimensional photonic 

crystal slab nanocavities in very thin barriers,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 111112 (2008).

8. Z. Han, X. Checoury, D. Néel, S. David, M. El Kurdi, and P. Boucaud, “Optimized design for 2×106 ultra-high Q 

silicon photonic crystal cavities,“ Opt. Commun. 283, 4387-4391 (2010). 

9. H. Sekoguchi, Y. Takahashi, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “Photonic crystal nanocavity with a Q-factor of ~9 

million,” Opt. Express 22, 916-924 (2014). 

10.T. Asano, Y. Ochi, Y. Takahashi, K. Kishimoto, and S. Noda, “Photonic crystal nanocavity with a Q factor 

exceeding eleven million,” Opt. Express 25, no. 3, pp. 1769-1777 (2017).

11.K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, “Momentum space design of high-Q photonic crystal optical cavities,” Opt. 

Express 10, 670–684 (2002).

12.D. Englund, I. Fushman, and J. Vucković, “General recipe for designing photonic crystal cavities,” Opt. 

Express 13, 5961–5975 (2005).

13.Y. Tanaka, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “Design of Photonic Crystal Nanocavity With Q-Factor of ~ 109,” J. Light. 

Technol. 26, pp. 1532–1539 (2008).

14.Y. Lai, S. Pirotta, G. Urbinati, D. Gerace, M. Minkov, V. Savona, A. Badolato, and M. Galli, “Genetically 

designed L3 photonic crystal nanocavities with measured quality factor exceeding one million,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 104, 241101 (2014).

15.T. Nakamura, Y. Takahashi, Y. Tanaka, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “Improvement in the quality factors for 

photonic crystal nanocavities via visualization of the leaky components,” Opt. Express 24, 9541-9549 
(2016). 

16.M. Minkov, V. Savona, and D. Gerace, “Photonic crystal slab cavity simultaneously optimized for ultra-high 

Q / V and vertical radiation coupling,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 131104 (2017). 

17.M. Nomura, N. Kumagai, S. Iwamoto, Y. Ota, and Y. Arakawa, “Laser oscillation in a strongly coupled single 

quantum dot-nanocavity system,” Nat. Phys. 6, 279-283 (2009).

18.S. Kita, K. Nozaki and T. Baba, “Refractive index sensing utilizing a cw photonic crystal nanolaser and its 

array configuration,” Opt. Express 16(11), 8174-8180 (2008).

19.T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, G. Rupper, C. Ell, O. B. Shchekin, and D. G. 

Deppe, “Vacuum Rabi splitting with a single quantum dot in a photonic crystal nanocavity,” Nature 432, 
200-203 (2004). 

20.S. Sun, H. Kim, Z. Luo, G. S. Solomon, E. Waks, “A single-photon switch and transistor enabled by a solid-

state quantum memory”, Science 361, 57-60 (2018).

21.K. Nozaki, A. Shinya, S. Matsuo, Y. Suzaki, T. Segawa, T. Sato, Y. Kawaguchi, R. Takahashi, and M. Notomi, 

“Ultralow-power all-optical RAM based on nanocavities,” Nat. Photon. 6, 248-252 (2012).


22.Y. Takahashi, Y. Inui, M. Chihara, T. Asano, R. Terawaki, and S. Noda, “A micrometre-scale Raman silicon 

laser with a microwatt threshold,” Nature 498, 470-474 (2013). 

23.Y. Tanaka, J. Upham, T. Nagashima, T. Sugiya, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “Dynamic control of the Q factor in a 

photonic crystal nanocavity,” Nat. Mater. 6, 862-865 (2007). 

24.Y. Sato, Y. Tanaka, J. Upham, Y. Takahashi, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “Strong coupling between distant 

photonic nanocavities and its dynamic control,“ Nat. Photon. 6, 56-61 (2012). 

25.R. Konoike, H. Nakagawa, M. Nakadai, T. Asano, Y. Tanaka and S. Noda, “On-demand transfer of trapped 

photons on a chip,“ Science Advances 2, e1501690 (2016).

26.Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning”, Nature 521, 436-444  (2015).
27.Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jacklel, “Handwritten 

Digit Recognition with a Back-Propagation Networks,” in Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, pp. 396-404 (1990).

28.A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural 

Networks,” in Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1097-1105, (2012).

29.X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio: “Deep Sparse Rectifier Neural Networks,” in Proceedings of Artificial 

Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 315-323 (2011).

30.N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A Simple Way to 

Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, pp. 1929–1958 
(2014).

31.A. Krogh and J. A. Hertz, “A Simple Weight Decay Can Improve Generalization,” in Proceedings of Advances 

in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 950–957 (1991). 

32.D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning representations by back-propagating errors,” 

Nature 323, 533–536 (1986).

33.B. T. Polyak, “Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods,” USSR Computational 

Mathematics and Mathematical Physics 4, 791-803 (1964).


