1 

 

 

Abstract – Carrier Selective (CS) Silicon solar cells are 
increasingly explored as a low cost alternative to PN junction 
Silicon solar cells. While the recent trends on power conversion 
efficiency are encouraging, the temperature coefficient and hence 
the power output under elevated temperatures are not well 
explored for such solar cells. Here, we address this issue through 
detailed numerical simulations to explore the influence of 
interface and material parameters on the temperature coefficient. 
Our results indicate that irrespective of the interface quality, the 
temperature coefficient of CS solar cells improves with an 
increase in band discontinuities. Interestingly, contrary to the 
trends related to efficiency, our results indicate that the 
temperature coefficient of CS solar cells is more critically 
affected by the interface quality of the minority carrier 
extraction layer than the majority carrier extraction layer. These 
insights have important implications towards the choice of 
optimal material and processing conditions for Si based CS solar 
cells.  

 
 
Index Terms—Temperature coefficient, semiconductor device 

modelling, photovoltaic cells 

 

I. 
INTRODUCTION 

Si based CS solar cells are considered as a good candidate 

to challenge the market dominance of conventional PN 
junction based solar cells. The perceived competitiveness 
stems from a few advantages like  – (a) large band gap 
materials used as CS layers provides carrier selectivity 
through appropriate band offsets[1][2], (b) it reduces the 
parasitic absorption as compared to the heavily doped emitter 
layer in PN junction solar cells or doped a-Si in HIT solar 
cells[3], (c) the intrinsic doping density of many CS 
materials[4]–[6] could be significant enough to eliminate the 
need for any additional intentional doping process, and (d)  
possibility of low temperature deposition processes for CS 
layers[6]–[11]. These aspects could lead to reduced thermal 
budget and hence lower the cost of fabrication - which 
motivates the significant recent research interest in CS based 
solar cells. Accordingly, different materials such as TiO2[4], 
[5], 
[12], 
a:Si[3], 
poly-Si[13], 
LiFx[7], 
KFx[8], 

PEDOT:PSS[6],  MoOx[9]–[11], [14],V2O5[11], and WO3[11] 
have been extensively studied. Similarly, there are numerous 
simulations and analytical studies to understand the working 
of these types of solar cells [15], [16][17]. However, all these 
studies were at standard test conditions which could be 

 

The authors are with Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 

400076, 
India 
(email: 
nithin@ee.iitb.ac.in; 
aldrinantony@iitb.ac.in; 

prnair@ee.iitb.ac.in) 
 

significantly different from the actual conditions at the place 
of deployment. The eventual power output from a panel at 
actual conditions could be significantly different from that at 
STC due to the strong dependence of efficiency on 
temperature. In this regard, the temperature coefficient of a 
solar cell is often treated as a critical parameter to ascertain 
and compare the performance of various technologies. Indeed, 
the temperature coefficient of PN junction[18], [19] and HIT 
solar cells[20] are well explored. However, such a study has 
not been reported yet on CS solar cells. Since diverse 
materials are being investigated as CS layers, a-priori 
knowledge of temperature coefficient as a function of material 
parameters would be immensely beneficial. 

 
In this manuscript, the temperature coefficient for CS based 

solar cells is established through detailed modeling and is then 
compared with the well-established HIT and PERC solar cell 
technologies. For this, we first develop an analytical model to 
predict the functional dependence of temperature coefficient 
on important parameters like band discontinuity and interface 
quality (Section II). These predictions are then validated 
through detailed numerical simulations (Section III). Our 
results indicate that the temperature coefficient is limited 
by Voc for smaller band discontinuities and it follows the trend 
of  FF for 
larger 
magnitudes 
of 
band 
discontinuity. 

Additionally, unlike efficiency[17], temperature coefficient of 
CS based solar cells is dominated by the interface quality of 
the minority carrier collection junction. Below we first 
develop an analytical model to predict the temperature 
coefficient. 

II. 
ANALYTICAL MODEL 

 

Figure 1 shows band level alignments of Si heterojunction 

solar cell with CS layers (the material parameters are provided 
in the appendix). ESL and HSL in the figure denote the 
electron and hole selective layers, respectively. The large 
valence band offset at ESL/Si interface blocks the transport of 
holes from Si to ESL. However, the smaller conduction band 
offset at the same interface aids the transport of electrons to 
ESL. Note that a positive value for band offset indicates that 
the photo-generated carriers need to overcome a barrier to 
reach the corresponding transport layer, where as a negative 
value for the offset indicates that the carrier injection from 
transport layer to silicon is limited by a potential barrier. 
Further there could be imperfections in the interface in the 
form of traps. Similarly, we assume that the Si/HSL interface 
to be perfect electron blocking with a smaller valence band 
offset that aids hole collection. Here we explicitly consider the 
temperature coefficient variations of such solar cells as a 

Nithin Chatterji, Aldrin Antony, and Pradeep R. Nair

Temperature coefficient of Silicon based carrier 

selective solar cells


2 

 

function of transport barrier and interface trap density. As 
such, temperature coefficient could also be influenced by 
parameters like the effective doping and thickness of carrier 
selective layers, nature of metal or TCO contact with the 
carrier selective layers, etc. With the aim of developing a 
coherent description of the various effects, here we make a 
few simplifying assumptions – (a) the contact layers are 
assumed to be doped, (b) the metal or TCO contact with 
selective layers are assumed to be ohmic in nature, (c) over the 
barrier transport is assumed as the dominant transport 
mechanism at Si/CS layer interface, and (d) uniform density of 
traps at Si/CS layer interface. With these assumptions we first 
develop an analytical model to predict the device performance. 
Later, results from detailed numerical simulations (self-
consistent solution of Poisson and carrier continuity equations) 
are provided to further refine analytical predictions. The 
parameters used in this study are listed in appendix A. 

 

 

 

   
 
 
The temperature coefficient of the efficiency is defined as, 

TCη =
1

η(STC)

∂η
∂T,                                           (1) 

where STC denotes the standard test conditions, which 

assumes T=298K in this manuscript. The efficiency of a solar 
cell, in turn, depends on  the open circuit potential (Voc), short 
circuit current (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF)[21]. Accordingly, a 
first order estimate for TCη  can be obtained in terms of the 
individual temperature coefficients as given below  

 

1

η(STC) 

∂η
∂T =
1

Voc(STC) 

∂Voc
∂T +
1

Jsc(STC) 

∂Jsc
∂T +
1

FF(STC) 

∂FF
∂T . 

(2) 

 
Here the terms in the RHS denote temperature coefficients 

of Voc (TCVoc), Jsc (TCJsc), and FF (TCFF), respectively. Note 
that each of these temperature coefficients is defined against 
the respective parameter at STC. As such, good estimates for 
the temperature coefficient of efficiency can be obtained 
through detailed knowledge about the temperature variation of 
parameters like Voc, Jsc, and FF. With this aim, and to develop 
quantitative insights, we first explore the effect ESL/Si 
interface parameters on  TCη with ideal conditions assumed 
for Si/HSL interface (i.e., zero band offset for holes, perfect 
electron blocking, and lack of any interface trap states).  

   a ) Effect of ΔEc on 

1

Voc

∂Voc

∂T : It is well known that the 

temperature coefficient of solar cell is dominated by the 
temperature sensitivity of  Voc[22]. For a solar cell the 
maximum achievable Voc is dictated by the detailed balance of 
carrier generation with various recombination mechanisms. 
The asymptotic limits of Voc for a CS solar cell in the presence 
of interface traps was recently shown as [17] 

Voc,max = kT

q ln (GτbNA

ni

2
),                           (3) 

Voc,min = 2kT

q ln (
2GwSi

cnsDitEg,Sini

).                  (4) 

Here, Voc,max and  Voc,min are the maximum and minimum 
values of Voc respectively, G is the carrier generation rate in 
Silicon, τb is the effective bulk life time in Silicon (the 
combined 
effects 
of 
SRH, 
radiative, 
and 
Auger 

recombinations), NA is the acceptor doping in Silicon, ni is the  
intrinsic carrier concentration in Silicon, Dit is the interface 
defect density at the ESL/Si interface and Eg,Si is the bandgap 
of Silicon. Note that Voc,max  is influenced only by the bulk 
lifetime while Voc,min is entirely dictated by the interface 
recombination. 
Although 
eq. 
(4) 
considers 
interface 

recombination at Si/ESL junction only, it could be easily 
modified to account for the recombination in Si/HSL junction 
as well[17].  
 
Equations (3) and (4) allow us to estimate the asymptotic 
limits for temperature coefficient of Voc. Accordingly, the 
maximum and minimum values of  TCVoc is determined 
as −0.19%/℃  and −0.37%/℃, 
respectively 
for 
typical 

values of one sun generation with the Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1 
and τb = 1ms. The values for radiative and auger  coefficients 
are given in Appendix A.  The dominant temperature 
dependence of both the limits is through ni

−2 which has an 

exponential relation with temperature (ni

2 ~e−Eg/KT).  Hence 

the temperature coefficient, 

1

Voc(STC)

∂Voc

∂T , is negative. The 

smaller the magnitude of temperature coefficient for Voc, the 
better is its performance at high temperature.  
 
Although the above discussion allows us to estimate the 
asymptotic limits of  TCVoc, it still lacks quantitative 
information of the functional dependence of  TCVoc on various 
parameters like band offset ΔEc, interface state density Dit, etc. 
To obtain the same, we rely on the modified analytical model 
for Voc reported in ref.[17]. The same model indicates 
that Voc varies almost symmetrically with ΔEc, with the 
minimum at ΔEc=0. This is due to the fact that interface 
recombination maximizes under such conditions. The model 
also indicates that Voc improves for large ΔEc due to the 
reduction in interface recombination.  Further, the same model 
anticipates the variation with parameters like Dit, NA, εESL, etc. 
 
 Figure 2(a) shows the variation of Voc with temperature as 
function of band discontinuity ΔEc between ESL and Si 

Fig. 1: Energy level alignments of a Si based carrier 
selective solar cell. Refer Table 1 for simulation 
parameters.


3 

 

with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1. As expected, the Voc decreases 
with temperature due to its strong dependence of ni.  
 

 

 

z 

 
 
 

 
 
Figure 2(b) shows the variation in the temperature coefficient 
of  Voc with interface trap density, Dit, and ΔEc. In general, the 
temperature coefficient degrades with an increase in Dit as the 
contribution due to interface recombination becomes 
significant. 
However, 
for 
large 
ΔEc , the 
interface 

recombination decreases due to enhanced field effect 
passivation of traps which results in an increase in 
both Voc and TCVoc.  

 
b) Effect of ΔEc on Jsc  and FF:  Jsc depends on the number 

of absorbed photons in c-Si bulk and hence increases with 
temperature as Si bandgap decreases with temperature. This 
leads to a positive temperature coefficient of 0.0156%/0C 
which is very small compared to the TCVoc reported in 
previous section. If we further account for the fact that the 
parasitic absorption in the ESL also increases with 
temperature, then the effect of temperature on Jsc is expected 
to decrease further. As this effect is insignificant relative to 
that due to  Voc, we neglect the effect of band gap variation 
on Jsc and assume that the effective photo-carrier generation 
rate is invariant with temperature.  
While the net carrier generation rate could be rather 
insensitive to temperature variation, the charge collection 
efficiency could show strong temperature dependence and 
hence influence Jsc. Over the barrier transport of carriers 
across the ESL/Si junction is a dominant mechanism for 
collection of photo-generated carriers which might introduce 
additional such temperature dependence on Jsc. At short circuit 
conditions, the interface recombination is negligible and the 

interface 
carrier 
density 
is 
given 
as ns~

ni

2

NA e+

qψSi

kT , 

where ψSi is the band bending in Si at ESL/Si interface. 

Hence, the current through the ESL, which is Jsc, is given as  
[17] 
 

Jsc ∝ nse−ΔEc

kT .                               (5) 

 

The above equation can be conveniently interpreted in 

terms of the supply of electrons ( ns on the RHS) and the 

factor e−ΔEc

kT   denotes the probability of carriers crossing the 

barrier due to band offset (i.e., for ΔEc > 0.  Otherwise, the 
current will be limited by the diffusion of electrons from bulk 
to Si/ESL interface). 
   It has been recently shown that the band bending in Si (ψSi) 
at the Si/ETL interface increases with increase in ΔEc [17]. 
Accordingly, the  ns increases with increase in ΔEc and 
compensates for the reduction in the probability of crossing 
the barrier (see eq. 5) and hence Jsc remains invariant till 
strong inversion happens[17]. So, the temperature coefficient 
will be negligible for small  ΔEc . However, for large  ΔEc , 
strong inversion conditions arise at Si interface and hence 
the ns will no longer increase with  ΔEc .  This results in a 
decrease in Jsc for large ΔEc , as predicted by eq. 5.  However, 
for such cases, the probability of carriers crossing the barrier 
increases with temperature and as a result Jsc also improves 
with temperature (see eq. 5). Hence, the temperature 
coefficient for large band offsets will be positive.   
 FF, which is a measure of collection efficiency at maximum 
power point, was shown in ref. [17] to follow the trends 
of Voc for small ΔEc and Jsc for large ΔEc. Accordingly, for 
small ΔEc  the temperature coefficient of FF will be 
proportional to the temperature coefficient of  Voc. However, 
for large ΔEc, the  FF follows the trend of current at maximum 
power point similar to that of  Jsc. Accordingly, the FF 
improves with temperature due to the increase in probability 
of carriers crossing the barrier,  and hence its temperature 
coefficient will be positive. 
  

Finally, the temperature coefficient of efficiency which is 

the sum of the temperature coefficients of Voc, Jsc and FF is 
significantly affected by the Voc for lower band discontinuities. 
For these cases, the FF too follows Voc trends. For larger band 
discontinuity (> 0.4eV) the temperature coefficient is dictated 
by FF, as over the barrier transport of carriers at maximum 
power point increases with temperature. The analysis in this 
section predicts that temperature coefficient of efficiency 
improves with increase in ΔEc. Interestingly, the temperature 
coefficient might become positive for large ΔEc, however, the 
overall efficiency could still be lower than the corresponding 
values for small ΔEc.  Therefore, there is an optimal band 
offset considering both the tradeoff between efficiency and 
temperature coefficient, which will be explored in detail using 
numerical simulations.   

 

III. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS 

 

In the previous section, we used the analytical model to 

explore the variation of temperature coefficient as a function 
of band discontinuity and interface quality. The model predicts 

Fig. 2: Variation of Voc with ΔEc , temperature and Dit.
Part (a) shows the variation of Voc with temperature 
for Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1. Part (b) shows the variation of 
temperature coefficient with Dit. 


4 

 

that TCη closely follows the features of TCVoc. In this section 
we discuss the results of detailed numerical simulations. 
Current-Voltage characteristics of the modeled device was 
obtained through self-consistent solution of Poisson and drift 
diffusion equations [23]. From the obtained characteristics, 
temperature coefficient of Voc, Jsc, FF, and efficiency were 
estimated. Note the TCη is estimated directly through eq. (1) 
and as such the numerical simulations do not rely on the 
simplifying assumptions made in the derivation of the 
analytical model (for example, validity of eq. (2), and also see 
the discussion on FF in previous section) and hence can be 
used as a test bed for analytical predictions. As before, 
initially we study the effect of conduction band offset ΔEc at 
the ESL/Si interface on the temperature coefficient while 
keeping Si/HSL interface perfect (ΔEv = 0eV and Dit = 0). 
The interface trap density at the ESL/c-Si interface is assumed 
to be uniform as in the analytical model. Later the effect of 
band offsets at Si/HSL interface and the combined effect of 
both the offsets are also discussed. The list of parameters used 
in simulations is given in Appendix A.  

The influence of band offset on the interface recombination 

is highlighted in Fig. 3. Here we consider two cases of ΔEc 
and the subsequent effect on interface recombination. A 
comparison of parts (a) and (b) of Fig. 3 indicates that the 
band bending in Si near Si/ESL interface increases with ΔEc. 
Accordingly, the corresponding minority carrier density 
decreases with an increase in band offset (see parts (c) and (d) 
of Fig. 3).As a result, the interface recombination reduces and 
hence Voc increases as ΔEc increases. Further, the increase in 
minority carrier density with temperature is also influenced 
by ΔEc. The increase in minority carrier density with 
temperature  leads to an increase in interface recombination 
and hence reduces Voc. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 shows the variation of normalized performance 

metrics with temperature and ΔEc.  Normalization is done with 

respect to the corresponding value (same ΔEc) at STC 
conditions and then multiplying by 100. Figure 4a shows that 
the slope for the normalized Voc is more for  ΔEc = 0 and that 
the slope decreases as the magnitude of ΔEc  increases.  This is 
expected from the analytical model on Voc and also supported 
by the simulation results provided in Fig. 3. For small  ΔEc,  
the Voc is dominated by interface recombination whose 
contribution decreases as  ΔEc increases. Accordingly, 
the Voc degradation 
decreases 
as 
 ΔEc 
increases. 

Normalized Jsc (Fig. 4b) remains invariant with ΔEc for the 
temperature range under consideration due to (a) the 
assumption of a constant generation rate, and (b) the fact that 
over the barrier transport of carriers is yet to be significantly 
influenced by the band offsets – these arguments are 
consistent with those   provided in the analytical section. 
Normalized FF (Fig. 4c) follows the trends of Voc for lower 
values of ΔEc. For  ΔEc = 0.5eV, the FF increases with 
temperature initially and then saturates. This rather surprising 
result could be understood as follows: For large  ΔEc, the 
current at maximum power point conditions at STC is 
dominated by over the barrier transport limitations due to  ΔEc 
band offset. An increase in temperature results in larger over 
the barrier transport, which leads to better charge collection 
efficiency and hence the FF. For still higher temperatures the 
increase in collection efficiency is counter balanced by the 
decrease in Voc and this result in the saturation of FF (see Fig. 
4c). While the trends indicate that it is beneficial to have 
large ΔEc from the perspective of temperature coefficient, we 
stress that the efficiency is also a function of ΔEc (see inset in 
Fig. 4d for effect of ΔEc on efficiency at STC with Dit =
1012cm−2eV−1). Accordingly, maximum power output at 
higher temperature could still be given by an optimum ΔEc. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 5 shows the temperature coefficient for all 

performance parameters as a function of ΔEc and Dit. The 

Fig. 4: The effect of the ΔEc and temperature on normalized 
performance metrics- (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, and  (d) 
efficiency of CS Si solar cells for Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1. The 
labels 
represent 
ΔEc = −0.6eV,−0.3eV,0eV, 0.3eV,

0 and 0.5eV. The inset in (d) shows the effect of ΔEc on 
efficiency with Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1.  

Fig. 3: The effect of ΔEc on band bending and carrier 
densities at ESL/c-Si interface with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1

(numerical simulations, under illumination). Parts (a) and 
(b) 
show 
the 
energy 
band 
diagram 

for ΔEc = 0eV and ΔEc = 0.3eV, respectively, 
at 
short 

circuit conditions. Parts (c, d) show the variation in interface 
carrier densities ns , ps with bias and temperature. 


5 

 

trends in Fig. 5a are broadly similar to that in the analytical 
model for temperature coefficient of  Voc (see Fig.2b). As 
explained already in the analytical section (see eq.4 and Fig. 
3), Voc and its temperature coefficient is indeed limited by the 
interface traps when ΔEc is low. Further, for larger values 
of ΔEc, Voc improves due to the field effect passivation of the 
interface traps thus improving its temperature coefficient as 
well. As explained before, this improvement in passivation is 
due to the increase in band bending with increase in 
ΔEc between ESL/Si and the corresponding decrease in the 
minority carrier concentration at the interface. 

  

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The temperature coefficient of  Jsc (Fig. 5b) at small  ΔEc is 

zero due to (a) insignificant variation in net carrier generation 
rate, and (b) the over the barrier transport is unaffected for the 
range of  ΔEc under consideration (as predicted by the 
analytical model). The trends for the temperature coefficient 
of FF (Fig. 5c) are similar to temperature coefficient of Voc for 
most values of ΔEc. However, for large values of ΔEc, the 
current at maximum power point increases with temperature, 
which leads to an improvement in TCFF. Figure 5d shows the 
variation of temperature coefficient of efficiency which 
follows the trends of Voc and FF. The same figure also 
highlights a comparison of the temperature coefficient of CS 
solar cells with that of state of the art PERC and HIT solar 
cells[20].  It is evident that unless the band discontinuity is 
small and the interface quality is very bad, temperature 
coefficient of CS solar cells can be better than PERC solar 
cells (of course, the effect of HTL/Si interface should also be 
accounted for a proper comparison – which will be attempted 
in later sections). Further, HIT cells are almost universally 
better than both the CS as well as the PERC cells. However, 
we note that for very large  ΔEc, CS solar cells show 
better TCη than even HIT cells. This is a regime where the 
charge collection efficiency and hence the FF is limited by 
over the barrier transport. So, although the TCη is better, the 

efficiency of such cells is still much lower than that of 
comparable HIT cells.   

The previous section detailed the influence of minority 

carrier extraction interface on the temperature coefficients. 
Here, we extend the same to majority carrier extraction 
interface (i.e., c-Si/HTL). The effects of temperature and band 
discontinuity (i.e.,  ΔEv ) at c-Si/HSL interface on the 
normalized solar cell performance metrics are shown in Fig.6. 
As before, here we assume ideal conditions at ESL/c-Si 
interface (i.e., zero band offset and no traps). While the trends 
in Voc degradation with temperature (Fig. 6a) are somewhat 
similar to the results for minority carrier collection (as 
discussed in Fig. 4a), the trends for Jsc variation with 
temperature is distinctly different (i.e., compare Fig. 6b with 
Fig. 4b). Specifically, the results indicate a positive 
temperature coefficient for small ΔEv. As a result, the FF (Fig. 
6c) and efficiency (Fig. 6d) trends are different compared to 
Fig. 4. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The trends in Jsc can be explained by using Fig. 7. Parts (a) 

and (b) of Fig. 7 indicate the E-B diagrams for   ΔEv = 0 eV 
and for   ΔEv = 0.2 eV, respectively. For these two cases, the 
variation in majority carrier density (ps) and the net interface 
recombination are plotted in parts (c) and (d). Fig 7c shows 
that for  ΔEv = 0 eV, the interface recombination remains 
unaffected by the temperature and that the psincreases with 
temperature. This improves the collection efficiency and 
hence leads to an increase in Jsc with temperature as observed 
in Fig. 6c for ΔEv = 0 eV. However, Fig. 7d shows that the 
interface recombination increases with temperature and leads 
to a decrease in ps for  ΔEv = 0.2 eV. This increase in 
interface recombination with temperature coupled with the 
decrease in ps contributes to a reduction in Jsc and hence the 
temperature coefficient for Jsc  is negative at higher band 
discontinuities.  

 

Fig. 5: The effect of the ΔEc on temperature coefficient of 
parameters - (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, and  (d) efficiency for 
different Dit(cm−2eV–1) values. The trends are broadly 
consistent with the analytical model for Voc . FF follows the 
trends of Voc for low values of ΔEc and for high values 
of ΔEc it increases with temperature due to the increase in 
current at maximum power point. 

Fig. 6: The effect of the temperature on normalized 
performance metrics - (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, and  (d) 
efficiency of CS Si solar cells for Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1.  
The labels represent ΔEv = 0eV,0.1eV,0.2eV and 0.3eV. 
The inset in (d) shows the effect of ΔEv on efficiency 
with Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1.  


6 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 shows the effect of c-Si/HSL interface quality 

(ΔEv, Dit) on temperature coefficient of parameters for CS 
solar 
cell. 
As 
the 
band 
offset 
increases, 
interface 

recombination decreases and hence the  TCVoc improves. 
These trends are similar to the results shown in Fig. 5a. 
However, the temperature coefficient for Jsc (see Fig. 8b) 
shows significant variation at low values of ΔEv. The 
difference between the corresponding curves in Fig. 5b is due 
to lower band bending at the PP+ junction between HSL and 
Si for low values of ΔEv. Figure 8c and 8d show the variation 
in temperature coefficient of FF and efficiency respectively. 
We find that TCη broadly follows the trends of TCVoc. 
However, for small ΔEv, the trends are influenced by 
the TCJsc as well. The comparison with state of the art PERC 
and HIT cells gives similar inferences as in Fig. 5d.  

The combined effect of interface non-idealities at ESL/Si 

and HSL/Si interfaces on temperature coefficient is shown in 
Fig. 9. Here parts (a) and (b) show the variation in temperature 
coefficient when ΔEc = ΔEv = 0eV and ΔEc = ΔEv = 0.3eV, 
respectively. For a given interface trap density, the lower band 
discontinuities result in a larger temperature coefficient. 
Curiously, the same results indicate that the quality of 
minority carrier extraction layer interface with Silicon is more 
critical for temperature coefficient of the device than the 
quality of majority carrier extraction layer interface with 
Silicon. Finally, we note that the effect of interface traps is not 
cumulative 
on 
the 
temperature 
coefficient, 
i.e., 
for 

same Dit the sum of temperature coefficients with traps at only 
one interface (ESL/Si or HSL/Si) is more than the temperature 
coefficient with traps at both interfaces. Comparison with the 
state of the art cells indicates that while HIT cells may 
continue to boast excellent temperature coefficients, well 
designed CS solar cells might perform better than PERC cells. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 

To summarize, here we addressed the temperature 

coefficient of Si based CS layers as a function of the band 
discontinuity and interface quality. Through an analytical 
model we explored the functional dependence of temperature 
coefficient on such material and interface properties. These 
predications 
were 
validated 
using detailed numerical 

simulations. The results show that the temperature coefficient 
improves with band discontinuity if the interface quality is 
imperfect. Further for larger band discontinuity the 
temperature coefficient improves due to the increase in over 
the barrier transport with temperature irrespective of the 
interface quality. In addition, our results show that the 

Fig. 9: The effect of traps at both the HSL and the ESL 
interface with c-Si on temperature coefficient for (a) ΔEc =
ΔEv = 0eV and (b) ΔEc = ΔEv = 0.3eV. The quality of 
minority carrier extraction layer interface with Silicon is 
more critical for temperature coefficient of the device than 
the quality of majority carrier extraction layer interface with 
Silicon.

Fig. 7: The effect of ΔEv on band bending and carrier 
densities at c-Si/HSL interface with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1

(numerical simulations, under illumination). Parts (a) and 
(b) 
show 
the 
energy 
band 
diagram 

for ΔEv = 0eV and ΔEv = 0.2eV, respectively, at short 
circuit conditions. Parts (c, d) show the variation in 
normalized interface carrier density ps and normalized 
interface recombination with temperature at short circuit 
conditions for ΔEv = 0eV and ΔEv = 0.2eV, respectively. 

Fig. 8: The effect of ΔEv on temperature coefficient of 
performance metrics - (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, and  (d) 
efficiency in the presence of interface traps. Due to the 
variation in Jsc the curves for efficiency are different from the 
corresponding curves for ΔEc.


7 

 

passivation quality at the minority carrier layer interface is 
more critical than the majority layer interface and that the 
temperature coefficient is not cumulative, i.e., the temperature 
coefficient of a structure with traps at both interfaces is better 
than the sum of the temperature coefficient of separate device 
structures with traps being present at only one interface (either 
ESL/Si or HSL/Si). Finally our results indicate that with 
appropriate design, CS solar cells can achieve temperature 
coefficients better than PERC solar cells – although they 
might still be inferior to HIT solar cells. These interesting 
insights could be of broad interest to the community towards 
the optimization of process and material considerations for Si 
based CS solar cells.  

V. 
APPENDIX 

A. Parameters used in simulations: The band 

offset ΔEc at the ESL/c-Si interface is varied from −0.6eV 
to +0.6eV, while the barrier for holes is kept fixed (2.28eV). 
Accordingly, in our simulations the ESL band gap varies 
from 2.8eV to 4eV, which is comparable to the band gap of 
TiO2 (~3.4eV). At the c-Si/HSL interface, ΔEv is varied 
from −0.1eV to +0.4eV, while the barrier for electrons is 
kept fixed (2.28eV). Correspondingly, the HSL bandgap 
varies from 3.3eV to 3.8eV. For ease of analysis, we have 
used same dielectric constant (6.2) for both ESL and HSL. 
We consider uniform distribution of traps at the interface of 
CS layer and Si. The capture cross section of these traps was 
assumed as 10−16cm−2. The rest of the parameters are 
provided in the table below. 

 

Parameter
c-Si
ESL
HSL

Nc(cm-3)
3.23 × 1019
2.5 × 1020
2.5 × 1020

Nv(cm-3)
1.83 × 1019
2.5 × 1020
2.5 × 1020

Mobility(

𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1 (n, p))

1417, 470.5
20, 2
20, 2

τ SRH (s)
10-3
10-6
10-6

Radiative 

Recombination 
coefficient (𝑐𝑚3𝑠−1) 
[24]

1.1 × 10−14

Auger Coefficients 

(𝑐𝑚6𝑠−1) (n,p) [25]

1 × 10−31,

0.79 × 10−31

Doping(cm-3)n/p
p - 1017
n - 1017
p - 1017

 
 
 

Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge Center of Excellence in 

Nanoelectronics (CEN) and National Center for Photovoltaic Research and 
Education (NCPRE), IIT Bombay for computational facilities. 

 

References 

[1] 
J. C. Bean, “Silicon-based semiconductor heterostructures: column 
IV bandgap engineering,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 571–587, 
Apr. 1992. 

[2] 
H. Kroemer, “Heterostructure devices: A device physicist looks at 
interfaces,” Surf. Sci., vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 543–576, Sep. 1983. 

[3] 
S. de Wolf, A. Descoeudres, Z. C. Holman, C. Ballif, S. De Wolf, 
A. Descoeudres, Z. C. Holman, and C. Ballif, “High-efficiency 
Silicon Heterojunction Solar Cells: A Review,” green, vol. 2. pp. 7–

24, Mar. 2012. 

[4] 
S. Avasthi, W. E. McClain, G. Man, A. Kahn, J. Schwartz, and J. C. 
Sturm, “Hole-blocking titanium-oxide/silicon heterojunction and its 
application to photovoltaics,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 102, no. 20, p. 
203901, May 2013. 

[5] 
K. A. Nagamatsu, S. Avasthi, G. Sahasrabudhe, G. Man, J. Jhaveri, 
A. H. Berg, J. Schwartz, A. Kahn, S. Wagner, and J. C. Sturm, 
“Titanium dioxide/silicon hole-blocking selective contact to enable 
double-heterojunction crystalline silicon-based solar cell,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 106, no. 12, p. 123906, Mar. 2015. 

[6] 
D. Zielke, A. Pazidis, F. Werner, and J. Schmidt, “Organic-silicon 
heterojunction solar cells on n-type silicon wafers: The 
BackPEDOT concept,” Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 131, pp. 
110–116, Dec. 2014. 

[7] 
J. Bullock, P. Zheng, Q. Jeangros, M. Tosun, M. Hettick, C. M. 
Sutter-Fella, Y. Wan, T. Allen, D. Yan, D. Macdonald, S. De Wolf, 
A. Hessler-Wyser, A. Cuevas, and A. Javey, “Lithium Fluoride 
Based Electron Contacts for High Efficiency n-Type Crystalline 
Silicon Solar Cells,” Adv. Energy Mater., vol. 6, no. 14, p. 1600241, 
Jul. 2016. 

[8] 
J. Bullock, M. Hettick, J. Geissbühler, A. J. Ong, T. Allen, C. M. 
Sutter-Fella, T. Chen, H. Ota, E. W. Schaler, S. De Wolf, C. Ballif, 
A. Cuevas, and A. Javey, “Efficient silicon solar cells with dopant-
free asymmetric heterocontacts,” Nat. Energy, vol. 1, p. 15031, Jan. 
2016. 

[9] 
B. Macco, M. F. J. Vos, N. F. W. Thissen, A. A. Bol, and W. M. M. 
Kessels, “Low-temperature atomic layer deposition of MoOx for 
silicon heterojunction solar cells,” Phys. status solidi – Rapid Res. 
Lett., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 393–396, Jul. 2015. 

[10] 
M. Bivour, J. Temmler, H. Steinkemper, and M. Hermle, 
“Molybdenum and tungsten oxide: High work function wide band 
gap contact materials for hole selective contacts of silicon solar 
cells,” Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 142, pp. 34–41, Nov. 
2015. 

[11] 
L. G. Gerling, S. Mahato, A. Morales-Vilches, G. Masmitja, P. 
Ortega, C. Voz, R. Alcubilla, and J. Puigdollers, “Transition metal 
oxides as hole-selective contacts in silicon heterojunctions solar 
cells,” Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 145, pp. 109–115, Feb. 
2016. 

[12] 
T. G. Allen, J. Bullock, Q. Jeangros, C. Samundsett, Y. Wan, J. Cui, 
A. Hessler-Wyser, S. De Wolf, A. Javey, and A. Cuevas, “A Low 
Resistance Calcium/Reduced Titania Passivated Contact for High 
Efficiency Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells,” Adv. Energy Mater., vol. 
7, no. 12, p. 1602606, Jun. 2017. 

[13] 
B. Nemeth, D. L. Young, M. R. Page, V. LaSalvia, S. Johnston, R. 
Reedy, and P. Stradins, “Polycrystalline silicon passivated tunneling 
contacts for high efficiency silicon solar cells,” Journal of Materials 
Research, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 671–681, Mar.2016. 

[14] 
J. Geissbühler, J. Werner, S. Martin de Nicolas, L. Barraud, A. 
Hessler-Wyser, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, A. Tomasi, B. Niesen, S. 
De Wolf, and C. Ballif, “22.5% efficient silicon heterojunction solar 
cell with molybdenum oxide hole collector,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 
107, no. 8, p. 81601, Aug. 2015. 

[15] 
R. Islam, K. N. Nazif, and K. C. Saraswat, “Si Heterojunction Solar 
Cells: A Simulation Study of the Design Issues,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 4788–4795, Dec. 2016. 

[16] 
H. Imran, T. M. Abdolkader, and N. Z. Butt, “Carrier-Selective 
NiO/Si and TiO2/Si Contacts for Silicon Heterojunction Solar 
Cells,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 3584–
3590, Sep. 2016. 

[17] 
N. Chatterji, A. Antony, and P. R. Nair, “Interface-Dependent 
Efficiency Tradeoff in Si-Based Carrier-Selective Solar Cells,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 2509–2516, Jun. 
2018. 

[18] 
C. Wu and J. Chen, “Temperature coefficients of the open‐circuit 
voltage of p‐n junction solar cells,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 
3852–3858, Jan. 1982. 

[19] 
S. Ponce-Alcántara, J. P. Connolly, G. Sánchez, J. M. Míguez, V. 
Hoffmann, and R. Ordás, “A Statistical Analysis of the Temperature 
Coefficients of Industrial Silicon Solar Cells,” Energy Procedia, 
vol. 55, pp. 578–588, 2014. 

 [20] 
Pansonic Corporation, “HIT Photovoltaic Module,” Brochure, 2017. 
[Online]. Available: 
https://panasonic.net/ecosolutions/solar/download/pdf/HIT_N330_N
325_Brochure.pdf. 

Table. 1: Parameters used in numerical simulations.


8 

 

[21] 
J. Nelson, The Physics of solar cells, 1st ed. London, UK: Imperial 
College Press, 2003. 

[22] 
M. A. Green, “General temperature dependence of solar cell 
performance and implications for device modelling,” Prog. 
Photovoltaics Res. Appl., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 333–340, Aug. 2003. 

[23] 
“Synopsys.” Synopsys TCAD, 2013. 

[24] 
W. Gerlach, H. Schlangenotto, and H. Maeder, “On the radiative 
recombination rate in silicon,” Phys. status solidi, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 
277–283, Sep. 1972. 

[26] 
M. A. Green, “Limits on the Open-circuit Voltage and Efficiency,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-31, no. 5, pp. 671–678, May 
1984. 

 


