1

Paper submitted to Acta Materialia 2016 as MS A-16-2401 

Quantitative explanation of the reported values of the Hall-Petch parameter

Y. Li,a A.J. Bushby b and D.J. Dunstan a *

a School of Physics and Astronomy,

b School of Engineering and Materials Science,

Queen Mary University of London,

London, E1 4NS, England. 

Abstract:
The Hall-Petch effect has been described for the past sixty years as a 

dependence of the strength of polycrystalline metals on the inverse square-root of grain 
size d. The value of the coefficient of the dependence has been the subject of discussion 
throughout. Here, we find what factors in the experiments determine its values. A meta-
analysis using maximum-likelihood methods is reported of the literature values of the 
coefficient in sixty-one datasets. Weak dependence is found on composition and bulk 
strength. Clear dependence is found on the elastic anisotropy of the different metals and 
on their stacking fault energies. Surprisingly, no dependence is found on plastic strain, 
and the strongest dependence is found on the average grain size of each study. Combining 
these effects accounts for the reported values of about 80% of the sixty-one coefficients. 
The grain-size dependence and the bulk strength dependence indicate that the Hall-Petch 
coefficient is an artefact arising from incorrect fitting of the data. Moreover, the grain-
size dependence implies a minimum strength described by a simple inverse 1/d or a lnd/d
function, which arises theoretically from considerations of dislocation curvature.

Keywords: 
metals; grain boundary constraint; Hall-Petch effect; dislocations; scaling exponents. 

*  Corresponding Author
Email address:
d.dunstan@qmul.ac.uk

Telephone
(+44) 020 7882 3411

Postal address:
School of Physics and Astronomy,
Queen Mary University of London,
London, E1 4NS, England.


2

Graphical Abstract


3

1. Introduction

The Hall-Petch equation expressing the inverse-square-root dependence of yield or flow 
strength of polycrystalline metals on the grain size was first proposed in 1951 by Hall [1]
and confirmed in 1953 by Petch [2]. Since then, a large body of experimental data has 
been published in good agreement with this equation. Although it has frequently been 
challenged, as early as 1958 by Baldwin [3], it is presented in most elementary materials
textbooks and university courses and used in industry to predict strength. Most authors 
consider that it has strong experimental support. Indeed, a conference was held in 2013 to 
celebrate its sixtieth anniversary [4], with a conference logo incorporating the Hall-Petch 
equation,

/ 2
1

0


   
kd
Y
(1)

In this expression, Y is the yield strength, but the equation has been used as often to 
describe the flow stress at a given plastic strain, (P), and in what follows we will not 
need to distinguish yield stress and flow stress [5, 6]. The constant 0 is the yield or flow 
stress of single-crystal or bulk large-grain-size polycrystalline material. It is expected to 
be largely dependent on the history and preparation of the specimen, apart from having, 
for each metal, a minimum value in ideal specimens due to the Peierls stress. The second 
term on the right-hand side of Eq.1 describes the dependence of yield or flow stress on 
grain size d. The notation dISR will be convenient below for the inverse square-root of 
grain size, d–½.

The values of the parameter k for different metals have been of great interest 

throughout this period. Experimentally, values reported in the literature even for the 
same metal are often very scattered.  Many authors have proposed theories consistent 
with the inverse square-root of d in Eq.1 and capable of explaining the experimental 
values of k. See, e.g., the early review of Li and Chou [7], the comprehensive review of 
experiments and theories of Cordero et al. [8], and references therein, and two modern 
discussions specifically of the value of the parameter k [9, 10]. Such attempts have been 
frustrated, either by the large scatter in the experimental values of k, or by lack of clarity 
as to the applicability of the predictions of the various theories to specific experimental 
situations. Thus, some theories predict a non-zero k for the yield point.  Others predict k = 
0 for the yield point and k proportional to plastic strain pl for the flow stress.  It may be 
debated whether k is a derived quantity predictable from more fundamental material 
parameters, or whether it is a material parameter in its own right to be measured for each 
metal but not predictable from more basic considerations. Or, like 0, it may be largely
dependent on the history and preparation of the samples. 

In two previous papers, we have challenged Eq.1 [5, 6]. Following Baldwin [3], 

we found that the quality of fit of Eq.1 to many datasets was as good with exponents x
from x = ¼ to x = 1 as it was with the x = ½ of Eq.1. Using dummy data sets and fitting 
for the value of the exponent x, we found that the least-square residuals fitting procedure 
is biased due to the random errors in grain-size estimation, and returns an exponent on 
average about half the true value. We considered also the probability of the data being 
where it is under the different hypotheses of Eq.1 and alternative expressions. In the 
course of that work, we gathered sixty-one datasets from the literature that have been 


4

considered to support Eq.1. Here, we report a meta-analysis of the sixty-one values of k
from these datasets to see what can be deduced from them about the representation of the 
data by Eq.1 and the physical interpretation of k. Note that in this analysis we do not 
invoke any theories of the Hall-Petch effect.  Our purpose here is only to find what 
factors in the experiments influence or determine the observed values of k.    

Our conclusions are that there is a clear dependence of k on anisotropy, and on 

stacking-fault energy, and that there is no evidence of a dependence of k on plastic strain.
We find weak dependence on composition (purity) and bulk strength. Surprisingly, since 
the dependence of  on dISR in Eq.1 is already given explicitly, there is a strong 
dependence of k on dISR. That is, the coefficient k is not a constant as it should be, but as 
the function k(d) it conceals within itself much of the true functional dependence of  on 
d. These outcomes of the meta-analysis of course have implications for theories of Eq.1, 
discussed in Section 4.  

2. Meta-analysis of k values

We apply meta-analysis to the sixty-one values of k. While commonplace in social 
sciences and medicine, meta-analysis is relatively unusual in materials science and 
metallurgy (but see Deville et al. [11]). The purpose of meta-analysis is to take multiple 
studies and by combining their results to obtain a greater statistical significance for a 
result, or, less often, to obtain a result that the original studies did not consider. Meta-
analysis has dangers, which can introduce bias. This is well-documented in the medical 
literature. See the Appendix for a discussion of their relevance and their mitigation here. 

2.1. Data sources and selection.

We assembled a body of data consisting of data-sets that were fitted with Eq.1 by 

their authors or subsequently. Citations, references and search engines led us to more 
data, as did helpful input from colleagues. We included more recent data when we found 
it, but our emphasis was on the early data that contributed towards the establishment of 
Eq.1. All the data-sets that we found, we use; that is, there has been no selection. The 
sixty-one that we use are distinguished from the unknown number in the literature only 
by the random accidents of the search processes. There is therefore no risk of selection 
bias (see Appendix). 

Different authors gave more or less information on specimen characterisation, 

measurement techniques, and errors, but in any case such information was not used by 
the original authors to correct in any way the data values fitted with Eq.1 nor the 
parameter values obtained from the fits.  Consequently, it would be inappropriate – it 
would risk bias – to use any such information here.  We work with the raw data. 

2.2.  Meta-Analysis Factors

Comparing the values of k across many studies requires considering several major 

factors which are expected from theory to affect values of k. Data from both tension 


5

experiments and indentation hardness testing are used. We divide the hardnesses by a 
factor of 2.8 for comparability with the tension data, and attribute the nominal value of 
plastic strain pl = 0.2 to these datasets. A number of different metals are used.  All of the 
theories of Eq.1 predict that kHP will depend on the elastic moduli cIJ of the metal and on 
its Burger’s vector b. We normalise stresses for different metals by dividing by the 
Young’s modulus to give elastic strains. Similarly the grain sizes are normalised to the 
size of the crystal unit cell, by dividing the values given by the lattice constant of each 
metal.  (This may be taken as a proxy for normalising to the Burgers vector, which would 
introduce uncertainties as to the appropriate projections of the vector onto relevant slip 
planes, etc.)  For details of the normalisation see Ref.6 and the Supplementary 
Information. Following these normalisations, the value of k is dimensionless. 

This leaves five known factors in the experiments which may affect the data. 

Different metals have different elastic anisotropies and this should affect how 
polycrystalline specimens behave. Some datasets report yield stresses, which ideally 
would be at a plastic strain of pl = 0 but may be at the conventional pl = 0.002 or at a 
lower or upper yield point, while others report flow stresses at various plastic strains pl
up to 0.3 – and theories differ in their predictions of the variation of kHP on plastic strain.
Different datasets use widely varying ranges of grain size. The metals studied vary in 
their purity, or number of metallurgically significant elements, from commercial brass 
and steel to high-purity aluminium.  The fitted bulk strength 0 may be treated as a factor.
Any known physical properties of the various metals could also be considered as factors. 
We tested the stacking-fault energy, bringing the total of factors considered here to six. 

In Ref.6, the data were first digitised, normalised as described above, and fitted 

with Eq.1. Full information on the datasets, normalisation and fitting are given in [6] and 
the data are given in the Supplementary Information. Here, to test the effects of these six
factors, the values of k returned by the fits are plotted against each factor in turn, and 
tested for correlation with each of the six factors by fitting the data to the function y = ax
+ b.  Independence of k of a given factor corresponds to fitted values of a close to zero, 
within the statistical error bar. 

2.3 Statistical Analysis

In a standard analysis of experimental results, data is obtained as a function of 
experimental parameters in the light of theory.  There will be a predicted functional 
dependence and perhaps quantitative predictions of coefficients, and it is to test and 
refine these predictions that the experiments are performed.  Meta-analysis proceeds 
differently.  We have a set of reported data, here, values of k, and potential factor values, 
constituting a large matrix of numbers. The objective is to establish correlations within 
this matrix. The most powerful way to do this is factor analysis but for our purposes here 
it is preferable to use a less powerful but more transparent technique. 

We begin by inspecting the properties of the 61 normalised values of k. They have 

a mean of 0.155, but a wide distribution of values from –0.001 to 0.998 (Fig.1), so the 
mean is near the lower end of the range. The standard deviation about the mean is 0.207.


6

The kurtosis (fourth moment over second moment) is 11 and the skewness is 3, compared 
with the values 3  0.5 and 0  0.3 expected for a Gaussian distribution of 61 numbers
For log10k, the mean is –1.02, variance 0.214, kurtosis 7.5 and skewness –1.  Thus the 
distribution of the data is far from normal or lognormal.  Least-squares fitting methods
assume that the residuals ri – the scatter of the data around the fitted model – are 
Gaussian-distributed, independently drawn from an identical normal distribution (i.i.d.).  
When that is not so, as here, least-squares methods discard much of the information in the 
data, and it is preferable to use other methods which make use of more of the
information. We use Maximum Likelihood methods. For accessible introductions to these 
methods, see e.g. [12, 13].

Fig.1. (Colour on-line.) The 61 values of the Hall-Petch parameter k in (a) and 
log10k in (b) are plotted against a random abscissa in the range 0-1. The extreme 
high values are not shown in (a) but may be seen in (b); similarly the extreme low 
and negative values are not shown in (b) but may be seen in (a). Fits are shown by a 
classic least-squares (LS) procedure (thin solid lines) and by Maximum Likelihood 
methods using the Lorentzian pdf (thick dotted blue lines, the double Gaussian pdf 
(DG, thick chain-dotted green lines) and the Gaussian plus flat pdf (GF, thick 
dashed red lines) with the values given in Table 1. 

2.3.1. Testing with dummy datasets. We begin by testing the statistical methods against 
dummy datasets, as a benchmark. Suitable dummy datasets may be constructed as (i, ki) 
where i are random numbers in the range 0 to 1, and ki are the Hall-Petch parameters (i = 
1 to 61).  Using a least-squares procedure to fit these dummy data to ax + b, we expect, 
within error, a = 0 and 
b  k
where k = 0.155 is the mean value of our collection of k

values. One such dataset gives a = –0.056  0.098, b = 0.182  0.054, as expected within 
error (Fig.1a). However, the correlation matrix for a and b has off-diagonal terms of 
about 0.9.  It is better to fit to the datasets 
)
,
(
k
ki
i

  
, and restore the average values 

after fitting.  This gives the same result for a, with b =
k  a
 0.027 and the off-

diagonal terms in the correlation matrix are now zero. In this way, we created 500 such 


7

dummy datasets.  The 500 values of a averaged to –0.002 and the standard deviation of 
the values of a was 0.055 (Table I). The value of b and the error in it is no longer 
interesting. 

Given the presence of excess kurtosis, the few datapoints at values of k up to 1 are 

heavily distorting the least-squares fits. A common procedure in such cases is to 
eliminate these datapoints, as outliers, and fit to the remaining points which have a much 
narrower normal distribution. It is better to exploit all the information in the data using 
the Maximum Likelihood method, as any probability distribution function (pdf) may be 
used as best fits the data. For any pdf P(x) for the residuals ri, the likelihood of each 
datum ki is P(ri), and the likelihood of the dataset under the model is 

 
 









n

i

i

n

i

i
P r
L
P r
L

1
1

ln
ln
,
(2)

Residuals are functions of the parameters a and b of the model, and for a normal 
distribution of residuals centred on zero, the standard deviation  of the Gaussian pdf is 
the third parameter of the model. Values of L can be very large or very small, and have 
no intrinsic meaning. It is more convenient to sum the natural logarithms of P(ri) to 
calculate the log-likelihood, lnL. This is then maximised with respect to a, b and . Doing 
this with the single dummy dataset mentioned above, we get a = –0.056, as above, and 
= 0.29 which is not an error estimate for a or b but describes the variance (2) of the data 
with respect to the model. The log-likelihood is lnL = 10. Error estimates for a and b can 
be found by varying each individually while leaving the other as a free fitting parameter
and looking for a reduction in lnL of 0.5. Here that gives a  0.096 in agreement with the 
least-squares method as expected for a Gaussian pdf. 

Changes in the fitted model that give increases in lnL of more than 2 or 3 are what 

matter, as this is equivalent to 4 - 6 in classic least-squares methods. Accordingly, we 
calculate lnL with other pdf’s.  Given the large kurtosis, we are interested in fat-tailed 
distributions compatible with a significant proportion of apparent outliers in the dataset.
The Lorentzian is suitable.  The maximum of lnL is found to be 56.5 for a = – 0.018 
0.024, with width  = 0.034. Thus a is found to be significantly closer to zero, by a factor 
of about three, than by the least-squares model (Fig.1a).  The increase in lnL is massively 
significant – with 0.5 in lnL corresponding to 1 in a Gaussian analysis, an increase in 
lnL ~ 2 – 3 is considered to give very significant preference to one model over another, 
and here we have an increase of 45. Moreover, we do not have to consider that the 
datapoints that are a long way from the fitted line are outliers – on the contrary, they are 
accommodated by the Lorenztian pdf on a par with all the other datapoints. 

Other fat-tailed pdfs give similar results.  We can attribute the outliers to a broad 

Gaussian pdf and the other data points to a narrow one about the line y = ax + b, so that 
we have a double-Gaussian pdf, referred to below as DG. Then, as well as looking for the 
values a, b and the -values of the two distributions, we look for the fraction f of the 
broad pdf and the fraction (1 – f) of the narrow pdf that maximizes lnL. Fitting with the 
two extra parameters, the width of the second Gaussian and the value of the fraction f, we 
obtain a = 0.010  0.025, f = 0.142  0.050, and the standard deviations of the narrow and 


8

broad distributions are 0.067 and 0.80 respectively.  That is, about one seventh of the data 
belong to the broad distribution, and the others form a distribution sharper by a factor of
more than two than the single Gaussian PDF gave. The value of lnL is 61. Each extra 
fitting parameter requires an increase in lnL of 1 to offset it (this corresponds to the 
Akaike information criterion [14]), so this model is only slightly more probable than the 
Lorentzian.  However, it provides a first insight into the number of apparent outliers – the 
fraction f of the data, or about ten datapoints that appear to belong to a different pdf.  

Alternatively, we can consider that each datum has a probability f of being an 

outlier in this sense, and that the outliers have a flat distribution over a range of k values 
of width g, hence a flat pdf of magnitude fg–1 over the range. Then (1 – f) of a sharp 
Gaussian distribution (the GF pdf) is added. Now, maximization of lnL yields a = 0.011 
0.025, f = 0.158   0.056 and lnL = 68.5 (Fig.1a).  Especially with one fewer parameter 
than the double Gaussian, this increase in lnL is highly significant – this is by far the best 
model.

Table 1. Results of fitting randomized datasets with various Maximum Likelihood 
(ML) probability distributions, Gaussian (G), equivalent to a least-squares (LS) fit, 
Lorentzian (Lor), double-Gaussian (DG) and Gaussian plus flat (GF).  

ML/MS G 
ML Lor 
ML DG 
ML GF

P(ri)
2 / 2
1






ir
e
2
2

1

 



ir
)
)G(
1(

)
(
G

2

1







f

f
)G( )
1(



f
fg

500 LS 
dummies

a: –0.003
 0.092 

Dummy

D1

lnL: 10.0
f: 0
a: –0.056

 0.096

: 0.29

lnL: 56.6
f: 0
a: –0.018

 0.024

: 0.034 

lnL: 61.2
f: 0.14  0.5
a: –0.010

 0.025

1: 0.07; 2: 0.8

lnL: 68.5; g: 1
f: 0.15  0.05
a: –0.011

 0.025

: 0.062

log10D1
lnL: –38.0
f: 0
a: –0.17

 0.21

: 0.65

lnL: –29.2
f: 0
a: –0.072

 0.11

: 0.16 

lnL: –26.5
f: 0.42  0.12
a: –0.076

 0.11

1: 0.21; 2: 1.0

lnL: –25.1
f: 0.09  0.03; g: 3
a: –0.078

 0.12

: 0.27

Similar results are obtained by fitting to values of log10ki (Fig.1b).  The ordinary 

least-squares method works better here, as there is less skewness in this distribution, but 
still gives an error in the gradient nearly three times the gradient given by the GF pdf.  
The least squares lnL is –39, rising to –29.5 for the Lorentzian, –26 for the double-
Gaussian and –25 for the GF pdf. (The absolute value of lnL is not important; it is lower 
here because the pdf is spread more thinly on the y-axis from –3 to 0 instead of 0 to 1, 
corresponding to g = 3 in Table 1). The main difference is the much higher proportion of 
outliers attributed to the log10ki by the DG and GF pdfs.  It probably occurs because the 
true outliers are much closer to the main distribution, as seen in the DG results by the 
relative values of 1 and 2. 


9

What we have established in this Section is that the Maximum Likelihood 

methods are about four times more sensitive than the least-squares method for exposing a 
correlation or lack of correlation between the data, the experimental values of k, and the 
abscissa or factor against which they are plotted. The key benchmark is the variance of 
the fitted values of the slope, a.  Using least-squares fitting, a slope a of 0.096 (on a plot 
where the abscissa values have been normalized to the range 0–1) is not significant. 
Using Maximum Likelihood methods, this criterion is sharpened to about 0.024. Of these 
methods, the flat distribution for the outliers with a Gaussian for the bulk of the data is 
the most probable model.  There is a consensus among the methods that about 15% of the 
data, or ten of them, are outliers. The GF pdf gives the highest likelihoods.  The ki and the 
log10ki give very similar results, except that the outliers are probably over-reported in the 
log10ki analysis. 

Fig.2. (Colour on-line.) Plots and fits against (a) plastic strain pl and (b) our purity 
factor p. The thin solid lines are the least-squares fits, the thick chain-dotted green 
lines are the fits using the Lorentzian pdf and the thick dashed red lines are the fits 
of the GF model.

2.3.2.  Physical Factors:  The next step is to plot the data against the various physical 
factors reported by the original authors and to fit with ax + b as for the dummy datasets of 
the previous Section. For comparability, the range of each factor is rescaled to the 
dimensionless range 0-1.  The resulting slope a for each factor is given in Table 2 for the 
fits to each of the six factors plotted in Fig.2-Fig.4. The corresponding slopes  for fits to 
the real values of the factors are also given. It should be noted, however, that the slopes 
are dimensionless (except for stacking-fault energy) because of our initial normalizations
of yield or flow stress by division by the Young’s modulus to yield or flow elastic strain, 
and grain size to number of units cells per grain by division by the lattice constant. This 
initial normalization was essential if different metals are to be compared.

Some readers will need to be warned that the large scatter in these plots does not 

show that they mean nothing.  Such eye-balling is not a statistical technique 
mathematically proven to extract the full information in the data.  The Maximum 


10

Likelihood method is [12], and what matter is lnL, not a subjective assessment of the 
scatter.

To plot the data against plastic strain pl, we deleted three datasets for brass, for 

which we could not find information on the strain. The fits to the remaining 59 values of 
k are shown in Fig.2a.  While the least-squares method gives a negative slope – but zero 
within error – the maximum likelihood methods are very consistent in giving a positive 
slope outside error.  At less than 2, this might be interpreted as evidence for no effect of 
strain on the Hall-Petch parameter, however, the increase in log-likelihood to 72.6 (Table 
2) from the random-variable value of 68.5 (Table 1) offers some support. The value of 
for this fit is meaningful, and dimensionless because k and strain are both dimensionless.
To describe the purity or composition of the metals studied, given the complexities of 
metallurgy, we adopted the simple scheme of assigning the value p = 0 to a pure metal 
(four or five nines), p = 1 for the addition of an alloying element (as in brass) or purities 
around two nines, and p = 2 for anything more complicated, i.e. commercial iron and 
steel. In Fig.2b, there is a strong effect, with a slope at over 4. The jump in the log-
likelihood to 76 (Table 2) is highly significant.  The value of  for this fit is not 
meaningful because of our arbitrary quantification of purity p. 

Fig.3. (Colour on-line.) Plots and fits against (a) bulk strength 0 and (b) anisotropy 
C. The thin solid lines are the least-squares fits, the thick chain-dotted green lines 
are the fits using the Lorentzian pdf and the thick dashed red lines are the fits of the 
GF model.

For the bulk strength (Fig.3a), we used the values of 0 obtained by fitting the 

data to Eq.1 (see Supplementary Information). Because 0 is normalized as elastic strain, 
the value of  for this fit, , is dimensionless. For anisotropy, we deleted the titanium 
data, leaving 59 datasets, as the anisotropy factor is less well defined for hexagonal 
metals than it is for the cubic metals.  For the cubic metals, we used the standard 
definition that is based on the ratio of the two shear moduli,  C = 2c44/(c11 – c12) – 1.  This 
has the advantage, compared with e.g. C = 2c44 – c11 + c12, of being already normalised 
for different metals.  It shows a stronger effect (Fig.3b), at almost 5, but a rather 


11

surprising fallback in lnL to 71 (Table 2). Because C is dimensionless, the value of  for 
this fit, C, is dimensionless.

Fig.4. (Colour on-line.) Plots and fits against (a) the inverse of the stacking fault 
energy, and (b) the midpoint grain size of each dataset. The thin solid lines are the 
least-squares fits, the thick chain-dotted green lines are the fit using the Lorentzian 
pdf and the thick dashed red lines are the fits of the GF model.

Estimates of stacking-fault energies  were found in the literature for all the 

metals except Ti and Cr (see Supplementary Information). Deleting those three datasets 
left 58 values. Their slope against  is negative, so for easier comparability with the other 
factors, we used the inverse stacking-fault energy, –1, plotted in Fig.4a. The slope SFE
for this factor therefore has units of mJ m–2. For the grain size, we take the mid-points of 
the datasets on the classic Hall-Petch plots, i.e. 
)
½(
min
max

ISR
ISR

mean
ISR
d
d
d


(Fig.4b). 

Because the grain size is normalized to the number of lattice constants per grain, the 
value of  for this fit, d, is dimensionless. This characterization of d is motivated by 
consideration of what a d–1 dependence looks like on a Hall-Petch plot. It is a parabola, 
and the slope of a straight line fitted to data that follow the parabola would be 
approximately the gradient of the parabola at the mid-point of the data range – though 
any dependence of k on any measure of d would contradict Eq.1. Yet this factor and the 
stacking-fault energy have the strongest effects, with the largest slopes, at 5, and with 
jumps in lnL to 74 and 76 (Table 2).  

Compared with the null hypothesis of Section 2.3.1, i.e. the hypothesis that there 

is no effect of these factors on the Hall-Petch parameter k so that random ordering would 
give the same results as ordering the k values by these factors, all six of these models are 
supported by the data. That being so, we should suppose they all represent effects that 
apply in all Hall-Petch experiments, so we should test the effect of these factors acting 
together. The ten or so outliers may be the result of other large, rare perturbations but the 
factors for these have not been identified. 


12

Table 2. Fitting parameters for the various factors of Figs 2-4 using the 
Maximum Likelihood method with the Gaussian plus Flat pdf. The fraction of 
outliers is f and the maximum log-likelihood is lnL. 

Abscissa
Slopes a
Slopes 
Outliers f
lnL

Strain, pl
a = 0.033  0.020
α = 0.1 
0.10  0.05
73

Purity, p
ap = 0.067  0.015
α p = 0.033
0.16  0.06
76

Bulk strength, 0
a = 0.073  0.028
α  = 20
0.15  0.06
72

Anisotropy, C
aC = 0.095  0.020
α C = 0.012
0.20  0.06
71

Stacking fault 
energy, 

a = 0.101  0.020
α  = 1.32
m2 mJ–1
0.16  0.06
76

Grain size, dISR
ad = 0.103  0.020
α d = 3.9
0.09  0.05
74

It is worth considering how this would work in the ideal case.  Suppose that these 

six factors are the only factors determining k, that they are wholly independent, and that 
their linear (ax + b with b = 0) contributions to k simply sum.  Then in the fits to single 
factors so far discussed, the other five factors contribute both the intercepts b and the 
scatter which gives the uncertainties in a. If we suitably scale all six factors and add their 
contributions to k, the intercept b should decrease to zero and the uncertainties in a
should decrease; a itself should increase. Keeping the abscissa normalized to the range 0 
to 1, with all six factors included, the slope a should be within error equal to the highest 
values of k not belonging to outliers, i.e. about 0.18 or more if some of the outliers are 
brought within the main distribution when all factors are considered. The remaining 
outliers will be the result of other large, rare perturbations due to unidentified factors. 
. 

The anisotropy factor was rescaled to the 0-1 range by dividing values of C by the 

highest value of C in the data, 7.57, so the true gradient C is the value of aC reported 
above, divided by 7.57.  The values of 
mean
dISR
were divided by 0.026 to rescale to the 0-1 

range, so the true dependence is k = d dISR

mean
ddISR
k
 
with d given by ad / 0.026. The 

gradients a for strain, purity, 0 and stacking fault energy are similarly divided by 0.3, 2 
and 20 and multiplied by 13 respectively to get , p and . The combined abscissa is 
C C + d dISR +  pl + p p +  0 +  –1. For comparison with the foregoing single-
factor fits and plots, we rescale this new abscissa again to the 0-1 range. In order to 
include all sixty-one data, the missing values for plastic strain (brass), anisotropy (Ti) and 
the stacking fault energy (Cr) were allocated mid-range values (in italics in the 
Supplementary Information).  The results of fitting to this dataset are given in Table 3.  
The slope a is increased, and, most significantly, the lnL increases sharply to 88. This is a 
much better model than any of the six factors taken alone.


13

Fig.5. (Colour on-line.) Plots and fits against the weighted combination of all six 
factors of the last line of Table 3 (see text). In (a), the scale is the same as in Figs 2-
4 for comparison; in (b) the scale is enlarged to show all the data. The thin solid 
lines are the least-squares fit, the thick chain-dotted green lines are the fits using the 
Lorentzian pd f and the thick dashed red lines are the fits of the GF model. The 
thin red solid lines show the width (one sigma) of the Gaussian distribution of the 
mainstream data around the best GF fit.

Table 3. Fitting parameters for weighted combinations of factors. Fixed 
fitting parameters are in bold. In the first column, equal weights are given to 
all factors. In the final column, weights are optimized for the highest lnL. In 
between, each factor in turn has been eliminated by giving a fixed weight of 
zero and lnL has been optimized with respect to the other weights. The final 
row gives the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC [15]) values for each model.  

Factors
wi
wi
wi
wi
wi
wi
wi
wi

Strain, pl
1
0.2
1.2
1.3
2.2
2.6
0
0.7  0.8

Purity, p
1
2.2
0.8
0.9
1.1
0
1.5
1.3  0.3

Bulk strength, 0
1
1.8
0.7
0.4
0
–0.4
1.5
1.1  0.7

Anisotropy, C
1
3.4
1.2
0
2.0
0.3
2.5
2.3  0.5

Stacking-fault 
energy, 

1
–1.5   
0
1.2
–1.0
1.6
–1.6
–1.4  0.5

Grain size, dISR
1
0
2.0
2.2
1.8
1.9
2.2
2.0  0.2

“Outliers”, f
0.19
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.20
0.16
0.21
0.20

Slope, a
0.152
0.175
0.167
0.155
0.262
0.146
0.238
0.231

Offset, b
–0.06
0.022
0.006
0.019
0.0002
0.029
–0.006
–0.005

Gaussian width, 
0.037
0.030
0.029
0.038
0.027
0.039
0.026
0.026

Log-Likelihood, lnL
88
87
96
93
98
90
99
100

AIC
–158
–158
–176
–170
–180
–164
–182
–182


14

However, we can add weightings wi ≠ 1 to the factors, while keeping wi = 6. The 

lnL is then maximized with respect to the six weights wi (five extra free fitting 
parameters) as well as to a, b and . The optimum combined abscissa in Fig.5 uses the 
weightings of the last column of Table 3. This gives another large increase in the log-
likelihood to 100, an increase in the slope a to 0.231, and a very small intercept of b = 
0.006  0.0060. The errors on the weightings are obtained as above, by fitting with each 
weight fixed in turn at its optimized value plus or minus an offset, and looking for the 
value of the offset which reduces lnL for the fit by 0.5. The scatter in the weightings 
across the Table is the consequence of eliminating each factor in turn by settings its 
weight to zero and then optimizing the other five.

We may expect reduced weightings of factors which are interdependent or 

correlated. For example, strain causes strain-hardening which increases strength. Equally, 
correlations with no physical significance will arise from experimenters’ deliberate or 
chance choices – for example, it is possible that only metals with small stacking-fault 
energies were studied at high strain. If two factors are interdependent or correlated, their 
slopes in Figs 2-4 would each have a contribution from the other, and the weights in 
Table 3 would be reduced accordingly. 

The last row of Table 3 gives the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) values for each 

model. For choosing between models with different numbers of parameters, this quantity 
corrects the log-likelihood for the number of free fitting parameters in different models. It 
is defined as 2P – 2lnL where P is the number of parameters [15]. Its absolute values 
have no significance, but a decrease of n of one model compared with another is 
equivalent to an n-sigma preference for the model with the lower AIC. Thus the models 
of the last two columns are to be preferred over the others, but there is nothing to choose 
between them. The weights in these two columns are all consistent within error, and so 
there is no evidence for a non-zero weight for plastic strain. 

3. Discussion

Several points stand out among the data in Table 3. First, the weightings of plastic strain 
depend enormously on what other factors are taken into account. It is clear that, as a 
factor in determining the Hall-Petch coefficient, it is highly correlated with other factors. 
Eliminating plastic strain as a factor (penultimate column) reduces the lnL very little, and 
the AIC not at all. The models of the last two columns are highly preferred over all the 
others by their AICs, and whether plastic strain is deleted as a relevant factor or given a 
weighting consistent with zero within the error bar as in the final column does not matter. 
So, despite its importance in some theories of the Hall-Petch effect, we conclude that 
plastic strain is not a significant factor in determining the Hall-Petch coefficient. 

The weightings of the four factors purity, bulk strength, anisotropy and stacking-

fault energy swing violently according to which of them are included in or deleted from 
the analysis. These factors are closely related, that is, there are strong correlations among 
them. The bulk strength is clearly the least meaningful. Deleting it affects the AIC rather 


15

little, and in the last column its weight has an error nearly as large as the value. However, 
the methods here are not powerful enough to determine from this cluster of factors what 
are the real factors. Anisotropy, however, is clearly not ruled out, with its relatively large 
weighting and small error in the final column. 

The weights for grain size in Table 3 are large and very stable against the 

selection of other factors. In the final column, it has the smallest error on its weight of all 
the factors.  This indicates that it is largely independent of, and uncorrelated with, the 
other factors. Its large slope and large weighting combine to make it the most significant 
factor in determining the Hall-Petch coefficient.   

The models with the highest lnL are the combined fits with variable weightings of 

all six parameters of the last column of Table 3, and with plastic strain deleted as a factor 
(penultimate column). From these, the dominant factor in the Hall-Petch parameter k is 
the grain size, dISR. (This is the midpoint grain size of the dataset, not of each specimen:
the measure of grain size that matters for each specimen must be its own dISR; it is not 
possible for the strength of a single specimen to depend on the range of grain sizes that 
determined 
mean
dISR
.) .This is in direct contradiction of Eq.1, in which the effect of dISR on 

is supposed to be entirely in the denominator. That the bulk yield or flow stress, 0, 
should play a role is also in direct contradiction of Eq.1 in which it is only added to the 
Hall-Petch effect. Considering only the factor dISR, we have,

d
d

d

d
k
d
ISR
d

Y

   
   
  

0
0
0
(3)

To see the effect of the strength, 0, consider a family of curves Y = 0 + ad/d on a log-
log plot with ad constant and 0 varied).  The position of the elbow between the part of 
the curve with a slope near –1 at small d and the part with a slope near 0 at large d (i.e. 
around d ~ ad /0) moves to smaller d as 0 is increased, at one decade per decade. A 
similar family of curves Y = 0 + k dISR has the corresponding elbows move to smaller d
at two decades per decade. Consequently, if data obeying the former are fitted with the 
latter family of curves, to keep the elbow in the right place to fit the data, it will be 
necessary to increase k at one decade per decade of 0.  That is, the coefficient will 
increase linearly with 0, as observed here. So both of these effects, the dependence of k
on dISR and on 0, occur naturally if the true dependence of yield or flow stress, Y, on 
grain size goes as 1/d (or ln d / d) yet is fitted by a linear dependence on dISR.

As well as the six factors considered here which do contribute to the Hall-Petch 

parameter k, there are phenomena such as dislocation pile-up which are thought to 
contribute to the Hall-Petch parameter [15, 16]. The analysis here gives little room for 
these other parameters – only the value of the intercept, b = 0.006  0.006, gives any 
scope for them The theory of pile-up does not predict any dependence on the factors
considered here, but (in normalized units) is supposed to contribute a value p up to about 
0.03 to k, a value which is capped by the theoretical strength of materials [16].  What is 
clear, is that even if pile-up were to account for the intercept, it has little to do with the 
values of k ranging from 0.01 up to 0.2.


16

It might be thought that these results show that the Hall-Petch equation should be 

rewritten as

d
d

a
kd
d
C
p

ISR
Y

1

6
2.2
1

6

6.1
5.2
5.1
5.1
0

0
0






 
 

  
  





(4)

( values from the penultimate column of Table 3). That would be incautious. The path 
from the raw data to Eq.4 has gone via an invalid fitting procedure (fitting to Eq.1), 
generating an invalid constant k, followed by a correction in the light of Fig.4b. There is 
no evidence in the results reported here that the correction will not have wider effects; no 
evidence that the middle term, over the square-root of d, in the RHS of Eq.4 is correctly 
formulated. It will be preferable to start afresh not from data (k) resulting from fitting to 
the incorrect Eq.1, but from the raw data, that is, the measured values of  and the values 
of all known factors, and to carry out rigorous factor analysis. We have not done that 
here, because that would merely set up a rival fit to compete with Eq.1.  The technique 
we use here is less powerful, but is better targeted to reveal unambiguously and 
transparently the issues with Eq.1. It is unambiguously shown to be the incorrect equation 
to fit the data, by the resulting internal contradictions revealed by meta-analysis.

There remains a factor (or factors) that we have not identified, that would account 

for the 10% or 15% of reported k values, up to k ~ 1, that are many standard deviations 
away from Eq.4 (Fig.5b). The key point here is that we kept these data in the analysis, so 
that if any of the factors had accounted for them (or if the Lorentzian pdf had been the 
pdf with the highest likelihood), they would have rejoined the main pdf rather than 
keeping their own separate pdf.  

4. Conclusions

The variation of reported (normalised) values of the Hall-Petch coefficient k that 

fall in the range 0 to 0.2 is largely accounted for by the various factors reported by the 
original authors – specifically, by the purity, the bulk strength and the grain size, and also 
by the material parameters, the elastic anisotropy and the stacking-fault energy. The very 
wide variation of the remaining 20% of reported values in the range up to 1 remains 
unaccounted for. The variation in values of k that arises from the various values of the 
different factors in different studies does not of itself indicate that Eq.1 is incorrect.
However, that the grain size itself is one of the factors that matters most, unambiguously 
demonstrates that fitting the data to Eq.1 is incorrect. Rather remarkably, plastic strain is 
not a factor. 

Some comment can be made on the consequences of these conclusions for the 

various theories of the Hall-Petch effect.  It is now clear that the difficulties previously 
encountered in explaining the values of the Hall-Petch coefficient k are due to trying to 
explain an incorrect equation.  The theories that invoke plastic strain will need to be 
reconsidered, perhaps in terms of the cluster of correlated factors more-or-less related to 
strength. The theories that do not invoke the factors found here, such as pile-up [1, 2, 15], 
are very restricted in their application, since they would account for an intercept on the 
ordinate of Fig.5, which here is zero within error. Grain size is the dominant independent 
factor, and the resulting dependence Y on d–1 supports the theory of dislocation curvature 
or source size constraint [6].


17

The other factors can all go to zero in suitable circumstances. That leaves the 

grain-size itself as the only universal contributor to k and the general 1/d or lnd / d size 
effect as the only ubiquitous Hall-Petch mechanism, to which will be added the effects of 
the mechanisms that invoke the other factors when applicable. 

Acknowledgements
Yuan Li is grateful to the Chinese Scholarship Council for his research studentship. This 
research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, 
commercial, and not-for-profit sectors.

References

[1]
E.O. Hall, The deformation and ageing of mild steel: III Discussion of results, Proc. 
Phys. Soc. B 64 (1951) 747–753.

[2]
N.J. Petch, The cleavage strength of polycrystals , J. Iron Steel Institute 174 (1953)
25–28.

[3]
W.M. Baldwin, Yield strength of metals as a function of grain size, Acta Metall. 6 
(1958) 139–141.

[4]
International symposium on Strength of Fine Grained Materials - 60 years of Hall-
Petch, Tokyo, 2013. URL:  http://www.u-gakugei.ac.jp/~tkosaka/sfgm2013/ (26th

Mar 2015).

[5]
D.J. Dunstan, A.J. Bushby, Grain size dependence of the strength of metals: The 
Hall–Petch effect does not scale as the inverse square root of grain size, Int. J. 
Plasticity 53 (2014) 56–65.

[6]
Y. Li, A.J. Bushby, D.J. Dunstan, The Hall-Petch effect as a manifestation of the 
general size effect, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 472 (2016) 20150890.

[7]
J.C.M. Li, Y.T. Chou, Role of dislocations in flow stress grain size relationships, 
Metall. Trans. 1 (1970) 1145

[8]
Z.C. Cordero, B.E. Knight and C.A. Schuh. Six decades of the Hall-Pertch effect –
a survey of grain-size strengthening studies on pure metals, Int. Mater. Rev. 61 
(2016) 495 – 512.   

[9]
V. Bata and E.V. Pereloma, An alternative physical explanation of the Hall–Petch 
relation, Acta Mat. 52 (2004) 657–665. 

[10] J. Aldazabal, J. Gil Sevillano, Hall–Petch behaviour induced by plastic strain 

gradients, Mater. Sci. Eng. A365 (2004) 186–190.

[11] S. Deville, S. Meille, J. Seuba, A meta-analysis of the mechanical properties of ice-

templated ceramics and metals, Sci. Tech. Adv. Mater. 16 (2015) 043501.

[12] A.W.F. Edwards, Likelihood, John Hopkins University Press 1992. 
[13] Bevan, A.J., Statistical data analysis in the physical sciences, Cambridge 

University Press 2013.

[14] H. Akaike, New look at statistical-model identification, IEEE Trans. Automatic 

Control 19 (1974) 716–723. 

[15] J.D. Eshelby, F.C. Frank, F.R.N. Nabarro, The equilibrium of linear arrays of 

dislocations, Phil Mag. 42 (1951) 351–364.

[16] S.D. Antolovich, R.W. Armstrong, Plastic strain localization in metals: Origins and 

consequences, Prog. Mater. Sci. 59 (2014) 1–160.


18

[17] E. Walker, A.V. Hernandez, M.W. Kattan, Meta-analysis: Its strengths and 

limitations, Cleveland Clinic. J. Medicine 75 (2008) 431-439.

[18] H. Cooper, L.V. Hedges, J.C. Valentine (Eds,) The Handbook of Research 

Synthesis and Meta-Analysis, 2nd ed., Russell Sage Foundation, New York, 2009. 

[19] R. Rosenthal, The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results, Psychological 

Bulletin 86 (1979), 638–641.

[20] J.M.C. Li, Petch relation and grain boundary sources, Trans. TMS 227 (1963) 239–

247.

[21] H. Conrad, Effect of grain size on the lower yield and flow stress on iron and steel, 

Acta Met. 11 (1963) 75–77.

[22] M.F. Ashby, The deformation of plastically non-homogeneous materials, Phil. 

Mag. 21 (1970) 399–424.

Appendix. Pitfalls of Meta-Analysis

The purpose of meta-analysis is to take multiple studies and by combining their 

results to obtain a greater statistical significance for a result, or, as here, to obtain a result 
that the original studies did not consider.  A review by Walker et al. [17] identifies four 
critical issues for meta-analysis. They are discussed in more detail by Cooper et al. [18]. 

The file-drawer problem, or publication effect [19] is liable to occur when the 

meta-analysis is conducted to test the same hypothesis that the original authors were 
studying. Only, or predominantly, studies with positive outcomes are published, while all 
the studies with null outcomes languish unpublished in the filing-cabinet.  Then, all the 
meta-study achieves is to confirm the original prejudice according to which positive 
results were interesting and null results not.  That is not a risk here.  The original authors 
did not select for publication only those datasets which fitted well with Eq.3.  On the 
contrary, they might have rejected those that didn’t fit Eq.1, but that would not matter to 
us. What matters is that they did not – could not – select data for publication according 
the fit with the hypothesis that we are testing.  

The comprehensiveness of the search for studies also matters for if it is not 

comprehensive there is scope for selection bias in the studies selected for inclusion in the 
meta-study. Walker et al. [17] do not emphasise, though, that if the search not 
comprehensive, but is random with respect to the hypothesis under test, having fewer 
studies merely lowers the statistical significance of the result of the meta-analysis but 
does not invalidate it in any other way. That is clearly the case here, for the same reason 
as this study does not risk publication bias.  

Heterogeneity of results, or not comparing like with like, risks burying a few 

positive results from well-focused studies under scattered results from many less 
irrelevant studies. That is not an issue here. All the datasets we used gave good fits to 
Eq.1. 

Availability of relevant information is the third key issue, and it does apply 

here. Among these datasets are of course wide variations of techniques such as grain-size 


19

measurement and characterisation of texture. Such variations were not generally fully 
reported by the original authors and the data were not then and cannot now be corrected 
in any way for them. However, such variations did not affect the validity of the datasets 
as published or later used as support for Eq.1, and no more do they affect their validity 
under meta-analysis as evidence of a behaviour which refutes Eq.1. Indeed, selection or 
correction of the raw data is dangerous in meta-analysis because of the risk of introducing 
bias. Some authors gave information about, for example, measurement of grain size, 
while others did not. This is not a risk factor providing that (1) there is little likelihood 
that the reported information or lack of it is correlated any of the factors, and (2) that no 
attempt is made to correct some data in the light of this information while other data 
cannot be corrected for lack of the information. 

Analysis of data is a rather technical issue that does not concern us here, for it 

covers issues such as data-mining, in which a large body of data, tested for a very large 
number of correlations, will by chance give some false-positive outcomes among the very 
large number of true-negatives. Here we are looking for and finding specific outcomes 
predicted by theory. 

Good physics: The previous point raises a final criticism of meta-analysis, made 

by a referee of a previous version of this paper: good physics does not arise out of 
statistical analyses of large datasets. Here, of course, the physics does not arise out of the 
statistical analysis.  The physics arises out of the Orowan-Bragg ideas about dislocation 
curvature, or out of the Eshelby-Frank-Nabarro pile-up ideas. Statistics are used merely 
to choose between them, in as rigorous a way as possible.  It is for this reason that we do 
not use a coefficient of determination such as R2 to test Eq.1 or Eq.3, but consider, 
simply, the question, what model is most likely given the data?  


