Kirigami Metamaterials for Reconfigurable Toroidal 

Circular Dichroism 

Liqiao Jing1#, Zuojia Wang2#*, Bin Zheng1,3*, Huaping Wang1,4, Yihao Yang1, Lian 

Shen1, Wenyan Yin1, Erping Li1, Hongsheng Chen1,3*

1Key Lab. of Advanced Micro/Nano Electronic Devices & Smart Systems of Zhejiang, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China

2School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, 
China

3State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentations, The Electromagnetics 
Academy at Zhejiang University, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China

4Institute of Marine Electronics Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, 
China

# Co-first authors.
*Corresponding authors:

Name: Zuojia Wang
Full postal address: 27 Shanda South Road, Jinan 250100, China
Telephone: +86- 13616518084
E-mail address: z.wang@sdu.edu.cn

Name: Bin Zheng
Full postal address: 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310027, China
Telephone: +86-15868184212
E-mail address: zhengbin@zju.edu.cn

Name: Hongsheng Chen
Full postal address: 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310027, China
Telephone: +86-571-87951013
E-mail address: hansomchen@zju.edu.cn

ABSTRACT


The ancient paper craft of kirigami has recently emerged as a potential tool for the 

design of functional materials. Inspired by the kirigami concept, we propose a class of

kirigami-based metamaterials whose electromagnetic functionalities can be switched

between nonchiral and chiral states by stretching the predesigned split-ring resonator 

array. Single-band, dual-band and broadband circular polarizers with reconfigurable 

performance are experimentally demonstrated with maximum circular dichroisms of

0.88, 0.94 and 0.92, respectively. The underlying mechanism is explained and 

calculated via detailed analysis of the excited multipoles, including the electric, 

magnetic, and toroidal dipoles and quadrupole. Our approach enables tailoring the 

electromagnetic functionalities in kirigami patterns and provides an alternate avenue 

for reconfigurable optical metadevices with exceptional mechanical properties.

KEYWORDS: kirigami, metamaterials, chiroptical response, reconfigurable

INTRODUCTION

Metamaterials are artificial materials engineered at the subwavelength scale to 

achieve electromagnetic functionalities1. Several novel optical phenomena have been 

observed in metamaterial-based devices, such as negative refraction2-4, superlens5, 

invisibility
cloaking6-8,
and strong chiroptical responses9,10. Although bulk 

metamaterials show intriguing optical properties, the complexity of fabrication and 

large loss in metallic meta-atoms hamper their applications in practice. Recently, new 

degrees of freedom have been attained by introducing abrupt phase discontinuities on 

metasurfaces, the two-dimensional counterparts of metamaterials. Metasurfaces show 


great capabilities in wavefront
manipulation and
reduce
the complexity of

fabrication11-15. Spin-selective absorption has been demonstrated by designing chiral 

meta-atoms, with promising potential applications in polarimetry, circular polarization 

detectors and chiral cavities16-19. However, structural modification is generally 

challenging once metamaterials or metasurfaces are fabricated, rendering them 

functionally nonreconfigurable. 

Reconfigurable metamaterials are designed to achieve dynamic control over the 

physical properties to realize multiple functions in one metadevice20. Tuning methods 

include the use of capacitors21, semiconductors22, phase-change materials23,24 and 

ferromagnetic/ferroelectric materials25. However, compared with the surrounding 

media and metamaterial constituents, most of these methods suffer from a limited 

tuning range because the variation is usually very small. Another strategy is changing 

the structural shapes for reconfigurable functionality. Recently, origami provided an 

alternative approach to construct strong, lightweight, and tunable three-dimensional 

(3D) blocks from flat sheets26,27. By applying prescribed sequences of folds to flat 

surfaces, researchers demonstrated flexible and efficient control over mechanical26,28, 

electronic29, acoustic30, superconducting31-33 and electromagnetic functionalities34. 

Although the design capacity of origami is remarkable, achieving complex target 

shapes with only folds is mathematically challenging. Such complex folding patterns 

require a convoluted series of deformations from the flat to folded shapes, making 

fabrication difficult. Different from origami, kirigami is an art form that introduces

cuts into folding processes, providing extra degrees of freedom in 3D shape 


construction35. It allows for similarly complicated shapes to be formed with greatly 

reduced complexity in the design process and less wasted material36,37. When 

applying sufficiently large amounts of stretching, buckling is triggered, resulting in 

the formation of a 3D structure comprising a well-organized pattern of mountains and 

valleys. Kirigami is a highly promising technique to design complex 3D metadevices 

with reconfigurable functionalities but has not been applied in the design of 

electromagnetic metamaterials with extraordinary chiral properties, especially for 

reconfigurable toroidal circular dichroism. 

A chiral structure can be modeled as electric and magnetic dipoles with parallel or 

antiparallel orientations of comparable magnitude. Different absorption occurs when 

circularly polarized waves pass through such a structure. This is the widely discussed 

phenomenon of conventional circular dichroism. However, for toroidal circular 

dichroism, the chiroptical effects are mostly attributed to the combination of toroidal 

dipoles and other higher order electric multipoles.

In this letter, we propose and demonstrate a general class of kirigami-based chiral 

metamaterials (KCMMs) whose electromagnetic performance can be switched 

between nonchiral and chiral states at single-band, dual-band and broadband 

wavelengths. Moreover, for the first time, we propose and investigate the 

reconfigurable toroidal dipole moments based on the kirigami. Split-ring resonators 

(SRRs) are periodically arranged on thin, foldable sheets. When transforming the 2D 

metasurface to 3D kirigami-based metamaterials, the resonant modes exhibit a 

gradually enhanced chiroptical response. The underlying mechanism is explained via


detailed analyses of the excited multipoles, including the electric, magnetic, and 

toroidal dipoles and electric quadrupole. The nonradiating feature and high flexibility 

of the toroidal geometry will be useful in many applications, such as lasers38,39, 

ultrasensitive biosensors and nonlinear effects40,41. The reconfigurable circular 

dichroism generated by toroidal dipoles offers an alternative approach to broadband

chiroptical responses beyond the widely adopted methods based on parallel electric 

and magnetic dipoles. Circular dichroisms of 0.88, 0.94 and 0.92 have been 

experimentally observed for single-band, dual-band and broadband configurations, 

respectively.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The schematic of the KCMMs is illustrated in Figure 1. The functionality of the 

proposed KCMMs is to totally transmit the designated circularly polarized wave and 

reflect the other spin state with maximum efficiency. Split-ring resonators are adopted 

as the basic meta-atoms printed on a thin and flexible dielectric substrate. Before 

cutting and folding, the metasurface is achiral because of its mirror symmetry with 

respect to the yz plane. Subsequently, the 2D metasurface is transformed into 3D 

geometries by introducing cuts at the boundary between neighboring meta-atoms in 

the y direction. The kirigami approach is considerably diverse; we investigate three 

types of KCMMs that are cut and folded from 2D metasurfaces. Type-I KCMMs 

represent kirigami structures whose neighboring units are connected by the midpoints 

of the sides at the cut boundary, whereas type-II KCMMs are based on 

buckling-induced kirigami in which the meta-atoms are connected by the vertices of 


the squares. Foldable 3D structures are formed by stretching the cut materials. Both 

type-I and type-II KCMMs contain four SRRs in a unit cell. To obtain toroidal dipole 

responses, type-III KCMMs are formed by stacking two type-I layers. The mirror 

symmetry is broken by introducing cuts and folds along different axes. Notably, all 

KCMMs can be folded into two kinds of chiral enantiomers, which are mirror images 

of each other. For simplicity, we label the two enantiomers as R-handed and L-handed. 

Additional details on the geometric dimensions of KCMMs and the folding process 

can be found in the Supporting Information (Figure S1, S3).

Figure 1. Schematic of the construction of KCMMs. Split-ring resonators are 

periodically arranged to form an achiral metasurface (left top panel). The 2D 

metasurface can be continuously transformed into 3D chiral metamaterials: type-I 

KCMM (top panel), type-II KCMM (middle panel) and type-III KCMM (bottom 

panel). Chirality switching is achieved by changing the deformation direction of the 

planar metasurface.

Proof-of-concept KCMMs were designed in the microwave region. The unit cell of 


the 2D metasurface is composed of four SRRs with side length l and width w. The gap 

size of each SRR is g = 1 mm, and the lattice constant is 20 mm. This unfolded 

metasurface has mirror symmetry around the yz plane and hence does not exhibit 

intrinsic chirality. Full-wave numerical simulations were conducted using the 

commercial software CST Microwave Studio. In simulation, SRRs are assumed to be 

standing in free space, and the influence of the ultrathin dielectric substrate is 

neglected. This is reasonable because the dielectric substrate only influences the gap 

capacity of the SRR and thus produces only a slight shift of the resonant frequency.

RESULTS

The simulation results for the three types of KCMM are illustrated in Figure 2. In the 

folded state of  = 45°, the type-I KCMMs exhibit chiroptical responses at the 

resonant frequency of 6.78 GHz, with opposite handedness in the two enantiomers. 

For the L-handed enantiomer, as shown in Figure 2(a), there is a left-handed resonant 

mode in which right-handed circularly polarized (RCP) waves are highly transmitted 

(tRR=0.95) and left-handed circularly polarized (LCP) waves are perfectly reflected 

(tLL=0.03). Chirality switching into the R-handed enantiomer is realized by changing

the folding direction, resulting in the completely reversed chiroptical response, as

shown in Figure 2(b). Both the type-I KCMM enantiomers demonstrate only one 

strong chiral resonant mode. In the type-II KCMMs, buckling is introduced to induce 

out-of-plane rotations of both the square domains and the cuts. As shown in Figure 

2(e), a second chiral resonant mode occurs at a higher frequency of 7.8 GHz with 

opposite handedness. When linearly polarized waves impinge on the L-handed 


enantiomer of the type-II KCMM, LCP and RCP waves are transmitted at 6.78 GHz 

and 7.8 GHz, respectively. Similarly, the R-handed enantiomer modulates waves with 

opposite handedness (Figure 2(f)). Therefore, type-II KCMMs can act as dual-band 

bifunctional circular polarizers that filter different spin states at two resonant 

frequencies. Although type-I and type-II KCMMs show the inspiring ability to

manipulate chiroptical effects, the assembly of multilayer KCMMs could offer 

striking bandwidth enhancement. The type-III KCMMs are stacked from two type-I 

KCMMs with identical handedness. Two resonant modes of the L-handed type-III 

occur at 6.40 and 7.12 GHz (Figure 2(i)). Unlike the type-II KCMMs, both modes 

show the left-handed feature and hence could be combined to achieve a broadband 

feature. In contrast, stacking two R-handed type-I KCMMs can produce an R-handed 

type-III KCMM that behaves in an opposite manner (Figure 2(j)). 

To illustrate the abilities of the KCMMs as circular polarizers, we investigate the 

circular dichroism (CD) spectra, which are calculated by CD = |tRR|2 - |tLL|2. The 

dependence of performance on the folding angle is plotted in Figure 2 (c, g, h). It 

demonstrates that the chiroptical effects of R-handed and L-handed enantiomers are 

complementary to each other. The chiral responses were gradually enhanced as the 

folding angle increased and reached their maximum at approximately 70 degrees. For 

the type-I and type-II KCMMs, the resonant frequencies gradually shifted as the 

folding angle increased, indicating that the operating frequencies of the single-band 

and dual-band circular polarizers can be flexibly tuned by adjusting the deformation 

states. The broadband performance of the type-III KCMMs is also well preserved at 


different folding states. The CD curves for three states ( = 0°, 45°, -45°) of the 

KCMMs are plotted in Figure 2(d, h, l). When  = 45°, the maximum CDs for type-I, 

type-II and type-III KCMMs are 0.90, 0.89 and 0.94, respectively. Such prominent 

performance makes KCMMs good candidates for reconfigurable circular polarizers. 

Animations can be found in the supplementary materials (video 1, 2,3).

Figure 2. Simulated chiral responses of the kirigami-based metamaterials. (a-d) 

Type-I KCMMs. (e-h) Type-II KCMMs. (i-l) Type-III KCMMs. (a, e, i) the 

transmission spectra of the L-handed enantiomers and (b, f, j) R-handed enantiomers. 

The dependence of the CD spectra on the folding angle is shown in (c, g, k), and CD 

curves for selected angles are shown in (d, h, l). 

To demonstrate the chiroptical responses experimentally, samples were fabricated 

based on printed circuit board (PCB) technology. Copper split-ring resonators 

(thickness 0.035 mm) were periodically printed on a type of polyimide film (thickness 

0.05 mm) with a permittivity of 3.5. Measurements of chiroptical responses and 


chirality switching of the KCMMs were implemented in a microwave chamber with a 

vector network analyzer. KCMMs consisting of 10×20 unit cells were designed along 

the x- and y-axes, respectively. Additional experimental details are described in the 

Supporting Information. The results are illustrated in Figure 3. As expected, when the 

2D metasurface is deformed to 3D geometries, the mirror symmetry of the structure is 

broken, and the chiroptical response emerges. At a resonant frequency of 6.4 GHz, the 

L-handed enantiomer of the type-I KCMM blocks most of the LCP waves, whereas 

the R-handed enantiomer is more opaque for the other spin state (Figure 3(a, b)). The 

measured CD spectra plotted in Figure 3(c) demonstrate the performance of chirality 

switching at the resonant frequency, as predicted by the preceding simulations (Figure 

2d). For the L-handed type-II KCMM enantiomer, the first resonant frequency is also 

at approximately 6.4 GHz, where most of the RCP waves are transmitted. The 

situation is reversed for the second resonant mode at approximately 7.4 GHz, where

the type-II KCMM reverses its chirality handedness (Figure 3(d, e, f)). For the 

type-III KCMMs, broadband chiroptical responses occur between two resonant 

frequencies of 6.2 GHz and 6.7 GHz. As expected, the L-handed and R-handed 

enantiomers behave as broadband circular polarizers that transmit only RCP and LCP 

waves (Figure 3(g, h)), respectively. The measured CD spectra are plotted in Figure 

3(i) and are highly consistent with the theoretical prediction. 


Figure 3. Photographs of the fabricated KCMMs and experimental demonstration of 

the reconfigurable chiroptical responses in kirigami-based metamaterials. (a-c) Type-I 

KCMMs. (d-f) Type-II KCMMs. (g-i) Type-III KCMMs. (a, d, g) show measured 

transmission spectra of the L-handed enantiomers, and (b, e, h) correspond to the 

R-handed enantiomers. (c, f, i) show measured CD spectra, which were calculated 

from the measured transmission spectra. 

Split-ring resonators produce effective electric, magnetic and toroidal dipoles at the 

resonance. To determine the origin of the circular dichroism at these resonances in our 

KCMMs, we conducted a dipolar analysis to determine the underlying mechanism.

The specific combination of the electric and magnetic dipoles, that is, parallel or 

antiparallel with comparable magnitudes, can induce strong chiral responses similar to 

those in natural chiral molecules42,43. For simplicity, we label the four squares of a 

superunit with numbers (see Figure S2 in the Supporting Information). The normal 

vectors are defined as 𝑛̅1 =

𝑎̅1×𝑎̅4

𝑎2 , 𝑛̅2 =

𝑎̅1×𝑎̅2

𝑎2 , 𝑛̅3 =

𝑎̅1×𝑎̅2

𝑎2 , and 𝑛̅4 =

𝑎̅1×𝑎̅4

𝑎2 , where 

ia
is the i-th edge vector of the square. Then, we can obtain the effective electric 


dipoles as 𝑝̅1 = −𝑝1

𝑛̅1×𝑎̅1

𝑎
, 𝑝̅2 = −𝑝2

𝑛̅2×𝑎̅3

𝑎 , 𝑝̅3 = −𝑝3

𝑛̅3×𝑎̅3

𝑎
, and 𝑝̅4 = −𝑝4

𝑛̅4×𝑎̅1

𝑎 . The 

effective magnetic dipoles are expressed as 
i
i
i
m
= m n
. The total effective electric and 

magnetic 
dipoles 
are 
,
,
,
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
eff
i
eff x
eff y
eff z
p
p
x
y
z
p
p
p
+
+
=
=

and 

,
,
,
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
eff
i
eff x
eff y
eff z
m
m
x
y
m
z
m
m
+
+
=
=

, respectively. The surface current distributions

for the 2D achiral metasurface and the L-handed enantiomers of the KCMMs are

plotted in Figure 4(a-e). Before folding, the total effective electric dipole moment is 

along the y direction, yet the total effective magnetic dipole moment is zero; hence, no 

chiroptical response occurs for the achiral metasurface. In the L-handed type-I 

KCMM, the induced magnetic dipoles are no longer antiparallel with each other, and 

hence, a net magnetic response occurs (Figure 4(c)). The total effective electric and 

magnetic dipoles are antiparallel to each other along the y-axis, contributing to the 

strong left-handed chiral response. For the L-handed type-II KCMM, the electric and 

magnetic dipoles experience out-of-plane rotations in the folding process. At the first 

resonant mode (6.78 GHz), the y components of the effective electric and magnetic 

dipoles are antiparallel to each other, contributing to the strong left-handed chiral 

response. In contrast, the effective electric and magnetic dipoles are parallel at the 

second resonant mode (7.8 GHz), as shown in Figure 4(e), indicating the right-handed 

chiral response. Therefore, the type-II KCMMs flexibly switch their functionality

between transparent and opaque states for circular polarized waves. 


Figure 4. Surface current distributions and dipolar responses of the kirigami-based 

metamaterials. (a) The orientation of the four split-ring resonators (b) The surface 

current distributions at a resonant frequency of 6.9 GHz. Four resonators all working

via the asymmetric modes with in-plane electric dipoles and out-of-plane magnetic 

dipoles. (c) The surface current distributions for the resonant modes of the L-handed 

type-I KCMM. The induced electric and magnetic dipoles have anti-parallel 

components, resulting in the left handedness. (d, e) The surface current distributions 

for the first (d) and second (e) resonant modes of the L-handed type-II KCMM. The 

induced electric and magnetic dipoles have anti-parallel components at 6.78 GHz but 

parallel components at 7.8 GHz, leading to the opposite handedness of the 


kirigami-based metamaterial at the two resonant frequencies.

To quantitatively analyze the nature of these chiral modes, we performed a multipole 

analysis by calculating the simulated surface current excited by the plane waves at 

normal incidence. Then, the multipolar expansions were calculated using the integral 

of the currents;44-46 additional details can be found in the supplementary materials.

We performed a multipole decomposition to quantify their contributions. In our 

KCMMs, only the electric dipole P, magnetic dipole M, toroidal dipole T, and 

electric quadrupole Qe
provide significant contributions to the macroscopic 

electromagnetic responses, and all the other higher-order multipoles are relatively 

weak and can be neglected. The radiated powers of multipole components as a 

function of wavelength were calculated by integrating the current, and the results are 

plotted in Fig. 5. For the achiral metasurface (Fig. 5(a)), the y component of the 

electric dipole (Py) is the maximum component, and the other components show zero

responses. The toroidal dipole Tz is weak, the electric quadrupole Qe and magnetic 

dipole My are zero. When the achiral metasurface folds to the type-I KCMM (Fig. 

5(b)), the electric dipole Py and magnetic dipole My play dominant roles in 

comparison with the toroidal dipole Tz, and the electric quadrupole Qe is still 

extremely weak. The results agree with the qualitative analysis. 

For the L-handed type-II KCMM, Fig 5(c, d) shows that the first resonant mode of 

type-II KCMM is similar to that of type-I KCMM, and the handedness switching in 

the second chiral resonant frequency is attributed to the appearance of other 


components of multipoles (Px, Pz, Mx, Mz, Tz). Notably, the strong electric dipole 

component Pz, magnetic dipole component Mz and toroidal dipole component Tz do 

not directly contribute to the far-field radiation at normal incidence but may couple

with the surface wave or other dark modes. This is the underlying mechanism of the 

second chiral resonance mode.

Figure 5. Amplitudes of the fields radiated by the four most dominant multipole 

components (electric dipole P, magnetic dipole M, toroidal dipole T, and electric 

quadrupole Qe) that contribute to the polarization conversion response of the 

metamaterial. (a) The calculated scattering power of multipoles of the achiral 

metasurface. (b) The calculated scattering power of multipoles of the L-handed type-I 

KCMM. (c, d) The calculated scattering power of multipoles of the L-handed type-II 


KCMM.

For the type-III KCMMs, the microscopic origin of the chiroptical responses is

different from those for type-I and type-II. To understand the chiral performance, it is 

not sufficient to analyze the electric and magnetic dipoles only; toroidal multipolar 

analysis is needed40,47. The presence of the multipole pairs is visually detected in the 

distributions of the electric and magnetic fields inside the unit cell arising from 

circularly polarized excitation. At f1 (7.12GHz), the field lines of the electric and 

magnetic fields are aligned parallel to the y-axis yet with opposite directions, which 

contributes to the electric and magnetic dipolar excitations with the net dipole 

moments collinearly oriented along the y-axis (Figure 6(a,b)). This is also the 

aforementioned microscopic origin of the chiroptical responses in type-I and type-II 

KCMMs. However, at f2 (6.4GHz), the magnetic field is confined within a 

well-defined ring-like area where the field lines thread through the individual SRRs

and form a closed loop (Figure 6(d)). Such a magnetic-field configuration is formed 

by poloidal currents flowing in the wire loops of the SRRs and is unique to the 

toroidal dipolar excitation with a net dipole moment aligned parallel to the x-axis.

Compared with that in Figure 6(a), the distribution of the electric field shows a similar 

pattern but with field lines on the opposite sides of the SRR aligned antiparallel to 

each other, indicating an electric quadrupole excitation (Figure 6(c)). Therefore, the 

additional electric quadrupole and magnetic toroidal dipole excitations contribute to 

the broadband chiroptical performance of the type-III KCMMs. The analysis was 


performed using multipole decomposition for x and y polarization waves. Different 

multipoles contribute to the same resonant features in y polarization and x 

polarization incidence waves. As shown in Fig 6(e, f), the dominant multipoles are the 

electric and magnetic dipoles Py and My at f1. However, at f2, the electric quadrupole 

Qe-yz (electric quadrupole in the yz plane) and the toroidal dipole Tx show the largest 

moments, and those of the magnetic dipole My and electric dipole Py are secondary.

Circularly polarized light can be regarded as the decomposition of two linear 

polarizations. Hence, it is sufficient to perform multipole decomposition of the 

metamaterial’s polarization conversion responses txy and tyx. From the multipole 

analysis shown in Figure 6, the electric dipole Py and magnetic dipole My can be 

excited under Ex and Ey incident fields at f1, respectively, indicating strong 

polarization conversion (tyx and txy). This implies that the circular dichroism that 

depends on Im(txy-tyx) is highly enhanced at this frequency. However, at f2, the strong 

chiroptical response is attributed to the simultaneous excitation of Qe-yz (electric 

quadrupole in the yz plane) and Tx, from which the cross-polarization powers arises.


Figure 6. (a-d) Field distributions around a meta-atom of L-handed type-III KCMM

when excited by LCP waves. (a, b) show the electric (log10|E|) (a) and magnetic 

(log10|E|) (b) field distributions at f1 (7.12 GHz) (c, d) give the electric (log10|E|) (c) 

and magnetic (log10|E|) (d) field distributions at f2 (6.4 GHz). The arrows indicate the 

directions of the fields. The green (blue) arrows show the orientation of the induced 

electric (magnetic) dipoles for the individual rings. (e, f) Amplitudes of the fields 

radiated by the four most dominant multipole components (electric dipole P, magnetic 

dipole M, toroidal dipole T, and electric quadrupole Qe) that contribute to the 

polarization conversion response of the metamaterial under (e) x-polarized Ex and (f) 

y-polarized Ey incident light.


Toroidal moments have been found in nuclear and atomic physics and solid state 

physics. Recently, toroidal dipole excitations in metamaterials were observed, and the 

nonradiating feature of the toroidal geometry provides many interesting phenomena,

with enhanced light-matter interaction and applications in lasers, ultrasensitive 

biosensors and nonlinear effects. We investigated the reconfigurable toroidal dipole 

moments. We also investigated the relationship between Tx and the folding angle 

by plotting the resonant strength of toroidal dipole excitation as a function of the 

folding angle. We also investigate the relationship between the toroidal dipole 

resonant frequency and the folding angle  . As shown in Figure 7(a), the resonant 

frequency of the toroidal dipole is sensitive to the folding angle. As the type III 

KCMM folds from a two-dimensional surface to 3D blocks, the resonant frequency 

increases to reach its maximum at approximately 45 degrees and then decreases. This 

feature is consistent with the simulated circular dichroism spectra in Figure 2(k). The 

radiated power of the toroidal dipole versus the folding angle is depicted in Figure 

7(b). The radiated power of the toroidal dipole becomes relatively weak when the 

folding angle is too large or too small.


Figure 7. (a) Toroidal dipole Tx resonant frequency as a function of folding angle. (b)

Magnitude of the excited toroidal dipole component as a function of the folding angle 

at the instant of the electromagnetic resonance. 

Moreover, due to the scaling properties of Maxwell’s equations, the proposed strategy 

for reconfigurable electromagnetic performance can be extended to other frequencies, 

from millimeter-scale architectures in microwave regimes to tunable metasurfaces in 

terahertz regimes. We investigated one type of Micro-electro-mechanical-systems 

(MEMS) kirigami metamaterial. The right picture in Figure 8(a) depicts the basic 

structure of an SRR and two cantilever legs. The SRR can rotate as the cantilever legs 

bend in response to thermal changes. The Au/Cr (200 nm) layer is used for the SRRs,

and the SiNx (400 nm) layer is used for the supporting layer and bending of the legs. 

The difference in the thermal expansion coefficients of SiNx and Au/Cr lead to 

bending of the cantilever supports. Rapid thermal annealing (RTA) at a specific 

temperature sets the orientation of the SRRs at a particular folding angle with respect 

to the substrate, as shown in Figure 8(a). In this way, it is possible to create a response 

over a large folding angle range from 0 to nearly 90

 . CST MICROWAVE STUDIO 

was used to simulate the electromagnetic response. The conductivity of gold was set 


to 4.09e7 S/m, and the permittivity of SiNx was 7. To accurately simulate the bending 

of the bimaterial cantilevers, they were modeled as thin curved strips of constant 

length. The RTA at specific temperatures corresponds to particular folding angles 48-51: 

350 C

-30

 , 400 C

-40

 450 C

-60

 , and 500 C

-80

 . 

Figure 8(b-d) show the results of simulations of the transmission spectra. No 

chiroptical response occurs for the achiral metasurface, as shown in Figure 8(b). 

Figure 8(c) shows transmission spectra corresponding to different temperatures: 350

 C
, 450 C

, 450 C

, and 500 C

. The resonant frequencies gradually shift as the 

folding angle increases, indicating that the operating frequencies can be flexibly tuned 

by adjusting the deformation states. Figure 8(d) shows the corresponding circular 

dichroism (CD) spectrum.

Figure 8. (a) Schematic view of a MEMS kirigami metamaterial structure and how the 

SRRs rotate as the cantilever legs bend. Parameters: p: 100 μm; length of the 

supporting SiNx plate a: 80 μm; SRR side length h: 72 μm; width of the bimaterial leg 

d: 4 μm; length of the bimaterial leg l: 92 μm; SRR line width w: 8 μm; and SRR gap 


distance g: 4 μm. (b-c) Transmission spectra of the L-handed MEMS kirigami 

metamaterial. Black – 0 degrees, red – 30 degrees (350 C

), blue – 40 degrees (400

 C
), green – 60 degrees (450 C

), and magenta – 80 degrees (500 C

). (d) 

Corresponding CD spectra for different folding angles.

DISCUSSION

We proposed and demonstrated a general class of kirigami-based chiral metamaterials

whose electromagnetic functionalities can be switched between nonchiral and chiral 

states. By introducing cuts and selecting the connection points between neighboring 

meta-atoms, 2D achiral metasurfaces can be deformed to 3D shapes with significantly 

enhanced chiroptical responses. Highly efficient single-band, dual-band and 

broadband circular polarizers experimentally demonstrated switchable handedness 

realized by adjusting the deformation direction. The underlying mechanism was 

confirmed by detailed analyses of the excited electrical, magnetic and toroidal dipoles. 

Compared with the technique of origami, kirigami allows for the practitioner to 

exploit cuts in addition to folds to achieve large deformations and create complex 3D 

objects. With the ongoing development of micromanufacturing techniques, we expect 

our work to lead to alternate approaches to lightweight, reconfigurable, and 

deployable metadevices.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:

This work was sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under 

Grant No. 61625502, No. 61574127, No. 61601408, No. 61775193 and No. 11704332, 

the ZJNSF under Grant No. LY17F010008, the Top-Notch Young Talents Program of

China, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the 

Innovation Joint Research Center for Cyber-Physical-Society System.

References:
1
Liu, Y. & Zhang, X. Metamaterials: a new frontier of science and technology. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 2494-2507 (2011).

2
Shelby, R. A., Smith, D. R. & Schultz, S. Experimental verification of a 
negative index of refraction. Science 292, 77-79 (2001).

3
Valentine, J. et al. Three-dimensional optical metamaterial with a negative 
refractive index. Nature 455, 376-379 (2008).

4
Pendry, J. B. Negative refraction makes a perfect lens. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 
3966 (2000).

5
Fang, N., Lee, H., Sun, C. & Zhang, X. Sub–diffraction-limited optical 
imaging with a silver superlens. Science 308, 534-537 (2005).

6
Liu, R. et al. Broadband ground-plane cloak. Science 323, 366-369 (2009).

7
Schurig, D.
et al.
Metamaterial electromagnetic cloak at microwave 

frequencies. Science 314, 977-980 (2006).

8
Zheng, B. et al. Concealing arbitrary objects remotely with multi-folded 
transformation optics. Light Sci.Appl 5, e16177 (2016).

9
Gansel, J. K. et al. Gold helix photonic metamaterial as broadband circular 
polarizer. Science 325, 1513-1515 (2009).

10
Wang, Z., Cheng, F., Winsor, T. & Liu, Y. Optical chiral metamaterials: a 
review of the fundamentals, fabrication methods and applications. 
Nanotechnology 27, 412001 (2016).

11
Kildishev, A. V., Boltasseva, A. & Shalaev, V. M. Planar photonics with 
metasurfaces. Science 339, 1232009 (2013).

12
Yu, N. & Capasso, F. Flat optics with designer metasurfaces. Nat. Mater 13, 
139-150 (2014).

13
Yang, Y. et al. Full‐Polarization 3D Metasurface Cloak with Preserved 


Amplitude and Phase. Adv. Mater. 28, 6866-6871 (2016).

14
Yang, Y., Wang, H., Yu, F., Xu, Z. & Chen, H. A metasurface carpet cloak for 
electromagnetic, acoustic and water waves. Sci. Rep. 6, 20219 (2016).

15
Yang, Y. et al. Hyperbolic spoof plasmonic metasurfaces. NPG Asia Materials
9, e428 (2017).

16
Wang, Z. et al. Circular dichroism metamirrors with near-perfect extinction. 
ACS Photonics 3, 2096-2101 (2016).

17
Plum, E. & Zheludev, N. I. Chiral mirrors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 221901 
(2015).

18
Jing, L. et al. Chiral metamirrors for broadband spin-selective absorption. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 231103 (2017).

19
Li, W. et al. Circularly polarized light detection with hot electrons in chiral 
plasmonic metamaterials. Nat. Commun. 6, 8379, (2015).

20
Zheludev, N. I. The road ahead for metamaterials. Science 328, 582-583 
(2010).

21
Aydin, K. & Ozbay, E. Capacitor-loaded split ring resonators as tunable 
metamaterial components. J. Appl. Phys. 101, 024911 (2007).

22
Boulais, K. et al. Tunable split-ring resonator for metamaterials using 
photocapacitance of semi-insulating GaAs. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 043518 
(2008).

23
Dicken, M. J. et al. Frequency tunable near-infrared metamaterials based on 
VO 2 phase transition. Opt. Express 17, 18330-18339 (2009).

24
Samson, Z. et al. Metamaterial electro-optic switch of nanoscale thickness. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 143105 (2010).

25
Kang, L., Zhao, Q., Zhao, H. & Zhou, J. Magnetically tunable negative 
permeability metamaterial composed by split ring resonators and ferrite rods. 
Opt. Express 16, 8825-8834 (2008).

26
You, Z. Folding structures out of flat materials. Science 345, 623-624 (2014).

27
Chen, Y., Peng, R. & You, Z. Origami of thick panels. Science 349, 396-400 
(2015).

28
Waitukaitis, S., Menaut, R., Chen, B. G.-g. & van Hecke, M. Origami 
multistability: From single vertices to metasheets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 055503 
(2015).

29
Song, Z. et al. Origami lithium-ion batteries. Nat. Commun 5, 3140 (2014).

30
Babaee, S., Overvelde, J. T., Chen, E. R., Tournat, V. & Bertoldi, K. 
Reconfigurable origami-inspired acoustic waveguides. Sci. Adv 2, e1601019 
(2016).

31
Ricci, M., Orloff, N. & Anlage, S. M. Superconducting metamaterials. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 87, 034102 (2005).

32
Savinov, V., Delfanazari, K., Fedotov, V. & Zheludev, N. I. Giant nonlinearity 
in a superconducting sub-terahertz metamaterial. Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 
101107 (2016).

33
Chen, H.-T. et al. Tuning the resonance in high-temperature superconducting 
terahertz metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 247402 (2010).


34
Wang, Z. et al. Origami‐Based Reconfigurable Metamaterials for Tunable 
Chirality. Adv. Mater 29, 1700412 (2017).

35
Callens, S. J. & Zadpoor, A. A. From flat sheets to curved geometries: Origami 
and kirigami approaches. Mater. Today 21, 241(2017).

36
Castle, T., Sussman, D. M., Tanis, M. & Kamien, R. D. Additive lattice 
kirigami. Sci. Adv 2, e1601258 (2016).

37
Sussman, D. M. et al. Algorithmic lattice kirigami: A route to pluripotent 
materials. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 112, 7449-7453 (2015).

38
Zheludev, N. I., Prosvirnin, S., Papasimakis, N. & Fedotov, V. Lasing spaser. 
Nat. photonics 2, 351-354 (2008).

39
Huang, Y.-W. et al. Toroidal lasing spaser. Sci. Rep. 3, 1237 (2013).

40
Papasimakis, N., Fedotov, V., Savinov, V., Raybould, T. & Zheludev, N. 
Electromagnetic toroidal excitations in matter and free space. Nat. Mater 15, 
263-271 (2016).

41
Gupta, M. & Singh, R. Toroidal versus Fano Resonances in High Q planar 
THz Metamaterials. Advanced Optical Materials 4, 2119-2125 (2016).

42
Alaeian, H. & Dionne, J. A. Controlling electric, magnetic, and chiral dipolar 
emission with PT-symmetric potentials. Phys. Rev. B 91, 245108 (2015).

43
Yoo, S. & Park, Q.-H. Chiral light-matter interaction in optical resonators. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 203003 (2015).

44
Kaelberer, T., Fedotov, V., Papasimakis, N., Tsai, D. & Zheludev, N. Toroidal 
dipolar response in a metamaterial. Science 330, 1510-1512 (2010).

45
Huang, Y.-W. et al. Design of plasmonic toroidal metamaterials at optical 
frequencies. Opt. Express 20, 1760-1768 (2012).

46
Radescu, E. & Vaman, G. Exact calculation of the angular momentum loss, 
recoil force, and radiation intensity for an arbitrary source in terms of electric, 
magnetic, and toroid multipoles. Phys. Rev. E 65, 046609 (2002).

47
Raybould, T. et al. Toroidal circular dichroism. Phys. Rev. B 94, 035119 
(2016).

48
Tao, H. et al. Reconfigurable terahertz metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 
147401 (2009).

49
Lin, I.-K., Zhang, X. & Zhang, Y. Inelastic deformation of bilayer 
microcantilevers with nanoscale coating. Sensors and Actuators A: Physical
168, 1-9 (2011).

50
Tao, H. et al. Microwave and terahertz wave sensing with metamaterials. Opt. 
Express 19, 21620-21626 (2011).

51
Zheludev, N. I. & Kivshar, Y. S. From metamaterials to metadevices. Nat. 
Mater 11, 917 (2012).


