1 
 

Laser writing of bright colours on near-percolation plasmonic reflector 
arrays 

Alexander S. Roberts1, Sergey M. Novikov1, Yuanqing Yang1, Yiting Chen1, Sergejs Boroviks1, 

Jonas Beermann1, N. Asger Mortensen1,2 & Sergey I. Bozhevolnyi1,2* 

1Centre for Nano Optics, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark 

2Danish Institute for Advanced Study, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, 
Denmark 

 

Colouration by surface nanostructuring has attracted a great deal of attention by the virtue of 

making use of environment-friendly recyclable materials and generating non-bleaching 

colours1-8. Recently, it was found possible to delegate the task of colour printing to laser post-

processing that modifies carefully designed and fabricated nanostructures9,10. Here we take 

the next crucial step in the development of structural colour printing by dispensing with 

preformed nanostructures and using instead near-percolation metal films atop dielectric-

metal sandwiches, i.e., near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays. Scanning rapidly (~ 20 

μm/s) across 4-nm-thin island-like gold films supported by 30-nm-thin silica layers atop 100-

nm-thick gold layers with a strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser beam, while adjusting the 

average laser power from 1 to 10 mW, we produce bright colours varying from green to red 

by laser-heating-induced merging and reshaping of gold islands. Selection of strongly heated 

islands and their reshaping, both originating from the excitation of plasmonic resonances, are 

strongly influenced by the polarization direction of laser illumination, so that the colours 

produced are well pronounced only when viewed with the same polarization. Conversely, the 

laser colour writing with circular polarizations results in bright polarization-independent 

colour images.  The fabrication procedure for near-percolation reflector arrays is exceedingly 

simple and scalable to mass production, while the laser-induced modification occurs 

inherently with the subwavelength resolution. This unique combination of remarkable 

features makes the approach developed for laser colour writing readily amenable for practical 

implementation and use in diverse applications ranging from nanoscale patterning for 

security marking to large-scale colour printing for decoration. 

 

*e-mail: seib@mci.sdu.dk 


2 
 

Ultrafast laser processing of materials holds important implications for both applied and 

fundamental research11, including novel possibilities for post-processing and reconfiguring 

nanophotonic structures12,13. Laser processing at the nanoscale often involves resonant (local) field 

enhancement and photo-thermal effects, for example, to modify the morphology of individual 

plasmonic resonators14 or dielectric nanoparticles (NPs)10. Fascinating applications range from the 

ultrafast delivery of heat at the nanoscale15 to laser writing of plasmonic colours with sub-

diffraction-limit resolution9. Laser ablation, achieved typically at high radiation fluences, can also 

be used for colouration of plasmonic surfaces1, although with considerably lower spatial 

resolutions. Previous works on plasmonic colours2,3 have extensively utilised progress in 

nanofabrication technologies to accurately pattern surfaces with carefully designed plasmonic 

nanostructures4–6, using also replication techniques oriented towards mass production7,8. 

Considering a very large body of research conducted in the field of structural colours1-10, it seems 

unavoidable that high-resolution colour printing requires high-resolution fabrication of designed 

nanostructures, which would result in appropriate colours either immediately1-8 or after post-

processing by laser writing9,10. 

In this work, we demonstrate a conceptually new approach to high-resolution laser printing 

of structural colours (Fig. 1) that eliminates the need for preformed nanostructures, using instead 

near-percolation metal films atop dielectric-metal sandwiches, i.e., near-percolation plasmonic 

reflector arrays (NPPRAs). The main idea is to take advantage of unique scattering-absorption 

properties of gap-surface plasmon (GSP) resonators16,17 (that make these particularly attractive for 

the environment-protected colour printing12) and laser-induced modification of local resonance 

properties in near-percolation metal films18-20. Here, the GSP back-reflector configuration is pivotal 

for improving the colour vibrancy, which is generally recognized as a common challenge for 

plasmonic colours10, while a very high NP surface-density in near-percolation metal films ensures 

high spatial resolution in laser-heating-induced NP reshaping and thereby in colour writing. 

Furthermore, due to inherent stability of GSP resonators with respect to surfactants, the fabricated 

colour prints can be protected with a transparent dielectric overlay (deposited before or after colour 

printing) for ambient use without destroying its colouring5. Finally, the NPPRA fabrication is 

exceedingly simple and requires only three consecutive material depositions, producing an optically 

thick metal back-reflector, a thin dielectric spacer and a very thin semi-continuous metal film. 

The NPPRA-based laser-writing platform (Fig. 1) is amenable to a variety of modifications 

through the rich physics involved in thermally and locally induced NP reshaping and associated 

dependencies on interfacial energies, surface tensions and laser (pulse) characteristics, among 


3 
 

others, and is thus intimately dependent on material and geometric choices as well as spatial and 

temporal properties of the laser. The thermally induced NP merging and reshaping can, in general, 

be viewed as a part of dewetting that describes the rupture of a thin (melted) film on the substrate 

and the formation of droplets. Thermally induced dewetting of a top metal film (as a whole) in 

metal-insulator-metal structures has been found suitable for fabrication of plasmonic broadband 

visible absorbers21 and solar absorbers22, replacing typically slow and expensive lithographic nano-

patterning step with a straightforward and cost-effective heating procedure. Similar global 

dewetting of a silver film on glass has been used to fabricate a layer of plasmonic NPs producing 

dichroic colours when viewed in transmission/reflection23 as in the famous Lycurgus cup. Local 

laser-heating-induced NP reshaping in NPPRAs introduced in our work allows one not only to 

realize laser colour writing with subwavelength resolution but also to achieve polarization 

selectivity, an interesting feature that might be useful for polarization multiplexing. 

The NPPRA-based configuration investigated in detail in this work comprises 4-nm-thin (on 

average) gold films evaporated on 30-nm-thick silica (SiO2) layers atop optically thick (100 nm) 

gold films supported by silicon substrates (Fig. 1). The laser colour writing is performed with a 

strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser (750 nm wavelength) beam with linear polarization and average 

powers ranging from 1 to 11 mW with the power level maintained in a closed feedback loop and 

controlled synchronously with beam positioning via a computer interface (see Supplementary 

Section 1). The top island-like gold film contains differently sized NPs that are gradually merged 

and reshaped due to local laser-induced heating, changing thereby the colour of reflected light (Fig. 

1). Viewing through an analyser that is co-polarized with the polarization of the writing beam 

reveals bright and deeply saturated colours that span from yellow for the pristine sample and low-

power exposures to green (for intermediate powers) and red for the largest powers (Fig. 2a). 

Notably, the colours are uniform even when viewed through diffraction-limited optics, indicating 

that the density of reshaped NPs is sufficiently high to average out local variations in the optical 

response on scales comparable to the diffraction limit as observed in a colour print of the University 

of Southern Denmark (SDU) logo (Fig. 2b) fabricated using a computerized script5. Comparing 

these images with those viewed through a cross-polarized analyser (Figs. 2c and 2d) demonstrates a 

high degree of polarization selectivity for colours obtained at powers up to ~ 4 mW, indicating 

thereby the colour range that can be accessed independently in both linear polarisations. At higher 

powers, the colours seen in the cross-polarised configuration start to divert from the pristine 

NPPRA colour, and begin to exhibit colours seen in the co-polarized configuration for lower 

powers. Different colours observed in the co- and cross-polarized configurations are associated with 

different bright-field reflectance spectra (Figs. 2e and 2f) that can in turn be mapped on a standard 


4 
 

CIE-1931 and linear sRGB colour spaces  (Figs. 2g and 2h). The colours observed without using an 

analyser and the reflection spectra obtained with unpolarized light represent an intermediate case as 

expected (see Supplementary Section 4). In general, even though the cross talk in the images 

written and viewed with orthogonal polarizations is substantial, the degree of their differences is 

still appreciable and can further be enhanced using image processing methods and recognition 

techniques. We believe that this interesting and important feature might be found useful for 

polarization multiplexing (see Supplementary Section 4).  

Local laser-heating-induced NP reshaping in NPPRAs and ensuing surface colouration 

introduced in our work is expected to feature subwavelength resolution because of very high 

densities of NPs (>> 100 µm-2) typical for near-percolation metal films. Similar to the colour laser 

printing on preformed nanostructures9,10, the NP reshaping requires a certain level of the writing 

laser power, a feature that opens a way to achieving, in general, deep subwavelength resolutions by 

properly adjusting the writing laser power. On the other hand, in the absence of well-defined unit 

cells (that one can immediately judge as being modified or not), it is difficult to quantify the 

achieved resolution using non-optical characterization, such as SEM imaging. Using optical images, 

even with high magnifications and numerical apertures, allows one to determine the resolution only 

up to the diffraction limit of half of the wavelength used. In this respect, the optical image shown in 

Fig. 2b indicates that the spatial resolution is close to or even better than the wavelength when 

imaging with the co-polarized (with respect to the writing polarization) illumination.  

In the course of our investigations, we have used for colour printing different NPPRA 

configurations, i.e., having thicknesses of both spacer SiO2 layers and thin island-like gold films, 

and found the effect of polarization-selective laser colour printing to be remarkably robust (see 

Supplementary Section 6). The practical applicability of colour printing schemes hinges on the 

robustness of the printed colours under often chemically and mechanically corrosive influences of 

the environment. While colours in the simple configuration with a laser-reshaped gold top layer can 

simply be wiped off with a light touch, the presented approach suggests various schemes of 

protection with a dielectric overlay due to the inherent stability of GSP resonators with respect to 

surfactants5. Thus, we have demonstrated both that the fabricated colour prints can be protected 

with a transparent dielectric (polymer) overlay for ambient use without destroying its colouring, and 

the possibility for laser colour printing on SiO2-protected NPPRAs (see Supplementary Section 7). 

Laser-heating induced morphological changes in near-percolation metal films have recently 

been considered using two-photon luminescence (TPL) imaging18,19  and scanning (amplitude-phase 

resolved) near-field optical micrscopy19 as well as bright-field optical microscopy along with 


5 
 

electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS)20. In general, highly localized heating, which results in 

NP merging and reshaping upon laser light exposure, originates from the excitation of strongly 

enhanced and confined (dipolar) resonant surface plasmon (SP) excitations, whose existence for 

thin near-percolation (island-like) metal films illuminated with practically any wavelength is well 

documented19,20,24-26. The presence of an optically thick metal back-reflector changes drastically 

both underlying physical mechanisms involved and their optical manifestation. Thus, in the case of 

plasmonic metasurfaces, we established that the presence of a back reflector enhances dramatically 

the scattering contribution from induced magnetic dipoles17 and opens thereby the possibility for 

controlling the reflected field phase within the whole 2π range27. In the current case of laser colour 

writing with NPPRAs, we have experimentally established using TPL imaging of coloured NPPRA 

areas intimate relationship between plasmonic resonances (see Supplementary Section 8). 

Further understanding of underlying physical mechanisms involved in the proposed 

approach for colour printing requires constructing an adequate physical system amenable to 

modelling of its optical properties. To this end, we have verified the correlation between the surface 

morphology reconstructed using the SEM images and the optical reflectance spectra calculated 

using three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations28. Using the SEM 

images of three different areas (pristine and illuminated with a linearly polarized 3.9 and 7.3 mW 

beam) of a 4-nm-thin gold island-like film showing three distinct colours, yellow, green and red 

(Fig. 3a), we calculated the reflectance spectra for the co- and cross-polarized illumination (Fig. 3b) 

and their colour representations (Fig. 3c). It is seen that the simulations reproduce qualitatively the 

experimental observations of spectra and colours, including the effect of polarization sensitivity (cf. 

Fig. 2e-h and Fig. 3b,c) that is apparently introduced by the melting-induced anisotropy in NP 

shapes19,20. The electric (Ex) and magnetic (Hy) field magnitude distributions (Fig. 3d) indicate the 

occurrence of localized SP modes (hot spots) typical for near-percolation metal films24-26 revealed 

by the electric field distributions as well as relatively weakly localized GSP modes (due to their 

scattering by random nanostructures) revealed by the magnetic field distributions. These underlying 

physical mechanisms responsible for both selection of strongly heated NPs and their merging and 

reshaping were further revealed by simulating the absorption spectra for different material 

compositions based on the same random nanostructure reconstructed from the SEM image of the 

red-coloured surface (see Supplementary Section 2). We found the absorption spectra originate 

from the interband absorption in the thick bottom gold layer for short (< 500 nm) wavelengths, 

while the direct absorption in the top gold nanostructured film contributes primarily to the total 

absorption for long (> 700 nm) wavelengths. In the intermediate wavelength range (500 nm < λ < 

700 nm), the absorption due to the strongly localized SP and weakly localized GSP modes becomes 


6 
 

dominant. Finally, a special role played by the circumstance that NP shapes are different from 

spherical ones for the observed polarization sensitivity19,20 was further emphasized using 

simulations of reflectance spectra from regular arrays of gold ellipsoidal NPs supported by 

dielectric-metal sandwiches (see Supplementary Section 3). 

The polarization selectivity discussed at length in the previous sections becomes detrimental 

when targeting conventional colour printing with prints to be viewed with ambient (unpolarized) 

light. In order to produce polarization-independent colour images we employed circularly polarized 

light for laser colour printing. We found that the corresponding colour prints look identical for all 

polarizations as well as for unpolarised light (see Supplementary Section 5) and even exhibit a bit 

brighter and more intense colours than those observed with the co-polarized writing and viewing, 

although the difference being admittedly small (cf. Fig 2b and Fig. 4a). Polarization insensitive 

printing with circularly polarized light is a nontrivial feature, when taking into account the 

demonstration of chiral SP multiple scattering by random surface nanostructures exploited for on-

chip spectro-polarimetry29. In the current configuration, random NPs involved in scattering of 

various SP modes as discussed above are significantly smaller, and the regime of strong multiple 

scattering (resulting in strong localization) required for chiral sensitivity29 is apparently not 

accessible. We further used the printed image for determination of the spatial resolution by 

superimposing optical microscopy and SEM images and highlighting thereby the correlation 

between structural colours and the morphology of island-like film (Fig. 4). Analysing the SEM 

zoom shown in Fig. 4c, one infers that the width of transition between modified (by laser writing) 

and pristine film surface is at the level of 400 nm, or even smaller, justifying thereby our claim of 

the subwavelength resolution in the considered approach for laser colour printing. 

In summary, we have demonstrated the usage of near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays 

for laser printing of structured colours. Scanning rapidly (~ 20 μm/s) across 4-nm-thin island-like 

gold films supported by 30-nm-thin silica layers atop 100-nm-thick gold layers with a strongly 

focused Ti-sapphire laser beam, while adjusting the average laser power from 1 to 10 mW, we  have 

produced bright colours varying from green to red by laser-heating-induced merging and reshaping 

of gold islands. Both polarization sensitive and independent colour writing were demonstrated using 

linearly and circularly polarized light, respectively. In the case of linearly polarized writing, the 

difference between cross-polarized images is substantial, suggesting important perspectives for 

polarization multiplexing. The fabrication procedure for near-percolation reflector arrays is 

exceedingly simple requiring only three consecutive material depositions (to produce an optically 

thick metal back-reflector, a thin dielectric spacer and a very thin semi-continuous metal film) and 


7 
 

thereby truly scalable to mass production. At the same time, the laser-induced modification occurs 

inherently with the subwavelength resolution, while the fabricated colour prints can be protected 

with a transparent dielectric overlay for ambient use without destroying its colouring. Moreover, we 

have also demonstrated the possibility for laser colour printing on polymer-protected near-

percolation plasmonic reflector arrays, a procedure that allows one to separate the process of 

pristine sample fabrication and that of laser colour printing. The unique combination of 

aforementioned remarkable features makes the approach developed for laser colour writing readily 

amenable for practical implementation and use in diverse applications ranging from nanoscale 

patterning for security marking to large-scale colour printing for decoration. 

 

Methods 

Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper as 

supplementary information. 

Acknowledgments  

S. I. B. acknowledges the European Research Council, Grant 341054 (PLAQNAP). N. A. M. is a 

VILLUM Investigator supported by VILLUM FONDEN (grant No. 16498). Centre for Nano Optics 

is financially supported by the University of Southern Denmark (SDU 2020 funding). 

Author contributions  

S. I. B. conceived the idea. A. S. R. and S. M. N. contributed equally to this work. A. S. R. and Y. 

C. fabricated the substrates. Y. C. did the SEM characterisation, while A. S. R. and S. M. N. 

performed the laser writing and optical characterisation. J. B. performed characterization by two-

photon induced photoluminescence microscopy. Y. Y. conducted the analysis of underlying 

physical effects involved in NPPRA colouring. S. B. evaluated contributions to the reflection 

spectra of differently sized NPs using a semi-analytic model. S. I. B., J. B., and N. A. M. supervised 

the project and provided feedback on the experiments. All authors contributed to the interpretation 

of results and participated in the preparation of manuscript. 

Additional information  

Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Reprints and permission 

information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints. 

Competing financial interests  

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 


8 
 

References 

1. Guay, J.-M. et al. Laser-induced plasmonic colours on metals. Nat. Commun. 8, 16095 (2017). 

2. Gu, Y., Zhang, L., Yang, J. K.W., Yeo, S. P. & Qiu, C.-W. Color generation via subwavelength 

plasmonic nanostructures. Nanoscale 7, 6409–6419 (2015). 

3. Kristensen, A. et al. Plasmonic colour generation. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, 16088 (2016). 

4. Kumar, K. et al. Printing colour at the optical diffraction limit. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 557–561 

(2012). 

5. Roberts, A. S., Pors, A., Albrektsen, O. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Subwavelength plasmonic color 

printing protected for ambient use. Nano Lett. 14, 783–787 (2014). 

6. Tan, S. J. et al. Plasmonic color palettes for photorealistic printing with aluminum 

nanostructures. Nano Lett. 14, 4023–4029 (2014). 

7. Clausen, J. S. et al. Plasmonic metasurfaces for coloration of plastic consumer products. Nano 

Lett. 14, 4499–4504 (2014). 

8. Højlund-Nielsen, E. et al. Plasmonic colors: Toward mass production of metasurfaces. Adv. 

Mater. Technol. 1, 1600054 (2016). 

9. Zhu, X., Vannahme, C., Højlund-Nielsen, E., Mortensen, N. A. & Kristensen, A. Plasmonic 

colour laser printing. Nat. Nanotech. 11, 325–329 (2016). 

10. Zhu, X., Yan, W., Levy, U., Mortensen, N. A. & Kristensen, A. Resonant-laser-printing of 

structural colors on high-index dielectric metasurfaces. Sci. Adv. 3, e1602487 (2017).  

11. Malinauskas, M. et al. Ultrafast laser processing of materials: from science to industry. Light 

Sci. Appl. 5, e16133 (2016). 

12. Makarov, S. V. et al. Light-induced tuning and reconfiguration of nanophotonic structures. 

Laser Photon. Rev. 11, 1700108 (2017). 

13. Zhu, X. et al. Digital resonant laser printing: Bridging nanophotonic science and consumer 

products. Nano Today 18 (2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.nantod.2017.10.002. 

14. Chen, X., Chen, Y., Yan, M. & Qiu, M. Nanosecond photothermal effects in plasmonic 

nanostructures. ACS Nano 6, 2550–2557 (2012). 

15. Baffou, G. & Quidant, R. Thermo-plasmonics: using metallic nanostructures as nano-sources of 

heat. Laser Photon. Rev. 7, 171–187 (2013). 

16. Bozhevolnyi, S. I. & Søndergaard, T. General properties of slow-plasmon resonant 

nanostructures: nanoantennas and resonators. Opt. Express 15, 10869-10877 (2007). 

17. Pors, A. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Plasmonic metasurfaces for efficient phase control in reflection. 

Opt. Express 21, 27438-27451 (2013). 


9 
 

18. Novikov, S. M. et al. Enhancement of two-photon photoluminescence and SERS for low-

coverage gold films. Opt. Express 24, 16743–16751 (2016). 

19. Novikov, S. M. et al. White light generation and anisotropic damage in gold films near 

percolation threshold. ACS Photonics 4, 1207–1215 (2017). 

20. Frydendahl, C. et al. Optical reconfiguration and polarization control in semi-continuous gold 

films close to the percolation threshold. Nanoscale 9, 12014–12024 (2017). 

21. Yan, M., Dai, J. & Qiu, M. Lithography-free broadband visible light absorber based on a mono-

layer of gold nanoparticles. J. Opt. 16, 025002 (2014). 

22. Berean, K. J. et al. Laser-induced dewetting for precise local generation of Au nanostructures 

for tunable solar absorption. Adv. Opt. Mater. 4, 1247–1254 (2016). 

23. Yu, R. et al. Structural coloring of glass using dewetted nanoparticles and ultrathin films of 

metals. ACS Photonics 3, 1194–1201 (2016). 

24. Ducourtieux, S. et al. Near-field optical studies of semicontinuous metal films. Phys. Rev. B 64, 

165403 (2001). 

25. Seal, K. et al. Coexistence of localized and delocalized surface plasmon modes in percolating 

metal films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 206103 (2006). 

26. Losquin, A. et al. Experimental evidence of nanometer-scale confinement of plasmonic 

eigenmodes responsible for hot spots in random metallic films. Phys. Rev. B 88, 115427 (2013). 

27. Pors, A. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Efficient and broadband quarter-wave plates by gap-plasmon 

resonators. Opt. Express 21, 2942-2952 (2013). 

28. Chettiar, U. K. et al. FDTD modeling of realistic semicontinuous metal films. Appl. Phys. B-

Lasers Opt. 100, 159-168 (2010). 

29. Chen, Y., Ding, F., Coello, V. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. On-chip spectropolarimetry by 

fingerprinting with random surface arrays of nanoparticles. ACS Photonics 5, 1703–1710 (2018). 

 
 


10 
 

 

 

 

Figure 1  Laser colour writing on near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays. Schematic of 

laser-heating-induced reshaping of gold islands of near-percolation thin gold films atop silica-gold 

sandwiches. The island-like film shown represents three-dimensional rendering of an actual SEM 

image (1132×821 nm2) taken from a sample (consisting of a 4-nm-thin gold film supported by a 30-

nm-thin silica layer atop a 100-nm-thick gold layer), whose right half acquired red colour after 

illumination with a strongly focused 10-mW laser beam as shown on the inset to the left. Both laser 

beam and left inset are shown not to scale. The lateral dependence of the filling ratio was calculated 

from the extended (in the other direction) version of the same SEM image (1132×3621 nm2), 

reflecting the fact that reshaping by local melting produces island in-plane shrinking and merging. 

 

 

 
 


11 
 

 

Figure 2  Colour and spectral analyses of anisotropic laser colour writing. Bright-field 

optical microscopy images (×50 magnification, NA = 0.80) of (a, d) 15 × 15 µm2 colour 

squares produced with different average laser powers increasing gradually from 0 to 11 mW 

and (b, c) a 90 × 90 µm2 colour print of the SDU logo viewed with an analyser (a, b) co-

polarized and (c, d) cross-polarized with respect to the polarization of writing laser beam. 

Scale bars: 10 µm. e, f Optical reflectance spectra and (g, h) their representations in a 

standard CIE-1931 and linear sRGB colour spaces corresponding to the colour squares 

shown in (a) and (d), respectively. 

 

 
 


12 
 

 

 

 

Figure 3  Modelling of anisotropic laser colour writing. a SEM images of a pristine 4-

nm-thin gold island-like film (yellow frame) and those exposed to the laser colour writing 

with an x-polarized  3.9 mW (green frame) and 7.3 mW (red frame) beam. Scale bars: 100 

nm. The insets represent optical bright-field microscopy images of the corresponding film 

areas (~ 15 µm2 in size). b Simulated reflectance spectra of island-like films shown in (a) 

for the co- and cross-polarized illumination (solid and dashed lines, respectively), revealing 

anisotropy in the optical properties of laser-modified films, and (c) their representations in a 

standard CIE-1931 and linear sRGB colour spaces. d Electric (Ex) and magnetic (Hy) field 

magnitude distributions calculated for the red-frame surface morphology (illuminated with 

the x-polarized light at 740 nm) in the middle spacer plane (left and middle panels) and in 

the cross section (right panels) along the dashed line indicated in the panels with plane 

distributions. Scale bars: 100 nm. 

 

 
 


13 
 

 

Figure 4  Colour writing with circularly polarized light. a Bright-field optical 

microscopy (×50 magnification, NA = 0.80) image of a 90 × 90 µm2 colour print of the SDU 

logo written with circularly polarized and viewed with unpolarised light. b Zoom (15 × 15 

µm2) of the optical microscope image shown in (a). c, d SEM images (3.2 × 3.2 µm2) of the 

area contoured in (b) with the boundaries of differently coloured regions indicated with 

white dotted lines in (c) and the lower half of the SEM image being covered with the 

corresponding zoom of the optical microscope image shown in (b). 

 

 

b
a
c

d


1 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 

Laser writing of bright colours on near-percolation plasmonic reflector 
arrays 

Alexander S. Roberts1, Sergey M. Novikov1, Yuanqing Yang1, Yiting Chen1, Sergejs Boroviks1, 

Jonas Beermann1, N. Asger Mortensen1,2 & Sergey I. Bozhevolnyi1,2* 

1Centre for Nano Optics, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark 

2Danish Institute for Advanced Study, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, 
Denmark 

*Correspondence to: seib@mci.sdu.dk 

 

This PDF file includes: 

1. Optical characterization and writing methods 

2. Computer simulations of realistic near-percolation arrays 

3. Coupled dipole analysis 

4. Polarization selectivity, cross-talk and multiplexing 

5. Polarization invariant colour printing 

6. Robustness of the near-percolation plasmonic reflector array configuration  

7. Printing of environmentally protected colours  

8. Correlation between optical colour and two-photon luminescence images 

Supplementary Figures S1- S13 

Supplementary References 1- 8 

 

1. Optical characterization and writing methods 

Linear reflection spectroscopy is performed on a BX51 research microscope (Olympus) equipped 

with a halogen light source, polarizers and a fibre-coupled grating spectrometer (Ocean Optics 

QE65000, wavelength resolution: 1.6 nm). The reflected light is collected using an MPlanFL 

objective (Olympus) with ×100 magnification (NA = 0.9). Through use of a pinhole placed in a 

conjugated image plane, we collect spectra from an area with a diameter of ~ 20 μm. The 

experimental reflectance data shown in the main manuscript (Figure 2e and 2f), as well as in 

Supplementary Information, represent the reflection spectra calculated as the ratio Rstr/Rref, where 


2 
 

Rstr is the reflection measured from colourised areas, and Rref is the reference obtained from a 

protected silver mirror (Thorlabs, PF10-03-P01) that exhibits an average reflection of 99% in the 

wavelength range between 350 and 1100 nm. 

 
The two-photon photoluminescence microscopy (TPL) characterization relies on the 

previously described approach1. The experimental setup consists of a scanning optical microscope 

in reflection geometry built on the basis of a commercial microscope and a computer-controlled 

translation stage. The linearly polarized light beam from a mode-locked pulsed (pulse duration ~200 

fs, repetition rate ~80 MHz) Ti-Sapphire laser (wavelength λ: 730 nm to 860 nm, Δλ ≅ 10 nm, 

average power ~300 mW) is used as an illumination source at the fundamental harmonic (FH) 

frequency. After passing an optical isolator (to suppress back-reflection into the laser cavity), half-

wave plate, polarizer, red colour filter, and wavelength selective beam splitter, the laser beam is 

focused on the sample surface at normal incidence with a Mitutoyo infinity-corrected long working 

distance objective (×100 magnification, NA = 0.70). The half-wave plate and polarizer allow 

accurate adjustment of the incident power. TPL radiation generated in reflection and the reflected 

FH beam are collected simultaneously with the same objective, separated by the wavelength 

selective beam splitter, directed through the appropriate filters and detected with two 

photomultiplier tubes (PMTs). The tube for TPL photons (within the transmission band of 350 nm 

to 550 nm) is connected with a photon counter giving typically only ~20 dark counts per second 

(cps). The FH and TPL spatial resolution at full-width-half- maximum is ~ 0.75 μm and ~ 0.35 μm, 

respectively, which means no individual clusters are resolved in the TPL images. In this work, we 

used the following scan parameters: the integration time (at one point) of 50 ms, scanning speed 

(between the measurement points) of 20 μm/s, and scanning step sizes of ~ 360 nm. The TPL 

images are obtained with the incident power of 0.3 mW. For writing, we used an incident power of 

1 to 11 mW. For the reference bulk gold sample, we confirmed that the TPL signals obtained 

depend quadratically on the incident power. During these measurements, we kept for simplicity the 

excitation wavelength fixed at 740 nm, since there are no specific resonances close to this 

wavelength, and 740 nm is more visible and convenient to focus. 

 
The printing of coloured images with power modulation for individual pixels is based on the 

setup used for TPL microscopy, with an additional electronically controllable optical attenuator 


3 
 

(Thorlabs, EVOA800A) inserted in the beam path prior to the microscope (Figure S1). The fibre-

coupled optical attenuator can be inserted and removed from the beam path by means of flip-

mirrors, which guide the laser beam towards an objective (collimator) for in-coupling (out-

coupling). Polarization-maintaining single-mode fibres are used to maintain control of the 

polarization state. For the exposure with a circularly polarized beam, an additional Glan-Taylor 

polarizer and subsequent achromatic quarter-wave plate (Thorlabs SAQWP05M-700) with a flat 

retardance in the spectral region from 300 – 1100 nm are inserted after the optical attenuator. The 

scanning speed of 20 μm/s used throughout for colour printing represents the largest speed, which is 

limited due to relatively slow operations of the variable optical attenuator (VOA) and closed-

feedback loop control used for precise coordinate determination in the computer-controlled 

scanning stage. 

Figure S1. Schematic of the setup used for TPL acquisition and colour printing. The pulsed 

Ti:Sapphire is passed through an optical isolator (not shown), a half-wave plate (HWP) and 

polarizer (Pol.) in order to regulate the power, after which it is coupled to a polarization maintaining 

single-mode fibre (PM-SMF) via an objective (Obj.). From here, the light is directed to the variable 

optical attenuator (VOA) which has a computer-controlled attenuation ratio. The attenuated light 

passes then back to the optical path via another PM-SMF and collimated with an adjustable 

collimator (Coll.). A polarizer and quarter-wave plate are then used to control the polarization state 


4 
 

after which the light enters the microscope through a semi-transparent mirror, which is used to 

collect the fundamental harmonic (FH) reflection when doing two-photon luminescence 

measurements. A dichroic mirror (DCM) then direct the laser beam into a long working distance 

objective (LW-obj.) which focusses the beam onto the sample placed on a computer-controlled 

scanning stage. 

2. Computer simulations of realistic near-percolation arrays 

Three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations2 were performed with a 

commercially available software package (Lumerical). The permittivity of gold was taken from the 

experimental data determined by ellipsometry measurements on evaporated gold3. The structural 

features of the top semi-continuous gold films were directly extracted from SEM images of the 

films themselves. For each of the three different areas (reshaped under different laser powers) 

shown in Figure 3a in the main manuscript, six regions of 400 × 400 nm2 were cropped out of the 

SEM image and used as multiple inputs to the FDTD simulations (Figure 3b). The height h was 

assumed to be uniform and determined by the mass-equivalent thickness of the top gold layer t (4 

nm) and corresponding filling ratio f as h = t/f. Given the different metal filling ratios of the three 

areas (53.1 %, 38.1 %, 32.0% for gold, green, and red areas, respectively), their heights were set as 

7.5 nm, 10.5 nm, and 12.5 nm, correspondingly. Periodic boundary conditions were used in 

horizontal directions, and perfectly-matched layers were invoked at the top and bottom boundaries 

of the simulation area to absorb any transmitted or reflected waves. The overall response of each 

area was finally obtained by averaging the six simulated spectra (Figure S2). 

 
To better reveal the physical origin of the spectral characteristics and associated colours of the 

system, we simulated four different scenarios and compare their optical responses (Figure S3). 

Here, the reshaped area showing red colour (Figure 3a in the main manuscript) is modelled as a 

representative example with the reflection and absorption spectra shown in Figure S3b. Due to the 

optically thick bottom gold layer, the NPPRAs can be treated as a single-port reflective system. 

Absorption is the only channel attenuating the reflected power and thus can well account for the 

features on both measured and simulated reflection spectra. Bearing this in mind, we first calculate 

the optical response of the percolated gold film on SiO2 (Figure S3c). One observes that the direct 

absorption from the percolated film is almost identical to the absorption of the complete system for 

wavelengths  > 750 nm (grey shaded area), indicating that direct absorption of the top gold film is 

the major contributor at long wavelengths. Moreover, the absorption peak around 570 nm of the top 

thin film also corresponds well to that of the complete system, indicating the importance of the 

percolated film structure for representing resonant features of the system.  


5 
 

 

Figure S2. Simulations of the reflection spectra. (a) Each simulated area of the structure divided 

into six 400×400 nm regions, and treated numerically as described in the beginning of this section. 

The resulting spectra, and the average of the six spectra, are plotted in the six corresponding graphs 

(b), from which it emerges that the variance between the subdivided areas is small and arguably 

negligible. To further reduce the sensitivity towards local variations, we use the average of six 

400×400 nm2 area (solid black lines). 

 

 
The resonant features associated with the percolated film are attributed to the occurrence of 

localized SP resonances of isolated gold NPs formed in the process of merging and reshaping under 

intense local illumination. The occurrence of SP resonances can be directly evidenced and argued 

for by considering electric field distributions that feature electric field hotspots (Figure 3d of the 


6 
 

main manuscript). This finding further explains why the spectral properties (position and 

bandwidth) of the resonances change significantly with the laser power and exhibit a strong 

polarization dependence. Next, to exclude the direct absorption of the top film as discussed above, 

we replace the top film with a perfect electrical conductor (PEC) material while maintaining its 

structural features. In this case, the bottom gold layer is the only absorption source for the incoming 

light (Figure S3d). For short wavelengths (λ < 500 nm) the interband absorption of the bottom gold 

layer dominates the absorption of the complete system, whereas for longer wavelengths (500 nm < 

λ < 700 nm) the absorption spectrum manifests an appreciable feature of SPP dispersion, providing 

the evidence for the generation of SPPs propagating along the SiO2-Au interface. The topmost PEC 

NPs, though they cannot directly give rise to any absorption, can function as efficient nanoantennae 

that mediate coupling to SPPs. The near-field distributions shown in Figure 3d of the main 

manuscript also demonstrate the existence of SP modes propagating along the bottom interface.  

Figure S3. Simulations of reflection spectra for different material combinations. (a) Schematic 

of the considered cases used to identify different physic origins of the spectral characteristics and 

associated colour. The geometry of the top percolated layer is inferred from SEM images (region 1 

of the area with red colour in Figure S2a) while the thicknesses of the underlying layers are tSiO2 = 


7 
 

30 nm and tAu = 100 nm. (b) Absorption and reflection of the complete system as used for colour 

printing. (c) Absorption of the complete system (black, solid) and the unaltered top gold layer on a 

semi-infinite SiO2 layer (grey, dashed). (d) Absorption for a perfect electrical conductor top layer 

[with similar geometry to (c)] placed on the unaltered SiO2/Au substrate (blue, solid). (e) 

Absorption of the structure when the bottom continuous gold layer is replaced with silver (magenta, 

solid). The absorption of the complete system is plotted as a reference. 

 
To further separate the two mechanisms involving the bottom gold layer, we apply a silver 

bottom layer instead (Figure S3e). In this case, the absorption of the silver system is dramatically 

smaller compared to that of the complete system at short wavelengths in the range 350 nm < λ < 

500 nm, because silver does not exhibit any interband absorption at this wavelength range, thus 

unambiguously verifying our explanations above. Moreover, the dispersion feature of the SP waves 

supported by the SiO2-Ag interface and the asymptotic SP wavelength of silver (~ 350 nm) can both 

be easily observed and identified. In addition, we would like to note that, for the complete system, 

the excitation of GSP modes between the top and bottom layer (see magnetic field distributions 

shown in Figure 3d in the main manuscript) cannot possibly be separated and studied individually 

in these scenarios. Nevertheless, we can see that at certain wavelengths (e.g. the resonance peak 

~570 nm in Figure S3d), the total absorption from the top film and the bottom layer is still lower 

than that of the complete system. Together with the magnetic field distributions shown in Figure 3d 

of the main manuscript, we argue that these observations provide clear evidence of the GSPs 

excited in our system. Overall, several distinct physical processes provide a combined contribution 

to the spectral features and associated colours of our system: a) for short wavelengths (λ < 500 nm), 

the interband absorption from the bottom gold layer dominates the total absorption; b) for long 

wavelengths (λ > 750 nm), the direct absorption from the top gold film primarily contributes to the 

total absorption; c) for intermediate wavelengths (500 nm < λ< 750 nm), three mechanisms, i.e., 

direct absorption of the top film, SP modes propagating along SiO2-Au interfaces, and GSPs 

between the NP layer and thick bottom layer together produce high absorption and the resonant 

features observed in the spectra. 

3. Coupled dipole analysis 

For a sufficiently advanced dewetting process, i.e. for colours written at high powers, the percolated 

film reconfigures into a film of discrete particles that can with good accuracy be described by arrays 

of large (relative to pristine-film features) polarisable ellipsoids using a modified long wavelength 

approximation (MLWA)4. The contribution of the shape and orientation of individual particles to 

the overall reflection spectra can be evaluated using transmission line theory (TLT), under the 

assumption that particles remain only weakly coupled5. In our framework involving three layers (i = 


8 
 

1; 2; 3), one of the several physical mechanisms involved in the colour formation can be illustrated, 

i.e. induced dipole moments in the particles in the proximity of the metal substrate. The film of 

particles has subwavelength thickness (t << λ) and thus effectively serves to add a surface current K 

to the interface between the two homogeneous media (in this case semi-infinite vacuum with 

refractive index n1 = 1 and a glass layer with n2 = 1.45 and thickness t2) in the vicinity of a semi-

infinite metal reflector with n3 = nAu (described by interpolated experimental data6). To facilitate a 

semi-analytic model, we consider an array of identical particles, which support an interface-

averaged induced surface current7: 

where ω = ck0 is the angular frequency of the incident light, αeff is the effective polarizability tensor 

(calculated using MLWA), Λ is the (artificial) array period, ˆz  is the normal to the surface, and E1 is 

the electric field vector. Light is incident on the array of particles normal to the surface of the 

homogenized film. Matching fields at the two interfaces results in the following expression for the 

reflection coefficient of the three-layer system: 

 where Zi is the wave impedance and 
eff
αvv
 are diagonal elements of the effective polarisability 

tensor with ν = x, y, z (Figure S4). Reflection spectra for 40-nm-period metasurfaces with prolate 

spheroids characterized by the constant volume (

3
5 10 nm3
⋅
 - average determined from experimental 

SEM images) but having different aspect ratios were calculated using the above formulae (Fig. S5). 

Figure S4. Schematic of the coupled dipole model. 

Bulk refractive indices n1, n2 and n3 and associated wave 

impedances Z1, Z2 and Z3 experienced by the incident 

light are shown (top). The quadratic array of period Λ of 

coupled dipoles is positioned between layers 1 and 2, 

giving rise to the surface current K is shown bottom left. 

The individual ellipsoids are shown bottom right (out-of-

plane dimension hz not shown). 


9 
 

Figure S5. Reflection spectra from ellipsoidal NPs of different sizes. (a) SEM image used for the 

evaluation of the resemblance of coupled-dipole arrays of ellipsoids fitted to particle shapes as 

viewed in the SEM. Six particles (1-6, colour coded) with areas larger than 500 nm2 are chosen. (b) 

NPs chosen in (a) are simulated as an array of coupled dipoles in the framework of transmission-

line theory under the MLWA for an array period of 40 nm under x- (upper) and y- polarized (lower) 

illumination. The aspect ratio (AR) between major and minor axes of the ellipsoidal particles is 

indicated in the legend (see Figure S4 for the model schematic). 

4. Polarization selectivity, cross-talk and multiplexing 

Strongly polarization-selective colour-writing can be achieved using linearly polarized light, and 

yields colours with strong polarization anisotropy for all colours, with bright saturated colours 

resulting from viewing under co-polarized illumination - including bright and dark greens, grey as 

well as bright and dark reds -  and only weakly saturated areas appearing in the cross-polarization. It 

is possible to achieve even brightly saturated red in co-polarized illumination while maintaining 

very low colour saturation for the cross-polarized illumination. This fact is particularly noteworthy 

since the thermal diffusion by necessity introduces the onset of polarization cross-talk at some 

power threshold, while Figure S6 demonstrates that substrates can be engineered to reveal the full 

colour palette before the onset of strong polarization crosstalk due to thermal diffusion. We next 

investigated the extent to which colours can be written independently in the two linear polarization 

states. We chose the highest powers of each horizontal line in Figure S6 (1.3, 4.5, 7.5 & 11 mW) 

and twice expose a square area consisting of four lines with the chosen powers in each polarization, 

where both the exposure pattern and the polarization is rotated between the two exposures (Figure 

S7). Thus, the powers increase from top to bottom (x-pol) and left to right (y-pol). This yields a 

diagonally symmetric pattern when viewed under unpolarized light. When inserting a polarizer 

aligned along either direction, the pattern exposed in that particular polarization reveals itself - with 

only minimal visible colour variation resulting from the orthogonally polarized exposure. 


10 
 

Figure S6. Polarization selectivity. (a) - (c) Microscopic bright-field images of 16 areas (15×15 

µm2 each) exposed on an Au (100 nm) - SiO2 (25 nm) - Au (4 nm) substrate at increasing powers 

from the upper left to the lower right corner, illuminated with light (a) co-polarized, (b) unpolarized 

and (c) cross-polarized with respect to the writing polarization. (d) - (f) Spectral reflectance of the 

areas in (a) - (c), under correspondingly polarized illumination. 

Figure S7. Polarization cross-talk. (a) - (c) Microscopic images of  16 areas (15×15 µm2 each)  

exposed with x-polarized (horizontal) at increasing powers from the top to the bottom, and with y-

polarized (vertical) light at increasing powers from left to right. Viewed in (a) x-polarized, (b) y-

polarized and (c) unpolarized. The x-polarized exposure was written first. 

 
An illustration of two different images exposed in each polarization is seen in Figure S8, 

where we have used local pedestrian traffic light images of Hans Christian Andersen. Figure S8 (b, 

c) show the green and red light images exposed in y- and x-polarization, respectively, while Figure 

S8 (a, d) show the intended silhouettes. It emerges clearly that each HCA silhouette stands out 


11 
 

clearly when viewed under the intended polarization, even though the cross-polarized silhouette 

admittedly is still faintly visible due to the polarization cross-talk. As might be expected from 

Figure S7, the red (high-power) exposure leaks more strongly into the orthogonal polarization than 

does the green (low power) exposure. 

Figure S8. Polarization multiplexing. (a) y-polarized exposure pattern of a walking H.C. 

Andersen figure and (b) resulting microscopic bright-field image under y-polarized illumination. (c) 

Standing HCA traffic light figure viewed and exposed with x-polarized light. (d) Exposure pattern 

used for the x-polarized writing at the same place as that used for the y-polarized writing.  

5. Polarization invariant colour printing 

With the aim of achieving images that are invariant under any, linear or circular, polarization state – 

and for unpolarized and even partially polarized viewing - we modify our experimental setup with 

an additional quarter-wave plate and polarizer, enabling the exposure with a circularly polarized 

beam. This makes the resulting image fully invariant under both linear and circular polarizations 

(Figure S9). It is clearly seen that no noteworthy changes (slight homogenous variations in the 

background and SDU logo colours are due to variations in polarization properties of the dichroic 

mirror used as a beam splitter, see Figure S1) occur when changing between unpolarized 

illumination and the four investigated polarization states, clearly demonstrating that polarization 

invariant prints can indeed be obtained in a single scan when using a circularly polarized beam for 

printing colour images. 

 

 


12 
 

Figure S9. Polarization invariant colour printing. Image exposed with a circularly polarized 

beam. Image viewed under unpolarized illumination (a), vertical (b) and horizontal (c) linear 

polarization, and right (e) and left (f) circularly polarized light, demonstrating fully polarization 

independent behaviour. The imperfections in the image result from SEM images taken prior to the 

investigation of polarization invariance. Scale bars: 10 µm. 

6. Robustness of the near-percolation plasmonic reflector array configuration 

In the course of our studies, we have tried different thicknesses of both spacer SiO2 layers and thin 

island-like gold films that were also deposited under different conditions and using different 

evaporation chambers and deposition techniques. Without going into detail of all these exploratory 

experiments, we would like to emphasize that the effect of polarization-selective laser colour 

printing was seen to be remarkably robust, as it has been found with all investigated configurations, 

albeit with somewhat different colour palettes and colour vividness (as illustrated in Figure S10 

below). It should be mentioned that the parameter space of the proposed approach is enormous as it 

includes also various surface treatments that might strongly influence the morphology of near-

percolated metal films. 

 

 


13 
 

Figure S10. Robustness of polarization-selective laser colour printing. Optical bright-field 

microscopy images of (50×5 µm2) rectangular stripes exposed with increasing (from top to bottom) 

powers (from 0 to 10 mW) of the x-polarized writing laser beam and viewed with x- and y-polarized 

illumination (top and bottom rows, respectively) for 4 different (in the SiO2 spacer and gold 

thicknesses as indicated) samples. 

7. Printing of environmentally protected colours 

The practical applicability of colour printing schemes hinges on the robustness of the printed 

colours under the often chemically and mechanically corrosive influence of the environment. While 

colours in the simple configuration with a percolated top layer can simply be wiped off with a light 

touch, the technique nevertheless lends itself to various schemes of protection via a dielectric 

overlay, which, intriguingly, can be applied in either pre- or post-processing of the substrate. With 

the aim of showing that both colours and polarization sensitivity of the exposure are preserved 

when applying a PMMA protection layer in post-processing, we cover the sample from Figure S7 

with roughly 230 nm of PMMA, which includes baking step for 180 seconds at 180°C. While this 

protection introduces obvious changes to the colours (Figure S11), as the PMMA layer acts as an 

antireflection stack, the resulting colours are perceived not too dissimilar to the initial ones, with a 

range including greens and reds. The polarization dependence is not influenced.  

 
While the application of dielectric layers in post-processing is feasible for some applications, 

such as colouration of consumer products, the technique is entirely impractical for in-situ printing 

applications, where the printable substrate should be protected both prior, under and after printing. 

This creates the need to encapsulate the (close to) percolated gold layer at the fabrication stage. We 

demonstrate that a sample can indeed be covered with a protective layer of silicon dioxide prior to 

the laser writing – again with no loss of saturation or polarization selectivity (Figure S12). Both 


14 
 

techniques result in prints that can be handled and touched with bare hands with no visible effect 

(not shown). It deserves mentioning that, while 20 nm of SiO2 is not a robust protection layer that 

can withstand robustly mechanical handling, a simple increase of the layer thickness can increase 

the robustness significantly. 

Figure S11. Protection of printed colours. Protection of printed colours by addition of a dielectric 

PMMA layer (approximately 230 nm) layer post-printing (d-f). (a-c) Polarization multiplexed scans 

identical to Figure S7 before PMMA deposition. (d-f) Polarization multiplexed scans identical to 

Figure S7 after PMMA deposition, showing that both colour saturation and polarization selectivity 

survive the spin-coating of a 230-nm-thick PMMA layer as well as subsequent baking at 180°C. 

Figure S12. Colour printing on protected near-percolated gold films. Optical bright-field 

microscopy images of (50×5 µm2) rectangular stripes exposed with increasing (from top to bottom) 


15 
 

powers (from 0 to 10 mW) of the x-polarized writing laser beam and viewed with x- and y-polarized 

illumination (top and bottom rows, respectively) for 4 different (in the SiO2 spacer and gold 

thicknesses as indicated) samples that were covered with a 20-nm-thick SiO2 protection film before 

the laser writing. Different colouration of protected pristine films compared to the previously 

investigated (unprotected) films (cf. Figure S10) is related to the influence of the protection layer. 

8. Correlation between optical colour and two-photon luminescence images 

We have also investigated the correlation between colour printing as observed with optical bright-

field microscopy and two-photon luminescence (TPL) imaging by exposing two (5×5 µm2) square 

areas with different powers of incident light being x- and, slightly above, y-polarized, resulting in 4 

coloured areas located close to each other (Figure S13). 

Figure S13. Correlation between optical colour and TPL images. (a) Fundamental harmonic and 

(b) TPL images of a 4-nm-thin gold film on a 30-nm-thin SiO2 spacer supported by a 100-nm-thick 

gold film after being subjected to laser colour printing with different powers and polarizations, with 

x- and y-polarized light as shown in (c)  by white arrows. (c) Optical bright-field microscopy 


16 
 

images obtained under the unpolarized (top) and x-polarized (bottom) illumination. (d) Averaged 

TPL signal obtained with the x-polarized illumination along the cross sections taken at the positions 

indicated by black and red dashed lines numbered in (b). 

 
It is seen that, while the optical bright-field images look essentially identical for the 

unpolarized illumination, the polarization sensitivity in both optical and TPL images obtained with 

the x-polarized illumination is equally pronounced. This is understandable, since the optical image 

colouration is associated with the excitation of plasmonic resonances, and the TPL images are also 

correlated with local field enhancements at both the illumination and detection wavelength8. Rather 

large FH (a) and very low TPL (b) signals obtained with the x-polarized illumination for two lower 

areas indicate that the x-polarized writing destroys (x-polarized) resonances at 740 nm, while 

enhancing (x-polarized) scattering for shorter wavelengths, leaving y-polarized resonances intact. 

Supplementary References 

1. Beermann, J. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Two-photon luminescence microscopy of field 

enhancement at gold nanoparticles. Phys. Status Solidi C 2, 3983–3987 (2005).  

2. Chettiar, U. K. et al. FDTD modeling of realistic semicontinuous metal films. Appl. Phys. B 

100, 159–168 (2010).  

3. Olmon, R. L. et al. Optical dielectric function of gold. Phys. Rev. B 86, 235147 (2012).  

4. Kelly, K. L., Coronado, E., Zhao, L. L. & Schatz, G. C. The optical properties of metal 

nanoparticles: the influence of size, shape, and dielectric environment. J. Phys. Chem. B 

107, 668–677 (2003).  

5. Tretyakov, S. Analytical Modeling in Applied Electromagnetics (Artech House, Boston, 

2003).  

6. Johnson, P. B. & Christy, R. W. Optical constants of the noble metals. Phys. Rev. B 6, 

4370–4379 (1972).  

7. Zhao, Y., Engheta, N. & Alù, A. Homogenization of plasmonic metasurfaces modeled as 

transmission-line loads. Metamaterials 5, 90-96 (2011).  

8. Andersen, S. K. H., Pors, A. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Gold photoluminescence wavelength and 

polarization engineering, ACS Photonics 2, 432-438 (2015). 


