arXiv:1808.05449v1  [physics.bio-ph]  16 Aug 2018

Ungerminated Rice Grains Observed by Femtosecond Pulse Laser
Second-harmonic Generation Microscopy

⊲ Yue Zhao1
⊲ Shogo Takahashi1
⊲ Yanrong Li1
⊲ K. T. T. Hien1 ⊲ Akira Matsubara1

⊲ Goro Mizutani1⋆
⊲ Yasunori Nakamura2

1 School of Materials Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Asahidai 1-1 Nomi, 923-1292, Japan
2 Faculty of Bioresource Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita City, Akita 010-0195, Japan

J. Phys. Chem. B, 122(32), 7855-7861 (2018). DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcb.8b04610

As a demonstration that second-order nonlinear
optical microscopy is a powerful tool for rice
grain
science,
we
observed
second-harmonic
generation
(SHG)
images
of
amylose-
free
glutinous
rice
and
amylose-containing
nonglutinous rice grains. The images obtained
from SHG microscopy and photographs of the
iodine-stained starch granules indicate that the
distribution of starch types in the embryo-facing
endosperm region (EFR) depends on the type of
rice and suggests that glucose, maltose, or both
are localized on the testa side of the embryo. In
the testa side of the embryo, crystallized glucose
or maltose are judged to be detected by SHG.
These monosaccharides and disaccharides play
an important role, as they trigger energy in
the initial stage of germination. These results
confirm SHG microscopy is a good method to
monitor the distribution of such sugars and
amylopectin in the embryo and its neighboring
regions of rice grains.

1 Introduction

Rice is an important food. The endosperm of rice
is mostly composed of starch, which is an energy
source for most organisms. A previous study using sum

⋆ Goro Mizutani: mizutani@jaist.ac.jp

frequency generation (SFG) microscopy reported the
starch distribution in the cross section of a glutinous rice
grain. The SFG signal is enhanced in the crush cell layer,
which is an ∼100 μm wide zone between the endosperm
and the embryo [1].
Cells in the crush cell layer and the size of the
starch granules are smaller than those in the center of
the endosperm [2]. In the nuclear stage of endosperm
formation, the endosperm nucleus grows remarkably in
the vicinity of the embryo [3, 4]. The embryo and the
endosperm must interact and communicate at this stage
because angiosperm seeds of overlapping fertilization
ensure
cooperative
growth
[5].
The
embryo-facing
endosperm region (EFR) develops differently from other
endosperm tissues via programmed cell death [6].
Endosperm cells closest to the embryo do not accumulate
starch granules. The next-nearest neighbor endosperm
cells have special slender shapes, and the stored starch
granules are small sized [6]. Previous research has
suggested that the construction of EFR and the size
ratio of the embryo and endosperm are closely related [6].
Therefore, morphological analysis in EFR is important
for breeding science. On the other hand, during the
stage of water absorption of germination, the crush cell
layer acts as a water reservoir and absorbs water first
[7]. Then, starch is digested from the EFR near the
scutellum as the endosperm develops [8].
However, the origin of the SFG enhancement in
the crush cell layer [1] remains unclear. Two origins
have been proposed for the enhanced large second-order
nonlinear effect. One is the high density of amylopectin
near the crush cell layer. The other is a high degree of
orientation of amylopectin near the crush cell layer. To
identify the origin, herein we observe the crush cell layers
of two kinds of rice grains using SHG microscopy and
map the broken symmetry of the molecular structure.
Optical second harmonic generation (SHG) occurs
in non-centrosymmetric media within an electric dipole
approximation, and its frequency is double that of
the
incident
one.
Hence,
optical
SHG
microscopy
can
map
asymmetrically
oriented
structures.
The
monosaccharide α-D-glucopyranose is a constituent unit


2
Yue Zhao et al. ♦

of saccharide chains in starch. Since its structure is
non-centrosymmetric, it displays a nonzero second-
order nonlinear susceptibility and SHG activity. The
anisotropic hydroxide and hydrogen bonds of aligned
water have been reported as the origin of SHG in glucose
and amylopectin hydrates [9]. Additionally, D-glucose,
D-fructose, and sucrose have been reported to show sum
frequency generation (SFG) signals [10].
Starch, which is comprised of various components
such as amylopectin and amylose, exhibits SHG activity
[11,12]. The origin of SHG in dry starch is amylopectin
[13–15]. Amylopectin has a tandem cluster structure
where the sugar chains on small branches have a double
helix structure [16]. It is hardly soluble in water.
Since its higher-order cluster structure has a macro-
scopic asymmetry, the large nonlinear polarization
in monosaccharide α-D-glucopyranose generates strong
SHG
light.
In
contrast,
the
amylose
structure
is
speculated to be mostly amorphous in the starch
granule of rice with a single helical structure [17–
21]. The nonlinear polarization of the monosaccharide
α-D-glucopyranose is thought to be canceled by the
glucopyranose unit in the single helical structure. Thus,
dry amorphous amylose does not display macroscopic
nonlinear polarization, and has a very weak SHG [15,22].
On the other hand, amylose can be crystallized in both
single (V) and double (A and B) crystal forms [23, 24].
The ordered hydrogen and hydroxyl bond networks in
the hydrates of these crystals are reported to allow SHG
[25].
Generally, a starch iodine reaction is an easy
and useful method to observe the starch distribution.
However, the sample may permeate, resulting in an
irreversible change. Although the method of F. Vilaplana
et al. can quantify amylopectin and amylose in starch
[26], it cannot map their densities.
Second-order
nonlinear
optical
microscopy
is
a
non-destructive
method.
Amylopectin
in
starch
generates
an
SHG
signal
due
to
macroscopic
asymmetry [11,13,14], but amorphous amylose does not
show SHG [15,22]. Thus, the distribution of amylopectin
in the endosperm of amylose-free glutinous-type rice
cultivar can be examined using SHG microscopy. In
the initial stage of germination of a rice seed, the
morphological structure of the crush cell layer, which
is a special structure between the embryo and the
endosperm that serves as a water reservoir, and the
distribution
of
monosaccharides
and
disaccharides,
which trigger energy in the embryo, have yet to be
accurately examined.
Herein,
SHG images of
a typical nonglutinous
rice
cultivar
Koshihikari,
which
includes
both
amylose and amylopectin, and a typical glutinous
rice
cultivar
Shintaishomochi,
which
includes
only
amylopectin, are obtained using SHG microscopy with
a femtosecond pulse laser and a morphological analysis.
The comparison of the two cultivars confirms that

amylose does not affect the experimental results. To our
knowledge, previous research has not directly compared
these two cultivars, demonstrating that SHG microscopy
is a powerful tool to evaluate the distribution of sugars
and amylopectin in the embryo and its neighboring
regions of rice grains.

2 Experimental Setup and Method

In the experimental setup (see Fig. 1), the light
source was a titanium sapphire femtosecond pulsed
laser (Spectra-Physics: Tsunami) with a regenerative
amplifier (Spectra-Physics: Spitfire) with a repetition
frequency of 1 kHz, pulse width of 120 fs, and wavelength
of 800 nm. The beam directly irradiated the sample
without a focusing lens. The irradiated area on the
sample stage with the sample was about 170 mm2. The
incident light energy density per unit area on the sample
was 0.4 nJ/μm2, and the incident angle with respect
to the normal to the sample stage was 60◦. A CMOS
camera (Lumenera corporation, Lu135M) was used
to monitor the sample surface using an incandescent
lamp. The images of the scattered SHG light were
observed by microscope optics (OLYMPUS BX60) with
an image intensified charge coupled device (II-CCD)
camera (HAMAMATSU, PMA-100). The power of the
excitation light on the sample surface was controlled by
using ND (Neutral Density) filters.

Fig. 1 Experimental setup for SHG microscopic observation
using an II-CCD camera, femtosecond Ti:sapphire pulse
laser, and regenerative amplifier. Details are described in the
main text. M1, M2: Mirror. L.P.F.: Long wavelength pass
filter. S.P.F.: short wavelength filter. B.P.F.: bandpass filter.

The sample was placed on a silicon wafer substrate.
The SHG intensity of the oxidized Si surface is very
weak compared to the SHG of bulk amylopectin rice
seeds, and thus, it is negligible. Before the sample, a long
wavelength pass filter (L.P.F.) was placed to block light
with wavelengths shorter than 780 nm while allowing
the 800 nm wavelength beam to pass. The scattered
SHG light from the sample passed through an objective
lens with a ×5 and NA of 0.15, became a parallel
ray, and then passed through a short wavelength pass


Ungerminated Rice Grains Observed by Femtosecond Pulse Laser Second-harmonic Generation Microscopy
3

filter (S.P.F.) with a transmission wavelength range of
350785 nm. This short pass filter blocked the 800 nm
wavelength light. Finally, the SHG signal was selected
by Semrocks (FF01-395/ 11) band-pass filter (B.P.F.)
with a center wavelength of 395 nm (the transmittance
at 400 nm wavelength is over 90%), and two-photon
excitation fluorescence (2PEF) was selected by Semrocks
(FF02-438/24) band-pass filter with a center wavelength
of 438 nm. Both the S.P.F. and B.P.F. were tilted 5◦ with
respect to the wavefront of the parallel ray to eliminate
“ghost”signals. The spatial resolution of the microscope
was determined by the chip size of the II-CCD camera
(11 μm × 13 μm). In this case, the resolution was 2.6 μm
for a 5× magnification. The imaging integration time
was 60 s. The polarization of the incident light was
parallel to the horizontal direction of the microscopic
images of Figs. 2(e), 3(e), 4(c) and 5(c). The polarization
of the detected SHG was not chosen.

The SHG signal was identified from the difference
in the intensity distributions between 400 and 438 nm.
There are two possible origins for the 400 nm signal
in an image with a 400 nm wavelength bandpass filter.
One is an SHG signal. The other is multiphoton excited
fluorescence. In the latter case, the sample is excited by
a multiphoton transition and emits luminescence pulses
at a photon energy lower than the multiphoton energy.
If the signal is dominated by the latter, observation
wavelengths of 400 and 438 nm should provide similar
results, and the images for both B.P.F.s should be
similar, because the spectra of multiphoton-excited
fluorescence should be continuous near the two-photon
wavelength [27]. If the spatial distributions of the signals
clearly differ, then the signal from the 400 nm B.P.F. is
SHG, whereas that for the 438 nm B.P.F. is 2PEF.

In this study, the maximum incident light energy
density per unit area on the sample was 0.4 nJ/μm2.
No damage was observed at this incident light energy
density. When observing starch by a scanning type SHG
microscopy [9, 25], the excitation beam was focused
on the sample via an objective lens. In this case, the
irradiation area should be 0.23 μm2 for a wavelength of
800 nm and a numerical aperture (NA) of the focusing
lens of 0.75. When the energy of one pulse was 2 nJ,
the incident light energy density per unit area was
8.7 nJ/μm2 [9, 25]. This comparison shows that the
current method is much less likely to damage the sample
than typical scanning SHG microscopy. The nonscanning
type setup can give a wider field of view than the
scanning type SHG microscope, so it is convenient for
samples with a large size such as the rice seeds. Our
SHG microscope can acquire images in a short time
such as several seconds to several minutes. This is
because the excitation light energy density at the sample
surface is made comparable to that of the scanning
type microscope by using the regenerative amplifier. The
scanning type laser microscope can give a diffraction

limit spatial resolution, and it is better than the typical
resolution of our type.

3 Results

First, the grain cross section of ungerminated brown
rice was observed. Figures 2 and 3 show grains from
amylose-free glutinous rice cv. Shintaishomochi and
amylose-containing nonglutinous rice cv. Koshihikari,
respectively. The photographs before and after the
starch-iodine staining of the cross section of glutinous
rice are shown in Fig. 2(b) and (d), while parts (b)
and (d) of Fig. 3 show those of nonglutinous rice,
respectively. Figures 2(a), 2(c), 3(a) and 3(c) are their
expanded images taken by the CMOS camera. The SHG
images of the corresponding samples are shown in Figs.
2(e) and 3(e). The SHG image intensity is pseudocolored
by the intensity scale bar on the right and superimposed
on the images in Figs. 2(c) and 3(c). Because the
iodine solution does not affect the SHG intensity under
the current conditions [11], the SHG images after the
addition of iodine solution are shown.
Cisek et al. [25] reported that a hydration treatment
alters the SHG in glucose, amylose, and starch. However,
we found that the water absorption has a negligible
impact on the relative SHG intensity in the images.
Kong et al. [28] reported that amylose in the presence of
small guest molecules of iodine forms 6-fold left-handed
single helices packed in an antiparallel arrangement
and shows SHG activity. They oriented the amylose
molecules by pulling the amylose film before and during
exposure of the film to iodine gas [29]. This study does
not apply a mechanical force on the sample. Thus, the
amylose remains amorphous in the rice grains, and the
contribution of amylose to the SHG response is regarded
as negligible. The signals in Figs. 2(e) and 3(e) are SHG
because the images in Fig. 3(e) and (g) differ from each
other.
The images in Figs. 2(c) and 3(c) show the two kinds
of rice cross sections expanded by water absorption in
the starch iodine test. These images slightly differ from
those in Figs. 2(a) and 3(a). First, the iodine reagent,
which reacts more strongly to amylose than amylopectin,
colors the endosperm of both the glutinous rice and the
nonglutinous rice (Figs. 2(d) and 3(d)). Figures 2(c) and
3(c) are black and white images, but the yellow hollow
arrows denote the colored parts. In the glutinous rice
grains (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Shintaishomochi) in Fig. 2(d),
the color of the endosperm near the crush cell layer is
weaker, suggesting that the crush cell layer either lacks
or has a small amount of amylopectin. On the other
hand, in the nonglutinous rice grains (Oryzaglutinosa cv.
Koshihikari) in Fig. 3(d), the coloring of the endosperm
near the crush cell layer is stronger than the other part,
indicating that amylose is present at higher densities in
that region.


4
Yue Zhao et al. ♦

Fig. 2 Ungerminated glutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Shintaishomochi) grain images. (a) Microscopic image of the glutinous
brown rice cross section and (b) a photograph of the whole grain cross section. (c) Microscopic image and (d) macroscopic
photograph after starch iodine reaction for 1 h. (e) SHG image of the same grain as in part c. (f) SHG intensity distribution
within the yellow frame in part e. (g) 2PEF image of the same grain as in part c. The cyan frames in photographs b and d
show the field of view of the microscope images of parts a, c, e, and g. Linear images a and c are illuminated by white light.
SHG (e) and 2PEF (g) images are overlaid on the corresponding linear microscopic images. It is pseudocolored by the intensity
scale bar at the right. In part f, each intensity is the summation of the corresponding vertical pixel SHG intensities. Note the
strong SHG spots in the embryo near the embryo testa and the enhanced SHG at the crush cell layer.

Fig. 3 Ungerminated nonglutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Koshihikari) grain images. (a) Microscopic image of the
nonglutinous brown rice cross section and (b) a photograph of the whole grain cross section. (c) Microscopic image and
(d) macroscopic photograph of 5 min starch iodine reaction. (e) SHG image of the same grain as in part c. (f) SHG intensity
distribution within the yellow frame in part e. (g) 2PEF image of the same grain as in part c. The cyan frames in photographs
b and d show the field of view of the microscope images of parts a, c, e, and g. Linear images a and c are illuminated by white
light. SHG (e) and 2PEF (g) images are overlaid on the corresponding linear microscopic images. It is pseudocolored by the
intensity scale bar at the right. In part f, each intensity is the summation of the corresponding vertical pixel SHG intensities.
Note the strong SHG spots in the embryo near the embryo testa and a gradual change of the SHG intensity at the crush cell
layer.

The SHG signals are observed from the endosperms
of both the glutinous and the nonglutinous rice (Figs.
2(e) and 3(e)). In the crush cell layer, the SHG signal is
enhanced in the glutinous rice (Figs. 2(e, f)), but not in
the nonglutinous rice (Figs. 3(e, f)).
SHG signals along the testa edge of the embryo
exhibit a very strong intensity (Figs. 2(e) and 3(e),
empty red arrow heads). To further investigate the

strong SHG signals from the testa edge of the embryo in
Figs. 2(e) and 3(e), the outer walls on the testa side of
the embryo of the two brown rice grains were observed
from the outer side (Figs. 4 and 5). Very strong SHG
spots are seen along the hypocotyl in Figs. 4(c) and
5(c). A 2PEF signal is observed (Figs. 4(d) and 5(d)),
but its distribution differs from that of SHG (Figs. 4(c)


Ungerminated Rice Grains Observed by Femtosecond Pulse Laser Second-harmonic Generation Microscopy
5

Fig. 4 Images of ungerminated glutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Shintaishomochi) grains. (a) Macroscopic photograph from
the embryo side. (b) Linear microscopic image. (c) SHG image. (d) 2PEF image. Linear images are obtained by illuminating
the sample by white light. SHG (c) and 2PEF (d) images are overlaid on the respective linear microscopic images. The SHG
image is pseudocolored according to the intensity scale bar at the bottom.

Fig. 5 Images of ungerminated nonglutinous brown rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Koshihikari) grains. (a) Macroscopic photograph
from the embryo side. (b) Linear microscopic image. (c) SHG image. (d) 2PEF image. Linear images are obtained by
illuminating the sample by white light. SHG (c) and 2PEF (d) images are overlaid on the respective linear microscopic
images. The SHG image is pseudocolored according to the intensity scale bar at the bottom.

Table 1 Results of SHG Microscopy of the Dried Residue

sample
not washed
water washed
DMF washed
ethanol washed
SHG
active
inactive
inactive
active

and 5(c)). The outer walls of the endosperms display
very weak SHG signals but not 2PEF signals (data not
shown).
To assign the origin of the strong SHG spot
at the end of the embryo, we examined the SHG
response of possible SHG active substances in the
embryo.
Commercially
available
powders
of
three
substances (i.e., α-amylase (Kishida Chemical Co., Ltd.,
product code: 260-04412), glucose (Wako Pure Chemical
Industries, Ltd., product code: 049-00591), and maltose
(ChromaDex, Inc., product code: ASB-00013055-001)
crystalline powders) as delivered were observed by our
SHG microscope. All of these are SHG active (data not
shown).
We also examined the SHG response of testa powder
taken from the rice grains by a commercial “rice huller”,
which removes only the testa and a part of the embryo.
The starch iodine reaction confirms that the peeled
powder lacks starch. However, the peeled powder shows
an SHG response (data not shown). We put three doses
of the peeled powder of 2.5 mg each into 50 mL of water,
N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and ethanol, stirred
them well for 5 min, and filtered them. Three residues on
the filter paper were collected and dried for 24 h. Table
1 shows the SHG responses of the dried residues. The

SHG activity of the testa powder is lost after washing
with water and DMF but remains after washing with
ethanol.

4 Discussion

4.1 SHG Images of EFR

A previous study on the cross section of a glutinous rice
grain around the crush cell layer between the endosperm
and the embryo reported an enhanced SFG signal at
wavenumbers of 2920 and 2970 cm−1 of the IR light
[1]. This IR frequency is the resonant C-H stretching
vibration region of the amylopectin molecules. A similar
enhanced SHG in the glutinous rice occurs around the
crush cell layer in this study (Figs. 2(e, f)). Additionally,
the SHG intensity distribution profile of Fig. 2(f) is
similar to the SFG profile of the previous report [1].
There
are
two
possibilities
for
the
enhanced
second-order nonlinear effect. One is the high density of
amylopectin near the crush cell layer. The other is the
highly oriented amylopectin near the crush cell layer.
The iodine starch reaction (Fig. 2(c)) indicates that the
density of amylopectin is rather constant in this region.
Since this study reveals that both SFG and SHG are


6
Yue Zhao et al. ♦

Table 2 Solubilities, Residue Components, and SHG Activities of the Residues for the Three Candidates

water
DMF
ethanol

(i) α-amylase
soluble
insoluble
insoluble
(ii) glucose, maltose
soluble
soluble
insoluble
(iii) leukoplasts
insoluble
unknown
soluble (only lipids)

possible residue
(iii)
(i), (iii)
(i), (ii), (iii) [without lipids]

SHG of residue in Table 1
no
no
yes

strong near the crush cell layer, we speculate that the
origin of the enhanced SFG signal in the crush cell layer
of the glutinous rice [1] is the high degree of asymmetry
in the amylopectin chain structure.
On the other hand, the nonglutinous rice does not
show SHG near the crush cell layer (Figs. 3(e, f)),
suggesting that crush cell layer of the nonglutinous rice
has a lower concentration of amylopectin. The starch in
the glutinous rice is composed mostly of amylopectin,
whereas the nonglutinous rice contains amylose and
amylopectin. The starch iodine reaction is rather strong
near the crush cell layer of the nonglutinous rice (Fig.
3(d)). Therefore, one possibility is that the endosperm
near the crush cell layer of the nonglutinous rice has a
higher concentration of amylose. Amylose has a better
water absorption than insoluble amylopectin. Because
the crush cell layer serves as a water reservoir in
germination, the amylose content may be high in the
nonglutinous rice. This hypothesis is consistent with the
weak SHG in the crush cell layer of the nonglutinous rice.
These results suggest that the distribution of starch in
the vicinity of the crush cell layer depends on the type
of rice.
In fact, we measured the vibrational spectrum of a
cross section of a rice grain with the Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), but the factor analysis
of the infrared spectra of amylose, amylopectin, and rice
starch was unsuccessful. FT-IR is a general method to
distinguish between molecular species, but it is unsuited
to identify starch types [30]. The molecular units of
the polysaccharides in starch and cellulose are almost
the same. It has also been reported that the infrared
spectroscopy of amylose, amylopectin, and rice starch
have similar factor analysis patterns [31]. On the other
hand, it has been reported that amylose gives a Raman
band at 1657 cm−1 while amylopectin does not [32].
Therefore, Raman spectroscopy and microscopy can be
another way to map amylose in the rice grain. The
comparison of the performances of SHG and Raman
spectroscopy is our future target.
2PEF images of chromophores in a young leaf tissue
have been reported [33,34] and the origin of the resonant
2PEF was assigned to proplastid. However, it is difficult
to judge that the observed SHG in our study is due
to proplastid because its resonant wavelength does not
match our light source. The resonance bands of colorless
saccharides in the visible region are quite unlikely, and
the origin of the 2PEF in this study is not clear.

4.2 SHG Images in Embryos

We considered three possible origins of the SHG spots
in Figs. 2(e), 3(e), 4(c) and 5(c) at the ends of the
embryos: (i) amylase, (ii) crystals of glucose, maltose,
or both, and (iii) leucoplasts. (i) Amylase may be stored
in the aleurone layer of ungerminated rice grains [35].
α-Amylase reagent has a detectable SHG signal. Because
α-amylase forms a single crystal in the P212121 space
group [36] with a broken inversion symmetry, it should
have a nonzero second-order nonlinear susceptibility.
(ii) Glucose and maltose are believed to be present in
ungerminated grain embryos [7, 37]. Detection of the
SFG signal in the crystalline powder of glucose has been
reported [10]. We have confirmed the SHG response
from the crystalline powder of glucose and maltose. (iii)
Leucoplast is a generic term for amyloplast, elaioplast,
and proteinoplast [38]. Since amyloplast, which can
generate SHG light, is generally contained in the root
cell of the plant [39], it may also be contained in the
hypocotyl and the radicle in the grain in question.
Elaioplast is an organelle that stores lipids. Some lipids
have optical nonlinearity [38]. Similarly, proteinoplast is
an organelle. It is only found in plant cells, especially in
roots and seeds. It contains some protein crystals [40,41].
In a protein crystal, the protein molecules may show
a strong second-order nonlinear response due to their
well-oriented structure [42].
The SHG observations in Table 1 are used to discuss
the feasibility of the three candidates. Table 2 lists
the solubility of the three candidates in the solvent.
After washing with water, only (iii) leucoplast remains
in the residue. The SHG signal is not observed in
the water washed residue. Thus, candidate (iii) can
be excluded as the origin of the strong SHG spots in
embryos near embryo testa in Figs. 2(e), 3(e), 4(c) and
5(c). After washing with DMF, (i) α-amylase remains
in the residue and the DMF-washed testa does not
exhibit an SHG signal. Hence, candidate (i) can also be
excluded. Although the solubility of leucoplast in DMF is
unknown, it is excluded above. Therefore, the remaining
candidate (ii) of glucose or maltose is considered to be
the origin of the strong SHG spots in the embryo.
When
the
rice
seed
absorbs
water
during
germination,
the
water
passes
through
the
seed
coat covering the boundary between the embryo and
endosperm (Figs. 4(a) and 5(a), near the black arrows)
to reach the crush cell layer. The water subsequently


Ungerminated Rice Grains Observed by Femtosecond Pulse Laser Second-harmonic Generation Microscopy
7

passes through the absorption cell layer of the scutellum
and moves to embryonic tissue [7]. The embryo breathes
by consuming its carbohydrate but not its starch [7,37].
Since the hypocotyl needs energy for growth, glucose
and maltose must move to it to be consumed. In fact,
since seeds sprout when they are covered by water in
the ripening season, it is highly likely that glucose and
maltose will move even in ripened seeds.
Finally, although our measurement indicates that the
reagent of α-amylase is SHG active, it is assumed that
the amount of α-amylase present in the ungerminated
rice grains is too small for SHG detection because
α-amylase in rice is synthesized only during the seed
germination process [43].

5 Conclusion

The SHG images are obtained from ungerminated
glutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Shintaishomochi)
and nonglutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Koshihikari).
The observed enhancement effect of the SHG in the
crush cell layer of the glutinous rice is consistent
with the enhancement effect of SFG in the previous
study [1]. The origin of the enhancement effect is
broken centrosymmetry, not the resonance of molecular
vibration. On the other hand, the enhancement effect
of SHG is not observed near the crush cell layer of the
nonglutinous rice. Considering the results of the starch
iodine reaction, amylopectin in the crush cell layer in
the glutinous rice grains may have a highly oriented
structure, while the endosperm near the crush cell layer
of the nonglutinous rice may have a higher concentration
of amylose. Hence, the type and distribution of starch in
the vicinity of the crush cell layer may depend on the
type of rice. Additionally, some strong SHG spots are
observed along the testa side on the embryo. However,
the testa side lacks starch. Thus, the origin of these SHG
spots is likely glucose, maltose, or both. In the testa side
of the embryo, crystallized glucose or maltose is detected
by SHG.
This
study
examined
typical
rice
species.
As
the results demonstrate that SHG can monitor the
distribution of sugars and amylopectin in the embryo
and
neighboring
regions
of
rice
grains,
we
plan
to investigate more varieties to verify whether the
tendencies observed here apply to rice in general.

Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

References

1. H. Li, Y. Miyauchi, N. A. Tuan, G. Mizutani, and
M. Koyano, “Optical sum frequency generation image

of rice grains”, J. Biomater. Nanobiotech. 3, 286–291
(2012).
2. K. Hoshikawa, “Development of starch parenchymatous
tissue”, in “T. Matsuo, et al., Eds., Science of the Rice
Plant,” , vol. I, Morphology (Rural Culture Association,
Tokyo, 1990), pp. 295–302. [in Japanese].
3. K.
Hoshigawa,
“Studies
on
the
development
of
endosperm in rice : 1. Process of endosperm tissue
formation [in Japanese]”, Nippon Sakumotsu Gakkai Kiji
36, 151–161 (1967).
4. K. Hoshigawa, “Structure of the endosperm tissue of rice
and its development [in Japanese]”, Biol. Sci. 23, 66–76
(1972).
5. C.
Lafon-Placette
and
C.
K¨ohler,
“Embryo
and
endosperm, partners in seed development”, Curr. Opin.
Plant Biol. 17, 64–69 (2014).
6. K. Hibara, “Molecular genetics of the events of early
differentiation in rice [in Japanese]”, Breed. Res. 17,
115–119 (2015).
7. N. Takahashi, “Physicogenetical Studies on Germination
of Rice Seeds with Special Reference to its Genetical
Factors [in Japanese]”, Bull. Inst. Agr. Res. Tohoku
Univ. 14, 1–87 (1962).
8. K. Hoshikawa, “Digestion of the endosperm”, in “T.
Matsuo, et al., Eds., Science of the Rice Plant,” , vol. I,
Morphology (Rural Culture Association, Tokyo, 1990),
p. 75. [in Japanese].
9. R. Cisek, D. Tokarz, S. Krouglov, M. Steup, M. J.
Emes, I. J. Tetlow, and V. Barzda, “Second harmonic
generation
mediated
by
aligned
water
in
starch
granules”, J. Phys. Chem. B 118, 14785–14794 (2014).
10. H.
C.
Hieu,
H.
Li,
Y.
Miyauchi,
G.
Mizutani,
N.
Fujita,
and
Y.
Nakamura,
“Wetting
effect
on
optical sum frequency generation (SFG) spectra of
D-glucose, D-fructose, and sucrose”, Spectrochim. Acta
Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 138, 834–839 (2015).
11. G.
Mizutani,
Y.
Sonoda,
H.
Sano,
M.
Sakamoto,
T. Takahashi, and S. Ushioda, “Detection of starch
granules in a living plant by optical second harmonic
microscopy”, J. Lumin. 87–89, 824–826 (2000).
12. G. Cox, N. Moreno, and J. Feij´o, “Second-harmonic
imaging of plant polysaccharides”, J. Biomed. Opt. 10,
24013–240136 (2005).
13. S.
Psilodimitrakopoulos,
I.
Amat-Roldan,
P.
Loza-Alvarez,
and
D.
Artigas,
“Estimating
the
helical pitch angle of amylopectin
in starch using
polarization second harmonic generation microscopy”,
J. Opt. 12, 084007 (2010).
14. Z.
Y.
Zhuo,
C.
S.
Liao,
C.
H.
Huang,
J.
Y.
Yu,
Y.
Y.
Tzeng,
W.
Lo,
C.
Y.
Dong,
H.
C.
Chui, Y. C. Huang, H. M. Lai, and S. W. Chu,
“Second harmonic generation imagingA new method for
unraveling molecular information of starch”, J. Struct.
Biol. 171, 88–94 (2010).
15. R.
Cisek,
D.
Tokarz,
L.
Kontenis,
V.
Barzda,
and
M.
Steup,
“Polarimetric
Second
Harmonic
Generation Microscopy: An Analytical Tool for Starch
Bioengineering”, Starch-St¨arke 70, 1700031 (2018).
16. K. Kainuma and D. French, “Naegeli amylodextrin and
its relationship to starch granule structure. II. Role of
water in crystallization of B-starch”, Biopolymers 11,
2241–2250 (1972).


8
Yue Zhao et al. ♦

17. Y. Takeda, S. Hizukuri, and B. O. Juliano, “Purification
and structure of amylose from rice starch”, Carbohydr.
Res. 148, 299–308 (1986).
18. S. Hizukuri, Y. Takeda, N. Maruta, and B. O. Juliano,
“Molecular structures of rice starch”, Carbohydr. Res.
189, 227–235 (1989).
19. D.
J.
Manners,
“Recent
developments
in
our
understanding of amylopectin structure”, Carbohydr.
Polym. 11, 87–112 (1989).
20. A.
Imberty,
A.
Bul´eon,
V.
Tran,
and
S.
P´erez,
“Recent advances in knowledge of starch structure”,
Starch-St¨arke 43, 375–384 (1991).
21. T. A. Waigh, I. Hopkinson, A. M. Donald, M. F.
Butler, F. Heidelbach, and C. Riekel, “Analysis of the
native structure of starch granules with X-ray microfocus
diffraction”, Macromolecules 30, 3813–3820 (1997).
22. Y. Miyauchi, H. Sano, and G. Mizutani, “Selective
observation of starch in a water plant using optical
sum-frequency microscopy”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 23,
1687–1690 (2006).
23. A. Imberty, H. Chanzy, S. P´erez, A. Bul´eon, and V. Tran,
“The double-helical nature of the crystalline part of
A-starch”, J. Mol. Biol. 201, 365–378 (1988).
24. D. Popov, A. Bul´eon, M. Burghammer, H. Chanzy,
N. Montesanti, J.-L. Putaux, G. Potocki-Veronese, and
C. Riekel, “Crystal structure of A-amylose: A revisit
from synchrotron microdiffraction analysis of single
crystals”, Macromolecules 42, 1167–1174 (2009).
25. R. Cisek, D. Tokarz, M. Steup, I. J. Tetlow, M. J.
Emes, K. H. Hebelstrup, A. Blennow, and V. Barzda,
“Second harmonic generation microscopy investigation
of the crystalline ultrastructure of three barley starch
lines affected by hydration”, Biomed. Opt. Express 6,
3694–3700 (2015).
26. F. Vilaplana, J. Hasjim, and R. G. Gilbert, “Amylose
content in starches: Toward optimal definition and
validating experimental methods”, Carbohydr. Polym.
88, 103–111 (2012).
27. W. R. Zipfel, R. M. Williams, R. Christie, A. Y. Nikitin,
B. T. Hyman, and W. W. Webb, “Live tissue intrinsic
emission microscopy using multiphoton-excited native
fluorescence and second harmonic generation”, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 7075–7080 (2003).
28. L. Kong, C. Lee, S. H. Kim, and G. R. Ziegler,
“Characterization of starch polymorphic structures using
vibrational sum frequency generation spectroscopy”, J.
Phys. Chem. B 118, 1775–1783 (2014).
29. T. L. Bluhm and P. Zugenmaier, “Detailed structure
of the Vh-amylose-iodine complex: a linear polyiodine
chain”, Carbohydr. Res. 89, 1–10 (1981).
30. S. Pavlovic and P. R. G. Brand˜ao, “Adsorption of starch,
amylose, amylopectin and glucose monomer and their
effect on the flotation of hematite and quartz”, Miner
Eng. 16, 1117–1122 (2003).
31. K. Iizuka and T. Aishima, “Starch Gelation Process
Observed
by
FT-IR/ATR
Spectrometry
with
Multivariate Data Analysis”, J. Food Sci. 64, 653–658
(1999).
32. D. L. Phillips, J. Xing, H. Liu, D.-H. Pan, and H. Corke,
“Potential use of Raman spectroscopy for determination
of amylose content in maize starch”, Cereal Chem. 76,
821–823 (1999).

33. J. A. Feij´o and N. Moreno, “Imaging plant cells by
two-photon excitation”, Protoplasma 223, 1–32 (2004).
34. Z. Benediktyov´a and L. Nedbal, “Imaging of multi-color
fluorescence emission from leaf tissues”, Photosynth. Res.
102, 169 (2009).
35. K. Okamoto and T. Akazawa, “Enzymic mechanisms of
starch breakdown in germinating rice seeds 7. Amylase
formation in the epithelium”, Plant physiology
63,
336–340 (1979).
36. A. Ochiai, H. Sugai, K. Harada, S. Tanaka, Y. Ishiyama,
K. Ito, T. Tanaka, T. Uchiumi, M. Taniguchi, and
T. Mitsui, “Crystal structure of α-amylase from Oryza
sativa: molecular insights into enzyme activity and
thermostability”,
Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem.
78,
989–997 (2014).
37. T. Murata, T. Akazawa, and S. Fukuchi, “Enzymic
Mechanism of Starch Breakdown in Germinating Rice
Seeds I. An Analytical Study1”, Plant Physiol. 43,
1899–1905 (1968).
38. D.
D´ebarre,
W.
Supatto,
A.-M.
Pena,
A.
Fabre,
T. Tordjmann, L. Combettes, M.-C. Schanne-Klein,
and E. Beaurepaire, “Imaging lipid bodies in cells and
tissues using third-harmonic generation microscopy”,
Nat. Methods 3, 47–53 (2006).
39. C. Saito, M. T. Morita, T. Kato, and M. Tasaka,
“Amyloplasts
and
vacuolar
membrane
dynamics in
the
living
graviperceptive
cell
of
the
Arabidopsis
inflorescence stem”, Plant Cell 17, 548–558 (2005).
40. E. L. Vigil and M. Ruddat, “Development and enzyme
activity of protein bodies in proteinoplasts of tobacco
root cells”, Histochemistry 83, 17–27 (1985).
41. R. R. Wise, “The diversity of plastid form and function”,
in “The structure and function of plastids,” (Springer,
2007), pp. 3–26.
42. S. Fine and W. P. Hansen, “Optical second harmonic
generation
in
biological
systems”,
Appl.
Opt.
10,
2350–2353 (1971).
43. S. Miyata and T. Akazawa, “Enzymic mechanism of
starch breakdown in germinating rice seeds”, Plant
Physiol. 70, 147–153 (1982).


