1

Interplay between structural and magnetic-

electronic responses of FeAl2O4 to a 

megabar:  site inversion and spin crossover

W. M. Xu,1 G. R. Hearne,2
S. Layek,1 D. Levy,1 M. P. Pasternak,1 

G. Kh. Rozenberg1 and E. Greenberg1,3

1School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel 

2Department of Physics, University of Johannesburg,  P.O. Box 524 , Auckland Park, 

2006, Johannesburg,  South Africa 

3Center for Advanced Radiation Sources, University of Chicago,  

Argonne, IL 60439, USA

Abstract

X-ray diffraction pressure studies at room temperature demonstrate that the spinel 

FeAl2O4 transforms to a tetragonal phase at ~18 GPa. This tetragonal phase has a 

highly irregular unit-cell volume versus pressure dependence up to ~45 GPa, after 

which a transformation to a Cmcm post-spinel phase is onset.    This is attributable to

pressure driven Fe  Al site inversion at room temperature, corroborated by 

signatures in the 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy pressure data.   At the tetragonal 

post-spinel transition, onset in the range 4550 GPa, there is a concurrent emergence 

of a non-magnetic spectral component in the Mössbauer data at variable cryogenic 

temperatures.  This is interpreted as spin crossover at sixfold coordinated Fe locations 

emanated from site inversion.  Spin crossover commences at the end of the pressure 

range of the tetragonal phase and progresses in the post-spinel structure. There is also 

a much steeper volume change V/V ~ 10% in the range 4550 GPa compared to the 

preceding pressure regime, from the combined effects of the structural transition and 

spin crossover electronic change.  At the highest pressure attained, ~106 GPa, the 

Mössbauer data evidences a diamagnetic Fe low-spin abundance of ~50%.  The rest 

of the high-spin Fe in eightfold coordinated sites continue to experience a relatively 

small internal magnetic field of ~33 T.  This is indicative of a magnetic ground state 

 Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed :  xuw@post.tau.ac.il


2

associated with strong covalency, as well as substantive disorder from site inversion 

and the mixed spin-state configuration.  Intriguingly magnetism survives in such a 

spin-diluted post-spinel lattice at high densities. The R(300 K) data decreases by only 

two orders of magnitude from ambient pressure to the vicinity of ~100 GPa.  Despite 

a ~26% unit-cell volume densification from the lattice compressibility, structural 

transitions and spin crossover, FeAl2O4 is definitively non-metallic with an estimated 

gap of  ~400 meV at ~100 GPa.  At such high densification  appreciable bandwidth 

broadening and gap-closure would be anticipated.
Reasons for the resilient non-

metallic behavior are briefly discussed.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Hercynite FeAl2O4 is a 2-3 cubic spinel, which is isomorphic to the mineral 

MgAl2O4. In this structure the Fe2+ and Al3+ cations can occupy both tetrahedral A

and octahedral B sites of a spinel with a general compound formulation AB2O4.  An 

inversion parameter x specifying the fraction of A sites occupied by trivalent cations 

in hercynite leads to a formulation: 
 


IV
VI
2
3
2
3

1
2
4
Fe
Al
Fe Al
O
x
x
x
x








, where the roman 

numerals refer to the fourfold and sixfold coordination sites.     The degree of 

inversion at ambient conditions depends on synthesis conditions, viz, high 

temperature annealing value and cooling rate [1, 2]. The cation distribution amongst 

A and B sites in turn determines the chemical and physical properties of the spinel.

From a magnetic perspective the normal spinel x = 0 case, FeAl2O4,  is of 

considerable interest. The B-site cations form a pyrochlore sublattice.  A-site cations  

in these ferrous spinels form a diamond sublattice.  This in itself does not lead to 

geometric spin frustration, but nearest-neighbor spin coupling J1 and next nearest 

neighbor coupling J2 engenders strong frustration. Consequentially exotic spin liquid 

or orbital liquid/glass ground states may be stabilized, as ascertained from 

comprehensive magnetic susceptibility and neutron scattering experiments [3, 4].  

Different degrees of inversion disrupt these exotic ground states and for relatively  

low levels of inversion, say x ~ 0.2,  spin glass behavior tends to be rendered in the 

system [4, 5].

Our interest is in the pressure response of the magnetic-electronic behavior of 

these ferrous spinels, up to the current state-of-the-art megabar (100 GPa  0.6 eV Ǻ-3) 


3

regime. Such energy density input is necessary to impact on the typical pertinent large 

energy scales (~eV) of important electron interactions in these transition metal oxide 

systems.  Moreover spinels under pressure are known to transit through various 

structural phases which have been investigated primarily by x-ray diffraction and 

Raman spectroscopy, for a review see ref [6].  But little is know about the magnetic-

electronic aspects of these high pressure structural phases.  We have recently 

addressed this in ferrous spinels in our investigations of FeCr2O4 [7] and Fe2TiO4 [8], 

summarized in the following.  We extend similar such investigations to FeAl2O4 in 

this study.

In our recent high pressure study of the normal spinel (Fe)IV(Cr2)VIO4 in which 

both A and B cations have a magnetic moment and resultant interesting magnetic-

electronic properties (e.g., dynamical Jahn-Teller effect,  orbital ordering, 

multiferroicity), we have demonstrated that an unusual pressure response occurs [7]. 

A cubic to tetragonal transition occurs at ~12 GPa at room temperature and then 

persistent increased tetragonality prevails up to nearly a megabar.  Fe  Cr site 

inversion is onset at ~30 GPa at room temperature. This leads to a situation where 

Cr3+ (3d3) is unusually stabilized in tetrahedral coordination. The inverted Fe2+, at 

distorted octahedral sites, then undergo high- to low- spin crossover (HS  LS 

transition) onset at ~60 GPa.  Near to 100 GPa  50% of the Fe is LS implying pressure 

driven inversion to attain x ~ 0.5 in 
 


IV
VI
2
3
2
3

1
2
4
Fe
Cr
Fe Cr
O
x
x
x
x








. In spite of a more 

than 30% decrease in unit cell volume the tetragonal high pressure phase remains 

persistently non-metallic.

In our subsequent study in ulvöspinel (Fe)IV(FeTi)VIO4 [8],  a sequence of 

structural transitions cubic  tetragonal  orthorhombic (Cmcm)  orthorhombic 

(Pmma)  occur up to ~100 GPa.  The symmetry lowering in the orthorhombic post-

spinel phase, onset at ~55 GPa, is associated with a disorder/order transition of Fe/Ti 

at sixfold coordinated sites.  Spin crossover is triggered in the Cmcm phase and 

evolves to ~50% abundance of Fe in octahedral sites in the Pmma phase at the highest 

pressure near ~100 GPa , where persistent non-metallic behavior prevails.

The two above-mentioned cases represented some of the first studies of the

interplay between magnetic-electronic behavior and structural response of magnetic 

spinels to high densification.  Establishing that pressure driven site-inversion and 

partial spin crossover may occur, is crucial for knowledge of the physical and 


4

chemical properties of such systems in mineral assemblages under extreme pressure-

temperature conditions of the deep Earth.  Moreover there is also now some intrigue 

as to the resilience of the charge gap at such high densification.  As a follow-up to 

these recent studies we have conducted similar structural and magnetic-electronic 

investigations of FeAl2O4 to the megabar regime. Our study aims to answer questions  

of whether pressure induces site-inversion, orbital moment quenching, spin state

crossover and whether the band gap prevails to such high pressures.  This may then 

constitute a comparative study with the behavior of other ferrous analogs FeCr2O4

(normal spinel) and Fe2TiO4 (inverse spinel). 

To this end we employ 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy (MS) as arguably the most 

suitable direct probe of the Fe magnetic-electronic state to extreme conditions, 

pressures of ~100 GPa and temperatures in the range 3004 K. For this purpose an 

57Fe isotopically enriched sample was prepared.  This was to ensure spectra with an 

adequate signal-to-noise ratio could be obtained for a reliable analysis,  when probing 

the microscopic pressurized sample cavity to extreme conditions in a diamond anvil 

cell with MS. As such, in the synthesis procedure briefly described in the next section,   

some degree of inversion has been attained,  x ~ 0.2.
Hence ~20% of the Fe 

(tetrahedral) sites on the diamond sublattice are populated by spin vacancies (non-

magnetic Al3+ cations), and the magnetic ground state is certainly expected to be a 

spin glass.  The pressure response of this spin glass state is thus investigated to very 

high densification.  Complementary x-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) at room 

temperature and temperature-dependent electrical-resistance measurements, both to 

the vicinity of a megabar, delineate the structural response to pressurization of the 

spinel and evolution of the charge gap, respectively.    

II.
EXPERIMENTAL

FeAl2O4 was synthesized using stoichiometric quantities of Fe, Al2O3 and Fe2O3.  

The Fe2O3 precursor material was enriched to ~20% 57Fe. The pelleted mixture was 

heated in an evacuated quartz tube at 1000 °C for 24 hours and then annealed at 

500 °C for a week to minimize the inversion. The single-phase purity of the sample, 

cubic structure and magnetic properties compared with the literature [9] were 

confirmed by conventional powder XRD and MS at ambient pressure. 


5

The combination of high pressure MS , resistivity and XRD methodologies used 

here are very similar to that of our previous investigations of ferrous spinels [7, 8].    

Pressure generation was by means of custom built miniature piston cylinder diamond 

anvil cells (DACs) made at Tel-Aviv University (TAU) [10] for the MS and 

resistance measurements and 4-pin DACs made at Bayerisches Geoinstitut (BGI) for 

XRD experiments.  Anvils with culets in the range 200300 m diameter have been 

used for pressurization up to ~100 GPa.  Samples were loaded into 100150 m 

diameter cavities drilled in  rhenium gaskets.  The calibration scales mentioned in ref. 

[11] were used for pressure determination from the ruby fluorescence measurements.  

The error in the pressure determination is 510% of the reported average pressure 

from the ruby fluorescence measurements in the case of the MS and resistance 

experiments.  Liquid argon was used as a pressurizing medium [12, 13] in the MS 

experiments.

For the resistance measurements the rhenium gasket was insulated with a layer of 

Al2O3-NaCl (3:1 wt. %) mixed with epoxy to avoid short-circuiting the Pt electrodes 

used to measure the sample resistance in the DC four-probe configuration. 
A few 

ruby fragments for pressure determination were located in the region between the Pt 

electrode tips overlapping the sample. No pressure transmitting medium was used, but 

pressure is effectively transmitted to the sample upon compression by way of the 

surrounding insulation. Pressure gradients are expected to be small in the distances 

(20–30 m) between the tips of the Pt electrodes across which voltage measurements 

are made. 

Variable temperature, 300–5 K Mössbauer studies involved 57Co(Rh) 10-mCi 

point-source methodology and a top-loading liquid-helium cryostat [14]. Typical data 

collection time for a single spectrum was ~24 hours. Spectra were analyzed using 

appropriate fitting programs from which the hyperfine interaction parameters (internal 

magnetic field Hhf, isomer (centroid) shift IS and quadrupole splitting/shift QS) and 

the corresponding relative abundances of the spectral sub-components were derived. 

The isomer shift in the present work is calibrated relative to -Fe. 

For variable low temperature resistance measurements the DAC was placed on a 

probe connected to a “dip-stick” stepper-motor assembly, which by computer control 

slowly changed the height of the DAC above the cryogen level in a liquid nitrogen or 


6

helium Dewar. The temperature was monitored by a Lakeshore Si (DT-421-HR) 

diode in proximity to the DAC.

Powder XRD measurements were carried out at room temperature up to 80 GPa at 

the 13ID-D beamline of the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne , Il, USA), with a 

wavelength of  = 0.3344 Å in angle-dispersive mode and patterns were collected 

using a MAR CCD detector.  Ne was used as the pressure transmitting medium.  

Pressure was determined from the ruby fluorescence spectra up to 5060 GPa.  The 

Ne equation of state was used to ascertain pressures through most of the pressure 

range, and especially at pressures beyond P > 50 GPa [15].   Both methods give 

rather similar pressure values with the difference not exceeding 0.5 GPa. The error in 

the pressure determination is about 2% of the reported average pressure.  Diffraction 

images were integrated using the FIT2D [16, 17] and DIOPTAS software [18] .  

Powder diffraction patterns were analyzed using the GSAS-II software [19] to extract 

the unit-cell parameters. 

The intensities of the diffraction peaks are affected by instrumental and grain-

size issues (diamond x-ray absorption and low statistics in the random distribution of 

sample crystallites).  Therefore the Rietveld refinement of the powder diffraction 

patterns did not result in a good enough fit.  Hence diffraction patterns were analyzed 

by using the whole profile fitting (Pawley) method [20]. Diffraction spectra mainly 

exhibit peaks from the sample, as well as minor peak contributions from Al2O3

impurity and the pressure medium (Ne). These phases were considered in the 

refinements. The reliability factor Rwp obtained in the refinement of each of the 

powder diffraction patterns is ~1%.

III.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Our MS spectra of FeAl2O4 at ambient pressure involving measurements at room 

temperature (RT) and liquid helium temperatures are similar to those of Dormann et 

al. [9], see Fig. 1.
Dormann et al. [9] obtained an  inversion factor of  x ~ 0.2 from 

neutron diffraction measurements.  They also determined the spin-freezing 

temperature to be at Tg ~ 13−14 K from the maximum in AC-susceptibility 

measurements and temperature evolution of the internal magnetic fields in MS 

experiments.  From the similarity of our spectral profiles to that of Dormann et al. [9] , 

we infer that our sample is also a partially inverse spinel, with 2025% of the Fe2+


7

cations located in B (octahedral) sites. We expect the  quadrupole doublet splitting 

(QS), representing deviations of the Fe local environment from cubic symmetry, of B

sites to be larger than the A sites.
The latter fourfold coordinated sites normally 

deviate less from cubic symmetry than the octahedral B sites in spinels [21, 22].

Hence the spectrum at ambient conditions has been fitted by using two sub-spectra 

with an abundance of  80:20 for the different A– and B- site QS components, 

respectively, see Fig. 1.  The spectrum is not sufficiently well resolved to permit more 

reliable detailed fitting, e.g., with QS distributions.  So broadened sub-spectrum 

linewidths mimick the QS distribution associated with the various Fe local next-

nearest neighbor environments. The line width for the tetrahedral sites is broader than 

that of the octahedral sites, reflecting the different QS distributions for the two sites.  

We have analyzed the magnetic spectra at low temperatures (LT) using a similar 

fitting strategy to that of Dormann et al. [9] for dealing with their temperature 

dependent MS spectra at ambient pressure where complex spectral profiles of a spin

glass occur.  A minimum number of multiple sub-spectra involving broadened 

magnetically split sub-components have been used. This mimicks internal magnetic 

field (Hhf) distributions associated with the varied Fe local environments, since we are 

not able to make a unique identification of the distribution [23].  The Hhf values of the 

discrete sub-components approximate the average values of the true Hhf distributions. 

We have also attempted to maintain consistency between RT and LT spectra for the 

respective abundances assigned to A- and B-sites.
The hyperfine interaction (HI)

parameters of the various sub-components like the centroid IS and Hhf values as 

estimates of average values of Hhf distributions are quite reliable. This is considered a 

good starting model for monitoring changes in the HI parameters and component 

abundances as evolved at pressure. 
The pressure evolution of spectra at RT and LT 

is depicted in Fig.1.  Fig. 2 presents the derived HI parameters of the RT spectra in the 

different structural regimes. The various structural phases are discerned in the XRD 

measurements depicted in Fig. 3 and derived structural parameters in Fig. 4.  The 

interplay between magnetic-electronic behavior and structural response is discussed in 

the following.

A. Low pressure high-spin spinel phase,  116 GPa


8

In this pressure range the XRD data shows that FeAl2O4 is in the spinel phase, see Fig.

3. The plot of MS HI parameters at RT in Fig. 2 shows that there is a steep increase 

of QS site-asymmetry parameters up to 10 GPa, indicative of the local distortion of 

the cubic field. Similar behavior of the QS increase was also observed in FeCr2O4

where it was attributed to pressure effects on the dynamical Jahn-Teller distortion [7]. 

The IS values have a negative linear dependence on s(0), the s-electron density at the 

nucleus [24, 25]
. Thus the decrease in IS values upon increasing pressure is 

anticipated as the s-electron density increases under compression.

Low-temperature MS spectra, measured at ~10 K, each retain the same profile

as ambient pressure up to 10 GPa. From this we infer that the spin glass nature, 

reported by Dorman et al. [9], remains as such in this pressure range. It should be 

noted that it is the combination of complex magnetic Mössbauer spectra and the peak 

features in the AC-suceptibility measurements of Dormann et al. [9] and Soubeyroux 

et al. [26] , respectively, that established the occurrence of spin-glass behavior in an 

FeAl2O4 sample  with inversion factor x ~ 0.2 at ambient pressure. Up to ~10 GPa the

LT spectral profiles of our sample, similar to that of Dorman et al. [9], are typical of 

magnetic spectra which develop complexity manifested in a distribution of Hhf values 

below a temperature Tg characteristic of spin glass freezing. This would primarily be 

directly deduced from temperature-dependent AC-susceptibilty measurements.

Hence similar to Dormann et al., the spectra at LT and ambient pressure in Fig. 1 are 

fitted with one component having a conspicuously large magnetic field of ~48 T (~20%

abundance, attributed to inverted Fe at B-sites).  Additional multiple (three) 

magnetically split components with Hhf ≤ 25 T are used, as a representation of the Hhf-

distribution associated with the varied local environments and magnetic interactions 

of Fe at A-sites.

The MS spectra show magnetic hyperfine splittings as temperature rises to above 

25 K upon increasing pressure to beyond ~10 GPa. It is unlikely that a magnetic

hyperfine splitting at such high temperatures is a signature of spin-freezing at such 

elevated temperatures in a spin glass.  In which case we suppose that at these reduced 

interatomic spacings a different magnetic ground state has been stabilized compared 

to ambient pressure. 


9

The assignment of the large Hhf ~ 48 T component to Fe at B-sites (inversion) is 

partly based on how it evolves at much higher pressures, as discussed in the following 

sub-sections.

B. Tetragonal spinel phase, 1855 GPa

The XRD profiles in Fig. 3 indicate that beyond 16 GPa tetragonality occurs and 

prevails as such to ~55 GPa.   Fig. 4 depicts lattice parameters and unit-cell volume as 

a function of pressure.
The behavior of the unit-cell volume shows an “apparent 

stiffening” up to ~35 GPa, after which there is a change to a much steeper pressure 

dependence of the unit-cell volume (increased compressibility) up to ~55 GPa where 

this phase has disappeared, see Fig. 4(b).   For comparison purposes we extrapolate 

the equation of state (EOS) of the low pressure cubic phase to well beyond 16 GPa up 

to ~50 GPa.  This may be compared with the structural response of cubic and 

tetragonal phases in other normal spinels, e.g., ZnGa2O4 [27].  Therein there is no 

discernable change in compressibility associated with the cubic  tetragonal 

transition.  Therefore the compression of tetragonal FeAl2O4 may be deemed as 

highly irregular and merits deeper consideration, as discussed in the following.

A representative Mössbauer spectrum of the tetragonal phase at 30 GPa and RT is 

shown in Fig. 1. The abundance of the large QS component attributable to sixfold 

(octahedral) coordination, has increased appreciably ~40%, compared to that in the 

cubic phase.  This prevails to ~50 GPa where further conspicuous changes then 

become onset.  The irregular compression behavior of the unit-cell volume in 

conjunction with the increase in abundance of the large QS component of the 

spectrum at RT is considered as evidence of pressure-induced Fe  Al site inversion 

triggered at room temperature.   Thus in Fig. 4(b) the up-turn in unit-cell volume to 

~40 GPa signifies the progression of inversion to completion, after which normal 

compressibility behavior occurs.

The LT magnetic spectrum at 30 GPa in Fig. 1 also shows some changes to the 

profile in the centralized velocity region near zero mm s-1.  The spectrum is 

characterized by a large Hhf ~ 46 T component and 20−25 T discrete components 

equivalent of  Hhf-distribution averages.   The originally inverted Fe sites are 

represented by the large Hhf ~ 46 T component. Further inversion and its magnetic 


10

signatures are convoluted into the rest of the Hhf-distribution by an equivalent discrete 

~25 T component as manifested in some changes in the centralized region compared 

to the cubic phase.
The third component,  a small ~20 T Hhf-distribution average 

equivalent, is ascribed to the varied local environments of fourfold coordinated sites 

HS(IV). 

It is also noteworthy that the pressure dependence of R(300 K) shows non-

monotonic behavior in the 20−50 GPa range, see Fig. 5.  The value of R(300 K)  

changes by only one order of magnitude from its initial value up to 50 GPa.  This also 

translates to hardly any change in the activation energy of the original insulating state.

The top right hand inset of Fig. 5 also shows plots of the data in terms of Arrhenius 

thermally activated hopping behavior, lnR  1/T .  Below ~41 GPa linearity is only in 

a limited high temperature range from which the activation energy Ea is extracted.  At 

higher pressures P  52 GPa linearity occurs throughout the temperature range 3004 

K. This indicates that a temperature induced change in conduction mechanism which 

occurs at lower pressures, does not occur at higher pressures. This could be associated 

with the Fe  Al site inversion occurring at P < 40 GPa.

In the vicinity just prior to ~50 GPa  XRD patterns show evidence of reflections 

of another structural transition occurring, see Fig. 3 (a).  Based on the evolution of 

this new phase to higher pressures P > 55 GPa, we have deduced that this is the 

orthorhombic Cmcm post-spinel phase.  Thus XRD data indicates that 46−55 GPa is a 

regime of coexistence of  tetragonal spinel and orthorhombic post-spinel phases. 

FeAl2O4 is fully converted to post-spinel as pressure rises above 55 GPa.  

At ~55 GPa RT and LT MS profiles show rather conspicuous changes compared 

to spectra at lower pressure.  The RT spectrum develops pronounced asymmetry in 

the overall spectral envelope and the LT spectrum exhibits an appreciable increase in 

intensity in the centralized velocity region.   These are considered manifestations of a 

new doublet component emerging. In the RT spectrum this is a component with HI 

parameters of IS = 0.45 mm s-1 and QS = 0.8 mm s-1 .  This new doublet component 

remains as such down to the lowest temperature measured, 12 K.  This indicates that 

it is non-magnetic in nature and accounts for the increased intensity in the centralized 

region of the magnetic spectrum, see Fig. 1. This diamagnetic component coexists 

with other sub-spectra which may be remnants of the low pressure phase as well as 

with anticipated eightfold coordination sites (HS(VIII)) of the post-spinel phase.  


11

These HS(VIII) sites likely evolve from the tetrahedral HS(IV) sites of the tetragonal 

spinel, involving the reconstructive mechanisms described by Arévalo-López et al.

[28].  

C. P > 55 GPa, partially spin converted post-spinel

The XRD data in Fig. 3 indicates that above 55 GPa only the post-spinel phase is 

discerned.  There is a much steeper change in unit-cell volume V/V ~ 10%  

preceding this, in the range 45−50 GPa.  In addition to the normal compressibility, we 

attribute this to both the transition to a denser orthorhombic post-spinel structure and 

also to what the emergence of a diamagnetic spectral  component in the MS spectra is 

suggesting. This non-magnetic component has HI parameters typical of  low-spin (LS) 

Fe at sixfold coordinated sites, from 3d spin crossover at HS(VI) sites [24].  Spin 

crossover and the consequential 3d electron spin-pairing HS:()() 

LS:()( ), t2g4eg2 t2g6eg0 , leads to a change of atomic spin S=2 moment to a 

collapsed S=0 diamagnetic (Hhf=0) state.  The LS electronic configuration also 

represents a more symmetric local environment of surrounding charge.  Consequently 

the QS (site-asymmetry) parameter values are normally much lower than in the HS 

state, as discerned by the LS(VI)-designated values in the Cmcm section of Fig. 2.  

The other tell-tale signature of an HS  LS change is the pronounced decrease in IS,  

Fig. 2 bottom panel.  This is because of the change in 3d-electron shielding of s-

electrons, from the re-distribution of charge in the 3d orbitals.  This in turn affects IS 

because of its relation to the s-electron density, as delineated at the end of the first 

paragraph in sub-section A [24].

We identify these as the Fe sites evolved from  Fe  Al site inversion. Recall that 

such sites originated in the original sample synthesis process (20−25% abundance)

and additional inversion is triggered at high pressure in the tetragonal phase (20−25% 

abundance).  There is also an anticipated volume contraction associated with the HS 

 LS spin crossover process [29, 30], due to the redistribution of charge from eg to t2g

orbitals in ferrous iron t2g4eg2 t2g6eg0.  The QS site-asymmetry parameters in Fig. 2 

for the various local environments show an increasing trend.  This is presumably 

indicative of appreciable polyhedral distortions at this high compression, resulting in 

increased crystal field (CF) values that trigger spin crossover at octahedral sites [30].


12

Differences in the onset pressures of spin crossover as discerned by XRD (45−50 

GPa) and MS (50−55 GPa) may be attributed to the different pressure transmitting 

media used and how the degree of non-hydrostaticity affects the electronic transition

[31].
In addition, in the synchrotron XRD measurements the signal derives from a 

small central part of the sample.  Whereas in Mössbauer pressure studies the signal is 

collected from a much larger ∼2/3 inner region of the sample diameter, resulting in 

possible pressure gradient effects which could be significant in determining phase 

transition pressures. Differences may also arise from the higher sensitivity of the 

synchrotron XRD method, where the higher signal/noise ratio allows the detection of 

new components at a level where its relative abundance is too small for discernment 

by MS in a spectrum with strongly overlapping sub-components.

Thus the pronounced volume change V/V ~ 10% in the vicinity of ~50 GPa 

evident in the unit-cell volume evolution in this pressure regime, Fig. 4(b), is partially

attributable to both the tetragonal  post-spinel structural change and emergence of 

LS states, LS(VI), at sixfold coordinated sites in the post-spinel phase as originated 

from site-inversion processes (involving HS(VI)).
Normally such a densification 

should manifest as corresponding decreases in IS values at RT of the MS sub-

components in Fig. 2 [25].  At HS(VIII) sites this is compensated by the increase in 

coordination (IV)  (VIII) which normally leads to an increase in IS [32].  The large 

difference in IS for HS(VI) and LS(VI) likely has contributions from both the 

concurrent spinel/post-spinel densification as well as from the effects of spin-pairing

[29, 33].

The evolution of the MS spectra beyond ~55 GPa , Fig. 1, indicates that the 

abundance of the LS component progressively increases with a corresponding 

diminution of HS(VI) abundance.  Beyond a megabar , at ~106 GPa, 
the LS 

abundance is ~50% as deduced from the (shaded) absorption areas of the sub-

components in Fig. 1. 

A broadened magnetic component with average Hhf ~33 T is still present in the LT 

spectrum at the highest pressure attained.  This is ascribed to the 50% abundant Fe 

sites in eightfold coordination, HS (VIII),  originated from non-inverted HS(IV) sites 

of the cubic spinel phase.  In such a high-coordination local environment the crystal 

field splitting is not large enough for spin crossover to ensue [8, 34].  


13

Comparison of the Hhf-distribution average equivalent for the HS(VIII)-designated 

component indicates that it has increased from ~20 T at 55 GPa to ~33 T at 106 GPa. 

These are depicted as the dotted line sub-components in Fig. 2.  In ferrous iron Hhf = 

HC + HL, comprised of an s-electron spin-density related Fermi-contact term HC and 

orbital moment term HL which may have opposite signs [35].  Modifications to the 3d

level scheme due to compression changes in the eightfold coordinated local 

environment, lead to quenching of HL and consequently to an increase in Hhf [8].
In 

the LT spectrum at 68 GPa, two dotted line sub-components with different Hhf

average values are required to make up sufficient absorption area so as to be 

compatible with the HS(VIII) component area at RT. At this intermediate pressure

some HS(VIII) sites have a higher degree of HL quenching than others, likely due to 

inhomogeneous distortions at eightfold coordinated sites. At the highest pressure all 

HS(VIII) sites have HL quenched to the same extent such that  an average Hhf  ~ 33 T 

component is discerned.

The final picture that emerges of the high density FeAl2O4 post-spinel phase 

beyond a megabar, is that of a partially spin-converted lattice structure.  About half of 

the Fe2+ reside in sixfold coordinated sites from prior inversion processes and all of 

this has undergone spin crossover.  The remainder reside in eightfold coordinated 

sites and still exhibit evidence of a magnetic ground state.   The post-spinel sublattice 

involving eightfold coordinated sites has both Fe2+ (HS(VIII)) and Al3+ constituents. 

Similarly the sublattice involving sixfold coordinated sites has LS(VI) Fe2+ and Al3+

constituents. This renders the overall lattice configuration as one involving a large 

degree of site disorder.    

The resistance measurements up to the highest pressure of ~90 GPa in Fig. 5 

indicate that R(300 K) decreases by less than two orders of magnitude over the entire 

pressure range.  At the highest pressure there is also a tendency toward plateau 

behavior, typical of what has been seen in other (partially) spin converted lattices 

involving ferrous iron analogs [7, 8].  
A high density ~400 meV gapped state 

prevails to ~100 GPa as inferred from an extrapolation of the activation energies from 

lower pressures.

The ~26% decrease in unit-cell volume up to a ~100 GPa from combined lattice 

compressibility, structural transitions and partial spin crossover should lead to an 

appreciable increase in 3d band-broadening and gap closure, yet the compound 

remains resiliently non-metallic.  We rationalize this in terms of an increase in Ueff ,  


14

the electron-correlation gap between upper and lower Hubbard sub-bands, at spin 

crossover which is specific to Fe2+(3d6) [36] , as we have suggested for the other 

ferrous analogs  FeCr2O4 and Fe2TiO4 [7, 8].  Additionally we also suggest Anderson 

localization effects may be prevalent from disorder as a result of both Fe/Al site 

inversion and the mixed high-spin/low-spin electronic configurations at Fe sites in the 






VI

HS

VIII
2
3
2
3

1
2
4
LS
Fe
Al
Fe Al
O
x
x
x
x








, x ~ 0.5, lattice structure.

It is noteworthy that according to XRD data in Fig. 4(b) the transition from the 

tetragonal to orthorhombic (Cmcm) structure is irreversible.  Upon decompression 

down to at least 28 GPa no phase transition back to the intermediate I41/amd structure 

was observed. Furthermore, we do not observe a steep change in unit-cell volume at 

40–50 GPa, similar to that observed upon compression, corresponding with the HS-

LS transition of Fe2+ in octahedral sites (Fig. 4(b)). There is only a very sluggish 

deviation of the V(P) curve from the high pressure Cmcm EOS extrapolated down to 

28 GPa (Fig. 4(b), dashed blue line), which reaches ~2% at 28 GPa. Such a volume 

deviation can be related to a spin-state change back to HS at one quarter of the Fe 

sites in the structure.  This takes into account an estimate of the relative difference in 

octahedral volumes of ~21% expected for HS and LS FeO6 polyhedrons [8] and that 

Fe,  constituting one third of the cations,  is equally distributed at sixfold coordinated 

(VI) sites where a spin-state change is possible and eightfold coordinated (VIII) sites.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Hercynite FeAl2O4 up to a megabar has the following sequence of structural 

transitions : cubic (
3
Fd m ) 16 GPa tetragonal (I41/amd) 45 GPa orthorhombic

(Cmcm), at the
indicated onset transition pressures.
The following physical 

properties of these various structural phases are manifest :

(i) In the cubic spinel spin ordering temperatures rise from a spin-freezing Tg ~ 14 

K at ambient pressure to ordering temperatures that exceed 25 K above 10 GPa.  In 

the tetragonal phase the compression of the unit-cell volume is highly irregular. This 

is ascribed to “cold compression” driven Fe  Al site inversion at room temperature.

(ii)  There is a steep change in unit-cell volume V/V ~ 10%  in a pressure window 

of 10 GPa encompassing ~50 GPa, to culminate in the fully stabilized Cmcm post-

spinel phase as pressure rises above 55 GPa.  Mössbauer spectra also evidence the 


15

emergence of a diamagnetic spectral component.  Part of this volume contraction as 

well as the diamagnetic spectral component are accounted for by spin crossover at 

sixfold coordinated sites, initiated at the end of the pressure range of the tetragonal 

phase and progressed in the emergent post-spinel phase.

(iii)  These are Fe sites originated from prior inversion processes from both sample 

synthesis conditions and pressure effects on the tetragonal phase.   The low-spin 

abundance evolves to maximally ~50% of the Fe sites in the post-spinel phase at the 

highest measured pressure of 106 GPa.  This high density post-spinel is inferred to 

have the formulation  




VIII
VI
2
3
2
3

1
2
4
Fe
Al
Fe Al
O
x
x
x
x








with x ~ 0.5 and is a highly 

disordered lattice structure.  

(iv) The structural transition from tetragonal (I41/amd) to orthorhombic (Cmcm) is 

irreversible, possibly as a result of the appreciable disorder in the Cmcm phase. 

Furthermore, upon decompression to 28 GPa there is an increase in unit-cell volume 

with no change in symmetry.  This deviates to above the EOS of the orthorhombic

Cmcm high pressure phase from a back transition to HS, limited to about half of all 

the Fe in octahedral sites (partial hysteretic behavior of the electronic HS-LS

transition).

In closing :  partial spin crossover appears to be the preferred electronic response 

of ferrous spinels at sufficiently high density, as demonstrated in our work on 

FeCr2O4 (chromite), Fe2TiO4 (ulvöspinel) and again in the current case of FeAl2O4

(hercynite).  In the chromite and hercynite normal spinels at room temperature 

pressure drives inversion, notably HS(IV)  HS(VI) site diffusion.  Appreciable 

polyhedral distortions and increased CF values trigger spin crossover at selected (VI) 

sites in high-density phases of these partially inverse systems.  Similar site-specific 

spin crossover occurs in the originally fully inverse ulvöspinel system to render a 

partially spin converted  post-spinel phase.  It is noteworthy that in all of the ferrous 

iron systems we have investigated, this partial HS-LS transition takes place in the 

vicinity of ~50 GPa, irrespective of whether the structure is tetragonal or 

orthorhombic. This is a regime involving sufficiently reduced and distorted octahedral 

volumes such that the corresponding CF is at critical values to invoke spin crossover 

[30].

At a megabar these ferrous iron systems are all spin-diluted by  “Hund’s spin 

vacancies”  (LS sites), to differing degrees of dilution.  In spite of this and the 


16

appreciable 3d band broadening from various lattice responses that contribute to the 

unit-cell reduction, they continue to have concurrent resilient magnetic and non-

metallic ground-state features of strong electron correlations. It is likely that the 

positive pressure dependence developed by Ueff at spin crossover, specific to the 3d6

electronic structure [36], prevents the anticipated break down of strong electron 

correlations anticipated at such high densities.


17

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant No. 1189/14).

G.R.H. acknowledges financial support from the National Research Foundation of 

South Africa (Grant No. 105870).  We acknowledge M. Shulman for his help in DAC 

preparation and XRD experiments.  Portions of this work were performed at 

GeoSoilEnviroCARS (The University of Chicago, Sector 13), Advanced Photon 

Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory. GeoSoilEnviroCARS is supported by 

the National Science Foundation - Earth Sciences (EAR-1634415) and Department of 

Energy-GeoSciences (DE-FG02-94ER14466). Use of the COMPRES-GSECARS gas 

loading system was supported by COMPRES under NSF Cooperative Agreement 

EAR-1606856 and by GSECARS through NSF grant EAR-1634415 and DOE grant 

DE-FG02-94ER14466. This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, 

a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the 

DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-

AC02-06CH11357.


18

FIGURE CAPTIONS  

FIG. 1.  Selected Fe Mössbauer spectra at room temperature (RT, left panel ) and low 

temperatures (LT, right panel), in the pressure regimes discussed in the text.   Solid 

line through the data points represent the overall fit to the data from the sum of sub-

components shown. Dotted line sub-components refer to the fourfold (IV) or eightfold 

(VIII) coordinated sites and other sub-components refer to sixfold (VI) coordinated 

sites, discussed in the text.  Multiple magnetically split components representing the 

Hhf distribution associated with A-sites (IV) of the complex spectrum of the spin glass 

state at LT and ambient pressure [9], are not shown.
The shaded component 

represents low-spin Fe sites originated from (IV)  (VI)  site-inversion processes.  

FIG. 2.  Pressure dependences of the hyperfine interaction parameters from best fits 

to the Mössbauer spectra at RT.  QS and IS parameters from fitted sub-components 

of RT spectra exemplified in Fig.1 are in the top and bottom panels, respectively.  

Three pressure regimes of structurally distinct phases demarcated by the vertical 

dotted lines have been identified and discussed in the text.  Roman numerals IV, VI 

and VIII refer to four- six- and eightfold coordinated tetrahedral, octahedral and 

bicapped trigonal prismatic sites, respectively.  Spectra in the range ambient18 GPa, 

where XRD discerns cubic behavior at 300 K, are best fit at this temperature with two 

QS components having similar IS values as discussed in the text.
These are 

associated with high-spin Fe local environment distributions of sixfold coordinated Fe 

sites from inversion HS(VI) and fourfold coordinated sites HS(IV).   Spectra in the 

regime 2055 GPa are deconvoluted in a similar way.  Beyond 5055 GPa the 

structural transformation of fourfold to eightfold coordinated HS(VIII) sites and 

evolution of the sixfold coordinated sites across the  I41/amd  Cmcm reconstructive 

transition are described in ref. [28]. Parameters for the low-spin sites are delineated 

by the (LS) labels.

FIG. 3.  (a) Pressure evolution of the XRD patterns up to ~80 GPa  ( = 0.3344 Å).      

The three pressure regimes of structurally distinct phases are demarcated on the 

vertical axis, as discussed in the text.  (b) Examples of Pawley method refinements 

[20] of the XRD patterns at pressure in the various structural phases. Contamination 


19

reflections from minor phase Al2O3 remnant and solid Ne pressure transmitting 

medium are indicated. The unit-cell parameters of the phases depicted in the three 

panels are: cubic a = 8.087(1) Å ;   tetragonal a = 5.622(9) Å and c = 7.951(13) Å ; 

orthorhombic a = 8.703(9) Å, b = 8.688(9) Å and c = 2.654(8) Å.

FIG. 4.  Pressure dependences of the lattice parameters (a) and unit-cell volume (b) of 

the various structural phases. The vertical error bars do not exceed the size of the 

symbols. Solid lines through the data symbols are fits with a Birch-Murnaghan 

equation of state (EOS) to obtain bulk modulus K0 and constraining its derivative at 

K0'=4 [37]. The vertical dashed lines in (b) demarcate the pressures where transitions 

to new structural phases are completed. Note the irregular behavior of both the lattice 

parameters and unit-cell volume of the tetragonal phase in the range 2050 GPa.  In 

particular, note the change in pressure dependences of  c(P) and a(P) beyond ~22 GPa 

followed by a steeper  c-parameter and c/a ratio decrease above 40 GPa.  A steeper 

decrease of the c-parameter is also observed for the emergent Cmcm phase up to ~53 

GPa. Above 53 GPa the compressibility of the orthorhombic structure is isotropic.

This behavior is attributable to Fe  Al site inversion followed by a sluggish HS-LS 

transition initiating at octahedral sites (VI) as discussed in the text. The EOS of the 

cubic phase is extrapolated to ~50 GPa to emphasize the anticipated behavior if there 

is no pressure instigated site inversion [27].  For the decompression data the EOS of 

the orthorhombic phase is extrapolated to ~28 GPa to reveal unit-cell volume changes 

related to only partial recovery of the Fe HS state at sixfold coordinated sites.

FIG. 5.   Pressure dependence of the resistance at 300 K in the main panel.  Top right 

inset shows linearized temperature dependent data at various pressures assuming 

Arrhenius activated hopping transport, ln( )
.
a

B

E
R
const
 k T

. The activation energy 

Ea is obtained from the slope of linear fits to these plots to obtain the charge gap for 

intrinsic conduction Eg = 2Ea . Bottom left-hand inset shows the pressure dependence 

of Ea ,  the solid line through the data points is to guide the eye. Dashed vertical lines 

in the main panel delineate pressures where transitions to new structural phases are 

completed according to XRD experiments, see text and preceding Fig. 4.


20

REFERENCES

[1]  H. St-O'Neil, and A. Navrotsky. Amer. Mineral. 68, 181 (1983).

[2]  M.R. De Guire, R. C. O’Handley, and G. Kalonji. J. Appl. Phys. 65, 3167 (1989).

[3]  H. S. Nair, R. Kumar, and A. M. Strydom. Phys. Rev. B  91, 054423 (2015).

[4]  A. Krimmel, H. Mutka, M. M. Koza, V. Tsurkan, and A. Loidl. Phys. Rev. B 79, 
134406 (2009).

[5]  K. Hanashima, Y. Kodama, D. Akahoshi, C. Kanadani, and T. Saito. J. Phys. Soc. 
Jpn. 82, 024702 (2013).

[6]  D. Errandonea, AB2O4 Compounds at High Pressures (Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg 2014), in Pressure-Induced Phase Transitions in AB2X4 Chalcogenide 
Compounds, Springer Series in  Materials Science Vol. 189, Ed by F. J. Manjón, I. 
Tiginyanu, and V. Ursaki, pp. 53 - 73 

[7]  W. M. Xu, G. R. Hearne, S. Layek, D. Levy, J.-P. Itié, M. P. Pasternak, G. Kh 
Rozenberg, and E. Greenberg. Phys. Rev. B 95, 045110 (2017).

[8]  W. M. Xu, G. R. Hearne, S. Layek, D. Levy, J.-P. Itié, M. P. Pasternak, G. K. 
Rozenberg, and E. Greenberg. Phys. Rev. B 96, 045108 (2017).

[9]  J. L. Dormann, M. Seqqat, D. Fiorani, M. Noguès, J. L. Soubeyroux, S. C. 
Bhargava, and P. Renaudin. Hyperfine Interactions 54, 503 (1990).

[10]  G. Yu. Machavariani, M. P. Pasternak, G. R. Hearne, and G. Kh. Rozenberg. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 1423 (1998).

[11]  A. D. Chijioke, W. J. Nellis, A. Soldatov, and I. F. Silvera. J. of Appl. Phys. 98, 
114905 (2005).

[12]  D. Errandonea, R. Boehler, S. Japel, M. Mezouar, and L. R. Benedetti. Phys. 
Rev. B 73, 092106 (2006).

[13]  S. Klotz, J. C. Chervin, P. Munsch, and G. L. Marchand. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
42, 075413 (2009).

[14]  G. R. Hearne, M. P. Pasternak, and R. D. Taylor. Rev. Sci. Inst. 65, 3787 (1994).

[15]  A. Dewaele, F. Datchi, P. Loubeyre, and M. Mezouar. Phys. Rev. B 77, 094106 
(2008).

[16]  A. P. Hammersley, S. O. Svensson, M. Hanfland, A. N. Fitch, and D. 
Hausermann. High Press. Res. 14, 235 (1996).

[17]   A P Hammersley, ESRF Internal Report, ESRF97HA02T, “FIT2D: An 
Introduction 
and 
Overview'', 
(1997). 
 
See 

http://www.esrf.eu/computing/scientific/FIT2D/.


21

[18]  C. Prescher, and V. B. Prakapenka. High Press. Res. 35, 223 (2015).

[19]  B. H. Toby, and R. B. Von-Dreele. J. Appl. Cryst. 46, 544 (2013).

[20]  G. S. Pawley. J. Appl. Cryst. 14, 357 (1981).

[21]  S. Nakamura, and A. Fuwa. Hyperfine Interact. 226, 267 (2014).

[22]  A. Kyono, S. A. Gramsch, T. Yamanaka, D. Ikuta, M. Ahart, B. O. Mysen, H. K. 
Mao, and R. J. Hemley. Phys. Chem. Minerals (2012) 39, 131 (2012).

[23]  Extrinsic contributions to line broadening emanate from the high specific 
activity of the source and from pressure  gradients and non-hydrostatic pressure 
effects in the sample cavity.  These are not easily deconvoluted from intrinsic 
broadening effects from a distribution of Fe local environments.  As such it may be 
difficult to find a reliable and unique parameter distribution.  Various trial fits, for 
example using QS or Hhf distributions,  have shown that the average values of these 
distributions are quite reliable and conform closely to those obtained when discrete 
broadened Lorentzian sub-components are fitted.  The parameter distributions are thus 
mimicked by the line broadening which includes extrinsic as well as intrinsic 
contributions.  .

[24]  P. Gütlich, E. Bill, and A. X. Trautwein, Mössbauer Spectroscopy and 
Transition Metal Chemistry: Fundamentals and Applications (Springer, Berlin, 2011).

[25]  The isomer shift has the formulation IS = -(constant)s(0) + (constant') , where 
the constants are atomic and nuclear parameters. In this formulation s(0) is the s-
electron density at the nucleus which is also affected by 3d electron shielding.  This 
indicates that IS decreases as the s-electron density increases under compression.

[26]  J. C. Soubeyroux, D. Fiorani, E. Agostinelli, S. C. Bhargava, and J. L. Dormann. 
J. de Physique 49(C8), C8-1118 (1988).

[27]  D. Errandonea, R. S. Kumar, F. J. Manjón, V. V. Ursaki, and E. V. Rusu. Phys. 
Rev. B 79, 024103 (2009).

[28]  Á. M. Arévalo-López, A. J. Dos-santos-García, E. Castillo-Martínez, A. Durán, 
and M. Á. Alario-Franco. Inorg. Chem.  49, 2827 (2010).

[29]  According to R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A 32, 751 (1976) the ionic 
radii at ambient conditions of Fe2+ in sixfold coordination in high-spin and low-spin 
states are 0.78 Å and 0.61 Å, respectively.

[30]  There is a corresponding increased energy cost of occupying higher-lying eg
electronic states, which are originally separated from lower lying t2g orbital levels by 
the crystal field splitting designated CF = 10Dq (∼1 eV).  At a critical value of the 
crystal field splitting this increased cost will supersede the energy gain from 
maximizing the possible pairs of parallel spins in different 3d orbitals on the same site 
(Hund’s rule, whereby there is effectively a gain of  -J ∼ -1 eV for each set of parallel 
spins, from intratomic “on-site” ferromagnetic exchange coupling). When CF > 3 J
for the 3d6 (Fe2+) electronic configuration, antiparallel spin pairing in lower-lying (t2g) 


22

electronic orbital states becomes energetically favorable and HS → LS crossover 
occurs.

[31]  K. Glazyrin, N. Miyajima, J. S. Smith, and K. K. M. Lee. J. Geophys. Res. Solid 
Earth 121, 3377 (2016).

[32]  M. D. Dyar, D. G. Agresti, M. W. Schaefer, C. A. Grant, and E. C. Sklute. Annu. 
Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 34, 83 (2006).

[33]  The isomer shift , IS  is obtained from the centroid of the spectral component.  
It is a measure of the s-electron density at the Fe nucleus.  In transition metal 
compounds the d-electrons shield the s-electrons.  This shielding in ferrous iron (3d6) 
is different to that in ferric iron (3d5) and hence isomer shift values are significantly 
different.  Similarly, 3d-electron shielding is different in the HS and LS states of 
ferrous or ferric iron, where in the LS state the shielding tends to be less effective.

[34]  J.-F. Lin, S. Speziale, Z. Mao, and H. Marquardt. Rev. Geophys. 51, 244 (2013).

[35]  The magnetic hyperfine field is a result of the nuclear Zeeman splitting of 57Fe 
nuclear levels due to an internal magnetic field at the nucleus.  The primary 
contribution to this internal field , Hhf, is from the contact term.   This is the effect of 
d-electron spin polarisation on the s-electrons.  Other contributions to Hhf are from 
comparatively small dipolar and orbital terms.  In high-spin ferric iron  the orbital and 
dipolar terms are negligibly small.  The orbital term in high-spin ferrous iron and low-
spin ferric iron may be appreciable and of opposite sign to the contact term.  At well 
below the magnetic ordering temperatures,  Hhf in high-spin ferric oxides is typically 
clustered around ~50 T whereas in ferrous compounds it may range from near zero to 
44 T depending on the orbital configuration.

[36]  S. G. Ovchinnikov. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 107, 140 
(2008).

[37]  F. Birch. J. Geophys. Res. 83, 1257 (1978).


23

Fig. 1   Xu et al.

-3
0
3

0.96

0.98

1.00

106 GPa

 

Intensity

Velocity (mm s-1)

(RT)

68 GPa

 

30 GPa

Fd 3m

 

0.001 GPa

 

 

 

 

10 K

-8
-4
0
4
8

VIII 

 

 

 

10 K

(LT)

VI 

 

 

5 K

Cmcm

VIII

 

55 GPa

 

 

12 K

I41/amd

IV

 

VI 

14 K

 

 


24

Fig. 2   Xu et al.

0
20
40
60
80
100
120

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

2.4

2.8

0
20
40
60
80
100
120

 

IS (mm s-1)

Pressure (GPa)

Fd 3m
I41/amd
Cmcm

HS(VI)

HS(IV)

HS(VI)

HS(VIII)

LS(VI)

 

 

 
QS (mm s-1)

HS(VI)

HS(IV)

HS(VIII)

LS(VI)

HS(VI)


25

Fig. 3   Xu et al.

(a)

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Orthorhombic 

P > 46 GPa

Tetragonal 

18- 55 GPa

Cubic 

0 - 16 GPa

Intensity (arb. units)

 

 

 

2 (degrees)

(b)

-200

0

200

400

600

800

Fd 3m

 Observed
 Calculated
 Difference
 FelAl2O4
 Al2O3
 Neon

6 GPa

-200

0

200

400

Cmcm

I41/amd

 Observed
 Calculated
 Difference
 FeAl2O4
 Al2O3
 Neon

Intensity (arb. units)

18.5 GPa

6
8
10
12
14

-100

0

100

200

 Observed
 Calculated
 Difference
 FeAl2O4
 Neon

2(degrees) 

76.9 GPa


26

Fig. 4   Xu et al.

2.6

2.8

3.0

7.0

7.5

8.0

8.5

9.0

9.5

 

 ac

 aT
 cT
 aor
 bor
 cor

 

(a)

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

200

220

240

260

280

(b)

Lattice parameter (Å)

Cmcm
I41/amd
Fd 3m

K0= 227(12)

V0=248.3(6)

 Vcub
 Vtetr
 VCmcm
 VCmcm dec.

Volume (Å

3)

K0= 393(12)

V0=263.9(4)

 

Pressure (GPa)

V /V ~3%

Compression

K0=225(7)

V0=270.6(4)


27

Fig. 5   Xu et al.

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90

10

6

10

7

0
20
40
60
80
100

200

225

250

275

a (meV)

 

P (GPa)

3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5

14

16

18

20

62

52

40.6

72

 

 

ln R 

1000/T   (K

-1)

10 GPa

 

R ()

P (GPa)


