Electrically packaged silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) 
I/Q-modulator for 64 GBd operation 

HEINER ZWICKEL,1 JUNED N. KEMAL,1 CLEMENS KIENINGER,1,2 YASAR 
KUTUVANTAVIDA,1,2 JONAS RITTERSHOFER,1 MATTHIAS LAUERMANN,1,3 
WOLFGANG FREUDE,1 SEBASTIAN RANDEL,1 AND CHRISTIAN KOOS1,2,* 

1Institute of Photonics and Quantum Electronics (IPQ), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 
Germany 
2Institute of Microstructure Technology (IMT), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany 
3Now with Vanguard Photonics GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany 
*christian.koos@kit.edu 

Abstract: Silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) electro-optic (EO) modulators combine small 
footprint with low operating voltage and hence low power dissipation, thus lending themselves 
to on-chip integration of large-scale device arrays. Here we demonstrate an electrical packaging 
concept that enables high-density radio-frequency (RF) interfaces between on-chip SOH 
devices and external circuits. The concept combines high-resolution Al2O3 printed-circuit 
boards with technically simple metal wire bonds and is amenable to packaging of device arrays 
with small on-chip bond pad pitches. In a set of experiments, we characterize the performance 
of the underlying RF building blocks and we demonstrate the viability of the overall concept 
by generation of high-speed optical communication signals. Achieving line rates (symbols 
rates) of 128 Gbit/s (64 GBd) using quadrature-phase-shift-keying (QPSK) modulation and of 
160 Gbit/s (40 GBd) using 16-state quadrature-amplitude-modulation (16QAM), we believe 
that our demonstration represents an important step in bringing SOH modulators from proof-
of-concept experiments to deployment in commercial environments. 

 

1. Introduction 

Efficient broadband electro-optic (EO) modulators are key components in microwave 
photonics and in optical communication systems. Over the last decade, the footprint of EO 
modulators has been radically reduced, moving from centimeter-long LiNbO3-devices to 
millimeter- or sub-millimeter components that exploit high-index-contrast waveguides on 
semiconductor substrates [1–4]. In this context silicon photonics (SiP) has emerged as a 
particularly promising platform, exploiting advanced CMOS processes for high-yield mass 
production of modulators — either as standalone devices or as parts of more complex photonic 
integrated circuits (PIC) [5–8]. To improve the performance of SiP modulators, silicon 
nanowire waveguides can be combined with highly efficient organic EO materials that have 
been engineered on a molecular level [9,10]. This so-called silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) 
approach allows to reduce the voltage-length product of EO modulators to 0.32 Vmm [11] — 
more than an order of magnitude below that of conventional depletion-type SiP modulators. 
SOH integration allows to realize high-speed modulators with sub-millimeter device lengths. 
The modulators offer line rates up to 120 Gbit/s for intensity modulation and direct detection 
(IM/DD) [12], and up to 400 Gbit/s for coherent 16QAM signaling [13]. 

However, while reducing the on-chip footprint of EO modulators increases integration 

density as well as modulation speed, electrical packaging of the devices becomes increasingly 
difficult [14]. One of the main problems is the vast size mismatch between the ultra-fine 
features that can be realized by advanced deep-UV lithography on the silicon chip and the much 
larger dimensions of radio frequency (RF) traces that are commonly available on printed circuit 
boards (PCB) or interposers. This often results in a mismatch of bond pad pitch, which impedes


high-density packaging of large-scale device arrays and must be overcome by excessively long 
metal wire bonds with limited performance in terms of bandwidth and signal fidelity [15]. In 
the field of microelectronics, flip-chip bonding is often used for broadband connections 
between interposers and densely integrated on-chip circuits [16]. This approach has been 
recently transferred to packaging of advanced SiP transceivers [17–19], enabling transmission 
of optical signals with data rates of up to 136 Gbit/s using 16QAM signaling at a symbol rate 
of 34 GBd [19]. However, flip-chip bonding of PIC blocks access to the chip surface and thus 
complicates optical packaging, often leaving edge coupling to actively aligned optical fibers as 
the only option [20]. Moreover, flip-chip bonding of photonic devices often requires dedicated 
processes that need to be adapted to specific optical components in terms of thermal budget or 
with respect to the deployed flux chemicals [15,21]. In contrast to flip-chip bonding, accessing 
high-density PIC by metallic wire bonds leaves the top surface of the chip free and thus offers 
high flexibility with respect to optical packaging [22–30], exploiting, e.g., highly efficient SiP 
grating couplers [31], photonic wire bonds [32], or facet-attached micro-lenses [33]. However, 
published signaling demonstrations using SiP modulators accessed by metal wire bonds have 
so far been limited to symbol rates of 28 GBd. Moreover, none of the aforementioned 
approaches have so far been applied to SOH devices. 

In this paper, we demonstrate an electrically packaged SOH EO modulator that exploits 

simple metal wirebonds in combination with a high-resolution ceramic PCB to establish 
broadband connections from standard coaxial connectors to sub-mm on-chip devices. Our 
approach allows to adapt the bond-pad pitch on the PCB to that of the PIC, thereby permitting 
connections through short parallel metal wire bonds that are amenable to broadband packaging 
of large-scale device arrays. In a set of experiments, we expand upon our earlier work [34] and 
demonstrate line rates (symbols rates) of 128 Gbit/s (64 GBd) using quadrature-phase-shift-
keying (QPSK) modulation, and line rates (symbol rates) of 160 Gbit/s (40 GBd) using 16-state 
quadrature-amplitude-modulation (16QAM). This is among the highest symbol and line rates 
demonstrated so far with electrically packaged SiP modulators. In addition, our devices feature 
a voltage-length product of only UπL = 0.9 Vmm, which is well below that of packaged SiP 
devices that were previously demonstrated. When combined with recent progress in improving 
thermal stability of organic EO materials [35] and of SOH modulators [36] as well as with 
novel technologies for hybrid photonic integration [37], we believe that our demonstration 
represents an important step in bringing SOH modulators from proof-of-concept experiments 
to deployment in laboratory and commercial environments. 

2. Concept, fabrication, and assembly 

This section introduces the concept of silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) modulators, reports on the 
fabrication and characterization of the high-frequency ceramic printed circuit board (PCB), and 
shows the assembly of the electrically packaged modulator. 

2.1 SOH Mach-Zehnder modulator 

The concept of a strip-loaded SOH Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) [9,38,39] is depicted in 
Fig. 1. The basic optical waveguide structure is fabricated on a standard 220 nm silicon-on-
insulator (SOI) wafer using 248 nm deep-UV lithography. The MZM consists of two parallel 
0.6 mm long phase shifter sections. Each phase shifter comprises a silicon slot waveguide filled 
with an electro-optic (EO) organic material. The slot has a width of 120 nm. The 240 nm wide 
Si rails of the slot waveguide are connected to the electrodes with thin, doped Sis labs and Al 
vias. The device is realized as traveling-wave modulator where the optical mode in the slot 
waveguide co-propagates with the electric (modulating) mode. Both phase shifter sections 
share the central signal electrode which, together with the outer ground electrodes, form a 
coplanar ground-signal-ground transmission line. Aluminum vias connect the electrodes to 
bond pads of the top metal layer at both ends of the transmission line. The electrical RF voltage 
drops mainly across the narrow slot where the light is highly confined, thus leading to a high 


 

Fig. 1. Device concept and operation of an SOH Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM). (a) Artist’s 
view of the MZM: The organic EO cladding (green) is shown in one arm only. Aluminum vias 
connect the doped thin Si slabs to the traveling-wave electrodes and to the bond pads on the top 
metal layer. (b) Schematic of traveling-wave MZM with electrodes that form a ground-signal-
ground coplanar transmission line having bond pads at both ends. (c, d) Colour plot of the 
dominant x-component of the RF electric field and the optical electric field. The strong overlap 
leads to efficient modulation. (e-1) to (e-3): Poling of the modulator. (e-1) Prior to poling, the 
molecular dipoles (green arrows) in the organic EO material are randomly oriented such that no 
macroscopic Pockels effect can be observed. (e-2) At elevated temperatures, a poling voltage 
induces a poling field Epol which aligns the molecular dipoles predominantly along the electric 
field. This molecular orientation is frozen when the material is cooled down to room 
temperature. (e-3) In push-pull operation, the modulating RF voltage is applied to the center 
signal electrode thereby leading to a modulating field Emod that is oriented parallel to the poling 
direction in one arm and anti-parallel in the other one. This allows for pure amplitude or intensity 
modulation without residual phase modulation (chirp-free) [12]. 

overlap of the modulating electric field and the optical mode and a high modulation efficiency. 
As an EO material, we use the guest-host material SEO250, which is locally deposited on the 
slot waveguides by a high-resolution dispensing technique. To activate the macroscopic χ(2)-
nonlinearity, the microscopic molecular dipole moments of chromophores in the organic EO 
material need to be aligned in a one-time poling process. To this end, a poling voltage Upol is 
applied across the (floating) ground electrodes at an elevated temperature for aligning the EO 
chromophores. After cooling the device down, the poling voltage is removed, and the molecular 
orientation is frozen as indicated by the green arrows in Fig. 1(e-3). The modulating field Emod 
induced by the RF drive voltage is oriented parallel to the chromophore alignment in one arm 
of the MZM and antiparallel in the other arm, which leads to chirp-free push-pull operation. 
The PIC used in this work contains an array of MZM that are configured as nested pairs to serve 
as IQ-modulators. Alternatively, the unused ports of the MZM can be accessed directly via 
attached grating couplers, which allows to use the devices individually for amplitude or 
intensity modulation. 

2.2 High-frequency PCB 

The PCB traces are realized as 50 Ω coplanar ground-signal-ground (GSG) transmission lines 
(TL). To facilitate electrical board-to-chip connections with short wire bonds and to enable the 


integration of densely spaced modulator arrays, the spacing of the board-level RF traces must 
be matched to the pitch of the bond pads on the silicon chip, which is chosen to be 100 µm to 
save chip area while enabling reliable placement of metal wire bonds. At the same time, the 
board-level RF traces must allow for easy interfacing to discrete devices such as coaxial 
connectors or surface mount devices (SMD), which feature millimeter-size contact spacing. To 
this end, we use tapered sections of RF traces with impedance-matched transitions between RF 
traces of different dimensions. Fabrication of the underlying PCB requires structuring 
techniques that combine micrometer resolution with the ability to process boards with 
centimeter-scale overall dimensions. To this end, we have developed a direct-laser write 
(DLW) fabrication process which allows for flexible mask-less fabrication at low cost. The 
process starts from square 100 × 100 mm2 Al2O3 ceramic substrates which are covered by a  
3 µm thick electroplated Au layer. The substrates are coated with a positive-tone photoresist 
(AZ1500) and patterned with a Nd:YAG laser. After development of the exposed structures, the 
Au layer is wet-etched using a KI solution, and the resist mask is removed. 

The performance of the RF building blocks is characterized using dedicated test structures. 

Figure 2(a) shows the TL near the chip edge, Fig. 2(b) displays the taper section, and Fig. 2(c) 
illustrates the TL near a coaxial connector. For the characterization, the TL as used near the 
chip edge is contacted on both sides using GSG microwave probes, and the S-parameters are 
measured using a vector network analyzer (VNA). The reference planes are moved to the probe 
tips by using a short/open/load/through (SOLT) calibration routine with a proper calibration 
substrate. Using the method described in [40], we extract the characteristic impedance Z0 and 
the power loss coefficient α from the measured S-parameters, Fig. 2(d).  

 

Fig. 2. Characterization of the RF building blocks. (a) Micrograph of a coplanar TL with 
dimensions matching the bond pads on the Si chip. The TL has been fabricated on gold-plated 
ceramic substrates using direct laser writing and wet etching. (b) Micrograph of a tapered section 
of the TL. The left-hand side corresponds to the TL shown in (a), the right-hand side matches 
the TL shown in (c). (c) Test structure to characterize the transition from a surface-mounted 
coaxial connectors to a TL. (d) Characteristic impedance Z0 (dark red: mean value from a set of 
10 measurements, light red: corresponding standard deviation) and power propagation loss α 
(light blue dots: measurement data; blue line: moving average as a guide to the eye) extracted 
from S-parameters of TL with the small cross-section shown in (a). The characteristic impedance 
Z0 is well matched to 50 Ω, and the losses stay below 2 dB/cm. (e) S-parameters of a test structure 
comprising a 9 mm long TL with large cross section as shown in (c), terminated by a pair of 
tapers as shown in (b). The measurements exhibit the high transmission and reflection quality of 
the tapers. (f) S-parameters obtained from a test structure comprising a 7.8 mm long TL 
terminated by a pair of coaxial SMP-M connectors as shown in (c). The measurement also 
comprised the influence of two semi-flexible cable assemblies converting from the 1.85 mm 
VNA connectors to the SMP-M interface. 


The characteristic impedance Z0 is well matched to the system impedance of 50 Ω over the 
entire measurement range. The power loss coefficient α, presumably dominated by conductor 
loss, increases with frequency due to the skin effect, but stays below 2 dB/cm, which compares 
well to the losses achieved on state-of-the-art calibration substrates [41]. The characteristic 
impedance and the power loss coefficient shown in Fig. 2(d) were extracted from a set of 10 
different TL, all of which yield comparable results. 

The transition between TL of different cross sections is realized by an impedance-matched 

linear taper. Figure 2(e) shows the measured S-parameters of the corresponding test structure 
comprising two tapers at both sides of a 9 mm long TL section as in Fig. 2(b). The 3-dB 
bandwidth extracted from S21 is larger than 60 GHz, and the reflection as expressed by S11 stays 
below −15 dB. 

To feed the signal from coaxial cables to the PCB, surface-mounted coaxial connectors are 

soldered to appropriate pads connected to the centimeter-scale transmission line. Measured S-
parameters of a structure comprising two such connectors (surface-mounted type SMP-M) at 
the ends of a 7.8 mm long TL indicate good performance up to 20 GHz. However, the increase 
of the power reflections limits the performance in the 25…40 GHz range, see Fig. 2(f). The 
reduction in transmitted power beyond 25 GHz is attributed to losses in the coaxial connectors 
and the transition to the on-board pads. Note that our measurements with SMP-M connectors 
include the influence of two semi-flexible cable assemblies converting from 1.85 mm VNA 
connectors to the SMP-M interface, which we could not isolate because we lack an SMP-M 
calibration kit. These assemblies are specified to have a 3dB bandwidth > 65 GHz such that we 
do not expect any significant distortions of our measurements. 

Assembly 

Figure 3 shows the module assembly. The SiP chip is glued on a metal sub-mount using a 
conductive epoxy adhesive, Fig. 3. After poling the modulators, two identical ceramic PCB are 
placed on both sides of the Si chip and are glued to the same metallic sub-mount (see Fig. 3(a) 
and Fig. 3(c)). By precise machining of the sub-mount, the surfaces of the Si chip and the PCB 
are brought to approximately the same height to allow for short wire bonds. To avoid excitation 

 

Fig. 3. Electrical packaging. (a) Artist’s view of the module connecting two silicon-organic 
hybrid (SOH) Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZM) to surface-mounted SMP-M connectors on a 
ceramic printed circuit board (PCB). The external electrical circuit used for experiments is 
depicted schematically in red for one of the MZM (b) Two MZM, connected by bond wires. (c) 
Image of the complete module. (d) Micrograph of the SiP chip. Wire bonds are used for 
connecting the chip to the traces on the two ceramic PCB. 


of unwanted substrate modes, the sub-mount features a void below the RF traces, see Fig. 3(a). 
The traveling-wave electrodes of the modulators are connected to the PCB traces at both ends 
using Au wires attached by wedge-to-wedge bonding. Wedge bonding was chosen because the 
wire lengths can be kept shorter than with ball bonding. A short bondwire connection is 
desirable for high-frequency operation. Surface-mounted GPPO-compatible SMP-M 
receptacles and coaxial cables are used to connect to the signal source at one end of the 
transmission line and to a terminating resistor at the other end. The module contains two MZM 
that can be used either individually for amplitude or intensity modulation, or, by using a 
different optical input/output, as two nested MZM which form an I/Q-modulator. Figure 3(c) 
shows an image of the module, and Fig. 3(d) displays a micrograph of the bonded chip. Light 
is coupled to and received from the chip using on-chip grating couplers. 

3. Optical, DC, and small-signal characterization of module 

To measure the optical transmission spectrum of the electrically packaged MZM, we use a 
tunable laser. The static extinction ratio of the modulator exceeds 30 dB. The fiber-to-fiber 
insertion loss is 11.6 dB. This includes overall fiber-chip coupling losses of 8.9 dB caused by 
the two grating couplers, as well as an on-chip device loss of 1.3 dB, caused by passive 
components, namely two MMI splitters (0.37 dB each), input/output access waveguides (0.2 dB 
in total), and mode converters at the strip-slot waveguide interface (0.4 dB in total). The 
remaining 1.4 dB are attributed to slot waveguide loss in the phase shifter sections, which leads 
to an estimated propagation loss of a = 2.3 dB/mm. The π-voltage Uπ of the MZM is measured 
by applying a low-frequency (< 1 kHz) electrical signal, and by recording the applied voltage 
and the transmitted optical power using an oscilloscope. The π-voltage Uπ corresponds to the 
voltage that needs to be applied to the center electrode of the MZM in the low-frequency limit 
to induce a relative phase shift of π between the two arms of the device. We find Uπ = 1.5 V, 
leading to a modulation efficiency of the 0.6 mm long MZM of UπL = 0.9 Vmm and a π-
voltage-loss product aUπL = 2.1 dBV — the best value so far achieved in SOH modulators 
using an EO material with a high glass transition temperature Tg. Note that this π-voltage-loss 
product is significantly smaller than the best value achieved in high-speed depletion-type SiP 
modulators, which amounts to 12 dBV [42]. The low UπL-product of the SOH modulator results 
from the high EO activity of the organic cladding material in combination with the slot-
waveguide geometry of the phase shifter [9], which leads to a good overlap of the optical mode 
and the modulating RF field. To improve the EO modulation bandwidth of the MZM, the 
conductivity of the doped silicon slabs can be increased by a gate voltage applied between the 
ground electrode and the Si substrate [43]. This leads to an accumulation layer of electrons at 
the interface of the doped Si slabs and the buried oxide, thereby increasing the slab 
conductivity. In the experiment, we use a gate field strength of 50 V/µm, which increases the 
loss of the slot waveguide only moderately by 0.2 dB. This setting was used for the dynamic 
analysis shown below, and for the data generation (Section 4). Note that the gate voltage can 
be reduced by using a gate electrode [44] or even omitted by using optimized doping profiles. 
The dynamic behavior of the MZM is characterized for the small-signal case using a VNA. 
First, the electrical S-parameters of the unpackaged MZM are measured using microwave 
probes at both ends of the modulator’s coplanar TL. The result is shown in Fig. 4(a) along with 
the S-parameters of the electrically packaged modulator, which were measured by connecting 
the VNA ports directly to the SMP-M connectors on the ceramic PCB. The package has a 
significant influence on the electrical transmission spectrum at frequencies larger than 20 GHz. 
This is in agreement with the finding from Fig. 2(f), where a drop of the transmission in the 
transition to the surface-mounted connectors limits the performance beyond 20 GHz. In the 
low-frequency range, no significant impact on the EO performance is expected. This is 
confirmed by a second experiment, in which the electro-optical-electrical (EOE) bandwidth is 
measured using a VNA and a calibrated photodiode. Figure 4(b) shows the EOE responses of 
the electrically packaged and unpackaged MZM.  


 

Fig. 4. Small-signal characterization of the MZM module. (a) Electrical S-parameters of the 
unpackaged modulator measured with microwave probes (dashed line), and of the electrically 
packaged modulator measured by connecting the VNA ports directly to the SMP-M connectors 
on the ceramic PCB (solid lines). (b) Electro-optical-electrical (EOE) bandwidth of the 
unpackaged modulator (dashed line), and of the electrically packaged modulator (solid line). 
Both S-parameters traces are normalized to the respective value measured at 40 MHz. At 
frequencies beyond 20 GHz, a slight roll-off is observed for the packaged device with respect to 
the unpacked device. The electro-optic 3-dB (6-dB) bandwidth for the electrically packaged 
modulator is 21 GHz (31 GHz). 

As expected, the EOE responses are comparable up to a frequency of 20 GHz, with a rather 
modest frequency roll-off beyond that frequency. There is even a slight improvement of the 
frequency roll-off in the low-frequency range for the packaged MZM with respect to the 
unpackaged device. This observation is attributed to resonant peaking caused by imperfect 
impedance matching. The electro-optic 3-dB (6-dB) bandwidth for the electrically packaged 
modulator is 21 GHz (31 GHz). At frequencies between 20 GHz and 30 GHz, only a slight roll-
off is observed for the packaged device with respect to the unpacked device. Beyond 30 GHz, 
the roll-off of the packaged device is more pronounced, thus limiting the achievable symbol 
rates in comparison the earlier transmission demonstrations that were performed with 
unpackaged devices contacted by high-frequency microwave probes. 

Note that the response of the Pockels-type EO material in the modulator is ultra-fast and 

would in principle allow for THz modulation bandwidths. In real SOH devices, however, the 
speed is limited by the capacitance of the slot waveguide that needs to be charged and 
discharged via the resistive doped silicon slabs [9]. This effect can be mitigated by an improved 
doping profile for the silicon slabs, which reduces the resistivity and the associated RC time 
constant and therefore improves the bandwidth of the modulator without an undue increase of 
the optical loss. In addition, we may improve the bandwidth of the packaged module by using 
a more elaborate design of the critical transition between the coaxial connector and the coplanar 
transmission line on the PCB. Note that, besides the EOE bandwidth itself, the characteristic of 
the transfer function beyond the corner frequency is also important. As an example, a modulator 
with a bandwidth of 25 GHz but with a moderate roll-off can easily support a 100 Gbit/s OOK 
modulation [45]. 

4. Intensity-modulated and coherent signaling 

Using a single MZM, intensity-modulated signals are generated in a first set of experiments. 
Four channels of a pulse pattern generator (PPG) are serialized in an electrical 4 × 1 multiplexer 
(MUX) to generate a pseudo random binary sequence (PRBS) with a length of 2311. The 
output of the MUX delivers a voltage swing of 2 Vpp and is directly connected to the input of 
the module. Light is coupled to the device using grating couplers. After the modulator, the 
optical signal is amplified by an erbium-doped amplifier (EDFA). Out-of-band amplified 
spontaneous emission (ASE) noise is removed using an optical band-pass filter. 
The signal is detected using a photodiode connected to an equivalent-time sampling 
oscilloscope (Agilent 86100C), exploiting the repetitive nature of the test pattern for broadband 
electrical acquisition. Recorded eye diagrams at 20 Gbit/s and 40 Gbit/s are shown in Fig. 5(a) 
and Fig. 5(b), respectively. At 20 Gbit/s (40 Gbit/s) the measured Q-factor amounts to 9.8 (4.1). 


 

Fig. 5. Optical signaling using various modulation formats. (a) Eye diagrams for 20 Gbit/s OOK 
and (b) 40 Gbit/s OOK without pre-compensation or post-processing using a pulse-pattern 
generator and an equivalent-time sampling oscilloscope. (c) Eye diagrams for 40 Gbit/s OOK 
with an adaptive equalizer applied on the recorded data using a real-time sampling oscilloscope 
and offline DSP. Pulses with a raised-cosine spectrum and a roll-off factor of β = 1 were used. 
(d) Eye diagram for 40 GBd (80 Gbit/s) PAM4 using pulse shaping with β = 0.3 and offline 
DSP. (e-h) Constellation diagrams for (e) 28 GBd 16QAM, (f) 40 GBd 16QAM, (g) 56 GBd 
QPSK and (h) 64 GBd QPSK. 

Neglecting inter-symbol interference (ISI) and assuming additive Gaussian noise as the only 
signal distortion, a bit error ratio (BER) of BERe = 5.6 × 1023 at 20 Gbit/s is estimated [46], 
and a BERe = 2.1 × 105 at 40 Gbit/s. Note that the underlying assumptions might not hold 
exactly, especially at 40 Gbit/s where ISI might start to play a role. Still, without claiming exact 
quantitative accuracy of the estimated BERe values, we are confident that the true BER falls 
well below the forward error correction (FEC) threshold of 4.40 × 103 for less than 7% 
overhead [47]. 

In a second set of experiments, an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Keysight M8196A) 

replaces the PPG, and a real-time sampling oscilloscope (Keysight DSO-X 93204A) replaces 
the equivalent-time sampling oscilloscope of the previous experiment. In a first step, we 
generate intensity-modulated two- and multilevel signals, record the received data, and apply 
digital signal processing (DSP) for equalization and analysis of the received signal. The AWG 
generates a PRBS with a length of 2151. The resulting pulses are shaped to have root-raised 
cosine spectrum. Figure 5(c) shows the eye diagram of a 40 Gbit/s OOK signal, generated with 
a roll-off factor β = 1, after applying an adaptive equalizer to flatten out the end-to-end 
frequency response of the system using an oversampling factor of ten. Here, the SOH MZM 
was driven with a peak-to-peak voltage swing of 1.4 Vpp at the input coaxial connector of the 
module. No errors were found in our 62 µs long recording (2.48 × 106 measured bit), which 
confirms that the BER is below 4 × 105. For OOK at a line rate of 56 Gbit/s and using β = 0.1, 
a BERm = 1.96 × 105 is measured (not displayed in the figure). Figure 5(d) shows the eye 
diagram for a four-level pulse amplitude (PAM4) modulated signal, generated using β = 0.3, at 
a symbol rate of 40 GBd (corresponding to a line rate of 80 Gbit/s). The BER is measured to 
be BERm = 1.63 × 104, well below the 7% overhead FEC threshold.  

The IM/DD data generation is complemented by the generation of quadrature-amplitude-

modulated (QAM) signals, driving the electrically packaged SOH IQ modulator by a two-
channel AWG and detecting the signal by a coherent receiver. Figure 5(e) shows the 


constellation diagrams for a 28 GBd 16QAM signal. The BER is measured to be 
BERm = 7.78 × 104. For 40 GBd, see Fig. 5(f), the BER increases to 1.31 × 102 but stays 
below the threshold of soft-decision FEC codes with a 20 % overhead [47]. This results in a 
line rate of 160 Gbit/s and a post-FEC net data rate of 133 Gbit/s on a single polarization. Using 
QPSK signals, symbol rates of 56 Gbd and 64 GBd were generated with a BER below the 
threshold for a hard-decision FEC with 7% overhead, see Fig. 5(g) and Fig. 5(h). Note that at a 
symbol rate of 64 GBd, we used a PRBS of length 2111 due to hardware limitations of our 
AWG. In all data generation experiments, a gate field of 50 V/µm has been applied to the 
modulator substrate [44]. 

These results compare well with previously published signaling demonstrations using SiP 

modulators accessed by metal wire bonds, for which 16QAM symbol rates of 28 GBd and line 
rates of 112 Gbit/s were demonstrated for a single polarization. Relying on the published state-
of-the art, we believe that our demonstrations of 64 GBd QPSK and of 40 GBd 16QAM 
correspond to the highest symbol rate and the highest line rate achieved so far with a wire-
bonded SiP modulators [29] and that the approach can well compete with more complex 
packaging concept based on flip-chip bonding [19]. In comparison to earlier demonstrations of 
packaged pn-depletion-type MZM, our SOH device features a significantly lower voltage-
length product of only UπL = 0.9 Vmm, well below that of best-in-class depletion-type SiP 
modulators with UπL = 6 Vmm [42]. 

5. Summary 

We demonstrate for the first time that electrical packaging of high-speed SOH modulators is 
possible without significantly degrading the performance of the devices. To this end, we 
developed a dedicated packaging concept that utilizes technically simple metal wire bonding 
for packaging of highly compact SOH devices. The concept relies on high-resolution ceramic 
PCB that allow to adapt the interposer bond-pad pitch to that of the PIC, thereby permitting 
connections through short parallel metal wire bonds that are amenable to broadband packaging 
of densely integrated device arrays. The modulators feature a π-voltage-length product of 
UπL = 0.9 Vmm and a π-voltage-loss product of aUπL = 2.1 dBV, thereby outperforming 
conventional depletion-type pn-modulators. In our experiments, we demonstrate generation of 
intensity modulated signals with line rates of up to 80 Gbit/s as well as of QPSK and 16QAM 
signals with symbol rates up to 64 GBd and lines rates up to 160 Gbit/s, respectively. In 
combination with recent progress regarding EO material stability [36] and novel technologies 
for hybrid photonic integration [37], our concept builds upon the intrinsic efficiency and 
performance advantages demonstrated for die-level SOH devices and allows to exploit them on 
the level of electrically packaged communication modules. 

Funding 

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) project HIPES (383043731); European Research 
Council (ERC Consolidator Grant “TeraSHAPE” (773248); ERC Proof-of-Concept Grant 
‘SCOOTER’, (755380)); EU-FP7 projects PhoxTroT (318240) and BigPipes (619591); Alfried 
Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach Foundation; Helmholtz International Research School for 
Teratronics (HIRST); Karlsruhe School of Optics and Photonics (KSOP); and Karlsruhe Nano-
Micro Facility (KNMF). 

Acknowledgment 

We thank Jingdong Luo and Alex K.-Y. Jen from Soluxra for providing the organic EO 
material. We thank Oswald Speck, Florian Rupp, Marco Hummel und Andreas Lipp for support 
during packaging of the modulator. 

Portions of this work were presented at the Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), 
2018 in San José, paper SM3B.1. [34]. 


References 

1. S. Lange, S. Wolf, J. Lutz, L. Altenhain, R. Schmid, R. Kaiser, M. Schell, C. Koos, and S. Randel, “100 GBd 

intensity modulation and direct detection with an InP-based monolithic DFB laser Mach–Zehnder modulator,” J. 
Lightwave Technol. 36(1), 97–102 (2018). 

2. P. C. Schindler, D. Korn, C. Stamatiadis, M. F. OKeefe, L. Stampoulidis, R. Schmogrow, P. Zakynthinos, R. 

Palmer, N. Cameron, Y. Zhou, R. G. Walker, E. Kehayas, S. Ben-Ezra, I. Tomkos, L. Zimmermann, K. 
Petermann, W. Freude, C. Koos, and J. Leuthold, “Monolithic GaAs electro-optic IQ modulator demonstrated at 
150 Gbit/s with 64QAM,” J. Lightwave Technol. 32(4), 760–765 (2014). 

3. G. T. Reed, G. Mashanovich, F. Y. Gardes, and D. J. Thomson, “Silicon optical modulators,” Nat. Photonics 

4(8), 518–526 (2010). 

4. A. Abbasi, J. Verbist, L. A. Shiramin, M. Verplaetse, T. De Keulenaer, R. Vaernewyck, R. Pierco, A. Vyncke, 

X. Yin, G. Torfs, G. Morthier, J. Bauwelinck, and G. Roelkens, “100-Gb/s electro-absorptive duobinary 
modulation of an InP-on-Si DFB laser,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 30(12), 1095–1098 (2018). 

5. D. Inniss and R. Rubenstein, Silicon Photonics: Fueling the Next Information Revolution, (Morgan Kaufmann, 

2016). 

6. A. H. Atabaki, S. Moazeni, F. Pavanello, H. Gevorgyan, J. Notaros, L. Alloatti, M. T. Wade, C. Sun, S. A. 

Kruger, H. Meng, K. Al Qubaisi, I. Wang, B. Zhang, A. Khilo, C. V. Baiocco, M. A. Popović, V. M. Stojanović, 
and R. J. Ram, “Integrating photonics with silicon nanoelectronics for the next generation of systems on a chip,” 
Nature 556(7701), 349–354 (2018). 

7. T. Baehr-Jones, T. Pinguet, P. Lo Guo-Qiang, S. Danziger, D. Prather, and M. Hochberg, “Myths and rumours of 

silicon photonics,” Nat. Photonics 6(4), 206–208 (2012). 

8. A. Rickman, “The commercialization of silicon photonics,” Nat. Photonics 8(8), 579–582 (2014). 
9. C. Koos, J. Leuthold, W. Freude, M. Kohl, L. Dalton, W. Bogaerts, A. L. Giesecke, M. Lauermann, A. 

Melikyan, S. Koeber, S. Wolf, C. Weimann, S. Muehlbrandt, K. Koehnle, J. Pfeifle, W. Hartmann, Y. 
Kutuvantavida, S. Ummethala, R. Palmer, D. Korn, L. Alloatti, P. C. Schindler, D. L. Elder, T. Wahlbrink, and J. 
Bolten, “Silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) and plasmonic-organic hybrid (POH) integration,” J. Lightwave Technol. 
34(2), 256–268 (2016). 

10. W. Heni, Y. Kutuvantavida, C. Haffner, H. Zwickel, C. Kieninger, S. Wolf, M. Lauermann, Y. Fedoryshyn, A. 

F. Tillack, L. E. Johnson, D. L. Elder, B. H. Robinson, W. Freude, C. Koos, J. Leuthold, and L. R. Dalton, 
“Silicon-organic and plasmonic-organic hybrid photonics,” ACS Photonics 4(7), 1576–1590 (2017). 

11. C. Kieninger, Y. Kutuvantavida, D. L. Elder, S. Wolf, H. Zwickel, M. Blaicher, J. N. Kemal, M. Lauermann, S. 

Randel, W. Freude, L. R. Dalton, and C. Koos, “Ultra-high electro-optic activity demonstrated in a silicon-
organic hybrid modulator,” Optica 5(6), 739–748 (2018). 

12. H. Zwickel, S. Wolf, C. Kieninger, Y. Kutuvantavida, M. Lauermann, T. de Keulenaer, A. Vyncke, R. 

Vaernewyck, J. Luo, A. K.-Y. Jen, W. Freude, J. Bauwelinck, S. Randel, and C. Koos, “Silicon-organic hybrid 
(SOH) modulators for intensity-modulation / direct-detection links with line rates of up to 120 Gbit/s,” Opt. 
Express 25(20), 23784–23800 (2017). 

13. S. Wolf, H. Zwickel, C. Kieninger, M. Lauermann, W. Hartmann, Y. Kutuvantavida, W. Freude, S. Randel, and 

C. Koos, “Coherent modulation up to 100 GBd 16QAM using silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) devices,” Opt. 
Express 26(1), 220–232 (2018). 

14. T. Tekin, “Review of packaging of optoelectronic, photonic, and MEMS components,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. 

Quantum Electron. 17(3), 704–719 (2011). 

15. L. Carroll, J.-S. Lee, C. Scarcella, K. Gradkowski, M. Duperron, H. Lu, Y. Zhao, C. Eason, P. Morrissey, M. 

Rensing, S. Collins, H. Hwang, and P. O’Brien, “Photonic packaging: transforming silicon photonic integrated 
circuits into photonic devices,” Appl. Sci. (Basel) 6(12), 426 (2016). 

16. P. Elenius and L. Levine, “Comparing flip-chip and wire-bond interconnection technologies,” Chip Scale 

Review 4, 81 (2000). 

17. D.-W. Kim, A. L. E. Jin, M. K. Raja, V. V. Kulkarni, L. C. Wai, J. L. T. Yang, and P. L. G. Qiang, “Compactly 

packaged high-speed optical transceiver using silicon photonics ICs on ceramic submount,” in 2016 IEEE 66th 
Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) (IEEE, 2016), pp. 1075–1080. 

18. C. Doerr, J. Heanue, L. Chen, R. Aroca, S. Azemati, G. Ali, G. McBrien, L. Chen, B. Guan, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, 

T. Nielsen, H. Mezghani, M. Mihnev, C. Yung, and M. Xu, “Silicon photonics coherent transceiver in a ball-grid 
array package,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC) (OSA, 2017), paper Th5D.5. 

19. A. Novack, M. Streshinsky, T. Huynh, T. Galfsky, H. Guan, Y. Liu, Y. Ma, R. Shi, A. Horth, Y. Chen, A. 

Hanjani, J. Roman, Y. Dziashko, R. Ding, S. Fathololoumi, A. E.-J. Lim, K. Padmaraju, R. Sukkar, R. Younce, 
H. Rohde, R. Palmer, G. Saathoff, T. Wuth, M. Bohn, A. Ahmed, M. Ahmed, C. Williams, D. Lim, A. 
Elmoznine, A. Rylyakov, T. Baehr-Jones, P. Magill, D. Scordo, and M. Hochberg, “A silicon photonic 
transceiver and hybrid tunable laser for 64 Gbaud coherent communication,” in Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference Postdeadline Papers (OSA, 2018), paper Th4D.4. 

20. C. Kopp, S. Bernabé, B. Ben Bakir, J. Fedeli, R. Orobtchouk, F. Schrank, H. Porte, L. Zimmermann, and T. 

Tekin, “Silicon photonic circuits: on-CMOS integration, fiber optical coupling, and packaging,” IEEE J. Sel. 
Top. Quantum Electron. 17(3), 498–509 (2011). 

21. E. Higurashi, T. Imamura, T. Suga, and R. Sawada, “Low-temperature bonding of laser diode chips on silicon 

substrates using plasma activation of Au films,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 19(24), 1994–1996 (2007). 


22. S. Bernabe, B. Blampey, A. Myko, B. Charbonnier, K. Frigui, S. Bila, A. Mottet, J. Hauden, S. Jillard, B. Frigui, 

G. Duan, X. Pommarede, and G. Charlet, “Packaging of photonic integrated circuit based high-speed coherent 
transmitter module,” in 2016 IEEE 66th Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) (IEEE, 
2016), pp. 1081–1086. 

23. S. Bernabé, S. Olivier, A. Myko, M. Fournier, B. Blampey, A. Abraham, S. Menezo, J. Hauden, A. Mottet, K. 

Frigui, S. Ngoho, B. Frigui, S. Bila, D. Marris-Morini, D. Pérez-Galacho, P. Brindel, and G. Charlet, “High-
speed coherent silicon modulator module using photonic integrated circuits: from circuit design to packaged 
module,” in Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE Photonics Europe, 
2016), paoper 98910Z. 

24. D. Celo, D. J. Goodwill, J. Jiang, P. Dumais, C. Zhang, F. Zhao, X. Tu, C. Zhang, S. Yan, J. He, M. Li, W. Liu, 

Y. Wei, D. Geng, H. Mehrvar, and E. Bernier, “32x32 silicon photonic switch,” in OptoElectronics and 
Communications Conference (OECC) Held Jointly with 2016 International Conference on Photonics in 
Switching (PS) (2016), paper WF1–4. 

25. C. Hoessbacher, Y. Salamin, Y. Fedoryshyn, W. Heni, B. Baeuerle, A. Josten, C. Haffner, M. Zahner, H. Chen, 

D. L. Elder, S. Wehrli, D. Hillerkuss, D. Van Thourhout, J. Van Campenhout, L. R. Dalton, C. Hafner, and J. 
Leuthold, “Optical interconnect solution with plasmonic modulator and Ge photodetector array,” IEEE 
Photonics Technol. Lett. 29(21), 1760–1763 (2017). 

26. D. Vermeulen, R. Aroca, L. Chen, L. Pellach, G. McBrien, and C. Doerr, “Demonstration of silicon photonics 

push–pull modulators designed for manufacturability,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 28(10), 1127–1129 
(2016). 

27. C. Lacava, I. Cardea, I. Demirtzioglou, A. E. Khoja, L. Ke, D. J. Thomson, X. Ruan, F. Zhang, G. T. Reed, D. J. 

Richardson, and P. Petropoulos, “49.6 Gb/s direct detection DMT transmission over 40 km single mode fibre 
using an electrically packaged silicon photonic modulator,” Opt. Express 25(24), 29798–29811 (2017). 

28. X. Ruan, K. Li, D. J. Thomson, C. Lacava, F. Meng, I. Demirtzioglou, P. Petropoulos, Y. Zhu, G. T. Reed, and 

F. Zhang, “Experimental comparison of direct detection Nyquist SSB transmission based on silicon dual-drive 
and IQ Mach-Zehnder modulators with electrical packaging,” Opt. Express 25(16), 19332–19342 (2017). 

29. P. Dong, X. Liu, S. Chandrasekhar, L. L. Buhl, R. Aroca, and Y.-K. Chen, “Monolithic silicon photonic 

integrated circuits for compact 100+Gb/s coherent optical receivers and transmitters,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 20, 150–157 (2014). 

30. N. Qi, X. Xiao, S. Hu, X. Li, H. Li, L. Liu, Z. Li, N. Wu, and P. Y. Chiang, “Co-Design and demonstration of a 

25-Gb/s silicon-photonic Mach–Zehnder modulator with a CMOS-based high-swing driver,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 22(6), 131–140 (2016). 

31. Y. Ding, C. Peucheret, H. Ou, and K. Yvind, “Fully etched apodized grating coupler on the SOI platform with -

0.58 dB coupling efficiency,” Opt. Lett. 39(18), 5348–5350 (2014). 

32. N. Lindenmann, S. Dottermusch, M. L. Goedecke, T. Hoose, M. R. Billah, T. P. Onanuga, A. Hofmann, W. 

Freude, and C. Koos, “Connecting silicon photonic circuits to multicore fibers by photonic wire bonding,” J. 
Lightwave Technol. 33(4), 755–760 (2015). 

33. P.-I. Dietrich, M. Blaicher, I. Reuter, M. Billah, T. Hoose, A. Hofmann, C. Caer, R. Dangel, B. Offrein, U. 

Troppenz, M. Moehrle, W. Freude, and C. Koos, “In situ 3D nanoprinting of free-form coupling elements for 
hybrid photonic integration,” Nat. Photonics 12(4), 241–247 (2018). 

34. H. Zwickel, J. N. Kemal, C. Kieninger, Y. Kutuvantavida, M. Lauermann, J. Rittershofer, R. Pajković, D. Lindt, 

S. Randel, W. Freude, and C. Koos, “Electrically Packaged Silicon-Organic Hybrid Modulator for 
Communication and Microwave Photonic Applications,” in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (OSA, 
2018), paper SM3B.1. 

35. H. Miura, F. Qiu, A. M. Spring, T. Kashino, T. Kikuchi, M. Ozawa, H. Nawata, K. Odoi, and S. Yokoyama, 

“High thermal stability 40 GHz electro-optic polymer modulators,” Opt. Express 25(23), 28643–28649 (2017). 

36. C. Kieninger, Y. Kutuvantavida, J. N. Kemal, H. Zwickel, H. Miura, S. Randel, W. Freude, S. Yokoyama, and 

C. Koos, “Demonstration of long-term thermal stability of a silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) modulator at 85°C,” 
Opt. Express 26, 27955–27964 (2018). 

37. M. Billah, J. N. Kemal, M. Blaicher, Y. Kutuvantavida, C. Kieninger, H. Zwickel, P.-I. Dietrich, S. Wolf, T. 

Hoose, Y. Xu, U. Troppenz, M. Möhrle, S. Randel, W. Freude, and C. Koos, “Four-channel 784 Gbit / s 
transmitter module enabled by photonic wire bonding and silicon-organic hybrid modulators,” in European 
Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC) (2017), paper Th.PDP.C.1. 

38. R. Ding, T. Baehr-Jones, Y. Liu, R. Bojko, J. Witzens, S. Huang, J. Luo, S. Benight, P. Sullivan, J.-M. Fedeli, 

M. Fournier, L. Dalton, A. Jen, and M. Hochberg, “Demonstration of a low V π L modulator with GHz 
bandwidth based on electro-optic polymer-clad silicon slot waveguides,” Opt. Express 18(15), 15618–15623 
(2010). 

39. C. Koos, J. Brosi, M. Waldow, W. Freude, and J. Leuthold, “Silicon-on-insulator modulators for next-generation 

100 Gbit/s-ethernet,” in European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC) (2007), paper P056. 

40. M. J. Degerstrom, B. K. Gilbert, and E. S. Daniel, “Accurate resistance, inductance, capacitance, and 

conductance (RLCG) from uniform transmission line measurements,” in 2008 IEEE-EPEP Electrical 
Performance of Electronic Packaging (IEEE, 2008), pp. 77–80. 

41. F. J. Schmückle, R. Doerner, G. N. Phung, W. Heinrich, D. Williams, and U. Arz, “Radiation, Multimode 

Propagation, and Substrate Modes in W-Band CPW Calibrations,” in 41st European Microwave Conference 
(2011), pp. 297–300. 


42. J. Fujikata, M. Noguchi, J. Han, S. Takahashi, M. Takenaka, and T. Nakamura, “Record-high modulation-

efficiency depletion-type Si-based optical modulator with in-situ B doped strained SiGe layer on Si waveguide 
for 1.3 um wavelength,” in European Conference on Optical Communications (ECOC) (2016), paper Tu.3.A.4. 

43. L. Alloatti, R. Palmer, S. Diebold, K. P. Pahl, B. Chen, R. Dinu, M. Fournier, J.-M. Fedeli, T. Zwick, W. Freude, 

C. Koos, and J. Leuthold, “100 GHz silicon–organic hybrid modulator,” Light Sci. Appl. 3(5), e173 (2014). 

44. L. Alloatti, D. Korn, R. Palmer, D. Hillerkuss, J. Li, A. Barklund, R. Dinu, J. Wieland, M. Fournier, J. Fedeli, H. 

Yu, W. Bogaerts, P. Dumon, R. Baets, C. Koos, W. Freude, and J. Leuthold, “42.7 Gbit/s electro-optic 
modulator in silicon technology,” Opt. Express 19(12), 11841–11851 (2011). 

45. S. Wolf, H. Zwickel, W. Hartmann, M. Lauermann, Y. Kutuvantavida, C. Kieninger, L. Altenhain, R. Schmid, J. 

Luo, A. K.-Y. Jen, S. Randel, W. Freude, and C. Koos, “Silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) Mach-Zehnder 
modulators for 100 Gbit/s on-off keying,” Sci. Rep. 8(1), 2598 (2018). 

46. W. Freude, R. Schmogrow, B. Nebendahl, M. Winter, A. Josten, D. Hillerkuss, S. Koenig, J. Meyer, M. 

Dreschmann, M. Huebner, C. Koos, J. Becker, and J. Leuthold, “Quality metrics for optical signals: Eye 
diagram, Q-factor, OSNR, EVM and BER,” in International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks 
(ICTON) (IEEE, 2012), paper Mo.B1.5. 

47. L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Staircase codes with 6% to 33% overhead,” J. Lightwave Technol. 32(10), 

1999–2002 (2014). 

 


