Noisy defects in a doped Mott insulator

F. Massee1,∗, Y. K. Huang2, M. S. Golden2 & M. Aprili1

1Laboratoire de Physique des Solides (CNRS UMR 8502), Bˆatiment 510, Universit´e Paris-
Sud/Universit´e Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France
2Institute of Physics, University of Amsterdam, 1098XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Detailed understanding of the role of single dopant atoms in host materials has been crucial
for the continuing miniaturization in the semiconductor industry as local charging and trap-
ping of electrons can completely change the behaviour of a device. Similarly, as dopants can
turn a Mott insulator into a high temperature superconductor, their electronic behaviour at
the atomic scale is of much interest. Due to limited time resolution of conventional scanning
tunnelling microscopes, most atomic scale studies in these systems focussed on the time av-
eraged effect of dopants on the electronic structure. Here, by using atomic scale shot-noise
measurements in the doped Mott insulator Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x, we visualize sub-nanometer
sized objects where remarkable dynamics leads to an enhancement of the tunnelling current
noise by at least an order of magnitude. From the position, current and energy dependence
we argue that these defects are oxygen dopant atoms that were unaccounted for in previous
scanning probe studies, whose local environment leads to charge dynamics that strongly af-
fect the tunnelling mechanism. The unconventional behaviour of these dopants opens up the
possibility to dynamically control doping at the atomic scale, enabling the direct visualization
of the effect of local charging on e.g. high Tc superconductivity.

Charging effects by defects and impurities have long been recognised as the leading cause
for 1/f noise in conducting devices1. As the miniaturization of devices requires complete under-
standing and control of defects and trapping sites, much effort has been put into uncovering the
properties of individual defects and their charging behaviour in semiconductors by using local
probes such as scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). Charge dynamics of nanometre sized junc-
tions with e.g. molecules, nano-crystals and semiconductor quantum dots have been extensively
studied 2–8, as well as charging at atomic scale sites 9–13. Thus far, the study of charged defects
and their dynamics has mostly concentrated on semiconductor materials. However, many corre-
lated electron systems show a rich phase diagram as a function of impurity doping. Doped Mott
insulator materials, such as the high temperature superconducting cuprates and related ruthenates,
are particularly interesting materials in this regard as the dopant atoms often reside in otherwise
insulating layers - a promising environment for charge dynamics to occur. Locally detecting, and
possibly manipulating, these sites would open up a new avenue to study the effect of impurities on
the physical properties of the system. Thus far, however, to our knowledge no reports have been
made of local dynamic charging effects in any of these systems, which seems to indicate that de-
spite the insulating nature of the layers where the dopant atoms reside, the coupling of the dopants
to the continuum conduction or valence bands is still too strong for charging to affect tunnelling
on the millisecond time-scales that can typically be addressed with an STM.

1

arXiv:1809.09840v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  26 Sep 2018


Real-time detection of charging and de-charging at time-scales on the order of the single
electron tunnelling rate (τ), which for typical currents (I) of a few hundred pico ampere is in the
nanosecond range (τ = e/I), is complicated as cable and stray capacitances limit the bandwidth
of conventional STMs. A measurement of fluctuations in the current due to the discreteness of the
electron charge, or shot-noise, on the other hand, is directly sensitive to changes in the tunnelling
dynamics due to local charging effects - even if these are on the time-scale of the tunnelling process.
This is because depending on the exact process, local charging can lead to ordering or bunching of
electron tunnelling. This results in a reduction (F < 1) or enhancement (F > 1), respectively, of the
current noise, which for random (i.e. Poissonian, F = 1) tunnelling is given by SI = 2eIF, where
SI is the shot-noise power spectral density, e the electron charge, I the current and F the Fano fac-
tor 14,15. In order to measure shot-noise at the atomic scale on correlated electron systems, whose
often weakly van der Waals bound layered structures generally require high junction resistances,
circuitry operating in the MHz regime has recently been developed 16,17. Thus equipped we set out
to look for signatures of charging at atomic scale defects on time-scales on the order of the tun-
nelling process in the near-optimally doped high temperature superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x
(Bi2212).

A typical constant current image of cleaved Bi2212 is shown in Fig. 1a, displaying the
characteristic incommensurate super-modulation, and clear atomic contrast of the Bi atoms in the
BiO surface termination plane. Numerous studies focussing on the tunnelling paths in Bi2212 have
attributed this surface appearance to the insight that the main tunnelling path from the (conducting)
copper oxygen plane below the surface through the (insulating) buffer layers to the tip is through
the bismuth atoms directly above the copper atoms, whereas the oxygen atoms in the CuO plane
cannot be resolved due to a π-phase difference 18–23. Upon adding a dopant atom, the situation
changes. In general, the interstitial oxygen atoms have a net negative charge from donating one
or two holes to the CuO plane. For sufficiently high positive bias of the tip (negative bias of the
sample) this charge can be removed. If the oxygen dopant is coupled strongly enough to the CuO
charge reservoir, the removed electron will be replaced immediately, resulting in the opening of an
additional conduction channel. Previous studies have identified two types of such oxygen dopant
atoms (at E = -1 eV and E = -1.5 eV), as well as oxygen vacancies (at E = +1 eV), through the
enhancement of the local density of states 23–27. At the negative sample bias we focus on in this
study, we find both types of oxygen dopant and even resolve the previously predicted anisotropic
shape for those found at E = -1.5 eV 23, see Supplementary Information section I. The difference
in appearance of the two types of oxygen atoms comes from the observation that although both
dopants are below the BiO layer, those found at E = -1.5 eV are located in between two Bi atoms,
whereas the E = -1 eV dopants lie in between a square of four Bi atoms 23,27. Other than the
presence of these dopant states, the general tunnelling process from the CuO plane to the tip is
unaffected: atomic contrast and the super-modulation are nearly identical at E = -1.5 eV to that at
lower energy, see Fig. 1b; the additional bright spots correspond to the dopant states that appear at
this energy.

2


Figure 1
Noisy defects in Bi2212. a Constant current image (55 nm) of Bi2212, E =
-100 meV, I = 100 pA. b Constant current image taken directly after a with E = -1.5 eV, I
= 400 pA. c, d Shot-noise images simultaneously taken with a, b respectively. The inset
in c shows a horizontal line cut through c (red) and d (black) at the position indicated by
the arrows. Note: the bright spots in b do not correspond to the locations with excess
shot-noise in d, see also Supplementary Information section I.

In contrast to the dopant atoms discussed thus far that are strongly coupled to the charge
reservoir, local environments are conceivable where this is not the case. Once an electron is re-
moved from such a dopant, it cannot be replaced immediately, leading temporarily to a locally
charged (or strictly speaking less charged) state. The charging and de-charging of such a dopant

3


and the accompanying fluctuations in the local potential will completely change the tunnelling
dynamics. In general, a strongly fluctuating local potential will have two immediate effects on
tunnelling through the dominant current carrying conduction channel(s): the differential conduc-
tance will go down as the number of states available for tunnelling is intermittently reduced, and
the current noise will increase as tunnelling will take place in bursts that mimic bunching. Addi-
tionally, the current noise, in analogy with the current dependence of the charging and de-charging
of defects that leads to 1/f noise, will become quadratically instead of linearly dependent on the
current 28. In fact, in addition to the known (strongly coupled) oxygen dopants, we find defects
with spectral features at different energies, a significant number of which display a clear suppres-
sion of the density of states. Moreover, unlike the Poissonian shot-noise (F = 1) we measure at
low energies (see Fig. 1c)1, at high energy the same atomically sized regions that show additional
spectral features display a strongly enhanced current-noise (F ≫ 1), see Fig. 1d. The slope of the
shot-noise in these regions can be up to tens of times higher than for the random tunnelling seen at
low energies.

Could the defects with excess, or super-Poissonian, shot-noise be charging and de-charging
dopant atoms? To investigate them in more detail we first focus on their shape and spatial location.
As the images in Fig. 1 show, the ‘noisy’ defects are not located in the topmost BiO layer - there
is no signature in topography indicating their presence. Furthermore, their predominant profile
in the current noise is approximately spherical, although their appearance can be clover-like and
energy dependent leading to more complicated shapes which we will discuss later. To determine
the average shape of the defects and their spatial location, we extract the centre of each defect
that is sufficiently isolated from neighbouring ones by fitting an xy-symmetric 2D Gaussian. For
Fig. 1d this amounts to 44 defects. We then define an equally sized window around the centre of
each defect and construct the average Fano- and topographic images. Fig. 2a shows the average
defect seen through the shot-noise: an isotropic sphere with a diameter of ∼ 8 ˚A and a magnitude of
F∼17 (at E = -1.5 eV). If the defects had been situated at a random xy-location in the unit cell, the
atomic contrast of the averaged topographic image shown in Fig. 2b would have been washed out.
Instead, we maintain clear atomic contrast, indicating that the defects are all located roughly at the
same xy-location in the unit cell. This location, which corresponds to the centre of the images in
Fig. 2a-b, is in the middle of a square of Bi atoms - exactly like the oxygen dopant atoms found at
-1 eV which have a comparable size and shape 23,26,27, but no excess current noise.

1The signal-to-noise for this particular measurement is set to be able to resolve changes in the slope of a factor of
∼5. This can be greatly improved upon by longer averaging or point spectroscopy, see Ref. [16].

4


Figure 2
General characteristics of noisy defects. a Average shot-noise image
constructed from 44 defects in Fig. 2d. b Average topographic image corresponding to
a. The clear atomic contrast indicates that the defects are all located at roughly the same
location, i.e. in between four Bi atoms. c Typical differential conductance spectrum plotted
versus the current (solid red, left axis, Esetup = -1 eV, the dip is located at E = -0.75 eV) and
simultaneously recorded noise (blue markers and line, right axis): the drop in differential
conductance is strongly correlated with the deviation of the noise from the Poissonian
value (dashed line).

To find out more, we turn our attention to spectroscopy. The spatially averaged spectrum of
Bi2212 at negative energies is dominated by the appearance of the Cu-O and O bands at E ≲ -1 eV
29,30, with localised peaks in the density of states due to single oxygen dopants 23–27. In agreement
with tunnelling affected by local charge modulations, the defects with super-Poissonian noise are
generally characterised by a suppression of the differential conductance instead of a peak. This
suppression is in most cases preceded by a modest increase at slightly lower energy, or occurs on
the flank of a steep increase. A typical example of a spectrum taken on top of a ‘noisy’ defect and
the simultaneously recorded shot-noise is shown in Fig. 2c. Clearly, the deviation from Poissonian
noise (i.e. F = 1) is strongly correlated with the drop in differential conductance.

Although most of the noisy defects we observe on Bi2212 show a modest decrease in dif-
ferential conductance, a few actually display negative differential conductance (NDC). Instead of
a point-like spatial appearance in the centre of a square of four Bi atoms as shown in Fig. 2a, the
enhanced noise of these defects is initially located on top of the four neighbouring Bi atoms and
radially expands up to one or two lattice sites with increasing energy, see Fig. 3a-f. Point spectra
taken on the Bi atom indicated with a cross in Fig. 3a at low currents display similar behaviour
to that in Fig. 2c: a slight increase in differential conductance followed by a drop. However, for
increasing currents, the initial increase is suppressed and for I > 100 pA the differential conduc-
tance becomes negative as can be seen in Fig. 3g. The simultaneously recorded shot-noise has
a pronounced peak coinciding with the drop in differential conductance. As expected for charge
modulated current, the maximum of the shot-noise is quadratic in current (Fig. 3h). We further
note that even though the current-noise decreases after reaching a peak, it does not return to its

5


Poissonian value, an observation that is true for all noisy defects we have observed.

Figure 3
Negative differential conductance and dispersion. a Constant current
image of an area with a noisy defect (E = -100 meV, I = 100 pA). b-f Spatially resolved
shot-noise for five different energies: the noise initially appears (in c) on top of four neigh-
bouring Bi atoms, but then radially moves outwards for increasing energies (each energy
is recorded at I = 400 pA). Blue dots mark the location of the Bi atoms in a. g Differential
conductance taken on the Bi atom marked in panel a) for increasing setup currents (Esetup
= -1 eV), becoming negative for I > 100 pA. h Shot-noise taken simultaneously with g.
Poissonian (SI = 2eI) and a quadratic dependence of the noise on current (SI = A2eI2)
are indicated with dotted lines.

Based on the atomic scale size and the location between four Bi atoms, a natural explanation
for the super-Poissonian noise we observe in Bi2212 is that tunnelling is strongly affected by a
charging and de-charging oxygen dopant atom. The earlier observation that there are too few
conventional defects (at E = -1 eV and E = -1.5 eV) for the expected oxygen doping concentration
26,27 strongly favours this assignment. This implies, however, that certain oxygen dopants that
would otherwise have lead to a conventional resonance at E = -1 eV, instead appear as noisy defects.
Figure 4a exemplifies this by showing a Fano image on a 3 nm field of view containing three
defects we encounter on the same xy-position relative to the unit cell: (1) a conventional one with
a resonance around E = -1 eV, (2a) a noisy one with the excess current noise appearing directly
above the defect, and (2b) a noisy one with excess noise and negative differential conductance
appearing on the four Bi atoms neighbouring the defect. The spectra corresponding to the three
defects, as well as that of a region without one (0), are shown in Fig. 4b. The atomic structure of

6


the topmost three layers of cleaved Bi2212 and the lowest energy position of a dopant atom (black)
19 in agreement with the location of the defects is shown in Figure 4c.

Figure 4
All-in-one: different manifestations of defects on the same xy-location.
a Fano factor on a 3 nm field of view (E = -1.4 eV, I = 400 pA) with three different defects:
one conventional (#1) and two noisy (#2a,b). A location without defect is also marked
(#0). Blue dots mark the location of the Bi atoms. b Differential conductance taken at the
locations indicated in a. c Top three layers of cleaved Bi2212, the dopant location from
Ref. [19] in agreement with our data is shown in black (the dotted line represents possible
height variations of the dopant). Weak coupling to the CuO plane of some defects due
to their local environment leads to charging and de-charging that modulates the current
through the main conduction channels - for the bottom defect in a this is through the four
neighbouring Bi atoms.

The question is how oxygen dopant atoms, which are located at the same xy-location within
experimental error, can manifest themselves so dramatically differently. One important clue comes
from the current dependence of the defects. In semiconductor systems, a strong dependence of the
differential conductance on the setup conditions (i.e. current) is known to be caused by the electric
field from the tip that locally bends the bands up- or downwards at the surface, i.e. tip induced
band bending (TIBB) 31. In essence, for increasing tunnelling currents at the same voltage, the tip
is closer to the surface, which increases the tip induced electric field and reduces the barrier for
tunnelling from dopants near the surface to the tip. Crucially, the effect is strongest for dopants
closest to the surface. Clearly, the defect with negative resistance (Fig. 3) displays a strong current
dependence of the differential conductance and accompanying shot-noise. In general, nearly all
noisy defects show a finite current dependence, in contrast to the conventional resonances that show
no dependence on the setup current (see Supplementary Information section III). This observation
strongly suggests that a key parameter for how a dopant atom reveals itself is its distance from
the BiO plane. The distance, combined with the complicated crystal structure, possible nearby
elemental substitutions, other defects and vacancies, and the non-commensurate super-modulation,
then provides a range of local environments where the coupling of a dopant atom can become weak

7


enough to lead to the array of observed atomic scale charge dynamics.

A consequence of the reduced tunnel barrier for dopants close to the surface due to TIBB is
an increase in the rate of ionization. Therefore, for higher setup currents at the same voltage, the
average time the dopant is positively (strictly speaking less negatively) charged due to an electron
tunnelling to the tip will increase, reducing the differential conductance to lower - or even negative -
values and increasing the effective bunching, all in agreement with our observations. Additionally,
TIBB is known to produce an energy dependent halo around charged dopants in semiconductors
like GaAs and InAs 10–12, where the halo reflects the energy dependent lateral distance from which
a dopant can be ionised. The dispersive current noise in Fig. 3b-f, which has a one-to-one corre-
spondence to changes in the differential conductance (see Supplementary Information section II),
is consistent with this mechanism.

Although the general behaviour of the differential conductance - a dip preceded by an in-
crease - and appearance of super-Poissonian noise is very reminiscent of resonant tunnelling in
a double barrier structure 32–36, there is one crucial difference: for resonant tunnelling the noise
returns to its Poissonian value once the energy reaches the end of the resonance. This also holds
for dynamical Coulomb blockaded tunnelling due to an interacting localised state 37–42, where a
quadratic dependence of the noise on the current has been observed 37. In contrast, the shot-noise
of our noisy defects does not return to the Poissonian value of F = 1. The fact that we still observe
excess current noise at E = -1.5 eV in Fig. 1d despite all resonant energies being at lower energies
is a direct visualization thereof. Unlike resonant tunnelling, charging and de-charging can still take
place at higher energies, resulting in enhanced current noise even at energies above the resonant
energy. The magnitude of the current noise then reflects the derivative of the differential conduc-
tance with respect to the fluctuating potential. As shown in Supplementary Information section IV,
we have evidence that this is indeed the case.

Could our observations, instead of the result of charge dynamics at oxygen dopants, some-
how be caused by an artefact of the tip, sample contamination, the AC circuitry we use to measure
the shot-noise, or local heating? To exclude tip effects, we have used tungsten and Pt/Ir tips,
both giving identical results. Furthermore, intentionally damaging either tip material has no effect
other than reducing the spatial resolution (see Supplementary Information section V). Multiple
as-grown, as well as annealed samples have been studied, all showing similar behaviour, ruling
out sample contamination or unusual inhomogeneous samples as culprit. With our ability to com-
pletely disconnect our AC circuitry without changing tunnelling conditions, we confirmed that the
defect in Fig. 3 displays negative differential conductance both with and without AC circuit (see
Supplementary Information section V). Lastly, the noise power spectral density we measure is the
sum of the shot-noise and the thermal noise. In principle, local (energy dependent) heating could
therefore enhance the apparent shot-noise. However, to reach noise levels we observe on a number
of defects would require local electron temperatures of >20 K, which is highly unlikely for our
sample temperature of <2 K.

8


To summarize, by combining scanning tunnelling microscopy and shot-noise measurements,
we resolve atomic scale defects where the current noise is strongly enhanced and the differential
conductance reduced - for some defects even negative. These noisy defects most likely constitute
a subset of the oxygen dopant atoms that are introduced to turn the Mott insulator Bi2212 into a
high temperature superconductor, dopants that were unaccounted for in previous scanning probe
studies. The locally enhanced current noise and reduced differential conductance is expected for
charging and de-charging on time scales of the tunnelling process due to weak coupling of these
dopants to the CuO charge reservoir, resulting in local potential fluctuations that strongly affect
the dominant tunnelling channel(s). Given the similar xy-location, the exact details of the local
environment plays a key role in the charge dynamics of oxygen dopants and their effect on the
tunnelling process. Their unconventional behaviour, in particular of the defects with negative dif-
ferential conductance, can in principle be utilised to dynamically control the doping at the atomic
scale, enabling direct visualization of the effect of local charging on e.g. high Tc superconductivity.

Methods

High quality Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x single crystals were grown at the University of Amsterdam using
the floating zone technique. Both as-grown samples with a Tc ∼ 90 K and samples annealed for 5
days at 450 ◦C under 20 mbar oxygen pressure with a Tc ∼ 81 K were studied. The samples were
mechanically cleaved in cryogenic vacuum at T ∼ 20 K and directly inserted into the STM head at
4.2 K. Etched atomically sharp and stable tungsten tips, and mechanically cut Pt/Ir tips were used,
both with energy independent density of states. Differential conductance measurements throughout
used a standard lock-in amplifier with a modulation frequency of 429.7Hz. STM and simultaneous
noise measurements were performed with the home-built setup and MHz circuitry described in
Ref. [16]. A bandpass filter followed by a Herotek DZM020BB diode was used to integrate the
noise amplitude spectral density in the 100 kHz - 5 MHz frequency range. Lock-in measurements
of the noise at the LCcable resonance of 1 MHz gave identical results. All presented measurements
were recorded at T = 1.8 K.

References

1. M. J. Uren, D. J. Day and M. J. Kirton, Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 1195 (1985) 1/f and random
telegraph noise in silicon metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors

2. J. Chen, M. A. Reed, A. M. Rawlett, J. M. Tour, Science 286, 1550 (1999) Large on-off ratios
and negative differential resistance in a molecular electronic device

3. U. Banin, Y. Cao, D. Katz and O. Millo, Nature 400, 542 (1999) Identifcation of atomic-like
electronic states in indium arsenide nanocrystal quantum dots

4. N. A. Pradhan, N. Liu, C. Silien and W. Ho, PRL 94, 076801 (2005) Atomic scale conductance
induced by single impurity charging

9


5. S. Loth, S. Baumann, C. P. Lutz, D. M. Eigler, A. J. Heinrich, Science 335, 196 (2012) Bista-
bility in atomic-scale antiferromagnets

6. J. Schaffert, M. C. Cottin, A. Sonntag, H. Karacuban, C. A. Bobisch, N. Lorente, J. -P. Gauyacq
and R. M¨oller, Nature Materials 12, 223 (2013) Imaging the dynamics of individually adsorbed
molecules

7. J. van der Lit, M. P. Boneschanscher, D. Vanmaekelbergh, M. Ij¨as, A. Uppstu, M. Ervasti, A.
Harju, P. Liljeroth and I. Swart, Nature Communications 4, 2023 (2013) Suppression of electron-
vibron coupling in graphene nanoribbons contacted via a single atom

8. S. Wickenburg, J. Lu, J. Lischner, H. -Z. Tsai, A. A. Omrani, A. Riss, C. Karrasch, A. Bradley,
H. Sae Jung, R. Khajeh, D. Wong, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. Zettl, A. H. Castro Neto,
S. G. Louie and M. F. Crommie, Nature Communications 7, 13553 (2016) Tuning charge and
correlation effects for a single molecule on a graphene device

9. J. Repp, G. Meyer, F. E. Olsson and M. Persson, Science 305, 493 (2004) Controlling the charge
state of individual gold atoms

10. D. -H. Lee and J. A. Gupta, Nano Letters 11, 2004-2007 (2004) Tunable control over the
ionization state of single Mn acceptors in GaAs with defect-induced band bending

11. K. Teichmann, M. Wenderoth, S. Loth, R. G. Ulbrich, J. K. Garleff, A. P. Wijnheijmer and
P. M. Koenraad, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 076103 (2008) Controlled charge switching on a single
donor with a scanning tunneling microscope

12. F. Marczinowski, J. Wiebe, F. Meier, K. Hashimoto and R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. B 77,
115318 (2008) Effect of charge manipulation on scanning tunneling spectra of single Mn accep-
tors in InAs

13. M. Rashidi, J. A. J. Burgess, M. Taucer, R. Achal, J. L. Pitters, S. Loth and R. A. Wolkow,
Nature Communications 7, 13258 (2016) Time-resolved single dopant charge dynamics in silicon

14. Ya. M. Blanter and M. B¨uttiker, Physics Reports 336, 1-166 (2000) Shot noise in mesoscopic
conductors

15. Ya. M. Blanter Recent Advances in Studies of Current Noise In: Vojta M., R¨othig C., Sch¨on
G. (eds) CFN Lectures on Functional Nanostructures - Volume 2. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol
820. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg

16. F. Massee, Q. Dong, A. Cavanna, Y. Jin and M. Aprili, arXiv:1806.00372 (2018) Atomic scale
shot-noise using broadband scanning tunnelling microscopy

17. K. M. Bastiaans, T. Benschop, D. Chatzopoulos, D. H. Cho, Q. Dong, Y. Jin and M. P. Allan,
arXiv:1806.00374 (2018) Amplifier for scanning tunneling microscopy at MHz frequencies

10


18. I. Martin, A. V. Balatsky and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 097003 (2002) Impurity states
and interlayer tunneling in high temperature superconductors

19. Y. He, T. S. Nunner, P. J. Hirschfeld, and H. -P. Cheng, PRL 96, 197002 (2006) Local elec-
tronic structure of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 near oxygen dopants, a window on the high-Tc pairing mech-
anism

20. S. Zhou, H. Ding and Z. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 076401 (2007) Correlating off-
stoichiometric doping and nanoscale electronic inhomogeneity in the high-Tc superconductor
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ

21. J. Nieminen, I. Suominen, R. S. Markiewicz, H. Lin and A. Bansil, Phys. Rev. B 80, 134509
(2009) Spectral decomposition and matrix element effects in scanning tunneling spectroscopy of
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ

22. J. Nieminen, H. Lin, R. S. Markiewicz and A. Bansil, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 037001 (2009) Ori-
gin of the electron-hole asymmetry in the scanning tunneling spectrum of the high-temperature
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ superconductor

23. I. Zeljkovic, J. Nieminen, D. Huang, T. -R. Chang, Y. He, H. -T. Jeng, Z. Xu, J. Wen, G. Gu,
H. Lin, R. S. Markiewicz, A. Bansil and J. E. Hoffman, Nano Letters 14, 6749 (2014) Nanoscale
interplay of strain and doping in a high-temperature superconductor

24. G. Kinoda and T. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. B 67, 224509 (2003) Observations of electronic inho-
mogeneity in heavily pb-doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2Oy single crystals by scanning tunneling microscopy

25. G. Kinoda, H. Mashima, K. Shimizu, J. Shimoyama, K. Kishio and T. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev.
B 71, 020502(R) (2005) Direct determination of localized impurity levels located in the blocking
layers of Bi2Sr2CaCu2Oy using scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy

26. K. McElroy, J. Lee, J. A. Slezak, D. -H. Lee, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida and J. C. Davis, Sci-
ence 309, 1048 (2005) Atomic-scale sources and mechanism of nanoscale electronic disorder in
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ

27. I. Zeljkovic, Z. Xu, J. Wen, G. Gu, R. S. Markiewicz and J. E. Hoffman, Science 337, 320
(2012) Imaging the impact of single oxygen atoms on superconducting Bi2+ySr2−yCaCu2O8+x

28. A. van der Ziel and E. R. Chenette, Advances in Electronics and Electron Physics 46, 313383
(1978) Noise in Solid State Devices

29. M. S. Hybertsen and L. F. Mattheiss, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1661 (1988) Electronic band struc-
ture of CaBi2Sr2Cu2O8

30. B. O. Wells, P. A. P. Lindberg, Z. -X. Shen, S. D. Dessau, W. E. Spicer, I. Lindau, D. B. Mitzi
and A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev. B 40, 5259 (1989) Valence-band states in Bi2(Ca,Sr,La)3Cu2O8

11


31. R. M. Feenstra and J. A. Stroscio, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 5, 923 (1987) Tunneling spectroscopy
of the GaAs(110) surface

32. E. R. Brown, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 39, 2686 (1992) Analytic model of shot
noise in double-barrier resonant-tunneling diodes

33. M. M. Jahan and A. F. M. Anwar, Solid-State Electronics 38, 429 (1995) Shot noise in double
barrier quantum structures

34. G. Iannaccone, G. Lombardi, M. Macucci and B. Pellegrini, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1054 (1998)
Enhanced shot noise in resonant tunneling: theory and experiment

35. V. V. Kuznetsov, E. E. Mendez, J. D. Bruno and J. T. Pham, Phys. Rev. B 58, 10159(R) (1998)
Shot noise enhancement in resonant-tunneling structures in a magnetic field

36. Ya. M. Blanter and M. B¨uttiker, Phys. Rev. B 59, 10217 (1999) Transition from sub-Poissonian
to super-Poissonian shot noise in resonant quantum wells

37. S. S. Safonov, A. K. Savchenko, D. A. Bagrets, O. N. Jouravlev, Y. V. Nazarov, E. H. Linfield
and D. A. Ritchie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 136801 (2003) Enhanced shot noise in resonant tunneling
via interacting localized states

38. A. Thielmans, M. H. Hettler, J. K¨onig and G. Sch¨on, Phys. Rev. B 71, 045341 (2005) Super-
Poissonian noise, negative differential conductance, and relaxation effects in transport through
molecules, quantum dots, and nanotubes

39. I. Djuric, B. Dong and H. L. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 032105 (2005) Super-Poissonian shot
noise in the resonant tunneling due to coupling with a localized level

40. O. Zarchin, Y. C. Chung, M. Heiblum, D. Rohrlich and V. Umansky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
066801 (2007) Electron bunching in transport through quantum dots in a high magnetic field

41. Y. Kim , H. Song, D. Kim, T. Lee and H. Jeong, ACS Nano 4, 4426 (2010) Noise characteris-
tics of charge tunneling via localised states in metal-molecule-metal junctions

42. H. -B. Xue, J. -Q. Liang and W. -M. Liu, Scientific Reports 5, 8730 (2015) Negative differential
conductance and super-Poissonian shot noise in single-molecule magnet junctions

Acknowledgements
We thank J. C. Davis, A. Mesaros, D. K. Morr, D. Roditchev and P. Simon for fruitful
discussions. FM would like to acknowledge funding from H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (grant
number 659247) and the ANR (ANR-16-ACHN-0018-01).

Author contributions
F.M. and M.A. conceived the study. F.M. designed and built the microscope, per-
formed and analysed all measurements and wrote the manuscript with valuable input from M.S.G. and M.A..
Samples were grown by Y.H.K..

12


