See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325303471

Chipless Dielectric Constant Sensor for Structural Health Testing

Article  in  IEEE Sensors Journal · May 2018

DOI: 10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

CITATIONS
0

READS
46

7 authors, including:

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Wearables View project

Nondestructive evaluation View project

Antonio Lázaro Guillén

Universitat Rovira i Virgili

158 PUBLICATIONS   1,606 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

R. Villarino

Universitat Rovira i Virgili

58 PUBLICATIONS   796 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Filippo Costa

Università di Pisa

115 PUBLICATIONS   1,906 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Simone Genovesi

Università di Pisa

122 PUBLICATIONS   1,087 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Antonio Lázaro Guillén on 14 August 2018.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


1

1

Abstract— A low-cost chipless RFID sensor tag to determine the 

dielectric properties of materials is presented. The sensor is based 
on a depolarizing dipole resonator loaded with printed capacitors 
whose capacitance depends on the permittivity of the material 
located on contact with the tag. The permittivity is obtained from 
the shift of the resonance frequency. The resonator is tested both 
individually as well as placed on a periodic arrangement so as to 
form a frequency selective structure (FSS) to increase the cross-
polar radar cross section, thus facilitating the tag detection. The 
proposed structure and measurement procedure is particularly 
suitable for the characterization of civil materials as a non-
destructive testing (NDT).

Index Terms—Chipless RFID, Frequency Selective Surfaces 

(FSS), non-destructive testing (NDT), concrete, permittivity 
sensor.

I. INTRODUCTION

hipless radio identification (RFID) tags are passive 
transponders that do not uses a microchip. Chipless RFID 
technology has emerged during last years in the literature. 

The main research efforts have been oriented to increase the 
number of bits that the electromagnetic structure can encode [1-
3] or developing low cost printing techniques to manufacture 
low cost tags. However, this technology has also been proposed 
as a sensor [4-11]. In this case, due to the limited number of 
sensors within the read range of the tag, a large number of bits 
to perform the identification is not necessary. In this work, a 
chipless RFID tag is proposed as relative permittivity sensor 
that can be used for non-destructive testing (NDT). Non-
destructive testing of materials is an important issue in civil 
structures [12], [13]. It is especially important in the case of 
concrete, since its structural properties depend on the mixture 
of compounds. The quality dependency of concrete in both the 
fresh and hardened states is dependent on many factors such as 
the type of cement, type of aggregates, water content, curing, 
and environmental conditions [13].
A wrong mixture could 

cause a structure to collapse. For these reasons, samples of the 
materials are periodically inspected in the laboratory. However, 
in situ methods and long-term non-destructive testing (NDT) of 
the civil structures are highly desirable. Chemical attack can 
stem from an ingress of aggressive agents (e.g. corrosion can 
follow carbonation or chloride ingress). Carbonation process is 

Manuscript received January 14th 2018. 
This work was supported by the, H2020 Grant Agreement 645771–
EMERGENT and the Spanish Government Project TEC2015-67883-R. The 
authors are with the Department of Electronics, Electrics and Automatic 
Control Engineering, Rovira i Virgili University, Tarragona, Av. Països 

due to the chemical reaction of the dioxide from the 
environment and starts on the surface but progress to the 
interior. Carbonation results in degradation of concrete 
indirectly by reducing the pH. Due to carbonation, the 
permittivity 
decreases
[14].
Microwave 
materials 

characterization techniques based upon dielectric property 
measurements have been proposed for detection and evaluation 
of physical and chemical changes in cement-based materials 
[14-16]. Several works have already proposed different 
wireless sensors for structural health monitoring [17-22]. A
wireless sensor network is often used to collect the data from 
distributed sensors [12], [19]. A fiber optic link used for 
monitoring the strain of civil infrastructures at long distances is 
described in [17]. In the recent years, the RFID technology has 
been introduced for construction supply chain control [23]. A 
passive water-content sensor based on the detuning of a low-
frequency resonator has been proposed in [18]. A similar 
concept is used for corrosion detection in [19] or dielectric 
permittivity measurements [20]. The detuning of the UHF 
RFID antenna is also used to sense dielectric constant in [21]. 
A UHF RFID integrated circuit that contains a temperature 
sensor has been proposed for monitoring the temperature during 
concrete maturation [24].

The tag consists of a Frequency-Selective-Surface (FSS). 

The unit cell element is a bent dipole over a ground plane loaded 
with capacitors whose capacitance depends on the relative 
permittivity of the material that is on contact with the tag. 
Therefore, its resonance frequency depends on the electrical 
characteristics of this material. The absence of a battery in the 
proposed tag makes it cheaper than the active ones and suitable 
for harsh environments. The paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents the system and the sensing principle. Section 
III presents the simulations of the tag. Some preliminary 
experimental results are presented in Section IV. Section V 
presents a method to calibrate the tag and the experimental 
results. A low-cost reader based on Software Defined Radio
(SDR) is presented in Section VI. Finally, Section VI draws the 
conclusions. 

II. SENSING PRINCIPLE

A chipless frequency-coded tag is based on one or several 

resonators that produces a change in the frequency response of 

Catalans 26, 43007 Tarragona, Spain. e-mail: antonioramon.lazaro@urv.cat. F. 
Costa, S.Genovesi, A. Gentile and L. Buoncristiani are with Department of 
Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Via G. Caruso, 56122 - Pisa, Italy.
E-mail:filippo.costa@iet.unipi.it

Chipless Dielectric Constant Sensor for 

Structural Health Testing

Antonio Lazaro, Senior Member, IEEE, Ramon Villarino, Filippo Costa, Member IEEE, Simone Genovesi, Member 

IEEE, Antonio Gentile, Luca Buoncristiani, David Girbau, Senior Member, IEEE

C

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


2

the Radar Cross Section (RCS). Then, the detection is based on 
the measurement of the resonance frequency. However, the 
reflections at the environment (especially large objects near the 
tag) are often noticeably higher than the power reflected at the 
tag when conventional (non-depolarizing) resonators are used. 
This makes tags difficult to be detected in real environments, 
especially when attached to large elements, such as civil 
structures. To this end, this work uses of depolarizing tags [1], 
[2], [9-11]. Depolarizing tags based on resonators have been 
introduced in [2] and they show good performance when they 
are attached to lossy materials. Additionally, in this application, 
the reflections produced on the wall are mainly in the incoming 
polarization. Therefore, the use of a depolarizing tag overcomes
this drawback.

A representation of the measurement system is shown in 

Fig.1. The tag is remotely read using a Vector Network 
Analyzer (VNA) that works as a reader. The reader sends a
polarized wave (e.g. using a vertical oriented Vivaldi antenna) 
and then sweeps the interrogation frequency in order to measure 
the resonance frequency of the tag that depends on the material 
behind it (as will be explained later). The tag can be detected 
measuring the cross polar component using a cross-polarized 
antenna (e.g. using a horizontal oriented Vivaldi antenna) in 
reception. Therefore, the reception antenna filters the reflection 
on the wall and receives the backscattered field produced on the 
tag. In addition, the coupling interference between transmission 
and reception antennas is also minimized when using 
depolarizing tags. 

Fig.1. Schema of the measurement system. 

A Frequency Selective Surface (FSS) composed of a 

depolarizing resonator (bent dipole) is used as dielectric 
constant sensor (Fig.2). It uses four-unit cell resonators to 
increase the level of the reflected signal and facilitate the sensor 
detection. The depolarizing resonator is based on a bent dipole 
loaded with two capacitors etched on the ground and connected 
to the resonant structure through vias. Fig.3. describes the
layout of the unit cell. In Fig.3.b, the detail of the sensing 
capacitor formed by a slot ring around the small patch can be 
appreciated.

(a)
(b)

Fig.2. Prototype of the sensor tag composed by four unit cells. (a) Top view, (b) 
bottom view.

(a)
(b)

Fig. 3. Layout of the tag unit cell (a) top side, (b) bottom side. The via holes 
that connect the resonator in the top layer and the patch in the bottom layer have 
been marked. In the bottom, the sensing capacitor is formed by a slot ring 
around the small patch.

(a)

Current
Density

C
C

Lvia
Lvia

L1
L2
L1

Zin
L
Zin
R

(b)

Fig. 4. Unit cell resonator (a), transmission line model and approximated 
current distribution (b).

In order to estimate the resonance frequency, a model of the 

resonator is shown in Fig.4.a where the distributed capacitor is 
modelled with its lumped equivalent. The perpendicular arms 
generate the depolarization of the incident wave and their length 
must be adequately tuned [10]. The resonance frequency can be 
tuned by changing the capacitor geometries. The capacitors are 

C

L1

L2

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


3

patterned in the ground plane in order to sense the materials 
attached to the tag (see the layout of Fig.3). Their capacitances 
depend on the slot width and the permittivity of the material. 
Therefore, a frequency shift in the resonance is expected as a 
function of the permittivity. A qualitative electrical model is 
shown in Fig.4.b. It consists of a section of microstrip lines with 
the two lumped capacitors. A simplified model for the capacitor 
is composed of the via inductance and the distributed 
capacitance.

III. SIMULATIONS

In order to maximize the cross-polar component, the induced 

current in the lateral arms must be comparable to the current in 
the center of the dipole that contributes mainly to the co-polar 
component of the radar cross section. The current at the ends of 
the unit cell resonator must be zero imposed by the open circuit 
condition. The capacitor presents a low impedance at the 
resonance frequency. Therefore, a low value of current is 
expected at this point. An approximated current density 
distribution along the resonator is shown in Fig.4.b. This 
current distribution has been verified by means of 
electromagnetic simulations that will be shown below. It can be 
expected that the 3rd resonance increases the cross-polar 
components. Therefore, a simplified circuit of Fig.4.b for the 
determination of resonance frequency can be proposed. The 
equivalent circuit is composed by a microstrip transmission line
of length L2 that models the section of the resonator oriented in 
the copolar direction (vertical direction in Fig.1-2). This line is 
loaded with two microstrip transmission lines of length L1 that
model the propagation in the bent lines. The sensors at the 
corners are modelled as capacitors whose capacitance changes 
with the dielectric constant of the material under the ground 
plane. An inductor connected in series with the capacitance 
between the slot ring and the ground models the inductance of 
the via hole that connects the strip line printed on the top layer 
and the small patch situated just under the line on the bottom 
layer (see Fig.3).  

The resonance frequency can be obtained from the transverse 

resonance method [25]. If the middle point in the model of 
Fig.4.b is considered, the impedance ZinR looking forward must 
be equal to minus the impedance ZinL looking backward, so that 
ZinL+ZinR =0. The other resonances can be obtained applying the 
dual condition, YinL+YinR =0.

The impedance from the middle point can be obtained from 

the input impedance of a transmission line of length L2/2 and a 
characteristic impedance Z0 loaded with an impedance ZL:

𝑍𝑖𝑛

𝐿,𝑅 = 𝑍0

𝑍𝐿+𝑗𝑍0𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝛽𝐿2 2
⁄ )

𝑍0+𝑗𝑍𝐿𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝛽𝐿2 2
⁄ )
(1)

Where ZL is the parallel combination impedance of the 

capacitance C in series with inductance Lvia and the open circuit 
transmission line of length L1:

𝑍𝐿 =

1

1

𝑗𝜔𝐿𝑣𝑖𝑎+1/(𝑗𝜔𝐶)+𝑗( 1

𝑍0)𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝛽𝐿1)
(2)

Fig.5 shows the variation of the 3rd resonance frequency as 

function of the capacitance C. It is numerically obtained solving 
the resonance condition equation using a zero-search routine 
(with Matlab) and it is checked using a circuit simulator 
(Keysight ADS). An inductance of 2.5 nH for the via hole is 

considered. It is demonstrated that, for capacitances smaller 
than 2.5 pF, the behavior is nearly linear, therefore it is expected 
to obtain a linear dependence with the permittivity of the 
material located behind the ground plane. Fig.6 shows the 
simulation of the capacitance of the slot capacitor (C) 
performed with Keysight Momentum) with a gap of 0.8 mm as 
function of the dielectric permittivity of the material behind the 
tag. It can be observed that the capacitance C varies linearly
with the permittivity.

Fig.5. Resonance frequency as a function of load capacitance computed with 
the transmission line model (-) and the circuit simulator (□).

Fig.6. Simulated capacitance of the slot capacitor as function of the relative 
permittivity of the material.

As a proof of concept, a design at 4 GHz is performed. This 

frequency is selected because it matches with the peak gain of 
the antennas used in the experimental setup and where the 
maximum isolation is achieved. However, the design can be 
easily scaled to other frequencies by changing the length of the 
dipoles. The chosen lengths of dipole arms are L1=20 mm, 
L2=22 mm and the width is 2 mm. The via's hole diameter is 1 
mm and the slot gap in the ground plane is 0.8 mm. The 
parameters have been chosen keeping a compromise between 
the quality factor of the resonance and the level of cross polar 
radar cross section. From the image electromagnetic theory, the 
image currents induced in the ground plane under the strips 
have opposite sign with respect the current in the strips. 
Therefore, a partial cancellation of the radiation fields is 
produced due to these currents. Small substrate thickness results 
on high quality factors but the cross polar RCS is smaller than 
when thicker substrates are used. The substrate used in these 
prototypes is Roger RO4003 with 64 mil thickness in order to 
facilitate tag detection. However, to derive a simple model from 
the slot capacitance is not straightforward. For this reason, 

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


4

HFSS 3D electromagnetic simulations are used to confirm the 
previous model. Fig.7 shows the current distribution of the unit-
cell element at the frequency that maximizes the cross-polar 
component. The current distribution confirms the behavior
predicted in Fig.4b. The high current introduced in the folded 
arms produces the cross-polar component of the radar cross 
section. 

Fig. 7. Current density distribution in the resonator.

Fig.8 shows HFSS simulations of the cross-polar RCS for 

materials located behind the tag with different permittivities 
(εr). A smooth frequency shift, of the same order than the 
predicted by the transmission model, is appreciated. The width 
of the slot in the ground plane (see Fig.3) can be used to perform 
a fine tuning of the resonance frequency as it is shown in the 
simulations of Fig.9. In practice, this parameter is sensitive to 
the layout tolerance, especially if the printed board is 
manufactured using custom facilities. Fig.10 shows the effect 
of loss introduced by the material attached behind the tag. To 
avoid the dependence of the result with the thickness of material 
a 10 mm slab is considered in the simulations, since in real 
environments tags will be embedded on the surface of a thick 
material under test. The quality factor decreases, and a 
frequency shift is predicted. Therefore, the tag can be useful for 
materials with low or moderate losses, being wet samples (e.g. 
fresh concrete) very difficult to detect.

Fig.8. Simulated cross-polar RCS as a function of the frequency for different 
permittivity of the material behind.

Fig. 9. Simulation of the tag response on air with respect to the slot width.

Fig. 10.  Effect of material losses in the tag response.

IV. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION WITH 

BACKGROUND SUBTRACTION

In order to increase the RCS and the detectability, the 

manufactured tag is composed by four unit cells, as shown in 
Fig.2. Fig.11 reports the measurements of backscattered cross-
polarized fields for different materials with known permittivity. 
These results will be used to calibrate the sensor. The thickness 
of the materials behind is larger than 10 mm to avoid 
dependence of the frequency shift also on the thickness. The 
results are obtained using the background subtraction technique 
that consists of subtracting the measurement of the scene 
without the tag from the measured parameter S21 in presence of 
the tag. The same smooth frequency shift observed in 
simulations are found. The resonant frequency obtained is 
slightly lower than in simulations due to the coupling between 
elements and the tolerances in the fabrication of the slot and the 
via holes using a custom circuit manufacturing facility. 
Therefore, the experimental permittivity calibration procedure 
may be required. Fig.12 shows the variation of the frequency 
peak obtained from Fig.11 as a function of the material 
permittivity. A linear regression is made with good agreement. 
This line can be used to measure the permittivity of unknown 
materials. An additional important parameter is the read range
and the repeatability of the measurement when the distance 
changes. Fig.13a shows the measurement of the tag on the air 
as a function of the reader-to-tag distance. When the distance 
increases, the received level clearly decreases however the peak 
frequency remains constant. A read range close to 1 m is 
estimated, if a minimum signal-to-noise ratio of 10 dB is 
assumed. The read-range can be increased by adding more unit 
cells, at the expense of increasing the tag size as can be shown 
in Fig.13b. The resonance frequency of the tag with only one 
element (unit cell) and the FSS with 2 x 2 elements is the same 
but the range achieved is higher in this case compared to the 
one element case, 100 cm in front of 40 cm An improvement of 
12 dB is obtained as it was expected due to increase of the radar 
cross section of the FSS that depends of N2, where N is the 
number of cells [26].

3.5
3.75
4
4.25
4.5
4.5
-55

-50

-45

-40

-35

-30

-25

Frequency(GHz)

Cross polar Component(dB)

tan=0
tan=0.05
tan=0.1
tan=0.2
tan=0.5

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


5

Fig. 11. Measured cross-polar component after background subtraction for 
different materials behind the tag. 

Fig.12. Measured peak frequency as a function of the permittivity of known 
materials (□). A linear regression is applied to measured resonances of sample 
materials (o).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13. (a) Measured response of the tag composed by 4 elements for different 
reader-to-tag distances. (b) Measured response of the tag composed by 4 
elements and single element at distance of 40 cm and 100 cm

V.
ON-SITE CALIBRATION TECHNIQUES

A. Calibration
One of the main difficulties in chipless RFID technology is 

the calibration needed for tag detection. Usually the background 
subtraction technique is used, but this approach is unpractical 
in most real applications, since it requires to remove the tag to 
measure the scene [1-3]. For long-term NDT of civil structures, 
the tag is inserted during the fabrication of the structure and it 
is periodically measured (after the sample is dry). Therefore, 
the tag cannot be removed to perform background subtraction. 
In order to solve this problem some alternatives have been 
investigated.

First of all, an analysis of the received signal (parameter S21

measured between the transmit and receive antennas) is taken 
into account. The measured signal can be modelled as the sum 
of three contributions: the tag response, stag(t), the coupling 
interference between the antennas, sc(t), and the clutter due to 
the backscattered field on the surrounding objects, sclutter(t).

𝑠(𝑡) = 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔(𝑡) + 𝑠𝑐(𝑡) + 𝑠𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟(𝑡)
(3)

The coupling signal is due to the crosstalk between the 

antennas and depends on the antennas used and the distance 
between them. It can be considered constant with respect to the 
distance between the tag and reader and often it presents a much 
higher amplitude than the tag and the clutter. The amplitude of 
the tag response depends on the distance between tag and 
reader. The clutter response can be split in a couple of terms: 
one due to the objects close to the tag and the other due to the 
objects far from the tag. The first contribution presents higher 
amplitude and it often strongly depends on frequency. In case 
of depolarizing tags, the reflection in flat surfaces such as walls 
or ground is minimized because co-polar component that is 
filtered by the receiver antenna in cross polarization is 
produced. Following the model (3), the tag response can be 
obtained subtracting a reference measurement without tag 
response (sref(t)≈sc(t)+sclutter(t)) to the measurement of the tag. 
Therefore, the reference measurement can be obtained 
eliminating the tag response by locating an absorbent that 
attenuates the reflection in both polarizations or placing a 
metallic plate that eliminates the reflection in the cross polar 
component. In both cases, it is assumed that the clutter is 
invariant along the measurement with the tag and the calibration 
with the reference. The metallic plate can be replaced by the 
wall or another material where the tag is attached, assuming that 
the distance remains invariant.

Two different practical scenarios are considered. In the first 

one, the read range is very small (20-30 cm), and in the second 
one the distance to the material under test is higher (50 cm). In 
all the cases, the crosstalk between antennas dominates, 
especially outside the resonance frequency of the tag, but it is 
removed using any of the previous reference measurements. In 
the first case, the tag response dominates over the clutter 
contributions, whereas in the second the clutter amplitude is 
dominant. For small read range (Fig.14.a), the tag can be 
detected easily from the raw measurement without subtracting 
any reference measurement because the amplitude of the 
backscattered field in cross polarization is higher than the other 
contributions, mainly in copolar components. Therefore, only 

3
3.5
4
4.5
4.5
-70

-65

-60

-55

-50

-45

Frequency (GHz)

Cross polar Component(dB)

Air
Teflon
Polietilene
PVC
RO4003
FR4

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

4

4.1

Relative Permittivity

Peak frequency (GHz)

Measured
Linear regression

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


6

one measurement is needed.  However, for longer distances 
(Fig.14.b) it is not possible to detect the tag from the raw 
measurement.

Experimental results with the tag attached on a wall of bricks 

in the laboratory (indoor environment) located at 20 cm and 50 
cm from the antennas are shown in Figure 14.a and 14.b, 
respectively. Fig. 15 shows a photograph of the experiment 
where the tag is on contact with the wall. These figures show 
the raw measurement (parameter S21 between two cross-
polarized antennas), and the signal obtained by subtracting the 
following reference measurements: the wall without the tag, a 
metallic plate (used as reference tag), an absorbent material that 
covers the tag and the crosstalk measurement of the antennas. 
A piece of Eccosorb VHP-4 with a typical reflectivity of -30 dB 
at the operating band with the same area of the tag and thickness 
of 5 cm is used as absorber. In both of the tested scenarios, the 
tag can be detected using a metallic plate or an absorber as 
background, or subtracting the crosstalk between antennas. This 
crosstalk measurement can be stored once and subtracted to all 
tag measurements. A good agreement is obtained between the 
three calibration procedures. As conclusion, the detection of the 
proposed permittivity sensor based on a FSS made of 
depolarizing resonators can be measured up to 50 cm.

(a)

(b)

Fig.14. Comparison of the raw measurement of the tag on a wall at 20 cm (a) 
and 50 cm (b) for different calibration procedures.

Fig.15. Photography of the experimental setup for measurement of the tag in a 
wall.

B. Comparison with other dielectric measurement 
techniques
Finally, the measurement method is tested, in a realistic 

environment, with different types of walls. Sample 1 is a wall 
of concrete (100% concrete), sample 2 is a block of 50% 
concrete and 50% sand and sample 3 is a wall of bricks. In order 
to compare the values of permittivity obtained with the chipless 
sensor, the samples have also been measured with the ring 
resonator method [6]. In this characterization method, the 
permittivity is obtained from the frequency shift of the 
resonance frequency [27]. A ring resonator printed on 1.6 mm 
thick Rogers 4003 has been designed to resonate around 4 GHz
(see Fig.16). The first resonance frequency can be obtained 
from the effective permittivity εref given by [28]:

𝑓𝑟 =

𝑐

2𝜋𝑅√𝜀𝑟𝑒𝑓
(4)

𝜀𝑟𝑒𝑓 =

𝜀𝑟𝑠+𝜀𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡

2
+

𝜀𝑟𝑠−𝜀𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡

2
(1 +

12𝑊𝑒

ℎ )

−1/2

(5)

Where R is the radius of the resonator (6.9 mm), W is the 

width of the line (1.85 mm), h is the thickness of the substrate
(32 mil) and t is the metallization thickness (34 µm). εrs and εrmat
is the relative permittivity of the substrate and the material, 
respectively. We is the effective width given by:

𝑊𝑒 = 𝑊 +

𝑡

𝜋 (1 + 𝑙𝑛 (

2ℎ

𝑡 ))
(6)

When the material under test is located on the top of the 

resonator, a shift in the resonance frequency is produced due to 
the variation of the effective permittivity. Fig.17 shows the 
resonator's relative frequency shift, considering the presence 
and absence of a material on the top. The expressions (4)-(6) 
have been checked with electromagnetic simulations with 
Keysight Momentum. Fig.18. depicts an example of 
measurement, where both the frequency shift and the reduction 
of the quality factor due to the presence of the block of concrete
are clearly visible. Table I compares the permittivity obtained 
using the calibration line obtained in Fig.12
and the 

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


7

measurement of the samples using the ring resonator method. 
The average difference between the two methods is 3.94%.

(a)
(b)

Fig.16. Photography of the unloaded ring resonator (a) and loaded with a block 
of concrete (b).

TABLE I

SAMPLE COMPOSITION AND PERMITTIVITY

Sample
Material

Measured 
permittivity

Chipless 

tag

Measured 
permittivity

Ring 

resonator 
method

Difference

(%)

1
Concrete 100%
3.56
3.51
3.55

2
Concrete 50%
3.98
4.07
3.97

3
Wall of bricks
4.31
4.24
4.30

Fig.17. Normalized frequency shift with respect the ring resonator loaded with 
the air as function of the material relative permittivity. Comparison between the 
analytical (solid line) model and EM simulations (□) with Keysight 
Momentum.

Fig.18. Measured S21 for the ring resonator unloaded (in air, solid line) and with 
a sample block of concrete (dotted line).

C. Effect of humidity and temperature

In order to study the influence of the moisture in the sample 

some experiments have been done. First, a dry concrete wall is 
measured. Later the wall has been wet with water and the 
measurement has been repeated. The results are shown in 
Fig.19. A shift in the measurement is depicted due to the 
moisture, but the peak frequency returns to the dry value when 
the sample tends to dry state after 1 h. The absorption of 
moisture by the substrate used to print the tag due to the ambient 
humidity can also affect the measure. In order to quantify it a 
ring resonator is introduced in a climatic chamber. Fig. 20

shows the variation of the permittivity of the Rogers 4003 
substrate over a cycle from 0 to 100%. A variation of 0.1 in the 
permittivity and a recover of its initial value when substrate is 
dried can be observed. The reduction of the quality factor or 
increase of the tangent losses as consequence of the water 
absorption is also observed. The result of variation in the 
resonance frequency of the ring resonator is 1%. It can be 
expected that the variation of the frequency of the chipless tag 
due to ambient humidity will be of the same order. 

The temperature can also affect the measurement of the 

resonance of the chipless tag. A small change in the permittivity
of the substrate and the expansion of the resonator is produced.
Fig. 21 compares the measurement of a tag (at approximately 
distance of 20 cm from the reader) on the air at 25ºC and after 
heating with a heat gun at 100ºC. The variation is -9.1 MHz.
This variation is smaller than the bandwidth (about 100 MHz) 
of the measured peak. Therefore, the error can be neglected for
the typical temperature measurement range. 

Fig.19. Comparison of a measurement of a wall of concrete as function of the 
moist degree.

Fig.20. Variation of the resonance frequency, quality factor and relative 
permittivity of a ring resonator made with Rogers 4003 as function of the time 
when the relative humidity change (top).

Fig.21. Comparison of a tag measurement at 25 ºC and 100 ºC.

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


8

VI. DETECTION WITH LOW-COST SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO 

(SDR) READER

One important drawback of chipless technology over well-

established commercial RFID technologies (HF or UHF RFID) 
is the lack of commercial readers. Therefore, the measurements 
are often performed using VNA available at laboratories. 
However, some proof of concept prototypes has been proposed 
in the literature. A prototype based on a VCO and a phase/gain 
detector (AD8302) between 1.9 GHz and 2.5 GHz is reported 
in [29]. Software defined radio (SDR) N210 USRP platform 
based on powerful FPGA is used as reader in [30][30]. Another 
reader based on time-domain UWB sampler is presented in 
[31], [32]. Additionally, low-cost VNA can be found in the 
market that can replace benchtop VNA for field measurements.
Experimental results of section V.A shows that for small 
distances, scalar measurements can achieve good precision 
because the scattered field by the tag is high enough to neglect 
the coupling. Therefore, these results open the door to use 
simplified low-cost readers such as spectrum analyzers with 
tracking generator option or low-cost receivers as described 
next. As a proof of concept, a low-cost reader based on a 
popular low-cost SDR receiver
(RTL-SDR based on 

RTL2832U chipset) is used. As the frequency band of the 
RTL2832U is up to 2 GHz, a down-converter based on a mixer
(LRMS30J from Minicircuits) is used. The local oscillator for 
the mixer and the transmitter can be implemented using a phase-
lock-loop (PLL) synthesizer (from IDM Instruments). The 
received signal at fixed IF (1.5 GHz) is sampled by the RTL-
SDR receiver. The data is transferred to the computer by USB. 
After filtering the data, the Hilbert transform is applied to the 
sampled signal obtaining both amplitude and phase 
information. The reader is powered by USB, therefore a 
portable reader can be implemented. Fig.22 shows the block 
diagram and a photography of the prototype. Fig. 23 shows a
short range (20 cm) typical tag measurement which achieves
good agreement with that obtained with the VNA.

RTL-SDR

To PC

PLL2

PLL1
f0

fOL

Antenna Tx 
(vertical Pol.)

Antenna Rx 
(horizontal 
Pol.)

Depolarizing
tag

(a)

(b)

Fig.22. (a) Block diagram and photography (b) of the reader based on a low-
cost SDR receiver. 

Fig.23. Comparison of a measurement as function of the frequency performed 
with the SDR based reader and with VNA.

VII. CONCLUSION

A novel cross-polarized chipless
sensor based on a 

depolarizing dipole loaded with capacitors is proposed as 
permittivity sensor for long-term non-destructive testing of 
structures. A simple model based on a loaded transmission line 
is presented. Simulated and experimental results show a nearly-
linear dependence of the resonance frequency of the tag with 
the permittivity, which permits the calibration of the sensor. 
The tag has been tested in realistic scenarios and different 
procedures to detect the sensor on large civil structures are 
proposed, which do not require tag removal, as an alternative to 
background subtraction. For small distances the tag can be 
detected from the raw measurement without subtracting any 
background subtraction. However, for higher distances, the tag 
can be detected subtracting the crosstalk measurement or using 
a reference tag composed by a metallic plate in front the tag or 
an absorbent. The influence of temperature, moisture and 
ambient humidity is empirically analyzed. Finally, the 
feasibility of detecting the sensor using a low-cost reader based 
on SDR receiver has been demonstrated for short ranges.

REFERENCES

[1]
S.Preradovic, I. Balbin, N.C. Karmakar, G.F. Swiegers,  “Multiresonator-
based chipless RFID system for low-cost item tracking”, IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol.57, No.5, 
pp.1411-1419, 2009.

[2]
A.Vena, E.Perret, S.Tedjini, “Chipless RFID tag using hybrid coding 
technique,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Vol.59, No.12, pp.3356-3364, 2011.

[3]
A. Lazaro, A. Ramos, D. Girbau and R. Villarino, "Chipless UWB RFID 
Tag Detection Using Continuous Wavelet Transform," IEEE Antennas 
and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 10, pp. 520-523, 2011

[4]
D.Girbau,A.Lazaro, R.Villarino, “Passive wireless permittivity sensor 
based on frequency-coded chipless RFID tags,” IEEE Microwave 
Symposium Digest (MTT), pp. 1-3, 2012.

[5]
D. Girbau, Á. Ramos, A. Lazaro, S. Rima, and R. Villarino, “Passive 
Wireless Temperature Sensor Based on Time-Coded UWB Chipless 
RFID Tags,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., Vol. 60, No.11, pp. 
3623–3632, 2012.

[6]
A.Ramos, D.Girbau, A.Lazaro, R.Villarino, “Wireless concrete mixture 
composition sensor based on time-coded UWB RFID,” IEEE Microwave 
and Wireless Components Letters, Vol.25, No.10, pp.681-683, 2015.

[7]
Y. Feng, L. Xie, Q. Chen and L. R. Zheng, "Low-Cost Printed Chipless 
RFID Humidity Sensor Tag for Intelligent Packaging," IEEE Sensors 
Journal, Vol. 15, No. 6, pp. 3201-3208, June 2015

[8]
A.Lazaro, A.Ramos, D.Girbau, R.Villarino, “Signal Processing 
Techniques for Chipless UWB RFID Thermal Threshold Detector 
Detection,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol.15, 
pp.618-621, 2016.

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


9

[9]
E.Perret, ”Permittivity characterization based on Radar Cross 
measurements,” URSI International Symposium on
Electromagnetic 

Theory (EMTS), pp. 457-460, 2016.

[10] M. Borgese, F. Costa, S. Genovesi, A. Monorchio, and G. Manara, 

“Multi-frequency polarizarition converter with enhanced angular 
robustness,” in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and 
Propagation (APSURSI), pp. 669–670, 2016.

[11] M.Borgese, F.Dicandia, F.Costa, S.Genovesi, G.Manara, “An Inkjet 

Printed Chipless RFID Sensor for Wireless Humidity Monitoring,“ IEEE 
Sensors Journal, Vol.17, No.15, pp.4699-4707, 2017.

[12] J. P. Lynch, “An overview of wireless structural health monitoring for 

civil structures,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, Vol. 365, No. 1851, pp. 345-372, 
2007.

[13] R. Prakash, Non-destructive testing techniques, New Age Science, 2009. 

ISBN: 1906574065

[14] G. Villain. X. Dérobert, C. Gomez-Cardenas, J.P. Balayssac, “Effect of 

concrete carbonation on GPR and capacitive measurements,” in the 9th 
IEEE International Workshop on Advanced Ground Penetrating Radar 
(IWAGPR), pp.1-6, 2017.

[15] J. Hugenschmidt, R. Loser, “Detection of chlorides and moisture in 

concrete structures with ground penetrating radar”, Materials and 
Structures, Vol. 41, 2008, pp.785–792, 2008.

[16] C. Thajudeen, A. Hoorfar, F. Ahmad, T. Dogaru, “Measured complex 

permittivity of walls with different hydration levels and the effect on 
power estimation of TWRI target returns,” Progress in Electromagnetics 
Research, Vol.30, pp.177-199, 2011.

[17] S. Liehr et al., "Polymer Optical Fiber Sensors for Distributed Strain 

Measurement and Application in Structural Health Monitoring," IEEE 
Sensors Journal, Vol. 9, No. 11, pp. 1330-1338, 2009.

[18] J. B. Ong, Z. You, J. Mills-Beale, E. L. Tan, B. D. Pereles and K. G. Ong, 

“A Wireless, Passive Embedded Sensor for Real-Time Monitoring of 
Water Content in Civil Engineering Materials,” IEEE Sensors Journal, 
Vol. 8, No. 12, pp. 2053-2058, 2008.

[19] Q. Ling, Z. Tian, Y. Yin and Y. Li, "Localized Structural Health 

Monitoring Using Energy-Efficient Wireless Sensor Networks," IEEE 
Sensors Journal, Vol. 9, No. 11, pp. 1596-1604, 2009.

[20] M. Alamin, G.Y. Tian, A.Andrews, P.Jackson, “Corrosion detection using 

low-frequency RFID technology,” Insight-Non-Destructive Testing and 
Condition Monitoring, Vol.54, No.2, pp.72-75, 2012.

[21] R. Suwalak, C. Phongcharoenpanich, D. Torrungrueng, and M. Krairiksh, 

“Determination of Dielectric Property of Construction Material Products 
Using a Novel RFID Sensor,” Progress in Electromagnetics Research, 
Vol. 130, pp. 601-617, 2014.

[22] S. Higashi and T. Fukusako, "A sensor antenna for non-destructive 

testing," IEEE Conference on Antenna Measurements & Applications 
(CAMA), Chiang Mai, pp. 1-3, 2015.

[23] Q.Shi, X.Ding, J.Zuo, G.Zillante, “Mobile Internet based construction 

supply chain management: A critical review,“ Automation in 
Construction, vol. 72, part 2, pp. 143-154, 2016.

[24] S. Manzari, T. Musa, M. Randazzo, Z. Rinaldi, A. Meda and G. Marrocco, 

"A passive temperature radio-sensor for concrete maturation monitoring," 
2014 IEEE RFID Technology and Applications Conference (RFID-TA), 
Tampere, 2014, pp. 121-126.

[25] D.M.Pozar, Microwave engineering, John Wiley & Sons, 2nd Ed. New 

York, 1998.

[26] F. Costa, S. Genovesi, and A. Monorchio, “A Chipless RFID Based on 

Multiresonant High-Impedance Surfaces,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 146–153, Jan. 
2013.

[27] F. Costa et al., "Progress in green chipless RFID sensors," 2017 11th 

European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EUCAP), Paris, 
2017, pp. 3917-3921.

[28] I.J. Bahl and D. K. Trivedi, "A Designer's Guide to Microstrip Line", 

Microwaves, May 1977, pp. 174-182.

[29] S. Preradovic and N. C. Karmakar, "Design of short range chipless RFID 

reader prototype," 2009 International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, 
Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP), Melbourne, VIC, 
2009, pp. 307-312.

[30] A.El-Awamry, M. Khaliel, A. Fawky, M. El-Hadidy and T. Kaiser, 

"Novel notch modulation algorithm for enhancing the chipless RFID tags 
coding capacity," 2015 IEEE International Conference on RFID (RFID), 
San Diego, CA, 2015, pp. 25-31.

[31] M. Garbati, R. Siragusa, E. Perret and C. Halopé, "Low cost low sampling 

noise UWB Chipless RFID reader," 2015 IEEE MTT-S International 
Microwave Symposium, Phoenix, AZ, 2015, pp. 1-4.

[32] R. V. Koswatta and N. C. Karmakar, "A Novel Reader Architecture Based 

on UWB Chirp Signal Interrogation for Multiresonator-Based Chipless 
RFID Tag Reading," in IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2925-2933, Sept. 2012.

Antonio Lázaro (M’07, SM’16) was born in 
Lleida, Spain, in 1971. He received the M.S. and 
Ph.D. 
degrees 
in 
telecommunication 

engineering from the Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain, in 1994 
and 1998, respectively. He then joined the 
faculty of UPC, where he currently teaches a 
course on microwave circuits and antennas. 
Since July 2004, he is a Full-Time Professor at 

the Department of Electronic Engineering, Universitat Rovira i Virgili 
(URV), Tarragona, Spain. His research interests are microwave device 
modeling, on-wafer noise measurements, monolithic microwave 
integrated circuits (MMICs), low phase noise oscillators, MEMS, 
RFID, UWB and microwave systems. 

Ramon 
Villarino
received 
the 

Telecommunications Technical Engineering 
degree from the Ramon Llull University 
(URL), Barcelona, Spain in 1994, the Senior 
Telecommunications Engineering degree from 
the Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC), 
Barcelona, Spain in 2000 and the PhD from the 
UPC in 2004. During 2005-2006, he was a 
Research Associate at the Technological 

Telecommunications Center of Catalonia (CTTC), Barcelona, Spain. 
He worked at the Autonomous University of Catalonia (UAB) from 
2006 to 2008 as a Researcher and Assistant Professor. Since January 
2009 he is a Full-Time Professor at Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV). 
His research activities are oriented to radiometry, microwave devices 
and systems, based on UWB, RFIDs and frequency selective structures 
using MetaMaterials (MM). 

Filippo Costa (S’07-M’11) received the M.Sc. 
degree in telecommunication engineering and 
the Ph.D. degree in applied electromagnetism 
from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2006 
and 2010, respectively. In 2009, he was a 
Visiting Researcher at the Department of Radio 
Science and Engineering, Helsinki University of 
Technology, TKK (now Aalto University), 
Finland. 
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the 

University of Pisa. His research interests include metamaterials, 
metasurfaces, antennas and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID). 
He serves as an Associate Editor of the IEEE SENSORS LETTERS. 
He was appointed as outstanding reviewer of IEEE TRANSACTIONS 
ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION in 2015, 2016 and 2017 and 
IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROPAGATION LETTERS in 
2017. He received three times the URSI Young Scientist Award in 
2013, 2014 and 2015.

Antonio Gentile received Bachelor and M.Sc. 
degree in Telecommunications Engineering 
from the university of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2013 
and 2016, respectively. From August 2016, he 
is Research Assistant at the Microwave and 
Radiation 
Laboratory, 
Information 

Department, 
University 
of 
Pisa. 
From 

February 2017 to December 2017, he was a 

Visiting Researcher at University Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain, 
working on chipless RFID sensors. 

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


10

Luca Buoncristiani received Bachelor and 
M.Sc. 
degree 
in 
telecommunications 

engineering from the University of Pisa, Italy, 
in 2013 and 2016, respectively. In 2016, he was 
Research Assistant at the Microwave and 
Radiation 
Laboratory, 
Dipartimento 

dell'informazione, University of Pisa. During 
the period 2016-2017 he was a Visiting 

Researcher at University Rovira I Virgili, working on chipless RFID 
sensors. Currently he is with U-blox and he is involved in design and 
testing of cellular modules.

Simone Genovesi (S’99-M’07) received the 
Laurea
degree 
in 
telecommunication 

engineering and the Ph.D. degree in information 
engineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy, in 2003 and 2007, respectively. He is 
currently an Assistant Professor at the 
Microwave 
and 
Radiation 
Laboratory, 

University of Pisa. Current research topics focus 
on metamaterials, radio frequency identification 
(RFID) systems, optimization algorithms and 

reconfigurable antennas. He was the recipient of a grant from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the framework of the MIT 
International Science and Technology Initiatives (MISTI).

David Girbau (M’04, SM’13) received the BS in 
Telecommunication 
Engineering, 
MS 
in 

Electronics 
Engineering 
and 
PhD 
in 

Telecommunication from Universitat Politècnica 
de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain, in 1998, 
2002 and 2006, respectively. From February 
2001 to September 2007 he was a Research 
Assistant with the UPC. From September 2005 to 
September 2007 he was a Part-Time Assistant 

Professor with the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB). Since 
October 2007 he is a Full-Time Professor at Universitat Rovira i 
Virgili (URV). His research interests include microwave devices and 
systems, with emphasis on UWB, RFIDs, RF-MEMS and wireless 
sensors.

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2839689

Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
View publication stats
View publication stats


